
1. Plant Cell Rep. 2008 Feb;27(2):279-87. Epub 2007 Oct 9.

Comparative expression of beta-glucuronidase with five different promoters in
transgenic carrot (Daucus carota L.) root and leaf tissues.

Wally O(1), Jayaraj J, Punja ZK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University, 8888 University
Drive, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6, Canada. owenw@sfu.ca

Tissue-specific patterns and levels of protein expression were characterized in
transgenic carrot plants transformed with the beta-glucuronidase (GUS) gene
driven by one of five promoters: Cauliflower mosaic virus 35S (35S) and double
35S (D35S), Arabidopsis ubiquitin (UBQ3), mannopine synthase (mas2) from
Agrobacterium tumefaciens or the rooting loci promoter (rolD) from A. rhizogenes.
Five independently transformed carrot lines of each promoter construct were
assessed for GUS activity. In leaves, activity was highest in plants with the
D35S, 35S and UBQ3 promoters, while staining was weak in plants with the mas2
promoter, and only slight visual staining was present in the leaf veins of plants
containing rolD promoter . Strong staining was seen in the lateral roots,
including root tips, hairs and the vascular tissues of plants expressing the 35S,
D35S and UBQ3. Lateral roots of plants containing the rolD construct also showed 
staining in these tissues while the mas2 promoter exhibited heightened staining
in the root tips. Relatively strong GUS staining was seen throughout the tap root
with all the promoters tested.. When GUS expression was quantified, the UBQ3
promoter provided the highest activity in roots of mature plants, while plants
with the D35S and 35S promoter constructs had higher activity in the leaves.
Although plants containing the mas2 promoter had higher levels of activity
compared to the rolD plants, these two promoters were significantly weaker than
D35S, 35S and UBQ3. The potential for utilization of specific promoters to target
expression of desired transgenes in carrot tissues is demonstrated.

DOI: 10.1007/s00299-007-0461-1 
PMID: 17924115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

