
1. Antiviral Res. 2008 Jan;77(1):20-7. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

Inhibition of HSV-1 replication and HSV DNA polymerase by the chloroxoquinolinic 
ribonucleoside 6-chloro-1,4-dihydro-4-oxo-1-(beta-D-ribofuranosyl)
quinoline-3-carboxylic acid and its aglycone.

Souza TM(1), De Souza MC, Ferreira VF, Canuto CV, Marques IP, Fontes CF,
Frugulhetti IC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Virologia Molecular, Departamento de Biologia Celular e
Molecular, Instituto de Biologia, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Niterói, RJ,
Brazil. tmoreno@bioqmed.ufrj.br

We describe in this paper that the synthetic chloroxoquinolinic ribonucleoside
6-chloro-1,4-dihydro-4-oxo-1-(beta-D-ribofuranosyl) quinoline-3-carboxylic acid
(compound A) and its free aglycogene base (compound B) inhibit, with low
cytotoxicity, the replication of herpes simplex virus type 1 and 2 (HSV-1 and
HSV-2). Compound A inhibited HSV-1 replication in Vero cells with an EC(50) of
1.3 and 1.4 microM for an acyclovir (ACV)-sensitive strain and an ACV-resistant
strain of this virus, respectively. Additionally, it inhibited HSV-2 replication 
with an EC(50) of 1.1 microM. Compound B also inhibited the ACV-sensitive and
-resistant HSV-1 strains, and HSV-2 at EC(50) values of 1.7, 1.9 and 1.6 microM, 
respectively. Time-of-addition assays, performed with compound A, suggested that 
this molecule at an early time point of the HSV replication cycle. Kinetic assays
demonstrated that compounds A and B inhibit the HSV DNA polymerase activity in a 
noncompetitive fashion, with a K(i) equal to 0.1 and 0.2 microM, respectively.
Taken together, our results suggest that compounds A and B represent promising
lead molecules for further anti-HSV drug design.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2007.08.011 
PMID: 17931712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

