
1. Virol J. 2007 Nov 9;4:121.

Evolution of temperate pathogens: the bacteriophage/bacteria paradigm.

Koch AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405-6801, USA.
koch@indiana.edu

BACKGROUND: Taking as a pattern, the T4 and lambda viruses interacting with each 
other and with their Gram-negative host, Escherichia coli, a general model is
constructed for the evolution of 'gentle' or temperate pathogens. This model is
not simply either pure group or kin selection, but probably is common in a
variety of host-parasite pairs in various taxonomic groups. The proposed
mechanism is that for its own benefit the pathogen evolved ways to protect its
host from attack by other pathogens and this has incidentally protected the host.
Although appropriate mechanisms would have been developed and excluded related
viral species and also other quite different pathogens, the important advance
would have been when other individuals of the same species that arrive at the
host subsequent to the first infecting one were excluded.
RESULTS: Such a class of mechanisms would not compete one genotype with another, 
but simply would be of benefit to the first pathogen that had attacked a host
organism.
CONCLUSION: This would tend to protect and extend the life of the host against
the detrimental effects of a secondarily infecting pathogen. This leads to the
pathogens becoming more temperate via the now favorable co-evolution with its
host, which basically protects both host and virus against other pathogens but
may cause slowing of the growth of the primary infecting pathogen. Evolution by a
'gentle' strategy would be favored as long as the increased wellbeing of the host
also favored the eventual transmission of the early infecting pathogen to other
hosts.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-4-121 
PMCID: PMC2169209
PMID: 17996103  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

