
1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2007 Nov;23(11):1322-9. doi: 10.1089/aid.2007.0063.

Buenos Aires cohort of men who have sex with men: prevalence, incidence, risk
factors, and molecular genotyping of HIV type 1.

Segura M(1), Sosa Estani S, Marone R, Bautista CT, Pando MA, Eyzaguirre L,
Sánchez JL, Carr JK, Montano SM, Weissenbacher M, Avila MM.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Referencia para el SIDA, Departamento de Microbiología,
Parasitología e Inmunología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The prevalence, incidence, risk factors, and molecular genotyping of HIV-1
infection among men who have sex with men (MSM) were assessed through a
prospective cohort study. The study was conducted in Buenos Aires from February
2003 to December 2004. Sociodemographic, sexual risk behavior data, and blood
samples for HIV testing were collected at baseline and at 6 and 12 months. Cox
regression analysis was applied to determine risk factors associated with HIV
seroconversion. HIV-positive samples were analyzed by partial (pro/RT) and
full-length genome sequencing. Of 811 HIV-negative participants evaluated at
baseline, 327 volunteers that fulfilled the inclusion criteria were enrolled.
Retention rates at 6 and 12 months were 97.2% and 91.5%, respectively. Twelve MSM
seroconverted for HIV infection [incidence rate = 3.9 (95% CI = 2.0-6.7) per 100 
person-years]. HIV seroconversion was associated with a greater number of
different sexual contacts in the preceding 6 months (> or =10, hazard ratio =
3.3, 95% CI: 1.1-10.4). By partial pro/RT genotyping analysis, 83% HIV-positive
samples were subtype B and 17% samples were BF recombinants, most of these being 
unique recombinant forms. This study describes for the first time the recruitment
and follow-up of a cohort of MSM in Argentina. Retention rates and HIV incidence 
rate were high. These data should be considered as a promising potential
population for HIV vaccine trials.

DOI: 10.1089/aid.2007.0063 
PMID: 18184073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

