
1. Vaccine. 2008 Feb 6;26(6):845-52. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2007.11.022. Epub 2007
Nov 29.

V3 CTL epitope density in a single recombinant molecule antigen differentially
affects the number and activity of primary and memory CD8+ T cells.

Lu L(1), Zhu Y, Diao J, Wang Z, Chen YH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Department of Biology and Institute of Biomedical
Science, Tsinghua University, Protein Science Laboratory of the MOE, Beijing
100084, PR China. chenyh@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Previous studies have found the close correlation between epitope density and
epitope-specific response, which have shown that high epitope density in a single
recombinant protein molecule significantly enhances the humoral response and
protective immunity. However, it has not been determined whether this kind of
high epitope density could also significantly influence T cell response. Based on
this, a series of recombinant DNA and proteins were designed and prepared. Each
molecule consists of various copy numbers of the V3 CTL epitope on HIV-1 gp120
(one, two, four and eight copies). Our results show clearly that different
V3-epitope densities in just one single DNA or protein molecules have
respectively different effects on the number and activity of both primary and
memory T cells. Interestingly, this effect is more complex than that on the B
cells: epitope density in one plasmid or protein antigen affects the number, not 
the cytotoxic avidity, of primary CD8+ T cells, but affects both the number and
cytotoxic avidity of memory CD8+ T cells. It indicates epitope density in the
antigen is an important consideration to optimize T cell response induction and
may facilitate the development of effective T cell-based anti-virus vaccines.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2007.11.022 
PMID: 18191003  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

