
1. Blood. 2008 Apr 1;111(7):3355-63. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-08-104901. Epub 2008
Jan 18.

Phosphatidylcholine-specific phospholipase C activation is required for
CCR5-dependent, NF-kB-driven CCL2 secretion elicited in response to HIV-1 gp120
in human primary macrophages.

Fantuzzi L(1), Spadaro F, Purificato C, Cecchetti S, Podo F, Belardelli F,
Gessani S, Ramoni C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neurosciences, Istituto Superiore di Sanit√†,
Rome, Italy.

CCL2 (MCP-1) has been shown to enhance HIV-1 replication. The expression of this 
chemokine by macrophages is up-modulated as a consequence of viral infection or
gp120 exposure. In this study, we show for the first time that the
phosphatidylcholine-specific phospholipase C (PC-PLC) is required for the
production of CCL2 triggered by gp120 in human monocyte-derived macrophages
(MDMs). Using a combination of pharmacologic inhibition, confocal laser-scanner
microscopy, and enzymatic activity assay, we demonstrate that R5 gp120
interaction with CCR5 activates PC-PLC, as assessed by a time-dependent
modification of its subcellular distribution and a concentration-dependent
increase of its enzymatic activity. Furthermore, PC-PLC is required for
NF-kB-mediated CCL2 production triggered by R5 gp120. Notably, PC-PLC activation 
through CCR5 is specifically induced by gp120, since triggering CCR5 through its 
natural ligand CCL4 (MIP-1beta) does not affect PC-PLC cellular distribution and 
enzymatic activity, as well as CCL2 secretion, thus suggesting that different
signaling pathways can be activated through CCR5 interaction with HIV-1 or
chemokine ligands. The identification of PC-PLC as a critical mediator of
well-defined gp120-mediated effects in MDMs unravels a novel mechanism involved
in bystander activation and may contribute to define potential therapeutic
targets to block Env-triggered pathologic responses.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2007-08-104901 
PMCID: PMC2275005
PMID: 18203956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

