
1. J Immunol Methods. 2008 Mar 20;332(1-2):53-60. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2007.12.010.
Epub 2008 Jan 14.

Development and studies of the anti-R7V neutralizing antibody ELISA test: a new
serological test for HIV seropositive patients.

Sanchez A(1), Gemrot F, Da Costa Castro JM.

Author information: 
(1)IVAGEN, 62, Route Nationale 113, 30620 Bernis, France.

A new peptide-based ELISA test developed for the detection of anti-R7V specific
antibodies in the sera of HIV seropositive patients is described. HIV virus
acquires a cellular antigen at the moment the virus is released by budding, the
R7V epitope. Certain patients produce anti-R7V Ab which are described as having
the capacity to neutralize in vitro cell infection by HIV. Anti-R7V Ab are also
detected in asymptomatic patients who have a lower likelihood of progressing to
AIDS. Tested with 449 serum samples, the prevalence of anti-R7V Ab was 53.2% in
HIV positive patients and 5.5% in HIV negative subjects. According to the
duration of infection, the seroprevalence reaches almost 80% of non-treated
long-term infected patients. Other retrospective studies were conducted on 308
HIV positive samples; the presence of anti-R7V Ab was significantly higher for
177 asymptomatic patients (64.4%) compared to the 131 symptomatic patients
(35.1%). Regarding their neutralizing ability, anti-R7V antibodies were detected 
at the highest percentage in asymptomatic HIV-infected patients naive of
treatment. Besides conventional biological parameters (CD4 and viral load), the
detection of anti-R7V antibodies could be proposed to clinicians as an additional
tool to manage treatment initiation and to improve the psychological state of
their asymptomatic patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2007.12.010 
PMID: 18234206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

