
1. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Jul;29(7):1312-8. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn060. Epub 2008 Feb 
29.

Cytoplasmic RASSF2A is a proapoptotic mediator whose expression is epigenetically
silenced in gastric cancer.

Maruyama R(1), Akino K, Toyota M, Suzuki H, Imai T, Ohe-Toyota M, Yamamoto E,
Nojima M, Fujikane T, Sasaki Y, Yamashita T, Watanabe Y, Hiratsuka H, Hirata K,
Itoh F, Imai K, Shinomura Y, Tokino T.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University, Sapporo
060-8556, Japan.

Gastric cancer cells often show altered Ras signaling, though the underlying
molecular mechanism is not fully understood. We examined the expression profile
of eight ras-association domain family (RASSF) genes plus MST1/2 and found that
RASSF2A is the most frequently downregulated in gastric cancer. RASSF2A was
completely silenced in 6 of 10 gastric cancer cell lines as a result of promoter 
methylation, and expression was restored by treating the cells with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. Introduction of RASSF2A into non-expressing cell lines
suppressed colony formation and induced apoptosis. These effects were associated 
with the cytoplasmic localization of RASSF2A and morphological changes to the
cells. Complementary DNA microarray analysis revealed that RASSF2A suppresses the
expression of inflammatory cytokines, which may in turn suppress angiogenesis and
invasion. In primary gastric cancers, aberrant methylation of RASSF2A was
detected in 23 of 78 (29.5%) cases, and methylation correlated significantly with
an absence of the lymphatic invasion, absence of venous invasion, absence of
lymph node metastasis, less advanced stages, Epstein-Barr virus, absence of p53
mutations and the presence of the CpG island methylator phenotype-high. These
results suggest that epigenetic inactivation of RASSF2A is required for
tumorigenesis in a subset of gastric cancers.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgn060 
PMCID: PMC2500213
PMID: 18310659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

