
1. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 2008 Mar;72(1):157-96, table of contents. doi:
10.1128/MMBR.00033-07.

Human RNA "rumor" viruses: the search for novel human retroviruses in chronic
disease.

Voisset C(1), Weiss RA, Griffiths DJ.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-UMR8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille et Institut Pasteur de Lille,
Lille, France.

Comment in
    Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2014 Mar;24(3):382.

Retroviruses are an important group of pathogens that cause a variety of diseases
in humans and animals. Four human retroviruses are currently known, including
human immunodeficiency virus type 1, which causes AIDS, and human T-lymphotropic 
virus type 1, which causes cancer and inflammatory disease. For many years, there
have been sporadic reports of additional human retroviral infections,
particularly in cancer and other chronic diseases. Unfortunately, many of these
putative viruses remain unproven and controversial, and some retrovirologists
have dismissed them as merely "human rumor viruses." Work in this field was last 
reviewed in depth in 1984, and since then, the molecular techniques available for
identifying and characterizing retroviruses have improved enormously in
sensitivity. The advent of PCR in particular has dramatically enhanced our
ability to detect novel viral sequences in human tissues. However, DNA
amplification techniques have also increased the potential for false-positive
detection due to contamination. In addition, the presence of many families of
human endogenous retroviruses (HERVs) within our DNA can obstruct attempts to
identify and validate novel human retroviruses. Here, we aim to bring together
the data on "novel" retroviral infections in humans by critically examining the
evidence for those putative viruses that have been linked with disease and the
likelihood that they represent genuine human infections. We provide a background 
to the field and a discussion of potential confounding factors along with some
technical guidelines. In addition, some of the difficulties associated with
obtaining formal proof of causation for common or ubiquitous agents such as HERVs
are discussed.

DOI: 10.1128/MMBR.00033-07 
PMCID: PMC2268285
PMID: 18322038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

