
1. AIDS. 2008 Mar 30;22(6):685-94. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e3282f4de35.

Toll-like receptor expression and responsiveness are increased in viraemic HIV-1 
infection.

Lester RT(1), Yao XD, Ball TB, McKinnon LR, Kaul R, Wachihi C, Jaoko W, Plummer
FA, Rosenthal KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. rlester@csrtkenya.org

OBJECTIVES: Toll-like receptors (TLR) are important in pathogen recognition and
may play a role in HIV disease. We evaluated the effect of chronic untreated and 
treated HIV-1 infection on systemic TLR expression and TLR signalling.
METHODS: Two hundred HIV-infected and uninfected women from a Kenya cohort
participated in the studies. TLR1 to TLR10 messenger RNA expression was
determined by quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). TLR ligand responsiveness was
determined in or using ex-vivo PBMC by cytokine production in culture
supernatants.
RESULTS: Chronic, untreated HIV-1 infection was significantly associated with
increased mRNA expression of TLR6, TLR7, and TLR8 and when analysis was limited
to those with advanced disease (CD4 cell count < 200 cells/ml) TLR2, TLR3, and
TLR4 were additionally elevated. TLR expression correlated with the plasma
HIV-RNA load, which was significant for TLR6 and TLR7. In vitro HIV
single-stranded RNA alone could enhance TLR mRNA expression. PBMC of HIV-infected
subjects also demonstrated profoundly increased proinflammatory responsiveness to
TLR ligands, suggesting sensitization of TLR signalling in HIV. Finally, viral
suppression by HAART was associated with a normalization of TLR levels.
CONCLUSION: Together, these data indicate that chronic viraemic HIV-1 is
associated with increased TLR expression and responsiveness, which may perpetuate
innate immune dysfunction and activation that underlies HIV pathogenesis, and
thus reveal potential new targets for therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e3282f4de35 
PMID: 18356597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

