
1. Vaccine. 2008 May 23;26(22):2738-45. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2008.03.019. Epub
2008 Apr 1.

Immunization with an HIV-1 immunogen induces CD4+ and CD8+ HIV-1-specific
polyfunctional responses in patients with chronic HIV-1 infection receiving
antiretroviral therapy.

Valor L(1), Navarro J, Carbone J, Rodríguez-Sáinz C, Gil J, López F,
Fernández-Cruz E; STIR-2102 Team.

Collaborators: Desco M, Rodríguez-Molina J, Bouza E, Pérez Molina J, Peña JM,
Podzamczer D, Ferrer E, Ocaña I, Díaz M, Clotet B, Jou A, Sirera G, Rubio R,
Pulido F, Viciana P, Maradona JA, Blazquez R, Barros C, Moreno S, Quereda C,
Gatell JM, González-Lahoz J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, University General Hospital Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, 
Spain.

Development of polyfunctional T lymphocyte responses is critical in the
immunological response against HIV-1. Fifty-four HIV-1 infected patients
receiving antiretroviral treatment (ART) and immunization with an HIV-1 immunogen
or placebo, periodically every 3 months throughout a period of 36 months, were
evaluated for the purposes of analysing the development of HIV-1-specific CD4+
and CD8+ responses. A significant increase of proliferating and IFN-gamma
producing CD8+ HIV-1-specific T cells, of HIV-1-specific precursor frequencies
for CD8+ and for CD4+ T cells and of Gag/pol-specific memory CTL precursors
(CTLp) was observed in the immunogen group in comparison to placebo. IL-2
intracellular expression and IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha co-expression in
HIV-1-specific CD8+ T cells were also substantially increased in the immunized
group. A negative correlation between viral load and CD3+CD4+CFSElow
HIV-1-specific lymphoproliferative response and frequency of Gag/pol-specific
CTLp was solely observed in the HIV-1 immunogen group. Long-term immunization in 
patients receiving ART helps to develop HIV-1-specific polyfunctional T cell
responses.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2008.03.019 
PMID: 18433946  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

