
1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2008 Jul;326(1):41-50. doi: 10.1124/jpet.107.129429. Epub
2008 Apr 23.

Effects of the cFMS kinase inhibitor
5-(3-methoxy-4-((4-methoxybenzyl)oxy)benzyl)pyrimidine-2,4-diamine (GW2580) in
normal and arthritic rats.

Conway JG(1), Pink H, Bergquist ML, Han B, Depee S, Tadepalli S, Lin P, Crumrine 
RC, Binz J, Clark RL, Selph JL, Stimpson SA, Hutchins JT, Chamberlain SD, Brodie 
TA.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Inc., Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA.
conway_james@bellsouth.net

The cFMS (cellular homolog of the V-FMS oncogene product of the Susan McDonough
strain of feline sarcoma virus) (Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 83:3331-3335, 1986)
kinase inhibitor
5-(3-methoxy-4-((4-methoxybenzyl)oxy)benzyl)pyrimidine-2,4-diamine (GW2580)
inhibits colony-stimulating factor (CSF)-1-induced monocyte growth and bone
degradation in vitro and inhibits CSF-1 signaling through cFMS kinase in 4-day
models in mice (Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102:16078, 2005). In the present study, 
the kinase selectivity of GW2580 was further characterized, and the effects of
chronic treatment were evaluated in normal and arthritic rats. GW2580 selectively
inhibited cFMS kinase compared with 186 other kinases in vitro and completely
inhibited CSF-1-induced growth of rat monocytes, with an IC(50) value of 0.2
microM. GW2580 dosed orally at 25 and 75 mg/kg 1 and 5 h before the injection of 
lipopolysaccharide inhibited tumor necrosis factor-alpha production by 60 to 85%,
indicating a duration of action of at least 5 h. In a 21-day adjuvant arthritis
model, GW2580 dosed twice a day (b.i.d.) from days 0 to 21, 7 to 21, or 14 to 21 
inhibited joint connective tissue and bone destruction as assessed by radiology, 
histology and bone mineral content measurements. In contrast, GW2580 did not
affect ankle swelling in the adjuvant model nor did it affect ankle swelling in a
model where local arthritis is reactivated by peptidoglycan polysaccharide
polymers. GW2580 administered to normal rats for 21 days showed no effects on
tissue histology and only modest changes in serum clinical chemistry and blood
hematology. In conclusion, GW2580 was effective in preserving joint integrity in 
the adjuvant arthritis model while showing minimal effects in normal rats.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.107.129429 
PMID: 18434589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

