
1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008 May;7(5):1329-35. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-07-2015.

Human papillomavirus type 16 L1E7 chimeric capsomeres have prophylactic and
therapeutic efficacy against papillomavirus in mice.

Bian T(1), Wang Y, Lu Z, Ye Z, Zhao L, Ren J, Zhang H, Ruan L, Tian H.

Author information: 
(1)Biotech Center for Viral Disease Emergency, Yingxin Street 100, Xuanwu
District, Beijing 100052, People's Republic of China.

Genital human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is the primary cause of cervical
cancer in women. Although the HPV recombinant L1 protein was recently licensed as
an available vaccine, it has numerous shortcomings. New vaccination strategies
should be considered. To enable the design of a prophylactic and therapeutic
low-cost vaccine candidate, chimeric HPV16 L1DeltaC34E7N1-60 capsomeres were
produced in Escherichia coli. The immune characteristics and potential
prophylactic and therapeutic effects of these capsomeres were examined in C57BL/6
mice. Following protein purification and renaturation, the majority of the
recombinant chimeric proteins (L1DeltaC34E7N1-60) assembled into capsomeres.
These capsomeres were able to induce conformational and neutralizing antibodies
against HPV virus-like particles and trigger cell-mediated specific immune
responses against the L1 and E7 peptides. In vivo tumor challenge assays showed
that mice immunized with the capsomeres were protected against a challenge with
both C3 and TC-1 tumor cells. Furthermore, in vivo tumor rejection assays showed 
that capsomeres have therapeutic efficacy in mice following inoculation with C3
and TC-1 tumor cells. Chimeric capsomeres are capable of preventing and
eliminating HPV16 infection. Therefore, our study has provided an economical
vaccine candidate.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-07-2015 
PMID: 18483320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

