
1. J Virol Methods. 1991 Jan;31(1):31-45.

Infection of cultured human tracheal epithelial cells by human parainfluenza
virus types 2 and 3.

Stark JM(1), Huang YT, Carl J, Davis PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve, University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH 44106.

Despite growing information of the effects of human respiratory virus infection
on airway physiology, little information is available on the mechanisms of
pathology and pathophysiology in these infections. The human respiratory
pathogens, parainfluenza virus types 2 and 3 (hPIV2, hPIV3, respectively),
clinically cause laryngotracheobronchitis (infection of the large proximal
airways). In order to examine the pathobiology of these viruses in airway cells
of human origin, we exposed primary cultures of human tracheal epithelial cells. 
Primary cultures of human tracheal epithelial cells were readily infected by
these agents: cells exposed to hPIV2 and hPIV3 expressed viral antigens
(demonstrated by indirect immunofluorescence assay), produced infectious virus,
and demonstrated cytopathic effects (including early syncytium formation). Peak
viral titers of 2 x 10(7) plaque-forming units per milliliter were obtained,
similar to titers from permissive CV-1 cells. Trypan blue staining and direct
cell counts demonstrated no difference in the viability of the control and
infected cells until the infected cells began to detach from the culture
substrate. However, infected cells release significantly more LDH than control
cells by 48 h following infection at a multiplicity of infection of 1
virus/target cell. This system provides a model for studying the effects of
infection of the human tracheal epithelium by human respiratory viral pathogens
without confounding interactions with other cell and tissue types.

DOI: 10.1016/0166-0934(91)90142-m 
PMID: 1849915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

