
1. J Clin Invest. 2008 Jun;118(6):2039-49. doi: 10.1172/JCI33814.

Availability of activated CD4+ T cells dictates the level of viremia in naturally
SIV-infected sooty mangabeys.

Klatt NR(1), Villinger F, Bostik P, Gordon SN, Pereira L, Engram JC, Mayne A,
Dunham RM, Lawson B, Ratcliffe SJ, Sodora DL, Else J, Reimann K, Staprans SI,
Haase AT, Estes JD, Silvestri G, Ansari AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Naturally SIV-infected sooty mangabeys (SMs) remain asymptomatic despite high
virus replication. Elucidating the mechanisms underlying AIDS resistance of
SIV-infected SMs may provide crucial information to better understand AIDS
pathogenesis. In this study, we assessed the determinants of set-point viremia in
naturally SIV-infected SMs, i.e., immune control of SIV replication versus target
cell limitation. We depleted CD4+ T cells in 6 naturally SIV-infected SMs by
treating with humanized anti-CD4 mAb (Cdr-OKT4A-huIgG1). CD4+ T cells were
depleted almost completely in blood and BM and at variable levels in mucosal
tissues and LNs. No marked depletion of CD14+ monocytes was observed.
Importantly, CD4+ T cell depletion was associated with a rapid, significant
decline in viral load, which returned to baseline level at day 30-45, coincident 
with an increased fraction of proliferating and activated CD4+ T cells.
Throughout the study, virus replication correlated with the level of
proliferating CD4+ T cells. CD4+ T cell depletion did not induce any changes in
the fraction of Tregs or the level of SIV-specific CD8+ T cells. Our results
suggest that the availability of activated CD4+ T cells, rather than immune
control of SIV replication, is the main determinant of set-point viral load
during natural SIV infection of SMs.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI33814 
PMCID: PMC2391063
PMID: 18497876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

