
1. Virus Genes. 2008 Aug;37(1):110-8. doi: 10.1007/s11262-008-0241-1. Epub 2008 May 
23.

Genome analysis and detection of a Chilean isolate of Grapevine leafroll
associated virus-3.

Engel EA(1), Girardi C, Escobar PF, Arredondo V, Domínguez C, Pérez-Acle T,
Valenzuela PD.

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Ciencia para la Vida and Instituto Milenio de Biología Fundamental y
Aplicada, Zañartu, 1482 Santiago, Chile, eaengeli@yahoo.com

The complete genome of the Chilean isolate Cl-766 of Grapevine
leafroll-associated virus-3 (GLRaV-3) has been sequenced. This is the first
genome sequence obtained from a GLRaV-3 isolate of the Southern hemisphere. The
genomic RNA of 17,919 nucleotides contains 13 open reading frames (ORFs) with 5' 
and 3' untranslated regions (UTR) of 158 and 277 nucleotides, respectively.
Comparison with NY1, the only isolate with complete genomic sequence available
today, shows 97.6% nucleotide identity between the two isolates. Examination of
the genome variability shows that most of the genetic diversity is concentrated
in ORF1a. Three additional isolates from different geographic regions of Chile
were partially sequenced as well, one which showed sequence divergence with
respect to the other local and foreign isolates, indicative of different
evolutionary constrains. Immunodetection systems were developed using monoclonal 
and polyclonal antibodies produced against the recombinant major coat protein of 
GLRaV-3, providing sensitive and specific detection using a triple antibody
sandwich-enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (TAS-ELISA) and an
immunocapture-reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (IC-RT-PCR) assay.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-008-0241-1 
PMID: 18498048  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

