
1. PLoS One. 2008 Jun 18;3(6):e2500. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002500.

Optimal probe length varies for targets with high sequence variation:
implications for probe library design for resequencing highly variable genes.

Haslam NJ(1), Whiteford NE, Weber G, Pr√ºgel-Bennett A, Essex JW, Neylon C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Southhampton, United Kingdom. 
haslam@embl.de

BACKGROUND: Sequencing by hybridisation is an effective method for obtaining
large amounts of DNA sequence information at low cost. The efficiency of SBH
depends on the design of the probe library to provide the maximum information for
minimum cost. Long probes provide a higher probability of non-repeated sequences 
but lead to an increase in the number of probes required whereas short probes may
not provide unique sequence information due to repeated sequences. We have
investigated the effect of probe length, use of reference sequences, and thermal 
filtering on the design of probe libraries for several highly variable target DNA
sequences.
RESULTS: We designed overlapping probe libraries for a range of highly variable
drug target genes based on known sequence information and develop a formal
terminology to describe probe library design. We find that for some targets these
libraries can provide good coverage of a previously unseen target whereas for
others the coverage is less than 30%. The optimal probe length varies from as
short at 12 nt to as large as 19 nt and depends on the sequence, its variability,
and the stringency of thermal filtering. It cannot be determined from inspection 
of an example gene sequence.
CONCLUSIONS: Optimal probe length and the optimal number of reference sequences
used to design a probe library are highly target specific for highly variable
sequencing targets. The optimum design cannot be determined simply by inspection 
of input sequences or of alignments but only by detailed analysis of the each
specific target. For highly variable sequences, shorter probes can in some cases 
provide better information than longer probes. Probe library design would benefit
from a general purpose tool for analysing these issues. The formal terminology
developed here and the analysis approaches it is used to describe will contribute
to the development of such tools.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002500 
PMCID: PMC2430613
PMID: 18563203  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

