
1. Virology. 1984 Jan 30;132(2):271-81.

Translation of soybean mosaic virus RNA in vitro: evidence of protein processing.

Vance VB(1), Beachy RN.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biology Program, Department of Biology, Washington University, St.
Louis, Missouri 63130, USA.

The genomic RNA of soybean mosaic virus (SMV), a member of the potyvirus group of
plant viruses, was translated in both the wheat germ and reticulocyte cell free
systems to identify some viral encoded proteins and as an approach to determining
the translational strategy of the virus. The RNA was translated into the same
specific set of 10 to 12 polypeptides in both in vitro systems. Immunological
tests and peptide analyses indicate that six translation products are related to 
SMV coat protein, and one of these comigrated with coat protein during
electrophoresis. Two other antigenically distinct classes of polypeptides were
identified by their specific immunoprecipitation with antibody against the SMV
cytoplasmic inclusion body protein or tobacco etch virus nuclear inclusion body
protein. To determine if any products of the in vitro translation reactions
resulted from proteolytic processing of a precursor molecule, translation
reactions were carried out with amino terminal label
N-formyl[35S]methionyl-tRNA(Met)i (f-Met), or with [35S]methionine, and the
resultant products were compared. The putative SMV coat protein and a translation
product related to the nuclear inclusion body protein were not labeled with f-Met
indicating that they were generated by proteolytic processing at their amino
termini. Consistent with this finding is the accumulation of new polypeptides of 
greater apparent molecular weight when amino acid analogs were present during
translation.

DOI: 10.1016/0042-6822(84)90034-5 
PMID: 18639801 

