
1. Ecohealth. 2008 Mar;5(1):40-8. doi: 10.1007/s10393-007-0150-0. Epub 2008 Feb 12.

Influence of warming tendency on Culex pipiens population abundance and on the
probability of West Nile fever outbreaks (Israeli Case Study: 2001-2005).

Paz S(1), Albersheim I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geography and Environmental Studies, University of Haifa, Abba
Hushi Road, Mt. Carmel, Haifa, 31905, Israel. shlomit@geo.haifa.ac.il

Climate change and West Nile fever (WNV) are both subjects of global importance. 
Many mosquitoes and the diseases they carry, including West Nile virus (WNV), are
sensitive to temperature increase. The current study analyzes the lag
correlations between weather conditions (especially air temperature) and 1) Culex
pipiens mosquito population abundance, and 2) WNF frequency in humans, between
2001 and 2005 in Israel. These 5 years follow a long period with a documented
tendency for temperature increase in the hot season in the country. Monthly
anomalies of minimum and maximum temperatures, relative seasonal rainfall
contribution, mosquito samplings (hazard level), and WNF cases (hospital
admission dates and patients' addresses) were analyzed. Logistic regression was
calculated between the climatic data and the mosquito samples, as Spearman
correlations and Pearson cross-correlations were calculated between daily
temperature values (or daily precipitation amounts) and the hospital admission
dates. It was found that the disease appearance reflects the population
distribution, while the risk tends to escalate around the metropolis
characterized by an urban heat island. Positive anomalies of the temperature
during the study period appear to have facilitated the mosquito abundance and,
consequently, the disease emergence in humans. An important finding is the
potential influence of extreme heat in the early spring on the vector population 
increase and on the disease's appearance weeks later. Awareness of such
situations at the beginning of the spring may help authorities to reduce the
disease risk before it becomes a real danger.

DOI: 10.1007/s10393-007-0150-0 
PMID: 18648796  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

