
1. J Viral Hepat. 2008 Nov;15(11):839-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2008.01017.x.
Epub 2008 Jul 17.

Expression of hepatitis B virus nuclear core antigen in young cirrhotic patients 
is associated with an unfavourable long-term outcome.

Yeh CT(1), Tang JH, Hsu CW, Chen YC, Chang ML, Lin CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Liver Cancer Research Centre, Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. chauting@adm.cgmh.org.tw

The aim of this case control study was to investigate the clinical significance
of hepatitis B virus nuclear core antigen (HBcAg) in young cirrhotic patients.
Fifteen cirrhotic patients with nuclear HBcAg in the liver biopsies were
included. Their clinicopathological parameters as well as the core gene sequences
were compared with those of a sex- and age-matched (1 to 2) control group. The
mean follow-up periods were 124 +/- 80 and 102 +/- 43 months, respectively.
Expression of nuclear HBcAg in cirrhotic liver was significantly associated with 
higher aspartate aminotransferase levels (P = 0.001), alanine aminotransferase
levels (P < 0.001), and alpha-fetoprotein levels (P = 0.002), as well as a
shorter duration to develop hepatocellular carcinoma or liver decompensation
(Kaplan-Meier method, P = 0.044). Sequence analysis revealed mutations on the
nuclear localization signal (NLS) of core protein in five cirrhotic patients with
nuclear HBcAg (Q171K in four and Q179K in one patients). Site-directed
mutagenesis experiments demonstrated that both the Q171K and Q179K mutation
enhanced nuclear localization of the core protein. In conclusion, expression of
nuclear HBcAg in young cirrhotic patients was associated with more severe
hepatitis activities as well as an unfavourable long-term outcome. Mutations on
the NLS of core protein were selected in some patients with nuclear HBcAg.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2008.01017.x 
PMID: 18647234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

