
1. Biomedica. 2008 Mar;28(1):78-86.

[Patterns of antiretroviral drug prescription in 997 Colombian patients].

[Article in Spanish]

Machado JE(1), Alzate JA.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Investigación de Farmacoepidemiología, Departamento de Ciencias
Básicas, Universidad Technológica de Pereira, Pereira, Colombia.
jormach@telesat.com.co

INTRODUCTION: Antiretroviral therapy for treatment of human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection has improved steadily since the advent of
combination therapy in 1996.
OBJECTIVE: The pharmacological therapies of the infection by HIV/AIDS were
documented in order to determine if effective treatment regimes were prescribed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Pharmacological therapies of the human immunodeficiency
virus infection were compared in 997 patients affiliated with the health security
system, of both sexes and all ages. All had been in treatment for more than three
months (July--September 2006) and were distributed in 15 Colombian cities. The
data were retrieved from medication consumption files which were maintained by
the institutions that had distributed medications to the selected patients.
RESULTS: The average age of patients was 37.7+/-13.2 and 82.6% were men. All the 
patients received between three to five antiretrovirals. The medications most
commonly prescribed were nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (96.4%),
nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (54.9%), protease inhibitors
(39.8%) and others (0.4%). All of the doses were at recommended levels. The most 
common combinations were lamivudine-zidovudine-efavirenz (35%),
lamivudine-zidovudine+lopinavir/ritonavir (8.4%), abacavir+lamivudine-zidovudine 
(5.5%), lamivudine-zidovudine+nevirapine (5.2 %) and others (45.9%), consisting
of 65 different combinations.
CONCLUSIONS: All agents were used at internationally recommended doses and
rational prescription patterns prevailed in the initial therapy. However, the use
of 69 different associations suggested that after the beginning of treatment,
clinicians do not have adequate criteria to prescribe in accordance with
international guidelines of antiretroviral therapy; they adopt a variety of
options that may be outside of established recommendations.


PMID: 18645663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

