
1. Lab Invest. 1976 Dec;35(6):515-24.

In vivo assembly and maturation of vesicular stomatitis virus.

Dal Canto MC, Rabinowitz SG, Johnson TC.

Previous studies on vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) maturation in infected cells
have utilized in vitro cell cultures. The present study is, to our knowledge, the
first in vivo analysis of VSV-cell interaction in the central nervous system of
weaning outbred Swiss mice. Intracerebral inoculation of wild-type VSV resulted
in rapid viral replication in brain and spinal cord. By immunoflourescence, viral
antigens were first seen in ependymal cells of brain and spinal cord and soon
thereafter in surrounding neurons. The large anterior horn neurons of spinal cord
appeared to be in the most heavily infected. Ultrastructurally, VSV-neuron
interaction evolved in three phases. The first phase consisted of viral entry
into the cell by fusion and viropexis. The second phase was characterized by
nucleocapsid accumulation and resulted in the appearance of large cytoplasmic
inclusions. The third phase was maturation and release from the infected cell and
was accomplished by viral budding from plasma membranes. Degenerative changes in 
infected neurons were generally absent. Cells in the area of the central canal
seemed to present a different pattern of virus-cell interaction especially at the
level of maturation and release. Some of these cells in advanced stages of
degeneration showed viral particles free in nucleocapsid material with no
virus-membrane association. Viral budding was not observed and, because these
cells do eventually die, it is possible that virus was released in the
intercellular space at the moment of cellular disruption. These results suggest
that VSV-cell interactions may vary depending upon the nature of the infected
cells.


PMID: 186663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

