
1. Am J Pathol. 2008 Sep;173(3):856-64. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.080096. Epub 2008
Aug 7.

Elevated expression of the miR-17-92 polycistron and miR-21 in
hepadnavirus-associated hepatocellular carcinoma contributes to the malignant
phenotype.

Connolly E(1), Melegari M, Landgraf P, Tchaikovskaya T, Tennant BC, Slagle BL,
Rogler LE, Zavolan M, Tuschl T, Rogler CE.

Author information: 
(1)Marion Bessin Liver Research Center, Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Alterations in microRNA (miRNA) expression in both human and animal models have
been linked to many forms of cancer. Such miRNAs, which act directly as
repressors of gene expression, have been found to frequently reside in fragile
sites and genomic regions associated with cancer. This study describes a miRNA
signature for human primary hepatitis B virus-positive human hepatocellular
carcinoma. Moreover, two known oncomiRs--miRNAs with known roles in cancer--the
miR-17-92 polycistron and miR-21, exhibited increased expression in 100% of
primary human and woodchuck hepatocellular carcinomas surveyed. To determine the 
importance of these miRNAs in tumorigenesis, an in vitro antisense
oligonucleotide knockdown model was evaluated for its ability to reverse the
malignant phenotype. Both in human and woodchuck HCC cell lines, separate
treatments with antisense oligonucleotides specific for either the miR-17-92
polycistron (all six members) or miR-21 caused a 50% reduction in both hepatocyte
proliferation and anchorage-independent growth. The combination of assays
presented here supports a role for these miRNAs in the maintenance of the
malignant transformation of hepatocytes.

DOI: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.080096 
PMCID: PMC2527078
PMID: 18688024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

