
1. J Virol Methods. 2008 Nov;153(2):196-202. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2008.07.012.
Epub 2008 Sep 6.

Optimization of plasmid-only rescue of highly attenuated and
temperature-sensitive respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) vaccine candidates for
human trials.

Kaur J(1), Tang RS, Spaete RR, Schickli JH.

Author information: 
(1)MedImmune, 297 N. Bernardo Avenue, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the most common cause of severe
bronchiolitis in infants and young children in the U.S. No licensed RSV vaccines 
are currently available. Established techniques for recovering RSV from cDNA
utilize mammalian cells, such as HEp-2 or BSR T7/5, that are not currently
suitable for vaccine manufacture. When using HEp-2 cells, co-infection with an
attenuated vaccinia virus that expresses T7 RNA polymerase is also required. For 
human clinical trials, processes that do not require the use of helper viruses
and minimize the use of animal derived materials must be developed to reduce the 
potential theoretical risk of transmitting adventitious agents such as BSE. RSV
was generated by electroporating Vero cells from a well characterized cell bank
with 6 plasmids expressing T7 RNA polymerase, the full-length anti-genomic RSV
and RSV N, P, M2-1 and L. The process was optimized such that highly attenuated
and temperature-sensitive RSV vaccine candidates could be recovered in a system
completely free of animal derived components. Efficiencies of virus recovery
ranged from 30% to 100%. Human metapneumovirus was also readily recovered,
suggesting that this protocol is applicable for the production of clinical trial 
material of other non-segmented negative sense RNA viruses.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2008.07.012 
PMID: 18722472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

