
1. Avian Pathol. 2008 Oct;37(5):527-35. doi: 10.1080/03079450802356946.

Avian hepatitis E virus infection and possible associated clinical disease in
broiler breeder flocks in Hungary.

Morrow CJ(1), Samu G, MÃ¡trai E, Klausz A, Wood AM, Richter S, Jaskulska B, Hess
M.

Author information: 
(1)Bioproperties Ltd, Ringwood, Victoria, Australia.
Chris.morrow@bioproperties.com.au

In broiler breeder flocks in one broiler integration in Hungary, a new syndrome
appeared in January 2005 with initially four successive post-peak flocks
experiencing significant decreases in egg production. Clinically birds became
depressed and there was a small increase in the mortality rate. Postmortem
examinations revealed enlarged livers in up to 19% of birds dying, and enlarged
spleens in some. Also observed were birds with either clotted blood or
serosanguineous fluid in the abdomen and subcapsular haemorrhages of the liver.
Histopathology and polymerase chain reaction excluded tumours and the presence of
common tumour-associated viruses. Chronic bacterial infections (especially
causing hepatitis, peritonitis and airsacculitis) were common but many enlarged
livers had no obvious bacterial involvement. After a 9-month period during which 
a majority of flocks became affected, no newly affected flocks occurred.
Investigations showed that all tested affected flocks were seropositive in the
big liver and spleen (BLS) Agar Gel Immunodiffusion test. Subsequent flocks
without post-peak egg-production drops were shown to be seronegative in the BLS
AGID test, as were all the parent flocks contributing to the affected flocks.
Liver samples and cloacal swabs were positive by polymerase chain reaction (aHEV 
helicase target), and calicivirus-like particles were demonstrated in bile
samples from affected birds. These observations are similar to
hepatitis-splenomegaly syndrome as described in North America and BLS syndrome as
described in Australia. Histopathological features were a non-specific chronic
hepatitis similar to those described in BLS and hepatitis-splenomegaly syndrome. 
Immunohistochemistry using a BLS-specific monoclonal antibody confirmed the
presence of avian hepatitis E virus antigen in livers and spleen.

DOI: 10.1080/03079450802356946 
PMID: 18798029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

