
1. Traffic. 2008 Nov;9(11):1972-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2008.00817.x. Epub 2008
Aug 9.

Functional replacement of a retroviral late domain by ubiquitin fusion.

Joshi A(1), Munshi U, Ablan SD, Nagashima K, Freed EO.

Author information: 
(1)Virus-Cell Interaction Section, HIV Drug Resistance Program, National Cancer
Institute, Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA.

Retroviral Gag polyprotein precursors are both necessary and sufficient for the
assembly and release of virus-like particles (VLPs) from infected cells. It is
well established that small Gag-encoded motifs, known as late domains, promote
particle release by interacting with components of the cellular endosomal sorting
and ubiquitination machinery. The Gag proteins of a number of different
retroviruses are ubiquitinated; however, the role of Gag ubiquitination in
particle egress remains undefined. In this study, we investigated this question
by using a panel of equine infectious anemia virus (EIAV) Gag derivatives bearing
the wild-type EIAV late domain, heterologous retroviral late domains or no late
domain. Ubiquitin was fused in cis to the C-termini of these Gag polyproteins,
and the effects on VLP budding were measured. Remarkably, fusion of ubiquitin to 
EIAV Gag lacking a late domain (EIAV/DeltaYPDL-Ub) largely rescued VLP release.
We also determined the effects of ubiquitin fusion on the sensitivity of particle
release to budding inhibitors and to depletion of key endosomal sorting factors. 
Ubiquitin fusion rendered EIAV/DeltaYPDL-Ub sensitive to depletion of cellular
endosomal sorting factors Tsg101 and Alix and to overexpression of
dominant-negative fragments of Tsg101 and Alix. These findings demonstrate that
ubiquitin can functionally compensate for the absence of a retroviral late domain
and provide insights into the host-cell machinery engaged by ubiquitin during
particle egress.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2008.00817.x 
PMCID: PMC2763539
PMID: 18817521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

