
1. J Virol. 1991 Oct;65(10):5465-70.

Neuroattenuation of an avirulent bunyavirus variant maps to the L RNA segment.

Endres MJ(1), Griot C, Gonzalez-Scarano F, Nathanson N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia 19104-6076.

The derivation and characterization of a neuroattenuated reassortant clone (RFC
25/B.5) of California serogroup bunyavirus was described previously (M. J.
Endres, A. Valsamakis, F. Gonzalez-Scarano, and N. Nathanson, J. Virol.
64:1927-1933, 1990). To map the RNA segment responsible for this attenuation, a
panel of reassortants was constructed between the attenuated clone B.5 (genotype 
TLL) and a virulent clone (B1-1a) of reciprocal genotype (LTT). Parent viruses
and clones representing all of the six possible reassortants were examined for
neurovirulence by intracerebral injection in adult mice. Reassortants bearing the
large RNA segment from the virulent parent were almost as virulent as the
virulent parent virus, while reassortants bearing the large RNA segment from the 
avirulent parent virus exhibited low or intermediate virulence. These results
indicate that the large RNA segment is the major determinant of neuroattenuation 
of clone B.5. In addition to its neuroattenuation, clone B.5 was temperature
sensitive and exhibited an altered plaque morphology. These phenotypes also
segregated with the large RNA segment. The importance of the large RNA segment
(which encodes the viral polymerase) in neurovirulence contrasts with prior
studies which indicate that the ability to cause lethal encephalitis after
peripheral injection of suckling mice (neuroinvasiveness) is primarily determined
by the middle-sized RNA segment, which encodes the viral glycoproteins.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.65.10.5465-5470.1991 
PMCID: PMC249038
PMID: 1895395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

