
1. Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics. 2008 Jun;6(2):121-8. doi:
10.1016/S1672-0229(08)60027-3.

Identification of microRNA precursors with support vector machine and string
kernel.

Xu JH(1), Li F, Sun QF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210097,
China. xujianhua@njnu.edu.cn

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are one family of short (21-23 nt) regulatory non-coding RNAs 
processed from long (70-110 nt) miRNA precursors (pre-miRNAs). Identifying true
and false precursors plays an important role in computational identification of
miRNAs. Some numerical features have been extracted from precursor sequences and 
their secondary structures to suit some classification methods; however, they may
lose some usefully discriminative information hidden in sequences and structures.
In this study, pre-miRNA sequences and their secondary structures are directly
used to construct an exponential kernel based on weighted Levenshtein distance
between two sequences. This string kernel is then combined with support vector
machine (SVM) for detecting true and false pre-miRNAs. Based on 331 training
samples of true and false human pre-miRNAs, 2 key parameters in SVM are selected 
by 5-fold cross validation and grid search, and 5 realizations with different
5-fold partitions are executed. Among 16 independent test sets from 3 human, 8
animal, 2 plant, 1 virus, and 2 artificially false human pre-miRNAs, our method
statistically outperforms the previous SVM-based technique on 11 sets, including 
3 human, 7 animal, and 1 false human pre-miRNAs. In particular, premiRNAs with
multiple loops that were usually excluded in the previous work are correctly
identified in this study with an accuracy of 92.66%.

DOI: 10.1016/S1672-0229(08)60027-3 
PMCID: PMC5054094
PMID: 18973868  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

