
1. PLoS One. 2008;3(11):e3725. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003725. Epub 2008 Nov 14.

Treatment of late stage disease in a model of arenaviral hemorrhagic fever: T-705
efficacy and reduced toxicity suggests an alternative to ribavirin.

Gowen BB(1), Smee DF, Wong MH, Hall JO, Jung KH, Bailey KW, Stevens JR, Furuta Y,
Morrey JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Antiviral Research, Logan, UT, USA. brian.gowen@usu.edu

A growing number of arenaviruses are known to cause viral hemorrhagic fever (HF),
a severe and life-threatening syndrome characterized by fever, malaise, and
increased vascular permeability. Ribavirin, the only licensed antiviral indicated
for the treatment of certain arenaviral HFs, has had mixed success and
significant toxicity. Since severe arenaviral infections initially do not present
with distinguishing symptoms and are difficult to clinically diagnose at early
stages, it is of utmost importance to identify antiviral therapies effective at
later stages of infection. We have previously reported that T-705, a substituted 
pyrazine derivative currently under development as an anti-influenza drug, is
highly active in hamsters infected with Pichinde virus when the drug is
administered orally early during the course of infection. Here we demonstrate
that T-705 offers significant protection against this lethal arenaviral infection
in hamsters when treatment is begun after the animals are ill and the day before 
the animals begin to succumb to disease. Importantly, this coincides with the
time when peak viral loads are present in most organs and considerable tissue
damage is evident. We also show that T-705 is as effective as, and less toxic
than, ribavirin, as infected T-705-treated hamsters on average maintain their
weight better and recover more rapidly than animals treated with ribavirin.
Further, there was no added benefit to combination therapy with T-705 and
ribavirin. Finally, pharmacokinetic data indicate that plasma T-705 levels
following oral administration are markedly reduced during the latter stages of
disease, and may contribute to the reduced efficacy seen when treatment is
withheld until day 7 of infection. Our findings support further pre-clinical
development of T-705 for the treatment of severe arenaviral infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003725 
PMCID: PMC2579488
PMID: 19008960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

