
1. APMIS. 2008 Sep;116(9):816-22.

Maternal Epstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus infections and risk of testicular
cancer in the offspring: a nested case-control study.

Holl K(1), Surcel HM, Koskela P, Dillner J, Hallmans G, Wadell G, Kaasila M,
Olafsdottir GH, Ogmundsdottir HM, Pukkala E, Stattino P, Lehtinen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Health, National Public Health Institute,
Oulu, Finland. katsiaryna.holl@uta.fi

During recent decades the incidence of testicular cancer (TC) has increased
rapidly around the world. Associated exogenous etiological factors might
therefore be identifiable. We performed a case-control study nested within
Finnish, Swedish and Icelandic maternity cohorts exploiting early pregnancy serum
samples to evaluate the role of congenital or neonatal infections with
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV) as risk factors of TC in the
offspring. For each case-index mother pair, three or four matched control-control
mother pairs were identified using national population registries. First
trimester sera were retrieved from the index mothers of 66 TC cases and 258
matched control mothers, and were tested for antibodies to EBV and CMV. High
level of maternal EBV IgG antibodies was associated with significantly increased 
risk of TC in the offspring (odds ratio (OR), 2.50; 95% confidence interval (CI),
1.15, 5.40), especially with risk of non-seminoma TC (OR, 2.73; 950% CI, 1.25,
5.99) and non-seminoma TC diagnosed under 8 years of age (OR, 2.72; 95% CI, 1.05,
7.04). In contrast, offspring of CMV IgG-seropositive mothers had a decreased
risk of TC diagnosed under 8 years of age (OR, 0.35; 95% CI, 0.14, 0.89). Our
results suggest that EBV and CMV infections may be associated with TC.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2008.00983.x 
PMID: 19024602  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

