
1. Hepatology. 2009 Jan;49(1):195-203. doi: 10.1002/hep.22655.

Insulin resistance is a risk factor for esophageal varices in hepatitis C virus
cirrhosis.

Cammà C(1), Petta S, Di Marco V, Bronte F, Ciminnisi S, Licata G, Peralta S,
Simone F, Marchesini G, Craxì A.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra & Unità Operativa di Gastroenterologia, Di.Bi.M.I.S., University of
Palermo, Italy.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2009 Apr;49(4):1394; author reply 1394-5.
    Hepatology. 2009 May;49(5):1775-6; author reply 1776.
    Hepatology. 2009 May;49(5):1775; author reply 1776.

Indirect methods to predict the presence of esophageal varices (EV) in patients
with cirrhosis are not sensitive enough to be used as a surrogate for endoscopy. 
We tested the effectiveness of liver stiffness measurement (LSM) by transient
elastography and the presence of insulin resistance (IR), a marker associated
with fibrosis progression, in the noninvasive prediction of portal hypertension. 
One hundred four consecutive patients with newly diagnosed Child A hepatitis C
virus (HCV) cirrhosis underwent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy to search for
EV. Clinical, anthropometric, biochemical, ultrasonographic, and metabolic
features, including IR by the homeostasis model assessment (HOMA), and LSM by
transient elastography, were recorded at the time of endoscopy. EVs were detected
in 63 of 104 patients (60%). In 10 patients (16%), the EVs were medium-large
(>or=F2). By multivariate analysis, the presence of EVs was independently
associated with a low platelet count/spleen diameter ratio (OR, 0.998; 95% CI,
0.996-0.999) and a high HOMA-IR score (OR, 1.296; 95%CI, 1.018-1.649), not with
LSM (OR, 1.009; 95%CI, 0.951-1.070). It is noteworthy that nine of ten patients
with medium-large EVs had a platelet/spleen ratio of less than 792 or an HOMA-IR 
of greater than 3.5. The independent association between low platelet
count/spleen diameter ratio (OR, 0.998; 95%CI, 0.996-1.000), high HOMA-IR score
(OR, 1.373; 95%CI, 1.014-1.859) and presence of EV was confirmed in the subgroup 
of 77 nondiabetic subjects.CONCLUSIONS: In patients with Child A HCV cirrhosis,
two simple, easy-to-get tests, namely the platelet/spleen ratio and insulin
resistance measured by HOMA-IR, regardless of the presence of diabetes,
significantly predict the presence of EV, outweighing the contribution given by
transient elastography.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.22655 
PMID: 19065558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

