
1. Microbes Infect. 2009 Feb;11(2):198-204. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2008.11.005. Epub 
2008 Nov 24.

Escape mutation selected by Gag28-36-specific cytotoxic T cells in
HLA-A*2402-positive HIV-1-infected donors.

Koizumi H(1), Iwatani T, Tanuma J, Fujiwara M, Izumi T, Oka S, Takiguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Viral Immunology, Center for AIDS Research, Kumamoto University,
2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

Gag-specific CTLs are known to have stronger ability to control HIV-1 replication
than others that are protein-specific. Therefore, the analysis of Gag escape
mutants is expected to clarify the mechanisms of immune control in HIV-1-infected
donors. However, only a limited number of Gag escape mutants have been identified
so far. A previous study suggested the possibility that Gag28-3R (KW9-3R) is an
escape mutant from HLA-A*2402-restricted KW9-specific CTLs but did not show any
evidence of it. Here we sought to demonstrate that KW9-3R is selected as escape
mutant by KW9-specific CTLs. KW9-specific CTLs showed a remarkable reduction in
recognition of target cells infected with the KW9-3R mutant. The sequence
analysis of HIV-1 from 58 HIV-1-infected individuals showed that the frequency of
the KW9-3R mutant was significantly higher in HLA-A*2402(+) individuals than in
HLA-A*2402(-) individuals. Longitudinal analysis of an HLA-A*2402(+) individual
with HIV-1 early infection showed that this escape mutant was selected over an
approximately 2-year period. These results together indicate that Gag28-3R is an 
escape mutant selected by HLA-A*2402-restricted KW9-specific CTLs. Further
analysis of this epitope will clarify the role of HIV-1-specific CTLs in the
control of HIV-1 among the Japanese population, since 70% of them carry this
allele.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2008.11.005 
PMID: 19063987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

