
1. Vet Microbiol. 2009 May 28;137(1-2):60-5. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2009.01.002. Epub
2009 Jan 6.

Sequence and classification of FdPV2, a papillomavirus isolated from feline
Bowenoid in situ carcinomas.

Lange CE(1), Tobler K, Markau T, Alhaidari Z, Bornand V, Stöckli R, Trüssel M,
Ackermann M, Favrot C.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Unit, Clinic for Small Animal Internal Medicine, Vetsuisse
Faculty, Zurich, Switzerland. clange@vetclinics.uzh.ch

Bowenoid in situ squamous cell carcinoma (BISC) is a rare feline skin disorder,
which has been described as often associated with papillomavirus infection. It is
clinically characterized by solitary or multiple hyperkeratotic plaques affecting
older cats. Papillomavirus (PV) sequences amplified from feline viral plaques,
and BISC lesions seldom correspond to FdPV1. The goal of the present study was to
investigate three cases of BISC and to carry out initial genomic analysis of the 
associated viral DNA. Samples of skin biopsies taken from three BISC cats were
histologically characterized. DNA was extracted and rolling-circle amplification 
was performed on the skin samples. Restriction enzyme analysis of the amplified
DNA revealed the presence of a putative unknown PV. The whole genome was
subsequently sequenced and cloned. Alignments with previously described feline PV
sequences were carried out and phylogenetic trees were generated. The circular
7,899 base pair sequence of Felis domesticus PV type 2 (FdPV2) contains a typical
noncoding region and characteristic open reading frames (ORF) for six putative
viral proteins. Phylogenetic analysis based on the nucleotide alignment of L1
genes or the amino acid alignment of E1 proteins of FdPV2 and 52 other PV types
indicates that FdPV2 might represent a new genus.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2009.01.002 
PMID: 19181460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

