
1. Eur J Epidemiol. 2009;24(3):149-55. doi: 10.1007/s10654-009-9315-1. Epub 2009 Feb
7.

Surveillance of lower respiratory tract infections outbreaks in nursing homes in 
France.

Vaux S(1), Poujol I, Bonmarin I, Lévy-Bruhl D, Desenclos JC.

Author information: 
(1)Département des maladies infectieuses, Institut de Veille Sanitaire, French
Institute for Public Health Surveillance, Saint-Maurice Cedex, France.
s.vaux@invs.sante.fr

Lower respiratory tract infections (LRTI) are the leading cause of infectious
deaths in nursing homes. An early reporting procedure of LRTI outbreaks to local 
public health authorities was set up in France in 2006 in order to reduce the
morbidity and the mortality related to these events. Local public health
authorities reported these outbreaks to the French institute for Public Health
Surveillance through a web application allowing a real-time exchange of
information. Between August 2006 and July 2007, 64 outbreaks were reported. In
more than 30% of the episodes, influenza virus was detected. On average, attacks 
rates were 22% for the residents and 7% for the staff. Staff members were
affected in at least 56% of outbreaks. Average influenza vaccine uptake was 91%
for the residents and 38% for the staff. The time for control measures
implementation was 6.7 days on average and control measures were implemented
after reporting in 36% of outbreaks. When control measures were implemented more 
than 2 days after the onset of the first case, the duration of outbreaks was
longer (16.4 days vs. 8.3 days, P < 0.005) and residents had an increased rate of
LRTI (P < 0.001) than when these measures were implemented earlier. These data
show that the influenza immunization coverage for staff working in nursing homes 
is limited. The implementation of control measures is often delayed, although
recommendations stress that they should start upon diagnosis of the first case.
Reporting creates a dialog between nursing homes and public health professionals 
which facilitates outbreak management.

DOI: 10.1007/s10654-009-9315-1 
PMID: 19199055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

