
1. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2009 Feb 6;58(RR-2):1-25.

Prevention of rotavirus gastroenteritis among infants and children:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP).

Cortese MM(1), Parashar UD; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory
Diseases, Atlanta GA 30333, USA. mcortese@cdc.gov

Erratum in
    MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010 Aug 27;59(33):1074.

Rotavirus is the most common cause of severe gastroenteritis in infants and young
children worldwide. Before initiation of the rotavirus vaccination program in the
United States in 2006, approximately 80% of U.S. children had rotavirus
gastroenteritis by age 5 years. Each year during the 1990s and early 2000s,
rotavirus resulted in approximately 410,000 physician visits, 205,000272,000
emergency department visits, and 55,00070,000 hospitalizations among U.S. infants
and children, with total annual direct and indirect costs of approximately $1
billion. In February 2006, a live, oral, human-bovine reassortant rotavirus
vaccine (RotaTeq(R) [RV5]) was licensed as a 3-dose series for use among U.S.
infants for the prevention of rotavirus gastroenteritis, and the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommended routine use of RV5 among
U.S. infants (CDC. Prevention of rotavirus gastroenteritis among infants and
children: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
[ACIP]. MMWR 2006;55[No. RR-12]). In April 2008, a live, oral, human attenuated
rotavirus vaccine (Rotarix(R) [RV1]) was licensed as a 2-dose series for use
among U.S. infants, and in June 2008, ACIP updated its rotavirus vaccine
recommendations to include use of RV1. This report updates and replaces the 2006 
ACIP statement for prevention of rotavirus gastroenteritis. ACIP recommends
routine vaccination of U.S. infants with rotavirus vaccine. RV5 and RV1 differ in
composition and schedule of administration. RV5 is to be administered orally in a
3-dose series, with doses administered at ages 2, 4, and 6 months. RV1 is to be
administered orally in a 2-dose series, with doses administered at ages 2 and 4
months. ACIP does not express a preference for either RV5 or RV1. The
recommendations in this report also address the maximum ages for doses,
contraindications, precautions, and special situations for the administration of 
rotavirus vaccine.


PMID: 19194371  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

