
1. J Fish Dis. 2009 Apr;32(4):311-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2008.00993.x. Epub
2009 Feb 18.

Antibody response of two populations of common carp, Cyprinus carpio L., exposed 
to koi herpesvirus.

St-Hilaire S(1), Beevers N, Joiner C, Hedrick RP, Way K.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, Weymouth, Dorset,
UK.

Common carp, Cyprinus carpio L., exposed to koi herpesvirus (KHV) may become
persistently infected and populations containing such virus-infected individuals 
may transmit the virus to other fish when co-habited. Detection of virus-infected
fish in a population is thus critical to surveillance and control programmes for 
KHV. A study was therefore designed to detect anti-KHV serum antibodies, with an 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, in common carp following experimental
exposures to KHV under varying environmental conditions. The study determined
that a proportion of fish within a population experimentally exposed to KHV (at
least 10-25%) develop high antibody titres (1/1600 or greater) to the virus, and 
this immunological response was detectable for several months (observed at the
termination of the experiments at 65, 46 and 27 weeks post-exposure).
Furthermore, this response was detected in one population of fish that did not
succumb to a high level of mortality when maintained at water temperatures that
were non-permissive for KHV. Elevating the water temperatures to permissive
conditions for KHV resulted in recurrence of disease despite the presence of
anti-virus antibodies, suggesting that serum antibodies alone are not protective 
under the conditions of our trials.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2008.00993.x 
PMID: 19236553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

