
1. S Afr Med J. 1991 Oct 5;80(7):340-3.

Sexual behaviour and knowledge of AIDS among urban black mothers. Implications
for AIDS intervention programmes.

Abdool Karim Q(1), Abdool Karim SS, Nkomokazi J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Diseases, Tropical Environment of the South African
Medical Research Council, Durban.

Questionnaires were administered to 122 urban black mothers of teenagers in order
to: (i) understand aspects of their sexual behaviour and knowledge of the
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS); and (ii) assess their communication
with their teenage children with regard to AIDS and sexual behaviour. The
subjects comprised a 12.5% random sample of all houses in Lamontville, a black
township south of Durban. The level of AIDS knowledge among mothers was high,
while their sexual behaviour, characterised by a high pregnancy rate and a high
proportion who have had children by more than one consort, placed them at high
risk of acquiring human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. No mother had
experienced sexual intercourse during which her partner used a condom.
Communication with their teenage children was poor; none of the mothers had
spoken with them about AIDS and 89.3% had not discussed contraceptive methods
with their teenage children. We found that urban black mothers were at high risk 
of acquiring HIV and, despite their knowledge of the modes of transmission and
prevention of HIV infection, they had not begun using condoms as a risk-reducing 
measure, nor had they communicated the risk of unprotected sex to their teenage
children. We recommend that AIDS intervention strategies should not concentrate
only on passing on knowledge but also on providing women with the communication
skills to negotiate the use of condoms with their partners and to convey the risk
of HIV infection to their teenage children.


PMID: 1925842  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

