
1. Hepatology. 2009 Apr;49(4):1090-7. doi: 10.1002/hep.22794.

HBV superinfection in HCV chronic carriers: a disease that is frequently severe
but associated with the eradication of HCV.

Sagnelli E(1), Coppola N, Pisaturo M, Masiello A, Tonziello G, Sagnelli C,
Messina V, Filippini P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Medicine, Section of Infectious Diseases, 2nd University 
of Naples, Naples, Italy. evangelista.sagnelli@unina2.it

The impact of hepatitis B virus (HBV) superinfection in hepatitis C virus (HCV)
chronic carriers was evaluated in a long-term follow-up study on 29 chronic
anti-HCV carriers with acute hepatitis B (AVH-B) (Case group BC) and 29 anti-HCV 
negative patients with AVH-B (Control group B), pair-matched for age (+/-5
years), sex, and risk factors for the acquisition of HBV infection. Patients in
Case group BC and those in Control group B showed similar initial HBV viral load 
and a similar trend of becoming negative for HBV-DNA. AVH-B showed a severe
course more frequently in Case group BC than in Control group B (34.5% versus
6.9%, P < 0.05). Of the 28 patients in Case group BC alive at the end of the
acute illness (one death from liver failure), 24 were followed up for 2-6 years, 
median 5 years: 22 patients became HBsAg-negative and two progressed to
HBsAg-positive chronic hepatitis. HCV-RNA was undetectable in all patients during
AVH-B; in the 24 patients with a long-term follow-up, HCV-RNA was detected in
seven (29.2%) after 1 year, in 14 (58.3%) after 2 years, and in 18 (75%) after
3-6 years. The six patients who eradicated chronic HCV infection, compared with
18 showing reactivation of HCV replication, had higher values of aspartate
aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase and a higher prevalence of cases
with severe AVH-B (83.3% versus 22.2%, P < 0.05).CONCLUSIONS: Although it can be 
life-threatening, HBV superinfection in HCV chronic carriers may lead to
clearance of chronic HCV infection, especially in patients with severe AVH-B.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.22794 
PMID: 19263473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

