
1. J Immunol Methods. 2009 Mar 31;343(1):42-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2009.01.008.

Fluorescent dye labeled influenza virus mainly infects innate immune cells and
activated lymphocytes and can be used in cell-mediated immune response assay.

Xie D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Connecticut School of Medicine,
Farmington, CT 06030-1601, USA. dx2118@columbia.edu

Early results have recognized that influenza virus infects the innate and
adaptive immune cells. The data presented in this paper demonstrated that
influenza virus labeled with fluorescent dye not only retained the ability to
infect and replicate in host cells, but also stimulated a similar human immune
response as did unlabeled virus. Influenza virus largely infected the innate and 
activated adaptive immune cells. Influenza B type virus was different from that
of A type virus. B type virus was able to infect the immature lymphocytes, but in
lower amounts when compared to activated lymphocytes. Protection from influenza
is tightly associated with cellular immunity. Traditional methods of cellular
immunity assay had limitations to imitate the natural human cell-mediated
responses to influenza virus. Labeled viruses could be used in the assay of
virus-specific cytotoxicity, which might reflect the natural process more
closely. Furthermore, human immune cells activated by one influenza subtype virus
could kill the cells infected by other subtype virus. These results implied the
human immune cells could directly handle and remove free virus using similar
mechanism that was used to remove virus-infected nonimmune cells, which might
help to simplify the design and production of influenza vaccine, thereby reduce
the cost.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2009.01.008 
PMCID: PMC2888934
PMID: 19330946  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

