
1. Vaccine. 2009 Mar 18;27(13):1957-63. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.01.098. Epub
2009 Jan 31.

Immunogenicity of the highly pathogenic porcine reproductive and respiratory
syndrome virus GP5 protein encoded by a synthetic ORF5 gene.

Li B(1), Xiao S, Wang Y, Xu S, Jiang Y, Chen H, Fang L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Infectious Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Agricultural
Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University,
Wuhan 430070, PR China.

Since May 2006, a highly pathogenic porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome
virus (PRRSV), which causes continuous high fever and a high proportion of deaths
in vaccinated pigs of all ages, has emerged and prevailed in Mainland China. Huge
efforts should be made towards the development of an efficient vaccine against
the highly pathogenic PRRSV. Although the ORF5-encoded GP5 is the most important 
immunogenic protein, accumulating evidences have demonstrated that incomplete
protection conferred by GP5-based vaccines. The inability to induce robust
protective immunity has been postulated to be associated with the presence of a
non-neutralizing decoy epitope and heavy glycosylation in close to its
neutralizing epitope. In this study, a synthetic ORF5 gene (SynORF5) was
engineered with the codon usage optimized for mammalian cell expression based on 
the native ORF5 gene of highly pathogenic PRRSV strain WUH3. Additional
modifications, i.e., inserting a Pan DR T-helper cell epitope (PADRE) between the
neutralizing epitope and the non-neutralizing decoy epitope, and mutating four
potential N-glycosylation sites (N30, N34, N35 and N51) were also included in the
synthetic ORF5 gene. The immunogenicity of the SynORF5-encoded GP5 was evaluated 
by DNA vaccination in mice and piglets. Results showed that significantly
enhanced GP5-specific ELISA antibody, PRRSV-specific neutralizing antibody,
IFN-gamma level, as well as lymphocyte proliferation response, could be induced
in mice and piglets immunized with DNA construct encoding the modified GP5 than
those received DNA vaccine expressing the native GP5. The enhanced immunogenicity
of the modified GP5 will be useful to facilitate the development of efficient
vaccines against the highly pathogenic PRRSV in the future.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.01.098 
PMID: 19368777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

