
1. Arch Pharm Res. 2009 Mar;32(3):383-9. doi: 10.1007/s12272-009-1311-1. Epub 2009
Apr 23.

Serologic response to human papillomavirus type 16 virus-like particles in Korean
women with cervical precancerous and cancerous lesions.

Jeong NH(1), Lee NW, Woo MK, Kim HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine, Kyung-Hee
University, Seoul, Korea.

The aim of the study was to investigate the seroprevalence to HPV type 16 in
Korean women with precancerous and cancerous lesions of the uterine cervix. The
cases were 173 Korean women of whom 130 had high-grade cervical intraepithelial
neoplasias (CIN), 43 cervical carcinomas and the control group was 106 women
showing normal cervical cytology. Serologic assays were performed using HPV-16
VLPs as antigen in an ELISA. Specific antibodies against HPV-16 VLP were detected
in 59.2% (77/130) of the patients with high-grade CIN, in 67.4% (29/43) of the
patients with cervical cancer and in 20.8% (22/106) of control subjects. No
difference of serologic response was found between high-grade CIN and cancer.
HPV-16 seropositivity showed the significant association with patients' age and
preoperative HPV DNA infection. Recurrence of high-grade CIN was not affected by 
the VLP-16 seropositivity. Recurrence of carcinoma showed the borderline
association with HPV-16 seropositivity (P=0.06). The association between the
cancer recurrence and seropositivity was not found in the logistic regression
analysis. Two patients dying of cancer during the follow-up period were both
seronegative (P=0.01). In conclusion, serologic testing for HPV-16 VLP antibody
provides a disease indicator of cervical lesions and potential prognostic
parameter of cervical carcinoma.

DOI: 10.1007/s12272-009-1311-1 
PMID: 19387582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

