
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2009 Oct 15;131(3-4):158-66. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2009.04.003. Epub 2009 Apr 11.

Prime-boost immunization using alphavirus replicon and adenovirus vectored
vaccines induces enhanced immune responses against classical swine fever virus in
mice.

Zhao HP(1), Sun JF, Li N, Sun Y, Wang Y, Qiu HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Swine Infectious Diseases, National Key Laboratory of Veterinary
Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China.

This study was designed to evaluate the prime-boost vaccination regimens as a
novel immunization strategy for DNA vaccine against classical swine fever virus
(CSFV). BALB/c mice were primed with the alphavirus replicon-vectored DNA vaccine
pSFV1CS-E2-UL49 encoding the E2 protein of CSFV fused with the UL49 gene encoding
the transduction protein VP22 of pseudorabies virus, followed by either
homologous boosting with pSFV1CS-E2-UL49 or heterologous boosting with the
recombinant adenovirus rAdV-E2 expressing the E2 protein or with the
baculovirus-produced recombinant E2 protein (rE2) in adjuvant. The humoral and
cell-mediated immune responses following prime-boost vaccination were assessed.
The results showed that: (1) boosting with either rAdV-E2 or rE2 elicited
high-level antibodies, whereas homologous boosting with pSFV1CS-E2-UL49 elicited 
low-level antibodies (below positive threshold); (2) heterologous boosting with
rAdV-E2 resulted in stronger CD8(+) and CD4(+) T cells proliferation responses
and higher stimulation indexes; and (3) heterologous boosting with rAdV-E2
induced more IFN-gamma production. These results support the notion that a
regimen of DNA prime-recombinant adenovirus boost enhances humoral and
cell-mediated immune responses, and the DNA prime-protein boost regimen enhances 
humoral immune responses.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2009.04.003 
PMID: 19411115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

