
1. BMC Public Health. 2009 Jun 19;9:195. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-9-195.

Characteristics and determinants of sexual behavior among adolescents of migrant 
workers in Shangai (China).

Li S(1), Huang H, Cai Y, Xu G, Huang F, Shen X.

Author information: 
(1)Shangai Xin Hua Hospital affiliated with Shangai Jiaotong University School of
Medicine, Shangai, PR China. Lsh9907@163.com

BACKGROUND: China is facing a critical challenge of rapid and widespread human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) increase. 
Rural-to-urban migration plays a crucial role in shifting the HIV/sexual
transmitted infection (STI) epidemic. The purpose of this study was to assess the
prevalence of sexual behaviors and the correlates among the early adolescents of 
migrant workers in China.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted in 10 junior high schools from
April to June of 2008. A total of 2821 adolescents aged 14.06 +/- 0.93 years
(8.9% of migrant workers vs. 91.1% of general residents) participated in the
survey. A self-administrated questionnaire was used to collect information on
knowledge, attitude, and behaviors associated with increased risk for HIV/STI.
RESULTS: The percentage of adolescents who ever had sexual intercourse or had
sexual intercourse in last three months was 7.2% and 4.3% in adolescents of
migrant workers, respectively; in contrast, 4.5% and 1.8% in their peers of
general residents, respectively. 47.3% adolescents of migrant workers and 34.3%
of those adolescents of general residents reported no condom use in sexual
intercourse during last three months. Multivariate logistic regression analyses
found that migration was a independent risk factor for sexual intercourse in last
three months in our sampled adolescents (odds ratio [OR] = 1.23, 95% confidence
interval [CI]: 1.01-1.72). In adolescents of migrant workers, factors such as
lower family income (OR: 2.22, CI: 1.09-3.05 for low level; OR:1.25, CI:
1.04-1.59 for medium level), younger age at first sexual intercourse (OR: 1.24,
CI: 1.09-1.57), lower knowledge on HIV/AIDS (OR: 0.93, CI: 0.90-0.97), and fewer 
communication on HIV/AIDS related issues (OR: 0.79, CI: 0.90-0.97) were related
to sexual intercourse in last three months.
CONCLUSION: Based on these results, we advocated that heightened concerns
targeting the adolescents of migrant workers be particularly necessary, given
their higher level of sexual experience, lower socioeconomic status, restricted
reproductive health information, and vulnerability to HIV/STI.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2458-9-195 
PMCID: PMC2706248
PMID: 19538756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

