
1. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Dec;22(6):422-4.

[Relationships between liver function test, serum HBeAg or HBV DNA level and
liver pathological changes in patients with chronic hepatitis B].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu QH(1), Shu X, Chen LB, Huang HH, Zhang K, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease, Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yet-sen
University, Guangzhou 510630, China. xqh0303@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between
liver function test, serum HBeAg, HBV DNA level and liver pathological changes in
patients with chronic hepatitis B.
METHODS: 233 patients with chronic hepatitis B accept liver puncture biopsy,
liver function test, HBeAg detection and HBV DNA fluorescent quantitation PCR
detection. Comparisons of liver function test, HBeAg and HBV DNA level were
conducted among different liver pathological changes including inflammation
grading and fibrosis staging.
RESULTS: In different inflammation grading groups, ALT was highest in group G3
and lowest in group G(0-1)(P = 0.016); TBil was highest in group G4 and lowest in
group G(0-1) (P = 0.000); HBV DNA level was highest in group G4 and lowest in
group G(0-1), but not statistically significant among groups (P = 0.463). In
different fibrosis staging groups, ALT was highest in group S3 and lowest in
group S(0-1), but not statistically significant among groups (P = 0.562); TBil
was highest in group S4 and lowest in group S2 (P = 0.039); HBV DNA level was
highest in group S3 and lowest in group S(0-1), but not statistically significant
among groups (P = 0.395). In HBeAg positive group,the proportion of G(3-4) in
inflammation grading or S(3-4) in fibrosis staging was lower than that in HBeAg
negative group (46% vs. 52%, P = 0.438; 38% vs. 53%, P = 0.025; respectively).
CONCLUSION: HBV DNA level can not indicate the severity of liver inflammation or 
fibrosis in chronic HBV infection. Patients with HBeAg negative often are
complicated with more severity of liver fibrosis. In routine liver function test,
TBil level correlates with liver inflammation grading or fibrosis staging; ALT
level also correlates with liver inflammation grading but not with fibrosis
staging.


PMID: 19544633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

