
1. Liver Transpl. 2009 Jul;15(7):754-62. doi: 10.1002/lt.21744.

Survival after liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma in the model
for end-stage liver disease and pre-model for end-stage liver disease eras and
the independent impact of hepatitis C virus.

Thuluvath PJ(1), Maheshwari A, Thuluvath NP, Nguyen GC, Segev DL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Digestive Health and Liver Diseases, Mercy Medical Center,
Baltimore, MD 21229, USA. thuluvath@gmail.com

It has been suggested that hepatitis C virus (HCV) patients with hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) may have worse outcomes after liver transplantation (LT) because 
of more aggressive tumor biology. In this study, we determined the post-LT
survival of HCC patients with and without HCV using United Network for Organ
Sharing data from January 1994 to March 2008. Patients with HCC were stratified
into HCV (HCC-HCV) and non-HCV (HCC-non-HCV) groups. In the era before the Model 
for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD), there were 1237 HCC patients (780, HCV; 373, 
non-HCV; 84, unknown HCV status), and during the MELD era, there were 4933 HCC
patients (3272, HCV; 1348, non-HCV; 313, unknown). In the pre-MELD era, 5-year
graft (58.6% versus 53.7%) and patient (61.7% versus 59.3%) survival rates were
marginally higher for HCC-non-HCV patients than for HCC-HCV patients. In the MELD
era also, 5-year graft (61.2% versus 55.5%) and patient (63.7% versus 58.2%)
survival rates were marginally higher for HCC-non-HCV patients than for HCC-HCV
patients. In patients without HCC, pre-MELD and MELD era graft/patient survival
rates for non-HCV patients were higher than those for HCV patients. The
differences in survival rates for HCC patients with and without HCV were lower
than those for non-HCC patients stratified by their HCV status. HCV had no
additional negative impact on the post-LT survival of patients with HCC, and this
was further confirmed by multivariate analysis. In conclusion, the survival of
HCC patients has remained unchanged in the past 2 decades. HCV patients have a
lower survival rate than non-HCV patients, regardless of their HCC status, but
HCV has no additional negative impact on survival in patients with HCC.

DOI: 10.1002/lt.21744 
PMID: 19562709  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

