
1. Antivir Ther. 2009;14(4):551-6.

HIV type-1 transmission dynamics in recent seroconverters: relationship with
transmission of drug resistance and viral diversity.

Recordon-Pinson P(1), Anies G, Bruyand M, Neau D, Morlat P, Pellegrin JL, Groppi 
A, Thiébaut R, Dabis F, Fleury H, Masquelier B; ANRS CO3 Aquitaine Cohort.

Author information: 
(1)CHU de Bordeaux, Laboratoire de Virologie, and Université Victor Segalen
Bordeaux 2, Bordeaux, France.

BACKGROUND: HIV type-1 (HIV-1) has been shown to be frequently transmitted by
acutely infected patients. We investigated the relationship between the dynamics 
of HIV-1 transmission within recently infected patients, the HIV-1 variability
and the transmission of antiretroviral drug resistance.
METHODS: We included patients infected between 1996 and 2006, with a plasma
sample obtained <18 months after seroconversion and prior to antiretroviral
therapy initiation. Reverse transcriptase (RT) and protease sequences were
determined by direct population sequencing from plasma samples. Genotypic
resistance was interpreted with the Agence Nationale de Recherches sur le SIDA et
les Hépatites Virales 2006 algorithm and International AIDS Society-USA list.
Phylogenetic analysis (neighbour-joining and maximum likelihood methods) of RT
sequences was used to determine the HIV-1 subtype and the interrelationship
between sequences.
RESULTS: Genotypic resistance was detected in 37/263 (14.1%) patients. Patients
were infected by HIV-1 clade B in 222 (84%) cases and with non-B subtypes in 41
(16%). A total of 80 (30.4%) RT sequences were segregated in 24 clusters with
bootstrap values >98% for 22 clusters. The frequency of grouping in clusters was 
higher within B sequences compared with non-B sequences (35.1% versus 4.9%;
P<2.10(-4)). Drug-resistant isolates were retrieved in only 3 clusters, but the
prevalence of resistance in clustering viruses (10/80, 12.5%) was not different
than in isolated sequences.
CONCLUSIONS: The segregation into clusters suggested frequent forward
transmission events in patients infected with HIV-1 subtype B, including the
possibility of transmission of drug-resistant isolates. These findings warrant
increasing prevention efforts and serological screening in the at-risk
populations.


PMID: 19578240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

