
1. Liver Int. 2009 Oct;29(9):1294-305. doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2009.02085.x. Epub
2009 Jul 10.

Current management of hepatitis B virus infection before and after liver
transplantation.

Papatheodoridis GV(1), Cholongitas E, Archimandritis AJ, Burroughs AK.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Internal Medicine, Athens University Medical School,
Hippokration General Hospital, 114 Vas. Sophias avenue, Athens, Greece.
gepapath@med.uoa.gr

The progress in treatment against hepatitis B virus (HBV) has substantially
improved the outcome of all HBV-infected patients. We systematically reviewed the
existing data in the management of HBV transplant patients in order to assess the
optimal regimen in the pretransplant setting, for post-transplant prophylaxis and
for therapy of HBV recurrent infection. All data suggest that an effective
pretransplant anti-HBV therapy prevents post-transplant HBV recurrence.
Pretransplant therapy has been based on lamivudine with addition of adefovir upon
lamivudine resistance, but the use of newer, potent high-genetic barrier agents
is expected to improve long-term efficacy. Moreover, it may lead to improvement
of liver function, which sometimes removes the need for transplantation, although
more objective criteria for removal from waiting lists are required. After liver 
transplantation, the combination of HBV immunoglobulin and one nucleos(t)ide
analogue, mostly lamivudine, is currently the best approach, almost eliminating
the probability of HBV recurrence. Treatment of post-transplant HBV recurrence
has been mainly studied with lamivudine, but it will be most effective with
entecavir and tenofovir, which have a low risk of resistance. In conclusion, the 
newer anti-HBV agents improve the treatment of HBV both pretransplant and
post-transplant. HBV immunoglobulin is still used in combination with an anti-HBV
agent for post-transplant prophylaxis. Monoprophylaxis with one of the new
anti-HBV agents might be possible, particularly in patients preselected as having
a low risk of HBV recurrence, but further data are needed and strategies to
ensure compliance must be used.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2009.02085.x 
PMID: 19619264  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

