
1. J Infect Dis. 2009 Oct 1;200(7):1022-30. doi: 10.1086/605699.

Perinatal outcomes, including mother-to-child transmission of HIV, and child
mortality and their association with maternal vitamin D status in Tanzania.

Mehta S(1), Hunter DJ, Mugusi FM, Spiegelman D, Manji KP, Giovannucci EL,
Hertzmark E, Msamanga GI, Fawzi WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA. smehta@hsph.harvard.edu

Comment in
    J Infect Dis. 2009 Oct 1;200(7):1015-7.
    J Infect Dis. 2010 Jun 15;201(12):1950-1; author reply 1951.

BACKGROUND: Vitamin D is a strong immunomodulator and may protect against adverse
pregnancy outcomes, mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) of human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV), and child mortality.
METHODS: A total of 884 HIV-infected pregnant women who were participating in a
vitamin supplementation trial in Tanzania were monitored to assess pregnancy
outcomes and child mortality. The association of these outcomes with maternal
vitamin D status at enrollment was examined in an observational analysis.
RESULTS: No association was observed between maternal vitamin D status and
adverse pregnancy outcomes, including low birth weight and preterm birth. In
multivariate models, a low maternal vitamin D level (<32 ng/mL) was associated
with a 50% higher risk (95% confidence interval [CI], 2%-120%) of MTCT of HIV at 
6 weeks, a 2-fold higher risk of MTCT of HIV through breast-feeding among
children who were HIV uninfected at 6 weeks (95% CI, 1.08-3.82), and a 46% higher
overall risk of HIV infection (95% CI, 11%-91%). Children born to women with a
low vitamin D level had a 61% higher risk of dying during follow-up (95% CI,
25%-107%).
CONCLUSIONS: If found to be efficacious in randomized trials, vitamin D
supplementation could prove to be an inexpensive method of reducing the burden of
HIV infection and death among children, particularly in resource-limited
settings.

DOI: 10.1086/605699 
PMCID: PMC2758703
PMID: 19673647  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

