
1. J Infect Dis. 2009 Oct 1;200(7):1104-1112. doi: 10.1086/605606.

Viral genetic determinants of H5N1 influenza viruses that contribute to cytokine 
dysregulation.

Mok KP(#)(1), Wong CHK(#)(1), Cheung CY(1), Chan MC(1), Lee SMY(1), Nicholls
JM(2), Guan Y(1), Peiris JSM(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of
Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, People's Republic
of China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong
Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, People's Republic of
China.
(3)HKU-Pasteur Research Centre, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

Human disease caused by highly pathogenic avian influenza (H5N1) is associated
with fulminant viral pneumonia and mortality rates in excess of 60%. Cytokine
dysregulation is thought to contribute to its pathogenesis. In comparison with
human seasonal influenza (H1N1) viruses, clade 1, 2.1, and 2.2 H5N1 viruses
induced higher levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha in primary human
macrophages. To understand viral genetic determinants responsible for this
hyperinduction of cytokines, we constructed recombinant viruses containing
different combinations of genes from high-cytokine (A/Vietnam/1203/04) and
low-cytokine (A/WSN/33) phenotype H1N1 viruses and tested their cytokine-inducing
phenotype in human macrophages. Our results suggest that the H5N1 polymerase gene
segments, and to a lesser extent the NS gene segment, contribute to cytokine
hyperinduction in human macrophages and that a putative H5 pandemic virus that
may arise through genetic reassortment between H5N1 and one of the current
seasonal influenza viruses may have a markedly altered cytokine phenotype.

DOI: 10.1086/605606 
PMCID: PMC4028720
PMID: 19694514  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

