
1. Infect Immun. 2009 Nov;77(11):4976-82. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00306-09. Epub 2009 Aug
24.

Mouse eosinophils possess potent antibacterial properties in vivo.

Linch SN(1), Kelly AM, Danielson ET, Pero R, Lee JJ, Gold JA.

Author information: 
(1)Oregon Health and Science University, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Medicine, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Rd., Mail Code UHN67, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

Eosinophils are best known as the predominant cellular infiltrate associated with
asthma and parasitic infections. Recently, numerous studies have documented the
presence of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) on the surfaces of eosinophils, suggesting
that these leukocytes may participate in the recognition and killing of viruses
and bacteria. However, the significance of this role in the innate immune
response to bacterial infection is largely unknown. Here we report a novel role
for eosinophils as antibacterial defenders in the host response. Isolated mouse
eosinophils possessed antipseudomonal properties in vitro. In vivo, interleukin-5
transgenic mice, which have profound eosinophilia, demonstrated improved
clearance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa introduced into the peritoneal cavity. The
findings of improved bacterial clearance following adoptive transfer of
eosinophils, and impaired bacterial clearance in mice with a congenital
eosinophil deficiency, established that this effect was eosinophil specific. The 
data presented also demonstrate that eosinophils mediate this antibacterial
effect in part through the release of cationic secondary granule proteins.
Specifically, isolated eosinophil granules had antibacterial properties in vitro,
and administration of eosinophil granule extracts significantly improved
bacterial clearance in vivo. These data suggest a potent yet underappreciated
antibacterial role for eosinophils in vivo, specifically for eosinophil granules.
Moreover, the data suggest that the administration of eosinophil-derived products
may represent a viable adjuvant therapy for septic or bacteremic patients in the 
intensive care unit.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00306-09 
PMCID: PMC2772534
PMID: 19703974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

