
1. Gene Ther. 2010 Feb;17(2):217-26. doi: 10.1038/gt.2009.136. Epub 2009 Oct 22.

Effect of nuclear localization and hydrodynamic delivery-induced cell division on
phiC31 integrase activity.

Woodard LE(1), Hillman RT, Keravala A, Lee S, Calos MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305-5120, USA.

Phage phiC31 integrase is a recombinase that can be expressed in mammalian cells 
to integrate plasmids carrying an attB sequence into the genome at specific
pseudo attP locations. We show by immunofluoresence that wild-type phiC31
integrase is cytoplasmic and that addition of the SV40 nuclear localization
signal (NLS) localized phiC31 integrase to the nucleus. Unexpectedly, the NLS
depressed integration efficiency in HeLa cells and provided no benefit when used 
to integrate the human Factor IX (hFIX) gene into mouse liver. As breakdown of
the nuclear membrane during mitosis could allow cytoplasmic integrase access to
the chromosomes, we analyzed whether cell division was required for integration
into liver cells in vivo. Hepatocytes were labeled with iododeoxyuridine to mark 
cells that underwent DNA replication during the week after hydrodynamic
injection. Hydrodynamic delivery led to DNA replication in one-third of
hepatocytes. Approximately three out of four cells having phiC31
integrase-mediated stable hFIX expression did not undergo replication, indicating
that cell division was not required for integrase function in liver. Therefore,
although the bulk of phiC31 integrase protein seems to be cytoplasmic in
mammalian cells, integration can still occur in the nucleus, even without cell
division.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2009.136 
PMCID: PMC2820593
PMID: 19847205  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

