
1. J Immunol. 2009 Nov 15;183(10):6545-53. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900867. Epub 2009 
Oct 28.

Long double-stranded RNA induces an antiviral response independent of IFN
regulatory factor 3, IFN-beta promoter stimulator 1, and IFN.

DeWitte-Orr SJ(1), Mehta DR, Collins SE, Suthar MS, Gale M Jr, Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Molecular Medicine, Michael DeGroote Institute for
Infectious Disease Research, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Virus infection elicits a robust innate antiviral response dominated by the
production of type 1 IFN. In nonprofessional innate immune cells such as
fibroblasts, type 1 IFN is rapidly produced following the recognition of viral
dsRNA and the subsequent activation of the constitutively expressed transcription
factor IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). Although origin, localization, and length 
are factors in mediating dsRNA recognition and binding by cellular dsRNA-binding 
proteins, the biological significance of differential dsRNA binding is unclear,
since the subsequent signaling pathways converge on IRF3. In this study, we show 
a dsRNA length-dependent activation of IRFs, IFNs, and IFN-stimulated genes in
mouse fibroblasts. The length dependence was exacerbated in fibroblasts deficient
in the mitochondria-associated adaptor IFN-beta promoter stimulator 1 and IRF3,
suggesting that antiviral gene induction mediated by short and long dsRNA
molecules is predominantly IFN-beta promoter stimulator 1 and IRF3 dependent and 
independent, respectively. Furthermore, we provide evidence of an innate
antiviral response in fibroblasts in the absence of both IRF3 and type 1 IFN
induction. Even with these key modulators missing, a 60-90% inhibition of virus
replication was observed following 24-h treatment with short or long dsRNA
molecules, respectively. These data provide evidence of a novel antiviral pathway
that is dependent on dsRNA length, but independent of the type 1 IFN system.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900867 
PMCID: PMC2885285
PMID: 19864603  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

