
1. Biochemistry. 1991 Feb 5;30(5):1425-32.

Second-site revertants of an inactive T4 lysozyme mutant restore activity by
restructuring the active site cleft.

Poteete AR(1), Sun DP, Nicholson H, Matthews BW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Oregon, Eugene 97403.

Substitution of Thr26 by Gln in the lysozyme of bacteriophage T4 produces an
enzyme with greatly reduced activity but essentially unaltered stability relative
to wild type. Spontaneous second-site revertants of the mutant were selected
genetically; two of them were chosen for structural and biochemical
characterization. One revertant bears (in addition to the primary mutation) the
substitution Tyr18----His, the other, Tyr18----Asp. The primary mutant and both
revertant lysozyme genes were reconstructed in a plasmid-based expression system,
and the proteins were produced and purified. The two revertant lysozymes exhibit 
enzymatic activities intermediate between wild type and the primary mutant; both 
also exhibit melting temperatures approximately 3 degrees C lower than either the
wild type or the primary mutant. Crystals suitable for X-ray diffraction analysis
were obtained from both revertant lysozymes, but not the primary mutant.
Structures of the double mutant lysozymes were refined at 1.8-A resolution to
crystallographic residuals of 15.1% (Tyr18----His) and 15.2% (Tyr18----Asp).
Model building suggests that the side chain of Gln26 in the primary mutant is
forced to protrude into the active site cleft, resulting in low catalytic
activity. In contrast, the crystal structures of the revertants reveal that the
double substitutions (Gln26 and His18, or Gln26 and Asp18) fit into the same
space that is occupied by Thr26 and Tyr18 in the wild-type enzyme; the effect is 
a restructuring of the surface of the active site cleft, with essentially no
perturbation of the polypeptide backbone. This restructuring is effected by a
novel series of hydrogen bonds and electrostatic interactions that apparently
stabilize the revertant structures.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00219a037 
PMID: 1991123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

