
1. J Vis Exp. 2009 Dec 8;(34). pii: 1553. doi: 10.3791/1553.

Generation of induced pluripotent stem cells by reprogramming human fibroblasts
with the stemgent human TF lentivirus set.

Wu D(1), Hamilton B, Martin C, Gao Y, Ye M, Yao S.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development, Stemgent.

In 2006, Yamanaka and colleagues first demonstrated that retrovirus-mediated
delivery and expression of Oct4, Sox2, c-Myc and Klf4 is capable of inducing the 
pluripotent state in mouse fibroblasts.(1) The same group also reported the
successful reprogramming of human somatic cells into induced pluripotent stem
(iPS) cells using human versions of the same transcription factors delivered by
retroviral vectors.(2) Additionally, James Thomson et al. reported that the
lentivirus-mediated co-expression of another set of factors (Oct4, Sox2, Nanog
and Lin28) was capable of reprogramming human somatic cells into iPS cells.(3)
iPS cells are similar to ES cells in morphology, proliferation and the ability to
differentiate into all tissue types of the body. Human iPS cells have a distinct 
advantage over ES cells as they exhibit key properties of ES cells without the
ethical dilemma of embryo destruction. The generation of patient-specific iPS
cells circumvents an important roadblock to personalized regenerative medicine
therapies by eliminating the potential for immune rejection of non-autologous
transplanted cells. Here we demonstrate the protocol for reprogramming human
fibroblast cells using the Stemgent Human TF Lentivirus Set. We also show that
cells reprogrammed with this set begin to show iPS morphology four days
post-transduction. Using the Stemolecule Y27632, we selected for iPS cells and
observed correct morphology after three sequential rounds of colony picking and
passaging. We also demonstrate that after reprogramming cells displayed the
pluripotency marker AP, surface markers TRA-1-81, TRA-1-60, SSEA-4, and SSEA-3,
and nuclear markers Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog.

DOI: 10.3791/1553 
PMCID: PMC3157854
PMID: 19997062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

