
1. Hypertension. 2010 Feb;55(2):277-83, 6p following 283. doi:
10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.142646. Epub 2009 Dec 14.

Induction of hypertension and peripheral inflammation by reduction of
extracellular superoxide dismutase in the central nervous system.

Lob HE(1), Marvar PJ, Guzik TJ, Sharma S, McCann LA, Weyand C, Gordon FJ,
Harrison DG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Lowance Center of Human Immunology, Department of
Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Ga 30322, USA.

Comment in
    Hypertension. 2010 Feb;55(2):228-30.

The circumventricular organs (CVOs) lack a well-formed blood-brain barrier and
produce superoxide in response to angiotensin II and other hypertensive stimuli. 
This increase in central superoxide has been implicated in the regulation of
blood pressure. The extracellular superoxide dismutase (SOD3) is highly expressed
in cells associated with CVOs and particularly with tanycytes lining this region.
To understand the role of SOD3 in the CVOs in blood pressure regulation, we
performed intracerebroventricular injection an adenovirus encoding
Cre-recombinase (5x10(8) particles per milliliter) in mice with loxP sites
flanking the SOD3 coding region (SOD3(loxp/loxp) mice). An adenovirus encoding
red-fluorescent protein was injected as a control. Deletion of CVO SOD3 increased
baseline blood pressure modestly and markedly augmented the hypertensive response
to low-dose angiotensin II (140 ng/kg per day), whereas intracerebroventricular
injection of adenovirus encoding red-fluorescent protein had minimal effects on
these parameters. Adenovirus encoding Cre-recombinase-treated mice exhibited
increased sympathetic modulation of heart rate and blood pressure variability,
increased vascular superoxide production, and T-cell activation as characterized 
by increased circulating CD69(+)/CD3(+) cells. Deletion of CVO SOD3 also markedly
increased vascular T-cell and leukocyte infiltration caused by angiotensin II. We
conclude that SOD3 in the CVO plays a critical role in the regulation of blood
pressure, and its loss promotes T-cell activation and vascular inflammation, in
part by modulating sympathetic outflow. These findings provide insight into how
central signals produce vascular inflammation in response to hypertensive
stimuli, such as angiotensin II.

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.142646 
PMCID: PMC2813894
PMID: 20008675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

