
1. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Dec;5(12):e1000700. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000700. Epub
2009 Dec 18.

BCA2/Rabring7 promotes tetherin-dependent HIV-1 restriction.

Miyakawa K(1), Ryo A, Murakami T, Ohba K, Yamaoka S, Fukuda M, Guatelli J,
Yamamoto N.

Author information: 
(1)AIDS Research Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Shinjuku-ku, 
Tokyo, Japan.

Host cell factors can either positively or negatively regulate the assembly and
egress of HIV-1 particles from infected cells. Recent reports have identified a
previously uncharacterized transmembrane protein, tetherin/CD317/BST-2, as a
crucial host restriction factor that acts during a late budding step in HIV-1
replication by inhibiting viral particle release. Although tetherin has been
shown to promote the retention of nascent viral particles on the host cell
surface, the precise molecular mechanisms that occur during and after these
tethering events remain largely unknown. We here report that a RING-type E3
ubiquitin ligase, BCA2 (Breast cancer-associated gene 2; also called Rabring7,
ZNF364 or RNF115), is a novel tetherin-interacting host protein that facilitates 
the restriction of HIV-1 particle production in tetherin-positive cells. The
expression of human BCA2 in "tetherin-positive" HeLa, but not in
"tetherin-negative" HOS cells, resulted in a strong restriction of HIV-1 particle
production. Upon the expression of tetherin in HOS cells, BCA2 was capable of
inhibiting viral particle production as in HeLa cells. The targeted depletion of 
endogenous BCA2 by RNA interference (RNAi) in HeLa cells reduced the
intracellular accumulation of viral particles, which were nevertheless retained
on the plasma membrane. BCA2 was also found to facilitate the internalization of 
HIV-1 virions into CD63(+) intracellular vesicles leading to their lysosomal
degradation. These results indicate that BCA2 accelerates the internalization and
degradation of viral particles following their tethering to the cell surface and 
is a co-factor or enhancer for the tetherin-dependent restriction of HIV-1
release from infected cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000700 
PMCID: PMC2788703
PMID: 20019814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

