
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2010 Mar;76(5):1406-16. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02517-09. Epub
2009 Dec 28.

Assessing niche separation among coexisting Limnohabitans strains through
interactions with a competitor, viruses, and a bacterivore.

Simek K(1), Kasalický V, Hornák K, Hahn MW, Weinbauer MG.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Centre of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Hydrobiological Institute, Ceské Budejovice, Czech Republic. ksimek@hbu.cas.cz

Erratum in
    Appl Environ Microbiol. 2010 Jun;76(11):3762.

We investigated potential niche separation in two closely related (99.1% 16S rRNA
gene sequence similarity) syntopic bacterial strains affiliated with the R-BT065 
cluster, which represents a subgroup of the genus Limnohabitans. The two strains,
designated B4 and D5, were isolated concurrently from a freshwater reservoir.
Differences between the strains were examined through monitoring interactions
with a bacterial competitor, Flectobacillus sp. (FL), and virus- and
predator-induced mortality. Batch-type cocultures, designated B4+FL and D5+FL,
were initiated with a similar biomass ratio among the strains. The proportion of 
each cell type present in the cocultures was monitored based on clear differences
in cell sizes. Following exponential growth for 28 h, the cocultures were amended
by the addition of two different concentrations of live or heat-inactivated
viruses concentrated from the reservoir. Half of virus-amended treatments were
inoculated immediately with an axenic flagellate predator, Poterioochromonas sp. 
The presence of the predator, of live viruses, and of competition between the
strains significantly affected their population dynamics in the experimentally
manipulated treatments. While strains B4 and FL appeared vulnerable to
environmental viruses, strain D5 did not. Predator-induced mortality had the
greatest impact on FL, followed by that on D5 and then B4. The virus-vulnerable
B4 strain had smaller cells and lower biomass yield, but it was less subject to
grazing. In contrast, the seemingly virus-resistant D5, with slightly larger
grazing-vulnerable cells, was competitive with FL. Overall, our data suggest
contrasting ecophysiological capabilities and partial niche separation in two
coexisting Limnohabitans strains.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02517-09 
PMCID: PMC2832377
PMID: 20038688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

