
1. J Virol. 2010 Mar;84(6):2946-54. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01779-09. Epub 2009 Dec 30.

Activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma by human
cytomegalovirus for de novo replication impairs migration and invasiveness of
cytotrophoblasts from early placentas.

Rauwel B(1), Mariam√© B, Martin H, Nielsen R, Allart S, Pipy B, Mandrup S,
Devignes MD, Evain-Brion D, Fournier T, Davrinche C.

Author information: 
(1)NSERM, U563, Toulouse F-31300, France.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) contributes to pathogenic processes in
immunosuppressed individuals, in fetuses, and in neonates. In the present report,
by using reporter gene activation assays and confocal microscopy in the presence 
of a specific antagonist, we show for the first time that HCMV infection induces 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) transcriptional
activity in infected cells. We demonstrate that the PPARgamma antagonist
dramatically impairs virus production and that the major immediate-early promoter
contains PPAR response elements able to bind PPARgamma, as assessed by
electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Due to
the key role of PPARgamma in placentation and its specific trophoblast expression
within the human placenta, we then provided evidence that by activating PPARgamma
human cytomegalovirus dramatically impaired early human trophoblast migration and
invasiveness, as assessed by using well-established in vitro models of invasive
trophoblast, i.e., primary cultures of extravillous cytotrophoblasts (EVCT)
isolated from first-trimester placentas and the EVCT-derived cell line HIPEC. Our
data provide new clues to explain how early infection during pregnancy could
impair implantation and placentation and therefore embryonic development.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01779-09 
PMCID: PMC2826069
PMID: 20042507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

