
1. Oncogene. 2010 Apr 15;29(15):2205-16. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.507. Epub 2010 Jan
25.

Rac1 is required for oncolytic NDV replication in human cancer cells and
establishes a link between tumorigenesis and sensitivity to oncolytic virus.

Puhlmann J(1), Puehler F, Mumberg D, Boukamp P, Beier R.

Author information: 
(1)Bayer Schering Pharma AG, Global Drug Discovery, Berlin, Germany.

Oncolytic Newcastle disease virus (NDV) replicates selectively in most human
tumor cells but not in normal cells. The relationship between tumorigenesis and
the selective susceptibility of most tumor cells to oncolytic NDV replication is 
poorly understood. A multistage skin carcinogenesis model derived from
non-tumorigenic HaCaT cells was used to systematically investigate the molecular 
mechanisms involved in the oncolytic NDV-sensitivity associated with tumorigenic 
transformation. No significant differences in interferon signaling were observed 
between the virus-sensitive tumor cells and the virus-resistant non-tumorigenic
parental cells. Oncogenic H-Ras, which had been used for tumorigenic
transformation, was shown to be necessary for virus replication but was not
sufficient to render cells susceptible to NDV replication. By using an siRNA
screening approach to search for virus-sensitizing genes in the tumorigenic
cells, we could identify the small GTPase Rac1 as an oncogenic protein that is
essential for NDV replication and anchorage-independent growth in tumorigenic
cells. Furthermore, Rac1 expression was sufficient to render non-tumorigenic
cells susceptible to NDV replication and to oncolytic cytotoxicity. This study
establishes Rac1 as a link between tumorigenesis and oncolytic virus sensitivity 
in the HaCaT multistage skin carcinogenesis model.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2009.507 
PMID: 20101224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

