
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Aug;1806(1):42-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2010.01.004.
Epub 2010 Feb 1.

CXCR6/CXCL16 functions as a regulator in metastasis and progression of cancer.

Deng L(1), Chen N, Li Y, Zheng H, Lei Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and
Cancer Center, West China Hospital/West China School of Medicine, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

Metastasis is considered the obvious mark for most aggressive cancers. However,
little is known about the molecular mechanism of the regulation of cancer
metastasis. Recent evidence increasingly suggests that the interaction between
chemokines and chemokine receptors is pivotal in the process of metastasis. The
chemokine receptor CXCR4 and its ligand CXCL12, for example, have been reported
to play a vital role in cancer metastasis. Another chemokine and chemokine
receptor pair, the CXCL16/CXCR6 axis, has been studied by several independent
research groups. Here, we summarize recent advances in our knowledge of the
function of CXC chemokine receptor CXCR6 and its ligand CXCL16 in regulating
metastasis and invasion of cancer. CXCR6 and CXCL16 are up-regulated in multiple 
cancer tissue types and cancer cell lines relative to normal tissues and cell
lines. In addition, both CXCR6 and CXCL16 levels increase as tumor malignancy
increases. Trans-membranous CXCL16 chemokine reduces proliferation while soluble 
CXCL16 chemokine enhances proliferation and migration. TM-CXCL16 functions as an 
inducer for lymphocyte build-up around tumor sites. High trans-membranous CXCL16 
expression correlates with a good prognosis. Moreover, the Akt/mTOR signal
pathway is involved in activating the CXCR6/CXCL16 axis. These findings suggest
multiple opportunities for blocking the CXCR6/CXCL16 axis and the Akt/mTOR signal
pathway in novel cancer therapies.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2010.01.004 
PMID: 20122997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

