
1. Viral Immunol. 2010 Feb;23(1):99-104. doi: 10.1089/vim.2009.0072.

Detection of enterovirus RNA in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of type 1
diabetic patients beyond the stage of acute infection.

Schulte BM(1), Bakkers J, Lanke KH, Melchers WJ, Westerlaken C, Allebes W,
Aanstoot HJ, Bruining GJ, Adema GJ, Van Kuppeveld FJ, Galama JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre
and Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
b.schulte@ncmls.ru.nl

Previous studies have shown that enteroviral RNA can be detected in blood at the 
onset of type 1 diabetes (T1D). The infection may play a role in triggering T1D
and genetic host factors may contribute to this process. We investigated (1)
whether enterovirus is present at the onset of T1D in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC), plasma, throat, or stool, and (2) whether enteroviral
presence is linked with HLA-DR type and/or polymorphisms in melanoma
differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) and 2'-5' oligoadenylate synthetase 1
(OAS1), factors of antiviral immunity. To this end, PBMC, plasma, throat, and
stool samples from 10 T1D patients and 20 unrelated controls were tested for the 
presence of enteroviruses (RT-PCR), for HLA-DR type, and polymorphisms in MDA5
and OAS1. Enterovirus RNA was detected in PBMC of 4/10 T1D patients, but none of 
20 controls. Plasma was positive in 2/10 T1D patients and none of 20 controls,
suggesting that enteroviruses found at the onset of T1D are mainly present in
PBMC. All throat samples from positive T1D patients were virus-negative and only 
1 fecal sample was positive. The negative results for all throat and most stool
samples argues against acute infection. Enterovirus presence was linked with
HLA-DR4, but not with polymorphisms in MDA5 or OAS1.

DOI: 10.1089/vim.2009.0072 
PMID: 20121407  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

