
1. J Neurosci Methods. 2010 May 30;189(1):30-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2010.03.008.
Epub 2010 Mar 19.

Expression and purification of ataxin-1 protein.

Husain-Ponnampalam R(1), Turnbull V, Tarlac V, Storey E.

Author information: 
(1)Van Cleef Roet Centre for Nervous Diseases, Monash University (AMREP), The
Alfred Hospital, Commercial Road, Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia.
eponnampalam@dairyinnovation.com.au

Ataxin-1 is part of a larger family of polyglutamine-containing proteins that is 
linked to nine distinct neurodegenerative disorders. There are no known effective
therapies for any of these expanded polyglutamine tract disorders. One possible
reason for this is the lack of sufficient amounts of pure
polyglutamine-containing proteins suitable for biochemical and conformational
studies. Here, we show that we were able to successfully purify a
non-pathological, wild-type human ataxin-1 protein containing a 30-glutamine
repeat sequence. This ataxin-1 protein was expressed in Escherichia coli as a
fusion protein with a GST tag at the N-terminus and a double (His)(6) tag at the 
C-terminus. The devised dual affinity tag strategy allowed successful
purification of the full-length ataxin-1 fusion protein to 90% homogeneity as
confirmed by Western blot analysis using the two monoclonal ataxin-1 antibodies
developed in our laboratory. In addition, the GST tag was successfully removed
from the purified ataxin-1 fusion protein by treatment with Tobacco etch virus
(TEV) protease. Since polyglutamine-containing proteins tend to aggregate,
solvents/buffers that minimize aggregation have been used in the purification
process. This dual affinity purification protocol could serve as a useful basis
for purifying aggregation-prone proteins that are involved in other
neurodegenerative diseases.

(c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2010.03.008 
PMID: 20304006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

