
1. Vet Microbiol. 2010 Sep 28;145(1-2):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2010.02.028. Epub 
2010 Feb 24.

Qualitative and quantitative distribution of PCV2 in wild boars and domestic pigs
in Germany.

Reiner G(1), Bronnert B, Hohloch C, Fresen C, Haack I, Willems H, Reinacher M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Swine Diseases,
Justus-Liebig-University, Frankfurter Strasse 112, 35392 Giessen, Germany.
gerald.reiner@vetmed.uni-giessen.de

Porcine circovirus 2 (PCV2), the causative agent of postweaning multisystemic
wasting syndrome (PMWS), has been detected in North American and European wild
boars at prevalences arguing for high circulation rates among populations.
Systematic data on the qualitative distribution of PCV2 infections and on PCVD
(PCV2 diseases) in wild boars are rare, however, and quantitative data about
viral loads are missing. To be able to judge the PCV2/PCVD situation in wild
boars, evaluation of the nationwide qualitative and quantitative distribution of 
PCV2 and PCVD in Germany was the objective of the present study. Wild boar
samples were compared with domestic pig samples of the same greater areas,
including tonsils, lungs, spleen, Lnn. bronchiales and Lnn. mesenterici of 349
wild boars and 348 domestic pigs. All of the wild boars and 308 of the domestic
pigs have been apparently free of PCVD, 40 of the domestic pigs had been rejected
from slaughter due to health problems (i.e. wasting). Tissues were examined by
pathohistology, immunohistology (IHC), nested PCR (nPCR and quantitative PCR
(qPCR). One wild boar (0.3%) and 8.7% of the domestic pigs were classified as
PCVD-affected, based on pathohistology and IHC. PCV2 DNA was detected in 63.1%
and 45.4% of the wild boars by nPCR and qPCR, respectively, and in 100% and 98.8%
of the domestic pigs. PCV2 loads differed significantly between wild boars
(average: 10(2.8) PCV2 genomes/microg extracted sample DNA) and domestic pigs
(average: 10(4.2) PCV2 genomes/microg of sample DNA). The qualitative detection
of PCV2 DNA in tissues of wild boars and domestic pigs was abundant and not of
any pathological relevance. The overall load of PCV2 in domestic pigs was
relatively high and borderline with respect to PCVD, and there was no difference 
between apparently healthy pigs and pigs rejected from slaughter in this respect.
Most of the wild boars were infected with PCV2 at loads less relevant for PCVD.

(c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2010.02.028 
PMID: 20346600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

