
1. J Virol. 2010 Jul;84(13):6846-60. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00399-10. Epub 2010 Apr 14.

Structure/Function analysis of the vaccinia virus F18 phosphoprotein, an abundant
core component required for virion maturation and infectivity.

Wickramasekera NT(1), Traktman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Rd., Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

Poxvirus virions, whose outer membrane surrounds two lateral bodies and a core,
contain at least 70 different proteins. The F18 phosphoprotein is one of the most
abundant core components and is essential for the assembly of mature virions. We 
report here the results of a structure/function analysis in which the role of
conserved cysteine residues, clusters of charged amino acids and clusters of
hydrophobic/aromatic amino acids have been assessed. Taking advantage of a
recombinant virus in which F18 expression is IPTG
(isopropyl-beta-d-thiogalactopyranoside) dependent, we developed a transient
complementation assay to evaluate the ability of mutant alleles of F18 to support
virion morphogenesis and/or to restore the production of infectious virus. We
have also examined protein-protein interactions, comparing the ability of mutant 
and WT F18 proteins to interact with WT F18 and to interact with the viral A30
protein, another essential core component. We show that F18 associates with an
A30-containing multiprotein complex in vivo in a manner that depends upon
clusters of hydrophobic/aromatic residues in the N' terminus of the F18 protein
but that it is not required for the assembly of this complex. Finally, we
confirmed that two PSSP motifs within F18 are the sites of phosphorylation by
cellular proline-directed kinases in vitro and in vivo. Mutation of both of these
phosphorylation sites has no apparent impact on virion morphogenesis but leads to
the assembly of virions with significantly reduced infectivity.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00399-10 
PMCID: PMC2903294
PMID: 20392848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

