
1. J Gen Virol. 2010 Aug;91(Pt 8):1971-1977. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.020420-0. Epub 2010 
Apr 28.

Crystal structure of equine rhinitis A virus in complex with its sialic acid
receptor.

Fry EE(1), Tuthill TJ(2), Harlos K(1), Walter TS(1), Rowlands DJ(2), Stuart
DI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Structural Biology and Oxford Protein Production Facility, The
Henry Wellcome Building for Genomic Medicine, Roosevelt Drive, Headington, Oxford
OX3 7BN, UK.
(2)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology and Astbury Centre for Structural 
Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2
9JT, UK.

Equine rhinitis A virus (ERAV) shares many features with foot-and-mouth disease
virus (FMDV) and both are classified within the genus Aphthovirus of the family
Picornaviridae. ERAV is used as a surrogate for FMDV research as it does not
require high-level biosecurity. In contrast to FMDV, which uses integrins as
cellular receptors, the receptor for ERAV has been reported to involve the sugar 
moiety sialic acid. This study confirmed the importance of sialic acid for cell
entry by ERAV and reports the crystal structure of ERAV particles complexed with 
the receptor analogue 3'-sialyllactose. The receptor is attached to the rim of a 
capsid pit adjacent to the major immunogenic site and distinct from the sialic
acid binding site used by a related picornavirus, the cardiovirus Theiler's
murine encephalitis virus. The structure of the major antigenic determinant of
the virus, previously identified from antibody escape mutations, is also
described as the EF loop of VP1, which forms a hairpin stretching across the
capsid surface close to the icosahedral fivefold axis, neighbouring the
receptor-binding site, and spanning two protomeric units.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.020420-0 
PMID: 20427563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

