
1. Euro Surveill. 2010 Apr 22;15(16). pii: 19547.

West Nile virus circulation in Emilia-Romagna, Italy: the integrated surveillance
system 2009.

Angelini P(1), Tamba M, Finarelli AC, Bellini R, Albieri A, Bonilauri P, Cavrini 
F, Dottori M, Gaibani P, Martini E, Mattivi A, Pierro AM, Rugna G, Sambri V,
Squintani G, Macini P.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Service, Emilia-Romagna Region, Bologna, Italy.
pangelini@regione.emilia-romagna.it

Following a large West Nile virus (WNV) epidemic in northeastern Italy in 2008,
human and animal surveillance activities were implemented in Emilia Romagna.
Human surveillance was performed by serology or genome detection on blood and
cerebrospinal fluid for all suspected cases suffering from acute
meningoencephalitis in the regional territory. Animal surveillance consisted of
passive and active surveillance of horses and active surveillance of wild birds
and mosquitoes. Between 15 June and 31 October 2009, nine of 78 possible cases of
West Nile neuroinvasive disease were confirmed (three fatal). From May to
October, 26 cases of neurological West Nile disease were confirmed among 46
horses. The overall incidence of seroconversion among horses in 2009 was 13%. In 
2009, 44 of 1,218 wild birds yielded positive PCR results for WNV infection. The 
planned veterinary and entomological surveillance actions detected WNV activity
from the end of July 2009, about 2-3 weeks before the onset of the first human
neurological case. Passive surveillance of horses seems to be an early and
suitable tool for the detection of WNV activity, but it will be less sensitive in
the future, because an intensive programme of horse vaccination started in June
2009.


PMID: 20430000  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

