
1. Avian Dis. 2010 Mar;54(1 Suppl):668-72.

Simultaneous detection of avian influenza virus NP and H5 antibodies in chicken
sera using a fluorescence microsphere immunoassay.

Lupiani B(1), Mozisek B, Mason PW, Lamichhane C, Reddy SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA.
blupiani@cvm.tamu.edu

Avian influenza (AI) surveillance in commercial poultry is accomplished by
detecting the presence of antibodies to two group-specific antigens, NP and M1,
using the agar gel immunodiffusion test. In order to determine the viral subtype 
responsible for the infection, positive samples must be further subtyped using
the hemagglutination inhibition and neuraminidase inhibition tests. These tests
are labor intensive and may take up to 4 days, thus slowing down responses to
outbreaks. To expedite the subtyping of chicken sera we have developed a
multiplex fluorescence microsphere immunoassay (FMIA), which allows for the
simultaneous detection and subtyping of chicken sera to H5 influenza viruses. The
FMIA was developed using NP (full length) and H5 (HA1 region) proteins expressed 
in baby hamster kidney cells using a Venezuela equine encephalitis virus replicon
system. Both proteins were tagged with 6xHis at the carboxy-end and purified
using cobalt-coated agarose beads. Purified H5 protein showed minimal
cross-reactivity with anti-H2 serum, while no cross-reactivity was observed with 
sera to other AI virus (AIV) subtypes and other important poultry viral
pathogens. In addition, and as expected, all the AIV sera tested reacted strongly
with purified NP protein. Our results indicate that FMIA can be used for rapid
subtyping of chicken sera.

DOI: 10.1637/8818-040209-ResNote.1 
PMID: 20521712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

