
1. Avian Dis. 2010 Mar;54(1 Suppl):390-3.

Economic effect of the highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 outbreaks among
turkey producers, 2005-06, Turkey.

Yalcin C(1), Sipahi C, Aral Y, Cevger Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Health Economics and Management, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Ankara University, Diskapi 06110, Ankara, Turkey.
cyalcin@veterinary.ankara.edu.tr

This research assessed the direct economic effects of the 2005-06 HPAI outbreaks 
on contracted turkey producers in Turkey in 2007. The data were obtained from 71 
randomly selected, contracted turkey farms (producing 23% of the national turkey 
meat in Turkey in 2005) from five provinces for four integrated firms, which
account for 67% of the national turkey production. Each farm was visited once for
an oral interview conducted by the authors in 2007, using a questionnaire survey.
The financial data before and after highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1
outbreak periods were obtained from available financial records. Changes in
production and economics parameters before and after the HPAI H5N1 outbreak
periods were compared. In the analyses, the "before the HPAI H5N1 outbreak"
period was stated as October 1, 2004, to May 31, 2005, whereas the "after the
HPAI H5N1 outbreak" period was stated as the 8-mo between October 1, 2005, and
May 31, 2006. The research revealed that changes in the technical parameters
(number of hired labor, feed conversion rate, mortality rate, and the length of
fattening period) were not found to be statistically significant at P > 0.05.
However, there were severe effects of the HPAI H5N1 outbreaks on the economic
parameters of the turkey production. The contracted turkey producers lost on
average 0.9 cycles (38%) of production, and their management fees were reduced by
9.3% in the 8 mo after the outbreaks. As a result, the production level and
enterprise income declined by 36% and 39%, respectively. About 93% of the
producers did not do any other supplementary work during the idle production
period; 59% of the producers had to use on average 4970TL (US$3200) from their
personnel saving during the HPAI H5N1 outbreaks. About 62% of the producers
stated that they had been considering expanding their businesses, but suspended
the idea because of the outbreak, and 80% of the producers increased the
biosecurity measures after the outbreaks. The futures of the contracted turkey
producers are fully dependent on those of the integrated firms. Any negative
effects on the latter appear to be directly transferred to the former. However,
the government neglected contracted producers in the HPAI compensation programs.

DOI: 10.1637/8710-031809-Reg.1 
PMID: 20521667  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

