
1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 May 27;6(5):e1000928. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000928.

Massive APOBEC3 editing of hepatitis B viral DNA in cirrhosis.

Vartanian JP(1), Henry M, Marchio A, Suspène R, Aynaud MM, Guétard D,
Cervantes-Gonzalez M, Battiston C, Mazzaferro V, Pineau P, Dejean A, Wain-Hobson 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Retrovirology Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
jean-Pierre.vartanian@pasteur.fr

DNA viruses, retroviruses and hepadnaviruses, such as hepatitis B virus (HBV),
are vulnerable to genetic editing of single stranded DNA by host cell APOBEC3
(A3) cytidine deaminases. At least three A3 genes are up regulated by
interferon-alpha in human hepatocytes while ectopic expression of activation
induced deaminase (AICDA), an A3 paralog, has been noted in a variety of chronic 
inflammatory syndromes including hepatitis C virus infection. Yet virtually all
studies of HBV editing have confined themselves to analyses of virions from
culture supernatants or serum where the frequency of edited genomes is generally 
low (< or = 10(-2)). We decided to look at the nature and frequency of HBV
editing in cirrhotic samples taken during removal of a primary hepatocellular
carcinoma. Forty-one cirrhotic tissue samples (10 alcoholic, 10 HBV(+), 11
HBV(+)HCV(+) and 10 HCV(+)) as well as 4 normal livers were studied. Compared to 
normal liver, 5/7 APOBEC3 genes were significantly up regulated in the order:
HCV+/-HBV>HBV>alcoholic cirrhosis. A3C and A3D were up regulated for all groups
while the interferon inducible A3G was over expressed in virus associated
cirrhosis, as was AICDA in approximately 50% of these HBV/HCV samples. While
AICDA can indeed edit HBV DNA ex vivo, A3G is the dominant deaminase in vivo with
up to 35% of HBV genomes being edited. Despite these highly deleterious mutant
spectra, a small fraction of genomes survive and contribute to loss of HBeAg
antigenemia and possibly HBsAg immune escape. In conclusion, the cytokine storm
associated with chronic inflammatory responses to HBV and HCV clearly up
regulates a number of A3 genes with A3G clearly being a major restriction factor 
for HBV. Although the mutant spectrum resulting from A3 editing is highly
deleterious, a very small part, notably the lightly edited genomes, might help
the virus evolve and even escape immune responses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000928 
PMCID: PMC2877740
PMID: 20523896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

