
1. J Virol. 2010 Sep;84(18):9149-60. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00642-10. Epub 2010 Jun 30.

Foot-and-mouth disease virus replicates only transiently in well-differentiated
porcine nasal epithelial cells.

Dash P(1), Barnett PV, Denyer MS, Jackson T, Stirling CM, Hawes PC, Simpson JL,
Monaghan P, Takamatsu HH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Health, Pirbright Laboratory, Pirbright, Woking, Surrey
GU24 0NF, United Kingdom.

Three-dimensional (3D) porcine nasal mucosal and tracheal mucosal epithelial cell
cultures were developed to analyze foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV)
interactions with mucosal epithelial cells. The cells in these cultures
differentiated and polarized until they closely resemble the epithelial layers
seen in vivo. FMDV infected these cultures predominantly from the apical side,
primarily by binding to integrin alphav beta6, in an Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD)-dependent 
manner. However, FMDV replicated only transiently without any visible cytopathic 
effect (CPE), and infectious progeny virus could be recovered only from the
apical side. The infection induced the production of beta interferon (IFN-beta)
and the IFN-inducible gene Mx1 mRNA, which coincided with the disappearance of
viral RNA and progeny virus. The induction of IFN-beta mRNA correlated with the
antiviral activity of the supernatants from both the apical and basolateral
compartments. IFN-alpha mRNA was constitutively expressed in nasal mucosal
epithelial cells in vitro and in vivo. In addition, FMDV infection induced
interleukin 8 (IL-8) protein, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(GM-CSF), and RANTES mRNA in the infected epithelial cells, suggesting that it
plays an important role in modulating the immune response.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00642-10 
PMCID: PMC2937594
PMID: 20592089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

