
1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010 Jul 2;59(25):773-5.

Vaccinia virus infection after sexual contact with a military smallpox vaccinee
-Washington, 2010.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

On March 1, 2010, the Washington State Department of Health (WADOH) notified
Public Health - Seattle & King County (PHSKC) of a suspected case of contact
transmission of vaccinia virus from sexual contact with a member of the military 
who had been vaccinated against smallpox. Vaccinia virus infection after sexual
contact has been reported previously (1-4). Despite the patient's exposure
history and clinical presentation, the diagnosis initially was not considered by 
the patient's physician, who ordered laboratory testing for several common
sexually transmitted infections. The patient was seen by a second physician and
referred to an infectious disease specialist, who obtained a swab sample of a
genital lesion for laboratory testing for vaccinia virus. Vaccinia virus was
confirmed by the Washington State Public Health Laboratory (WAPHL) and the CDC
Poxvirus Laboratory. The patient resided in a household with an immunosuppressed 
renal transplant recipient. Appropriate contact precautions were recommended to
the patient. No additional cases of contact transmission were reported. This
report describes the patient's clinical course and the associated epidemiologic
investigation. Health-care providers caring for U.S. military personnel or their 
contacts should consider vaccinia virus infection in the differential diagnosis
of clinically compatible genital lesions. Contact precautions should be
emphasized to all persons who are vaccinated, as well as their contacts with
unexplained lesions that might represent vaccinia infection from contact
transmission.


PMID: 20592687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

