
1. Hum Gene Ther. 2010 Dec;21(12):1749-57. doi: 10.1089/hum.2010.047. Epub 2010 Nov 
3.

Molecular anthropology meets genetic medicine to treat blindness in the North
African Jewish population: human gene therapy initiated in Israel.

Banin E(1), Bandah-Rozenfeld D, Obolensky A, Cideciyan AV, Aleman TS, Marks-Ohana
D, Sela M, Boye S, Sumaroka A, Roman AJ, Schwartz SB, Hauswirth WW, Jacobson SG, 
Hemo I, Sharon D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel. banine@cc.huji.ac.il

The history of the North African Jewish community is ancient and complicated with
a number of immigration waves and persecutions dramatically affecting its
population size. A decade-long process in Israel of clinical-molecular screening 
of North African Jews with incurable autosomal recessive blindness led to the
identification of a homozygous splicing mutation (c.95-2A > T; IVS2-2A > T) in
RPE65, the gene encoding the isomerase that catalyzes a key step in the
retinoid-visual cycle, in patients from 10 unrelated families. A total of 33
patients (four now deceased) had the severe childhood blindness known as Leber
congenital amaurosis (LCA), making it the most common cause of retinal
degeneration in this population. Haplotype analysis in seven of the patients
revealed a shared homozygous region, indicating a population-specific founder
mutation. The age of the RPE65 founder mutation was estimated to have emerged
100-230 (mean, 153) generations ago, suggesting it originated before the
establishment of the Jewish community in North Africa. Individuals with this
RPE65 mutation were characterized with retinal studies to determine if they were 
candidates for gene replacement, the recent and only therapy to date for this
otherwise incurable blindness. The step from molecular anthropological studies to
application of genetic medicine was then taken, and a representative of this
patient subgroup was treated with subretinal rAAV2-RPE65 gene therapy. An
increase in vision was present in the treated area as early as 15 days after the 
intervention. This process of genetically analyzing affected isolated populations
as a screen for gene-based therapy suggests a new paradigm for disease diagnosis 
and treatment.

DOI: 10.1089/hum.2010.047 
PMID: 20604683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

