
1. J Virol. 2010 Sep;84(18):9546-56. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00823-10. Epub 2010 Jul 7.

Remarkable lethal G-to-A mutations in vif-proficient HIV-1 provirus by individual
APOBEC3 proteins in humanized mice.

Sato K(1), Izumi T, Misawa N, Kobayashi T, Yamashita Y, Ohmichi M, Ito M,
Takaori-Kondo A, Koyanagi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Pathogenesis, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto
University, 53 Shogoinkawara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Genomic hypermutation of RNA viruses, including human immunodeficiency virus type
1 (HIV-1), can be provoked by intrinsic and extrinsic pressures, which lead to
the inhibition of viral replication and/or the progression of viral diversity.
Human APOBEC3G was identified as an HIV-1 restriction factor, which edits nascent
HIV-1 DNA by inducing G-to-A hypermutations and debilitates the infectivity of
vif-deficient HIV-1. On the other hand, HIV-1 Vif protein has the robust
potential to degrade APOBEC3G protein. Although subsequent investigations have
revealed that lines of APOBEC3 family proteins have the capacity to mutate HIV-1 
DNA, it remains unclear whether these endogenous APOBEC3s, including APOBEC3G,
contribute to mutations of vif-proficient HIV-1 provirus in vivo and, if so, what
is the significance of these mutations. In this study, we use a human
hematopoietic stem cell-transplanted humanized mouse (NOG-hCD34 mouse) model and 
demonstrate the predominant accumulation of G-to-A mutations in vif-proficient
HIV-1 provirus displaying characteristics of APOBEC3-mediated mutagenesis.
Notably, the APOBEC3-associated G-to-A mutation of HIV-1 DNA that leads to the
termination of translation was significantly observed. We further provide a novel
insight suggesting that HIV-1 G-to-A hypermutation is independently induced by
individual APOBEC3 proteins. In contrast to the prominent mutation in
intracellular proviral DNA, viral RNA in plasma possessed fewer G-to-A mutations.
Taken together, these results provide the evidence indicating that endogenous
APOBEC3s are associated with G-to-A mutation of HIV-1 provirus in vivo, which can
result in the abrogation of HIV-1 infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00823-10 
PMCID: PMC2937654
PMID: 20610708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

