
1. Gynecol Oncol. 2010 Oct;119(1):98-105. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2010.06.011. Epub
2010 Jul 8.

Performance of p16INK4a-cytology, HPV mRNA, and HPV DNA testing to identify high 
grade cervical dysplasia in women with abnormal screening results.

Reuschenbach M(1), Clad A, von Knebel Doeberitz C, Wentzensen N, Rahmsdorf J,
Schaffrath F, Griesser H, Freudenberg N, von Knebel Doeberitz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Tumor Biology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. miriam.reuschenbach@med.uni-heidelberg.de

OBJECTIVE: The prognostic value of dysplastic lesions of the uterine cervix
cannot be adequately determined by Pap cytology alone. Detection of HPV DNA
increases the diagnostic sensitivity. However, due to the very high prevalence of
transient HPV infections, HPV DNA testing suffers from poor diagnostic
specificity. Biomarkers that highlight the shift from self limited transient to
potentially dangerous transforming HPV infections may improve the accuracy of
cervical cancer screening. We evaluated HPV E6/E7 mRNA detection (APTIMA),
p16(INK4a)-immunocytology (CINtec), and HPV DNA testing (HC2) to identify women
with high grade cervical neoplasia in a disease-enriched cross-sectional cohort.
METHODS: Liquid based cytology specimens were collected from 275 patients. All
assays were performed from these vials. Detection rates of each test were
evaluated against conventional H&E based histopathology alone and stratified by
p16(INK4a)-immunohistochemistry (IHC).
RESULTS: All assays yielded a high sensitivity for the detection of CIN3+ (96.4% 
(95% CI, 90.4-98.8) for HC2, 95.5% (89.2-98.3) for APTIMA and CINtec) and CIN2+
(91.5% (85.8-95.1) for HC2, 88.4% (82.3-92.7) for APTIMA, 86.6% (80.2-91.2) for
CINtec). The specificity to detect high grade dysplasia was highest for CINtec
p16(INK4a)-cytology (60.6% (52.7-68.0) in CIN3+ and 74.8% (65.5-82.3) in CIN2+), 
followed by APTIMA (56.4% (48.4-64.0) in CIN3+ and 71.2% (61.7-79.2) in CIN2+)
and HC2 (49.1% (41.3-56.9) in CIN3+ and 63.4% (53.7-72.1) in CIN2+). All tests
had higher sensitivity using p16(INK4a)-IHC-positive CIN2+ lesions as endpoint.
CONCLUSIONS: Biomarkers that detect HPV induced dysplastic changes in the
transforming stage are promising tools to overcome the current limitations of
cervical cancer screening.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2010.06.011 
PMID: 20619445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

