
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2010 Oct;48(10):3666-74. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00866-10. Epub 2010
Jul 28.

Cholera between 1991 and 1997 in Mexico was associated with infection by
classical, El Tor, and El Tor variants of Vibrio cholerae.

Alam M(1), Nusrin S, Islam A, Bhuiyan NA, Rahim N, Delgado G, Morales R, Mendez
JL, Navarro A, Gil AI, Watanabe H, Morita M, Nair GB, Cravioto A.

Author information: 
(1)International Center for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (ICDDR,B),
Mohakhali, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Vibrio cholerae O1 biotype El Tor (ET), the cause of the current 7th pandemic,
has recently been replaced in Asia and Africa by an altered ET biotype possessing
cholera toxin (CTX) of the classical (CL) biotype that originally caused the
first six pandemics before becoming extinct in the 1980s. Until recently, the ET 
prototype was the biotype circulating in Peru; a detailed understanding of the
evolutionary trend of V. cholerae causing endemic cholera in Latin America is
lacking. The present retrospective microbiological, molecular, and phylogenetic
study of V. cholerae isolates recovered in Mexico (n = 91; 1983 to 1997) shows
the existence of the pre-1991 CL biotype and the ET and CL biotypes together with
the altered ET biotype in both epidemic and endemic cholera between 1991 and
1997. According to sero- and biotyping data, the altered ET, which has shown
predominance in Mexico since 1991, emerged locally from ET and CL progenitors
that were found coexisting until 1997. In Latin America, ET and CL variants
shared a variable number of phenotypic markers, while the altered ET strains had 
genes encoding the CL CTX (CTX(CL)) prophage, ctxB(CL) and rstR(CL), in addition 
to resident rstR(ET), as the underlying regional signature. The distinct regional
fingerprints for ET in Mexico and Peru and their divergence from ET in Asia and
Africa, as confirmed by subclustering patterns in a pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis (NotI)-based dendrogram, suggest that the Mexico epidemic in 1991
may have been a local event and not an extension of the epidemics occurring in
Asia and South America. Finally, the CL biotype reservoir in Mexico is
unprecedented and must have contributed to the changing epidemiology of global
cholera in ways that need to be understood.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00866-10 
PMCID: PMC2953092
PMID: 20668130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

