
1. BMC Public Health. 2010 Aug 10;10:472. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-10-472.

High risk behavior for HIV transmission among former injecting drug users: a
survey from Indonesia.

Iskandar S(1), Basar D, Hidayat T, Siregar IM, Pinxten L, van Crevel R, Van der
Ven AJ, De Jong CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, Padjajaran University/Hasan
Sadikin Hospital, Bandung, Indonesia. shelly_bdg@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Injecting drug use is an increasingly important cause of HIV
transmission in most countries worldwide, especially in eastern Europe, South
America, and east and southeast Asia. Among people actively injecting drugs,
provision of clean needles and opioid substitution reduce HIV-transmission.
However, former injecting drug users (fIDUs) are often overlooked as a high risk 
group for HIV transmission. We compared HIV risk behavior among current and
former injecting drug users (IDUs) in Indonesia, which has a rapidly growing
HIV-epidemic largely driven by injecting drug use.
METHODS: Current and former IDUs were recruited by respondent driven sampling in 
an urban setting in Java, and interviewed regarding drug use and HIV risk
behavior using the European Addiction Severity Index and the Blood Borne Virus
Transmission Questionnaire. Drug use and HIV transmission risk behavior were
compared between current IDUs and former IDUs, using the Mann-Whitney and Pearson
Chi-square test.
RESULTS: Ninety-two out of 210 participants (44%) were self reported former IDUs.
Risk behavior related to sex, tattooing or piercing was common among current as
well as former IDUs, 13% of former IDUs were still exposed to contaminated
injecting equipment. HIV-infection was high among former (66%) and current (60%) 
IDUs.
CONCLUSION: Former IDUs may contribute significantly to the HIV-epidemic in
Indonesia, and HIV-prevention should therefore also target this group, addressing
sexual and other risk behavior.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2458-10-472 
PMCID: PMC2931466
PMID: 20698979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

