
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2011 Sep;17(9):1336-42. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-0691.2010.03355.x. Epub 2011 Mar 3.

Impact of parvovirus B19 infection on paediatric patients with haematological
and/or oncological disorders.

Jitschin R(1), Peters O, Plentz A, Turowski P, Segerer H, Modrow S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene, Universität Regensburg,
Franz-Josef-Strauß-Allee, Regensburg, Germany.

To determine the frequency and the impact of parvovirus B19 (B19V) infection and 
its influence on the course of haematological and/or oncological diseases in
paediatric patients, consecutive serum and bone marrow samples from 110 were
analyzed for markers of acute, past and persistent B19V-infection using qPCR,
ELISA and WesternLine. Twenty-seven out of 110 (24.5%) children suffered from
non-malignant diseases (anaemia, pancytopenia, autoimmune disorders); 68/110
(61.8%) patients had developed leukaemia, malignant lymphoma or solid malignant
tumours; 15/110 patients (13.6%) presented with other symptoms. At admission,
B19V-specific IgM and IgG indicating acute or previous B19V-infection were
observed in 5 (4.5%) and 48 patients (43.6%), respectively. B19V-DNA (10(3)
-10(9)  geq/mL) was detectable in serum and/or bone marrow of 22 patients
(20.0%). These suffered from leukaemia (5), non-Hodgkin lymphoma (2), solid
tumours (6), autoimmune (4) and haematological (4) disease and fever (1). During 
clinical observation four further leukaemia patients developed viraemia and
persistent B19V-infection was observed in 13/22 DNA-positive patients. Treatment 
of B19V-DNA-positive cancer patients was associated with more supportive therapy 
involving erythrocyte and thrombocyte transfusion and/or antibiotic therapy.
Acute B19V-infection has been frequently observed in paediatric patients with
haematological and/or oncological disease. In patients with non-malignant
diseases anaemia or autoimmune disorders were diagnosed in association with
B19V-infection. Furthermore, a significant number of cancer patients displayed
markers for acute, recent or persistent B19V-infection. This association may be
strengthened by frequent treatment with blood products combined with therapeutic 
immune suppression. In B19V-infected cancer patients supportive therapy was more 
complex.

© 2011 The Authors. Clinical Microbiology and Infection © 2011 European Society
of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2010.03355.x 
PMID: 20825443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

