
1. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2010 Nov;19(11):1113-23. doi: 10.1002/pds.2025.

An open-safety study of dual antiviral therapy in real-world patients with
chronic hepatitis C.

Tinè F(1), Graviano D, Giannuoli G, Madonia S, Malizia G, Patti S, Fasola S,
Cottone M, D'Amico G; at Liver Study Group of Villa Sofia-Cervello Hospital
(LSVSCH).

Author information: 
(1)Unità operativa di Gastroenterologia e Medicina, Ospedali Riuniti Villa Sofia 
e Cervello, Palermo, Italy. fabiotinemd@virgilio.it

PURPOSE: Treatment of patients with chronic hepatitis C with alpha-interferon and
ribavirin usually produces adverse events within the first 3 months. We aimed to 
assess safety and predictors of discontinuation or dose modification of these
drugs.
METHODS: Observational study of 312 patients with predominantly genotype 1
chronic hepatitis C treated openly along 5 years in a clinical practice setting.
RESULTS: Eighty-four percent of patients experienced at least one adverse event
(853 events in total, 3.3 per patient on average). Incidence rate was higher
during the first 90 days and decreased thereafter (<5%). Discontinuation rates at
30 and 90 days and at end of treatment were 2, 4 and 8%, respectively. Seventy
percent of discontinuation cases were due to adverse events rather than to
laboratory abnormalities. Serious adverse events were rare (<1%). Dose
modifications were made in 158 patients (51%) on 237 occasions. After adjusting
for covariates, older age was a predictor of early discontinuation, whereas HCV
genotypes 1-4 and daily ribavirin dose of 1000 mg or more were predictors of dose
modification.
CONCLUSIONS: The majority of real-world patients with chronic hepatitis C
tolerate acceptably dual therapy and very few discontinue it. Subjective
decisions on dose reduction of either compound appears to have a major impact on 
adherence of patients. There is a need to better define, collect and analyse
clinical features which may predict adverse events and safety-related decisions
during therapy of chronic hepatitis C.

Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pds.2025 
PMID: 20848397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

