
1. Bundesgesundheitsblatt Gesundheitsforschung Gesundheitsschutz. 2010
Sep;53(9):917-24. doi: 10.1007/s00103-010-1117-9.

[Validation of a syndromic surveillance system of acute respiratory tract
diseases in preschools of Schleswig-Holstein (SHARE)].

[Article in German]

Korte J(1), LÃ¤ubrich C, Fickenscher H, Rautenberg P.

Author information: 
(1)Fachdienst Gesundheit, Kreis Schleswig-Flensburg, Schleswig.

To obtain reliable, regionalized, and timely data for the spread of seasonal
influenza in various age groups, which are preferentially affected by the
influenza virus, a syndromic surveillance system for acute respiratory tract
infections in Schleswig-Holstein (SHARE) was established in preschools and
nurseries starting in 2006. The Schleswig-Flensburg district with 12 of 114
preschools and nurseries and 850 of 5,750 supervised children served as a pilot
district. The weekly rates of sickness absenteeism correlated most strongly with 
the onset of seasonal influenza and with population density during the first half
of the year. Mean annual sickness absenteeism levels of above 6% occurred more
frequently above a population density of 200 inhabitants/km(2) than below this
density (relative risk 2.50, 95% confidence interval 1.18-5.32). By analysis of
the receiver-operating characteristic curve, the diagnostic performance of the
SHARE system as a classifier for seasonal influenza was determined. The
sensitivity was 83% and the specificity was 79% when sickness absence rates
exceeded 5%. The performance of the SHARE system correlated with the size of the 
kindergarten. In 2008, 13 of 15 districts of Schleswig-Holstein participated with
157 of 1,684 kindergarten and 10,300 of 113,000 children. The evaluation for 2008
confirmed that the SHARE system is suitable for the surveillance of seasonal
influenza at the district and state levels.

DOI: 10.1007/s00103-010-1117-9 
PMID: 20853089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

