
1. Am J Reprod Immunol. 1990 Dec;24(4):95-8.

Immune modulation of natural killer cell cytotoxicity against herpes infected
target cells in pregnancy.

Gonik B(1), Loftin KC, Tan NS, Crump J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, University of
Texas Medical School, Houston 77030.

Natural killer cell cytotoxicity (NKC) is a nonspecific, primary immunodefense
system active against a variety of pathogens, including herpes simplex virus
(HSV). Evidence suggests that during pregnancy, NKC is attenuated. The regulatory
mechanisms for this immune attenuation have yet to be defined. We examined two
cytokines (interleukin-2 [IL-2] and alpha interferon [IFN]) for their ability to 
alter NKC responsiveness during pregnancy, utilizing an HSV-infected target cell 
model. Peripheral mononuclear effector cells were isolated from 19 pregnant and
19 nonpregnant subjects by Ficoll-Paque separation. These cells were incubated
with IFN, IL-2, or media alone, and analyzed for %NKC by an 18 h chromium release
assay. The percentage of NKC was lower using the effector cells from the pregnant
subjects as compared to nonpregnant controls. Incubation with either IFN or IL-2 
resulted in a significant augmentation of NKC in both the pregnant and
nonpregnant derived cells. There were no differences in IL-2 dose requirements or
levels of cytotoxicity achieved (43.1 +/- 6.8% vs. 44.4 +/- 6.8%, respectively)
between pregnant and nonpregnant derived cells. The IFN-mediated augmentation of 
NKC was somewhat blunted in pregnancy both in terms of absolute levels of
cytotoxicity achieved (26.1 +/- 3.9% vs. 37.2 +/- 4.9%, respectively) and dose
response curves generated. These results demonstrate that NKC against HSV
infected cells is attenuated during pregnancy and can be immunoregulated with the
use of either IFN and IL-2. The restoration of NKC responsiveness with IFN,
however, remains incomplete during pregnancy, suggesting that this cytokine's
mechanism of action differs from that of IL-2.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0897.1990.tb01045.x 
PMID: 2085395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

