
1. Hum Gene Ther. 2011 Apr;22(4):389-404. doi: 10.1089/hum.2010.100. Epub 2011 Feb
2.

Selectivity and efficiency of late transgene expression by transcriptionally
targeted oncolytic adenoviruses are dependent on the transgene insertion
strategy.

Quirin C(1), Rohmer S, Fern√°ndez-Ulibarri I, Behr M, Hesse A, Engelhardt S, Erbs 
P, Enk AH, Nettelbeck DM.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-University Group Oncolytic Adenoviruses @ DKFZ, German Cancer
Research Center, Heidelberg University Hospital, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment in
    Hum Gene Ther. 2011 Apr;22(4):387-8.

Key challenges facing cancer therapy are the development of tumor-specific drugs 
and potent multimodal regimens. Oncolytic adenoviruses possess the potential to
realize both aims by restricting virus replication to tumors and inserting
therapeutic genes into the virus genome, respectively. A major effort in this
regard is to express transgenes in a tumor-specific manner without affecting
virus replication. Using both luciferase as a sensitive reporter and genetic
prodrug activation, we show that promoter control of E1A facilitates highly
selective expression of transgenes inserted into the late transcription unit.
This, however, required multistep optimization of late transgene expression.
Transgene insertion via internal ribosome entry site (IRES), splice acceptor
(SA), or viral 2A sequences resulted in replication-dependent expression.
Unexpectedly, analyses in appropriate substrates and with matching control
viruses revealed that IRES and SA, but not 2A, facilitated indirect transgene
targeting via tyrosinase promoter control of E1A. Transgene expression via SA was
more selective (up to 1,500-fold) but less effective than via IRES. Notably, we
also revealed transgene-dependent interference with splicing. Hence, the prodrug 
convertase FCU1 (a cytosine deaminase-uracil phosphoribosyltransferase fusion
protein) was expressed only after optimizing the sequence surrounding the SA site
and mutating a cryptic splice site within the transgene. The resulting tyrosinase
promoter-regulated and FCU1-encoding adenovirus combined effective oncolysis with
targeted prodrug activation therapy of melanoma. Thus, prodrug activation showed 
potent bystander killing and increased cytotoxicity of the virus up to 10-fold.
We conclude that armed oncolytic viruses can be improved substantially by
comparing and optimizing strategies for targeted transgene expression, thereby
implementing selective and multimodal cancer therapies.

DOI: 10.1089/hum.2010.100 
PMCID: PMC3073076
PMID: 20939692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

