
1. N Engl J Med. 2010 Oct 14;363(16):1499-509. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0906626.

Antiretroviral therapies in women after single-dose nevirapine exposure.

Lockman S(1), Hughes MD, McIntyre J, Zheng Y, Chipato T, Conradie F, Sawe F,
Asmelash A, Hosseinipour MC, Mohapi L, Stringer E, Mngqibisa R, Siika A, Atwine
D, Hakim J, Shaffer D, Kanyama C, Wools-Kaloustian K, Salata RA, Hogg E,
Alston-Smith B, Walawander A, Purcelle-Smith E, Eshleman S, Rooney J, Rahim S,
Mellors JW, Schooley RT, Currier JS; OCTANE A5208 Study Team.

Collaborators: Zwickl B, Mutuluuza CK, Kaseba C, Maponga CC, Watts H, Kuritzkes
D, Campbell TB, Kidd-Freeman L, Carten M, Hitti J, Marovich M, Mugyenyi PN,
Rwambuya S, Sanne IM, Putnam B, Marcus C, Wester C, DiFrancesco R, Halvas E,
Beddison A, Lehrman S, Aweeka F, Dong B, Ziba PN, Saag MS, Holmes WC, Hammer SM, 
Dangaiso E, Rassool MS, Tsotsotetsi J, Potani C, Mwausegha R, Laher F, Hen-Boisen
R, Kirwa K, Nzioka A, Chibowa M, Stringer J, Sebina K, Mburu K, Kakhu T, Moorad
B, Kityo C, Rwambuya S, Amod F, Lalloo U, Pillay S, Sun X, Nair A, Smith LM,
Tutko J, Lee C, Purdue L, Ferguson E, Martinez A, Delph Y, Gettinger N, Berman L,
Boone L, Adedeji B.

Author information: 
(1)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. slockman@hsph.harvard.edu

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Oct 14;363(16):1570-2.

BACKGROUND: Peripartum administration of single-dose nevirapine reduces
mother-to-child transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) but
selects for nevirapine-resistant virus.
METHODS: In seven African countries, women infected with HIV-1 whose CD4+ T-cell 
counts were below 200 per cubic millimeter and who either had or had not taken
single-dose nevirapine at least 6 months before enrollment were randomly assigned
to receive antiretroviral therapy with tenofovir–emtricitabine plus nevirapine or
tenofovir-emtricitabine plus lopinavir boosted by a low dose of ritonavir. The
primary end point was the time to confirmed virologic failure or death.
RESULTS: A total of 241 women who had been exposed to single-dose nevirapine
began the study treatments (121 received nevirapine and 120 received
ritonavir-boosted lopinavir). Significantly more women in the nevirapine group
reached the primary end point than in the ritonavir-boosted lopinavir group (26% 
vs. 8%) (adjusted P=0.001). Virologic failure occurred in 37 (28 in the
nevirapine group and 9 in the ritonavir-boosted lopinavir group), and 5 died
without prior virologic failure (4 in the nevirapine group and 1 in the
ritonavir-boosted lopinavir group). The group differences appeared to decrease as
the interval between single-dose nevirapine exposure and the start of
antiretroviral therapy increased. Retrospective bulk sequencing of baseline
plasma samples showed nevirapine resistance in 33 of 239 women tested (14%).
Among 500 women without prior exposure to single-dose nevirapine, 34 of 249 in
the nevirapine group (14%) and 36 of 251 in the ritonavir-boosted lopinavir group
(14%) had virologic failure or died.
CONCLUSIONS: In women with prior exposure to peripartum single-dose nevirapine
(but not in those without prior exposure), ritonavir-boosted lopinavir plus
tenofovir–emtricitabine was superior to nevirapine plus tenofovir–emtricitabine
for initial antiretroviral therapy. (Funded by the National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Diseases and the National Research Center; ClinicalTrials.gov
number, NCT00089505.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa0906626 
PMCID: PMC2994321
PMID: 20942666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

