
1. Mol Ther. 2011 Jan;19(1):122-32. doi: 10.1038/mt.2010.226. Epub 2010 Oct 26.

Biochemical correction of X-CGD by a novel chimeric promoter regulating high
levels of transgene expression in myeloid cells.

Santilli G(1), Almarza E, Brendel C, Choi U, Beilin C, Blundell MP, Haria S,
Parsley KL, Kinnon C, Malech HL, Bueren JA, Grez M, Thrasher AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology Unit, Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

X-linked chronic granulomatous disease (X-CGD) is a primary immunodeficiency
caused by mutations in the CYBB gene encoding the phagocyte nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)-oxidase catalytic subunit gp91(phox). A recent
clinical trial for X-CGD using a spleen focus-forming virus (SFFV)-based
Î³-retroviral vector has demonstrated clear therapeutic benefits in several
patients although complicated by enhancer-mediated mutagenesis and diminution of 
effectiveness over time due to silencing of the viral long terminal repeat (LTR).
To improve safety and efficacy, we have designed a lentiviral vector that directs
transgene expression primarily in myeloid cells. To this end, we created a
synthetic chimeric promoter that contains binding sites for myeloid transcription
factors CAAT box enhancer-binding family proteins (C/EBPs) and PU.1, which are
highly expressed during granulocytic differentiation. As predicted, the chimeric 
promoter regulated higher reporter gene expression in myeloid than in nonmyeloid 
cells, and in human hematopoietic progenitors upon granulocytic differentiation. 
In a murine model of stem cell gene therapy for X-CGD, the chimeric vector
resulted in high levels of gp91(phox) expression in committed myeloid cells and
granulocytes, and restored normal NADPH-oxidase activity. These findings were
recapitulated in human neutrophils derived from transduced X-CGD CD34(+) cells in
vivo, and suggest that the chimeric promoter will have utility for gene therapy
of myeloid lineage disorders such as CGD.

DOI: 10.1038/mt.2010.226 
PMCID: PMC3017453
PMID: 20978475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

