
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Dec 3;403(1):40-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.10.107. Epub 2010 Oct 29.

Identification of a novel Vpr-binding compound that inhibits HIV-1 multiplication
in macrophages by chemical array.

Hagiwara K(1), Murakami T, Xue G, Shimizu Y, Takeda E, Hashimoto Y, Honda K,
Kondoh Y, Osada H, Tsunetsugu-Yokota Y, Aida Y.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Infectious Diseases Research Unit, RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama
351-0198, Japan.

Although HIV-1 replication can be controlled by highly active anti-retroviral
therapy (HAART) using protease and reverse transcriptase inhibitors, the
development of multidrug-resistant viruses compromises the efficacy of HAART.
Thus, it is necessary to develop new drugs with novel targets. To identify new
anti-HIV-1 compounds, recombinant Vpr was purified from transfected COS-7 cells
and used to screen compounds by chemical array to identify those that bound Vpr. 
From this screen, 108 compounds were selected as positive for Vpr binding. Among 
these, one structurally similar group of four compounds showed anti-HIV activity 
in macrophages. In particular, compound SIP-1 had high inhibition activity and
reduced the levels of p24 by more than 98% in macrophages after 8 or 12 days of
infection. SIP-1 had no cytotoxic effects and did not disrupt cell cycle
progression or induce apoptosis of Molt-4 and HeLa cell lines as measured by MTT 
assay, flow-cytometry analysis, and a caspase-3 assay. In addition, SIP-1
specifically bound to Vpr as assessed by photo-cross-linked small-molecule
affinity beads. These results suggest that Vpr is a good target for the
development of compounds that could potentially inhibit HIV-1 replication.
Collectively, our results strongly suggest that chemical array is a useful method
for screening anti-viral compounds.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.10.107 
PMID: 21036153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

