
1. Plant Biotechnol J. 2011 May;9(4):503-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7652.2010.00571.x. 
Epub 2010 Oct 29.

Targeting specific genes for RNA interference is crucial to the development of
strong resistance to rice stripe virus.

Shimizu T(1), Nakazono-Nagaoka E, Uehara-Ichiki T, Sasaya T, Omura T.

Author information: 
(1)National Agricultural Research Center, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Rice stripe virus (RSV) has a serious negative effect on rice production in
temperate regions of East Asia. Focusing on the putative importance of the
selection of target sequences for RNA interference (RNAi), we analysed the
effects of potential target sequences in each of the coding genes in the RSV
genome, using transgenic rice plants that expressed a set of inverted-repeat (IR)
constructs. The reactions of inoculated transgenic T(1) plants to RSV were
divided subjectively into three classes, namely highly resistant, moderately
resistant and lacking enhanced resistance to RSV, even though plants that
harboured any constructs accumulated transgene-specific siRNAs prior to
inoculation with RSV. Transgenic plants that harboured IR constructs specific for
the gene for pC3, which encodes nucleocapsid protein, and for pC4, which encodes 
a viral movement protein, were immune to infection by RSV and were more resistant
to infection than the natural resistant cultivars that have been used to control 
the disease in the field. By contrast, the IR construct specific for the gene for
pC2, which encodes a glycoprotein of unknown function, and for p4, which encodes 
a major non-structural protein of unknown function, did not result in resistance.
Our results indicate that not all RNAi constructs against viral RNAs are equally 
effective in preventing RSV infection and that it is important to identify the
viral 'Achilles heel' for RNAi attack in the engineering of plants.

© 2010 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal © 2010 Society for Experimental
Biology, Association of Applied Biologists and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7652.2010.00571.x 
PMID: 21040387  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

