
1. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2011 Jul;12(4):426-30. doi: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e3181ff41c1.

Development of a collaborative program to provide extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation for adults with refractory hypoxemia within the framework of a
pandemic.

Turner DA(1), Williford WL, Peters MA, Thalman JJ, Shearer IR, Walczak RJ Jr,
Griffis M, Olson SA, Sowers KW, Govert JA, Macintyre NR, Cheifetz IM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Duke
Children's Hospital, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
David.Turner@Duke.edu

Comment in
    Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2011 Jul;12(4):476-7.

OBJECTIVE: We report the process used to rapidly develop a collaborative adult
respiratory extracorporeal membrane oxygenation program as a response to caring
for young adult patients with refractory hypoxemia in the setting of the pH1N1
pandemic.
DESIGN: Interdisciplinary response of a complex medical system to a public health
crisis. PATIENTS, INTERVENTIONS, MEASUREMENTS, AND MAIN RESULTS: After the
successful use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in young adults with
pH1N1-induced acute respiratory distress syndrome refractory to conventional
therapies, an adult venovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation program was
implemented over an 8-wk period. Implementation of this program involved a number
of key steps that were crucial in the development process, including
administrative and institutional support, multidisciplinary leadership and
collaboration, extensive interdisciplinary educational initiatives, and
substantial technical modifications.
CONCLUSIONS: In the setting of the pH1N1 influenza pandemic, an adult respiratory
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation program was successfully developed to
complement an established neonatal-pediatric program. This program expansion
integrated all of the necessary components involved in the development process
from start to finish and confirms that a healthcare system can respond very
quickly and successfully to an urgent healthcare need.

DOI: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e3181ff41c1 
PMID: 21057349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

