
1. Biomaterials. 2011 Feb;32(4):1177-84. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.10.015.
Epub 2010 Nov 10.

A multicomponent recognition and separation system established via fluorescent,
magnetic, dualencoded multifunctional bioprobes.

Hu J(1), Xie M, Wen CY, Zhang ZL, Xie HY, Liu AA, Chen YY, Zhou SM, Pang DW.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry for Biology and Medicine (Ministry of
Education), College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 
430072, PR China.

Accurate and rapid recognition and separation of multiple types of biological
targets such as molecules, cells, bacteria or viruses from complex sample
mixtures is of great importance for a wide range of diagnostic and therapeutic
strategies. To achieve this goal, a set of fluorescent, magnetic, dual-encoded
multifunctional bioprobes has been constructed by co-embedding different-sized
quantum dots and varying amounts of γ-Fe(2)O(3) magnetic nanoparticles into
swollen poly(styrene/acrylamide) copolymer nanospheres. The dual-encoded
bioprobes, which possessed different photoluminescent property and magnetic
susceptibility, were proven to be capable of simultaneously recognizing and
separating multiple components from a complex sample when three kinds of lectins 
were used as the targets. The lectins were separated with high efficiency and
kept their bioactivity during the process. Compared to the conventional batchwise
separation, this method does not require a large number of sequential reaction
steps, which is economical of time and can be very reagent-saving. By combining
the multiplexing capability of quantum dots with the superparamagnetic properties
of iron oxide nanoparticles, this dual-encoded technique is expected to open new 
opportunities in high-throughput and multiplex bioassays, such as cell sorting,
proteomical and genomical applications, drug screening etc.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.10.015 
PMID: 21071081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

