
1. Transplant Proc. 2010 Nov;42(9):3887-91. doi: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2010.09.003.

Simultaneous pancreas-kidney transplantation in HIV-infected patients: a case
report and literature review.

Miro JM(1), Ricart MJ, Trullas JC, Cofan F, Cervera C, Brunet M, Tuset M,
Manzardo C, Oppenheimer F, Moreno A.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Service, Hospital Clinic-IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain. jmmiro@ub.edu

Comment in
    Transplant Proc. 2011 Dec;43(10):3903-4.

Since the introduction of combined antiretroviral therapy (cART), solid organ
transplantation (SOT) has become a therapeutic option for the HIV-positive
population. In contrast with liver and kidney transplantation, only three
simultaneous pancreas-kidney transplants (SPKT) have been reported among
HIV-infected patients. Herein we have reported the first SPKT in an HIV-infected 
patient in Spain. The pancreas graft failed at 2 weeks and the patient died at 9 
months because of a Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. The three recipients
reported in the literature lived, despite the failure of both the pancreas and
kidney grafts in one subject. Despite the poor outcome of our case, HIV-1
infection was controlled after transplantation (stable CD4(+) cells and no
AIDS-related events), and the kidney graft functioned with no episodes of
rejection. The cART regimen used in the pretransplant period was switched at the 
time of transplantation to raltegravir and two nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (NRTI). Raltegravir has no interactions with immunosuppressive drugs. 
Target plasma levels of tacrolimus were achieved at a dose similar to that used
in HIV-negative transplant recipients. The most adequate antiretroviral regimen
for HIV-infected SOT recipients has not yet been established; however, one may
consider switching protease inhibitors or non-NRTI-based regimens for a
raltegravir-based regimen at the time of transplantation.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2010.09.003 
PMID: 21094878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

