
1. J Med Chem. 2011 Jan 13;54(1):222-32. doi: 10.1021/jm1011462. Epub 2010 Dec 3.

Novel antiviral C5-substituted pyrimidine acyclic nucleoside phosphonates
selected as human thymidylate kinase substrates.

Topalis D(1), Pradère U, Roy V, Caillat C, Azzouzi A, Broggi J, Snoeck R, Andrei 
G, Lin J, Eriksson S, Alexandre JA, El-Amri C, Deville-Bonne D, Meyer P,
Balzarini J, Agrofoglio LA.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe d'Enzymologie Moléculaire et Fonctionnelle, UR4-UPMC, Université Pierre
et Marie Curie, Sorbonne Universités, Paris, France.

Acyclic nucleoside phosphonates (ANPs) are at the cornerstone of DNA virus and
retrovirus therapies. They reach their target, the viral DNA polymerase, after
two phosphorylation steps catalyzed by cellular kinases. New pyrimidine ANPs have
been synthesized with unsaturated acyclic side chains (prop-2-enyl-, but-2-enyl-,
pent-2-enyl-) and different substituents at the C5 position of the uracil
nucleobase. Several derivatives in the but-2-enyl- series 9d and 9e, with (E) but
not with (Z) configuration, were efficient substrates for human thymidine
monophosphate (TMP) kinase, but not for uridine monophosphate-cytosine
monophosphate (UMP-CMP) kinase, which is in contrast to cidofovir. Human TMP
kinase was successfully crystallized in a complex with phosphorylated
(E)-thymidine-but-2-enyl phosphonate 9e and ADP. The bis-pivaloyloxymethyl (POM) 
esters of (E)-9d and (E)-9e were synthesized and shown to exert activity against 
herpes virus in vitro (IC(50) = 3 μM) and against varicella zoster virus in vitro
(IC(50) = 0.19 μM), in contrast to the corresponding inactive (Z) derivatives.
Thus, their antiviral activity correlates with their ability to act as
thymidylate kinase substrates.

DOI: 10.1021/jm1011462 
PMID: 21128666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

