
1. FEBS J. 2011 Jan;278(2):316-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07952.x. Epub 2010 
Dec 13.

Peptides that bind the HIV-1 integrase and modulate its enzymatic
activity--kinetic studies and mode of action.

Levin A(1), Benyamini H, Hayouka Z, Friedler A, Loyter A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life 
Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

Several peptides that specifically bind the HIV-1 integrase (IN) and either
inhibit or stimulate its enzymatic activity were developed in our laboratories.
Kinetic studies using 3'-end processing and strand-transfer assays were performed
to study the mode of action of these peptides. The effects of the various
peptides on the interaction between IN and its substrate DNA were also studied by
fluorescence anisotropy. On the basis of our results, we divided these
IN-interacting peptides into three groups: (a) IN-inhibitory peptides, whose
binding to IN decrease its affinity for the substrate DNA - these peptides
increased the K(m) of the IN-DNA interaction, and were thus inhibitory; (b)
peptides that slightly increased the K(m) of the IN-DNA interaction, but in
addition modified the V(max) and K(cat) values of the IN, and thus stimulated or 
inhibited IN activity, respectively; and (c) peptides that bound IN but had no
effect on its enzymatic activity. We elucidated the approximate binding sites of 
the peptides in the structure of IN, providing structural insights into their
mechanism of action. The IN-stimulating peptide bound IN in several specific
sites that did not bind any of the inhibitory peptides. This may account for its 
unique activity.

© 2010 The Authors Journal compilation © 2010 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07952.x 
PMID: 21156026  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

