
1. Transplant Proc. 2010 Dec;42(10):4479-87. doi:
10.1016/j.transproceed.2010.10.011.

Seropositive abdominal and thoracic donor organs are largely underutilized.

Taylor RM(1), Pietroski RE, Hagan M, Eisenbrey AB, Fontana RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
USA. rtaylor2@kumc.edu

The aim of this study was to describe the epidemiology and utilization of
anti-hepatitis B core protein(+) and anti-hepatitis C virus(+) organ donor
referrals in a large organ procurement organization. Between 1995 and 2006, 3,134
deceased organ donor referrals were tested for anti-HBc and anti-HCV using
commercial assays. The prevalence of anti-HCV(+) organ donor referrals
significantly increased from 3.4% in 1994-1996 to 8.1% in 2003-2005 (P < .001),
whereas the prevalence of anti-HBc(+) organ donor referrals remained unchanged at
3%-4% (P = .20). The 112 anti-HBc(+) (3.5%) and 173 anti-HCV(+) (5.5%) organ
donor referrals were significantly older and more likely to be noncaucasian than 
seronegative organ donor referrals (P < .02). The procurement and utilization
rates of seropositive thoracic and abdominal donor organs were significantly
lower compared with seronegative organ donors (P < .0001). However, liver
utilization rates significantly increased from anti-HBc(+) donors over time (21% 
vs 46%; P = .026), whereas utilization of anti-HCV(+) liver donors remained
unchanged over time (5% vs 18%; P = .303). In summary, the proportion of
anti-HCV(+) organ donor referrals has significantly increased and the proportion 
of anti-HBc(+) organ donor referrals has remained stable. Both thoracic and
abdominal organs from seropositive donors are largely underutilized.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2010.10.011 
PMID: 21168721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

