
1. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Dec;39(12):798-803.

[Clinicopathologic features and protein expression study of Epstein-Barr
virus-associated gastric carcinoma in Guangzhou].

[Article in Chinese]

Han J(1), He D, Feng ZY, Ding YG, Shao CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510630, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the prevalence of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated
gastric carcinomas in Guangzhou, their clinicopathologic features and related
protein expressions including DNMT1, p16, and cyclin D1.
METHOD: A total of 676 cases of EBV-associated gastric carcinoma were included in
the study. The presence of EBV-encoded small RNA1 (EBER1), a marker for EBV
infection, was analyzed by in-situ hybridization using formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded tumor samples. Expression of EBV-encoded proteins, DNMT1, p16
and cyclin D1 were detected by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Forty-five of 676 gastric carcinomas showed EBER intranuclear positivity
in all tumor cells. EBV involvement was significantly more frequent among the
male than the female patients, especially in tumors of less differentiated types 
(diffuse type) and involving the upper stomach (P < 0.05). EBNA1 and LMP2A
expression were detected in 42 (93.3%) and 24 (53.3%) cases, respectively. None
expressed EBNA2, LMP1, and ZEBRA. Among 45 cases of EBV associated gastric
carcinomas, DNMT1, p16 and cyclin D1 expression were seen in 35 (77.8%), 10
(22.2%), and 29 (64.4%) cases, respectively. In contrast, among 40 EBV negative
gastric carcinomas, expression of the three proteins were 20 (50.0%), 25 (62.5%) 
and 12 (30.0%), respectively. The difference of expression of the three proteins 
between the two groups was significant (P < 0.05). Expression of p16 correlated
with the depth of the tumor invasion. Correlated protein expression was seen
between LMP2A and DNMT1, between DNMT1 and p16, and between p16 and cyclin D1 (P 
< 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: EBV associated gastric carcinoma accounts for 6.7% of gastric
carcinomas in Guangzhou with the Latency I pattern in some cases and between
Latency I and II in others. The correlated expression of LMP2A, DNMT1, p16 and
cyclin D1 may contribute to the pathogenesis of EBV associated gastric
carcinomas.


PMID: 21215093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

