
1. J Virol Methods. 2011 May;173(2):374-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2011.01.020. Epub
2011 Feb 3.

Development of optimal liquid based cytology sample processing methods for HPV
testing: minimising the 'inadequate' test result.

Peevor R(1), Jones J, Fiander AN, Hibbitts S.

Author information: 
(1)HPV Research Group, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, School of
Medicine, Heath Park, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF14 4XN, United Kingdom.
peevorrj@cardiff.ac.uk

Incorporation of HPV testing into cervical screening is anticipated and robust
methods for DNA extraction from liquid based cytology (LBC) samples are required.
This study compared QIAamp extraction with Proteinase K digestion and developed
methods to address DNA extraction failure (β-globin PCR negative) from clinical
specimens. Proteinase K and QIAamp extraction methods in paired LBC samples were 
comparable with adequate DNA retrieved from 93.3% of clinical specimens. An HPV
prevalence cohort (n=10,000) found 7% (n=676) LBC samples tested negative for
β-globin, and were classified as inadequate. This 'failure' rate is unsuitable
for population screening, particularly as the sampling method is intrusive.
379/676 samples were assessed to determine the cause of test failure. Re-testing 
confirmed adequate DNA in 21.6% of the original extracts; re-extraction from
stored material identified 56.2% samples contained adequate material; dilution to
overcome sample inhibition (1:10) resolved 51.7% cases in original extracts and
28% in new extracts. A standardised approach to HPV testing with an optimal DNA
concentration input rather than standard volume input is recommended. Samples
failing initial DNA extraction should be repeat extracted and assessed for sample
inhibition to reduce the 7% of HPV tests being reported as inadequate and reduce 
the need for retesting of those women to <1%.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2011.01.020 
PMID: 21295606  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

