
1. Med Mal Infect. 2011 Jun;41(6):322-9. doi: 10.1016/j.medmal.2010.12.010. Epub
2011 Feb 3.

[Rift Valley fever].

[Article in French]

Pépin M(1); avec la participation de la CIRE Réunion-Mayotte et l'Institut de
Veille Sanitaire (InVS).

Author information: 
(1)VetAgroSup - Campus vétérinaire de Lyon, 1, avenue Bourgelat, 69280
Marcy-l'Étoile, France. m.pepin@vetagro-sup.fr

Rift Valley Fever (RVF) is a zoonotic arbovirosis. Among animals, it mainly
affects ruminants, causing abortions in gravid females and mortality among young 
animals. In humans, RVF virus infection is usually asymptomatic or characterized 
by a moderate fever. However, in 1 to 3% of cases, more severe forms of the
disease (hepatitis, encephalitis, retinitis, hemorrhagic fever) can lead to the
death of infected individuals or to major sequels. The RVF virus (Bunyaviridae,
genus Phlebovirus) was identified for the first time in the 1930s in Kenya. It
then spread over almost all African countries, sometimes causing major
epizootics/epidemics. In 2000, the virus was carried out of Africa, in the Middle
East Arabian Peninsula. In 2007-2008, Eastern-African countries, including
Madagascar, reported significant episodes of RVF virus, this was also the case
for the Comoros archipelago and the French island of Mayotte. This ability to
spread associated with many vectors, including in Europe, and high viral loads in
infected animals led the health authorities worldwide to warn about the potential
emergence of RVF virus in areas with a temperate climate. The awareness has
increased in recent years with climate changes, which may possibly modify the
vector distribution and competence, and prompted many RVF virus-free countries to
better prepare for a potential implantation of RVF.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medmal.2010.12.010 
PMID: 21295425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

