
1. Hum Vaccin. 2011 Feb;7(2):153-60. Epub 2011 Feb 1.

Current experience with school-located influenza vaccination programs in the
United States: a review of the medical literature.

Hull HF(1), Ambrose CS.

Author information: 
(1)HF Hull & Associates, LLC, St. Paul, MN, USA. idepi@q.com

In the United States, all children 6 months through 18 years of age are
recommended to be vaccinated against influenza annually. However, the existing
pediatric immunization infrastructure does not have the capacity to vaccinate a
high proportion of children each year. School-located influenza vaccination
(SLIV) programs provide an opportunity to immunize large numbers of school-age
children. We reviewed the medical literature in order to document the current
U.S. experience to benefit future SLIV programs. Published reports or abstracts
for 36 SLIV programs were identified, some of which spanned multiple years. The
programs immunized between 70-128,228 students. While most programs vaccinated
40-50% of students, coverage ranged from 7-73%. Higher percentages of elementary 
students were vaccinated compared with middle and high school students. While
many programs offered only intranasal vaccine, several programs have successfully
used both the intranasal and injectable vaccines. Faculty and staff were
immunized in some programs and uptake in this group varied considerably. Students
were vaccinated quickly during school hours. Costs, where reported, ranged from
approximately $20-$27 per dose delivered, including both vaccine and
administration costs. The greatest need for future U.S. SLIV program
implementation is the development of a financially sustainable model that can be 
replicated annually on a national scale.

DOI: 10.4161/hv.7.2.13668 
PMCID: PMC3166475
PMID: 21311217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

