
1. Retrovirology. 2011 Feb 16;8:11. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-8-11.

Highly conserved serine residue 40 in HIV-1 p6 regulates capsid processing and
virus core assembly.

Votteler J(1), Neumann L, Hahn S, Hahn F, Rauch P, Schmidt K, Studtrucker N,
Solbak SM, Fossen T, Henklein P, Ott DE, Holland G, Bannert N, Schubert U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Friedrich-Alexander-University, Erlangen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The HIV-1 p6 Gag protein regulates the final abscission step of
nascent virions from the cell membrane by the action of two late assembly (L-)
domains. Although p6 is located within one of the most polymorphic regions of the
HIV-1 gag gene, the 52 amino acid peptide binds at least to two cellular budding 
factors (Tsg101 and ALIX), is a substrate for phosphorylation, ubiquitination,
and sumoylation, and mediates the incorporation of the HIV-1 accessory protein
Vpr into viral particles. As expected, known functional domains mostly overlap
with several conserved residues in p6. In this study, we investigated the
importance of the highly conserved serine residue at position 40, which until now
has not been assigned to any known function of p6.
RESULTS: Consistently with previous data, we found that mutation of Ser-40 has no
effect on ALIX mediated rescue of HIV-1 L-domain mutants. However, the only
feasible S40F mutation that preserves the overlapping pol open reading frame
(ORF) reduces virus replication in T-cell lines and in human lymphocyte tissue
cultivated ex vivo. Most intriguingly, L-domain mediated virus release is not
dependent on the integrity of Ser-40. However, the S40F mutation significantly
reduces the specific infectivity of released virions. Further, it was observed
that mutation of Ser-40 selectively interferes with the cleavage between capsid
(CA) and the spacer peptide SP1 in Gag, without affecting cleavage of other Gag
products. This deficiency in processing of CA, in consequence, led to an
irregular morphology of the virus core and the formation of an electron dense
extra core structure. Moreover, the defects induced by the S40F mutation in p6
can be rescued by the A1V mutation in SP1 that generally enhances processing of
the CA-SP1 cleavage site.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, these data support a so far unrecognized function of p6
mediated by Ser-40 that occurs independently of the L-domain function, but
selectively affects CA maturation and virus core formation, and consequently the 
infectivity of released virions.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-8-11 
PMCID: PMC3049138
PMID: 21324168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

