
1. J Med Case Rep. 2011 Feb 14;5:60. doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-5-60.

Primary effusion lymphoma associated with Human Herpes Virus-8 and Epstein Barr
virus in an HIV-infected woman from Kampala, Uganda: a case report.

Tumwine LK(1), Lalitha R, Agostinelli C, Luzige S, Orem J, Piccaluga PP, Osuwat
LO, Pileri SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Biomedical Sciences, Makerere University
College of Health Sciences, Mulago Hill Road, PO Box 7072, Kampala, Uganda.
tumwinelynnette@yahoo.com.

INTRODUCTION: Primary effusion lymphoma is a recently recognized entity of AIDS
related non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Despite Africa being greatly affected by the
HIV/AIDS pandemic, an extensive MEDLINE/PubMed search failed to find any report
of primary effusion lymphoma in sub-Saharan Africa. To our knowledge this is the 
first report of primary effusion lymphoma in sub-Saharan Africa. We report the
clinical, cytomorphologic and immunohistochemical findings of a patient with
primary effusion lymphoma.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 70-year-old newly diagnosed HIV-positive Ugandan African
woman presented with a three-month history of cough, fever, weight loss and
drenching night sweats. Three weeks prior to admission she developed right sided 
chest pain and difficulty in breathing. On examination she had bilateral pleural 
effusions.Haematoxylin and eosin stained cytologic sections of the formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded cell block made from the pleural fluid were processed in the
Department of Pathology, Makerere University, College of Health Sciences,
Kampala, Uganda. Immunohistochemistry was done at the Institute of Haematology
and Oncology "L and A Seragnoli", Bologna University School of Medicine, Bologna,
Italy, using alkaline phosphatase anti-alkaline phosphatase method. In situ
hybridization was used for detection of Epstein-Barr virus.The tumor cells were
CD45+, CD30+, CD38+, HHV-8 LANA-1+; but were negative for CD3-, CD20-, CD19-, and
CD79a- and EBV RNA+ on in situ hybridization. CD138 and Ki-67 were not evaluable.
Our patient tested HIV positive and her CD4 cell count was 127/Î¼L.
CONCLUSIONS: A definitive diagnosis of primary effusion lymphoma rests on finding
a proliferation of large immunoblastic, plasmacytoid and anaplastic cells; HHV-8 
in the tumor cells, an immunophenotype that is CD45+, pan B-cell marker negative 
and lymphocyte activated marker positive. It is essential for clinicians and
pathologists to have a high index of suspicion of primary effusion lymphoma when 
handling HIV positive patients who have effusions without palpable tumor masses. 
Basic immunohistochemistry is essential for definitive diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-1947-5-60 
PMCID: PMC3048476
PMID: 21320326 

