
1. Mutat Res. 2011 May 10;709-710:7-14. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2011.02.014. Epub 2011
Mar 3.

Local infection with oilseed rape mosaic virus promotes genetic rearrangements in
systemic Arabidopsis tissue.

Yao Y(1), Bilichak A, Golubov A, Kovalchuk I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Lethbridge, Lethbridge, T1K
3M4, Alberta, Canada. youli.yao@uleth.ca

We have previously shown that local infection of tobacco plants with tobacco
mosaic virus (TMV) or oilseed rape mosaic virus (ORMV) results in a systemic
increase in the homologous recombination frequency (HRF). Here, we analyzed what 
other changes in the genome are triggered by pathogen infection. For the analysis
of HRF, mutation frequency (MF) and microsatellite instability (MI), we used
three different transgenic Arabidopsis lines carrying β-glucuronidase (GUS)-based
substrates in their genome. We found that local infection of Arabidopsis with
ORMV resulted in an increase of all three frequencies, albeit to differing
degrees. The most prominent increase was observed in microsatellite instability. 
The increase in HRF was the lowest, although still statistically significant. The
analysis of methylation of the 35S promoter and transgene expression showed that 
the greater instability of the transgene was not attributed to these changes.
Strand breaks brought about a significant increase in non-treated tissues of
infected plants. The expression of genes associated with various repair
processes, such as KU70, RAD51, MSH2, DNA POL α and DNA POL δ, was also
increased. To summarize, our data demonstrate that local ORMV infection
destabilizes the genome in systemic tissues of Arabidopsis plants in various ways
resulting in large rearrangements, point mutations and microsatellite
instability.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2011.02.014 
PMID: 21376739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

