
1. Hum Gene Ther. 2011 May;22(5):595-604. doi: 10.1089/hum.2010.202.

Good manufacturing practice production of self-complementary serotype 8
adeno-associated viral vector for a hemophilia B clinical trial.

Allay JA(1), Sleep S, Long S, Tillman DM, Clark R, Carney G, Fagone P, McIntosh
JH, Nienhuis AW, Davidoff AM, Nathwani AC, Gray JT.

Author information: 
(1)Children's GMP, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

To generate sufficient clinical-grade vector to support a phase I/II clinical
trial of adeno-associated virus serotype 8 (AAV8)-mediated factor IX (FIX) gene
transfer for hemophilia B, we have developed a large-scale, good manufacturing
practice (GMP)-compatible method for vector production and purification. We used 
a 293T-based two-plasmid transient transfection system coupled with a
three-column chromatography purification process to produce high-quality
self-complementary AAV2/8 FIX clinical-grade vector. Two consecutive production
campaigns using a total of 432 independent 10-stack culture chambers produced a
total of ∼2 × 10(15) vector genomes (VG) by dot-blot hybridization.
Benzonase-treated microfluidized lysates generated from pellets of transfected
cells were purified by group separation on Sepharose beads followed by
anion-exchange chromatography. The virus-containing fractions were further
processed by gel filtration and ultrafiltration, using a 100-kDa membrane. The
vector was formulated in phosphate-buffered saline plus 0.25% human serum
albumin. Spectrophotometric analysis suggested ∼20% full particles, with only low
quantities of nonviral proteins were visible on silver-stained sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gels. A sensitive assay for the detection of
replication-competent AAV was developed, which did reveal trace quantities of
such contaminants in the final product. Additional studies have confirmed the
long-term stability of the vector at -80°C for at least 24 months and for at
least 24 hr formulated in the clinical diluent and stored at room temperature
within intravenous bags. This material has been approved for use in clinical
trials in the United States and the United Kingdom.

DOI: 10.1089/hum.2010.202 
PMCID: PMC3081439
PMID: 21410419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

