
1. Faraday Discuss. 2011;149:201-10; discussion 227-45.

Peptide-tags for enhanced DNA microarray performance.

Schulze H(1), Ross AJ, Ember SW, Luby J, Khondoker M, Giraud G, Ciani I, Tlili C,
Papale D, Terry JG, Mount AR, Walton AJ, Crain J, Ghazal P, Bachmann TT, Campbell
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathway Medicine, College of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine, The
University of Edinburgh, Chancellor's Building, 49 Little France Crescent,
Edinburgh, EH16 4SB, Scotland. holger.schulze@ed.ac.uk

DNA microarrays are powerful tools for gene expression analysis and genotyping
studies in research and diagnostic applications. A high sensitivity and short
time-to-result are prerequisites for their practical application in the clinic.
The hybridization efficiency of DNA microarrays depends on the probe density and 
the probe orientation and thus their accessibility for target molecules. In order
to find an optimal probe immobilization procedure a set of different
oligonucleotide modifications was tested on epoxy silane functionalized glass
slides. It was found that histidine-tagged oligonucleotides resulted in the
highest amount of bound probe and by far the best hybridization efficiencies. The
detection limit obtained with histidine-tagged probes was up to two orders of
magnitude lower compared to commonly used probe modifications. In order to
further investigate the binding mechanism of histidine-tags towards
functionalized glass substrates a set of different peptide-tags with and without 
free terminal amino-groups and with different amino acid compositions was tested.
The results indicate an impact of the terminal amino group on the covalent
surface binding and of aromatic amino acid residues on the enhanced hybridisation
efficiency.

DOI: 10.1039/c005491g 
PMID: 21413182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

