
1. J Virol. 2011 Jun;85(11):5651-63. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01189-10. Epub 2011 Mar 23.

Identification and characterization of a ross river virus variant that grows
persistently in macrophages, shows altered disease kinetics in a mouse model, and
exhibits resistance to type I interferon.

Lidbury BA(1), Rulli NE, Musso CM, Cossetto SB, Zaid A, Suhrbier A, Rothenfluh
HS, Rolph MS, Mahalingam S.

Author information: 
(1)Virus and Inﬂammation Research Group, Faculty of Applied Science, University
of Canberra, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia. s.mahalingam@griffith.edu.au.

Alphaviruses, such as chikungunya virus, o'nyong-nyong virus, and Ross River
virus (RRV), cause outbreaks of human rheumatic disease worldwide. RRV is a
positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus endemic to Australia and Papua New
Guinea. In this study, we sought to establish an in vitro model of RRV evolution 
in response to cellular antiviral defense mechanisms. RRV was able to establish
persistent infection in activated macrophages, and a small-plaque variant
(RRV(PERS)) was isolated after several weeks of culture. Nucleotide sequence
analysis of RRV(PERS) found several nucleotide differences in the nonstructural
protein (nsP) region of the RRV(PERS) genome. A point mutation was also detected 
in the E2 gene. Compared to the parent virus (RRV-T48), RRV(PERS) showed
significantly enhanced resistance to beta interferon (IFN-β)-stimulated antiviral
activity. RRV(PERS) infection of RAW 264.7 macrophages induced lower levels of
IFN-β expression and production than infection with RRV-T48. RRV(PERS) was also
able to inhibit type I IFN signaling. Mice infected with RRV(PERS) exhibited
significantly enhanced disease severity and mortality compared to mice infected
with RRV-T48. These results provide strong evidence that the cellular antiviral
response can direct selective pressure for viral sequence evolution that impacts 
on virus fitness and sensitivity to alpha/beta IFN (IFN-α/β).

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01189-10 
PMCID: PMC3094974
PMID: 21430046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

