
1. J Mol Model. 2012 Jan;18(1):39-51. doi: 10.1007/s00894-011-1018-3. Epub 2011 Mar 
29.

Homology modeling, molecular dynamics, e-pharmacophore mapping and docking study 
of Chikungunya virus nsP2 protease.

Singh KhD(1), Kirubakaran P, Nagarajan S, Sakkiah S, Muthusamy K, Velmurgan D,
Jeyakanthan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, Alagappa University, Karaikudi, India.

To date, no suitable vaccine or specific antiviral drug is available to treat
Chikungunya viral (CHIKV) fever. Hence, it is essential to identify drug
candidates that could potentially impede CHIKV infection. Here, we present the
development of a homology model of nsP2 protein based on the crystal structure of
the nsP2 protein of Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV). The protein
modeled was optimized using molecular dynamics simulation; the junction peptides 
of a nonstructural protein complex were then docked in order to investigate the
possible protein-protein interactions between nsP2 and the proteins cleaved by
nsP2. The modeling studies conducted shed light on the binding modes, and the
critical interactions with the peptides provide insight into the chemical
features needed to inhibit the CHIK virus infection. Energy-optimized
pharmacophore mapping was performed using the junction peptides. Based on the
results, we propose the pharmacophore features that must be present in an
inhibitor of nsP2 protease. The resulting pharmacophore model contained an
aromatic ring, a hydrophobic and three hydrogen-bond donor sites. Using these
pharmacophore features, we screened a large public library of compounds (Asinex, 
Maybridge, TOSLab, Binding Database) to find a potential ligand that could
inhibit the nsP2 protein. The compounds that yielded a fitness score of more than
1.0 were further subjected to Glide HTVS and Glide XP. Here, we report the best
four compounds based on their docking scores; these compounds have IDs of 27943, 
21362, ASN 01107557 and ASN 01541696. We propose that these compounds could bind 
to the active site of nsP2 protease and inhibit this enzyme. Furthermore, the
backbone structural scaffolds of these four lead compounds could serve as
building blocks when designing drug-like molecules for the treatment of
Chikungunya viral fever.

DOI: 10.1007/s00894-011-1018-3 
PMID: 21445710  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

