
1. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2011 Aug;37(5):464-83. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2990.2011.01177.x.

Cannabinoid receptor expression in HIV encephalitis and HIV-associated
neuropathologic comorbidities.

Cosenza-Nashat MA(1), Bauman A, Zhao ML, Morgello S, Suh HS, Lee SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx Department
of Pathology, Mt Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

AIMS: Cannabinoids have been proposed for treating various neurodegenerative
disorders and as adjunct therapy for HIV+ patients with neurologic sequelae. The 
expression of cannabinoid receptors (CB1 and CB2) has been reported in
neurodegenerative diseases and in simian immunodeficiency virus encephalitis, yet
the receptor expression in the central nervous system of HIV+ individuals is not 
known.
METHODS: An anti-CB1 antibody and two anti-CB2 antibodies were employed for
immunohistochemistry in the cerebral cortex and white matter of HIV encephalitis 
(HIVE) and HIV-associated comorbidities, as well as control brains (HIV- and
HIV+).
RESULTS: By quantitative image analysis, we observed that CB1 was increased in
HIVE brains and those with comorbidities, while CB2 was significantly increased
in the white matter of HIVE. Morphologically, CB1 was present in neurones, and
both CB1 and CB2 were present in meningeal macrophages and subpial glia in all
brains. In HIVE, CB1 was found in white matter microglia and perivascular cells, 
while CB2 was increased in microglia, astrocytes and perivascular macrophages.
Double immunofluorescence with cell-specific markers and immunoblots on primary
cultured microglia and astrocytes substantiated the glial localization of the
cannabinoid receptors and specificity of the antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates that cannabinoid receptor expression occurs in
glia in HIVE brains, and this may have ramifications for the potential use of
cannabinoid ligands in HIV-infected patients.

© 2011 The Authors. Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology © 2011 British
Neuropathological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2990.2011.01177.x 
PMCID: PMC3135748
PMID: 21450051  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

