
1. J Gen Virol. 2011 Aug;92(Pt 8):1778-1786. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.031526-0. Epub 2011 
Apr 6.

p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase is crucial for bovine papillomavirus type-1 
transformation of equine fibroblasts.

Yuan Z(1), Gault EA(1), Campo MS(1), Nasir L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, College of Medical,
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Garscube Campus, Bearsden
Road, Glasgow G61 1QH, UK.

Equine sarcoids represent the most common skin tumours in equids worldwide,
characterized by extensive invasion and infiltration of lymphatics, rare
regression and high recurrence after surgical intervention. Bovine papillomavirus
type-1 (BPV-1) and less commonly BPV-2 are the causative agents of the diseases. 
It has been demonstrated that BPV-1 viral gene expression is necessary for
maintaining the transformation phenotype. However, the underlying mechanism for
BPV-1 transformation remains largely unknown, and the cellular factors involved
in transformation are not fully understood. Previously mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK) signalling pathway has been shown to be important for cellular
transformation. This study investigated the role of p38 MAPK (p38) in the
transformation of equine fibroblasts by BPV-1. Elevated expression of
phosphorylated p38 was observed in BPV-1 expressing fibroblasts due to the
expression of BPV-1 E5 and E6. The phosphorylation of the MK2 kinase, a substrate
of p38, was also enhanced. Inhibition of p38 activity by its selective inhibitor 
SB203580 changed cell morphology, reduced the proliferation of sarcoid
fibroblasts and inhibited cellular invasiveness, indicating the indispensable
role of p38 in BPV-1 transformation of equine fibroblasts. These findings provide
new insights into the pathogenesis of equine sarcoids and suggest that p38 could 
be a potential target for equine sarcoid therapy.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.031526-0 
PMID: 21471309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

