
1. Vulnerable Child Youth Stud. 2009 Jan 1;4(4):346-352.

Trajectories of risk behaviors and exiting homelessness among newly homeless
adolescents.

Milburn NG(1), Liang LJ, Lee SJ, Rotheram-Borus MJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Los Angeles, Department of Psychiatry and
Biobehavioral Sciences, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior,
Center for Community Health, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Using cluster analysis techniques, we identified two distinct clusters of newly
homeless adolescents in Los Angeles (n = 261): those who are protected and doing 
relatively well while out of home with more protective than risk factors, and
those who are risky with more risk than protective factors. The objective of this
study was to examine the trajectories of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) risk 
behaviors and exiting homelessness among protected newly homeless adolescents,
compared to those who are classified as risky. HIV risk behavior included
unprotected sex, having multiple sex partners and hard drug use. Logistic
regression mixed-effects models were used to evaluate the trajectories of HIV
risk behaviors and exiting homelessness over time. The adolescents in the
protected group reported significantly less unprotected sex ( p = 0.0156), being 
abstinent or monogamous ( p < 0.0001) and less hard drug use ( p < 0.0001)
compared to the adolescents in the risky group. In addition, the protected group 
reported more "exiting homelessness", compared to the risky group ( p = 0.0007). 
However, the differences in the level of unprotected sex between the protected
and risky groups decreased over time. Our findings confirm the notion that newly 
homeless adolescents are indeed heterogeneous. Given that the risk behavior
profiles of protected group merges to the risky group over time, our findings
underscore the need to mount tailored interventions to be designed for the
protected group early in the process.

DOI: 10.1080/17450120902884068 
PMCID: PMC3075065
PMID: 21494426 

