
1. J Virol. 2011 Jul;85(13):6162-7. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00335-11. Epub 2011 Apr 20.

Genetic evidence for Rift Valley fever outbreaks in Madagascar resulting from
virus introductions from the East African mainland rather than enzootic
maintenance.

Carroll SA(1), Reynes JM, Khristova ML, Andriamandimby SF, Rollin PE, Nichol ST.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Division of High Consequence Pathogens and
Pathology, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Road,
Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA.

Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV), a mosquito-borne phlebovirus, has been detected
in Madagascar since 1979, with occasional outbreaks. In 2008 to 2009, a large
RVFV outbreak was detected in Malagasy livestock and humans during two successive
rainy seasons. To determine whether cases were due to enzootic maintenance of the
virus within Madagascar or to importation from the East African mainland, nine
RVFV whole genomic sequences were generated for viruses from the 1991 and 2008
Malagasy outbreaks. Bayesian coalescent analyses of available whole S, M, and L
segment sequences were used to estimate the time to the most recent common
ancestor for the RVFVs. The 1979 Madagascar isolate shared a common ancestor with
strains on the mainland around 1972. The 1991 Madagascar isolates were in a clade
distinct from that of the 1979 isolate and shared a common ancestor around 1987. 
Finally, the 2008 Madagascar viruses were embedded within a large clade of RVFVs 
from the 2006-2007 outbreak in East Africa and shared a common ancestor around
2003 to 2004. These results suggest that the most recent Madagascar outbreak was 
caused by a virus likely arriving in the country some time between 2003 and 2008 
and that this outbreak may be an extension of the 2006-2007 East African
outbreak. Clustering of the Malagasy sequences into subclades indicates that the 
viruses have continued to evolve during their short-term circulation within the
country. These data are consistent with the notion that RVFV outbreaks in
Madagascar result not from emergence from enzootic cycles within the country but 
from recurrent virus introductions from the East African mainland.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00335-11 
PMCID: PMC3126502
PMID: 21507967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

