
1. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2011 Aug;12(12):1875-85. doi:
10.1517/14656566.2011.584062. Epub 2011 May 3.

Antiretroviral use during pregnancy for treatment or prophylaxis.

Sturt AS(1), Read JS.

Author information: 
(1)Medicine/Infectious Diseases, Santa Clara Valley Medical Center, Ira Greene
PACE Clinic, 751 S. Bascom Avenue, San Jose, CA 95128 , USA.

INTRODUCTION: Antiretrovirals are recommended for all pregnant women either for
treatment of HIV-1 infection or for prevention of mother-to-child transmission.
Distinguishing between HIV-1-infected pregnant women who meet treatment criteria 
and those who do not (who use antiretrovirals during pregnancy for prophylaxis)
is accomplished by assessing the HIV-1 disease stage and has important
implications regarding when antiretroviral drugs are initiated during pregnancy, 
what drugs are used and antiretroviral use after delivery.
AREAS COVERED: This review addresses antiretroviral use by HIV-1-infected women
during pregnancy. Specifically, the review focuses on antiretroviral therapy for 
HIV-1-infected pregnant women who meet criteria for treatment and antiretroviral 
prophylaxis for HIV-1-infected pregnant women (to prevent mother-to-child
transmission of HIV-1). The review primarily addresses antiretroviral use in
resource-rich settings, but use in resource-poor settings is briefly addressed.
EXPERT OPINION: Antiretrovirals represent only one component of the overall
management of HIV-1 infected pregnant women and, therefore, cannot be viewed in
isolation from other components of optimal care for HIV-1-infected women and from
other efficacious interventions to prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1.
Antiretrovirals can be used safely and effectively during pregnancy. We concur
with current guidelines regarding the threshold that differentiates which women
need antiretroviral therapy for HIV-1 infection for their own health versus those
who need prophylaxis to prevent transmission of HIV-1 infection to their child.
We thus recommend that lifelong antiretroviral therapy be initiated in patients
with an AIDS-defining illness, a CD4 count < 350 cells/mm(3) or other co-morbid
conditions such as acute opportunistic infections, HIV-1-associated nephropathy
or hepatitis B co-infection. Irrespective of whether or not antiretrovirals are
used during pregnancy, or whether antiretrovirals during pregnancy are used for
treatment or prophylaxis, all infants of HIV-1-infected women should receive
antiretroviral post-exposure prophylaxis.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2011.584062 
PMID: 21534886  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

