
1. Microb Biotechnol. 2011 Sep;4(5):651-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-7915.2011.00263.x.
Epub 2011 Apr 27.

Domain shuffling and module engineering of Listeria phage endolysins for enhanced
lytic activity and binding affinity.

Schmelcher M(1), Tchang VS, Loessner MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food, Nutrition and Health, ETH Zurich, Schmelzbergstrasse 7,
CH-8092 Zürich, Switzerland.

Bacteriophage endolysins are peptidoglycan hydrolases employed by the virus to
lyse the host at the end of its multiplication phase. They have found many uses
in biotechnology; not only as antimicrobials, but also for the development of
novel diagnostic tools for rapid detection of pathogenic bacteria. These enzymes 
generally show a modular organization, consisting of N-terminal enzymatically
active domains (EADs) and C-terminal cell wall-binding domains (CBDs) which
specifically target the enzymes to their substrate in the bacterial cell
envelope. In this work, we used individual functional modules of Listeria phage
endolysins to create fusion proteins with novel and optimized properties for
labelling and lysis of Listeria cells. Chimaeras consisting of individual EAD and
CBD modules from PlyPSA and Ply118 endolysins with different binding specificity 
and catalytic activity showed swapped properties. EAD118-CBDPSA fusion proteins
exhibited up to threefold higher lytic activity than the parental endolysins.
Recombineering different CBD domains targeting various Listeria cell surfaces
into novel heterologous tandem proteins provided them with extended recognition
and binding properties, as demonstrated by fluorescent GFP-tagged CBD fusions. It
was also possible to combine the binding specificities of different single CBDs
in heterologous tandem CBD constructs such as CBD500-P35 and CBDP35-500, which
were then able to recognize the majority of Listeria strains. Duplication of
CBD500 increased the equilibrium cell wall binding affinity by approximately
50-fold, and the enzyme featuring tandem CBD modules showed increased activity at
higher ionic strength. Our results demonstrate that modular engineering of
endolysins is a powerful approach for the rational design and optimization of
desired functional properties of these proteins.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2011 Society for Applied Microbiology
and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1751-7915.2011.00263.x 
PMCID: PMC3819014
PMID: 21535426  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

