
1. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1990 Feb;141(2):352-6.

Relationship between milk intake and mucus production in adult volunteers
challenged with rhinovirus-2.

Pinnock CB(1), Graham NM, Mylvaganam A, Douglas RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Medicine, University of Adelaide, Royal Adelaide
Hospital, South Australia.

In the first of three studies investigating the widely held belief that "milk
produces mucus," 60 volunteers were challenged with rhinovirus-2, and daily
respiratory symptoms and milk and dairy product intake records were kept over a
10-day period. Nasal secretion weights were obtained by weighing tissues
collected and sealed immediately after use. Information was obtained on 51
subjects, yielding 510 person-days of observation. Subjects consumed zero to 11
glasses of milk per day (mean, 2.7; SE, 0.08), and secretion weights ranged from 
zero to 30.4 g/day (mean, 1.1; SE, 0.1). In response to an initial questionnaire,
27.5% reported the practice of reducing intake of milk or dairy products with a
cold or named milk or dairy products as bad for colds. Of the latter group, 80%
stated the reason as "producing more mucus/phlegm." Milk and dairy product intake
was not associated with an increase in upper or lower respiratory tract symptoms 
of congestion or nasal secretion weight. A trend was observed for cough, when
present, to be loose with increasing milk and dairy product intake; however, this
effect was not statistically significant at the 5% level. Those who believe "milk
makes mucus" or reduce milk intake with colds reported significantly more cough
and congestion symptoms, but they did not produce higher levels of nasal
secretions. We conclude that no statistically significant overall association can
be detected between milk and dairy product intake and symptoms of mucus
production in healthy adults, either asymptomatic or symptomatic, with rhinovirus
infection.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm/141.2.352 
PMID: 2154152  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

