
1. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 2011 Jun;24(6):671-84. doi: 10.1094/MPMI-08-10-0183.

Use of a secretion trap screen in pepper following Phytophthora capsici infection
reveals novel functions of secreted plant proteins in modulating cell death.

Yeom SI(1), Baek HK, Oh SK, Kang WH, Lee SJ, Lee JM, Seo E, Rose JK, Kim BD, Choi
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Science, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of
Korea.

In plants, the primary defense against pathogens is mostly inducible and
associated with cell wall modification and defense-related gene expression,
including many secreted proteins. To study the role of secreted proteins, a
yeast-based signal-sequence trap screening was conducted with the RNA from
Phytophthora capsici-inoculated root of Capsicum annuum 'Criollo de Morelos 334' 
(CM334). In total, 101 Capsicum annuum secretome (CaS) clones were isolated and
identified, of which 92 were predicted to have a secretory signal sequence at
their N-terminus. To identify differences in expressed CaS genes between
resistant and susceptible cultivars of pepper, reverse Northern blots and
real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction were performed with RNA
samples isolated at different time points following P. capsici inoculation. In an
attempt to assign biological functions to CaS genes, we performed in planta
knock-down assays using the Tobacco rattle virus-based gene-silencing method.
Silencing of eight CaS genes in pepper resulted in suppression of the cell death 
induced by the non-host bacterial pathogen (Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato T1). 
Three CaS genes induced phenotypic abnormalities in silenced plants and one,
CaS259 (PR4-l), caused both cell death suppression and perturbed phenotypes.
These results provide evidence that the CaS genes may play important roles in
pathogen defense as well as developmental processes.

DOI: 10.1094/MPMI-08-10-0183 
PMID: 21542767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

