
1. J Med Virol. 2011 Jul;83(7):1288-99. doi: 10.1002/jmv.22076.

Detection of G3P[3] and G3P[9] rotavirus strains in American Indian children with
evidence of gene reassortment between human and animal rotaviruses.

Grant L(1), Esona M, Gentsch J, Watt J, Reid R, Weatherholtz R, Santosham M,
Parashar U, O'Brien K.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Department of International
Health, Center for American Indian Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
lgrant@jhsph.edu

The distribution and evolution of human rotavirus strains is important for
vaccine development and effectiveness. In settings where rotavirus vaccine
coverage is high, vaccine pressure could select for replacement of common strains
(similar to those included in rotavirus vaccines) with uncommon strains, some of 
which could be generated by reassortment between human and animal rotaviruses.
Between 2002 and 2004, a phase-III rotavirus vaccine clinical trial was conducted
among American Indian children of the Navajo and White Mountain Apache tribes,
which are known to be at high risk for rotavirus diarrhea. We evaluated the
rotavirus strains collected from study participants who received placebo during
the trial to determine the distribution of rotavirus genotypes and to detect
emerging strains that contribute to disease and could influence rotavirus vaccine
effectiveness. Three uncommon strains of human rotavirus, two G3P[3] and one
G3P[9] strains were detected in stools of children aged 3 to 6 months of age.
Segments of all 11 rotavirus genes were sequenced and genotyped by comparison of 
cognate gene fragments with reference strains. The G3P[3] strains had similar
genotypes to each other and to reference dog and cat strains. The G3P[9] strain
had similar genotypes to cow, cat and dog reference strains. Genetic analyses of 
these three strains support the known diversity generating mechanisms of
rotavirus.

Copyright Â© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.22076 
PMID: 21567432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

