
1. Vet Dermatol. 2011 Dec;22(6):570-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3164.2011.00987.x. Epub
2011 Jun 6.

Persistent, widespread papilloma formation on the penis of a horse: a novel
presentation of equine papillomavirus type 2 infection.

Knight CG(1), Munday JS, Rosa BV, Kiupel M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary, Animal and Biomedical Sciences, Massey University,
Palmerston North, New Zealand. c.knight@massey.ac.nz

A 9-year-old gelding presented with approximately 100 papillomas that covered
about 75% of the distal penis. Biopsy was performed, and histology showed
evidence of viral cytopathic change and koilocytosis. Polymerase chain reaction
using DNA extracted from biopsied tissue amplified equine papillomavirus type 2
(EcPV-2) DNA sequences. Sixteen months later, the horse was re-examined and the
appearance of the papillomas was unchanged. Equine papillomavirus type 2 DNA
sequences were again amplified from both biopsied tissue and swabs of the penis. 
Papillomavirus was localized to the lesions by immunohistochemistry and in situ
hybridization. An examination 2 years after the initial presentation revealed no 
detectable change in the appearance of the penis. The large number of papillomas 
and their failure to regress over an extended period support a clinical
classification of papillomatosis. To the authors' knowledge, this is the first
report of papillomatosis of the equine penis. This novel clinical manifestation
suggests that persistent EcPV-2 infection is possible in horses. As there is
evidence that EcPV-2 may promote development of equine penile squamous cell
carcinoma, understanding the natural history of EcPV-2 infections may be
important in preventing equine penile neoplasia.

© 2011 The Authors. Veterinary Dermatology. © 2011 ESVD and ACVD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3164.2011.00987.x 
PMID: 21645140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

