
1. J Virol. 2011 Sep;85(17):8811-8. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00447-11. Epub 2011 Jun 22.

Cleavage of the adaptor protein TRIF by enterovirus 71 3C inhibits antiviral
responses mediated by Toll-like receptor 3.

Lei X(1), Sun Z, Liu X, Jin Q, He B, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Genetic Engineering, Institute 
of Pathogen Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing 100730, People's Republic of China.

Enterovirus 71 (EV71) causes hand-foot-and-mouth disease and neurological
complications in young children. Although the underlying mechanisms remain
obscure, impaired or aberrant immunity is thought to play a role. In infected
cells, EV71 suppresses type I interferon responses mediated by retinoid
acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I). This involves the EV71 3C protein, which disrupts 
the formation of a functional RIG-I complex. In the present study, we report that
EV71 inhibits the induction of innate immunity by Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) via
a distinct mechanism. In HeLa cells stimulated with poly(I · C), EV71 inactivates
interferon regulatory factor 3 and drastically suppresses interferon-stimulated
gene expression. Notably, EV71 specifically downregulates a TRIF, TIR
domain-containing adaptor inducing beta interferon (IFN-β). When expressed alone 
in mammalian cells, EV71 3C is capable of exhibiting these activities. EV71 3C
associates with and induces TRIF cleavage in the presence of Z-VAD-FMK, a caspase
inhibitor. TRIF cleavage depends on its amino acid pair Q312-S313, which
resembles a proteolytic site of picornavirus 3C proteases. Further, site-specific
3C mutants with a defective protease activity bind TRIF but fail to mediate TRIF 
cleavage. Consequently, these 3C mutants are unable to inhibit NF-κB and IFN-β
promoter activation. TRIF cleavage mediated by EV71 may be a mechanism to impair 
type I IFN production in response to Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) activation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00447-11 
PMCID: PMC3165803
PMID: 21697485  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

