
1. Health Educ Res. 2011 Oct;26(5):859-71. doi: 10.1093/her/cyr041. Epub 2011 Jun
21.

Everywhere you go, everyone is saying condom, condom. But are they being used
consistently? Reflections of South African male students about male and female
condom use.

Mantell JE(1), Smit JA, Beksinska M, Scorgie F, Milford C, Balch E, Mabude Z,
Smith E, Adams-Skinner J, Exner TM, Hoffman S, Stein ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, HIV Center for Clinical and Behavioral Studies, New 
York State Psychiatric Institute and Columbia University, New York, NY 10032,
USA. jem57@columbia.edu

Young men in South Africa can play a critical role in preventing new human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infections, yet are seldom targeted for HIV
prevention. While reported condom use at last sex has increased considerably
among young people, consistent condom use remains a challenge. In this study, 74 
male higher education students gave their perspectives on male and female condoms
in 10 focus group discussions. All believed that condoms should be used when
wanting to prevent conception and protect against HIV, although many indicated
that consistent condom use was seldom attained, if at all. Three possible
situations for not using condoms were noted: (i) when sex happens in the heat of 
the moment and condoms are unavailable, (ii) when sexual partnerships have
matured and (iii) when female partners implicitly accept unprotected sex. Men
viewed it as their responsibility to have male condoms available, but attitudes
about whose decision it was to initiate condom use were mixed. Almost all
sexually active men had male condom experience; however, very few had used female
condoms. Prevention initiatives should challenge traditional gendered norms that 
underpin poor condom uptake and continued use and build on the apparent shifts in
these norms that are allowing women greater sexual agency.

DOI: 10.1093/her/cyr041 
PMCID: PMC3168335
PMID: 21693684  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

