
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2011 Sep;55(9):4019-27. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00334-11.
Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Recombinant phenotyping of cytomegalovirus UL54 mutations that emerged during
cell passages in the presence of either ganciclovir or foscarnet.

Gilbert C(1), Azzi A, Goyette N, Lin SX, Boivin G.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center in Infectious Diseases, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Québec and Laval University, Québec City, Québec, Canada.

Selection of human cytomegalovirus variants in the presence of ganciclovir or
foscarnet led to 18 DNA polymerase mutations, 14 of which had not been previously
studied. Using bacterial artificial chromosome technology, each of these
mutations was individually transferred into the genome of a reference strain.
Following reconstitution of infectious viral stocks, each mutant was assessed for
its drug susceptibility and growth kinetics in cell culture. Computer-assisted
three-dimensional (3D) modeling of the polymerase was also used to position each 
of the mutations in one of four proposed structural domains and to predict their 
influence on structural stability of the protein. Among the 10 DNA polymerase
mutations selected with ganciclovir, 7 (P488R, C539R, L545S, V787L, V812L, P829S,
and L862F) were associated with ganciclovir resistance, whereas 2 (F595I and
V946L) conferred only foscarnet resistance. Among the eight mutations selected
with foscarnet, only two (T552N and S585A) conferred foscarnet resistance,
whereas four (N408D, K500N, L802V, and L957F) had an impact on ganciclovir
susceptibility. Surprisingly, the combination of mutations, some of which were
not associated with resistance for a specific antiviral, resulted in increasing
resistance effects. 3D modeling suggested that none of the mutated residues were 
directly involved in the polymerase catalytic site but rather had an influence on
drug susceptibility by modifying the structural flexibility of the protein. Our
study significantly adds to the number of DNA polymerase mutations conferring in 
vitro drug resistance and emphasizes the point that evaluation of individual
mutations may not accurately reflect the phenotype conferred by multiple
mutations.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00334-11 
PMCID: PMC3165324
PMID: 21709106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

