
1. Virus Res. 2011 Sep;160(1-2):191-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2011.06.011. Epub
2011 Jun 22.

Epstein-Barr virus genome polymorphisms of Epstein-Barr virus-associated gastric 
carcinoma in gastric remnant carcinoma in Guangzhou, southern China, an endemic
area of nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Chen JN(1), Jiang Y, Li HG, Ding YG, Fan XJ, Xiao L, Han J, Du H, Shao CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, No. 600 Tianhe Road, Guangzhou 510630, China.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is associated with a subset of gastric carcinoma which
was defined as EBV-associated gastric carcinoma (EBVaGC). The proportion of
EBVaGC in gastric remnant carcinoma (GRC) was apparently higher than that in
conventional gastric carcinoma (CGC) which occurs in the intact stomach. To
clarify the possible mechanisms, 26 GRC cases from Guangzhou were investigated
for the presence of EBV, and the EBV genome polymorphisms of EBVaGC in GRC were
analyzed. Besides, the clinicopathologic characteristics, EBV latency pattern of 
EBVaGC in GRC were also investigated. Eight (30.8%) out of 26 cases were
identified as EBVaGCs. Type A strain, prototype F, type I, mut-W1/I1, XhoI- and
del-LMP1 variants were predominant among EBVaGC patients, accounting for 7
(87.5%), 7 (87.5%), 8 (100%), 6 (75%), 5 (62.5%) and 8 (100%) cases,
respectively. All EBVaGC cases were male and with the histology of diffuse-type
carcinoma. The tumor cells expressed EBNA1 (87.5%) and LMP2A (62.5%) but not
LMP1, EBNA2 and ZEBRA. Thus, the EBV latency pattern was latency I. These were
similar to those in CGC, except for the significantly higher proportion of EBVaGC
in GRC than in CGC, suggesting that there is no more aggressive EBV variant in
EBVaGC in GRC, and the injuries of gastric mucosa and/or changes of the
microenvironment within the remnant stomach may be involved in the development of
EBVaGC in GRC. This, to our knowledge, is the first study concerning about the
EBV genome polymorphisms of EBVaGC in GRC in the world.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2011.06.011 
PMID: 21723347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

