
1. J Invertebr Pathol. 2011 Jul;107 Suppl:S80-93. doi: 10.1016/j.jip.2011.05.008.

Latest developments in the large-scale production of adeno-associated virus
vectors in insect cells toward the treatment of neuromuscular diseases.

Galibert L(1), Merten OW.

Author information: 
(1)Généthon, Laboratory for Applied Vectorology and Innovation, 1 rue de
l'Internationale, BP60, F-91002 Evry Cedex 2, France.

Adeno-associated viral (AAV) vectors are gene vectors of choice for the
development of gene therapy treatments for many rare diseases affecting various
tissues including retina, central nervous system, liver, and muscle. The AAV
based gene therapy approach became conceivable only after the development of
easily scalable production systems including the Sf9 cell/baculovirus expression 
system. Since the establishment of the production of AAV in the Sf9/baculovirus
system by the group of Rob Kotin, this new production system has largely been
developed for optimizing the large scale production of different serotypes of AAV
for preclinical and clinical purposes. Today this manufacturing system allows for
the production of purified vector genome (vg) quantities of up to 2 × 10(15) for 
AAV1 using a 50L reactor and the scale up to larger reactor volumes is paralleled
by a corresponding increase in the vector yield. This review presents the
principles and achievements of the Sf9/baculovirus system for the production of
AAV in comparison to other expression systems based on mammalian cells. In
addition, new developments and improvements, which have not yet been implemented 
at a large scale, and perspectives for further optimization of this production
system will be discussed. All of these achievements as well as further process
intensifications are urgently needed for the production of clinical doses for the
treatment of neuromuscular diseases for which estimated doses of up to
10(14)vg/kg body mass are required.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jip.2011.05.008 
PMID: 21784234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

