
1. Virus Res. 2011 Sep;160(1-2):274-82. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2011.06.028. Epub
2011 Jul 14.

The pathogenic and vaccine strains of equine infectious anemia virus
differentially induce cytokine and chemokine expression and apoptosis in
macrophages.

Lin YZ(1), Cao XZ, Li L, Li L, Jiang CG, Wang XF, Ma J, Zhou JH.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, China.

The attenuated equine infectious anemia virus (EIAV) vaccine was the first
attenuated lentivirus vaccine to be used in a large-scale application and has
been used to successfully control the spread of equine infectious anemia (EIA) in
China. To better understand the potential role of cytokines in the pathogenesis
of EIAV infection and resulting immune response, we used branched DNA technology 
to compare the mRNA expression levels of 12 cytokines and chemokines, including
IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-4, IL-10, TNF-α, IFN-γ, IP-10, IL-8, MIP-1α, MIP-1β, MCP-1, and 
MCP-2, in equine monocyte-derived macrophages (eMDMs) infected with the
EIAV(DLV121) vaccine strain or the parental EIAV(DLV34) pathogenic strain.
Infection with EIAV(DLV34) and EIAV(DLV121) both caused changes in the mRNA
levels of various cytokines and chemokines in eMDMs. In the early stage of
infection with EIAV(DLV34) (0-24h), the expression of the pro-inflammatory
cytokines TNF-α and IL-1β were significantly up-regulated, while with
EIAV(DLV121), expression of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-4 was markedly
up-regulated. The effects on the expression of other cytokines and chemokines
were similar between these two strains of virus. During the first 4 days after
infection, the expression level of IL-4 in cells infected with the pathogenic
strain were significantly higher than that in cells infected with the vaccine
strain, but the expression of IL-1α and IL-1β induced by the vaccine strain was
significantly higher than that observed with the pathogenic strain. In addition, 
after 4 days of infection with the pathogenic strain, the expression levels of 5 
chemokines, but not IP-10, were markedly increased in eMDMs. In contrast, the
vaccine strain did not up-regulate these chemokines to this level. Contrary to
our expectation, induced apoptosis in eMDMs infected with the vaccine strain was 
significantly higher than that infected with the pathogenic strain 4 days and 6
days after infection. Together, these results contribute to a greater
understanding of the pathogenesis of EIAV and of the mechanisms by which the
immune response is induced after EIAV infection.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2011.06.028 
PMID: 21782860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

