
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e22970. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022970. Epub 2011 Aug 2.

Study on phylogenetic relationships, variability, and correlated mutations in M2 
proteins of influenza virus A.

Le L(1), Leluk J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Ho Chi Minh International University, Ho Chi Minh
City, Vietnam.

M2 channel, an influenza virus transmembrane protein, serves as an important
target for antiviral drug design. There are still discordances concerning the
role of some residues involved in proton transfer as well as the mechanism of
inhibition by commercial drugs. The viral M2 proteins show high conservativity;
about 3/4 of the positions are occupied by one residue in over 95%. Nine M2
proteins from the H3N2 strain and possibly two proteins from H2N2 strains make a 
phylogenic cluster closely related to 2RLF. The variability range is limited to 4
residues/position with one exception. The 2RLF protein stands out by the presence
of 2 serines at the positions 19 and 50, which are in most other M2 proteins
occupied by cysteines. The study of correlated mutations shows that there are
several positions with significant mutational correlation that have not been
described so far as functionally important. That there are 5 more residues
potentially involved in the M2 mechanism of action. The original software used in
this work (Consensus Constructor, SSSSg, Corm, Talana) is freely accessible as
stand-alone offline applications upon request to the authors. The other software 
used in this work is freely available online for noncommercial purposes at public
services on bioinformatics such as ExPASy or NCBI. The study on mutational
variability, evolutionary relationship, and correlated mutation presented in this
paper is a potential way to explain more completely the role of significant
factors in proton channel action and to clarify the inhibition mechanism by
specific drugs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022970 
PMCID: PMC3149066
PMID: 21829678  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

