
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Sep 6;108(36):14926-31. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1112149108. Epub 2011 Aug 23.

Recombinant Rift Valley fever vaccines induce protective levels of antibody in
baboons and resistance to lethal challenge in mice.

Papin JF(1), Verardi PH, Jones LA, Monge-Navarro F, Brault AC, Holbrook MR,
Worthy MN, Freiberg AN, Yilma TD.

Author information: 
(1)International Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Tropical Disease Agents,
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Rift Valley fever (RVF) is a zoonotic disease endemic in Africa and the Arabian
Peninsula caused by the highly infectious Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) that can
be lethal to humans and animals and results in major losses in the livestock
industry. RVF is exotic to the United States; however, mosquito species native to
this region can serve as biological vectors for the virus. Thus, accidental or
malicious introduction of this virus could result in RVFV becoming endemic in
North America. Such an event would likely lead to significant morbidity and
mortality in humans, and devastating economic effects on the livestock industry. 
Currently, there are no licensed vaccines for RVF that are both safe and
efficacious. To address this issue, we developed two recombinant RVFV vaccines
using vaccinia virus (VACV) as a vector for use in livestock. The first vaccine, 
vCOGnGc, was attenuated by the deletion of a VACV gene encoding an IFN-γ binding 
protein, insertional inactivation of the thymidine kinase gene, and expression of
RVFV glycoproteins, Gn and Gc. The second vaccine, vCOGnGcγ, is identical to the 
first and also expresses the human IFN-γ gene to enhance safety. Both vaccines
are extremely safe; neither resulted in weight loss nor death in severe combined 
immunodeficient mice, and pock lesions were smaller in baboons compared with the 
controls. Furthermore, both vaccines induced protective levels of antibody titers
in vaccinated mice and baboons. Mice were protected from lethal RVFV challenge.
Thus, we have developed two safe and efficacious recombinant vaccines for RVF.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1112149108 
PMCID: PMC3169153
PMID: 21873194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

