
1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2012 Apr;44(4):855-61. doi: 10.1007/s11250-011-9978-y.
Epub 2011 Sep 21.

Pathological study of non-neoplastic urinary bladder lesions in cattle and
buffaloes: a preliminary report.

Somvanshi R(1), Pathania S, Nagarajan N, Pangty K, Kumar P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar UP 243 
122, India. dr.rsomvanshi@gmail.com

A total of 236 urinary bladders (94 cattle and 142 buffaloes) collected from
Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh, India, were studied for spontaneous lesions. These adult
animals belonged to Institute's organized dairy farm and rural areas in the
Rohilkhand region of Uttar Pradesh. Grossly, congestion, hemorrhages, and
cystoliths in urinary bladders were diagnosed. Histopathologically, the major
conditions diagnosed were acute cystitis, 44 (18.64%), including, congestion,
hemorrhages, sub-acute cystitis; chronic cystitis, 74 (31.35%), including chronic
cystitis un-complicated type, lymphocytic cystitis, plasmolymphocytic cystitis,
follicular cystitis, hyperplasia, nodular/acinar hyperplasia, and cystolithiasis;
and nothing unusual diagnosed, 118 (50.00%). Similar types of pathological
conditions were diagnosed in both species of animals with exception of follicular
cystitis and nodular/acinar hyperplasia which was diagnosed respectively only in 
buffaloes and cystoliths in cows. In addition, a good number of 17/25 (68%)
urinary bladder samples tested were found positive for presence of bovine
papillomavirus type-2 (BPV-2) by polymerase chain reaction. These included eight 
cases of acute cystitis, an equal number of cases of chronic cystitis, and one
normal bladder. BPV-2 is known as potential source of enzootic bovine hematuria
along with other co-factors in enzootic areas. Lesions of zoonotic significance, 
like tuberculosis, etc., were not diagnosed. None of the observed lesions
represented conditions, which, by themselves, would warrant carcass condemnation 
in buffaloes.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-011-9978-y 
PMID: 21935661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

