
1. J Health Popul Nutr. 2011 Aug;29(4):303-9.

Prevalence of antiretroviral drug resistance mutations and HIV-I subtypes among
newly-diagnosed drug-naïve persons visiting a voluntary testing and counselling
centre in northeastern South Africa.

Nwobegahay JM(1), Bessong PO, Masebe TM, Mavhandu LG, Iweriebor BC, Selabe G.

Author information: 
(1)AIDS Virus Research Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, University of
Venda, PMB X5050, Thohoyandou 0950, South Africa.

Data on antiretroviral drug resistance among drug-naive persons are important in 
developing sentinel and surveillance policies. This study was conducted to
determine the prevalence of antiretroviral drug resistance mutations among
drug-naïve HIV-infected individuals attending a voluntary testing and counselling
centre at the Mankweng Hospital in northeastern South Africa. In total, 79
drug-naïve HIV-positive individuals were sequentially recruited during February
2008-December 2008. Drug resistance mutations were determined using the
calibrated population resistance tool available on the Stanford HIV drug
resistance database. Viral DNA was obtained from 57 (72%) of the 79 individuals. 
Reliable nucleotide sequences were obtained for 54 reverse transcriptase (RT) and
54 protease (PR) gene regions from 54 individuals. Overall, five sequences (9.3%)
harboured drug resistance mutations (95% confidence interval -1.53 to 16.99).
Four (7.4%) of these were nucleoside RT inhibitor mutations (D67G, D67E, T69D,
and T215Y), and one (1.9%) was a PR inhibitor mutation (M46I). No major
non-nucleoside RT resistance mutation was detected. Several minor resistance
mutations and polymorphisms common in subtype C viruses were observed in the PR
and RT genes. Phlyogenetic analysis of the partial pol sequences showed that 52
(96%) of the 54 isolates were HIV-1 subtype C. One isolate (08MB08ZA) was HIV-1
subtype B while another (08MB26ZA) was related to HIV-1 subtype J. HIV-1 subtype 
recombination analysis with REGA assigned the pol sequence to HIV subtype J
(11_cpx) with a bootstrap value of 75%. The prevalence of drug resistance
mutations observed in the population studied was relatively higher than
previously reported from other parts of South Africa. In addition, this is
apparently the first report of an HIV-1 subtype J-like virus from northeastern
South Africa.

DOI: 10.3329/jhpn.v29i4.8444 
PMCID: PMC3190360
PMID: 21957668  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

