
1. Can Fam Physician. 2011 Oct;57(10):e367-72.

Preparing for an influenza pandemic: model of an immunization clinic in an urban 
family practice.

Bourgeois N(1), Franke C, O'Connor SA, Shaw H, Hum S, Dunn S.

Author information: 
(1)Family Practice Health Centre, Women's College Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. 
nicole.bourgeois@wchospital.ca

PROBLEM ADDRESSED: The surge in patient demand for the H1N1 influenza vaccine
during the 2009 pandemic.
OBJECTIVE OF THE PROGRAM: To facilitate timely delivery of the 2009 H1N1
influenza vaccine to a family practice population while preserving regular clinic
function and to create a model of effective vaccination delivery for future
outbreaks.
PROGRAM DESCRIPTION: An academic family practice in Toronto, Ont, adopted a
process-improvement approach and implemented 3 Saturday stand-alone H1N1
vaccination clinics to accommodate increased demand for the vaccine. Medical
directives were developed to give nurses the authority to vaccinate patients.
Consent forms with eligibility criteria and risks versus benefits sheets were
provided to patients in the waiting area to make optimal use of time. The clinic 
with "appointment blocks" for patients had improved efficiency (ie, fewer
bottlenecks from waiting area to vaccination room), which was satisfactory to
both staff and patients.
CONCLUSION: During a pandemic, when patient demand for vaccination is high, such 
stand-alone vaccination clinics in conjunction with family practices can deliver 
vaccines to patients in a timely and acceptable manner while promoting continuity
of care. This model requires the commitment of extra staffing resources if
regular primary care delivery is to be maintained.


PMCID: PMC3192102
PMID: 21998244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

