
1. Lasers Med Sci. 2012 Sep;27(5):943-50. doi: 10.1007/s10103-011-1013-z. Epub 2011 
Nov 3.

Photoinactivation of cell-free human immunodeficiency virus by hematoporphyrin
monomethyl ether.

Yin H(1), Li Y, Zheng Y, Ye X, Zheng L, Li C, Xue Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laser Medicine Laboratory, Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, Tianjin, 300192, China.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) particles that remain in the blood of patients
are frequently ignored as targets for AIDS treatment. We therefore investigated
the use of photodynamic therapy (PDT) with hematoporphyrin monomethyl ether
(HMME) as a means of inactivating cell-free HIV in vitro. Virus particles
including HIV-1(IIIB), resistant HIV-1 variants, HIV-1 clinical variants, and
HIV-2 variants were incubated with HMME for 40 min, followed by irradiation with 
a 630-nm semiconductor laser at an energy density of 0.3 J/cm(2). The antiviral
effects were evaluated by counting syncytium formation or measuring p24 antigen
expression levels in supernatants by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The
relationships between photoinactivation and HMME concentrations, energy density, 
power density and antioxidants (NaN(3) and D: -mannitol) were also assessed using
the above methods. All the tested virus particles were completely responsive to
HMME-PDT. HMME concentration and energy density were positively correlated with
photoinactivation of HIV, while power density was negatively correlated. Both
sodium azide and D: -mannitol weakened the inhibitory effect of PDT on
virus-induced membrane fusion, with D: -mannitol having a stronger effect.
HMME-PDT can inactivate HIV particles, and may therefore represent a promising
treatment for AIDS patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s10103-011-1013-z 
PMCID: PMC3414705
PMID: 22045116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

