
1. Arch Virol. 2012 Feb;157(2):235-46. doi: 10.1007/s00705-011-1153-2. Epub 2011 Nov
3.

A549 and PLC/PRF/5 cells can support the efficient propagation of swine and wild 
boar hepatitis E virus (HEV) strains: demonstration of HEV infectivity of porcine
liver sold as food.

Takahashi H(1), Tanaka T, Jirintai S, Nagashima S, Takahashi M, Nishizawa T,
Mizuo H, Yazaki Y, Okamoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Department of Infection and Immunity, Jichi Medical
University School of Medicine, 3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0498,
Japan.

Recent evidence has indicated the cross-species transmission of hepatitis E virus
(HEV) from pigs and wild boars to humans, causing zoonosis, mostly via
consumption of uncooked or undercooked animal meat/viscera. However, no efficient
cell culture system for swine and boar HEV strains has been established. We
inoculated A549 cells with 12 swine and boar HEV strains of liver, feces, or
serum origin at an HEV load of ≥2.0 × 10(4) copies per well and found that the
HEV progeny replicated as efficiently as human HEV strains, with a maximum load
of ~10(8) copies/ml. However, the HEV load in the culture medium at 30 days
post-inoculation differed markedly by inoculum, ranging from 1.0 × 10(2) to 1.1 ×
10(7) copies/ml upon inoculation at a lower load of approximately 10(5) copies
per well. All progeny were passaged successfully onto A549 and PLC/PRF/5 cells.
In sharp contrast, no progeny viruses were detectable in the culture supernatant 
upon inoculation with 13 swine and boar HEV strains at an HEV load of <1.8 ×
10(4) copies per well. The present study also demonstrates that swine liver sold 
as food can be infectious, supporting the risk of zoonotic food-borne HEV
infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-011-1153-2 
PMID: 22048607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

