
1. J Virol. 2012 Jan;86(2):1021-33. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00694-11. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Cooperation between viral interferon regulatory factor 4 and RTA to activate a
subset of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus lytic promoters.

Xi X(1), Persson LM, O'Brien MW, Mohr I, Wilson AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and NYU Cancer Institute, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

The four Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV)-encoded interferon (IFN) 
regulatory factor homologues (vIRF1 to vIRF4) are used to counter innate immune
defenses and suppress p53. The vIRF genes are arranged in tandem but differ in
function and expression. In KSHV-infected effusion lymphoma lines, K10.5/vIRF3
and K11/vIRF2 mRNAs are readily detected during latency, whereas K9/vIRF1 and
K10/vIRF4 mRNAs are upregulated during reactivation. Here we show that the
K10/vIRF4 promoter responds to the lytic switch protein RTA in KSHV-infected
cells but is essentially unresponsive in uninfected cells. Coexpression of RTA
with vIRF4 is sufficient to restore regulation, a property not shared by other
vIRFs. The K9/vIRF1 promoter behaves similarly, and production of infectious
virus is enhanced by the presence of vIRF4. Synergy requires the DNA-binding
domain (DBD) and C-terminal IRF homology regions of vIRF4. Mutations of arginine 
residues within the putative DNA recognition helix of vIRF4 or the invariant
cysteines of the adjacent CxxC motif abolish cooperation with RTA, in the latter 
case by preventing self-association. The oligomerization and transactivation
functions of RTA are also essential for synergy. The K10/vIRF4 promoter contains 
two transcription start sites (TSSs), and a 105-bp fragment containing the
proximal promoter is responsive to vIRF4/RTA. Binding of a cellular factor(s) to 
this fragment is altered when both viral proteins are present, suggesting a
possible mechanism for transcriptional synergy. Reliance on coregulators encoded 
by either the host or viral genome provides an elegant strategy for expanding the
regulatory potential of a master regulator, such as RTA.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00694-11 
PMCID: PMC3255833
PMID: 22090118  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

