
1. Immunol Invest. 2012;41(3):275-89. doi: 10.3109/08820139.2011.628732. Epub 2011
Dec 13.

Dietary whole glucan particles do not affect antibody or cell-mediated immune
responses to influenza virus vaccination in mice.

Pence BD(1), Hester SN, Donovan SM, Woods JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology & Community Health, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

Influenza virus is a serious health concern. β-glucans derived from plants,
bacteria, and fungi have been shown to potentiate immune system responses
including those elicited by vaccination. However, in these studies β-glucan was
administered as an adjuvant in the vaccine preparation. We hypothesized that
addition of a commercially available whole glucan particle supplement to the diet
would improve immune response to primary and secondary influenza vaccination in
mice. β-glucan was added to pelleted diet and fed to mice at concentrations
designed to deliver 0 (control), 1.8 or 90 mg·kg(-1)·day(-1) to each mouse.
Influenza vaccine was given intramuscularly in the left hindlimb and primary and 
secondary responses were assessed. Supplementation with β-glucan was not
effective in boosting immune responses to the vaccine, either in the primary or
secondary vaccination experiments. Surprisingly, addition of particulate β-glucan
to the vaccine itself also failed to elicit a greater antibody response. These
observations suggest that this particular form of β-glucan is ineffective in
boosting immune response to intramuscular influenza vaccination. Further study is
warranted to determine if the use of different mouse models, different vaccine
delivery systems, or β-glucans purified from different strains of bacteria,
fungi, or plants could improve outcomes using this or similar protocols.

DOI: 10.3109/08820139.2011.628732 
PMID: 22149961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

