
1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2012 Aug;44(6):1127-9. doi: 10.1007/s11250-011-0062-4.
Epub 2011 Dec 31.

Seroprevalence of bovine leukemia virus (BLV) infection in dairy cattle in
Isfahan Province, Iran.

Morovati H(1), Shirvani E, Noaman V, Lotfi M, Kamalzadeh M, Hatami A, Bahreyari
M, Shahramyar Z, Morovati MH, Azimi M, Sakhaei D.

Author information: 
(1)Quality Control Management, Razi Vaccine and Serum Research Institute, PO Box 
311975-148, Karaj, Iran. h.morovati@rvsri.ir

Bovine leukemia virus (BLV), the causative agent of enzootic bovine leukosis
(EBL) is an exogenous C-type oncovirus in the Retroviridae family. It causes
significant economic losses associated with the costs of control and eradication 
programs due to carcass condemnation at slaughter and restrictions of export of
cattle and semen to importing countries. The main objective of this research was 
to determine the seroprevalence of BLV infection in cattle herds in central
region of Iran (Isfahan province) using a commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay (ELISA) to detect serum antibodies against BLV. Samples of blood serum were
collected from 403 female dairy cattle (Holstein-Friesian) from 21 livestock
farms and 303 animals (81.9%) were BLV seropositive. A significant association
was found between age as a potential risk factor and BVL seroprevalence with
animals ≥ 4 years (86.6%) having a significantly (χ(2) = 35.6, p < 0.001) higher 
seroprevalence compared to those < 4 years (54.2%). We found no significant
statistical association between seroprevalence and pregnancy, lactation status
and farming systems as potential risk factors in this study (p > 0.1). It is
concluded that BLV infection is a very common problem in the study area. Hence,
control measures should be instituted to combat the disease and further studies
are required to investigate the impact of this disease on dairy production in the
country.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-011-0062-4 
PMID: 22210288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

