
1. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2012 Feb;22(2):303-10. doi: 10.1097/IGC.0b013e31823c2469.

Age-specific seroprevalence of human papillomavirus 16, 18, 31, and 58 in women
of a rural town of Colombia.

Bedoya AM(1), Gaviria AM, Baena A, Borrero M, Duarte DF, Combita AL, Castaño J,
Grisales H, Sánchez GI.

Author information: 
(1)Infection and Cancer Group, School of Medicine, University of Antioquia,
Medellin, Colombia.

OBJECTIVE: The study's objective was to estimate human papillomavirus (HPV)
genotype-specific seroprevalence to determine population HPV exposure and inform 
vaccine policy.
METHODS: This study is a cross-sectional prevalence survey of 878 women of
Pueblorrico, a rural town of Colombia. A standardized questionnaire was used to
obtain information on demographic characteristics, sexual and reproductive
history, and smoking habits. Seropositivity to HPV-16, -18, -31, and -58 was
determined by virus-like particles in an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: Overall seropositivity to any HPV genotype was 27.9%. The combined
seroprevalence of women 15 to 19 and 20 to 24 years old was 35.4% (95% confidence
interval [CI], 25.9-46.2) and 36.0% (95% CI, 27.7-45.3), respectively.
Seroprevalence for HPV-16 was 17% (95% CI, 14.6-19.6); for HPV-18, 9.8% (95% CI, 
8.0-11.9); for HPV-31, 11.4% (95% CI, 9.5-13.7); and for HPV 58, 12.5% (95% CI,
10.5-14.9). Higher HPV seropositivity was associated with the lifetime number of 
occasional sexual partners (odds ratio, 3.05; 95% CI, 1.26-7.37) and having more 
than 2 regular sexual partners (odds ratio, 3.00; 95% CI, 1.21-7.45) in women
younger than 44 and older than 45 years old, respectively. Use of oral
contraceptives and tobacco/cigarettes was significantly associated with reduced
HPV seropositivity in women older than 45 but not in women younger than 44 years 
old.
CONCLUSIONS: Human papillomavirus seropositivity is associated with measures of
sexual behavior, particularly a greater lifetime number of sexual partners.
Hormonal and tobacco/cigarette use may be factors influencing the HPV
seropositivity in women older than 45 years old.

DOI: 10.1097/IGC.0b013e31823c2469 
PMID: 22228426  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

