
1. Korean J Pediatr. 2011 Oct;54(10):409-13. doi: 10.3345/kjp.2011.54.10.409. Epub
2011 Oct 31.

Clinical features of Epstein-Barr virus-associated infectious mononucleosis in
hospitalized Korean children.

Son KH(1), Shin MY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Soonchunhyang University Bucheon Hospital,
Soonchunhyang University College of Medicine, Bucheon, Korea.

PURPOSE: Few studies have been conducted on the recent status of infectious
mononucleosis (IM) in Korean children. The aim of this study was to evaluate the 
recent trend in the clinical manifestations of Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-associated IM as well as the clinical differences according to age.
METHODS: A retrospective study was performed on 81 children hospitalized with
EBV-associated IM who fulfilled the serological criteria for the diagnosis of EBV
infection (viral capsid antigen immunoglobulin M positive). The patients were
divided into 3 age groups: <5 years, 5 to 9 years, and â‰¥10 years. We evaluated
the recent trend in clinical manifestations and the differences in clinical and
laboratory findings among the 3 age groups.
RESULTS: Thirty (37%) children were under 5 years of age, 38 (46.9%) were 5 to 9 
years of age, and 13 (16%) were 10 years of age or older. The differences in the 
symptoms and signs among the 3 age groups were not statistically significant,
except for headache. The mean duration of fever was 7.7 days (range, 0 to 18
days). A comparison of liver enzyme elevation among the age groups showed an
association with advancing age (26.6%, 63.1%, and 76.9%, respectively, P=0.04)
CONCLUSION: This study showed that EBV-associated IM in Korean children continues
to occur mostly in children under 10 years of age. In children with
EBV-associated IM, the incidence of headache and liver enzyme elevation, the
duration of fever, and the proportion of females to males were all positively
associated with advancing age.

DOI: 10.3345/kjp.2011.54.10.409 
PMCID: PMC3250594
PMID: 22232623 

