
1. Vaccine. 2012 Feb 21;30(9):1644-9. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.12.106. Epub 2012 
Jan 11.

Persistence of long-term immunity to hepatitis B among adolescents immunized at
birth.

Chaves SS(1), Fischer G, Groeger J, Patel PR, Thompson ND, Teshale EH, Stevenson 
K, Yano VM, Armstrong GL, Samandari T, Kamili S, Drobeniuc J, Hu DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA.
schaves@cdc.gov

The long-term duration of recombinant hepatitis B vaccine-induced immunity among 
persons vaccinated starting at birth is still not well understood. Waning of
vaccine-induced immunity could leave young adults at risk of hepatitis B virus
infection due to behavioral or occupational exposures. We followed a cohort of
children immunized starting at birth with a 3-dose regimen of recombinant
hepatitis B vaccine (5 mcg, 2.5 mcg, 2.5 mcg). They were challenged with a
booster dose of the hepatitis B vaccine 10 and 15 years after vaccination to
assess anamnestic response as a measure of persistence of protection. Among 108
participants who had lost protective antibody levels against hepatitis B, the
majority (>70%) had an anamnestic response to the booster dose; response rates
did not decline significantly between 10 and 15 years follow-up periods. A high
antibody concentration following primary vaccination was independently associated
with an anamnestic response later on in life. Nonetheless, ~20-30% of
participants were unable to mount an immune response after boosting. Hepatitis B 
revaccination might be required for persons vaccinated starting at birth if
opportunities for hepatitis B virus exposure exist. Future vaccine
recommendations should be based on studies ascertaining protection against
clinically significant disease.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.12.106 
PMID: 22245310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

