
1. Patient Prefer Adherence. 2011;5:619-27. doi: 10.2147/PPA.S25672. Epub 2011 Dec
16.

Impact of household food insecurity on the nutritional status and the response to
therapeutic feeding of people living with human immunodeficiency virus.

Bahwere P(1), Deconinck H, Banda T, Mtimuni A, Collins S.

Author information: 
(1)Valid International, Oxford, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: The role of household food security (HFS) in the occurrence of
wasting and the response to food-based intervention in people living with human
immunodeficiency virus (PLHIV), especially adults, is still controversial and
needs investigation.
METHODS: Face-to-face interviews to collect data for Coping Strategies Index
score and Dietary Diversity Score estimation were conducted during a
noncontrolled and nonrandomized study assessing the effectiveness of ready-to-use
therapeutic food in the treatment of wasting in adults with HIV. Coping
Strategies Index score and Dietary Diversity Score were used to determine HFS,
and the participants and tertiles of Coping Strategies Index score were used to
categorize HFS.
RESULTS: The study showed that most participants were from food insecure
households at admission, only 2.7% (5/187) ate food from six different food
groups the day before enrolment, and 93% (180/194) were applying forms of coping 
strategy. Acute malnutrition was rare among <5-year-old children from
participants' households, but the average (standard deviation) mid-upper arm
circumference of other adults in the same households were 272.7 (42.1) mm, 254.8 
(33.8) mm, and 249.8 (31.7) mm for those from the best, middle, and worst tertile
of HFS, respectively (P = 0.021). Median weight gain was lower in participants
from the worst HFS tertile than in those from the other two tertiles combined
during therapeutic feeding phase (0.0 [-2.1 to 2.6] kg versus 1.9 [-1.7 to 6.0]
kg; P = 0.052) and after ready-to-use therapeutic food discontinuation (-1.9
[-5.2 to 4.2] kg versus 1.8 [-1.4 to 4.7] kg; P = 0.098). Being on antiretroviral
therapy influenced the response to treatment and nutritional status after
discontinuation of ready-to-use therapeutic food supplementation.
CONCLUSION: Food insecurity is an important contributing factor to the
development of wasting in PLHIV and its impact on therapeutic feeding response
outlines the importance of food-based intervention in the management of wasting
of PLHIV.

DOI: 10.2147/PPA.S25672 
PMCID: PMC3259077
PMID: 22259239 

