
1. Cancer Lett. 2012 Jun 28;319(2):154-163. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.01.009. Epub 
2012 Jan 17.

CEA promoter-regulated oncolytic adenovirus-mediated Hsp70 expression in immune
gene therapy for pancreatic cancer.

Xu C(1), Sun Y(1), Wang Y(1), Yan Y(2), Shi Z(2), Chen L(2), Lin H(1), Lü S(1),
Zhu M(1), Su C(3), Li Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200433, China.
(2)Department of Molecular Oncology, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgical Hospital &
Institute, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200438, China.
(3)Department of Molecular Oncology, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgical Hospital &
Institute, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200438, China. Electronic
address: suchangqing@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200433, China. Electronic address: lizs56@126.com.

Gene therapy is an important means for the comprehensive treatment of pancreatic 
cancer. Challenges associated with gene therapy include control of vector
security and effective genetic screening. In this paper, a CEA promoter-regulated
oncolytic adenovirus vector was constructed. The reporter gene assay demonstrated
that the viral vector was confirmed to have tumor-specific replication features. 
In vitro cytology studies showed that the CEA promoter regulated the
proliferation of the adenovirus vector carrying the Hsp70 gene (AdCEAp-Hsp70),
which significantly increased the expression levels of Hsp70 in the CEA-positive 
pancreatic cancer cells, resulting in an overall reduction in the survival of
cancer cells. In the human pancreatic cancer Panc-1 xenograft model in immune
deficient nude mice, the CEA promoter-regulated adenovirus AdCEAp-Hsp70
significantly inhibited tumor growth. In the rat pancreatic cancer DSL-6A/C1
xenograft model in rats, the viral proliferation and high expression levels of
Hsp70 promoted the interstitial infiltration of CD4+, CD8+ and gamma/delta T
cells into tumors, induced host secretion of the cytokines TGF-β, INF-γ, and IL-6
and had a dual anti-tumor effects that completely inhibited the growth of
pancreatic cancer. The results demonstrated that the oncolytic adenovirus under
the control of CEA promoter provides additional assurances regarding the safety
and efficiency of cancer gene therapy. This gene therapy model improves
anti-cancer efficiency and has broad applications and developmental prospects.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.01.009 
PMID: 22261331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

