
1. Mol Ther. 2012 Apr;20(4):727-35. doi: 10.1038/mt.2012.5. Epub 2012 Feb 7.

Enhancing muscle membrane repair by gene delivery of MG53 ameliorates muscular
dystrophy and heart failure in δ-Sarcoglycan-deficient hamsters.

He B(1), Tang RH, Weisleder N, Xiao B, Yuan Z, Cai C, Zhu H, Lin P, Qiao C, Li J,
Mayer C, Li J, Ma J, Xiao X.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pharmaceutics, University of North Carolina Eshelman
School of Pharmacy, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Muscular dystrophies (MDs) are caused by genetic mutations in over 30 different
genes, many of which encode for proteins essential for the integrity of muscle
cell structure and membrane. Their deficiencies cause the muscle vulnerable to
mechanical and biochemical damages, leading to membrane leakage, dystrophic
pathology, and eventual loss of muscle cells. Recent studies report that MG53, a 
muscle-specific TRIM-family protein, plays an essential role in sarcolemmal
membrane repair. Here, we show that systemic delivery and muscle-specific
overexpression of human MG53 gene by recombinant adeno-associated virus (AAV)
vectors enhanced membrane repair, ameliorated pathology, and improved muscle and 
heart functions in δ-sarcoglycan (δ-SG)-deficient TO-2 hamsters, an animal model 
of MD and congestive heart failure. In addition, MG53 overexpression increased
dysferlin level and facilitated its trafficking to muscle membrane through
participation of caveolin-3. MG53 also protected muscle cells by activating cell 
survival kinases, such as Akt, extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK1/2),
and glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β) and inhibiting proapoptotic protein Bax.
Our results suggest that enhancing the muscle membrane repair machinery could be 
a novel therapeutic approach for MD and cardiomyopathy, as demonstrated here in
the limb girdle MD (LGMD) 2F model.

DOI: 10.1038/mt.2012.5 
PMCID: PMC3321592
PMID: 22314291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

