
1. Biochemistry. 2012 Mar 6;51(9):1836-47. doi: 10.1021/bi300003v. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Designed cyclic permutants of HIV-1 gp120: implications for envelope trimer
structure and immunogen design.

Saha P(1), Bhattacharyya S, Kesavardhana S, Miranda ER, Ali PS, Sharma D,
Varadarajan R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560 012,
India.

Most HIV-1 broadly neutralizing antibodies are directed against the gp120 subunit
of the env surface protein. Native env consists of a trimer of gp120-gp41
heterodimers, and in contrast to monomeric gp120, preferentially binds CD4
binding site (CD4bs)-directed neutralizing antibodies over non-neutralizing ones.
Some cryo-electron tomography studies have suggested that the V1V2 loop regions
of gp120 are located close to the trimer interface. We have therefore designed
cyclically permuted variants of gp120 with and without the h-CMP and SUMO2a
trimerization domains inserted into the V1V2 loop. h-CMP-V1cyc is one such
variant in which residues 153 and 142 are the N- and C-terminal residues,
respectively, of cyclically permuted gp120 and h-CMP is fused to the N-terminus. 
This molecule forms a trimer under native conditions and binds CD4 and the
neutralizing CD4bs antibodies b12 with significantly higher affinity than
wild-type gp120. It binds non-neutralizing CD4bs antibody F105 with lower
affinity than gp120. A similar derivative, h-CMP-V1cyc1, bound the V1V2
loop-directed broadly neutralizing antibodies PG9 and PG16 with âˆ¼20-fold higher
affinity than wild-type JRCSF gp120. These cyclic permutants of gp120 are
properly folded and are potential immunogens. The data also support env models in
which the V1V2 loops are proximal to the trimer interface.

DOI: 10.1021/bi300003v 
PMID: 22329717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

