
1. J Immunol. 2012 Apr 15;188(8):3620-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101593. Epub 2012
Mar 9.

HIV-1 proteins preferentially activate anti-inflammatory M2-type macrophages.

Chihara T(1), Hashimoto M, Osman A, Hiyoshi-Yoshidomi Y, Suzu I, Chutiwitoonchai 
N, Hiyoshi M, Okada S, Suzu S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for AIDS Research, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

HIV-1 proteins, including Tat, gp120, and Nef, activate macrophages (MΦ), which
is consistent with the fact that HIV-1 infection is characterized by sustained
immune activation. Meanwhile, MΦ are functionally classified into two types:
proinflammatory M1-MΦ and anti-inflammatory M2-MΦ. We show that HIV-1 proteins,
particularly Nef, preferentially activate M2-MΦ. Extracellular Tat, gp120, and
Nef activated MAPK and NF-κB pathways in human peripheral blood monocyte-derived 
MΦ. However, the activation was marked in M-CSF-derived M2-MΦ but not
GM-CSF-derived M1-MΦ. Nef was the most potent activator, and its signaling
activation was comparable to that by TNF-α. Indeed, Nef was internalized more
rapidly by M2-MΦ than by M1-MΦ. The myristoylation and proline-rich motif of Nef 
were responsible for the observed signaling activation. Consistent with the
activation of MAPK/NF-κB pathways, Nef stimulated the production of a number of
proinflammatory cytokines/chemokines by M2-MΦ. However, Nef reduced the
expression of CD163 and phagocytosis, the characteristic markers of M2-MΦ,
indicating that Nef drives an M2-like to M1-like phenotypic shift. Because the
differentiation of most tissue MΦ depends on M-CSF and its receptor, which is the
essential axis for the anti-inflammatory M2-MΦ phenotype, the current study
reveals an efficient mechanism by which HIV-1 proteins, such as Nef, induce the
proinflammatory MΦ.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101593 
PMID: 22407921  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

