
1. Antiviral Res. 2012 May;94(2):131-8. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2012.02.015. Epub
2012 Mar 8.

An engineered inhibitor RNA that efficiently interferes with hepatitis C virus
translation and replication.

Romero-López C(1), Berzal-Herranz B, Gómez J, Berzal-Herranz A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina "López-Neyra", IPBLN-CSIC, Parque
Tecnológico de Ciencias de la Salud, Armilla, Granada, Spain.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) translation is mediated by a highly conserved internal
ribosome entry site (IRES), mainly located at the 5'untranslatable region (5'UTR)
of the viral genome. Viral protein synthesis clearly differs from that used by
most cellular mRNAs, rendering the IRES an attractive target for novel antiviral 
compounds. The engineering of RNA compounds is an effective strategy for
targeting conserved functional regions in viral RNA genomes. The present work
analyses the anti-HCV potential of HH363-24, an in vitro selected molecule
composed of a catalytic RNA cleaving domain with an extension at the 3' end that 
acts as aptamer for the viral 5'UTR. The engineered HH363-24 efficiently cleaved 
the HCV genome and bound to the essential IIId domain of the IRES region. This
action interfered with the proper assembly of the translationally active
ribosomal particles 48S and 80S, likely leading to effective inhibition of the
IRES function in a hepatic cell line. HH363-24 also efficiently reduced HCV RNA
levels up to 70% in a subgenomic replicon system. These findings provide new
insights into the development of potential therapeutic strategies based on RNA
molecules targeting genomic RNA structural domains and highlight the feasibility 
of generating novel engineered RNAs as potent antiviral agents.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2012.02.015 
PMID: 22426470  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

