
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(4):e1002627. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002627. Epub 2012 Apr
5.

Small-molecule inhibitors of dengue-virus entry.

Schmidt AG(1), Lee K, Yang PL, Harrison SC.

Author information: 
(1)Jack and Eileen Connors Laboratory of Structural Biology, Department of
Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2019 Jan 31;15(1):e1007553.

Flavivirus envelope protein (E) mediates membrane fusion and viral entry from
endosomes. A low-pH induced, dimer-to-trimer rearrangement and reconfiguration of
the membrane-proximal "stem" of the E ectodomain draw together the viral and
cellular membranes. We found stem-derived peptides from dengue virus (DV) bind
stem-less E trimer and mimic the stem-reconfiguration step in the fusion pathway.
We adapted this experiment as a high-throughput screen for small molecules that
block peptide binding and thus may inhibit viral entry. A compound identified in 
this screen, 1662G07, and a number of its analogs reversibly inhibit DV
infectivity. They do so by binding the prefusion, dimeric E on the virion
surface, before adsorption to a cell. They also block viral fusion with
liposomes. Structure-activity relationship studies have led to analogs with
submicromolar IC₉₀s against DV2, and certain analogs are active against DV
serotypes 1,2, and 4. The compounds do not inhibit the closely related Kunjin
virus. We propose that they bind in a previously identified, E-protein pocket,
exposed on the virion surface and although this pocket is closed in the
postfusion trimer, its mouth is fully accessible. Examination of the E-trimer
coordinates (PDB 1OK8) shows that conformational fluctuations around the hinge
could open the pocket without dissociating the trimer or otherwise generating
molecular collisions. We propose that compounds such as 1662G07 trap the sE
trimer in a "pocket-open" state, which has lost affinity for the stem peptide and
cannot support the final "zipping up" of the stem.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002627 
PMCID: PMC3320583
PMID: 22496653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

