
1. Int J Cell Biol. 2012;2012:603961. doi: 10.1155/2012/603961. Epub 2012 Feb 19.

KSHV-Encoded MicroRNAs: Lessons for Viral Cancer Pathogenesis and Emerging
Concepts.

Qin Z(1), Jakymiw A, Findlay V, Parsons C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South
Carolina, 86 Jonathan Lucas St., Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

The human genome contains microRNAs (miRNAs), small noncoding RNAs that
orchestrate a number of physiologic processes through regulation of gene
expression. Burgeoning evidence suggests that dysregulation of miRNAs may promote
disease progression and cancer pathogenesis. Virus-encoded miRNAs, exhibiting
unique molecular signatures and functions, have been increasingly recognized as
contributors to viral cancer pathogenesis. A large segment of the existing
knowledge in this area has been generated through characterization of miRNAs
encoded by the human gamma-herpesviruses, including the Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV). Recent studies focusing on KSHV miRNAs
have led to a better understanding of viral miRNA expression in human tumors, the
identification of novel pathologic check points regulated by viral miRNAs, and
new insights for viral miRNA interactions with cellular ("human") miRNAs.
Elucidating the functional effects of inhibiting KSHV miRNAs has also provided a 
foundation for further translational efforts and consideration of clinical
applications. This paper summarizes recent literature outlining mechanisms for
KSHV miRNA regulation of cellular function and cancer-associated pathogenesis, as
well as implications for interactions between KSHV and human miRNAs that may
facilitate cancer progression. Finally, insights are offered for the clinical
feasibility of targeting miRNAs as a therapeutic approach for viral cancers.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/603961 
PMCID: PMC3296157
PMID: 22505930 

