
1. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2012 Jan-Mar;25(1):247-58.

Effects of highly active antiretroviral therapy on platelet activating factor
metabolism in naive HIV-infected patients: ii) study of the
abacavir/lamivudine/efavirenz HAART regimen.

Chini M(1), Tsoupras AB, Mangafas N, Tsogas N, Papakonstantinou VD, Fragopoulou
E, Antonopoulou S, Gargalianos P, Demopoulos CA, Lazanas MC.

Author information: 
(1)3rd Internal Medicine Department-Infectious Diseases Unit, Red Cross General
Hospital, Athens, Greece.

Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)-infected patients are at increased risk for
cardiovascular diseases partly due to chronic inflammation. Some antiretroviral
drugs and Highly Active Anti-Retroviral Therapy (HAART) regimens seem to be
related and amplify this increased risk, especially the ones containing abacavir.
Platelet-Activating-Factor (PAF) is a potent inflammatory mediator that is
implicated in both cardiovascular diseases and HIV-related manifestations. Our
objective is to study the in vivo effect of the abacavir/lamivudine/efavirenz
first-line HAART regimen on PAF metabolism in HIV-infected patients. The specific
activities of PAF basic biosynthetic enzymes in leukocytes and platelets,
PAF-cholinephosphotransferase (PAF-CPT) and lyso-PAF-acetyltransferase
(Lyso-PAF-AT), but also those of PAF-basic catabolic enzymes, PAF acetylhydrolase
(PAF-AH) in leukocytes and platelets and Lipoprotein-associated-Phospholipase-A2 
(LpPLA2) in plasma, were measured in blood samples of 10 asymptomatic na√Øve male 
HIV-infected patients just before and after 1, 3 and 6 months of treatment. CD4
cell counts, viral load and several biochemical markers were also measured in the
same blood samples of these patients. The repeated ANOVA measures and the Pearson
r criterion were used for studying statistical differences and correlations -
partial correlations respectively. Even though viral load was decreased and CD4
cell counts were beneficially increased after treatment with the
abacavir/lamivudine/efavirenz regimen, the main enzyme of the remodelling
PAF-synthesis that is implicated in pro-atherogenic inflammatory procedures,
Lyso-PAF-AT activity, was increased at 3 months of treatment in both leukocytes
and platelets, while the main enzyme of PAF-degradation, PAF-AH, was increased as
a response only in leukocytes at the 3rd month. Although the
abacavir/lamivudine/efavirenz HAART regimen exhibits very efficient
antiretroviral activities, on the other hand it induces an in vivo transient
increase in the inflammation-related remodeling PAF-biosynthetic pathway. This
finding supports the hypothesis of inflammation-mediated increased cardiovascular
risk in HIV-infected patients during the first months of abacavir-containing
HAART.

DOI: 10.1177/039463201202500127 
PMID: 22507337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

