
1. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Jun 15;18(12):3440-51. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-2852. 
Epub 2012 Apr 17.

A phase I clinical trial of Ad5.SSTR/TK.RGD, a novel infectivity-enhanced
bicistronic adenovirus, in patients with recurrent gynecologic cancer.

Kim KH(1), Dmitriev I, O'Malley JP, Wang M, Saddekni S, You Z, Preuss MA, Harris 
RD, Aurigemma R, Siegal GP, Zinn KR, Curiel DT, Alvarez RD.

Author information: 
(1)The Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Radiology, The University 
of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35249, USA.

PURPOSE: Ad5.SSTR/TK.RGD is an infectivity-enhanced adenovirus expressing a
therapeutic thymidine kinase suicide gene and a somatostatin receptor (SSTR) that
allows for noninvasive gene transfer imaging. The purpose of this study was to
identify the maximum tolerated dose (MTD), toxicities, clinical efficacy, and
biologic effects of Ad5.SSTR/TK.RGD in patients with recurrent gynecologic
cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Eligible patients were treated intraperitoneally for 3 days 
with 1 × 10(9) to 1 × 10(12) vp/dose of Ad5.SSTR/TK.RGD followed by intravenous
ganciclovir for 14 days. Toxicity and clinical efficacy were assessed using
Common Toxicity Criteria (CTC) Adverse Events grading and Response Evaluation
Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) criteria. Imaging using In-111 pentetreotide
was obtained before and after treatment. Tissue samples were obtained to evaluate
for gene transfer, generation of wild-type virus, viral shedding, and antibody
response.
RESULTS: Twelve patients were treated in three cohorts. The most common
vector-related clinical toxicities were grade I/II constitutional or pain
symptoms, experienced most often in patients treated at the highest dose. MTD was
not identified. Five patients showed stable disease; all others experienced
progressive disease. One patient with stable disease experienced complete
resolution of disease and normalization of CA125 on further follow-up. Imaging
detected increased In-111 pentetreotide retention in patients treated at the
highest dose. Ancillary studies showed presence of Ad5.SSTR/TK.RGD virus and
HSV1-tk expression in ascites samples collected at various time points in most
patients treated within the higher dose cohorts.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows the safety, potential efficacy, and possible gene
transfer imaging capacity of Ad5.SSTR/TK.RGD in patients with recurrent
gynecologic cancer. Further development of this novel gene therapeutic appears to
be warranted.

©2012 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-2852 
PMCID: PMC4065594
PMID: 22510347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

