
1. Indian J Sex Transm Dis AIDS. 2012 Jan;33(1):9-15. doi: 10.4103/0253-7184.93787.

Exploring dynamics of anal sex among female sex workers in Andhra Pradesh.

Tucker S(1), Krishna R, Prabhakar P, Panyam S, Anand P.

Author information: 
(1)India HIV/AIDS Alliance, Sarovar Center, Secretariat Road, Hyderabad, Andhra
Pradesh, India.

OBJECTIVE: The anal sex among heterosexual couples is on the rise as reported in 
many scientific studies. Considering that unprotected anal sex has higher risk of
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) transmission than the vaginal sex, we
undertook a study to understand the anal sex practices among Female Sex Workers
(FSW).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study was conducted among FSW attending 11 randomly
selected sexually transmitted infection (STI) clinics in Bill and Melinda Gates
supported targeted interventions in Andhra Pradesh. A structured questionnaire
was administered to the 555 FSW attending these clinics by project clinic
counselors. Informed consent was obtained from all the study participants.
RESULTS: Engaging in anal sex was self reported by 22% of sex workers, though
demand from clients was reported to be much higher (40%). The reasons for anal
sex practices included more money (61%), clout/influence of the client (45%),
risk of losing client (27%), and forced sex (1.2%). Factors associated with anal 
sex were higher number of clients, higher duration of sex work, higher income,
and older age group. Associated risks perceived by FSW were bleeding and injury
to anal canal (98%) while only 28% associated it with higher HIV transmission
risk. Reported Condom and lubricant use was about 88% and 39% respectively.
CONCLUSION: The study shows that there is frequent anal sex, inconsistent condom 
and infrequent lubricant usage, economic and physical coercion, and low awareness
of STI/HIV transmission risk among FSW, which have serious implications for HIV
prevention programmes. There is a need to focus on anal sex education and use of 
lubricants along with condoms during anal sex in FSW-targeted interventions in
AP.

DOI: 10.4103/0253-7184.93787 
PMCID: PMC3326863
PMID: 22529447 

