
1. Am J Transplant. 2012 Aug;12(8):2172-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-6143.2012.04076.x.
Epub 2012 Apr 30.

Prospective analysis of human cytomegalovirus DNAemia and specific CD8+ T cell
responses in lung transplant recipients.

Weseslindtner L(1), Kerschner H, Steinacher D, Nachbagauer R, Kundi M, Jaksch P, 
Simon B, Hatos-Agyi L, Scheed A, Klepetko W, Puchhammer-Stöckl E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

In lung transplant recipients (LuTRs), human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) DNAemia may
be associated with HCMV disease and reduced survival of the allograft. Because T 
cells are essential for controlling HCMV replication, we investigated in this
prospective study whether the kinetics of plasma HCMV DNA loads in LuTRs are
associated with HCMV-specific CD8+ T cell responses, which were longitudinally
assessed using a standardized assay. Sixty-seven LuTRs were monitored during the 
first year posttransplantation, with a mean of 17 HCMV DNA PCR quantifications
and 11.5 CD8+ T cell tests performed per patient. HCMV-specific CD8+ T cell
responses displayed variable kinetics in different patients, differed
significantly before the onset of HCMV DNAemia in LuTRs who subsequently
experienced episodes of DNAemia with high (>1000 copies/mL) and low plasma DNA
levels (p = 0.0046, Fisher's exact test), and were absent before HCMV disease. In
HCMV-seropositive LuTRs, high-level DNAemia requiring preemptive therapy occurred
more frequently when HCMV-specific CD8+ T cell responses fluctuated, were
detected only after HCMV DNA detection, or remained undetectable (p = 0.0392,
Fisher's exact test). Thus, our data indicate that HCMV-specific CD8+ T cells
influence the magnitude of HCMV DNAemia episodes, and we propose that a
standardized measurement of CD8+ T cell immunity might contribute to monitoring
the immune status of LuTRs posttransplantation.

© Copyright 2012 The American Society of Transplantation and the American Society
of Transplant Surgeons.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-6143.2012.04076.x 
PMID: 22548920  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

