
1. J Infect Chemother. 2013 Feb;19(1):149-53. doi: 10.1007/s10156-012-0421-8. Epub
2012 May 9.

A 4-year-old girl with clinically mild encephalopathy with a reversible splenial 
lesion associated with rotavirus infection.

Fuchigami T(1), Goto K, Hasegawa M, Saito K, Kida T, Hashimoto K, Fujita Y, Inamo
Y, Kuzuya M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, Nihon University Nerima Hikarigaoka
Hospital, Tokyo, 179-0072, Japan. fuchigami.tatsuo@nihon-u.ac.jp

Rotavirus is a common cause of severe gastroenteritis in children. It is known
that rotavirus gastroenteritis may be accompanied by neurological manifestations,
including encephalitis/encephalopathy and seizures. We report a case of a
4-year-old girl with clinically mild encephalopathy with a reversible splenial
lesion associated with rotavirus infection. She was admitted to our hospital
because of reduced level of consciousness, seizures, diarrhea, and vomiting.
Fecal rotavirus antigen testing was positive. Cell counts in the cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) were normal. She had a normal serum sodium level on admission. Brain 
computed tomography showed no cerebral edema. However, electroencephalography
showed generalized high-voltage slow waves, and diffusion-weighted magnetic
resonance imaging demonstrated a transient abnormality in the splenium of the
corpus callosum. We diagnosed clinically mild encephalopathy with a reversible
splenial lesion associated with rotavirus infection. She recovered well and
exhibited no neurological sequelae. Rotavirus RNA and antigen were not detected
in the CSF, suggesting that the reversible splenial change was caused by indirect
effects on the central nervous system subsequent to viral infection. Her normal
serum sodium level indicates that this change can occur without hyponatremia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10156-012-0421-8 
PMID: 22569794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

