
1. Hum Gene Ther Methods. 2012 Apr;23(2):98-110. doi: 10.1089/hgtb.2012.014. Epub
2012 May 8.

Inhalation of nebulized perfluorochemical enhances recombinant adenovirus and
adeno-associated virus-mediated gene expression in lung epithelium.

Beckett T(1), Bonneau L, Howard A, Blanchard J, Borda J, Weiner DJ, Wang L, Gao
GP, Kolls JK, Bohm R, Liggitt D, Weiss DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care, Vermont Lung Center, University of Vermont
College of Medicine, Burlington, VT 05405, USA.

Use of perfluorochemical liquids during intratracheal vector administration
enhances recombinant adenovirus and adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated lung
epithelial gene expression. We hypothesized that inhalation of nebulized
perfluorochemical vapor would also enhance epithelial gene expression after
subsequent intratracheal vector administration. Freely breathing adult C57BL/6
mice were exposed for selected times to nebulized perflubron or sterile saline in
a sealed Plexiglas chamber. Recombinant adenoviral vector was administered by
transtracheal puncture at selected times afterward and mice were killed 3 days
after vector administration to assess transgene expression. Mice tolerated the
nebulized perflubron without obvious ill effects. Vector administration 6 hr
after nebulized perflubron exposure resulted in an average 540% increase in gene 
expression in airway and alveolar epithelium, compared with that with vector
alone or saline plus vector control (p<0.05). However, vector administration 1
hr, 1 day, or 3 days after perflubron exposure was not different from either
nebulized saline with vector or vector alone and a 60-min exposure to nebulized
perflubron is required. In parallel pilot studies in macaques, inhalation of
nebulized perflubron enhanced recombinant AAV2/5 vector expression throughout the
lung. Serial chest radiographs, bronchoalveolar lavages, and results of complete 
blood counts and serum biochemistries demonstrated no obvious adverse effects of 
nebulized perflubron. Further, one macaque receiving nebulized perflubron only
was monitored for 1 year with no obvious adverse effects of exposure. These
results demonstrate that inhalation of nebulized perflubron, a simple, clinically
more feasible technique than intratracheal administration of liquid perflubron,
safely enhances lung gene expression.

DOI: 10.1089/hgtb.2012.014 
PMCID: PMC4015222
PMID: 22568624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

