
1. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2012 May;10(3):129-34. doi: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2012.04.001.
Epub 2012 May 10.

Imported cases of Ross River virus disease in New Zealand - a travel medicine
perspective.

Lau C(1), Weinstein P, Slaney D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Population Health, The University of Queensland, Herston, Queensland
4006, Australia. colleen.lau@uqconnect.edu.au

No known locally acquired human mosquito-borne diseases have occurred in New
Zealand, and reported cases of arboviral infections have been diagnosed
exclusively in travellers. In this paper, we review the epidemiology of Ross
River virus cases (RRV) in New Zealand and discuss the potential risk of local
disease transmission. Cases of RRV reported to the Notifiable Disease
Surveillance system from 1997 to 2009 were analysed. Available data included
demographics, travel history and mosquito avoidance behaviour. A total of 22
cases of RRV were reported, and included New Zealand residents returning home
from overseas (20 cases, 14 to Australia, 5 to Fiji, 1 unknown destination) as
well as international visitors (2 from Australia). Reported cases of RRV confirm 
that New Zealand is vulnerable to virus importation. With several potential
mosquito vectors, it is theoretically possible for a local "virgin soil" epidemic
to occur. It is important for travellers, medical practitioners, and public
health authorities to be aware of this threat, and take appropriate precautions
to reduce the risk of a local epidemic. Protecting travellers from RRV is
important from a travel medicine perspective, but also has potentially
significant public health benefits for the general population.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tmaid.2012.04.001 
PMID: 22579017  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

