
1. J Control Release. 2012 Aug 10;161(3):835-42. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2012.05.023.
Epub 2012 May 18.

Defeating Leishmania resistance to miltefosine (hexadecylphosphocholine) by
peptide-mediated drug smuggling: a proof of mechanism for trypanosomatid
chemotherapy.

Luque-Ortega JR(1), de la Torre BG, Hornillos V, Bart JM, Rueda C, Navarro M,
Amat-Guerri F, Acuña AU, Andreu D, Rivas L.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, CSIC, Ramiro de Maeztu 9, 28040 Madrid, 
Spain.

Miltefosine (hexadecylphosphocholine, HePC), the first orally active drug
successful against leishmaniasis, is especially active on the visceral form of
the disease. Resistance mechanisms are almost exclusively associated to
dysfunction in HePC uptake systems. In order to evade the requirements of its
cognate receptor/translocator, HePC-resistant Leishmania donovani parasites (R40 
strain) were challenged with constructs consisting of an ω-thiol-functionalized
HePC analogue conjugated to the cell-penetrating peptide (CPP) Tat(48-60), either
through a disulfide or a thioether bond. The conjugates enter and kill both
promastigote and intracellular amastigote forms of the R40 strain. Intracellular 
release of HePC by reduction of the disulfide-based conjugate was confirmed by
means of double tagging at both the CPP (Quasar 670) and HePC (BODIPY) moieties. 
Scission of the conjugate, however, is not mandatory, as the metabolically more
stable thioether conjugate retained substantial activity. The disulfide conjugate
is highly active on the bloodstream form of Trypanosoma b. brucei, naturally
resistant to HePC. Our results provide proof-of-mechanism for the use of CPP
conjugates to avert drug resistance by faulty drug accumulation in parasites, as 
well as the possibility to extend chemotherapy into other parasites intrinsically
devoid of membrane translocation systems.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2012.05.023 
PMID: 22609351  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

