
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2012 Aug;55(4):600-7. Epub 2012 May 18.

HIV replication and immune status are independent predictors of the risk of
myocardial infarction in HIV-infected individuals.

Lang S(1), Mary-Krause M, Simon A, Partisani M, Gilquin J, Cotte L, Boccara F,
Costagliola D; French Hospital Database on HIV (FHDH)–ANRS CO4.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U, Paris, France. slang@ccde.chups.jussieu.fr

BACKGROUND: Individuals infected by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) have a
higher risk of cardiovascular disease than the general population. The specific
effects of virological and immunological parameters on the risk of myocardial
infarction (MI) in HIV-infected individuals are debated.
METHODS: We conducted a nested case-control study within the French Hospital
Database on HIV. Case patients (n = 289) were patients who, between January 2000 
and December 2006, had a prospectively recorded and validated first MI. Up to 5
HIV-infected controls (n = 884) matched for age, sex, and clinical center were
selected, at random with replacement, among patients with no history of MI.
Conditional logistic regression models were used to identify predictors of the
risk of MI.
RESULTS: Plasma HIV-1 RNA levels >50 copies/mL, a low CD4 T-cell nadir, and a
high CD8 T-cell count were independently associated with an increased risk of MI,
with respective odds ratios of 1.51 (95% confidence interval, 1.09-2.10), 0.90
(.83-.97) per log(2) unit, and 1.48 (1.01-2.18) for the highest tertile of CD8
T-cell counts (>1150 cells/mm(3)) compared with the lowest (≤760 cells/mm(3)).
CONCLUSIONS: Independently of cardiovascular risk factors and antiretroviral
therapy, HIV replication, a low CD4 T-cell nadir and a high current CD8 T-cell
count are associated with an increased risk of MI in HIV-infected individuals.
This suggests new paths for interventions to diminish the risk of MI in
HIV-infected patients.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/cis489 
PMID: 22610928  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

