
1. Nephron Extra. 2012 Jan;2(1):76-86. doi: 10.1159/000337333. Epub 2012 Mar 28.

Association of HCV core antigen seropositivity with long-term mortality in
patients on regular hemodialysis.

Kato A(1), Takita T, Furuhashi M, Fujimoto T, Suzuki H, Maruyama Y, Sakao Y,
Miyajima H.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Purification Unit, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu,
Japan.

Anti-hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody seropositivity is independently associated 
with poor prognosis in hemodialysis (HD) patients. However, anti-HCV antibody
cannot distinguish between patients with active infection and those who have
recovered from infection. We therefore aimed in this study to examine the
association of HCV core antigen (HCVcAg) seropositivity with mortality in HD
patients. We first measured serum HCVcAg using an immunoradiometric assay and
anti-HCV antibody in 405 patients on regular HD, and followed them for 104
months. There were 82 patients (20.2%) who had been positive for anti-HCV
antibodies; 57 (69.5%) of these were positive for HCVcAg. During the follow-up,
29 patients were excluded, so we tested the association of HCVcAg seropositivity 
with all-cause, cardiovascular (CV) and non-CV mortalities in 376 patients. A
total of 209 patients (55.6%) had expired during the observational period, 92 out
of them due to CV causes. After adjusting for comorbid parameters, HCVcAg was
independently associated with overall mortality (HR 1.61, 95% CI 1.05-2.47, p <
0.05). HCV infection was significantly related to liver disease-related
mortality. Past HCV infection also contributed to CV mortality (HR 2.63, 95% CI
1.27-5.45, p < 0.01). In contrast, anti-HCV antibody and HCVcAg seropositivities 
did not associate with infectious disease-related and cancer-related (expect for 
hepatocellular carcinoma) mortality. It follows from these findings that HCVcAg
serology is associated with all-cause and CV mortality in HD patients.

DOI: 10.1159/000337333 
PMCID: PMC3350349
PMID: 22619670 

