
1. J Occup Environ Hyg. 2012;9(7):443-9. doi: 10.1080/15459624.2012.684582.

Quantity and size distribution of cough-generated aerosol particles produced by
influenza patients during and after illness.

Lindsley WG(1), Pearce TA, Hudnall JB, Davis KA, Davis SM, Fisher MA, Khakoo R,
Palmer JE, Clark KE, Celik I, Coffey CC, Blachere FM, Beezhold DH.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Health Effects
Laboratory Division, Morgantown, West Virginia, USA. wlindsley@cdc.gov

The question of whether influenza is transmitted to a significant degree by
aerosols remains controversial, in part, because little is known about the
quantity and size of potentially infectious airborne particles produced by people
with influenza. In this study, the size and amount of aerosol particles produced 
by nine subjects during coughing were measured while they had influenza and after
they had recovered, using a laser aerosol particle spectrometer with a size range
of 0.35 to 10 Î¼m. Individuals with influenza produce a significantly greater
volume of aerosol when ill compared with afterward (p = 0.0143). When the
patients had influenza, their average cough aerosol volume was 38.3 picoliters
(pL) of particles per cough (SD 43.7); after patients recovered, the average
volume was 26.4 pL per cough (SD 45.6). The number of particles produced per
cough was also higher when subjects had influenza (average 75,400
particles/cough, SD 97,300) compared with afterward (average 52,200, SD 98,600), 
although the difference did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.1042). The 
average number of particles expelled per cough varied widely from patient to
patient, ranging from 900 to 302,200 particles/cough while subjects had influenza
and 1100 to 308,600 particles/cough after recovery. When the subjects had
influenza, an average of 63% of each subject's cough aerosol particle volume in
the detection range was in the respirable size fraction (SD 22%), indicating that
these particles could reach the alveolar region of the lungs if inhaled by
another person. This enhancement in aerosol generation during illness may play an
important role in influenza transmission and suggests that a better understanding
of this phenomenon is needed to predict the production and dissemination of
influenza-laden aerosols by people infected with this virus. [Supplementary
materials are available for this article. Go to the publisher's online edition of
Journal of Occupational and Environmental Hygiene for the following free
supplemental resources: a PDF file of demographic information, influenza test
results, and volume and peak flow rate during each cough and a PDF file
containing number and size of aerosol particles produced.].

DOI: 10.1080/15459624.2012.684582 
PMCID: PMC4676262
PMID: 22651099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

