
1. Biol Pharm Bull. 2012;35(6):812-7.

Evolution of cytochrome p450 genes from the viewpoint of genome informatics.

Gotoh O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intelligence Science and Technology, Graduate School of
Informatics, Kyoto University, Yoshida Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Japan.
o.gotoh@aist.go.jp

Cytochrome P450 (CYP) constitutes a large gene superfamily descended from a
single common ancestor. CYP genes are widely distributed in all domains of life
from bacteria, archaea, and viruses to higher plants and animals. Because of
their monophyletic nature, all CYP genes may be hierarchically classified at
several distinct levels based on similarity of the protein amino acid sequences. 
A five-level classification (class, group, clan, family, and subfamily) is
reasonably stable and useful for conceptual categorization of CYP genes. With a
few exceptions, genes in a clan are specific to a kingdom or phylum, whereas
cross-kingdom genes may belong to the same group, indicating an ancient origin of
CYP diversification. CYP proteins are often functionally categorized into
catalysts of "endogenous," "secondary," and "xenobiotic" compounds according to
their substrate specificities. It was once postulated that
xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes were derived from an endogenous
substrate-catalyzing enzyme. Although functional flow from endogenous to
xenobiotic substrates occurred, recent evidence from a wide range of genomic
analyses has indicated that the opposite is the more dominant stream. Expression 
of most vertebrate CYP genes is regulated by internal and external stimuli
through transcription factors in the nuclear receptor family and bHLH-PAS family.
Some aspects of cooperative evolution between transcriptional regulators and
their target genes are briefly reviewed.

DOI: 10.1248/bpb.35.812 
PMID: 22687468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

