
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2013 Aug;60(4):315-29. doi:
10.1111/j.1865-1682.2012.01350.x. Epub 2012 Jun 12.

Investigation of foot and mouth disease hotspots in northern Lao PDR.

Nampanya S(1), Richards J, Khounsy S, Inthavong P, Yang M, Rast L, Windsor PA.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Science, the University of Sydney, Camden, NSW,
Australia. sonevilay@yahoo.co.uk

Foot and mouth disease (FMD) is an endemic transboundary disease in the Mekong
region, and FMD records of reports to animal health authorities in Lao PDR
between 2009 and 2011 were reviewed. FMD outbreaks occurred in 2 of 3 years in
eight districts in three of the eight northern Lao PDR provinces, locations
suggested as FMD 'hotspots'. The relatively higher risk of recurrence of FMD in
these districts was likely due to the presence of a dense large ruminant
population, extensive animal trading including transboundary movements and
ineffective animal movement controls. As an understanding of the epidemiology of 
FMD in these 'hotspots' may offer insights into improved FMD control in the
region, a study of an outbreak of FMD occurring in early 2010 following failure
to vaccinate was conducted in the endemic 'hotspot' area of Paek district in
Xiengkhoung province where in early 2009, a major outbreak of FMD in the district
had been prevented in two villages by vaccination. The 2010 outbreak included
collection of tissue samples 1 week after the onset of FMD that confirmed
infection with FMD virus serotype O (Myanmar topotype) in a population of 239
large ruminants, comprising 167 cattle and 72 buffalo. A survey by interview of
30 farmers conducted in July 2010 documented high morbidity in cattle and buffalo
(>90%) and identified disease risk factors, including increased trading of
animals at the end of the rice harvest, plus several failures of biosecurity. In 
late 2010 and early 2011, a total of 40 and 72 serum samples were collected from 
large ruminants prior to and post-FMD vaccination respectively and tested by
LPB-ELISA. Antibodies were present in the pre-vaccination samples attributable to
previous exposure to FMD virus and significantly rising post-vaccination titres
indicated likely temporary protection against future FMDV infection. It was
concluded that to provide sufficient control of FMD in this 'hotspot', regular
vaccination, particularly prior to the peak risk period in December-February,
plus improved farmer knowledge of disease transmission risk and biosecurity, is
required. Although low rural education standards and language barriers because of
multiple ethnic groups pose a challenge for the successful delivery of extension 
programmes in northern Lao PDR, training to improve disease recognition and
reporting plus village-level biosecurity practices is considered important in FMD
'hotspots' if sustainable regional initiatives directed at FMD control are to be 
achieved.

Â© 2012 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1865-1682.2012.01350.x 
PMID: 22690839  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

