
1. Environ Microbiol. 2012 Sep;14(9):2526-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2012.02791.x.
Epub 2012 Jun 20.

Towards quantitative metagenomics of wild viruses and other ultra-low
concentration DNA samples: a rigorous assessment and optimization of the linker
amplification method.

Duhaime MB(1), Deng L, Poulos BT, Sullivan MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson,
AZ, USA.

Metagenomics generates and tests hypotheses about dynamics and mechanistic
drivers in wild populations, yet commonly suffers from insufficient (< 1 ng)
starting genomic material for sequencing. Current solutions for amplifying
sufficient DNA for metagenomics analyses include linear amplification for deep
sequencing (LADS), which requires more DNA than is normally available,
linker-amplified shotgun libraries (LASLs), which is prohibitively low
throughput, and whole-genome amplification, which is significantly biased and
thus non-quantitative. Here, we adapt the LASL approach to next generation
sequencing by offering an alternate polymerase for challenging samples,
developing a more efficient sizing step, integrating a 'reconditioning PCR' step 
to increase yield and minimize late-cycle PCR artefacts, and empirically
documenting the quantitative capability of the optimized method with both
laboratory isolate and wild community viral DNA. Our optimized linker
amplification method requires as little as 1 pg of DNA and is the most precise
and accurate available, with G + C content amplification biases less than
1.5-fold, even for complex samples as diverse as a wild virus community. While
optimized here for 454 sequencing, this linker amplification method can be used
to prepare metagenomics libraries for sequencing with next-generation platforms, 
including Illumina and Ion Torrent, the first of which we tested and present data
for here.

© 2012 Society for Applied Microbiology and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2012.02791.x 
PMCID: PMC3466414
PMID: 22713159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

