
1. Semin Liver Dis. 2012 May;32(2):138-46. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1316469. Epub 2012
Jul 3.

Management and treatment of chronic hepatitis C in HIV patients.

Barreiro P(1), Vispo E, Labarga P, Soriano V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Hospital Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.

Progression to cirrhosis occurs faster whereas response to
peginterferon/ribavirin therapy is lower in patients with chronic hepatitis C
coinfected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), as compared with hepatitis C 
virus (HCV) monoinfected individuals. The use of antiretroviral therapy may
ameliorate poor outcomes in HIV/HCV coinfected patients. However, in the best
scenario peginterferon/ribavirin therapy provides cure to 30% of patients
harboring HCV genotypes 1 or 4 and to 70% of HCV genotypes 2 or 3 carriers, a
rate lower than that seen in HCV monoinfection. Moreover, a substantial
proportion of HIV/HCV coinfected patients are not treated due to
contraindications, or do not complete therapy due to serious adverse events, or
just do not wish to receive such a poorly tolerated medication. For these
reasons, the advent of direct acting antivirals (DAA) has been eagerly awaited
for treating HIV/HCV coinfected patients. However, new challenges have arisen,
including the potential for harmful drug interactions with antiretroviral agents,
poor drug adherence due to polymedication, increased risk for selection of
drug-resistant HCV mutants, and unaffordable coverage in an environment of
economic constraints. The use of noninvasive tools to measure liver fibrosis
(i.e., elastometry) and pharmacogenomics (testing for IL28B and perhaps ITPA
polymorphisms), along with consideration of early viral kinetics to guide length 
and drugs needed could help to individualize and improve the cost effectiveness
of therapeutic decisions using DAA in HIV-infected patients with chronic
hepatitis C.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0032-1316469 
PMID: 22760653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

