
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2012 Nov;55(9):1171-8. doi: 10.1093/cid/cis631. Epub 2012 Jul
17.

Evaluation of the Xpert MTB/RIF assay at a tertiary care referral hospital in a
setting where tuberculosis and HIV infection are highly endemic.

O'Grady J(1), Bates M, Chilukutu L, Mzyece J, Cheelo B, Chilufya M, Mukonda L,
Mumba M, Tembo J, Chomba M, Kapata N, Maeurer M, Rachow A, Clowes P, Hoelscher M,
Mwaba P, Zumla A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection, University College London Medical School, Royal Free 
Hospital, Rowland Hill St., London, UK.

Erratum in
    Clin Infect Dis. 2013 Jan;56(2):313.

BACKGROUND. There were 1.45 million deaths from tuberculosis in 2011. A
substantial proportion of active pulmonary tuberculosis cases in countries where 
tuberculosis, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, and AIDS are highly
endemic remain undiagnosed because of the reliance on sputum-smear microscopy.
This study evaluated the performance of the Xpert MTB/RIF assay at a tertiary
care referral center in Zambia, a country where the burden of tuberculosis and
HIV infection is high. METHODS. A total of 881 adult inpatients admitted to
University Teaching Hospital in Lusaka who were able to produce sputum were
enrolled and analyzed in the study, irrespective of admission diagnosis. Sputum
specimens were analyzed by fluorescence smear microscopy, the Xpert MTB/RIF
assay, mycobacterial growth indicator tube (MGIT) culture,and MGIT
drug-susceptibility testing. The sensitivity and specificity of the Xpert MTB/RIF
assay were evaluated using culture as the gold standard. RESULTS.
Culture-confirmed tuberculosis was found in 201 of 881 patients (22.8%). The
specificity of the Xpert MTB/RIF assay was 95.0% (95% confidence interval [CI],
92.4%–96.8%),and the sensitivity was 86.1% (95% CI, 80.3%–90.4%). In sputum
smear–negative, culture-positive cases, the assay was 74.7% sensitive (95% CI,
64.6%–82.8%), identifying 71 additional tuberculosis cases that were not detected
by smear microscopy.A total of 18 of 111 patients with tuberculosis who were
tested (16.2%) had multidrug-resistant (MDR) tuberculosis.The sensitivity and
specificity of the Xpert MTB/RIF assay for detecting culture-confirmed,
rifampicin-resistant tuberculosis was 81.3% (95% CI, 53.7%–95.0%) and 97.5% (95% 
CI,90.4%–99.6%), respectively. CONCLUSIONS. The Xpert MTB/RIF assay performs
better than smear microscopy in an inpatient setting in a country where
tuberculosis and HIV infection are highly endemic. Assessment of its usefulness
and cost-effectiveness for increased detection of tuberculosis cases missed by
sputum smear and for concomitant screening for MDR tuberculosis among adult
inpatients attending tertiary care referral centers in other countries with a
high burden of tuberculosis and HIV infection is warranted [corrected].

DOI: 10.1093/cid/cis631 
PMID: 22806590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

