
1. Hum Immunol. 2012 Sep;73(9):884-90. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2012.07.039. Epub 2012 
Jul 20.

Cellular and humoral immunity elicited by influenza vaccines in pediatric
hematopoietic-stem cell transplantation.

Guérin-El Khourouj V(1), Duchamp M, Krivine A, Pédron B, Ouachée-Chardin M,
Yakouben K, Frémond ML, Baruchel A, Dalle JH, Sterkers G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Robert Debré Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux 
de Paris, Paris 7 Denis Diderot University, Paris, France.

Immunity induced by influenza vaccines following hematopoietic stem-cell
transplantation (HSCT) is poorly understood. Here, 14 pediatric recipients (mean 
age: 6 years) received H1N1 (n=9) or H1N1/H3N2 (n=5) vaccines at a median of 5.7 
months post-HSCT (HLA-identical related bone-marrow graft: 10/14). Fourteen
clinically-matched non-vaccinated recipients were included as controls. Cellular 
response to vaccination was assessed by a T-cell proliferation assay. Humoral
response was assessed by H1N1-specific antibody titration. IL2 and IFNγ responses
to influenza were also evaluated by an intracellular cytokine accumulation method
for some of the recipients. Higher proliferative responses to H1N1 (p=0.0001) and
higher H1N1-specific antibody titers (p<0.02) were observed in vaccines opposed
to non-vaccinated recipients. In some cases, proliferative responses to H1N1
developed while at the same time antibody titers did not reach protective (≥1:40)
levels. Most recipients vaccinated with only the H1N1 strain had proliferative
responses to both H1N1 and H3N2 (median stimulation index H1N1: 96, H3N2: 126 in 
responders). Finally, IL2 responses predominated over IFNγ responses (p<0.02) to 
influenza viruses in responders. In conclusion, H1N1 vaccination induced
substantial cell-mediated immunity, and to a lesser extent, humoral immunity at
early times post-HSCT. H1N1/H3N2 T-cell cross-reactivity and protective (IL2)
rather than effector (IFNγ) cytokinic profiles were elicited.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humimm.2012.07.039 
PMID: 22820626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

