
1. Sheng Wu Yi Xue Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Jun;29(3):486-90, 500.

[Research on Tat peptide-polyethylene glycol modified gelatin-siloxane
nanoparticles across the blood-brain barrier].

[Article in Chinese]

Tian X(1), Wei F, Lin X, Feng W, Wang P.

Author information: 
(1)Neurosurgical Department of Affiliated Zhongshan Hospital, Xiamen University, 
Xiamen 361004, China.

Gelatin-siloxane nanoparticles (GS NPs) have been considered to be good gene
carrier candidate in vitro, since they have several advantages such as low
toxicity, easy preparation and surface modification. In this study, the
Tat-PEG-GS NPs were synthesized by the gelatin-siloxane, surface-modified with
the polyethylene glycol (H2 N-PEG-COOH) and Tat peptide (KYGRRRQRRKKRGC) and thus
constructed a delivery system which can cross BBB (Blood-brain barrier). The
morphology, diameter, and zeta potential of Tat-PEG-GS NPs carrier system were
characterized with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and Nano-ZS zetasizer
dynamic light scattering Detector. The organ distribution and dynamic evolution
localized in the brain parenchyma of Tat-PEG-GS NPs in vivo was investigated with
Cri in vivo imaging system and TEM. The obtained Tat-PEG-GS NPs were
approximately spherical in shape with average particle size of 150-200 nm and
zeta potentials of (32.27 +/- 2.47) mV. In vivo imaging results showed that the
accumulation of Tat-PEG-GS NPs was higher in the brain than the accumulation of
PEG-GS NPs, but the accumulation of Tat-PEG-GS NPs was lower in the liver than
the accumulation of PEG-GS NPs. These differences are statistically significant. 
The nanocomplex could cross the BBB and reach the neural tissues tested with TEM.
The Tat-PEG-GS NPs could cross the BBB and escape the arrest of the
reticuloendothelial system (RES), and it would be potential nano-carrier systems 
for central delivery.


PMID: 22826945  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

