
1. Avian Pathol. 2012;41(4):355-60. doi: 10.1080/03079457.2012.691154.

Preliminary evaluation of the immunoenhancement potential of Newcastle disease
vaccine formulated as a cationic liposome.

Onuigbo EB(1), Okore VC, Ofokansi KC, Okoye JO, Nworu CS, Esimone CO, Attama AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
Nigeria, Nsukka, Nigeria. ebele.onuigbo@unn.edu.ng

This study evaluates the enhancement of immune response of birds to Newcastle
disease (ND) vaccine encapsulated in 1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium propane
(DOTAP)-based liposomes. The vesicles of the liposomal ND vaccine were physically
characterized for shape, particle size and zeta potential. The results of the
analyses showed that vesicles of the liposomal ND vaccine were spherical and
tightly packed. The mean size distribution was below 100 nm. The mean zeta
potential was 24 mV. Sixty experimental birds were then divided into an
unvaccinated group, a liposomal ND vaccine group and a live La Sota(®) vaccine
group. Both the liposomal ND vaccine and live La Sota(®) vaccine groups were
vaccinated orally at 3 and 6 weeks of age. The mean antibody titres, total and
differential white blood cell count, and blood chemistry, respectively, were
assessed. Ten birds from each group were challenged by oral administration of 0.2
ml virulent Herts 33 strain at 9 weeks of age. The log(2) mean antibody titre
induced by the liposomal ND vaccine after secondary immunization of the birds was
9.60±0.95 while that of the live La Sota( (®) ) vaccine was 6.00±0.63. Nine of
the 10 challenged birds in the unvaccinated group died while none died from the
liposomal ND vaccine group or the live La Sota(®) vaccine group. After the boost 
vaccination, the chickens vaccinated with the liposomal ND vaccine had a higher
mean antibody titre, indicating that encapsulating ND vaccine in DOTAP-based
liposome induced significantly higher immunity than the live La Sota(®) vaccine.

DOI: 10.1080/03079457.2012.691154 
PMID: 22834549  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

