
1. Allergy Rhinol (Providence). 2012;3(1):e30-4. doi: 10.2500/ar.2012.3.0021. Epub
2012 May 3.

Regulation of dendritic cell functions against harmful respiratory pathogens by a
cysteinyl leukotrienes receptor antagonist.

Matsuse H(1), Hirose H, Fukahori S, Tsuchida T, Tomari S, Kawano T, Fukushima C, 
Kohno S.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Nagasaki University School of
Medicine, Nagasaki, Japan.

Cysteinyl leukotriene receptor antagonist (LTRA) is a widely used medicine for
asthma. Cysteinyl leukotrienes (cysLTs) are involved in the regulation of
dendritic cell (DC) function. However, the effects of LTRA on DC-related
antimicrobial immunity against harmful respiratory pathogens remain unknown. The 
purpose of this study was to examine the effects of LTRA administered in vivo on 
DC function against representative respiratory pathogens in vitro. Pulmonary DCs 
were isolated from four groups of mice: control, mite allergen sensitized (AS),
and AS mice treated with the corticosteroid dexamethasone (Dex) or with the LTRA 
pranlukast (Prl). These DCs were incubated with mite allergen, lipopolysaccharide
(LPS), Aspergillus fumigatus, or respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). IL-10 and
IL-12 production was then determined. Dex treatment significantly inhibited
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced IL-10 and IL-12 production as well as baseline
IL-12 production in AS mice. The Prl did not significantly inhibit LPS-induced
IL-10 and IL-12 production in AS mice. More importantly, Prl significantly
increased IL-10 and IL-12 in AS mice after RSV infection. This study shows that
LTRA that is used for asthma potentially up-regulates antimicrobial immunity
through modulation of DC function against some respiratory infections without
immunosuppression.

DOI: 10.2500/ar.2012.3.0021 
PMCID: PMC3404475
PMID: 22852127 

