
1. BMC Plant Biol. 2012 Aug 10;12:141. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-12-141.

Virus-induced gene-silencing in wheat spikes and grains and its application in
functional analysis of HMW-GS-encoding genes.

Ma M(1), Yan Y, Huang L, Chen M, Zhao H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas, Yangling, Shaanxi 
712100, China.

BACKGROUND: The Barley stripe mosaic virus (BSMV)-based vector has been developed
and used for gene silencing in barley and wheat seedlings to assess gene
functions in pathogen- or insect-resistance, but conditions for gene silencing in
spikes and grains have not been evaluated. In this study, we explored the
feasibility of using BSMV for gene silencing in wheat spikes or grains.
RESULTS: Apparent photobleaching on the spikes infected with BSMV:PDS at heading 
stage was observed after 13 days post inoculation (dpi), and persisted until 30
dpi, while the spikes inoculated with BSMV:00 remained green during the same
period. Grains of BSMV:PDS infected spikes also exhibited photobleaching.
Molecular analysis indicated that photobleached spikes or grains resulted from
the reduction of endogenous PDS transcript abundances, suggesting that BSMV:PDS
was able to induce PDS silencing in wheat spikes and grains. Inoculation onto
wheat spikes from heading to flowering stage was optimal for efficient silencing 
of PDS in wheat spikes. Furthermore, we used the BSMV-based system to reduce the 
transcript level of 1Bx14, a gene encoding for High-molecular-weight glutenin
subunit 1Bx14 (HMW-GS 1Bx14), by 97â€‰% in the grains of the BSMV:1Bx14 infected
spikes at 15 dpi, compared with that in BSMV:00 infected spikes, and the
reduction persisted until at least 25 dpi. The amount of the HMW-GS 1Bx14 was
also detectably decreased. The percentage of glutenin macropolymeric proteins in 
total proteins was significantly reduced in the grains of 1Bx14-silenced plants
as compared with that in the grains of BSMV:00 infected control plants,
indicating that HMW-GS 1Bx14 is one of major components participating in the
formation of glutenin macropolymers in wheat grains.
CONCLUSION: This is one of the first reports of successful application of
BSMV-based virus-induced-gene-silencing (VIGS) for gene knockdown in wheat spikes
and grains and its application in functional analysis of the 1Bx14 gene. The
established BSMV-VIGS system will be very useful in future research on functional
analysis of genes contributing to grain quality and the metabolic networks in
developing seeds of wheat.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2229-12-141 
PMCID: PMC3462119
PMID: 22882902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

