
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2014 Feb;61(1):69-74. doi: 10.1111/tbed.12004. Epub 2012
Sep 3.

Bluetongue serotype 2 and 9 modified live vaccine viruses as causative agents of 
abortion in livestock: a retrospective analysis in Italy.

Savini G(1), Lorusso A, Paladini C, Migliaccio P, Di Gennaro A, Di Provvido A,
Scacchia M, Monaco F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, OIE Reference Laboratory for Bluetongue, Istituto G.
Caporale, Teramo, Italy.

The recent outbreak caused by Schmallenberg virus, which affected sheep, goats
and cattle in Europe, highlighted the importance of having a robust surveillance 
plan capable of monitoring abortions and malformations in the livestock
offspring. In this context, bluetongue viruses (BTVs) represented and represent
one of the major threats to the European livestock industry. Aiming to improve
the understanding on BTV cross placental transmission and serotype involvement,
in this retrospective study foetal spleens and/or brains of 663 ovines, 429
bovines, 155 goats and 17 buffaloes were tested for the presence of BTV by virus 
isolation. BTV vaccine strains were isolated from 31 foetuses (2.4%; 95% CI:
1.7-3.4%): 24 (3.6%; 95% CI: 2.4-5.3%) from ovine foetal tissues; 6 (1.4%; 95%
CI: 0.6-3.0%) from bovine foetal tissues and 1 (0.6%; 95% CI: 0.2-3.5%) from the 
spleen of a caprine foetus. All foetuses were from animals vaccinated with either
BTV-2 or BTV-2, and BTV-9 modified live vaccines (MLVs) produced by Onderstepoort
Biological Products (OBP), South Africa. Among the 31 isolated vaccine strains,
serotype 9 (n = 28) was more frequently isolated (P < 0.05) than serotype 2
(n = 3). In two cases infectious vaccine strains were found in the foetal tissues
2 months after the vaccine administration. Other pathogens known to be causative 
agents of abortion in ruminants were not detected nor isolated. This study
demonstrates, for the first time, that BTV-2 and BTV-9 vaccine strains are able
to cross the placental barrier of sheep, cattle and goats. BTV-2 and BTV-9
vaccine strains are able to infect foetuses and cause abortions or malformations 
depending on the period of pregnancy at the time of vaccination.

© 2012 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.12004 
PMID: 22937914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

