
1. J Gastrointest Oncol. 2012 Sep;3(3):209-25. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2078-6891.2012.024.

Gastrointestinal lymphomas: Morphology, immunophenotype and molecular features.

Bautista-Quach MA, Ake CD, Chen M, Wang J.

Primary gastrointestinal lymphoma comprises 10-15% of all non-Hodgkin lymphomas
and encompasses 30-40% of the total extranodal lymphomas. Approximately 60-75% of
cases occur in the stomach, and then the small bowel, ileum, cecum, colon and
rectum. Lymphoid neoplasms may consist of mature B, T and less commonly
extranodal NK/T cells. Of these, the two most frequently encountered histologic
subtypes are extranodal marginal zone lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissue (MALT lymphoma), where Helicobacter pylori infection is implicated in a
number of cases, and diffuse large B cell lymphoma. Several B cell lymphomas are 
associated with chromosomal aberrations. Enteropathy-associated T cell lymphoma, 
type I in particular, usually arises in a background of celiac disease. T cell
gene rearrangement confirms clonality. NK/T cell neoplasms are invariably
associated with Epstein-Barr virus infection and are often aggressive; thus,
differentiation from a benign NK-cell enteropathy is paramount. Although
incidence of other hematopoietic malignancies in the gastrointestinal tract such 
as plasma cell myeloma associated with amyloidosis, plasmablastic lymphoma,
Hodgkin disease, histiocytic sarcoma and mast cell sarcoma is extremely rare,
these entities have been documented, with the latter two demonstrating aggressive
clinical behavior. Endoscopic ultrasonography is an important adjunct in disease 
staging and follow-up. Conservative antibiotic treatment of stage I MALT
lymphomas with associated Helicobacter pylori infection achieves good clinical
outcome with high remission rate. Chemotherapy, radiation and rarely surgery are 
reserved for advanced diseases or cases resistant to conservative therapy and
those not associated with Helicobacter pylori infection.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2078-6891.2012.024 
PMCID: PMC3418529
PMID: 22943012 

