
1. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2013 Jul;7(4):604-21. doi: 10.1111/irv.12002.
Epub 2012 Sep 18.

Review: interventions to increase influenza vaccination among healthcare workers 
in hospitals.

Hollmeyer H(1), Hayden F, Mounts A, Buchholz U.

Author information: 
(1)International Health Regulations Coordination Department, World Health
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. hollmeyerh@who.int

Annual influenza vaccination rates among hospital healthcare workers (HCW) are
almost universally low despite recommendations from WHO and public health
authorities in many countries. To assist in the development of successful
vaccination programmes, we reviewed studies where interventions aimed to increase
the uptake of influenza vaccination among hospital HCW. We searched PUBMED from
1990 up to December 2011 for publications with predetermined search strategies
and of pre-defined criteria for inclusion or exclusion. We evaluated a large
number of 'intervention programmes' each employing one or more 'intervention
components' or strategies, such as easy access to vaccine or educational
activities, with the goal to raise influenza vaccine uptake rates in hospital HCW
during one influenza season. Included studies reported results of intervention
programmes and compared the uptake with the season prior to the intervention
(historical control) or to another intervention programme within the same season 
that started from the same set of baseline activities. Twenty-five studies
performed in eight countries met our selection criteria and described 45 distinct
intervention programmes. Most studies used their own facility as historical
control and evaluated only one season. The following elements were used in
intervention programmes that increased vaccine uptake: provision of free vaccine,
easy access to the vaccine (e.g. through mobile carts or on-site vaccination),
knowledge and behaviour modification through educational activities and/or
reminders and/or incentives, management or organizational changes, such as the
assignment of personnel dedicated to the intervention programme, long-term
implementation of the strategy, requiring active declination and mandatory
immunization policies. The number of these components applied appeared to be
proportional to the increase in uptake. If influenza uptake in hospital HCW is to
be increased on sustained basis, hospital managers need to be committed to
conduct a well-designed long-term intervention programme that includes a variety 
of co-ordinated managerial and organizational elements.

Â© 2012 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/irv.12002 
PMCID: PMC5781006
PMID: 22984794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

