
1. Virus Res. 2012 Dec;170(1-2):109-17. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2012.09.004. Epub
2012 Sep 19.

Genetics and infectivity of H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses
isolated from chickens and wild birds in Japan during 2010-11.

Uchida Y(1), Suzuki Y, Shirakura M, Kawaguchi A, Nobusawa E, Tanikawa T, Hikono
H, Takemae N, Mase M, Kanehira K, Hayashi T, Tagawa Y, Tashiro M, Saito T.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Disease and Epidemiology Research Division, National Institute of Animal
Health, National Agriculture and Food Research Organization (NARO), Kannondai,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0856, Japan. uchiyu@affrc.go.jp

Outbreaks of H5N1 subtype highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (HPAIV) were
recorded in chickens, domesticated birds and wild birds throughout Japan from
November 2010 to March 2011. Genetic analysis of the Japanese isolates indicated 
that all gene segments, except the PA gene, were closely related to Japanese wild
bird isolates in 2008 and belonged to clade 2.3.2.1 classified by the WHO/OIE/FAO
H5N1 Evolution Working Group. Direct ancestors of the PA gene segment of all
Japanese viruses analyzed in this study can be found in wild bird strains of
several subtypes other than H5N1 isolated between 2007 and 2009. The PA gene of
these wild bird isolates share a common ancestor with H5N1 HPAIVs belonging to
clades 2.5, 7 and 9, indicating that wild birds were involved in the emergence of
the current reassortant 2.3.2.1 viruses. To determine how viruses were maintained
in the wild bird population, two isolates derived from chickens
(A/chicken/Shimane/1/2010, Ck10 and A/chicken/Miyazaki/S4/2011, CkS411) and one
from a wild bird (A/mandarin duck/Miyazaki/22M-765/2011, MandarinD11) were
compared in their ability to infect and be transmitted to chickens. There was a
significant difference in the survival of chickens that were infected with
10(6)EID(50) of CkS411 compared to those with MandarinD11 and the transmission
efficiency of CkS411 was greater than the other viruses. The increased titer of
CkS411 excreted from infected chickens contributed to the improved transmission
rates. It was considered that reduced virus excretion and transmission of
MandarinD11 could have been due to adaptation of the virus in wild birds.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2012.09.004 
PMID: 23000396  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

