
1. PLoS Genet. 2012 Sep;8(9):e1002934. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002934. Epub 2012 
Sep 13.

Citrullination of histone H3 interferes with HP1-mediated transcriptional
repression.

Sharma P(1), Azebi S, England P, Christensen T, Møller-Larsen A, Petersen T,
Batsché E, Muchardt C.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie du Développement, Institut Pasteur, CNRS URA2578,
Unité de Régulation Epigénétique, Paris, France.

Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease associated with abnormal
expression of a subset of cytokines, resulting in inappropriate T-lymphocyte
activation and uncontrolled immune response. A key issue in the field is the need
to understand why these cytokines are transcriptionally activated in the
patients. Here, we have examined several transcription units subject to
pathological reactivation in MS, including the TNFα and IL8 cytokine genes and
also several Human Endogenous RetroViruses (HERVs). We find that both the immune 
genes and the HERVs require the heterochromatin protein HP1α for their
transcriptional repression. We further show that the Peptidylarginine Deiminase 4
(PADI4), an enzyme with a suspected role in MS, weakens the binding of HP1α to
tri-methylated histone H3 lysine 9 by citrullinating histone H3 arginine 8. The
resulting de-repression of both cytokines and HERVs can be reversed with the
PADI-inhibitor Cl-amidine. Finally, we show that in peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells (PBMCs) from MS patients, the promoters of TNFα, and several HERVs share a 
deficit in HP1α recruitment and an augmented accumulation of histone H3 with a
double citrulline 8 tri-methyl lysine 9 modifications. Thus, our study provides
compelling evidence that HP1α and PADI4 are regulators of both immune genes and
HERVs, and that multiple events of transcriptional reactivation in MS patients
can be explained by the deficiency of a single mechanism of gene silencing.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002934 
PMCID: PMC3441713
PMID: 23028349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

