
1. Singapore Med J. 2012 Sep;53(9):604-7.

Cervical cancer in Brunei Darussalam.

Lee MY(1), Telisinghe PU, Ramasamy R.

Author information: 
(1)1Institute of Health Sciences, Universiti Brunei Darussalam, Gadong, Brunei
Darussalam.

INTRODUCTION: Cervical cancer caused by the human papilloma virus (HPV) is a
common cancer in women. There is no published data on the recent incidence of
cervical dysplasia, cervical cancer and genital warts caused by the different
types of HPVs in Brunei Darussalam.
METHODS: A cross-sectional, retrospective study was conducted utilising data from
patients diagnosed with cervical cancer during the period 2005-2009 in Brunei
Darussalam. The varying incidences of different types of cervical lesions among
various ethnic and age groups, and in the overall population, were determined.
RESULTS: The mean age-standardised incidence of invasive cervical cancer during
the five-year period was 24.9 per 100,000 women per year (95% confidence interval
[CI] 21.7, 28.1). Age-specific invasive cervical cancer incidence peaked in the
age group 45-59 years. Chinese females tended to have a higher incidence of
invasive cervical cancer (28.2 per 100,000 women per year; 95% CI 17.8, 38.7)
than Malay females (20.6 per 100,000 women per year; 95% CI 17.1, 24.2), while
other ethnic groups in Brunei Darussalam had a significantly lower incidence (6.5
per 100,000 women per year; 95% CI 3.0, 10.0).
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that Brunei Darussalam has a relatively higher
incidence of cervical cancer compared to its neighbouring countries. The findings
support the need for more comprehensive screening, public education programmes
and vaccination against HPV in the country.


PMID: 23023903  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

