
1. Minerva Anestesiol. 2012 Dec;78(12):1333-40. Epub 2012 Oct 2.

Effectiveness and predictors of success of noninvasive ventilation during H1N1
pandemics: a multicenter study.

Nicolini A(1), Tonveronachi E, Navalesi P, Antonelli M, Valentini I, Melotti RM, 
Pigna A, Carrassi A, Righini P, Ferrari Bravo M, Pelosi P, Nicoli F, Cosentini R,
Vaschetto R, Faenza S, Nava S.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Diseases Unit, Hospital of Sestri Levante, Sestri Levante, Genoa, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND: The use of non-invasive ventilation (NIV) in acute hypoxemic
respiratory failure (AHRF) due to H1N1 virus infection is controversial. In this 
multicenter study we aimed to assess the efficacy of NIV in avoiding endotracheal
intubation (ETI) and to identify predictors of success or failure.
METHODS: In this prospective multicenter study, 98 patients with new pulmonary
infiltrate(s) sustained by H1N1 virus and a PaO(2)/FiO2<300 were eligible for
study; 38/98 required immediate ETI, while the others received NIV as a first
line therapy; 13/60 patients failed NIV and were intubated after 5.8+5.5 hours
from enrolment. The remaining 47/60 patients were successfully ventilated with
NIV.
RESULTS: Hospital mortality was significantly higher in those patients who failed
NIV vs. those who succeeded (53.8% vs. 2.1%; OR=0.52, P<0.001). ETI was
associated with higher number of infectious complications, mainly sepsis and
septic shock. The OR of having one of these events in the NIV failure group vs.
NIV success was 16.7, P<0.001. According to logistic regression model, a SAPS
II>29 and a PaO(2)/FIO(2)≤127 at admission and PaO2/FIO(2)≤149 after 1 hr of NIV 
were independently associated with the need for ETI.
CONCLUSION: The early application of NIV, with the aim to avoid invasive
ventilation, during the H1N1 pandemics was associated with an overall success
rate of 47/98 (48%). Patients presenting at admission with an high SAPS II score 
and a low PaO(2)/FiO(2) ratio and/or unable to promptly correct gas exchange are 
at high risk of intubation and mortality.


PMID: 23032930  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

