
1. J Hepatol. 2013 Feb;58(2):375-84. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2012.09.022. Epub 2012 Oct 
4.

Host-targeting agents for prevention and treatment of chronic hepatitis C -
perspectives and challenges.

Zeisel MB(1), Lupberger J, Fofana I, Baumert TF.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U748, Strasbourg, France. Mirjam.Zeisel@unistra.fr

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a major cause of chronic liver disease and
hepatocellular carcinoma worldwide. Furthermore, HCV-induced liver disease is a
major indication of liver transplantation. In the past years, direct-acting
antivirals (DAAs) targeting HCV enzymes have been developed. DAAs increase the
virologic response to anti-HCV therapy but may lead to selection of
drug-resistant variants and treatment failure. To date, strategies to prevent HCV
infection are still lacking and antiviral therapy in immunocompromised patients, 
patients with advanced liver disease and HIV/HCV-co-infection remains limited.
Alternative or complementary approaches addressing the limitations of current
antiviral therapies are to boost the host's innate immunity or interfere with
host factors required for pathogenesis. Host-targeting agents (HTAs) provide an
interesting perspective for novel antiviral strategies against viral hepatitis
since they have (i) a high genetic barrier to resistance, (ii) a pan-genotypic
antiviral activity, and (iii) complementary mechanisms of action to DAAs and
might therefore act in a synergistic manner with current standard of care or DAAs
in clinical development. This review highlights HTAs against HCV infection that
have potential as novel antivirals and are in preclinical or clinical
development.

Copyright Â© 2012 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2012.09.022 
PMID: 23041307  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

