
1. Immunogenetics. 2013 Jan;65(1):75-81. doi: 10.1007/s00251-012-0655-8. Epub 2012
Oct 13.

Positive selection drives rapid evolution of certain amino acid residues in an
evolutionarily highly conserved interferon-inducible antiviral protein of fishes.

Padhi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, 208 Mueller Lab,
University Park, PA 16802, USA. abinash74@gmail.com

Viperin, an evolutionarily highly conserved interferon-inducible multifunctional 
protein, has previously been reported to exhibit antiviral activity against a
wide range of DNA and RNA viruses. Utilizing the complete nucleotide coding
sequence data of fish viperin antiviral genes, and employing the maximum
likelihood-based codon substitution models, the present study reports the
pervasive role of positive selection in the evolution of viperin antiviral
protein in fishes. The overall rate of nonsynonymous (dN) to synonymous (dS)
substitutions (dN/dS) for the three functional domains of viperin (N-terminal,
central domain and C-terminal) were 1.1, 0.12, and 0.24, respectively.
Codon-by-codon substitution analyses have revealed that while most of the
positively selected sites were located at the N-terminal amphipathic Î±-helix
domain, few amino acid residues at the C-terminal domain were under positive
selection. However, none of the sites in the central domain were under positive
selection. These results indicate that, although viperin is evolutionarily highly
conserved, the three functional domains experienced differential selection
pressures. Taken together with the results of previous studies, the present study
suggests that the persistent antagonistic nature of surrounding infectious viral 
pathogens might be the likely cause for such adaptive evolutionary changes of
certain amino acids in fish viperin antiviral protein.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-012-0655-8 
PMID: 23064402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

