
1. J Cell Biol. 1990 Mar;110(3):833-47.

Retroviral expression of alternatively spliced forms of rat fibronectin.

Guan JL(1), Trevithick JE, Hynes RO.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
02139.

We describe the construction in retroviral vectors and the expression of
recombinant rat fibronectin (FN) cDNAs corresponding with the various
alternatively spliced forms of FN. In NIH 3T3 cells, the exogenous rat FN
subunits are efficiently secreted as heterodimers with endogenous mouse subunits.
In contrast, in lymphoid WEHI231 cells, there is no endogenous FN synthesis and
the recombinant FNs are secreted and can be purified as homogeneous proteins. We 
show that the purified recombinant FNs are biochemically and biologically
functional. In basic assays for adhesion, spreading, cytoskeletal organization,
and migration using various established adherent cell lines, different forms of
FNs containing the different alternatively spliced segments show no marked
differences in activity. We have used these recombinant FNs to investigate three 
systems in which earlier results had suggested potential differences between
different forms of FN. First, all forms tested appear equally active in restoring
normal morphology to a transformed cell line. Second, we detect minor differences
in their ability to assemble into preexisting extracellular matrices. Finally, we
report that only those forms of FN that contain the V segment will promote the
spreading of a lymphoid cell line indicating that this segment confers additional
biological functions for some cell types, a result that confirms and extends
earlier data. These homogeneous, biologically active recombinant FNs will allow
further studies of the role of the alternatively spliced segments of FN.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.110.3.833 
PMCID: PMC2116055
PMID: 2307710  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

