
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48236. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048236. Epub 2012 Oct 30.

MicroRNA prediction using a fixed-order Markov model based on the secondary
structure pattern.

Shen W(1), Chen M, Wei G, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Center, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

Predicting miRNAs is an arduous task, due to the diversity of the precursors and 
complexity of enzyme processes. Although several prediction approaches have
reached impressive performances, few of them could achieve a full-function
recognition of mature miRNA directly from the candidate hairpins across species. 
Therefore, researchers continue to seek a more powerful model close to biological
recognition to miRNA structure. In this report, we describe a novel miRNA
prediction algorithm, known as FOMmiR, using a fixed-order Markov model based on 
the secondary structural pattern. For a training dataset containing 809 human
pre-miRNAs and 6441 human pseudo-miRNA hairpins, the model's parameters were
defined and evaluated. The results showed that FOMmiR reached 91% accuracy on the
human dataset through 5-fold cross-validation. Moreover, for the independent test
datasets, the FOMmiR presented an outstanding prediction in human and other
species including vertebrates, Drosophila, worms and viruses, even plants, in
contrast to the well-known algorithms and models. Especially, the FOMmiR was not 
only able to distinguish the miRNA precursors from the hairpins, but also locate 
the position and strand of the mature miRNA. Therefore, this study provides a new
generation of miRNA prediction algorithm, which successfully realizes a
full-function recognition of the mature miRNAs directly from the hairpin
sequences. And it presents a new understanding of the biological recognition
based on the strongest signal's location detected by FOMmiR, which might be
closely associated with the enzyme cleavage mechanism during the miRNA
maturation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048236 
PMCID: PMC3484136
PMID: 23118959  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

