
1. Gene Ther. 2013 Jul;20(7):703-16. doi: 10.1038/gt.2012.83. Epub 2012 Nov 8.

Modulation of feeding by chronic rAAV expression of a relaxin-3 peptide agonist
in rat hypothalamus.

Ganella DE(1), Callander GE, Ma S, Bye CR, Gundlach AL, Bathgate RA.

Author information: 
(1)Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, The University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Relaxin-3 is a neuropeptide that is abundantly expressed by discrete brainstem
neuron populations that broadly innervate forebrain areas rich in the relaxin-3
G-protein-coupled-receptor, RXFP3. Acute and subchronic central administration of
synthetic relaxin-3 or an RXFP3-selective agonist peptide, R3/I5, increase
feeding and body weight in rats. Intrahypothalamic injection of relaxin-3 also
increases feeding. In this study, we developed a recombinant adeno-associated
virus 1/2 (rAAV1/2) vector that drives expression and constitutive secretion of
bioactive R3/I5 and assessed the effect of intrahypothalamic injections on daily 
food intake and body weight gain in adult male rats over 8 weeks. In vitro
testing revealed that the vector rAAV1/2-fibronectin (FIB)-R3/I5 directs the
constitutive secretion of bioactive R3/I5 peptide. Bilateral injection of
rAAV1/2-FIB-R3/I5 vector into the paraventricular nucleus produced an increase in
daily food intake and body weight gain (P<0.01, ~23%, respectively), relative to 
control treatment. In a separate cohort of rats, quantitative polymerase chain
reaction analysis of hypothalamic mRNA revealed strong expression of R3/I5
transgene at 3 months post-rAAV1/2-FIB-R3/I5 infusion. Levels of mRNA transcripts
for the relaxin-3 receptor RXFP3, the hypothalamic 'feeding' peptides
neuropeptide Y, AgRP and POMC, and the reproductive hormone, GnRH, were all
similar to control, whereas vasopressin and oxytocin (OT) mRNA levels were
reduced by ~25% (P=0.051) and ~50% (P<0.005), respectively, in
rAAV1/2-FIB-R3/I5-treated rats (at 12 weeks, n=9/8 rats per group). These data
demonstrate for the first time that R3/I5 is effective in modulating feeding in
the rat by chronic hypothalamic RXFP3 activation and suggest a potential
underlying mechanism involving altered OT signalling. Importantly, there was no
desensitization of the feeding response over the treatment period and no apparent
deleterious health effects, indicating that targeting the relaxin-3-RXFP3 system 
may be an effective long-term therapy for eating disorders.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2012.83 
PMID: 23135160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

