
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2013 Feb;51(2):452-8. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01982-12. Epub 2012 Nov 
21.

Optimization of a combined human parechovirus-enterovirus real-time reverse
transcription-PCR assay and evaluation of a new parechovirus 3-specific assay for
cerebrospinal fluid specimen testing.

Selvaraju SB(1), Nix WA, Oberste MS, Selvarangan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Mercy Hospitals
and Clinics, Kansas City, Missouri, USA. rselvarangan@cmh.edu

Human parechoviruses (HPeVs), particularly type 3 (HPeV3), are known central
nervous system (CNS) pathogens, causing serious infections in infants similar to 
those caused by enteroviruses (EVs). The primary aim of this study was to combine
and validate HPeV and EV real-time reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) detection
assays with the best available RT-PCR reagents and conditions for parallel
detection of HPeV and EV on a single platform. The secondary aim was to develop
and validate a newly developed HPeV3-specific real-time RT-PCR assay. Five
commercially available RT-PCR kits were evaluated with the pan-HPeV and EV assays
in one-step and two-step RT-PCRs. Two-step RT-PCR with the AgPath ID RT-PCR (AGP)
kit performed best for both pan-HPeV and EV assays. The pan-HPeV-specific assay
performed best with the AGP kit in a one-step RT-PCR. Frozen aliquots of 145 (for
HPeV, n = 70; for EV, n = 75) previously characterized cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
specimens were tested by EV-, pan-HPeV-, and HPeV3-specific (HPeV specimens only)
assays. The pan-HPeV and EV assays demonstrated 100% analytical sensitivity and
specificity compared to historic results, while the HPeV3-specific assay
demonstrated 97% sensitivity and 100% specificity. We propose a real-time
pan-HPeV, EV two-step RT-PCR algorithm for simultaneous detection of HPeV and EV 
from CSF specimens on a single platform. The HPeV3-specific one-step RT-PCR assay
can be used as a rapid and cost-effective assay to detect and identify HPeV3 in
pan-HPeV RT-PCR assay-positive CSF specimens.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01982-12 
PMCID: PMC3553926
PMID: 23175256  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

