
1. BMC Genomics. 2012 Dec 5;13:682. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-682.

Asymmetric purine-pyrimidine distribution in cellular small RNA population of
papaya.

Aryal R(1), Yang X, Yu Q, Sunkar R, Li L, Ming R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

BACKGROUND: The small RNAs (sRNA) are a regulatory class of RNA mainly
represented by the 21 and 24-nucleotide size classes. The cellular sRNAs are
processed by RNase III family enzyme dicer (Dicer like in plant) from a
self-complementary hairpin loop or other type of RNA duplexes. The papaya genome 
has been sequenced, but its microRNAs and other regulatory RNAs are yet to be
analyzed.
RESULTS: We analyzed the genomic features of the papaya sRNA population from
three sRNA deep sequencing libraries made from leaves, flowers, and leaves
infected with Papaya Ringspot Virus (PRSV). We also used the deep sequencing data
to annotate the micro RNA (miRNA) in papaya. We identified 60 miRNAs, 24 of which
were conserved in other species, and 36 of which were novel miRNAs specific to
papaya. In contrast to the Chargaff's purine-pyrimidine equilibrium, cellular
sRNA was significantly biased towards a purine rich population. Of the two purine
bases, higher frequency of adenine was present in 23nt or longer sRNAs, while
22nt or shorter sRNAs were over represented by guanine bases. However, this bias 
was not observed in the annotated miRNAs in plants. The 21nt species were
expressed from fewer loci but expressed at higher levels relative to the 24nt
species. The highly expressed 21nt species were clustered in a few isolated
locations of the genome. The PRSV infected leaves showed higher accumulation of
21 and 22nt sRNA compared to uninfected leaves. We observed higher accumulation
of miRNA* of seven annotated miRNAs in virus-infected tissue, indicating the
potential function of miRNA* under stressed conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified 60 miRNAs in papaya. Our study revealed the
asymmetric purine-pyrimidine distribution in cellular sRNA population. The 21nt
species of sRNAs have higher expression levels than 24nt sRNA. The miRNA* of some
miRNAs shows higher accumulation in PRSV infected tissues, suggesting that these 
strands are not totally functionally redundant. The findings open a new avenue
for further investigation of the sRNA silencing pathway in plants.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-682 
PMCID: PMC3582581
PMID: 23216749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

