
1. J Vis Exp. 2012 Dec 4;(70):e4165. doi: 10.3791/4165.

A quantitative evaluation of cell migration by the phagokinetic track motility
assay.

Nogalski MT(1), Chan GC, Stevenson EV, Collins-McMillen DK, Yurochko AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center.

Cellular motility is an important biological process for both unicellular and
multicellular organisms. It is essential for movement of unicellular organisms
towards a source of nutrients or away from unsuitable conditions, as well as in
multicellular organisms for tissue development, immune surveillance and wound
healing, just to mention a few roles(1,2,3). Deregulation of this process can
lead to serious neurological, cardiovascular and immunological diseases, as well 
as exacerbated tumor formation and spread(4,5). Molecularly, actin polymerization
and receptor recycling have been shown to play important roles in creating
cellular extensions (lamellipodia), that drive the forward movement of the
cell(6,7,8). However, many biological questions about cell migration remain
unanswered. The central role for cellular motility in human health and disease
underlines the importance of understanding the specific mechanisms involved in
this process and makes accurate methods for evaluating cell motility particularly
important. Microscopes are usually used to visualize the movement of cells.
However, cells move rather slowly, making the quantitative measurement of cell
migration a resource-consuming process requiring expensive cameras and software
to create quantitative time-lapsed movies of motile cells. Therefore, the ability
to perform a quantitative measurement of cell migration that is cost-effective,
non-laborious, and that utilizes common laboratory equipment is a great need for 
many researchers. The phagokinetic track motility assay utilizes the ability of a
moving cell to clear gold particles from its path to create a measurable track on
a colloidal gold-coated glass coverslip(9,10). With the use of freely available
software, multiple tracks can be evaluated for each treatment to accomplish
statistical requirements. The assay can be utilized to assess motility of many
cell types, such as cancer cells(11,12), fibroblasts(9), neutrophils(13),
skeletal muscle cells(14), keratinocytes(15), trophoblasts(16), endothelial
cells(17), and monocytes(10,18-22). The protocol involves the creation of slides 
coated with gold nanoparticles (AuÂ°) that are generated by a reduction of
chloroauric acid (Au(3+)) by sodium citrate. This method was developed by
Turkevich et al. in 1951(23) and then improved in the 1970s by Frens et
al.(24,25). As a result of this chemical reduction step, gold particles (10-20 nm
in diameter) precipitate from the reaction mixture and can be applied to glass
coverslips, which are then ready for use in cellular migration analyses(9,26,27).
In general, the phagokinetic track motility assay is a quick, quantitative and
easy measure of cellular motility. In addition, it can be utilized as a simple
high-throughput assay, for use with cell types that are not amenable to
time-lapsed imaging, as well as other uses depending on the needs of the
researcher. Together, the ability to quantitatively measure cellular motility of 
multiple cell types without the need for expensive microscopes and software,
along with the use of common laboratory equipment and chemicals, make the
phagokinetic track motility assay a solid choice for scientists with an interest 
in understanding cellular motility.

DOI: 10.3791/4165 
PMCID: PMC3567159
PMID: 23242175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

