
1. Acta Cytol. 2013;57(2):159-63. doi: 10.1159/000345103. Epub 2013 Feb 28.

Effectiveness of the ThinPrep Imaging System in the detection of abnormal
cervicovaginal cytology: a practical experience in Korea.

Ha SY(1), Lee YK, Oh YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study is to report our experience with the
implementation of the ThinPrep Imaging System (TIS) in a tertiary hospital in
Korea and to evaluate the effectiveness of the TIS compared to manual methods in 
the screening of cervical cytology.
STUDY DESIGN: Detection rates of cervical abnormalities in the pre- and post-TIS 
periods (January 2009 to February 2010 and March 2010 to December 2010,
respectively) were compared. Follow-up cytological and histological results with 
concurrent or subsequent human papillomavirus (HPV) tests were retrieved.
RESULTS: ASC-US, ASC-H, LSIL, and HSIL were more frequently detected in the
post-TIS period than in the pre-TIS period (p < 0.005). The proportions of
correlated cases of ASC-US were 42.2 and 40.4% in the pre- and post-TIS periods, 
respectively. The detection rates of high-risk types of HPV in ASC-US were not
significantly different between the two groups. The proportion of correlated
biopsy for ASC-H, LSIL, and HSIL was similar in both periods. HPV positivity for 
ASC-H, LSIL, and HSIL showed no significant change between the two periods.
CONCLUSION: The TIS is potentially useful for the detection of abnormal cervical 
cytology on the basis of the increased detection rate of squamous cell
abnormalities, with a relatively similar proportion of correlated cases compared 
to the manual screening method.

Copyright Â© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000345103 
PMID: 23406895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

