
1. J Med Virol. 1990 Mar;30(3):163-8.

Speed of progression to AIDS and degree of antibody response to accessory gene
products of HIV-1.

Reiss P(1), Lange JM, de Ronde A, de Wolf F, Dekker J, Debouck C, Goudsmit J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Antibodies to E. coli-produced HIV-1 nef, rev, tat, vpu, and vpr proteins were
measured by enzyme immunoassay in serial sets of sera from 72 men seroconverting 
for antibodies to HIV-1 structural proteins, and from 190 initially symptom-free 
men who were seropositive for these antibodies at entry into the study. In the
men seroconverting for antibodies to structural proteins the levels of nef-,
rev-, and tat-specific antibodies, but not of vpu-, and vpr-specific antibodies, 
within 3 months of seroconversion, appeared to be lower in the five men
progressing to AIDS, compared with the men remaining symptom-free during
follow-up. Analysis of the prevalence of previously described antibody profiles
to these accessory gene products was carried out. In all HIV-1 antibody
seroconverters and in those HIV-1 antibody seropositive men with 15 or more
months of follow-up who progressed to AIDS, there was a shift from predominantly 
nef- and vpu-specific antibody negative profiles in the men developing AIDS in
the early years of the study to predominantly nef- and vpu-specific antibody
positive profiles in men who developed AIDS later. Rev- and tat-specific antibody
negative profiles were dominant in men progressing to AIDS throughout follow-up. 
No vpr-specific antibody profile occurred preferentially in the men progressing
to AIDS throughout follow-up. Low antibody reactivity to accessory gene products 
nef, rev, and tat appears, like low anti-core antibody reactivity, to be
associated with progression to AIDS relatively rapidly after infection with
HIV-1.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.1890300303 
PMID: 2341832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

