
1. Pathol Int. 2013 Feb;63(2):108-12. doi: 10.1111/pin.12030. Epub 2013 Feb 22.

Lung miliary micro-nodules in human T-cell leukemia virus type I carriers.

Fukuoka J(1), Tominaga M, Ichikado K, Tanaka T, Ichiyasu H, Kohrogi H, Ishizawa
S, Suga M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Toyama University Hospital, Toyama, Japan.
fukuokaj@nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) carriers are rarely subject to
inflammatory disorders in multiple organs, other than the well-known
complication, adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL). HTLV-1 associated
bronchiolo-alveolar disorder (HABA) has been proposed as an immune mediated
pulmonary reaction seen rarely in HTLV-1 carriers. The reported
clinico-pathological patterns of HABA are diffuse panbronchiolitis (DPB) and
lymphoid interstitial pneumonia (LIP). We here report three cases of HTLV-1
carriers showing miliary micro-nodules throughout both lungs. Microscopic
examination in the video assisted thoracic surgery biopsies demonstrated that all
cases had multiple discrete micro-nodules which consisted of marked lymphoid
infiltration, granulomas, eosinophils and a few foci of necrosis inside the
granuloma. No findings indicating ATLL, other neoplastic conditions, infection or
interstitial pneumonia, including DPB and LIP, were present following panels of
special staining and immunohistochemical examinations. Two patients improved
without treatment within one month, with no evidence of recurrence after 7 years.
One patient showed slow deterioration of lung reticular shadows in spite of a low
dose corticosteroid therapy (prednisolone 10 mg/day). We believe these cases may 
be a newly recognized variant of HABA.

© 2013 The Authors. Pathology International © 2013 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pin.12030 
PMID: 23464968  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

