
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 May;41(9):5036-48. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt164. Epub 2013 Mar
19.

Site-selective probing of cTAR destabilization highlights the necessary
plasticity of the HIV-1 nucleocapsid protein to chaperone the first strand
transfer.

Godet J(1), Kenfack C, Przybilla F, Richert L, Duportail G, Mély Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biophotonique et Pharmacologie, Faculté de Pharmacie, UMR 7213 
CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, 67401 Illkirch, France.

The HIV-1 nucleocapsid protein (NCp7) is a nucleic acid chaperone required during
reverse transcription. During the first strand transfer, NCp7 is thought to
destabilize cTAR, the (-)DNA copy of the TAR RNA hairpin, and subsequently direct
the TAR/cTAR annealing through the zipping of their destabilized stem ends. To
further characterize the destabilizing activity of NCp7, we locally probe the
structure and dynamics of cTAR by steady-state and time resolved fluorescence
spectroscopy. NC(11-55), a truncated NCp7 version corresponding to its
zinc-finger domain, was found to bind all over the sequence and to preferentially
destabilize the penultimate double-stranded segment in the lower part of the cTAR
stem. This destabilization is achieved through zinc-finger-dependent binding of
NC to the G(10) and G(50) residues. Sequence comparison further revealed that C•A
mismatches close to the two G residues were critical for fine tuning the
stability of the lower part of the cTAR stem and conferring to G(10) and G(50)
the appropriate mobility and accessibility for specific recognition by NC. Our
data also highlight the necessary plasticity of NCp7 to adapt to the sequence and
structure variability of cTAR to chaperone its annealing with TAR through a
specific pathway.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt164 
PMCID: PMC3643577
PMID: 23511968  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

