
1. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 May 2;12(5):546-58. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.03.001. Epub
2013 Mar 21.

Expansion of functional human mucosal-associated invariant T cells via
reprogramming to pluripotency and redifferentiation.

Wakao H(1), Yoshikiyo K, Koshimizu U, Furukawa T, Enomoto K, Matsunaga T, Tanaka 
T, Yasutomi Y, Yamada T, Minakami H, Tanaka J, Oda A, Sasaki T, Wakao R, Lantz O,
Udagawa T, Sekiya Y, Higuchi K, Harada N, Nishimura K, Ohtaka M, Nakanishi M,
Fujita H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Biology, School of Medicine, Hokkaido University, 
Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. hwakao@med.hokudai.ac.jp

Mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells play an important physiological role 
in host pathogen defense and may also be involved in inflammatory disorders and
multiple sclerosis. The rarity and inefficient expansion of these cells have
hampered detailed analysis and application. Here, we report an induced
pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-based reprogramming approach for the expansion of
functional MAIT cells. We found that human MAIT cells can be reprogrammed into
iPSCs using a Sendai virus harboring standard reprogramming factors. Under
T cell-permissive conditions, these iPSCs efficiently redifferentiate into
MAIT-like lymphocytes expressing the T cell receptor Vα7.2, CD161, and
interleukin-18 receptor chain α. Upon incubation with bacteria-fed monocytes, the
derived MAIT cells show enhanced production of a broad range of cytokines.
Following adoptive transfer into immunocompromised mice, these cells migrate to
the bone marrow, liver, spleen, and intestine and protect against Mycobacterium
abscessus. Our findings pave the way for further functional analysis of MAIT
cells and determination of their therapeutic potential.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.03.001 
PMID: 23523177  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

