
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59025. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059025. Epub 2013 Mar 8.

Recombinant vectors based on porcine adeno-associated viral serotypes transduce
the murine and pig retina.

Puppo A(1), Bello A, Manfredi A, Cesi G, Marrocco E, Della Corte M, Rossi S,
Giunti M, Bacci ML, Simonelli F, Surace EM, Kobinger GP, Auricchio A.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, Italy.

Recombinant adeno-associated viral (AAV) vectors are known to safely and
efficiently transduce the retina. Among the various AAV serotypes available,
AAV2/5 and 2/8 are the most effective for gene transfer to photoreceptors (PR),
which are the most relevant targets for gene therapy of inherited retinal
degenerations. However, the search for novel AAV serotypes with improved PR
transduction is ongoing. In this work we tested vectors derived from five AAV
serotypes isolated from porcine tissues (referred to as porcine AAVs, four of
which are newly identified) for their ability to transduce both the murine and
the cone-enriched pig retina. Porcine AAV vectors expressing EGFP under the
control of the CMV promoter were injected subretinally either in C57BL/6 mice or 
Large White pigs. The resulting retinal tropism was analyzed one month later on
histological sections, while levels of PR transduction were assessed by Western
blot. Our results show that all porcine AAV transduce murine and porcine retinal 
pigment epithelium and PR upon subretinal administration. AAV2/po1 and 2/po5 are 
the most efficient porcine AAVs for murine PR transduction and exhibit the
strongest tropism for pig cone PR. The levels of PR transduction obtained with
AAV2/po1 and 2/po5 are similar, albeit not superior, to those obtained with
AAV2/5 and AAV2/8, which evinces AAV2/po1 and 2/po5 to be promising vectors for
retinal gene therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059025 
PMCID: PMC3592811
PMID: 23520549  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

