
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(4):e1003218. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003218. Epub 2013 Apr
4.

Allosteric modulation of the HIV-1 gp120-gp41 association site by adjacent gp120 
variable region 1 (V1) N-glycans linked to neutralization sensitivity.

Drummer HE(1), Hill MK, Maerz AL, Wood S, Ramsland PA, Mak J, Poumbourios P.

Author information: 
(1)Macfarlane Burnet Institute for Medical Research and Public Health, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia.

The HIV-1 gp120-gp41 complex, which mediates viral fusion and cellular entry,
undergoes rapid evolution within its external glycan shield to enable escape from
neutralizing antibody (NAb). Understanding how conserved protein determinants
retain functionality in the context of such evolution is important for their
evaluation and exploitation as potential drug and/or vaccine targets. In this
study, we examined how the conserved gp120-gp41 association site, formed by the
N- and C-terminal segments of gp120 and the disulfide-bonded region (DSR) of
gp41, adapts to glycan changes that are linked to neutralization sensitivity. To 
this end, a DSR mutant virus (K601D) with defective gp120-association was
sequentially passaged in peripheral blood mononuclear cells to select suppressor 
mutations. We reasoned that the locations of suppressors point to structural
elements that are functionally linked to the gp120-gp41 association site. In
culture 1, gp120 association and viral replication was restored by loss of the
conserved glycan at Asn¹³⁶ in V1 (T138N mutation) in conjunction with the L494I
substitution in C5 within the association site. In culture 2, replication was
restored with deletion of the N¹³⁹INN sequence, which ablates the overlapping
Asn¹⁴¹-Asn¹⁴²-Ser-Ser potential N-linked glycosylation sequons in V1, in
conjunction with D601N in the DSR. The 136 and 142 glycan mutations appeared to
exert their suppressive effects by altering the dependence of gp120-gp41
interactions on the DSR residues, Leu⁵⁹³, Trp⁵⁹⁶ and Lys⁶⁰¹. The 136 and/or 142
glycan mutations increased the sensitivity of HIV-1 pseudovirions to the
glycan-dependent NAbs 2G12 and PG16, and also pooled IgG obtained from
HIV-1-infected individuals. Thus adjacent V1 glycans allosterically modulate the 
distal gp120-gp41 association site. We propose that this represents a mechanism
for functional adaptation of the gp120-gp41 association site to an evolving
glycan shield in a setting of NAb selection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003218 
PMCID: PMC3616969
PMID: 23592978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

