
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2015 Feb;62(1):108-14. doi: 10.1111/tbed.12089. Epub 2013
Apr 17.

Molecular characterization of peste des petits ruminants viruses from outbreaks
caused by unrestricted movements of small ruminants in pakistan.

Munir M(1), Saeed A, Abubakar M, Kanwal S, Berg M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Veterinary Public Health, Swedish
University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.

Peste des petits ruminants (PPR) is an endemic disease of small ruminants, and
vaccination has been the method of control but outbreaks are continuously
occurring in Pakistan. The following study presents a detailed investigation of
an outbreak, suspected to be PPR, probably introduced by PPRV-infected sheep and 
goats from Sindh Province (north-west) to Punjab Province (central) of Pakistan
during the flood relief campaign in 2011. A total of 70 serum samples from 28
different flocks were tested with competitive ELISA (H antibodies), which
detected 24 (34.2%) samples positive for PPRV antibodies. Nasal swabs and faeces 
were tested with immunocapture ELISA (N antigen), which detected 18 (25.7%)
samples positive for PPRV antigen. The RNA detected positive (n = 28, 40%) using 
real-time PCR was subjected to conventional PCR for the amplification of the
fusion and nucleoprotein genes. Sequencing of both genes and subsequent
phylogenetic analysis indicated the grouping of all the sequences to be in
lineage IV along with other Asian isolates of PPRV. However, sequences of both
genes were divided into two groups within lineage IV. One group of viruses
clustered with previously characterized Pakistani isolates, whereas the other
group was distinctly clustered with isolates from the Middle East or India. The
sequence identity indicated the introduction of at least one population of PPRV
from a different source and circulation in the local flocks of small ruminants,
which emphasized the need to obtain health clearance certificate before movement 
of animals. The results of this study provide baseline data for the genetic
characterization of different PPRV populations in Pakistan.

© 2013 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.12089 
PMID: 23590481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

