
1. Am J Epidemiol. 2013 Jun 15;177(12):1443-51. doi: 10.1093/aje/kws402. Epub 2013
Apr 28.

The serial intervals of seasonal and pandemic influenza viruses in households in 
Bangkok, Thailand.

Levy JW(1), Cowling BJ, Simmerman JM, Olsen SJ, Fang VJ, Suntarattiwong P, Jarman
RG, Klick B, Chotipitayasunondh T.

Author information: 
(1)Influenza Program and International Emerging Infections Program, Thailand
Ministry of Public Health–US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Collaboration, Nonthaburi, Thailand. jenslevy@gmail.com

The serial interval (SI) of human influenza virus infections is often described
by a single distribution. Understanding sources of variation in the SI could
provide valuable information for understanding influenza transmission dynamics.
Using data from a randomized household study of nonpharmaceutical interventions
to prevent influenza transmission in Bangkok, Thailand, over 34 months between
2008 and 2011, we estimated the influence of influenza virus type/subtype and
other characteristics of 251 pediatric index cases and their 315 infected
household contacts on estimates of household SI. The mean SI for all households
was 3.3 days. Relative to influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 (3.1 days), the SI for influenza
B (3.7 days) was 22% longer (95% confidence interval: 4, 43), or about half a
day. The SIs for influenza viruses A(H1N1) and A(H3N2) were similar to that for
A(H1N1)pdm09. SIs were shortest for older index cases (age 11-14 years) and for
younger infected household contacts (age ≤15 years). Greater time spent in
proximity to the index child was associated with shorter SIs. Differences in the 
SI might reflect differences in incubation period, viral shedding, contact, or
susceptibility. These findings could improve parameterization of mathematical
models to better predict the impact of epidemic or pandemic influenza mitigation 
strategies.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kws402 
PMCID: PMC3676150
PMID: 23629874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

