
1. Public Health Rep. 2013 May-Jun;128(3):221-30.

Correlation between aerial insecticide spraying to interrupt west nile virus
transmission and emergency department visits in Sacramento County, California.

Geraghty EM(1), Margolis HG, Kjemtrup A, Reisen W, Franks P.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Davis, Division of General Medicine, Sacramento, CA 
95817, USA. estella.geraghty@ucdmc.ucdavis.edu

OBJECTIVES: Insecticides reduce vector-borne pathogen transmission but also pose 
health risks. In August 2005, Sacramento County, California, underwent emergency 
aerial ultralow-volume (ULV) application of pyrethrin insecticide to reduce the
population of West Nile virus (WNV)-infected mosquitoes and thereby interrupt
enzootic and tangential transmission. We assessed the association between
aerially applied pyrethrin insecticide and patterns of emergency department (ED) 
visit diagnoses.
METHODS: We used geographic information systems software to determine ZIP
Code-level exposure to pyrethrin. We used logistic regression models to examine
the relationship between exposure status and three-digit International
Classification of Diseases, Ninth Edition, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM) codes
(785 in total) for all ED visits (n=253,648) within Sacramento County in 2005 and
for specific diagnostic clusters (e.g., respiratory, gastrointestinal, skin, eye,
and neurologic). All models were adjusted for age, gender, race/ethnicity
(individual level), median income, ozone, and temperature (ZIP Code level).
RESULTS: Exposure to aerially applied insecticide was not associated with
clusters of respiratory, gastrointestinal, skin, eye, and neurologic complaints
in adjusted models but was inversely associated with ICD-9-CM code 799 ("other
ill-defined morbidity and mortality"), with adjusted odds ratios (AORs) ranging
from 0.31 to 0.36 for 0-3 lag days (95% confidence interval 0.17, 0.68). Spraying
was also directly associated with ICD-9-CM code 553 ("other abdominal hernia"),
with AORs ranging from 2.34 to 2.96 for 2-3 lag days.
CONCLUSIONS: The observed significant ICD-9-CM code associations likely
represented chance findings. Aerial ULV pyrethrin applications were not
associated with ED visits for specific diagnoses or clusters of diagnoses.

DOI: 10.1177/003335491312800312 
PMCID: PMC3610074
PMID: 23633737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

