
1. Viral Immunol. 2013 Jun;26(3):172-9. doi: 10.1089/vim.2012.0093. Epub 2013 May 2.

Use of transcriptional profiling to delineate the initial response of mice to
intravaginal herpes simplex virus type 2 infection.

Cherpes TL(1), Harvey SA, Phillips JM, Vicetti Miguel RD, Melan MA, Quispe Calla 
NE, Hendricks RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15224, USA. cherpest@pitt.edu

Intravaginal (ivag) infection of mice with herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2)
causes genital tissue damage, quickly followed by development of fatal
encephalopathy. To delineate initial host responses generated by HSV-2 infection,
here oligonucleotide microarrays compared gene expression in vaginal tissue from 
uninfected mice and mice 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7 days after ivag infection with
10(4) pfu HSV-2. While comparison of mRNA expression in uninfected and
HSV-infected vaginal tissue detected few changes during the first 2 days post
infection (dpi), there were 156 genes whose expression was first significantly
altered 3 dpi that remained significantly modified at all later time points
examined. These 156 genes were significantly enriched in canonical pathways
associated with interferon (IFN) signaling, activation of IFN elements by
intracellular pattern recognition receptors, and antiviral immunity induced by
cytosolic RIG-like receptors. Evaluation of this gene set with the National
Center for Biotechnology Information Gene and INTERFEROME databases corroborated 
pathway analysis, as function of most (53%) were linked to IFN-mediated host
immunity. In the final set of experiments, ivag administration of the Toll-like
receptor 3 agonist polyinosinic: polycytidylic acid (poly I:C) 24â€‰h before ivag
HSV-2 infection reduced the incidence of genital pathology and encephalopathy,
while these poly I:C-treated mice were subsequently protected from ocular HSV-2
challenge lethal to uninfected controls. The latter results imply that the
exuberant antiviral immunity produced in our experimental model is simply formed 
too late to prevent viral replication and dissemination, and that poly
I:C-induced formation of an antiviral state protecting against primary ivag
infection also permits development of HSV-specific protective immunity.

DOI: 10.1089/vim.2012.0093 
PMCID: PMC3676663
PMID: 23638732  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

