
1. J Neurosci Res. 2013 Sep;91(9):1174-82. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23240. Epub 2013 May 17.

Anti-hypoxia effect of adenovirus-mediated expression of heat shock protein 70
(HSP70) on primary cultured neurons.

Hu D(1), Chen F, Guan C, Yang F, Qu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intensive Care Unit, Municipal Hospital of Medical College of
Qingdao University, Qingdao, China.

Heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) has attracted great attention recently in hypoxia
injury because of its close link to the recovery after hypoxic-ischemic damage in
organs. However, the cellular mechanism underlying its protective roles remains
unclear. In this study, we developed a recombinant adenovirus containing
HSP70-GFP (vAd-HSP70-GFP) and studied the effect of virus-mediated expression of 
exogenous HSP70 gene on neurons in response to hypoxia-reoxygenation injury.
Virus-mediated expression of HSP70 was detected as early as 24 hr and lasted
until 10 days after infection. Neurons with 48 hr vAd-HSP70-GFP infection were
exposed to 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, or 4 hr hypoxia followed by 1 hr reoxygenation. The
mRNA and protein levels of HSP70 in neurons exposed to different lengths of
hypoxia were compared by using RT-PCR and Western blotting (WB). The 1-hr hypoxia
exposure showed the most significant increases in the HSP70 mRNA and protein
level compared with other exposure durations. MTT assay showed that HSP70
overexpression significantly increased the neuronal viability, accompanied by
decreased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity in the culture medium after
hypoxia-reoxygenation. Neurons with vAd-HSP70-GFP exhibited increased levels of
mitochondrial cytochrome C (Cyt-C) and decreased levels of cytoplasmic Cyt-C
compared with vAd-GFP-infected cells. These results suggest a neuroprotective
role of exogenous HSP70 against hypoxia-reoxygenation injury, possibly via
preventing initiation of mitochondrial apoptosis.

Copyright Â© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.23240 
PMID: 23686726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

