
1. J Biotechnol. 2013 Jul 20;166(4):152-65. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2013.05.001. Epub
2013 May 17.

Generation of HIV-1 Gag VLPs by transient transfection of HEK 293 suspension cell
cultures using an optimized animal-derived component free medium.

Cervera L(1), Gutiérrez-Granados S, Martínez M, Blanco J, Gòdia F, Segura MM.

Author information: 
(1)Departament d'Enginyeria Química, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Campus
Bellaterra, Cerdanyola del Vallès 08193, Barcelona, Spain.

Virus-like particles (VLPs) offer great promise as candidates for new vaccine
strategies. Large-scale approaches for the manufacturing of HIV-1 Gag VLPs have
mainly focused on the use of the baculovirus expression system. In this work, the
development and optimization of an HIV-1 Gag VLP production protocol by transient
gene expression in mammalian cell suspension cultures is reported. To facilitate 
process optimization, a Gag-GFP fusion construct enabling the generation of
fluorescent VLPs was used. The great majority of Gag-GFP present in cell culture 
supernatants was shown to be correctly assembled into virus-like particles of the
expected size and morphology consistent with immature HIV-1 particles. Medium
optimization was performed using design of experiments (DoE). Culture medium
supplementation with non-animal derived components including recombinant proteins
and lipids of synthetic or non-animal-derived origin resulted in improved HEK 293
cell growth and VLP production. The maximum cell density attained using the
optimized Freestyle culture medium was 5.4×10(6)cells/mL in batch mode, almost
double of that observed using the unsupplemented medium (2.9×10(6)cells/mL). Best
production performance was attained when cells were transfected at mid-log phase 
(2-3×10(6)cells/mL) with medium exchange at the time of transfection using
standard amounts of plasmid DNA and polyethylenimine. By using an optimized
production protocol, VLP titers were increased 2.4-fold obtaining 2.8μg of
Gag-GFP/mL or 2.7×10(9)VLPs/mL according to ELISA and nanoparticle tracking
quantification analyses, respectively.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2013.05.001 
PMID: 23688724  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

