
1. J Biomol Screen. 2013 Oct;18(9):1027-34. doi: 10.1177/1087057113489883. Epub 2013
May 24.

A fluorescence-based high-throughput screen to identify small compound inhibitors
of the genotype 3a hepatitis C virus RNA polymerase.

Eltahla AA(1), Lackovic K, Marquis C, Eden JS, White PA.

Author information: 
(1)1School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, Faculty of Science,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) plays an
essential role in the replication of HCV and is a key target for novel antiviral 
therapies. Several RdRp inhibitors are in clinical trials and have increased
response rates when combined with current interferon-based therapies for genotype
1 (G1) HCV patients. These inhibitors, however, show poor efficacy against non-G1
genotypes, including G3a, which represents ~20% of HCV cases globally. Here, we
used a commercially available fluorescent dye to characterize G3a HCV RdRp in
vitro. RdRp activity was assessed via synthesis of double-stranded RNA from the
single-stranded RNA poly(C) template. The assay was miniaturized to a 384-well
microplate format and a pilot high-throughput screen was conducted using 10,208
"lead-like" compounds, randomly selected to identify inhibitors of HCV G3a RdRp. 
Of 150 compounds demonstrating greatest inhibition, 10 were confirmed using both 
fluorescent and radioactive assays. The top two inhibitors (HAC001 and HAC002)
demonstrated specific activity, with an IC(50) of 12.7 µM and 1.0 µM,
respectively. In conclusion, we describe simple, fluorescent-based
high-throughput screening (HTS) for the identification of inhibitors of de novo
RdRp activity, using HCV G3a RdRp as the target. The HTS system could be used
against any positive-sense RNA virus that cannot be cultured.

DOI: 10.1177/1087057113489883 
PMID: 23708123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

