
1. Mol Reprod Dev. 1990 Jun;26(2):122-8.

Characterization of the antiviral activity constitutively produced by murine
conceptuses: absence of placental mRNAs for interferon alpha and beta.

Cross JC(1), Farin CE, Sharif SF, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri-Columbia 65211.

Antiviral activity has been found in conceptus and placental tissues in numerous 
species, including mice, pigs, sheep, cattle and humans. In sheep and cattle, the
antiviral activity is due to an interferon alpha (IFN-alpha), but in other
species the nature of the protein(s) responsible for placental activity is
unknown. The objectives of this study were to determine if the constitutive
antiviral activity associated with the mouse conceptus is produced as early as
the peri-implantation period, and to determine if the activity is due to an
IFN-alpha or -beta. Conceptus and placental tissue explants released antiviral
activity from Day 4 through at least Day 16 of gestation as measured in an agar
overlay bioassay employing CHO cells challenged with vesicular stomatitis virus. 
This activity was neutralized by antiserum against MuIFN-alpha/beta. The same
antiserum failed, however, to immunoprecipitate radiolabeled proteins from medium
collected from Day 4 blastocysts cultured in the presence of L-[35S]-methionine. 
S1 nuclease analysis of placental RNA and screening of ectoplacental cone and
extraembryonic ectoderm cDNA libraries with MuIFN-alpha and -beta probes failed
to detect IFN related mRNAs, even under relatively non-stringent conditions of
hybridization. Thus, while antiviral activity is produced by peri-implantation
conceptuses in several diverse mammalian species, it does not appear to be due to
a conserved type of IFN in all these species.

DOI: 10.1002/mrd.1080260205 
PMID: 2372395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

