
1. Neurobiol Dis. 2013 Oct;58:144-55. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.05.018. Epub 2013 Jun 
5.

Modulation of neural stem/progenitor cell proliferation during experimental
Herpes Simplex encephalitis is mediated by differential FGF-2 expression in the
adult brain.

Rotschafer JH(1), Hu S, Little M, Erickson M, Low WC, Cheeran MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Population Medicine, University of Minnesota, St.
Paul, MN 55108, USA.

Neural stem cells (NSCs) respond to inflammatory cues induced during brain injury
and are thought to be involved in recovery from brain damage. Little is known
about NSC response during brain infections. The present study evaluated NSC
proliferation during Herpes Simplex Virus-1 brain infection. Total numbers of
nestin(+) NSCs increased significantly in infected brains at 6 days post
infection (p.i.). However, by 15 days p.i. the nestin(+) population decreased
significantly below levels observed in uninfected brains and remained depressed
through 30 days p.i. This initial increase in NSC population occurred
concurrently with increased brain cell proliferation, which peaked at 3 days p.i.
On closer examination, we found that while actively proliferating Sox2(+) NSCs
increased in number at 6 days p.i., proliferating DCX(+) neuroblasts contributed 
to the increased response at 3 days p.i. However, overall proliferation decreased
steadily from 15 days p.i. to below control levels. To determine the mechanisms
involved in altering NSC proliferation, neurotrophin and growth factor expression
profiles were assessed. FGF-2 gene expression increased at 5 days p.i. and was
robustly down-regulated at 15 days p.i. (>1000-fold), which was further confirmed
by increased FGF-2 immunostaining around the lateral ventricles. Furthermore,
supplementing infected animals with recombinant FGF-2, at 15 days p.i.,
significantly increased the number of proliferating brain cells. These findings
demonstrate that the temporal changes in NSC proliferation are mediated through
the regulation of FGF-2 and that the NSC niche may benefit from supplementation
with FGF-2 during HSV-1 brain infection.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.05.018 
PMCID: PMC3748217
PMID: 23748078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

