
1. J Infect Public Health. 2013 Aug;6(4):307-15. doi: 10.1016/j.jiph.2013.02.003.
Epub 2013 Apr 22.

Non-adherence to antiretroviral therapy in Yaounde: prevalence, determinants and 
the concordance of two screening criteria.

Pefura-Yone EW(1), Soh E, Kengne AP, Balkissou AD, Kuaban C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Subspecialties, Faculty of Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, University of Yaounde I, Cameroon. pefura2002@yahoo.fr

PURPOSE: To assess the prevalence and determinants of non-adherence to
antiretroviral therapy (ART) as well as the concordance of two screening criteria
in a major center for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) treatment in Yaounde,
Cameroon.
METHODS: In 2011, we conducted a cross-sectional study involving a random sample 
of 889 adults (age > 18 years, 67.9% women) infected with HIV who were receiving 
chronic care at the Yaounde Jamot Hospital. Adherence was assessed via
self-administered questionnaires using the Community Programs for Clinical
Research on AIDS (CPCRA) index and the Center for Adherence Support Evaluation
(CASE) index.
RESULTS: The prevalence of non-adherence to ART was 22.5% based on the CPCRA
index and 34.9% based on the CASE index, with a low agreement between the two
indexes [kappa = 0.37 (95% confidence interval 0.31-0.44)]. Independent
determinants of CPCRA-diagnosed non-adherence were as follows: being a
remunerated employee [odds ratio (95% confidence interval): 1.61 (1.14-2.28)],
Pentecostal Christianity [2.18 (1.25-3.80)], alcohol consumption [1.65
(1.16-2.34)] and non-adherence to cotrimoxazole prophylaxis [5.73 (3.92-8.38)].
The equivalents for CASE-diagnosed non-adherence were [1.59 (1.19-2.12)], [1.83
(1.36-2.47)], [1.70 (1.27-2.28)], respectively, in addition to association with
changes to the ART regimen [1.61 (1.17-2.20)].
CONCLUSIONS: Non-adherence to ART remains high in this population. The careful
evaluation of patients for the presence of determinants of non-adherence
identified in this study may aid ART optimization.

Copyright Â© 2013 King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiph.2013.02.003 
PMID: 23806707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

