
1. J Virol. 2013 Sep;87(18):10190-4. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01467-13. Epub 2013 Jul 17.

The template specificity of bacteriophage Phi6 RNA polymerase.

Qiao J(1), Mindich L.

Author information: 
(1)The Public Health Research Institute, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, 
Newark, New Jersey, USA.

Bacteriophage Φ6 contains three double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) genomic segments, L, 
M, and S. The RNA is located inside a core particle composed of multiple copies
of a major structural protein, an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, a hexameric
NTPase, and an auxiliary protein. The virion RNA polymerase in the core particle 
transcribes segments M and S in vitro. Segment L is transcribed poorly because
its transcript starts with GU instead of GG found on segments S and M.
Transcription in vivo is modified by the binding of host protein YajQ to the
outside the core particle so that segment L is transcribed well. This mechanism
is the determinant of the temporal control of gene expression in Φ6. Mutants of
Φ6 have been isolated that are independent of YajQ for transcription of segment
L. The mutations are found in the gene of the viral polymerase or the major
capsid protein or both. These mutants are capable of transcribing segment L with 
the GU start or GA or GC. The same is found to be true when YajQ is added to
wild-type particles. Minus-strand synthesis has restrictions that are different
from that of plus-strand synthesis, and YajQ or mutations to independence do not 
modify minus-strand synthesis behavior. Purified polymerase P2 is able to
transcribe dsRNA, but transcription behavior of segment L by both wild-type and
mutant polymerases is different from that seen in capsid structures. Adding YajQ 
to purified polymerase does not change its transcription specificity.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01467-13 
PMCID: PMC3754000
PMID: 23864621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

