
1. J Virol Methods. 2013 Nov;193(2):492-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2013.07.027. Epub
2013 Jul 25.

Performance evaluation of ExiStation HBV diagnostic system for hepatitis B virus 
DNA quantitation.

Cha YJ(1), Yoo SJ, Sohn YH, Kim HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Chung-Ang University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

The performance of a recently developed real-time PCR system, the ExiStation HBV 
diagnostic system, for quantitation of hepatitis B virus (HBV) in human blood was
evaluated. The detection limit, reproducibility, cross-reactivity, and
interference were evaluated as measures of analytical performance. For the
comparison study, 100 HBV-positive blood samples and 100 HBV-negative samples
from Korean Blood Bank Serum were used, and the results of the ExiStation HBV
system showed good correlation with those obtained using the Cobas TaqMan
(r2=0.9931) and Abbott real-time PCR systems (r2=0.9894). The lower limit of
detection was measured as 9.55 IU/mL using WHO standards and the dynamic range
was linear from 6.68 to 6.68×10(9) IU/mL using cloned plasmids. The within-run
coefficient of variation (CV) was 9.4%, 2.1%, and 1.1%, and the total CV was
11.8%, 3.6%, and 1.7% at a concentration of 1.92 log10 IU/mL, 3.88 log10 IU/mL,
and 6.84 log10 IU/mL, respectively. No cross-reactivity or interference was
detected. The ExiStation HBV diagnostic system showed satisfactory analytical
sensitivity, excellent reproducibility, no cross-reactivity, no interference, and
high agreement with the Cobas TaqMan and Abbott real-time PCR systems, and is
therefore a useful tool for the detection and monitoring of HBV infection.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2013.07.027 
PMCID: PMC7119692
PMID: 23892129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

