
1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Apr 9;93(14):1058-62.

[Construction of keratinocyte growth factor phage active peptides for the
promotion of epidermal cell proliferation].

[Article in Chinese]

Zong XL(1), Jiang DY, Li GJ, Cai JL.

Author information: 
(1)Sixteenth Department of Cosmetic Plastic Surgery, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To construct and display the keratinocyte growth factor (KGF) phage
active peptides so as to detect the promoting effects of epidermal cell.
METHODS: KGF sequences were chosen and their primers were designed. The selected 
genes of P1, P2 and P4 were obtained by reverse transcription (RT)-PCR. P3 was
obtained by direct synthesis. And the KGF genes were subcloned into pComb3
vector. The technique of phage display was employed to display the genes on phage
surface. Methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTT) assay was used to evaluate the
promoting effects of KGF phage active peptides on the proliferation of epidermal 
cell. Optical density (A) was determined at 570 nm. Immunofluorescent assay was
employed to evaluate the cell affinity of KGF phage active peptides.
RESULTS: The four KGF genes were obtained and subcloned into pComb3 vector. The
proteins of the KGF genes were expressed on the surface of the pComb3 vector. The
MTT data of optical density (A) showed that significant differences existed
between the negative control and KGF control (0.293 ± 0.017 vs 0.520 ± 0.043) and
KGF phage active peptide groups (0.293 ± 0.017 vs 0.469 ± 0.057, 0.441 ± 0.048,
0.438 ± 0.035, 0.446 ± 0.037) (all P < 0.01). The results of immunofluorescent
assay indicated that KGF and KGF phage active peptides had excellent cell
affinity.
CONCLUSION: KGF phage active peptides are successfully constructed and displayed 
and they may promote the proliferation of epidermal cell.


PMID: 23902836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

