
1. Vet Microbiol. 2013 Oct 25;166(3-4):450-60. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2013.06.029.
Epub 2013 Jul 9.

Probability of detecting influenza A virus subtypes H1N1 and H3N2 in individual
pig nasal swabs and pen-based oral fluid specimens over time.

Goodell CK(1), Prickett J, Kittawornrat A, Zhou F, Rauh R, Nelson W, O'Connell C,
Burrell A, Wang C, Yoon KJ, Zimmerman JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Diagnostic and Production Animal Medicine, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50010, USA.
christa-goodell@idexx.com

The probability of detecting influenza A virus (IAV) by virus isolation (VI),
point-of-care (POC) antigen detection, and real-time reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) was estimated for pen-based oral fluid (OF)
and individual pig nasal swab (NS) specimens. Piglets (n=82) were isolated for 30
days and confirmed negative for porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome
virus, Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae, and IAV infections. A subset (n=28) was
vaccinated on day post inoculation (DPI) -42 and -21 with a commercial
multivalent vaccine. On DPI 0, pigs were intratracheally inoculated with
contemporary isolates of H1N1 (n=35) or H3N2 (n=35) or served as negative
controls (n=12). OF (n=370) was collected DPI 0-16 and NS (n=924) DPI 0-6, 8, 10,
12, 14, 16. The association between IAV detection and variables of interest
(specimen, virus subtype, assay, vaccination status, and DPI) was analyzed by
mixed-effect repeated measures logistic regression and the results used to
calculate the probability (pˆ) of detecting IAV in OF and NS over DPI by assay.
Vaccination (p-value<0.0001), DPI (p-value<0.0001), and specimen-assay
interaction (p-value<0.0001) were significant to IAV detection, but virus subtype
was not (p-value=0.89). Vaccination and/or increasing DPI reduced pˆ for all
assays. VI was more successful using NS than OF, but both VI and POC were
generally unsuccessful after DPI 6. Overall, rRT-PCR on OF specimens provided the
highest pˆ for the most DPIs, yet significantly different results were observed
between the two laboratories independently performing rRT-PCR testing.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2013.06.029 
PMID: 23910522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

