
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2013 Dec;41(4):766-71. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2013.07.018. Epub
2013 Aug 2.

Molecular characterization, expression patterns, and subcellular localization of 
RIG-I in the Jinding duck (Anas platyrhynchos domesticus).

Chen Y(1), Zhang Y, Huang Z, Xu Q, Zhu Z, Tong Y, Yu Q, Ding J, Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou,
225009 Jiangsu, PR China.

Retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs) have recently been
identified as cytoplasmic sensors for RNA virus. Recent research has shown that
RIG-I, a member of this family, play an important role in innate immunity. In
this study, we cloned the RIG-I gene from Jinding duck by reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE).
We determined that the cDNA of duRIG-I contains a 14-bp 5' UTR, a 2802-bp open
reading frame, and alternative 3' UTRs (295-bp and 927-bp) and encodes a
polypeptide of 933 amino acids. Based on this sequence, the duRIG-I protein is
predicted to have conserved domains typical of RLRs. In addition, duRIG-I was
found to be distributed throughout DF1 cells by indirect immunofluorescence, as
predicted. duRIG-I mRNA was scarcely detected in healthy tissues by
semi-quantitative RT-PCR (sqRT-PCR). To study the role of RIG-I in innate
immunity, we used synthetic double-stranded RNA to mimic viral infection in vivo 
and detected duRIG-I transcripts in spleen and liver by quantitative real-time
PCR (qRT-PCR). The expression of duRIG-I mRNA was significantly elevated at 8h
post-injection (P < 0.05) and was indistinguishable from control levels at other 
time points (P > 0.05). These results suggest that duRIG-I plays an important
role in innate immune responses to double-stranded RNA viruses and warrant
further studies to reveal the possible mechanism.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2013.07.018 
PMID: 23916689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

