
1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 12;8(8):e64345. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064345. eCollection
2013.

Low primary and secondary HIV drug-resistance after 12 months of antiretroviral
therapy in human immune-deficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)-infected individuals from
Kigali, Rwanda.

Rusine J(1), Asiimwe-Kateera B, van de Wijgert J, Boer KR, Mukantwali E, Karita
E, Gasengayire A, Jurriaans S, de Jong M, Ondoa P.

Author information: 
(1)Amsterdam Institute for Global Health and Development (AIGHD), Department of
Global Health, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Treatment outcomes of HIV patients receiving antiretroviral therapy (ART) in
Rwanda are scarcely documented. HIV viral load (VL) and HIV drug-resistance
(HIVDR) outcomes at month 12 were determined in a prospective cohort study of
antiretroviral-naïve HIV patients initiating first-line therapy in Kigali.
Treatment response was monitored clinically and by regular CD4 counts and
targeted HIV viral load (VL) to confirm drug failure. VL measurements and HIVDR
genotyping were performed retrospectively on baseline and month 12 samples. One
hundred and fifty-eight participants who completed their month 12 follow-up visit
had VL data available at month 12. Most of them (88%) were virologically
suppressed (VL≤1000 copies/mL) but 18 had virological failure (11%), which is in 
the range of WHO-suggested targets for HIVDR prevention. If only CD4 criteria had
been used to classify treatment response, 26% of the participants would have been
misclassified as treatment failure. Pre-therapy HIVDR was documented in 4 of 109 
participants (3.6%) with an HIVDR genotyping results at baseline. Eight of 12
participants (66.7%) with virological failure and HIVDR genotyping results at
month 12 were found to harbor mutation(s), mostly NNRTI resistance mutations,
whereas 4 patients had no HIVDR mutations. Almost half (44%) of the participants 
initiated ART at CD4 count ≤200 cell/µl and severe CD4 depletion at baseline (<50
cells/µl) was associated with virological treatment failure (p = 0.008). Although
the findings may not be generalizable to all HIV patients in Rwanda, our data
suggest that first-line ART regimen changes are currently not warranted. However,
the accumulation of acquired HIVDR mutations in some participants underscores the
need to reinforce HIVDR prevention strategies, such as increasing the
availability and appropriate use of VL testing to monitor ART response, ensuring 
high quality adherence counseling, and promoting earlier identification of HIV
patients and enrollment into HIV care and treatment programs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064345 
PMCID: PMC3741294
PMID: 23950859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

