
1. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2014 Feb;83(2):154-66. doi: 10.1111/cbdd.12207. Epub 2013 Oct
4.

Discovery of HIV-1 integrase inhibitors: pharmacophore mapping, virtual
screening, molecular docking, synthesis, and biological evaluation.

Bhatt H(1), Patel P, Pannecouque C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Institute of Pharmacy, Nirma
University, Ahmedabad, 382 481, India.

HIV-1 integrase enzyme plays an important role in the life cycle of HIV and
responsible for integration of virus into human genome. Here, both computational 
and synthetic approaches were used to design and synthesize newer HIV-1 integrase
inhibitors. Pharmacophore mapping was performed on 20 chemically diverse
molecules using DISCOtech, and refinement was carried out using GASP. Ten
pharmacophore models were generated, and model 2, containing four features
including two donor sites, one acceptor atom, and one hydrophobic region, was
considered the best model as it has the highest fitness score. It was used as a
query in NCI and Maybridge databases. Molecules having more than 99% Q(fit) value
were used to design 30 molecules bearing pteridine ring and were docked on
co-crystal structure of HIV-1 integrase enzyme. Among these, six molecules,
showing good docking score compared with the reference standards, were
synthesized by conventional as well as microwave-assisted methods. All compounds 
were characterized by physical and spectral data and evaluated for in vitro
anti-HIV activity against the replication of HIV-1 (IIIB) in MT-4 cells. The used
approach of molecular docking and anti-HIV activity data of designed molecules
will provide significant insights to discover novel HIV-1 Integrase Inhibitors.

Â© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/cbdd.12207 
PMID: 23957390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

