
1. Vaccine. 2013 Oct 1;31(42):4860-6. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.07.068. Epub 2013 
Aug 14.

Associations between health communication behaviors, neighborhood social capital,
vaccine knowledge, and parents' H1N1 vaccination of their children.

Jung M(1), Lin L, Viswanath K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Community-Based Research, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA; Department of Health Science, Dongduk Women's University, Seoul, South
Korea. Electronic address: minsoo_jung@dfci.harvard.edu.

During the H1N1 pandemic in 2009-10, the vaccination behavior of parents played a
critical role in preventing and containing the spread of the disease and the
subsequent health outcomes among children. Several studies have examined the
relationship between parents' health communication behaviors and vaccinations for
children in general. Little is known, however, about the link between parents'
health communication behaviors and the vaccination of their children against the 
H1N1 virus, and their level of vaccine-related knowledge. We drew on a national
survey among parents with at least one child less than 18 years of age (n=639) to
investigate Parents' H1N1-related health communication behaviors including
sources of information, media exposure, information-seeking behaviors,
H1N1-related knowledge, and neighborhood social capital, as well as the H1N1
vaccination rates of their children. Findings showed that there is a significant 
association between the degree at which parents obtained H1N1 vaccination for
their children and health communication variables: watching the national
television news and actively seeking H1N1 information. And this association was
moderated by the extent of the parents' H1N1-related knowledge. In addition, the 
parents' degree of neighborhood social capital mediated the association between
H1N1 knowledge of the parents and H1N1 vaccination acceptance for their children.
We found, compared to those with a low-level of neighborhood social capital,
parents who have a high-level of neighborhood social capital are more likely to
vaccinate their children. These findings suggest that it is necessary to design a
strategic health communication campaign segmented by parent health communication 
behaviors.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.07.068 
PMID: 23954379  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

