
1. Protein Sci. 2013 Nov;22(11):1502-18. doi: 10.1002/pro.2336. Epub 2013 Sep 20.

Protein domain definition should allow for conditional disorder.

Yegambaram K(1), Bulloch EM, Kingston RL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019,
Auckland, 1142, New Zealand.

Proteins are often classified in a binary fashion as either structured or
disordered. However this approach has several deficits. Firstly, protein folding 
is always conditional on the physiochemical environment. A protein which is
structured in some circumstances will be disordered in others. Secondly, it hides
a fundamental asymmetry in behavior. While all structured proteins can be
unfolded through a change in environment, not all disordered proteins have the
capacity for folding. Failure to accommodate these complexities confuses the
definition of both protein structural domains and intrinsically disordered
regions. We illustrate these points with an experimental study of a family of
small binding domains, drawn from the RNA polymerase of mumps virus and its
closest relatives. Assessed at face value the domains fall on a structural
continuum, with folded, partially folded, and near unstructured members. Yet the 
disorder present in the family is conditional, and these closely related
polypeptides can access the same folded state under appropriate conditions. Any
heuristic definition of the protein domain emphasizing conformational stability
divides this domain family in two, in a way that makes no biological sense.
Structural domains would be better defined by their ability to adopt a specific
tertiary structure: a structure that may or may not be realized, dependent on the
circumstances. This explicitly allows for the conditional nature of protein
folding, and more clearly demarcates structural domains from intrinsically
disordered regions that may function without folding.

Â© 2013 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.2336 
PMCID: PMC3831666
PMID: 23963781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

