
1. Cancer Sci. 2013 Nov;104(11):1483-91. doi: 10.1111/cas.12266. Epub 2013 Sep 19.

Molecular mechanism underlying the antiproliferative effect of suppressor of
cytokine signaling-1 in non-small-cell lung cancer cells.

Shimada K(1), Serada S, Fujimoto M, Nomura S, Nakatsuka R, Harada E, Iwahori K,
Tachibana I, Takahashi T, Kumanogoh A, Kishimoto T, Naka T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Immune Signal, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation,
Osaka, Japan; Department of Respiratory Medicine, Allergy and Rheumatic Diseases,
Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.

Lung cancer (LC) is the major cause of death by cancer and the number of LC
patients is increasing worldwide. This study investigated the therapeutic
potential of gene delivery using suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS-1), an 
endogenous inhibitor of intracellular signaling pathways, for the treatment of
LC. To examine the antitumor effect of SOCS-1 overexpression on non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) cells, NSCLC cells (A549, LU65, and PC9) were infected with
adenovirus-expressing SOCS-1 vector. The cell proliferation assay showed that
A549 and LU65, but not PC9, were sensitive to SOCS-1 gene-mediated suppression of
cell growth. Although JAK inhibitor I could also inhibit proliferation of A549
and LU65 cells, SOCS-1 gene delivery appeared to be more potent as SOCS-1 could
suppress focal adhesion kinase and epidermal growth factor receptor, as well as
the JAK/STAT3 signaling pathway. Enhanced phosphorylation of the p53 protein was 
detected by means of phospho-kinase array in SOCS-1 overexpressed A549 cells
compared with control cells, whereas no phosphorylation of p53 was observed when 
JAK inhibitor I was used. Furthermore, treatment with adenoviral vector AdSOCS-1 
in vivo significantly suppressed NSCLC proliferation in a xenograft model. These 
results suggest that the overexpression of SOCS-1 gene is effective for antitumor
therapy by suppressing the JAK/STAT, focal adhesion kinase, and epidermal growth 
factor receptor signaling pathways and enhancing p53-mediated antitumor activity 
in NSCLC.

Â© 2013 Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.12266 
PMID: 23962256  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

