
1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 23;8(8):e72174. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072174. eCollection
2013.

Comparative evaluation of six commercialized multiplex PCR kits for the diagnosis
of respiratory infections.

Pillet S(1), Lardeux M, Dina J, Grattard F, Verhoeven P, Le Goff J, Vabret A,
Pozzetto B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bacteriology and Virology, University Hospital of Saint-Etienne,
Saint-Etienne, France.

The molecular diagnosis of respiratory infection can be performed using different
commercial multiplex-based PCR kits whose performances have been previously
compared individually to those of conventional techniques. This study compared
the practicability and the diagnostic performances of six CE-marked kits
available in 2011 on the French market, including 2 detecting viruses and
atypical bacteria (from Pathofinder and Seegene companies) and 4 detecting only
viruses (from Abbott, Genomica, Qiagen and Seegene companies). The respective
sensitivity, specificity, accuracy and agreement of each multiplex technique were
calculated by comparison to commercial duplex PCR tests (Argene/bioMérieux) used 
as gold standard. Eighty-eight respiratory specimens with no pathogen (n = 11),
single infections (n = 33) or co-infections (n = 44) were selected to cover 9
viruses or groups of viruses and 3 atypical bacteria. All samples were extracted 
using the NUCLISENS® easyMAG™ instrument (bioMérieux). The overall sensitivity
ranged from 56.25% to 91.67% for viruses and was below 50% with both tests for
bacteria. The overall specificity was excellent (>94% for all pathogens). For
each tested kit, the overall agreement with the reference test was strong for
viruses (kappa test >0.60) and moderate for bacteria. After the extraction step, 
the hands-on time varied from 50 min to 2h30 and the complete results were
available in 2h30 to 9 h. The spectrum of tested agents and the technology used
to reveal the PCR products as well as the laboratory organization are determinant
for the selection of a kit.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072174 
PMCID: PMC3751960
PMID: 24058410  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

