
1. J Virol. 2013 Dec;87(23):12885-99. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02264-13. Epub 2013 Sep 25.

Viroplasm protein P9-1 of Rice black-streaked dwarf virus preferentially binds to
single-stranded RNA in its octamer form, and the central interior structure
formed by this octamer constitutes the major RNA binding site.

Wu J(1), Li J, Mao X, Wang W, Cheng Z, Zhou Y, Zhou X, Tao X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Integrated Management of Crop Diseases and Pests (Ministry
of Education), Department of Plant Pathology, Nanjing Agricultural University,
Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

The P9-1 protein of Rice black-streaked dwarf virus (RBSDV) is an essential part 
of the viroplasm. However, little is known about its nature or biological
function in the viroplasm. In this study, the structure and function of P9-1 were
analyzed for in vitro binding to nucleic acids. We found that the P9-1 protein
preferentially bound to single-stranded versus double-stranded nucleic acids;
however, the protein displayed no preference for RBSDV versus non-RBSDV
single-stranded ssRNA (ssRNA). A gel mobility shift assay revealed that the RNA
gradually shifted as increasing amounts of P9-1 were added, suggesting that
multiple subunits of P9-1 bind to ssRNA. By using discontinuous blue native gel
and chromatography analysis, we found that the P9-1 protein was capable of
forming dimers, tetramers, and octamers. Strikingly, we demonstrated that P9-1
preferentially bound to ssRNA in the octamer, rather than the dimer, form.
Deletion of the C-terminal arm resulted in P9-1 no longer forming octamers;
consequently, the deletion mutant protein bound to ssRNA with significantly lower
affinity and with fewer copies bound per ssRNA. Alanine substitution analysis
revealed that electropositive amino acids among residues 25 to 44 are important
for RNA binding and map to the central interior structure that was formed only by
P9-1 octamers. Collectively, our findings provide novel insights into the
structure and function of RBSDV viroplasm protein P9-1 binding to RNA.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02264-13 
PMCID: PMC3838130
PMID: 24067964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

