
1. J Control Release. 2013 Dec 28;172(3):962-74. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.09.015.
Epub 2013 Sep 25.

Progress in microRNA delivery.

Zhang Y(1), Wang Z, Gemeinhart RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 
60612-7231, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are non-coding endogenous RNAs that direct
post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression by several mechanisms.
Activity is primarily through binding to the 3' untranslated regions (UTRs) of
messenger RNAs (mRNA) resulting in degradation and translation repression. Unlike
other small-RNAs, miRNAs do not require perfect base pairing, and thus, can
regulate a network of broad, yet specific, genes. Although we have only just
begun to gain insights into the full range of biologic functions of miRNA, their 
involvement in the onset and progression of disease has generated significant
interest for therapeutic development. Mounting evidence suggests that miRNA-based
therapies, either restoring or repressing miRNAs expression and activity, hold
great promise. However, despite the early promise and exciting potential,
critical hurdles often involving delivery of miRNA-targeting agents remain to be 
overcome before transition to clinical applications. Limitations that may be
overcome by delivery include, but are not limited to, poor in vivo stability,
inappropriate biodistribution, disruption and saturation of endogenous RNA
machinery, and untoward side effects. Both viral vectors and nonviral delivery
systems can be developed to circumvent these challenges. Viral vectors are
efficient delivery agents but toxicity and immunogenicity limit their clinical
usage. Herein, we review the recent advances in the mechanisms and strategies of 
nonviral miRNA delivery systems and provide a perspective on the future of
miRNA-based therapeutics.

Â© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.09.015 
PMCID: PMC3891846
PMID: 24075926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

