
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Dec;57(12):6223-35. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01835-13. 
Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Biochemical analysis of the role of G118R-linked dolutegravir drug resistance
substitutions in HIV-1 integrase.

Quashie PK(1), Mespl√®de T, Han YS, Veres T, Osman N, Hassounah S, Sloan RD, Xu
HT, Wainberg MA.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University AIDS Centre, Lady Davis for Medical Research, Jewish General
Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Erratum in
    Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014 Jan;58(1):633.

Drug resistance mutations (DRMs) have been reported for all currently approved
anti-HIV drugs, including the latest integrase strand transfer inhibitors
(INSTIs). We previously used the new INSTI dolutegravir (DTG) to select a G118R
integrase resistance substitution in tissue culture and also showed that
secondary substitutions emerged at positions H51Y and E138K. Now, we have
characterized the impact of the G118R substitution, alone or in combination with 
either H51Y or E138K, on 3' processing and integrase strand transfer activity.
The results show that G118R primarily impacted the strand transfer step of
integration by diminishing the ability of integrase-long terminal repeat (LTR)
complexes to bind target DNA. The addition of H51Y and E138K to G118R partially
restored strand transfer activity by modulating the formation of integrase-LTR
complexes through increasing LTR DNA affinity and total DNA binding,
respectively. This unique mechanism, in which one function of HIV integrase
partially compensates for the defect in another function, has not been previously
reported. The G118R substitution resulted in low-level resistance to DTG,
raltegravir (RAL), and elvitegravir (EVG). The addition of either of H51Y or
E138K to G118R did not enhance resistance to DTG, RAL, or EVG. Homology modeling 
provided insight into the mechanism of resistance conferred by G118R as well as
the effects of H51Y or E138K on enzyme activity. The G118R substitution therefore
represents a potential avenue for resistance to DTG, similar to that previously
described for the R263K substitution. For both pathways, secondary substitutions 
can lead to either diminished integrase activity and/or increased INSTI
susceptibility.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01835-13 
PMCID: PMC3837891
PMID: 24080645  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

