
1. J Virol. 2013 Dec;87(24):13354-69. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02465-13. Epub 2013 Oct 2.

Evasion of superinfection exclusion and elimination of primary viral RNA by an
adapted strain of hepatitis C virus.

Webster B(1), Ott M, Greene WC.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology.

Cells that are productively infected by hepatitis C virus (HCV) are refractory to
a second infection by HCV via a block in viral replication known as
superinfection exclusion. The block occurs at a postentry step and likely
involves translation or replication of the secondary viral RNA, but the mechanism
is largely unknown. To characterize HCV superinfection exclusion, we selected for
an HCV variant that could overcome the block. We produced a high-titer HC-J6/JFH1
(Jc1) viral genome with a fluorescent reporter inserted between NS5A and NS5B and
used it to infect Huh7.5 cells containing a Jc1 replicon. With multiple passages 
of these infected cells, we isolated an HCV variant that can superinfect cells at
high levels. Notably, the superinfectious virus rapidly cleared the primary
replicon from superinfected cells. Viral competition experiments, using a novel
strategy of sequence-barcoding viral strains, as well as superinfection of
replicon cells demonstrated that mutations in E1, p7, NS5A, and the poly(U/UC)
tract of the 3' untranslated region were important for superinfection.
Furthermore, these mutations dramatically increased the infectivity of the virus 
in naive cells. Interestingly, viruses with a shorter poly(U/UC) and an NS5A
domain II mutation were most effective in overcoming the postentry block. Neither
of these changes affected viral RNA translation, indicating that the major
barrier to postentry exclusion occurs at viral RNA replication. The evolution of 
the ability to superinfect after less than a month in culture and the concomitant
exclusion of the primary replicon suggest that superinfection exclusion
dramatically affects viral fitness and dynamics in vivo.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02465-13 
PMCID: PMC3838274
PMID: 24089557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

