
1. Nucleic Acid Ther. 2013 Dec;23(6):379-88. doi: 10.1089/nat.2012.0348. Epub 2013
Oct 1.

The distribution, clearance, and safety of an anti-MMP-9 DNAzyme in normal and
MMTV-PyMT transgenic mice.

Hallett MA(1), Dalal P, Sweatman TW, Pourmotabbed T.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Biochemistry, University of
Tennessee Health Science Center , Memphis Tennessee.

Catalytic oligonucleotides, known as DNAzymes, are a new class of nucleic
acid-based gene therapy that have recently been used in preclinical animal
studies to treat various cancers. In this study the systemic distribution,
pharmacokinetics, and safety of intravenously administered anti-MMP (matrix
metalloproteinase)-9 DNAzyme (AM9D) were determined in healthy FVB and in
MMTV-polyoma virus middle T (PyMT) transgenic mice bearing mammary tumors. MMP-9 
is known to be involved in tumor cell development, angiogenesis, invasion, and
metastasis. Sulfur-35 ((35)S) labeled ([(35)S]-AM9D) administered intravenously, 
without the use of carrier molecules, to healthy and mammary tumor bearing
MMTV-PyMT transgenic mice distributed to all major organs. The order of
percentages of [(35)S]-AM9D accumulation in different organs of healthy and
MMTV-PyMT mice were blood>liver>kidney>lung>spleen>heart and mammary
tumor>blood≈liver>kidney>spleen>lung>heart, respectively. The amount of AM9D
accumulated in mammary tumors 2 hours post injection was 0.6% and 0.2% higher
than in either blood or liver, respectively, and its rate of initial clearance
from mammary tissue was at least 50% slower than the other organs. Approximately 
43% of the delivered dosage of [(35)S]-AM9D was cleared from the system via feces
and urine over a period of 72 hours. No evidence of acute or chronic
cytotoxicity, local or widespread, associated with AM9D treatment (up to 75 mg
AM9D /kg of body weight) was observed in the organs examined. These data suggest 
that DNAzyme in general and AM9D in particular can be used systemically as a
therapeutic agent to treat patients with breast cancer or other metastatic and
surgically inaccessible tumors.

DOI: 10.1089/nat.2012.0348 
PMCID: PMC3868393
PMID: 24083396  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

