
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 Jan;13(1):184-203. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.030155. Epub
2013 Oct 29.

Elucidating novel hepatitis C virus-host interactions using combined mass
spectrometry and functional genomics approaches.

Germain MA(1), Chatel-Chaix L, Gagné B, Bonneil É, Thibault P, Pradezynski F, de 
Chassey B, Meyniel-Schicklin L, Lotteau V, Baril M, Lamarre D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Immunologie et en Cancérologie (IRIC), Université de 
Montréal, C.P. 6128, succursale Centre-ville, Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7, Canada;

More than 170 million people worldwide are infected with the hepatitis C virus
(HCV), for which future therapies are expected to rely upon a combination of oral
antivirals. For a rapidly evolving virus like HCV, host-targeting antivirals are 
an attractive option. To decipher the role of novel HCV-host interactions, we
used a proteomics approach combining immunoprecipitation of viral-host protein
complexes coupled to mass spectrometry identification and functional genomics RNA
interference screening of HCV partners. Here, we report the proteomics analyses
of protein complexes associated with Core, NS2, NS3/4A, NS4B, NS5A, and NS5B
proteins. We identified a stringent set of 98 human proteins interacting
specifically with one of the viral proteins. The overlap with previous virus-host
interaction studies demonstrates 24.5% shared HCV interactors overall (24/98),
illustrating the reliability of the approach. The identified human proteins show 
enriched Gene Ontology terms associated with the endoplasmic reticulum, transport
proteins with a major contribution of NS3/4A interactors, and transmembrane
proteins for Core interactors. The interaction network emphasizes a high degree
distribution, a high betweenness distribution, and high interconnectivity of
targeted human proteins, in agreement with previous virus-host interactome
studies. The set of HCV interactors also shows extensive enrichment for known
targets of other viruses. The combined proteomic and gene silencing study
revealed strong enrichment in modulators of HCV RNA replication, with the
identification of 11 novel cofactors among our set of specific HCV partners.
Finally, we report a novel immune evasion mechanism of NS3/4A protein based on
its ability to affect nucleocytoplasmic transport of type I interferon-mediated
signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 nuclear translocation. The
study revealed highly stringent association between HCV interactors and their
functional contribution to the viral replication cycle and pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M113.030155 
PMCID: PMC3879614
PMID: 24169621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

