
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2014 Jan;52(1):234-43. doi: 10.1128/JCM.02820-13. Epub 2013 Nov
6.

Isolation and characterization of porcine epidemic diarrhea viruses associated
with the 2013 disease outbreak among swine in the United States.

Chen Q(1), Li G, Stasko J, Thomas JT, Stensland WR, Pillatzki AE, Gauger PC,
Schwartz KJ, Madson D, Yoon KJ, Stevenson GW, Burrough ER, Harmon KM, Main RG,
Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Diagnostic and Production Animal Medicine, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Microbiol. 2014 Sep;52(9):3509-10.
    J Clin Microbiol. 2014 Sep;52(9):3511-4.

Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) was detected in May 2013 for the first
time in U.S. swine and has since caused significant economic loss. Obtaining a
U.S. PEDV isolate that can grow efficiently in cell culture is critical for
investigating pathogenesis and developing diagnostic assays and for vaccine
development. An additional objective was to determine which gene(s) of PEDV is
most suitable for studying the genetic relatedness of the virus. Here we describe
two PEDV isolates (ISU13-19338E and ISU13-22038) successfully obtained from the
small intestines of piglets from sow farms in Indiana and Iowa, respectively. The
two isolates have been serially propagated in cell culture for over 30 passages
and were characterized for the first 10 passages. Virus production in cell
culture was confirmed by PEDV-specific real-time reverse-transcription PCR
(RT-PCR), immunofluorescence assays, and electron microscopy. The infectious
titers of the viruses during the first 10 passages ranged from 6 × 10(2) to 2 ×
10(5) 50% tissue culture infective doses (TCID50)/ml. In addition, the
full-length genome sequences of six viruses (ISU13-19338E homogenate, P3, and P9;
ISU13-22038 homogenate, P3, and P9) were determined. Genetically, the two PEDV
isolates were relatively stable during the first 10 passages in cell culture.
Sequences were also compared to those of 4 additional U.S. PEDV strains and 23
non-U.S. strains. All U.S. PEDV strains were genetically closely related to each 
other (≥99.7% nucleotide identity) and were most genetically similar to Chinese
strains reported in 2011 to 2012. Phylogenetic analyses using different genes of 
PEDV suggested that the full-length spike gene or the S1 portion is appropriate
for sequencing to study the genetic relatedness of these viruses.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.02820-13 
PMCID: PMC3911415
PMID: 24197882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

