
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Nov 7;19(41):6969-78. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i41.6969.

PNPLA3 I148M polymorphism and progressive liver disease.

Dongiovanni P(1), Donati B, Fares R, Lombardi R, Mancina RM, Romeo S, Valenti L.

Author information: 
(1)Paola Dongiovanni, Benedetta Donati, Roberta Fares, Rosa Lombardi, Luca
Valenti, Internal Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Policlinico
Milano, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Universit√† degli Studi
di Milano, 20122 Milano, Italy.

The 148 Isoleucine to Methionine protein variant (I148M) of patatin-like
phospholipase domain-containing 3 (PNPLA3), a protein is expressed in the liver
and is involved in lipid metabolism, has recently been identified as a major
determinant of liver fat content. Several studies confirmed that the I148M
variant predisposes towards the full spectrum of liver damage associated with
fatty liver: from simple steatosis to steatohepatitis and progressive fibrosis.
Furthermore, the I148M variant represents a major determinant of progression of
alcohol related steatohepatitis to cirrhosis, and to influence fibrogenesis and
related clinical outcomes in chronic hepatitis C virus hepatitis, and possibly
chronic hepatitis B virus hepatitis, hereditary hemochromatosis and primary
sclerosing cholangitis. All in all, studies suggest that the I148M polymorphism
may represent a general modifier of fibrogenesis in liver diseases. Remarkably,
the effect of the I148M variant on fibrosis was independent of that on hepatic
steatosis and inflammation, suggesting that it may affect both the quantity and
quality of hepatic lipids and the biology of non-parenchymal liver cells besides 
hepatocytes, directly promoting fibrogenesis. Therefore, PNPLA3 is a key player
in liver disease progression. Assessment of the I148M polymorphism will possibly 
inform clinical practice in the future, whereas the determination of the effect
of the 148M variant will reveal mechanisms involved in hepatic fibrogenesis.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i41.6969 
PMCID: PMC3819533
PMID: 24222941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

