
1. Viral Immunol. 2013 Dec;26(6):396-403. doi: 10.1089/vim.2013.0073. Epub 2013 Nov 
16.

Contribution of the NS1 gene of H7 avian influenza virus strains to pathogenicity
in chickens.

Post J(1), Peeters B, Cornelissen JB, Vervelde L, Rebel JM.

Author information: 
(1)1 Central Veterinary Institute of Wageningen UR , Lelystad, The Netherlands .

Using reverse genetics (rg), we generated two reassortant viruses carrying the
NS1 gene of two closely related HPAIV and LPAIV H7N1 variants (designated rgH7N7 
HP(HPNS1) and rgH7N7 HP(LPNS1), respectively) in the backbone of the HP H7N7
strain A/Chicken/Netherlands/621557/03 (rgH7N7 HP). Comparison of these
reassortants allowed us to determine the effect of amino acid differences in the 
nuclear export and nucleolar localization sequences of NS1 on pathogenesis in
chickens. Compared to rgH7N7 HP(LPNS1), a delay in weight gain and an increase in
mortality were observed for rgH7N7 HP(HPNS1). Furthermore, an increase in viral
load in brains, lungs, and cloacal swabs, as well as an increased induction of
mRNA for type I interferons and pro-inflammatory cytokines in brains, were
observed for rgH7N7 HP(HPNS1). Comparison of rgH7N7 HP(LPNS1) with the backbone
strain rgH7N7 HP allowed us to examine differences in pathogenesis due to
differences in NS1 alleles. rgH7N7 HP, which contained allele A of NS1 showed a
higher in vitro replication rate and proved to be more virulent than the isogenic
virus carrying allele B of NS1(rgH7N7 HP(LPNS1)). In addition, higher virus
accumulation in the lungs and brains, and an increased induction of host gene
responses, especially in the brains, were found for rgH7N7 HP compared to rgH7N7 
HP(LPNS1). No large differences were observed in type I interferon expression in 
the lungs of chickens infected with any of the viruses, suggesting that
differences in virulence due to differences in NS1 could be related to
differences in the induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines in vital organs such
as the brains.

DOI: 10.1089/vim.2013.0073 
PMID: 24236854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

