
1. ACS Nano. 2013 Dec 23;7(12):10799-808. doi: 10.1021/nn4040553. Epub 2013 Nov 26.

Cell membranes open "doors" for cationic nanoparticles/biomolecules: insights
into uptake kinetics.

Lin J(1), Alexander-Katz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Material Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology , Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States.

Cationic nanoparticles (NPs) and cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) can enter cells
in an energy-independent fashion, escaping the traditional endocytosis route,
which is known as direct translocation. This unconventional entry, usually
complementary to endocytosis, features rapid uptake and thus makes both cationic 
NPs and CPPs fascinating intracellular delivery agents. However, the mechanisms
of the direct translocation of both cationic NPs and CPPs across cell membranes
into the cytosol are not understood. Moreover, the relationship between direct
translocation and endocytosis is also unclear. Here, using coarse-grained
molecular dynamics simulations we show that a model cell membrane generates a
nanoscale hole to assist the spontaneous translocation of cationic gold
nanoparticles (AuNPs) as well as HIV-1 Tat peptides to the cytoplasm side under a
transmembrane (TM) potential. After translocation, the AuNPs/Tat peptides move
freely in the "cytoplasm" region and the membrane reseals itself within a
microsecond, while the TM potential is strongly diminished. Furthermore, we show 
that the shape of the cationic object is crucial in determining if it can
translocate or not across. The results provide insights into the uptake kinetics 
of cationic NPs/CPPs, which features the relationship between direction
translocation and endocytosis. The mechanism put forward here establishes
fundamental principles of the intracellular delivery of cationic nanocarriers.

DOI: 10.1021/nn4040553 
PMID: 24251827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

