
1. Eur J Med Chem. 2014 Jan;71:81-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2013.10.063. Epub 2013
Nov 7.

Exploring naphthyl-carbohydrazides as inhibitors of influenza A viruses.

Barman S(1), You L(1), Chen R(1), Codrea V(1), Kago G(1), Edupuganti R(1),
Robertus J(1), Krug RM(2), Anslyn EV(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA;
Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
78712, USA.
(2)Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
78712, USA. Electronic address: rkrug@austin.utexas.edu.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.
Electronic address: anslyn@austin.utexas.edu.

A library of hydrazide derivatives was synthesized to target non-structural
protein 1 of influenza A virus (NS1) as a means to develop anti-influenza drug
leads. The lead compound
3-hydroxy-N-[(Z)-1-(5,6,7,8-tetrahydronaphthalen-2-yl)ethylideneamino]naphthalene
-2-carboxamide, which we denoted as "HENC", was identified by its ability to
increase the melting temperature of the effector domain (ED) of the NS1 protein, 
as assayed using differential scanning fluorimetry. A library of HENC analogs was
tested for inhibitory effect against influenza A virus replication in MDCK cells.
A systematic diversification of HENC revealed the identity of the R group
attached to the imine carbon atom significantly influenced the antiviral
activity. A phenyl or cyclohexyl at this position yielded the most potent
antiviral activity. The phenyl containing compound had antiviral activity similar
to that of the active form of oseltamivir (Tamiflu), and had no detectable effect
on cell viability.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2013.10.063 
PMCID: PMC4545637
PMID: 24287556  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

