
1. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 1;192(3):1257-66. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302471. Epub 2013
Dec 18.

CCR7 is mainly expressed in teleost gills, where it defines an IgD+IgM- B
lymphocyte subset.

Castro R(1), Bromage E, Abós B, Pignatelli J, González Granja A, Luque A, Tafalla
C.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación en Sanidad Animal, Instituto Nacional de Investigación
Agraria y Alimentaria, Valdeolmos, Madrid 28130, Spain.

Chemokine receptor CCR7, the receptor for both CCL19 and CCL21 chemokines,
regulates the recruitment and clustering of circulating leukocytes to secondary
lymphoid tissues, such as lymph nodes and Peyer's patches. Even though teleost
fish do not have either of these secondary lymphoid structures, we have recently 
reported a homolog to CCR7 in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). In the present
work, we have studied the distribution of leukocytes bearing extracellular CCR7
in naive adult tissues by flow cytometry, observing that among the different
leukocyte populations, the highest numbers of cells with membrane (mem)CCR7 were 
recorded in the gill (7.5 ± 2% CCR7(+) cells). In comparison, head kidney,
spleen, thymus, intestine, and peripheral blood possessed <5% CCR7(+) cells. When
CCR7 was studied at early developmental stages, we detected a progressive
increase in gene expression and protein CCR7 levels in the gills throughout
development. Surprisingly, the majority of the CCR7(+) cells in the gills were
not myeloid cells and did not express membrane CD8, IgM, nor IgT, but expressed
IgD on the cell surface. In fact, most IgD(+) cells in the gills expressed CCR7. 
Intriguingly, the IgD(+)CCR7(+) population did not coexpress memIgM. Finally,
when trout were bath challenged with viral hemorrhagic septicemia virus, the
number of CCR7(+) cells significantly decreased in the gills while significantly 
increased in head kidney. These results provide evidence of the presence of a
novel memIgD(+)memIgM(-) B lymphocyte subset in trout that expresses memCCR7 and 
responds to viral infections. Similarities with IgD(+)IgM(-) subsets in mammals
are discussed.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302471 
PMID: 24353268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

