
1. Arch Virol. 2014 Jun;159(6):1351-7. doi: 10.1007/s00705-013-1953-7. Epub 2013 Dec
19.

Genetic diversity of the coat protein of olive latent virus 1 isolates.

Varanda CM(1), Nolasco G, Clara MI, Félix MR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Virologia Vegetal, Instituto de Ciências Agrárias e Ambientais 
Mediterrânicas, Universidade de Évora, Apartado 94, 7002-554, Évora, Portugal,
carlavaranda@uevora.pt.

The CP gene variability among 21 olive latent virus 1 (OLV-1) isolates obtained
from different hosts and locations and at different times was assessed. Amplicons
obtained by RT-PCR were cloned, and at least 10 sequences from each isolate were 
analyzed and compared. OLV-1 sequences available in GenBank were included. The
encoded CPs consisted of 270 amino acids, except those of isolates G1S and C7
(269 aa) and G6 (271 aa). Comparison of CP genomic sequences of the isolates
under study showed very low values of nucleotide diversity, 0.02, and maximum
nucleotide distances between (0.087) or within isolates (0.001). Although very
few nucleotide sequence differences were observed among the isolates, olive
isolates exhibited lower diversity (0.012). In addition, at position 158 (157 in 
C7 and G1S and 159 in G6) of the deduced aa sequences, an alanine residue was
found to be conserved among the olive isolates. In citrus and tulip isolates, a
threonine residue was present at position 158, whereas a valine was present at
this same position in tomato isolates. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that OLV-1
isolates clustered in five groups according to original host. However, G6,
originally recovered from olive but repeatedly inoculated and maintained in N.
benthamiana plants for 8 years in our laboratory, was separated from other
isolates. This may be attributable to adaptation to the experimental host over
time. There was no correlation of phylogenetic grouping of isolates based on
geographical location or year of collection. Strong negative selection may have
contributed to the low diversity among the OLV-1 CP isolates.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-013-1953-7 
PMID: 24352437  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

