
1. Mol Pharm. 2014 Mar 3;11(3):1069-74. doi: 10.1021/mp4005854. Epub 2014 Jan 24.

Development of a novel efficient method to construct an adenovirus library
displaying random peptides on the fiber knob.

Yamamoto Y(1), Goto N, Miura K, Narumi K, Ohnami S, Uchida H, Miura Y, Yamamoto
M, Aoki K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene and Immune Medicine, National Cancer Center Research
Institute , 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Redirection of adenovirus vectors by engineering the capsid-coding region has
shown limited success because proper targeting ligands are generally unknown. To 
overcome this limitation, we constructed an adenovirus library displaying random 
peptides on the fiber knob, and its screening led to successful selections of
several particular targeted vectors. In the previous library construction method,
the full length of an adenoviral genome was generated by a Cre-lox mediated in
vitro recombination between a fiber-modified plasmid library and the
enzyme-digested adenoviral DNA/terminal protein complex (DNA-TPC) before
transfection to the producer cells. In this system, the procedures were
complicated and time-consuming, and approximately 30% of the vectors in the
library were defective with no displaying peptide. These may hinder further
extensive exploration of cancer-targeting vectors. To resolve these problems, in 
this study, we developed a novel method with the transfection of a fiber-modified
plasmid library and a fiberless adenoviral DNA-TPC in Cre-expressing 293 cells.
The use of in-cell Cre recombination and fiberless adenovirus greatly simplified 
the library-making steps. The fiberless adenovirus was useful in suppressing the 
expansion of unnecessary adenovirus vectors. In addition, the complexity of the
library was more than a 10(4) level in one well in a 6-well dish, which was
10-fold higher than that of the original method. The results demonstrated that
this novel method is useful in producing a high quality live adenovirus library, 
which could facilitate the development of targeted adenovirus vectors for a
variety of applications in medicine.

DOI: 10.1021/mp4005854 
PMCID: PMC4110195
PMID: 24380399  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

