
1. Curr Opin Chem Biol. 2014 Feb;18:87-94. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2014.01.007. Epub
2014 Feb 7.

The neoglycolipid (NGL)-based oligosaccharide microarray system poised to
decipher the meta-glycome.

Palma AS(1), Feizi T(2), Childs RA(3), Chai W(3), Liu Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Glycosciences Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London,
United Kingdom; REQUIMTE/CQFB, Faculty of Science and Technology, New University 
of Lisbon, Caparica, Portugal. Electronic address: angelina.palma@fct.unl.pt.
(2)The Glycosciences Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London,
United Kingdom. Electronic address: t.feizi@imperial.ac.uk.
(3)The Glycosciences Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London,
United Kingdom.
(4)The Glycosciences Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London,
United Kingdom. Electronic address: yan.liu2@imperial.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Curr Opin Chem Biol. 2014 Aug;21:170.

The neoglycolipid (NGL) technology is the basis of a state-of-the-art
oligosaccharide microarray system. The NGL-based microarray system in the
Glycosciences Laboratory Imperial College London
(http://www3.imperial.ac.uk/glycosciences) is one of the two leading platforms
for glycan microarrays, being offered for screening analyses to the broad
biomedical community. Highlighted in this review are the sensitivity of the
analysis system and, coupled with mass spectrometry, the provision for generating
'designer' microarrays from glycomes to identify novel ligands of biological
relevance. Among recent applications are assignments of ligands for apicomplexan 
parasites, pandemic 2009 influenza virus, polyoma and reoviruses, an innate
immune receptor against fungal pathogens, Dectin-1, and a novel protein of the
endoplasmic reticulum, malectin; also the characterization of an elusive
cancer-associated antigen. Some other contemporary advances in
glycolipid-containing arrays and microarrays are also discussed.

Copyright Â© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2014.01.007 
PMCID: PMC4105633
PMID: 24508828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

