
1. J Virol. 2014 May;88(9):4976-86. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00324-14. Epub 2014 Feb 19.

CD4+ memory stem cells are infected by HIV-1 in a manner regulated in part by
SAMHD1 expression.

Tabler CO(1), Lucera MB, Haqqani AA, McDonald DJ, Migueles SA, Connors M, Tilton 
JC.

Author information: 
(1)Case Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

CD4(+) and CD8(+) memory T cells with stem cell-like properties (T(SCM) cells)
have been identified in mice, humans, and nonhuman primates and are being
investigated for antitumor and antiviral vaccines and immunotherapies. Whether
CD4(+) T(SCM) cells are infected by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was
investigated by using a combination HIV reporter virus system in vitro and by
direct staining for HIV p24 antigen ex vivo. A proportion of T(SCM) cells were
found to express the HIV coreceptors CCR5 and CXCR4 and were infected by HIV both
in vitro and in vivo. Analysis of viral outcome following fusion using the
combination reporter virus system revealed that T(SCM) cells can become
productively or latently infected, although the vast majority of T(SCM) cells are
abortively infected. Knockdown of the HIV restriction factor SAMHD1 using
Vpx-containing simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) virion-like particles enhanced
the productive infection of T(SCM) cells, indicating that SAMHD1 contributes to
abortive infection in these cells. These results demonstrate that CD4(+) T(SCM)
cells are targets for HIV infection, that they become productively or latently
infected at low levels, and that SAMHD1 expression promotes abortive infection of
this important memory cell subset.IMPORTANCE: Here we demonstrate the
susceptibility of CD4(+) memory stem cells (T(SCM) cells) to infection by HIV in 
vitro and in vivo, provide an in-depth analysis of coreceptor expression,
demonstrate the infection of na√Øve and memory CD4(+) T cell subsets with both
CCR5- and CXCR4-tropic HIV, and also perform outcome analysis to calculate the
percentage of cells that are productively, latently, or abortively infected.
Through these outcome studies, we determined that the vast majority of T(SCM)
cells are abortively infected by HIV, and we demonstrate that knockdown of SAMHD1
significantly increases the frequency of infection of this CD4(+) T cell subset, 
indicating that SAMHD1 is an active restriction factor in T(SCM) cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00324-14 
PMCID: PMC3993838
PMID: 24554663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

