
1. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Aug;27(4):283-5.

[Relationship between effect of lamivudine in the treatment of cirrhotic patients
with uncompensated hepatitis B with HBV genotypes and cytotoxic T lymphocyte].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang D(1), Gu XB(1), Zhu YF(1), Xiao-Juan Y(1), Jiang XH(1), Huang LH(1), Qiu
YW(1), Wu HY(1), Yu P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wuxi Hospital for Infectious Diseases, Wuxi 214005, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore relationship between effect of Lamivudine in the treatment 
of cirrhotic patients with uncompensated hepatitis B with hepatitis B virus
(HBV)genotypes and HBV specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL).
METHODS: 80 cases of uncompensated cirrhotic hepatitis B (40 cases with genotype 
B and 40 with genotype C), HBV DNA positive, HBeAg positive and human leukocyte
antigen (HLA)-A2 positive,were treated with Lamivudine 100 mg/d, one year later, 
its effect and relationship with HBV genotypes and HBV specific CTL were
observed.
RESULTS: HBV DNA turned negative:40 cases with genotype B turned negative (100%).
In the 9th and 10th month of treatment, there was one case with genotype C had
YMDD variation respectively and Adefovir dipivoxil was used for treatment, of the
rest 38 cases, HBV DNA of 26 cases (68.42%) turned negative,HBV DNA negative rate
of patients with genotype is lower than that of patients with genotype B, chi2 = 
14.91, P < 0.01. HBeAg turned negative: 18 cases with genotype B (45%) turned
negative, more than that of patients with genotype C (7 cases, 18.42%), chi2 =
6.32, P < 0.05. Peripheral blood HBV specific CTL level: before treatment, it was
(0.33 +/- 0.03)% of patients with genotype B,higher than that of patients with
genotype C [(0.11 +/- 0.02)%], t = 8.12, P < 0.001. 1 year after treatment: it
was (0.44 +/- 0.04)% of patients with genotype B, higher than that before
treatment, t = 4.01, P < 0.001, it was also higher than that of patients with
genotype C 1 year after treatment [(0.23 +/- 0.03)%], t = 5.63, P < 0.01, alanine
amino-transferase (ALT) returned to normal: 38 cases with genotype B (95%)
returned to normal, more than that of patients with genotype C (28 cases,
73.68%), X2 = 6.79, P < 0.01.
CONCLUSION: Effect of Lamivudinein the treatment of cirrhotic patients with
uncompensated hepatitis B is better in patients with genotype B than patients
with genotype C, its mechanism may be related to lower level of HBV specific CTL 
in patients with genotype C than patients with genotype B.


PMID: 24579476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

