
1. Eur J Pediatr. 2014 Aug;173(8):1059-65. doi: 10.1007/s00431-014-2285-7. Epub 2014
Mar 6.

Improving influenza surveillance in Portuguese preschool children by parents'
report.

Paixão P(1), Piedade C, Papoila A, Caires I, Pedro C, Santos M, Silvestre MJ,
Brum L, Nunes B, Guiomar R, Curran MD, Carvalho A, Marques T, Neuparth N.

Author information: 
(1)CEDOC, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, FCM, Universidade Nova de Lisboa,
1169-056, Lisboa, Portugal, paulo.paixao@fcm.unl.pt.

Influenza surveillance is usually based on nationally organized sentinel networks
of physicians and on hospital reports. This study aimed to test a different
report system, based on parents' phone contact to the research team and in home
collection of samples by a dedicated team. The identification of influenza and
other respiratory viruses in children who attended a Hospital Emergency
Department was also recorded. Real-time PCR and reverse transcription PCR were
performed for influenza A and B, parainfluenza 1-4, adenovirus, human
metapneumovirus, respiratory syncytial virus A and B, rhinovirus, enterovirus,
group 1 coronaviruses, group 2 coronaviruses, and human bocavirus. One hundred
children were included, 64 from the day care centers and 36 from the Hospital.
Overall, 79 samples were positive for at least one respiratory virus. Influenza A
(H3) was the virus most frequently detected: 25 cases, 20 of these in children
under 5 years of age (ten from day care centers and ten who went to the hospital)
which was higher than those reported by the National Influenza Surveillance
Programme for this age.CONCLUSION: The results obtained in this study suggest
that a surveillance system based on parents' reports could complement the
implanted system of the National Influenza Surveillance Programme.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-014-2285-7 
PMCID: PMC7087149
PMID: 24599798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

