
1. Poult Sci. 2014 Mar;93(3):702-10. doi: 10.3382/ps.2013-03520.

Application of bacteriophages specific to hydrogen sulfide-producing bacteria in 
raw poultry by-products.

Gong C(1), Liu X, Jiang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food, Nutrition and Packaging Sciences, Clemson University,
Clemson, SC.

Hydrogen sulfide-producing bacteria (SPB) can spoil raw animal materials and
release harmful hydrogen sulfide (H2S) gas. The objective of this study was to
apply a SPB-specific bacteriophage cocktail to control H2S production by SPB in
different raw poultry by-products in the laboratory (20, 30, and 37°C) and
greenhouse (average temperature 29 to 31°C, humidity 34.8 to 59.8%, and light
intensity 604.8 Wm(2)) by simulating transportation and a rendering facility. The
amount of H2S production was determined using either test strips impregnated with
lead acetate or a H2S monitor. In the laboratory, phage treatment applied to
fresh chicken meat inoculated with SPB, spoiled chicken meat, chicken guts, and
chicken feathers reduced H2S production by approximately 25 to 69% at
temperatures from 20 to 37°C. In the greenhouse, phage treatment achieved
approximately a 30 to 85% reduction of H2S yield in chicken offal and feathers.
Among all phage treatments, multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 100 exhibited the 
highest inhibitory activities against SPB on H2S production. Several factors such
as initial SPB level, temperature, and MOI affect lytic activities of
bacteriophages. Our study demonstrated that the phage cocktail is effective to
reduce the production of H2S by SPB significantly in raw animal materials. This
biological control method can control SPB in raw poultry by-products at ambient
temperatures, leading to a safer working environment and high quality product
with less nutrient degradation for the rendering industry.

DOI: 10.3382/ps.2013-03520 
PMID: 24604865  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

