
1. Proc Biol Sci. 2014 Mar 11;281(1782):20132286. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2013.2286. Print
2014 May 7.

Analysis of a summary network of co-infection in humans reveals that parasites
interact most via shared resources.

Griffiths EC(1), Pedersen AB, Fenton A, Petchey OL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, North Carolina State University, , Raleigh, NC
27695-7613, USA, Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of
Sheffield, , Alfred Denny Building, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK, Centre
for Immunology, Infection and Evolution, Institute of Evolutionary Biology,
School of Biological Sciences, Ashworth Labs, University of Edinburgh, , Kings
Buildings, West Mains Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JT, UK, Institute of Integrative
Biology, University of Liverpool, , Liverpool L69 7ZB, UK, Institute of
Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies, University of Zürich, ,
Winterthurerstrasse 190, Zürich 8057, Switzerland.

Simultaneous infection by multiple parasite species (viruses, bacteria,
helminths, protozoa or fungi) is commonplace. Most reports show co-infected
humans to have worse health than those with single infections. However, we have
little understanding of how co-infecting parasites interact within human hosts.
We used data from over 300 published studies to construct a network that offers
the first broad indications of how groups of co-infecting parasites tend to
interact. The network had three levels comprising parasites, the resources they
consume and the immune responses they elicit, connected by potential, observed
and experimentally proved links. Pairs of parasite species had most potential to 
interact indirectly through shared resources, rather than through immune
responses or other parasites. In addition, the network comprised 10 tightly knit 
groups, eight of which were associated with particular body parts, and seven of
which were dominated by parasite-resource links. Reported co-infection in humans 
is therefore structured by physical location within the body, with bottom-up,
resource-mediated processes most often influencing how, where and which
co-infecting parasites interact. The many indirect interactions show how treating
an infection could affect other infections in co-infected patients, but the
compartmentalized structure of the network will limit how far these indirect
effects are likely to spread.

DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2013.2286 
PMCID: PMC3973251
PMID: 24619434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

