
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Mar 21;20(11):2777-84. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i11.2777.

Role of macrophages and monocytes in hepatitis C virus infections.

Revie D(1), Salahuddin SZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dennis Revie, Department of Biology, California Lutheran University, Thousand 
Oaks, CA 91360, United States.

A number of studies conducted over many years have shown that hepatitis C virus
(HCV) can infect a variety of cell types. In vivo infection of monocytes,
macrophages, and dendritic cells by HCV has been frequently shown by a number of 
researchers. These studies have demonstrated replication of HCV by detecting the 
presence of both negative genomic strands and a variety of non-structural HCV
proteins in infected cells. In addition, analyses of genome sequences have also
shown that different cell types can harbor different HCV variants. Investigators 
have also done preliminary studies of which cellular genes are affected by HCV
infection, but there have not yet been a sufficient number of these studies to
understand the effects of infection on these cells. Analyses of in vitro HCV
replication have shown that monocytes, macrophages and dendritic cells can be
infected by HCV from patient sera or plasma. These studies suggest that entry and
cellular locations may vary between different cell types. Some studies suggest
that macrophages may preferentially allow HCV genotype 1 to replicate, but
macrophages do not appear to select particular hypervariable regions. Overall,
these studies agree with a model where monocytes and macrophages act as an
amplification system, in which these cells are infected and show few cytopathic
effects, but continuously produce HCV. This allows them to produce virus over an 
extended time and allows its spread to other cell types.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i11.2777 
PMCID: PMC3961986
PMID: 24659871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

