
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 May 2;447(2):341-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.03.150. Epub 2014 Apr 12.

Anti-HCV activity of the Chinese medicinal fungus Cordyceps militaris.

Ueda Y(1), Mori K(1), Satoh S(1), Dansako H(1), Ikeda M(1), Kato N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Virology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama 700-8558,
Japan.
(2)Department of Tumor Virology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama 700-8558,
Japan. Electronic address: nkato@md.okayama-u.ac.jp.

Persistent hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection causes chronic liver diseases and is
a global health problem. Although the sustained virologic response rate in the
treatment of genotype 1 using new triple therapy (pegylated-interferon,
ribavirin, and telaprevir/boceprevir) has been improved by more than 70%, several
severe side effects such as skin rash/ageusia and advanced anemia have become a
problem. Under these circumstances, a new type of anti-HCV oral drug with few
side effects is needed. Our recently developed HCV drug assay systems, including 
the HuH-7 cell line-derived OR6 and AH1R, and the Li23 cell line-derived ORL8 and
ORL11, allow genome-length HCV RNAs (several strains of genotype 1b) encoding
renilla luciferase to replicate efficiently. Using these systems as anti-HCV
candidates, we have identified numerous existing medicines that can be used
against HCV with few side effects, such as statins and teprenon. To obtain
additional anti-HCV candidates, we evaluated a number of oral health supplements,
and found that the capsule but not the liquid form of Cordyceps militaris (CM)
(Ascomycotinanorth, North Chinese caterpillar fungus), which is used as a Chinese
herbal medicine, exhibited moderate anti-HCV activity. In combination with
interferon-α or ribavirin, CM exhibited an additive inhibitory effect. Among the 
main components of CM, cordycepin, but not ergosterol, contributed to the
anti-HCV activity of CM. In consideration of all these results, we suggest that
CM would be useful as an oral anti-HCV agent in combination with interferon-α
and/or ribavirin.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.03.150 
PMID: 24726408  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

