
1. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2014 Sep;25(6):612-7. doi:
10.1097/MBC.0000000000000117.

Plasma pentraxin-3 and coagulation and fibrinolysis variables during acute
Puumala hantavirus infection and associated thrombocytopenia.

Laine OK(1), Koskela SM, Outinen TK, Joutsi-Korhonen L, Huhtala H, Vaheri A,
Hurme MA, Jylh채v채 J, M채kel채 SM, Mustonen JT.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Internal Medicine, Tampere University Hospital bSchool of
Medicine, University of Tampere cCoagulation Disorders, Department of Clinical
Chemistry (HUSLAB Laboratory Services), Helsinki University Central Hospital
dSchool of Health Sciences, University of Tampere eDepartment of Virology,
Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki fLaboratory Centre, Tampere University
Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

Thrombocytopenia and altered coagulation characterize all hantavirus infections. 
To further assess the newly discovered predictive biomarkers of disease severity 
during acute Puumala virus (PUUV) infection, we studied the associations between 
them and the variables reflecting coagulation, fibrinolysis and endothelial
activation. Nineteen hospital-treated patients with serologically confirmed acute
PUUV infection were included. Acutely, plasma levels of pentraxin-3 (PTX3),
cell-free DNA (cf-DNA), complement components SC5b-9 and C3 and interleukin-6
(IL-6) were recorded as well as platelet ligands and markers of coagulation and
fibrinolysis. High values of plasma PTX3 associated with thrombin formation
(prothrombin fragments F1+2; r = 0.46, P = 0.05), consumption of platelet ligand 
fibrinogen (r = -0.70, P < 0.001) and natural anticoagulants antithrombin (AT) (r
= -0.74, P < 0.001), protein C (r = -0.77, P < 0.001) and protein S free antigen 
(r = -0.81, P < 0.001) and a decreased endothelial marker ADAMTS13 (a disintegrin
and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 domain 13) (r = -0.48, P =
0.04). Plasma level of AT associated with C3 (r = 0.76, P < 0.001), IL-6 (r =
-0.56, P = 0.01) and cf-DNA (r = -0.47, P = 0.04). High cf-DNA coincided with
increased prothrombin fragments F1+2 (r = 0.47, P = 0.04). Low C3 levels
reflecting the activation of complement system through the alternative route
predicted loss of all natural anticoagulants (for protein C r = 0.53, P = 0.03
and for protein S free antigen r = 0.64, P = 0.004). Variables depicting altered 
coagulation follow the new predictive biomarkers of disease severity, especially 
PTX3, in acute PUUV infection. The findings are consistent with the previous
observations of these biomarkers also being predictive for low platelet count and
underline the cross-talk of inflammation and coagulation systems in acute PUUV
infection.

DOI: 10.1097/MBC.0000000000000117 
PMID: 24751477  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

