
1. J Immunol. 2014 Jun 15;192(12):5933-42. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1303470. Epub 2014 
May 5.

Simian virus 40 large T antigen induces IFN-stimulated genes through ATR kinase.

Forero A(1), Giacobbi NS(2), McCormick KD(1), Gjoerup OV(1), Bakkenist CJ(3),
Pipas JM(2), Sarkar SN(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Virology Program, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213; Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213;
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15213; and.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213.
(4)Cancer Virology Program, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213; Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213; saumen@pitt.edu.

Polyomaviruses encode a large T Ag (LT), a multifunctional protein essential for 
the regulation of both viral and host cell gene expression and productive viral
infection. Previously, we have shown that stable expression of LT protein results
in upregulation of genes involved in the IFN induction and signaling pathway. In 
this study, we focus on the cellular signaling mechanism that leads to the
induction of IFN responses by LT. Our results show that ectopic expression of
SV40 LT results in the induction of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) in human
fibroblasts and confers an antiviral state. We describe a LT-initiated DNA damage
response (DDR) that activates IFN regulatory factor 1, causing IFN-β production
and consequent ISG expression in human cells. This IFN-β and ISG induction is
dependent on ataxia-telangiectasia mutated and Rad3-related (ATR) kinase, but
independent of ATM. ATR kinase inhibition using a selective kinase inhibitor
(ETP-46464) caused a decrease in IFN regulatory factor 1 stabilization and ISG
expression. Furthermore, expression of a mutant LT that does not induce DDR also 
does not induce IFN-β and ISGs. These results show that, in the absence of viral 
infection, LT-initiated activation of ATR-dependent DDR is sufficient for the
induction of an IFN-β-mediated innate immune response in human cells. Thus, we
have uncovered a novel and critical role for ATR as a mediator of antiviral
responses utilizing LT.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1303470 
PMCID: PMC4078001
PMID: 24799566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

