
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2014 Jul;52(7):2552-6. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00061-14. Epub 2014 May
14.

Detection of Herpesviridae in whole blood by multiplex PCR DNA-based microarray
analysis after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

Debaugnies F(1), Busson L(2), Ferster A(3), Lewalle P(4), Azzi N(3), Aoun M(5),
Verhaegen G(6), Mahadeb B(2), de Marchin J(6), Vandenberg O(2), Hallin M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Diagnostic, iris-Lab, Iris-Brussels Public Hospital
Network, Brussels, Belgium fdebaugn@ulb.ac.be.
(2)Department of Microbiology, iris-Lab, Iris-Brussels Public Hospital Network,
Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Department of Haematology and Oncology, Hôpital Universitaire Des Enfants
Reine Fabiola, Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Department of Haematology, Jules Bordet Institute, Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Jules Bordet Institute, Brussels, Belgium.
(6)Center for Molecular Diagnostic, iris-Lab, Iris-Brussels Public Hospital
Network, Brussels, Belgium.

Viral infections are important causes of morbidity and mortality in patients
after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. The monitoring by PCR of
Herpesviridae loads in blood samples has become a critical part of posttransplant
follow-up, representing mounting costs for the laboratory. In this study, we
assessed the clinical performance of the multiplex PCR DNA microarray Clart
Entherpex kit for detection of cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV),
and human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) as a screening test for virological follow-up.
Two hundred fifty-five blood samples from 16 transplanted patients, prospectively
tested by routine PCR assays, were analyzed by microarray. Routine PCR detected
single or multiple viruses in 42% and 10% of the samples, respectively.
Microarray detected single or multiple viruses in 34% and 18% of the samples,
respectively. Microarray results correlated well with CMV and EBV detections by
routine PCR (kappa tests = 0.79 and 0.78, respectively), whereas a weak
correlation was observed with HHV-6 (0.43). HHV-7 was also detected in 48 samples
by microarray. In conclusion, the microarray is a reliable screening assay for a 
posttransplant virological follow-up to detect CMV and EBV infections in blood.
However, positive samples must be subsequently confirmed and viral loads must be 
quantified by PCR assays. Limitations were identified regarding HHV-6 detection. 
Although it is promising, is easy to use as a first-line test, and allows a
reduction in the cost of analysis without undue delay in the reporting of the
final quantitative result to the clinician, some characteristics of this
microarray should be improved, particularly regarding quality control and the
targeted virus panel, such that it could then be used as a routine test.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00061-14 
PMCID: PMC4097728
PMID: 24829249  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

