
1. Vaccine. 2014 Jul 16;32(33):4206-13. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.04.091. Epub
2014 May 15.

HLA genotypes and rubella vaccine immune response: additional evidence.

Ovsyannikova IG(1), Pankratz VS(2), Larrabee BR(2), Jacobson RM(3), Poland GA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic Vaccine Research Group, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA;
Program in Translational Immunovirology and Biodefense, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
MN 55905, USA.
(2)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(3)Mayo Clinic Vaccine Research Group, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA;
Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.
(4)Mayo Clinic Vaccine Research Group, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA;
Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA; Program in Translational Immunovirology and Biodefense, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA. Electronic address: poland.gregory@mayo.edu.

Recent population-based studies have demonstrated the genetic heritability of
rubella vaccine response and assessed that the HLA system may explain about 20%
of the inter-individual variance in humoral immune response to this vaccine. Our 
earlier studies compared HLA allelic associations with rubella vaccine-specific
antibodies between two smaller cohorts of healthy Rochester, MN, children (346
and 396 subjects) after two doses of rubella-containing vaccine. This study found
that specific HLA alleles were consistently associated with rubella-specific
antibody titers (B*27:05, DPA1*02:01, and DPB1*04:01 alleles). The current study 
examined HLA associations in an independent larger cohort of 1012 healthy San
Diego, CA, subjects (age 19-40 years) after rubella vaccine in order to replicate
our previous findings in the Rochester subjects. Two HLA associations of
comparable magnitudes were consistently observed between B*27:05 (median NT50
Rochester cohort 48.9, p=0.067; San Diego cohort 54.8, p=0.047) and DPB1*04:01
(median NT50 Rochester cohort 61.6, p<0.001; San Diego cohort 70.8, p=0.084)
alleles and rubella virus-neutralizing antibody titers. Additional HLA alleles
resulted in consistent effects on IL-6 production in both cohorts, but did not
meet criteria for statistical significance. Our data suggest these HLA alleles
play a role in rubella vaccine-induced immunity and provide the basis for future 
studies that may explain the mechanism(s) by which these HLA polymorphisms affect
immune responses to rubella vaccine.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.04.091 
PMCID: PMC4124933
PMID: 24837503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

