
1. Virus Genes. 2014 Oct;49(2):269-77. doi: 10.1007/s11262-014-1088-2. Epub 2014 May
27.

ORF005L from infectious spleen and kidney necrosis virus is located in the inner 
mitochondrial membrane and induces apoptosis.

Wang R(1), Yi Y, Liu L, Lu Y, Weng S, He J, Xu X.

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Safety / State Key Laboratory for
Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510275,
People's Republic of China.

Infectious spleen and kidney necrosis virus (ISKNV) belongs to the genus
Megalocytivirus in the family Iridoviridae. This virus is the etiological agent
of a serious and pandemic disease in fish. Cells infected with ISKNV undergo
apoptosis. In this study, the ISKNV ORF005L gene was characterized and
functionally investigated. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that the ORF005L
protein contains a region similar to the catalytic domain of CTD-like
phosphatases. Real-time quantitative-PCR results showed the transcription profile
of ORF005L in ISKNV-infected cells; in these cells, ORF005L was initially
transcribed at 24Â h post-infection. The green fluorescent protein-tagged ORF005L 
protein was localized in the mitochondria. Sub-mitochondrial fractions were
subjected to Western blot, and the results showed that ORF005L was specifically
located in the inner membrane of the mitochondria. The ORF005L in fathead minnow 
cells was transiently expressed, resulting in the decrease in mitochondrial
transmembrane potential, which induced cell apoptosis. ORF005L was knocked down
by specific dsRNA, thereby significantly reducing the apoptosis of mandarin fish 
fry-1 cells induced by ISKNV infection. These results indicated that the ORF005L 
of ISKNV could disrupt mitochondrial function and cause apoptosis. This study may
provide novel insights into the pathogenesis of Megalocytivirus infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-014-1088-2 
PMID: 24862228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

