
1. Plant Mol Biol. 2014 Aug;85(6):575-88. doi: 10.1007/s11103-014-0204-y. Epub 2014 
Jun 1.

Sequence comparison and phylogenetic analysis by the Maximum Likelihood method of
ribosome-inactivating proteins from angiosperms.

Di Maro A(1), Citores L, Russo R, Iglesias R, Ferreras JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental, Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences and
Technologies, Second University of Naples, 81100, Caserta, Italy.

Ribosome-inactivating proteins (RIPs) from angiosperms are rRNA N-glycosidases
that have been proposed as defence proteins against virus and fungi. They have
been classified as type 1 RIPs, consisting of single-chain proteins, and type 2
RIPs, consisting of an A chain with RIP properties covalently linked to a B chain
with lectin properties. In this work we have carried out a broad search of RIP
sequence data banks from angiosperms in order to study their main structural
characteristics and phylogenetic evolution. The comparison of the sequences
revealed the presence, outside of the active site, of a novel structure that
might be involved in the internal protein dynamics linked to enzyme catalysis.
Also the B-chains presented another conserved structure that might function
either supporting the beta-trefoil structure or in the communication between both
sugar-binding sites. A systematic phylogenetic analysis of RIP sequences revealed
that the most primitive type 1 RIPs were similar to that of the actual monocots
(Poaceae and Asparagaceae). The primitive RIPs evolved to the dicot type 1
related RIPs (like those from Caryophyllales, Lamiales and Euphorbiales). The
gene of a type 1 RIP related with the actual Euphorbiaceae type 1 RIPs fused with
a double beta trefoil lectin gene similar to the actual Cucurbitaceae lectins to 
generate the type 2 RIPs and finally this gene underwent deletions rendering
either type 1 RIPs (like those from Cucurbitaceae, Rosaceae and Iridaceae) or
lectins without A chain (like those from Adoxaceae).

DOI: 10.1007/s11103-014-0204-y 
PMID: 24880476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

