
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 8;289(32):22385-400. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.584466. Epub
2014 Jun 5.

Substitution of NS5 N-terminal domain of dengue virus type 2 RNA with type 4
domain caused impaired replication and emergence of adaptive mutants with
enhanced fitness.

Teramoto T(1), Boonyasuppayakorn S(1), Handley M(1), Choi KH(2), Padmanabhan
R(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Georgetown University
School of Medicine, Washington, D. C. 20057 and.
(2)the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555-0156.
(3)From the Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Georgetown University
School of Medicine, Washington, D. C. 20057 and rp55@georgetown.edu.

Flavivirus NS3 and NS5 are required in viral replication and 5'-capping. NS3 has 
NS2B-dependent protease, RNA helicase, and 5'-RNA triphosphatase activities. NS5 
has 5'-RNA methyltransferase (MT)/guanylyltransferase (GT) activities within the 
N-terminal 270 amino acids and the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (POL) activity
within amino acids 271-900. A chimeric NS5 containing the D4MT/D4GT and the D2POL
domains in the context of wild-type (WT) D2 RNA was constructed. RNAs synthesized
in vitro were transfected into baby hamster kidney cells. The viral replication
was analyzed by an indirect immunofluorescence assay to monitor NS1 expression
and by quantitative real-time PCR. WT D2 RNA-transfected cells were NS1- positive
by day 5, whereas the chimeric RNA-transfected cells became NS1-positive ∼30 days
post-transfection in three independent experiments. Sequence analysis covering
the entire genome revealed the appearance of a single K74I mutation within the
D4MT domain ∼16 days post-transfection in two experiments. In the third, D290N
mutation in the conserved NS3 Walker B motif appeared ≥16 days post-transfection.
A time course study of serial passages revealed that the 30-day supernatant had
gradually evolved to gain replication fitness. Trans-complementation by
co-expression of WT D2 NS5 accelerated viral replication of chimeric RNA without 
changing the K74I mutation. However, the MT and POL activities of NS5 WT D2 and
the chimeric NS5 proteins with or without the K74I mutation are similar. Taken
together, our results suggest that evolution of the functional interactions
involving the chimeric NS5 protein encoded by the viral genome species is
essential for gain of viral replication fitness.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.584466 
PMCID: PMC4139246
PMID: 24904061  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

