
1. J Fish Dis. 2015 May;38(5):451-65. doi: 10.1111/jfd.12256. Epub 2014 Jun 10.

Immune responses of whiteleg shrimp, Litopenaeus vannamei (Boone, 1931), to
bacterially expressed dsRNA specific to VP28 gene of white spot syndrome virus.

Taju G(1), Madan N, Abdul Majeed S, Kumar TR, Thamizhvanan S, Otta SK, Sahul
Hameed AS.

Author information: 
(1)OIE Reference Laboratory for WTD, PG & Research Department of Zoology, C.
Abdul Hakeem College, Melvisharam, Vellore District, Tamilnadu, India.

In this study, dsRNA specific to VP28 gene of white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) of
shrimp was synthesized in Escherichia coli in large scale and studied the immune 
response of shrimp to dsRNA-VP28. The haematological parameters such as clotting 
time and total haemocytes counts, and immunological parameters such as
prophenoloxidase (proPO), superoxide dismutase (SOD), superoxide anion (SOA) and 
malondialdehyde content, as well as the mRNA expression of ten immune-related
genes were examined to estimate the effect of dsRNA-VP28 on the innate immunity
of Litopenaeus vannamei. The activities of proPO, SOA and SOD significantly
increased in haemocyte after dsRNA-VP28 treatment, whereas MDA content did not
change significantly. Among the ten immune-related genes examined, only the mRNA 
expression of proPO, cMnSOD, haemocyanin, crustin, BGBP, lipopolysaccharides
(LPs), lectin and lysozyme in haemocytes, gill and hepatopancreas of L. vannamei,
was significantly upregulated at 12 h after dsRNA-VP28 treatment, while no
significant expression changes were observed in Toll receptor and tumour receptor
genes. The increase of proPO and SOD activities, and SOA level and mRNA
expression level of proPO, cMnSOD, haemocyanin, crustin, BGBP, LPs, lectin and
lysozyme after dsRNA-VP28 stimulation indicate that these immune-related genes
were involved in dsRNA-VP28-induced innate immunity in shrimp.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.12256 
PMID: 24917208  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

