
1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2014 Aug;30(8):753-68. doi: 10.1089/AID.2013.0262.
Epub 2014 Jul 8.

Burden of nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor resistance in
HIV-1-infected patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Snedecor SJ(1), Sudharshan L, Nedrow K, Bhanegaonkar A, Simpson KN, Haider S,
Chambers R, Craig C, Stephens J.

Author information: 
(1)1 Pharmerit International , Bethesda, Maryland.

The prevalence of HIV drug resistance varies with geographic location, year, and 
treatment exposure. This study generated yearly estimates of nonnucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI) resistance in treatment-naive (TN) and
treatment-experienced (TE) patients in the United States (US), Europe (EU), and
Canada. Studies reporting NNRTI resistance identified in electronic databases and
11 conferences were analyzed in three groups: (1) TN patients in one of four
geographic regions [US, Canada, EU countries with larger surveillance networks
("EU1"), and EU countries with fewer data ("EU2")]; (2) TE patients from any
region; and (3) TN patients failing NNRTI-based treatments in clinical trials.
Analysis data included 158 unique studies from 22 countries representing 84
cohorts of TN patients, 21 cohorts of TE patients, and 8 trials reporting
resistance at failure. From 1995 to 2000, resistance prevalence in TN patients
increased in US and EU1 from 3.1% to 7.5% and 0.8% to 3.6%, respectively.
Resistance in both regions stabilized in 2006 onward. Little resistance was
identified in EU2 before 2000, and increased from 2006 (5.0%) to 2010 (13.7%).
One TN Canadian study was identified and reported resistance of 8.1% in 2006.
Half of TN clinical trial patients had resistance after treatment failure at
weeks 48-144. Resistance in TE patients increased from 1998 (10.1%) to 2001
(44.0%), then decreased after 2004. Trends in NNRTI resistance among TN patients 
show an increased burden in the US and some EU countries compared to others.
These findings signify a need for alternate first-line treatments in some
regions.

DOI: 10.1089/AID.2013.0262 
PMCID: PMC4118702
PMID: 24925216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

