
1. Curr Microbiol. 2014 Oct;69(4):580-5. doi: 10.1007/s00284-014-0626-4. Epub 2014
Jun 17.

Bacterial community survey of Solenopsis invicta Buren (red imported fire ant)
colonies in the presence and absence of Solenopsis invicta virus (SINV).

Powell CM(1), Hanson JD, Bextine BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Texas at Tyler, 3900 University Blvd,
Tyler, TX, 75799, USA, cpowell8@patriots.uttyler.edu.

Insect bacterial symbionts contribute to many essential biological functions of
their hosts and can also influence host fecundity and fitness. The physiological 
contribution symbionts provide can aid in immune response and xenobiotic
detoxification. Both of these immune factors can directly impact strategies aimed
at managing insect populations. One biological control strategy that shows
promise in insects is the use of single-stranded RNA viruses within the group
Dicistroviridae. The Solenopsis invicta Virus (SINV; Dicistroviridae), a ssRNA
virus, has been proposed as a potential biological control agent for the urban
pest S. invicta Buren or red imported fire ant (RIFA). SINV has been shown to be 
prevalent in RIFA populations of Texas and Florida; however, mortality is
associated with high viral load. In other insect microbe systems, presence of
particular bacteria induced resistance against Dicistrovirus. If this type of
relationship is present in the RIFA-SINV system, their bacterial community could 
reduce the effectiveness of SINV as a biological control system. The advantage of
454 pyro-sequencing is that it enables classification of unculturable bacteria.
This study examines the bacterial community in brood, workers, and reproductive
cast members from colonies with and without SINV infection. Manipulation of the
bacterial community may alter virus infection and replication within the mid-gut.
Understanding the differences in the microbial community of ant colonies may
provide insights that will refine current efforts designing control strategies
for this important urban pest.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-014-0626-4 
PMID: 24934994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

