
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jul 25;450(2):1070-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.06.109. Epub 2014 Jun 27.

Inhibition of influenza virus infection and hemagglutinin cleavage by the
protease inhibitor HAI-2.

Hamilton BS(1), Chung C(1), Cyphers SY(1), Rinaldi VD(1), Marcano VC(1),
Whittaker GR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853, USA. Electronic address: grw7@cornell.edu.

Influenza virus remains a significant concern to public health, with the
continued potential for a high fatality pandemic. Vaccination and antiviral
therapeutics are effective measures to circumvent influenza virus infection,
however, multiple strains have emerged that are resistant to the antiviral
therapeutics currently on the market. With this considered, investigation of
alternative antiviral therapeutics is being conducted. One such approach is to
inhibit cleavage activation of the influenza virus hemagglutinin (HA), which is
an essential step in the viral replication cycle that permits viral-endosome
fusion. Therefore, targeting trypsin-like, host proteases responsible for HA
cleavage in vivo may prove to be an effective therapeutic. Hepatocyte growth
factor activator inhibitor 2 (HAI-2) is naturally expressed in the respiratory
tract and is a potent inhibitor of trypsin-like serine proteases, some of which
have been determined to cleave HA. In this study, we demonstrate that HAI-2 is an
effective inhibitor of cleavage of HA from the human-adapted H1 and H3 subtypes. 
HAI-2 inhibited influenza virus H1N1 infection in cell culture, and HAI-2
administration showed protection in a mouse model of influenza. HAI-2 has the
potential to be an effective, alternative antiviral therapeutic for influenza.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.06.109 
PMCID: PMC4465281
PMID: 24978308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

