
1. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:598732. doi: 10.1155/2014/598732. Epub 2014 Jun 16.

Genetic characterization and evolution of H1N1pdm09 after circulation in a swine 
farm.

Boni A(1), Vaccari G(1), Di Trani L(1), Zaccaria G(1), Alborali GL(2), Lelli
D(2), Cordioli P(2), Moreno AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica Veterinaria e Sicurezza Alimentare, Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Virologia, Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della
Lombardia e dell'Emilia Romagna, Via A. Bianchi 9, 25124 Brescia, Italy.

Following the emergence of the A(H1N1)pdm09 in humans, this novel influenza virus
was reverse transmitted from infected people to swine population worldwide. In
this study we investigated the molecular evolution of A(H1N1)pdm09 virus
identified in pigs reared in a single herd. Nasal swabs taken from pigs showing
respiratory distress were tested for influenza type A and A(H1N1)pdm09 by
real-time RT-PCR assays. Virus isolation from positive samples was attempted by
inoculation of nasal swabs samples into specific pathogen free embryonated
chicken eggs (ECE) and complete genome sequencing was performed on virus strains 
after replication on ECE or from original swab sample. The molecular analysis of 
hemagglutinin (HA) showed, in four of the swine influenza viruses under study, a 
unique significant amino acid change, represented by a two-amino acid insertion
at the HA receptor binding site. Phylogenetic analysis of HA, neuraminidase, and 
concatenated internal genes revealed a very similar topology, with viruses under 
study forming a separate cluster, branching outside the A(H1N1)pdm09 isolates
recognized until 2014. The emergence of this new cluster of A(H1N1)pdm09 in swine
raises further concerns about whether A(H1N1)pdm09 with new molecular
characteristics will become established in pigs and potentially transmitted to
humans.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/598732 
PMCID: PMC4082835
PMID: 25025062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

