
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 16;9(7):e102150. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102150.
eCollection 2014.

Dynamics of linker residues modulate the nucleic acid binding properties of the
HIV-1 nucleocapsid protein zinc fingers.

Zargarian L(1), Tisné C(2), Barraud P(2), Xu X(3), Morellet N(4), René B(1), Mély
Y(5), Fossé P(1), Mauffret O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie et Pharmacologie Appliquée, Ecole Normale Supérieure
de Cachan, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche
8113, Cachan, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Cristallographie et RMN Biologiques, Université Paris
Descartes, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche
8015, Paris, France.
(3)Laboratoire de Biologie et Pharmacologie Appliquée, Ecole Normale Supérieure
de Cachan, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche
8113, Cachan, France; Department of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, 
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(4)Centre de Recherches de Gif, Institut de Chimie des Substances Naturelles,
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Gif sur Yvette, France.
(5)Laboratoire de Biophotonique et Pharmacologie, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7213, Faculté de Pharmacie, Université de 
Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.

The HIV-1 nucleocapsid protein (NC) is a small basic protein containing two zinc 
fingers (ZF) separated by a short linker. It is involved in several steps of the 
replication cycle and acts as a nucleic acid chaperone protein in facilitating
nucleic acid strand transfers occurring during reverse transcription. Recent
analysis of three-dimensional structures of NC-nucleic acids complexes
established a new property: the unpaired guanines targeted by NC are more often
inserted in the C-terminal zinc finger (ZF2) than in the N-terminal zinc finger
(ZF1). Although previous NMR dynamic studies were performed with NC, the dynamic 
behavior of the linker residues connecting the two ZF domains remains unclear.
This prompted us to investigate the dynamic behavior of the linker residues.
Here, we collected 15N NMR relaxation data and used for the first time data at
several fields to probe the protein dynamics. The analysis at two fields allows
us to detect a slow motion occurring between the two domains around a hinge
located in the linker at the G35 position. However, the amplitude of motion
appears limited in our conditions. In addition, we showed that the neighboring
linker residues R29, A30, P31, R32, K33 displayed restricted motion and numerous 
contacts with residues of ZF1. Our results are fully consistent with a model in
which the ZF1-linker contacts prevent the ZF1 domain to interact with unpaired
guanines, whereas the ZF2 domain is more accessible and competent to interact
with unpaired guanines. In contrast, ZF1 with its large hydrophobic plateau is
able to destabilize the double-stranded regions adjacent to the guanines bound by
ZF2. The linker residues and the internal dynamics of NC regulate therefore the
different functions of the two zinc fingers that are required for an optimal
chaperone activity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102150 
PMCID: PMC4100767
PMID: 25029439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

