
1. J Neurosci. 2014 Jul 23;34(30):9951-62. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1996-14.2014.

AAVshRNA-mediated suppression of PTEN in adult rats in combination with salmon
fibrin administration enables regenerative growth of corticospinal axons and
enhances recovery of voluntary motor function after cervical spinal cord injury.

Lewandowski G(1), Steward O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Reeve-Irvine Research Center, Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology,
osteward@uci.edu glewando@uci.edu.
(2)Reeve-Irvine Research Center, Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology,
Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, and Department of Neurosurgery,
University of California, Irvine, California 92697 osteward@uci.edu
glewando@uci.edu.

Conditional genetic deletion of phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) in the
sensorimotor cortex of neonatal mice enables regeneration of corticospinal tract 
(CST) axons after spinal cord injury (SCI). The present study addresses three
questions: (1) whether PTEN knockdown in adult rats by nongenetic techniques
enables CST regeneration, (2) whether interventions to enable CST regeneration
enhance recovery of voluntary motor function, and (3) whether delivery of salmon 
fibrin into the injury site further enhances CST regeneration and motor recovery.
Adult rats were trained in a staircase-reaching task and then received either
intracortical injections of AAVshPTEN to delete PTEN or a control vector
expressing shRNA for luciferase (AAVshLuc). Rats then received cervical dorsal
hemisection injuries and salmon fibrin was injected into the injury site in half 
the rats, yielding four groups (AAVshPTEN, AAVshLuc, AAVshPTEN + fibrin, and
AAVshLuc + fibrin). Forepaw function was assessed for 10 weeks after injury and
CST axons were traced by injecting biotin-conjugated dextran amine into the
sensorimotor cortex. Rats that received AAVshPTEN alone did not exhibit improved 
motor function, whereas rats that received AAVshPTEN and salmon fibrin had
significantly higher forelimb-reaching scores. Tract tracing revealed that CST
axons extended farther caudally in the group that received AAVshPTEN and salmon
fibrin versus other groups. There were no significant differences in lesion size 
between the groups. Together, these data suggest that the combination of PTEN
deletion and salmon fibrin injection into the lesion can significantly improve
voluntary motor function after SCI by enabling regenerative growth of CST axons.

Copyright Â© 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/349951-12$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1996-14.2014 
PMCID: PMC4107411
PMID: 25057197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

