
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Jul 28;20(28):9245-52. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i28.9245.

Polymorphisms in the IFNL3/IL28B gene and hepatitis C: from adults to children.

Indolfi G(1), Azzari C(1), Resti M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Giuseppe Indolfi, Massimo Resti, Paediatric and Liver Unit, Meyer Children's
University Hospital of Florence, I-50139 Florence, Italy.

The purpose of the present review is to summarise the current knowledge on the
association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the interferon L3
(IFNL3) gene and hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in children. Many studies in
adults have demonstrated that genetic variation in IFNL3 is a strong predictor of
the virological response in treatment-naive patients with HCV genotype 1 who were
treated with Pegylated-IFN-α and ribavirin. Genetic variation in IFNL3 is also
associated with the spontaneous clearance of HCV. Thus far, few paediatric
studies have explored the association between variations in the IFNL3 gene and
either spontaneous or treatment-induced clearance of HCV. The CC genotype of the 
rs12979860 SNP is associated with the spontaneous clearance of HCV in children
independently of HCV genotype. Four paediatric studies have shown that both the
CC genotype of the rs12979860 SNP and the TT genotype of the rs8099917 SNP are
associated with the treatment-induced (IFN monotherapy and Pegylated-IFN-α and
ribavirin association) clearance of HCV, while the rs12980275 SNP did not affect 
the virological response. The possible role of IFNL3 gene variation as a
pre-treatment and on-treatment predictor of virological response in children is
highly attractive but still undetermined. Further paediatric studies are needed
to evaluate if testing for SNPs in IFNL3, either alone or together with other
predictors of response to treatment, could be used to direct treatment
strategies, including an avoidance of unnecessary protease inhibitor therapy and 
the duration of treatment.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i28.9245 
PMCID: PMC4110554
PMID: 25071317  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

