
1. Public Health Rep. 1989 Sep-Oct;104(5):416-24.

Analysis of Michigan Medicaid costs to treat HIV infection.

Solomon DJ(1), Hogan AJ, Bouknight RR, Solomon CT.

Author information: 
(1)College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing 48824.

To obtain better understanding of the nature and cost of health care related to
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, medical payment records were
analyzed for 204 men, women, and children older than 60 months who had
indications of HIV infection. The records were those of Michigan Medicaid, the
General Assistance Medical Program, and the Resident County Hospitalization
Program, with service dates on or after January 1, 1984, and which were processed
by November 30, 1987. Patient payment records were coded according to whether the
patient's condition was considered to be pre-HIV, HIV unrelated, possibly HIV
related, or HIV related. Average monthly payments were found to be $150 for
pre-HIV patient payment records, $114 for those HIV unrelated, $57 for those
possibly related, and $1,213 for those related to HIV infection. HIV-related
monthly payments rose from about $1,500 per month in the period 3 months prior to
the patient's death to more than $8,000 in the last month of life. Men were found
to have twice as many claims as women, and men's claims cost about three times as
much. A higher percentage of women than men (91 percent versus 37 percent)
received pre-HIV paid services, indicating a higher percentage of women were at
least initially receiving Medicaid for reasons other than an HIV-related
disability. Diagnostic categories that accounted for the bulk of the HIV-related 
health care utilization included infectious and parasitic diseases, acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome, diseases of the respiratory system, and
non-HIV-specific immunity disorders. Inpatient hospitalization accounted for more
than 75 percent of the payments, followed by physician costs (11 percent),
pharmacy costs (5 percent), and outpatient costs (3 percent). A total of 45, or
about 22 percent of the recipients, received zidovudine (AZT) prescriptions at an
average monthly cost of $404.


PMCID: PMC1579960
PMID: 2508170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

