
1. Mol Biotechnol. 2014 Dec;56(12):1110-20. doi: 10.1007/s12033-014-9791-8.

Virus-like particles from Escherichia Coli-derived untagged papaya ringspot virus
capsid protein purified by immobilized metal affinity chromatography enhance the 
antibody response against a soluble antigen.

Guerrero-Rodríguez J(1), Manuel-Cabrera CA, Palomino-Hermosillo YA,
Delgado-Guzmán PG, Escoto-Delgadillo M, Silva-Rosales L, Herrera-Rodríguez SE,
Sánchez-Hernández C, Gutiérrez-Ortega A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Universitario de Ciencias Biológicas y Agropecuarias, Universidad de
Guadalajara, Carretera Guadalajara-Nogales km 15.5, 45110, Zapopan, Jalisco,
Mexico, guerreroajf@hotmail.com.

There is a growing interest in using virus-like particles (VLPs) as scaffolds for
the presentation of antigens of choice to the immune system. In this work, VLPs
from papaya ringspot virus capsid protein expressed in Escherichia coli were
evaluated as enhancers of antibody response against a soluble antigen.
Interestingly, although the capsid protein lacks a histidine tag, its
purification by immobilized metal affinity chromatography was achieved. The
formation of VLPs was demonstrated by electron microscopy for the first time for 
this capsid protein. VLPs were enriched by polyethylene glycol precipitation.
Additionally, these VLPs were chemically coupled to green fluorescent protein in 
order to evaluate them as antigen carriers; however, bioconjugate instability was
observed. Nonetheless, the adjuvant effect of these VLPs on BALB/c mice was
evaluated, using GFP as antigen, resulting in a significant increase in anti-GFP 
IgG response, particularly, IgG1 class, demonstrating that the VLPs enhance the
immune response against the antigen chosen in this study.

DOI: 10.1007/s12033-014-9791-8 
PMID: 25119647  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

