
1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 29;9(8):e106418. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106418.
eCollection 2014.

HIV-1 Vpr induces interferon-stimulated genes in human monocyte-derived
macrophages.

Zahoor MA(1), Xue G(1), Sato H(2), Murakami T(2), Takeshima SN(2), Aida Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Infectious Diseases Unit, RIKEN, Wako, Saitama, Japan; Japanese
Foundation of AIDS Prevention, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Viral Infectious Diseases Unit, RIKEN, Wako, Saitama, Japan.

Macrophages act as reservoirs of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) and 
play an important role in its transmission to other cells. HIV-1 Vpr is a
multi-functional protein involved in HIV-1 replication and pathogenesis; however,
its exact role in HIV-1-infected human macrophages remains poorly understood. In 
this study, we used a microarray approach to explore the effects of HIV-1 Vpr on 
the transcriptional profile of human monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs). More
than 500 genes, mainly those involved in the innate immune response, the type I
interferon pathway, cytokine production, and signal transduction, were
differentially regulated (fold change >2.0) after infection with a recombinant
adenovirus expressing HIV-1 Vpr protein. The differential expression profiles of 
select interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) and genes involved in the innate immune
response, including STAT1, IRF7, MX1, MX2, ISG15, ISG20, IFIT1, IFIT2, IFIT3,
IFI27, IFI44L, APOBEC3A, DDX58 (RIG-I), TNFSF10 (TRAIL), and RSAD2 (viperin) were
confirmed by real-time quantitative PCR and were consistent with the microarray
data. In addition, at the post-translational level, HIV-1 Vpr induced the
phosphorylation of STAT1 at tyrosine 701 in human MDMs. These results demonstrate
that HIV-1 Vpr leads to the induction of ISGs and expand the current
understanding of the function of Vpr and its role in HIV-1 immune pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106418 
PMCID: PMC4149569
PMID: 25170834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

