
1. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Sep 12;13(3):7542-52. doi: 10.4238/2014.September.12.21.

Composition and structure of microbial communities associated with different
domestic sewage outfalls.

Wang ZH(1), Yang JQ(2), Zhang DJ(1), Zhou J(1), Zhang CD(1), Su XR(3), Li TW(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Marine Science, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang Province, China.
(2)North China Sea Branch of The State Oceanic Administration, Qingdao, Shandong 
Province, China.
(3)School of Marine Science, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang Province, China 
suxiurong@nbu.edu.cn.
(4)Ningbo City College of Vocational Technology, Ningbo, Zhejiang Province,
China.

The diversity of microbiota in waste waters has not been thoroughly examined,
despite the potential impact of microbes on effluent quality. Wastewater
microbial communities harbor pathogenic bacteria, viruses, and parasites. To
study microbial communities in domestic sewage outfalls, 454 pyrosequencing
technology was used to investigate the composition of microbial communities
associated with municipal wastewater during different seasons sampled over the
course of one year. A total of 195,103 16S rRNA gene sequences were obtained from
20 samples. The R software was used to calculate the number of indices describing
the alpha diversity associated with each bacterial assemblage. In this study, the
a-diversity index (H', D, J), in which higher numbers represent more diversity,
was found to change with seasonal cycle. The diversity of bacterial assemblages
was high in all samples, indicating that species diversity was also very high.
The taxonomic composition of the assemblages varied considerably among samples,
with some dominated by Proteobacteria, while others were dominated by
Bacteroidetes or Firmicutes. In 2 samples, the relative prevalence of
Proteobacteria exceeded 90%. Î±-Proteobacteria, b-proteobacteria, and
g-proteobacteria represented 90% or more of all Proteobacteria. The present
characterization of wastewater from five sewage outfalls indicated the presence
of some pathogenic bacteria. The g-Proteobacteria in sewage wastefalls identified
in this study included Enterobacteriaceae, Vibrionaceae, Pseudomonadaceae,
Salmonella, Yersinia, Vibrio, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

DOI: 10.4238/2014.September.12.21 
PMID: 25222254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

