
1. Vet Pathol. 2015 Jul;52(4):724-31. doi: 10.1177/0300985814551580. Epub 2014 Sep
24.

Pathologic and Molecular Virologic Characterization of a Canine Distemper
Outbreak in Farmed Civets.

Techangamsuwan S(1), Banlunara W(2), Radtanakatikanon A(3), Sommanustweechai
A(4), Siriaroonrat B(4), Lombardini ED(5), Rungsipipat A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok, Thailand Both authors contributed equally
somporn62@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok, Thailand Both authors contributed equally.
(3)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Bureau of Research, Conservation and Education, Zoological Park Organization, 
Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Armed Forces Research Institute of Medical Sciences (AFRIMS), Bangkok,
Thailand.

In October 2011, a fatal disease outbreak occurred in 3 civet species farmed for 
their use in the coffee industry in Thailand. The disease quickly killed 20
animals in a mixed population of Asian palm civets (Paradoxurus hermaphroditus; n
= 18), a masked palm civet (Paguma larvata; n = 1), and small Indian civet
(Viverricula indica; n = 1). Clinical signs consisted of severe lethargy,
weakness, vomiting, and diarrhea with associated dehydration, dyspnea, nasal and 
footpad hyperkeratosis, and seizures. All civets were positive for canine
morbillivirus using the commercial canine distemper virus (CDV) antigen test kit.
Consistently observed necropsy findings consisted of severe pneumonia and
hemorrhagic enteritis. Microscopic examination revealed severe gastroenteritis,
bronchointerstitial pneumonia, lymphadenitis, necrotizing dermatitis,
nonsuppurative polioencephalitis, and characteristic
intranuclear/intracytoplasmic eosinophilic viral inclusions in multiple tissues. 
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed immunoreactivity of varying intensity,
while virus isolation demonstrated typical cytopathic effects. To confirm CDV
infection, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction against fusion (F),
phosphoprotein (P), and hemagglutinin (H) genes showed bands of expected size
using conjunctival swabs (9 civets, 1 dog [Canis lupus familiaris] living on the 
farm). Phylogenetic analyses and restriction fragment length polymorphism results
indicated that the civets were infected by the Asia-1 strain of CDV commonly
found in dogs in Thailand. The deduced amino acid sequences of the signaling
lymphocyte activation molecule binding region of the CDV-H proteins revealed a
Y549H mutation in both CDV-infected Asian palm civets (n = 4) and a co-located
dog. We report a canine distemper outbreak in a civet colony with lineage
classification and a Y549H mutation in noncanid species in Thailand.

Â© The Author(s) 2014.

DOI: 10.1177/0300985814551580 
PMID: 25253065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

