
1. Nervenarzt. 2014 Oct;85(10):1280-90. doi: 10.1007/s00115-014-4082-y.

[HIV 1-associated neurocognitive disorder: current epidemiology, pathogenesis,
diagnosis and management].

[Article in German]

Eggers C(1); für die Deutsche Neuro-AIDS-Arbeitsgemeinschaft (DNAA).

Author information: 
(1)Neurologie mit Stroke Unit, Krankenhaus der Barmherzigen Brüder, Seilerstätte 
2, 4021, Linz, Österreich, Christian.Eggers@bblinz.at.

By restoring the immunological function the modern antiretroviral treatment of
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) infection has considerably lowered the
incidence of opportunistic infections. As opposed to the classical manifestations
of HIV-induced immunosuppression the incidence and prevalence of HIV-associated
neurocognitive disorders (HAND) has not noticeably decreased and HAND continues
to be relevant in daily clinical practice. At present, HAND occurs in earlier
stages of HIV infection, and the clinical course differs from that before the
introduction of combination antiretroviral treatment (cART). The predominant
clinical manifestation is a subcortical dementia with deficits in the domains
attention, concentration and memory. Signs of central motor pathway lesions have 
become less frequent and less prominent. Prior to the advent of cART the cerebral
dysfunction could at least partially be explained by the viral load and by
virus-associated histopathological findings. In patients with at least partially 
successfully treated infections, this relationship no longer exists, but a
plethora of poorly understood immunological and probably toxic phenomena are
under discussion.This consensus paper summarizes the progress made in the last 12
years in the field of HAND and provides suggestions for the diagnostic and
therapeutic management.

DOI: 10.1007/s00115-014-4082-y 
PMID: 25292163  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

