
1. BMC Evol Biol. 2014 Oct 25;14:206. doi: 10.1186/s12862-014-0206-z.

Global distribution of Chelonid fibropapilloma-associated herpesvirus among
clinically healthy sea turtles.

Alfaro-Núñez A(1), Frost Bertelsen M(2), Bojesen AM(3), Rasmussen I(4),
Zepeda-Mendoza L(5), Tange Olsen M(6), Gilbert MT(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for GeoGenetics, Section for Evolutionary Genomics, Natural History
Museum of Denmark, Øster Voldgade 5-7, 1350, Copenhagen K, Denmark.
alonzoalfaro@gmail.com.
(2)Centre for Zoo and Wild Animal Health, Copenhagen Zoo, Frederiksberg, Denmark.
mfb@zoo.dk.
(3)Department of Veterinary Disease Biology, Veterinary Clinical Microbiology,
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark. miki@sund.ku.dk.
(4)Centre for GeoGenetics, Section for Evolutionary Genomics, Natural History
Museum of Denmark, Øster Voldgade 5-7, 1350, Copenhagen K, Denmark.
isabelhojgaard@gmail.com.
(5)Centre for GeoGenetics, Section for Evolutionary Genomics, Natural History
Museum of Denmark, Øster Voldgade 5-7, 1350, Copenhagen K, Denmark.
lisandracady@gmail.com.
(6)Centre for GeoGenetics, Section for Evolutionary Genomics, Natural History
Museum of Denmark, Øster Voldgade 5-7, 1350, Copenhagen K, Denmark.
mortentolsen@gmail.com.
(7)Centre for GeoGenetics, Section for Evolutionary Genomics, Natural History
Museum of Denmark, Øster Voldgade 5-7, 1350, Copenhagen K, Denmark.
mtpgilbert@gmail.com.
(8)Trace and Environmental DNA Laboratory, School of Environment and Agriculture,
Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia, 6845, Australia.
mtpgilbert@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Fibropapillomatosis (FP) is a neoplastic disease characterized by
cutaneous tumours that has been documented to infect all sea turtle species.
Chelonid fibropapilloma-associated herpesvirus (CFPHV) is believed to be the
aetiological agent of FP, based principally on consistent PCR-based detection of 
herpesvirus DNA sequences from FP tumours. We used a recently described PCR-based
assay that targets 3 conserved CFPHV genes, to survey 208 green turtles (Chelonia
mydas). This included both FP tumour exhibiting and clinically healthy
individuals. An additional 129 globally distributed clinically healthy individual
sea turtles; representing four other species were also screened.
RESULTS: CFPHV DNA sequences were obtained from 37/37 (100%) FP exhibiting green 
turtles, and 45/300 (15%) clinically healthy animals spanning all five species.
Although the frequency of infected individuals per turtle population varied
considerably, most global populations contained at least one CFPHV positive
individual, with the exception of various turtle species from the Arabian Gulf,
Northern Indian Ocean and Puerto Rico. Haplotype analysis of the different gene
markers clustered the CFPHV DNA sequences for two of the markers (UL18 and UL22) 
in turtles from Turks and Caicos separate to all others, regardless of host
species or geographic origin.
CONCLUSION: Presence of CFPHV DNA within globally distributed samples for all
five species of sea turtle was confirmed. While 100% of the FP exhibiting green
turtles yielded CFPHV sequences, surprisingly, so did 15% of the clinically
healthy turtles. We hypothesize that turtle populations with zero (0%) CFPHV
frequency may be attributed to possible environmental differences, diet and/or
genetic resistance in these individuals. Our results provide first data on the
prevalence of CFPHV among seemingly healthy turtles; a factor that may not be
directly correlated to the disease incidence, but may suggest of a long-term
co-evolutionary latent infection interaction between CFPHV and its turtle-host
across species. Finally, computational analysis of amino acid variants within the
Turks and Caicos samples suggest potential functional importance in a
substitution for marker UL18 that encodes the major capsid protein gene, which
potentially could explain differences in pathogenicity. Nevertheless, such a
theory remains to be validated by further research.

DOI: 10.1186/s12862-014-0206-z 
PMCID: PMC4219010
PMID: 25342462  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

