
1. Geburtshilfe Frauenheilkd. 2012 Feb;72(2):132-136.

Oncolytic Viruses to Treat Ovarian Cancer Patients - a Review of Results From
Clinical Trials.

Hartkopf AD(1), Fehm T(1), Wallwiener M(2), Lauer U(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen.

Oncolytic viruses are replication competent "live" viruses. They infect tumor
cells, replicate highly selective inside and thereby destroy them. Because of the
enormous advances in the field of genetic engineering and biotechnology during
the last decade, virotherapy is increasingly used within clinical trials and
proved to be safe and effective. In particular, treatment of ovarian cancer
patients is one main focus of research. On the one hand, this is due to the poor 
prognosis of this dismal entity, resulting in the urgent need for novel
therapeutics. On the other hand, as ovarian cancer typically spreads within the
peritoneal cavity, intraperitoneal administration of oncolytic viruses is
feasible. This paper provides an overview of promising results from clinical
trials to treat ovarian cancer patients with oncolytic viruses.

Publisher: Onkolytische Viren sind replikationsfähige „lebende“ Viren. Sie
infizieren hochselektiv Tumorzellen, vermehren sich in diesen und zerstören sie
dabei. Aufgrund der enormen Fortschritte auf dem Gebiet der Gen- und
Biotechnologie kommt die Virotherapie zunehmend in klinischen Studien zum Einsatz
und erweist sich als äußerst sicher, nebenwirkungsarm und effektiv. Insbesondere 
findet sich bei der Behandlung von Ovarialkarzinompatientinnen ein wichtiger
Forschungsschwerpunkt. Zum einen liegt dies an der schlechten Prognose der
Erkrankung und der hieraus resultierenden Notwendigkeit neuer
Therapiemodalitäten. Zum anderen breitet sich das Ovarialkarzinom typischerweise 
lokoregionär aus, woraus sich die spezielle Möglichkeit der intraperitonealen
Applikation onkolytischer Viren ergibt. Die vorliegende Arbeit fasst die
vielversprechenden Ergebnisse klinischer Studien zur Behandlung von
Ovarialkarzinompatientinnen mit onkolytischen Viren zuammen.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0031-1298281 
PMCID: PMC4215573
PMID: 25374430 

