
1. J Virol. 1989 May;63(5):2108-17.

Structure, origin, and transforming activity of feline leukemia virus-myc
recombinant provirus FTT.

Doggett DL(1), Drake AL, Hirsch V, Rowe ME, Stallard V, Mullins JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115.

A myc-containing recombinant feline leukemia provirus, designated FTT, was
molecularly cloned from the cat T-cell lymphoma line F422. Its transforming
activity, as well as the nucleotide sequence of the 3' 2.7 kilobases of FTT,
including v-myc, was determined. The predicted v-myc protein differs from feline 
c-myc by three amino acid changes and is truncated by two amino acids at the
carboxyl terminus. Comparison with feline leukemia virus (FeLV), feline c-myc,
and other FeLV proviruses indicates that recombination junctions involved in the 
generation of FeLV-onc viruses occur at preferred locations within the virus.
They usually follow or occur within the sequence ACCCC at 5' junctions and may
result from homologous recombination between sequences of marked
purine-pyrimidine strand bias, especially at 3' junctions. Some recombination
sites also resemble recombinase recognition sequences utilized in immunoglobulin 
and T-cell receptor variable-region joining. Transfection of primary rat embryo
fibroblasts and subsequent in vivo analysis revealed that morphologic and
tumorigenic transformation require cotransfection of FTT with human EJ-ras DNA;
neither gene alone is sufficient. FTT v-myc is expressed in these transformed rat
cells as a 3.0-kilobase subgenomic RNA; however, in contrast to the depressed
level of c-myc expression in v-myc-involved feline tumors, steady-state levels of
rat c-myc RNA and protein are apparently unaltered.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.63.5.2108-2117.1989 
PMCID: PMC250627
PMID: 2539507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

