
1. BMC Res Notes. 2014 Nov 24;7:828. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-7-828.

Alcohol use disorders and associated factors among people living with HIV who are
attending services in south west Ethiopia.

Soboka M(1), Tesfaye M, Feyissa GT, Hanlon C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, College of Public Health and Medical Sciences, Jimma
University, Jimma, Ethiopia. matiwos2004@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Alcohol use disorders (AUDs) in persons living with human
immunodeficiency virus (PLHIV) in high-income countries have been associated with
poor adherence to antiretroviral medications and worse HIV-related outcomes.
Little is known about AUDs among people attending HIV services in sub-Saharan
Africa.
METHODS: Across-sectional study was carried out among PLHIV who attended HIV
services at Jimma University Specialized Hospital in September 2012. The World
Health Organization's Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Tool (AUDIT) was used 
to measure probable hazardous, harmful and dependent use of alcohol ('alcohol use
disorders'). Associations between AUDs and other variables were explored using
logistic regression analysis. All variables associated with AUDs with a p
value<0.25 were included in the final multivariable model.
RESULTS: The overall prevalence of AUDs was 32.6%, with hazardous use, harmful
use and alcohol dependence accounting for 24.7%, 2.8% and 5.1% of the total,
respectively. There was no significant difference in the prevalence of AUDs in
persons receiving antiretroviral treatment compared to those who were
antiretroviral therapy naÃ¯ve (32.6% vs. 38.6%). AUDs were identified in 26.0% and
44.1% of females and males, respectively. Male gender, smoking cigarettes and
psychological distress were positively associated independently with AUDs.
CONCLUSION: The high prevalence of AUDs detected in our facility-based survey of 
PLHIV in Ethiopia highlights the need to integrate delivery of effective and
feasible interventions for AUDs into HIV care.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-0500-7-828 
PMCID: PMC4289332
PMID: 25417542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

