
1. Cancer Lett. 2015 Jan 28;356(2 Pt B):733-42. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.10.023.
Epub 2014 Oct 24.

Epstein-Barr virus miR-BART20-5p regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis by
targeting BAD.

Kim H(1), Choi H(1), Lee SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Lifescience, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, 222 Banpo-daero, Seocho-gu, Seoul 137-701, South Korea.
(2)Department of Medical Lifescience, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, 222 Banpo-daero, Seocho-gu, Seoul 137-701, South Korea.
Electronic address: sukklee@catholic.ac.kr.

Although Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) BamHI A rightward transcript (BART) microRNAs
(miRNAs) are ubiquitously expressed in EBV-associated tumors, the role of most
BART miRNAs is unclear. In this study, we showed that Bcl-2-associated death
promoter (BAD) expression was significantly lower in EBV-infected AGS-EBV cells
than in EBV-negative AGS cells and investigated whether BART miRNAs target BAD.
Using bioinformatics analysis, five BART miRNAs showing seed match with the 3'
untranslated region (3'-UTR) of BAD were selected. Of these, only miR-BART20-5p
reduced BAD expression when individually transfected into AGS cells. A luciferase
assay revealed that miR-BART20-5p directly targets BAD. The expression of BAD
mRNA and protein was decreased by miR-BART20-5p and increased by an inhibitor of 
miR-BART20-5p. PE-Annexin V staining and cell proliferation assays showed that
miR-BART20-5p reduced apoptosis and enhanced cell growth. Furthermore,
miR-BART20-5p increased chemoresistance to 5-fluorouracil and docetaxel. Our data
suggest that miR-BART20-5p contributes to tumorigenesis of EBV-associated gastric
carcinoma by directly targeting the 3'-UTR of BAD.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.10.023 
PMID: 25449437  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

