
1. Psychosom Med. 2015 Jan;77(1):26-32. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000123.

Comparison of telomere length in black and white teachers from South Africa: the 
sympathetic activity and ambulatory blood pressure in Africans study.

von KÃ¤nel R(1), Malan NT, Hamer M, Malan L.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Neurology (R.v.K.), Inselspital, Bern University
Hospital, and Department of Clinical Research (R.v.K.), University of Bern,
Switzerland; Department of Psychosomatic Medicine (R.v.K.), Clinic Barmelweid,
Barmelweid, Switzerland; Hypertension in Africa Research Team (HART) (N.T.M.,
M.H., L.M.), Faculty of Health Sciences, North-West University, Potchefstroom,
North-West, South Africa; and Department of Epidemiology and Public Health
(M.H.), University College London, London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Telomere length is a marker of biological aging that has been linked
to cardiovascular disease risk. The black South African population is witnessing 
a tremendous increase in the prevalence of cardiovascular disease, part of which 
might be explained through urbanization. We compared telomere length between
black South Africans and white South Africans and examined which biological and
psychosocial variables played a role in ethnic difference in telomere length.
METHODS: We measured leukocyte telomere length in 161 black South African
teachers and 180 white South African teachers aged 23 to 66 years without a
history of atherothrombotic vascular disease. Age, sex, years having lived in the
area, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, hypertension, body mass
index, dyslipidemia, hemoglobin A1c, C-reactive protein, smoking, physical
activity, alcohol abuse, depressive symptoms, psychological distress, and work
stress were considered as covariates.
RESULTS: Black participants had shorter (median, interquartile range) relative
telomere length (0.79, 0.70-0.95) than did white participants (1.06, 0.87-1.21; p
< .001), and this difference changed very little after adjusting for covariates. 
In fully adjusted models, age (p < .001), male sex (p = .011), and HIV positive
status (p = .023) were associated with shorter telomere length. Ethnicity did not
significantly interact with any covariates in determining telomere length,
including psychosocial characteristics.
CONCLUSIONS: Black South Africans showed markedly shorter telomeres than did
white South African counterparts. Age, male sex, and HIV status were associated
with shorter telomere length. No interactions between ethnicity and biomedical or
psychosocial factors were found. Ethnic difference in telomere length might
primarily be explained by genetic factors.

DOI: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000123 
PMID: 25469684  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

