
1. Cancer Lett. 2015 Feb 28;357(2):575-81. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.12.017. Epub
2014 Dec 10.

Restoration of IRF1-dependent anticancer effects by MEK inhibition in human
cancer cells.

AbuSara N(1), Razavi S(1), Derwish L(1), Komatsu Y(1), Licursi M(1), Hirasawa
K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of BioMedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of
Newfoundland, St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada.
(2)Division of BioMedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of
Newfoundland, St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada. Electronic address:
kensuke@mun.ca.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF1) is a potent antiviral, antitumor and immune
regulatory protein. Recently, we found that activated Ras/MEK inhibits antiviral 
response by downregulating IRF1 expression and renders cancer cells susceptible
to oncolytic viruses. In this study, we sought to determine whether IRF1
downregulation underlies oncogenesis induced by Ras/MEK activation in human
cancer cells. Treatment of the MEK inhibitor U0126 promoted IRF1 expression in 7 
of 11 cancer cell lines we tested. IRF1 promotion was also observed in human
cancer cell lines treated with different MEK inhibitors or with RNAi
oligonucleotides against extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs).
Restoration of the expression of antitumor genes, p27 and p53 upregulated
modulator of apoptosis (PUMA), by MEK inhibition was less in IRF1 shRNA knockdown
cancer cells than in vector control cancer cells, suggesting that Ras/MEK targets
IRF1 for the downregulation of the antitumor genes. Moreover, apoptosis induction
by U0126 was significantly reduced in IRF1 shRNA knockdown cells than vector
control cells. This study demonstrates that IRF1 expression is suppressed by
activated Ras/MEK in human cancer cells and that IRF1 plays essential roles in
apoptosis induced by Ras/MEK inhibition.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.12.017 
PMID: 25497010  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

