
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Mar;43(1):51-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.12.004. Epub
2014 Dec 17.

Identification and functional analysis of a Hemolin like protein from Litopenaeus
vannamei.

Zuo H(1), Li H(1), Wei E(1), Su Z(1), Zheng J(1), Li C(1), Chen Y(2), Weng S(1), 
He J(3), Xu X(4).

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Safety/State Key Laboratory for
Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China;
Institute of Aquatic Economic Animals and Guangdong Province Key Laboratory for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Sun Yat-sen University, PR China.
(2)Institute of Aquatic Economic Animals and Guangdong Province Key Laboratory
for Aquatic Economic Animals, Sun Yat-sen University, PR China; School of Marine 
Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China.
(3)MOE Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Safety/State Key Laboratory for
Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China;
Institute of Aquatic Economic Animals and Guangdong Province Key Laboratory for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Sun Yat-sen University, PR China. Electronic address:
lsshjg@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(4)MOE Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Safety/State Key Laboratory for
Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China;
Institute of Aquatic Economic Animals and Guangdong Province Key Laboratory for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Sun Yat-sen University, PR China. Electronic address:
xuxpeng@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Hemolin is a specific immune protein belonging to immunoglobulin superfamily and 
firstly identified in insects. Growing evidences suggest that Hemolin can be
activated by bacterial and viral infections and may play an important role in
antimicrobial immunity. In this paper, we firstly identified a Hemolin-like
protein from Litopenaeus vannamei (LvHemolin). Sequence analysis showed that
LvHemolin shares high similarity with insect Hemolins and is mainly composed of
seven immunoglobulin (Ig) domains which form a 'horseshoe' tertiary structure.
Tissue distribution analysis demonstrated that LvHemolin mainly expressed in
stomach, gill, epithelium and pyloric cecum of L. vannamei. After challenge with 
pathogens or stimulants, expression of LvHemolin was significantly up-regulated
in both gill and stomach. Agglutination analysis demonstrated that recombinant
LvHemolin protein purified from Escherichia coli could accelerate the
agglutination of Vibrio parahaemolyticus, E. coli, Staphylococcus aureus, and
Bacillus subtilis in the presence of Ca(2+). To verify the immune function of
LvHemolin in vivo, shrimps were injected with gene-specific dsRNA, followed by
challenge with white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) or V. parahaemolyticus. The
results revealed that silence of LvHemolin could increase the cumulative
mortalities of shrimps challenged by pathogens and increase the WSSV copies in
shrimp tissues. These suggested that Hemolin could play an important role in
shrimp innate immune defense against bacterial and viral infections.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.12.004 
PMID: 25527138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

