
1. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2015 Jan;109(1):62-9. doi: 10.1093/trstmh/tru198.

Vaccination and heterologous immunity: educating the immune system.

Gil A(1), Kenney LL(1), Mishra R(1), Watkin LB(1), Aslan N(1), Selin LK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA liisa.selin@umassmed.edu.

This review discusses three inter-related topics: (1) the immaturity of the
neonatal and infant immune response; (2) heterologous immunity, where prior
infection history with unrelated pathogens alters disease outcome resulting in
either enhanced protective immunity or increased immunopathology to new
infections, and (3) epidemiological human vaccine studies that demonstrate
vaccines can have beneficial or detrimental effects on subsequent unrelated
infections. The results from the epidemiological and heterologous immunity
studies suggest that the immune system has tremendous plasticity and that each
new infection or vaccine that an individual is exposed to during a lifetime will 
potentially alter the dynamics of their immune system. It also suggests that each
new infection or vaccine that an infant receives is not only perturbing the
immune system but is educating the immune system and laying down the foundation
for all subsequent responses. This leads to the question, is there an optimum way
to educate the immune system? Should this be taken into consideration in our
vaccination protocols?

Â© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Royal
Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. All rights reserved. For permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/trstmh/tru198 
PMCID: PMC4351360
PMID: 25573110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

