
1. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 3;10(2):e0117450. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117450.
eCollection 2015.

Dopamine increases CD14+CD16+ monocyte migration and adhesion in the context of
substance abuse and HIV neuropathogenesis.

Coley JS(1), Calderon TM(1), Gaskill PJ(1), Eugenin EA(2), Berman JW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York,
United States of America.
(2)Public Health Research Institute, New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers
University, Newark, New Jersey, United States of America.
(3)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York,
United States of America; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America.

Drug abuse is a major comorbidity of HIV infection and cognitive disorders are
often more severe in the drug abusing HIV infected population. CD14+CD16+
monocytes, a mature subpopulation of peripheral blood monocytes, are key
mediators of HIV neuropathogenesis. Infected CD14+CD16+ monocyte transmigration
across the blood brain barrier mediates HIV entry into the brain and establishes 
a viral reservoir within the CNS. Despite successful antiretroviral therapy,
continued influx of CD14+CD16+ monocytes, both infected and uninfected,
contributes to chronic neuroinflammation and the development of HIV associated
neurocognitive disorders (HAND). Drug abuse increases extracellular dopamine in
the CNS. Once in the brain, CD14+CD16+ monocytes can be exposed to extracellular 
dopamine due to drug abuse. The direct effects of dopamine on CD14+CD16+
monocytes and their contribution to HIV neuropathogenesis are not known. In this 
study, we showed that CD14+CD16+ monocytes express mRNA for all five dopamine
receptors by qRT-PCR and D1R, D5R and D4R surface protein by flow cytometry.
Dopamine and the D1-like dopamine receptor agonist, SKF38393, increased
CD14+CD16+ monocyte migration that was characterized as chemokinesis. To
determine whether dopamine affected cell motility and adhesion, live cell imaging
was used to monitor the accumulation of CD14+CD16+ monocytes on the surface of a 
tissue culture dish. Dopamine increased the number and the rate at which
CD14+CD16+ monocytes in suspension settled to the dish surface. In a spreading
assay, dopamine increased the area of CD14+CD16+ monocytes during the early
stages of cell adhesion. In addition, adhesion assays showed that the overall
total number of adherent CD14+CD16+ monocytes increased in the presence of
dopamine. These data suggest that elevated extracellular dopamine in the CNS of
HIV infected drug abusers contributes to HIV neuropathogenesis by increasing the 
accumulation of CD14+CD16+ monocytes in dopamine rich brain regions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117450 
PMCID: PMC4315499
PMID: 25647501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

