
1. Hum Gene Ther Clin Dev. 2015 Mar;26(1):5-14. doi: 10.1089/humc.2014.153. Epub
2015 Feb 12.

Translational data from adeno-associated virus-mediated gene therapy of
hemophilia B in dogs.

Nichols TC(1), Whitford MH, Arruda VR, Stedman HH, Kay MA, High KA.

Author information: 
(1)1 Francis Owen Blood Research Laboratory, Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , Chapel Hill,
NC 27516.

Preclinical testing of new therapeutic strategies in relevant animal models is an
essential part of drug development. The choice of animal models of disease that
are used in these studies is driven by the strength of the translational data for
informing about safety, efficacy, and success or failure of human clinical
trials. Hemophilia B is a monogenic, X-linked, inherited bleeding disorder that
results from absent or dysfunctional coagulation factor IX (FIX). Regarding
preclinical studies of adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated gene therapy for
hemophilia B, dogs with severe hemophilia B (<1% FIX) provide well-characterized 
phenotypes and genotypes in which a species-specific transgene can be expressed
in a mixed genetic background. Correction of the hemophilic coagulopathy by
sustained expression of FIX, reduction of bleeding events, and a comprehensive
assessment of the humoral and cell-mediated immune responses to the expressed
transgene and recombinant AAV vector are all feasible end points in these dogs.
This review compares the preclinical studies of AAV vectors used to treat dogs
with hemophilia B with the results obtained in subsequent human clinical trials
using muscle- and liver-based approaches.

DOI: 10.1089/humc.2014.153 
PMCID: PMC4442577
PMID: 25675273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

