
1. Arch Environ Health. 1989 Sep-Oct;44(5):323-30.

Intracellular Ca2+ and cytotoxicity.

Lynn WS(1), Mathews D, Cloyd M, Wallwork JC, Thompson A, Sachs C Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine and Community Health, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston.

Following injury or activation in some immune cell lines, elevation of
intracellular Ca2+ concentration (Cai2+) is an early and major event that
precedes cell death. Agents shown to elevate Cai2+ and to result subsequently in 
the death of some cells include human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (in T4+
cells), 25-hydroxy cholesterol, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), cyclosporine,
dexamethasone, alpha-interferon, and Ca2+ ionophores. The effects of these
agents, both on Cai2+ and on cytotoxicity, are additive. This type of
Ca2+-related cytotoxicity may be associated with either accelerated synthesis of 
triglycerides (TNF), accelerated synthesis of cholesterol ester (25-hydroxy
cholesterol), or cholesterol (HIV) and terminally with declining synthesis of
structural phospholipid. Agents that can lower Cai2+ (e.g., phorbol esters,
diglycerides, lipoproteins [LDL], oleic acid, or serum) under appropriate
conditions ameliorate the Ca2+-induced cytotoxicity. Metabolism of other divalent
metals, i.e., Zn2+ and Cd2+, also become altered with cell injury, e.g.,
glucocorticoids elevate Cai2+, but block uptake of Zn2+. These observations
support the idea that chronic elevation of Cai2+ by many chemically unrelated
agents leads to cell death by creating imbalance both in cell biosynthetic
mechanisms--especially in those controlling lipid metabolism--as well as creating
imbalances in metabolism of other trace metals, especially Zn2+.

DOI: 10.1080/00039896.1989.9935901 
PMID: 2573316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

