
1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 6;10(3):e0119792. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119792.
eCollection 2015.

Characterization of influenza A (H7N9) viruses isolated from human cases imported
into Taiwan.

Yang JR(1), Kuo CY(1), Huang HY(1), Wu FT(1), Huang YL(1), Cheng CY(1), Su YT(1),
Wu HS(2), Liu MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research, Diagnostics and Vaccine Development, Centers for Disease 
Control, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(2)Center for Research, Diagnostics and Vaccine Development, Centers for Disease 
Control, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; School of Medical Laboratory Science and
Biotechnology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

A novel avian influenza A (H7N9) virus causes severe human infections and was
first identified in March 2013 in China. The H7N9 virus has exhibited two
epidemiological peaks of infection, occurring in week 15 of 2013 and week 5 of
2014. Taiwan, which is geographically adjacent to China, faces a large risk of
being affected by this virus. Through extensive surveillance, launched in April
2013, four laboratory-confirmed H7N9 cases imported from China have been
identified in Taiwan. The H7N9 virus isolated from imported case 1 in May 2013
(during the first wave) was found to be closest genetically to a virus from wild 
birds and differed from the prototype virus, A/Anhui/1/2013, in the MP gene. The 
other three imported cases were detected in December 2013 and April 2014 (during 
the second wave). The viruses isolated from cases 2 and 4 were similar in the
compositions of their 6 internal genes and distinct from A/Anhui/1/2013 in the
PB2 and MP genes, whereas the virus isolated from case 3 exhibited a novel
reassortment that has not been identified previously and was different from
A/Anhui/1/2013 in the PB2, PA and MP genes. The four imported H7N9 viruses share 
similar antigenicity with A/Anhui/1/2013, and their HA and NA genes grouped
together in their respective phylogenies. In contrast with the HA and NA genes,
which exhibited a smaller degree of diversity, the internal genes were
heterogeneous and provided potential distinctions between transmission sources in
terms of both geography and hosts. It is important to strengthen surveillance of 
influenza and to share viral genetic data in real-time for reducing the threat of
rapid and continuing evolution of H7N9 viruses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119792 
PMCID: PMC4351886
PMID: 25748033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

