
1. J Virol. 2015 Jun;89(11):5935-48. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02537-14. Epub 2015 Mar 25.

Pandemic Swine H1N1 Influenza Viruses with Almost Undetectable Neuraminidase
Activity Are Not Transmitted via Aerosols in Ferrets and Are Inhibited by Human
Mucus but Not Swine Mucus.

Zanin M(1), Marathe B(1), Wong SS(1), Yoon SW(1), Collin E(2), Oshansky C(3),
Jones J(1), Hause B(4), Webby R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(2)Newport Laboratories, Worthington, Minnesota, USA.
(3)Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA.
(4)Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas, 
USA.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA richard.webby@stjude.org.

A balance between the functions of the influenza virus surface proteins
hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) is thought to be important for the
transmission of viruses between humans. Here we describe two pandemic H1N1
viruses, A/swine/Virginia/1814-1/2012 and A/swine/Virginia/1814-2/2012
(pH1N1low-1 and -2, respectively), that were isolated from swine symptomatic for 
influenza. The enzymatic activity of the NA of these viruses was almost
undetectable, while the HA binding affinity for α2,6 sialic acids was greater
than that of the highly homologous pH1N1 viruses A/swine/Pennsylvania/2436/2012
and A/swine/Minnesota/2499/2012 (pH1N1-1 and -2), which exhibited better-balanced
HA and NA activities. The in vitro growth kinetics of pH1N1low and pH1N1 viruses 
were similar, but aerosol transmission of pH1N1low-1 was abrogated and
transmission via direct contact in ferrets was significantly impaired compared to
pH1N1-1, which transmitted by direct and aerosol contact. In normal human
bronchial epithelial cells, pH1N1low-1 was significantly inhibited by mucus but
pH1N1-1 was not. In Madin-Darby canine kidney cell cultures overlaid with human
or swine mucus, human mucus inhibited pH1N1low-1 but swine mucus did not. These
data show that the interaction between viruses and mucus may be an important
factor in viral transmissibility and could be a barrier for interspecies
transmission between humans and swine for influenza viruses.IMPORTANCE: A balance
between the functions of the influenza virus surface proteins hemagglutinin (HA) 
and neuraminidase (NA) is thought to be important for transmission of viruses
from swine to humans. Here we show that a swine virus with extremely functionally
mismatched HA and NAs (pH1N1low-1) cannot transmit via aerosol in ferrets, while 
another highly homologous virus with HA and NAs that are better matched
functionally (pH1N1-1) can transmit via aerosol. These viruses show similar
growth kinetics in Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells, but pH1N1low-1 is
significantly inhibited by mucus in normal human bronchial epithelial cells
whereas pH1N1-1 is not. Further, human mucus could inhibit these viruses, but
swine mucus could not. These data show that the interaction between viruses and
mucus may be an important factor in viral transmissibility and could be a species
barrier between humans and swine for influenza viruses.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02537-14 
PMCID: PMC4442420
PMID: 25810540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

