
1. J Urban Health. 2015 Jun;92(3):460-71. doi: 10.1007/s11524-015-9951-6.

Love on lockdown: how social network characteristics predict separational
concurrency among low income African-American women.

King KM(1), Latkin CA, Davey-Rothwell MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health, Behavior and Society, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of 
Public Health, 615 N. Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD, 21231, USA, Kking40@jhu.edu.

One out of nine African-American men between the ages of 20 and 34 is behind
bars, resulting in many African-American women losing their primary romantic
partners to incarceration. Research suggests that partner incarceration may
contribute to increased risk of sexually transmitted infections (STIs)/human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV); however, factors associated with women's decisions 
to begin new sexual partnerships following partner incarceration (i.e.,
separational concurrency) have not been well studied. This study examined the
social context relevant to initiating separational concurrency, following
incarceration of a primary male partner. Cross-sectional secondary data analysis 
of 6-month follow-up data from the CHAT Project, a social-network based
HIV/sexually transmitted disease (STD) prevention study in Baltimore, MD, USA.
Participants were N = 196 African-American women, who reported ever having had a 
partner who was incarcerated for at least 6 months during the relationship. The
majority (81.5%) of women were unemployed with a mean age of 41.7 years. Over
half of the sample (59.5%) reported having used crack or heroin at least once in 
the previous 12 months; 48.5% of the women had experienced physical abuse, with
over half of the sample reporting a lifetime history of emotional abuse (54.6%). 
Separational concurrency, defined as answering yes to the item, "While [your]
partner was incarcerated, did you have any other sexual partners?," was the
primary outcome measure. After adjusting for age, drug use and unemployment the
multiple logistic regression model found that women who reported a history of
physical or emotional abuse were over two times as likely to report separational 
concurrency than women without an abuse history [adjusted odds ratio (AOR), 2.24;
95% CI, 1.24, 4.05; p = .007 and AOR, 2.44; 95% CI, 1.33, 4.46; p = .004,
respectively]. Individuals who reported a higher number of drug-using sex
partners (AOR, 2.49; 95% CI, 1.4, 4.5; p = .002), sex exchange partners (AOR,
4.0; 95% CI, 1.8 8.9; p = .001), and sexual partners who engaged in concurrency
(AOR: 2.67; 95% CI: 1.5, 4.8; p = .001) were significantly more likely to report 
separational concurrency. Conversely, participants who reported more female kin
in their social networks (AOR, .808; 95% CI, .67, .97; p = .025), having known
network members a longer time (AOR, .997; 95% CI, .993, .999; p = .043), and
higher levels of trust for network members (AOR, .761; 95% CI, .63, .92;
p = .005) were significantly less likely to report separational concurrency.
Results of this study demonstrate that social network characteristics may be
crucial to understanding separational concurrency among African-American urban
women who have lost a partner to incarceration. Social network and other
resource-based interventions, which provide instrumental, social, and economic
resources to women who have experienced the loss of a partner to incarceration,
may be important tools in empowering women and helping to reduce the
disproportionate burden of STIs/HIV among low income, African-American women.

DOI: 10.1007/s11524-015-9951-6 
PMCID: PMC4456476
PMID: 25820220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

