
1. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2015 Apr;19(4):454-62. doi: 10.5588/ijtld.14.0608.

Immunogenicity of BCG in HIV-exposed and non-exposed infants following routine
birth or delayed vaccination.

Hesseling AC(1), Jaspan HB(2), Black GF(3), Nene N(3), Walzl G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Desmond Tutu TB Centre, Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Faculty of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg, South Africa.
(2)Division of Immunology, Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular
Medicine, University of Cape Town Health Sciences Faculty, Cape Town, South
Africa; Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Department of Science and Technology/National Research Foundation Centre of
Excellence for Biomedical TB Research/Medical Research Council Centre for
Molecular and Cellular Biology, Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics,
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg,
South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) exposed infants are at high risk
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis exposure, have high rates of progression to
tuberculosis (TB) disease and are at significant risk of bacille Calmette-Guérin 
(BCG) induced adverse events.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate a delayed BCG vaccination strategy in HIV-exposed infants.
DESIGN: A randomised trial of routine BCG vaccination given at birth compared to 
14 weeks of age in HIV-exposed non-infected and non-HIV-exposed infants to
investigate longitudinal BCG-induced immune responses using a 7-day whole blood
interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: A significantly higher proportion of infants had positive responses to
M. tuberculosis purified protein derivative (PPD) and BCG at 14 weeks in the
birth vs. delayed vaccination groups (P = 0.001 for both). This difference was no
longer apparent at weeks 24 or 52. Among infants vaccinated at birth, the 14-week
IFN-γ response to M. tuberculosis PPD was lower among HIV-exposed than
non-exposed infants (276.5 pg/ml vs. 790.2, P = 0.048). Among all infants, there 
were significant correlations between the magnitude of IFN-γ responses to BCG, M.
tuberculosis PPD, TB 10.4 and culture filtrate protein 10/early secreted
antigenic target 6.
CONCLUSIONS: The timing of vaccination had limited effect on BCG-induced IFN-γ
responses, which waned considerably over 1 year despite initial vigorous
responses in both vaccination groups. The lower responses in HIV-exposed
non-infected infants suggest potentially altered mycobacterial immunity early in 
life.

DOI: 10.5588/ijtld.14.0608 
PMCID: PMC4530999
PMID: 25860002  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

