
1. J Virol. 2015 Jul;89(13):6673-84. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00636-15. Epub 2015 Apr 15.

Dynasore disrupts trafficking of herpes simplex virus proteins.

Mues MB(1), Cheshenko N(2), Wilson DW(3), Gunther-Cummins L(4), Herold BC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, 
USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York, USA.
(3)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York, USA Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA betsy.herold@einstein.yu.edu.

Dynasore, a small-molecule inhibitor of the GTPase activity of dynamin, inhibits 
the entry of several viruses, including herpes simplex virus (HSV), but its
impact on other steps in the viral life cycle has not been delineated. The
current study was designed to test the hypothesis that dynamin is required for
viral protein trafficking and thus has pleiotropic inhibitory effects on HSV
infection. Dynasore inhibited HSV-1 and HSV-2 infection of human epithelial and
neuronal cells, including primary genital tract cells and human fetal neurons and
astrocytes. Similar results were obtained when cells were transfected with a
plasmid expressing dominant negative dynamin. Kinetic studies demonstrated that
dynasore reduced the number of viral capsids reaching the nuclear pore if added
at the time of viral entry and that, when added as late as 8 h postentry,
dynasore blocked the transport of newly synthesized viral proteins from the
nucleus to the cytosol. Proximity ligation assays demonstrated that treatment
with dynasore prevented the colocalization of VP5 and dynamin. This resulted in a
reduction in the number of viral capsids isolated from sucrose gradients. Fewer
capsids were observed by electron microscopy in dynasore-treated cells than in
control-treated cells. There were also reductions in infectious progeny released 
into culture supernatants and in cell-to-cell spread. Together, these findings
suggest that targeting dynamin-HSV interactions may provide a new strategy for
HSV treatment and prevention.IMPORTANCE: HSV infections remain a global health
problem associated with significant morbidity, particularly in neonates and
immunocompromised hosts, highlighting the need for novel approaches to treatment 
and prevention. The current studies indicate that dynamin plays a role in
multiple steps in the viral life cycle and provides a new target for antiviral
therapy. Dynasore, a small-molecule inhibitor of dynamin, has pleiotropic effects
on HSV-1 and HSV-2 infection and impedes viral entry, trafficking of viral
proteins, and capsid formation.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00636-15 
PMCID: PMC4468502
PMID: 25878109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

