
1. J Virol Methods. 2015 Aug;220:64-75. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2015.04.013. Epub
2015 Apr 20.

Development and validation of a multiplex reverse transcription quantitative PCR 
(RT-qPCR) assay for the rapid detection of Citrus tristeza virus, Citrus psorosis
virus, and Citrus leaf blotch virus.

Osman F(1), Hodzic E(2), Kwon SJ(3), Wang J(3), Vidalakis G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
(2)Real-time PCR Research & Diagnostic Core Facility, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, University of California,
Riverside, CA 92521, USA.
(4)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, University of California,
Riverside, CA 92521, USA. Electronic address: georgios.vidalakis@ucr.edu.

A single real-time multiplex reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-qPCR) assay for the simultaneous detection of Citrus tristeza virus 
(CTV), Citrus psorosis virus (CPsV), and Citrus leaf blotch virus (CLBV) was
developed and validated using three different fluorescently labeled minor groove 
binding qPCR probes. To increase the detection reliability, coat protein (CP)
genes from large number of different isolates of CTV, CPsV and CLBV were
sequenced and a multiple sequence alignment was generated with corresponding CP
sequences from the GenBank and a robust multiplex RT-qPCR assay was designed. The
capacity of the multiplex RT-qPCR assay in detecting the viruses was compared to 
singleplex RT-qPCR designed specifically for each virus and was assessed using
multiple virus isolates from diverse geographical regions and citrus species as
well as graft-inoculated citrus plants infected with various combination of the
three viruses. No significant difference in detection limits was found and
specificity was not affected by the inclusion of the three assays in a multiplex 
RT-qPCR reaction. Comparison of the viral load for each virus using singleplex
and multiplex RT-qPCR assays, revealed no significant differences between the two
assays in virus detection. No significant difference in Cq values was detected
when using one-step and two-step multiplex RT-qPCR detection formats. Optimizing 
the RNA extraction technique for citrus tissues and testing the quality of the
extracted RNA using RT-qPCR targeting the cytochrome oxidase citrus gene as an
RNA specific internal control proved to generate better diagnostic assays.
Results showed that the developed multiplex RT-qPCR can streamline viruses
testing of citrus nursery stock by replacing three separate singleplex assays,
thus reducing time and labor while retaining the same sensitivity and
specificity. The three targeted RNA viruses are regulated pathogens for
California's mandatory "Section 3701: Citrus Nursery Stock Pest Cleanliness
Program". Adopting a compatible multiplex RT-qPCR testing protocol for these
viruses as well as other RNA and DNA regulated pathogens will provide a valuable 
alternative tool for virus detection and efficient program implementation.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2015.04.013 
PMID: 25907469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

