
1. Avian Pathol. 2015;44(4):259-68. doi: 10.1080/03079457.2015.1042428.

Characterization of the M2e antibody response following highly pathogenic H5N1
avian influenza virus infection and reliability of M2e ELISA for identifying
infected among vaccinated chickens.

Tarigan S(1), Indriani R, Durr PA, Ignjatovic J.

Author information: 
(1)a Indonesian Research Center for Veterinary Sciences , Bogor , Indonesia.

A surveillance method able to differentiate between vaccinated and infected
poultry is required for those countries that practice vaccination against highly 
pathogenic avian influenza H5N1. The external domain of the M2 protein (M2e) of
influenza virus is a potentially useful differentiating-infected from vaccinated 
animals (DIVA) antigen but little is known about the M2e antibody response and
factors influencing its detection. In this study, the M2e antibody response was
characterized in layer birds vaccinated and challenged with an Indonesian H5N1
virus isolate, using a single M2e peptide or four-branched multiple antigenic
peptide form of M2e (MAP-M2e) as antigens in two separate ELISAs. Anti-M2e
antibodies were absent in chicks with high level of maternal haemagglutination
inhibition antibodies and also in all layers vaccinated once, twice or three
times with an inactivated commercial H5N1 vaccine. In contrast, anti-M2e
antibodies were detected in vaccinated layers challenged with H5N1 virus and
their presence was associated with virus isolation and an increase in
haemagglutination inhibition titres. The number of birds that developed M2e
antibodies, as well as the strength and duration of the M2e antibody response
were strongly influenced by the length of the interval between vaccination and
challenge. Birds challenged at six weeks after vaccination all developed M2e
antibodies by 14 days that lasted until at least 56 days after infection. In
birds challenged at two weeks after vaccination, only a proportion of birds
developed M2e antibodies by 14 days that lasted only until 28 days
post-infection. Both single M2e peptide and MAP-M2e ELISAs had high diagnostic
specificity but the diagnostic sensitivity of MAP-M2e ELISA was significantly
higher and more effective in detecting M2e antibody in immune and infected birds.
The results show that MAP-M2e ELISA would be useful for surveillance in countries
using vaccination to control highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1.

DOI: 10.1080/03079457.2015.1042428 
PMID: 25915110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

