
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 May 1;11(5):e1004178. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004178.
eCollection 2015 May.

Estimating the In Vivo Killing Efficacy of Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes across
Different Peptide-MHC Complex Densities.

Garcia V(1), Richter K(2), Graw F(3), Oxenius A(2), Regoes RR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Integrative Biology, ETH Zurich, Universit√§tstr, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Center for Modeling and Simulation in the Biosciences, Bio-Quant Center,
Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.

Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) are important agents in the control of
intracellular pathogens, which specifically recognize and kill infected cells.
Recently developed experimental methods allow the estimation of the CTL's
efficacy in detecting and clearing infected host cells. One method, the in vivo
killing assay, utilizes the adoptive transfer of antigen displaying target cells 
into the bloodstream of mice. Surprisingly, killing efficacies measured by this
method are often much higher than estimates obtained by other methods based on,
for instance, the dynamics of escape mutations. In this study, we investigated
what fraction of this variation can be explained by differences in peptide loads 
employed in in vivo killing assays. We addressed this question in mice immunized 
with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV). We conducted in vivo killing
assays varying the loads of the immunodominant epitope GP33 on target cells.
Using a mathematical model, we determined the efficacy of effector and memory
CTL, as well as CTL in chronically infected mice. We found that the killing
efficacy is substantially reduced at lower peptide loads. For physiological
peptide loads, our analysis predicts more than a factor 10 lower CTL efficacies
than at maximum peptide loads. Assuming that the efficacy scales linearly with
the frequency of CTL, a clear hierarchy emerges among the groups across all
peptide antigen concentrations. The group of mice with chronic LCMV infections
shows a consistently higher killing efficacy per CTL than the acutely infected
mouse group, which in turn has a consistently larger efficacy than the memory
mouse group. We conclude that CTL killing efficacy dependence on surface epitope 
frequencies can only partially explain the variation in in vivo killing efficacy 
estimates across experimental methods and viral systems, which vary about four
orders of magnitude. In contrast, peptide load differences can explain at most
two orders of magnitude.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004178 
PMCID: PMC4416789
PMID: 25933039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

