
1. Genet Mol Res. 2015 May 11;14(2):4818-28. doi: 10.4238/2015.May.11.14.

Identification of highly expressed host microRNAs that respond to white spot
syndrome virus infection in the Pacific white shrimp Litopenaeus vannamei
(Penaeidae).

Zeng DG(1), Chen XL(1), Xie DX(1), Zhao YZ(1), Yang Q(1), Wang H(1), Li YM(1),
Chen XH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Guangxi Key Laboratory of Aquatic Genetic Breeding and Healthy Aquaculture,
Guangxi Academy of Fisheries Sciences, Nanning, China.
(2)Guangxi Key Laboratory of Aquatic Genetic Breeding and Healthy Aquaculture,
Guangxi Academy of Fisheries Sciences, Nanning, China gxnnscs@126.com.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are known to play an important role in regulating both
adaptive and innate immunity. Pacific white shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei) is the 
most widely farmed crustacean species in the world. However, little is known
about the role miRNAs play in shrimp immunity. To understand the impact of viral 
infection on miRNA expression in shrimp, we used high-throughput sequencing
technology to sequence two small RNA libraries prepared from L. vannamei under
normal and white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) challenged conditions. Approximately 
19,312,189 and 39,763,551 raw reads corresponding to 17,414,787 and 28,633,379
high-quality mappable reads were obtained from the two libraries, respectively.
Twelve conserved miRNAs and one novel miRNA that were highly expressed (>100 RPM)
in L. vannamei were identified. Of the identified miRNAs, 8 were differentially
expressed in response to the virus infection, of which 1 was upregulated and 7
were downregulated. The prediction of miRNA targets showed that the target genes 
of the differentially expressed miRNAs were related to immunity, apoptosis, and
development functions. Our study provides the first characterization of L.
vannamei miRNAs in response to WSSV infection, which will help to reveal the
roles of miRNAs in the antiviral mechanisms of shrimp.

DOI: 10.4238/2015.May.11.14 
PMID: 25966256  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

