
1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

J Immunol Methods. 2015 Sep;424:80-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2015.05.003. Epub 2015
May 21.

A neutralizing scFv antibody against infectious bursal disease virus screened by 
flow cytometry.

Zhou Y(1), Xie ZG(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences and Agro-forest, Qiqihar University, Qiqihar 161000, 
PR China.
(2)College of Life Sciences and Agro-forest, Qiqihar University, Qiqihar 161000, 
PR China. Electronic address: 2731848980@qq.com.

Retraction in
    J Immunol Methods. 2016 Oct;437:70.

Infectious bursal disease (IBD) is considered a vital viral disease that
threatens the poultry industry worldwide. In this study, a recombinant single
chain variable fragment (scFv) antibody library derived from chickens immunized
with VP2 protein of infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV) was constructed. The
library was subjected to three rounds of screening by flow cytometry (FCM)
against VP2/IBDV through a bacteria display technology, resulting in the
enrichment of scFvs. Three scFv clones with different fluorescence intensity were
obtained by colony pick up at random. The obtained scFv antibodies were expressed
and purified. Relative affinity assay showed the three clones had different
sensitivity to VP2, in accordance with fluorescence activity cell sorting
analysis (FACS). The potential use of the isolated IBDV-specific scFv antibodies 
was demonstrated by the successful application of these antibodies in Western
blotting and ELISA assay. What's more, in vitro neutralization measurement showed
that one of the three isolated antibodies possessed the neutralization function
against IBDV. This study provides new strategies for screening of antibody
library, and scFv antibodies isolated in this study may be utilized as lead
candidates for further development of diagnostic or therapeutic antibodies for
detection and treatment of IBDV infection.

Copyright Â© 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2015.05.003 
PMID: 26003676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

