
1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2015 May 13;2:15017. doi: 10.1038/mtm.2015.17.
eCollection 2015.

Development of a replication-competent lentivirus assay for dendritic
cell-targeting lentiviral vectors.

Farley DC(1), McCloskey L(1), Thorne BA(2), Tareen SU(2), Nicolai CJ(2), Campbell
DJ(2), Bannister R(1), Stewart HJ(1), Pearson LJ(1), Moyer BJ(2), Robbins SH(2), 
Zielinski L(2), Kim T(2), Radcliffe PA(1), Mitrophanous KA(1), Gombotz WR(2),
Miskin JE(1), Kelley-Clarke B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Oxford BioMedica (UK) Limited, Windrush Court, Transport Way , Oxford, UK.
(2)Immune Design , Seattle, Washington, USA.

It is a current regulatory requirement to demonstrate absence of detectable
replication-competent lentivirus (RCL) in lentiviral vector products prior to use
in clinical trials. Immune Design previously described an HIV-1-based
integration-deficient lentiviral vector for use in cancer immunotherapy (VP02).
VP02 is enveloped with E1001, a modified Sindbis virus glycoprotein which targets
dendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing non-integrin
(DC-SIGN) expressed on dendritic cells in vivo. Vector enveloped with E1001 does 
not transduce T-cell lines used in standard HIV-1-based RCL assays, making
current RCL testing formats unsuitable for testing VP02. We therefore developed a
novel assay to test for RCL in clinical lots of VP02. This assay, which utilizes 
a murine leukemia positive control virus and a 293F cell line expressing the
E1001 receptor DC-SIGN, meets a series of evaluation criteria defined in
collaboration with US regulatory authorities and demonstrates the ability of the 
assay format to amplify and detect a hypothetical RCL derived from VP02 vector
components. This assay was qualified and used to test six independent GMP
production lots of VP02, in which no RCL was detected. We propose that the
evaluation criteria used to rationally design this novel method should be
considered when developing an RCL assay for any lentiviral vector.

DOI: 10.1038/mtm.2015.17 
PMCID: PMC4445008
PMID: 26029728 

