
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Oct;1848(10 Pt A):2244-52. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamem.2015.06.010. Epub 2015 Jun 11.

Membrane topology of NS2B of dengue virus revealed by NMR spectroscopy.

Li Y(1), Li Q(2), Wong YL(1), Liew LS(1), Kang C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Therapeutics Centre, Agency for Science, Technology and Research 
(A*STAR), 31 Biopolis Way, Nanos, #03-01, 138669, Singapore.
(2)Institute of Chemical & Engineering Sciences, Agency for Science, Technology
and Research (A*STAR), 1 Pesek Road, Jurong Island, Singapore 627833, Singapore.
(3)Experimental Therapeutics Centre, Agency for Science, Technology and Research 
(A*STAR), 31 Biopolis Way, Nanos, #03-01, 138669, Singapore. Electronic address: 
cbkang@etc.a-star.edu.sg.

Non-structural (NS) proteins of dengue virus (DENV) are important for viral
replication. There are four membrane proteins that are coded by viral genome.
NS2B was shown to be one of the membrane proteins and its main function was
confirmed to regulate viral protease activity. Its membrane topology is still not
known because only few studies have been conducted to understand its structure.
Here we report the determination of membrane topology of NS2B from DENV serotype 
4 using NMR spectroscopy. NS2B of DENV4 was expressed and purified in detergent
micelles. The secondary structure of NS2B was first defined based on backbone
chemical resonance assignment. Four helices were identified in NS2B. The membrane
topology of NS2B was defined based on relaxation analysis and paramagnetic
relaxation enhancement experiments. The last three helices were shown to be more 
stable than the first helix. The NS3 protease cofactor region between α2 and α3
is highly dynamic. Our results will be useful for further structural and
functional analysis of NS2B.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2015.06.010 
PMID: 26072288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

