
1. J Clin Invest. 2015 Jul 1;125(7):2891-903. doi: 10.1172/JCI81380. Epub 2015 Jun
22.

Synaptic pathology and therapeutic repair in adult retinoschisis mouse by AAV-RS1
transfer.

Ou J, Vijayasarathy C, Ziccardi L, Chen S, Zeng Y, Marangoni D, Pope JG, Bush RA,
Wu Z, Li W, Sieving PA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2015 Jul 1;125(7):2572-5.

Strategies aimed at invoking synaptic plasticity have therapeutic potential for
several neurological conditions. The human retinal synaptic disease X-linked
retinoschisis (XLRS) is characterized by impaired visual signal transmission
through the retina and progressive visual acuity loss, and mice lacking
retinoschisin (RS1) recapitulate human disease. Here, we demonstrate that
restoration of RS1 via retina-specific delivery of adeno-associated virus type
8-RS1 (AAV8-RS1) vector rescues molecular pathology at the
photoreceptor-depolarizing bipolar cell (photoreceptor-DBC) synapse and restores 
function in adult Rs1-KO animals. Initial development of the photoreceptor-DBC
synapse was normal in the Rs1-KO retina; however, the metabotropic glutamate
receptor 6/transient receptor potential melastatin subfamily M member 1-signaling
(mGluR6/TRPM1-signaling) cascade was not properly maintained. Specifically, the
TRPM1 channel and G proteins Gαo, Gβ5, and RGS11 were progressively lost from
postsynaptic DBC dendritic tips, whereas the mGluR6 receptor and RGS7 maintained 
proper synaptic position. This postsynaptic disruption differed from other murine
night-blindness models with an electronegative electroretinogram response, which 
is also characteristic of murine and human XLRS disease. Upon AAV8-RS1 gene
transfer to the retina of adult XLRS mice, TRPM1 and the signaling molecules
returned to their proper dendritic tip location, and the DBC resting membrane
potential was restored. These findings provide insight into the molecular
plasticity of a critical synapse in the visual system and demonstrate potential
therapeutic avenues for some diseases involving synaptic pathology.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI81380 
PMCID: PMC4563692
PMID: 26098217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

