
1. Sci Rep. 2015 Jun 26;5:11639. doi: 10.1038/srep11639.

Preparation by alkaline treatment and detailed characterisation of empty
hepatitis B virus core particles for vaccine and gene therapy applications.

Strods A(1), Ose V(1), Bogans J(1), Cielens I(1), Kalnins G(1), Radovica I(1),
Kazaks A(1), Pumpens P(1), Renhofa R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Ratsupites Str. 1 k-1, LV-1067, 
Riga, Latvia.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) core (HBc) virus-like particles (VLPs) are one of the
most powerful protein engineering tools utilised to expose immunological epitopes
and/or cell-targeting signals and for the packaging of genetic material and
immune stimulatory sequences. Although HBc VLPs and their numerous derivatives
are produced in highly efficient bacterial and yeast expression systems, the
existing purification and packaging protocols are not sufficiently optimised and 
standardised. Here, a simple alkaline treatment method was employed for the
complete removal of internal RNA from bacteria- and yeast-produced HBc VLPs and
for the conversion of these VLPs into empty particles, without any damage to the 
VLP structure. The empty HBc VLPs were able to effectively package the added DNA 
and RNA sequences. Furthermore, the alkaline hydrolysis technology appeared
efficient for the purification and packaging of four different HBc variants
carrying lysine residues on the HBc VLP spikes. Utilising the introduced lysine
residues and the intrinsic aspartic and glutamic acid residues exposed on the
tips of the HBc spikes for chemical coupling of the chosen peptide and/or nucleic
acid sequences ensured a standard and easy protocol for the further development
of versatile HBc VLP-based vaccine and gene therapy applications.

DOI: 10.1038/srep11639 
PMCID: PMC4650659
PMID: 26113394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

