
1. Biomed Rep. 2015 May;3(3):375-378. Epub 2015 Mar 5.

Isolation and genetic characterization of enterovirus in patients with febrile
rash illness.

Ni Z(1), Xiang F(1), Huang H(1), Wang G(1), Li F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenobiology, The Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Chinese
Ministry of Education, College of Basic Medical Science, Jilin University,
Changchun, Jilin 130021, P.R. China.

Measles and rubella virus are usually considered as the causative agents in
patients with febrile rash illness (FRI). However, investigators have identified 
that enteroviruses are also associated with FRI, and the present study was
undertaken to investigate this association. In the study, 20 throat swab samples 
were collected from patients suffering from rash and fever between April and July
in 2013. The 20 samples tested negative for measles virus, but all were positive 
when reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction was performed using
enterovirus universal primers. Specifically, five tested positive for Coxsackie
B3 virus (CVB3). The titers of the five CVB3 isolates were 106.5, 106.4, 107.5,
106.5 and 106.5 tissue culture infectious dose50/100 Âµl respectively. The partial
VP1 sequences of the five CVB3 isolates were identical to each other and were
closely associated with the CVB3/MKP and CVB3/Macocy strains, which are known to 
induce myocarditis and neonatal diseases of the central nervous system. In
conclusion, CVB3 may cause symptoms of fever and rash and should be
differentiated from measles, rubella and other infectious pathogens. The five
CVB3 isolates described in the study were genetically similar to each other and
to other local CVB3 strains. The results provide further data on the viral
pathogen spectrum associated with FRI.

DOI: 10.3892/br.2015.441 
PMCID: PMC4467221
PMID: 26137239 

