
1. Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 2015 Jul-Aug;26(4):810-5. doi:
10.4103/1319-2442.160225.

Indications and results of renal biopsy in children: A single-center experience
from Morocco.

Souilmi FZ(1), Houssaini TS, Alaoui H, Harmouch T, Atmani S, Hida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hassan II University Hospital; Faculty of Medicine
and Pharmacy, Sidi Mohamed Ben Abdellah University, Fez, Morocco.

The contribution of renal biopsy (RB) is of major importance in the management of
many renal diseases in children. Specific indications for performing biopsy in
children include steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome (NS) and secondary
nephropathies. The aim of our study was to report the common histological
varieties of kidney diseases in children in Morocco. In this retrospective and
descriptive study, we included all renal biopsies performed in patients under 16 
years in the Department of Pediatrics of Hassan II University Hospital, Fez,
Morocco from July 2009 to December 2013. Biopsy samples without glomeruli and
those with less than five glomeruli or repeat biopsies on the same patient were
excluded from our study. We performed 112 RBs during this period; the average age
at the time of RB was 10.05 Â± 4 years and the sex-ratio was 1.07. The indications
for RB were NS with hematuria and/or renal failure (RF) in 32.1%, active urinary 
sediment in 21.4%, isolated NS in 15.2%, RF in 13.4% and steroid-resistant NS in 
10.7% of cases. Primary nephropathies represented 59.8% of cases, with a
predominance of minimal change disease (MCD) seen in 40.2% of the cases.
Secondary nephropathies accounted for 27.7% of the cases, with a predominance of 
lupus nephritis (11.6%), followed by Henoch-Schonlein purpura nephritis (6.2% of 
cases) and post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis (3.6%). There was one case of
hepatitis B virus-associated membranous glomerulonephritis. Chronic
glomerulonephritis accounted for 12.5% of the cases. Vascular and
tubulo-interstitial nephritis were rare. Our study confirmed that primary
glomerular nephropathy was the most common renal disease in children. The most
common lesion was MCD. Secondary nephropathies were less frequent, with a
predominance of lupus nephritis.

DOI: 10.4103/1319-2442.160225 
PMID: 26178566 

