
1. Eurasian J Med. 2015 Jun;47(2):158-60. doi: 10.5152/eurasianjmed.2015.102.

Classical Kaposi's Sarcoma in a Nigerian Farmer: A Case Report.

Iroezindu MO(1), Achusi IB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Nigeria College of Medicine, Enugu,
Nigeria ; Federal Medical Centre, Owerri, Imo State, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Federal Staff Hospital, Abuja, Nigeria.

Classical Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) typically affects elderly men of Mediterranean
and Jewish origin. We present an unusual case of classical KS in a human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) negative elderly farmer from rural Nigeria. He had
multiple brownish nodules and plaques on both lower extremities associated with
lymphoedema. Histopathological examination of a biopsy of the skin nodule
confirmed the diagnosis of KS. The lesions only showed marginal improvement on
chemotherapy which necessitated a referral for radiotherapy. There is a need to
look beyond the traditional geographical distinction of KS variants as we
continue to experience a dynamic role for environmental co-factors in the
development of KS.

Publisher: Klasik Kaposi sarkomu (KS), tipik Akdeniz ve Yahudi kökenli yaşlı
erkekleri etkiler. Burada kırsal Nijerya bir HIV negatif yaşlı çiftçi klasik KS
olgusu sunmaktayız. Hastanın lenfödem ile ilişkili her iki alt ekstremitelerde
birden çok kahverengi nodüller ve plaklar bulunmaktaydı. Cilt nodülün
biyopsisinin histopatholjik incelemesi KS tanısını doğrulanmıştır. Lezyonlar
kemoterapi ile sadece marjinal gelişme göstererek radyoterapiye başvurmayı
zorunlu kılmıştır. KS gelişiminde çevresel ko-faktörler için dinamik bir rol
devam ederken, KS çeşitlerinin geleneksel coğrafi ayrımının ötesine bakmak
gerekir.
DOI: 10.5152/eurasianjmed.2015.102 
PMCID: PMC4494554
PMID: 26180504 

