
1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2016 Mar;54(3):319-30. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2014-0246OC.

Targeted Type 2 Alveolar Cell Depletion. A Dynamic Functional Model for Lung
Injury Repair.

Garcia O(1), Hiatt MJ(1), Lundin A(2), Lee J(1), Reddy R(1), Navarro S(1),
Kikuchi A(1), Driscoll B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Developmental Biology and Regenerative Medicine Program, Department of
Surgery, Saban Research Institute, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California; and.
(2)2 California Institute for Regenerative Medicine (CIRM)-Bridges to Stem Cell
Research Program, Pasadena City College, Pasadena, California.

Type 2 alveolar epithelial cells (AEC2) are regarded as the progenitor population
of the alveolus responsible for injury repair and homeostatic maintenance.
Depletion of this population is hypothesized to underlie various lung
pathologies. Current models of lung injury rely on either uncontrolled,
nonspecific destruction of alveolar epithelia or on targeted, nontitratable
levels of fixed AEC2 ablation. We hypothesized that discrete levels of AEC2
ablation would trigger stereotypical and informative patterns of repair. To this 
end, we created a transgenic mouse model in which the surfactant protein-C
promoter drives expression of a mutant SR39TK herpes simplex virus-1 thymidine
kinase specifically in AEC2. Because of the sensitivity of SR39TK, low doses of
ganciclovir can be administered to these animals to induce dose-dependent AEC2
depletion ranging from mild (50%) to lethal (82%) levels. We demonstrate that
specific levels of AEC2 depletion cause altered expression patterns of apoptosis 
and repair proteins in surviving AEC2 as well as distinct changes in distal lung 
morphology, pulmonary function, collagen deposition, and expression of remodeling
proteins in whole lung that persist for up to 60 days. We believe SPCTK mice
demonstrate the utility of cell-specific expression of the SR39TK transgene for
exerting fine control of target cell depletion. Our data demonstrate, for the
first time, that specific levels of type 2 alveolar epithelial cell depletion
produce characteristic injury repair outcomes. Most importantly, use of these
mice will contribute to a better understanding of the role of AEC2 in the
initiation of, and response to, lung injury.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2014-0246OC 
PMCID: PMC4821031 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26203800  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

