
1. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2016 Feb;87(2):200-12. doi: 10.1111/cbdd.12620. Epub 2015 Dec
14.

Molecular Modeling, Synthesis, and Anti-HIV Activity of Novel Isoindolinedione
Analogues as Potent Non-nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors.

Kumari G(1), Singh RK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nucleic Acids and Antiviral Research Laboratory, Department of Chemistry,
University of Allahabad, Allahabad, India.

Different isoindolinedione derivatives bearing imine, amide, thioamide, and
sulfonamide linkages have been designed in silico using discovery studio software
(BIOVIA, San Diego, CA, USA), synthesized, and evaluated for their anti-HIV
activity. SAR studies revealed that the linkages in these molecules did affect
their anti-HIV activity and the molecules having sulfonamide linkages were the
most potent HIV-RT inhibitors as the S=O bonds of the sulfonamide moiety
interacted with Lys103 (NH or carbonyl or both) and Pro236; the NH part of the
sulfonamide linkage formed bond with carbonyl of Lys101. blood-brain barrier
(BBB) plots were also studied, and it was found that all the designed molecules
have potential to cross BBB, a very vital criteria for anti-HIV drugs. In vitro
screening was performed using HIV-1 strain IIIB in MT-4 cells using the MTT
assay, and it was seen that some of these molecules were effective inhibitors of 
HIV-1 replication at nanomolar concentration with selectivity indices ranging
from 33.75 to 73.33 under in vitro conditions. Some of these molecules have shown
good anti-HIV activity at 3-4 nm concentrations. These derivatives have potential
to be developed as lead molecules effective against HIV-1. Novel isoindolinedione
derivatives as probable NNRTIs have been synthesized and characterized. Some of
these molecules have shown good anti-HIV activity at 3-4 nm concentrations.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/cbdd.12620 
PMID: 26212217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

