
1. Tumour Biol. 2016 Jan;37(1):313-21. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3769-4. Epub 2015 Jul
26.

Delivery of miR-155 to retinal pigment epithelial cells mediated by Burkitt's
lymphoma exosomes.

Yoon C(1), Kim J(1), Park G(1), Kim S(1), Kim D(1), Hur DY(1), Kim B(2), Kim
YS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Research Center for Tumor Immunology, Inje
University College of Medicine, Bokji-ro 75, Busanjin-gu, Busan, 614-735,
Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pathology, Inje University College of Medicine, Busan, Republic 
of Korea.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Research Center for Tumor Immunology, Inje
University College of Medicine, Bokji-ro 75, Busanjin-gu, Busan, 614-735,
Republic of Korea. newsoft@inje.ac.kr.

Exosomes are extracellularly secreted vesicles ranging from 40 to 100Â nm in
diameter that are thought to play important roles in intercellular communication.
Exosomes contain numerous proteins, RNA, and lipids that can affect the status of
recipient cells under various pathological conditions. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are
small non-coding RNAs that play a major role in post-transcriptional gene
silencing by interacting with the 3'-untranslated regions of target genes.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) has been reported to induce sustained elevation of
cellular miRNAs such as miR-155. We hypothesized that miRNAs delivered by
exosomes might affect the angiogenesis of retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells.
Here, we demonstrated that co-culture of EBV-positive Burkitt's lymphoma (BL)
cells (Raji) with retinal pigment epithelial (ARPE-19) cells increased the level 
of miR-155 in recipient cells whereas no major difference was detected for
co-culture with EBV-negative BL cells (Ramos). Isolated Raji exosomes increased
transcriptional and translational levels of VEGF-A in ARPE-19 cells, which was
reversely correlated with von Hippel-Lindau expression. A human umbilical vein
endothelial cell tube formation assay showed that delivery of ectopic miR-155
rendered ARPE-19 cells proangiogenic. Our results demonstrate that sustained
accumulation of miR-155 mediated by exosomes might affect remote recipient cells 
such as retinal pigment epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-015-3769-4 
PMID: 26211004  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

