
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2015 Oct;93(4):684-90. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.14-0755. Epub 2015
Jul 27.

Economic Burden of Dengue Virus Infection at the Household Level Among Residents 
of Puerto Maldonado, Peru.

Salmon-Mulanovich G(1), Blazes DL(2), Lescano AG(2), Bausch DG(2), Montgomery
JM(2), Pan WK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Emerging Infections, Naval Medical Research Unit
No. 6, Callao, Peru; Department of International Health,Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland; Military Tropical Medicine Course, 
Navy Medicine Professional Development Center, Bethesda, Maryland; Department of 
Parasitology, Naval Medical Research Unit No. 6, Callao, Peru; School of Public
Health and Management, Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru;
Department of Tropical Medicine, Tulane School of Public Health and Tropical
Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana; Division of Global Health Protection, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention Kenya, Nairobi, Kenya; Nicholas School of the 
Environment, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina
gabriela.salmon@med.navy.mil.
(2)Department of Virology and Emerging Infections, Naval Medical Research Unit
No. 6, Callao, Peru; Department of International Health,Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland; Military Tropical Medicine Course, 
Navy Medicine Professional Development Center, Bethesda, Maryland; Department of 
Parasitology, Naval Medical Research Unit No. 6, Callao, Peru; School of Public
Health and Management, Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru;
Department of Tropical Medicine, Tulane School of Public Health and Tropical
Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana; Division of Global Health Protection, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention Kenya, Nairobi, Kenya; Nicholas School of the 
Environment, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.

Dengue virus (DENV) was reintroduced to Peru in the 1990s and has been reported
in Puerto Maldonado (population ~65,000) in the Peruvian southern Amazon basin
since 2000. This region also has the highest human migration rate in the country,
mainly from areas not endemic for DENV. The objective of this study was to assess
the proportion of household income that is diverted to costs incurred because of 
dengue illness and to compare these expenses between recent migrants (RMs) and
long-term residents (LTRs). We administered a standardized questionnaire to
persons diagnosed with dengue illness at Hospital Santa Rosa in Puerto Maldonado 
from December 2012 to March 2013. We compared direct and indirect medical costs
between RMs and LTRs. A total of 80 participants completed the survey, of whom 28
(35%) were RMs and 52 (65%) were LTRs. Each dengue illness episode cost the
household an average of US$105 (standard deviation [SD] = 107), representing 24% 
of their monthly income. Indirect costs were the greatest expense (US$56, SD =
87), especially lost wages. The proportion of household income diverted to dengue
illness did not differ significantly between RM and LTR households. The study
highlights the significant financial burden incurred by households when a family 
member suffers dengue illness.

Â© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.14-0755 
PMCID: PMC4596582
PMID: 26217040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

