
1. J Clin Med. 2015 Apr 2;4(4):579-92. doi: 10.3390/jcm4040579.

The Interaction between Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Human Papillomaviruses
in Heterosexuals in Africa.

Williamson AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Cape Town and National Health Laboratory Service, Groote 
Schuur Hospital, Observatory, Cape Town 7925, South Africa.
Anna-Lise.Williamson@uct.ac.za.

Sub-Saharan Africa has the highest incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV) and
cervical cancer in the world, which is further aggravated by the burden of human 
immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) disease with
invasive cervical cancer being an AIDS-defining cancer. The prevalence of HPV
infection and associated disease is very high in HIV-infected people and
continues to be a problem even after anti-retroviral therapy. In the genital
tract, the interaction between HPV and HIV is complex, with infection with
multiple HPV types reported to make both women and men more susceptible to HIV
infection.Â Besides the national programmes to vaccinate girls against HPV and
screen women for cervical cancer, there should be targeted cervical cancer
screening, treatment and prevention programmes introduced into HIV treatment
centres. There is evidence that in high HIV prevalence areas, HIV-positive women 
could cause increases in the prevalence of genital HPV infection in HIV-negative 
men and so increase the HPV circulating in the community. Condom use and
circumcision reduce the acquisition of HIV-1, and also to some extent of HPV.
This review will highlight what is known about the interaction of HIV and HPV,
with an emphasis on research in Africa.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm4040579 
PMCID: PMC4470157
PMID: 26239348 

