
1. Front Microbiol. 2015 Aug 4;6:722. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.00722. eCollection
2015.

Pithovirus sibericum, a new bona fide member of the "Fourth TRUC" club.

Sharma V(1), Colson P(2), Chabrol O(3), Pontarotti P(3), Raoult D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherche sur les Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales Emergentes,
UM63, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 7278, IRD 198, Institut
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U1095, Aix-Marseille University 
Marseille, France ; I2M UMR 7373, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
Équipe Evolution Biologique et Modélisation, Aix-Marseille University Marseille, 
France.
(2)Unité de Recherche sur les Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales Emergentes,
UM63, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 7278, IRD 198, Institut
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U1095, Aix-Marseille University 
Marseille, France ; Institut Hospitalo-Universitaire (IHU) Méditerranée
Infection, Pôle des Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales Clinique et Biologique,
Fédération de Bactériologie-Hygiène-Virologie, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire
Timone, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille Marseille, France.
(3)I2M UMR 7373, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Équipe Evolution
Biologique et Modélisation, Aix-Marseille University Marseille, France.

Nucleocytoplasmic large DNA viruses, or representatives of the proposed order
Megavirales, include giant viruses of Acanthamoeba that were discovered over the 
last 12 years and are bona fide microbes. Phylogenies based on a few genes
conserved amongst these megaviruses and shared by microbes classified as Eukarya,
Bacteria, and Archaea, allowed for delineation of a fourth monophylogenetic group
or "TRUC" (Things Resisting Uncompleted Classification) composed of the
Megavirales representatives. A new Megavirales member named Pithovirus sibericum 
was isolated from a >30,000-year-old dated Siberian permafrost sample. This
virion is as large as recently described pandoraviruses but has a genome that is 
approximately three to four times shorter. Our objective was to update the
classification of P. sibericum as a new member of the "Fourth TRUC" club.
Phylogenetic trees were constructed based on four conserved ancient genes and a
phyletic analysis was concurrently conducted based on the presence/absence
patterns of a set of informational genes from members of Megavirales, Bacteria,
Archaea, and Eukarya. Phylogenetic analyses based on the four conserved genes
revealed that P. sibericum is part of the fourth TRUC composed of Megavirales
members, and is closely related to the families Marseilleviridae and
Ascoviridae/Iridoviridae. Additionally, hierarchical clustering delineated four
branches, and showed that P. sibericum is part of this fourth TRUC. Overall,
phylogenetic and phyletic analyses using informational genes clearly indicate
that P. sibericum is a new bona fide member of the "Fourth TRUC" club composed of
representatives of Megavirales, alongside Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.00722 
PMCID: PMC4523831
PMID: 26300849 

