
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Aug;94(34):e1296. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001296.

Late-Onset Immune Thrombocytopenic Purpura After Withdrawal of Interferon
Treatment for Chronic Hepatitis C Infection: A Case Report.

Hsiao CH(1), Tseng KC, Tseng CW, Tung CH.

Author information: 
(1)From the College of Medicine, Tzu Chi University (C-HH, K-CT, C-WT);
Department of Internal Medicine, Dalin Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical
Foundation (C-HH, K-CT, C-WT); Division of Gastroenterology, Department of
Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, and National Yang-Ming University
School of Medicine, Taipei (C-WT); and Division of Allergy, Immunology and
Rheumatology; Dalin Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical Foundation,
Chia-Yi, Taiwan (C-HT).

Immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is a life-threatening complication
following pegylated interferon alpha (PEG-IFN) plus ribavirin treatment, the
standard treatment for hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. We reported a rare case
with late-onset ITP after withdrawal of PEG-IFN treatment.A 53-year-old male with
hepatitis C developed massive gum bleeding and a severe, reversible, immune
thrombocytopenia 2 weeks after cessation of PEG-IFN treatment for HCV due to
anemia and depression. The platelet count decreased to 4000 cells/μL. The HCV
viral load was undetectable at the end of PEG-IFN treatment and during follow-up 
for 5 months. Other potential autoimmune disorders were ruled out. Late-onset ITP
associated with PEG-IFN treatment was diagnosed.The patient was treated
successfully with steroid and azathioprine. Platelet count gradually increased to
117 × 10 cells/μL on the 18th day after admission.ITP is a rare complication in
patients with hepatitis C or in patients who received PEG-IFN treatment. The
particular case supported that it may occur even after withdrawal of PEG-IFN
treatment. Physicians should be aware of this late-onset complication.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001296 
PMCID: PMC4602894
PMID: 26313770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

