
1. Biol Direct. 2015 Sep 16;10:53. doi: 10.1186/s13062-015-0083-4.

KGCAK: a K-mer based database for genome-wide phylogeny and complexity
evaluation.

Wang D(1)(2), Xu J(3)(4), Yu J(5).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of
Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, PR China.
dapeng.wang@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Stem Cell Laboratory, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London,
WC1E 6BT, UK. dapeng.wang@ucl.ac.uk.
(3)CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of
Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, PR China. xujy@big.ac.cn.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
xujy@big.ac.cn.
(5)CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of
Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, PR China.
junyu@big.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: The K-mer approach, treating genomic sequences as simple characters
and counting the relative abundance of each string upon a fixed K, has been
extensively applied to phylogeny inference for genome assembly, annotation, and
comparison.
RESULTS: To meet increasing demands for comparing large genome sequences and to
promote the use of the K-mer approach, we develop a versatile database, KGCAK (
http://kgcak.big.ac.cn/KGCAK/ ), containing ~8,000 genomes that include genome
sequences of diverse life forms (viruses, prokaryotes, protists, animals, and
plants) and cellular organelles of eukaryotic lineages. It builds phylogeny based
on genomic elements in an alignment-free fashion and provides in-depth data
processing enabling users to compare the complexity of genome sequences based on 
K-mer distribution.
CONCLUSION: We hope that KGCAK becomes a powerful tool for exploring relationship
within and among groups of species in a tree of life based on genomic data.

DOI: 10.1186/s13062-015-0083-4 
PMCID: PMC4573299
PMID: 26376976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

