
1. Acta Med Port. 2015 May-Jun;28(3):286-96. Epub 2015 Jun 30.

Clinical and Radiological Characterization of Progressive Multifocal
Leukoencephalopathy in HIV-Infected Patients: A Retrospective Analysis and Review
of the Literature.

Augusto L(1), Neves N(2), Reis C(1), Abreu C(2), Sarmento A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroradiology Department. Centro Hospitalar São João. Porto. Portugal.
(2)Infectious Diseases Department. Centro Hospitalar São João. Porto. Portugal.
(3)Infectious Diseases Department. Centro Hospitalar São João. Porto. Portugal.
Infectious Diseases Department. Faculty of Medicine. University of Porto. Porto. 
Portugal.

Comment in
    Acta Med Port. 2015 Nov-Dec;28(6):797.

INTRODUCTION: Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy is a demyelinating
disease of the central nervous system caused by John Cunningham virus, mostly
associated with immunodeficiency conditions, such as the human immunodeficiency
virus infection. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy can have multiple
clinical features and usually presents a typical lesion pattern on brain magnetic
resonance imaging. Its course may be rapidly progressive, although immunological 
responsiveness can be associated with an improved prognosis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of the clinical and
radiological data from patients admitted in our institution between January 2005 
and April 2014 with the diagnosis of definitive progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy (ICD10:A81.2) in the setting of human immunodeficiency virus 
infection.
RESULTS: Twenty-one patients were included in our study, mostly men (n = 20,
95.2%). Mean age at diagnosis was 39 years. Motor deficits were the most common
clinical finding. John Cunningham virus-DNA was detected in the cerebral spinal
fluid in 20 patients (95.2%). Brain imaging studies most commonly disclosed
bilateral supratentorial, asymmetric lesions. Four (19%) patients developed
immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome in the follow-up. Therapeutic
approach included initiation and continuation/optimization of antiretroviral
therapy, with adjunctive therapy with corticosteroids in four patients. Seventeen
(81%) patients died during the study period; median survival time following
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy diagnosis was 3 months (range 1 - 13).
DISCUSSION: The results of our study are in accordance with the data previously
published on progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in human immunodeficiency
virus patients. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy is predominantly
associated with severe immunosuppression, particularly in patients who are not
under anti-retroviral therapy, and usually presents with motor and cognitive
symptoms and signs. A typical bilateral asymmetric pattern in conventional
magnetic resonance imaging is present in the majority of the patients. There is
no specific therapy for progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy and it is
usually fatal, although outcomes can improve with highly active anti-retroviral
therapy. Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome is also an important
complication related with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, usually
associated with anti-retroviral therapy. Progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy-immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome presents with
different imaging characteristics from progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
and treatment with steroids can improve survival.
CONCLUSION: The mortality rate and long-term neurological morbidity associated
with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy are quite high. These data should
increase clinician awareness to the occurrence of progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy among human immunodeficiency virus patients and highlight the
important role of magnetic resonance imaging, as early diagnosis may beassociated
with better outcome.

Publisher: Introdução: A leucoencefalopatia multifocal progressiva é uma
patologia desmielinizante causada pelo vírus John Cunningham, geralmente
associada a estados de imunodepressão, em particular a infeção pelo vírus da
imunodeficiência humana. Pode apresentar múltiplas manifestações clínicas e tem
habitualmente um padrão imagiológico típico. A evolução clínica é geralmente
progressiva, podendo ocorrer uma melhoria do prognóstico associada à recuperação 
imunológica.Material e Métodos: Foi conduzida uma análise retrospetiva dos dados 
clínicos e imagiológicos de doentes admitidos no nosso Hospital entre janeiro de 
2005 e abril de 2014 com o diagnóstico de leucoencefalopatia multifocal
progressiva (ICD10:A81.2) associado a infeção por vírus da imunodeficiência
humana.Resultados: Vinte e um doentes foram incluídos, sendo 20 do sexo masculino
(95,2%). A idade média na altura do diagnóstico foi 39 anos. A forma de
apresentação mais frequente foi défice motor. O vírus John Cunningham foi
identificado no líquido cefalorraquidiano em 20 doentes (95,2%). Nos estudos de
imagem verificou-se um predomínio de lesões supratentoriais, assimétricas e
bilaterais. Quatro doentes (19%) desenvolveram síndrome inflamatória de resposta 
imunológica. A abordagem terapêutica incluiu início ou otimização de terapêutica 
anti-retrovirica, associada a corticoterapia em quatro casos. Dezassete (81%)
doentes morreram no período do estudo, sendo a sobrevida mediana após diagnóstico
de três meses (intervalo 1 a13).Discussão: Os resultados do nosso estudo são
concordantes com os dados previamente publicados relativamente à
leucoencefalopatia multifocal progressiva, evidenciando a sua associação à
infecção pelo vírus da imunodeficiência humana, particularmente nos doentes com
imunossupressão grave, o predomínio de sinais e sintomas motores e cognitivos, e 
a existência de um atingimento bilateral e assimétrico evidente nas sequências
convencionais dos estudos de ressonância magnética. Não existe terapêutica
específica e esta patologia é normalmente fatal, apesar de se verificar um
aumento da sobrevida associado à terapêutica anti-retrovírica. A síndrome
inflamatória de reconstituição imunológica é uma complicação associada a
leucoencefalopatia multifocal progressiva, habitualmente ocorrendo após início de
terapêutica anti-retrovírica, apresentando caraterísticas imagiológicas
diferentes da leucoencefalopatia multifocal progressiva. A instituição de
corticoterapia pode melhorar o prognóstico dos doentes que desenvolvem síndrome
inflamatória de reconstituição imunológica associada a leucoencefalopatia
multifocal progressiva.Conclusão: A mortalidade e morbilidade associadas à
leucoencefalopatia multifocal progressiva são elevadas, com sequelas neurológicas
importantes a longo-prazo. Os dados apresentados deverão alertar os clínicos para
a ocorrência desta patologia nos doentes com infecção vírus da imunodeficiência
humana, evidenciando o papel cada vez mais determinante da Ressonância Magnética 
no diagnóstico precoce da leucoencefalopatia multifocal progressiva e consequente
melhoria do prognóstico.
DOI: 10.20344/amp.5950 
PMID: 26421780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

