
1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(15):6769-72.

Type-Specific Human Papillomavirus Distribution in Invasive Squamous Cervical
Carcinomas in Tunisia and Vaccine Impact.

Ennaifer E(1), Salhi F, Laassili T, Fehri E, Ben Alaya N, Guizani I, Boubaker S.

Author information: 
(1)HPV Research Unit, Laboratory of Molecular Epidemiology and Experimental
Pathology Applied to Infectious Diseases, Pasteur Institute of Tunis, Tunis,
Tunisia *E-mail : emna.jerbi@pasteur.rns.tn, emnaennaifer@yahoo.fr.

BACKGROUND: High risk human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are the leading cause of
cervical cancer (CC) and Pap smear screening has not been successful in
preventing CC in Tunisia. HPV vaccination that targets HPV16 and 18 offers a new 
efficient prevention tool. Identification of HPV types in CC is thus essential to
determine the impact of HPV vaccine implementation. The aim of this study is to
provide specific data from Tunisia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 89 histological confirmed paraffin embedded
samples isolated from patients with CC diagnosed between 2001 and 2011 were
collected from five medical centres from Northern and Southern Tunisia. HPV DNA
was detected using a nested PCR (MY09/MY11-GP5+/GP6+) and genotyping was assessed
using a reverse blot line hybridisation assay that enables the detection of 32
HPV types.
RESULTS: HPV DNA was detected in all samples. Twelve high risk types were
detected; HPV16 and/or 18 were predominant, accounting together for 92.1% of all 
the CC cases (HPV16: 83.1%). Single infections accounted for 48.8% of the cases
and were mostly linked to HPV 16 (32.6%) and less frequently to HPV 18 (2.4%).
The other high risk HPV single infections were linked to HPV 35 (4.6%), 45
(4.6%), 58 (2.3%) and 59 (2.3%). Multiple infections with mixing of 2 to 4
genotypes predominately featrued HPV16 and/or 18 with HPV 35 and 45 (96.6 %) and 
less frequently with HPV 59, 40, 66, 73 and 58. There was no statistically
significant variation in the relative distribution of HPV types with age.
CONCLUSIONS: These results strongly indicate that prophylactic HPV vaccines can
have a major impact in preventing CC in Tunisia.

DOI: 10.7314/apjcp.2015.16.15.6769 
PMID: 26434909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

