
1. J Med Virol. 2016 May;88(5):895-905. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24401. Epub 2015 Oct 23.

Characterization of phiCFP-1, a virulent bacteriophage specific for Citrobacter
freundii.

Zhao X(1), Huang S(1), Zhao J(2), He X(3), Li E(4), Li H(1), Liu W(1), Zou D(1), 
Wei X(1), Wang X(1), Dong D(1), Yang Z(1), Yan X(1), Shen Z(5), Yuan J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Disease Control and Prevention, Academy of Military Medical
Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Emergency Department, Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, China.
(3)College of Food Science and Engineering, Northwest A and F University,
Yangling, China.
(4)College of Food Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou,
China.
(5)Tianjin Institute of Health and Environmental Medicine, Key Laboratory of Risk
Assessment and Control for Environment and Food Safety, Tianjin, China.

Citrobacter freundii, a Gram-negative bacterium, causes many opportunistic
infections. Bacteriophage phiCFP-1 was isolated and characterized by its ability 
to lyse the multidrug-resistant clinical C. freundii strain P10159. Transmission 
electron microscopy showed that the phage has an icosahedral head and a short
tail, making it a Podoviridae family member. In a single-step growth experiment, 
phiCFP-1 exhibited an eclipse period of 20 min and a burst size of 100 particles 
per cell. Its genome assembled as a circular molecule when genomic sequencing was
completed. However, based on genome content and organization, it was categorized 
as a classic T7-related phage, and such phages are known to have linear genomes
with direct terminal repeats. With the quick and simple method established
herein, the 38,625-bp linear double-stranded DNA with 229-bp direct terminal
repeats was accurately identified. The genome contained 43 putative open reading 
frames and no tRNA genes. Using a proteomics-based approach, seven viral and two 
host proteins from purified phiCFP-1 particles were identified. Comparative
genomics and recombination analyzes revealed close genetic relatedness among
phiCFP-1, phiYeO3-12/vB_YenP_AP5 (from Yersinia enterocolitica O3), and phiSG-JL2
(from Salmonella enterica).

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24401 
PMID: 26455439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

