
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Oct 14;21(38):10714-20. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v21.i38.10714.

Hepatitis B virus infection in Indonesia.

Yano Y(1), Utsumi T(1), Lusida MI(1), Hayashi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yoshihiko Yano, Takako Utsumi, Yoshitake Hayashi, Center for Infectious
Diseases, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

Approximately 240 million people are chronically infected with hepatitis B virus 
(HBV), 75% of whom reside in Asia. Approximately 600000 of infected patients die 
each year due to HBV-related diseases or hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The
endemicity of hepatitis surface antigen in Indonesia is intermediate to high with
a geographical difference. The risk of HBV infection is high in hemodialysis (HD)
patients, men having sex with men, and health care workers. Occult HBV infection 
has been detected in various groups such as blood donors, HD patients, and
HIV-infected individuals and children. The most common HBV subgenotype in
Indonesia is B3 followed by C1. Various novel subgenotypes of HBV have been
identified throughout Indonesia, with the novel HBV subgenotypes C6-C16 and D6
being successfully isolated. Although a number of HBV subgenotypes have been
discovered in Indonesia, genotype-related pathogenicity has not yet been
elucidated in detail. Therefore, genotype-related differences in the prognosis of
liver disease and their effects on treatments need to be determined. A previous
study conducted in Indonesia revealed that hepatic steatosis was associated with 
disease progression. Pre-S2 mutations and mutations at C1638T and T1753V in
HBV/B3 have been associated with advanced liver diseases including HCC. However, 
drug resistance to lamivudine, which is prominent in Indonesia, remains obscure. 
Although the number of studies on HBV in Indonesia has been increasing, adequate 
databases on HBV infection are limited. We herein provided an overview of the
epidemiology and clinical characteristics of HBV infection in Indonesia.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i38.10714 
PMCID: PMC4600573
PMID: 26478663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

