
1. J Gen Virol. 2016 Jan;97(1):246-257. doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.000323. Epub 2015 Oct 22.

Tobacco rattle virus 16K silencing suppressor binds ARGONAUTE 4 and inhibits
formation of RNA silencing complexes.

Fernández-Calvino L(1), Martínez-Priego L(1), Szabo EZ(2), Guzmán-Benito I(1),
González I(1), Canto T(1), Lakatos L(2)(3), Llave C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Biology, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Ramiro de Maeztu 9, 28040
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University of Szeged, H-6720
Szeged, Koranyi str. 6, Hungary.
(3)MTA-SZTE Dermatological Research Group, Hungary.

The cysteine-rich 16K protein of tobacco rattle virus (TRV), the type member of
the genus Tobravirus, is known to suppress RNA silencing. However, the mechanism 
of action of the 16K suppressor is not well understood. In this study, we used a 
GFP-based sensor strategy and an Agrobacterium-mediated transient assay in
Nicotiana benthamiana to show that 16K was unable to inhibit the activity of
existing small interfering RNA (siRNA)- and microRNA (miRNA)-programmed
RNA-induced silencing effector complexes (RISCs). In contrast, 16K efficiently
interfered with de novo formation of miRNA- and siRNA-guided RISCs, thus
preventing cleavage of target RNA. Interestingly, we found that transiently
expressed endogenous miR399 and miR172 directed sequence-specific silencing of
complementary sequences of viral origin. 16K failed to bind small RNAs, although 
it interacted with ARGONAUTE 4, as revealed by bimolecular fluorescence
complementation and immunoprecipitation assays. Site-directed mutagenesis
demonstrated that highly conserved cysteine residues within the N-terminal and
central regions of the 16K protein are required for protein stability and/or RNA 
silencing suppression.

DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.000323 
PMID: 26498945  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

