
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Mar 18;44(5):e46. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1198. Epub 2015 Nov
19.

Estimate of within population incremental selection through branch imbalance in
lineage trees.

Liberman G(1), Benichou JI(2), Maman Y(3), Glanville J(4), Alter I(2), Louzoun
Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Gonda Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 
5290002, Israel.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Bar Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 5290002, Israel.
(3)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520-8011, USA Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New Haven, CT 06519, USA.
(4)Program in Computational and Systems Immunology, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA Department of Pathology, Transplantation and Infection,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA Program in Immunology,
Transplantation and Infection, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
Distributed Bio, San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
(5)Gonda Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 
5290002, Israel Department of Mathematics, Bar Ilan University, Ramat-Gan
5290002, Israel ylouzoun@gmail.com.

Incremental selection within a population, defined as limited fitness changes
following mutation, is an important aspect of many evolutionary processes.
Strongly advantageous or deleterious mutations are detected using the synonymous 
to non-synonymous mutations ratio. However, there are currently no precise
methods to estimate incremental selection. We here provide for the first time
such a detailed method and show its precision in multiple cases of
micro-evolution. The proposed method is a novel mixed lineage tree/sequence based
method to detect within population selection as defined by the effect of
mutations on the average number of offspring. Specifically, we propose to measure
the log of the ratio between the number of leaves in lineage trees branches
following synonymous and non-synonymous mutations. The method requires a high
enough number of sequences, and a large enough number of independent mutations.
It assumes that all mutations are independent events. It does not require of a
baseline model and is practically not affected by sampling biases. We show the
method's wide applicability by testing it on multiple cases of micro-evolution.
We show that it can detect genes and inter-genic regions using the selection rate
and detect selection pressures in viral proteins and in the immune response to
pathogens.

Â© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv1198 
PMCID: PMC4797263
PMID: 26586802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

