
1. RNA Biol. 2016;13(1):83-97. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2015.1119365.

The transcription initiation sites of eggplant latent viroid strands map within
distinct motifs in their in vivo RNA conformations.

López-Carrasco A(1), Gago-Zachert S(2), Mileti G(1), Minoia S(1), Flores R(1),
Delgado S(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Plantas (IBMCP), Universidad
Politécnica de Valencia-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas ,
Valencia , Spain.
(2)b Department of Molecular Signal Processing , Leibniz Institute of Plant
Biochemistry , Halle ( Saale ), Germany.

Eggplant latent viroid (ELVd), like other members of family Avsunviroidae,
replicates in plastids through a symmetric rolling-circle mechanism in which
elongation of RNA strands is most likely catalyzed by a nuclear-encoded
polymerase (NEP) translocated to plastids. Here we have addressed where NEP
initiates transcription of viroid strands. Because this step is presumably
directed by sequence/structural motifs, we have previously determined the
conformation of the monomeric linear (+) and (-) RNAs of ELVd resulting from
hammerhead-mediated self-cleavage. In silico predictions with 3 softwares led to 
similar bifurcated conformations for both ELVd strands. In vitro examination by
non-denaturing PAGE showed that they migrate as prominent single bands, with the 
ELVd (+) RNA displaying a more compact conformation as revealed by its faster
electrophoretic mobility. In vitro SHAPE analysis corroborated the ELVd
conformations derived from thermodynamics-based predictions in silico. Moreover, 
sequence analysis of 94 full-length natural ELVd variants disclosed
co-variations, and mutations converting canonical into wobble pairs or vice
versa, which confirmed in vivo most of the stems predicted in silico and in
vitro, and additionally helped to introduce minor structural refinements.
Therefore, results from the 3 experimental approaches were essentially consistent
among themselves. Application to RNA preparations from ELVd-infected tissue of
RNA ligase-mediated rapid amplification of cDNA ends, combined with pretreatments
to modify the 5' ends of viroid strands, mapped the transcription initiation
sites of ELVd (+) and (-) strands in vivo at different sequence/structural
motifs, in contrast with the situation previously observed in 2 other members of 
the family Avsunviroidae.

DOI: 10.1080/15476286.2015.1119365 
PMCID: PMC4829332
PMID: 26618399  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

