
1. Virusdisease. 2015 Dec;26(4):225-36. doi: 10.1007/s13337-015-0276-6. Epub 2015
Sep 3.

Herbal plants and plant preparations as remedial approach for viral diseases.

Ganjhu RK(1), Mudgal PP(1), Maity H(1), Dowarha D(1), Devadiga S(1), Nag S(2),
Arunkumar G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virus Research (Manipal Centre for Virus Research), Manipal
University, Manipal, Karnataka 576104 India.
(2)Department of Zoology, Ranchi University, Ranchi, Jharkhand 834001 India.

Herbal plants, plant preparations and phytoconstituents have proved useful in
attenuating infectious conditions and were the only remedies available, till the 
advent of antibiotics (many being of plant origin themselves). Among infectious
diseases, viral diseases in particular, remain the leading cause of death in
humans globally. A variety of phytoconstituents derived from medicinal herbs have
been extensively studied for antiviral activity. Based on this rationale, an
online search was performed, which helped to identify a large number of plant
species harboring antiviral molecules. These herbal sources have been reported
individually or in combinations across a large number of citations studied.
Activities against rabies virus, Human immunodeficiency virus, Chandipura virus, 
Japanese Encephalitis Virus, Enterovirus, Influenza A/H1N1 and other influenza
viruses were discovered during the literature search. This review includes all
such plant species exhibiting antiviral properties. The review also encompasses
composition and methodologies of preparing various antiviral formulations around 
the globe. An elaborate section on the formulations filed for patent
registration, along with non-patented formulations, has also been included in
this article. To conclude, herbal sources provide researchers enormous scope to
explore and bring out viable alternatives against viral diseases, considering
non-availability of suitable drug candidates and increasing resistance to
existing drug molecules for many emerging and re-emerging viral diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s13337-015-0276-6 
PMCID: PMC4663710
PMID: 26645032 

