
1. J Virol. 2015 Dec 9;90(5):2306-15. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02324-15.

Interaction of Human Parainfluenza Virus Type 3 Nucleoprotein with Matrix Protein
Mediates Internal Viral Protein Assembly.

Zhang G(1), Zhong Y(1), Qin Y(1), Chen M(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology and Modern Virology Research Center, College 
of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Virology and Modern Virology Research Center, College 
of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China chenmz@whu.edu.cn.

Human parainfluenza virus type 3 (HPIV3) belongs to the Paramyxoviridae family.
Its three internal viral proteins, the nucleoprotein (N), the phosphoprotein (P),
and the polymerase (L), form the ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex, which
encapsidates the viral genome and associates with the matrix protein (M) for
virion assembly. We previously showed that the M protein expressed alone is
sufficient to assemble and release virus-like particles (VLPs) and a mutant with 
the L305A point mutation in the M protein (ML305A) has a VLP formation ability
similar to that of wild-type M protein. In addition, recombinant HPIV3 (rHPIV3)
containing the ML305A mutation (rHPIV3-ML305A) could be successfully recovered.
In the present study, we found that the titer of rHPIV3-ML305A was at least
10-fold lower than the titer of rHPIV3. Using VLP incorporation and
coimmunoprecipitation assays, we found that VLPs expressing the M protein
(M-VLPs) can efficiently incorporate N and P via an N-M or P-M interaction and
ML305A-VLPs had an ability to incorporate P via a P-M interaction similar to that
of M-VLPs but were unable to incorporate N and no longer interacted with N.
Furthermore, we found that the incorporation of P into ML305A-VLPs but not M-VLPs
was inhibited in the presence of N. In addition, we provide evidence that the
C-terminal region of P is involved in its interaction with both N and M and N
binding to the C-terminal region of P inhibits the incorporation of P into
ML305A-VLPs. Our findings provide new molecular details to support the idea that 
the N-M interaction and not the P-M interaction is critical for packaging N and P
into infectious viral particles.IMPORTANCE: Human parainfluenza virus type 3
(HPIV3) is a nonsegmented, negative-sense, single-stranded RNA virus that belongs
to the Paramyxoviridae family and can cause lower respiratory tract infections in
infants and young children as well as elderly or immunocompromised individuals.
However, no effective vaccine has been developed or licensed. We used virus-like 
particle (VLP) incorporation and coimmunoprecipitation assays to determine how
the M protein assembles internal viral proteins. We demonstrate that both
nucleoprotein (N) and phosphoprotein (P) can incorporate into M-VLPs and N
inhibits the M-P interaction via the binding of N to the C terminus of P. We also
provide additional evidence that the N-M interaction but not the P-M interaction 
is critical for the regulation of HPIV3 assembly. Our studies provide a more
complete characterization of HPIV3 virion assembly and substantiation that N
interaction with M regulates internal viral organization.

Copyright Â© 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02324-15 
PMCID: PMC4810691
PMID: 26656716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

