
1. Prev Vet Med. 2016 Jan 1;123:138-142. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2015.11.022. Epub 
2015 Dec 3.

Bayesian estimation of diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of a nervous
necrosis virus antibody ELISA.

Jaramillo D(1), Dürr S(1), Hick P(1), Whittington R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Science, The University of Sydney, Camden, NSW,
Australia(​).
(2)Faculty of Veterinary Science, The University of Sydney, Camden, NSW,
Australia(​). Electronic address: richard.whittington@sydney.edu.au.

Diagnosis of nervous necrosis virus (NNV) infection in susceptible fish species
is mostly performed post-mortem due to the neurotropism of the causative agent
and the only validated diagnostic assays require samples from brain and retinal
tissue. However, a non-lethal alternative to test for exposure of fish to NNV is 
needed. An indirect ELISA for the detection of anti-NNV antibodies in was
recently developed and evaluated to detect responses in the sera from immunized
fish. For this study, we assessed the accuracy of the assay at detecting specific
antibodies from naturally exposed fish using field samples from populations with 
differing infection status. We applied a Bayesian model, using RTqPCR as a second
test. Median estimates of the diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of the VNN
ELISA were 81.8% and 86.7%, respectively. We concluded that the assay was fit for
the purpose of identifying animals in naturally exposed populations. With further
evaluation in larger populations the test might be used to inform implementation 
of control measures, and for estimating infection prevalence to facilitate risk
analysis. To our knowledge this is the first report on the diagnostic accuracy of
an antibody ELISA for an infectious disease in finfish.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2015.11.022 
PMID: 26702588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

