
1. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 5;11(1):e0146000. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146000.
eCollection 2016.

Hepatitis C Virus Increases Occludin Expression via the Upregulation of Adipose
Differentiation-Related Protein.

Branche E(1), Conzelmann S(1), Parisot C(1), Bedert L(1), Lévy PL(1), Bartosch
B(2), Clément S(3), Negro F(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Geneva,
Switzerland.
(2)CRCL, INSERM U1052, CNRS 5286, University of Lyon, Lyon, France.
(3)Divisions of Clinical Pathology, University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) life cycle is closely associated with lipid
metabolism. In particular, HCV assembly initiates at the surface of lipid
droplets. To further understand the role of lipid droplets in HCV life cycle, we 
assessed the relationship between HCV and the adipose differentiation-related
protein (ADRP), a lipid droplet-associated protein. Different steps of HCV life
cycle were assessed in HCV-infected human Huh-7 hepatoma cells overexpressing
ADRP upon transduction with a lentiviral vector. HCV infection increased ADRP
mRNA and protein expression levels by 2- and 1.5-fold, respectively. The
overexpression of ADRP led to an increase of (i) the surface of lipid droplets,
(ii) the total cellular neutral lipid content (2.5- and 5-fold increase of
triglycerides and cholesterol esters, respectively), (iii) the cellular free
cholesterol level (5-fold) and (iv) the HCV particle production and infectivity
(by 2- and 3.5-fold, respectively). The investigation of different steps of the
HCV life cycle indicated that the ADRP overexpression, while not affecting the
viral replication, promoted both virion egress and entry (~12-fold), the latter
possibly via an increase of its receptor occludin. Moreover, HCV infection
induces an increase of both ADRP and occludin expression. In HCV infected cells, 
the occludin upregulation was fully prevented by the ADRP silencing, suggesting a
specific, ADRP-dependent mechanism. Finally, in HCV-infected human livers,
occludin and ADRP mRNA expression levels correlated with each other. Alltogether,
these findings show that HCV induces ADRP, which in turns appears to confer a
favorable environment to viral spread.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146000 
PMCID: PMC4701191
PMID: 26731658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

