
1. Biophys J. 2016 Feb 23;110(4):827-39. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2015.11.3522. Epub 2015 
Dec 30.

Resolution and Probabilistic Models of Components in CryoEM Maps of Mature P22
Bacteriophage.

Pintilie G(1), Chen DH(2), Haase-Pettingell CA(3), King JA(3), Chiu W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. Electronic address: pintilie@bcm.edu.
(2)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(3)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.

CryoEM continues to produce density maps of larger and more complex assemblies
with multiple protein components of mixed symmetries. Resolution is not always
uniform throughout a cryoEM map, and it can be useful to estimate the resolution 
in specific molecular components of a large assembly. In this study, we present
procedures to 1) estimate the resolution in subcomponents by gold-standard
Fourier shell correlation (FSC); 2) validate modeling procedures, particularly at
medium resolutions, which can include loop modeling and flexible fitting; and 3) 
build probabilistic models that combine high-accuracy priors (such as
crystallographic structures) with medium-resolution cryoEM densities. As an
example, we apply these methods to new cryoEM maps of the mature bacteriophage
P22, reconstructed without imposing icosahedral symmetry. Resolution estimates
based on gold-standard FSC show the highest resolution in the coat region
(7.6 Å), whereas other components are at slightly lower resolutions: portal
(9.2 Å), hub (8.5 Å), tailspike (10.9 Å), and needle (10.5 Å). These differences 
are indicative of inherent structural heterogeneity and/or reconstruction
accuracy in different subcomponents of the map. Probabilistic models for these
subcomponents provide new insights, to our knowledge, and structural information 
when taking into account uncertainty given the limitations of the observed
density.

Copyright © 2016 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2015.11.3522 
PMCID: PMC4775875
PMID: 26743049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

