
1. Animals (Basel). 2016 Jan 15;6(1). pii: E7. doi: 10.3390/ani6010007.

Ochre Bathing of the Bearded Vulture: A Bio-Mimetic Model for Early Humans
towards Smell Prevention and Health.

Tributsch H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bio-Mimetics Program, Carinthia University for Applied Sciences, Europastrasse
4, Villach 9524, Austria. helmut.tributsch@alice.it.

Since primordial times, vultures have been competing with man for animal
carcasses. One of these vultures, the once widespread bearded vulture ( Gypaetus 
barbatus ), has the habit of bathing its polluted feathers and skin in red iron
oxide - ochre - tainted water puddles. Why? Primitive man may have tried to find 
out and may have discovered its advantages. Red ochre, which has accompanied
human rituals and everyday life for more than 100,000 years, is not just a simple
red paint for decoration or a symbol for blood. As modern experiments
demonstrate, it is active in sunlight producing aggressive chemical species. They
can kill viruses and bacteria and convert smelly organic substances into volatile
neutral carbon dioxide gas. In this way, ochre can in sunlight sterilize and
clean the skin to provide health and comfort and make it scentless, a definitive 
advantage for nomadic meat hunters. This research thus also demonstrates a
sanitary reason for the vulture's habit of bathing in red ochre mud. Prehistoric 
people have therefore included ochre use into their rituals, especially into
those in relation to birth and death. Significant ritual impulses during
evolution of man may thus have developed bio-mimetically, inspired from the
habits of a vulture. It is discussed how this health strategy could be developed 
to a modern standard helping to fight antibiotics-resistant bacteria in
hospitals.

DOI: 10.3390/ani6010007 
PMCID: PMC4730124
PMID: 26784238 

