
1. Vet Microbiol. 2016 Feb 1;183:50-61. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2015.11.036. Epub 2015
Nov 30.

Reconstruction of the Schmallenberg virus epidemic in Belgium: Complementary use 
of disease surveillance approaches.

Poskin A(1), Théron L(2), Hanon JB(3), Saegerman C(4), Vervaeke M(5), Van der
Stede Y(3), Cay B(6), De Regge N(7).

Author information: 
(1)CODA-CERVA, Coordination of Veterinary Diagnostics Epidemiology and Risk
Analysis, Groeselenberg 99, B-1180 Brussels, Belgium; CODA-CERVA, Operational
Directorate Viral Diseases, Groeselenberg 99, B-1180 Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liège, Clinic Department of
Production Animals (DCP), Boulevard de Colonster, 20, B42, Quartier Vallée 2,
Avenue de Cureghem 7A, B-4000 Liège, Belgium.
(3)CODA-CERVA, Coordination of Veterinary Diagnostics Epidemiology and Risk
Analysis, Groeselenberg 99, B-1180 Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liège, Research Unit of
Epidemiology and Risk Analysis Applied to Veterinary Sciences (UREAR), Boulevard 
de Colonster, 20, B42, Quartier Vallée 2, Avenue de Cureghem 7A, B-4000 Liège,
Belgium.
(5)Agentschap Natuur en Bos, Koning Albert II-laan 20 bus 8, B-1000 Brussels,
Belgium.
(6)CODA-CERVA, Operational Directorate Viral Diseases, Groeselenberg 99, B-1180
Brussels, Belgium.
(7)CODA-CERVA, Operational Directorate Viral Diseases, Groeselenberg 99, B-1180
Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: nick.deregge@coda-cerva.be.

Schmallenberg virus (SBV) emerged across Europe in 2011 and Belgium was among the
first countries affected. In this study, published findings are combined with new
data from veterinary surveillance networks and the Belgian reference laboratory
for SBV at the Veterinary and Agrochemical Research centre (CODA-CERVA) to
reconstruct the epidemic in Belgium. First retrospective cases of SBV were
reported by veterinarians that observed decreased milk yield and fever in dairy
cattle in May 2011. The number of SBV suspicions subsequently increased in adult 
cattle in August 2011. That month, first SBV positive pools of Culicoides were
detected and extensive virus circulation occurred in Belgium during late summer
and autumn 2011. As a consequence, most pregnant ruminants were infected and
their fetuses exposed to the virus. This resulted in an outbreak of abortions,
still-births and malformed new-borns observed between January and April 2012. The
number of cases drastically diminished in 2012-2013, although multiple lines of
evidence obtained from cross-sectional serological surveys, analyses on aborted
foetuses, sentinel herd surveillance and surveillance of SBV in vectors prove
that SBV was still circulating in Belgium at that time. Virus circulation was
then probably strongly reduced in 2013-2014, while increasing evidence indicates 
its recirculation in 2014-2015 in Belgium. Based on the experience gathered with 
the closely related Akabane virus, recurrent outbreaks of congenital events can
be expected for a long period. Vaccination of seronegative animals before the
first mating could be used to prevent the deleterious effects of SBV. During this
epidemic, different surveillance approaches including syndromic surveillance,
sentinel herd surveillance, cross-sectional seroprevalence studies and pathogen
surveillance in vectors have proven their utility and should be considered to
continue in the future.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2015.11.036 
PMID: 26790935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

