
1. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2016 Apr;133(1):80-3. doi: 10.1016/j.ijgo.2015.08.014.
Epub 2015 Dec 14.

A retrospective study of 152 women with vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia.

Zhang J(1), Chang X(1), Qi Y(2), Zhang Y(1), Zhang S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical
University, Shenyang, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical University,
Shenyang, China.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical
University, Shenyang, China. Electronic address: 13361963@qq.com.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the clinical characteristics and treatment of women with
vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VAIN), as well as HPV prevalence in this
population.
METHODS: A retrospective review was undertaken of the medical records of women
diagnosed with VAIN at a clinic in Shenyang, China, between January 1, 2009, and 
December 31, 2012.
RESULTS: Of the 152 records reviewed, 69 (45.4%) women had low-grade VAIN (VAIN1)
and 83 (54.6%) had high-grade VAIN (VAIN2/3). Among 110 patients with an
available HPV status, 97 (88.2%) were positive. The predominant HPV types were
HPV16, HPV33, HPV81, HPV53, HPV18, HPV58, and HPV66. Previous hysterectomy was
documented in 60 (39.5%) patients. Additionally, 80 (52.6%) patients had no
history of dysplasia of the lower genital tract. Of patients with VAIN1, 50
(72.5%) were treated by observation only, 31 (62.0%) of whom regressed
spontaneously. Of 66 patients with VAIN2, 38 (57.6%) underwent treatment, 14
(36.8%) of whom experienced recurrence or progression. Of 17 patients with VAIN3,
13 (76.5%) underwent treatment, 5 (38.5%) of whom experienced recurrence or
progression.
CONCLUSION: Evaluation of the entire vagina by colposcopy is warranted in each
patient with abnormal cervical screening results. The predominant HPV genotypes
among patients with VAIN could be used to establish diagnosis program and develop
an HPV vaccine.

Copyright Â© 2015 International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics. Published
by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijgo.2015.08.014 
PMID: 26797205  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

