
1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2016 Mar 15;24(6):1346-55. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2016.02.007. Epub 
2016 Feb 6.

Design, RNA cleavage and antiviral activity of new artificial ribonucleases
derived from mono-, di- and tripeptides connected by linkers of different
hydrophobicity.

Tamkovich N(1), Koroleva L(1), Kovpak M(1), Goncharova E(1), Silnikov V(1),
Vlassov V(1), Zenkova M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Lavrentiev Ave, 8,
Novosibirsk 630090, Russia.
(2)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Lavrentiev Ave, 8,
Novosibirsk 630090, Russia. Electronic address: marzen@niboch.nsc.ru.

A novel series of metal-free artificial ribonucleases (aRNases) was designed,
synthesized and assessed in terms of ribonuclease activity and ability to
inactivate influenza virus WSN/A33/H1N1 in vitro. The compounds were built of two
short peptide fragments, which include Lys, Ser, Arg, Glu and imidazole residues 
in various combinations, connected by linkers of different hydrophobicity
(1,12-diaminododecane or 4,9-dioxa-1,12-diaminododecane). These compounds
efficiently cleaved different RNA substrates under physiological conditions at
rates three to five times higher than that of artificial ribonucleases described 
earlier and displayed RNase A-like cleavage specificity. aRNases with the
hydrophobic 1,12-diaminododecane linker displayed ribonuclease activity 3-40
times higher than aRNases with the 4,9-dioxa-1,12-diaminododecane linker. The
assumed mechanism of RNA cleavage was typical for natural ribonucleases, that is,
general acid-base catalysis via the formation of acid/base pairs by functional
groups of amino acids present in the aRNases; the pH profile of cleavage
confirmed this mechanism. The most active aRNases under study exhibited high
antiviral activity and entirely inactivated influenza virus A/WSN/33/(H1N1) after
a short incubation period of viral suspension under physiological conditions.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2016.02.007 
PMID: 26899594  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

