
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2016 Jun;40:126-135. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.02.033. Epub
2016 Feb 27.

Mosquito saliva induced cutaneous events augment Chikungunya virus replication
and disease progression.

Agarwal A(1), Joshi G(1), Nagar DP(2), Sharma AK(3), Sukumaran D(3), Pant SC(2), 
Parida MM(1), Dash PK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Defence R and D Establishment, Jhansi Road, Gwalior 474 
002, M. P., India.
(2)Pharmacology and Toxicology Division, Defence R and D Establishment, Jhansi
Road, Gwalior 474 002, M. P., India.
(3)Vector Management Division, Defence R and D Establishment, Jhansi Road,
Gwalior 474 002, M. P., India.
(4)Division of Virology, Defence R and D Establishment, Jhansi Road, Gwalior 474 
002, M. P., India. Electronic address: pabandash@drde.drdo.in.

Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is transmitted when infected mosquito probes the host
skin. While probing, mosquito saliva is expectorated into host skin along with
virus which contains cocktail of molecules having anti-hemostatic and
immunomodulatory properties. As mosquito saliva is a critical factor during
natural arboviral infection, therefore we investigated mosquito saliva induced
cutaneous events that modulate CHIKV infection. The effect of mosquito saliva on 
CHIKV infection was examined through inoculation of suckling mice subcutaneously 
with either CHIKV alone or uninfected mosquito bite followed by CHIKV.
Histopathological evaluation of skin revealed infiltration of transmigrated
inflammatory cells. Dermal blood vessels were hyperemic and adnexa showed
degenerating lesions. Severe hemorrhage was observed in dermis and hypodermis in 
mosquito bite+CHIKV group compared to CHIKV group. Analysis of cytokines in skin 
showed significant downregulation of inflammatory genes like TLR-3, IL-2, IFN-γ, 
TNF-α and IFN-β in mosquito bite+CHIKV group compared to CHIKV group. In
contrast, significant upregulation of anti-inflammatory genes like IL-4 and IL-10
was observed. These early events might have been responsible for increased
dissemination of CHIKV to serum and peripheral organs as demonstrated through
>10-fold higher viremia, antigen localization, cellular infiltration and
degenerative changes. Thus mosquito saliva induced early cellular infiltration
and associated cytokines augment CHIKV pathogenesis in a mouse model. This
mosquito improved CHIKV mouse model simulates the realistic conditions that occur
naturally during infected mosquito bite to a host. It will lead to better
understanding of CHIKV pathobiology and promote the evaluation of novel medical
countermeasures against emerging CHIKV.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.02.033 
PMID: 26925703  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

