
1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016 Mar 4;65(8):202-5. doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6508a2.

Cluster of Ebola Virus Disease Linked to a Single Funeral - Moyamba District,
Sierra Leone, 2014.

Curran KG, Gibson JJ, Marke D, Caulker V, Bomeh J, Redd JT, Bunga S, Brunkard J, 
Kilmarx PH.

As of February 17, 2016, a total of 14,122 cases (62% confirmed) of Ebola Virus
Disease (Ebola) and 3,955 Ebola-related deaths had been reported in Sierra Leone 
since the epidemic in West Africa began in 2014. A key focus of the Ebola
response in Sierra Leone was the promotion and implementation of safe, dignified 
burials to prevent Ebola transmission by limiting contact with potentially
infectious corpses. Traditional funeral practices pose a substantial risk for
Ebola transmission through contact with infected bodies, body fluids,
contaminated clothing, and other personal items at a time when viral load is
high; however, the role of funeral practices in the Sierra Leone epidemic and
ongoing Ebola transmission has not been fully characterized. In September 2014, a
sudden increase in the number of reported Ebola cases occurred in Moyamba, a
rural and previously low-incidence district with a population of approximately
260,000. The Sierra Leone Ministry of Health and Sanitation and CDC investigated 
and implemented public health interventions to control this cluster of Ebola
cases, including community engagement, active surveillance, and close follow-up
of contacts. A retrospective analysis of cases that occurred during July
11-October 31, 2014, revealed that 28 persons with confirmed Ebola had attended
the funeral of a prominent pharmacist during September 5-7, 2014. Among the 28
attendees with Ebola, 21 (75%) reported touching the man's corpse, and 16 (57%)
reported having direct contact with the pharmacist before he died. Immediate,
safe, dignified burials by trained teams with appropriate protective equipment
are critical to interrupt transmission and control Ebola during times of active
community transmission; these measures remain important during the current
response phase.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6508a2 
PMID: 26938950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

