
1. Viruses. 2016 Mar 3;8(3):67. doi: 10.3390/v8030067.

Remodeling of the Host Cell Plasma Membrane by HIV-1 Nef and Vpu: A Strategy to
Ensure Viral Fitness and Persistence.

Sugden SM(1), Bego MG(2), Pham TN(3), Cohen ÉA(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Retrovirology, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal (IRCM), 110 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada.
scott.sugden@ircm.qc.ca.
(2)Laboratory of Human Retrovirology, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal (IRCM), 110 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada.
mariana.bego@ircm.qc.ca.
(3)Laboratory of Human Retrovirology, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal (IRCM), 110 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada.
tram.pham@ircm.qc.ca.
(4)Laboratory of Human Retrovirology, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal (IRCM), 110 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada.
eric.cohen@ircm.qc.ca.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Université de
Montréal, C.P. 6128, Succursale Centre-ville, Montréal, QC H3C 3J7, Canada.
eric.cohen@ircm.qc.ca.

The plasma membrane protects the cell from its surroundings and regulates
cellular communication, homing, and metabolism. Not surprisingly, the composition
of this membrane is highly controlled through the vesicular trafficking of
proteins to and from the cell surface. As intracellular pathogens, most viruses
exploit the host plasma membrane to promote viral replication while avoiding
immune detection. This is particularly true for the enveloped human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which assembles and obtains its lipid shell
directly at the plasma membrane. HIV-1 encodes two proteins, negative factor
(Nef) and viral protein U (Vpu), which function primarily by altering the
quantity and localization of cell surface molecules to increase virus fitness
despite host antiviral immune responses. These proteins are expressed at
different stages in the HIV-1 life cycle and employ a variety of mechanisms to
target both unique and redundant surface proteins, including the viral receptor
CD4, host restriction factors, immunoreceptors, homing molecules, tetraspanins
and membrane transporters. In this review, we discuss recent progress in the
study of the Nef and Vpu targeting of host membrane proteins with an emphasis on 
how remodeling of the cell membrane allows HIV-1 to avoid host antiviral immune
responses leading to the establishment of systemic and persistent infection.

DOI: 10.3390/v8030067 
PMCID: PMC4810257
PMID: 26950141  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

