
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 10;11(3):e0151161. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151161.
eCollection 2016.

Diversity, Mutation and Recombination Analysis of Cotton Leaf Curl Geminiviruses.

Saleem H(1), Nahid N(2), Shakir S(1), Ijaz S(1), Murtaza G(1), Khan AA(1), Mubin 
M(1), Nawaz-Ul-Rehman MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Virology Lab, Center for Agricultural Biochemistry and Biotechnology,
University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Bioinformatics and Biotechnology, GC University Faisalabad,
Faisalabad, Pakistan.

The spread of cotton leaf curl disease in China, India and Pakistan is a recent
phenomenon. Analysis of available sequence data determined that there is a
substantial diversity of cotton-infecting geminiviruses in Pakistan. Phylogenetic
analyses indicated that recombination between two major groups of viruses, cotton
leaf curl Multan virus (CLCuMuV) and cotton leaf curl Kokhran virus (CLCuKoV),
led to the emergence of several new viruses. Recombination detection programs and
phylogenetic analyses showed that CLCuMuV and CLCuKoV are highly recombinant
viruses. Indeed, CLCuKoV appeared to be a major donor virus for the coat protein 
(CP) gene, while CLCuMuV donated the Rep gene in the majority of recombination
events. Using recombination free nucleotide datasets the substitution rates for
CP and Rep genes were determined. We inferred similar nucleotide substitution
rates for the CLCuMuV-Rep gene (4.96X10-4) and CLCuKoV-CP gene (2.706X10-4),
whereas relatively higher substitution rates were observed for CLCuMuV-CP and
CLCuKoV-Rep genes. The combination of sequences with equal and relatively low
substitution rates, seemed to result in the emergence of viral isolates that
caused epidemics in Pakistan and India. Our findings also suggest that CLCuMuV is
spreading at an alarming rate, which can potentially be a threat to cotton
production in the Indian subcontinent.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151161 
PMCID: PMC4872795
PMID: 26963635  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

