
1. Am J Epidemiol. 2016 Apr 1;183(7):671-9. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwv281. Epub 2016 Mar
10.

The Natural History of Human Polyomaviruses and Herpesviruses in Early Life--The 
Rhea Birth Cohort in Greece.

Karachaliou M, Waterboer T, Casabonne D, Chalkiadaki G, Roumeliotaki T, Michel A,
Stiakaki E, Chatzi L, Pawlita M, Kogevinas M, de Sanjose S.

Erratum in
    Am J Epidemiol. 2016 Jun 15;183(12 ):1174.

Sparse data exist on the patterns and determinants of acquisition of
polyomaviruses and herpesviruses in childhood. We measured immunoglobulin G
seroreactivity against 10 polyomaviruses (BKPyV, JCPyV, KIPyV, WUPyV, MCPyV,
HPyV6, HPyV7, TSPyV, HPyV9, HPyV10) and 5 herpesviruses (Epstein Barr virus
(EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2, human
herpesvirus 8) using multiplex serology on blood samples collected at birth (cord
blood, n = 626) and at follow-up at 3 years (n = 81) and 4 years (n = 690) of age
among the Rhea birth cohort recruited in Greece from pregnant women in 2007-2008.
We used Poisson regression with robust variance to identify determinants of
seropositivity at age 4. Seroprevalence of polyomaviruses ranged from 38.5% to
99.8% in cord blood and from 20.9% to 82.3% at age 4. Seroprevalence of EBV, CMV,
herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2, and human herpesvirus 8 was 99.4%, 74.9%,
26.2%, 8.0%, and 1.6% in cord blood and 52.5%, 25.8%, 3.6%, 1.4%, and 0% at age
4, respectively. Determinants of seropositivity at age 4 were cord seropositivity
(JCPyV, HPyV7, HPyV10, CMV), vaginal delivery (HPyV10), breastfeeding (CMV),
younger age at day-care entry (BKPyV, KIPyV, WUPyV, TSPyV, HPyV10, HPyV9, EBV,
CMV), and swimming pool attendance (BKPyV, KIPyV, WUPyV, HPyV10). Television
viewing, parental stress, and hygiene practices were inversely associated with
the seroprevalence of polyomaviruses and herpesviruses.

Â© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwv281 
PMID: 26968942  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

