
1. J Immunol Methods. 2016 Jun;433:51-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2016.03.002. Epub 2016
Mar 8.

A new cell line for high throughput HIV-specific antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC) and cell-to-cell virus transmission studies.

Orlandi C(1), Flinko R(2), Lewis GK(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Human Virology of the University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. Electronic address: corlandi@ihv.umaryland.edu.
(2)The Institute of Human Virology of the University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)The Institute of Human Virology of the University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. Electronic address: glewis@ihv.umaryland.edu.

Several lines of evidence indicate that antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity 
(Wren et al., 2013) is important in the pathogenesis of HIV-1 infection. Namely, 
ADCC is induced during natural HIV-1 infection or in HIV-1 vaccine studies, the
latter demonstrated by the RV144 vaccine trial. To expedite the assessment of
ADCC in studies of HIV, we have developed a high throughput assay. We have
optimized the rapid fluorometric antibody-mediated cytotoxicity assay (RFADCC) by
transfecting the EGFP-CEM-NKr cell line to constitutively express SNAP-tagged
CCR5. This cell line can then serve as a source of HIV-specific targets when
coated with monomeric gp120, spinoculated with inactivated intact virions,
infected by cell-free viral diffusion or infected by cell-to-cell transmission of
virus. The optimized strategy has two significant advantages over the original
RFADCC method: First, the preparation of detectable target cells is less labor
intensive and faster as it does not rely on multiple staining and washing steps
for target cells. Second, because the target cell markers GFP and SNAP are
constitutively expressed, the assay provides highly reproducible data. These
strengths make the optimized RFADCC assay suitable not only for studies of HIV-1 
specific cytotoxicity but also for studies of cell-cell transmission of virus. In
conclusion, this assay provides a new generation T cell line that can expedite
large clinical studies as well as research studies in humans or non-human
primates.

Copyright Â© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2016.03.002 
PMCID: PMC4869150
PMID: 26969387  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

