
1. Vaccine. 2016 Jun 3;34(26):2967-2970. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2016.02.077. Epub
2016 Mar 11.

Status of research and development of vaccines for enterovirus 71.

Reed Z(1), Cardosa MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Development Consultant, 26 Rue Lecourbe, Paris 75015, France.
Electronic address: zahussain22@gmail.com.
(2)Sentinext Therapeutics, 19H Level 19, Menara Northam, 55, Jalan Sultan Ahmad
Shah, 10050 George Town, Pulau Pinang, Malaysia.

Although outbreaks of Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease (HFMD) in young children have
long been recognized worldwide, the occurrence of rare and life-threatening
neurological, respiratory, and cardiac complications has propelled this common
condition into the spotlight as a major public health problem in the affected
countries. Various enteroviruses cause HFMD, but the severe complications have
been mostly associated with enterovirus 71 (EV71). Medical treatment is
supportive and measures to interrupt transmission have been challenging to
implement. Preventive vaccines could have an important clinical impact,
especially among children younger than 3 years old who are most susceptible to
the neurological complications. Several groups in the highly affected
Asia-Pacific region are working towards vaccines against EV71 and some candidates
have progressed to late-stage clinical trials with two vaccines recently reported
to have been approved by the regulatory authorities in China. This report
summarizes current issues and progress in the development of vaccines against
EV71.

Copyright Â© 2016 World Health Organization. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2016.02.077 
PMID: 26973065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

