
1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1989;569:25-35.

Perspectives on research and diseases of the Tropics: an Asian view.

Ramalingaswami V(1).

Author information: 
(1)United Nations Children's Fund, New York, New York 10017.

PIP: Diarrhea, pneumonia, and malnutrition account for most of mortality and
morbidity in children in developing countries. The Expanded Program of
Immunization (EPI) is making progress with more than 50% of children under the
age of 1 year receiving vaccination against the 6 EPI-listed diseases. The
eradication of poliomyelitis by 2000 is realistic, so that the world could be
smallpox- and polio-free by the 21st century. In July-August 1988 a cholera
epidemic erupted in Delhi, India in which several hundreds died. The combined
whole cell and toxin-B subunit oral vaccine against cholera has shown a decrease 
in protection from around 75-80% at the end of 6 months to around 60% at the end 
of 2 years. Typhoid fever affecting close to 8 million people in Asia has been
treated with the improved formulation of TY21A vaccine and with the Vi
polysaccharide capsular surface antigen in encouraging trials in Nepal.
Co-trimoxazole has reduced child mortality caused by acute lower respiratory
tract infections at the community level. 3 oral antirabies vaccines have been
found safe, and oral baits have been effective. Chloroquine-resistant Plasmodium 
falciparum malaria is a major problem in may Asian countries involving
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine combinations as well. Lymphatic filariasis is expressed
clinically as elephantiasis. More than 90 million people are believed to be
infected. Ivermectin in a single dose as low as 25 mcg/kg of body weight was
shown to be microfilaricidal in lymphatic filariasis. Allopurinol riboside is
effective against visceral leishmaniasis or kala-azar. Leprosy and tuberculosis
continue to be major health problems in Asia. There have been encouraging
advances in immunization against cancers of the tropics, such as hepatitis B and 
primary carcinoma of the liver, the human papilloma virus and cancer of the
uterine cervix, the Epstein-Barr virus and Burkitt's lymphoma, and nasopharyngeal
carcinoma.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1989.tb27356.x 
PMID: 2698093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

