
1. J Nutr Biochem. 2016 Apr;30:102-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2015.12.006. Epub 2016 
Jan 6.

High folic acid intake reduces natural killer cell cytotoxicity in aged mice.

Sawaengsri H(1), Wang J(2), Reginaldo C(1), Steluti J(1), Wu D(1), Meydani SN(1),
Selhub J(1), Paul L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, 
Boston, MA, 02111.
(2)Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, 
Boston, MA, 02111; Translational Medical Center of Huaihe Clinical College, Henan
University, Kaifeng, 475000, China.
(3)Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, 
Boston, MA, 02111. Electronic address: Ligi.Paul_Pottenplackel@tufts.edu.

Presence of unmetabolized folic acid in plasma, which is indicative of folic acid
intake beyond the metabolic capacity of the body, is associated with reduced
natural killer (NK) cell cytotoxicity in postmenopausal women ≥50years. NK cells 
are cytotoxic lymphocytes that are part of the innate immune system critical for 
surveillance and defense against virus-infected and cancer cells. We determined
if a high folic acid diet can result in reduced NK cell cytotoxicity in an aged
mouse model. Female C57BL/6 mice (16-month-old) were fed an AIN-93M diet with the
recommended daily allowance (1× RDA, control) or 20× RDA (high) folic acid for
3months. NK cytotoxicity was lower in splenocytes from mice fed a high folic acid
diet when compared to mice on control diet (P<.04). The lower NK cell
cytotoxicity in high folic acid fed mice could be due to their lower mature
cytotoxic/naïve NK cell ratio (P=.03) when compared to the control mice.
Splenocytes from mice on high folic acid diet produced less interleukin (IL)-10
when stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (P<.05). The difference in NK cell
cytotoxicity between dietary groups was abolished when the splenocytes were
supplemented with exogenous IL-10 prior to assessment of the NK cytotoxicity,
suggesting that the reduced NK cell cytotoxicity of the high folic acid group was
at least partially due to reduced IL-10 production. This study demonstrates a
causal relationship between high folic acid intake and reduced NK cell
cytotoxicity and provides some insights into the potential mechanisms behind this
relationship.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2015.12.006 
PMID: 27012626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

