
1. RNA Biol. 2016 Sep;13(9):743-7. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2016.1166330. Epub 2016 Mar
31.

Hepatitis B virus nuclear export elements: RNA stem-loop α and β, key parts of
the HBV post-transcriptional regulatory element.

Lim CS(1), Brown CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Biochemistry and Genetics Otago , University of Otago , Dunedin , New
Zealand.

Many viruses contain RNA elements that modulate splicing and/or promote nuclear
export of their RNAs. The RNAs of the major human pathogen, hepatitis B virus
(HBV) contain a large (~600 bases) composite cis-acting 'post-transcriptional
regulatory element' (PRE). This element promotes expression from these naturally 
intronless transcripts. Indeed, the related woodchuck hepadnavirus PRE (WPRE) is 
used to enhance expression in gene therapy and other expression vectors. These
PRE are likely to act through a combination of mechanisms, including promotion of
RNA nuclear export. Functional components of both the HBV PRE and WPRE are 2
conserved RNA cis-acting stem-loop (SL) structures, SLα and SLβ. They are within 
the coding regions of polymerase (P) gene, and both P and X genes, respectively. 
Based on previous studies using mutagenesis and/or nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR), here we propose 2 covariance models for SLα and SLβ. The model for the
30-nucleotide SLα contains a G-bulge and a CNGG(U) apical loop of which the first
and the fourth loop residues form a CG pair and the fifth loop residue is bulged 
out, as observed in the NMR structure. The model for the 23-nucleotide SLβ
contains a 7-base-pair stem and a 9-nucleotide loop. Comparison of the models
with other RNA structural elements, as well as similarity searches of human
transcriptome and viral genomes demonstrate that SLα and SLβ are specific to HBV 
transcripts. However, they are well conserved among the hepadnaviruses of
non-human primates, the woodchuck and ground squirrel.

DOI: 10.1080/15476286.2016.1166330 
PMCID: PMC5013995
PMID: 27031749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

