
1. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2016 Oct;42(5):1369-82. doi: 10.1007/s10695-016-0225-3.
Epub 2016 Apr 5.

Cloning and characterization of Bax1 and Bax2 genes of Ctenopharyngodon idellus
and evaluation of transcript expression in response to grass carp reovirus
infection.

Wang H(1)(2), He L(1), Pei Y(1)(2), Chu P(1)(2), Huang R(1), Li Y(1), Liao L(1), 
Zhu Z(1), Wang Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, 430072, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, 430072, China.
wangypihb@163.com.

Multidomain proapoptotic Bcl-2-associated X (Bax) protein is an essential
effector responsible for mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization, resulting
in cell death via apoptosis. In this study, two Bax genes of grass carp
(Ctenopharyngodon idellus), designated as CiBax1 and CiBax2, were isolated and
analyzed. The obtained CiBax1 cDNA is 2058 bp long, with a 579 bp open reading
frame (ORF) coding a protein of 192 amino acid residues. The full-length cDNA of 
CiBax2 is 1161 bp, with a 618 bp ORF coding 205 amino acids. Both CiBax1 and
CiBax2 are typical members of Bcl-2 family containing conserved Bcl and
C-terminal domains, and they share conserved synteny with zebrafish Bax genes
despite the grass carp Bax mapping to different linkage groups. Phylogenetic
analysis showed that CiBax1 was clustered with Bax from most teleost fish, and
CiBax2 was close to Bax2 from teleost fish but far separated from that of Salmo
salar. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis revealed broad expression of CiBax1
and CiBax2 in tissues from healthy grass carp, but the relative expression level 
differed. The mRNA expression of CiBax1 and CiBax2 was both upregulated
significantly and peaked in all examined tissues at days 5 or 6 post-infection
with grass carp reovirus. Subcellular localization indicated that CiBax1 protein 
was localized in both nucleus and cytosol, while CiBax2 protein only in cytosol. 
Moreover, CiBax2, but not CiBax1 was colocalized with mitochondrion under normal 
condition. Taken together, the findings would be helpful for further
understanding of the function of Bax in teleost fish.

DOI: 10.1007/s10695-016-0225-3 
PMID: 27048597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

