
1. Adv Virus Res. 2016;95:43-85. doi: 10.1016/bs.aivir.2016.03.001. Epub 2016 Apr 4.

Cell-to-Cell Spread of HIV and Viral Pathogenesis.

Law KM(1), Satija N(1), Esposito AM(1), Chen BK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Institute Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY,
United States.
(2)Immunology Institute Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY,
United States. Electronic address: benjamin.chen@mssm.edu.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) gives rise to a chronic infection
that progressively depletes CD4(+) T lymphocytes. CD4(+) T lymphocytes play a
central coordinating role in adaptive cellular and humoral immune responses, and 
to do so they migrate and interact within lymphoid compartments and at effector
sites to mount immune responses. While cell-free virus serves as an excellent
prognostic indicator for patient survival, interactions of infected T cells or
virus-scavenging immune cells with uninfected T cells can greatly enhance viral
spread. HIV can induce interactions between infected and uninfected T cells that 
are triggered by cell surface expression of viral Env, which serves as a cell
adhesion molecule that interacts with CD4 on the target cell, before it acts as
the viral membrane fusion protein. These interactions are called virological
synapses and promote replication in the face of selective pressure of humoral
immune responses and antiretroviral therapy. Other infection-enhancing cell-cell 
interactions occur between virus-concentrating antigen-presenting cells and
recipient T cells, called infectious synapses. The exact roles that these
cell-cell interactions play in each stage of infection, from viral acquisition,
systemic dissemination, to chronic persistence are still being determined.
Infection-promoting immune cell interactions are likely to contribute to viral
persistence and enhance the ability of HIV-1 to evade adaptive immune responses.

Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.aivir.2016.03.001 
PMID: 27112280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

