
1. Virus Res. 2016 Jul 15;220:161-71. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2016.04.019. Epub 2016
Apr 27.

Characterization of epitopes on the rabies virus glycoprotein by selection and
analysis of escape mutants.

Fallahi F(1), Wandeler AI(2), Nadin-Davis SA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Expertise for Rabies, Canadian Food Inspection Agency, Ottawa
Laboratory-Fallowfield, 3851 Fallowfield Road, Ottawa, ON, Canada; Department of 
Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
ON, Canada. Electronic address: firouzeh.fallahi@inspection.gc.ca.
(2)Centre of Expertise for Rabies, Canadian Food Inspection Agency, Ottawa
Laboratory-Fallowfield, 3851 Fallowfield Road, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(3)Animal Health Microbiology Research Group, Canadian Food Inspection Agency,
Ottawa Laboratory-Fallowfield, 3851 Fallowfield Road, Ottawa, ON, Canada.

The glycoprotein (G) is the only surface protein of the lyssavirus particle and
the only viral product known to be capable of eliciting the production of
neutralizing antibodies. In this study, the isolation of escape mutants resistant
to monoclonal antibody (Mab) neutralization was attempted by a selection strategy
employing four distinct rabies virus strains: the extensively passaged Evelyn
Rokitnicki Abelseth (ERA) strain and three field isolates representing two
bat-associated variants and the Western Canada skunk variant (WSKV). No escape
mutants were generated from either of the bat-associated viral variants but two
neutralization mutants were derived from the WSKV isolate. Seven independent ERA 
mutants were recovered using Mabs directed against antigenic sites I (four
mutants) and IIIa (three mutants) of the glycoprotein. The cross-neutralization
patterns of these viral mutants were used to determine the precise location and
nature of the G protein epitopes recognized by these Mabs. Nucleotide sequencing 
of the G gene indicated that those mutants derived using Mabs directed to
antigenic site (AS) III all contained amino acid substitutions in this site.
However, of the four mutants selected with AS I Mabs, two bore mutations within
AS I as expected while the remaining two carried mutations in AS II. WSKV mutants
exhibited mutations at the sites appropriate for the Mabs used in their
selection. All ERA mutant preparations were more cytopathogenic than the parental
virus when propagated in cell culture; when in vivo pathogenicity in mice was
examined, three of these mutants exhibited reduced pathogenicity while the
remaining four mutants exhibited comparable pathogenic properties to those of the
parent virus.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2016.04.019 
PMID: 27132040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

