
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2016 Aug;23(16):16816-33. doi:
10.1007/s11356-016-6812-0. Epub 2016 May 19.

Evaluation of the microbiological quality of reclaimed water produced from a
lagooning system.

Fernandez-Cassi X(1), Silvera C(2), Cervero-Aragó S(3)(4)(5), Rusiñol M(3),
Latif-Eugeni F(2), Bruguera-Casamada C(3), Civit S(6), Araujo RM(3), Figueras
MJ(2), Girones R(3), Bofill-Mas S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain. xaviako@gmail.com.
(2)Unitat de Microbiologia, Departament de Ciènces Médiques Bàsiques, Facultat de
Medicina i Ciències de la Salut, IISPV, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Reus,
Spain.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Water Hygiene, Institute for Hygiene and Applied Immunology, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)ICC Water and Health, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Department of Statistics, Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.

The use of lagooning as a complementary natural method of treating secondary
effluents of wastewater treatment plants has been employed as an affordable and
easy means of producing reclaimed water. However, using reclaimed water for some 
purposes, for example, for food irrigation, presents some risks if the effluents 
contain microbial pathogens. Classical bacterial indicators that are used to
assess faecal contamination in water do not always properly indicate the presence
of bacterial or viral pathogens. In the current study, the presence of faecal
indicator bacteria (FIB), heterotrophic bacterial counts (HBC), pathogens and
opportunistic pathogens, such as Legionella spp., Aeromonas spp., Arcobacter
spp., free-living amoeba (FLA), several viral indicators (human adenovirus and
polyomavirus JC) and viral pathogens (noroviruses and hepatitis E virus) were
analysed for 1 year in inlet and outlet water to assess the removal efficiency of
a lagooning system. We observed 2.58 (1.17-4.59) and 1.65 (0.15-3.14) log
reductions in Escherichia coli (EC) and intestinal enterococci (IE),
respectively, between the inlet and outlet samples. Genomic copies of the viruses
were log reduced by 1.18 (0.24-2.93), 0.64 (0.12-1.97), 0.45 (0.04-2.54) and 0.72
(0.22-2.50) for human adenovirus (HAdV), JC polyomavirus (JCPyV) and human
noroviruses (NoV GI and GII), respectively. No regrowth of opportunistic
pathogens was observed within the system. FLA, detected in all samples, did not
show a clear trend. The reduction of faecal pathogens was irregular with 6 out of
12 samples and 4 out of 12 samples exceeding the EC and IE values, specified in
the Spanish legislation for reclaimed water (RD 1620/2007). This data evidences
that there is a need for more studies to evaluate the removal mechanisms of
lagooning systems in order to optimize pathogen reduction. Moreover, surveillance
of water used to irrigate raw edible vegetables should be conducted to ensure the
fulfilment of the microbial requirements for the production of safe reclaimed
water.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-016-6812-0 
PMID: 27194016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

