
1. Viruses. 2016 Jun 17;8(6). pii: E165. doi: 10.3390/v8060165.

The Feat of Packaging Eight Unique Genome Segments.

Giese S(1), Bolte H(2)(3), Schwemmle M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, University Medical Center Freiburg,
Hermann-Herder-Strasse 11, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
sebastian.giese@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(2)Institute of Virology, University Medical Center Freiburg,
Hermann-Herder-Strasse 11, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
hardin.bolte@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(3)Spemann Graduate School of Biology and Medicine, University of Freiburg, 79104
Freiburg, Germany. hardin.bolte@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(4)Institute of Virology, University Medical Center Freiburg,
Hermann-Herder-Strasse 11, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
martin.schwemmle@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Influenza A viruses (IAVs) harbor a segmented RNA genome that is organized into
eight distinct viral ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complexes. Although a segmented
genome may be a major advantage to adapt to new host environments, it comes at
the cost of a highly sophisticated genome packaging mechanism. Newly synthesized 
vRNPs conquer the cellular endosomal recycling machinery to access the viral
budding site at the plasma membrane. Genome packaging sequences unique to each
RNA genome segment are thought to be key determinants ensuring the assembly and
incorporation of eight distinct vRNPs into progeny viral particles. Recent
studies using advanced fluorescence microscopy techniques suggest the formation
of vRNP sub-bundles (comprising less than eight vRNPs) during their transport on 
recycling endosomes. The formation of such sub-bundles might be required for
efficient packaging of a bundle of eight different genomes segments at the
budding site, further highlighting the complexity of IAV genome packaging.

DOI: 10.3390/v8060165 
PMCID: PMC4926185
PMID: 27322310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

