
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2016 Nov;54(11):2661-2668. Epub 2016 Aug 17.

Detection of Anti-Hepatitis B Virus Drug Resistance Mutations Based on Multicolor
Melting Curve Analysis.

Mou Y(1)(2), Athar MA(1)(2), Wu Y(1)(2), Xu Y(1)(2), Wu J(3), Xu Z(3), Hayder
Z(4), Khan S(5), Idrees M(6), Nasir MI(7), Liao Y(8)(9), Li Q(8)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, State Key Laboratory of
Molecular Vaccinology and Molecular Diagnostics, Engineering Research Center of
Molecular Diagnostics of the Ministry of Education, School of Life Sciences,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.
(2)Shenzhen Research Institute of Xiamen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
(3)Xiamen Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Xiamen, Fujian, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Quid-e-Azam Medical College, Bahawalpur, Punjab,
Pakistan.
(5)Department of Molecular Pathology, Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi,
Pakistan.
(6)Center for Applied Molecular Biology, University of the Punjab, Lahore,
Pakistan.
(7)Department of Molecular Pathology, Liaquat National Hospital, Karachi,
Pakistan.
(8)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, State Key Laboratory of
Molecular Vaccinology and Molecular Diagnostics, Engineering Research Center of
Molecular Diagnostics of the Ministry of Education, School of Life Sciences,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China yqliao@xmu.edu.cn qgli@xmu.edu.cn.
(9)School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.

Detection of anti-hepatitis B virus (HBV) drug resistance mutations is critical
for therapeutic decisions for chronic hepatitis B virus infection. We describe a 
real-time PCR-based assay using multicolor melting curve analysis (MMCA) that
could accurately detect 24 HBV nucleotide mutations at 10 amino acid positions in
the reverse transcriptase region of the HBV polymerase gene. The two-reaction
assay had a limit of detection of 5 copies per reaction and could detect a minor 
mutant population (5% of the total population) with the reverse transcriptase
M204V amino acid mutation in the presence of the major wild-type population when 
the overall concentration was 104 copies/μl. The assay could be finished within 3
h, and the cost of materials for each sample was less than $10. Clinical
validation studies using three groups of samples from both nucleos(t)ide
analog-treated and -untreated patients showed that the results for 99.3%
(840/846) of the samples and 99.9% (8,454/8,460) of the amino acids were
concordant with those of Sanger sequencing of the PCR amplicon from the HBV
reverse transcriptase region (PCR Sanger sequencing). HBV DNA in six samples with
mixed infections consisting of minor mutant subpopulations was undetected by the 
PCR Sanger sequencing method but was detected by MMCA, and the results were
confirmed by coamplification at a lower denaturation temperature-PCR Sanger
sequencing. Among the treated patients, 48.6% (103/212) harbored viruses that
displayed lamivudine monoresistance, adefovir monoresistance, entecavir
resistance, or lamivudine and adefovir resistance. Among the untreated patients, 
the Chinese group had more mutation-containing samples than did the Pakistani
group (3.3% versus 0.56%). Because of its accuracy, rapidness, wide-range
coverage, and cost-effectiveness, the real-time PCR assay could be a robust tool 
for the detection if anti-HBV drug resistance mutations in resource-limited
countries.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00439-16 
PMCID: PMC5078540
PMID: 27535686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

