
1. J Hepatol. 2016 Oct;65(1 Suppl):S82-S94. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2016.06.011.

Hepatitis C virus infection and chronic kidney disease: Time for reappraisal.

Cacoub P(1), Desbois AC(2), Isnard-Bagnis C(3), Rocatello D(4), Ferri C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, UMR 7211, and
Inflammation-Immunopathology-Biotherapy Department (DHU i2B), F-75005 Paris,
France; INSERM, UMR_S 959, F-75013 Paris, France; CNRS, FRE3632, F-75005 Paris,
France; AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Department of Internal
Medicine and Clinical Immunology, F-75013 Paris, France. Electronic address:
patrice.cacoub@aphp.fr.
(2)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, UMR 7211, and
Inflammation-Immunopathology-Biotherapy Department (DHU i2B), F-75005 Paris,
France; INSERM, UMR_S 959, F-75013 Paris, France; CNRS, FRE3632, F-75005 Paris,
France; AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Department of Internal
Medicine and Clinical Immunology, F-75013 Paris, France.
(3)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, UMR 7211, and
Inflammation-Immunopathology-Biotherapy Department (DHU i2B), F-75005 Paris,
France; AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Department of Nephrology,
F-75013 Paris, France.
(4)Center of Research of Immunopathology and Rare Diseases, and Nephrology and
Dialysis Unit. San G. Bosco Hospital and University of Turin, Italy.
(5)Rheumatology Unit, Medical School, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia,
Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria, Policlinico di Modena, 41124 Modena, Italy.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is associated with tremendous morbidity and
mortality due to liver complications. HCV infection is also associated with many 
extrahepatic manifestations including cardiovascular diseases, glucose metabolism
impairment, cryoglobulinemia vasculitis, B cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma and chronic 
kidney disease (CKD). Many studies have shown a strong association between HCV
and CKD, by reporting (i) an increased prevalence of HCV infection in patients on
haemodialysis, (ii) an increased incidence of CKD and proteinuria in HCV-infected
patients, and (iii) the development of membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
secondary to HCV-induced cryoglobulinemia vasculitis. HCV seropositivity is found
to be associated with an increased relative risk for all-cause and cardiovascular
mortality in the dialysis population. HCV seropositivity is linked to lower
patient and graft survival after kidney transplantation. Such poor HCV-associated
prognosis should have encouraged clinicians to treat HCV in CKD patients.
However, due to frequent side effects and the poor efficacy of interferon-based
treatments, very few HCV dialysis patients have received HCV medications until
now. The emergence of new direct acting, interferon-free antiviral treatment,
leading to HCV cure in most cases with a satisfactory safety profile, will
shortly modify the management of HCV infection in CKD patients. In patients with 
a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) >30ml/min, the choice of DAA is not
restricted. In those with a GFR <30 and >15ml/min, only
paritaprevir/ritonavir/ombitasvir/dasabuvir or a grazoprevir plus elbasvir
regimen are approved. In patients with end stage renal disease (GFR <15ml/min or 
dialysis), current data only allows for the use of a grazoprevir plus elbasvir
combination. No doubt these data will be modified in the future with the advent
of new studies including larger cohorts of HCV patients with renal impairment.

Copyright © 2016 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2016.06.011 
PMID: 27641990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

