
1. Viruses. 2016 Sep 19;8(9). pii: E256.

Functional Equivalence of Retroviral MA Domains in Facilitating Psi RNA Binding
Specificity by Gag.

Rye-McCurdy T(1), Olson ED(2), Liu S(3), Binkley C(4), Reyes JP(5), Thompson
BR(6), Flanagan JM(7), Parent LJ(8), Musier-Forsyth K(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, Center
for Retroviral Research, and Center for RNA Biology, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
rye.10@osu.edu.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, Center
for Retroviral Research, and Center for RNA Biology, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
olson.249@osu.edu.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, Center
for Retroviral Research, and Center for RNA Biology, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
liu.4982@buckeyemail.osu.edu.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, Center
for Retroviral Research, and Center for RNA Biology, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
binkley.94@osu.edu.
(5)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, Center
for Retroviral Research, and Center for RNA Biology, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
reyes.313@buckeyemail.osu.edu.
(6)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, Center
for Retroviral Research, and Center for RNA Biology, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
thompson.2255@buckeyemail.osu.edu.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Penn State College of
Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA. jmf27@psu.edu.
(8)Departments of Medicine and Microbiology and Immunology, Division of
Infectious Diseases and Epidemiology, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA
17033, USA. lparent@psu.edu.
(9)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, Center
for Retroviral Research, and Center for RNA Biology, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
musier-forsyth.1@osu.edu.

Retroviruses specifically package full-length, dimeric genomic RNA (gRNA) even in
the presence of a vast excess of cellular RNA. The "psi" (Ψ) element within the
5'-untranslated region (5'UTR) of gRNA is critical for packaging through
interaction with the nucleocapsid (NC) domain of Gag. However, in vitro Gag
binding affinity for Ψ versus non-Ψ RNAs is not significantly different. Previous
salt-titration binding assays revealed that human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) Gag bound to Ψ RNA with high specificity and relatively few charge
interactions, whereas binding to non-Ψ RNA was less specific and involved more
electrostatic interactions. The NC domain was critical for specific Ψ binding,
but surprisingly, a Gag mutant lacking the matrix (MA) domain was less effective 
at discriminating Ψ from non-Ψ RNA. We now find that Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) Gag
also effectively discriminates RSV Ψ from non-Ψ RNA in a MA-dependent manner.
Interestingly, Gag chimeras, wherein the HIV-1 and RSV MA domains were swapped,
maintained high binding specificity to cognate Ψ RNAs. Using Ψ RNA mutant
constructs, determinants responsible for promoting high Gag binding specificity
were identified in both systems. Taken together, these studies reveal the
functional equivalence of HIV-1 and RSV MA domains in facilitating Ψ RNA
selectivity by Gag, as well as Ψ elements that promote this selectivity.

DOI: 10.3390/v8090256 
PMCID: PMC5035970
PMID: 27657107 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

