
1. Pediatr Res. 2017 Jan;81(1-2):162-169. doi: 10.1038/pr.2016.191. Epub 2016 Sep
27.

Treatment of perinatal viral infections to improve neurologic outcomes.

Muller WJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine 
and Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

Viral infections in the fetus or newborn often involve the central nervous system
(CNS) and can lead to significant morbidity and mortality. Substantial progress
has been made in identifying interventions decreasing adverse neurodevelopmental 
outcomes in this population. This review highlights progress in treatment of
important viruses affecting the CNS in these susceptible hosts, focusing on
herpes simplex virus (HSV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV), and enteroviruses. The observation that high-dose acyclovir improves
mortality in neonatal HSV disease culminated decades of antiviral research for
this disease. More recently, prolonged oral acyclovir was found to improve
neurologic morbidity after neonatal HSV encephalitis. Ganciclovir, and more
recently its oral prodrug valganciclovir, is effective in improving hearing and
neurodevelopment after congenital CMV infection. Increasing evidence suggests
early control of perinatal HIV infection has implications for neurocognitive
functioning into school age. Lastly, the antiviral pleconaril has been studied
for nearly two decades for treating severe enteroviral infections, with newer
data supporting a role for this drug in neonates. Identifying common mechanisms
for pathogenesis of viral CNS disease during this critical period of brain
development is an important research goal, highlighted by the recent emergence of
Zika virus as a potential cause of fetal neurodevelopmental abnormalities.

DOI: 10.1038/pr.2016.191 
PMID: 27673425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

