
1. Mol Diagn Ther. 2017 Feb;21(1):45-57. doi: 10.1007/s40291-016-0236-x.

Diagnostic and Prognostic Value of MicroRNA in Viral Diseases.

Auvinen E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University
Hospital, Haartmaninkatu 3, POB 21, 00014, Helsinki, Finland.
Eeva.auvinen@helsinki.fi.

Virology is probably the most rapidly developing field within clinical laboratory
medicine. Adequate diagnostic methods exist for the diagnostics of most acute
viral infections. However, emergence of pathogenic viruses or virus strains and
new disease associations of known viruses require the establishment of new
diagnostic methods, sometimes very rapidly. In the field of chronic or persistent
viral diseases, particularly those involving potential of malignant or fatal
development, there is a constant need for improved differential diagnostics,
monitoring, prognosis and risk assessment. Increasing understanding of disease
pathogenesis also enables better patient management and personalized medicine,
where companion diagnostics can offer precise and specific tools for individual
care. Very often the new tools are offered by molecular diagnostic techniques,
and this includes the detection of microRNAs (miRNAs). miRNAs are small
regulatory RNA molecules, which regulate the expression of their target genes.
They are encoded both by viruses and their host, and both can target either viral
or cellular gene expression. In this review the diagnostic possibilities offered 
by miRNA will be discussed. The focus will be on selected viral and human miRNAs 
in viral diseases, and examples of miRNAs of putative diagnostic potential will
be presented.

DOI: 10.1007/s40291-016-0236-x 
PMID: 27682074  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

