
1. Ann Gastroenterol. 2016 Oct-Dec;29(4):454-459. Epub 2016 Jul 8.

Fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis C in post-transplant adult recipients of liver
transplantation.

Hori T(1), Onishi Y(1), Kamei H(1), Kurata N(1), Ishigami M(2), Ishizu Y(2),
Ogura Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transplant Surgery (Tohomide Hori, Yasuharu Onishi, Hideya
Kamei, Nobuhiko Kurata, Yasuhiro Ogura), Nagoya University Hospital, Nagoya,
Japan.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology (Masatoshi Ishigami), Nagoya
University Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.

Hepatitis C recurrence continues to present a major challenge in liver
transplantation (LT). Approximately 10% of hepatitis C virus (HCV)-positive
recipients will develop fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis (FCH) after LT. FCH is
clinically characterized as marked jaundice with cholestatic hepatic dysfunction 
and high titers of viremia. Pathologically, FCH manifests as marked hepatocyte
swelling, cholestasis, periportal peritrabecular fibrosis and only mild
inflammation. This progressive form usually involves acute liver failure, and
rapidly results in graft loss. A real-time and precise diagnosis based on
histopathological examination and viral measurement is indispensable for the
adequate treatment of FCH. Typical pathological findings of FCH are shown.
Currently, carefully selected combinations of direct-acting antivirals (DAAs)
offer the potential for highly effective and safe regimens for hepatitis C, both 
in the pre- and post-transplant settings. Here, we review FCH caused by HCV in LT
recipients, and current strategies for sustained virological responses after LT. 
Only a few cases of successfully treated FCH C after LT by DAAs have been
reported. The diagnostic findings and therapeutic dilemma are discussed based on 
a literature review.

DOI: 10.20524/aog.2016.0069 
PMCID: PMC5049551
PMID: 27708510 

Conflict of interest statement: None

