
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Nov 15;6:36948. doi: 10.1038/srep36948.

Microbiome analysis reveals the abundance of bacterial pathogens in Rousettus
leschenaultii guano.

Banskar S(1), Bhute SS(2), Suryavanshi MV(1), Punekar S(3), Shouche YS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Culture Collection, National Centre for Cell Science, Pune, India.
(2)Department of Zoology, Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune, India.
(3)Biosphere, Eshwari, 52/403, Lakshminagar, Parvati, Pune-411009 (Maharashtra), 
India.

Bats are crucial for proper functioning of an ecosystem. They provide various
important services to ecosystem and environment. While, bats are well-known
carrier of pathogenic viruses, their possible role as a potential carrier of
pathogenic bacteria is under-explored. Here, using culture-based approach,
employing multiple bacteriological media, over thousand bacteria were cultivated 
and identified from Rousettus leschenaultii (a frugivorous bat species), the
majority of which were from the family Enterobacteriaceae and putative pathogens.
Next, pathogenic potential of most frequently cultivated component of microbiome 
i.e. Escherichia coli was assessed to identify its known pathotypes which
revealed the presence of virulent factors in many cultivated E. coli isolates.
Applying in-depth bacterial community analysis using high-throughput 16â€‰S rRNA
gene sequencing, a high inter-individual variation was observed among the studied
guano samples. Interestingly, a higher diversity of bacterial communities was
observed in decaying guano representative. The search against human pathogenic
bacteria database at 97% identity, a small proportion of sequences were found
associated to well-known human pathogens. The present study thus indicates that
this bat species may carry potential bacterial pathogens and advice to study the 
effect of these pathogens on bats itself and the probable mode of transmission to
humans and other animals.

DOI: 10.1038/srep36948 
PMCID: PMC5109407
PMID: 27845426  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

