
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2017;1521:41-53.

Generation of Efficient miRNA Inhibitors Using Tough Decoy Constructs.

Yoo J(1), Hajjar RJ(1), Jeong D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 1
Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1030, New York, NY, 10029-6574, USA.
(2)Cardiovascular Research Center, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 1
Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1030, New York, NY, 10029-6574, USA.
dongtak.jeong@mssm.edu.

Over the last decade a previously unappreciated mechanism of gene regulation has 
been uncovered that is mediated by a large class of small noncoding RNAs known as
microRNAs (miRNAs), and this mechanism is utilized by organisms ranging from
plants to humans. MiRNAs are important downregulators of gene expression and are 
seen to be dysregulated in disease development. Thus inhibition of aberrantly
upregulated miRNAs as a therapeutic approach has become a promising field.Many
models of miRNA inhibitors currently exist, with decoy models being the most
successful in current research. A promising inhibition model is the tough decoy
(TuD) RNAs inhibitor, which uses antisense sequences to bind to target miRNAs,
preventing them from binding to their endogenous targets. Since the TuD
inhibitors have the ability to be successfully used in vitro and in vivo studies,
this is a covetable inhibition method. In this chapter, we introduce how to
design and generate miRNA tough decoy inhibitors with an adeno-associated viral
construct. TuD inhibitors will have two miRNA binding sites. The TuD will include
stem sequences, a miRNA binding site, and linkers. In vitro validation
experiments to confirm the effectiveness of the TuD to inhibit miRNA are
described. We also propose some practical approaches for making a TuD for miRNA
of interest. We hope this chapter facilitates readers to create a simpler method 
to generate TuD that can be used for miRNA loss of function studies.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6588-5_3 
PMID: 27910040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

