
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Dec 15;6:38714. doi: 10.1038/srep38714.

Low expression of CXCR1/2 on neutrophils predicts poor survival in patients with 
hepatitis B virus-related acute-on-chronic liver failure.

Xu R(1), Bao C(2), Huang H(1), Lin F(3), Yuan Y(1), Wang S(1), Jin L(1), Yang
T(1), Shi M(1), Zhang Z(1), Wang FS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Treatment and Research Centre for Infection Disease, Beijing 302 Hospital,
Beijing 100039, China.
(2)The Institute of Clinical Examination Centre, Beijing 302 Hospital, Beijing
100039, China.
(3)The Institute of Intensive Care Unit, Beijing 302 Hospital, Beijing 100039,
China.

Polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) and proinflammatory cytokines have been
implicated in the pathogenesis of acute-on-chronic liver failure (ACLF). But the 
utility of CXC chemokine receptor expression on PMNs as a biomarker for
prediction of disease severity is still uncertain. In this study, we investigated
the dynamic expression of CXCR1 and CXCR2 on neutrophils, and found that patients
with hepatitis B virus-related ACLF displayed low expression of CXCR1 and CXCR2
on peripheral neutrophils compared with healthy subjects and patients with
chronic hepatitis B. This expression pattern was correlated with disease
severity. Additionally, increased production of IL-8 in peripheral blood was
significantly associated with reduced CXCR1 and CXCR2 expression, as shown by the
decreased CXCR1 and CXCR2 expression on neutrophils after treating neutrophils
with plasma from ACLF patients. This effect could be overcomed through IL-8
blockage with an anti-IL-8 antibody. We also found that IL-8 production and
neutrophil infiltration were coordinately increased in the liver tissue of
HBV-ACLF patients, and this increase was associated with liver inflammation.
Overall, increased production of IL-8 associated with neutrophils infiltration
into the liver and decreased CXCR1/2 expression on peripheral neutrophils. CXCR1 
and CXCR2 expression levels could be served as early markers to predict the
severity of ACLF.

DOI: 10.1038/srep38714 
PMCID: PMC5156931
PMID: 27974825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

