
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jan 6;7:40206. doi: 10.1038/srep40206.

The driving force of prophages and CRISPR-Cas system in the evolution of
Cronobacter sakazakii.

Zeng H(1), Zhang J(1), Li C(1), Xie T(1), Ling N(1), Wu Q(1), Ye Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Microbiology, South China, Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Microbiology Culture Collection and Application,
Guangdong Open Laboratory of Applied Microbiology, Guangdong Institute of
Microbiology, Guangzhou 510070, China.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2017 Apr 26;7:46783.

Cronobacter sakazakii is an important foodborne pathogens causing rare but
life-threatening diseases in neonates and infants. CRISPR-Cas system is a new
prokaryotic defense system that provides adaptive immunity against phages, latter
play an vital role on the evolution and pathogenicity of host bacteria. In this
study, we found that genome sizes of C. sakazakii strains had a significant
positive correlation with total genome sizes of prophages. Prophages contributed 
to 16.57% of the genetic diversity (pan genome) of C. sakazakii, some of which
maybe the potential virulence factors. Subtype I-E CRISPR-Cas system and five
types of CRISPR arrays were found in the conserved site of C. sakazakii strains. 
CRISPR1 and CRISPR2 loci with high variable spacers were active and showed
potential protection against phage attacks. The number of spacers from two active
CRISPR loci in clinical strains was significant less than that of foodborne
strains, it maybe a reason why clinical strains were found to have more prophages
than foodborne strains. The frequently gain/loss of prophages and spacers in
CRISPR loci is likely to drive the quick evolution of C. sakazakii. Our study
provides a new insight into the co-evolution of phages and C. sakazakii.

DOI: 10.1038/srep40206 
PMCID: PMC5216340
PMID: 28057934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

