
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2017 Jan;183:7-15. doi: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2016.11.002.
Epub 2016 Nov 11.

Positive immunomodulatory effects of heterologous DNA vaccine- modified live
vaccine, prime-boost immunization, against the highly-pathogenic PRRSV infection.

Sirisereewan C(1), Nedumpun T(2), Kesdangsakonwut S(3), Woonwong Y(1), Kedkovid
R(1), Arunorat J(1), Thanawongnuwech R(4), Suradhat S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Veterinary Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
(2)Interdisciplinary Program in Medical Microbiology, Graduate School,
Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
(3)Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan Bangkok
10330, Thailand.
(4)Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan Bangkok
10330, Thailand; Center of Excellence in Emerging Infectious Diseases in Animals,
Chulalongkorn University (CU-EIDAs), Pathumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
(5)Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan Bangkok
10330, Thailand; Center of Excellence in Emerging Infectious Diseases in Animals,
Chulalongkorn University (CU-EIDAs), Pathumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
Electronic address: Sanipa.S@chula.ac.th.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) infection is one of
the most important swine pathogens, and causes a major economic impact worldwide.
Recently, a new variant type 2 PRRSV, highly pathogenic PRRSV (HP-PRRSV) has
emerged and continued to circulate in Southeast Asia region. Currently,
commercially available PRRSV vaccines, modified live PRRS vaccines (MLV) are not 
able to provide complete protection against HP-PRRSV and been reported to induce 
negative immunomodulatory effects. Interestingly, a novel DNA vaccine was
developed and successfully used to improve PRRSV-specific immune responses
following MLV vaccination. To investigate the efficacy of a heterologous DNA-MLV 
prime-boost immunization against the HP-PRRSV infection, an experimental
vaccinated-challenged study was conducted. Two-week-old, PRRSV-seronegative,
crossbred pigs (5-8 pigs/group) were allocated into 5 groups. At day -14 (D-14), 
the treatment group (DNA-MLV) was immunized with a DNA vaccine encoding
PRRSV-truncated nucleocapsid protein (pORF7t), followed by a commercial modified 
live type 2 PRRS vaccine (MLV) at D0. The other groups included the group that
received PBS at D-14 followed by MLV at D0 (MLV), pORF7t at D-14 (DNA), PBS at D0
(PBS) and the negative control group. At D42, all groups, except the negative
control group, were challenged with HP-PRRSV (strain 10PL1). The results
demonstrated that pigs that received MLV, regardless of the DNA priming,
exhibited less clinical signs and faster viral clearance. Following HP-PRRSV
challenge, the DNA-MLV group exhibited improved PRRSV-specific immunity, as
observed by increased neutralizing antibody titers and PRRSV-specific IFN-γ
production, and reduced IL-10 and PRRSV-specific Treg productions. However,
neither the prime-boost immunization nor the MLV was able to induce complete
clinical protection against HP-PRRSV infection. In conclusion, improved
immunological responses, but not clinical protection, were achieved by DNA-MLV
prime-boost immunization. This study highlights the potential use of heterologous
prime-boost vaccination regimen, where DNA can be incorporated with other vaccine
candidates, for improving anti-PRRSV immunity that may eventually lead induction 
of complete PRRSV protection.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2016.11.002 
PMID: 28063479  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

