
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jan 20;7:40424. doi: 10.1038/srep40424.

Shigatoxin encoding Bacteriophage ϕ24B modulates bacterial metabolism to raise
antimicrobial tolerance.

Holt GS(1), Lodge JK(1), McCarthy AJ(2), Graham AK(1), Young G(1), Bridge SH(1), 
Brown AK(3), Veses-Garcia M(2), Lanyon CV(1), Sails A(4), Allison HE(2), Smith
DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon
Tyne, UK.
(2)Microbiology Research Group, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(3)School of Medicine, Pharmacy and Health, Durham University, Durham, UK.
(4)Public Health England, Royal Victoria Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

How temperate bacteriophages play a role in microbial infection and disease
progression is not fully understood. They do this in part by carrying genes that 
promote positive evolutionary selection for the lysogen. Using Biolog phenotype
microarrays and comparative metabolite profiling we demonstrate the impact of the
well-characterised Shiga toxin-prophage ϕ24B on its Escherichia coli host MC1061.
As a lysogen, the prophage alters the bacterial physiology by increasing the
rates of respiration and cell proliferation. This is the first reported study
detailing phage-mediated control of the E. coli biotin and fatty acid synthesis
that is rate limiting to cell growth. Through ϕ24B conversion the lysogen also
gains increased antimicrobial tolerance to chloroxylenol and 8-hydroxyquinoline. 
Distinct metabolite profiles discriminate between MC1061 and the ϕ24B lysogen in 
standard culture, and when treated with 2 antimicrobials. This is also the first 
reported use of metabolite profiling to characterise the physiological impact of 
lysogeny under antimicrobial pressure. We propose that temperate phages do not
need to carry antimicrobial resistance genes to play a significant role in
tolerance to antimicrobials.

DOI: 10.1038/srep40424 
PMCID: PMC5247750
PMID: 28106081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

