
1. PLoS One. 2017 Feb 2;12(2):e0170658. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170658.
eCollection 2017.

Using spatio-temporal surveillance data to test the infectious environment of
children before type 1 diabetes diagnosis.

Bougnères P(1)(2), Le Fur S(1)(2); Isis-Diab collaborative group, Valtat S(1),
Kamatani Y(3), Lathrop M(4), Valleron AJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Bicêtre Hospital, Paris Sud University,
AP-HP, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.
(2)Inserm U1169, Paris Sud University, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.
(3)Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Laboratory for Statistical
Analysis, Kanagawa, Japan.
(4)Centre National de Génotypage, Evry, France, and Génome Québec Innovation
Centre, McGill University, Montréal (Québec), Canada.

The "hygiene hypothesis" postulates that reduced exposure to infections favours
the development of autoimmunity and childhood type 1 diabetes (T1D). But on the
other side, viruses, notably enteroviruses, are suspected to trigger T1D. The
assessment of the possible relationships between infections and T1D still defies 
the classical tools of epidemiology. We report the methods and results of a
geographical approach that maps the addresses of patients to a communicable
diseases surveillance database. We mapped the addresses of patients at birth,
infancy and T1D diagnosis to the weekly estimates of the regional incidences of 5
frequent communicable diseases routinely collected since 1984 by the French
Sentinel network. The pre-diagnostic infectious environment of 3548 patients with
T1D diagnosed between 0.5 and 15 years was compared to those of 100 series of
age-matched "virtual controls" drawn randomly on the map. Associations were
classified as "suggestive" (summer diarrhea, SD, and varicella, V) when p< 0.05, 
or "significant" (influenza-like infections, ILI) when they passed the Bonferroni
correction for FDR. Exposure to ILI and SD were associated with T1D risk, while V
seemed protective. In the subset of 2521 patients for which we had genome wide
data, we used a case-only approach to search for interactions between SNPs and
the infectious environment as defined by the Sentinel database. Two SNPs,
rs116624278 and rs77232854, showed significant interaction with exposure to V
between 1 and 3 years of life. The infectious associations found should be taken 
as possible markers of patients' environment, not as direct causative factors of 
T1D. They require replication in other populations. The increasing public
availability of geographical environmental databases will expand the present
approach to map thousands of environmental factors to the lifeline of patients
affected by various diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170658 
PMCID: PMC5289461
PMID: 28152013  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: NovoNordisk provided an institutional support to 
the cohort in a joint funding with Inserm, without any matter for employment,
consultancy, patents, products in development, or relationships at all with
marketed products. Lilly France provided also an institutional support to the
cohort without any matter for employment, consultancy, patents, products in
development, or relationships at all with marketed products. This does not alter 
our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.

