
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Feb 8;7:42180. doi: 10.1038/srep42180.

Marine Streptomyces sp. derived antimycin analogues suppress HeLa cells via
depletion HPV E6/E7 mediated by ROS-dependent ubiquitin-proteasome system.

Zhang W(1), Che Q(1)(2), Tan H(1), Qi X(1)(2), Li J(1)(2), Li D(1)(2), Gu
Q(1)(2), Zhu T(1)(2), Liu M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Marine Drugs, Chinese Ministry of Education, School of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, People's
Republic of China.
(2)Laboratory for Marine Drugs and Bioproducts of Qingdao National Laboratory for
Marine Science and Technology, 266237, People's Republic of China.

Four new antimycin alkaloids (1-4) and six related known analogs (5-10) were
isolated from the culture of a marine derived Streptomyces sp. THS-55, and their 
structures were elucidated by extensive spectroscopic analysis. All of the
compounds exhibited potent cytotoxicity in vitro against HPV-transformed HeLa
cell line. Among them, compounds 6-7 were derived as natural products for the
first time, and compound 5 (NADA) showed the highest potency. NADA inhibited the 
proliferation, arrested cell cycle distribution, and triggered apoptosis in HeLa 
cancer cells. Our molecular mechanic studies revealed NADA degraded the levels of
E6/E7 oncoproteins through ROS-mediated ubiquitin-dependent proteasome system
activation. This is the first report that demonstrates antimycin alkaloids
analogue induces the degradation of high-risk HPV E6/E7 oncoproteins and finally 
induces apoptosis in cervical cancer cells. The present work suggested that these
analogues could serve as lead compounds for the development of HPV-infected
cervical cancer therapeutic agents, as well as research tools for the study of
E6/E7 functions.

DOI: 10.1038/srep42180 
PMCID: PMC5296914
PMID: 28176847  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interests.

