
1. Mol Ther. 2017 Apr 5;25(4):904-916. doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2017.02.006. Epub 2017
Feb 22.

Gene Therapeutic Reversal of Peripheral Olfactory Impairment in Bardet-Biedl
Syndrome.

Williams CL(1), Uytingco CR(1), Green WW(1), McIntyre JC(1), Ukhanov K(1),
Zimmerman AD(1), Shively DT(1), Zhang L(1), Nishimura DY(2), Sheffield VC(3),
Martens JR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Florida College of 
Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA; Center for Smell and Taste, University of
Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA; Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Florida College of 
Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA; Center for Smell and Taste, University of
Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. Electronic address:
martensj@ufl.edu.

Olfactory dysfunction is a pervasive but underappreciated health concern that
affects personal safety and quality of life. Patients with olfactory dysfunctions
have limited therapeutic options, particularly those involving congenital
diseases. Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is one such disorder, where olfactory loss 
and other symptoms manifest from defective cilium morphology and/or function in
various cell types/tissues. Olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) of BBS mutant mice
lack the capacity to build/maintain cilia, rendering the cells incapable of odor 
detection. Here we examined OSN cilium defects in Bbs1 mutant mice and assessed
the utility of gene therapy to restore ciliation and function in young and adult 
mice. Bbs1 mutant mice possessed short residual OSN cilia in which BBSome protein
trafficking and odorant detection were defective. Gene therapy with an
adenovirus-delivered wild-type Bbs1 gene restored OSN ciliation, corrected BBSome
cilium trafficking defects, and returned acute odor responses. Finally, using
clinically approved AAV serotypes, we demonstrate, for the first time, the
capacity of AAVs to restore ciliation and odor detection in OSNs of Bbs1 mutants.
Together, our data demonstrate that OSN ciliogenesis can be promoted in
differentiated cells of young and adult Bbs1 mutants and highlight the potential 
of gene therapy as a viable restorative treatment for congenital olfactory
disorders.

Copyright © 2017 The American Society of Gene and Cell Therapy. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2017.02.006 
PMCID: PMC5383630
PMID: 28237838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

