
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2017 Oct;75:77-85. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2017.02.023. Epub 2017
Feb 28.

miRNAs associated with immune response in teleost fish.

Andreassen R(1), Høyheim B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Biomedical and Laboratory Sciences, Faculty of
Health Sciences, Oslo and Akershus University College of Applied Sciences,
Pilestredet 50, N-0130 Oslo, Norway. Electronic address: Rune.Andreassen@hioa.no.
(2)Department of Basic Sciences and Aquatic Medicine, School of Veterinary
Medicine, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Ullevålsveien 72, 0454 Oslo,
Norway. Electronic address: bjorn.hoyheim@nmbu.no.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been identified as important post transcriptional
regulators of gene expression. In higher vertebrates, a subset of miRNAs has been
identified as important regulators of a number of key genes in immune system gene
networks, and this paper review recent studies on miRNAs associated with immune
response in teleost fish. Challenge studies conducted in several species have
identified differently expressed miRNAs associated with viral or bacterial
infection. The results from these studies point out several miRNAs that are
likely to have evolutionary conserved functions that are related to immune
response in teleost fish. Changed expression levels of mature miRNAs from the
five miRNA genes miRNA-462, miRNA-731, miRNA-146, miRNA-181 and miRNA-223 are
observed following viral as well as bacterial infection in several teleost fish. 
Furthermore, significant changes in expression of mature miRNAs from the five
genes miRNA-21, miRNA-155, miRNA-1388, miRNA-99 and miRNA-100 are observed in
multiple studies of virus infected fish while changes in expression of mature
miRNA from the three genes miRNA-122, miRNA-192 and miRNA-451 are observed in
several studies of fish with bacterial infections. Interestingly, some of these
genes are not present in higher vertebrates. The function of the evolutionary
conserved miRNAs responding to infection depends on the target gene(s) they
regulate. A few target genes have been identified while a large number of target 
genes have been predicted by in silico analysis. The results suggest that many of
the targets are genes from the host's immune response gene networks. We propose a
model with expected temporal changes in miRNA expression if they target immune
response activators/effector genes or immune response inhibitors, respectively.
The best way to understand the function of a miRNA is to identify its target
gene(s), but as the amount of genome resources for teleost fish is limited, with 
less well characterized genomes and transcriptomes, identifying the true target
genes of the miRNAs associated with the immune response is a challenge.
Identifying such target genes by applying new methods and approaches will likely 
be the next important step to understand the function of the miRNAs associated
with immune response in teleost fish.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2017.02.023 
PMID: 28254620  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

