
1. Am J Dermatopathol. 2017 Jun;39(6):445-456. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000000681.

Beta Human Papillomavirus Infection Is Prevalent in Elephantiasis and Exhibits a 
Productive Phenotype: A Case-Control Study.

Carlson JA(1), Rady P, Kadam P, He Q, Simonette R, Tyring S.

Author information: 
(1)*Divisions of Dermatology and Dermatopathology, Albany Medical College,
Albany, NY; and â€ Departments of Dermatology, Microbiology/Medical Genetics, and
Internal Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, TX.

Elephantiasis is considered a cutaneous region of immune deficiency with
cobblestone-like surface caused by a wart-like eruption. Verrucosis is a diffuse 
human papillomavirus (HPV) infection linked to immunodeficiency disorders. The
objective of this study was to examine the prevalence of HPV infection in
lymphedema and its pathogenic role in elephantiasis. A retrospective case-control
study was performed examining lymphedematous skin and controls of peritumoral
normal skin. HPV infection was evaluated at the DNA, protein, and histopathologic
levels by polymerase chain reaction, immunohistochemistry, and light microscopy, 
respectively. Overall, 540 HPV DNAs were detected in 120 of 122 cutaneous samples
(median 4 HPV DNAs per sample, range 0-9). Compared with controls, no differences
existed in type or number of HPVs identified. Instead, a diverse spectrum of
HPV-related histopathologies were evident, likely reflecting the multiplicity of 
HPV genotypes detected. Most notably, increasing histopathologic lymphedema stage
significantly correlated with markers of productive HPV infection such as altered
keratohyaline granules and HPV L1 capsid expression. Limitations of this study
are the absence of normal skin controls not associated with neoplasia or
subclinical lymphedema, and lack of assessment of HPV copy number per
keratinocyte infected. In conclusion, productive HPV infection, not HPV type or
numbers detected, distinguished lymphedematous skin from controls. These findings
support the theory that lymphedema creates a region of depressed immunity that
permits productive HPV infection, manifested clinically by diffuse
papillomatosis, characteristic of elephantiasis.

DOI: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000000681 
PMID: 28253203  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

