
1. J Med Chem. 2017 Apr 13;60(7):3124-3153. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b00179. Epub 
2017 Mar 16.

Synthesis, Antiviral Potency, in Vitro ADMET, and X-ray Structure of Potent CD4
Mimics as Entry Inhibitors That Target the Phe43 Cavity of HIV-1 gp120.

Curreli F(1), Kwon YD(2), Belov DS(3), Ramesh RR(1), Kurkin AV(3), Altieri A(3), 
Kwong PD(2), Debnath AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Modeling and Drug Design, Lindsey F. Kimball Research 
Institute, New York Blood Center , 310 E 67th Street, New York, New York 10065,
United States.
(2)Structural Biology Section, Vaccine Research Center, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health , Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, United States.
(3)EDASA Scientific, Scientific Park, Moscow State University , Leninskie Gory,
Bld. 75, 77-101b; 119992 Moscow, Russia.

Erratum in
    J Med Chem. 2017 Jun 8;60(11):4734.

In our attempt to optimize the lead HIV-1 entry antagonist, NBD-11021, we present
in this study the rational design and synthesis of 60 new analogues and
determination of their antiviral activity in a single-cycle and a multicycle
infection assay to derive a comprehensive structure-activity relationship (SAR). 
Two of these compounds, NBD-14088 and NBD-14107, showed significant improvement
in antiviral activity compared to the lead entry antagonist in a single-cycle
assay against a large panel of Env-pseudotyped viruses. The X-ray structure of a 
similar compound, NBD-14010, confirmed the binding mode of the newly designed
compounds. The in vitro ADMET profiles of these compounds are comparable to that 
of the most potent attachment inhibitor BMS-626529, a prodrug of which is
currently undergoing phase III clinical trials. The systematic study presented
here is expected to pave the way for improving the potency, toxicity, and ADMET
profile of this series of compounds with the potential to be moved to the early
preclinical development.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b00179 
PMID: 28266845  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

