
1. PLoS Pathog. 2017 Mar 10;13(3):e1006270. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006270.
eCollection 2017 Mar.

Endothelial cell tropism is a determinant of H5N1 pathogenesis in mammalian
species.

Tundup S(1)(2), Kandasamy M(1)(2), Perez JT(1), Mena N(3), Steel J(4), Nagy T(5),
Albrecht RA(3), Manicassamy B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States 
of America.
(2)Howard Taylor Ricketts Laboratory, University of Chicago, Argonne, IL, United 
States of America.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY, United States of America.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States of
America.
(5)Comparative Pathology Laboratory, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United
States of America.

The cellular and molecular mechanisms underpinning the unusually high virulence
of highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 viruses in mammalian species remains
unknown. Here, we investigated if the cell tropism of H5N1 virus is a determinant
of enhanced virulence in mammalian species. We engineered H5N1 viruses with
restricted cell tropism through the exploitation of cell type-specific microRNA
expression by incorporating microRNA target sites into the viral genome.
Restriction of H5N1 replication in endothelial cells via miR-126 ameliorated
disease symptoms, prevented systemic viral spread and limited mortality, despite 
showing similar levels of peak viral replication in the lungs as compared to
control virus-infected mice. Similarly, restriction of H5N1 replication in
endothelial cells resulted in ameliorated disease symptoms and decreased viral
spread in ferrets. Our studies demonstrate that H5N1 infection of endothelial
cells results in excessive production of cytokines and reduces endothelial
barrier integrity in the lungs, which culminates in vascular leakage and viral
pneumonia. Importantly, our studies suggest a need for a combinational therapy
that targets viral components, suppresses host immune responses, and improves
endothelial barrier integrity for the treatment of highly pathogenic H5N1 virus
infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006270 
PMCID: PMC5362246
PMID: 28282445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

