
1. Antiviral Res. 2017 Oct;146:221-232. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2017.03.013. Epub
2017 Mar 29.

The history of rabies in the Western Hemisphere.

Velasco-Villa A(1), Mauldin MR(2), Shi M(3), Escobar LE(4), Gallardo-Romero
NF(5), Damon I(5), Olson VA(5), Streicker DG(6), Emerson G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for
Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 1600 Clifton Rd, NE, Atlanta, 30329, GA, USA. Electronic address:
DLY3@CDC.GOV.
(2)Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for
Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 1600 Clifton Rd, NE, Atlanta, 30329, GA, USA; Oak Ridge Institute for
Science and Education (ORISE), CDC Fellowship Program, Oak Ridge, TN, USA.
(3)Charles Perkins Centre, School of Life and Environmental Sciences and Sydney
Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia.
(4)Department of Fisheries, Wildlife and Conservation Biology, University of
Minnesota, Saint Paul, 55108, MN, USA.
(5)Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for
Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 1600 Clifton Rd, NE, Atlanta, 30329, GA, USA.
(6)Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, University 
of Glasgow, Graham Kerr Building, Glasgow, G12 8QQ, Scotland, UK; MRC-University 
of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Sir Henry Wellcome Building, Glasgow, G61
1QH, Scotland, UK.

Before the introduction of control programs in the 20th century, rabies in
domestic dogs occurred throughout the Western Hemisphere. However, historical
records and phylogenetic analysis of multiple virus isolates indicate that,
before the arrival of the first European colonizers, rabies virus was likely
present only in bats and skunks. Canine rabies was either rare or absent among
domestic dogs of Native Americans, and first arrived when many new dog breeds
were imported during the period of European colonization. The introduction of the
cosmopolitan dog rabies lyssavirus variant and the marked expansion of the dog
population provided ideal conditions for the flourishing of enzootic canine
rabies. The shift of dog-maintained viruses into gray foxes, coyotes, skunks and 
other wild mesocarnivores throughout the Americas and to mongooses in the
Caribbean has augmented the risk of human rabies exposures and has complicated
control efforts. At the same time, the continued presence of bat rabies poses
novel challenges in the absolute elimination of canine and human rabies. This
article compiles existing historical and phylogenetic evidence of the origins and
subsequent dynamics of rabies in the Western Hemisphere, from the era preceding
the arrival of the first European colonizers through the present day. A companion
article reviews the current status of canine rabies control throughout the
Western Hemisphere and steps that will be required to achieve and maintain its
complete elimination (Velasco-Villa etÂ al., 2017).

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2017.03.013 
PMCID: PMC5620125
PMID: 28365457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

