
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2017 Sep;36(9):1629-1634. doi:
10.1007/s10096-017-2976-x. Epub 2017 Apr 8.

Efficacy of palivizumab prophylaxis on the frequency of RSV-associated lower
respiratory tract infections in preterm infants: determination of the ideal
target population for prophylaxis.

Cetinkaya M(1), Oral TK(2), Karatekin S(2), Cebeci B(2), Babayigit A(2), Yesil
Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
drmerih@yahoo.com.
(2)Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) prophylaxis in high-risk infants is an
effective intervention for the prevention of severe disease. The aim of this
study was to determine the ideal target preterm population that might benefit
from palivizumab prophylaxis by establishing the main risk factors for acute
RSV-related infections. Former premature infants born with a gestational age
≤37 weeks and ≤1 year of age at the beginning of the RSV season and admitted with
respiratory infection were included. RSV status was evaluated by RSV strip test
in all infants. RSV-positive and -negative infants were compared in terms of
demographic features, risk factors, requirement of hospitalisation and
palivizumab administration. A total of 202 preterm infants under 1 year of age
were enrolled. The RSV test was positive in 34 (16.8%) infants. Maternal age was 
significantly lower in RSV-positive infants compared with RSV-negative infants
(p = 0.03). RSV-positive infants were found to be significantly discharged during
the RSV season (p = 0.03). RSV-positive infants required significantly higher
rates of hospitalisation and need for mechanical ventilation. Of the RSV-positive
infants, 28 (82%) had a gestational age ≥29 weeks. Seventeen (77%) RSV-positive
infants that required hospitalisation were ≥29 weeks of gestation. All infants
with a gestational age ≥29 weeks and without palivizumab prophylaxis developed
RSV infection. Palivizumab prophylaxis should be implemented into guidelines to
cover preterm infants with a gestational age >29 weeks. Palivizumab prophylaxis
should also be considered in high-risk infants ≤6 months of age during the RSV
season.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-017-2976-x 
PMID: 28391538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

