
1. Virulence. 2018 Jan 1;9(1):83-98. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2017.1326443. Epub 2017
Jun 1.

PI3K-Akt-mTOR axis sustains rotavirus infection via the 4E-BP1 mediated autophagy
pathway and represents an antiviral target.

Yin Y(1), Dang W(1), Zhou X(1), Xu L(1), Wang W(1), Cao W(1), Chen S(1), Su J(2),
Cai X(3), Xiao S(4), Peppelenbosch MP(1), Pan Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology , Erasmus MC-University
Medical Center , Rotterdam , The Netherlands.
(2)b Medical Faculty, Kunming University of Science and Technology , Kunming , P.
R. China.
(3)c State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Lanzhou Veterinary
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS) , Lanzhou ,
P. R. China.
(4)d State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University , Wuhan , P. R. China.

Comment in
    Virulence. 2018 Jan 1;9(1):5-8.

Rotavirus infection is a major cause of severe dehydrating diarrhea in infants
younger than 5Â y old and in particular cases of immunocompromised patients
irrespective to the age of the patients. Although vaccines have been developed,
antiviral therapy is an important complement that cannot be substituted. Because 
of the lack of specific approved treatment, it is urgent to facilitate the
cascade of further understanding of the infection biology, identification of
druggable targets and the final development of effective antiviral therapies.
PI3K-Akt-mTOR signaling pathway plays a vital role in regulating the infection
course of many viruses. In this study, we have dissected the effects of
PI3K-Akt-mTOR signaling pathway on rotavirus infection using both conventional
cell culture models and a 3D model of human primary intestinal organoids. We
found that PI3K-Akt-mTOR signaling is essential in sustaining rotavirus
infection. Thus, blocking the key elements of this pathway, including PI3K, mTOR 
and 4E-BP1, has resulted in potent anti-rotavirus activity. Importantly, a
clinically used mTOR inhibitor, rapamycin, potently inhibited both experimental
and patient-derived rotavirus strains. This effect involves 4E-BP1 mediated
induction of autophagy, which in turn exerts anti-rotavirus effects. These
results revealed new insights on rotavirus-host interactions and provided new
avenues for antiviral drug development.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2017.1326443 
PMCID: PMC5955461
PMID: 28475412  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

