
1. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2017 Nov/Dec;51(10):900-906. doi:
10.1097/MCG.0000000000000806.

Identifying Patient and Provider-specific Gaps in Care Among Patients With
Hepatitis B.

Kushner T(1), Lam R, Gray DL, Kaplan DE, Serper M.

Author information: 
(1)*Division of Gastroenterology/Liver Transplant, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA †Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Thomas Jefferson
University ‡Gastroenterology Section, Corporal Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical
Center §Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hospital of the University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.

GOALS: To examine patient, provider, and health system barriers to clinical
follow-up among US veterans with chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV).
BACKGROUND: Studies have demonstrated deficiencies in clinical care and follow-up
in HBV; however, patient, provider, and health-system barriers in non-Asian
populations are understudied.
STUDY: A retrospective cohort of 517 US veterans with chronic HBV at 3 diverse
Veterans Affairs sites from 1999 to 2015. Laboratory testing and completion of
clinical appointments were collected for 2 years following initial presentation.
RESULTS: Among HBV patients, 36% had drug abuse, 41% alcohol misuse, and 45% had 
psychiatric disorders. Patients had an average of 4.4 primary care visits within 
2 years of the index hepatitis B surface antigen positive result, 38% had
psychiatry visits, 21% had a psychiatric hospitalization; 26% saw
gastroenterology/hepatology specialists. Within 1 year of the index hepatitis B
surface antigen positive result, 75% had alanine aminotransferase testing, 14%
had HBV entered into the problem list, and 8% had serologic confirmation. In
multivariable analyses, cirrhosis [odds ratio (OR)=3.42; 95% confidence interval 
(CI), 1.84-6.36] was associated with higher odds of appropriate laboratory
testing, alcohol misuse (OR=0.45; 95% CI, 0.29-0.80) was associated lower odds.
Cirrhosis (OR=2.03; 95% CI, 1.11-3.72) and ≥2 primary care visits per year
(OR=1.06; 95% CI, 1.01-1.11) were associated with higher odds of completing
gastroenterology/hepatology consultation, whereas ≥1 psychiatric hospitalization 
in 2 years was associated with lower odds (OR=0.53; 95% CI, 0.34-0.82).
CONCLUSIONS: In a diverse cohort of veterans with high psychiatric comorbidity
and substance abuse, important patient and provider factors influence appropriate
follow-up care. Future studies should evaluate the impact of provider education
and care coordination strategies in HBV.

DOI: 10.1097/MCG.0000000000000806 
PMID: 28492425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

