
1. Soft Matter. 2017 Jun 14;13(23):4176-4209. doi: 10.1039/c7sm00384f.

Cholesteric liquid crystals in living matter.

Mitov M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Elaboration de Mat√©riaux et d'Etudes Structurales (CEMES), CNRS, BP
94347, 29 rue Jeanne-Marvig, F-31055 Toulouse Cedex 4, France. mitov@cemes.fr.

Liquid crystals play an important role in biology because the combination of
order and mobility is a basic requirement for self-organisation and structure
formation in living systems. Cholesteric liquid crystals are omnipresent in
living matter under both in vivo and in vitro conditions and address the major
types of molecules essential to life. In the animal and plant kingdoms, the
cholesteric structure is a recurring design, suggesting a convergent evolution to
an optimised left-handed helix. Herein, we review the recent advances in the
cholesteric organisation of DNA, chromatin, chitin, cellulose, collagen, viruses,
silk and cholesterol ester deposition in atherosclerosis. Cholesteric structures 
can be found in bacteriophages, archaea, eukaryotes, bacterial nucleoids,
chromosomes of unicellular algae, sperm nuclei of many vertebrates, cuticles of
crustaceans and insects, bone, tendon, cornea, fish scales and scutes, cuttlebone
and squid pens, plant cell walls, virus suspensions, silk produced by spiders and
silkworms, and arterial wall lesions. This article specifically aims at
describing the consequences of the cholesteric geometry in living matter, which
are far from being fully defined and understood, and discusses various
perspectives. The roles and functions of biological cholesteric liquid crystals
include maximisation of packing efficiency, morphogenesis, mechanical stability, 
optical information, radiation protection and evolution pressure.

DOI: 10.1039/c7sm00384f 
PMID: 28589190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

