
1. Viruses. 2017 Jun 9;9(6). pii: E110. doi: 10.3390/v9060110.

UK Pigs at the Time of Slaughter: Investigation into the Correlation of Infection
with PRRSV and HEV.

Frossard JP(1), Grierson S(2), Cheney T(3), Steinbach F(4), Choudhury B(5),
Williamson S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Animal and Plant Health Agency, Woodham Lane, New Haw, Surrey KT15 3NB, UK.
jean-pierre.frossard@apha.gsi.gov.uk.
(2)Animal and Plant Health Agency, Woodham Lane, New Haw, Surrey KT15 3NB, UK.
Sylvia.Grierson@apha.gsi.gov.uk.
(3)Animal and Plant Health Agency, Woodham Lane, New Haw, Surrey KT15 3NB, UK.
tcheney87@hotmail.com.
(4)Animal and Plant Health Agency, Woodham Lane, New Haw, Surrey KT15 3NB, UK.
Falko.Steinbach@apha.gsi.gov.uk.
(5)Animal and Plant Health Agency, Woodham Lane, New Haw, Surrey KT15 3NB, UK.
Bhudipa.Choudhury@apha.gsi.gov.uk.
(6)Surveillance Intelligence Unit, Animal and Plant Health Agency, Rougham Hill, 
Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk IP33 2RX, UK. Susanna.Williamson@apha.gsi.gov.uk.

Hepatitis E virus (HEV) and porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus
(PRRSV) and are both globally prevalent in the pig population. While HEV does not
cause clinical disease in pigs, its zoonotic potential has raised concerns in the
food safety sector. PRRS has become endemic in the United Kingdom (UK) since its 
introduction in 1991, and continues to cause considerable economic losses to the 
swine industry. A better understanding of the current prevalence and diversity of
PRRSV and HEV in the UK, and their potential association, is needed to assess
risks and target control measures appropriately. This study used plasma, tonsil, 
and cecal content samples previously collected from pigs in 14 abattoirs in
England and Northern Ireland to study the prevalence of several pathogens
including PRRSV and HEV. The diversity of PRRSV strains detected in these samples
was analyzed by sequencing open reading frame 5 (ORF5), revealing no substantial 
difference in PRRSV strains from these clinically unaffected pigs relative to
those from clinical cases of disease in the UK. Despite the potential
immuno-modulatory effect of PRRSV infection, previously demonstrated to affect
Salmonella and HEV shedding profiles, no significant association was found
between positive PRRSV status and positive HEV status.

DOI: 10.3390/v9060110 
PMCID: PMC5490802
PMID: 28598352  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funding sponsors had no role in the design of the study; in the collection,
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, and in the
decision to publish the results.

