
1. Mol Plant Pathol. 2018 Apr;19(4):883-895. doi: 10.1111/mpp.12572. Epub 2017 Jul
31.

Exogenously applied dsRNA molecules deriving from the Zucchini yellow mosaic
virus (ZYMV) genome move systemically and protect cucurbits against ZYMV.

Kaldis A(1), Berbati M(1), Melita O(1), Reppa C(2), Holeva M(2), Otten P(3),
Voloudakis A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Βreeding and Biometry, Agricultural University of Athens, 
Athens, 11855, Greece.
(2)Laboratory of Bacteriology, Benaki Phytopathological Institute, Kifissia,
14561, Greece.
(3)Fasteris SA, Plan-les-Ouates, Geneva, 1228, Switzerland.

Zucchini yellow mosaic virus (ZYMV) causes serious damage in a large number of
cucurbits, and control measures are necessary. Transgenic cucurbits expressing
parts of the ZYMV genome have been shown to be resistant to the cognate virus. A 
non-transgenic approach involving the exogenous application of double-stranded
RNA (dsRNA) has also been shown to induce resistance in tobacco against Cucumber 
mosaic virus (CMV) and Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). In the present study, dsRNA
molecules derived from the helper component-proteinase (HC-Pro) and coat protein 
(CP) genes of the ZYMV_DE_2014 isolate were produced in vitro. On exogenous dsRNA
application in cucumber, watermelon and squash plants, dsRNA HC-Pro conferred
resistance of 82%, 50% and 18%, and dsRNA CP molecules of 70%, 43% and 16%,
respectively. On deep sequencing analysis of ZYMV-infected watermelon, hot-spot
regions for viral small interfering RNAs (vsiRNAs) in the genome of ZYMV were
identified. Stem-loop reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
detection of selected 21-nucleotide-long vsiRNAs in plants that received only
dsRNA molecules suggested that the dsRNAs exogenously applied onto plants were
successfully diced, thus initiating RNA silencing. dsRNA molecules were found to 
be progressively degraded in planta, and strongly detected by semi-quantitative
RT-PCR for at least 9 days after exogenous application. Moreover, dsRNA molecules
were detected in systemic tissue of watermelon and squash, showing that dsRNA is 
transported long distances in these plants.

© 2017 BSPP AND JOHN WILEY & SONS LTD.

DOI: 10.1111/mpp.12572 
PMCID: PMC6638139
PMID: 28621835  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

