
1. Nature. 2017 Jun 29;546(7660):646-650. doi: 10.1038/nature22975. Epub 2017 Jun
21.

Host and viral traits predict zoonotic spillover from mammals.

Olival KJ(1), Hosseini PR(1), Zambrana-Torrelio C(1), Ross N(1), Bogich TL(1),
Daszak P(1).

Author information: 
(1)EcoHealth Alliance, 460 West 34th Street, New York, New York 10001, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2017 Aug 31;548(7669):612.

Comment in
    Nature. 2017 Jun 29;546(7660):603-604.

The majority of human emerging infectious diseases are zoonotic, with viruses
that originate in wild mammals of particular concern (for example, HIV, Ebola and
SARS). Understanding patterns of viral diversity in wildlife and determinants of 
successful cross-species transmission, or spillover, are therefore key goals for 
pandemic surveillance programs. However, few analytical tools exist to identify
which host species are likely to harbour the next human virus, or which viruses
can cross species boundaries. Here we conduct a comprehensive analysis of
mammalian host-virus relationships and show that both the total number of viruses
that infect a given species and the proportion likely to be zoonotic are
predictable. After controlling for research effort, the proportion of zoonotic
viruses per species is predicted by phylogenetic relatedness to humans, host
taxonomy and human population within a species range-which may reflect
human-wildlife contact. We demonstrate that bats harbour a significantly higher
proportion of zoonotic viruses than all other mammalian orders. We also identify 
the taxa and geographic regions with the largest estimated number of 'missing
viruses' and 'missing zoonoses' and therefore of highest value for future
surveillance. We then show that phylogenetic host breadth and other viral traits 
are significant predictors of zoonotic potential, providing a novel framework to 
assess if a newly discovered mammalian virus could infect people.

DOI: 10.1038/nature22975 
PMCID: PMC5570460
PMID: 28636590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

