
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2017 Nov;76:310-315. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2017.07.005. Epub 2017 
Jul 8.

Expression of IL-1Ra, IL-6, IL-8, IL-18, TNF-α and IFN-γ genes in peripheral
blood leukocytes of rabbits infected with RHDV (Rabbit Haemorrhagic Disease
Virus).

Trzeciak-Ryczek A(1), Tokarz-Deptuła B(2), Deptuła W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Biology, University of Szczecin,
Szczecin, Poland; Molecular Biology and Biotechnology Center, Faculty of Biology,
University of Szczecin, Szczecin, Poland.
(2)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Biology, University of Szczecin,
Szczecin, Poland; Molecular Biology and Biotechnology Center, Faculty of Biology,
University of Szczecin, Szczecin, Poland. Electronic address: kuki001@interia.pl.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biology, University of Szczecin,
Szczecin, Poland; Molecular Biology and Biotechnology Center, Faculty of Biology,
University of Szczecin, Szczecin, Poland.

Rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) induces a highly contagious and
extremely lethal disease that fulfils many requirements of an animal model of
fulminant hepatic failure (FHF); however, the pathogenesis of RHD has still not
been fully elucidated. Cytokines play an important role in regulation of the
immune response and pathogenesis of many diseases, including those caused by
viral infections. Furthermore, recent studies indicate a role of the immune
response, especially peripheral blood leukocytes (PBL), in the pathogenesis of
RHD. Thus, in the present study we investigated the expression of IL-1Ra, IL-6,
IL-8, IL-18, TNF-α and IFN-γ genes in PBL of RHDV-infected rabbits. We also
compared the expression of genes encoding these cytokines in rabbits with
different course of RHDV infection (in animals that died 36 h post infection or
survived even over 60 h after infection). The study revealed increased expression
of genes encoding pro-inflammatory cytokines: IL-6, IL-8, TNF-α, IFN-γ in PBL of 
RHDV-infected rabbits. Moreover, the level of cytokine gene expression depended
on the course of RHD. Hence, the results obtained indicate the potential role of 
these cytokines in RHDV infection and their influence on the survival time of
infected rabbits.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2017.07.005 
PMID: 28689774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

