
1. Front Plant Sci. 2017 Jun 28;8:1068. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2017.01068. eCollection
2017.

CaRDR1, an RNA-Dependent RNA Polymerase Plays a Positive Role in Pepper
Resistance against TMV.

Qin L(1), Mo N(1), Zhang Y(1), Muhammad T(1), Zhao G(1), Zhang Y(1), Liang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology in Arid Areas, College of
Horticulture, Northwest A&F UniversityYangling, China.

RNA silencing functions as a major natural antiviral defense mechanism in plants.
RNA-dependent RNA polymerases (RDRs) that catalyze the synthesis of
double-stranded RNAs, are considered as a fundamental element in RNA silencing
pathways. In Arabidopsis thaliana, RDR1, 2 and 6 play important roles in
anti-viral RNA silencing. Expression of RDR1 can be elevated following plant
treatment with defense hormones and virus infection. RDR1 has been studied in
several crop species, but not in pepper (Capsicum annuum L.). Here, a RDR1 gene
was isolated from Capsicum annuum L., designated as CaRDR1. The full-length cDNA 
of CaRDR1 was 3,351 bp, encoding a 1,116-amino acid protein, which contains
conserved regions, such as the most remarkable motif DLDGD. The transcripts of
CaRDR1 could be induced by salicylic acid (SA), abscisic acid (ABA), H2O2, and
tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). Silencing of CaRDR1 in pepper resulted in increased
susceptibility to TMV as evident by severe symptom, increased of TMV-CP
transcript, higher malondialdehyde (MDA) content and lower antioxidant enzymes
activities compared with that of control plants. CaRDR1-overexpressing in
Nicotiana benthamiana showed mild disease symptom and reduced TMV-CP transcripts 
than that of empty vector (EV) following TMV inoculation. The RNA silencing
related genes, including NbAGO2, NbDCL2, NbDCL3, and NbDCL4 elevated expression
in overexpressed plants. Alternative oxidase (AOX), the terminal oxidase of the
cyanide (CN)-resistant alternative respiratory pathway, catalyze oxygen-dependent
oxidation of ubiquinol in plants. It has an important function in plant defense
against TMV. In addition, CaRDR1 overexpression promoted the expression of
NbAOX1a and NbAOX1b. In conclusion, these results suggest that CaRDR1 plays a
positive role in TMV resistance by regulating antioxidant enzymes activities and 
RNA silencing-related genes expression to suppress the replication and movement
of TMV.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2017.01068 
PMCID: PMC5487767
PMID: 28702034 

