
1. Insect Sci. 2019 Feb;26(1):44-57. doi: 10.1111/1744-7917.12505. Epub 2017 Oct 9.

Genome-wide identification and characterization of HSP gene superfamily in
whitefly (Bemisia tabaci) and expression profiling analysis under temperature
stress.

Wang XR(1), Wang C(1), Ban FX(1), Zhu DT(1), Liu SS(1), Wang XW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Agriculture Key Laboratory of Agricultural Entomology, Institute
of Insect Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

Heat shock proteins (HSP) are essential molecular chaperones that play important 
roles in the stress stimulation of insects. Bemisia tabaci, a phloem feeder and
invasive species, can cause extensive crop damage through direct feeding and
transmission of plant viruses. Here we employed comprehensive genomics approaches
to identity HSP superfamily members in the Middle East Asia Minor 1 whitefly
genome. In total, we identified 26 Hsp genes, including three Hsp90, 17 Hsp70,
one Hsp60 and five sHSP (small heat shock protein) genes. The HSP gene
superfamily of whitefly is expanded compared with the other five insects surveyed
here. The gene structures among the same families are relatively conserved.
Meanwhile, the motif compositions and secondary structures of BtHsp proteins were
predicted. In addition, quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis showed
that the expression patterns of BtHsp gene superfamily were diverse across
different tissues of whiteflies. Most Hsp genes were induced or repressed by
thermal stress (40°C) and cold treatment (4°C) in whitefly. Silencing the
expression of BtHsp70-6 significantly decreased the survival rate of whitefly
under 45°C. All the results showed the Hsps conferred thermo-tolerance or
cold-tolerance to whiteflies that protect them from being affected by detrimental
temperature conditions. Our observations highlighted the molecular evolutionary
properties and the response mechanism to temperature assaults of Hsp genes in
whitefly.

© 2017 Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/1744-7917.12505 
PMID: 28714602  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

