
1. Hepatology. 2017 Dec;66(6):1805-1813. doi: 10.1002/hep.29362. Epub 2017 Sep 14.

Impact of an electronic health record alert in primary care on increasing
hepatitis c screening and curative treatment for baby boomers.

Konerman MA(1), Thomson M(1), Gray K(2), Moore M(2), Choxi H(3), Seif E(2), Lok
ASF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Ann Arbor, MI.
(2)Population and Health Management Ambulatory Care Services Team, Ann Arbor, MI.
(3)Department of Family Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.

Despite effective treatment for chronic hepatitis C, deficiencies in diagnosis
and access to care preclude disease elimination. Screening of baby boomers
remains low. The aims of this study were to assess the impact of an electronic
health record-based prompt on hepatitis C virus (HCV) screening rates in baby
boomers in primary care and access to specialty care and treatment among those
newly diagnosed. We implemented an electronic health record-based "best practice 
advisory" (BPA) that prompted primary care providers to perform HCV screening for
patients seen in primary care clinic (1) born between 1945 and 1965, (2) who
lacked a prior diagnosis of HCV infection, and (3) who lacked prior documented
anti-HCV testing. The BPA had associated educational materials, order set, and
streamlined access to specialty care for newly diagnosed patients. Pre-BPA and
post-BPA screening rates were compared, and care of newly diagnosed patients was 
analyzed. In the 3 years prior to BPA implementation, 52,660 baby boomers were
seen in primary care clinics and 28% were screened. HCV screening increased from 
7.6% for patients with a primary care provider visit in the 6 months prior to BPA
to 72% over the 1 year post-BPA. Of 53 newly diagnosed patients, all were
referred for specialty care, 11 had advanced fibrosis or cirrhosis, 20 started
treatment, and 9 achieved sustained virologic response thus far.CONCLUSION:
Implementation of an electronic health record-based prompt increased HCV
screening rates among baby boomers in primary care by 5-fold due to efficiency in
determining needs for HCV screening and workflow design. Streamlined access to
specialty care enabled patients with previously undiagnosed advanced disease to
be cured. This intervention can be easily integrated into electronic health
record systems to increase HCV diagnosis and linkage to care. (Hepatology
2017;66:1805-1813).

Â© 2017 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.29362 
PMCID: PMC5696058
PMID: 28714196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

