
1. Rev Bras Parasitol Vet. 2017 Apr-Jun;26(2):177-184. doi:
10.1590/S1984-29612017025.

Fatal toxoplasmosis in an immunosuppressed domestic cat from Brazil caused by
Toxoplasma gondii clonal type I.

Pena HFJ(1), Evangelista CM(2), Casagrande RA(2), Biezus G(2), Wisser CS(2),
Ferian PE(2), Moura AB(2), Rolim VM(3), Driemeier D(3), Oliveira S(1), Alves
BF(1), Gennari SM(1), Traverso SD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina Veterinária Preventiva e Saúde Animal, Faculdade de
Medicina Veterinária e Zootecnia - FMVZ, Universidade de São Paulo - USP, São
Paulo, SP, Brasil.
(2)Departamento de Medicina Veterinária, Centro de Ciências Agroveterinárias -
CAV, Universidade do Estado de Santa Catarina - UDESC, Lages, SC, Brasil.
(3)Departamento de Patologia Clínica, Faculdade de Veterinária - FaVet,
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul - UFRGS, Porto Alegre, RS, Brasil.

The objective of the study was to report on a fatal case of feline toxoplasmosis 
with coinfection with the feline leukemia virus (FeLV). A domestic cat (Felis
silvestris catus) presented intense dyspnea and died three days later. In the
necropsy, the lungs were firm, without collapse and with many white areas;
moderate lymphadenomegaly and splenomegaly were also observed. The
histopathological examination showed severe necrotic interstitial
bronchopneumonia and mild necrotic hepatitis, associated with intralesional cysts
and tachyzoites of Toxoplasma gondii that were positive by anti-T. gondii
immunohistochemical (IHC) evaluation. The bone marrow showed chronic myeloid
leukemia and the neoplastic cells were positive by anti-FeLV IHC evaluation. DNA 
extracted from lungs was positive for T. gondii by PCR targeting REP-529. T.
gondii was characterized by PCR-RFLP and by the microsatellites technique.
ToxoDB-PCR-RFLP #10, i.e. the archetypal type I, was identified. Microsatellite
analysis showed that the strain was a variant of type I with two atypical
alleles. This was the first time that a T. gondii clonal type I genotype was
correlated with a case of acute toxoplasmosis in a host in Brazil.

DOI: 10.1590/S1984-29612017025 
PMID: 28746448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

