
1. Circulation. 2017 Oct 17;136(16):1509-1524. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.029003. Epub 2017 Jul 28.

In Vivo Functional Selection Identifies Cardiotrophin-1 as a Cardiac Engraftment 
Factor for Mesenchymal Stromal Cells.

Bortolotti F(1), Ruozi G(1), Falcione A(1), Doimo S(1), Dal Ferro M(1), Lesizza
P(1), Zentilin L(1), Banks L(1), Zacchigna S(1), Giacca M(2).

Author information: 
(1)From Molecular Medicine (F.B., G.R., A.F., L.Z., M.G.), Tumour Biology (L.B.),
and Cardiovascular Biology (S.Z.) Laboratories, International Centre for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology, Trieste, Italy; Department of Medical, Surgical
and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, Italy (S.D., M.D.F., P.L., S.Z.,
M.G.); and Center for Translational Cardiology, Azienda Sanitaria Integrata di
Trieste, Italy (S.D., M.D.F., P.L., S.Z., M.G.).
(2)From Molecular Medicine (F.B., G.R., A.F., L.Z., M.G.), Tumour Biology (L.B.),
and Cardiovascular Biology (S.Z.) Laboratories, International Centre for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology, Trieste, Italy; Department of Medical, Surgical
and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, Italy (S.D., M.D.F., P.L., S.Z.,
M.G.); and Center for Translational Cardiology, Azienda Sanitaria Integrata di
Trieste, Italy (S.D., M.D.F., P.L., S.Z., M.G.). giacca@icgeb.org.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2017 Oct 17;136(16):1525-1527.

BACKGROUND: Transplantation of cells into the infarcted heart has significant
potential to improve myocardial recovery; however, low efficacy of cell
engraftment still limits therapeutic benefit. Here, we describe a method for the 
unbiased, in vivo selection of cytokines that improve mesenchymal stromal cell
engraftment into the heart both in normal conditions and after myocardial
infarction.
METHODS: An arrayed library of 80 secreted factors, including most of the
currently known interleukins and chemokines, were individually cloned into
adeno-associated viral vectors. Pools from this library were then used for the
batch transduction of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells ex vivo,
followed by intramyocardial cell administration in normal and infarcted mice.
Three weeks after injection, vector genomes were recovered from the few
persisting cells and identified by sequencing DNA barcodes uniquely labeling each
of the tested cytokines.
RESULTS: The most effective molecule identified by this competitive engraftment
screening was cardiotrophin-1, a member of the interleukin-6 family. Intracardiac
injection of mesenchymal stromal cells transiently preconditioned with
cardiotrophin-1 preserved cardiac function and reduced infarct size, parallel to 
the persistence of the transplanted cells in the healing hearts for at least 2
months after injection. Engraftment of cardiotrophin-1-treated mesenchymal
stromal cells was consequent to signal transducer and activator of transcription 
3-mediated activation of the focal adhesion kinase and its associated focal
adhesion complex and the consequent acquisition of adhesive properties by the
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support the feasibility of selecting molecules in vivo
for their functional properties with adeno-associated viral vector libraries and 
identify cardiotrophin-1 as a powerful cytokine promoting cell engraftment and
thus improving cell therapy of the infarcted myocardium.

Â© 2017 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.029003 
PMID: 28754835  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

