
1. FEBS J. 2017 Oct;284(19):3171-3201. doi: 10.1111/febs.14193. Epub 2017 Aug 29.

Mapping the interactome of HPV E6 and E7 oncoproteins with the
ubiquitin-proteasome system.

Poirson J(1), Biquand E(2), Straub ML(1), Cassonnet P(2), Nominé Y(3), Jones
L(4), van der Werf S(2), Travé G(3), Zanier K(1), Jacob Y(2), Demeret C(2),
Masson M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ecole Supérieure de Biotechnologie Strasbourg, UMR-7242, CNRS, Université de
Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.
(2)UMR 3569, CNRS, Unité de Génétique Moléculaire des Virus à ARN, Institut
Pasteur, Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France.
(3)UMR 7104-Inserm U964, CNRS, IGBMC-CBI, Equipe labellisée Ligue 2015, Illkirch,
France.
(4)Biostatistiques et biologie intégrative (C3BI), Institut Pasteur, Centre de
bioinformatique, Paris, France.

Comment in
    FEBS J. 2017 Oct;284(19):3168-3170.

Protein ubiquitination and its reverse reaction, deubiquitination, regulate
protein stability, protein binding activity, and their subcellular localization. 
These reactions are catalyzed by the enzymes E1, E2, and E3 ubiquitin (Ub)
ligases and deubiquitinases (DUBs). The Ub-proteasome system (UPS) is targeted by
viruses for the sake of their replication and to escape host immune response. To 
identify novel partners of human papillomavirus 16 (HPV16) E6 and E7 proteins, we
assembled and screened a library of 590 cDNAs related to the UPS by using the
Gaussia princeps luciferase protein complementation assay. HPV16 E6 was found to 
bind to the homology to E6AP C terminus-type Ub ligase (E6AP), three really
interesting new gene (RING)-type Ub ligases (MGRN1, LNX3, LNX4), and the DUB
Ub-specific protease 15 (USP15). Except for E6AP, the binding of UPS factors did 
not require the LxxLL-binding pocket of HPV16 E6. LNX3 bound preferentially to
all high-risk mucosal HPV E6 tested, whereas LNX4 bound specifically to HPV16 E6.
HPV16 E7 was found to bind to several broad-complex tramtrack and bric-a-brac
domain-containing proteins (such as TNFAIP1/KCTD13) that are potential substrate 
adaptors of Cullin 3-RING Ub ligases, to RING-type Ub ligases implicated in
innate immunity (RNF135, TRIM32, TRAF2, TRAF5), to the substrate adaptor DCAF15
of Cullin 4-RING Ub ligase and to some DUBs (USP29, USP33). The binding to UPS
factors did not require the LxCxE motif but rather the C-terminal region of HPV16
E7 protein. The identified UPS factors interacted with most of E7 proteins across
different HPV types. This study establishes a strategy for the rapid
identification of interactions between host or pathogen proteins and the human
ubiquitination system.

© 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.14193 
PMID: 28786561  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

