
1. Front Vet Sci. 2017 Jul 27;4:121. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2017.00121. eCollection
2017.

The Use of Bioaerosol Sampling for Airborne Virus Surveillance in Swine
Production Facilities: A Mini Review.

Anderson BD(1)(2), Lednicky JA(2), Torremorell M(3), Gray GC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, School of Medicine, Global Health Institute, 
Duke University, Durham, NC, United States.
(2)Department of Environmental and Global Health, College of Public Health &
Health Professions, Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, United States.
(3)Department of Veterinary Population Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, Saint Paul, MN, United States.

Modern swine production facilities typically house dense populations of pigs and 
may harbor a variety of potentially zoonotic viruses that can pass from one pig
generation to another and periodically infect human caretakers. Bioaerosol
sampling is a common technique that has been used to conduct microbial risk
assessments in swine production, and other similar settings, for a number of
years. However, much of this work seems to have been focused on the detection of 
non-viral microbial agents (i.e., bacteria, fungi, endotoxins, etc.), and efforts
to detect viral aerosols in pig farms seem sparse. Data generated by such studies
would be particularly useful for assessments of virus transmission and ecology.
Here, we summarize the results of a literature review conducted to identify
published articles related to bioaerosol generation and detection within swine
production facilities, with a focus on airborne viruses. We identified 73
scientific reports, published between 1991 and 2017, which were included in this 
review. Of these, 19 (26.7%) used sampling methodology for the detection of
viruses. Our findings show that bioaerosol sampling methodologies in swine
production settings have predominately focused on the detection of bacteria and
fungi, with no apparent standardization between different approaches.
Information, specifically regarding virus aerosol burden in swine production
settings, appears to be limited. However, the number of viral aerosol studies has
markedly increased in the past 5â€‰years. With the advent of new sampling
technologies and improved diagnostics, viral bioaerosol sampling could be a
promising way to conduct non-invasive viral surveillance among swine farms.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2017.00121 
PMCID: PMC5529434
PMID: 28798919 

