
1. J Cell Physiol. 1987 Jan;130(1):44-50.

Intracellular distribution of active and inactive transglutaminase in stimulated 
cultured C6 glioma cells.

Korner G, Bachrach U.

The cellular distribution of active and inactive transglutaminase (TGase) was
studied in C6 glioma cells before and during stimulation by a serum-containing
medium. The activity of the enzyme was determined in the soluble and insoluble
fractions obtained by freezing and thawing the cells, followed by centrifugation 
at 12,000g for 5 min. In the soluble fractions, the activity of TGase decreased
2.5 h post-stimulation and increased after 5 and 8 h. In the corresponding
insoluble fractions, no significant changes in the activity of the enzyme were
noted up to 8 h after stimulating the cells with fresh medium. An immunological
approach was next used to determine the quantity of TGase antigen during the
stimulation of the cultured glioma cells. In the soluble fraction, the quantity
of the antigen decreases significantly at 2.5, 5, and 8 h. In contrast, in the
insoluble fraction, a significant increase in TGase antigen was detected 8 h
after the addition of fresh medium. Cycloheximide completely inhibited the
increase in the quantity of TGase antigen in the insoluble fraction, 8 h
post-stimulation, while actinomycin D caused a partial inhibition. Trypsin,
neuraminidase, or Sendai viruses increased the activity of TGase significantly,
when added to nonstimulated cells. Trypsin had no effect on TGase activity when
added to the cells 2 h after stimulation with a serum-containing medium. These
findings suggest that an inactive form of the enzyme is present in the insoluble 
cellular fraction. A model has been proposed to explain the variations in TGase
activity, its distribution and translocation during cellular stimulation.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.1041300108 
PMID: 2879848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

