
1. Plant Cell. 2017 Sep;29(9):2214-2232. doi: 10.1105/tpc.17.00180. Epub 2017 Aug
16.

The Intracellular Immune Receptor Sw-5b Confers Broad-Spectrum Resistance to
Tospoviruses through Recognition of a Conserved 21-Amino Acid Viral Effector
Epitope.

Zhu M(1), Jiang L(1), Bai B(1), Zhao W(1), Chen X(1), Li J(1), Liu Y(2), Chen
Z(1), Wang B(1), Wang C(1), Wu Q(1), Shen Q(3), Dinesh-Kumar SP(4), Tao X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing
210095, P.R. China.
(2)Institute of Plant Protection, Hunan Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Changsha 410125, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Plant Cell and Chromosome Engineering, Institute of
Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, 
China.
(4)Department of Plant Biology and The Genome Center, College of Biological
Sciences, University of California, Davis, California 95616.
(5)Department of Plant Pathology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing
210095, P.R. China taoxiaorong@njau.edu.cn.

Plants use both cell surface-resident pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) and
intracellular nucleotide binding leucine-rich repeat (NLR) receptors to detect
various pathogens. Plant PRRs typically recognize conserved pathogen-associated
molecular patterns (PAMPs) to provide broad-spectrum resistance. By contrast,
plant NLRs generally detect pathogen strain-specific effectors and confer
race-specific resistance. Here, we demonstrate that the tomato (Solanum
lycopersicum) NLR Sw-5b confers broad-spectrum resistance against American-type
tospoviruses by recognizing a conserved 21-amino acid peptide region within viral
movement protein NSm (NSm21). Sw-5b NB-ARC-LRR domains directly associate with
NSm21 in vitro and in planta. Domain swap, site-directed mutagenesis and
structure modeling analyses identified four polymorphic sites in the Sw-5b LRR
domain that are critical for the recognition of NSm21 Furthermore, recognition of
NSm21 by Sw-5b likely disturbs the residues adjacent to R927 in the LRR domain to
weaken the intramolecular interaction between LRR and NB-ARC domains, thus
translating recognition of NSm21 into activation of Sw-5b. Natural variation
analysis of Sw-5b homologs from wild tomato species of South America revealed
that the four polymorphic sites in the Sw-5b LRR domain were positively selected 
during evolution and are all necessary to confer resistance to tospovirus. The
results described here provide a new example of a plant NLR mediating
broad-spectrum resistance through recognition of a small conserved PAMP-like
region within the pathogen effector.

Â© 2017 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.17.00180 
PMCID: PMC5635987
PMID: 28814646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

