
1. BMC Vet Res. 2017 Aug 31;13(1):277. doi: 10.1186/s12917-017-1172-7.

Longitudinal study of Senecavirus a shedding in sows and piglets on a single
United States farm during an outbreak of vesicular disease.

Tousignant SJP(1), Bruner L(2), Schwartz J(2), Vannucci F(3), Rossow S(3),
Marthaler DG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Swine Vet Center, 1608 South Minnesota Avenue, St. Peter, MN, 56082, USA.
stous@swinevetcenter.com.
(2)Swine Vet Center, 1608 South Minnesota Avenue, St. Peter, MN, 56082, USA.
(3)Department of Preventive Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, University 
of Minnesota, 1333 Gortner Avenue, St. Paul, MN, 55106, USA.

BACKGROUND: The study highlights the shedding pattern of Senecavirus A (SVA)
during an outbreak of vesicular disease in a sow farm from the South-central
Minnesota, USA. In this study, 34 individual, mixed parity sows with clinical
signs of vesicular lesions and 30 individual piglets from 15 individual litters
from sows with vesicular lesions were conveniently selected for individual,
longitudinal sampling. Serum, tonsil, rectal, and vesicular swabs were collected 
on day1 post outbreak, and then again at 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 9 weeks post
outbreak. Samples were tested at the University of Minnesota Veterinary
Diagnostic Laboratory for SVA via Real Time Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR)
RESULTS: In sows, vesicular lesions had the highest concentration of SVA, but had
the shortest duration of detection lasting only 2 weeks. Viremia was detected for
1 week post outbreak, and quickly declined thereafter. SVA was detected at
approximately the same frequency for both tonsil and rectal swabs with the
highest percentage of SVA positive samples detected in the first 6 weeks post
outbreak. In suckling piglets, viremia quickly declined 1 week post outbreak and 
was prevalent in low levels during the first week after weaning (4 weeks post
outbreak) and was also detected in piglets that were co-mingled from a SVA
negative sow farm. Similar to sows, SVA detection on rectal and tonsil swabs in
piglets lasted approximately 6 weeks post outbreak.
CONCLUSION: The study illustrates the variation of SVA shedding patterns in
different sample types over a 9 week period in sows and piglets, and suggests the
potential for viral spread between piglets at weaning.

DOI: 10.1186/s12917-017-1172-7 
PMCID: PMC5580203
PMID: 28859639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

