
1. Biochem J. 2017 Oct 5;474(20):3471-3483. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20170353.

Expression of an RNA glycosidase inhibits HIV-1 transactivation of transcription.

Kutky M(1), Hudak KA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Biology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
hudak@yorku.ca.

Comment in
    Biochem J. 2018 Mar 20;475(6):1059-1062.

HIV-1 (human immunodeficiency virus) transcription is primarily controlled by the
virally encoded Tat (transactivator of transcription) protein and its interaction
with the viral TAR (transcription response element) RNA element. Specifically,
binding of a Tat-containing complex to TAR recruits cellular factors that promote
elongation of the host RNA polymerase engaging the viral DNA template. Disruption
of this interaction halts viral RNA transcription. In the present study, we
investigated the effect of pokeweed antiviral protein (PAP), an RNA glycosidase
(EC#: 3.2.2.22) synthesized by the pokeweed plant (Phytolacca americana), on
transcription of HIV-1 mRNA. We show that co-expression of PAP with a proviral
clone in culture cells resulted in a Tat-dependent decrease in viral mRNA levels.
PAP reduced HIV-1 transcriptional activity by inhibiting Tat protein synthesis.
The effects of PAP expression on host factors AP-1 (activator protein 1), NF-κB
(nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B-cells) and specificity 
protein 1, which modulate HIV-1 transcription by binding to the viral LTR
(5'-long terminal repeat), were also investigated. Only AP-1 showed a modest JNK 
pathway-dependent increase in activity in the presence of PAP; however, this
activation was not sufficient to significantly enhance transcription from a
partial viral LTR containing AP-1 binding sites. Therefore, the primary effect of
PAP on HIV-1 transcription is to reduce viral RNA synthesis by decreasing the
abundance of Tat. These findings provide a mechanistic explanation for the
observed decrease in viral RNAs in cells expressing PAP and contribute to our
understanding of the antiviral effects of this plant protein.

© 2017 The Author(s). Published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the
Biochemical Society.

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20170353 
PMID: 28864671  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

