
1. Med Sci Monit. 2017 Sep 21;23:4526-4532.

Hepatitis C Virus Infection Increases c-Jun N-Terminal Kinase (JNK)
Phosphorylation and Accentuates Hepatocyte Lipoapoptosis.

Takaki H(1), Akazawa Y(2)(3), Kido Y(2), Morishita M(1), Honda T(1), Shibata
H(1), Miuma S(1), Miyaaki H(1), Taura N(1), Kondo H(4), Nakao K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Nagasaki University Hospital,
Nagasaki City, Nagasaki, Japan.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Nagasaki University Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki City, Nagasaki, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Nagasaki University Hospital, Nagasaki City,
Nagasaki, Japan.
(4)Biostatistics Section, Division of Scientific Data Registry, Department of
Radioisotope Medicine, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki City, Nagasaki,
Japan.

BACKGROUND Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection and metabolic diseases including
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) exhibit a complex interplay. Although free
fatty acid-mediated apoptosis is a prominent feature of NASH, the impact of HCV
infection on hepatocyte lipotoxicity has remained largely unexplored. The study
aimed at identifying whether infection by HCV affected the apoptotic pathway in
hepatocytes during fatty acid assault. MATERIAL AND METHODS OR6 cells, which are 
derived from human hepatocellular carcinoma Huh-7 cells and harbor a full-length 
HCV RNA genome replication system, were treated with palmitate. Apoptosis was
examined by 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole staining. Activation and expression of 
JNK, Bim, cIAP-1, and Mcl-1 were examined by immunoblotting. mRNA expression of
CHOP, a major player in endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated apoptosis, was
assessed by real-time PCR. RESULTS Palmitate-induced hepatocyte apoptosis was
significantly enhanced in OR6 cells compared to cured cells, in which the HCV
genome had been eradicated by treatment with interferon-Î±. Although basal
expression of CHOP mRNA was enhanced in OR6 cells compared to cured cells, it was
similarly upregulated in both cell lines following palmitate treatment. Notably, 
palmitate-induced JNK phosphorylation was accentuated in OR6 cells compared to
cured cells. Inhibition of JNK with SP600125 attenuated palmitate-induced
apoptosis. Palmitate-mediated upregulation of BH3-only protein Bim, which acts
downstream of JNK, was also enhanced in OR6 cells compared to cured cells. In
contrast, Mcl-1 and cIAP-1 were equally reduced in OR6 cells and cured cells
following palmitate treatment. CONCLUSIONS These findings suggest that during
lipoapoptosis, HCV infection may enhance hepatocyte toxicity by increasing JNK
phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.12659/msm.903210 
PMCID: PMC5621789
PMID: 28931802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

