
1. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2017 Nov 15;9(45):39152-39164. doi:
10.1021/acsami.7b10796. Epub 2017 Nov 3.

Ovarian Cancer Therapy by VSVMP Gene Mediated by a Paclitaxel-Enhanced
Nanoparticle.

Long J(1)(2)(3)(4), Yang Y(1)(3), Kang T(1)(3), Zhao W(1)(3), Cheng H(1)(3), Wu
Y(1)(3), Du T(1)(3), Liu B(1)(3), Li Y(1)(3), Luo F(1)(2)(3), Gou M(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and cancer center, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu, 
610041, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Lung Cancer Center, Cancer Center, West China 
Hospital, Medical School, Sichuan University , Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P. R.
China.
(3)Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy , Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P.
R. China.
(4)Department of Oncology, West China Guang'an Hospital, Sichuan University ,
Guang'an, Sichuan 638000, P. R. China.

Erratum in
    ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2020 Jun 10;12(23):26755.

Nanoparticles have great promise for gene delivery. However, the transfection
efficiency of nanoparticle-based gene delivery systems is always unsatisfied to
meet the requirement of effective gene therapy. Herein, we used low-dosage
paclitaxel to enhance a nanoscaled gene delivery system that was self-assembled
from N-[1-(2,3-dioleoyloxy)propyl]-N,N,N-trimethylammoniummethyl sulfate and
monomethoxy poly(ethylene glycol)-poly(d,l-lactide) (DPP), creating a
paclitaxel-encapsulated DPP (P-DPP) nanoparticle. The encapsulated low-dosage
paclitaxel significantly improved the gene delivery efficiency of the DPP
nanoparticles against multiple cancer cells, in some of which the transfection
efficiency is as high as 92%. By the P-DPP nanoparticle, vesicular stomatitis
virus matrix protein (VSVMP) that could induce cell apoptosis was delivered to
treat ovarian cancer. The encapsulation of paclitaxel in DPP nanoparticles
increased the expression of VSVMP, enhancing VSVMP to induce antiproliferation
and apoptosis in SKOV3 ovarian cancer cells. Intraperitoneal administration of
P-DPP-delivered VSVMP effectively inhibited the intraperitoneal metastasis of
SKOV3 ovarian cancer, which was more efficient than DPP-delivered VSVMP.
Moreover, it was found that the tumor cell apoptosis induction, tumor cell
proliferation inhibition, and tumor angiogenesis suppression were involved in the
anticancer mechanism of this nanocomplex. Our data suggest that the encapsulation
of low-dosage paclitaxel can enhance the gene delivery efficiency of the DPP
nanoparticles against multiple cancer cells and exert a synergistic anticancer
effect with VSVMP gene in ovarian cancer treatment. The VSVMP gene therapy
delivered by the paclitaxel-enhanced nanoparticle has potential application in
ovarian cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1021/acsami.7b10796 
PMID: 28944654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

