
1. Virus Genes. 2018 Feb;54(1):124-129. doi: 10.1007/s11262-017-1510-7. Epub 2017
Sep 23.

Distribution of Tomato planta macho viroid in germinating pollen and transmitting
tract.

Matsushita Y(1), Yanagisawa H(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Vegetable and Floriculture Science, National Agriculture and Food
Research Organization, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8519, Japan. yousuken@affrc.go.jp.
(2)Central Region Agricultural Research Centre, National Agriculture and Food
Research Organization, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8666, Japan.
(3)The United Graduate School of Agricultural Sciences, Iwate University,
Morioka, Iwate, 020-8550, Japan.

Vertical and horizontal pollen transmission is important for efficient infection 
by viroids. Vertical pollen transmission of viroids is attributed to the
infection by viroid in the embryo sac through infected pollen. To identify the
viroid infection in pollen and pollen tubes elongating through the transmitting
tract, we used in situ hybridization to histochemically analyze the distribution 
of Tomato planta macho viroid (TPMVd) in pollen grains, the stigma, and style of 
petunia plants. TPMVd was present in the generative nucleus and vegetative
nucleus of mature infected pollen grains and germinating pollen grains. During
pollen tube growth, TPMVd was present in the vegetative nucleus and two sperm
nuclei, which were generated by division of the generative nucleus in the style
transmitting tract. These findings indicated that viroid infection in sperm
nuclei is responsible for vertical pollen transmission of viroids. TPMVd
infection from TPMVd-infected pollen tubes to the transmitting tract was not
observed. In addition, TPMVd signals were not confirmed in the stigma and
transmitting tract of TPMVd-infected petunia plants, suggesting that viroids may 
not replicate in these tissues at the stage of mature style. Therefore, TPMVd may
leak from the pollen tube somewhere in the ovary, except in the transmitting
tract, during the horizontal transmission of TPMVd.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-017-1510-7 
PMID: 28942579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

