
1. Infect Dis (Lond). 2018 Feb;50(2):140-144. doi: 10.1080/23744235.2017.1380841.
Epub 2017 Sep 26.

Xpert Flu as a rapid diagnostic test for respiratory tract viral infection:
evaluation and implementation as a 24/7 service.

Haglund S(1), Quttineh M(1), Nilsson Bowers A(1), Matussek A(1)(2)(3),
Henningsson AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Laboratory Medicine , Region Jönköping County , Sweden.
(2)b Karolinska University Laboratory , Karolinska University Hospital , Solna , 
Sweden.
(3)c Division of Clinical Microbiology, Department of Laboratory Medicine ,
Karolinska Institute, Karolinska University Hospital , Huddinge , Sweden.

Comment in
    Infect Dis (Lond). 2018 Jun;50(6):476-478.

A rapid and reliable influenza method is important to meet diagnostic needs.
Here, the performance of the cartridge-based Xpert Flu assay was evaluated in
comparison with an in-house real-time PCR method. Analysis was then decentralized
from the clinical microbiology laboratory located at County Hospital Ryhov,
Jönköping, Sweden, to the clinical chemistry laboratories present at the three
hospitals in Region Jönköping County, allowing a 24/7 service. In total, 189
clinical samples were included in 2014-2015. The overall sensitivity and
specificity of Xpert Flu were both 99%. With Xpert Flu and the 24/7 service the
median turn-around time from sampling to available test result decreased from
22 h in 2013 to 1.9 h in 2015. In summary, the analytical performance of Xpert
Flu is excellent. The large degree of automation of GeneXpert and Xpert Flu with 
assay on demand has allowed a 24/7 service at the clinical chemistry laboratories
in the county, and a significantly reduced turn-around time, which is valuable
for both patients and the healthcare providers.

DOI: 10.1080/23744235.2017.1380841 
PMID: 28950760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

