
1. Pathologe. 2018 Feb;39(1):57-64. doi: 10.1007/s00292-017-0382-x.

[Munich Nomenclature III: classification according to risk : Follow-up for
conspicuous squamous findings].

[Article in German]

Marquardt K(1), Ziemke P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Praxis für Pathologie, Güstrower Str. 34, 19055, Schwerin, Deutschland.
katrin.marquardt.schwerin@gmail.com.
(2), Potsdam, Deutschland.

AIM: The present study evaluates the risk of progression of cytologic diagnoses
which do not require immediate therapy but do need follow-up. The presented data 
can contribute to risk-adapted management strategies, according to Munich
Nomenclature III.
METHODS: Between January 2014 and March 2016, 3396 women were diagnosed as group 
II-p, IIID1, III-p, IIID2, IVa-p, IVb-p, and V‑p and represent the study
population. Follow-up information on all subsequent cytologic and histologic
findings were collected up to July 2017. For the initial cytologic diagnosis, the
cumulative risk of CIN2+ or CIN3+ and the risk for persistent pathologic findings
was calculated.
RESULTS: The cumulative risk of CIN2+ for initial findings II-p, IIID1, III-p,
and IIID2 is calculated as 7.3, 17.1, 46.3, and 62.4%, respectively, after a mean
observation period of 24.4, 21.1, 15.6, and 14.3 months. The cumulative risk of
CIN3+ (%) is determined as 5.0, 9.3, 37.6, and 45.8. For persistent cytologic
diagnoses II-p, IIID1, III-p, and IIID2, the risk of CIN2+ increases
significantly after the second result (0 to 3.6, 0.21 to 3.6, 7.2 to 58.3, and
8.1 to 64.7%). Risk of CIN2+ and CIN3+ for group III-p is significantly higher
for women <35 years and <30 years compared with women of higher age. There are no
significant age-dependent differences for findings II-p, IIID1, and IIID2.
CONCLUSIONS: The Munich Nomenclature III classifies cytologic findings according 
to risk. The diagnostic groups of the Munich Nomenclature III provide a solid
basis for a risk-adapted clinical management, if the cytologic history of the
individual patient is taken into account.

DOI: 10.1007/s00292-017-0382-x 
PMID: 28993907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

