
1. Swiss Med Wkly. 2017 Oct 31;147:w14520. doi: 10.4414/smw.2017.14520. eCollection 
2017.

Prevention and therapy of JC polyomavirus-mediated progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy - a realistic possibility?

Jelcic I(1), Combaluzier B(2), Jelcic I(1), Sospedra M(1), Grimm J(2), Martin
R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology and Multiple Sclerosis Research Section, Department of
Neurology, University of Zurich, University Hospital Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Neurimmune Holding AG, Schlieren, Switzerland.

Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a serious opportunistic
infection of the brain caused by the JC polyomavirus (JCPyV). PML occurs when
immune control of persistent infection with JCPyV fails, the virus mutates and
changes its cellular tropism, enters the brain and infects astrocytes,
oligodendrocytes and, in particular cases, also neurones. Currently, there is no 
therapy for this often fatal disease. A number of approaches have failed, and
only the restoration of protective immunity, if possible, can lead to clearance
of the virus once PML has occurred. During the last two decades, investigators
have attempted to understand the factors contributing to the development of PML, 
which immune mechanisms are involved in immune surveillance, and which in
clearing JCPyV from the brain once PML has occurred. Recent data suggest that
both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells of the cellular immune system, and also JCPyV-specific
antibodies, are involved in protection against PML and in resolving the
opportunistic infection. Based on the current immunological data, prophylactic
and therapeutic vaccination strategies have been proposed, and first treatment
attempts in PML patients have provided promising results that indicate
therapeutic vaccination may be feasible.

DOI: 10.4414/smw.2017.14520 
PMID: 29120025  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

