
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2018 Jan;72:410-417. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2017.11.018. Epub
2017 Nov 13.

SNPs in the Toll1 receptor of Litopenaeus vannamei are associated with immune
response.

Yao D(1), Su H(1), Zhu J(1), Zhao X(2), Aweya JJ(1), Wang F(1), Zhong M(1), Zhang
Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Marine
Biotechnology, Shantou University, Shantou 515063, China.
(2)College of Fisheries, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang 453007, China.
(3)Department of Biology and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Marine
Biotechnology, Shantou University, Shantou 515063, China. Electronic address:
zhangyl@stu.edu.cn.

Tolls and Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are important regulators in the innate
immune system and their genetic variations usually affect the host's
susceptibility/resistance to pathogen infections. In this study, we report on the
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of Toll1 in Litopenaeus vannamei (LvToll1)
and how this is associated with immune response. PCR-DGGE analysis revealed
genetic polymorphisms in LvToll1 at both the genomic DNA (gDNA) and cDNA levels. 
Using high-throughput sequencing, 223 SNPs were identified at the gDNA level, of 
which 145 were non-synonymous SNP (nsSNP), with 3 nsSNPs having frequency over
1%. On the other hand, 60 SNPs were identified at the cDNA level including 38
nsSNPs and 4 nsSNPs with frequency over 1%. Upon challenging shrimps with
Streptococcus iniae, Vibrio parahaemolyticus and white spot syndrome virus
(WSSV), LvToll1 was shown to generate 6, 4 and 4 novel bands, respectively when
analyzed with PCR-DGGE. Sequencing analysis of these bands showed that they
contained 6, 4 and 2 nsSNPs, respectively. Moreover, the nsSNP C1526T was
detected in S. iniae-resistant but not in susceptible shrimps. Most
significantly, the C1526T mutation could shorten the α-helix of the LRR domain
and was predicted to affect the function of LvToll1, indicating that SNP C1526T
might be associated with shrimp's resistance to pathogen infections. In sum, our 
findings here reveal that the genetic polymorphisms of Toll receptor are linked
with the immune response to pathogen infections in L. vannamei.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2017.11.018 
PMID: 29146444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

