
1. J Invertebr Pathol. 2018 Jan;151:131-136. doi: 10.1016/j.jip.2017.11.009. Epub
2017 Nov 20.

Acute bee paralysis virus occurs in the Asian honey bee Apis cerana and parasitic
mite Tropilaelaps mercedesae.

Chanpanitkitchote P(1), Chen Y(2), Evans JD(2), Li W(2), Li J(3), Hamilton M(2), 
Chantawannakul P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Bee Protection Laboratory, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chiang
Mai University, Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand.
(2)USDA-ARS Beltsville Bee Research Laboratory, Beltsville, MD 20705, USA.
(3)USDA-ARS Beltsville Bee Research Laboratory, Beltsville, MD 20705, USA;
College of Bee Science, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou
350002, China.
(4)Bee Protection Laboratory, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chiang
Mai University, Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand; Environmental Science Research
Center, Faculty of Science, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand.
Electronic address: panuwan@gmail.com.

Viruses, and especially RNA viruses, constantly change and adapt to new host
species and vectors, posing a potential threat of new and reemerging infectious
diseases. Honey bee Acute bee paralysis virus (ABPV) and Deformed wing virus
(DWV) are two of the most common honey bee viruses found in European honey bees
Apis mellifera and have been implicated in worldwide Varroa-associated bee colony
losses. Previous studies have shown that DWV has jumped hosts several times in
history causing infection in multiple host species. In the present study, we show
that DWV infection could be detected in the Asian honey bee, A. cerana, and the
parasitic mite Tropilaelaps mercedesae, confirming previous findings that DWV is 
a multi-host pathogen and supporting the notion that the high prevalence of DWV
in honey bee host populations could be attributed to the high adaptability of
this virus. Furthermore, our study provides the first evidence that ABPV occurs
in both A. cerana and T. mercedesae in northern Thailand. The geographical
proximity of host species likely played an important role in the initial exposure
and the subsequent cross-species transmission of these viruses. Phylogenetic
analyses suggest that ABPV might have moved from T. mercedesae to A. mellifera
and to A. cerana while DWV might have moved in the opposite direction from A.
cerana to A. mellifera and T. mercedesae. This result may reflect the differences
in virus life history and virus-host interactions, warranting further
investigation of virus transmission, epidemiology, and impacts of virus
infections in the new hosts. The results from this study indicate that viral
populations will continue to evolve and likely continue to expand host range,
increasing the need for effective surveillance and control of virus infections in
honey bee populations.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jip.2017.11.009 
PMID: 29158015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

