
1. Epidemiol Infect. 2018 Jan;146(1):119-124. doi: 10.1017/S0950268817002606. Epub
2017 Nov 23.

Detection of HEV-specific antibodies in four non-human primate species, including
great apes, from different zoos in Germany.

Spahr C(1), Knauf-Witzens T(1), Dähnert L(2), Enders M(3), Müller M(3), Johne
R(4), Ulrich RG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wilhelma Zoological-Botanical Gardens,Stuttgart,Germany.
(2)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health,
Institute of Novel and Emerging Infectious Diseases,Greifswald-Insel
Riems,Germany.
(3)Laboratory Enders, Prof. Dr. med. Gisela Enders & Partners,Stuttgart,Germany.
(4)German Federal Institute of Risk Assessment,Berlin,Germany.

The hepatitis E virus (HEV) has been described in humans and various animal
species in different regions of the world. However, the knowledge on natural HEV 
infection in non-human primates and the corresponding risk of zoonotic
transmission is scarce. To determine whether primates in captivity are affected
by HEV infection, we investigated 259 individual sera of clinically healthy
non-human primates of 14 species from nine German zoos. Using a commercial
double-antigen-sandwich ELISA and a commercial IgG ELISA, 10 animals (3·9%)
reacted positive in at least one assay. Three ape species and one Old World
monkey species were among the seropositive animals: bonobo (Pan paniscus),
gorilla (Gorilla gorilla gorilla), lar gibbon (Hylobates lar) and drill
(Mandrillus leucophaeus). Testing for anti-HEV-IgM antibodies by commercial ELISA
and for viral RNA by reverse-transcription real-time polymerase chain reaction
resulted in negative results for all animals indicating the absence of acute HEV 
infections. In the past, no clinical signs of hepatitis were recorded for the
seropositive animals. The results suggest that non-human primates in zoos can get
naturally and subclinically infected with HEV or related hepeviruses. Future
studies should evaluate potential sources and transmission routes of these
infections and their impact on human health.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268817002606 
PMID: 29168441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

