
1. J Cell Physiol. 2018 Jun;233(6):4479-4489. doi: 10.1002/jcp.26384. Epub 2018 Jan 
15.

RETREG1 (FAM134B): A new player in human diseases: 15 years after the discovery
in cancer.

Islam F(1)(2), Gopalan V(1), Lam AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Molecular Pathology, School of Medicine and Griffith Health Institute, 
Griffith University, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Rajshahi,
Rajshahi, Bangladesh.

FAM134B (family with sequence similarity 134, member B)/RETREG1 and its
functional roles are relatively new in human diseases. This review aimed to
summarize various functions of FAM134B since our first discovery of the gene in
2001. The protein encoded by FAM134B is a reticulophagy receptor that regulates
turnover of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by selective phagocytosis. Absence or 
non-functional expression of FAM134B protein impairs ER-turnover and thereby is
involved in the pathogenesis of some human diseases. FAM134B inhibition
contributes to impair proteostasis in the ER due to the accumulation of misfolded
or aggregated proteins, which in turn leads to compromised neuronal survival and 
progressive neuronal degenerative diseases. Mutations in FAM134B associated with 
hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type IIB (HSAN IIB). Selective
cleavage of FAM134B by Dengue, Zika, and West Nile virus encoded protease NS2B3
leads to the increased production of infection units, whereas upregulation of
FAM134B inhibits viral replication. In cancer, FAM134B acts as a tumor suppressor
and inhibit cancer growth both in-vitro and in-vivo. Pharmacological upregulation
of FAM134B resulted in reduced cancer cell growth and proliferation. In addition,
FAM134B mutations are common in patients with colorectal adenocarcinoma, and
oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma. These mutations and expression changes of
FAM134B were associated with the biological aggressiveness of these cancers.
FAM134B also plays a role in allergic rhinitis, vascular dementia, and
identification of stem cells. Taken together, information available in the
literature suggests that FAM134B plays critical roles in human diseases, by
interacting with different biological and chemical mediators, which are primarily
regulated by ER turnover.

Â© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.26384 
PMID: 29226326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

