
1. PLoS One. 2017 Dec 13;12(12):e0189481. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189481.
eCollection 2017.

The role of phytochromes in regulating biosynthesis of sterol glycoalkaloid in
eggplant leaves.

Wang CC(1), Sulli M(2), Fu DQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fruit Biology Laboratory, College of Food Science and Nutritional Engineering,
China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(2)Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Sustainable
Development, Roma, Italy.

Glycoalkaloids are toxic compounds that are synthesized by many Solanum species. 
Glycoalkaloid biosynthesis is influenced by plant genetic and environmental
conditions. Although many studies have shown that light is an important factor
affecting glycoalkaloid biosynthesis, the specific mechanism is currently
unknown. Chlorophyll and carotenoid biosynthesis depend on light signal
transduction and share some intermediate metabolites with the glycoalkaloid
biosynthetic pathway. Here, we used virus-induced gene silencing to silence genes
encoding phytoene desaturase (PDS) and magnesium chelatase (CHLI and CHLH) to
reduce chlorophyll and carotenoid levels in eggplant leaves. Quantification of
carotenoid and chlorophyll levels is analyzed by LC/PDA/APCI/MS and semipolar
metabolite profiling by LC/HESI/MS. Notably, the resulting lines showed decreases
in glycoalkaloid production. We further found that the expression of some genes
involved in the production of glycoalkaloids and other metabolites were
suppressed in these silenced lines. Our results indicate that photosynthetic
pigment accumulation affects steroidal glycoalkaloid biosynthesis in eggplant
leaves. This finding lays the foundation for reducing the levels of endogenous
antinutritional compounds in crops.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189481 
PMCID: PMC5728552
PMID: 29236780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

