
1. J Virol. 2018 Feb 12;92(5). pii: e01813-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01813-17. Print 2018
Mar 1.

Herpes Simplex Virus 1 DNA Polymerase RNase H Activity Acts in a 3'-to-5'
Direction and Is Dependent on the 3'-to-5' Exonuclease Active Site.

Lawler JL(1)(2), Mukherjee P(1), Coen DM(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)PhD Program in Virology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA don_coen@hms.harvard.edu.

The catalytic subunit (Pol) of herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) DNA polymerase has 
been extensively studied both as a model for other family B DNA polymerases and
for its differences from these enzymes as an antiviral target. Among the
activities of HSV-1 Pol is an intrinsic RNase H activity that cleaves RNA from
RNA-DNA hybrids. There has long been a controversy regarding whether this
activity is due to the 3'-to-5' exonuclease of Pol or whether it is a separate
activity, possibly acting on 5' RNA termini. To investigate this issue, we
compared wild-type HSV-1 Pol and a 3'-to-5' exonuclease-deficient mutant, D368A
Pol, for DNA polymerase activity, 3'-to-5' exonuclease activity, and RNase H
activity in vitro Additionally, we assessed the RNase H activity using
differentially end-labeled templates with 5' or 3' RNA termini. The mutant enzyme
was at most modestly impaired for DNA polymerase activity but was drastically
impaired for 3'-to-5' exonuclease activity, with no activity detected even at
high enzyme-to-DNA substrate ratios. Importantly, the mutant showed no detectable
ability to excise RNA with either a 3' or 5' terminus, while the wild-type HSV-1 
Pol was able to cleave RNA from the annealed RNA-DNA hairpin template, but only
detectably with a 3' RNA terminus in a 3'-to-5' direction and at a rate lower
than that of the exonuclease activity. These results suggest that HSV-1 Pol does 
not have an RNase H separable from its 3'-to-5' exonuclease activity and that
this activity prefers DNA degradation over degradation of RNA from RNA-DNA
hybrids.IMPORTANCE Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) is a member of the
Herpesviridae family of DNA viruses, several of which cause morbidity and
mortality in humans. Although the HSV-1 DNA polymerase has been studied for
decades and is a crucial target for antivirals against HSV-1 infection, several
of its functions remain to be elucidated. A hypothesis suggesting the existence
of a 5'-to-3' RNase H activity intrinsic to this enzyme that could remove RNA
primers from Okazaki fragments has been particularly controversial. In this
study, we were unable to identify RNase H activity of HSV-1 DNA polymerase on
RNA-DNA hybrids with 5' RNA termini. We detected RNase H activity on hybrids with
3' termini, but this was due to the 3'-to-5' exonuclease. Thus, HSV-1 is unlikely
to use this method to remove RNA primers during DNA replication but may use
pathways similar to those used in eukaryotic Okazaki fragment maturation.

Copyright Â© 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01813-17 
PMCID: PMC5809741
PMID: 29237844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

