
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2019 Jan;37(1):131-146. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2017.1420489. 
Epub 2018 Jan 7.

Molecular docking, QSAR and ADMET based mining of natural compounds against prime
targets of HIV.

Vora J(1)(2), Patel S(3), Sinha S(1), Sharma S(1), Srivastava A(1), Chhabria
M(3), Shrivastava N(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry , B. V. Patel Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research Development (PERD) Centre , Ahmedabad , Gujarat , India.
(2)b Department of Life science, School of Science , Gujarat University ,
Ahmedabad , Gujarat , India.
(3)c Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry , L.M. College of Pharmacy ,
Navrangpura, Ahmedabad , Gujarat , India.

AIDS is one of the multifaceted diseases and this underlying complexity hampers
its complete cure. The toxicity of existing drugs and emergence of
multidrug-resistant virus makes the treatment worse. Development of effective,
safe and low-cost anti-HIV drugs is among the top global priority. Exploration of
natural resources may give ray of hope to develop new anti-HIV leads. Among the
various therapeutic targets for HIV treatment, reverse transcriptase, protease,
integrase, GP120, and ribonuclease are the prime focus. In the present study, we 
predicted potential plant-derived natural molecules for HIV treatment using
computational approach, i.e. molecular docking, quantitative structure activity
relationship (QSAR), and ADMET studies. Receptor-ligand binding studies were
performed using three different software for precise prediction - Discovery
studio 4.0, Schrodinger and Molegrow virtual docker. Docking scores revealed that
Mulberrosides, Anolignans, Curcumin and Chebulic acid are promising candidates
that bind with multi targets of HIV, while Neo-andrographolide, Nimbolide and
Punigluconin were target-specific candidates. Subsequently, QSAR was performed
using biologically proved compounds which predicted the biological activity of
compounds. We identified Anolignans, Curcumin, Mulberrosides, Chebulic acid and
Neo-andrographolide as potential natural molecules for HIV treatment from results
of molecular docking and 3D-QSAR. In silico ADMET studies showed drug-likeness of
these lead molecules. Structure similarities of identified lead molecules were
compared with identified marketed drugs by superimposing both the molecules.
Using in silico studies, we have identified few best fit molecules of natural
origin against identified targets which may give new drugs to combat HIV
infection after wet lab validation.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2017.1420489 
PMID: 29268664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

