
1. Prep Biochem Biotechnol. 2018 Feb 7;48(2):144-150. doi:
10.1080/10826068.2017.1407944. Epub 2018 Feb 9.

Selection, purification, and characterization of a HER2-targeting soluble
designed ankyrin repeat protein by E. coli surface display using HER2-positive
melanoma cells.

Chen X(1), Yu X(1), Song X(1), Liu L(1), Yi Y(1), Yao W(1), Gao X(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Druggability of Biopharmaceuticals, State Key
Laboratory of Natural Medicines , School of Life Science and Technology, China
Pharmaceutical University , Nanjing , PR China.

Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is a powerful target for cancer
immune therapy. The development of anti-HER2 monoclonal antibodies targeting
different domains of HER2 is quite effective. However, the selection and
production of multivalent antibodies are complicated. In this study, a
mimivirus-based designed ankyrin repeat protein (DARPin) targeting HER2 was
selected from an artificial library by bacteria surface display. The selection
was performed on HER2-positive B16BL6/E2 melanoma cells and HER2-nagative cells. 
DARPin selected from the library could be expressed in soluble form with a yield 
of 70 mg/L. After purified by two continuous and easy steps, the purity of DARPin
was 90% as established by SDS-PAGE and RP-HPLC. Selected DARPin showed
significant HER2-targeting ability with an affinity of 1.05 ± 0.47 µM. MTT assay 
demonstrated that at the concentration of 640 nM, the selected DARPin dimer could
inhibit the SK-BR-3 growth at a rate of 36.63 and 46.34% in 48 and 72 hr
incubation separately, which was similar to trastuzumab (43.12 and 49.14%
separately). These findings suggested that it was an effective method to select
antibody mimetic DARPin by bacteria surface display combined with live cells
sorting and provided a drug candidate for cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1080/10826068.2017.1407944 
PMID: 29313422  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

