
1. mBio. 2018 Jan 30;9(1). pii: e02314-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02314-17.

Mucolipin-2 Cation Channel Increases Trafficking Efficiency of Endocytosed
Viruses.

Rinkenberger N(1), Schoggins JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA john.schoggins@utsouthwestern.edu.

Receptor-mediated endocytosis is a cellular process commonly hijacked by viruses 
to enter cells. The stages of entry are well described for certain viruses, but
the host factors that mediate each step are less well characterized. We
previously identified endosomal cation channel mucolipin-2 (MCOLN2) as a host
factor that promotes viral infection. Here, we assign a role for MCOLN2 in
modulating viral entry. We show that MCOLN2 specifically promotes viral vesicular
trafficking and subsequent escape from endosomal compartments. This mechanism
requires channel activity, occurs independently of antiviral signaling, and
broadly applies to enveloped RNA viruses that require transport to late endosomes
for infection, including influenza A virus, yellow fever virus, and Zika virus.
We further identify a rare allelic variant of human MCOLN2 that has a
loss-of-function phenotype with respect to viral enhancement. These findings
establish a mechanistic link between an endosomal cation channel and late stages 
of viral entry.IMPORTANCE Viruses must co-opt cellular processes to complete
their life cycle. To enter cells, viruses frequently take advantage of cellular
receptor-mediated endocytosis pathways. A growing number of host proteins are
implicated in these viral uptake pathways. Here, we describe a new role for the
gated cation channel MCOLN2 in viral entry. This endosomal protein modulates
viral entry by enhancing the efficiency of viral trafficking through the
endosomal system. Thus, MCOLN2-mediated enhancement of infection may represent a 
key vulnerability in the viral life cycle that could be targeted for therapeutic 
intervention.

Copyright Â© 2018 Rinkenberger and Schoggins.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02314-17 
PMCID: PMC5790917
PMID: 29382735  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

