
1. Hepatol Commun. 2017 Mar 28;1(3):256-269. doi: 10.1002/hep4.1025. eCollection
2017 May.

Interferon-alpha-induced hepatitis C virus clearance restores p53 tumor
suppressor more than direct-acting antivirals.

Aydin Y(1), Chatterjee A(2), Chandra PK(2), Chava S(2), Chen W(2), Tandon A(2),
Dash A(2), Chedid M(2), Moehlen MW(1), Regenstein F(1), Balart LA(1), Cohen A(3),
Lu H(4), Wu T(2), Dash S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Tulane
University Health Sciences Center New Orleans LA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Tulane University Health
Sciences Center New Orleans LA.
(3)Liver Transplant Surgery Section Ochsner Medical Center New Orleans LA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry Tulane University Health Sciences Center New
Orleans LA.

The mechanism why hepatitis C virus (HCV) clearance by direct-acting antivirals
(DAAs) does not eliminate the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) among
patients with advanced cirrhosis is unclear. Many viral and bacterial infections 
degrade p53 in favor of cell survival to adapt an endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-stress response. In this study, we examined whether HCV clearance by
interferon-alpha or DAAs normalizes the ER stress and restores the expression of 
p53 tumor suppressor in cell culture. We found that HCV infection induces chronic
ER stress and unfolded protein response in untransformed primary human
hepatocytes. The unfolded protein response induces chaperone-mediated autophagy
(CMA) in infected primary human hepatocytes and Huh-7.5 cells that results in
degradation of p53 and induced expression of mouse double minute 2 (Mdm2).
Inhibition of p53/Mdm2 interactions by small molecule (nutlin-3) or silencing
Mdm2 did not rescue the p53 degradation, indicating that HCV infection induces
degradation of p53 independent of the Mdm2 pathway. Interestingly, we found that 
HCV infection degrades p53 in a lysosome-dependent mechanism because
lysosome-associated membrane protein 2A silencing restored p53 degradation. Our
results show that HCV clearance induced by interferon-alpha-based antiviral
therapies normalizes the ER-stress response and restores p53, whereas HCV
clearance by DAAs does neither. We show that decreased expression of p53 in
HCV-infected cirrhotic liver is associated with expression of chaperones
associated with ER stress and the CMA response. Conclusion: HCV-induced ER stress
and CMA promote p53 degradation in advanced liver cirrhosis. HCV clearance by
DAAs does not restore p53, which provides a potential explanation for why a viral
cure by DAAs does not eliminate the HCC risk among patients with advanced liver
disease. We propose that resolving the ER-stress response is an alternative
approach to reducing HCC risk among patients with cirrhosis after viral cure.
(Hepatology Communications 2017;1:256-269).

DOI: 10.1002/hep4.1025 
PMCID: PMC5721446
PMID: 29404458 

