
1. Epidemiol Infect. 2018 Apr;146(5):612-618. doi: 10.1017/S0950268818000250. Epub
2018 Feb 21.

A prospective study of women with ASCUS or LSIL pap smears at baseline and HPV
E6/E7 mRNA positive: a 3-year follow-up.

Bruno MT(1), Ferrara M(1), Fava V(1), Barrasso G(1), Panella MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery and Medical Surgical Specialties, Gynecological 
Clinic of the Policlinico universitario, via s.sofia 78, 95124, Catania, Italy.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) testing is used in the triage of women with a
borderline smear result. The efficiency of testing women with a low-grade
squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) and atypical squamous cells of
undetermined significance (ASCUS) is less clear. For this reason we used a new
HPV test that detects E6/E7 messenger RNA (mRNA), which might have a higher
specificity. The objective of this prospective study was to assess whether HPV
E6/E7 mRNA positivity in women with ASCUS and LSIL at baseline, is able to
predict those women who have a high risk of developing a histological cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN2) or worse lesion. We took into consideration the 
women's age and HPV DNA genotype and followed them up for 3 years. Cervical
samples from women with high-risk HPV (HR-HPV) DNA-positive ASCUS (n = 90) or
LSIL (n = 222) were tested for the presence of HR-HPV E6/E7 mRNA and the women
were monitored for the development of histopathologically verified CIN2+.
Thirteen patients with ASCUS and 17 with LSIL did not complete follow-up. All
patients with LSIL and ASCUS, enrolled in this study, had confirmed lesions at
the colposcopic examination. Follow-up was available for 312 women, 193 were
positive in the HR-HPV DNA test and 93 had a HPV E6/E7 mRNA positive test.
Finally, 22 women positive in the HPV DNA test for high-risk genotypes and with
positive E6/E7 mRNA had a histologically confirmed CIN2+. Only two cases with
negative HPV E6/E7 mRNA had CIN2+. The study shows that women positive in the HPV
E6/E7 mRNA test have a greater risk of malignant progression of cervical lesions 
and therefore deserve greater attention and earlier check-ups.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268818000250 
PMID: 29465024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

