
1. Viruses. 2018 Feb 23;10(2). pii: E90. doi: 10.3390/v10020090.

Oncotargeting by Vesicular Stomatitis Virus (VSV): Advances in Cancer Therapy.

Bishnoi S(1), Tiwari R(2), Gupta S(3), Byrareddy SN(4), Nayak D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology Indore, Indore, MP 453 552, India. phd1501171015@iiti.ac.in.
(2)Discipline of Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology Indore, Indore, MP 453 552, India. phd1501171001@iiti.ac.in.
(3)Discipline of Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology Indore, Indore, MP 453 552, India. shgupta@iiti.ac.in.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neurosciences, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68130, USA. sid.byrareddy@unmc.edu.
(5)Discipline of Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology Indore, Indore, MP 453 552, India. nayakdn@iiti.ac.in.

Modern oncotherapy approaches are based on inducing controlled apoptosis in tumor
cells. Although a number of apoptosis-induction approaches are available,
site-specific delivery of therapeutic agents still remain the biggest hurdle in
achieving the desired cancer treatment benefit. Additionally, systemic
treatment-induced toxicity remains a major limiting factor in chemotherapy. To
specifically address drug-accessibility and chemotherapy side effects, oncolytic 
virotherapy (OV) has emerged as a novel cancer treatment alternative. In OV,
recombinant viruses with higher replication capacity and stronger lytic
properties are being considered for tumor cell-targeting and subsequent cell
lysing. Successful application of OVs lies in achieving strict tumor-specific
tropism called oncotropism, which is contingent upon the biophysical interactions
of tumor cell surface receptors with viral receptors and subsequent replication
of oncolytic viruses in cancer cells. In this direction, few viral vector
platforms have been developed and some of these have entered
pre-clinical/clinical trials. Among these, the Vesicular stomatitis virus
(VSV)-based platform shows high promise, as it is not pathogenic to humans.
Further, modern molecular biology techniques such as reverse genetics tools have 
favorably advanced this field by creating efficient recombinant VSVs for OV; some
have entered into clinical trials. In this review, we discuss the current status 
of VSV based oncotherapy, challenges, and future perspectives regarding its
therapeutic applications in the cancer treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/v10020090 
PMCID: PMC5850397
PMID: 29473868  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

