
1. BMJ Case Rep. 2018 Mar 5;2018. pii: bcr-2017-223670. doi:
10.1136/bcr-2017-223670.

Methylprednisolone-induced acute liver injury in a patient treated for multiple
sclerosis relapse.

Bresteau C(1), Prevot S(2), Perlemuter G(1), Voican C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepato Gastroenterology and Nutirtion, Hopital Antoine-Beclere, 
Clamart, France.
(2)Department of Pathology, Hopital Antoine-Beclere, Clamart, France.

Drug-induced liver injury is the fourth most common cause of liver disease in
industrialised countries. Methylprednisolone is often considered to be a
treatment with a low hepatotoxicity. We report a case of
methylprednisolone-induced liver injury in a 35-year-old woman. She was admitted 
to our department for acute liver injury 2 months after a treatment with high
dose of methylprednisolone (1 g/day) for a multiple sclerosis relapse. No other
cause of liver injury could be found (screening for hepatotropic viruses,
autoimmune antibodies, ceruloplasmin, abdominal ultrasonography and liver
biopsy). Liver function tests spontaneously improved and returned to normal range
within 6 weeks. We also performed a brief review of the literature and identified
12 other cases of methylprednisolone-induced liver injury in patients treated for
multiple sclerosis relapse. An immune rebound phenomenon could be responsible for
rare but true hepatotoxicity of high-dose methylprednisolone therapy.

© BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (unless otherwise stated in the text of the article)
2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise
expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2017-223670 
PMCID: PMC5847962
PMID: 29507031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Clement Bresteau: none
declared. Sophie Prevot: none declared. Gabriel Perlemuter: reimbursement for
conferences from Abbvie, Gilead, Janssen and Servier; speaking and consulting
fees from Biocodex, Gilead, Pilèje and Servier; royalties from Elsevier/Masson,
John Libbey and Solar. Cosmin Voican: reimbursement for conferences from Gilead, 
Biocodex, Aptalis Pharma, Abbvie and Janssen; speaking fees from Gilead. .

