
1. Virology. 2018 May;518:232-240. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2018.03.008. Epub 2018 Mar
15.

Evidence for a novel negative-stranded RNA mycovirus isolated from the plant
pathogenic fungus Fusarium graminearum.

Wang L(1), He H(1), Wang S(1), Chen X(1), Qiu D(1), Kondo H(2), Guo L(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Disease and Insect Pests, Institute 
of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100193,
China.
(2)Institute of Plant Science and Resources (IPSR), Okayama University,
Kurashiki, Okayama 710-0046, Japan. Electronic address:
hkondo@rib.okayama.u-ac.jp.
(3)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Disease and Insect Pests, Institute 
of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100193,
China. Electronic address: guolihua72@yahoo.com.

Here we describe a novel (-)ssRNA mycovirus, Fusarium graminearum
negative-stranded RNA virus 1 (FgNSRV-1), isolated from Fusarium graminearum
strain HN1. The genome of FgNSRV-1 is 9072 nucleotides in length, with five
discontinuous but linear ORFs (ORF I-V). Phylogenetic analysis based on entire L 
polymerase sequences indicated that FgNSRV-1 is related to the (-)ssRNA mycovirus
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum negative-stranded RNA virus 1 (SsNSRV-1), and other
mycoviruses. Our data suggest that FgNSRV-1 can be classified into the family
Mymonaviridae, order Mononegavirales. Putative enveloped virion-like structures
with filamentous morphology similar to SsNSRV-1 were observed in virion
preparation samples. The L proteins of FgNSRV-1, and other fungal
mononegaviruses, were found to be related to L protein-like sequences in some
fungal genome, supporting the hypothesis that there is coevolution occurring
between mycoviruses and fungi. Besides, clearing the virus from the infected host
fungus resulted in no discernable phenotypic change.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2018.03.008 
PMID: 29549785  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

