
1. J Virol. 2018 May 14;92(11). pii: e00114-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00114-18. Print
2018 Jun 1.

Activation and Induction of Antigen-Specific T Follicular Helper Cells Play a
Critical Role in Live-Attenuated Influenza Vaccine-Induced Human Mucosal
Anti-influenza Antibody Response.

Aljurayyan A(1), Puksuriwong S(1), Ahmed M(1), Sharma R(2), Krishnan M(2), Sood
S(2), Davies K(3), Rajashekar D(3), Leong S(4), McNamara PS(5), Gordon S(6),
Zhang Q(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Infection, Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(2)ENT Department, Alder Hey Children's Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(3)ENT Department, Royal Liverpool and Broadgreen University Hospitals,
Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(4)ENT Department, Aintree University Hospital of Liverpool, Liverpool, United
Kingdom.
(5)Institute in the Park, Alder Hey Children's Hospital, Liverpool, United
Kingdom.
(6)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Clinical Infection, Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom
Qibo.Zhang@liv.ac.uk.

There is increasing interest recently in developing intranasal vaccines against
respiratory tract infections. The antibody response is critical for
vaccine-induced protection, and T follicular helper cells (TFH) are considered
important for mediating the antibody response. Most data supporting the role for 
TFH in the antibody response are from animal studies, and direct evidence from
humans is limited, apart from the presence of TFH-like cells in blood. We studied
the activation and induction of TFH and their role in the anti-influenza antibody
response induced by a live-attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV) in human
nasopharynx-associated lymphoid tissue (NALT). TFH activation in adenotonsillar
tissues was analyzed by flow cytometry, and anti-hemagglutinin (anti-HA)
antibodies were examined following LAIV stimulation of tonsillar mononuclear
cells (MNC). Induction of antigen-specific TFH by LAIV was studied by flow
cytometry analysis of induced TFH and CD154 expression. LAIV induced TFH
proliferation, which correlated with anti-HA antibody production, and TFH were
shown to be critical for the antibody response. Induction of TFH from naive T
cells by LAIV was shown in newly induced TFH expressing BCL6 and CD21, followed
by the detection of anti-HA antibodies. Antigen specificity of LAIV-induced TFH
was demonstrated by expression of the antigen-specific T cell activation marker
CD154 upon challenge by H1N1 virus antigen or HA. LAIV-induced TFH
differentiation was inhibited by BCL6, interleukin-21 (IL-21), ICOS, and CD40
signaling blocking, and that diminished anti-HA antibody production. In
conclusion, we demonstrated the induction by LAIV of antigen-specific TFH in
human NALT that provide critical support for the anti-influenza antibody
response. Promoting antigen-specific TFH in NALT by use of intranasal vaccines
may provide an effective vaccination strategy against respiratory infections in
humans.IMPORTANCE Airway infections, such as influenza, are common in humans.
Intranasal vaccination has been considered a biologically relevant and effective 
way of immunization against airway infection. The vaccine-induced antibody
response is crucial for protection against infection. Recent data from animal
studies suggest that one type of T cells, TFH, are important for the antibody
response. However, data on whether TFH-mediated help for antibody production
operates in humans are limited due to the lack of access to human immune tissue
containing TFH In this study, we demonstrate the induction of TFH in human immune
tissue, providing critical support for the anti-influenza antibody response, by
use of an intranasal influenza vaccine. Our findings provide direct evidence that
TFH play a critical role in vaccine-induced immunity in humans and suggest a
novel strategy for promoting such cells by use of intranasal vaccines against
respiratory infections.

Copyright Â© 2018 Aljurayyan et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00114-18 
PMCID: PMC5952133
PMID: 29563292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

