
1. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2018 Mar;164(5):636-640. doi: 10.1007/s10517-018-4048-3. Epub 
2018 Mar 26.

Signal Immune Reactions of Macrophages Differentiated from THP-1 Monocytes to
Infection with Pandemic H1N1PDM09 Virus and H5N2 and H9N2 Avian Influenza A
Virus.

Sokolova TM(1), Poloskov VV(2), Shuvalov AN(2), Rudneva IA(3), Timofeeva TA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Subdivision of D. I. Ivanovsky Research Institute of Virology, N. F. Gamaleya 
Research Center of Epidemiology and Microbiology, Ministry of Health of Russian
Federation, Moscow, Russia. tmsokolovavir@mail.ru.
(2)Department of Interferons, Laboratory of Physiology of Viruses, Moscow,
Russia.
(3)Subdivision of D. I. Ivanovsky Research Institute of Virology, N. F. Gamaleya 
Research Center of Epidemiology and Microbiology, Ministry of Health of Russian
Federation, Moscow, Russia.

In culture of THP-1 cells differentiated into macrophages with PMA (THP-PMA
macrophages) infected with influenza viruses of subtypes H1, H5 and H9, we
measured the expression of TLR7 and RIG1 receptor genes, sensors of viral RNA and
ribonucleoprotein, and the levels of production of inflammatory cytokines IL-1β, 
TNFα, IL-10, and IFNα. The sensitivity and inflammatory response of THP-PMA
macrophages to pandemic influenza A virus H1N1pdm09 and avian influenza H5N2 and 
H9N2 viruses correlate with the intracellular level of their viral RNA and
activation of the RIG1 gene. Abortive infection is accompanied by intensive
macrophage secretion of TNFα, IL-1β, and toxic factors inducing cell death.
Activity of endosomal TLR7 receptor gene changed insignificantly in 24 h after
infection and significantly decreased in 48 and 72 h under the action of H5N2 and
H9N2, which correlated with manifestation of the cytopathogenic effect of these
viruses. H5N2 and H9N2 avian viruses in THP-PMA macrophages are strong activators
of the expression of the gene of the cytoplasmic RIG1 receptor 24 and 48 h after 
infection, and the pandemic virus H1N1pdm09 is a weak stimulator of RIG1 gene.
Avian influenza H5N2 and H9N2 viruses are released by rapid induction of the
inflammatory response in macrophages. At the late stages of infection, we
observed a minor increase in IL-10 secretion in macrophages and, probably, the
polarization of a part of the population in type M2. The studied influenza A
viruses are weak inductors of IFN in THP-PMA macrophages. In the culture medium
of THP-PMA macrophages infected with H9N2 and H5N2 viruses, MTT test revealed
high levels of toxic factors causing the death of Caco-2 cells. In contrast to
avian viruses, pandemic virus H1N1pdm09 did not induce production of toxic
factors.

DOI: 10.1007/s10517-018-4048-3 
PMID: 29577197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

