
1. Lasers Med Sci. 2018 Aug;33(6):1327-1333. doi: 10.1007/s10103-018-2485-x. Epub
2018 Apr 3.

Application of wavelet analysis to detect dysfunction in cerebral blood flow
autoregulation during experimental hyperhomocysteinaemia.

Aleksandrin VV(1), Ivanov AV(2), Virus ED(2), Bulgakova PO(2), Kubatiev AA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Pathophysiology, Federal State Budgetary
Scientific Institution "Institute of General Pathology and Pathophysiology",
Moscow, Russia. aleksandrin-54@mail.ru.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Pathophysiology, Federal State Budgetary
Scientific Institution "Institute of General Pathology and Pathophysiology",
Moscow, Russia.

The purpose of the present study was to investigate the use of laser Doppler
flowmetry (LDF) signals coupled with spectral wavelet analysis to detect
endothelial link dysfunction in the autoregulation of cerebral blood flow in the 
setting of hyperhomocysteinaemia (HHcy). Fifty-one rats were assigned to three
groups (intact, control, and HHcy) according to the results of biochemical assays
of homocysteine level in blood plasma. LDF signals on the rat brain were recorded
by LAKK-02 device to measure the microcirculatory blood flow. The laser operating
wavelength and output power density were1064 nm and 0.051 W/mm2, respectively. A 
Morlet mother wavelet transform was applied to the measured 8-min LDF signals,
and periodic oscillations with five frequency intervals were identified
(0.01-0.04 Hz, 0.04-0.15 Hz, 0.15-0.4 Hz, 0.4-2 Hz, and 2-5 Hz) corresponding to 
endothelial, neurogenic, myogenic, respiratory, and cardiac origins,
respectively. In initial state, the amplitude of the oscillations decreased by
38% (P < 0.05) in the endothelial range in HHcy rats than in control rats.
Cerebral autoregulation was challenged by hemorrhagic hypotension. The lower
limit of autoregulation raised in a rat model of chronic HHcy (71.5 ± 0.7 mmHg in
HHcy vs. 62.3 ± 0.5 mmHg in control). The data obtained indicate that the laser
Doppler method and wavelet analysis may be successfully applied to detect the
dysfunction of the endothelial link in cerebral vessel tone and to reveal the
pathological shift of lower limit of autoregulation.

DOI: 10.1007/s10103-018-2485-x 
PMID: 29611066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

