
1. J Environ Qual. 2018 Mar;47(1):336-344. doi: 10.2134/jeq2017.07.0285.

Fate of Manure-Borne Pathogens during Anaerobic Digestion and Solids Separation.

Burch TR, Spencer SK, Borchardt SS, Larson RA, Borchardt MA.

Anaerobic digestion can inactivate zoonotic pathogens present in cattle manure,
which reduces transmission of these pathogens from farms to humans through the
environment. However, the variability of inactivation across farms and over time 
is unknown because most studies have examined pathogen inactivation under ideal
laboratory conditions or have focused on only one or two full-scale digesters at 
a time. In contrast, we sampled seven full-scale digesters treating cattle manure
in Wisconsin for 9 mo on a biweekly basis ( = 118 pairs of influent and effluent 
samples) and used real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction to analyze
these samples for 19 different microbial genetic markers. Overall, inactivation
of pathogens and fecal indicators was highly variable. When aggregated across
digester and season, log-removal values for several representative
microorganisms-bovine , -like CowM3, and bovine polyomavirus-were 0.78 ± 0.34,
0.70 ± 0.50, and 0.53 ± 0.58, respectively (mean ± SD). These log-removal values 
were up to two times lower than expected based on the scientific literature.
Thus, our study indicates that full-scale anaerobic digestion of cattle manure
requires optimization with regard to pathogen inactivation. Future studies should
focus on identifying the potential causes of this suboptimal performance (e.g.,
overloading, poor mixing, poor temperature control). Our study also examined the 
fate of pathogens during manure separation and found that the majority of
microbes we detected ended up in the liquid fraction of separated manure. This
finding has important implications for the transmission of zoonotic pathogens
through the environment to humans.

Copyright © by the American Society of Agronomy, Crop Science Society of America,
and Soil Science Society of America, Inc.

DOI: 10.2134/jeq2017.07.0285 
PMCID: PMC7166490
PMID: 29634802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

