
1. Virology. 2018 May;518:423-433. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2018.03.010. Epub 2018 Apr
9.

A giant virus infecting green algae encodes key fermentation genes.

Schvarcz CR(1), Steward GF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oceanography, Daniel K. Inouye Center for Microbial
Oceanography: Research and Education, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, 1950
East-West Road, Honolulu, HI 96822, United States.
(2)Department of Oceanography, Daniel K. Inouye Center for Microbial
Oceanography: Research and Education, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, 1950
East-West Road, Honolulu, HI 96822, United States. Electronic address:
grieg@hawaii.edu.

The family Mimiviridae contains uncommonly large viruses, many of which were
isolated using a free-living amoeba as a host. Although the genomes of these and 
other mimivirids that infect marine heterokont and haptophyte protists have now
been sequenced, there has yet to be a genomic investigation of a mimivirid that
infects a member of the Viridiplantae lineage (green algae and land plants). Here
we characterize the 668-kilobase complete genome of TetV-1, a mimivirid that
infects the cosmopolitan green alga Tetraselmis (Chlorodendrophyceae). The
analysis revealed genes not previously seen in viruses, such as the mannitol
metabolism enzyme mannitol 1-phosphate dehydrogenase, the saccharide degradation 
enzyme alpha-galactosidase, and the key fermentation genes pyruvate formate-lyase
and pyruvate formate-lyase activating enzyme. The TetV genome is the largest
sequenced to date for a virus that infects a photosynthetic organism, and its
genes reveal unprecedented mechanisms by which viruses manipulate their host's
metabolism.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2018.03.010 
PMID: 29649682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

