
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2018 Jun;200:40-51. doi: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2018.04.006. 
Epub 2018 Apr 10.

Nasal delivery of chitosan/alginate nanoparticle encapsulated bee (Apis
mellifera) venom promotes antibody production and viral clearance during porcine 
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus infection by modulating T cell
related responses.

Lee J(1), Kim YM(1), Kim JH(2), Cho CW(2), Jeon JW(3), Park JK(3), Lee SH(4),
Jung BG(5), Lee BJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Infectious Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.
(2)College of Pharmacy and Institute of Drug Research & Development, Chungnam
National University, Daejeon 305-764, Republic of Korea.
(3)Wissen Co., Ltd, #410 Bio Venture Town, 461-8, Daejeon 305-811, Republic of
Korea.
(4)Department of Veterinary Obstetrics, College of Veterinary Medicine, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Pulmonary Immunology, Center for Pulmonary and Infectious
Diseases Control, University of Texas Health Science Center at Tyler, TX
75708-3154, USA.
(6)Department of Veterinary Infectious Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: bjlee@chonnam.ac.kr.

In this study, we administered specially developed chitosan/alginate nanoparticle
encapsulated BV (CH/AL-BV) which has slow-releasing properties and mucosal
adhesiveness to pig via nasal route and evaluate whether it can facilitate
systemic immune response and improve clearance of porcine reproductive and
respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV). The CH/AL-BV-administered group with PRRSV
vaccination showed significantly enhanced Th1-related responses including a high 
population of CD4+ T lymphocyte and cytokine mRNA levels including
interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) and interleukin (IL)-12 and increased PRRSV-specific IgG
levels. In the PRRSV challenge experiment, the CH/AL-BV group showed a
significant decrease of viral burden in the sera and tissues (lung and bronchial 
lymph node) and mild interstitial pneumonia signs on both lung gross examination 
and microscopic evaluation with high levels of PRRSV-specific IgG and viral
neutralizing antibody. CH/AL-BV also effectively induced not only Th1-related
immune responses including increase in portion of CD4+ T lymphocyte, cytokines
(IFN-γ and IL-12), and transcriptional factors (STAT4 and T-bet), but also
stimulated IFN-γ-secreting cell families such as CD4+ T lymphocytes and Th/memory
cells. Interestingly, the CH/AL-BV group showed decrease in PRRSV-specific
immune-suppressive actions, including the T regulatory cell population and its
related cytokines (IL-10 and TGF-β) and transcriptional factors (STAT5 and
Foxp3). Therefore, nasal-delivered CH/AL-BV may effectively induce non-specific
immune stimulating actions, particularly those related to Th1 responses and viral
clearance activities against PRRSV infection. Based on these results, CH/AL-BV
could be a promising strategy for overcoming the disadvantages of classical PRRSV
vaccination and can be applied as a preventive agent against PRRSV and other
viral diseases, particularly those with immune-suppressive characteristics.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2018.04.006 
PMID: 29776611  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

