
1. J Virol. 1985 Mar;53(3):751-60.

Evidence for a direct role for both the 175,000- and 110,000-molecular-weight
immediate-early proteins of herpes simplex virus in the transactivation of
delayed-early promoters.

O'Hare P, Hayward GS.

We reconstructed the regulated induction of delayed-early (DE) transcription that
occurs during herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection by using a transient
expression system in which recombinant target genes were cotransfected into Vero 
cells together with intact activating genes. Plasmids containing cloned HSV-1 or 
HSV-2 immediate-early (IE) genes stimulated by up to 100-fold the expression from
recombinant constructs containing the bacterial chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
(CAT) gene under the control of the DE promoter/regulatory region from the genes 
for an HSV-2 38,000-molecular-weight (38K) protein and the HSV-1 thymidine
kinase. This activation was specific to hybrid genes containing DE regulatory
regions since no significant increases in expression were observed in
cotransfection experiments with the CAT gene without any promoter region or under
the control of a number of other regulatory regions, including an HSV-1 IE
regulatory region, the complete or enhancerless early regulatory region of simian
virus 40, and an inducible cellular promoter/regulatory region. By using a
variety of cotransfected plasmids containing individual or different combinations
of HSV-1 or HSV-2 IE genes, we show that of the five known IE genes, two, those
coding for the 175K and 110K polypeptides, each possessed the ability to
stimulate expression from both DE promoters. Cleavage of the input plasmids
within the known coding regions for the 175K and 110K proteins abolished
stimulation of DE/CAT gene expression, whereas cleavage outside the coding
regions had no effect on stimulation. We conclude that stimulation of CAT
expression occurred exclusively by a transactivation mechanism in which the
products encoded by these IE genes acted on the DE hybrid constructs at the
transcription level. No transcriptional stimulatory function was demonstrated for
the IE 68K and 63K proteins, although our results indicate that the IE 12K
protein may augment the DE stimulatory activity of the 175K and 110K proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.53.3.751-760.1985 
PMCID: PMC254703
PMID: 2983086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

