
1. Immunity. 2018 Jun 19;48(6):1172-1182.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2018.04.018. Epub
2018 May 29.

Transcription Factor IRF8 Orchestrates the Adaptive Natural Killer Cell Response.

Adams NM(1), Lau CM(2), Fan X(2), Rapp M(2), Geary CD(2), Weizman OE(2),
Diaz-Salazar C(2), Sun JC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065, USA; Louis V. Gerstner Jr. Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(2)Immunology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065, USA.
(3)Immunology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065, USA; Louis V. Gerstner Jr. Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Department of
Immunology and Microbial Pathogenesis, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York,
NY 10065, USA. Electronic address: sunj@mskcc.org.

Natural killer (NK) cells are innate lymphocytes that display features of
adaptive immunity during viral infection. Biallelic mutations in IRF8 have been
reported to cause familial NK cell deficiency and susceptibility to severe viral 
infection in humans; however, the precise role of this transcription factor in
regulating NK cell function remains unknown. Here, we show that cell-intrinsic
IRF8 was required for NK-cell-mediated protection against mouse cytomegalovirus
infection. During viral exposure, NK cells upregulated IRF8 through
interleukin-12 (IL-12) signaling and the transcription factor STAT4, which
promoted epigenetic remodeling of the Irf8 locus. Moreover, IRF8 facilitated the 
proliferative burst of virus-specific NK cells by promoting expression of
cell-cycle genes and directly controlling Zbtb32, a master regulator of
virus-driven NK cell proliferation. These findings identify the function and
cell-type-specific regulation of IRF8 in NK-cell-mediated antiviral immunity and 
provide a mechanistic understanding of viral susceptibility in patients with IRF8
mutations.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2018.04.018 
PMCID: PMC6233715
PMID: 29858012  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

