
1. NPJ Vaccines. 2018 Jun 11;3:24. doi: 10.1038/s41541-018-0061-9. eCollection 2018.

Current status of Zika vaccine development: Zika vaccines advance into clinical
evaluation.

Barrett ADT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sealy Institute for Vaccine Sciences and Department of Pathology, University
of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555-0436 USA.

Zika virus (ZIKV), a mosquito-borne flavivirus, was first identified in the 1940s
in Uganda in Africa and emerged in the Americas in Brazil in May 2015. In the 30 
months since ZIKV emerged as a major public health problem, spectacular progress 
has been made with vaccine development cumulating with the publication of three
reports of phase 1 clinical trials in the 4th quarter of 2017. Clinical trials
involving candidate DNA and purified inactivated virus vaccines showed all were
safe and well-tolerated in the small number of volunteers and all induced
neutralizing antibodies, although these varied by vaccine candidate and dosing
regimen. These results suggest that a Zika vaccine can be developed and that
phase 2 clinical trials are warranted. However, it is difficult to compare the
results from the different phase 1 studies or with neutralizing antibodies
induced by licensed flavivirus vaccines (Japanese encephalitis, tick-borne
encephalitis, and yellow fever) as neutralizing antibody assays vary and,
unfortunately, there are no standards for Zika virus neutralizing antibodies. In 
addition to clinical studies, substantial progress continues to be made in
nonclinical development, particularly in terms of the ability of candidate
vaccines to protect reproductive tissues, and the potential use of monoclonal
antibodies for passive prophylaxis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41541-018-0061-9 
PMCID: PMC5995964
PMID: 29900012 

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no competing interests.

