
1. J Manag Care Spec Pharm. 2018 Jul;24(7):664-676. doi:
10.18553/jmcp.2018.24.7.664.

Sustained Virologic Response and Costs Associated with Direct-Acting Antivirals
for Chronic Hepatitis C Infection in Oklahoma Medicaid.

Pham TT(1), Keast SL(1), Farmer KC(1), Thompson DM(2), Rathbun RC(1), Nesser
NJ(3), Holderread BP(1), Skrepnek GH(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 University of Oklahoma College of Pharmacy, Oklahoma City.
(2)2 University of Oklahoma College of Public Health, Oklahoma City.
(3)3 Oklahoma Health Care Authority, Oklahoma City.

BACKGROUND: Outcomes involving newer direct-acting antiviral (DAA) hepatitis C
virus (HCV) regimens have not been studied extensively among the Medicaid
population.
OBJECTIVE: To assess clinical (treatment failure) and economic outcomes for
chronic HCV-infected Oklahoma Medicaid members following treatment with DAAs and 
to measure associations with patient, treatment, and clinical characteristics.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study used Oklahoma Medicaid pharmacy and medical
claims data for adult members who used a newer DAA agent and had reported a
successful or failed sustained virological response rate 12 weeks after therapy
completion (SVR12) from January 1, 2014, to June 30, 2016. Multivariable logistic
and gamma regressions assessed predictors of SVR12 failure and costs controlling 
for member demographics (i.e., age, sex, race, rural residence); type of DAA and 
adherence; clinical characteristics (e.g., comorbid conditions, advanced liver
disease); and the implementation of changes to a prior authorization program.
RESULTS: Of 934 Medicaid members eligible for treatment with DAAs between January
1, 2014, and June 30, 2016, 906 received DAA treatment, 40.6% (368/906) had
reported SVR12 outcomes, and 59.4% (n = 538) did not have a reported SVR
recorded. Of those with reported SVR12 outcomes, patients were 53.1 ± 9.7 years
of age, 51.1% were male, 8.4% had SVR12 failure, and each member had mean costs
of $140,283 ± $52,779. Multivariable analyses indicated higher odds of SVR12
failure was independently associated with cirrhosis (OR [decompensated] = 6.69
and OR [compensated] = 3.52, P < 0.001), while males had higher odds of failure
than females (OR = 3.34, P < 0.010). No significant difference in SVR12 failure
was noted, according to DAA type or a medication adherence threshold of > 95%.
Ledipasvir/sofosbuvir was independently associated with lower costs (exp[b] =
0.81; P < 0.001) compared with sofosbuvir, while higher costs were associated
with decompensated cirrhosis (exp[b] = 1.22; P < 0.001) and treatment failure
(exp[b] = 1.18, P < 0.010). In an analysis including members without reported
SVR12 outcomes, decompensated and compensated cirrhosis had lower odds (P <
0.001) of no reported SVR12 from ambulatory clinic settings.
CONCLUSIONS: Almost 60% of Medicaid members receiving DAA treatment did not have 
a final reported SVR12 outcome. Among those with viral load measurements,
treatment success was high and both decompensated and compensated cirrhosis were 
independently associated with significantly higher odds of treatment failure.
Addressing a loss to follow-up among HCV patients and curtailing the development 
of cirrhosis to improve treatment success may warrant interventions that improve 
access to care and remove barriers that impede treatment initiation and
completion.
DISCLOSURES: No outside funding supported this study. Pham, Keast, Holderread,
Nesser, and Skrepnek disclose either employment by the Oklahoma Health Care
Authority or contractual work for this employer. Pham discloses fellowship
funding from Purdue Pharma unrelated to this study. Keast and Skrepnek disclose
research grant funding from Gilead Sciences and Abbvie. Holderread also reports
grant funding from Gilead Sciences and fees from PRIME Education. Thompson,
Farmer, and Rathbun have nothing to disclose.

DOI: 10.18553/jmcp.2018.24.7.664 
PMID: 29952711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

