
1. Immunol Invest. 2018 Oct;47(7):735-744. doi: 10.1080/08820139.2018.1489832. Epub 
2018 Jul 6.

Association between HLA class II alleles and hepatitis B virus infection in
Transylvania, Romania.

Matei HV(1)(2), Vica ML(1), Siserman CV(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Cell and Molecular Biology , 'Iuliu Haţieganu' University of
Medicine and Pharmacy , Cluj-Napoca , Romania.
(2)b Molecular Biology Laboratory , Legal Medicine Institute , Cluj-Napoca ,
Romania.
(3)c Department of Legal Medicine , 'Iuliu Haţieganu' University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy , Cluj-Napoca , Romania.

Infection with hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a major problem worldwide. The major
histocompatibility complex plays an essential role in host immunity and can help 
eliminate the HBV of infected hepatocytes. Our study aimed to determine the role 
of certain human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II molecules (i.e. HLA-DRB1 and
HLA-DQB1) in the persistence or removal of HBV. Sixty patients confirmed to be
HBV-positive via real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR), i.e. people with
chronic active hepatitis, were included in the study along with a control group
of 100 healthy individuals without evidence of HBV infection. The DNA was
subsequently used to determine HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQB1 low-resolution typing
genetic profile via PCR amplification. The univariate analysis performed revealed
significant association of the HLA-DRB1*03 and HLA-DQB1*05 alleles to the
infected persons (study group), while HLA-DRB1*01 was shown to be protective
against HBV infection. To our knowledge, this is the first Romanian study
associating HLA with HBV, and it can provide valuable insight concerning the
relationship between genetic factors and immune response in the sampled
population.

DOI: 10.1080/08820139.2018.1489832 
PMID: 29979894  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

