
1. J Law Med. 2018 Apr;25(3):707-726.

Who Are Indigenous and Local Communities and What Is Traditional Knowledge for
Virus Access and Benefit-sharing? A Textual Analysis of the Convention on
Biological Diversity and Its Nagoya Protocol.

Rourke MF(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Griffith Law School, Griffith University, Gold Coast Queensland.
(2)Australian Defence Force Malaria and Infectious Disease Institute, Gallipoli
Barracks, Enoggera Queensland.

The United Nations' Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) (CBD) has become
the focal point for the regulation of traditional knowledge (TK) held by
indigenous and local communities (ILCs). The legally binding CBD is bolstered by 
a supplementary, non-binding agreement, The Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic 
Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their
Utilization (2010) (Nagoya Protocol). Both instruments create the conditions for 
the access and benefit-sharing (ABS) of genetic resources, and for TK associated 
with those resources. There has been no consideration as to how TK might factor
into virus ABS arrangements. Most of the literature on these issues relates to
how the TK provisions of the CBD and Nagoya Protocol should be implemented; there
is little guidance as to how to interpret the text itself. This article provides 
a textual analysis of all provisions of the CBD and Nagoya Protocol that relate
to TK and the interests of ILCs. The analysis clarifies the differences in scope 
between the two instruments and will provide some insights as to how to interpret
key terms, particularly indigenous and local communities, traditional knowledge
and traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources. This is critical to 
understanding the obligations that apply to accessing virus samples that are
regulated as genetic resources under the CBD.


PMID: 29978663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

