
1. J Virol. 1986 Mar;57(3):1023-36.

Characterization of the genes encoding herpes simplex virus type 1 and type 2
alkaline exonucleases and overlapping proteins.

Draper KG, Devi-Rao G, Costa RH, Blair ED, Thompson RL, Wagner EK.

A detailed sequence analysis of the herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) and HSV-2
DNA encoding the alkaline exonuclease mRNA clusters has been completed. Three
partially colinear mRNAs (2.3, 1.9, and 0.9 kilobases) are completely encoded
within the DNA sequence presented. The putative promoter regions of the
transcripts were inserted upstream of a plasmid-borne chloramphenicol acetyl
transferase (CAT) gene and assayed for their ability to induce transcription of
the CAT gene upon low multiplicity of infection with HSV in transient expression 
assays. We conclude that the expression of all three transcripts appear to be
controlled by individual promoters. The 2.3-kilobase mRNA contains an open
translational reading frame sufficient to encode 626 amino acids for the HSV-1
alkaline exonuclease enzyme; this value is 620 amino acids for HSV-2. A
comparison of the predicted amino acid sequences of the HSV-1 and HSV-2 alkaline 
exonuclease enzymes revealed significant amino acid differences in the N-terminal
portions of the two proteins; however, computer analyses suggest that the
three-dimensional structures of the HSV-1 and HSV-2 nuclease enzymes are very
similar. The 0.9-kilobase mRNA contains an open reading frame which shares a
small amount of out-of-phase overlap with the C-terminal portion of the alkaline 
nuclease open reading frame. This open reading frame has the capacity to encode a
96-amino-acid polypeptide (10,500 daltons).

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.57.3.1023-1036.1986 
PMCID: PMC252836
PMID: 3005609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

