
1. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc. 2019 Jan 5;206:197-201. doi:
10.1016/j.saa.2018.08.008. Epub 2018 Aug 6.

Raman spectroscopy based differentiation of typhoid and dengue fever in infected 
human sera.

Naseer K(1), Amin A(1), Saleem M(2), Qazi J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(2)Agri. & Biophotonics Division, National Institute of Lasers and Optronics
(NILOP), Lehtrar Road, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
Electronic address: javariaq@yahoo.com.

This study investigated the potential of Raman spectroscopy, to differentiate
between two different types of human pathological conditions with some symptom
similarity; typhoid and dengue. Raman spectra were recorded from 20 Salmonella
Typhi infected and 22 dengue virus (DENV) infected sera samples using laser
wavelength 785 nm. When Raman spectrum (540 to 1830 cm-1) of serum samples was
compared it showed significant variations. Twelve characteristic Raman bands at
562, 649, 716, 780, 838, 1099, 1144, 1156, 1260, 1386, 1556 and 1746 cm-1 were
recorded specifically in case of the typhoid infected samples, whereas four Raman
bands at 756, 1218, 1672 and 1686 cm-1 were found specifically in the DENV
infected samples. For statistical differentiation principal component analysis
(PCA) and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) was applied which successfully
separated two sets of data. These disease specific Raman signatures may be
labeled as biomarkers for identification as well as differential diagnosis of
typhoid and dengue infection. Hence we propose that Raman spectroscopy has the
potential to not only identify but also to differentiate between different
pathological conditions, having some similar symptoms like high grade fever in
this case.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.saa.2018.08.008 
PMID: 30114579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

