
1. J Virol. 2018 Oct 29;92(22). pii: e01444-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01444-18. Print
2018 Nov 15.

Comparative In Vitro and In Vivo Analysis of H1N1 and H1N2 Variant Influenza
Viruses Isolated from Humans between 2011 and 2016.

Pulit-Penaloza JA(1), Pappas C(1), Belser JA(1), Sun X(1), Brock N(1), Zeng H(1),
Tumpey TM(1), Maines TR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Influenza Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Influenza Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA
tmaines@cdc.gov.

Influenza A virus pandemics are rare events caused by novel viruses which have
the ability to spread in susceptible human populations. With respect to H1
subtype viruses, swine H1N1 and H1N2 viruses occasionally cross the species
barrier to cause human infection. Recently isolated from humans (termed
variants), swine viruses were shown to display great genetic and antigenic
diversity, hence posing considerable public health risk. Here, we utilized in
vitro and in vivo approaches to provide characterization of H1 subtype variant
viruses isolated since the 2009 pandemic and discuss the findings in context with
previously studied H1 subtype human isolates. The variant viruses were well
adapted to replicate in the human respiratory cell line Calu-3 and the
respiratory tracts of mice and ferrets. However, with respect to hemagglutinin
(HA) activation pH, the variant viruses had fusion pH thresholds closer to that
of most classical swine and triple-reassortant H1 isolates rather than viruses
that had adapted to humans. Consistent with previous observations for swine
isolates, the tested variant viruses were capable of efficient transmission
between cohoused ferrets but could transmit via respiratory droplets to differing
degrees. Overall, this investigation demonstrates that swine H1 viruses that
infected humans possess adaptations required for robust replication and, in some 
cases, efficient respiratory droplet transmission in a mammalian model and
therefore need to be closely monitored for additional molecular changes that
could facilitate transmission among humans. This work highlights the need for
risk assessments of emerging H1 viruses as they continue to evolve and cause
human infections.IMPORTANCE Influenza A virus is a continuously evolving
respiratory pathogen. Endemic in swine, H1 and H3 subtype viruses sporadically
cause human infections. As each zoonotic infection represents an opportunity for 
human adaptation, the emergence of a transmissible influenza virus to which there
is little or no preexisting immunity is an ongoing threat to public health.
Recently isolated variant H1 subtype viruses were shown to display extensive
genetic diversity and in many instances were antigenically distinct from seasonal
vaccine strains. In this study, we provide characterization of representative
H1N1v and H1N2v viruses isolated since the 2009 pandemic. Our results show that
although recent variant H1 viruses possess some adaptation markers of concern,
these viruses have not fully adapted to humans and require further adaptation to 
present a pandemic threat. This investigation highlights the need for close
monitoring of emerging variant influenza viruses for molecular changes that could
facilitate efficient transmission among humans.

Copyright Â© 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01444-18 
PMCID: PMC6206486
PMID: 30158292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

