
1. J Viral Hepat. 2019 Jan;26(1):25-29. doi: 10.1111/jvh.12994. Epub 2018 Sep 27.

Screening haemodialysis patients for hepatitis C in Vietnam: The inconsistency
between common hepatitis C virus serological and virological tests.

Duong MC(1), McLaws ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health and Community Medicine, University of New South Wales,
Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Selecting the appropriate screening method and interval for the early detection
of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in low-resourced haemodialysis settings is a
challenge. The challenge occurs when patients are classified as HCV-RNA positive 
but negative to HCV-core antigen (HCV-coreAg), anti-HCV and genotyping tests. We 
aim to clarify the inconsistency between HCV-RNA, HCV-coreAg, anti-HCV and HCV
genotyping tests in haemodialysis patients and determine the reliability of
HCV-coreAg as a routine two-monthly screening strategy. Haemodialysis patients
were tested every 2 months between 2012 and 2014 at the largest district
haemodialysis unit in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, for aminotransferases, anti-HCV 
antibodies, HCV-coreAg, HCV-RNA and HCV genotype. HCV-coreAg and anti-HCV results
were tested against HCV-RNA for sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value (PPV), negative predictive value (NPV). All 201 patients participated in
the study. The HCV-coreAg test performed better than the anti-HCV test for
sensitivity (100% vs 31%), NPV (100% vs 90%) and accuracy (100% vs 90%). The
HCV-coreAg and anti-HCV tests performed no differently for specificity (100% and 
98%, respectively) or PPV (100% and 73%, respectively). Kappa values for
HCV-coreAg and anti-HCV tests were 1 and 0.39, respectively. Early detection of
HCV for the purpose of infection prevention requires a high level of sensitivity 
and HCV-coreAg performed better in our chronic haemodialysis population as a
two-monthly screening method than routine anti-HCV testing. HCV-coreAg test is
less labour-intensive with a higher level of accuracy in patients with low viral 
loads making it cost effective for low-resourced settings. Repeating genotyping
may be required in HCV-coreAg positive patients with a low viral load.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jvh.12994 
PMID: 30187621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

