
1. Comp Immunol Microbiol Infect Dis. 2018 Jun;58:31-35. doi:
10.1016/j.cimid.2018.08.001. Epub 2018 Aug 16.

Protein profile of FAdV-4 based on SDS-PAGE and Western blot isolated from
chickens in India.

Dhar P(1), Thakur A(2), Asrani RK(3), Katoch V(2), Sharma M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Dr. G. C. Negi College of Veterinary
and Animal Sciences, CSK HPKV, Palampur, 176062, Himachal Pradesh, India.
Electronic address: prasen727779@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Dr. G. C. Negi College of Veterinary
and Animal Sciences, CSK HPKV, Palampur, 176062, Himachal Pradesh, India.
(3)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Dr. G. C. Negi College of Veterinary and
Animal Sciences, CSK HPKV, Palampur, 176062, Himachal Pradesh, India.

Fowl adenovirus-4 (FAdV-4) causes hydropericardium syndrome (HPS) in poultry
worldwide. An understanding of viral structural protein composition is important 
for developing novel immunodiagnostics and immunoprophylactics. Here we report
isolation, culture, molecular and protein profile of FAdV-4 isolates recovered
from HPS outbreaks in chicken in the states of Himachal Pradesh and Tamil Nadu in
India. We performed a sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE) and Western blotting-based protein profiling of FAdV-4 isolates
against a reference FAdV-1 or Chicken Embryo Lethal Orphan (CELO) virus. SDS-PAGE
analysis showed that seven protein bands in FAdV-4 isolates were similar to CELO 
expect an additional band of 110 kDa in CELO virus. On Western blotting, two
protein fractions of 43 kDa and 78 kDa size were observed in FAdV-4 isolates.
Overall, results show that FAdV-4 isolates recovered from different regions of
the country had similar protein profile and possibly a common source of origin.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cimid.2018.08.001 
PMID: 30245048  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

