
1. J Fish Dis. 2018 Dec;41(12):1811-1819. doi: 10.1111/jfd.12890. Epub 2018 Sep 26.

Development of a VP38 recombinant protein-based indirect ELISA for detection of
antibodies against grass carp reovirus genotype II (iELISA for detection of
antibodies against GCRV II).

Zeng W(1), Wang Y(1), Guo Y(2), Bergmann SM(3), Yin J(1), Li Y(1), Ren Y(1), Shi 
C(1), Wang Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Fishery Drug Development, Ministry of Agriculture, Key
Laboratory of Aquatic Animal Immune Technology, Pearl River Fisheries Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(2)College of Medical Science and Technology, Heze University, Heze, China.
(3)FLI Insel Riems, Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.

Currently, serological assays for grass carp reovirus genotype II (GCRV-II)
diagnosis are not available. In this study, an indirect enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for the detection of antibodies against GCRV-II was
developed. The structural protein VP38 of GCRV-II was used as the coating
antigen. Monoclonal antibodies (mAb) against IgM of grass carp labelled with HRP 
were used as a secondary antibody. The antigen concentration and serum dilution
were optimized using chess board titration. Furthermore, the specificity of
indirect ELISA assay was confirmed by cross check with sera positive for other
grass carp pathogens. In comparison with results obtained from indirect
immunofluorescence assay (IFA) and Western blot by testing of 60 serum samples to
evaluate the sensitivity and specificity of the ELISA, agreement between 90% and 
96.7% was reached, respectively. A serological survey was performed using the
assay with grass carp field serum samples. The seropositive rate of the 242 serum
samples was 69.8%. In conclusion, the developed indirect ELISA is a very specific
and sensitive test that will be useful for large-scale serological surveys to
detect indirectly GCRV II infections as well as to monitor the changes of
antibody level after immunization.

Â© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.12890 
PMID: 30255607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

