
1. Virus Res. 1986 Nov;6(2):109-21.

Localization and characterization of Sendai virus nonstructural C and C' proteins
by antibodies against synthetic peptides.

Portner A, Gupta KC, Seyer JM, Beachey EH, Kingsbury DW.

Antibodies were raised in rabbits against two synthetic peptides, each 30
residues in length, one corresponding to the predicted common carboxyl termini of
the nonstructural C and C' proteins of Sendai virus and the other to the unique
amino terminus of the larger C protein. Each peptide was inoculated as a covalent
complex with tetanus toxoid or in uncomplexed form. Only antibodies to the free
carboxyl-terminal peptide precipitated both C and C' proteins made by in vitro
translation of viral mRNA and reacted with the C protein from infected cells.
These results confirm that the C and C' proteins are carboxyl-coterminal.
Contrasting with the reported colocalization of intracellular measles virus C
proteins with nucleocapsid inclusions, immunofluorescence studies revealed that
Sendai virus C proteins were uniformly distributed in the cytoplasm whereas the
viral P protein was present in inclusions that were mainly perinuclear. Since
almost all P protein molecules are associated with viral nucleocapsids, these
observations suggested that Sendai virus C protein molecules may be both
nucleocapsid-associated and free in the cytoplasm. This interpretation was
supported when the C and C' proteins were found in both nucleocapsid and free
protein fractions of cell lysates. Anti-C antibodies did not inhibit viral RNA
synthesis when added to an extract of infected cells. This result was consistent 
with the conclusion that the C proteins have no direct role in viral
transcription, since virions lack C proteins but are transcriptionally active.
Therefore, the functions of the C proteins remain undefined.

DOI: 10.1016/0168-1702(86)90043-2 
PMID: 3026113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

