
1. J Virol. 1987 Jun;61(6):2017-23.

Characteristics of the specific cell-mediated immune response in human
immunodeficiency virus infection.

Wahren B, Morfeldt-Månsson L, Biberfeld G, Moberg L, Sönnerborg A, Ljungman P,
Werner A, Kurth R, Gallo R, Bolognesi D.

The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-specific lymphocyte proliferation response
was determined for 40 persons at different stages of HIV infection. The specific 
response to purified HIV virion antigens from strain HTLV-IIIB was poor, occurred
in only 9 of the 40 subjects, was not improved with the addition of
interleukin-2, and was more frequent in symptom-free individuals (46%) than in
patients with lymphadenopathy syndrome (10%). Reactivity to subcomponent p24 was 
better than that to whole HIV; reactivity was present in five of six infected
persons and increased with the addition of exogenous interleukin-2. Reactivities 
to subcomponents (g)p41 and gp120 were also measured. This is the first evidence 
of a specific cell-mediated immune response to HIV antigen in HIV-infected
persons. Monkeys immunized with purified HIV or with purified p24 displayed
cellular immunoreactivity both to whole HIV and to subcomponents. In contrast to 
the poor reactivity to HIV antigen, the lymphocytes of the patients had good
specific cell proliferation responses to cytomegalovirus and herpes simplex virus
challenge and a normal response to the addition of phytohemagglutinin. The
results suggest a functional defect in peripheral lymphocytes of some
HIV-infected individuals on the basis of their response to whole HIV antigen and 
a better response to gag protein.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.61.6.2017-2023.1987 
PMCID: PMC254211
PMID: 3033328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

