
1. J Anim Sci. 2019 Feb 1;97(2):559-568. doi: 10.1093/jas/sky430.

Genetic parameters for variability in the birth of persistently infected cattle
following likely in utero exposure to bovine viral diarrhea virus.

Ring SC(1)(2), Graham DA(3), Kelleher MM(4), Doherty ML(2), Berry DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Teagasc, Animal and Grassland Research and Innovation Centre, Moorepark,
Fermoy, Co. Cork Ireland.
(2)School of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin,
Ireland.
(3)Animal Health Ireland, 4-5 The Archways, Carrick on Shannon, Co. Leitrim,
Ireland.
(4)Irish Cattle Breeding Federation, Highfield House, Bandon, Co. Cork, Ireland.

Genetic selection is an inexpensive and complementary strategy to traditional
methods of improving animal health and welfare. Nonetheless, endeavors to
incorporate animal health and welfare traits in international breeding programs
have been hampered by the availability of informative phenotypes. The recent
eradication program for bovine viral diarrhea (BVD) in the Republic of Ireland
has provided an opportunity to quantify the potential benefits that genetic
selection could offer BVD eradication programs elsewhere, as well as inform
possible eradication programs for other diseases in the Republic of Ireland.
Using a dataset of 188,085 Irish calves, the estimated direct and maternal
heritability estimates for the birth of persistently infected calves following
likely in utero exposure to BVD virus ranged from not different from zero (linear
model) to 0.29 (SE = 0.075; threshold model) and from essentially zero (linear
model) to 0.04 (SE = 0.033; threshold model), respectively. The corresponding
genetic SD for the direct and maternal effect of the binary trait (0, 1) ranged
from 0.005 (linear model) to 0.56 (threshold model) units and ranged from 0.00008
(linear model) to 0.20 (threshold model) units, respectively. The coefficient of 
direct genetic variation based on the linear model was 2.56% indicating
considerable genetic variation could be exploited. Based on results from the
linear model in the present study, there is the potential to reduce the incidence
of persistent infection in cattle by on average 0.11 percentage units per year
which is cumulative and permanent. Therefore, genetic selection can contribute to
reducing the incidence of persistent infection in cattle. Moreover, where
populations are free from persistent infection, inclusion of the estimated
genetic merit for BVD in national breeding indexes could contribute to a
preservation of a BVD-free status. Results from the present study can be used to 
inform breeding programs of the potential genetic gains achievable. Moreover, the
approaches used in the present study can be applied to other diseases when data
become available.

DOI: 10.1093/jas/sky430 
PMCID: PMC6358239
PMID: 30412254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

