
1. J Med Virol. 2019 Apr;91(4):555-563. doi: 10.1002/jmv.25356. Epub 2018 Dec 17.

Dynamics of nonstructural glycoprotein-1 in dengue patients presenting with
different clinical manifestations from 1986 to 2012 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Gonçalves BS(1), Horta MAP(1), Acero PHC(2), Bochner R(3), Queiroz Lima MDR(4),
de Araújo ES(1), Sampaio SA(1), Nogueira RMR(1), de Filippis AMB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Flavivirus Laboratory, Oswaldo Cruz Institute/FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Human Genetics, Oswaldo Cruz Institute/FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Scientific and Technological Information in Health, Institute of
Communication and Scientific and Technological Information in Health/ FIOCRUZ,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Laboratory of Viral Immunology, Oswaldo Cruz Institute/FIOCRUZ, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

The hyperendemicity and co-circulation of different dengue serotypes in Brazil
have increased the number of severe dengue cases and the rate of hospitalization 
for dengue. Virological and individual factors are associated with the complexity
of the disease. Antigenemia levels of nonstructural glycoprotein-1 (NS1) have
been associated with severe dengue. Aiming to identify a severity marker during
the acute phase (days 0 to 5 of disease), the association of NS1 antigenemia with
clinical presentation, sex, age range, immune response, number of days of
disease, and serotype RNA levels was evaluated in serum samples of patients from 
the state of Rio de Janeiro clinically classified as having dengue without
warning signs (DWWS) or dengue with warning signs/severe dengue (DWWS/SD). The
immune response was classified by in-house enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay,
antigenemia was determined by quantification of NS1, and viremia was quantified
by real-time PCR. Of the total number of patients, 36.6% (74 of 202) presented
warning signs/severe dengue and 72.3% (146 of 202) were classified with primary
infection. DENV-2 presented an association between clinical presentation and
antigenemia (P = 0.02). DENV-3 had higher levels of NS1 (P < 0.0001). This study 
has shown that the infecting serotype influences circulating NS1 levels in the
host, as well as NS1 antigenemia may vary as to the clinical presentation of the 
patient infected with DENV-2. However, the criterion used to screen patients for 
clinical presentation, in DWWS and DWWS/SD patients, was not a good marker for
dengue severity in our study.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.25356 
PMID: 30411369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

