
1. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2018 Oct;43(20):4019-4026. doi:
10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.20180517.001.

[Ferroptosis pathway and its intervention regulated by Chinese materia medica].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu WH(1)(2), Li CH(2), Jiang TL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Artemisinin, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100700, China.
(2)Tang Center for Herbal Medicine Research, Institute of Chinese Materia Medica,
China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 100700, China.

Ferroptosis is a new form of regulated cell death which is different from
apoptosis, necrosis and autophagy, and results from iron-dependent lipidperoxide 
accumulation. Now, it is found that ferroptosis is involved in multiple
physiological and pathological processes, such as cancer, arteriosclerosis,
neurodegenerative diseases, diabetes, antiviral immune response, acute renal
failure, hepatic and heart ischemia/reperfusion injury. On the one hand, it could
be found the appropriate drugs to promote ferroptosis to clear cancer cells and
virus infected cells, etc. On the other hand, we could inhibit ferroptosis to
protect healthy cells. China has a wealth of traditional Chinese medicine
resources. Chinese medicine contains a variety of active ingredients that
regulate ferroptosis. Here, this paper reported the research of ferroptosis
pathway, targets of its inducers and inhibitors that have been discovered, and
the regulatory effects of the discovered Chinese herbs and its active ingredients
on ferroptosis to help clinical and scientific research.

CopyrightÂ© by the Chinese Pharmaceutical Association.

DOI: 10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.20180517.001 
PMID: 30486525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this article and the planning
committee members and staff have no relevant financial relationships with
commercial interests to disclose.

