
1. Virusdisease. 2018 Dec;29(4):548-552. doi: 10.1007/s13337-018-0499-4. Epub 2018
Oct 20.

PR8 virus harbouring H5N1 NS gene contributed for THP-1 cell tropism.

Lamichhane PP(1)(2), Puthavathana P(1).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok Noi, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Present Address: Department of Laboratory Medicine, A & B International
Hospital, Pokhara-2, Nepal.

Innate immune cells are key player in immune response to influenza virus
infection. Influenza infected monocytes exacerbate the disease pathology.
However, monocytes differ in susceptibilities to influenza virus infection.
Herein, susceptibilities of U937 and THP-1 monocytic cells to PR8 virus
infection, the associated cellular factor- sialic acid (SA) receptor distribution
and viral factor were determined. Moreover, amino acid sequences in hemagglutinin
(HA) receptor binding domain (RBD) of PR8 virus that determine SA preferences
were analysed. PR8 infected U937 cells express significantly higher numbers of
nucleoprotein positive cells suggesting U937 cells being more susceptible to
influenza virus than THP-1 cells. Lectin staining suggested similar pattern of SA
receptor distribution in both cells. Interestingly, sequence analysis of RBD
suggested their preferences for alpha 2,3 SA receptors suggesting RBD sequences
are not always determining for SA preferences. Furthermore, the resistance
barrier on THP-1 cells was overcome by H5N1 NS gene. In conclusion, the study
demonstrated that decreased susceptibility of THP-1 cells to PR8 virus could not 
be related to the SA receptor distribution, and H5N1 NS gene was sufficient to
determine tropism for THP-1 cells. Hence, mechanistic basis of NS gene on cell
tropism and contribution of other internal genes remained to be determined.

DOI: 10.1007/s13337-018-0499-4 
PMCID: PMC6261886
PMID: 30539061 

