
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2019 Mar;86:805-813. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2018.12.012. Epub
2018 Dec 9.

The antiviral mechanism of viperin and its splice variant in spring viremia of
carp virus infected fathead minnow cells.

Wang F(1), Jiao H(1), Liu W(1), Chen B(1), Wang Y(1), Chen B(1), Lu Y(2), Su
J(1), Zhang Y(3), Liu X(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, China; 
Freshwater Aquaculture Collaborative Innovation Center of Hubei Province, Wuhan, 
430070, China; Hubei Engineering Technology Research Center for Aquatic Animal
Diseases Control and Prevention, Wuhan, 430070, China.
(2)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu,
HI, USA.
(3)College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, China.
(4)College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, China; 
Freshwater Aquaculture Collaborative Innovation Center of Hubei Province, Wuhan, 
430070, China; Hubei Engineering Technology Research Center for Aquatic Animal
Diseases Control and Prevention, Wuhan, 430070, China. Electronic address:
xueqinliu@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

Viperin is known to play an important role in innate immune and its antiviral
mechanisms are well demonstrated in mammals. Fish Viperin mediates antiviral
activity against several viruses. However, little has been done to the underlying
mechanism. Here, we discovered a novel Viperin splice variant named Viperin_sv1
from viral-infected FHM cells. Spring varimia of carp virus (SVCV) was able to
increase the mRNA levels of both Viperin and Viperin_sv1, while poly(I:C) only
has effect on Viperin. Viperin functions as an antiviral protein at 24 h
post-SVCV infection, but the antiviral activity dramatically declined at late
infection stages. However, Viperin_sv1 inhibited SVCV replication significantly
at all the tested time. Viperin_sv1, but not Viperin can facilitate the
production of type I IFN and IFN stimulate genes (ISGs) through activation of
RIG-1, IRF3 and IRF7 signaling cascades. On the other hand, SVCV down-regulated
Viperin_sv1 at the protein level through the proteasome pathway to keep itself
away from the immune system monitoring. Taken together, these findings provide
new insights into the regulation of Viperin from the posttranscriptional
modification perspective and the role of splicing variant Viperin_sv1 in
virus-host interaction.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2018.12.012 
PMID: 30540955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

