
1. Zoonoses Public Health. 2019 Feb;66(1):155-163. doi: 10.1111/zph.12548. Epub 2018
Dec 10.

Hepatitis E virus infection in swine workers: A meta-analysis.

Huang X(1), Huang Y(1), Wagner AL(2), Chen X(1), Lu Y(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Fudan University School of Public Health, Key
Laboratory of Public Health Safety (Ministry of Education), Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(3)Fudan University Pudong Institute of Preventive Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Hepatitis E virus (HEV) infects both humans and animals. Swine has been confirmed
to be the principal natural reservoir, which raises a concern that HEV infection 
would be substantially increasing among swine workers. The present study
calculated the pooled prevalence of IgG antibodies against HEV among swine
workers and the general population in previous cross-sectional studies. We
conducted a meta-analysis comparing the prevalence of HEV infection between swine
workers and the general population, including local residents, blood donors and
non-swine workers. Through searches in three databases (PubMed and OVID in
English, and CNKI in Chinese) and after study selection, a total of 32 studies
from 16 countries (from 1999 through 2018) were included in the meta-analysis. A 
random-effect model was employed in the study; an I 2 statistic assessed
heterogeneity, and the Egger's test detected publication bias. The comparative
prevalence of anti-HEV IgG was pooled from the studies. Compared to the general
population, the prevalence ratio (PR) for swine workers was estimated to be 1.52 
(95% CI 1.38-1.76) with the I 2 being 71%. No publication bias was detected
(p = 0.40). A subgroup analysis further indicated increased prevalence of
anti-HEV IgG in the swine workers in Asia (PR = 1.49, 95% CI: 1.35-1.64), in
Europe (PR = 1.93, 95% CI: 1.49-2.50) and in all five swine-related occupations, 
including swine farmers, butchers, meat processors, pork retailers and
veterinarians (PR ranged between 1.19 and 1.75). In summary, swine workers have a
relatively higher prevalence of past HEV infection, and this finding is true
across swine-related occupations, which confirms zoonotic transmission between
swine and swine workers.

© 2018 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/zph.12548 
PMID: 30548110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

