
1. PLoS One. 2018 Dec 20;13(12):e0203513. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0203513.
eCollection 2018.

GI-16 lineage (624/I or Q1), there and back again: The history of one of the
major threats for poultry farming of our era.

Franzo G(1), Cecchinato M(1), Tosi G(2), Fiorentini L(2), Faccin F(3), Tucciarone
CM(1), Trogu T(3), Barbieri I(3), Massi P(2), Moreno A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Medicine, Production and Health (MAPS), University of
Padua, Legnaro (PD), Italy.
(2)Sezione di Forlì, Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Lombardia e
Emilia Romagna, Forlì Cesena, Italy.
(3)Department of Virology, Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Lombardia 
e Emilia Romagna, Brescia, Italy.

The genetic variability of Infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) is one of the main
challenges for its control, hindering not only the development of effective
vaccination strategies but also its classification and, consequently,
epidemiology understanding. The 624/I and Q1 genotypes, now recognized to be part
of the GI-16 lineage, represent an excellent example of the practical
consequences of IBV molecular epidemiology limited knowledge. In fact, being
their common origin unrecognized for a long time, independent epidemiological
pictures were drawn for the two genotypes. To fix this misinterpretation, the
present study reconstructs the history, population dynamics and spreading
patterns of GI-16 lineage as a whole using a phylodynamic approach. A collection 
of worldwide available hypervariable region 1 and 2 (HVR12) and 3 (HVR3)
sequences of the S1 protein was analysed together with 258 HVR3 sequences
obtained from samples collected in Italy (the country where this genotype was
initially identified) since 1963. The results demonstrate that after its
emergence at the beginning of the XX century, GI-16 was able to persist until
present days in Italy. Approximately in the late 1980s, it migrated to Asia,
which became the main nucleus for further spreading to Middle East, Europe and
especially South America, likely through multiple introduction events. A
remarkable among-country diffusion was also demonstrated in Asia and South
America. Interestingly, although most of the recent Italian GI-16 strains
originated from ancestral viruses detected in the same country, a couple were
closely related to Chinese ones, supporting a backward viral flow from China to
Italy. Besides to the specific case-study results, this work highlights the
misconceptions that originate from the lack of a unified nomenclature and poor
molecular epidemiology data generation and sharing. This shortcoming appears
particularly relevant since the described scenario could likely be shared by many
other IBV genotypes and pathogens in general.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0203513 
PMCID: PMC6301571
PMID: 30571679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

