
1. Mol Pharm. 2019 Feb 4;16(2):779-785. doi: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.8b01046. Epub
2019 Jan 15.

Liposome Encapsulation of Oncolytic Virus M1 To Reduce Immunogenicity and Immune 
Clearance in Vivo.

Wang Y(1), Huang H(1), Zou H(1)(2), Tian X(3), Hu J(3), Qiu P(3), Hu H(1), Yan
G(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences , Sun Yat-sen University , Waihuan East Road
132, Guangzhou Higher Education Mega Center , Guangzhou 510006 , P.R. China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy , The Seventh Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University , Shenzhen 518107 , P.R. China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Zhongshan School of Medicine , Sun Yat-sen
University , Zhongshan II Road 74 , Guangzhou 510080 , P.R. China.

Oncolytic viral therapy is an attractive novel strategy for cancer therapy. As a 
natural alphavirus, oncolytic virus M1 is able to infect and kill various zinc
finger antiviral protein (ZAP)-deficient tumor cells selectively, while leaving
normal cells undamaged. However, M1 can trigger the production of neutralizing
antibodies that dramatically weaken its antitumor effect. In order to attenuate
immunogenicity of the therapeutic M1 virus, we encapsulated it into liposomes
(referred to as M-LPO) using the thin-film hydration method. The effect of
anti-M1 neutralizing antibody on M-LPO was examined in LoVo and Hep 3B cell
lines. In the absence of neutralizing antibodies, treating cells with naked M1,
blank liposomes (LPO), M-LPO, or a simple mixture of M1 and liposomes (LPO+M1)
inhibited cell growth. In the presence of neutralizing antibodies, only M-LPO
inhibited cell growth. After intravenous administration, M-LPO reduced the
production of the M1-neutralizing antibody and the corresponding immune response.
Analysis of the M-LPO uptake by cells was examined by confocal microscopy using
M1 labeled with FITC and liposomal shells labeled with RhB. The results suggest
that M1 may be released from liposomes before or after M-LPO internalization.
Taken together, our results suggest that encapsulating oncolytic virus M1 in
liposomes may reduce intrinsic viral immunogenicity for improved anticancer
therapy.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.8b01046 
PMID: 30604617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

