
1. Plant Dis. 2018 Mar;102(3):651-655. doi: 10.1094/PDIS-07-17-1069-RE. Epub 2018
Jan 23.

Grapevine red blotch virus: Absence in Swiss Vineyards and Analysis of Potential 
Detrimental Effect on Viticultural Performance.

Reynard JS(1), Brodard J(1), Dubuis N(1), Zufferey V(1), Schumpp O(1), Schaerer
S(1), Gugerli P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Agroscope.

Grapevine red blotch virus (GRBV) is a recently described virus that infects
grapevine. Little information is available on the possible occurrence and
distribution outside North America. Therefore, we surveyed commercial vineyards
from the three major grape-growing regions in Switzerland to determine the
presence or absence of GRBV. In total, 3,062 vines were analyzed by polymerase
chain reaction. None of the vines tested positive for GRBV, suggesting the
absence of GRBV from Swiss vineyards. We also investigated whether GRBV was
present in 653 grapevine accessions in the Agroscope grapevine virus collection
at Nyon, including dominantly Swiss (457) but also international accessions. Only
six referential accessions were infected by GRBV, all originating from the United
States, whereas all others from 10 European and 8 non-European origins tested
negative. High-throughput sequencing analysis of Zinfandel A2V13, in the
collection since 1985, confirmed close similarity of GRBV isolate Z_A2V13 to
American isolates according to genomes deposited in GenBank. Because the
Zinfandel A2V13 reference was also maintained grafted on the leafroll virus
indicator Vitis vinifera 'Gamay', we evaluated the effect of GRBV on viticultural
performance over a 3-year period. Our results showed clear detrimental effects of
GRBV on grapevine physiology (vine vigor, leaf chlorophyll content, and gas
exchange) and fruit quality. These findings underscore the importance of
implementation of GRBV testing worldwide in certification and quarantine programs
to prevent the dissemination of this virus.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS-07-17-1069-RE 
PMID: 30673492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

