
1. Plant Sci. 2019 Feb;279:96-107. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2018.04.027. Epub 2018
May 3.

Plant defense against aphids, the pest extraordinaire.

Nalam V(1), Louis J(2), Shah J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University-Purdue University, Fort Wayne,
Indiana, 46805, USA. Electronic address: nalamvj@pfw.edu.
(2)Department of Entomology and Department of Biochemistry, University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, 68583, USA. Electronic address: joelouis@unl.edu.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences and BioDiscovery Institute, University of
North Texas, Denton, TX, 76203, USA. Electronic address: Jyoti.Shah@unt.edu.

Aphids are amongst the most damaging pests of plants that use their stylets to
penetrate the plant tissue to consume large amounts of phloem sap and thus
deprive the plant of photoassimilates. In addition, some aphids vector important 
viral diseases of plants. Plant defenses targeting aphids are broadly classified 
as antibiosis, which interferes with aphid growth, survival and fecundity, and
antixenosis, which influences aphid behavior, including plant choice and feeding 
from the sieve elements. Here we review the multitude of steps in the infestation
process where these defenses can be exerted and highlight the progress made on
identifying molecular factors and mechanisms that contribute to host defense,
including plant resistance genes and signaling components, as well as
aphid-derived effectors that elicit or attenuate host defenses. Also discussed is
the impact of aphid-vectored plant viruses on plant-aphid interaction and the
concept of tolerance, which allows plant to withstand or recover from damage
resulting from the infestation.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2018.04.027 
PMID: 30709498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

