
1. PeerJ. 2019 Feb 20;6:e6216. doi: 10.7717/peerj.6216. eCollection 2019.

Genome organization and molecular characterization of the three Formica exsecta
viruses-FeV1, FeV2 and FeV4.

Dhaygude K(1), Johansson H(1), Kulmuni J(1)(2), Sundström L(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Organismal and Evolutionary Biology, Faculty of Biological and Environmental
Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield,
United Kingdom.
(3)Tvärminne Zoological Station, Faculty of Biological and Environmental
Sciences, University of Helsinki, Hanko, Finland.

We present the genome organization and molecular characterization of the three
Formica exsecta viruses, along with ORF predictions, and functional annotation of
genes. The Formica exsecta virus-4 (FeV4; GenBank ID: MF287670) is a newly
discovered negative-sense single-stranded RNA virus representing the first
identified member of order Mononegavirales in ants, whereas the Formica exsecta
virus-1 (FeV1; GenBank ID: KF500001), and the Formica exsecta virus-2 (FeV2;
GenBank ID: KF500002) are positive single-stranded RNA viruses initially
identified (but not characterized) in our earlier study. The new virus FeV4 was
found by re-analyzing data from a study published earlier. The Formica exsecta
virus-4 genome is 9,866 bp in size, with an overall G + C content of 44.92%, and 
containing five predicted open reading frames (ORFs). Our bioinformatics analysis
indicates that gaps are absent and the ORFs are complete, which based on our
comparative genomics analysis suggests that the genomes are complete. Following
the characterization, we validate virus infection for FeV1, FeV2 and FeV4 for the
first time in field-collected worker ants. Some colonies were infected by
multiple viruses, and the viruses were observed to infect all castes, and
multiple life stages of workers and queens. Finally, highly similar viruses were 
expressed in adult workers and queens of six other Formica species: F. fusca, F. 
pressilabris, F. pratensis, F. aquilonia, F. truncorum and F. cinerea. This
research indicates that viruses can be shared between ant species, but further
studies on viral transmission are needed to understand viral infection pathways.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.6216 
PMCID: PMC6387575
PMID: 30809424 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing
interests.

