
1. Plant Dis. 2002 Feb;86(2):112-117. doi: 10.1094/PDIS.2002.86.2.112.

Characterization of Tobacco mosaic virus Isolated from Potato Showing Yellow Leaf
Mosaic and Stunting Symptoms in Korea.

Jung HW(1), Yun WS(1), Hahm YI(2), Kim KH(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Agricultural Biotechnology and Research Center for New Biomaterials 
in Agriculture, Seoul National University, Suwon 441-744, Korea.
(2)Alpine Agriculture Experiment Station, Pyungchang, Kangwon 232-955, Korea.

Four isolates of Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV-potato 1 to 4) were obtained from
potato plants (Solanum tuberosum) in cultivated potato plantings in Korea. These 
isolates were differentiated based on biological properties, symptomatology, and 
nucleotide sequence analysis of the coat protein (CP) gene. TMV potato isolates
caused typical symptoms on 20 inoculated plant species as compared to the type
(U1) TMV strain. The four isolates each produced distinctly different symptoms on
Gomphrena globosa. In contrast to the type strain of TMV, infections with two of 
the isolates reported here were not restricted to inoculated leaves of G. globosa
but moved systemically through the plants. In addition, three additional systemic
hosts (Chenopodium amaranticolor, C. quinoa, and C. murale) for TMV were
revealed. Sequence analysis of the CP gene differentiated TMV-potato isolates.
The CP gene sequence exhibited significant identity (83.1 to 99.2%) among
TMV-potato isolates while showing 88.1 to 99.4% identities on predicted amino
acid sequences. Based on a comparison of the CP gene nucleotide and deduced amino
acid sequences between TMV-potato isolates and other TMV strains, TMV-potato 1,
3, and 4 were closely related to TMV strains U1, U2, V-FAVA, and NC82 with 98.8
to 100% identity. In contrast, TMV-potato 2 was closely related to TMV strains L,
KP, KO-TOB, K1, and K2 with 93.8 to 98.8% identity.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS.2002.86.2.112 
PMID: 30823306 

