
1. Microb Pathog. 2019 May;130:19-37. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.02.023. Epub 2019 
Feb 26.

Reverse vaccinology approach to design a novel multi-epitope subunit vaccine
against avian influenza A (H7N9) virus.

Hasan M(1), Ghosh PP(2), Azim KF(2), Mukta S(3), Abir RA(4), Nahar J(4), Hasan
Khan MM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Sylhet Agricultural
University, Sylhet, 3100, Bangladesh; Department of Pharmaceuticals and
Industrial Biotechnology, Sylhet Agricultural University, Sylhet, 3100,
Bangladesh. Electronic address: mhasan.pib@sau.ac.bd.
(2)Faculty of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Sylhet Agricultural
University, Sylhet, 3100, Bangladesh.
(3)Faculty of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Sylhet Agricultural
University, Sylhet, 3100, Bangladesh; Department of Plant and Environmental
Biotechnology, Sylhet Agricultural University, Sylhet, 3100, Bangladesh.
(4)Department of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Shahjalal University of
Science and Technology, Sylhet, 3114, Bangladesh.
(5)Faculty of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Sylhet Agricultural
University, Sylhet, 3100, Bangladesh; Department of Biochemistry and Chemistry,
Sylhet Agricultural University, Sylhet, 3100, Bangladesh.

H7N9, a novel strain of avian origin influenza was the first recorded incidence
where a human was transited by a N9 type influenza virus. Effective vaccination
against influenza A (H7N9) is a major concern, since it has emerged as a life
threatening viral pathogen. Here, an in silico reverse vaccinology strategy was
adopted to design a unique chimeric subunit vaccine against avian influenza A
(H7N9). Induction of humoral and cell-mediated immunity is the prime concerned
characteristics for a peptide vaccine candidate, hence both T cell and B cell
immunity of viral proteins were screened. Antigenicity testing, transmembrane
topology screening, allergenicity and toxicity assessment, population coverage
analysis and molecular docking approach were adopted to generate the most
antigenic epitopes of avian influenza A (H7N9) proteome. Further, a novel subunit
vaccine was designed by the combination of highly immunogenic epitopes along with
suitable adjuvant and linkers. Physicochemical properties and secondary structure
of the designed vaccine were assessed to ensure its thermostability, h
ydrophilicity, theoretical PI and structural behavior. Homology modeling,
refinement and validation of the designed vaccine allowed to construct a three
dimensional structure of the predicted vaccine, further employed to molecular
docking analysis with different MHC molecules and human immune TLR8 receptor
present on lymphocyte cells. Moreover, disulfide engineering was employed to
lessen the high mobility region of the designed vaccine in order to extend its
stability. Furthermore, we investigated the molecular dynamic simulation of the
modeled subunit vaccine and TLR8 complexed molecule to strengthen our prediction.
Finally, the suggested vaccine was reverse transcribed and adapted for E. coli
strain K12 prior to insertion within pET28a(+) vector for checking translational 
potency and microbial expression.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.02.023 
PMID: 30822457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

