
1. Biochim Biophys Acta Proteins Proteom. 2019 Jun;1867(6):645-653. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2019.02.002. Epub 2019 Feb 27.

Inhibition of ricin A-chain (RTA) catalytic activity by a viral genome-linked
protein (VPg).

Aitbakieva VR(1), Ahmad R(2), Singh S(2), Domashevskiy AV(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sciences, John Jay College of Criminal Justice, the City
University of New York, New York 10019, NY, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biology, Brooklyn College, The City University of New York,
Brooklyn, New York 11210, United States of America.
(3)Department of Sciences, John Jay College of Criminal Justice, the City
University of New York, New York 10019, NY, United States of America. Electronic 
address: adomashevskiy@jjay.cuny.edu.

Ricin is a plant derived protein toxin produced by the castor bean plant (Ricinus
communis). The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) classifies ricin as a Category B
biological agent. Currently, there is neither an effective vaccine that can be
used to protect against ricin exposure nor a therapeutic to reverse the effects
once exposed. Here we quantitatively characterize interactions between catalytic 
ricin A-chain (RTA) and a viral genome-linked protein (VPg) from turnip mosaic
virus (TuMV). VPg and its N-terminal truncated variant, VPg1-110, bind to RTA and
abolish ricin's catalytic depurination of 28S rRNA in vitro and in a cell-free
rabbit reticulocyte translational system. RTA and VPg bind in a 1 to 1
stoichiometric ratio, and their binding affinity increases ten-fold as
temperature elevates (5 °C to 37 °C). RTA-VPg binary complex formation is
enthalpically driven and favored by entropy, resulting in an overall favorable
energy, ΔG = -136.8 kJ/mol. Molecular modeling supports our experimental
observations and predicts a major contribution of electrostatic interactions,
suggesting an allosteric mechanism of downregulation of RTA activity through
conformational changes in RTA structure, and/or disruption of binding with the
ribosomal stalk. Fluorescence anisotropy studies show that heat affects the rate 
constant and the activation energy for the RTA-VPg complex, Ea = -62.1 kJ/mol.
The thermodynamic and kinetic findings presented here are an initial lead study
with promising results and provides a rational approach for synthesis of
therapeutic peptides that successfully eliminate toxicity of ricin, and other
cytotoxic RIPs.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2019.02.002 
PMCID: PMC7219317
PMID: 30822539  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

