
1. J Pathol. 2019 Jul;248(3):257-259. doi: 10.1002/path.5265. Epub 2019 Apr 22.

Bile ductular reactions in the liver: similarities are only skin deep.

Alison MR(1), Lin WR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Tumour Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, London, UK.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

Comment on
    J Pathol. 2019 May;248(1):66-76.

Extensive bile ductular reactions (DRs) accompany many cholestatic liver diseases
such as primary biliary cholangitis and primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) as
well as parenchymal liver cell diseases such as alcoholic liver disease,
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis and HCV and HBV infections. DRs originate from bile
ducts or hepatocytes after damage and can be identified by expression of markers 
associated with cholangiocytes, often being associated with disease progression
and fibrosis. In a recent issue of The Journal of Pathology, Govaere et al
employed high-throughput RNA sequencing to compare the transcriptomic profiles of
DR cells from liver diseases of different aetiology; HCV infection affecting
hepatocytes and PSC initially affecting biliary epithelial cells. Both DR
transcriptomes were markedly different from that of their neighbouring
hepatocytes and 330 genes were significantly differently expressed between the
DRs of the HCV and PSC liver diseases. Exploring such gene expression profiles
could enable therapeutic targeting of DRs, on the one hand to inhibit liver
fibrosis and inflammation and conversely to promote hepatocyte and cholangiocyte 
regeneration. Copyright © 2019 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2019 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/path.5265 
PMID: 30883752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

