
1. Food Environ Virol. 2019 Jun;11(2):193-197. doi: 10.1007/s12560-019-09377-1. Epub
2019 Mar 20.

Occurrence of Salivirus in Sewage and River Water Samples in Karaj, Iran.

Adineh M(1), Ghaderi M(2), Mousavi-Nasab SD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Karaj Branch, Islamic Azad University, Karaj,
Iran.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Karaj Branch, Islamic Azad University, Karaj,
Iran. ghaderi_viro@yahoo.com.
(3)Department of Research and Development, Production and Research Complex,
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.

Salivirus is a newly discovered virus which seems to be related to acute
gastroenteritis in children. Salivirus may infect susceptible children by
fecal-oral route after exposure to contaminated water. The present study aims to 
evaluate the occurrence and quantity of Salivirus in treated and untreated sewage
water and river water samples collected in the city of Karaj, Iran by reverse
transcription-quantitative PCR assay. A total of 50 samples were collected from
environmental waters containing 22 treated and untreated sewage water in volume
of 1 l and 28 river water samples in volume of 5 l were included in this study.
After viral RNA extraction, the Real-time PCR was performed to amplify the 5'UTR 
sequence of Salivirus genome and viral load was assessed. Out of the 50 samples
tested, the Salivirus genomic RNA was identified in 5/12 (41.6%) of treated and
3/10 (30%) of untreated sewage samples and in 8/28 (28.5%) of river water
samples. The maximum viral load was 4.8 × 106 copies/l in treated sewage water
sample in September and the lower viral load was 4 × 105 copies/l related to
treated sewage water taken in December. This is the first report of Salivirus
occurrence in the environmental waters in Iran. The viral prevalence of Salivirus
in each of the three sets of tested samples was within low to moderate in range.

DOI: 10.1007/s12560-019-09377-1 
PMID: 30895522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

