
1. J Insect Physiol. 2019 Apr;114:109-115. doi: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2019.03.006. Epub
2019 Mar 20.

Biosynthesis, modifications and degradation of chitin in the formation and
turnover of peritrophic matrix in insects.

Liu X(1), Cooper AMW(2), Zhang J(3), Zhu KY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Applied Biology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, Shanxi
030006, China.
(2)Department of Entomology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA.
(3)Research Institute of Applied Biology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, Shanxi
030006, China. Electronic address: zjz@sxu.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Entomology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA.
Electronic address: kzhu@ksu.edu.

The peritrophic matrix (PM) is an extracellular, semi-permeable biocomposite that
lines the midgut of most insects. The PM serves as the first defense in the
midgut to resist microorganisms such as viruses, bacteria and other pathogens,
and to protect epithelial cells from mechanical damage. The PM also separates the
midgut lumen into different compartments, which play important roles in nutrient 
ingestion and digestion. The PM is a highly dynamic structure that consists
mainly of chitin fibers cross-linked by proteins, glycoproteins, and
proteoglycans. The PM is continuously biosynthesized, assembled, and degraded in 
response to feeding and development. Chitin chains are synthesized by several
enzymes and organized in several hierarchical levels, in which various
PM-associated proteins appear to be essential for maintaining the structural
integrity and physiological function of the PM. This review summarizes research
advances on molecular components of the PM and their functions, as well as
related proteins and enzymes that contribute to PM formation and modification.
Crucial gaps in our current understanding of the PM are also addressed.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2019.03.006 
PMID: 30902530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

