
1. N Engl J Med. 2019 Apr 25;380(17):1606-1617. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1812406. Epub
2019 Apr 3.

Heart and Lung Transplants from HCV-Infected Donors to Uninfected Recipients.

Woolley AE(1), Singh SK(1), Goldberg HJ(1), Mallidi HR(1), Givertz MM(1), Mehra
MR(1), Coppolino A(1), Kusztos AE(1), Johnson ME(1), Chen K(1), Haddad EA(1),
Fanikos J(1), Harrington DP(1), Camp PC(1), Baden LR(1); DONATE HCV Trial Team.

Collaborators: Andrews K, Boukedes S, Burkett P, Chabria A, Cheng V, Coakley L,
Cronin L, Damp G, Desai A, Divo M, Durney V, El-Chemaly S, Groarke J, Issa N,
Keller S, Keshk M, Kim M, Lakdawala N, Lewis E, Madathil R, Marshall S, McKane C,
Mody G, Nohria A, Padera R, Page D, Pandit A, Pelletier M, Shang M, Shattuck C,
Stewart G, Sullivan K, Talbott S, Townsend K, Trindade A, Tsibris A, Tsveybel K, 
Weiffenbach C, Woodcome E.

Author information: 
(1)From the Divisions of Infectious Diseases (A.E.W., A.E.K., M.E.J., K.C.,
E.A.H., L.R.B.), Cardiac Surgery (S.K.S., H.R.M.), Thoracic Surgery (S.K.S.,
H.R.M., A.C., P.C.C.), Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine (H.J.G.), and
Cardiovascular Medicine (M.M.G., M.R.M.), and the Department of Pharmacy (J.F.), 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School (A.E.W., S.K.S., H.J.G.,
H.R.M., M.M.G., M.R.M., A.C., E.A.H., P.C.C., L.R.B.), Massachusetts College of
Pharmacy and Health Sciences (J.F.), the Department of Biostatistics and
Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute (D.P.H.), and Harvard T.H.
Chan School of Public Health (D.P.H.) - all in Boston.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2019 Apr 25;380(17):1669-1670.
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019 Jun;16(6):326.
    N Engl J Med. 2019 Sep 5;381(10):987-988.
    N Engl J Med. 2019 Sep 5;381(10):988.
    N Engl J Med. 2019 Sep 5;381(10):988-989.
    J Thorac Dis. 2019 Sep;11(Suppl 15):S1888-S1890.
    J Thorac Dis. 2019 Sep;11(Suppl 15):S1942-S1946.
    Transplantation. 2019 Nov;103(11):2215-2216.
    Ann Transl Med. 2019 Dec;7(Suppl 8):S279.

BACKGROUND: Hearts and lungs from donors with hepatitis C viremia are typically
not transplanted. The advent of direct-acting antiviral agents to treat hepatitis
C virus (HCV) infection has raised the possibility of substantially increasing
the donor organ pool by enabling the transplantation of hearts and lungs from
HCV-infected donors into recipients who do not have HCV infection.
METHODS: We conducted a trial involving transplantation of hearts and lungs from 
donors who had hepatitis C viremia, irrespective of HCV genotype, to adults
without HCV infection. Sofosbuvir-velpatasvir, a pangenotypic direct-acting
antiviral regimen, was preemptively administered to the organ recipients for 4
weeks, beginning within a few hours after transplantation, to block viral
replication. The primary outcome was a composite of a sustained virologic
response at 12 weeks after completion of antiviral therapy for HCV infection and 
graft survival at 6 months after transplantation.
RESULTS: A total of 44 patients were enrolled: 36 received lung transplants and 8
received heart transplants. The median viral load in the HCV-infected donors was 
890,000 IU per milliliter (interquartile range, 276,000 to 4.63 million). The HCV
genotypes were genotype 1 (in 61% of the donors), genotype 2 (in 17%), genotype 3
(in 17%), and indeterminate (in 5%). A total of 42 of 44 recipients (95%) had a
detectable hepatitis C viral load immediately after transplantation, with a
median of 1800 IU per milliliter (interquartile range, 800 to 6180). Of the first
35 patients enrolled who had completed 6 months of follow-up, all 35 patients
(100%; exact 95% confidence interval, 90 to 100) were alive and had excellent
graft function and an undetectable hepatitis C viral load at 6 months after
transplantation; the viral load became undetectable by approximately 2 weeks
after transplantation, and it subsequently remained undetectable in all patients.
No treatment-related serious adverse events were identified. More cases of acute 
cellular rejection for which treatment was indicated occurred in the HCV-infected
lung-transplant recipients than in a cohort of patients who received lung
transplants from donors who did not have HCV infection. This difference was not
significant after adjustment for possible confounders.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients without HCV infection who received a heart or lung
transplant from donors with hepatitis C viremia, treatment with an antiviral
regimen for 4 weeks, initiated within a few hours after transplantation,
prevented the establishment of HCV infection. (Funded by the Mendez National
Institute of Transplantation Foundation and others; DONATE HCV ClinicalTrials.gov
number, NCT03086044.).

Copyright Â© 2019 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1812406 
PMCID: PMC7369135
PMID: 30946553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

