
1. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2019 Jul;19(7):671-683. doi:
10.1080/14712598.2019.1604671. Epub 2019 Apr 22.

Universal influenza virus vaccines: what needs to happen next?

Trucchi C(1)(2), Paganino C(1), Amicizia D(1)(2)(3), Orsi A(2)(3), Tisa V(3),
Piazza MF(1)(3), Icardi G(2)(3), Ansaldi F(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Health Planning Unit , Liguria Health Authority (A.Li.Sa) , Genoa , Italy.
(2)b Hygiene Unit , Ospedale Policlinico San Martino IRCCS teaching hospital ,
Genoa , Italy.
(3)c Department of Health Sciences , University of Genoa , Genoa , Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Influenza occurs worldwide and causes significant disease burden in
terms of morbidity, associated complications, hospitalizations, and deaths.
Vaccination constitutes the primary approach for controlling influenza. Current
influenza vaccines elicit a strain-specific response yet occasionally exhibit
suboptimal effectiveness. This review describes the limits of available
immunization tools and the future prospects and potentiality of universal
influenza vaccines.
AREAS COVERED: New 'universal' vaccines, which are presently under development,
are expected to overcome the problems related to the high variability of
influenza viruses, such as the need for seasonal vaccine updates and
re-vaccination. Here, we explore vaccines based on the highly conserved epitopes 
of the HA, NA, or extracellular domain of the influenza M2 protein, along with
those based on the internal proteins such as NP and M1.
EXPERT OPINION: The development of a universal influenza vaccine that confers
protection against homologous, drifted, and shifted influenza virus strains could
obviate the need for annual reformulation and mitigate disease burden. The
scientific community has long been awaiting the advent of universal influenza
vaccines; these are currently under development in laboratories worldwide. If
such vaccines are immunogenic, efficacious, and able to confer long-lasting
immunity, they might be integrated with or supplant traditional influenza
vaccines.

DOI: 10.1080/14712598.2019.1604671 
PMID: 30957589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

