
1. Eur J Immunol. 2019 Aug;49(8):1167-1185. doi: 10.1002/eji.201948126. Epub 2019
May 2.

Naturally processed HLA-DR3-restricted HHV-6B peptides are recognized broadly
with polyfunctional and cytotoxic CD4 T-cell responses.

Becerra-Artiles A(1), Cruz J(1), Leszyk JD(2)(3), Sidney J(4), Sette A(4)(5),
Shaffer SA(2)(3), Stern LJ(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA.
(2)Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Shrewsbury, MA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA.
(4)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Immunology, San Diego,
CA.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, CA.

Human herpes virus 6B (HHV-6B) is a widespread virus that infects most people
early in infancy and establishes a chronic life-long infection with periodic
reactivation. CD4 T cells have been implicated in control of HHV-6B, but
antigenic targets and functional characteristics of the CD4 T-cell response are
poorly understood. We identified 25 naturally processed MHC-II peptides, derived 
from six different HHV-6B proteins, and showed that they were recognized by CD4
T-cell responses in HLA-matched donors. The peptides were identified by mass
spectrometry after elution from HLA-DR molecules isolated from HHV-6B-infected
T cells. The peptides showed strong binding to matched HLA alleles and elicited
recall T-cell responses in vitro. T-cell lines expanded in vitro were used for
functional characterization of the response. Responding cells were mainly CD3+
CD4+ , produced IFN-γ, TNF-α, and low levels of IL-2, alone or in combination,
highlighting the presence of polyfunctional T cells in the overall response. Many
of the responding cells mobilized CD107a, stored granzyme B, and mediated
specific killing of peptide-pulsed target cells. These results highlight a
potential role for polyfunctional cytotoxic CD4 T cells in the long-term control 
of HHV-6B infection.

© 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201948126 
PMID: 31020640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

