
1. Western Pac Surveill Response J. 2019 Feb 19;10(1):15-24. doi:
10.5365/wpsar.2017.8.4.001. eCollection 2019 Jan-Mar.

Dengue-like illness surveillance: a two-year longitudinal survey in suburban and 
rural communities in the Lao People's Democratic Republic and in Thailand.

Vannavong N(1)(2), Seidu R(3), Stenström TA(4), Dada N(1), Overgaard HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science and Technology, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Ås, 
Norway.
(2)Champasak Provincial Health Office, Pakse, Lao People's Democratic Republic.
(3)Water and Environmental Engineering Group, Institute for Marine Operations and
Civil Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Ålesund,
Norway.
(4)SARChl Chair, Institute for Water and Waste Water Technology, Durban
University of Technology, Durban, South Africa.

Objective: This study aimed to determine the incidences of dengue-like illness
(DLI), dengue virus (DENV) infection, and serotypes and to identify
socio-demographical and entomological risk factors of DLI in selected suburban
and rural communities in the Lao People's Democratic Republic and in Thailand.
Methods: A two-year longitudinal study was conducted in four villages during the 
inter-epidemic period between 2011 and 2013. Entomological surveys,
semi-structured interviews of household heads and observations were conducted.
Occurrences of DLI were recorded weekly using the World Health Organization's
dengue definition along with blood samples; results were compared with national
surveillance dengue data. Risk factors of DLI were assessed using logistic
regression.
Results: Among the 2007 people in the study, 83 DLI cases were reported: 69 in
suburban Lao People's Democratic Republic, 11 in rural Thailand, three in rural
Lao People's Democratic Republic and none in suburban Thailand. Four were
confirmed DENV: two from suburban Lao People's Democratic Republic (both DENV-1) 
and two from rural Thailand (both DENV-2). Although the number of detected DLIs
during the study period was low, DLI incidence was higher in the study compared
to the dengue surveillance data in both countries. DLI in suburban Lao People's
Democratic Republic was associated with age and occupation, but not with the
number of pupae per person.
Discussion: This study highlights the importance of continuous clinical and
vector surveillance for dengue to improve early detection of dengue and other
mosquito-borne diseases in the region.

DOI: 10.5365/wpsar.2017.8.4.001 
PMCID: PMC6507124
PMID: 31110838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

