
1. Virusdisease. 2019 Mar;30(1):22-31. doi: 10.1007/s13337-019-00514-9. Epub 2019
Mar 1.

Recent advances in understanding the replication initiator protein of the ssDNA
plant viruses of the family Nanoviridae.

Venkataraman S(1), Selvarajan R(2).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Biotechnology, Acharya Nagarjuna University, Nagarjuna Nagar,
Guntur, 522510 India.
(2)2ICAR National Research Centre for Banana, Thayanur Post, Tiruchirapalli,
620102 India.

The families of viruses possessing single-stranded (ss) circular genome employ a 
dedicated replication initiator protein (Rep) for making copies of their genome
through the process of rolling circle replication. The replication begins at
conserved nonanucleotide sequence at the intergenic region. The Rep protein seems
to be the most conserved amongst the available proteins of the nanovirids and
comprises of the N-terminal endonuclease domain and the C-terminal helicase
domain. The structural studies of Faba bean necrotic yellows virus endonuclease
domain suggests a α + β fold comprising of central β sheet built from five
antiparallel β strands surrounded by outer short α helices. The catalysis is
mediated by a conserved Tyr residue and employs divalent metal ions (Mn2+). On
one hand, the Reps associate with each other and oligomerize and on the other
hand interact with varied host and vector associated proteins for successful
infection. The sequence analysis of Reps from previously known nanovirids and the
newly found ones from metagenomics data shed light on the evolutionary pattern of
nanovirids in comparison to other plant infecting ssDNA viruses.

DOI: 10.1007/s13337-019-00514-9 
PMCID: PMC6517469
PMID: 31143829 

