
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2019 Sep;92:101-110. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2019.05.065. Epub
2019 Jun 1.

Recombinant baculovirus BacCarassius-D4ORFs has potential as a live vector
vaccine against CyHV-2.

Li K(1), Yuan R(2), Zhang M(1), Zhang T(1), Gu Y(1), Zhou Y(3), Dai Y(1), Fang
P(2), Feng Y(4), Hu X(4), Cao G(4), Xue R(4), Chen H(2), Gong C(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology and Basic Medical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou,
215123, China.
(2)(b)Jiangsu Center for Control and Prevention of Aquatic Animal Infectious
Disease, Nanjing, 210036, China.
(3)Dafeng District Aquaculture Technical Extension Station of Yancheng city,
Yancheng, 224100, China.
(4)School of Biology and Basic Medical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou,
215123, China; Agricultural Biotechnology Research Institute, Agricultural
biotechnology and Ecological Research Institute, Soochow University, Suzhou,
215123, China.
(5)School of Biology and Basic Medical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou,
215123, China; Agricultural Biotechnology Research Institute, Agricultural
biotechnology and Ecological Research Institute, Soochow University, Suzhou,
215123, China. Electronic address: gongcl@suda.edu.cn.

Cyprinid herpesvirus II (CyHV-2) is highly contagious and pathogenic to Carassius
auratus gibelio (gibel carp), causing enormous economic losses in aquaculture in 
Yancheng city, Jiangsu province, China; however, to date, there is no effective
way to protect C. auratus gibelio from CyHV-2 infection. In this study, a
recombinant baculovirus vector vaccine, BacCarassius-D4ORFs, containing a fused
codon-optimized sequence D4ORFs comprising the ORF72 (region 1-186 nt), ORF66
(region 993-1197 nt), ORF81 (region 603-783 nt) and ORF82 (region 85-186 nt)
genes of CyHV-2, driven by a Megalobrama amblycephala β-actin promoter, was
constructed. Then, qPCR, Western blotting and immunofluorescence assays showed
that the fused gene D4ORFs was successfully delivered and expressed in fish cells
or tissues by transduction with BacCarassius-D4ORFs. The fused gene D4ORFs could 
not be detected by PCR in the C. auratus gibelio injected with
BacCarassius-D4ORFs after 7 weeks. Specific antibody against ORF72 could be
detected in the serum of vaccinated C. auratus gibelio by injection with
BacCarassius-D4ORFs. Furthermore, when C. auratus gibelio were vaccinated with
BacCarassius-D4ORFs via the oral or injection route, followed by challenge with
CyHV-2, the relative survival rate of immunized C. auratus gibelio reached 59.3% 
and 80.01%, respectively. These results suggested that BacCarassius-D4ORFs has
the potential to be used as a vector-based vaccine for the prevention and
treatment of disease caused by CyHV-2 infection.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2019.05.065 
PMID: 31163296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

