
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2019 Sep;66(5):1834-1839. doi: 10.1111/tbed.13280. Epub
2019 Jul 17.

Novel goose parvovirus in domestic Linwu sheldrakes with short beak and dwarfism 
syndrome, China.

Wan C(1)(2)(3), Liu R(1)(2)(3), Chen C(1)(2)(3), Cheng L(1)(2)(3), Shi
S(1)(2)(3), Fu G(1)(2)(3), Chen H(1)(2)(3), Fu Q(1)(2)(3), Huang Y(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Fujian Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Fuzhou, China.
(2)Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory for Avian Diseases Control and Prevention,
Fuzhou, China.
(3)Fujian Animal Diseases Control Technology Development Center, Fuzhou, China.

Recently, short beak and dwarfism syndrome (SBDS) had a sudden outbreak in Cherry
Valley duck flocks, followed by Pekin ducks and mule ducks in various regions of 
mainland China. This widely spreading infectious disease was characterized by
growth retardation, smaller beak and tarsus with high morbidity and low mortality
rate. In this study, we identified and characterized virus from domestic Linwu
sheldrakes (namely as HuN18) with SBDS. HuN18 isolates shared high nucleotide
identity with novel goose parvovirus (N-GPV). A 5110-nucleotide full-length
genome sequence of HuN18 was found with no deletion in ITR region. Alignment
studies of HuN18 showed 96.8%-99.0% identity with other N-GPVs and 92.9%-96.3%
identity with classic GPV. According to the recombination analysis, HuN18 showed 
the potential major parent was the N-GPV sdlc01 strain, the potential minor
parent was the classical GPV Y strain, and the secondary potential minor parent
was the SYG61v strain. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of 
N-GPV in domestic Linwu sheldrakes with SBDS; these data provide evidence that
attenuated live viruses are involved in genetic recombination with prevailing
wild parvoviruses, which contributes to the novel emerging variants of waterfowl 
parvoviruses.

Â© 2019 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.13280 
PMID: 31237413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

