
1. Arch Intern Med. 1988 Jul;148(7):1613-6.

T4+ cell production of interferon gamma and the clinical spectrum of patients at 
risk for and with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.

Murray HW(1), Scavuzzo DA, Kelly CD, Rubin BY, Roberts RB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Cornell University Medical College, New York.

Comment in
    Arch Intern Med. 1989 May;149(5):1224, 1226.

To fully characterize the relationship between the clinical manifestations of
human immunodeficiency virus infection and T4+ cell defects, we determined T4+
cell number and interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) production in 238 patients. For
asymptomatic homosexuals, patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS)-related complex (ARC), and patients with fully established AIDS, clinical 
status correlated linearly with both T4+ cell number and T4+ cell-derived
(antigen-stimulated) IFN-gamma secretion. For asymptomatic homosexuals,
abnormalities in T4+ cell number and IFN-gamma generation were similar
irrespective of human immunodeficiency virus seropositivity. For patients with
ARC, those with lymphadenopathy (LA) alone or LA plus zoster or thrombocytopenia 
displayed T4+ cell defects similar to those observed in asymptomatic homosexuals.
Patients with ARC with LA plus constitutional symptoms and/or oral thrush,
however, had fewer T4+ cells, were strikingly more deficient in IFN-gamma
production, and closely resembled those with AIDS. Among patients with AIDS,
certain individuals with Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) alone were sufficiently less
cytopenic and less immunodeficient than patients with opportunistic infections
(Ols) to suggest that the immune impairment that predisposes to KS may differ. At
the time patients with KS developed Ols, however, T4+ cell number and
IFN-gamma-generating capacity had declined to the remarkably low levels observed 
in virtually all patients with Ols alone.


PMID: 3132901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

