
1. Antiviral Res. 2019 Oct;170:104567. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2019.104567. Epub
2019 Jul 24.

Polyphenylene carboxymethylene (PPCM) in vitro antiviral efficacy against Ebola
virus in the context of a sexually transmitted infection.

Escaffre O(1), Juelich TL(2), Freiberg AN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Galveston, TX, 77555, USA. Electronic address:
olescaff@utmb.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, Galveston, TX, 77555, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Galveston, TX, 77555, USA; Center for Biodefense and 
Emerging Infectious Diseases, Galveston, TX, 77555, USA; Institute for Human
Infections and Immunity, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX,
77555, USA. Electronic address: anfreibe@utmb.edu.

Ebola virus disease (EVD) is caused by Ebola virus (EBOV) and characterized in
humans by hemorrhagic fever with high fatality rates. Human-to-human EBOV
transmission occurs by physical contact with infected body fluids, or indirectly 
by contaminated surfaces. Sexual transmission is a route of infection only
recently documented despite isolating EBOV virus or genome in the semen since
1976. Data on dissemination of EBOV from survivors remain limited and EBOV
pathogenesis in humans following sexual transmission is unknown. The in vitro
antiviral efficacy of polyphenylene carboxymethylene (PPCM) against EBOV was
investigated considering the limited countermeasures available to block infection
through sexual intercourse. PPCM is a vaginal topical contraceptive microbicide
shown to prevent sexual transmission of HIV, herpes virus, and bacterial
infections in several different models. Here we demonstrate its antiviral
activity against EBOV. No viral replication was detected in the presence of PPCM 
in cell culture, including vaginal epithelial (VK2/E6E7) cells. Specifically,
PPCM reduced viral attachment to cells by interfering with EBOV glycoprotein, and
possibly through binding the cell surface glycosaminoglycan heparan sulfate
important in the infection process. EBOV-infected VK2/E6E7 cells were found to
secrete type III interferon (IFN), suggesting activation of distinct PRRs or
downstream signaling factors from those required for type I and II IFN. The
addition of PPCM following cell infection prevented notably the increase of these
inflammation markers. Therefore, PPCM could potentially be used as a topical
microbicide to reduce transmission by EBOV-positive survivors during sexual
intercourse.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2019.104567 
PMCID: PMC6765433 [Available on 2020-10-01]
PMID: 31351092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

