
1. Epidemiol Infect. 2019 Jan;147:e218. doi: 10.1017/S0950268819001031.

Molecular detection and characterisation of sapoviruses and noroviruses in
outpatient children with diarrhoea in Northwest Ethiopia.

Gelaw A(1), Pietsch C(2), Mann P(2), Liebert UG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology,School of Biomedical and Laboratory
Sciences,College of Medicine and Health Sciences,University of Gondar,Ethiopia.
(2)Institute of Virology,Leipzig University,Leipzig,Germany.

Childhood morbidity and mortality of diarrhoeal diseases are high, particularly
in low-income countries and noroviruses and sapoviruses are among the most
frequent causes worldwide. Their epidemiology and diversity remain not well
studied in many African countries. To assess the positivity rate and the
diversity of sapoviruses and noroviruses in Northwest Ethiopia, during November
2015 and April 2016, a total of 450 faecal samples were collected from outpatient
children aged &lt;5 years who presented with diarrhoea. Samples were screened for
noroviruses and sapoviruses by real-time RT-PCR. Partial VP1 genes were
sequenced, genotyped and phylogenetically analysed. Norovirus and sapovirus stool
positivity rate was 13.3% and 10.0%, respectively. Noroviruses included GII.4
(35%), GII.6 (20%), GII.17 (13.3%), GII.10 (10%), GII.2 (6.7%), GII.16 (5%),
GII.7 (3.3%), GII.9, GII.13, GII.20 and GI.3 (1.7% each) strains. For
sapoviruses, GI.1, GII.1 (20.0% each), GII.6 (13.3%), GI.2 (8.9%), GII.2 (11.1%),
GV.1 (8.9%), GIV.1 (6.7%), GI.3 and GII.4 (2.2% each) genotypes were detected.
This study demonstrates a high genetic diversity of noroviruses and sapoviruses
in Northwest Ethiopia. The positivity rate in stool samples from young children
with diarrhoea was high for both caliciviruses. Continued monitoring is
recommended to identify trends in genetic diversity and seasonal variations.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268819001031 
PMCID: PMC6625200
PMID: 31364546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

