
1. Eye Contact Lens. 2020 Sep;46(5):265-268. doi: 10.1097/ICL.0000000000000642.

The Prevalence of Bacteria, Fungi, Viruses, and Acanthamoeba From 3,004 Cases of 
Keratitis, Endophthalmitis, and Conjunctivitis.

Kowalski RP(1), Nayyar SV, Romanowski EG, Shanks RMQ, Mammen A, Dhaliwal DK,
Jhanji V.

Author information: 
(1)The Charles T. Campbell Eye Microbiology Laboratory, Department of
Ophthalmology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC), University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

PURPOSE: The definitive identification of ocular pathogens optimizes effective
treatment. Although the types of ocular pathogens are known; there is less
definitive information on the prevalence of causative infections including
viruses, fungi, and protozoa, which is the focus of this retrospective laboratory
review.
METHODS: Data used for laboratory certification were reviewed for the detection
of bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protozoa, from patients with infectious
keratitis, endophthalmitis, and conjunctivitis. The main outcome parameter was
laboratory-positive ocular infection.
RESULTS: The distribution of infectious agents for keratitis (n=1,387)
(2004-2018) was bacteria 72.1% (Staphylococcus aureus 20.3%, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa 18%, Streptococcus spp. 8.5%, other gram-positives 12.4%, and other
gram-negatives 12.9%), Herpes simplex virus 16%, fungi 6.7%, and Acanthamoeba
5.2%. For endophthalmitis, (n=770) (1993-2018), the bacterial distribution was
coagulase-negative Staphylococcus 54%, Streptococcus spp. 21%, S. aureus 10%,
other gram-positives 8%, and gram-negatives 7%. The distribution for
conjunctivitis (n=847) (2004-2018) was Adenovirus 34%, S. aureus 25.5%,
Streptococcus pneumoniae 9%, Haemophilus 9%, other gram-negatives 8.8%, other
gram-positives 6%, coagulase-negative Staphylococcus 4.5% and Chlamydia 3.2%.
CONCLUSION: An updated monitoring of ocular pathogens creates an awareness of the
different infectious etiologies and the importance of laboratory studies. This
information can determine treatment needs for infectious ocular diseases.

DOI: 10.1097/ICL.0000000000000642 
PMID: 31373904 

