
1. Brain Res. 2019 Dec 1;1724:146426. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2019.146426. Epub 2019
Aug 29.

The impact of substance abuse on HIV-mediated neuropathogenesis in the current
ART era.

Chilunda V(1), Calderon TM(1), Martinez-Aguado P(1), Berman JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park
Avenue, Bronx, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park
Avenue, Bronx, NY, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, USA. Electronic
address: joan.berman@einstein.yu.edu.

Approximately 37 million people worldwide are infected with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). One highly significant complication of HIV
infection is the development of HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) in
15-55% of people living with HIV (PLWH), that persists even in the antiretroviral
therapy (ART) era. The entry of HIV into the central nervous system (CNS) occurs 
within 4-8 days after peripheral infection. This establishes viral reservoirs
that may persist even in the presence of ART. Once in the CNS, HIV infects
resident macrophages, microglia, and at low levels, astrocytes. In response to
chronic infection and cell activation within the CNS, viral proteins,
inflammatory mediators, and host and viral neurotoxic factors produced over
extended periods of time result in neuronal injury and loss, cognitive deficits
and HAND. Substance abuse is a common comorbidity in PLWH and has been shown to
increase neuroinflammation and cognitive disorders. Additionally, it has been
associated with poor ART adherence, and increased viral load in the cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF), that may also contribute to increased neuroinflammation and neuronal
injury. Studies have examined mechanisms that contribute to neuroinflammation and
neuronal damage in PLWH, and how substances of abuse exacerbate these effects.
This review will focus on how substances of abuse, with an emphasis on
methamphetamine (meth), cocaine, and opioids, impact blood brain barrier (BBB)
integrity and transmigration of HIV-infected and uninfected monocytes across the 
BBB, as well as their effects on monocytes/macrophages, microglia, and astrocytes
within the CNS. We will also address how these substances of abuse may contribute
to HIV-mediated neuropathogenesis in the context of suppressive ART.
Additionally, we will review the effects of extracellular dopamine, a
neurotransmitter that is increased in the CNS by substances of abuse, on HIV
neuropathogenesis and how this may contribute to neuroinflammation, neuronal
insult, and HAND in PLWH with active substance use. Lastly, we will discuss some 
potential therapies to limit CNS inflammation and damage in HIV-infected
substance abusers.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2019.146426 
PMCID: PMC6889827 [Available on 2020-12-01]
PMID: 31473221 

