
1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2019 Jul 31;14:270-274. doi:
10.1016/j.omtm.2019.07.007. eCollection 2019 Sep 13.

Integration of Fluorescence Detection and Image-Based Automated Counting
Increases Speed, Sensitivity, and Robustness of Plaque Assays.

Masci AL(1), Menesale EB(1), Chen WC(1), Co C(1), Lu X(1), Bergelson S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bioassay and Gene Therapy, Analytical Development, Biogen, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Plaque assays are used to measure the infectious titer of viral samples. These
assays are multi-day and low-throughput and may be subject to analyst variability
from biased or subjective manual plaque counting. Typically, on day 1, cells are 
adhered to plates overnight. On day 2, cells are infected with virus. After 3
additional days, plaques are fixed, stained with a horseradish peroxidase
(HRP)-conjugated antibody and a HRP substrate, and counted by eye. Manual-based
visual counting of plaques is time-consuming and laborious and may be subject to 
variability between analysts. Also, the assay must proceed for several days to
allow the plaques to increase to sufficiently large sizes for manual
identification. Here, we integrate fluorescent detection and automated plaque
counting to increase the sensitivity and speed of the assay. First, we stain
plaques with a fluorescent-labeled antibody. Second, we implement a plate-based
cell imager to perform non-biased, non-subjective plaque counting. The
integration of these two technologies decreases the assay length by 40%, from
5 days to 3 days, because plaque size, plaque signal to noise, and manual
visualization are no longer limiting. This optimized plaque assay is sensitive,
fast, and robust and expands the throughput and usage of this method for
measuring plaque formation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2019.07.007 
PMCID: PMC6717064
PMID: 31489337 

