
1. Afr J AIDS Res. 2019 Sep;18(3):181-191. doi: 10.2989/16085906.2019.1637913. Epub 
2019 Sep 10.

Associations between female genital mutilation/cutting and HIV: a review of the
evidence.

Noah Pinheiro YA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Consultant, Population Council , Nairobi , Kenya.

Apart from its known association with short- and long-term adverse physical,
psychological, and sexual sequelae, female genital mutilation/cutting (FGM/C)
could be associated with increased susceptibility to HIV. Some experts propose
that FGM/C increases risk of genital trauma and bleeding. Given the known
protective effect for men of male circumcision against HIV and that, in some
communities, male circumcision and FGM/C are thought of as "equivalent" or
parallel procedures, there is an obvious need to more accurately determine the
effects of FGM/C on HIV infection risk in women. This article reviewed current
evidence of associations between FGM/C and HIV, drawing on evidence from
peer-reviewed as well as grey literature. All studies evaluated were
observational. This review investigated associations between FGM/C and HIV, not a
causal relationship, and observational studies therefore sufficed. The final
review included 14 studies from several African countries. The strength of the
evidence overall was determined to be of low to moderate quality by Department
for International Development criteria: conceptual framing, openness and
transparency, cogency, appropriateness and rigour, validity, reliability, and
cultural sensitivity. Findings were inconsistent: four studies found no
association between FGM/C and HIV, six found a negative association, two found a 
positive association, and two found an indirect association. Many of the studies 
had significant deficiencies including insufficient statistical power, inadequate
adjustment for potential confounders, and measurement of FGM/C status by
self-reporting alone. The available evidence did not conclusively demonstrate the
anticipated association between FGM/C and HIV. This review revealed the need for 
stronger study designs and outlines some considerations for future research.

DOI: 10.2989/16085906.2019.1637913 
PMID: 31502923  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

