
1. Mol Med Rep. 2019 Nov;20(5):4285-4292. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2019.10687. Epub 2019 Sep
16.

Adenovirus vector‑mediated in vivo gene transfer of nuclear factor
erythroid‑2p45‑related factor 2 promotes functional recovery following spinal
cord contusion.

Zhu FC(1), Jiang DM(2), Zhang MH(1), Zhao B(1), He C(1), Yang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Yongchuan Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 402160, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 401120, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to investigate whether nuclear factor erythroid 
2p45‑related factor 2 (Nrf2) overexpression by gene transfer may protect
neurons/glial cells and the association between neurons/glial cells and axons in 
spinal cord injury (SCI). In the present study, Nrf2 recombinant adenovirus (Ad) 
vectors were constructed. The protein levels of Nrf2 in the nucleus and of the
Nrf2‑regulated gene products heme oxygenase‑1 (HO‑1) and NAD (P)H‑quinone
oxidoreductase‑1 (NQO1), were detected using western blot analysis in PC12 cells 
following 48 h of transfection. Furthermore, the expression of Nrf2 was localized
using an immunofluorescence experiment, and the expression of Nrf2, HO‑1 and NQO1
were detected using an immunohistochemical experiment in the grey matter of
spinal cord in rats. Post‑injury motor behavior was assessed via the Basso,
Beattie and Bresnahan (BBB) locomotor scale method. In PC12 cells, subsequent to 
Ad‑Nrf2 transfection, nuclear Nrf2, HO‑1 and NQO1 levels were significantly
increased compared with the control (P<0.01). There was statistically signiﬁcant 
changes in the PC12‑Ad‑Nrf2 group [Nrf2 (1.146±0.095), HO‑1 (1.816±0.095) and
NQO1 (1.421±0.138)] compared with the PC12‑control group [Nrf2 (0.717±0.055),
HO‑1 (1.264±0.081) and NQO1 (0.921±0.088)] and PC12‑Ad‑green fluorescent protein 
group [Nrf2 (0.714±0.111), HO‑1 (1.238±0.053) and NQO1 (0.987±0.045); P<0.01].
The BBB scores of the rats indicated that they had improved functional recovery
following the local injection of Ad‑Nrf2. On the third day following the
operation, BBB scores in the adenovirus groups (0.167±0.408) were significantly
decreased compared with the SCI group (1±0.894; P<0.05). In the injured section
of the spinal cord in the rats, the number of positive cells expressing Nrf2,
HO‑1 and NQO1 were raised compared with the control and SCI groups, indicating
that the adenovirus vector‑mediated gene transfer of Nrf2 promotes functional
recovery following spinal cord contusion in rats.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2019.10687 
PMID: 31545436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

