
1. BMC Vet Res. 2019 Oct 28;15(1):373. doi: 10.1186/s12917-019-2092-5.

Characterization and pathogenicity of fowl adenovirus serotype 4 isolated from
eastern China.

Wang K(1), Sun H(1), Li Y(1), Yang Z(1), Ye J(2), Chen H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, CAAS, Shanghai, 200241, China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, 225009, China.
(3)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, CAAS, Shanghai, 200241, China.
vetchj@shvri.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Fowl adenovirus outbreaks have occurred in China since June 2015.
This virus is an emerging infectious disease that causes hydropericardium
syndrome and inclusion body hepatitis (HPS-IBH), resulting in significant
economic loss to poultry farmers. Five fowl adenovirus (FAdV) strains (HN, AQ,
AH726, JS07 and AH712) were isolated from Jiangsu and Anhui provinces.
RESULTS: Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the five isolates belonged to
species C fowl adenovirus serotype 4. An 11 amino-acid deletion in ORF29,
relative to an older viral isolate, JSJ13, was observed for all five strains
described here. In chicken experiments, 80-100% birds died after intramuscular
inoculation and displayed lesions characteristic of HPS-IBH. The viral DNA copies
were further detected by hexon-probe based real-time polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) in the chicken samples. The viral loads and cytokine profiles were recorded
in all the organs after infections. Despite minor genetic differences, the 5
strains displayed significantly different tissue tropisms and cytokine profiles.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data enhance the current understanding some of the factors
involved in the pathogenicity and genetic diversity of the FAdV serotype 4
(FAdV-4) in China. Our work provides theoretical support for the prevention and
control of HPS-IBH in chickens.

DOI: 10.1186/s12917-019-2092-5 
PMCID: PMC6816224
PMID: 31660972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

