
1. Arch Dermatol Res. 1987;279(8):499-503.

Initial lesions of HIV-related Kaposi's sarcoma--a histological,
immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural study.

Schulze HJ(1), RÃ¼tten A, Mahrle G, Steigleder GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Cologne, Federal Republic of Germany.

Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) in human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV) has become 
a rather frequent manifestation of the previously rare disease with fatal
outcome. Initial lesions of KS were studied by means of histopathology,
immunohistology, and electron microscopy in order to define the earliest
alterations. The histopathological changes of initial lesions were distinct,
consisting of (1) discrete proliferation of capillary vessels, (2) dissection of 
collagen by proliferating spindle cells which formed slits, (3) atypical spindle 
cells arranged in an Indian file pattern, and (4) the lack of any inflammatory
cellular infiltrate. Double staining with antibodies against vimentin and
immunohistochemical markers for endothelial cells revealed that slits forming
vimentin-positive spindle cells displayed laminin, factor VIII, and PAL-E.
Atypical vimentin-positive spindle cells arranged in an Indian file pattern
inconsistently expressed laminin and factor VIII, but not PAL-E. KS cells rarely 
stained with the lectin UEA I, not even in case of less advanced
dedifferentiation. Electron microscopy showed gradual transformation between
spindle cells forming slits and those having lost the ability to form incomplete 
vessel walls. The present findings support the view that KS develops from the
endothelial cells of the blood vessels. The proliferation of atypical endothelial
cells as early as in initial lesions and the lack of inflammation favors the
primary neoplastic genesis of KS.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00413279 
PMID: 3324975  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

