
1. Virology. 1988 Jan;162(1):65-75.

Time course of virus-specific macromolecular synthesis during rubella virus
infection in Vero cells.

Hemphill ML(1), Forng RY, Abernathy ES, Frey TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta 30303.

Virus specific macromolecular synthesis was studied in Vero cells infected with
plaque-purified rubella virus under one-step multiplication conditions. Under
these conditions, the rate of virus production was found to increase rapidly
until 24 hr postinfection after which time the rate of virus production rose more
slowly, reaching a peak level at 48 hr postinfection. This peak rate of virus
production was maintained through 72 hr postinfection. A majority of the cells
remained alive through 96 hr postinfection, although a 20 to 30% decrease in the 
number of living cells occurred between 24 and 48 hr postinfection, the time
period at which cytopathic effect was first observed. The virus structural
proteins were first detected intracellularly at 16 hr postinfection. The rate of 
synthesis of these proteins was already maximal at 16 hr postinfection and
remained constant through 48 hr postinfection. By immunofluorescence, cells
expressing virus proteins were first observed at 12 hr postinfection. At 24 hr
postinfection, 35 to 50% of the cells in the infected culture were exhibiting
immunofluorescence, at 36 hr postinfection, 65 to 90% of the cells were
exhibiting immunofluorescence, and at 48 hr postinfection, all of the cells were 
exhibiting immunofluorescence. The virus genomic and subgenomic RNA species were 
first detectable by 12 hr postinfection. The rate of synthesis of both of these
species peaked at 26 hr postinfection. Rubella virus infection was found to have 
no effect on total cell RNA synthesis. However, a modest inhibition of total cell
protein synthesis which reached 40% by 48 hr postinfection was observed. When
Northern analysis of RNA extracted from infected cells was performed, a
negative-polarity, virus-specific RNA probe hybridized only to the virus genomic 
and subgenomic RNA species. A positive-polarity, virus-specific RNA probe
hybridized predominantly to a negative-polarity RNA of genome length indicating
that both the genomic and subgenomic RNAs are synthesized from a genome-length
negative-polarity template. Defective interfering (DI) RNAs were not detected in 
infected cells through 96 hr postinfection or in cells onto which virus released 
through 96 hr postinfection was passaged. Thus, the generation of DI particles by
rubella virus appears to play no role in the slow, noncytopathic replication of
this virus or in the ability of rubella virus-infected cells to survive for
extended periods of time.

DOI: 10.1016/0042-6822(88)90395-9 
PMID: 3336944  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

