
1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1986 Oct;27(10):1459-65.

Role of virus-infected mononuclear leukocytes in herpetic chorioretinitis of
newborn rabbits.

Ohashi Y, Oh JO, Ou KH, Nichols B.

The role of virus-infected mononuclear leukocytes (MNLs) in the pathogenesis of
neonatal herpetic chorioretinitis in newborn rabbits was investigated. As early
as 2 days after inoculating the animals' skins with type 2 herpes simplex virus
(HSV-2), infectious MNLs in the infected animals' peripheral blood were found.
The virus was associated, for the most part, with MNLs that belonged to
phagocytic and adherent cell fractions. Observations by electron microscopy
indicated that HSV-2 was actively replicating in the MNLs. It was also found that
as few as 80 virus-infected MNLs injected via the right common carotoid artery
were capable of inducing the chorioretinal lesions in 50% of the eyes, but that
as many as 10(3) Pfu of free virus were required to produce the same lesions in
the same percentage of eyes. This result clearly indicated that virus-infected
MNLs were far more efficient in producing chorioretinitis than free virus, and
may thus play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of herpetic chorioretinitis in
newborn rabbits. When 111In-labeled virus-infected or uninfected MNLs were
injected into normal rabbits via the right common carotid artery, the
virus-infected MNLs localized more readily in the eye than the uninfected MNLs.
The virus-infected MNLs also attached to the cultured vascular endothelial cells 
significantly more often than the uninfected MNLs. These results suggested that
virus-infected MNLs might be easily trapped in the circulation of the eye and, in
this way, produce the ocular lesions.


PMID: 3759364  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

