
1. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 1985 Feb;4(1):26-31.

Inefficacy of immunosuppressive treatment in HBSAg-positive, delta-negative,
moderate chronic active hepatitis in children.

Vajro P, Orso G, D'Antonio A, Greco L, Fontanella A, Loffredo G, Oggero V,
Buffolano W.

The efficacy of immunosuppressive treatment was evaluated in a group of 15
children (aged 2-10 years) affected by clinically asymptomatic, biochemically
mild, HBSAg-positive, delta-antibody-negative, histologically moderate, chronic
active hepatitis (CAH). Clinical, biochemical, serological, and histological
features of chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection were studied during a
follow-up of 2 years. Eight of 15 patients received immunosuppressive treatment
(prednisone plus azathioprine); seven received a placebo. No significant
differences were found among treated and untreated patients, an overall
improvement of nearly all parameters of disease (aminotransferases, albumin,
prothrombin time, immunoglobulins, bromsulphalein at 45 min, and bile acid serum 
levels) being found in both groups. Treated patients showed an improvement in
aminotransferase levels only at the first 3-month checkup. This finding, however,
was not statistically significant in our study and disappeared at subsequent
follow-up examinations. A high incidence of HBeAg was noted at entry into the
study (10 of 15 patients checked). HBeAg seroconversion was observed in two of
the six HBeAg-positive treated patients and in two of the four HBeAg-positive
untreated patients. Finally, the histological picture showed similar patterns in 
both groups of patients studied. Our data suggest that no benefit from
immunosuppressive therapy can be proven at this time in asymptomatic, moderately 
active, HBsAg-positive, delta-negative CAH in children.

DOI: 10.1097/00005176-198502000-00006 
PMID: 3884766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

