
1. In Vitro. 1984 Jun;20(6):493-504.

Establishment and characterization of a new human hepatocellular carcinoma cell
line.

He L, Isselbacher KJ, Wands JR, Goodman HM, Shih C, Quaroni A.

A human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line (FOCUS--Friendship of China and United
States) was derived from a patient with primary hepatocellular carcinoma. This
cell line has been in continuous culture over an 18-mo period. The morphological 
and ultrastructural features of FOCUS are consistent with its neoplastic
hepatocellular origin. FOCUS cells contain aspartate aminotransferase and
glucose-6-phosphatase activity. In addition, alpha 1-antitrypsin, fibrinogen,
alpha fetoprotein, and carcinoembryonic antigens were detectable in the cytoplasm
of the cultured cells by immunochemical staining techniques. The karyotype of the
FOCUS cell is human in origin and its contains human DNA sequences as detected by
molecular hybridization analysis. The FOCUS cells do not show evidence of
density-dependent inhibition of growth under confluent conditions. Repeated
growth curves over an 18-mo period were identical, revealing a doubling time of
42 to 48 h. The malignant potential of FOCUS cells was further demonstrated by
their ability to lead to gross tumor formation after subcutaneous injection into 
nude mice. From one of the solid tumors grown in nude mice, recultured cell lines
have been established and found to have properties identical to the original
FOCUS cell line. This FOCUS cell line represents an additional model for further 
investigation of tumor specific antigens and the relationship between hepatitis B
virus (HBV) and hepatocellular carcinoma. Preliminary molecular characterization 
has indicated the existence of integrated HBV sequences within the FOCUS genome.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02619623 
PMID: 6086498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

