
1. Int J Cancer. 1981 Nov 15;28(5):559-66.

Retrovirus p30-related antigen in human syncytiotrophoblasts and IgG antibodies
in cord-blood sera.

Suni J, Wahlstr√∂m T, Vaheri A.

Sensitive immunological techniques were used to detect retrovirus markers in
human pregnancy. A total of 1,540 human cord-blood sera were tested for
retrovirus-reactive IgG antibodies using solid-phase enzyme immunoassay and
purified RD 114 virus as antigen. Of these, 118 (7.7%) sera were positive.
Blocking assays with specific animal anti-p30 sera, use of control antigen, and
electrophoretic protein experiments combined with immunological detection
indicated that the human antibodies reacted specifically with the p30 protein.
The occurrence of antibodies in cord-blood serum had a highly significant
correlation to complications during pregnancy and also correlated to the number
of previous abortions and stillbirths. When goat anti-RD 114 p30 serum was used
in the peroxidase-anti-peroxidase tissue staining procedure, p30-related antigen 
was detected in sections of all placental specimens (early and term pregnancies, 
blighted ova, hydatidiform moles, destructive moles and choriocarcinomas).
However, in each case only syncytiotrophoblastic cells were positive. These
findings, supplemented with different types of blocking tests, lead us to
conclude that retrovirus p30-related antigen is selectively expressed in the
highly differentiated syncytiotrophoblasts, which in the normal placenta are
directly exposed to maternal blood. It is suggested that retrovirus-reactive
antibodies may represent an autoimmune-like immune response to the p30-related
syncytiotrophoblast antigen escaping during cellular damage.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.2910280505 
PMID: 6273338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

