
1. J Med Virol. 1983;11(3):215-31.

Candidate adenoviruses 40 and 41: fastidious adenoviruses from human infant
stool.

de Jong JC, Wigand R, Kidd AH, Wadell G, Kapsenberg JG, Muzerie CJ, Wermenbol AG,
Firtzlaff RG.

About 200 antigenically related adenoviruses were isolated from cases of
infantile diarrhoea in the Netherlands and North-West Germany. The viruses were
fastidious and failed to replicate serially in human diploid fibroblasts and in
primary human embryonic kidney cells. A number of strains were established in
HeLa, HEp-2, Graham (293), cynomolgus monkey kidney, and Chang conjunctival
cells. The viruses were mammalian adenoviruses by the usual criteria. No
relationship to the 39 known human adenovirus species was found, either by
neutralization tests or by haemagglutination inhibition tests. Neutralization
tests showed two distinct variants, represented by strains Tak and Dugan. The
variants were identical in haemagglutination inhibition tests. DNA restriction
enzyme analysis showed Tak and Dugan to have considerably different genomes,
indicating that these variants should be classified as different species (Wadell 
et al, 1983). It is proposed that the variants should be called Mastadenovirus h 
40 (with reference strains Dugan and Hovi X) and Mastadenovirus h 41 (with
reference strain Tak). Neutralization and haemagglutination inhibition tests
demonstrated that the viruses from Glasgow and Helsinki (Hovi X) described by
Johansson et al [1980] and by Kidd and Madeley [1981] belong to these two
adenovirus species.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.1890110305 
PMID: 6306161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

