
1. Arch Virol. 1983;77(1):1-11.

Coxsackievirus B4: in vitro genetic markers and virulence.

Jimes S, Jamison RM.

The relationship of virulence to mice of the coxsackievirus B4 prototype JBV
strain and selected mutants to several in vitro genetic markers has been
examined. Markers studied include the t, d, DS, DEAE-D, and guanidine resistance 
(G), markers and a plaque size marker, here designated PS. The JVB strain was
found to have the characteristics t-, d-, DS+, DEAE-D+, G-, PS+ and to be
virulent when inoculated by the intraperitoneal route into suckling CD-1 mice
(log titer/LD50 = 6.4/6.0). One naturally occurring mutant strain (characteristic
= t-, d+, DS+, G-, PS+ was selected by terminal end point dilution and found to
be virulent (log titer/LD50 = 7.0/6.0). Passage of the JVB population in the
presence of guanidine hydrochloride (75 micrograms/ml) allowed selection of
avirulent, guanidine resistant mutants with characteristics of t-, d-, DS+,
DEAE-D+, G+. These mutants produced only small plaques (1.0-1.6 mm) and were
designated PS-. The prototype and other selected strains that contained both
large plaque and small plaque variants were characterized as PS+ and were
invariably virulent. Although a variance in the d character has been demonstrated
in some of the above strains, we conclude that virulence and the in vitro genetic
markers t, d, DS, and DEAE-D are not related in our coxsackievirus B4 CD-1 mouse 
system. A relationship between plaque size (PS) and/or guanidine resistance (G+) 
of selected strains of coxsackievirus B4 and avirulence has been demonstrated in 
this system.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01314859 
PMID: 6312933  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

