
1. Cancer Res. 1984 Mar;44(3):1288-300.

Immunological characterization of Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma patients
with high antibody titers against Epstein-Barr virus-associated antigens.

Masucci G, Mellstedt H, Masucci MG, Szigeti R, Ernberg I, Bj√∂rkholm M, Tsukuda K,
Henle G, Henle W, Pearson G, et al.

We have studied nine Hodgkin's lymphoma (HD) and ten non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL)
patients with extraordinarily high anti-viral capsid antigen (VCA) titers
(greater than 5120). Controls were 13 HD and 23 NHL patients with anti-VCA titers
between 40 and 2560. High anti-VCA titers were present in NHL patients at the
time of diagnosis or within 16 months, whereas the rise of anti-VCA titers in HD 
patients appeared to be a late event during the clinical course of the disease
(mean time from diagnosis, 68 months). In particular, we have asked whether the
exceptionally high anti-Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) titers in some HD and NHL
patients can be correlated to some of the EBV-specific and -nonspecific
parameters of cell-mediated immunity. The battery of non-EBV-specific
immunological tests included the assessment of natural killer cell activity and
the analysis of T-lymphocyte subclasses according to surface markers, together
with spontaneous and mitogen-induced DNA synthesis and their helper or suppressor
activity on PWM-generated immunoglobulin synthesis. Outgrowth inhibition (Ol) and
leukocyte migration inhibition were used to assess EBV-specific cell-mediated
immunity. The majority of the high-titer HD and NHL patients showed a drastically
reduced OKT4:OKT8 ratio in their peripheral lymphocyte population. Low-titer HD
and NHL patients showed no such reduction. There was no strict correlation
between the number of OKT8-positive cells and suppressor activity in the
functional PWM-induced immunoglobulin production test. Part of the high-titer HD 
patients showed defective cellular responses in the outgrowth inhibition test,
directed against the proliferation of EBV-transformed (EBV-determined nuclear
antigen-positive) cells. Some of them showed also a deficient leukocyte migration
inhibition response to EBV-determined nuclear antigen but, interestingly, not to 
early antigen-VCA. In the NHL group, only one of the high-titer patients showed a
similar defect. None of the low-titer HD and NHL patients showed such defects.


PMID: 6318984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

