
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1983 Dec 20;11(24):8747-60.

An enhancer element is located 340 base pairs upstream from the adenovirus-2 E1A 
capsite.

Hen R, Borrelli E, Sassone-Corsi P, Chambon P.

A chimeric recombinant, containing the 270 bp left-terminal fragment of
Adenovirus-2 (Ad2) inserted upstream from the -34 to +33 Ad2 major late promoter 
(Ad2MLP) element, has been used to characterize the transcription stimulatory
element which is located at least 231 bp upstream from the E1A capsite in the
left-end of Ad2 (Ref. 1). We demonstrate that this element, which acts in cis,
possesses several properties characteristic of transcriptional enhancers.
Firstly, it potentiates initiation of transcription from the capsite of the
heterologous Ad2MLP and from "cryptic" sites often preceded by TATA box-like
sequences. Secondly, although there is no critical distance requirement between
the enhancer element and the Ad2MLP, the extent of stimulation decreases as the
distance between the two element increases. However, in contrast to the other
known viral or cellular enhancers which are bidirectional, the Ad2 enhancer is
unidirectional, i.e. it potentiates the Ad2MLP element only when it is inserted
in its "natural" orientation with respect to the direction of transcription.
Using two convergent series of deletions, we have localized the Ad2 enhancer
element within a 24 bp segment located at approximately 160 bp from the Ad2
left-end, i.e. 340 bp upstream from the E1A capsite. This 24 bp segment contains 
a sequence which exhibits a striking homology with the consensus sequence of
several viral and cellular enhancers.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/11.24.8747 
PMCID: PMC326621
PMID: 6324099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

