
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1984 May;81(10):3133-7.

Occurrence of caldesmon (a calmodulin-binding protein) in cultured cells:
comparison of normal and transformed cells.

Owada MK, Hakura A, Iida K, Yahara I, Sobue K, Kakiuchi S.

Caldesmon is a calmodulin-binding and F-actin-binding protein originally purified
from chicken gizzard smooth muscle. This protein binds to F-actin filaments in a 
Ca2+- and calmodulin-dependent "flip-flop" fashion, thereby regulating the
function of actin filaments. Here we report that various lines of cultured cells 
contain a Mr 77,000 protein that specifically reacts with the affinity-purified
caldesmon antibody raised against chicken gizzard caldesmon . Among the
fibroblast proteins that had been pulse-labeled with [35S]methionine, the Mr
77,000 protein was the only protein band detected on the NaDodSO4 gel that
reacted with the anticaldesmon . The subcellular distribution of the Mr 77,000
protein was investigated by the indirect immunofluorescence technique using the
anticaldesmon . In all fibroblast cell lines examined, the immunofluorescence
localized along the cellular stress fibers and in leading edges of the cell. In
Rous sarcoma virus-transformed cells (S7-1), however, the distribution of the
fluorescence changed to a diffuse and blurred appearance. These staining patterns
of anticaldesmon obtained with the normal and transformed cells coincided with
those of antiactin in the corresponding states, strongly suggesting the
functional linkage between the Mr 77,000 protein and actin filaments. We propose 
to refer to this Mr 77,000 protein as caldesmon 77. The cellular level of
caldesmon 77 in transformed S7-1 cells decreased to about one-third of that in
their normal counterparts (cell line no. 7). Essentially the same result was
obtained with normal rat kidney cells infected with the temperature-sensitive
transformation mutant Schmidt-Ruppin strain of Rous sarcoma virus (68 N2 clone). 
The cellular level of caldesmon 77 observed at a permissive temperature (35
degrees C) was about one-third of that at a nonpermissive temperature (38.5
degrees C). These changes of caldesmon 77 in transformed cells may correlate with
the loss of Ca2+ regulation in the transformed state.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.81.10.3133 
PMCID: PMC345235
PMID: 6328499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

