
1. Circulation. 1978 Jun;57(6):1122-9.

An ultrastructural basis for electrocardiographic alterations associated with
Duchenne's progressive muscular dystrophy.

Sanyal SK, Johnson WW, Thapar MK, Pitner SE.

Electrocardiographic abnormalities were identified in 63 (84%) of 75 patients
with Duchenne's progressive muscular dystrophy. A tall R wave over V1 with an
abnormal R/S ratio was seen in 64% of the patients, a deep and narrow Q wave
greater than 4 mm over leads I, V5, and V6 in 44%, sinus tachycardia in 32% and
right axis deviation in 16%. Other ECG abnormalities included an abnormal PV1
index in 14% of patients and a short P-R interval in 6%. Ultrastructural
characteristics of the heart were determined for two patients with characteristic
electrocardiographic abnormalities. Common to both hearts was a total loss of
thick as well as thin myofilaments, which gave a "moth-eaten" appearance to the
myofiber. This feature, combined with preservation of the transverse tubular
system, formed the most characteristic ultrastructural finding and was seen most 
consistently in the posterobasal area of the left ventricle. Alterations of
Z-band material; accumulation of mitochondria, occasionally containing
electron-dense bodies and showing loss or discontinuity of cristae; dilatation of
sarcoplasmic reticulum with striking ectasia of cisternae; depletion of glycogen 
particles; a paucity of lipoid or lipochrome granules; and the absence of
virus-like particles were other consistent ultrastructural features. Comparison
of skeletal and cardiac muscle disclosed identical subcellular changes. These
observations support the contention that the distinctive ECG pattern associated
with Duchenne's dystrophy results from multifocal degenerative changes involving 
myocardium, predominantly the posterobasal region of the left ventricle and the
posterior papillary muscle.

DOI: 10.1161/01.cir.57.6.1122 
PMID: 639232  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

