
1. J Med. 1980;11(2-3):81-105.

Serotonin and its precursors as modulators of the immunological responsiveness in
mice.

Bliznakov EG.

Central nervous system regulation of endocrine functions is mediated by
neurotransmitters, via hypothalamic hypophysiotropic factors which in turn
control anterior pituitary functions. The evidence of serotonergic-endocrine
interrelations with regard to adrenal, thyroid, gonadal and prolactin functions
is fast accumulating. Our study extends the importance of those interrelations to
some functions of the immune system. Multiple administration of
5-hydroxytryptamine(serotonin) or its precursor, 5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan(5-HTPH), 
produces marked depression of T cell dependent, humoral, hemolytic, primary
immune response in mice. L-tryptophan, a more distant serotonin precursor,
produces slight but significant depression of this immune response. Multiple
treatment of mice infected with Friend Leukemia Virus (FLV) with serotonin or
5-HTPH alone or in combination with cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan) results in
significant delay of the clinical progression of the infection. L-tryptophan
produces a modest but significant improvement. Administration of serotonin or
5-HTPH causes a marked reduction of the thymus weight. It is reasonable to
postulate that the described effects result from the thymus involution which
affects the T cell compartment of the immune system. This is the consequence of
hormonal imbalance caused by the alteration of the serotonin biosynthetic pathway
in the brain. The adrenal cortex is not implicated in the mediation of this
effect. Since many clinically used drugs affect the serotonin metabolism, the
clinical consequences of the resulting alteration of the immunological
responsiveness should be considered.


PMID: 6967931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

