
1. J Clin Microbiol. 1982 Dec;16(6):1117-22.

New passive hemagglutination assay kit that uses hemagglutinin-sensitized
erythrocytes for detection of rubella antibodies.

Coates SR, Madsen RD, Rippe DF.

A new passive hemagglutination assay for the detection of antibodies to rubella
virus hemagglutinin (PHAST-Rubella) was compared with the hemagglutination
inhibition (HI) test and another passive hemagglutination test that uses a
soluble rubella virus antigen (SA-PHA). When the immune responses of vaccinated
individuals were monitored, similar rises in antibody titer were detected by HI
or PHAST-Rubella, whereas the rise in titer detected by SA-PHA was delayed.
Early-phase vaccine-induced immunoglobulin M antibody analyzed by sucrose
gradient fractionation was detected to the same degree by HI and PHAST-Rubella,
but early-phase immunoglobulin G antibody reacted more strongly in the HI test.
When acute and convalescent serum pairs from rubella-infected individuals were
evaluated, a fourfold rise in titer was detected by PHAST-Rubella and HI in 15 of
15 pairs, whereas SA-PHA, which is not intended for detecting antibody titer
rises in acute infections, detected a rise in titer in only 3 of 15 pairs. In
studies to determine rubella immune status, testing of 1,078 premarital and
random serum specimens resulted in 98.6% agreement among the three methods in
identifying rubella antibody-positive and -negative individuals. For the
quantitative PHAST-Rubella procedure, a coefficient of correlation of 0.93 was
obtained, in comparison with HI, when a panel of 40 characterized sera were
tested. These results indicate that PHAST-Rubella reagents can detect rubella
antibodies as well as HI reagents and thus may be used as a fast and accurate
means of determining rubella immune status and for the quantitation of rubella
antibodies.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.16.6.1117-1122.1982 
PMCID: PMC272550
PMID: 7161376  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

