
1. J Immunol Methods. 1995 Nov 16;187(1):179-88.

The use of dedicated peptide libraries permits the discovery of high affinity
binding peptides.

de Koster HS(1), Amons R, Benckhuijsen WE, Feijlbrief M, Schellekens GA,
Drijfhout JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Bank, University Hospital Leiden,
Netherlands.

The motif for peptide binding to monoclonal antibody mAb A16, which is known to
be directed against glycoprotein D of Herpes simplex virus type 1, was determined
using two dedicated peptide libraries. As a starting point for this study we used
an A-16 binding lead sequence, which had previously been obtained from a phage
display peptide library (Schellekens et al., 1994). Binding studies with
different length variants of this peptide identified a 12mer as a suitable lead
compound for our library study. Two incomplete dedicated resin-bound synthetic
peptide libraries were generated. Both consisted of 2 x 10(6) 12mers, in which
positions were alternately fixed (amino acids identical to the lead sequence) and
random. The libraries were screened with mAb A16 and beads with binding peptides 
were sequenced using Edman degradation. This resulted in a unique peptide binding
motif, essentially comprising a 7mer core sequence. Comparison of the sequence of
the natural epitope with the binding motif revealed that its sequence was
identical to the motif except for one position. Substitution of a methionine in
the natural epitope by a tyrosine or a phenylalanine at that position, as
dictated by the motif, resulted in a peptide with an affinity for binding to mAb 
A16 about 50 times higher than that of the natural epitope. Thus, if a lead
sequence is available, the use of incomplete, dedicated synthetic peptide
libraries provides a fast and powerful tool for the detection of high affinity
peptides.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-1759(95)00182-a 
PMID: 7490454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

