
1. J Virol. 1995 Dec;69(12):7712-7.

Antibody-forming cell response to virus challenge in mice immunized with DNA
encoding the influenza virus hemagglutinin.

Justewicz DM(1), Morin MJ, Robinson HL, Webster RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Molecular Biology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38101, USA.

Immunization of mice with DNA encoding the influenza virus hemagglutinin (HA)
affords complete protection against lethal influenza virus infection and the
means to investigate the mechanisms of B-cell responsiveness to virus challenge. 
Using a single-cell enzyme-linked immunospot assay, we sought to determine the
localization of HA-specific antibody-forming cells (AFCs) during the development 
of humoral immunity in mice given HA DNA vaccine by gene gun. At 33 days
postvaccination, populations of AFCs were maintained in the spleen and bone
marrow. In response to lethal challenge with influenza virus, the AFCs became
localized at the site of antigenic challenge, i.e., within the draining lymph
nodes of the lung compartment. Immunoglobulin G (IgG)- and IgA-producing AFCs
were detected in lymph nodes of the upper and lower respiratory tracts,
underscoring their importance in clearing virus from the lungs. Response to
challenge required competent CD4+ T cells, without which no AFCs were generated, 
even those producing IgM. By contrast, in mice vaccinated with an HA-containing
subunit vaccine, fewer AFCs were generated in response to challenge, and these
animals were less capable of resisting infection. Our findings demonstrate the
comparable localization of AFCs in response to challenge in mice vaccinated with 
either HA DNA or live virus. Moreover, the former strategy generates both IgG-
and IgA-producing plasma cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.69.12.7712-7717.1995 
PMCID: PMC189712
PMID: 7494280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

