
1. Immunopharmacology. 1993 Sep-Oct;26(2):181-5.

Papaverine hydrochloride: effects on HIV replication and T-lymphocyte cell
function.

Nokta M(1), Albrecht T, Pollard R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston
77550.

Papaverine hydrochloride (PAP) has previously been shown to have a potent
inhibitory effect on the replication of viruses such as cytomegalovirus (CMV) and
measles. In this report the effect of PAP on human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
replication and T lymphocyte cell function were examined. MT4 cells infected with
HIV strain 3b were incubated with serial dilutions of PAP (1-30 microM). At
selected times postinfection HIV replication was measured by reverse
transcriptase activity (RT) or HIV p24 Ag. PAP significantly inhibited HIV
replication by more than 99% at doses of 30 microM with an CD50 and ED50 of 32
microM and 5.8 microM respectively. The mechanism of inhibition of HIV caused by 
PAP appeared independent form its ability to increase intracellular levels of
cAMP and was not mediated via a direct effect on RT activity. To examine T cell
function, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from normal donors were
stimulated with phytohemagglutinin (PHA) or CMV Ag in the presence or absence of 
PAP (1-30 microM). At selected times proliferative response to PHA and CMV Ag
were determined by [3H]thymidine uptake. In addition, interferon (IFN) gamma and 
interleukin 2 (IL2) response to mitogens were measured by radioimmunoassay (RIA).
PAP enhanced PHA induced IFN production at doses of 1-10 microM and CMV Ag
induced IFN production at doses of 1-3 microM. Higher doses were inhibitory. PAP 
did not affect IL-2 production or IL2 receptor expression and had an inhibitory
effect on mitogenic responses.

DOI: 10.1016/0162-3109(93)90010-n 
PMID: 7506701  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

