
1. Biochemistry. 1994 Dec 13;33(49):14723-32.

Characterization of neuronal nitric oxide synthase and a C415H mutant, purified
from a baculovirus overexpression system.

Richards MK(1), Marletta MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109-1065.

Nitric oxide synthase (NOS) catalyzes the conversion of L-arginine to citrulline 
and nitric oxide (.NO). A baculovirus overexpression system has been developed
for a constitutive NOS isoform, cloned originally from rat cerebellum (B-NOS).
Recombinant virus was used at a multiplicity of infection of 5 to infect
Spodoptera frugiperda cells in culture, and NOS was expressed to 10% of the total
soluble protein at 48 h postinfection. In order to express catalytically active
enzyme, it was necessary to supplement the culture media with hemin. This
increased the activity of the enzyme 7-fold. A two column affinity purification
was developed for the recombinant enzyme, which gave homogeneous protein that
migrated at 150 kDa on a denaturing polyacrylamide gel. A Km for L-arginine was
determined to be 2.0 +/- 0.4 microM. As isolated, recombinant B-NOS exhibited a
Soret maximum at 402 nm, which shifted to 394 nm in the presence of L-arginine.
The Soret maximum of the reduced enzyme in the presence of CO was 444 nm. Initial
rate steady-state kinetic analysis of the recombinant B-NOS showed evidence of
substrate inhibition by L-arginine, which could also be seen in a partially
purified preparation of B-NOS from rat cerebella. This substrate inhibition was
not observed with the inducible isoform of NOS, purified from immunostimulated
murine macrophages. A C415H mutant was overexpressed and purified using the same 
conditions established for the wild-type recombinant B-NOS. This C415H mutant
exhibited no activity and did not bind heme, providing the first experimental
evidence to support previously reported primary amino acid comparisons which
suggest that C415 provides the coordinating thiolate to the heme moiety in B-NOS.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00253a010 
PMID: 7527656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

