
1. Haemostasis. 1995 Jul-Aug;25(4):193-201.

In vitro characterization of antithrombin III concentrates--a single-blind study.

Hellstern P(1), Moberg U, Ekblad M, Anders CU, Faller B, MÃ¼ller S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Transfusion Medicine and Immunohematology, Klinikum Ludwigshafen 
am Rhein, Germany.

Twenty-three lots of five antithrombin III (AT III) concentrates from four
manufacturers were analyzed in a single-blind study. All the preparations had
been virus-inactivated by pasteurization, and one concentrate had also been
treated with solvent/detergent (S/D). AT III activities were determined using two
thrombin-based and one factor Xa-based chromogenic substrate assays. AT III
antigen was measured by kinetic nephelometry. All AT III assays were tested
against the first international reference preparation coded 72/1. In addition, AT
III was characterized by crossed immunoelectrophoresis in the presence of heparin
and by gel filtration. The following were quantified: heparin cofactor II
activity and antigen content, heparin activity, thrombin-AT III complexes, AT
III-protease complexes, total protein, albumin, immunoglobulins, glucose and pH. 
The AT III concentrates differed markedly in terms of their purity and potency.
The specific activities of AT III and the ratios of AT III activity to antigen
content ranged from 3.4 to 6.9 and from 0.63 to 0.84, respectively. The highest
values were found in five lots of the concentrate that had been treated by both
pasteurization and S/D. This preparation was the only one that was virtually free
of denaturated AT III, as judged by crossed immunoelectrophoresis. Marked
batch-to-batch variation in AT III potencies was found in two out of the five
preparations analyzed. In two out of five lots from one manufacturer, the
measured potencies were more than 10% lower than the declared potencies.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1159/000217160 
PMID: 7557658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

