
1. Br J Cancer. 1995 Jul;72(1):134-9.

Human papillomavirus in vulvar and vaginal carcinoma cell lines.

Hietanen S(1), Grénman S, Syrjänen K, Lappalainen K, Kauppinen J, Carey T,
Syrjänen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Turku University Central Hospital,
Finland.

Erratum in
    Br J Cancer 1995 Nov;72(5):1338.

A number of reports associate human papillomavirus (HPV) with cervical cancer and
cancer cell lines derived from this tumour type. Considerably fewer reports have 
focused on the role of HPV in carcinomas from other sites of female anogenital
squamous epithelia. In this study we have tested for the presence of HPV in eight
low-passage vulvar carcinoma cell lines and one extensively passaged cell line,
A431. One cell line from a primary vaginal carcinoma was included. The presence
of the HPV was evaluated by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), by Southern blot
analysis and by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. General primer-mediated PCR 
was applied by using primers from the L1 region, E1 region and HPV 16 E7 region. 
Southern blot hybridisation was performed under low-stringency conditions (Tm =
-35 degrees C) using a whole genomic HPV 6/16/18 probe mixture and under high
stringency conditions (Tm = -18 degrees C) with the whole genomic probes of HPV
16 and 33. HPV 16 E6-E7 mRNA was assessed by ribonuclease protection assay (RPA).
HPV was found in only one vulvar carcinoma cell line, UM-SCV-6. The identified
type, HPV 16, was integrated in the cell genome and could be amplified with all
primers used. Also E6-E7 transcripts were found in these cells. Five original
tumour biopsies were available from the HPV-negative cell lines for in situ
hybridisation. All these were HPV negative with both the HPV 6/16/18 screening
probe mixture under low stringency and the HPV 16 probe under high stringency.
The results indicate that vulvar carcinoma cell lines contain HPV less frequently
than cervical carcinoma cell lines and suggest that a significant proportion of
vulvar carcinomas may evolve by an HPV-independent mechanism.

DOI: 10.1038/bjc.1995.289 
PMCID: PMC2034151
PMID: 7599042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

