
1. Blood. 1995 Oct 1;86(7):2708-14.

In vitro establishment and characterization of two acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome-related lymphoma cell lines (BC-1 and BC-2) containing Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-like (KSHV) DNA sequences.

Cesarman E(1), Moore PS, Rao PH, Inghirami G, Knowles DM, Chang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, New York
10021, USA.

Two unique DNA fragments were recently identified in over 90% of acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-related Kaposi's sarcoma tissues. Sequence
analysis suggests that these fragments belong to a previously unidentified human 
herpesvirus, Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV). These fragments have
also been identified in a subset of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas in human
immunodeficiency virus-positive patients; specifically, in body cavity-based
lymphomas (AIDS-BCBLs). We have established two cell lines derived from
AIDS-BCBLs, BC-1 and BC-2, which retain the KSHV sequences, and have used them to
further characterize this putative viral genome. In this report, we demonstrate
that the KSHV sequences represent a portion of a much larger DNA molecule that is
located predominantly in the nucleus of the infected cells. In situ hybridization
of metaphase spreads made from both of these cell lines show these sequences in
episomal structures. Their presence in the cells as large nuclear episomes
supports previous sequence homology data suggesting that KSHV belongs to the
herpesvirus family. These cell lines provide a continuous source of KSHV
sequences. Thus, they represent an important tool for future studies of this
recently described human herpesvirus that may be involved in the pathogenesis of 
Kaposi's sarcoma and some AIDS-related non-Hodgkin's lymphomas.


PMID: 7670109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

