
1. Eur J Biochem. 1993 Jan 15;211(1-2):19-26.

Synthesis and assembly of functionally active human vascular endothelial growth
factor homodimers in insect cells.

Fiebich BL(1), Jäger B, Schöllmann C, Weindel K, Wilting J, Kochs G, Marmé D, Hug
H, Weich HA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Cell Biology, University of Freiburg, Federal Republic 
of Germany.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an angiogenic growth factor with a
target-cell specificity highly restricted to vascular endothelial cells.
Recombinant baculovirus were constructed for the production of two different
forms of the human VEGF protein in insect cells. VEGF165 and VEGF121 proteins
produced by Sf158 cells underwent a similar processing compared with mammalian
cells, including efficient glycosylation, formation of a disulfide-linked dimer
and secretion into the media. Only one of these forms, VEGF165 had a high
affinity for heparin and this characteristic was used to purify this form to
homogenicity by a two-step heparin-affinity chromatography. The biological
activity of the purified 43-kDa homodimer was demonstrated by high-affinity
binding to VEGF receptors, and by the induction of DNA synthesis in vascular
endothelial cells. A positive angiogenic activity in vivo was demonstrated by the
day-13 chorioallantoic-membrane assay. The mitogenic potency of VEGF121 for human
umbilical vein endothelial cells was very similar compared to VEGF165. These
results demonstrate that an angiogenic growth factor whose normal processing
requires glycosylation and disulfide-bridge formation can be efficiently
expressed in high concentration (up to 5 micrograms/ml) in insects cells.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1993.tb19865.x 
PMID: 7678805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

