
1. Eur J Immunol. 1993 Feb;23(2):447-53.

A sequence pattern for peptides presented to cytotoxic T lymphocytes by HLA B8
revealed by analysis of epitopes and eluted peptides.

Sutton J(1), Rowland-Jones S, Rosenberg W, Nixon D, Gotch F, Gao XM, Murray N,
Spoonas A, Driscoll P, Smith M, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, GB.

HLA B8-restricted cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) specific for influenza A virus
were generated and shown to recognize the nucleoprotein (NP). The dominant
epitope was mapped using recombinant vaccinia viruses that expressed fragments of
the NP and then synthetic peptides based on the NP amino acid sequence. The
peptide 380-393 was first identified and further refined; it was shown that the
glutamic acid at position 380 was essential for recognition by CTL and that the
nonamer 380-388 was the optimum peptide. Six HLA B8-positive influenza immune
donors that we have tested respond to this peptide as part of their
influenza-specific CTL response. The amino acid sequence of the peptide epitope
was compared to six other known virus peptides known to be restricted by HLA B8
and a sequence homology was identified, which predicted nonamer and octamer
epitope sequences. Probable anchor residues were identified at peptide residues 3
(lysine/arginine), 5 (lysine/arginine) and 9 (leucine/isoleucine). Support for
this pattern came from sequencing peptides eluted from purified HLA B8 molecules,
where lysines were predominant at positions 3 and 5. One of the predicted epitope
peptides was made and shown to be recognized by specific CTL. These and the two
others were shown to compete with NP 380-388 for binding to HLA B8. A model was
made of the HLA B8 molecule and negatively charged pockets predicted, which could
accommodate the positively charged side chains of the peptide anchor residues.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830230222 
PMID: 7679646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

