
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr (1988). 1993 Sep;6(9):994-1001.

Measurement of cerebrospinal fluid antibody to the HIV-1 principal neutralizing
determinant (V3 loop).

Lucey DR(1), VanCott TC, Loomis LD, Bethke FR, Hendrix CW, Melcher GP, Redfield
RR, Birx DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Retroviral Research, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research,
Rockville, Maryland.

Antibody to the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 principal neutralizing
determinant (V3 loop) was measured by peptide enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and paired serum samples of 21
HIV-seropositive patients. These patients had normal neurologic examinations and 
were without neurologic symptoms. Peptide ELISA demonstrated intrathecal antibody
synthesis against the V3 loop of HIVMN, the V3 loop of HIVNY5, the V3 loop of
HIVLAI, and the entire recombinant HIV-1MN gp120 in 21 of 21, 10 of 21, one of
21, and 12 of 21 patients, respectively. Biospecific interaction analysis
(BIAcore), which requires only small amounts of CSF, was also used to detect
anti-V3 CSF antibody. Fine mapping of linear epitopes within the V3 region was
successful in three of five patients by Geysen PIN (PEPSCAN) ELISA and
discordance between epitope specificity of CSF and serum antibody was found.
While detection of CSF antibody against the V3 loop of HIVMN by peptide ELISA has
been recently reported, we add to this finding using the peptide ELISA, PEPSCAN
and BIAcore methodologies as well as measuring intrathecal antibody synthesis
against V3 loops from HIV strains. Application of these techniques to future
studies of anti-V3 antibody in CSF from persons receiving anti-HIV-1
immunizations may provide insight into the immunoregulation of the virus in the
nervous system.


PMID: 7688046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

