
1. Cancer Lett. 1995 May 4;91(1):85-92.

Transcriptional repression in normal human keratinocytes by wild-type and mutant 
p53.

Alvarez-Salas LM(1), Velazquez A, Lopez-Bayghen E, Woodworth CD, Garrido E,
Gariglio P, DiPaolo JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-4255, USA.

Wild-type p53 is a nuclear phosphoprotein that inhibits cell proliferation and
represses transcriptionally most TATA box-containing promoters in transformed or 
tumor-derived cell lines. This study demonstrates that p53 alters transcription
of the long control region (LCR) of human papillomavirus type 18 (HPV-18).
Wild-type and mutant p53 143Val to Ala repressed the HPV-18 LCR promoter in
normal human keratinocytes, the natural host cell for HPV infections. Repression 
by wild-type p53 was also observed in C-33A cells and in an HPV-16-immortalized
cell line with an inducible wild-type p53. However, when C-33A cells were
cotransfected with the HPV-18 LCR and mutant 143Val to Ala, repression did not
occur. Mutant p53 135Cys to Ser did not induce repression in either normal human 
keratinocytes or in the C-33A line; although like 143Val to Ala, it is thought to
affect the DNA binding activity of the wild-type protein. The ability of mutant
p53 143Val to Ala to inactivate the HPV early promoter in normal cells (by
approximately 60% reduction) suggests that this mutant may be able to associate
with wild-type p53 and interact with TATA box-binding proteins. Therefore, these 
results demonstrate that the transcriptional activities of p53 mutants may be
dependent upon the cell type assayed and the form of its endogenous p53.
Furthermore, normal human keratinocytes represent an alternative model for
determining the activities of p53 mutants.

DOI: 10.1016/0304-3835(95)03721-8 
PMID: 7750099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

