
1. J Med Virol. 1995 Feb;45(2):230-5.

Successful treatment of a squamous papilloma of the hypopharynx-esophagus by
local injections of (S)-1-(3-hydroxy-2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl)cytosine.

Van Cutsem E(1), Snoeck R, Van Ranst M, Fiten P, Opdenakker G, Geboes K, Janssens
J, Rutgeerts P, Vantrappen G, de Clercq E, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium.

Human papillomaviruses (HPV) are associated with benign lesions and show
specificity towards the location or tissues that they infect. HPVs are
responsible for warts. Among more than 60 different HPV types known to occur in
humans, a strong association has been found between types 16 and 18 and cervical 
cancer, and such an association is also suspected for types 31, 33, 35, 45, 51,
52, and 56. We describe the effects of
(S)-1-(3-hydroxy-2-phosphonyl-methoxypropyl)cytosine (HPMPC), following local
intratumoral injection, in a 69-year-old woman with hypopharyngeal and esophageal
papillomatous lesions, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) positive for HPV types 16 
and 18, that relapsed after surgery and that also failed to respond to Nd-Yag
laser photocoagulation and alpha-interferon treatment (6 x 10(6) U five times a
week for 4 weeks followed by three times a week for 2 months). HPMPC was given at
1.25 mg/kg, with a sclerosing needle, through the biopsy channel of a
video-endoscope, directly into the tumor, from March until July 1993 at seven
different occasions. The first four injections were given at an interval of 1
week at the level of the hypopharynx. The next three injections were given at an 
interval of 3 to 5 weeks. During the fourth to the seventh session, half of the
dose was injected into the hypopharyngeal and the other half into the esophageal 
tumor. Three further injections of HPMPC were administered at the level of the
esophageal tumor in September 1993 with 2-week intervals. After HPMPC treatment, 
the lesions became smaller and flat until they completely disappeared.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.1890450221 
PMID: 7775945  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

