
1. J Virol. 1995 Mar;69(3):1944-50.

Contribution of conserved amino acids in mediating the interaction between EBNA2 
and CBF1/RBPJk.

Ling PD(1), Hayward SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205.

The Epstein-Barr virus EBNA2 protein is a transcriptional activator that achieves
promoter specificity through interaction with the cellular DNA-binding protein
CBF1/RBPJk. Within the amino acid 252-to-425 EBNA2 domain that targets CBF1/RBPJk
lie three amino acid clusters, conserved regions (CR) 5, 6, and 7, that are
retained in the Epstein-Barr virus type A and type B and herpesvirus papio
proteins. To further define the important features of the targeting domain, we
constructed EBNA2 polypeptides containing deletions in the targeting domain and
double or triple point mutations in the conserved motifs. The ability of these
polypeptides and the type B and herpesvirus papio domains to interact with
CBF1/RBPJk was examined by performing electrophoretic mobility shift assays and
correlated with the effect of the mutations on EBNA2 transactivation. Both human 
type B EBNA2 and herpesvirus papio EBNA2 bound CBF1/RBPJk efficiently. Mutation
of hydrophobic residues in CR6 severely impaired CBF1/RBPJk interaction and
transactivation, while mutation of CR5 led to a moderate decrease in both
activities. Mutation of CR7 had only a minor effect. Synthetic peptides
corresponding to each of the conserved motifs were also used as competitors in an
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Only the peptide representing CR6 (amino
acids 318 to 327), and not a version of this peptide mutated at the tryptophan
residues at positions 323 and 324 (WW323,324), could compete for EBNA2 complex
formation with CBF1/RBPJk. Overall, the data indicated that CR5 contributes to an
optimal interaction, perhaps through stabilizing contacts, while CR6 forms a
crucial interface with CBF1/RBPJk. The peptide competition data are consistent
with direct contacts between WW323,324 and CBF1/RBPJk.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.69.3.1944-1950.1995 
PMCID: PMC188813
PMID: 7853539  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

