
1. J Virol. 1994 Nov;68(11):6910-7.

Cell type-specific MxA-mediated inhibition of measles virus transcription in
human brain cells.

Schneider-Schaulies S(1), Schneider-Schaulies J, Schuster A, Bayer M, Pavlovic J,
ter Meulen V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virology and Immunobiology, Würzburg, Germany.

Measles virus (MV)-specific transcription in human brain cells is characterized
by particularly low abundances of the distal mRNAs encoding the MV envelope
proteins. Similar transcriptional restrictions of the closely related vesicular
stomatitis virus have been observed in mouse fibroblasts constitutively
expressing the interferon-inducible MxA protein (P. Staeheli and J. Pavlovic, J. 
Virol. 65:4498-4501, 1991). We found that MV infection of human brain cells is
accompanied by rapid induction and high-level expression of endogenous MxA
proteins. After stable transfection of MxA, human glioblastoma cells (U-87-MxA)
released 50- to 100-fold less infectious virus and expression of viral proteins
was highly restricted. The overall MV-specific transcription levels were reduced 
by up to 90%, accompanied by low relative frequencies of the distal MV-specific
mRNAs. These restrictions were linked to an inhibition of viral RNA synthesis and
not to a decreased stability of the viral RNAs. Our results indicate that
expression of MxA is associated with transcriptional attenuation of MV in brain
cells, thus probably contributing to the establishment of persistent MV central
nervous system infections. In addition, the mechanism of MxA-dependent resistance
against MV infection, in contrast to that of vesicular stomatitis virus, is cell 
type specific, because an inhibition of MV glycoprotein synthesis independent of 
transcriptional alterations was observed in MxA-transfected human monocytes (J.
J. Schnorr, S. Schneider-Schaulies, A. Simon-Jödicke, J. Pavlovic, M. A.
Horisberger, and V. ter Meulen, J. Virol. 67: 4760-4768, 1993).

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.68.11.6910-6917.1994 
PMCID: PMC237126
PMID: 7933071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

