
1. Biochemistry. 1994 Nov 8;33(44):13093-101.

Membrane binding of myristylated peptides corresponding to the NH2 terminus of
Src.

Buser CA(1), Sigal CT, Resh MD, McLaughlin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, State University of New York, Stony
Brook 11794.

Membrane association is required for cell transformation by pp60v-src (v-Src),
the product of the v-src oncogene of Rous sarcoma virus. Previous experiments
have identified two NH2-terminal membrane-binding motifs: a myristate (14-carbon 
acyl chain) attached to the NH2-terminal glycine and three basic residues at
positions 5, 7, and 9 of Src. We examined the membrane binding of each motif
using myristylated (myr-src) and nonmyristylated (nonmyr-src) peptides
corresponding to the NH2 terminus of Src. All myristylated peptides partitioned
equally well onto electrically neutral phosphatidylcholine vesicles (K1 = 10(4)
M-1). Identical binding has been observed for simple myristylated peptides (e.g.,
myr-Gly) and arises from the hydrophobic insertion of the myristate into the
bilayer. A nonmyristylated peptide corresponding to residues 2-16 of Src
[nonmyr-src(2-16), net charge = +5] bound to vesicles containing 33% monovalent
acidic phospholipids with K1 = 10(3) M-1. Penta(lysine) (+5 net charge) exhibits 
the same binding behavior, which is due to the electrostatic interaction between 
basic residues and acidic lipids. The corresponding myristylated peptide,
myr-src(2-16), binds 3 orders of magnitude more strongly to vesicles containing
33% acidic lipids than to neutral vesicles. The resulting apparent association
constant, K1 = 10(7) M-1, is approximately equal to the product of the partition 
coefficients for the two individual interactions. This 10(7) M-1 binding is
sufficiently strong to anchor the Src protein to biological membranes. We propose
a simple model that explains the observed synergism between the two
peptide-membrane interactions.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00248a019 
PMID: 7947714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

