
1. Transfusion. 1994 Jun;34(6):521-6.

Differential sensitivities of viruses in red cell suspensions to methylene blue
photosensitization.

Wagner SJ(1), Robinette D, Storry J, Chen XY, Shumaker J, Benade L.

Author information: 
(1)Product Development Department, Jerome H. Holland Laboratory, American Red
Cross Blood Services, Rockville, Maryland.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies explored the feasibility of using the
photosensitizer methylene blue (MB) as a virucidal agent in red cell suspensions.
Under treatment conditions (5 microM [5 mumol/L] MB, 3.4 x 10(4) J/m2) that
resulted in more than 6 log10 inactivation of vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) or
of the enveloped bacteriophage phi 6, red cell membrane alterations were
observed. Increased red cell ion permeability and the binding of plasma proteins 
to the red cell surface were the most sensitive indicators, which varied in a
dose-dependent fashion.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Inactivation of three additional extracellular viruses 
and intracellular human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) was assessed after 
MB phototreatment of red cell suspensions. Potassium leakage and IgG binding also
were characterized in MB-treated red cell suspensions that were exposed to
low-fluence light (6 x 10(3) J/m2).
RESULTS: Different viruses exhibit a wide range of sensitivities to MB
photoinactivation. For example, phototreatment conditions (5 microM [5 mumol/L]
MB, 3.4 x 10(4) J/m2) that inactivated more than 6 log10 of VSV did not
inactivate the nonenveloped picornavirus, encephalomyocarditis virus. In
contrast, lower fluences (6 x 10(3) J/m2) inactivated approximately 5 log10 or
more of Sindbis virus and approximately 4log10 of extracellular HIV-1. These less
stringent phototreatment conditions (5 microM [5 mumol/L] 6 x 10(3) J/m2) caused 
lower rates of red cell potassium leakage (reduction by 6-fold) and little or no 
binding of plasma proteins to the red cell surface, compared to values observed
previously with higher fluences. However, neither 6 x 10(3) nor 4.1 x 10(4) J per
m2 fluences resulted in any inactivation of intracellular HIV as represented by
changes in the amount of p24 antigen produced during co-culture of actively
infected H9 cells.
CONCLUSION: MB-based protocols would require the use of high-efficiency (>
6log10) white cell-reduction filters or additional inactivation steps to deplete 
or inactivate intracellular virus.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1537-2995.1994.34694295069.x 
PMID: 8023394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

