
1. Am J Epidemiol. 1994 Jul 15;140(2):81-104.

Theoretical epidemiologic and morbidity effects of routine varicella immunization
of preschool children in the United States.

Halloran ME(1), Cochi SL, Lieu TA, Wharton M, Fehrs L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biostatistics, Emory University School of Public Health, Atlanta, 
GA 30329.

The authors studied the effects of routine varicella immunization of US preschool
children and of implementation of a catch-up program in older children on the age
distribution of cases and on overall morbidity, with emphasis on the sensitivity 
of the results to level of vaccine coverage, duration of protection,
responsiveness to boosting, relative residual susceptibility and infectiousness, 
and degree of morbidity among vaccine breakthrough cases. An age-structured
theoretical transmission model was used, with values for vaccine efficacy based
on a review of the literature by an expert panel. Although implementation of a
vaccination program resulted in a shift in the age distribution of remaining
varicella cases toward older ages with higher complication rates, the overall
reduction in cases resulted in decreased morbidity as measured by overall number 
of hospitalizations and number of primary cases. Routine immunization with
live-virus varicella vaccine would probably result in a substantial reduction in 
the number of uncomplicated primary cases of chickenpox, as well as a decreased
number of complicated cases requiring hospitalization. The number and age
distribution of vaccinated cases would depend strongly on the characteristics of 
the vaccine. Vaccine efficacy studies in the field should be designed to obtain
better estimates of residual susceptibility, residual infectiousness, duration of
protection, and effects of boosting by wild-type reinfection.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a117238 
PMID: 8023813  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

