
1. Vet Pathol. 1994 Jan;31(1):74-81.

Morphogenesis of enteric lesions induced by group D rotavirus in ringneck
pheasant chicks (Phasianus colchicus).

Haynes JS(1), Reynolds DL, Fagerland JA, Fix AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State
University, Ames.

Eight day-old male and female ringneck pheasants (Phasianus colchicus) were
inoculated with group D rotavirus and necropsied at 4, 7, and 11 days
post-inoculation. The intestinal tracts were examined by light and electron
microscopic and immunohistochemical methods. By 4 days post-inoculation, 2/3
(66%) inoculated birds were stunted and had diarrhea and dilated intestines.
Intestinal villi were shortened, and many villous enterocytes were partially
detached from the lamina propria. Crypts were hyperplastic, and the lamina
propria contained a diffuse infiltrate of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and
macrophages. Immunoreactivity to rotaviral antigen was localized to enterocytes
on the tips of villi in the duodenum, jejunum, and proximal ileum. By 7 days
post-inoculation, 3/3 (100%) inoculated birds had clinical signs and gross and
microscopic changes similar to those at 4 days post-inoculation but more severe. 
Immunoreactivity was localized in enterocytes scattered along the sides of villi,
in occasional crypt enterocytes, and within macrophages in the villous lamina
propria. Ultrastructurally, infected enterocytes contained cytoplasmic aggregates
of viroplasm with multiple viral core particles. Numerous mature virions (60-75
nm in diameter) were present within dilated components of the cytocavitary
network. Macrophages within the lamina propria contained phagocytosed remnants of
necrotic virus-infected cells. By 11 days post-inoculation, birds did not have
gross lesions, but 1/2 (50%) had mild crypt hyperplasia and an infiltrate of
leukocytes in the lamina propria. Occasional enterocytes along the sides of villi
and macrophages in the lamina propria were immunoreactive for viral
antigen.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1177/030098589403100110 
PMID: 8140729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

