
1. Protein Eng. 1994 Jan;7(1):83-9.

Herpes thymidine kinase mutants with altered catalytic efficiencies obtained by
random sequence selection.

Munir KM(1), French DC, Dube DK, Loeb LA.

Author information: 
(1)Joseph Gottstein Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Pathology,
University of Washington, Seattle 98195.

We have obtained 190 active Herpes simplex virus type 1 thymidine kinase mutants 
by substituting a 33 nucleotide sequence with 20% degeneracy for a portion of the
nucleotide sequence that encodes the putative thymidine binding site [K.M. Munir,
D.C. French, D.K. Dube and L.A. Loeb (1992) J. Biol. Chem., 167, 6584-6589]. In
order to classify these mutants with respect to thymidine kinase activity we
determined the ability of Escherichia coli harboring these mutants to form
colonies in the presence of varying concentrations of thymidine. Escherichia coli
harboring one of the mutant enzymes was able to form colonies at a concentration 
of thymidine lower than did the wild type. It was able to phosphorylate thymidine
more rapidly than the wild type both in vivo and in vitro. The increased
thymidine kinase activity was manifested by (i) a 42% enhanced uptake of
[methyl-3H]thymidine into E. coli, (ii) a 2.4 times higher rate of
[methyl-3H]thymidine incorporation into acid-insoluble material and (iii) a
5-fold increase in the kcat of the purified enzyme compared to the wild type.
Herpes thymidine kinase purified from other mutants that formed colonies at
higher thymidine concentrations than that of the wild type exhibited a decrease
in kcat. The kcat of one of these mutant thymidine kinases was 10(-4) of that of 
the wild type enzyme. This study demonstrates that a spectrum of mutant enzymes
with different catalytic properties can be obtained by selection from a plasmid
with random sequence substitutions and this can be done in the absence of
rational protein design.

DOI: 10.1093/protein/7.1.83 
PMID: 8140098  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

