
1. Neurosci Res. 1993 Aug;17(3):257-63.

Fate and behavior of genetically labeled cerebellar cells after transplantation
into mouse cerebellum.

Yuasa S(1), Tsuda M, Kawamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

A foreign gene coding the bacterial enzyme, chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
(CAT), was introduced into a primary culture of the mouse cerebellar primordium
by a retrovirus vector which harbors the neomycin-resistant gene. Following
selection of the gene-transferred cells based on neomycin resistance, most of the
selected cells expressed the CAT gene product as well as a marker for astrocytes,
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), when examined immunocytochemically. These
cells were transplanted into the adult mouse cerebellum, and the surviving cells 
were examined immunohistochemically by marking them with anti-CAT antibody. The
distribution of CAT-immunopositive cells coincided with that of
GFAP-immunopositive cells observed in serial sections of grafted sites at 10 days
after transplantation. Some of the transplanted CAT-immunopositive cells extended
processes and exhibited the morphological appearance of fibrous astrocytes.
Migration of the genetically labeled cells into the host molecular layer was also
observed and the morphological plasticity of the differentiated primary cells was
shown according to the grafted sites. These results indicate that stable marking 
of cells for grafting can be accomplished by retrovirus-mediated introduction of 
a foreign gene into the primary culture, and that the fate and behavior of the
labeled donor cells can be analyzed immunohistochemically following
transplantation into neural tissue.

DOI: 10.1016/0168-0102(93)90053-s 
PMID: 8233127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

