
1. Eur J Med. 1993 Jan;2(1):19-22.

Spontaneous pneumothorax in patients with the human immunodeficiency virus: study
of eight cases.

Valencia ME(1), Languna F, Moreno V, Martinez ML, Adrados M, Gonzalez Lahoz J.

Author information: 
(1)Service of Infectious Diseases, National Center of Clinical Investigation and 
Preventive Medicine, Madrid, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the risk factors and the natural history of spontaneous
pneumothorax in patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV).
METHODS: We studied eight HIV infected patients with spontaneous pneumothorax.
Variables assessed included sex, age, risk factor for HIV infection, use of
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia prophylaxis, total and CD4 positive lymphocyte
count, previous history of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia or pulmonary
tuberculosis, chest X-ray film, presence of simultaneous opportunistic infection,
partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood gas determination and clinical
outcome.
RESULTS: The patients were predominantly male and intravenous drug abusers. Mean 
age was 28 years (range: 21-44). Five patients had acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome, 2 oral candidiasis and one asymptomatic HIV infection. Three had
previously had Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia and six a concurrent opportunistic 
infection. No one was receiving aerosolized pentamidine prophylaxis. The
pneumothorax was bilateral in two cases. Chest tube evacuation was required in
seven, and six patients died. Only two patients without opportunistic infection
were discharged.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that spontaneous pneumothorax is a serious problem with 
high mortality in patients with advanced human immunodeficiency virus infection. 
Previous or active Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia appear to be a risk factor for 
developing pneumothorax. It seems to be independent of aerosolized pentamidine
use.


PMID: 8258000  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

