
1. J Med Virol. 1993 Oct;41(2):146-9.

Seroepidemiology of hepatitis A and hepatitis B virus infection in a Gurkha
community in Singapore.

Goh KT(1), Kong KH, Heng BH, Oon CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Quarantine and Epidemiology Department, Ministry of the Environment,
Singapore.

The overall prevalence of hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection among the Gurkhas and
their families stationed in Singapore was 83.2%, with antibody to HAV detected in
67 (38.1%) of 176 children under 5 years of age, 121 (76.6%) of 158 children
between 5 and 14 years, and 600 (97.9%) of 613 older children and adults over age
15 years. Children born in Singapore (102/223 or 45.7%) had a significantly lower
crude prevalence than those born in Nepal (85/110 or 77.3%) (P < 0.000001). The
age-adjusted difference in prevalence was also statistically significant (P <
0.001). Susceptible children had a high risk of acquiring HAV infection when they
travelled to Nepal. As for hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, the prevalence of
hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) was 2.8%, with a higher rate in males (20/560
or 3.6%) than in females (6/384 or 1.6%). The highest HBsAg prevalence (4/26 or
15.4%) was in young adult Gurkhas 15-19 years of age. No significant difference
in the crude prevalence of HBV markers was noted between children born in
Singapore (45/224 or 20.1%) and those born in Nepal (19/107 or 17.8%). Even after
age adjustment, the difference remained insignificant. The prevalence of HBV
markers of children of seropositive parents (27/156 or 17.3%) was not
significantly higher than that of seronegative parents (19/131 or 14.5%). Married
men had a significantly higher age-adjusted prevalence of infection than
unmarried men (45.4% and 32.4%, respectively; P < 0.05). Seropositivity of one
spouse was significantly correlated with the seropositivity of the other (P <
0.05), suggesting a role for heterosexual transmission of HBV infection.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.1890410210 
PMID: 8283176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

