
1. J Oral Pathol Med. 1993 Feb;22(2):64-8.

Recurrent aphthous ulceration: a possible clinical manifestation of reactivation 
of varicella zoster or cytomegalovirus infection.

Pedersen A(1), Hornsleth A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dentistry, University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

The etiology of the most common intraoral mucosal disease, recurrent aphthous
ulceration (RAU), remains obscure. Here, attempts were made to diagnose
reactivation of varicella zoster (VZV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein-Barr (EBV)
and human hepes virus 6 (HHV-6) infections from paired sera in association with
RAU recurrences. The first sample was obtained within 3 days after a new
recurrence (1) and the second 10-14 days later (2). The study initially comprised
18 otherwise healthy RAU patients (gr A) and 17 sex- and age-matched healthy
non-RAU individuals. Values of specific antibody subclasses (IgM, IgG, IgA) were 
determined by ELISA (VZV, CMV, EBV) and IFA (HHV-6). Patients and controls
exhibited differences in parameters on specific VZV IgM and CMV IgM. In order to 
substantiate these findings, specific VZV IgM and CMV IgM were subsequently also 
evaluated in 17 other RAU patients (gr B). Ten patients in gr A and 11 in gr B
were IgM seropositive for either VZV and/or CMV in at least one of the serum
samples, whereas in the controls only one was VZV IgM positive and none CMV IgM
positive. Evaluated as groups, optometric density (OD) antibody levels of VZV IgM
were significantly higher in the patients (gr A (1,2) vs controls: p < 0.0001; gr
B (1,2) vs controls: p < 0.001). CMV OD IgM antibody values were significantly
higher in gr B only (1,2 vs controls: p < 0.01). The study lends support for
reactivation of VZV and/or CMV infection associated with RAU recurrences.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0714.1993.tb00045.x 
PMID: 8383202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

