
1. Virology. 1993 May;194(1):277-83.

Purification of the IDIR strain of group B rotavirus and identification of viral 
structural proteins.

Vonderfecht SL(1), Schemmer JK.

Author information: 
(1)Upjohn Company, Kalamazoo, Michigan 49001.

A purification scheme was developed that allowed for the partial purification of 
complete, double-shelled particles of the infectious diarrhea of infant rats
(IDIR) virus, a group B rotavirus (GBR). Structural proteins from the isolated,
complete viral particles were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide 
gel electrophoresis and evaluated by silver staining and by immunoblotting using 
antisera obtained from rats that had recovered from IDIR virus infection.
Analysis of the stained gels and immunoblots demonstrated the presence of IDIR
virus structural proteins having estimated molecular weights of 130, 100, 88, 80,
61, 44, 32, and 25 kDa. Treatment of complete viral particles with EDTA removed
the outer capsid layer producing single-shelled particles that lacked the 80, 61,
32, and 25 kDa proteins seen in the double-shelled particles. The 44-kDa protein 
was most abundant and was recognized by a mouse monoclonal antibody and
hyperimmune guinea pig serum prepared against IDIR virus and by hyperimmune
guinea pig serum prepared against adult diarrhea rotavirus (ADRV), a human strain
of GBR. Convalescent serum obtained from a piglet inoculated with a porcine GBR
reacted with the 61 kDa, outer capsid protein of IDIR virus. This information on 
the structural nature of IDIR virus should be helpful in establishing the genetic
and structural relationships among the GBR and to further exploit the potential
of IDIR virus as a tool for understanding GBR infections in human and animal
populations.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1993.1258 
PMID: 8386876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

