
1. Immunology. 1993 Aug;79(4):594-9.

Inhibition of interferon-gamma by an interferon-gamma receptor immunoadhesin.

Haak-Frendscho M(1), Marsters SA, Chamow SM, Peers DH, Simpson NJ, Ashkenazi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco,
California 94080-4990.

Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) is an important cytokine which regulates
inflammatory and immune response mechanisms. IFN-gamma enhances the presentation 
and recognition of antigens by inducing the expression of major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins, by activating effector T cells and
mononuclear phagocytes, and by modulating immunoglobulin production and class
selection in B cells. Inappropriate production of IFN-gamma has been implicated
in the pathogenesis of several autoimmune and inflammatory diseases and in graft 
rejection. Here, we describe a recombinant inhibitor of IFN-gamma, termed murine 
IFN-gamma receptor immunoadhesin (mIFN-gamma R-IgG). We constructed this
immunoadhesin by linking the extracellular portion of the mouse IFN-gamma R to
the hinge and Fc region of an IgG1 heavy chain. Murine IFN-gamma R-IgG is
secreted by transfected cells as a disulphide-bonded homodimer which binds
IFN-gamma bivalently, with high affinity and in a species-specific manner. In
vitro, mIFN-gamma R-IgG can block mIFN-gamma-induced antiviral activity and
expression of the class I MHC antigen H-2Kk in cultured cells. In vivo,
mIFN-gamma R-IgG can block the function of endogenous mIFN-gamma in mouse models 
of infection with Listeria monocytogenes and of contact sensitivity. These
results show that mIFN-gamma R-IgG is an effective and specific inhibitor of
mIFN-gamma both in vitro and in vivo. Thus, in general, IFN-gamma receptor
immunoadhesins may be useful for investigating the biological functions of
IFN-gamma as well as for preventing deleterious effects of IFN-gamma in human
disease.


PMCID: PMC1421939
PMID: 8406584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

