
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Apr;13(4):2604-13.

Replication-competent retroviral vectors encoding alkaline phosphatase reveal
spatial restriction of viral gene expression/transduction in the chick embryo.

Fekete DM(1), Cepko CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

Replication-competent avian retroviruses, capable of transducing and expressing
up to 2 kb of nonviral sequences, are now available to effect widespread gene
transfer in chicken (chick) embryos (S. H. Hughes, J. J. Greenhouse, C. J.
Petropoulos, and P. Sutrave, J. Virol. 61:3004-3012, 1987). We have constructed
novel avian retroviral vectors that encode human placental alkaline phosphatase
as a marker whose expression can be histochemically monitored. These vectors have
been tested for expression by introducing them into the embryonic chick nervous
system. They have revealed that the expression of retrovirally transduced genes
can be spatially and temporally limited without the need for tissue-specific
promoters. By varying the site and time of infection, targeted gene transfer can 
be confined to selected populations of neural cells over the course of several
days, a time window that is sufficient for many key developmental processes. The 
capability of differentially infecting specific target populations may avoid
confounding variables such as detrimental effects of a transduced gene on
processes unrelated to the cells or tissue of interest. These vectors and methods
thus should be useful in studies of the effect of transduced genes on the
development of various organs and tissues during avian embryogenesis. In
addition, the vectors will facilitate studies aimed at an understanding of viral 
infection and expression patterns.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.13.4.2604 
PMCID: PMC359596
PMID: 8455633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

