
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1995 Nov;39(11):2426-35.

T30177, an oligonucleotide stabilized by an intramolecular guanosine octet, is a 
potent inhibitor of laboratory strains and clinical isolates of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1.

Ojwang JO(1), Buckheit RW, Pommier Y, Mazumder A, De Vreese K, Est√© JA, Reymen D,
Pallansch LA, Lackman-Smith C, Wallace TL, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Triplex Pharmaceutical Corporation, The Woodlands, Texas 77380, USA.

T30177, an oligonucleotide composed of only deoxyguanosine and thymidine, is 17
nucleotides in length and contains single phosphorothioate internucleoside
linkages at its 5' and 3' ends for stability. This oligonucleotide does not share
significant primary sequence homology with or possess any complementary
(antisense) sequence motifs to the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
genome. T30177 inhibited replication of multiple laboratory strains of HIV-1 in
human T-cell lines, peripheral blood lymphocytes, and macrophages. T30177 was
also found to be capable of inhibiting multiple clinical isolates of HIV-1 and
preventing the cytopathic effect of HIV-1 in primary CD4+ T lymphocytes. In
assays with human peripheral blood lymphocytes there was no observable toxicity
associated with T30177 at the highest concentration tested (100 microM), while
the median inhibitory concentration was determined to be in the range of 0.1 to
1.0 microM for the clinical isolates tested, resulting in a high therapeutic
index for this drug. In temporal studies, the kinetics of addition of T30177 to
infected cell cultures indicated that, like the known viral adsorption blocking
agents dextran sulfate and Chicago sky blue, T30177 needed to be added to cells
during or very soon after viral infection. However, analysis of nucleic acids
extracted at 12 h postinfection from cells treated with T30177 at the time of
virus infection established the presence of unintegrated viral cDNA, including
circular proviral DNA, in the treated cells. In vitro analysis of viral enzymes
revealed that T30177 was a potent inhibitor of HIV-1 integrase, reducing
enzymatic activity by 50% at concentrations in the range of 0.050 to 0.09 microM.
T30177 was also able to inhibit viral reverse transcriptase activity; however,
the 50% inhibitory value obtained was in the range of 1 to 10 microM, depending
on the template used in the enzymatic assay. No observable inhibition of viral
protease was detected at the highest concentration of T30177 used (10 microM). In
experiments in which T30177 was removed from infected cell cultures at 4 days
post-HIV-1 infection, total suppression of virus production was observed for more
than 27 days. PCR analysis of DNA extracted from cells treated in this fashion
was unable to detect the presence of viral DNA 11 days after removal of the drug 
from the infected cell cultures. The ability of T30177 to inhibit both laboratory
and clinical isolates of HIV-1 and the experimental data which suggest that
T30177 represents a novel class of integrase inhibitors indicate that this
compound is a viable candidate for evaluation as a therapeutic agent against
HIV-1 in humans.

DOI: 10.1128/aac.39.11.2426 
PMCID: PMC162960
PMID: 8585721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

