
1. J Cell Physiol. 1996 Feb;166(2):249-55.

Protein kinase C beta 1 overexpression augments phorbol ester-induced increase in
endothelial permeability.

Nagpala PG(1), Malik AB, Vuong PT, Lum H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Rush Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center/Rush
Medical College, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

We studied the postulated involvement of the protein kinase C beta 1 (PKC beta 1)
isoform in the regulation of endothelial permeability using human dermal
microvascular endothelial cell line (HMEC-1). We overexpressed the recombinant
PKC beta 1 gene via retroviral-mediated transduction in these cells. PKC beta 1
gene transfer was stable, and PKC beta 1 protein production was persistent for at
least 1 month posttransduction. Addition of 2 x 10(-9) M and 2 x 10(-8) M phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) to the control (nontransduced) HMEC-1 cells
increased the transendothelial 125I-albumin clearance rate (an index of
endothelial permeability) from 2.5 +/- 0.2 x 10(-2) microliters/min to 5.4 +/-
1.2 x 10(-2) microliters/min and 16.8 +/- 3.1 x 10(-2) microliters/min,
respectively. However, addition of 2 x 10(-9) M PMA to PKC beta 1-overexpressing 
HMEC-1 cells produced a maximal increase in the transendothelial 125I-albumin
clearance rate of 15.9 +/- 2.0 x 10(-2) microliters/min. Challenge of these cells
with 2 x 10(-8) M PMA did not further augment the increase in permeability.
Activation with PMA was associated with the translocation of the PKC beta 1 from 
the cytosol to the membrane. These data show that PKC beta 1 overexpression
augments the increase in endothelial permeability in response to PKC activation, 
suggesting an important function for the PKC beta 1 isoform in the regulation of 
endothelial barrier.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4652(199602)166:2<249::AID-JCP2>3.0.CO;2-P 
PMID: 8591984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

