
1. Antiviral Res. 1995 Nov;28(3):213-24.

Herpes simplex type1:lacZ recombinant viruses. II. Microtiter plate-based
colorimetric assays for the discovery of new antiherpes agents and the points at 
which such agents disrupt the viral replication cycle.

Dicker IB(1), Blasecki JW, Seetharam S.

Author information: 
(1)DuPont Merck Pharmaceutical Co., Experimental Station, Wilmington, DE
19880-0400, USA.

A panel of microtiter plate-based colorimetric assays for monitoring HSV-1 growth
has been made. The panel consists of 4 different HSV-1 (strain KOS) lacZ
recombinant viruses which express beta-galactosidase under the control of
different HSV-1 promoters derived from each class of herpes simplex gene
expression: immediate-early (ICP4), early (TK), delayed early (gD) and late (gC).
Inhibitors of HSV-1 growth were evaluated using differential effects on each of
the reporter viruses as a measure of which points in the viral replication cycle 
an inhibitor was acting. Aphidicolin (DNA synthesis inhibitor) was studied as a
model compound. At an m.o.i. of 0.05, at 24 h postinfection (h p.i.), aphidicolin
inhibited 80% of viral growth at 1 micrograms/ml, as determined by a reduction in
ICP4-driven activity within the second cycle of infection. At m.o.i. 5, within
the first infectious cycle, aphidicolin had no effect on the signals from either 
the ICP4 or TK viruses at 3 micrograms/ml, while largely suppressing gD and fully
inhibiting gC-driven signals at 2 micrograms/ml. This profile is consistent with 
the behavior expected of a DNA synthesis inhibitor. Five inhibitors of unknown
mechanism were evaluated. Two compounds inhibited ICP4-driven activity within the
first infectious cycle and were classified as potential inhibitors of viral
entry, uncoating or IE gene expression (XF884, BT318). One compound inhibited gD 
and gC-driven activity without inhibiting signal from the ICP4 and TK viruses,
and was classified as a potential DNA synthesis inhibitor (DS810). Two compounds 
(S5193, ER622) had effects on gD- and gC-driven activity which were somewhat
different from aphidicolin and DS810, but which could be interpreted as
inhibition of viral assembly and/or egress. The potency of XF884 varied with the 
time postinfection at which it was added to cells (IC50 3.7 to > 10
micrograms/ml) while the effects of BT318 were independent of time of addition
(IC50 11.4 micrograms/ml). These results suggest XF884 inhibits viral entry while
BT318 is acting after viral entry, possibly as a direct inhibitor of ICP4 gene
expression. Together, these results suggest the panel of recombinant herpes
viruses has utility in aiding in the identification of the points in the herpes
life cycle at which antiherpes drug candidates, of unknown mechanisms, are
acting.

DOI: 10.1016/0166-3542(95)00049-r 
PMID: 8629814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

