
1. J Exp Med. 1996 Apr 1;183(4):1545-52.

The requirement for proteasome activity class I major histocompatibility complex 
antigen presentation is dictated by the length of preprocessed antigen.

Yang B(1), Hahn YS, Hahn CS, Braciale TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Beirne B. Carter Center for Immunology Research, University of Virginia Health
Sciences Center, Charlottesville 22908, USA.

Accumulating evidence has implicated the proteasome in the processing of protein 
along the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I presentation pathway.
The availability of potent proteasome inhibitors provides an opportunity to
examine the role of proteasome function in antigen presentation by MHC class I
molecules to CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). We have investigated the
processing and presenting of antigenic epitopes from influenza hemagglutinin in
target cells treated with the inhibitor of proteasome activity MG132. In the
absence of proteasome activity, the processing and presentation of the
full-length hemagglutinin was abolished, suggesting the requirement for
proteasome function in the processing and presentation of the hemagglutinin
glycoprotein. Epitope-containing translation products as short as 21 amino acids 
when expressed in target cells required proteasome activity for processing and
presentation of the hemagglutin epitope to CTLs. However, when endogenous
peptides of 17 amino acids or shorter were expressed in target cells, the
processing and presentation of epitopes contained in these peptides were
insensitive to the proteasome inhibitor. Our results support the hypothesis that 
proteasome activity is required for the generation of peptides presented by MHC
class I molecules and that the requirement for proteasome activity is dependent
on the size of the translation product expressed in the target cell. The
implications of these findings are discussed.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.183.4.1545 
PMCID: PMC2192494
PMID: 8666912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

