
1. J Gen Virol. 1996 Jun;77 ( Pt 6):1277-85.

Replication of yellow fever virus in the mouse central nervous system: comparison
of neuroadapted and non-neuroadapted virus and partial sequence analysis of the
neuroadapted strain.

Schlesinger JJ(1), Chapman S, Nestorowicz A, Rice CM, Ginocchio TE, Chambers TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rochester General Hospital, New York, USA.

Serial passage of yellow fever virus (YF17D) in mouse brain enhances
neurovirulence, causing a reduction in survival time after intracerebral
inoculation of adult mice. To study the biological and genetic basis for this
phenomenon, we compared neurovirulence properties of the neuroadapted Porterfield
strain (PYF) to a YF17D strain generated from a full-length YF cDNA template
(YF5.2iv). Adult mice were infected by olfactory bulb inoculation, which results 
in widespread distribution of virus throughout the central nervous system.
Although PYF and YF5.2iv spread rapidly throughout the neuraxis, maximal titres
of PYF in the brain and spinal cord were 1000- to 10,000-fold higher than those
of YF5.2iv. Paralysis and death occurred earlier with the PYF strain. Several
cDNA clones of the E/NS1 region of the PYF strain were sequenced. Three predicted
amino acid changes were consistently observed in the envelope protein of the PYF 
strain compared to YF5.2iv. Common substitutions were also identified in NS1 and 
NS2A. The potential contribution of these genetic differences to neurovirulence
was evaluated by generating recombinant, intertypic PYF/YF5.2iv viruses. Physical
signs of disease and mean spinal cord titres after inoculation of one recombinant
were not different from the YF5.2iv parent. Our data indicate that PYF and
YF5.2iv differ significantly in their virulence properties, however, common amino
acid substitutions in the E/NS1 region of the PYF strain do not determine its
enhanced neurovirulence. Other regions of the viral genome may contribute
dominant effects on the virulence properties of the PYF strain.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-77-6-1277 
PMID: 8683217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

