
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 1996 Feb;37(2):303-13.

Activity of penciclovir in antiviral assays against herpes simplex virus.

Bacon TH(1), Howard BA, Spender LC, Boyd MR.

Author information: 
(1)SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals, Betchworth, Surrey, UK.

The effect of penciclovir and acyclovir on the replication of herpes simplex
virus type 1 (HSV-1) and type 2 (HSV-2) strains was determined in MRC-5 cells
infected with 0.01 pfu/cell and exposed to the drugs for 72 h to allow multiple
cycles of replication. Penciclovir was significantly more active than acyclovir
against three strains of HSV-1 and three strains of HSV-2 at 1 mg/L (P = 0.009), 
3 mg/L (P < 0.001) and 10 mg/L (P = 0.001). Further comparisons between the
compounds were made in MRC-5 cells infected with HSV-1 strain SC16 using four
different antiviral assays namely, the 24 h virus yield reduction assay, plaque
reduction assay, viral antigen inhibition assay, and a viral DNA inhibition
assay, to determine the relative merits of each. Penciclovir and acyclovir shared
similar activities in the plaque reduction assay (with 50% effective
concentrations, EC50, being 0.8 and 0.6 mg/L, respectively) and in the viral
antigen inhibition assay (EC50s. 0.6 and 0.7 mg/L, respectively). The EC50 of
penciclovir in the 24 h viral DNA inhibition assay was 0.01 mg/L compared with
0.06 mg/L of acyclovir. In the 24 h virus yield reduction assay in which MRC-5
cells were infected with 0.3 pfu/cell, penciclovir was more active than acyclovir
with 99% effective concentrations of 0.6 mg/L and 1.1 mg/L, respectively. The
activity of penciclovir in the 24 h virus yield reduction and antigen inhibition 
assays was inversely related to the multiplicity of infection, whereas this had
considerably less effect on the inhibition of viral DNA synthesis. These results 
suggest that famciclovir, which is the oral form of penciclovir, will be at least
as effective as acyclovir in treating infections caused by HSV-1 and HSV-2.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/37.2.303 
PMID: 8707740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

