
1. Immunol Lett. 1996 Mar;49(3):155-61.

Human-->mouse radiation chimera do not develop Epstein-Barr virus lymphoma.

Marcus H(1), Burakova T, Shezen E, David M, Canaan A, Lubin I, Reisner Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Membrane Research and Biophysics, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot, Israel.

It has been shown that engraftment of human peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL)
from Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) seropositive donors in C.B-17/SCID mice is
associated with a high incidence of human B cell tumors. More recently, we
described a new approach enabling engraftment of human PBL in normal strains of
mice or rats receiving lethal split-dose radiation and radioprotected with SCID
bone marrow. We now demonstrate that, in contrast to SCID recipients of human
PBL, Balb/c and C3H/HeJ recipients of 50-100 x 10(6) human PBL did not develop
any EBV lymphoma during a 7-month follow-up period, but were successfully
engrafted with human B and T cells. On the other hand, lymphoma developed in 90% 
of the C.B-17/SCID mice infused with 70 x 10(6) human PBL from the same donor.
Likewise, 36% of beige/nude/xid (BNX) mice, exposed to 12 Gy TBI, radioprotected 
with SCID bone marrow and then transplanted with human PBL developed lymphoma.
Similar results were obtained when different strains were infused with PBL of the
same donor. Immunohistochemical analysis indicated that the tumor cells were of
human B cell origin and expressed the EBV-encoded latent membrane protein-1 and
nuclear antigen 2. While further studies are required to understand the
mechanisms which suppressed outgrowth of EBV lymphoma in human --> mouse
radiation chimera, compared to human --> C.B-17/SCID or human --> BNX chimera,
this marked resistance offers new possibilities for transplantation of
hematopoietic tissues or cells from EBV-positive donors.

DOI: 10.1016/0165-2478(96)02497-2 
PMID: 8739310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

