
1. J Anim Sci. 1996 Jun;74(6):1358-66.

Effects of B vitamin injections on plasma B vitamin concentrations of
feed-restricted beef calves infected with bovine herpesvirus-1.

Dubeski PL(1), Owens FN, Song WO, Coburn SP, Mahuren JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater
74078-0425, USA.

For nonruminants, stress and disease greatly increase requirements for vitamin
B6, folic acid, pantothenic acid, and ascorbate. The effects of feed restriction,
virus infection, and vitamin injections on plasma concentrations of B vitamins
critical to the immune response were evaluated. Twelve beef steer calves, 6 to 8 
mo of age, were fed below maintenance for 17 d and deprived of food for 3 d
during a 20-d period after weaning. They then were inoculated intranasally with
live attenuated bovine herpesvirus-1 (BHV-1). Six calves received saline
injections and six received injections of a B vitamin mixture and ascorbate every
48 h for 14 d before and 14 d after inoculation. A mild respiratory infection
developed in all calves 4 to 5 d after inoculation. In control calves, restricted
intake and food deprivation decreased plasma vitamin B6 and pantothenate and
increased vitamin B12 but did not affect folic acid and ascorbate concentrations.
Vitamin injections increased plasma concentrations of vitamin B6, folic acid,
vitamin B12, pantothenic acid, and ascorbate (P < .002). Plasma concentrations of
vitamin B6, vitamin B12, pantothenic acid, and ascorbate, but not folic acid,
were markedly reduced in all calves during the BHV-1 infection (P = .001). The
vitamin B6, pantothenic acid, vitamin B12, and ascorbate status of stressed
calves may affect their immune response to vaccination or infection.

DOI: 10.2527/1996.7461358x 
PMID: 8791209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

