
1. Clin Infect Dis. 1996 Sep;23(3):468-74.

Exposure to cytomegalovirus from the donated organ is a risk factor for
bacteremia in orthotopic liver transplant recipients. Boston Center for Liver
Transplantation CMVIG Study Group.

Falagas ME(1), Snydman DR, Griffith J, Werner BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, New England Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts
02111, USA.

To define predictors of bacteremia and to assess the potential role of exposure
to cytomegalovirus (CMV) as a risk factor for bacteremia in liver transplant
recipients, an intention-to-treat analysis of data for 146 orthotopic liver
transplant recipients who participated in a multicenter, randomized, intervention
trial was undertaken. Fifty-eight episodes of bacteremia occurred in 40 (27.4%)
of 146 patients within 1 year after transplantation. Bacteremia was diagnosed a
median of 39.5 days (range, 1-325 days) after transplantation. One-year mortality
rates were higher among patients with bacteremia than among those without
bacteremia (47.5% [19 of 40] vs. 18% [19 of 106], respectively; P = .001). A
time-dependent multivariate analysis of variables that were significantly (P < or
= .05) associated with bacteremia in the univariate analysis showed that donor
CMV seropositivity (relative risk [RR], 3.4; 95% confidence interval [CI],
1.6-6.6; P = .0005), age of younger than 16 years (RR, 2.6; 95% CI, 1.3-5.2; P < 
.0059), and a major abdominal operation after transplantation excluding
retransplantation (RR, 3.8; 95% CI, 1.8-8.0; P = .0004) were independently
associated with bacteremia. These epidemiologic data suggest that exposure to CMV
from the donated organ is an independent risk factor for bacteremia in orthotopic
liver transplant recipients.

DOI: 10.1093/clinids/23.3.468 
PMID: 8879766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

