
1. Int Immunol. 1996 Sep;8(9):1441-51.

Differential activation of T cells by antibody-modulated processing of the
flanking sequences of class II-restricted peptides.

Fournier P(1), Ammerlaan W, Ziegler D, Giminez C, Rabourdin-Combe C, Fleckenstein
BT, Wiesmüller KH, Jung G, Schneider F, Muller CP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire National de Santé (LNS), Luxembourg.

Despite poor presentation of measles virus (MV) nucleoprotein (NP) by MHC class
II of infected cells, NP-specific antibodies are one of the hallmarks of the
early immune response against this virus. To study the influence of antibodies on
processing and presentation of NP to three different T cell hybridomas, mAb
recognizing distinctive llnear NP epitopes were developed. Two T cell hybridomas 
TNP408B and TNP408 reacted with the same core epitope of NP (amino acids
383-391), but differed in their sensitivity to the flanking sequences of peptides
containing this epitope. TNP408B reacted with minimal concentrations of NP when
this was complexed with mAb BNP146. NP alone or saturating concentrations of
other mAb did not activate this T cell. Both T cells, TNP408 and TNP408B, were
similar in their sensitivity to NP in the presence of saturating concentrations
of BNP146 or of appropriate peptide (NP379). TNP408 did not differ from another T
cell hybridoma (TNP79) in its sensitivity to different mAb, suggesting a
specificity-dependent and a specificity-independent effect of mAb.
Antibody-mediated activation was attributed to FcR-mediated uptake independent of
the fine specificity of the mAb. In the case of TNP408B, this effect was further 
enhanced by a specific effect of BNP146. While all NP-specific mAb were
sufficient to enhance presentation to TNP408 and TNP79 of their respective
peptides derived from processed NP, BNP146 was necessary to generate the peptides
with the proper flanking sequences required by TNP408B. Since the binding site of
BNP146 coincides with the T cell epitope of TNP408B (and TNP408) it is suggested 
that binding of this mAb modulates processing of the flanking sequences of the
peptides corresponding to this epitope. This study shows that antibodies can
influence the T cell response to an antigenic protein quantitatively and
qualitatively by taking advantage of the sensitivity of T cells to flanking
sequences of class II-restricted peptides.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/8.9.1441 
PMID: 8921422  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

