
1. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1996 Nov;60(5):535-42.

Disposition of didanosine in HIV-seropositive patients with normal renal function
or chronic renal failure: influence of hemodialysis and continuous ambulatory
peritoneal dialysis.

Knupp CA(1), Hak LJ, Coakley DF, Falk RJ, Wagner BE, Raasch RH, van der Horst CM,
Kaul S, Barbhaiya RH, Dukes GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company,
Princeton, NJ 08543, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the pharmacokinetics of didanosine in patients with normal
kidney function or chronic kidney failure.
METHODS: Three groups of patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection were studied: group I, six men with normal kidney function (creatinine 
clearance > 90 ml/min/1.73 m2); group II, six men with chronic renal failure
maintained on continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD); and group III,
four men and two women with chronic renal failure receiving hemodialysis three
times a week. A 300 mg dose of didanosine was administered orally and
intravenously according to a two-period randomized crossover design. Patients in 
group III were studied between hemodialysis sessions during the crossover
periods. In addition, patients in group III were studied in a third period after 
administration of a 300 mg oral dose of didanosine 4 hours before hemodialysis.
RESULTS: After intravenous administration in group I, the mean (+/-SD) total
clearance (CLT) was 13.0 +/- 1.6 ml/min/kg and the elimination half-life (t 1/2) 
was 1.56 +/- 0.43 hour. In groups II and III, the CLT decreased significantly to 
3.4 +/- 1.2 and 3.2 +/- 1.2 ml/min/kg, respectively, whereas the t1/2 increased
to 3.60 +/- 0.82 hours and 3.11 +/- 0.88 hours, respectively. The absolute
bioavailability of didanosine in groups I, II, and III was 42% +/- 12%, 52% +/-
6%, and 38% +/- 11%, respectively, and did not differ significantly. CAPD had
little effect on the removal of didanosine, whereas approximately 30% of the drug
present in the body at the start of dialysis was eliminated by an average 3-hour 
dialysis session.
CONCLUSION: The clearance of didanosine is impaired in patients with chronic
renal failure. To compensate, the dose and schedule of administration should be
adjusted. It is recommended that one-fourth of the total daily dose of didanosine
be administered once a day in this patient population.

DOI: 10.1016/S0009-9236(96)90149-6 
PMID: 8941026  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

