
1. Biopharm Drug Dispos. 1996 Apr;17(3):197-207.

Discontinuous oral absorption pharmacokinetic model and bioavailability of
1-(2-fluoro-5-methyl-beta-L-arabinofuranosyl)uracil (L-FMAU) in rats.

Wright JD(1), Ma T, Chu CK, Boudinot FD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, University of Georgia, Athens 30602, U.S.A.

1-(2-fluoro-5-methyl-beta-L-arabinofuranosyl)uracil (L-FMAU), the L isomer of
FMAU, has shown potent activity against hepatitis B virus and Epstein-Barr virus.
L-FMAU showed double peaks in the plasma concentration versus time profiles
following oral administration to rats, indicating discontinuous oral absorption. 
The objective of this study was to characterize the bioavailability and pattern
of L-FMAU absorption using a pharmacokinetic model which incorporated two
separate absorption processes following oral administration of the nucleoside in 
an animal model, the rat. Simultaneous fitting of differential equations to
L-FMAU plasma concentrations following oral and intravenous administration was
performed using PCNONLIN. Total clearance of L-FMAU was moderate, averaging 0.47 
+/- 0.16 L h-1 (mean +/- SD). Distributional clearance averaged 0.18 +/- 0.14 L
h-1. The volume of the central compartment averaged 0.30 +/- 0.09 L, and the
volume of the peripheral compartment averaged 0.15 +/- 0.08 L. The first-order
absorption rate constants describing the first and second absorption phases
averaged 1.22 +/- 1.56 and 4.14 +/- 5.42 h-1, respectively. Oral bioavailability 
was calculated by three methods: AUC, urinary excretion data, and a discontinuous
oral absorption pharmacokinetic model. Bioavailability averaged 0.59 +/- 0.16,
0.64 +/- 0.23, and 0.63 +/- 0.13, respectively, for the three methods. The
discontinuous oral absorption pharmacokinetic model is a promising new method for
estimating absorption from two phases and for calculating oral bioavailability.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1099-081X(199604)17:3<197::AID-BDD948>3.0.CO;2-1 
PMID: 8983395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

