
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 1997 Jan;107(1):15-20.

Escape of HIV-1 is associated with lack of V3 domain-specific antibodies in vivo.

Schreiber M(1), MÃ¼ller H, Wachsmuth C, Laue T, Hufert FT, Van Laer MD, Schmitz H.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology Section, Department of Virology, Bernhard Nocht Institute
for Tropical Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.

This study was performed to analyse correlates of viral escape in AIDS patients. 
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from HIV- donors were inoculated with
AIDS patients' serum to detect neutralization-resistant cell-free virus.
Infectious virus was detected by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and analysed by 
sequencing the V3 region. The escaped virus species was compared with all V3
virus variants found in the patients' PBMC and plasma. In one patient escaped
virus was also compared with variants found in CD4+ T cells isolated by FACS from
blood, spleen and lymph node. The frequency of the virus variants was determined 
by cloning and sequence analysis of 20 V3 clones for each PCR amplification. To
monitor anti-V3 antibodies by ELISA, each V3 sequence was expressed as fusion
with glutathione S-transferase (GST-V3). In our AIDS patients, a V3-directed
antibody response against the infectious virus V3 loop was not detectable. In
contrast, virus variants unable to infect the donor PBMC in vitro were well
recognized by homologous V3-directed antibody. After an interval of 1 year the
frequency of these variants clearly decreased, while at the same time the escaped
variants grew out and finally represented the predominant viral species both in
plasma and PBMC. The infectious variants lacking V3 antibody response were also
predominant in CD4+ T cells in spleen and lymph node. Our data indicate that the 
escape of virus variants is closely related to the lack of V3-directed antibody.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.1996.d01-909.x 
PMCID: PMC1904538
PMID: 9010251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

