
1. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 2;272(18):11824-31.

Bovine spleen multicatalytic proteinase complex (proteasome). Replacement of X,
Y, and Z subunits by LMP7, LMP2, and MECL1 and changes in properties and
specificity.

Eleuteri AM(1), Kohanski RA, Cardozo C, Orlowski M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Camerino, 62032 Camerino, Italy.

Amino acid sequencing of subunits of the multicatalytic proteinase complex (MPC) 
isolated from bovine spleen showed an almost complete replacement of the X, Y,
and Z subunits, constitutively expressed in most tissues, by the
interferon-gamma-inducible LMP7, LMP2, and MECL1 subunits. A comparison with the 
pituitary MPC found a decreased chymotrypsin-like activity, a depressed
peptidylglutamyl-peptide hydrolyzing activity, and a highly active component with
properties similar to, but not identical with, that of the pituitary branched
chain amino acid preferring (BrAAP) component. Unlike the pituitary BrAAP
component, that of the spleen MPC exhibited a greatly decreased Km, a highly
increased catalytic efficiency (kcat), and a 80-180 times greater specificity
constant (kcat/Km) toward substrates with either branched chain or aromatic amino
acid residues in the P1 position. Also, unlike the pituitary BrAAP component,
that of the spleen was sensitive to inactivation by 3,4-dichloroisocoumarin and
sensitive to inhibition by peptidyl-aldehydes with either phenylalaninal or
leucinal residues. Several phenylalaninal peptidyl-aldehydes were identified
which selectively inhibited components of the spleen but not of the pituitary
MPC. Two of the inhibitors are dipeptidyl-aldehydes, two others are
tetrapeptidyl-aldehydes with a Pro residue in the P3 position. The possibility is
discussed that the properties and specificity of the spleen MPC are a consequence
of the presence of the interferon-gamma-inducible subunits.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.18.11824 
PMID: 9115240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

