
1. Virology. 1997 May 12;231(2):201-9.

Amplification of recombinant adenoviral transgene products occurs by inhibition
of histone deacetylase.

Dion LD(1), Goldsmith KT, Tang DC, Engler JA, Yoshida M, Garver RI Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA.

n-Butyrate (butyrate) has been shown to amplify transgene expression in cells
infected with E1-defective adenoviruses. The present studies were undertaken in
order to better define the actions of butyrate in the context of adenovirus gene 
expression, and to attempt to elucidate the mechanism by which butyrate mediates 
the transgene amplification. It was found that butyrate amplified viral transgene
expression over a concentration range of 0.5-5 mM, and that the amplification
required an exposure of 12-24 hr for maximal effect. Western blot analysis of
representative viral proteins showed that butyrate treatment amplified
DNA-binding protein, but not fiber protein. A transient adenoviral replication
system suggested that butyrate had a modest inhibitory effect on replication of
the E1-defective adenovirus. Use of a specific inhibitor of histone deacetylase, 
trichostatin A (TSA), reproduced the amplification of the viral transgene product
achieved with the butyrate. In contrast, adenoviral transgene expression could
not be amplified by TSA treatment in a cell line known to have a TSA-resistant
histone deacetylase. Butyrate amplified steady-state gene expression of the viral
transgene, but had no detectable effects on either DNA-binding protein or fiber
steady-state gene expression. Nuclear run-off experiments showed that both
butyrate and TSA caused an increase in the viral transgene transcription. It was 
concluded that inhibitors of histone deacetylase amplify adenoviral transgene
expression at the transcriptional level.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1997.8538 
PMID: 9168882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

