
1. J Immunother. 1997 Jul;20(4):276-86.

Dendritic cells infected with poxviruses encoding MART-1/Melan A sensitize T
lymphocytes in vitro.

Kim CJ(1), Prevette T, Cormier J, Overwijk W, Roden M, Restifo NP, Rosenberg SA, 
Marincola FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Dendritic cells (DC) are potent professional antigen-presenting cells that can
activate naive T lymphocytes and initiate cellular immune responses. As
adjuvants, DC may be useful in enhancing the immunogenicity of tumor antigens and
mediating tumor regression. Endogenous expression of antigen by DC offers the
potential advantage of allowing prolonged constitutive presentation of
endogenously processed epitopes and exploitation of multiple restriction elements
for the presentation of the same antigen. In this report, we show that human DC
are (a) capable of infection by recombinant poxviruses encoding
melanoma-associated antigen (MAA) genes and (b) capable of efficiently processing
and presenting these MAA to cytotoxic T cells. In 6/6 HLA A*0201-expressing
melanoma patients tested, the virally driven expression of MART-1/Melan A MAA by 
DC was sufficient to generate CD8+ T lymphocytes that could recognize naturally
processed epitopes on tumor cells. In most cases, specific anti-MART-1 reactivity
could be detected after a single stimulation. Analysis of epitope dominance
revealed that the amino acid sequence recognized by these cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(CTL) corresponded to the MART-1(27-35) residues previously shown to be most
commonly recognized by cytotoxic T lymphocytes expanded from metastatic melanoma 
lesions. These data show that the virally driven expression of MAA by DC can be
exploited for the efficient induction of clinically relevant cytotoxic T-cell
responses. This has clinical implications for active immunization therapy, and
currently vaccine trials have been proposed for patients with metastatic
melanoma.

DOI: 10.1097/00002371-199707000-00004 
PMCID: PMC2562268
PMID: 9220317  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

