
1. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 1997 Sep;25(3):281-9.

Pattern of metabolism and composition of the fecal microflora in infants 10 to 18
months old from day care centers.

Guérin-Danan C(1), Andrieux C, Popot F, Charpilienne A, Vaissade P, Gaudichon C, 
Pedone C, Bouley C, Szylit O.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Ecologie et de Physiologie du Système Digestif, Equipe Métabolites
Bactériens et Santé, Jouy en Josas, France.

BACKGROUND: From 5 months of age, infants are progressively introduced to a
variety of foods which influence the equilibrium of the intestinal microflora.
METHODS: Thirty-five children age 10-18 months from 8 day care centers in France 
were studied. Fecal specimens were examined for their biochemical and
microbiological criteria.
RESULTS: Bifidobacteria and Bacteroides belong to the predominant populations
(9.7 and 8.6 log 10 cfu/g, respectively). The mean level of enterobacteria and
enterococci were 8.0 and 7.8 log 10 cfu/g, respectively. Only 10% of the infants 
presented a lactobacilli amount above 6 log 10 cfu/g. Most feces had similar pH
values (mean 6.4), percentage of water (mean 76.4%), and short chain fatty acid, 
ammonia and lactic acid concentrations (means 77, 6.7 and 2.3 mumol/g,
respectively). beta-galactosidase had the highest activity (106 IU/g of protein) 
and nitroreductase, the lowest (0.1 IU/g of protein). alpha-glucosidase and
nitrate reductase showed intermediate values of 17 and 4 IU/g of protein,
respectively. With the exception of 4 infants, beta-glucosidase and
beta-glucuronidase values were low (4 and 2 IU/g of protein). Age and day care
center were not significant factors for most parameters studied, except that
rotavirus was related to day care center, with detection in 5 infants from the
same center.
CONCLUSIONS: Many biochemical parameters were comparable to those found in
adults, with the exception of ammonia concentration and beta-galactosidase
activity. The fecal bacterial profile was different than in adults, with more
Bifidobacteria than Bacteroides and higher levels of facultative anaerobes. One
infant suffering from gastroenteritis had distinctive biochemical and bacterial
parameters.

DOI: 10.1097/00005176-199709000-00007 
PMID: 9285378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

