
1. J Virol. 1997 Oct;71(10):8066-72.

Biochemical characterization of a smaller form of recombinant Norwalk virus
capsids assembled in insect cells.

White LJ(1), Hardy ME, Estes MK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Virology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

The expression of the single capsid protein of Norwalk virus (NV) in Spodoptera
frugiperda (Sf9) insect cells infected with recombinant baculovirus results in
the assembly of virus-like particles (VLPs) of two sizes, the predominant 38-nm, 
or virion-size VLPs, and smaller, 23-nm VLPs. Here we describe the purification
and biochemical characterization of the 23-nm VLPs. The 23-nm VLPs were purified 
to 95% homogeneity from the medium of Sf9 cultures by isopycnic CsCl gradient
centrifugation followed by rate-zonal centrifugation in sucrose gradients. The
compositions of the purified 23- and 38-nm VLPs were compared by sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and protein immunoblots. VLPs of both 
sizes showed a doublet at 58 kDa, the size of the full-length capsid protein.
Upon alkaline treatment, the 23-nm VLPs underwent dissociation into soluble
intermediates that were able to reassemble into 23- and 38-nm VLPs upon dialysis,
suggesting that the assembly of both types of structures has a common pathway.
Antigenic and biochemical properties of the 38- and 23-nm VLPs were examined and 
found to be conserved. Immunoprecipitation assays using polyclonal and monoclonal
antibodies indicated that immunodominant epitopes on the capsid protein as well
as conformational epitopes are conserved in the two types of particles. The
trypsin cleavage site at residue 227 was protected in the assembled particles of 
both sizes but exposed after alkaline dissociation. These results, and the
conservation of the binding activity of both forms of recombinant NV VLPs to
cultured cells (L. J. White, J. M. Ball, M. E. Hardy, T. N. Tanaka, N. Kitamoto, 
and M. K. Estes, J. Virol. 70:6589-6597, 1996), suggest that the tertiary folding
of the capsid protein responsible for these properties is conserved in the two
structures. We hypothesize that the 23-nm VLPs are formed when 60 units of the NV
capsid protein assembles into a structure with T=1 symmetry.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.71.10.8066-8072.1997 
PMCID: PMC192173
PMID: 9311906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

