
1. Front Biosci. 1997 Nov 1;2:d527-37.

Cellular mechanisms of feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)-induced
neuropathogenesis.

Zenger E(1), Tiffany-Castiglioni E, Collisson EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, UCSF AIDS Program, San Francisco General Hospital,
University of California, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.
ezenger@sfaids.ucsf.edu

The high incidence of neurologic dysfunction from human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) infection has heightened interest in neuropathogenesis of other
lentiviruses, including that associated with feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV).
Both HIV and FIV efficiently enter the central nervous system and cause primary
neurological disease that is not attributable to opportunistic infections or
systemic disease. Cells in the brain infected by FIV are similar to those
observed in HIV infection, both viruses infect macrophages, microglia, and
astrocytes. Although substantial neuronal loss can occur in the cortex of HIV- or
FIV-infected patients, most studies agree that neurons are not infected and
indirect mechanisms of neurotoxicity are postulated. This review describes recent
information on the neuropathogenesis of FIV and how this information correlates
with what is known about the neuropathogenesis of HIV. Although the pathogenesis 
of neurological dysfunction in HIV- and FIV-infected patients is far from clear, 
it is becoming increasingly evident that the relationship between lentivirus
presence in the brain and neurological signs is not straightforward and cannot be
explained by simple cytolytic infection. The observed neurologic dysfunction is
likely multifactorial and complex involving an intricate web of subcellular
pathways and neurotoxic factors interacting with multiple cell types.

DOI: 10.2741/a210 
PMID: 9341240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

