
1. J Virol. 1997 Nov;71(11):8385-91.

Mutations in coat protein binding sites of alfalfa mosaic virus RNA 3 affect
subgenomic RNA 4 accumulation and encapsidation of viral RNAs.

Reusken CB(1), Neeleman L, Brederode FT, Bol JF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Plant Sciences, Gorlaeus Laboratories, Leiden
University, The Netherlands.

The 3'-untranslated regions (3'-UTRs) of the three RNAs of alfalfa mosaic virus
(AMV) contain a specific binding site for coat protein (CP) and act as a promoter
for minus-strand RNA synthesis by the purified AMV RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
(RdRp) in an in vitro assay. Binding of CP to the viral RNAs is required to
initiate infection. The sequence of the 3'-terminal 39 nucleotides of AMV RNA 3
can be folded into two stem-loop structures flanked by three single-stranded AUGC
sequences and represents a CP binding site. Mutations in this sequence that are
known to interfere with CP binding in vitro were introduced into an infectious
clone of RNA 3, and mutant RNA transcripts were used as templates in the in vitro
RdRp assay and to infect protoplasts and plants. Mutation of AUGC motif 2 or
disruption of the stem of the 3'-proximal hairpin 1 interfered with CP binding in
vitro but not with minus-strand promoter activity in vitro or replication of RNA 
3 in vivo. However, hairpin 1 appeared to be essential for encapsidation of RNA
3. Reversion of three G-C base pairs in hairpin 1 had no effect on CP binding but
interfered with minus-strand promoter activity in vitro and with RNA 3
replication in vivo. It is concluded that the viral RdRp and CP recognize
different elements in the 3'-UTRs of AMV RNAs. Moreover, several mutations that
interfered with CP binding in vitro interfered with the accumulation in vivo of
RNA 4, the subgenomic messenger for CP, but not with the accumulation of RNA 3.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.71.11.8385-8391.1997 
PMCID: PMC192300
PMID: 9343194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

