
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1997 Dec;41(12):2686-92.

Flow cytometric analysis of herpes simplex virus type 1 susceptibility to
acyclovir, ganciclovir, and foscarnet.

Pavić I(1), Hartmann A, Zimmermann A, Michel D, Hampl W, Schleyer I, Mertens T.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Virologie, Institut für Mikrobiologie, Universität Ulm, Germany.

We established a quantitative flow cytometric method for determination of herpes 
simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) susceptibility to acyclovir (ACV), ganciclovir, and 
foscarnet in vitro. Susceptibility was defined in terms of the drug concentration
which reduced the number of cells expressing HSV-1 glycoprotein C (gpC) with a
fluorescence intensity of > or =10(2) by 50% (IC50). Flow cytometry allowed us to
use a high (1.0) as well as a low (0.005) multiplicity of infection, and
determination of the IC50 was possible after one or more viral replicative
cycles. IC50s were dependent on virus input and on time postinfection. In mixture
experiments, 1 to 2% resistant viruses added to a sensitive strain could be
detected. The results obtained by flow cytometry showed a good qualitative
correlation with those achieved by cytopathic effect inhibitory assay. However,
flow cytometry might detect more quantitative differences in drug susceptibility,
especially among resistant strains, as confirmed also by determination of
intracellular drug phosphorylation. The mean IC50s for ACV-sensitive strains were
0.45 to 1.47 microM, and those for ACV-resistant strains were between 140 and
3,134 microM. Flow cytometric analysis was fast and accurate, automatizable, and 
highly reproducible. Flow cytometry may be a more powerful tool than standard
cytopathic effect-based assays and could have advantages for the detection of low
levels of drug resistance or mixtures of sensitive and resistant virus strains.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.41.12.2686 
PMCID: PMC164189
PMID: 9420039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

