
1. Cancer Gene Ther. 1998 Mar-Apr;5(2):119-26.

Transfection of primary tumor cells and tumor cell lines with plasmid DNA/lipid
complexes.

Stopeck AT(1), Hersh EM, Brailey JL, Clark PR, Norman J, Parker SE.

Author information: 
(1)Arizona Cancer Center, Tucson 85724-5024, USA.

Cancer vaccines that utilize genetically modified tumor cells require gene
transfer methods capable of producing immunostimulatory doses of transgenes from 
fresh or short-term cultures of human tumor cells. Our studies optimize in vitro 
transfection of primary tumor cells using cationic lipids and a plasmid encoding 
the gene for human interleukin-2 (IL-2). Established tumor cell lines produced
10- to 100-fold more IL-2 than did fresh or short-term tumor cultures as measured
by enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent analysis. Importantly, transfection of primary
tumor cells produced immunostimulatory levels of IL-2 as determined by increased 
thymidine incorporation by autologous peripheral blood mononuclear cells and
lymphokine-activated killer cell activity. IL-2 secretion by tumor cells
persisted for at least 30 days post-transfection and was unaffected by freeze
thawing or irradiation to 8000 rads. Multiple solid tumor types were successfully
transfected, but normal blood mononuclear cells and leukemic blasts were
resistant to transfection. Enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent analysis of the amount
of IL-2 secreted into the medium by transfected tumor cells correlated with the
percentage of tumor cells expressing intracellular IL-2 as measured by flow
cytometry. Plasmids utilizing a cytomegalovirus promoter yielded superior
transfection efficiencies compared with plasmids containing a Rous sarcoma virus 
promoter. These results suggest that a clinical vaccine trial using autologous
tumor cells genetically modified to secrete IL-2 is feasible in patients with
solid tumors.


PMID: 9570303  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

