
1. J Cell Biochem Suppl. 1997;28-29:133-9.

Effect of retinoic acid on HPV titration and colposcopic changes in Korean
patients with dysplasia of the uterine cervix.

Ahn WS(1), Lee JM, Namkoong SE, Lee HY, Kim SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kang Nam St. Mary's Hospital, College
of Medicine, Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

Retinoids, a family of molecules capable of profound impact on many biological
functions, have antiproliferative, differentiative, and immunomodulatory
properties. The present study assessed the effect of 13-cis-retinoic acid
(13-CRA) treatment in 13 chronic cervicitis and 52 cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia patients. We examined low- and high-risk human papilloma virus titer
(using the hybrid capture method) and made a colposcopic and cervicographic
examination before and after treatment with 13-CRA at 1 mg/kg for 4 to 12 weeks. 
Patients were between 27 and 64 years, the average age being 36.6 years.
Histology revealed chronic cervicitis in 13 cases, mild dysplasia in 18 cases,
moderate dysplasia in 18 cases, and severe dysplasia in 16 cases, totaling 65
cases. The expression rate of high-risk human papilloma virus (HPV 16, 18) was 9 
of 13 cases (69%) in chronic cervicitis, 7 of 18 cases (38%) in mild dysplasia, 9
of 18 cases (50%) in moderate dysplasia, and 12 of 16 cases (75%) in severe
dysplasia, with the overall expression rate being 37 of 65 cases (57%). Following
13-CRA treatment, decreases in high-risk titer were observed in 6 of 9 cases
(66%) of chronic cervicitis, 4 of 11 cases (36%) of mild dysplasia, 7 of 9 cases 
(77%) of moderate dysplasia, and 8 of 12 cases (75%) of severe dysplasia.
Overall, HPV titer decreased in 25 of 41 cases (61%). Minimal changes were found 
in colposcopic and cervicographic observations during the study. In summary,
high-risk HPV titer decreased after treatment with 13-CRA in the majority of
patients with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. This study supports the
potential of retinoids to interrupt multi-step carcinogenesis, possibly by
down-regulation of gene products (E6,E7) produced by HPV infection.


PMID: 9589358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

