
1. Med Klin (Munich). 1998 Apr 15;93(4):223-8.

[Cardiotropic DNA viruses and bacteria in the pathogenesis of dilated
cardiomyopathy with or without inflammation].

[Article in German]

Pankuweit S(1), Hufnagel G, Eckhardt H, Herrmann H, Uttecht S, Maisch B.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Innere Medizin-Schwerpunkt Kardiologie, Philipps-UniversitÃ¤t
Marburg. pankuwei@mailer.uni-marburg.de

In the report of the 1995 WHO/ISFC task force on the definition and
classification of cardiomyopathies a new entity within the dilated
cardiomyopathies was introduced as "inflammatory cardiomyopathy". It is defined
as myocarditis associated with cardiac dysfunction. Idiopathic, autoimmune and
infectious forms of inflammatory cardiomyopathy are now recognized through this
definition. Dilated cardiomyopathy with inflammation (DCMi, chronic myocarditis) 
was also defined by a recent ISFC task force as > 14 lymphocytes/macrophages/mm3.
Enteroviruses, adenoviruses and cytomegaloviruses are considered as main
etiopathogenetic factors in the pathogenesis of inflammatory heart disease and
have been demonstrated as important trigger for inflammatory cardiac disease.
They may also cause dilated cardiomyopathy by viral persistence or secondary
immunopathogenesis due to antigenic or molecular mimicry. For the detection of
viral persistence the investigation of endomyocardial biopsies in patients with
cardiomyopathy by the use of polymerase chain reaction and southern blot analysis
is an important step for the standardization of diagnostic criteria on virally
induced inflammatory cardiomyopathy. Present studies indicate an incidence of
cytomegalovirus-DNA in patients with inflammatory cardiomyopathy in 10%,
adenoviral-DNA in 17% and borreliosis only in rare cases (< 1%). In dilated
cardiomyopathy without inflammation the respective incidences were for
cytomegalovirus 12%, 15% for adenovirus and only 0.5% of cases for borreliosis.
In addition the results of immunohistochemical analysis and molecular biological 
investigations of endomyocardial biopsies may have implications for future
therapeutic studies. Depending on the etiology of the disease, immunosuppression 
may have benefit for patients with virus-negative cardiomyopathy with
inflammation in contrast to patients with cytomegalo-, adenovirus-DNA or
enteroviral persistence, in whom immunomodulation with hyperimmunoglobulins or
immunoglobulins may be a feasible therapeutic option. Patients with a positive
PCR for Borrelia burgdorferi should be treated with 3rd generation
cephalosporines and/or sublactam.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03044797 
PMID: 9594531  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

