
1. J Gen Virol. 1998 May;79 ( Pt 5):989-99.

Immune response in pigs vaccinated with plasmid DNA encoding ORF5 of porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus.

Pirzadeh B(1), Dea S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en virologie, Institut Armand-Frappier, Université du
Québec, Laval-des-Rapides, Canada.

The ORF5-encoded major envelope glycoprotein (GP5) of porcine reproductive and
respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) is one of the three major structural proteins 
of this virus. While some porcine convalescent sera and monoclonal antibodies
directed against GP4 and GP5 have the capacity to neutralize the virus in vitro, 
the protein specificity of porcine neutralizing sera has not yet been
established. DNA immunization with a plasmid encoding GP5 of PRRSV, under the
control of a human cytomegalovirus promoter, induced anti-GP5-specific
neutralizing antibodies in pigs and BALB/c mice. The GP5 protein specificity of
neutralizing sera was confirmed by immunoblotting and ELISA. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells obtained from DNA-vaccinated pigs underwent blastogenic
transformation in the presence of E. coli-expressed recombinant ORF5-encoded
protein, indicating the specificity of the cellular immune response to GP5.
Following a massive intratracheal challenge with the virulent IAF-Klop strain of 
PRRSV, DNA-vaccinated pigs were protected from generalized viraemia and the
development of typical macroscopic lung lesions that were observed in
unvaccinated, virus-challenged controls, as well as in pigs that were immunized
with E. coli-expressed GST-ORF5 recombinant fusion protein. Interstitial
pneumonitis and broncho-alveolitis were remarkably milder in DNA-vaccinated
animals. These results suggest that the GP5 of PRRSV is a good candidate for a
subunit recombinant-type vaccine.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-79-5-989 
PMID: 9603313  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

