
1. J Clin Microbiol. 1998 Jul;36(7):1919-22.

Use of lambda phage DNA as a hybrid internal control in a PCR-enzyme immunoassay 
to detect Chlamydia pneumoniae.

Pham DG(1), Madico GE, Quinn TC, Enzler MJ, Smith TF, Gaydos CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland 21205, USA.

An inherent problem in the diagnostic PCR assay is the presence of ill-defined
inhibitors of amplification which may cause false-negative results. Addition of
an amplifiable fragment of foreign DNA in the PCR to serve as a hybrid internal
control (HIC) would allow for a simple way to identify specimens containing
inhibitors. Two oligonucleotide hybrid primers were synthesized to contain
nucleic acid sequences of the Chlamydia pneumoniae 16S rRNA primers in a position
flanking two primers that target the sequences of a 650-bp lambda phage DNA
segment. By using the hybrid primers, hybrid DNA comprising a large sequence of
lambda phage DNA flanked by short pieces of chlamydia DNA was subsequently
generated by PCR, cloned into a plasmid vector, and purified. Plasmids containing
the hybrid DNA were diluted and used as a HIC by adding them to each C.
pneumoniae PCR test. Consequently, C. pneumoniae primers were able to amplify
both chlamydia DNA and the HIC DNA. The production of a 689-bp HIC DNA band on an
acrylamide gel indicated that the specimen contained no inhibitors and that
internal conditions were compatible with PCR. Subsequently, a biotinylated RNA
probe for the HIC was transcribed from a nested sequence of the HIC and was used 
for its hybridization. Detection of the HIC DNA-RNA hybrid was achieved by enzyme
immunoassay (EIA). This PCR-EIA system with a HIC was initially tested with 12
previously PCR-positive and 14 previously PCR-negative specimens. Of the 12
PCR-positive specimens, 11 were reconfirmed as positive; 1 had a negative HIC
value, indicating inhibition. Of the 14 previously PCR-negative specimens, 13
were confirmed as true negative; 1 had a negative HIC value, indicating
inhibition. The assay was then used with 237 nasopharyngeal specimens from
patients with pneumonia. Twenty-one of 237 (8.9%) were positive for C.
pneumoniae, and 42 (17.7%) were found to inhibit the PCR. Specimens showing
inhibitory activity were diluted 1:10 and were retested. Ten specimens were still
inhibitory to the PCR and required further DNA purification. No additional
positive samples were detected and 3 nasopharyngeal specimens remained inhibitory
to PCR. Coamplification of a HIC DNA can help confirm true-negative PCR results
by ruling out the presence of inhibitors of DNA amplification.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.36.7.1919-1922.1998 
PMCID: PMC104952
PMID: 9650936  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

