
1. AIDS. 1998 Jul 9;12(10):1227-34.

Studying dynamics of the HIV epidemic: population-based data compared with
sentinel surveillance in Zambia.

Fylkesnes K(1), Ndhlovu Z, Kasumba K, Mubanga Musonda R, Sichone M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Community Medicine, University of TromsÃ¸, Norway.

OBJECTIVES: To establish population-based HIV survey data in selected
populations, and to assess the validity of extrapolation from HIV sentinel
surveillance amongst antenatal clinic attenders (ANC) to the general population.
METHODS: In a population survey, adults aged > or = 15 years were selected by
stratified random cluster sampling (n = 4195). The survey was carried out in
catchment populations of clinics used for national HIV surveillance. The
methodology allows detailed comparisons of HIV infection patterns to be made in
two areas (urban and rural). Whereas the sentinel surveillance used serum-based
HIV testing, the population survey used saliva (93.5% consented to provide a
saliva sample).
RESULTS: Surveillance of ANC tended to underestimate the overall HIV prevalence
of the general population, but differences were not statistically significant. In
the urban area, the adjusted overall HIV prevalence rate of ANC (aged 15-39
years) was 24.4% [95% confidence interval (CI), 20.9-28.0] compared with 26.0%
(95% CI, 23.4-28.6) in the general population. The respective rural estimates
were 12.5% (95% CI, 9.3-15.6) versus 16.4% (95% CI, 12.1-20.6). Age-specific
prevalence rates showed ANC to overestimate infection in teenagers (aged 15-19
years), whereas in the reverse direction of those aged > or = 30 years. Teenagers
analysed by single year of age revealed both ANC and women in the general
population with about the same steep increase in prevalence by age, but the
former at consistently higher rates. Extrapolations might be biased substantially
due to the higher pregnancy rates amongst uninfected individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: ANC-based data might draw a rather distorted picture of current
dynamics of the HIV epidemic. Even though representing an obvious
oversimplification, extrapolations of overall prevalence rates may correlate with
that of the general population.

PIP: Assessments of the dynamics of the HIV/AIDS epidemic in Africa are based
largely on sentinel surveillance of antenatal clinic (ANC) attenders. The
validity of use of this key sentinel group in terms of HIV prevalence estimation 
was evaluated in a population-based survey of 4195 Zambian adults recruited
through stratified random cluster sampling in urban Lusaka and rural Mposhi
district in 1995-96. The survey was carried out in catchment populations of
clinics used for national HIV surveillance. Overall, ANC surveillance tended to
underestimate HIV prevalence in the general population, but differences were not 
statistically significant in either the urban or the rural area. In Lusaka, the
adjusted overall HIV prevalence among ANC attenders was 24.4% compared with 26.0%
in the population-based survey. The rural estimates were 12.5% and 16.4%,
respectively. Comparison of age-specific prevalences indicated ANC overestimated 
infection in teenagers and underestimated HIV in those aged 30 years and over.
Prevalence rates increased steeply by age, at comparable increment levels among
women in both samples, while men had stable prevalence rates by age. These
findings suggest that extrapolations from surveillance data may indeed produce a 
distorted picture of the current dynamics of the HIV epidemic in the population
at large. Women with higher educational attainment are underrepresented in the
ANC surveys. The higher pregnancy and birth rates among HIV-negative compared to 
HIV-positive women is another potential source of bias, as is the high rate of
ANC clients aged 18-19 years (66%, compared with 34% in the general population of
women). Information on single year of age, educational level, and residence
should be collected in sentinel surveillance systems to allow appropriate
stratification. Since HIV prevalence in young people may be the most reliable
marker of changes in incidence, sample size increases in the 15-19 year age group
should be considered.
DOI: 10.1097/00002030-199810000-00015 
PMID: 9677172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

