
1. J Virol. 1998 Sep;72(9):7669-75.

Caspase activation and specific cleavage of substrates after coxsackievirus
B3-induced cytopathic effect in HeLa cells.

Carthy CM(1), Granville DJ, Watson KA, Anderson DR, Wilson JE, Yang D, Hunt DW,
McManus BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia-St. Paul's Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3), an enterovirus in the family Picornaviridae, induces
cytopathic changes in cell culture systems and directly injures multiple
susceptible organs and tissues in vivo, including the myocardium, early after
infection. Biochemical analysis of the cell death pathway in CVB3-infected HeLa
cells demonstrated that the 32-kDa proform of caspase 3 is cleaved subsequent to 
the degenerative morphological changes seen in infected HeLa cells. Caspase
activation assays confirm that the cleaved caspase 3 is proteolytically active.
The caspase 3 substrates poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, a DNA repair enzyme, and
DNA fragmentation factor, a cytoplasmic inhibitor of an endonuclease responsible 
for DNA fragmentation, were degraded at 9 h following infection, yielding their
characteristic cleavage fragments. Inhibition of caspase activation by
benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Ala-Asp-fluoromethylketone (ZVAD.fmk) did not inhibit the
virus-induced cytopathic effect, while inhibition of caspase activation by
ZVAD.fmk in control apoptotic cells induced by treatment with the porphyrin
photosensitizer benzoporphyrin derivative monoacid ring A and visible light
inhibited the apoptotic phenotype. Caspase activation and cleavage of substrates 
may not be responsible for the characteristic cytopathic effect produced by
picornavirus infection yet may be related to late-stage alterations of cellular
homeostatic processes and structural integrity.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.72.9.7669-7675.1998 
PMCID: PMC110038
PMID: 9696873  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

