
1. Virology. 1998 Aug 1;247(2):232-9.

A single nucleotide substitution in the transcription start signal of the M2 gene
of respiratory syncytial virus vaccine candidate cpts248/404 is the major
determinant of the temperature-sensitive and attenuation phenotypes.

Whitehead SS(1), Firestone CY, Collins PL, Murphy BR.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Viruses Section, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0720, USA. sswhitehead@nih.gov

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) cpts248/404 is a live-attenuated,
temperature-sensitive (ts) vaccine candidate derived from cole-passaged cpRSV by 
two rounds of chemical mutagenesis and biological selection. Previous sequence
analysis showed that these two steps introduced three single nucleotide
substitutions into the cpRSV parent. Two of these occurred with the coding
sequence for the L protein, and each resulted in a single amino acid
substitution: Gin-831-Leu (248 mutation) and Asp-1183-Glu (404-L mutation). The
third mutation resulted in a nucleotide substitution at position 9 of the
c/s-acting gene start signal of the M2 gene (404-M2 mutation). In the present
study, the genetic basis of attenuation of cpts248/404 was defined by the
introduction of each of these mutations (singly or in combination) into a
full-length cDNA clone of cpRSV. Recombinant RSV derived from each mutant cDNA
was analyzed to determine the contribution of each mutation to the ts and
attenuation phenotypes of the virus. This analysis showed that the 248 mutation
specifies a significant reduction of plaque formation at 38 degrees and is
responsible for an intermediate level of attenuation in mice. In contrast, the
404-L mutation did not contribute to the ts or attenuation phenotype alone or in 
combination with other mutations and is thus an incidental change. unexpectedly, 
the 404-M2 mutation alone specified complete restriction of plaque formation at
37 degrees C an a high level of attenuation in mice. This indicates that the
level of temperature sensitivity and attenuation of cpts248/404 can be attributed
primarily to the 404-M2 mutation. Thus the cpts248/404 virus contains a set of ts
and non-ts attenuating mutations, which likely accounts for its genetic
stability. The recombinant version of this virus, rA2cp248/404, was
phenotypically indistinguishable from cpts248/404 and represents a background
into which additional mutations can be introduced as needed to obtain the desired
level of attenuation for successful immunization of the very young human infant.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1998.9248 
PMID: 9705916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

