
1. Vet Rec. 1998 Aug 1;143(5):136-9.

Serological and immunohistochemical study of African swine fever in wild boar in 
Spain.

Pérez J(1), Fernández AI, Sierra MA, Herráez P, Fernández A, Martín de las Mulas 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Pathology, Córdoba, Spain.

A serological and immunohistochemical study of African swine fever was carried
out in wild boar killed in seven municipalities in the north of the province of
Córdoba during two hunting seasons (1991-92 and 1992-93), when the area was
affected by the disease. Fourteen of 147 wild boar analysed by ELISA and
immunoblotting had antibodies to African swine fever virus. The
immunohistochemical study revealed that four cases (two seropositive and two
seronegative) showed immunoreactivity to the anti-VP73 monoclonal antibody. Two
of the VP73+ wild boar had severe generalised haemorrhages consistent with the
acute from of the disease, and another had lesions consistent with subacute
African swine fever, but none of the remaining 144 animals had gross or
microscopic changes suggestive of the disease. These results indicate that wild
boar can suffer from African swine fever without showing clinical signs. The
disease in wild boar was associated with the disease in domestic pigs. Thus, no
African swine fever-positive boar were found either in one municipality with no
out-breaks in domestic pigs or in three municipalities with only one outbreak in 
pigs during the hunting seasons and during the previous year. These results
suggest that European wild boar do not play an important role as carriers of the 
virus of African swine fever.

DOI: 10.1136/vr.143.5.136 
PMID: 9725185  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

