
1. Virology. 1998 Sep 30;249(2):418-26.

Cytodifferentiating agents affect the replication of herpes simplex virus type 1 
in the absence of functional VP16.

Preston CM(1), McFarlane M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Virology Unit, Church Street, Glasgow, G11 5JR,
Scotland. c.preston@vir.gla.ac.uk

The herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) mutant in1814 encodes an altered form of 
the virion protein VP16 that is unable to transactivate immediate-early (IE)
transcription. As a consequence of the mutation, in1814 initiates productive
replication inefficiently after infection of tissue culture cells. Previous
studies showed that this defect could be overcome by the inclusion in the culture
medium of hexamethylene bisacetamide (HMBA), a compound that promotes the
differentiation of murine erythroleukemia cells (MELCs). The effects of
additional agents known to induce differentiation of MELCs were investigated.
N'-Methylnicotinamide, at concentrations optimal for the induction of MELCs,
complemented the replication of in1814 and stimulated IE gene expression.
Suberoyl bishydroxamic acid and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, which induce
differentiation of MELCs at micromolar concentrations, did not complement in1814 
but specifically blocked the action of HMBA. The histone deacetylase inhibitor
trichostatin A, which also induces differentiation of MELCs, antagonized the
effect of HMBA in a manner similar to that of suberoyl bishydroxamic acid and
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid. The results demonstrate that the requirement for
VP16 activity is dependent on the metabolic state of the host cell and that the
pathways leading to complementation of in1814 and differentiation of MELCs are
overlapping but not identical.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1998.9314 
PMID: 9791032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

