
1. Biochemistry. 1998 Dec 1;37(48):17030-9.

Structural properties of the putative fusion peptide of fertilin, a protein
active in sperm-egg fusion, upon interaction with the lipid bilayer.

Martin I(1), Epand RM, Ruysschaert JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie-Physique des Macromolécules aux Interfaces (LCPMI),
CP206/2, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 1050 Brussels, Belgium. imartin@ulb.ac.be

We recently demonstrated that a peptide representing the putative fusion domain
of fertilin, a surface membrane protein of sperm involved in sperm-egg fusion,
induces fusion of large unilamellar vesicles containing negatively charged lipids
[Martin, I., and Ruysschaert, J. M. (1997) FEBS Lett. 405, 351-355]. In the
present work, we demonstrate that increasing the concentration in negatively
charged lipids strongly enhances the binding of the fertilin fusion peptide to
the membrane, suggesting that electrostatic attractions play a crucial role in
the binding process. While no significant change of the secondary structure
content is observed by increasing the amounts of negatively charged lipids in the
bilayer, the orientation of the alpha-helix changes from a parallel to an oblique
orientation in the membrane. This topological change is confirmed by amide II
hydrogen/deuterium exchange measurements that monitor the accessibility of the
peptide to the water medium. Differential scanning calorimetry data also suggest 
that the fertilin fusion peptide lowers the bilayer to hexagonal phase transition
temperature of model membranes composed of mixtures of
dipalmitoleoylphosphatidylethanolamine and 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoylphosphatidylserine
and therefore promotes negative curvature in lipid vesicles. A comparison of the 
biophysical properties and the membrane-perturbing activities of fertilin and of 
viral fusion peptides is discussed in terms of sperm-egg fusion and virus cell
fusion.

DOI: 10.1021/bi980909i 
PMID: 9836598  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

