
1. Antivir Chem Chemother. 1998 Mar;9(2):177-84.

3-Hydroxyphthaloyl beta-lactoglobulin. III. Antiviral activity against
herpesviruses.

Neurath AR(1), Strick N, Li YY.

Author information: 
(1)Lindsley F Kimball Research Institute of the New York Blood Center, New York, 
NY 10021, USA.

The spread of sexually transmitted diseases, including human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1) and herpesvirus infections, has continued unabated despite
educational efforts spearheaded as a response to the HIV-1 epidemic. This
suggests the need for prophylactic measures, including the application of topical
antiviral agents. Chemical modification of bovine beta-lactoglobulin (beta-LG),
the major protein of whey, by hydroxyphthalic anhydride (3HP) led to the
generation of a potent HIV-1 inhibitor (designated 3HP-beta-LG) shown to also
have activity against herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2 (HSV-1, HSV-2). This
report provides more detailed results concerning the anti-herpesvirus activity of
3HP-beta-LG, indicating that this compound: (i) inhibited infection by human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV), which is known to be sexually transmitted; (ii)
inactivated the infectivity of both HSV-1 and HSV-2; (iii) inhibited cell-to-cell
transmission of HSV-1 and HSV-2; and (iv) bound to HSV-1, HSV-2 and HCMV virus
particles and partially inhibited the binding of anti-glycoprotein E (gE) and
anti-gC monoclonal antibodies to HSV-1 and HSV-2. The binding of 3HP-beta-LG to
the herpesviruses under study was inhibited by aggregated human IgG, suggesting
that the respective viral Fc receptor is one of the target sites for 3HP-beta-LG.
In agreement with results on inhibition of HIV-1 infection, 3HP-beta-LG appears
to be the acid anhydride-modified protein of choice as an antiviral agent against
herpesviruses.

DOI: 10.1177/095632029800900209 
PMID: 9875389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

