
1. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 1999 Feb;12(2):153-62.

Restoration of wild-type virus by double recombination of tombusvirus mutants
with a host transgene.

Borja M(1), Rubio T, Scholthof HB, Jackson AO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley 
94720, USA.

Nicotiana benthamiana plants transformed with the coat protein gene of tomato
bushy stunt virus (TBSV) failed to elicit effective virus resistance when
inoculated with wildtype virus. Subsequently, R1 and R2 progeny from 13
transgenic lines were inoculated with a TBSV mutant containing a defective coat
protein gene. Mild symptoms typical of those elicited in nontransformed plants
infected with the TBSV mutant initially appeared. However, within 2 to 4 weeks,
up to 20% of the transgenic plants sporadically began to develop the lethal
syndrome characteristic of wild-type virus infections. RNA hybridization and
immunoblot analyses of these plants and nontransformed N. benthamiana inoculated 
with virus from the transgenic lines indicated that wild-type virus had been
regenerated by a double recombination event between the defective virus and the
coat protein transgene. Similar results were obtained with a TBSV deletion mutant
containing a nucleotide sequence marker, and with a chimeric cucumber necrosis
virus (CNV) containing the defective TBSV coat protein gene. In both cases,
purified virions contained wild-type TBSV RNA or CNV chimeric RNA derived by
recombination with the transgenic coat protein mRNA. These results thus
demonstrate that recombinant tombus-viruses can arise frequently from viral genes
expressed in transgenic plants.

DOI: 10.1094/MPMI.1999.12.2.153 
PMID: 9926415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

