
1. J Immunol. 1999 Sep 1;163(5):2829-35.

Inhibition of murine neutrophil recruitment in vivo by CXC chemokine receptor
antagonists.

McColl SR(1), Clark-Lewis I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Adelaide, Australia. 
smccoll@microb.adelaide.edu.au

In this study, we have examined the ability of chemokine receptor antagonists to 
prevent neutrophil extravasation in the mouse. Two murine CXC chemokines,
macrophage-inflammatory protein (MIP)-2 and KC, stimulated the accumulation of
leukocytes into s.c. air pouches, although MIP-2 was considerably more potent.
The leukocyte infiltrate was almost exclusively neutrophilic in nature. A human
CXC chemokine antagonist, growth-related oncogene (GRO)-alpha(8-73), inhibited
calcium mobilization induced by MIP-2, but not by platelet-activating factor in
leukocytes isolated from the bone marrow, indicating that this antagonist
inhibits MIP-2 activity toward murine leukocytes. Pretreatment of mice with
GROalpha(8-73) inhibited, in a dose-dependent manner, the MIP-2-induced influx of
neutrophils to levels that were not significantly different from control values. 
Moreover, this antagonist was also effective in inhibiting the leukocyte
recruitment induced by TNF-alpha, LPS, and IL-1beta. Leukocyte infiltration into 
the peritoneal cavity in response to MIP-2 was also inhibited by prior treatment 
of mice with GROalpha(8-73) or the analogue of platelet factor 4, PF4(9-70). The 
results of this study indicate 1) that the murine receptor for MIP-2 and KC,
muCXCR2, plays a major role in neutrophil recruitment to s.c. tissue and the
peritoneal cavity in response to proinflammatory agents and 2) that CXCR2
receptor antagonists prevent acute inflammation in vivo.


PMID: 10453028  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

