
1. Clin Cancer Res. 1999 Dec;5(12):4034-40.

Prostate-specific membrane antigen levels in sera from healthy men and patients
with benign prostate hyperplasia or prostate cancer.

Beckett ML(1), Cazares LH, Vlahou A, Schellhammer PF, Wright GL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Cell Biology, Virginia Prostate
Center, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk 23501, USA.

Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) serum levels have been proposed to be
of prognostic significance in patients with advanced prostate disease. The
objective of the present study was to confirm PSMA serum expression by Western
blot techniques, to determine whether such data could assist in the
differentiation of benign from malignant prostatic disease, and to determine the 
suitability of serum PSMA measurements in predicting recurrent or progressive
prostate malignancies. We measured PSMA, a transmembrane glycoprotein identified 
in prostate epithelial cells, in the sera of 236 normal individuals and cancer
patients by Western blot analysis. Within the normal male population, PSMA levels
increase with age and were found to be significantly elevated in subjects more
than 50 years of age when compared to those of younger men. We did not confirm
previous reports that serum PSMA measurements could distinguish late-stage
prostate carcinoma from early-stage prostate carcinoma, nor did we find PSMA to
be more effective than prostate-specific antigen in monitoring prostate cancer
patient prognosis. Furthermore, we found elevated serum PSMA in healthy females, 
and, similar to the healthy male population, the levels increased with age, with 
the highest levels found in the sera from breast cancer patients. These latter
observations further support that PSMA is not a specific biomarker for prostate
cancer and that a variety of normal and diseased tissue may contribute to the
serum levels of PSMA.


PMID: 10632336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

