
1. Oral Oncol. 2000 Jan;36(1):32-6.

Inhibition of microflora associated with oral malignancy.

Nagy K(1), Szöke I, Sonkodi I, Nagy E, Mari A, Szolnoky G, Newman HN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dentistry and Oral Surgery, Albert Szent-Györgyi Medical
University, Szeged, Hungary. nagykatalin@mail.tiszanet.hu

Changes in the microflora on oral carcinoma surfaces may lead to both local and
systemic infections, which may complicate the morbidity of the patient suffering 
from oral malignant neoplasms. Thus, anticancer therapy, irradiation,
chemotherapy or surgery impairs the defence mechanism of the oral mucosa and is
accompanied by proliferation of the mucosal biofilm with overgrowth of yeast and 
bacteria. This study investigates the inhibition of the biofilm present on the
surface of oral squamous cell carcinomas. Biofilm samples were obtained from the 
central surface (1 cm2) of each lesion in 10 patients (eight male, two female;
mean age: 47.6 years; SD +/- 7.6) before any antibiotherapy or tumour treatment. 
Patients were randomly divided into two groups and were rinsed with Meridol
mouthrinse (amine fluoride) or placebo (saline solution) for 7 days. Samples were
repeatedly taken from the same site after rinsing. Samples were transported in
pre-reduced brain heart infusion broth and cultured within 1 h of removal, using 
aerobic and anaerobic complete and selective media. Total aerobic and anaerobic
counts were determined and isolated bacteria were identified. The median counts
of colony forming units (CFU/ml) after rinsing with Meridol were significantly
lower for both aerobes and anaerobes than before rinsing with Meridol. (For
aerobes before rinsing: 1.35 x 10(6), after rinsing: 7.55 x 10(5); p = 0.025; for
anaerobes before rinsing: 1.39 x 10(6), after rinsing: 7.15 x 10(5); p = 0.011.
Rinsing with placebo: no significant difference was found. Aerobe median counts
before rinsing: 1.17 x 10(6), after rinsing: 1.03 x 10(5), and for anaerobes:
before rinsing 1.75 x 10(6), after rinsing: 1.51 x 10(6); p > 0.05 [Wilcoxon
test].) It was concluded that 7-days (three times a day) Meridol rinsing
significantly reduced the surface biofilm of oral carcinoma compared to rinsing
with placebo. Clinical examination indicated no irritation of the mucosa. The
mouthrinse was well tolerated by the patients, who commented on a reduction in
burning sensation and bad breath. Besides routine oral hygiene, rinsing itself
could reduce patient morbidity. The findings of the present study indicate that
in addition to any other oral focus, the lesion itself, when ulcerated, should
receive direct antimicrobial treatment so as to reduce patient morbidity and
enhance quality of life.

DOI: 10.1016/s1368-8375(99)00046-9 
PMID: 10889916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

