
1. Br J Cancer. 2000 Nov;83(9):1192-201.

MHC class II antigen presentation pathway in murine tumours: tumour evasion from 
immunosurveillance?

Walter W(1), Lingnau K, Schmitt E, Loos M, Maeurer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz,
D-55101, Germany.

Qualitative differences in the MHC class II antigen processing and presentation
pathway may be instrumental in shaping the CD4+ T cell response directed against 
tumour cells. Efficient loading of many MHC class II alleles with peptides
requires the assistance of H2-M, a heterodimeric MHC class II-like molecule. In
contrast to the HLA-DM region in humans, the beta-chain locus is duplicated in
mouse, with the H2-Mb1 (Mb1beta-chain distal to H2-Mb2 (Mb2) and the H2-Ma (Ma)
alpha-chain gene). Here, we show that murine MHC class II and H2-M genes are
coordinately regulated in murine tumour cell lines by T helper cell 1 (IFN-gamma)
and T helper cell 2 (IL-4 or IL-10) cytokines in the presence of the MHC class
II-specific transactivator CIITA as determined by mRNA expression and Western
blot analysis. Furthermore, Malphabeta1 and Malphabeta2 heterodimers are
differentially expressed in murine tumour cell lines of different histology. Both
H2-M isoforms promote equally processing and presentation of native protein
antigens to H2-A(d)- and H2-E(d)-restricted CD4+ T cells. Murine tumour cell
lines could be divided into three groups: constitutive MHC class II and CIITA
expression; inducible MHC class II and CIITA expression upon IFN-gamma-treatment;
and lack of constitutive and IFN-gamma-inducible MHC class II and CIITA
expression. These differences may impact on CD4+ T cell recognition of cancer
cells in murine tumour models.

Copyright 2000 Cancer Research Campaign.

DOI: 10.1054/bjoc.2000.1415 
PMCID: PMC2363595
PMID: 11027433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

