
1. Br J Fam Plann. 2000 Oct;26(4):202-6.

Feasibility of patient-collected vulval swabs for the diagnosis of Chlamydia
trachomatis in a family planning clinic: a pilot study.

MacMillan S(1), McKenzie H, Flett G, Templeton A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen,
Scotland.

This pilot study set out to determine the feasibility of using patient-collected 
vulval swabs, instead of urine, for the diagnosis of female Chlamydia trachomatis
infection. Main outcome measures included prevalence of infection and
sensitivity, specificity, and acceptability of both test methods. An assessment
was also made of those who declined to be tested. Consecutive women under 25
years of age attending a single urban family planning clinic were invited to
participate. Sixty-eight percent (103/152) agreed to undergo testing. Overall
prevalence was 11.7%. The sensitivity/specificity for the ligase chain reaction
(LCR) assayed patient-collected vulval swabs and urine was 100%/100% and
92%/100%, respectively. The acceptability of self-collection was high with 93%
characterising the test as 'not bad', 79% recommending it to a friend, and 79%
choosing the test next time. Significantly more women, however, would choose
urine for testing on a subsequent occasion (p < 0.001). Less than 1/5 of the
patients who declined did not take part because of concerns regarding the vulval 
swab. Patient-collected vulval swabs assayed by LCR represent a non-invasive,
sensitive, and acceptable way to detect genital C. trachomatis infection in women
attending a family planning clinic. Compared with urine testing, benefits in
terms of transport and processing should encourage more widespread use of this
approach.

DOI: 10.1783/147118900101194797 
PMID: 11053875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

