
1. Am J Pathol. 2001 Apr;158(4):1391-8.

Elevated proportion of natural killer T cells in periodontitis lesions: a common 
feature of chronic inflammatory diseases.

Yamazaki K(1), Ohsawa Y, Yoshie H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Faculty of Dentistry, Niigata University, 5274, 
Gakkocho-Dori 2-ban-cho, Niigata 951-8514, Japan. kaz@dent.niigata-u.ac.jp

Although periodontitis is a chronic inflammatory disease caused by a group of
so-called periodontopathic bacteria, autoimmune mechanisms have also been
implicated in the disease process. Recently, a unique subset of lymphocytes
designated natural killer (NK) T cells expressing the Valpha24JalphaQ invariant T
cell receptor (TCR) has been reported to have a regulatory role in certain
autoimmune diseases. Therefore, we investigated the proportion of the invariant
Valpha24JalphaQ TCR within the Valpha24 T cell population in periodontitis
lesions and gingivitis lesions using single-strand conformation polymorphism
methodology. NK T cells were identified with a specific JalphaQ probe whereas the
total Valpha24 TCR was identified using an internal Calpha probe. NK T cells were
a significant proportion of the total Valpha24 population both in periodontitis
lesions and to a lesser extent in gingivitis lesions but not in the peripheral
blood of either periodontitis patients or nondiseased controls. Using
immunohistochemistry, some of Valpha24(+) cells in the periodontitis lesions
seemed to associate with CD1d(+) cells, which are specific antigen-presenting
cells for NK T cells. Although the mechanism underlying the elevation of NK T
cells in periodontitis and in gingivitis lesions remains unclear, it can be
postulated that NK T cells are recruited to a play regulatory role in the immune 
response to bacterial infection.

DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64090-4 
PMCID: PMC1891892
PMID: 11290557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

