
1. Microbes Infect. 2001 Jul;3(8):611-9.

Mycobacterial cord factor, but not sulfolipid, causes depletion of NKT cells and 
upregulation of CD1d1 on murine macrophages.

Ryll R(1), Watanabe K, Fujiwara N, Takimoto H, Hasunuma R, Kumazawa Y, Okada M,
Yano I.

Author information: 
(1)Japan BCG Laboratory, 3-1-5 Matsuyama, Kiyose, 204-0022, Tokyo, Japan.
ryll@jet.sci.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Trehalose 6,6'-dimycolate (TDM, cord factor) has frequently been used as an
adjuvant to stimulate antibody production. Although it also induces cellular
immunity, detailed studies about the underlying events do not exist. To determine
the kinetics of TDM-specific changes promoting a T helper 1 (Th1) response, we
injected mice with TDM or 2,3,6,6'-tetraacyl trehalose 2'-sulfate (SL,
sulfolipid), another mycobacterial trehalose-containing glycolipid without
mycolic acid. TDM, but not SL, caused a strong increase in serum interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) levels 2 days later, accompanied by expansion of natural killer (NK) 
cells. Subsequent TDM effects included depletion of normal-density CD4(+)
NK1.1(+) TCRalpha/beta(intermediate) cells from day 7 on, upregulation of MHC
class II and CD1d1 on macrophages (peaking on day 21), and an increased
proportion of Th1 cells evident after 3 weeks. TDM, but not a similar glycolipid 
without mycolic acid, can therefore initiate a cascade of events starting with
strong release of IFN-gamma and NK cell expansion, resulting in the appearance of
macrophages activated for antigen presentation. Our data therefore provide the
basis for optimized immunization schedules with TDM as the adjuvant component of 
a Th1 vaccine.

DOI: 10.1016/s1286-4579(01)01416-2 
PMID: 11445447  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

