
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2001 Jun;124(3):516-21.

Skin T cell proliferative response to M protein and other cell wall and membrane 
proteins of group A streptococci in chronic plaque psoriasis.

Baker BS(1), Brown DW, Fischetti VA, Ovigne JM, Porter W, Powles A, Fry L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Imperial College of Science, Technology and
Medicine at St Mary's, London, UK. b.baker@ic.ac.uk

To determine and compare the T cell response to M protein and other group A
streptococcal (GAS) antigens, T cell lines (TCL) were cultured from the lesional 
skin of 33 psoriatic patients and 17 disease controls. GAS-reactive skin TCL were
tested in proliferation assays with recombinant M6 protein, and extracts of cell 
wall and membrane from type M6 GAS and its corresponding M gene deletion mutant. 
Initially, GAS-reactive skin TCL were obtained from 16 of 25 (64%) psoriasis, and
from seven of 17 (41%) control patients. Eleven psoriatic and four control
GAS-reactive TCL proliferated to M6 cell wall extract, whereas all the TCL from
both groups responded to the extract of M6 membrane proteins. This difference in 
response to the two extracts was significant for both groups of patients
(psoriasis, P = 0.0335, controls, P = 0.0156). GAS-reactive TCL from a further
eight psoriasis patients showed no difference in response to cell wall extract
from M6 GAS (containing the M protein minus its C-terminus) compared to that of
its corresponding M gene deletion mutant. Furthermore, GAS-reactive TCL did not
proliferate to recombinant M6 protein. However, a small, but significant
reduction in proliferation by the eight psoriatic GAS-reactive TCL to the
M-negative (lacking the M protein C-terminus) compared to M6-positive membrane
extract was observed (P = 0.01). These findings suggest that GAS-reactive T cells
in skin lesions of chronic plaque psoriasis proliferate to streptococcal membrane
and, to a lesser extent, cell wall proteins. However, psoriatic skin T cells do
not recognize cell wall M protein.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.2001.01563.x 
PMCID: PMC1906071
PMID: 11472417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

