
1. Front Biosci. 2001 Aug 1;6:D927-35.

Features of the two gene pairs RD-SKI2W and DOM3Z-RP1 located between complement 
component genes factor B and C4 at the MHC class III region.

Yang Z(1), Qu X, Yu CY.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Research Institute, 700 Children's Drive, Columbus, Ohio
43205-2664, USA. zhenyu.yang@menlo.ppdi.com

Located at the 30 kb genomic region between complement factor B and component C4 
are four ubiquitously expressed genes RD, SKI2W, DOM3Z and RP1. Besides RP1, the 
protein products of the other three genes each has highly conserved homologues or
related proteins in lower eukaryotes, contains leucine zipper motifs for protein 
interaction, and plays important roles related to RNA metabolism. RD is a subunit
of the negative transcription elongation factor, critical for the regulation of
gene expression. It has an RNA recognition motif and 24 copies of Arg-Asp (RD)
repeats. Ski2w is a nucleolar and cytoplasmic protein that has a putative RNA
helicase domain. Fusion proteins of human Ski2w expressed in insect cells and
bacteria have ATPase activity. The cytoplasmic protein of human Ski2w is
associated with the polysomes and probably the 40S subunit of ribosomes. Ski2w is
probably involved in the regulation of translation and RNA turnover. Dom3z is a
nuclear protein whose yeast homologue forms a complex with an exoribonuclease.
RP1 (or STK19) is a Ser/Thr nuclear protein kinase. No homologues of RP1 in lower
eukaryotes have been discovered. Six polymorphic residues are present in human
Ski2w and two in Dom3z. The potential roles of Ski2w and Dom3z on the clearance
of degraded nuclear and cytoplasmic RNA raised their possibilities as
susceptibility genes of systemic lupus erythematosus that is a disease with
flawed processes in the removal of apoptotic materials.

DOI: 10.2741/yang 
PMID: 11487501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

