
1. Eur J Immunol. 2003 Apr;33(4):1073-83.

Colonic lamina propria dendritic cells in mice with CD4+ T cell-induced colitis.

Krajina T(1), Leithäuser F, Möller P, Trobonjaca Z, Reimann J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ulm, Ulm,
Germany.

CD11c(+) (F4/80(-) CD68(-)) dendritic cells (DC) in the colonic lamina propria
(cLP) of normal and immunodeficient (RAG1(-/-)) C57BL/6 (B6) mice show high
surface expression of MHC class I/II molecules and CD1d, and low surface
expression of CD40, CD80, CD86 costimulator molecules. CD4(+) alpha beta T cells 
from normal or MHC class II-deficient B6 mice transferred into congenic RAG1(-/-)
hosts induce a progressive, lethal colitis. Concomitant with colitis development,
DC in the inflamed cLP increase in number and up-regulate surface expression of
CD1d, MHC class II molecules and CD40, CD80, CD86 costimulator molecules. cLP DC 
from non-transplanted (healthy) and transplanted (diseased) mice produce similar 
amounts of IL-12 p70 and IL-10 in response to CD40 signaling, but the inducible
IL-12 p40 release is 5-15-fold higher in mice with colitis than in
non-transplanted mice. Binding of IL-12 p40 to p19 generates IL-23. Freshly
isolated cLP lymphocytes (cLPL) from transplanted, diseased mice express
3-10-fold more p19 transcripts than cLPL from non-transplanted, healthy mice. p19
expression by cLPL is further up-regulated in response to CD40 ligation. Freshly 
isolated cLP DC from transplanted mice with colitis (but not from
non-transplanted controls) stimulate IFN-gamma (but not IL-4 or IL-13) release by
co-cultured NKT cells. Incolitis, DC accumulate in the cLP, show an activated
surface phenotype, up-regulate IL-12 p40 and p19 expression, and 'spontaneously' 
stimulate NKT-like cells. cLP DC may be interesting targets for novel therapeutic
approaches to modulate mucosal T cell responses in situ.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.200323518 
PMID: 12672074  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

