
1. Plasmid. 2003 Jul;50(1):12-27.

Display and release of the Plasmodium falciparum circumsporozoite protein using
the autotransporter MisL of Salmonella enterica.

Ruiz-Olvera P(1), Ruiz-Pérez F, Sepulveda NV, Santiago-Machuca A,
Maldonado-Rodríguez R, Garcia-Elorriaga G, González-Bonilla C.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación Médica en Inmunología e Infectología, Hospital de
Infectología "Dr. Daniel Méndez Hernández," Centro Médico "La Raza," IMSS, D.F., 
Mexico.

The Salmonella enterica MisL (protein of membrane insertion and secretion) is an 
autotransporter with high homology to AIDA-I (adhesin involved in diffuse
adherence) of enteropathogenic Escherichia coli. Considering that it has been
reported that the MisL beta translocator domain is able to display heterologous
passenger peptides to the bacterial surface, we developed a system to display
proteins and release them to the external environment by means of proteolytic
cleavage. Plasmids were constructed encoding 8 or 53 repeats of the NANP
(Asp-Ala-Asp-Pro) tetrapeptide, which is the main B cell epitope of the
Plasmodium falciparum circumsporozoitic protein (CSP), fused to the the MisL
beta-domain and including the recognition cleavage sequence from the E. coli OmpT
surface protease. E. coli XL-10Gold and BL21(DE3) (OmpT positive and negative,
respectively) and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium SL3261 (Aro A(-)) were 
transformed with the plasmids and, both expression and localization of the fusion
proteins were assessed by Western blot, indirect immunofluorescence, and flow
cytometry, using a monoclonal antibody against (NANP)(3). Higher expression of
the (NANP)(8) and (NANP)(53) fusion proteins was demonstrated on the bacterial
surface of the OmpT negative E. coli strains and the (NANP)(53) in the culture
supernatant of E. coli XL-10Gold indicating a protease mediated cleavage. The
flow cytometry analysis suggested 71 and 98% cleavage efficiency for the
(NANP)(8) and (NANP)(53), respectively, in E. coli XL-10Gold. Similar results
were obtained in S. enterica serovar Typhimurium SL3261, suggesting the
involvement of other proteases related to OmpT. These results demonstrate that
MisL may be used for the autodisplay and release of passenger proteins in
attenuated Salmonella or E. coli strains, which may have several applications in 
vaccine design.

DOI: 10.1016/s0147-619x(03)00047-7 
PMID: 12826054  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

