
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2003 Aug;15(2):107-15.

Gyrodactylus derjavini infection elicits IL-1beta expression in rainbow trout
skin.

Lindenstrøm T(1), Buchmann K, Secombes CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Section of Fish Diseases, Royal
Veterinary and Agricultural University, Stigbøjlen 4, DK-1870 C, Frederiksberg,
Denmark. thl@kvl.dk

Specific gene expression of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1beta and the type
II IL-1beta receptor (IL-1RII, 'decoy receptor') was studied in skin of rainbow
trout Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum, 1792) fry during infection with the
ectoparasitic monogenean Gyrodactylus derjavini Mikailov, 1975. Cytokine
expression was studied in both primary and secondary infections using a
semi-quantitative RT-PCR technique. Generally, low levels of specific IL-1beta1, 
IL-1beta2 and IL-1RII gene transcription were found in uninfected hosts. In
contrast, a clear induction of both IL-1beta isoforms could be observed during
the initial phases of primary G. derjavini infections. A less obvious induction
of IL-1beta expression was seen in secondary infections imposed just after
recovery from the priming infection. However, challenge infections given
one-month post full recovery of the primary infections did not elicit
transcription levels above those seen in skin samples from uninfected hosts.
Despite this, hosts carrying a secondary infection elicited a stronger response
toward G. derjavini thus expelling parasites quicker than their nai;ve
counterparts. When induced, indications of a more tight regulation of the
IL-1beta1 isoform compared to IL-1beta2 could be observed. Increased expression
of IL-1RII was seen later during the course of a primary infection and could be
involved in the observed down regulation of IL-1, especially the beta1 isoform.
The current study represents the first example of cytokine expression in fish
induced by an ectoparasitic infection and indicates the importance of localised
mucosal immune reactions in responses of fish towards gyrodactylids.

DOI: 10.1016/s1050-4648(02)00142-0 
PMID: 12834615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

