
1. J Muscle Res Cell Motil. 2002;23(7-8):853-65.

Multiple signalling pathways connect chemoattractant receptors and calcium
channels in Dictyostelium.

Nebl T(1), Kotsifas M, Schaap P, Fisher PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, La Trobe University, Bundoora, Victoria 3083,
Australia.

Dictyostelium mutants expressing aequorin were used to study and compare the
roles of heterotrimeric G-proteins and the second messengers IP3 and cGMP in
regulating folate- and cAMP receptor-activated [Ca2+]i signals. The calcium
responses of vegetative cells to folate were dramatically impaired in Gbeta and
Galpha4 null mutants but were restored with altered kinetics and
temperature-sensitivity in Gbeta null mutants overexpressing wild type and
temperature-sensitive Gbeta isoforms. Folic acid receptors thus mediate changes
in [Ca2+]i via a Galpha4betagamma-dependent pathway. Neither folate nor
cAMP-induced [Ca2+]i signals were significantly altered in PLC null
transformants, but [Ca2+]i changes elicited by both attractants were
significantly prolonged in two stmF mutants lacking cGMP-specific
phosphodiesterase activity. This confirms an important role of cGMP in regulating
receptor-activated Ca2+ uptake and/or extrusion systems. This cGMP-dependent part
of the Ca2+ response to cAMP stimuli was developmentally down-regulated and all
but disappeared by the time the cells reached full aggregation competence after 8
h of starvation. The results suggest that folate and cAMP receptor-activated
[Ca2+]i signals are regulated in a complex manner via multiple signalling
pathways, one that is G-protein- and cGMP-dependent (present at the vegetative
and early poststarvation stage) and another that is G-protein-independent
(dominant in fully aggregation-competent cells at approximately 8 h
poststarvation).

DOI: 10.1023/a:1024496232604 
PMID: 12952083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

