
1. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2003 Nov;147(1):28-35.

Comprehensive genome-wide comparison of DNA and RNA level scan using microarray
technology for identification of candidate cancer-related genes in the HL-60 cell
line.

Ulger C(1), Toruner GA, Alkan M, Mohammed M, Damani S, Kang J, Galante A, Aviv H,
Soteropoulos P, Tolias PP, Schwalb MN, Dermody JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical
School, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

Genome-wide scans for DNA and RNA changes in the HL-60 cell line relative to
normal leukocytes were conducted. Microarray-based comparative genome
hybridization (CGH) studies were performed with the Spectral Genomics Human
Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) 3MB system. Transcriptional measurements of
approximately 12,500 human genes were monitored using Affymetrix U95A GeneChips. 
In HL-60, genomic DNA amplification of the 8q24 locus, trisomy 18, and deletions 
at loci 5q11.2 approximately q31, 6q12, 9p21.3 approximately p22, 10p12
approximately p15, 14q22 approximately q31, 17p12 approximately p13.3, and
monosomy X were detected. After obtaining locus information about the RNA
transcripts from the Affymetrix database, 4368 genes were stratified both
according to status of RNA expression and the DNA copy number of their designated
loci. The expression level of 2326 (53.25%) of 4368 transcripts is concordant
with DNA copy number. Examples of specific, highly expressed, cancer-associated
genes in amplified loci include SERPINB10, MYC, TYMS, HEC, and EPB41L3, while
CD14, GZMK, TCF7, FOS, MLH3, CTNNA1, IRF1, VIM, CRK, MAP3K1, STAM, MAX, SFRG5,
ENC1, PURA, MNT, RASA1, GLRX, UBE2B, NR3C1, PTENP1, BS69, COPEB, SKIP, PIM2, and 
MIC2 represent cancer-associated genes in deleted loci with decreased expression.
The complementary usage of genome-wide DNA and RNA scans should enhance the
identification of candidate genes in the neoplastic process.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-4608(03)00155-9 
PMID: 14580768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

