
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 9;279(15):14579-86. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

Androgen receptor mediates non-genomic activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-OH
kinase in androgen-sensitive epithelial cells.

Baron S(1), Manin M, Beaudoin C, Leotoing L, Communal Y, Veyssiere G, Morel L.

Author information: 
(1)Génétique des Eucaryotes et Endocrinologie Moléculaire, UMR 6547
CNRS-Université Blaise Pascal, Campus universitaire des Cézeaux, 24 Avenue des
Landais, 63177 Aubière Cedex, France.

Androgens are known to modulate many cellular processes such as cell growth and
survival by binding to the androgen receptor (AR) and activating the
transcription of target genes. Recent data suggested that AR can also mediate
non-transcriptional actions outside the nucleus in addition to its
ligand-inducible transcription factor function. Here, we describe a
transcription-independent activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-OH kinase
(PI3-K) signaling pathway by androgens. Using non-transformed androgen-sensitive 
epithelial cells, we show that androgens enhance the PI3-K activity by promoting 
accumulation of phosphoinositide-3-P phospholipids in vitro. This activation is
found in conjunction with an increased time-dependent phosphorylation of the
downstream kinase AKT/protein kinase B on both Ser(473) and Thr(308) residues.
Hormone-stimulated phosphorylation of AKT requires AR since incubation with the
anti-androgen bicalutamide completely abolishes the androgen-stimulated AKT
phosphorylation. Accordingly, we show that androgens increase AKT phosphorylation
level in prostatic carcinoma PC3 cells only once they have been transfected with 
AR. Downstream, androgens enhance phosphorylation of transcription factor FKHR
(Forkhead in rhabdomyosarcoma)-L1 and proapoptotic Bad protein and promote cell
survival as they can counteract an apoptotic process. We also report that
non-genomic effects of androgens are based on direct interaction between AR and
the p85alpha regulatory subunit of class I(A) PI3-K. Together, these novel
findings point out an important and physiologically relevant link between
androgens and the PI3-K/AKT signaling pathway in governing cell survival.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M306143200 
PMID: 14668339  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

