
1. J Biomed Mater Res. 1992 May;26(5):631-50.

Difference in tumor incidence and other tissue responses to polyetherurethanes
and polydimethylsiloxane in long-term subcutaneous implantation into rats.

Nakamura A(1), Kawasaki Y, Takada K, Aida Y, Kurokama Y, Kojima S, Shintani H,
Matsui M, Nohmi T, Matsuoka A, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Devices, National Institute of Hygienic Sciences, Tokyo.

The long-term (1- and 2-year) adverse tissue responses including tumor formation 
by subcutaneous implantation of polyurethanes (PUs) and silicone (Sil) films into
rats were compared. The weight-averaged molecular weights (Mw) of the PUs
prepared from 4,4'-diphenylmethanediisocyanate, poly(tetramethyleneglycol) of Mn 
= 1000 and 1,4-butanediol are 220,000 (U-4), 124,000 (U-6), and 55,600 (U-8). The
50:50 mixed film of U-6 and silicone (U-6/sil) was prepared by roll-mixing of the
noncured silicone and the U-6 solution followed by evaporation of the solvent and
heat-curing at 70 degrees C. The tissue responses around implants were classified
into four groups as follows: (A) tumor, (B) atypical cell proliferation
accompanied by preneoplastic changes, (C) cell proliferation without
preneoplastic changes, (D) no obvious responses. In both implantation periods,
the PUs gave higher incidents of the adverse responses including tumor formation 
in comparison to Sil. No significant molecular weight-dependent trend was found
in a 1-year study using U-4, 6, and 8. Significant PU-dose-dependent trends were 
found in a 2-year study: the total active incidence (A+B+C), U-6(22/29) greater
than U-6/sil(11/29) greater than sil(7/28); tumor incidence (A), U-6(11/29)
greater than U-6/sil(2/29) = sil(2/28). No detectable amounts of
4,4'-methylenedianiline (MDA) were found in the PUs. The methanol extracts from
the PUs were negative in the mutagenicity tests. These indicate no relationship
between the tumor formation by the PU films and the mutagenicities of the
chemicals (mainly oligomers) leached from the PUs.

DOI: 10.1002/jbm.820260506 
PMID: 1512283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

