
1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2004 May 15;234(2):333-41.

NF-kappaB activation suppresses host cell apoptosis during Rickettsia rickettsii 
infection via regulatory effects on intracellular localization or levels of
apoptogenic and anti-apoptotic proteins.

Joshi SG(1), Francis CW, Silverman DJ, Sahni SK.

Author information: 
(1)Hemostasis and Thrombosis Program, Hematology-Oncology Unit, Department of
Medicine, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, P.O. Box 610,
601 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Rickettsia rickettsii, a gram-negative and obligate intracellular bacterium, is
the causative agent of Rocky Mountain spotted fever. In human infections, the
primary target of R. rickettsii infection is vascular endothelium. Our laboratory
has shown that activation of nuclear transcription factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB)
during R. rickettsii infection of cultured human endothelial cells protects
against apoptosis by preventing the activation of apical caspases-8 and -9, and
the effector caspase-3. To understand upstream signaling mechanisms, we have
determined the effect of NF-kappaB blockade on the status of different Bcl-2
(B-cell lymphoma 2) proteins in this study. Quantitative analysis following TUNEL
and Hoechst staining confirmed that infection of endothelial cells with R.
rickettsii for 6 h in the presence of a specific NF-kappaB inhibitor, MG132,
resulted in induction of apoptosis. Infection-induced apoptosis of EC was
associated with decreased level of Bid and accumulation of Bad, while cytosolic
level of Bax remained relatively unchanged. Further, the cellular levels of
apoptosis antagonist Bcl-2 were found to be down-regulated and apoptogenic
mitochondrial proteins Smac and cytochrome c were released into cytoplasm. These 
results implicate an important regulatory role for NF-kappaB in controlling the
intracellular levels and/or localization of pro- as well as anti-apoptotic
proteins of Bcl-2 family, the intricate balance of which is a critical
determinant of downstream signaling mechanisms governing cell fate during
intracellular infection.

Copyright 2004 Federation of European Microbiological Societies

DOI: 10.1016/j.femsle.2004.03.046 
PMID: 15135541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

