
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2004 Oct;138(1):83-93.

Peripheral blood T cell responses to keratin peptides that share sequences with
streptococcal M proteins are largely restricted to skin-homing CD8(+) T cells.

Johnston A(1), Gudjonsson JE, Sigmundsdottir H, Love TJ, Valdimarsson H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland.
Andrewj@landspitali.is

The association of psoriasis with Streptococcus pyogenes throat infections
suggests a potential antigenic target for the T cells that are known to
infiltrate psoriatic skin. Streptococcal M protein share an extensive sequence
homology with the human epidermal keratins. Keratin 17 (K17), while being mostly 
absent from uninvolved skin, is up-regulated in psoriatic lesions.
Consequentially, M-protein-primed T cells may recognize up-regulated keratin
epitopes via molecular mimicry. Using in vitro lymphocyte culture and cytokine
flow cytometry we demonstrate that HLA-Cw*0602(+) psoriasis patients had
significant CD8(+) T cell interferon (IFN)-gamma responses to peptides from the
K17 and M6 protein selected on the basis of sequence homology and predicted
HLA-Cw*0602 binding. These responses were about 10 times more frequent in the
skin-homing cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen-expressing (CLA(+)) subset of
CD8(+) T cells. CD4(+) T cells showed only borderline responses. CLA(+) CD8(+) T 
cells from Cw6(+) non-psoriatic individuals responded to some M6 peptides but
rarely to K17 peptides. Cw6(-) psoriasis patients showed a response that was
intermediate between Cw6(+) patients and controls. These findings indicate that
psoriatic individuals have CD8(+) T cells that recognize keratin self-antigens
and that epitopes shared by streptococcal M proteins and human keratins may be
targets for the CD8(+) T cells that infiltrate psoriatic skin lesions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2004.00600.x 
PMCID: PMC1809187
PMID: 15373909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

