
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Nov;24(21):9601-9.

FoxA proteins regulate H19 endoderm enhancer E1 and exhibit developmental changes
in enhancer binding in vivo.

Long L(1), Spear BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of 
Kentucky College of Medicine, 800 Rose St., Lexington, KY 40536-0298, USA.

Multiple enhancers govern developmental and tissue-specific expression of the
H19-Igf2 locus, but factors that bind these elements have not been identified.
Using chromatin immunoprecipitation, we have found two FoxA binding sites in the 
H19 E1 enhancer. Mutating these sites diminishes E1 activity in hepatoma cells.
Additional chromatin immunoprecipitations show that FoxA binds to E1 in fetal
liver, where H19 is abundantly expressed, but that binding decreases in adult
liver, where H19 is no longer transcribed, even though FoxA proteins are present 
at both times. FoxA proteins are induced when F9 embryonal carcinoma cells
differentiate into visceral endoderm (VE) and parietal endoderm (PE). We show
that FoxA binds E1 in VE cells, where H19 is expressed, but not in PE cells,
where H19 is silent. This correlation between FoxA binding and H19 expression
indicates a role for FoxA in regulating H19, including developmental activation
in the yolk sac and liver and postnatal repression in the liver. This is the
first demonstration of a tissue-specific factor involved in developmental control
of H19 expression. These data also indicate that the presence of FoxA proteins is
not sufficient for binding but that additional mechanisms must govern the
accessibility of FoxA proteins to their cognate binding sites within the H19 E1
enhancer.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.21.9601-9609.2004 
PMCID: PMC522251
PMID: 15485926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

