
1. Infect Immun. 2004 Dec;72(12):7220-30.

Identification of a novel virulence factor in Burkholderia cenocepacia H111
required for efficient slow killing of Caenorhabditis elegans.

Huber B(1), Feldmann F, Köthe M, Vandamme P, Wopperer J, Riedel K, Eberl L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Plant Biology, University Zürich,
Zollikerstrasse 107, CH-8008 Zürich, Switzerland.

Burkholderia cenocepacia H111, which was isolated from a cystic fibrosis patient,
employs a quorum-sensing (QS) system, encoded by cep, to control the expression
of virulence factors as well as the formation of biofilms. The QS system is
thought to ensure that pathogenic traits are expressed only when the bacterial
population density is high enough to overwhelm the host before it is able to
mount an efficient response. While the wild-type strain effectively kills the
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, the pathogenicity of mutants with defective
quorum sensing is attenuated. To date, very little is known about the
cep-regulated virulence factors required for nematode killing. Here we report the
identification of a cep-regulated gene, whose predicted amino acid sequence is
highly similar to the QS-regulated protein AidA of the plant pathogen Ralstonia
solanacearum. By use of polyclonal antibodies directed against AidA, it is
demonstrated that the protein is expressed in the late-exponential phase and
accumulates during growth arrest. We show that B. cenocepacia H111 AidA is
essential for slow killing of C. elegans but has little effect on fast killing,
suggesting that the protein plays a role in the accumulation of the strain in the
nematode gut. Thus, AidA appears to be required for establishing an
infection-like process rather than acting as a toxin. Furthermore, evidence is
provided that AidA is produced not only by B. cenocepacia but also by many other 
strains of the Burkholderia cepacia complex.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.72.12.7220-7230.2004 
PMCID: PMC529107
PMID: 15557647  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

