
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2005 Jan;43(1):30-5.

External quality assessment for molecular detection of Bordetella pertussis in
European laboratories.

Muyldermans G(1), Soetens O, Antoine M, Bruisten S, Vincart B, Doucet-Populaire
F, Fry NK, Olcén P, Scheftel JM, Senterre JM, van der Zee A, Riffelmann M,
Piérard D, Lauwers S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Academisch Ziekenhuis Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 
Laarbeeklaan 101, 1090 Brussels, Belgium. labomicro@az.vub.ac.be

Although the PCR for the detection of Bordetella pertussis is routinely performed
in diagnostic laboratories, no quality assessment program has so far been
described. We report on the results obtained with two external quality assessment
proficiency panels sent to European laboratories. The first proficiency panel
contained a series of dilutions of three previously characterized B. pertussis
clinical isolates and two negative controls. No false-positive results were
reported by six laboratories providing seven data sets. The reported limits of
detection of the three B. pertussis strains varied between 4 and 4,000, 9 and
9,000, and 3 and 30,000 CFU/ml, respectively. The second proficiency panel,
composed of a series of dilutions of reference strains of B. pertussis, B.
holmesii, B. hinzii, and B. bronchiseptica, as well as negative controls, was
sent to nine laboratories. One laboratory reported a negative result for a sample
and reported a B. parapertussis-positive sample to be positive for B. pertussis. 
By using the B. pertussis-specific target gene pertactin, one laboratory detected
B. pertussis with 100% specificity. All other laboratories, which used
IS481-based assays, reported positive results for the samples containing B.
holmesii and B. bronchiseptica, species that have occasionally been recovered
from human respiratory samples. These data show that the choice of the target
gene is particularly critical for the species specificity of B. pertussis PCR
assays.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.43.1.30-35.2005 
PMCID: PMC540137
PMID: 15634947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

