
1. Gene. 2005 Aug 1;355:1-10.

The roles of positive and negative selection in the molecular evolution of insect
endosymbionts.

Fry AJ(1), Wernegreen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Josephine Bay Paul Center for Comparative Molecular Biology and Evolution,
Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA.

The evolutionary rate acceleration observed in most endosymbiotic bacteria may be
explained by higher mutation rates, changes in selective pressure, and increased 
fixation of deleterious mutations by genetic drift. Here, we explore the forces
influencing molecular evolution in Blochmannia, an obligate endosymbiont of
Camponotus and related ant genera. Our goals were to compare rates of sequence
evolution in Blochmannia with related bacteria, to explore variation in the
strength and efficacy of negative (purifying) selection, and to evaluate the
effect of positive selection. For six Blochmannia pairs, plus Buchnera and
related enterobacteria, estimates of sequence divergence at four genes confirm
faster rates of synonymous evolution in the ant mutualist. This conclusion is
based on higher dS between Blochmannia lineages despite their more recent
divergence. Likewise, generally higher dN in Blochmannia indicates faster rates
of nonsynonymous substitution in this group. One exception is the groEL gene, for
which lower dN and dN/dS compared to Buchnera indicate exceptionally strong
negative selection in Blochmannia. In addition, we explored evidence for positive
selection in Blochmannia using both site-and lineage-based maximum likelihood
models. These approaches confirmed heterogeneity of dN/dS among codon sites and
revealed significant variation in dN/dS across Blochmannia lineages for three
genes. Lineage variation affected genes independently, with no evidence of
parallel changes in dN/dS across genes along a given branch. Our data also reveal
instances of dN/dS greater than one; however, we do not interpret these large
dN/dS ratios as evidence for positive selection. In sum, while drift may
contribute to an overall rate acceleration at nonsynonymous sites in Blochmannia,
variable selective pressures best explain the apparent gene-specific changes in
dN/dS across lineages of this ant mutualist. In the course of this study, we
reanalyzed variation at Buchnera groEL and found no evidence of positive
selection that was previously reported.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2005.05.021 
PMID: 16039807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

