
1. J Immunol. 2005 Aug 1;175(3):1758-66.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis regulates CD1 antigen presentation pathways through
TLR-2.

Roura-Mir C(1), Wang L, Cheng TY, Matsunaga I, Dascher CC, Peng SL, Fenton MJ,
Kirschning C, Moody DB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis remains a major pathogen of worldwide importance,
which releases lipid Ags that are presented to human T cells during the course of
tuberculosis infections. Here we report that cellular infection with live M.
tuberculosis or exposure to mycobacterial cell wall products converted CD1-
myeloid precursors into competent APCs that expressed group 1 CD1 proteins (CD1a,
CD1b, and CD1c). The appearance of group 1 CD1 proteins at the surface of
infected or activated cells occurred via transcriptional regulation, and new CD1 
protein synthesis and was accompanied by down-regulation of CD1d transcripts and 
protein. Isolation of CD1-inducing factors from M. tuberculosis using normal
phase chromatography, as well as the use of purified natural and synthetic
compounds, showed that this process involved polar lipids that signaled through
TLR-2, and we found that TLR-2 was necessary for the up-regulation of CD1 protein
expression. Thus, mycobacterial cell wall lipids provide two distinct signals for
the activation of lipid-reactive T cells: lipid Ags that activate T cell
receptors and lipid adjuvants that activate APCs through TLR-2. These dual
activation signals may represent a system for selectively promoting the
presentation of exogenous foreign lipids by those myeloid APCs, which come into
direct contact with pathogens.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.3.1758 
PMID: 16034117  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

