
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2005 Sep;151(Pt 9):3127-3135. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.28140-0.

Identification and expression of a host-recognized antigen, FspA, from
Flavobacterium psychrophilum.

Crump EM(1)(2), Burian J(1), Allen PD(2), Kay WW(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Microtek Research and Development Ltd, 6761 Kirkpatrick Crescent, Saanichton, 
BC, Canada V8M 1Z8.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, PO Box
3055, Victoria, BC, Canada V8W 3P6.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the aetiological agent of rainbow trout fry
syndrome, an economically important disease of immature salmonid fish for which
there is no vaccine. Convalescent serum from the host, rainbow trout
(Oncorhynchus mykiss), reacted strongly with a approximately 20 kDa,
Flavobacterium-specific protein antigen (subsequently named FspA) from F.
psychrophilum. Protein-enriched, detergent-partitioned samples were separated by 
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and the protein target was excised,
proteolytically cleaved and the resulting peptides analysed by MS.
Quadrupole-time-of-flight MS was used to generate a fragmented peptide spectrum. 
The resulting peptide sequences were then used to design degenerate PCR primers
to amplify the gene (fspA) of interest: 612 bp encoding 203 aa, including a
putative 19 aa N-terminal signal sequence which predicted a processed 19 303.6 Da
protein. FspA proved to be unique and only homologous to two unspecified
sequences reported from Flavobacterium johnsoniae, although weakly homologous to 
a Yersinia pseudotuberculosis adhesin. An amplified gene fragment (537 bp,
encoding 179 aa) was further cloned into an expression vector, expressed as a
approximately 30 kDa N-terminal fusion protein and found to retain its strong
reactivity with host serum antibodies. These results suggest that the
surface-localized FspA may be an important subunit vaccine candidate antigen
against F. psychrophilum.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.28140-0 
PMID: 16151223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

