
1. J Immunol. 2005 Oct 1;175(7):4416-25.

DX5/CD49b-positive T cells are not synonymous with CD1d-dependent NKT cells.

Pellicci DG(1), Hammond KJ, Coquet J, Kyparissoudis K, Brooks AG, Kedzierska K,
Keating R, Turner S, Berzins S, Smyth MJ, Godfrey DI.

Author information: 
(1)University of Melbourne, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia.

NKT cells are typically defined as CD1d-dependent T cells that carry an invariant
TCR alpha-chain and produce high levels of cytokines. Traditionally, these cells 
were defined as NK1.1+ T cells, although only a few mouse strains express the
NK1.1 molecule. A popular alternative marker for NKT cells has been DX5, an Ab
that detects the CD49b integrin, expressed by most NK cells and a subset of T
cells that resemble NKT cells. Interpretation of studies using DX5 as an NKT cell
marker depends on how well DX5 defines NKT cells. Using a range of DX5 and other 
anti-CD49b Abs, we reveal major differences in reactivity depending on which Ab
and which fluorochrome are used. The brightest, PE-conjugated reagents revealed
that while most CD1d-dependent NKT cells expressed CD49b, they represented only a
minority of CD49b+ T cells. Furthermore, CD49b+ T cell numbers were near normal
in CD1d-/- mice that are completely deficient for NKT cells. CD1d tetramer-
CD49b+ T cells differ from NKT cells by their activation and memory marker
expression, tissue distribution, and CD4/CD8 coreceptor profile. Interestingly,
both NKT cells and CD1d tetramer- CD49b+ T cells produce cytokines, but the
latter are clearly biased toward Th1-type cytokines, in contrast to NKT cells
that produce both Th1 and Th2 cytokines. Finally, we demonstrate that expression 
of CD49b by NKT cells does not dramatically alter with age, contrasting with
earlier reports proposing DX5 as a maturation marker for NKT cells. In summary,
our data demonstrate that DX5/CD49b is a poor marker for identifying
CD1d-dependent NKT cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.7.4416 
PMID: 16177083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

