
1. Br J Cancer. 2006 Jan 30;94(2):218-26.

Monocytes and neutrophils as 'bad guys' for the outcome of interleukin-2 with and
without histamine in metastatic renal cell carcinoma--results from a randomised
phase II trial.

Donskov F(1), Hokland M, Marcussen N, Torp Madsen HH, von der Maase H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Aarhus University Hospital, Denmark.
fd@microbiology.au.dk

Histamine (HDC) inhibits formation and release of phagocyte-derived reactive
oxygen species, and thereby protects natural killer (NK) and T cells against
oxidative damage. Thus, the addition of histamine may potentially improve the
efficacy of interleukin-2 (IL-2). We have explored this potential mechanism
clinically in two randomised phase II trials in metastatic renal cell carcinoma
(mRCC). In parallel with the clinical trial in Denmark (n=63), we obtained serial
blood samples and tumour biopsies searching for a potential histamine effect in
situ. At baseline and on-treatment weeks 3 and 8, we monitored the 'good guys'
(i.e. NK and T cells) and 'bad guys' (i.e. monocytes/macrophages and neutrophils)
simultaneously in blood (n=59) and tumour tissue (n=44). Patients with high
number of monocytes and neutrophils in peripheral blood had very poor survival,
with apparently no benefit from either IL-2 alone or IL-2/HDC treatment. Blood
monocytes (r=-0.36, P=0.01) and neutrophils (r=-0.46, P=0.001) were negatively
correlated with cytotoxicity, whereas blood NK cells were positively correlated
with cytotoxicity (r=0.39, P=0.002). Treatment with IL-2 alone resulted in a
significantly higher number of circulating monocytes (P=0.037) and intratumoral
macrophages (P=0.005) compared with baseline. In contrast, IL-2/HDC resulted in
an unchanged number of circulating monocytes and intratumoral macrophages, and in
addition, a significantly increased number of intratumoral CD56(+) NK cells
(P=0.008) and CD8(+) T cells (P=0.019) compared with baseline. The study provides
evidence that circulating monocytes and neutrophils are powerful negative
prognostic factors for IL-2-based immunotherapy and establishes a biological
rationale for the potential use of histamine in conjunction with IL-2 in mRCC.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6602937 
PMCID: PMC2361121
PMID: 16434984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

