
1. J Exp Med. 2006 Mar 20;203(3):661-73. Epub 2006 Feb 27.

A structural basis for selection and cross-species reactivity of the
semi-invariant NKT cell receptor in CD1d/glycolipid recognition.

Kjer-Nielsen L(1), Borg NA, Pellicci DG, Beddoe T, Kostenko L, Clements CS,
Williamson NA, Smyth MJ, Besra GS, Reid HH, Bharadwaj M, Godfrey DI, Rossjohn J, 
McCluskey J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria 3010, Australia.

Little is known regarding the basis for selection of the semi-invariant alphabeta
T cell receptor (TCR) expressed by natural killer T (NKT) cells or how this
mediates recognition of CD1d-glycolipid complexes. We have determined the
structures of two human NKT TCRs that differ in their CDR3beta composition and
length. Both TCRs contain a conserved, positively charged pocket at the ligand
interface that is lined by residues from the invariant TCR alpha- and
semi-invariant beta-chains. The cavity is centrally located and ideally suited to
interact with the exposed glycosyl head group of glycolipid antigens. Sequences
common to mouse and human invariant NKT TCRs reveal a contiguous conserved "hot
spot" that provides a basis for the reactivity of NKT cells across species.
Structural and functional data suggest that the CDR3beta loop provides a
plasticity mechanism that accommodates recognition of a variety of glycolipid
antigens presented by CD1d. We propose a model of NKT TCR-CD1d-glycolipid
interaction in which the invariant CDR3alpha loop is predicted to play a major
role in determining the inherent bias toward CD1d. The findings define a
structural basis for the selection of the semi-invariant alphabeta TCR and the
unique antigen specificity of NKT cells.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20051777 
PMCID: PMC2118261
PMID: 16505140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

