
1. Med Hypotheses. 2006;67(1):161-3. Epub 2006 Mar 7.

Angiogenic gene therapy as a potential therapeutic agent in chronic
osteomyelitis.

Ross JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Caritas Saint Elizabeth's Medical Center, 736
Cambridge Street, Boston, MA 02135, USA. jrossmd@cchcs.org

Bacterial osteomyelitis is common, and outcomes are often poor. Standard
therapies fail in 31% of cases, and lower extremity amputation and loss of
independent functional status are common. Innovative therapies are desperately
needed, particularly in diabetic patients with peripheral vascular disease at
high risk for bad outcomes. Angiogenic gene therapy is a novel, logical and
promising approach in these patients. Adult bone is not well vascularized. Host
inflammation and bacterial toxin production result in further loss of
vascularity, and produce bone necrosis. Dead bone acts as a foreign body, and is 
permissive for persistent infection. Poor blood supply prevents remodeling of
dead bone, delivery of antibiotics, and phagocytosis of bacteria. Therefore,
angiogenic gene therapy may be a useful therapeutic agent in osteomyelitis. It is
reasonable to pursue studies of angiogenic agents in established animal models of
chronic osteomyelitis, not only with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
but also with the powerful bone angiogenic agent, placental growth factor, as
well as other agents with tissue regenerative and angiogenic potential, such as
sonic hedgehog, bone morphogenetic proteins, matrix metalloproteinase-9,
secretoneurin, and perhaps pluripotent stem cells. If successful, animal studies 
could lead to pilot studies of one or more of these agents as adjunctive therapy,
in addition to antibiotics, in diabetic patients with chronic osteomyelitis who
have failed conventional treatment.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2006.01.022 
PMID: 16520007  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

