
1. J Hosp Infect. 2006 May;63 Suppl 1:S1-44. Epub 2006 Apr 3.

Guidelines for the control and prevention of meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus (MRSA) in healthcare facilities.

Coia JE(1), Duckworth GJ, Edwards DI, Farrington M, Fry C, Humphreys H, Mallaghan
C, Tucker DR; Joint Working Party of the British Society of Antimicrobial
Chemotherapy; Hospital Infection Society; Infection Control Nurses Association.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow, UK.

Erratum in
    J Hosp Infect. 2006 Sep;64(1):97-8.

Comment in
    J Hosp Infect. 2009 Apr;71(4):373-4.
    J Hosp Infect. 2011 Nov;79(3):275.
    J Hosp Infect. 2011 Nov;79(3):275-7.

Meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) remains endemic in many UK
hospitals. Specific guidelines for control and prevention are justified because
MRSA causes serious illness and results in significant additional healthcare
costs. Guidelines were drafted by a multi-disciplinary group and these have been 
finalised following extensive consultation. The recommendations have been graded 
according to the strength of evidence. Surveillance of MRSA should be undertaken 
in a systematic way and should be fed back routinely to healthcare staff. The
inappropriate or unnecessary use of antibiotics should be avoided, and this will 
also reduce the likelihood of the emergence and spread of strains with reduced
susceptibility to glycopeptides, i.e. vancomycin-intermediate S.
aureus/glycopeptide-intermediate S. aureus (VISA/GISA) and vancomycin-resistant
S. aureus (VRSA). Screening for MRSA carriage in selected patients and clinical
areas should be performed according to locally agreed criteria based upon
assessment of the risks and consequences of transmission and infection. Nasal and
skin decolonization should be considered in certain categories of patients. The
general principles of infection control should be adopted for patients with MRSA,
including patient isolation and the appropriate cleaning and decontamination of
clinical areas. Inadequate staffing, especially amongst nurses, contributes to
the increased prevalence of MRSA. Laboratories should notify the relevant
national authorities if VISA/GISA or VRSA isolates are identified.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhin.2006.01.001 
PMID: 16581155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

