
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2006 Dec;152(Pt 12):3551-3560. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.29247-0.

Cloning and characterization of the chromosomal arsenic resistance genes from
Acidithiobacillus caldus and enhanced arsenic resistance on conjugal transfer of 
ars genes located on transposon TnAtcArs.

Kotze AA(1), Tuffin IM(1), Deane SM(1), Rawlings DE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Stellenbosch, Private Bag X1,
Matieland 7602, South Africa.

All strains of the moderately thermophilic, acidophilic, sulphur-oxidizing
bacterium Acidithiobacillus caldus that have been tested contain a set of
chromosomal arsenic resistance genes. Highly arsenic-resistant strains isolated
from commercial arsenopyrite bio-oxidation tanks contain additional
transposon-located (TnAtcArs) arsenic resistance genes. The chromosomal At.
caldus ars genes were cloned and found to consist of arsR and arsC genes
transcribed in one direction, and arsB in the opposite direction. The arsRC genes
were co-transcribed with ORF1, and arsB with ORF5 in both At. caldus and
Escherichia coli, although deletion of ORFs 1 and 5 did not appear to affect
resistance to arsenate or arsenite in E. coli. ORFs 1 and 5 have not previously
been reported as part of the ars operons, and had high amino acid identity to
hypothetical proteins from Polaromonas naphthalenivorus (76%) and Legionella
pneumophila (60%), respectively. Reporter-gene studies showed that the arsenic
operon of transposon origin (TnAtcArs) was expressed at a higher level, and was
less tightly regulated in E. coli than were the At. caldus ars genes of
chromosomal origin. Plasmid pSa-mediated conjugal transfer of TnAtcArs from E.
coli to At. caldus strains lacking the transposon was successful, and resulted in
greatly increased levels of resistance to arsenite.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.29247-0 
PMID: 17159207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

