
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2007 Jan;147(1):128-38.

The dual role of p55 tumour necrosis factor-alpha receptor in Actinobacillus
actinomycetemcomitans-induced experimental periodontitis: host protection and
tissue destruction.

Garlet GP(1), Cardoso CR, Campanelli AP, Ferreira BR, Avila-Campos MJ, Cunha FQ, 
Silva JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, School of Dentistry of Bauru, Bauru,
Brazil. garletgp@usp.br

Inflammatory immune reactions in response to periodontopathogens are thought to
protect the host against infection, but may trigger periodontal destruction.
Thus, we examined the mechanisms by which the proinflammatory cytokine tumour
necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha modulates the outcome of Actinobacillus
actinomycetemcomitans-induced periodontal disease in mice. Our results showed
that TNF-alpha receptor p55-deficient mice [p55TNF-knock-out (KO)] developed a
less severe periodontitis in response to A. actinomycetemcomitans infection,
characterized by significantly less alveolar bone loss and inflammatory reaction.
Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) demonstrated that levels of chemokines 
(CXCL1, 3 and 10; CCL3 and 5) and their receptors (CXCR2 and 3, CCR5) were lower 
in p55TNF-KO mice, as were matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1, 2 and 9 and receptor
activator of nuclear factor kB ligand (RANKL) mRNA levels. However, the absence
of the TNF-alpha p55 results in an impairment of protective immunity to A.
actinomycetemcomitans infection, characterized by increased bacterial load and
higher levels of C-reactive protein during the course of disease. Such impaired
host response may be the result of the reduced chemoattraction of lymphocytes,
neutrophils and macrophages, and reduced inducible nitric oxide synthase
expression (iNOS) and myeloperoxidase (MPO) production in periodontal tissues of 
p55 TNF-KO mice. Our results demonstrate the mechanisms involved determining
periodontal disease severity by TNF-alpha receptor p55, and its role in providing
immune protection to A. actinomycetemcomitans periodontal infection.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2006.03260.x 
PMCID: PMC1810448
PMID: 17177972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

