
1. Blood. 2007 May 1;109(9):3794-802. Epub 2007 Jan 3.

An essential role for IL-17 in preventing pathogen-initiated bone destruction:
recruitment of neutrophils to inflamed bone requires IL-17 receptor-dependent
signals.

Yu JJ(1), Ruddy MJ, Wong GC, Sfintescu C, Baker PJ, Smith JB, Evans RT, Gaffen
SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences, University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA.

IL-17 and its receptor are founding members of a novel family of inflammatory
cytokines. IL-17 plays a pathogenic role in rheumatoid arthritis (RA)-associated 
bone destruction. However, IL-17 is also an important regulator of host defense
through granulopoiesis and neutrophil trafficking. Therefore, the role of IL-17
in pathogen-initiated bone loss was not obvious. The most common form of
infection-induced bone destruction occurs in periodontal disease (PD). In
addition to causing significant morbidity, PD is a risk factor for
atherosclerotic heart disease and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Similar to RA, bone destruction in PD is caused by the immune response. However, 
neutrophils provide critical antimicrobial defense against periodontal organisms.
Since IL-17 is bone destructive in RA but a key regulator of neutrophils, we
examined its role in inflammatory bone loss induced by the oral pathogen
Porphyromonas gingivalis in IL-17RA-deficient mice. These mice showed enhanced
periodontal bone destruction, suggesting a bone-protective role for IL-17,
reminiscent of a neutrophil deficiency. Although IL-17RA-deficient neutrophils
functioned normally ex vivo, IL-17RA knock-out (IL-17RA(KO)) mice exhibited
reduced serum chemokine levels and concomitantly reduced neutrophil migration to 
bone. Consistently, CXCR2(KO) mice were highly susceptible to alveolar bone loss;
interestingly, these mice also suggested a role for chemokines in maintaining
normal bone homeostasis. These results indicate a nonredundant role for IL-17 in 
mediating host defense via neutrophil mobilization.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2005-09-010116 
PMCID: PMC1874584
PMID: 17202320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

