
1. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2007 May;147(1):29-37. Epub 2006 Dec 12.

Molecular cloning, characterization and expression analysis of natural resistance
associated macrophage protein (Nramp) cDNA from turbot (Scophthalmus maximus).

Chen SL(1), Zhang YX, Xu JY, Meng L, Sha ZX, Ren GC.

Author information: 
(1)Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fisheries
Sciences, Key Lab For Sustainable Utilization of Marine Fisheries Resources,
Ministry of Agriculture, Qingdao, China. chensl@ysfri.ac.cn

Nramp (natural resistance associated macrophage protein) has been identified as
one of the major candidate genes for controlling natural resistance and/or
susceptibility to intracellular pathogens in vertebrates. However, few reports
are available about the structure and function of Nramp in teleost. We have
recently isolated the cDNA encoding Nramp from turbot (Scophthalmus maximus). The
full-length cDNA of the Nramp is 2584 bp in length, including 69 bp 5' terminal
UTR, 850 bp 3' terminal UTR and 1665 bp open reading frame for a protein with 554
amino acid residues (Genbank accession number: DQ263240). Comparison of amino
acid sequence indicated that turbot Nramp consists of 12 transmembrane regions
(TM) domains. A consensus transport motif (CTM) containing 20 residues was
observed between transmembrane domains 8 and 9. The deduced amino acid sequence
of turbot Nramp exhibited between 60 and 92% homology with 13 other vertebrate
Nramp sequences. Nramp transcripts were found to be highly abundant in head
kidney, kidney and spleen, abundant in intestine and gill, less abundant in
liver, brain, heart and gonad, least in muscle and skin. The level of Nramp mRNA 
in embryos gradually increases during embryogenesis from blastula stage to fry
stage. Challenge of turbot with pathogenic bacteria, Vibrio anguillarum, elevated
Nramp mRNA levels in liver and spleen. The Nramp transcripts were detected in
turbot embryonic cell line (TEC). Challenge of the TEC cell cultures with
pathogenic bacteria, V. anguillarum, significantly elevated Nramp mRNA levels in 
TEC cell cultures.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpb.2006.12.003 
PMID: 17317252  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

