
1. J Immunol Methods. 2007 May 31;323(1):11-23. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against complexes of the
NKT cell ligand alpha-galactosylceramide bound to mouse CD1d.

Yu KO(1), Im JS, Illarionov PA, Ndonye RM, Howell AR, Besra GS, Porcelli SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer) known as KRN7000 remains the best
studied ligand of the lipid-binding MHC class I-like protein CD1d. The
KRN7000:CD1d complex is highly recognized by invariant natural killer T (iNKT)
cells, an evolutionarily conserved subset of T lymphocytes that express an
unusual semi-invariant T cell antigen receptor, and mediate a variety of
proinflammatory and immunoregulatory functions. To facilitate the study of
glycolipid antigen presentation to iNKT cells by CD1d, we undertook the
production of mouse monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) specific for complexes of
KRN7000 bound to mouse CD1d (mCD1d) proteins. Three such monoclonal antibodies
were isolated that bound only to mCD1d proteins that were loaded with KRN7000 or 
closely-related forms of alpha-GalCer. These mAbs showed no reactivity with mCD1d
proteins that were not loaded with alpha-GalCer, nor did they bind to complexes
formed by loading mCD1d with the self-glycolipid and putative iNKT cell ligand
isoglobotrihexosylceramide. These complex-specific monoclonal antibodies allow
the direct detection and monitoring of complexes formed by the binding of KRN7000
and other alpha-GalCer analogues to mCD1d. The availability of these mAbs should 
facilitate a wide range of studies on the biology and potential clinical
applications of CD1d-restricted iNKT cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2007.03.006 
PMCID: PMC1939826
PMID: 17442335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

