
1. Mol Microbiol. 2007 Sep;65(6):1582-94. Epub 2007 Aug 21.

Spore cortex formation in Bacillus subtilis is regulated by accumulation of
peptidoglycan precursors under the control of sigma K.

Vasudevan P(1), Weaver A, Reichert ED, Linnstaedt SD, Popham DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Virginia Tech, 2119 Derring Hall MC0406,
Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.

The bacterial endospore cortex peptidoglycan is synthesized between the double
membranes of the developing forespore and is required for attainment of spore
dehydration and dormancy. The Bacillus subtilis spoVB, spoVD and spoVE gene
products are expressed in the mother cell compartment early during sporulation
and play roles in cortex synthesis. Here we show that mutations in these genes
block synthesis of cortex peptidoglycan and cause accumulation of peptidoglycan
precursors, indicating a defect at the earliest steps of peptidoglycan
polymerization. Loss of spoIV gene products involved in activation of later,
sigma(K)-dependent mother cell gene expression results in decreased synthesis of 
cortex peptidoglycan, even in the presence of the SpoV proteins that were
synthesized earlier, apparently due to decreased precursor production. Data show 
that activation of sigma(K) is required for increased synthesis of the soluble
peptidoglycan precursors, and Western blot analyses show that increases in the
precursor synthesis enzymes MurAA, MurB, MurC and MurF are dependent on sigma(K) 
activation. Overall, our results indicate that a decrease in peptidoglycan
precursor synthesis during early sporulation, followed by renewed precursor
synthesis upon sigma(K) activation, serves as a regulatory mechanism for the
timing of spore cortex synthesis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2007.05896.x 
PMID: 17714441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

