
1. Assay Drug Dev Technol. 2008 Feb;6(1):95-103. doi: 10.1089/adt.2007.114.

Identification of an inhibitor of the MurC enzyme, which catalyzes an essential
step in the peptidoglycan precursor synthesis pathway.

Zawadzke LE(1), Norcia M, Desbonnet CR, Wang H, Freeman-Cook K, Dougherty TJ.

Author information: 
(1)HTS Center of Emphasis, Pfizer Global Research & Development, Groton, CT, USA.
laura.e.zawadzke@pfizer.com

The pathway for synthesis of the peptidoglycan precursor UDP-N-acetylmuramyl
pentapeptide is essential in Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. This
pathway has been exploited in the recent past to identify potential new
antibiotics as inhibitors of one or more of the Mur enzymes. In the present
study, a high-throughput screen was employed to identify potential inhibitors of 
the Escherichia coli MurC (UDP-N-acetylmuramic acid:L-alanine ligase), the first 
of four paralogous amino acid-adding enzymes. Inhibition of ATP consumed during
the MurC reaction, using an adaptation of a kinase assay format, identified a
number of potential inhibitory chemotypes. After nonspecific inhibition testing
and chemical attractiveness were assessed, C-1 emerged as a compound for further 
characterization. The inhibition of MurC by this compound was confirmed in both a
kinetic-coupled enzyme assay and a direct nuclear magnetic resonance product
detection assay. C-1 was found to be a low micromolar inhibitor of the E. coli
MurC reaction, with preferential inhibition by one of two enantiomeric forms.
Experiments indicated that it was a competitive inhibitor of ATP binding to the
MurC enzyme. Further work with MurC enzymes from several bacterial sources
revealed that while the compound was equally effective at inhibiting MurC from
genera (Proteus mirabilis and Klebsiella pneumoniae) closely related to E. coli, 
MurC enzymes from more distant Gram-negative species such as Haemophilus
influenzae, Acinetobacter baylyi, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa were not inhibited.

DOI: 10.1089/adt.2007.114 
PMID: 18315498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

