
1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008 Apr 15;75(8):1588-600. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2008.01.007.
Epub 2008 Feb 2.

Structure-activity relationship for adenosine kinase from Mycobacterium
tuberculosis II. Modifications to the ribofuranosyl moiety.

Long MC(1), Shaddix SC, Moukha-Chafiq O, Maddry JA, Nagy L, Parker WB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, AL, United States.

Adenosine kinase (Ado kinase) from Mycobacterium tuberculosis is structurally and
biochemically unique from other known Ado kinases. This purine salvage enzyme
catalyzes the first step in the conversion of the adenosine analog, 2-methyl-Ado 
(methyl-Ado), into a metabolite with antitubercular activity. Methyl-Ado has
provided proof of concept that the purine salvage pathway from M. tuberculosis
may be utilized for the development of antitubercular compounds with novel
mechanisms of action. In order to utilize this enzyme, it is necessary to
understand the topography of the active site to rationally design compounds that 
are more potent and selective substrates for Ado kinase. A previous
structure-activity relationship identified modifications to the base moiety of
adenosine (Ado) that result in substrate and inhibitor activity. In an extension 
of that work, 62 Ado analogs with modifications to the ribofuranosyl moiety,
modifications to the base and ribofuranosyl moiety, or modifications to the
glycosidic bond position have been analyzed as substrates and inhibitors of M.
tuberculosis Ado kinase. A subset of these compounds was further analyzed in
human Ado kinase for the sake of comparison. Although no modifications to the
ribose moiety resulted in compounds as active as Ado, the best substrates
identified were carbocyclic-Ado, 8-aza-carbocyclic-Ado, and
9-[alpha-l-lyxofuranosyl]-adenine with 38%, 4.3%, and 3.8% of the activity of
Ado, respectively. The most potent inhibitor identified, 5'-amino-5'-deoxy-Ado,
had a K(i)=0.8muM and a competitive mode of inhibition. MIC studies demonstrated 
that poor substrates could still have potent antitubercular activity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2008.01.007 
PMCID: PMC2373907
PMID: 18329005  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

