
1. Pathol Int. 2008 Jun;58(6):371-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2008.02238.x.

Prognostic significance of intestinal claudins in high-risk synchronous and
metachronous multiple gastric epithelial neoplasias after initial endoscopic
submucosal dissection.

Semba S(1), Hasuo T, Satake S, Nakayama F, Yokozaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Kobe
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) is useful in en bloc curative resection
and enables patients with early gastric carcinoma (GC) to have a better quality
of life. But metachronous recurrence of GC at other sites in the stomach has
become a major issue after initial ESD. The purpose of the present paper was to
examine gastric (claudin-18) and intestinal claudin (claudin-3 and claudin-4)
expression in early GC on immunohistochemistry to clarify the association with
clinicopathology, mucin phenotypes, microsatellite instability (MSI) status and
the incidence of synchronous and metachronous gastric epithelial neoplasias after
initial ESD. According to intestinal claudin expression, a total of 73 early GC
were divided into two groups: intestinal claudin-positive (I-CLDN(+)) phenotype
(n = 52; 71%); and intestinal claudin-negative (I-CLDN(-)) phenotype (n = 21;
29%). Although no significant association was found with clinicopathology and the
MSI status, the I-CLDN(+) early GC correlated with the mucin phenotypes and had a
significantly higher incidence of synchronous and metachronous multiple GC and
gastric adenomas (P = 0.049). These results indicate that early GC demonstrating 
I-CLDN(+) phenotype have a high risk of synchronous and metachronous secondary
gastric epithelial neoplasias.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2008.02238.x 
PMID: 18477216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

