
1. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Jul;38(7):1961-70. doi: 10.1002/eji.200738100.

HLA-DM negatively regulates HLA-DR4-restricted collagen pathogenic peptide
presentation and T cell recognition.

Amria S(1), Hajiaghamohseni LM, Harbeson C, Zhao D, Goldstein O, Blum JS, Haque
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical University of South
Carolina, 173 Ashley Avenue, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Rheumatoid arthritis, an autoimmune disease, is significantly associated with the
HLA class II allele HLA-DR4. While the etiology of rheumatoid arthritis remains
unknown, type II collagen (CII) is a candidate autoantigen. An immunodominant
pathogenic epitope from this autoantigen, CII(261-273), which binds to HLA-DR4
and activates CD4+ T cells, has been identified. The non-classical class II
antigen, HLA-DM, is also a key component of class II antigen presentation
pathways influencing peptide presentation by HLA-DR molecules expressed on
professional antigen-presenting cells (APC). Here, we investigated whether the
HLA-DR4-restricted presentation of the pathogenic CII(261-273) epitope was
regulated by HLA-DM expression in APC. We show that APC lacking HLA-DM
efficiently display the CII(261-273) peptide/epitope to activate CD4+ T cells,
and that presentation of this peptide is modulated dependent on the level of
HLA-DM expression in APC. Mechanistic studies demonstrated that the CII(261-273) 
peptide is internalized by APC and edited by HLA-DM molecules in the recycling
pathway, inhibiting peptide presentation and T cell recognition. These findings
suggest that HLA-DM expression in APC controls class II-mediated CII(261-273)
peptide/epitope presentation and regulates CD4+ T cell responses to this self
epitope, thus potentially influencing CII-dependent autoimmunity.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.200738100 
PMID: 18506881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

