
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2008 Aug;154(Pt 8):2513-2521. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.2008/019216-0.

Plant host and sugar alcohol induced exopolysaccharide biosynthesis in the
Burkholderia cepacia complex.

Bartholdson SJ(1)(2), Brown AR(1), Mewburn BR(3), Clarke DJ(2), Fry SC(3),
Campopiano DJ(2), Govan JRW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infectious Diseases, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4SB,
UK.
(2)School of Chemistry, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3JJ, UK.
(3)Institute of Molecular Plant Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 
3JH, UK.

Comment in
    Microbiology. 2009 Mar;155(Pt 3):665-6; discussion 666.

The species that presently constitute the Burkholderia cepacia complex (Bcc) have
multiple roles; they include soil and water saprophytes, bioremediators, and
plant, animal and human pathogens. Since the first description of pathogenicity
in the Bcc was based on sour skin rot of onion bulbs, this study returned to this
plant host to investigate the onion-associated phenotype of the Bcc. Many Bcc
isolates, which were previously considered to be non-mucoid, produced copious
amounts of exopolysaccharide (EPS) when onion tissue was provided as the sole
nutrient. EPS production was not species-specific, was observed in isolates from 
both clinical and environmental sources, and did not correlate with the ability
to cause maceration of onion tissue. Chemical analysis suggested that the onion
components responsible for EPS induction were primarily the carbohydrates
sucrose, fructose and fructans. Additional sugars were investigated, and all
alcohol sugars tested were able to induce EPS production, in particular mannitol 
and glucitol. To investigate the molecular basis for EPS biosynthesis, we focused
on the highly conserved bce gene cluster thought to be involved in cepacian
biosynthesis. We demonstrated induction of the bce gene cluster by mannitol, and 
found a clear correlation between the inability of representatives of the
Burkholderia cenocepacia ET12 lineage to produce EPS and the presence of an 11 bp
deletion within the bceB gene, which encodes a glycosyltransferase. Insertional
inactivation of bceB in Burkholderia ambifaria AMMD results in loss of EPS
production on sugar alcohol media. These novel and surprising insights into EPS
biosynthesis highlight the metabolic potential of the Bcc and show that a
potential virulence factor may not be detected by routine laboratory culture. Our
results also highlight a potential hazard in the use of inhaled mannitol as an
osmolyte to improve mucociliary clearance in individuals with cystic fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.2008/019216-0 
PMID: 18667584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

