
1. Genome Biol. 2008;9(8):R122. doi: 10.1186/gb-2008-9-8-r122. Epub 2008 Aug 4.

Diarrhea as a cause of mortality in a mouse model of infectious colitis.

Borenshtein D(1), Fry RC, Groff EB, Nambiar PR, Carey VJ, Fox JG, Schauer DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

BACKGROUND: Comparative characterization of genome-wide transcriptional changes
during infection can help elucidate the mechanisms underlying host
susceptibility. In this study, transcriptional profiling of the mouse colon was
carried out in two cognate lines of mice that differ in their response to
Citrobacter rodentium infection; susceptible inbred FVB/N and resistant outbred
Swiss Webster mice. Gene expression in the distal colon was determined prior to
infection, and at four and nine days post-inoculation using a whole mouse genome 
Affymetrix array.
RESULTS: Computational analysis identified 462 probe sets more than 2-fold
differentially expressed between uninoculated resistant and susceptible mice. In 
response to C. rodentium infection, 5,123 probe sets were differentially
expressed in one or both lines of mice. Microarray data were validated by
quantitative real-time RT-PCR for 35 selected genes and were found to have a 94% 
concordance rate. Transcripts represented by 1,547 probe sets were differentially
expressed between susceptible and resistant mice regardless of infection status, 
a host effect. Genes associated with transport were over-represented to a greater
extent than even immune response-related genes. Electrolyte analysis revealed
reduction in serum levels of chloride and sodium in susceptible animals.
CONCLUSION: The results support the hypothesis that mortality in C.
rodentium-infected susceptible mice is associated with impaired intestinal ion
transport and development of fatal fluid loss and dehydration. These studies
contribute to our understanding of the pathogenesis of C. rodentium and suggest
novel strategies for the prevention and treatment of diarrhea associated with
intestinal bacterial infections.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2008-9-8-r122 
PMCID: PMC2575512
PMID: 18680595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

