
1. J Fish Dis. 2008 Dec;31(12):899-911. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2008.00956.x.

Immunization of rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum), with a low
molecular mass fraction isolated from Flavobacterium psychrophilum.

HÃ¶gfors E(1), Pullinen KR, Madetoja J, Wiklund T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Aquatic Pathobiology, Department of Biology, Abo Akademi
University, Turku, Finland.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum, the causative agent of rainbow trout fry syndrome
has become a widespread fish pathogen in freshwater aquaculture worldwide. In
this study, a low molecular mass fraction (P25-33), with an approximate weight of
25-33 kDa, was identified among F. psychrophilum strains in an immunoblotting
analysis with anti-F. psychrophilum sera. The immunogenic efficacy of the
isolated and extracted P25-33 was investigated in two intraperitoneal
immunization trials with rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum). The first 
trial included immunizations using P25-33 with Freund's complete adjuvant (FCA)
and the second trial included immunizations using P25-33, formalin-inactivated
whole and sonicated F. psychrophilum cell preparations without FCA. In both
trials, antibody titres against F. psychrophilum were analysed with an
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and the efficacy of the immunizations was
determined by a challenge with F. psychrophilum. The P25-33 was shown to give
rise to a protective immune response in rainbow trout after immunization with
FCA, but not without FCA when a low concentration of P25-33 was used. Instead
formalin-inactivated whole and sonicated cells of F. psychrophilum were able to
protect the immunized fish more effectively when immunized without FCA. The
results suggest that whole or sonicated F. psychrophilum cells could be better
candidates for a cost-effective water-based injection vaccine than the
immunogenic fraction.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2008.00956.x 
PMID: 18752545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

