
1. Blood. 2008 Nov 15;112(10):4128-38. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-05-157529. Epub 2008 
Sep 8.

Natural killer T-cell autoreactivity leads to a specialized activation state.

Wang X(1), Chen X, Rodenkirch L, Simonson W, Wernimont S, Ndonye RM, Veerapen N, 
Gibson D, Howell AR, Besra GS, Painter GF, Huttenlocher A, Gumperz JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, USA.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells are innate-like T cells that recognize specific
microbial antigens and also display autoreactivity to self-antigens. The nature
of NKT-cell autoreactive activation remains poorly understood. We show here that 
the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is operative during human
NKT-cell autoreactive activation, but calcium signaling is severely impaired.
This results in a response that is biased toward granulocyte macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) secretion because this cytokine requires
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling but is not highly calcium
dependent, whereas interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), interleukin (IL)-4, and IL-2
production are minimal. Autoreactive activation was associated with reduced
migration velocity but did not induce arrest; thus, NKT cells retained the
ability to survey antigen presenting cells (APCs). IL-12 and IL-18 stimulated
autoreactively activated NKT cells to secrete IFN-gamma, and this was mediated by
Janus kinase-signal transducers and activators of transcription
(JAK-STAT)-dependent signaling without induction of calcium flux. This pathway
did not require concurrent contact with CD1d(+) APCs but was strictly dependent
on preceding autoreactive stimulation that induced ERK activation. In contrast,
NKT-cell responses to the glycolipid antigen alpha-galactosyl ceramide
(alpha-GalCer) were dampened by prior autoreactive activation. These results show
that NKT-cell autoreactivity induces restricted cytokine secretion and leads to
altered basal activation that potentiates innate responsiveness to costimulatory 
cytokines while modulating sensitivity to foreign antigens.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2008-05-157529 
PMCID: PMC2581981
PMID: 18779390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

