
1. Infect Immun. 2008 Dec;76(12):5745-53. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00897-08. Epub 2008 Sep
22.

Immunogenicity of recombinant attenuated Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium 
vaccine strains carrying a gene that encodes Eimeria tenella antigen SO7.

Konjufca V(1), Jenkins M, Wang S, Juarez-Rodriguez MD, Curtiss R 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Biodesign Institute, Center for Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, School of
Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287, USA.
vkonjufca@pathology.wustl.edu

Recombinant attenuated Salmonella vaccines against avian coccidiosis were
developed to deliver Eimeria species antigens to the lymphoid tissues of chickens
via the type 3 secretion system (T3SS) and the type 2 secretion system (T2SS) of 
Salmonella. For antigen delivery via the T3SS, the Eimeria tenella gene encoding 
sporozoite antigen SO7 was cloned downstream of the translocation domain of the
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium sopE gene in the parental pYA3868 and
pYA3870 vectors to generate pYA4156 and pYA4157. Newly constructed T3SS vectors
were introduced into host strain chi8879 (Delta phoP233 Delta sptP1033::xylE
Delta asdA16), an attenuated derivative of the highly virulent UK-1 strain. The
SopE-SO7 fusion protein was secreted by the T3SS of Salmonella. The vector
pYA4184 was constructed for delivery of the SO7 antigen via the T2SS. The SO7
protein was toxic to Salmonella when larger amounts were synthesized; thus, the
synthesis of this protein was placed under the control of the lacI repressor
gene, whose expression in turn was dependent on the amount of available arabinose
in the medium. The pYA4184 vector was introduced into host strain chi9242 (Delta 
phoP233 Delta asdA16 Delta araBAD23 Delta relA198::araC P(BAD) lacI TT [TT is the
T4ipIII transcription terminator]). In addition to SO7, for immunization and
challenge studies we used the EAMZ250 antigen of Eimeria acervulina, which was
previously shown to confer partial protection against E. acervulina challenge
when it was delivered via the T3SS. Immunization of chickens with a combination
of the SO7 and EAMZ250 antigens delivered via the T3SS induced superior
protection against challenge by E. acervulina. In contrast, chickens immunized
with SO7 that was delivered via the T2SS of Salmonella were better protected from
challenge by E. tenella.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00897-08 
PMCID: PMC2583560
PMID: 18809658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

