
1. J Mol Biol. 2009 Jan 16;385(2):558-67. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.10.073. Epub 2008 
Nov 5.

Asp-to-Asn substitution at the first position of the DxD TOPRIM motif of
recombinant bacterial topoisomerase I is extremely lethal to E. coli.

Cheng B(1), Annamalai T, Sorokin E, Abrenica M, Aedo S, Tse-Dinh YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Basic Science Building, New 
York Medical College, Valhalla, NY 10595, USA.

The TOPRIM domain found in many nucleotidyl transferases contains a DxD motif
involved in magnesium ion coordination for catalysis. Medium- to high-copy-number
plasmid clones of Yersinia pestis topoisomerase I (YpTOP) with Asp-to-Asn
substitution at the first aspartate residue (D117N) of this motif could not be
generated in Escherichia coli without second-site mutation even when expression
was under the control of the tightly regulated BAD promoter and suppressed by 2% 
glucose in the medium. Arabinose induction of a single-copy YpTOP-D117N mutant
gene integrated into the chromosome resulted in approximately 10(5)-fold of cell 
killing in 2.5 h. Attempt to induce expression of the corresponding E. coli
topoisomerase I mutant (EcTOP-D111N) encoded on a high-copy-number plasmid
resulted in either loss of viability or reversion of the clone to wild type.
High-copy-number plasmid clones of YpTOP-D119N and EcTOP-D113N with the Asn
substitution at the second Asp of the TOPRIM motif could be stably maintained,
but overexpression also decreased cell viability significantly. The Asp-to-Asn
substitutions at these TOPRIM residues can selectively decrease Mg(2+) binding
affinity with minimal disruption of the active-site geometry, leading to trapping
of the covalent complex with cleaved DNA and causing bacterial cell death. The
extreme sensitivity of the first TOPRIM position suggested that this might be a
useful site for binding of small molecules that could act as topoisomerase
poisons.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.10.073 
PMCID: PMC2905861
PMID: 19013470  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

