
1. J Anim Sci. 2009 Mar;87(3):860-7. doi: 10.2527/jas.2008-1157. Epub 2008 Nov 21.

Rainbow trout resistance to bacterial cold-water disease is moderately heritable 
and is not adversely correlated with growth.

Silverstein JT(1), Vallejo RL, Palti Y, Leeds TD, Rexroad CE 3rd, Welch TJ, Wiens
GD, Ducrocq V.

Author information: 
(1)US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, National Center
for Cool and Cold Water Aquaculture, Kearneysville, WV 25430, USA.

The objectives of this study were to estimate the heritabilities for and genetic 
correlations among resistance to bacterial cold-water disease and growth traits
in a population of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). Bacterial cold-water
disease, a chronic disease of rainbow trout, is caused by Flavobacterium
psychrophilum. This bacterium also causes acute losses in young fish, known as
rainbow trout fry syndrome. Selective breeding for increased disease resistance
is a promising strategy that has not been widely used in aquaculture. At the same
time, improving growth performance is critical for efficient production. At the
National Center for Cool and Cold Water Aquaculture, reducing the negative impact
of diseases on rainbow trout culture and improving growth performance are primary
objectives. In 2005, when fish averaged 2.4 g, 71 full-sib families were
challenged with F. psychrophilum and evaluated for 21 d. Overall survival was
29.3% and family rates of survival varied from 1.5 to 72.5%. Heritability of
postchallenge survival, an indicator of disease resistance, was estimated to be
0.35 +/- 0.09. Body weights at 9 and 12 mo posthatch and growth rate from 9 to 12
mo were evaluated on siblings of the fish in the disease challenge study. Growth 
traits were moderately heritable, from 0.32 for growth rate to 0.61 for 12-mo BW.
Genetic and phenotypic correlations between growth traits and resistance to
bacterial cold-water disease were not different from zero. These results suggest 
that genetic improvement can be made simultaneously for growth and bacterial
cold-water disease resistance in rainbow trout by using selective breeding.

DOI: 10.2527/jas.2008-1157 
PMID: 19028851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

