
1. Int Immunol. 2009 Jul;21(7):779-91. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxp046. Epub 2009 May 21.

Functionally relevant decreases in activatory receptor expression on NK cells are
associated with pulmonary tuberculosis in vivo and persist after successful
treatment.

Bozzano F(1), Costa P, Passalacqua G, Dodi F, Ravera S, Pagano G, Canonica GW,
Moretta L, De Maria A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Eccellenza per la Ricerca Biomedica, Universit√† di Genova, Genova,
Italy.

Correlates for the initiation of Mycobacterium tuberculosis hominis (Mth)
replication from latency are needed in order to improve Mth control. In order to 
analyze if perturbations of peripheral NK cells may be associated with exit from 
Mth latency, sequential patients with newly diagnosed lung tuberculosis (TB) were
studied. Peripheral NK cells were analyzed by cytofluorometry, in vitro culture
and functional assays. At the onset of lung TB, imbalances in NK cell subsets
were evident. Decreased CD56(bright)CD16(+/-) subsets with significantly
compromised NKp30 and NKp46 expression and with specifically decreased gamma-IFN 
production upon triggering were evident. These features were not completely
restored when purified NK cells were cultured in vitro. Culture supplementation
with alpha-IFN increased only NKp30 expression in TB and healthy donors.
Extensive peripheral NK cell triggering was evident in these patients, as shown
by the expression of NK cell activation markers and of the lymph node-homing
chemokine receptor CCR7 on CD16(+) CD56(dull) cells. Significant persistence of
decreased NKp30 and NKp46 after successful treatment with a standard four-drug
regimen was detected after full recovery. NK cell function is deeply affected in 
patients at the onset of pulmonary TB. The involvement of multiple activatory
receptors may provide a relevant contribution to the spread of mycobacteria
exiting from latency.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxp046 
PMID: 19461127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

