
1. Eur J Immunol. 2009 Jul;39(7):1726-35. doi: 10.1002/eji.200839001.

Multiple tissue-specific isoforms of sulfatide activate CD1d-restricted type II
NKT cells.

Blomqvist M(1), Rhost S, Teneberg S, Löfbom L, Osterbye T, Brigl M, Månsson JE,
Cardell SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Gothenburg, Sweden.

The glycosphingolipid sulfatide (SO(3)-3Galbeta1Cer) is a demonstrated ligand for
a subset of CD1d-restricted NKT cells, which could regulate experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis, a murine model for multiple sclerosis, as well as
tumor immunity and experimental hepatitis. Native sulfatide is a mixture of
sulfatide isoforms, i.e. sulfatide molecules with different long-chain bases and 
fatty acid chain lengths and saturation. Here, we demonstrate that
sulfatide-specific CD1d-restricted murine NKT hybridomas recognized several
different sulfatide isoforms. These included the physiologically relevant
isoforms C24:1 and C24:0, major constituents of the myelin sheet of the nervous
system, and C16:0, prominent in the pancreatic islet beta-cells. The most potent 
sulfatide isoform was lysosulfatide (lacking a fatty acid). Shortened fatty acid 
chain length (C24:1 versus C18:1), or saturation of the long fatty acid (C24:0), 
resulted in reduced stimulatory capacity, and fatty acid hydroxylation abolished 
the response. Moreover, sulfatide was not responsible for the natural
autoreactivity toward splenocytes by XV19 T hybridoma cells. Our results reveal a
promiscuity in the recognition of sulfatide isoforms by a CD1d-restricted
NKT-cell clone, and suggest that sulfatide, a major component of the myelin sheet
and pancreatic beta-cells, is one of several natural ligands for type II
CD1d-restricted NKT cells.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.200839001 
PMCID: PMC4212524
PMID: 19582739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

