
1. J Dent Res. 1991 Nov;70(11):1436-40.

Reproducibility and sensitivity of oral malodor measurements with a portable
sulphide monitor.

Rosenberg M(1), Kulkarni GV, Bosy A, McCulloch CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Dentistry, University of Toronto, ON,
Canada.

Forty-one subjects with bad breath were assessed for oral malodor and periodontal
status on three occasions, at intervals of approximately one week. Oral malodor
was assessed by measurement of peak and steady-state volatile sulphide levels
with a portable sulphide monitor and by organoleptic measurement of whole-mouth, 
tongue dorsum, and interproximal dental odors by two independent judges.
Reproducibility of measurements, assessed by paired t tests and Kappa testing,
demonstrated no significant differences between any of the test results from the 
first and second appointments. Steady-state sulphide levels were the most
reproducible of all tests. The ability of the tests to detect an expected
reduction of malodor following a 0.2% chlorhexidine mouthrinse regimen was
investigated by comparison of test values between the second and third
appointments. Following the mouthrinsing treatment, 43% reductions of peak, 47%
reductions of steady-state volatile sulphide levels, and 15-58% reductions in all
other measurement categories were observed. The majority of the participants
(22/41) had no pockets greater than 5 mm and exhibited both moderate gingival
inflammation (Mean Gingival Index = 1.17) and moderate plaque accumulation (Mean 
Plaque Index = 1.84). Plaque Index and presence of pockets greater than 7 mm were
weakly related to sulphide measurements. Whereas assessment of steady-state
sulphide levels by the sulphide monitor does not constitute a direct measure of
oral malodor, its relation to organoleptic measurement, superior reproducibility,
objectivity, and sensitivity support the use of the sulphide monitor in clinical 
studies.

DOI: 10.1177/00220345910700110801 
PMID: 1960254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

