
1. PLoS Biol. 2009 Oct;7(10):e1000228. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000228. Epub 2009 
Oct 27.

Recognition of lyso-phospholipids by human natural killer T lymphocytes.

Fox LM(1), Cox DG, Lockridge JL, Wang X, Chen X, Scharf L, Trott DL, Ndonye RM,
Veerapen N, Besra GS, Howell AR, Cook ME, Adams EJ, Hildebrand WH, Gumperz JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells are a subset of T lymphocytes with potent
immunoregulatory properties. Recognition of self-antigens presented by CD1d
molecules is an important route of NKT cell activation; however, the molecular
identity of specific autoantigens that stimulate human NKT cells remains unclear.
Here, we have analyzed human NKT cell recognition of CD1d cellular ligands. The
most clearly antigenic species was lyso-phosphatidylcholine (LPC). Diacylated
phosphatidylcholine and lyso-phosphoglycerols differing in the chemistry of the
head group stimulated only weak responses from human NKT cells. However,
lyso-sphingomyelin, which shares the phosphocholine head group of LPC, also
activated NKT cells. Antigen-presenting cells pulsed with LPC were capable of
stimulating increased cytokine responses by NKT cell clones and by freshly
isolated peripheral blood lymphocytes. These results demonstrate that human NKT
cells recognize cholinated lyso-phospholipids as antigens presented by CD1d.
Since these lyso-phospholipids serve as lipid messengers in normal physiological 
processes and are present at elevated levels during inflammatory responses, these
findings point to a novel link between NKT cells and cellular signaling pathways 
that are associated with human disease pathophysiology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000228 
PMCID: PMC2760207
PMID: 19859526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

