
1. Am J Chin Med. 2009;37(5):977-89.

Structural determination and antioxidant activity of a polysaccharide from the
fruiting bodies of cultured Cordyceps sinensis.

Wang Y(1), Wang M, Ling Y, Fan W, Wang Y, Yin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Biochemistry, School of Life Science and
Technology, China Pharmaceutical University, Jiangsu, China.
wangying19830511@hotmail.com

A water-soluble polysaccharide named CPS1 had been isolated from C. sinensis
mycelium by hot water extraction, ethanol precipitation, anion-exchange, and
gel-permeation chromatography. UV spectra, FTIR spectra, partial acid hydrolysis,
PMP precolumn derivation, periodate oxidation and Smith degradation studies were 
conducted to elucidate its structure. The results indicated that CPS1 was a
glucomannogalactan with the monosaccharide composition of glucose: mannose:
galactose = 2.8: 2.9: 1. The total carbohydrate content of CPS1 was 99.0%. The
weight-average molecular weight was 8.1 x 10(3) Da. The results predicted (1-->2)
and (1-->4)-linkage of mannose, (1-->3)-linkage of galactose, (1--> ) and (1-->3,
6)-linkage of glucose composed the backbone of CPS1. CPS1 was also evaluated for 
its antioxidant activity in vitro, including scavenging effects on the hydroxyl
radicals, the reducing power, Fe(2+)-chelating activity, scavenging effect on
superoxide radicals, as well as the inhibition of hydrogen peroxide induced
haemolysis. CPS1 showed a high antioxidant effect, especially scavenging effect
of hydroxyl radicals, the reducing power and Fe(2+)-chelating activity. The
results provide scientific support for the antioxidant activity and indicated a
connection between antioxidant activity and reparation of renal failure.

DOI: 10.1142/S0192415X09007387 
PMID: 19885957  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

