
1. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2010 Jul;37(7):707-16. doi:
10.1007/s10295-010-0714-9. Epub 2010 Apr 9.

Inactivation of dhaD and dhaK abolishes by-product accumulation during
1,3-propanediol production in Klebsiella pneumoniae.

Horng YT(1), Chang KC, Chou TC, Yu CJ, Chien CC, Wei YH, Soo PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory, Medicine and Biotechnology, Tzu Chi University,
College of Medicine, 701 Section 3, Zhongyang Road, Hualien 970, Taiwan, ROC.

1,3-Propanediol (1,3-PD) can be used for the industrial synthesis of a variety of
compounds, including polyesters, polyethers, and polyurethanes. 1,3-PD is
generated from petrochemical and microbial sources. 1,3-Propanediol is a typical 
product of glycerol fermentation, while acetate, lactate, 2,3-butanediol, and
ethanol also accumulate during the process. Substrate and product inhibition
limit the final concentration of 1,3-propanediol in the fermentation broth. It is
impossible to increase the yield of 1,3-propanediol by using the traditional
whole-cell fermentation process. In this study, dhaD and dhaK, the genes for
glycerol dehydrogenase and dihydroxyacetone kinase, respectively, were
inactivated by homologous recombination in Klebsiella pneumoniae. The dhaD/dhaK
double mutant (designated TC100), selected from 5,000 single or double cross
homologous recombination mutants, was confirmed as a double cross by using
polymerase chain reaction. Analysis of the cell-free supernatant with
high-performance liquid chromatography revealed elimination of lactate and
2,3-butanediol, as well as ethanol accumulation in TC100, compared with the
wild-type strain. Furthermore, 1,3-propanediol productivity was increased in the 
TC100 strain expressing glycerol dehydratase and 1,3-PDO dehydrogenase regulated 
by the arabinose P(BAD) promoter. The genetic engineering and medium formulation 
approaches used here should aid in the separation of 1,3-propanediol from
lactate, 2,3-butanediol, and ethanol and lead to increased production of
1,3-propanediol in Klebsiella pneumoniae.

DOI: 10.1007/s10295-010-0714-9 
PMID: 20379761  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

