
1. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2010 Dec;7(12):1575-9. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2010.0615. Epub
2010 Aug 14.

CTX-M-type extended-spectrum β-lactamases present in Escherichia coli from the
feces of cattle in Ohio, United States.

Wittum TE(1), Mollenkopf DF, Daniels JB, Parkinson AE, Mathews JL, Fry PR, Abley 
MJ, Gebreyes WA.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Preventive Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
43210, USA. Thomas.Wittum@cvm.osu.edu

CTX-M extended-spectrum β-lactamases are enzymes produced by bacteria that are
capable of inhibiting the antimicrobial effects of cephalosporin drugs. Recently,
the first domestically acquired Salmonella in the United States expressing
bla(CTX-M) was reported. This is a concern because expanded-spectrum
cephalosporins are the treatment of choice for invasive Gram-negative infections,
including salmonellosis in children. Because Salmonella transmission is primarily
foodborne, there is also concern that resistant enteric bacteria from livestock
can be transferred through the food supply chain to consumers. bla(CTX-M) has not
been previously identified in bacterial isolates from food animal populations in 
the United States. We report the recovery of CTX-M-type extended-spectrum
β-lactamases from fecal Escherichia coli of sick and healthy dairy cattle in
Ohio. Four individual fecal samples yielded E. coli isolates representing three
clonal strains that carried bla(CTX-M) on transferable plasmids. Two
distinguishable plasmids were identified, each encoding bla(CTX-M-1) or
bla(CTX-M-79). Transferrable bla(CTX-M) genes in bovine E. coli have the
potential to serve as a reservoir of resistance for pathogens and may represent a
public health concern.

DOI: 10.1089/fpd.2010.0615 
PMID: 20707724  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

