
1. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Dec 28;29:171. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-29-171.

Co-expression and impact of prostate specific membrane antigen and prostate
specific antigen in prostatic pathologies.

Ben Jemaa A(1), Bouraoui Y, Sallami S, Banasr A, Ben Rais N, Ouertani L, Nouira
Y, Horchani A, Oueslati R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Immunology and Microbiology Environmental and Carcinogenesis, Faculty 
of Sciences of Bizerte, 7021 Zarzouna, University of 7-November at Carthage,
Tunisia.

BACKGROUND: The present study was undertaken to relate the co-expression of
prostate-associated antigens, PSMA and PSA, with the degree of vascularization in
normal and pathologic (hyperplasia and cancer) prostate tissues to elucidate
their possible role in tumor progression.
METHODS: The study was carried out in 6 normal, 44 benign prostatic hyperplastic 
and 39 cancerous human prostates. Immunohistochemical analysis were performed
using the monoclonal antibody CD34 to determine the angiogenic activity, and the 
monoclonal antibodies 3E6 and ER-PR8 to assess PSMA and PSA expression,
respectively.
RESULTS: In our study we found that in normal prostate tissue, PSMA and PSA were 
equally expressed (3.7 ± 0.18 and 3.07 ± 0.11). A significant difference in their
expression was see in hyperplastic and neoplastic prostates tissues (16.14 ± 0.17
and 30.72 ± 0.85, respectively) for PSMA and (34.39 ± 0.53 and 17.85 ± 1.21,
respectively) for PSA. Study of prostate tumor profiles showed that the profile
(PSA+, PSMA-) expression levels decreased between normal prostate, benign
prostatic tissue and primary prostate cancer. In the other hand, the profile
(PSA-, PSMA+) expression levels increased from normal to prostate tumor tissues. 
PSMA overexpression was associated with high intratumoral angiogenesis activity. 
By contrast, high PSA expression was associated with low angiogenesis activity.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that these markers are regulated differentially
and the difference in their expression showed a correlation with malignant
transformation. With regard to the duality PSMA-PSA, this implies the
significance of their investigation together in normal and pathologic prostate
tissues.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-9966-29-171 
PMCID: PMC3023682
PMID: 21189143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

