
1. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Mar;41(3):780-6. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040851. Epub 2011 Feb 1.

Lymphotoxin-β receptor-independent development of intestinal IL-22-producing
NKp46+ innate lymphoid cells.

Satoh-Takayama N(1), Lesjean-Pottier S, Sawa S, Vosshenrich CA, Eberl G, Di Santo
JP.

Author information: 
(1)Innate Immunity Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The natural cytotoxicity receptor NKp46 is an activating receptor expressed by
several distinct innate lymphoid cell (ILC) subsets, including NK cells, some γδ 
T cells and intestinal RORγt(+) IL-22(+) cells (NCR22 cells, IL-22-producing
NKp46(+) cell). NCR22 cells may play a role in mucosal barrier function through
IL-22-mediated production of anti-bacterial peptides from intestinal epithelial
cells. Previous studies identified a predominant proportion of NCR22 cells in gut
cryptopatches (CP), lymphoid structures that are strategically positioned to
collect and integrate signals from luminal microbes; however, whether CP or other
lymphoid structures condition NCR22 cell differentiation is not known. Programmed
and inducible lymphoid tissue development requires cell-surface-expressed
lymphotoxin (LT)α(1) β(2) heterotrimers (provided by lymphoid tissue inducer
(LTi) cells) to signal lymphotoxin-β receptor (LTR)(+) stromal cells. Here, we
analyzed NCR22 cells in LTβR-deficient Ncr1(GFP/+) mice that lack organized
secondary lymphoid tissues. We found that NCR22 cells develop in the absence of
LTβR, become functionally competent and localize to the lamina propria under
steady-state conditions. Following infection of LTβR(-/-) mice with the
Gram-negative pathogen Citrobacter rodentium, IL-22 production from NCR22 cells
was not affected. These results indicate that organized lymphoid tissue
structures are not critical for the generation of an intact and fully functional 
intestinal NCR22 cell compartment.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201040851 
PMID: 21341264  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

