
1. Microb Cell Fact. 2011 Apr 11;10:22. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-10-22.

Surface display of Salmonella epitopes in Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus
carnosus.

Nhan NT(1), Gonzalez de Valdivia E, Gustavsson M, Hai TN, Larsson G.

Author information: 
(1)Vietnam Institute of Biotechnology (IBT), Vietnamese Academy of Science and
Technology (VAST), Hanoi, Vietnam.

BACKGROUND: Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis (SE) is considered to be one
of the most potent pathogenic Salmonella serotypes causing food-borne disease in 
humans. Since a live bacterial vaccine based on surface display of antigens has
many advantages over traditional vaccines, we have studied the surface display of
the SE antigenic proteins, H:gm and SefA in Escherichia coli by the
Î²-autotransporter system, AIDA. This procedure was compared to protein
translocation in Staphylococcus carnosus, using a staphylococci hybrid vector
earlier developed for surface display of other vaccine epitopes.
RESULTS: Both SefA and H:gm were translocated to the outer membrane in
Escherichia coli. SefA was expressed to full length but H:gm was shorter than
expected, probably due to a proteolytic cleavage of the N-terminal during passage
either through the periplasm or over the membrane. FACS analysis confirmed that
SefA was facing the extracellular environment, but this could not be conclusively
established for H:gm since the N-terminal detection tag (His6) was cleaved off.
Polyclonal salmonella antibodies confirmed the sustained antibody-antigen binding
towards both proteins. The surface expression data from Staphylococcus carnosus
suggested that the H:gm and SefA proteins were transported to the cell wall since
the detection marker was displayed by FACS analysis.
CONCLUSION: Apart from the accumulated knowledge and the existence of a wealth of
equipment and techniques, the results indicate the selection of E. coli for
further studies for surface expression of salmonella antigens. Surface expression
of the full length protein facing the cell environment was positively proven by
standard analysis, and the FACS signal comparison to expression in Staphylococcus
carnosus shows that the distribution of the surface protein on each cell was
comparatively very narrow in E. coli, the E. coli outer membrane molecules can
serve as an adjuvant for the surface antigenic proteins and multimeric forms of
the SefA protein were detected which would probably be positive for the
realisation of a strong antigenic property. The detection of specific and similar
proteolytic cleavage patterns for both the proteins provides a further starting
point for the investigation and development of the Escherichia coli AIDA
autotransporter efficiency.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-10-22 
PMCID: PMC3094208
PMID: 21481238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

