
1. Sci Total Environ. 1990 May 1;94(1-2):125-41.

Carcinogenic and genotoxic activity of extracts from contaminated sediments in
western Lake Ontario.

Metcalfe CD(1), Balch GC, Cairns VW, Fitzsimons JD, Dunn BP.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental and Resource Studies Program, Trent University, Peterborough,
Ontario, Canada.

In order to investigate the putative association between chemical contamination
in western Lake Ontario and high prevalences of fish tumors, sediments from
Hamilton Harbour and Oakville Creek in Lake Ontario and reference sites in
non-polluted areas of Ontario, Canada were collected and extracted for organic
contaminants. Sediment extracts from Hamilton Harbour had the highest
concentrations of polychlorinated biphenyls and organochlorine insecticides (ppb)
and contained very high concentrations of polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons
(ppm); although the levels of these compounds varied widely with sampling
location in the harbor. A sediment extract from Hamilton Harbour was mutagenic in
the Ames bacterial assay, both with and without microsomal activation. High
levels of aromatic DNA adducts were induced in cultured mouse C3H1OT1/2 cells
after in vitro exposure to Hamilton Harbour sediment extract. In two separate
carcinogenicity experiments involving a sac fry microinjection assay with rainbow
trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), Hamilton Harbour sediment extract induced
hepatocellular carcinomas in fish. No hepatic neoplasms were observed in fish
that had been treated with sediment extract from Oakville Creek, or with extract 
from a reference sediment. The significance of these results is discussed in
relation to the distribution of neoplasms in feral fish within western Lake
Ontario.

DOI: 10.1016/0048-9697(90)90368-5 
PMID: 2163105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

