
1. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2011 Sep;4(9):1426-35. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-11-0219. Epub 2011 Jun 16.

17β-estradiol and tamoxifen prevent gastric cancer by modulating leukocyte
recruitment and oncogenic pathways in Helicobacter pylori-infected INS-GAS male
mice.

Sheh A(1), Ge Z, Parry NM, Muthupalani S, Rager JE, Raczynski AR, Mobley MW,
McCabe AF, Fry RC, Wang TC, Fox JG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Comparative Medicine, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Helicobacter pylori infection promotes male predominant gastric adenocarcinoma in
humans. Estrogens reduce gastric cancer risk and previous studies showed that
prophylactic 17β-estradiol (E2) in INS-GAS mice decreases H. pylori-induced
carcinogenesis. We examined the effect of E2 and tamoxifen (TAM) on H.
pylori-induced gastric cancer in male and female INS-GAS mice. After confirming
robust gastric pathology at 16 weeks postinfection (WPI), mice were implanted
with E2, TAM, both E2 and TAM, or placebo pellets for 12 weeks. At 28 WPI,
gastric histopathology, gene expression, and immune cell infiltration were
evaluated and serum inflammatory cytokines measured. After treatment, no gastric 
cancer was observed in H. pylori-infected males receiving E2 and/or TAM, whereas 
40% of infected untreated males developed gastric cancer. E2, TAM, and their
combination significantly reduced gastric precancerous lesions in infected males 
compared with infected untreated males (P < 0.001, 0.01, and 0.01, respectively).
However, TAM did not alter female pathology regardless of infection status.
Differentially expressed genes from males treated with E2 or TAM (n = 363 and n =
144, Q < 0.05) associated highly with cancer and cellular movement, indicating
overlapping pathways in the reduction of gastric lesions. E2 or TAM deregulated
genes associated with metastasis (PLAUR and MMP10) and Wnt inhibition (FZD6 and
SFRP2). Compared with controls, E2 decreased gastric mRNA (Q < 0.05) and serum
levels (P < 0.05) of CXCL1, a neutrophil chemokine, leading to decreased
neutrophil infiltration (P < 0.01). Prevention of H. pylori-induced gastric
cancer by E2 and TAM may be mediated by estrogen signaling and is associated with
decreased CXCL1, decreased neutrophil counts, and downregulation of oncogenic
pathways.

©2011 AACR

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-11-0219 
PMCID: PMC3168115
PMID: 21680705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

