
1. Vet Microbiol. 2012 Jan 27;154(3-4):369-75. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2011.07.029.
Epub 2011 Aug 4.

Detection of virulence factors of Escherichia coli focused on prevalence of EAST1
toxin in stool of diarrheic and non-diarrheic piglets and presence of adhesion
involving virulence factors in astA positive strains.

Zajacova ZS(1), Konstantinova L, Alexa P.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Research Institute, Hudcova 70, 621 00 Brno, Czech Republic.
sramkova@vri.cz

Between 2005 and 2009, a total of 800 Escherichia coli strains isolated from
piglets with diarrhea were tested for the presence of enteroaggregative
heat-stable enterotoxin EAST1, heat-labile (LT) and heat-stable enterotoxins
(STa) and shigatoxin (Stx2e) by PCR with the purpose of investigating the present
distribution of virulence factors on swine farms in the Czech Republic. The
isolates were analyzed for their O-serogroup, fimbrial (K88, K99, 987P, F41, F18)
and nonfimbrial adhesins (adhesin involved in diffuse adherence AIDA and porcine 
attaching and effacing-associated factor PAA). The detection rates of ETEC and
STEC isolates were 36.5% and 7.75%, respectively, which implies that ETEC play
the major role in E. coli infections in Czech herds. Generally, the most common
serotype was O149:K88 which possessed genetic determinants for LT and EAST1. None
of the tested E. coli isolates was positive for genes K99, 987P and F41. It was
shown that out of 800 E. coli strains isolated from pigs, 277 were EAST1 positive
and 74% from the latter were identified as ETEC. Of the fimbrial adhesins, K88
and F18 were commonly detected. Over 80% of K88/EAST1 positive strains possessed 
the gene for paa. We detected no EAE isolate positive for fimbrial adhesins or
PAA and AIDA. The AIDA was more often associated with F18 than with K88. The gene
astA was also identified among E. coli isolates of non-diarrheic piglets. We
tested rectal swab samples collected from apparently healthy piglets on three
farms. On all farms, E. coli astA positive strains (26.66%, 90.00% and 46.66%
astA positive animals) were isolated. Our results showed a significantly higher
prevalence of astA positive E. coli isolates among apparently healthy piglets in 
comparison with diarrheic piglets. The question remains as to what is the role of
the astA gene in the pathogenesis of porcine colibacillosis and as a virulence
factor.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2011.07.029 
PMID: 21864997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

