
1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2012 Jul;90(6):630-9. doi: 10.1038/icb.2011.78. Epub 2011 Sep 
13.

Preventing and curing citrulline-induced autoimmune arthritis in a humanized
mouse model using a Th2-polarizing iNKT cell agonist.

Walker KM(1), Rytelewski M, Mazzuca DM, Meilleur SA, Mannik LA, Yue D, Brintnell 
WC, Welch I, Cairns E, Haeryfar SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Western Ontario, 
London, Ontario, Canada.

Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells are innate lymphocytes with unique
reactivity to glycolipid antigens bound to non-polymorphic CD1d molecules. They
are capable of rapidly releasing pro- and/or anti-inflammatory cytokines and
constitute attractive targets for immunotherapy of a wide range of diseases
including autoimmune disorders. In this study, we have explored the beneficial
effects of OCH, a Th2-polarizing glycolipid agonist of iNKT cells, in a humanized
mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in which citrullinated human proteins
are targeted by autoaggressive immune responses in mice expressing an RA
susceptibility human leukocyte antigen (HLA) DR4 molecule. We found for the first
time that treatment with OCH both prevents and cures citrulline-induced
autoimmune arthritis as evidenced by resolved ankle swelling and reversed
histopathological changes associated with arthritis. Also importantly, OCH
treatment blocked the arthritogenic capacity of citrullinated antigen-experienced
splenocytes without compromising their global responsiveness or altering the
proportion of splenic naturally occurring CD4(+)CD25(+)FoxP3(+) regulatory T
cells. Interestingly, administering the Th1-promoting iNKT cell glycolipid ligand
Î±-C-galactosylceramide into HLA-DR4 transgenic mice increased the incidence of
arthritis in these animals and exacerbated their clinical symptoms, strongly
suggesting a role for Th1 responses in the pathogenesis of citrulline-induced
arthritis. Therefore, our findings indicate a role for Th1-mediated
immunopathology in citrulline-induced arthritis and provide the first evidence
that iNKT cell manipulation by Th2-skewing glycolipids may be of therapeutic
value in this clinically relevant model, a finding that is potentially
translatable to human RA.

DOI: 10.1038/icb.2011.78 
PMID: 21912419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

