
1. Chin J Physiol. 2012 Feb 29;55(1):37-46. doi: 10.4077/CJP.2012.AMM107.

Anti-inflammatory effects of probiotic Lactobacillus paracasi on ventricles of
BALB/C mice treated with ovalbumin.

Wang HF(1), Tseng CY, Chang MH, Lin JA, Tsai FJ, Tsai CH, Lu YC, Lai CH, Huang
CY, Tsai CC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Nutrition, Hungkuang University, Taiwan, Republic of
China.

Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) are microorganisms that benefit animals with allergic 
diseases and intestinal disorders such as inflammatory bowel disease. We propose 
that LAB can prevent cardiomyocytes inflammation and apoptosis in BALB/c mice
using an ovalbumin (OVA)-induced allergy. Thirty-nine male BALB/c mice were
divided into five groups: normal control, allergy control and three allergy
groups each treated with Kefir I (Kefir I), Kefir II (Kefir II) or GM080 products
(GM080). The myocardial architecture and apoptotic molecules in the excised left 
ventricle from these mice were investigated and post-treatment effects were
evaluated. The inflammatory pathway, including toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4),
phospholate-Jun-N-terminal kinase (p-JNK), JNK1/2 and tumor necrosis factor-
alpha (TNF-α) and the mitochondria-dependent apoptosis phospholate-p38 (p-p38),
Bcl-2 associated agonist of cell death (Bad), Bcl-2 associated X (Bax) and
activated caspase 3, were found to be significant- ly increased in the hearts of 
allergy mice. The expression of phospholate-nuclear factor-κB (p-NFκB), TNF-α,
p-p38 and Bad protein products were reduced or retarded in the Kefir I- or
II-treated allergy group. The GM080-treated allergy group exhibited significantly
lower p-JNK, JNK1/2, phospholate- Ikappa B (p-IκB), Bax and Bad protein products 
than the Kefir I and Kefir II allergy groups. These results indicate that LAB can
reduce inflammation and prevent apoptosis of cardiomyocytes in the heart of
OVA-induced allergy mice.

DOI: 10.4077/CJP.2012.AMM107 
PMID: 22242953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

