
1. Blood. 2012 Jun 14;119(24):5731-41. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-01-404012. Epub 2012 
Apr 25.

CD1d expression on and regulation of murine hematopoietic stem and progenitor
cells.

Broxmeyer HE(1), Christopherson K, Hangoc G, Cooper S, Mantel C, Renukaradhya GJ,
Brutkiewicz RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5181, USA. hbroxmey@iupui.edu

In the present study, surface CD1d, which is involved in immune cell
interactions, was assessed for effects on hematopoiesis. Mouse BM hematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs) and hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) express CD1d. The
numbers and cycling status of HPCs in the BM and spleen of different strains of
cd1d(-/-) mice were enhanced significantly, suggesting that CD1d is a negative
regulator of HPCs. In support of this, CD1d was required for the SCF and Flt3
ligand synergistic enhancement of CSF induction of HPC colony formation and for
HPC response to myelosuppressive chemokines. Colony formation by immature subsets
of HPCs was greatly enhanced when normal, but not cd1d(-/-), BM cells were
pretreated with CD1d Abs in vitro. These effects required the full CD1d
cytoplasmic tail. In contrast, long-term, but not short-term, repopulating HSC
engraftment was impaired significantly, an effect that was minimally influenced
by the presence of a truncated CD1d cytoplasmic tail. Pretreatment of normal BM
cells with CD1d Abs greatly enhanced their engraftment of HSCs. The results of
the present study implicate CD1d in a previously unrecognized regulatory role of 
normal and stressed hematopoiesis.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2012-01-404012 
PMCID: PMC3382932
PMID: 22535665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

