
1. Biochem Soc Trans. 2012 Jun 1;40(3):561-6. doi: 10.1042/BST20120067.

Engineering oxidoreductases: maquette proteins designed from scratch.

Lichtenstein BR(1), Farid TA, Kodali G, Solomon LA, Anderson JL, Sheehan MM,
Ennist NM, Fry BA, Chobot SE, Bialas C, Mancini JA, Armstrong CT, Zhao Z, Esipova
TV, Snell D, Vinogradov SA, Discher BM, Moser CC, Dutton PL.

Author information: 
(1)Johnson Research Foundation, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics,
University of Pennsylvania, 422 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, U.S.A.
lichtenstein@gmail.com

The study of natural enzymes is complicated by the fact that only the most recent
evolutionary progression can be observed. In particular, natural oxidoreductases 
stand out as profoundly complex proteins in which the molecular roots of
function, structure and biological integration are collectively intertwined and
individually obscured. In the present paper, we describe our experimental
approach that removes many of these often bewildering complexities to identify in
simple terms the necessary and sufficient requirements for oxidoreductase
function. Ours is a synthetic biology approach that focuses on from-scratch
construction of protein maquettes designed principally to promote or suppress
biologically relevant oxidations and reductions. The approach avoids mimicry and 
divorces the commonly made and almost certainly false ascription of atomistically
detailed functionally unique roles to a particular protein primary sequence, to
gain a new freedom to explore protein-based enzyme function. Maquette design and 
construction methods make use of iterative steps, retraceable when necessary, to 
successfully develop a protein family of sturdy and versatile single-chain three-
and four-Î±-helical structural platforms readily expressible in bacteria.
Internally, they prove malleable enough to incorporate in prescribed positions
most natural redox cofactors and many more simplified synthetic analogues.
External polarity, charge-patterning and chemical linkers direct maquettes to
functional assembly in membranes, on nanostructured titania, and to organize on
selected planar surfaces and materials. These protein maquettes engage in light
harvesting and energy transfer, in photochemical charge separation and electron
transfer, in stable dioxygen binding and in simple oxidative chemistry that is
the basis of multi-electron oxidative and reductive catalysis.

DOI: 10.1042/BST20120067 
PMCID: PMC3525474
PMID: 22616867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

