
1. Vet Microbiol. 2012 Nov 9;160(1-2):141-50. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.05.017.
Epub 2012 May 22.

The intramammary efficacy of first generation cephalosporins against
Staphylococcus aureus mastitis in mice.

Demon D(1), Ludwig C, Breyne K, Guédé D, Dörner JC, Froyman R, Meyer E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Ghent University, Salisburylaan 133, 9820
Merelbeke, Belgium. Dieter.Demon@ugent.be

Staphylococcus aureus-induced mastitis in cattle causes important financial
losses in the dairy industry due to lower yield and bad milk quality. Although S.
aureus is susceptible to many antimicrobials in vitro, treatment often fails to
cure the infected udder. Hence, comprehensive evaluation of antimicrobials
against S. aureus mastitis is desirable to direct treatment strategies. The mouse
mastitis model is an elegant tool to evaluate antimicrobials in vivo while
circumventing the high costs associated with bovine experiments. An evaluation of
the antimicrobial efficacy of the intramammary (imam) applied first generation
cephalosporins cefalexin, cefalonium, cefapirin and cefazolin, was performed
using the S. aureus mouse mastitis model. In vivo determination of the effective 
dose 2log(10) (ED(2log10)), ED(4log10), protective dose 50 (PD(50)) and PD(100)
in mouse mastitis studies, support that in vitro MIC data of the cephalosporins
did not fully concur with the in vivo clinical outcome. Cefazolin was shown to be
the most efficacious first generation cephalosporin to treat S. aureus mastitis
whereas the MIC data indicate that cefalonium and cefapirin were more active in
vitro. Changing the excipient for imam application from mineral oil to miglyol
812 further improved the antimicrobial efficacy of cefazolin, confirming that the
excipient can influence the in vivo efficacy. Additionally, statistical analysis 
of the variation of S. aureus-infected, excipient-treated mice from fourteen
studies emphasizes the strength of the mouse mastitis model as a fast,
cost-effective and highly reproducible screening tool to assess the efficacy of
antimicrobial compounds against intramammary S. aureus infection.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.05.017 
PMID: 22677480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

