
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e40059. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040059. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Exposure of soil microbial communities to chromium and arsenic alters their
diversity and structure.

Sheik CS(1), Mitchell TW, Rizvi FZ, Rehman Y, Faisal M, Hasnain S, McInerney MJ, 
Krumholz LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany and Microbiology, University of Oklahoma, Norman,
Oklahoma, United States of America.

Extensive use of chromium (Cr) and arsenic (As) based preservatives from the
leather tanning industry in Pakistan has had a deleterious effect on the soils
surrounding production facilities. Bacteria have been shown to be an active
component in the geochemical cycling of both Cr and As, but it is unknown how
these compounds affect microbial community composition or the prevalence and form
of metal resistance. Therefore, we sought to understand the effects that
long-term exposure to As and Cr had on the diversity and structure of soil
microbial communities. Soils from three spatially isolated tanning facilities in 
the Punjab province of Pakistan were analyzed. The structure, diversity and
abundance of microbial 16S rRNA genes were highly influenced by the concentration
and presence of hexavalent chromium (Cr (VI)) and arsenic. When compared to
control soils, contaminated soils were dominated by Proteobacteria while
Actinobacteria and Acidobacteria (which are generally abundant in pristine soils)
were minor components of the bacterial community. Shifts in community composition
were significant and revealed that Cr (VI)-containing soils were more similar to 
each other than to As contaminated soils lacking Cr (VI). Diversity of the
arsenic resistance genes, arsB and ACR3 were also determined. Results showed that
ACR3 becomes less diverse as arsenic concentrations increase with a single OTU
dominating at the highest concentration. Chronic exposure to either Cr or As not 
only alters the composition of the soil bacterial community in general, but
affects the arsenic resistant individuals in different ways.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040059 
PMCID: PMC3386950
PMID: 22768219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

