
1. J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad. 2011 Jan-Mar;23(1):47-50.

Health impact caused by poor water and sanitation in district Abbottabad.

Jabeen S(1), Mahmood Q, Tariq S, Nawab B, Elahi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences, COMSATS Institute of Information
Technology, Abbottabad, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Large proportions of people still do not have excess to safe drinking
water and proper sanitation.
METHODS: Qualitative and quantitative approaches were used to assess the health
impacts. Random households were selected. Information was collected from
questionnaire through interview schedule method, group discussion and observation
checklist.
RESULTS: People rated water and sanitation condition in urban as: 10% very good, 
27% good, 20% bad, 43% very bad, and none of them said we don't know While in
rural areas they rated 10% very good, 36% good, 44% bad, 6% very bad, and 4% of
them said we don't know. Water sources in selected urban and rural areas were
different. 37% in urban and 68% in rural area depended on bore wells as water
source, 22% depended on hand pumps. In urban areas, the disease ratio was typhoid
20%, hepatitis 13%, diarrhoea 27%, skin infection 23%, stomach problems 53% and
allergies 33%. In rural areas, after stomach problems, diarrhoea, hepatitis and
typhoid ratio was very high as compared to urban area. In rural community, 70%
were unaware of poor water and sanitation consequences on health.
CONCLUSION: The water and sanitation condition in urban as well as in rural
community is poor but in rural community it is even worse The drinking water was 
contaminated with E. coli, Enterobacter, Salmonella and Clostridium. This
observation was correlated with prevalence of many water born diseases especially
in rural communities of Abbottabad.


PMID: 22830145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

