
1. Environ Technol. 2012 Jun;33(10-12):1255-60.

Depuration in aerated ponds of citrus processing wastewater with a high
concentration of essential oils.

Zema DA(1), Andiloro S, Bombino G, Tamburino V, Sidari R, Caridi A.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Agricultural Hydraulics and Soil Conservation, Department
ofAgro-Forestry and Environmental Sciences and Technologies (DiSTAfA),
'Mediterrranea' University of Reggio Calabria, Reggio Calabria, Italy.

Citrus processing wastewater was treated in aerated pilot plants in order to
evaluate the following: (a) energy efficiency under different air flow rates and 
times; and (b) limits of spontaneous microflora in adapting to essential oils. In
comparison to permanent air flow, night aeration for 12 hours determined an
increase of up to 12% of the monthly removal rate of chemical oxygen demand (COD)
and a consequent reduction by 10% of energy consumptions per unit of COD removed 
from 0.63 to 0.57 kWh/kg(COD). Lowering night aeration from 14 to 7 1/m3/h
reduced by only 10% the removal rate of COD; the energy consumption per unit of
COD removed (0.32 kWh/kg(COD)) was consequently reduced by more than 40%.
Dissolved oxygen was maintained at very low level, rarely exceeding 0.2 ppm, with
no bad smell. The consequent high oxygen deficit of 98-99% of saturation induced 
high oxygen transfer efficiency. The microbial population was characterized
mainly by aerobic bacteria; only 5-8% of bacteria were strictly anaerobic. In the
deep tank layer under the air diffuser a small amount of sludge settled
(0.03-0.04 kg of dry matter per kg of COD removed), containing only 3% of total
organic matter detected at the end of the depuration process. The fact that the
concentration of essential oils could be progressively increased up to 1400 ppm
without noticeably slowing down the biological processes demonstrated the
remarkable microbial adaptation.

DOI: 10.1080/09593330.2011.618938 
PMID: 22856297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

