
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48775. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048775. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Endogenous thrombospondin-1 regulates leukocyte recruitment and activation and
accelerates death from systemic candidiasis.

Martin-Manso G(1), Navarathna DH, Galli S, Soto-Pantoja DR, Kuznetsova SA, Tsokos
M, Roberts DD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of
America.

Disseminated Candida albicans infection results in high morbidity and mortality
despite treatment with existing antifungal drugs. Recent studies suggest that
modulating the host immune response can improve survival, but specific host
targets for accomplishing this goal remain to be identified. The extracellular
matrix protein thrombospondin-1 is released at sites of tissue injury and
modulates several immune functions, but its role in C. albicans pathogenesis has 
not been investigated. Here, we show that mice lacking thrombospondin-1 have an
advantage in surviving disseminated candidiasis and more efficiently clear the
initial colonization from kidneys despite exhibiting fewer infiltrating
leukocytes. By examining local and systemic cytokine responses to C. albicans and
other standard inflammatory stimuli, we identify a crucial function of phagocytes
in this enhanced resistance. Subcutaneous air pouch and systemic candidiasis
models demonstrated that endogenous thrombospondin-1 enhances the early innate
immune response against C. albicans and promotes activation of inflammatory
macrophages (inducible nitric oxide synthase⁺, IL-6(high), TNF-α(high),
IL-10(low)), release of the chemokines MIP-2, JE, MIP-1α, and RANTES, and
CXCR2-driven polymorphonuclear leukocytes recruitment. However, thrombospondin-1 
inhibited the phagocytic capacity of inflammatory leukocytes in vivo and in
vitro, resulting in increased fungal burden in the kidney and increased mortality
in wild type mice. Thus, thrombospondin-1 enhances the pathogenesis of
disseminated candidiasis by creating an imbalance in the host immune response
that ultimately leads to reduced phagocytic function, impaired fungal clearance, 
and increased mortality. Conversely, inhibitors of thrombospondin-1 may be useful
drugs to improve patient recovery from disseminated candidiasis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048775 
PMCID: PMC3492437
PMID: 23144964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

