
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49280. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049280. Epub 2012 Nov 9.

Fluorescent In Situ hybridization: a new tool for the direct identification and
detection of F. psychrophilum.

Strepparava N(1), Wahli T, Segner H, Polli B, Petrini O.

Author information: 
(1)Cantonal Institute of Microbiology, Bellinzona, Switzerland.
nicole.strepparava@bluewin.ch

F. psychrophilum is the causative agent of Bacterial Cold Water Disease (BCW) and
Rainbow Trout Fry Syndrome (RTFS). To date, diagnosis relies mainly on direct
microscopy or cultural methods. Direct microscopy is fast but not very reliable, 
whereas cultural methods are reliable but time-consuming and labor-intensive. So 
far fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) has not been used in the diagnosis
of flavobacteriosis but it has the potential to rapidly and specifically detect
F. psychrophilum in infected tissues. Outbreaks in fish farms, caused by
pathogenic strains of Flavobacterium species, are increasingly frequent and there
is a need for reliable and cost-effective techniques to rapidly diagnose
flavobacterioses. This study is aimed at developing a FISH that could be used for
the diagnosis of F. psychrophilum infections in fish. We constructed a generic
probe for the genus Flavobacterium ("Pan-Flavo") and two specific probes
targeting F. psychrophilum based on 16S rRNA gene sequences. We tested their
specificity and sensitivity on pure cultures of different Flavobacterium and
other aquatic bacterial species. After assessing their sensitivity and
specificity, we established their limit of detection and tested the probes on
infected fresh tissues (spleen and skin) and on paraffin-embedded tissues. The
results showed high sensitivity and specificity of the probes (100% and 91% for
the Pan-Flavo probe and 100% and 97% for the F. psychrophilum probe,
respectively). FISH was able to detect F. psychrophilum in infected fish tissues,
thus the findings from this study indicate this technique is suitable as a fast
and reliable method for the detection of Flavobacterium spp. and F.
psychrophilum.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049280 
PMCID: PMC3494677
PMID: 23152887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

