
1. Cell Microbiol. 2013 Jul;15(7):1154-67. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12105. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

Group B Streptococcus CovR regulation modulates host immune signalling pathways
to promote vaginal colonization.

Patras KA(1), Wang NY, Fletcher EM, Cavaco CK, Jimenez A, Garg M, Fierer J, Sheen
TR, Rajagopal L, Doran KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Microbial Sciences, San Diego State
University, San Diego, CA 92182, USA.

Streptococcus agalactiae (Group B Streptococcus, GBS) is a frequent commensal
organism of the vaginal tract of healthy women. However, GBS can transition to a 
pathogen in susceptible hosts, but host and microbial factors that contribute to 
this conversion are not well understood. GBS CovR/S (CsrR/S) is a two component
regulatory system that regulates key virulence elements including adherence and
toxin production. We performed global transcription profiling of human vaginal
epithelial cells exposed to WT, CovR deficient, and toxin deficient strains, and 
observed that insufficient regulation by CovR and subsequent increased toxin
production results in a drastic increase in host inflammatory responses,
particularly in cytokine signalling pathways promoted by IL-8 and CXCL2.
Additionally, we observed that CovR regulation impacts epithelial cell attachment
and intracellular invasion. In our mouse model of GBS vaginal colonization, we
further demonstrated that CovR regulation promotes vaginal persistence, as
infection with a CovR deficient strainresulted in a heightened host immune
response as measured by cytokine production and neutrophil activation. Using
CXCr2 KO mice, we determined that this immune alteration occurs, at least in
part, via signalling through the CXCL2 receptor. Taken together, we conclude that
CovR is an important regulator of GBS vaginal colonization and loss of this
regulatory function may contribute to the inflammatory havoc seen during the
course of infection.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12105 
PMCID: PMC3657335
PMID: 23298320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

