
1. Int J Cancer. 2013 Dec 15;133(12):2872-83. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28302. Epub 2013 Sep 
3.

Deficiency of Kruppel-like factor KLF4 in mammary tumor cells inhibits tumor
growth and pulmonary metastasis and is accompanied by compromised recruitment of 
myeloid-derived suppressor cells.

Yu F(1), Shi Y, Wang J, Li J, Fan D, Ai W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, University of South
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, SC; Department of Nutrition and Food
Hygiene, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.

Increasing evidence indicates that myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs)
negatively regulate immune responses during tumor progression, inflammation and
infection. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms of their development and 
mobilization remain to be fully delineated. Kruppel-like factor KLF4 is a
transcription factor that has an oncogenic function in breast cancer development,
but its function in tumor microenvironment, a critical component for
tumorigenesis, has not been examined. By using a spontaneously metastatic 4T1
breast cancer mouse model and an immunodeficient NOD/SCID mouse model, we
demonstrated that KLF4 knockdown delayed tumor development and inhibited
pulmonary metastasis, which accompanied by decreased accumulation of MDSCs in
bone marrow, spleens and primary tumors. Mechanistically, we found that KLF4
knockdown resulted in a significant decrease of circulating GM-CSF, an important 
cytokine for MDSC biology. Consistently, recombinant GM-CSF restored the
frequency of MDSCs in purified bone marrow cells incubated with conditioned
medium from KLF4 deficient cells. In addition, we identified CXCL5 as a critical 
mediator to enhance the expression and function of GM-CSF. Reduced CXCL5
expression by KLF4 knockdown in primary tumors and breast cancer cells was
correlated with a decreased GM-CSF expression in our mouse models. Finally, we
found that CXCL5/CXCR2 axis facilitated MDSC migration and that anti-GM-CSF
antibodies neutralized CXCL5-induced accumulation of MDSCs. Taken together, our
data suggest that KLF4 modulates maintenance of MDSCs in bone marrow by inducing 
GM-CSF production via CXCL5 and regulates recruitment of MDSCs into the primary
tumors through the CXCL5/CXCR2 axis, both of which contribute to KLF4-mediated
mammary tumor development.

Copyright Â© 2013 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.28302 
PMCID: PMC3796127
PMID: 23737434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

