
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2013 Nov;35(5):1416-20. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.08.007.
Epub 2013 Aug 20.

Dietary galactooligosaccharide affects intestinal microbiota, stress resistance, 
and performance of Caspian roach (Rutilus rutilus) fry.

Hoseinifar SH(1), Khalili M, Rostami HK, Esteban MÁ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fisheries, Faculty of Fisheries and Environmental Sciences,
Gorgan University of Agricultural Sciences and Natural Resources, Gorgan, Iran.
Electronic address: hossein.hoseinifar@gmail.com.

The aim of this study was to assess the effects of galactooligosaccharide (GOS), 
on the growth performance, stress resistance and intestinal microbiota of Caspian
roach (Rutilus rutilus) fry. Specimens (1.36 ± 0.03 g) were fed either a basal
control diet (0% GOS, non-supplemented) or the basal diet supplemented with 1%
and 2% of GOS. After 7 weeks of the feeding trials, growth factors (final weight,
weight gain, specific growth rate, condition factor and food conversion ratio) as
well as body composition, resistance to salinity stress and autochthonous
intestinal microbiota were assessed. Results demonstrated that at the end of the 
trial growth factors (final weight, weight gain, SGR, FCR) were significantly
higher in 2% GOS fed fish (P < 0.05). In addition, supplementation of GOS
significantly increased both survival rate (P < 0.05), and resistance to a
salinity stress challenge of prebiotic fed groups (P < 0.05). However, body
composition and the total autochthonous intestinal heterotrophic bacteria counts 
remained unaffected in different treatments (P > 0.05). Nevertheless,
autochthonous lactic acid bacteria levels were significantly elevated in fish fed
2% dietary GOS (P < 0.05). These results confirm that GOS improves growth
performance, stress resistance and modulates intestinal microbiota by increasing 
lactic acid bacteria of Caspian roach fry, a very important fish species in the
Caspian Sea.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.08.007 
PMID: 23973845  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

