
1. Circulation. 2014 Feb 4;129(5):598-606. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.002562.
Epub 2013 Nov 7.

Role of extracellular RNA in atherosclerotic plaque formation in mice.

Simsekyilmaz S(1), Cabrera-Fuentes HA, Meiler S, Kostin S, Baumer Y, Liehn EA,
Weber C, Boisvert WA, Preissner KT, Zernecke A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Cardiovascular Research, RWTH University Hospital
Aachen, Aachen, Germany (S.S., E.A.L.); Department of Biochemistry, Medical
School, Justus-Liebig-University, Giessen, Germany (H.A.C.-F., K.T.P.);
Department of Microbiology, Kazan Federal University, Kazan, Russian Federation
(H.A.C.-F.); Center for Cardiovascular Research, John A. Burns School of
Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI (S.M., Y.B., W.A.B.); Core Lab for
Molecular and Structural Biology, Max-Planck-Institute for Heart and Lung
Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany (S.K.); Institute for Cardiovascular Prevention,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany (C.W.); DZHK (German Centre for
Cardiovascular Research), partner site Munich Heart Alliance, Munich, Germany
(C.W., A.Z.); Rudolf Virchow Center and Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and
Pathobiochemistry, University Hospital Würzburg, University of Würzburg,
Würzburg, Germany (A.Z.); and Department of Vascular Surgery, Klinikum rechts der
Isar, Technical University, Munich, Germany (A.Z.).

Comment in
    Circulation. 2014 Oct 14;130(16):e143.
    Circulation. 2014 Oct 14;130(16):e144-5.

BACKGROUND: Atherosclerosis and vascular remodeling after injury are driven by
inflammation and mononuclear cell infiltration. Extracellular RNA (eRNA) has
recently been implicated to become enriched at sites of tissue damage and to act 
as a proinflammatory mediator. Here, we addressed the role of eRNA in high-fat
diet-induced atherosclerosis and neointima formation after injury in
atherosclerosis-prone mice.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The presence of eRNA was revealed in atherosclerotic lesions
from high-fat diet-fed low-density lipoprotein receptor-deficient (Ldlr(-/-))
mice in a time-progressive fashion. RNase activity in plasma increased within the
first 2 weeks (44±9 versus 70±7 mU/mg protein; P=0.0012), followed by a decrease 
to levels below baseline after 4 weeks of high-fat diet (44±9 versus 12±2 mU/mg
protein; P<0.0001). Exposure of bone marrow-derived macrophages to eRNA resulted 
in a concentration-dependent upregulation of the proinflammatory mediators tumor 
necrosis factor-α, arginase-2, interleukin-1β, interleukin-6, and interferon-γ.
In a model of accelerated atherosclerosis after arterial injury in apolipoprotein
E-deficient (ApoE(-/-)) mice, treatment with RNase1 diminished the increased
plasma level of eRNA evidenced after injury. Likewise, RNase1 administration
reduced neointima formation in comparison with vehicle-treated ApoE(-/-) controls
(25.0±6.2 versus 46.9±6.9×10(3) μm(2), P=0.0339) and was associated with a
significant decrease in plaque macrophage content. Functionally, RNase1 treatment
impaired monocyte arrest on activated smooth muscle cells under flow conditions
in vitro and inhibited leukocyte recruitment to injured carotid arteries in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: Because eRNA is associated with atherosclerotic lesions and
contributes to inflammation-dependent plaque progression in atherosclerosis-prone
mice, its targeting with RNase1 may serve as a new treatment option against
atherosclerosis.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.002562 
PMCID: PMC3946546
PMID: 24201302  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

