
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Apr 18;446(4):997-1001. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.03.049. Epub 2014 Mar 19.

Comparative proteome analysis of the extracellular proteins of two Haemophilus
parasuis strains Nagasaki and SW114.

Wei X(1), Cao S(2), Zhang L(1), Wen X(1), Wen Y(1), Wu R(1), Huang X(1), Huang
Y(1), Yan Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Sichuan Agricultural University, Xinkang Road,
Ya'an 625014, China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Sichuan Agricultural University, Xinkang Road,
Ya'an 625014, China. Electronic address: csanjie@gmail.com.

This study used a comparative proteomics approach to distinguish between the
two-dimensional electrophoresis profiles of extracellular proteins in Nagasaki
and SW114. Protein spots were identified using matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization tandem time-of-flight mass spectrometry. The ten proteins
unique to Nagasaki were putative adhesin AidA protein, putative extracellular
serine protease (autotransporter) (771aa), putative extracellular serine protease
(autotransporter) (780aa), protective surface antigen D15, 30S ribosomal protein 
S2, periplasmic serine protease do/hhoA-like protein, acid phosphatase, membrane 
protein, protein-disulfide isomerase, and iron ABC transporter substrate-binding 
protein. Meanwhile, the two proteins unique to SW114 were C4-dicarboxylate ABC
transporter substrate-binding protein and peptide ABC transporter
substrate-binding protein. Quantitative PCR was used to analyze the mRNA
transcript levels of three randomly selected proteins. The afuA, AidA, and ompD15
genes encoding iron ABC transporter substrate-binding protein, putative adhesin
AidA protein and protective surface antigen D15 respectively demonstrated
significantly higher mRNA transcript levels (39.606, 3.924, and 36.668,
respectively) in Nagasaki than in SW114. These observations suggest the levels of
differentially expressed proteins were directly proportional to their cellular
mRNA levels. Three virulence-related proteins, namely, putative adhesin AidA
protein, putative extracellular serine protease (autotransporter) (771aa) and
putative extracellular serine protease (autotransporter) (780aa) were identified 
in Nagasaki.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.03.049 
PMID: 24657264  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

