
1. EMBO Mol Med. 2014 Jun;6(6):810-20. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201303415. Epub 2014 Apr 6.

Fibrates ameliorate the course of bacterial sepsis by promoting neutrophil
recruitment via CXCR2.

Tancevski I(1), Nairz M(2), Duwensee K(2), Auer K(2), Schroll A(2), Heim C(2),
Feistritzer C(2), Hoefer J(3), Gerner RR(4), Moschen AR(4), Heller I(5),
Pallweber P(5), Li X(6), Theurl M(7), Demetz E(2), Wolf AM(8), Wolf D(8), Eller
P(9), Ritsch A(4), Weiss G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine VI/Infectious Diseases, Immunology,
Rheumatology, Pneumology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria
ivan.tancevski@i-med.ac.at guenter.weiss@i-med.ac.at.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine VI/Infectious Diseases, Immunology,
Rheumatology, Pneumology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.
(3)Department of Urology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine I/Gastroenterology, Endocrinology & Metabolism
Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.
(5)Department of Hygiene and Medical Microbiology, Innsbruck Medical University, 
Innsbruck, Austria.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine III/Cardiology, Innsbruck Medical University, 
Innsbruck, Austria.
(8)Department of Hematology/Oncology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine/Angiology, Medical University of Graz, Graz,
Austria.

Bacterial sepsis results in high mortality rates, and new therapeutics to control
infection are urgently needed. Here, we investigate the therapeutic potential of 
fibrates in the treatment of bacterial sepsis and examine their effects on innate
immunity. Fibrates significantly improved the survival from sepsis in mice
infected with Salmonella typhimurium, which was paralleled by markedly increased 
neutrophil influx to the site of infection resulting in rapid clearance of
invading bacteria. As a consequence of fibrate-mediated early control of
infection, the systemic inflammatory response was repressed in fibrate-treated
mice. Mechanistically, we found that fibrates preserve chemotaxis of murine
neutrophils by blocking LPS-induced phosphorylation of ERK. This results in a
decrease of G protein-coupled receptor kinase-2 expression, thereby inhibiting
the LPS-mediated downregulation of CXCR2, a chemokine receptor critical for
neutrophil recruitment. Accordingly, application of a synthetic CXCR2 inhibitor
completely abrogated the protective effects of fibrates in septicemia in vivo.
Our results unravel a novel function of fibrates in innate immunity and host
response to infection and suggest fibrates as a promising adjunct therapy in
bacterial sepsis.

Â© 2014 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY license.

DOI: 10.1002/emmm.201303415 
PMCID: PMC4203357
PMID: 24755316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

