
1. J Aquat Anim Health. 2014 Jun;26(2):66-77. doi: 10.1080/08997659.2014.886632.

Investigation of the link between broodstock infection, vertical transmission,
and prevalence of Flavobacterium psychrophilum in eggs and progeny of Rainbow
Trout and Coho Salmon.

Long A(1), Call DR, Cain KD.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Fish and Wildlife Sciences and the Aquaculture Research
Institute , University of Idaho , Post Office Box 441136, Moscow , Idaho
83844-1136 , USA.

The etiological agent of bacterial coldwater disease (BCWD), Flavobacterium
psychrophilum, can be transmitted both vertically and horizontally. Outbreaks of 
BCWD can result in significant losses in salmonid aquaculture. Reduction of
outbreaks in fry may be possible through implementation of a management strategy 
in which progeny of heavily infected broodstock are culled from the general
population. Diagnostic assays to quantify F. psychrophilum concentrations in
tissue samples and confirm presence of the bacterium in ovarian fluid have been
previously validated. In the current study, these assays were used to screen 60
female Rainbow Trout Oncorhynchus mykiss and 60 female Coho Salmon O. kisutch
broodstock at two aquaculture facilities. Eyed eggs from 10 female broodstock
(five fish from each facility) exhibiting graded levels of infection were
transferred to the University of Idaho and monitored through early life stages
for the presence of F. psychrophilum. Female Rainbow Trout broodstock were not
positive for F. psychrophilum by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and
prevalence was low in these progeny. However, ELISA optical density values for
kidney correlated to F. psychrophilum prevalence in progeny (r = 0.938, P < 0.05)
of Coho Salmon. Nested PCR on ovarian fluid was not a reliable indicator of
vertical transmission in either species as broodstock ovarian fluid results did
not correlate to F. psychrophilum prevalence in eyed eggs. Further research with 
these assays is necessary; however, results from this study indicate that
broodstock screening may be a potential tool for evaluating F. psychrophilum
infection levels, which could become an important component for disease
management.

DOI: 10.1080/08997659.2014.886632 
PMID: 24895859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

