
1. Oncogene. 2015 Apr 16;34(16):2061-71. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.153. Epub 2014 Jun 9.

PRKACA mediates resistance to HER2-targeted therapy in breast cancer cells and
restores anti-apoptotic signaling.

Moody SE(1), Schinzel AC(2), Singh S(2), Izzo F(2), Strickland MR(2), Luo L(3),
Thomas SR(4), Boehm JS(4), Kim SY(5), Wang ZC(6), Hahn WC(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA [2] Department of Medicine, Bringham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA [3] Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA,
USA.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)1] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA [2] Department of Medicine, Bringham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University, Durham,
NC, USA.
(6)1] Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA
[2] Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.

Targeting HER2 with antibodies or small molecule inhibitors in HER2-positive
breast cancer leads to improved survival, but resistance is a common clinical
problem. To uncover novel mechanisms of resistance to anti-HER2 therapy in breast
cancer, we performed a kinase open reading frame screen to identify genes that
rescue HER2-amplified breast cancer cells from HER2 inhibition or suppression. In
addition to multiple members of the MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) and
PI3K (phosphoinositide 3-kinase) signaling pathways, we discovered that
expression of the survival kinases PRKACA and PIM1 rescued cells from anti-HER2
therapy. Furthermore, we observed elevated PRKACA expression in
trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer samples, indicating that this pathway is
activated in breast cancers that are clinically resistant to
trastuzumab-containing therapy. We found that neither PRKACA nor PIM1 restored
MAPK or PI3K activation after lapatinib or trastuzumab treatment, but rather
inactivated the pro-apoptotic protein BAD, the BCl-2-associated death promoter,
thereby permitting survival signaling through BCL-XL. Pharmacological blockade of
BCL-XL/BCL-2 partially abrogated the rescue effects conferred by PRKACA and PIM1,
and sensitized cells to lapatinib treatment. These observations suggest that
combined targeting of HER2 and the BCL-XL/BCL-2 anti-apoptotic pathway may
increase responses to anti-HER2 therapy in breast cancer and decrease the
emergence of resistant disease.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2014.153 
PMCID: PMC4261061
PMID: 24909179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

