
1. J Fish Dis. 2016 Jan;39(1):1-11. doi: 10.1111/jfd.12311. Epub 2014 Oct 1.

Microencapsulation of a putative probiotic Enterobacter species, C6-6, to protect
rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum), against bacterial coldwater
disease.

Ghosh B(1), Cain KD(2), Nowak BF(1), Bridle AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Marine Conservation and Resource Sustainability,
University of Tasmania, Launceston, Tasmania, Australia.
(2)Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources and the Aquaculture Research
Institute, University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho, USA.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the causative agent of bacterial coldwater
disease (BCWD), which has a major impact on salmonid aquaculture globally. An
Enterobacter species, C6-6, isolated from the gut of rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus 
mykiss (Walbaum), has been identified as a potential probiotic species providing 
protection against BCWD. This study examined the effects of alginate
microencapsulation on the protective efficacy of C6-6 against BCWD in vivo when
administered to rainbow trout fry orally or by intraperitoneal (IP) injection.
Viable C6-6 bacteria were microencapsulated successfully, and this process
(microencapsulation) did not significantly deteriorate its protective properties 
as compared to the administration of non-microencapsulated C6-6 bacteria. Both
oral and IP delivery of C6-6 achieved significantly better protection than
control treatments that did not contain C6-6 bacteria. The highest relative
percent survival (RPS) resulted from IP delivery (71.4%) and was significantly
greater than the highest oral RPS (38.6%). Successful intestinal colonization was
not critical to protective effects of C6-6. The study showed that C6-6
administration, with or without encapsulation, was a viable choice for protecting
fry from BCWD especially when administered intraperitoneally.

Â© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.12311 
PMID: 25272249  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

