
1. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl. 2015 Jan;46:381-6. doi:
10.1016/j.msec.2014.10.035. Epub 2014 Oct 22.

Chromium-doped DLC for implants prepared by laser-magnetron deposition.

Jelinek M(1), Kocourek T(2), Zemek J(3), Mikšovský J(2), Kubinová Š(4), Remsa
J(2), Kopeček J(3), Jurek K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physics AS CR, Na Slovance 2, 182 21 Praha 8, Czech Republic;
Czech Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Biomedical Engineering, nam.
Sitna 3105, 27201 Kladno, Czech Republic. Electronic address: jelinek@fzu.cz.
(2)Institute of Physics AS CR, Na Slovance 2, 182 21 Praha 8, Czech Republic;
Czech Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Biomedical Engineering, nam.
Sitna 3105, 27201 Kladno, Czech Republic.
(3)Institute of Physics AS CR, Na Slovance 2, 182 21 Praha 8, Czech Republic.
(4)Institute of Experimental Medicine ASCR, Vídeňská 1083, 14220 Praha 4, Czech
Republic.

Diamond-like carbon (DLC) thin films are frequently used for coating of implants.
The problem of DLC layers lies in bad layer adhesion to metal implants. Chromium 
is used as a dopant for improvement of adhesion of DLC films. DLC and Cr-DLC
layers were deposited on silicon, Ti6Al4V and CoCrMo substrates by a hybrid
technology using combination of pulsed laser deposition (PLD) and magnetron
sputtering. The topology of layers was studied using SEM, AFM and mechanical
profilometer. Carbon and chromium content and concentration of trivalent and
toxic hexavalent chromium bonds were determined by XPS and WDS. It follows from
the scratch tests that Cr doping improved adhesion of DLC layers. Ethylene
glycol, diiodomethane and deionized water were used to measure the contact
angles. The surface free energy (SFE) was calculated. The antibacterial
properties were studied using Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus
bacteria. The influence of SFE, hydrophobicity and surface roughness on
antibacterial ability of doped layers is discussed.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msec.2014.10.035 
PMID: 25492001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

