
1. Mediators Inflamm. 2015;2015:132458. doi: 10.1155/2015/132458. Epub 2015 Apr 9.

Enhanced levels of chemokines and their receptors in the colon of microscopic
colitis patients indicate mixed immune cell recruitment.

Günaltay S(1), Kumawat AK(2), Nyhlin N(3), Bohr J(3), Tysk C(3), Hultgren O(4),
Hultgren Hörnquist E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Örebro University, Department of Biomedicine, School of Health and Medical
Sciences, 70182 Örebro, Sweden.
(2)Örebro University, Department of Biomedicine, School of Health and Medical
Sciences, 70182 Örebro, Sweden ; University of Glasgow, Institute of Infection,
Immunity and Inflammation, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences,
Glasgow G128TA, UK.
(3)Örebro University, Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine,
Örebro University Hospital, School of Health and Medical Sciences, 70185 Örebro, 
Sweden.
(4)Örebro University Hospital, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 70185
Örebro, Sweden.

Microscopic colitis (MC), comprising collagenous colitis (CC) and lymphocytic
colitis (LC), is a common cause of chronic diarrhea. Various immune cell
infiltrations in the epithelium and lamina propria are seen in MC
immunopathology. We compared gene and protein expressions of different immune
cell attracting chemokines and their receptors in colon biopsies from MC patients
in active disease or histopathological remission (CC/LC-HR) with controls, using 
qRT-PCR and Luminex, respectively. CC and LC patients with active disease
demonstrated a mixed chemokine profile with significantly enhanced gene and/or
protein expressions of the chemokines CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, CCL5, CCL7, CCL22, CXCL8,
CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL11, and CX3CL1 and the receptors CCR2, CCR3, CCR4, CXCR1,
CXCR2, and CX3CR1. Enhanced chemokine/chemokine receptor gene and protein levels 
in LC-HR patients were similar to LC patients, whereas CC-HR patients
demonstrated almost normalized levels. These findings expand the current
understanding of the involvement of various immune cells in MC immunopathology
and endorse chemokines as potential diagnostic markers as well as therapeutic
candidates. Moreover, this study further supports the hypothesis that CC and LC
are two different entities due to differences in their immunoregulatory
responses.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/132458 
PMCID: PMC4408624
PMID: 25948880  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

