
1. Infect Drug Resist. 2015 Jun 26;8:181-7. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S61381. eCollection
2015.

Histopathological changes induced in an animal model by potentially pathogenic
Enterococcus faecalis strains recovered from ready-to-eat food outlets in Osun
State, Nigeria.

Olawale AK(1), David OM(2), Oluyege AO(3), Osuntoyinbo RT(4), Laleye SA(5),
Famurewa O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Sciences, Osun State Polytechnic, Iree, Nigeria ;
Department of Microbiology, University of Ado-Ekiti, Ado-Ekiti, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Ado-Ekiti, Ado-Ekiti, Nigeria ;
Phytomedicine Research Centre, Department of Botany, University of Fort Hare,
Alice, South Africa.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Ado-Ekiti, Ado-Ekiti, Nigeria.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Waterford Regional Hospital, Waterford, Republic
of Ireland.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Adekunle Ajasin University, Akungba-Akoko,
Nigeria.

Enterococci have been implicated as an emerging important cause of several
diseases and multiple antibiotic resistance. However, there is little information
about the prevalence of pathogenic and/or antibiotic-resistant Enterococcus
faecalis in ready-to-eat foods in Nigeria. Here we report the pathogenic
potential of three selected antibiotic-resistant E. faecalis strains isolated
from food canteens and food outlets with different virulence determinant genes,
including EFC 12 (with gel (+), esp (+), cylA (+), and asa1 (+)), EFT 148 (with
gel (+), ace (+), and asa1 (+)), and EFS 18 (with esp (+) and cylA (+)) in an
animal model. Enterococcemia, hematological parameters, and histopathological
changes in organ tissues were examined in experimental animals. The results
showed differences in enterococcemia and hematological parameters between the
control group and experimental animal group. Enterococcemia was observed for 7
days, and the animal group infected with EFC 12 showed the highest growth rate,
followed by EFT 148, with the lowest growth rate seen in the EFS 18-infected
group. White blood cell count, packed cell volume, and platelets were
significantly reduced (P<0.05) in the experimental animals compared with the
controls. White blood cells decreased drastically during the study period in rats
challenged with EFC 12 (from 7,800 to 6,120 per mm(3)) but levels remained higher
in the control group (from 9,228 to 9,306 per mm(3)). Histopathological changes
included areas of pronounced hemorrhage, necrosis, and distortion in liver
tissues, which were more marked in rats infected with EFC 12, followed by EFT
148, then EFS 18. The results of this study suggest the presence of potentially
pathogenic E. faecalis strains in food canteens and food outlets; hence, there is
a need for strict adherence to good hygiene practices in the study area owing to 
the epidemiological significance of foods.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S61381 
PMCID: PMC4492643
PMID: 26170700 

