
1. Clin J Gastroenterol. 2014 Aug;7(4):349-54. doi: 10.1007/s12328-014-0499-x. Epub 
2014 Jun 10.

Early syphilitic hepatitis concomitant with nephrotic syndrome followed by acute 
kidney injury.

Yoshikawa K(1), Aida Y, Seki N, Miyazaki T, Itagaki M, Ishiguro H, Abe H, Sutoh
S, Sakata A, Aizawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, The Jikei University School of 
Medicine, Katsushika Medical Center, 6-41-2 Aoto, Katsushika-ku, Tokyo, 125-8506,
Japan, kyoshikawa@jikei.ac.jp.

Although acute hepatitis and nephrotic syndrome are commonly reported as
complications of tertiary syphilis, nephrotic syndrome concomitant with hepatitis
in early-stage syphilis is rare. Here, we describe the case of a 46-year-old male
who was diagnosed with acute liver dysfunction and nephrotic syndrome after
presenting with general malaise, and who subsequently developed acute kidney
injury. Laboratory examination showed alkaline phosphatase had a greater
magnitude of elevation compared to alanine aminotransferase, suggesting the
possibility of syphilitic hepatitis. The rapid plasmin regain test and Treponema 
pallidum hemagglutination assay were positive, supporting the presence of a
syphilis infection. Additionally, liver biopsy examination showed infiltration of
inflammatory cells into the portal area and epithelioid cell granulomas.
Moreover, kidney biopsy examination by both optical and electron microscopy
showed a congestion of neutrophils in the capillary vessels, structural collapse 
of the tubules, and subepithelial deposits under the epithelium of the glomerular
endothelial cells. These pathological changes were consistent with those reported
previously for early syphilitic hepatitis and nephrotic syndrome in early-stage
syphilis. All the symptoms, including liver and renal dysfunction, resolved after
benzyl penicillin treatment was initiated. Hence, we believe early-stage syphilis
should be included in the differential diagnosis of unknown liver damage and/or
nephrosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s12328-014-0499-x 
PMID: 26185887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

