
1. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 12;10(8):e0135293. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135293.
eCollection 2015.

Novel Penicillin Analogues as Potential Antimicrobial Agents; Design, Synthesis
and Docking Studies.

Ashraf Z(1), Bais A(2), Manir MM(3), Niazi U(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Allama Iqbal Open University, H-8, Islamabad,
Pakistan; Department of Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Kongju National
University, Kongju, South Korea.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Allama Iqbal Open University, H-8, Islamabad,
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Kongju National University, Gongju, Republic of
Korea.
(4)Atta ur Rehman School of Modeling and Simulation, National University of
Science and Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan.

A number of penicillin derivatives (4a-h) were synthesized by the condensation of
6-amino penicillinic acid (6-APA) with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs as
antimicrobial agents. In silico docking study of these analogues was performed
against Penicillin Binding Protein (PDBID 1CEF) using AutoDock Tools 1.5.6 in
order to investigate the antimicrobial data on structural basis. Penicillin
binding proteins function as either transpeptidases or carboxypeptidases and in
few cases demonstrate transglycosylase activity in bacteria. The excellent
antibacterial potential was depicted by compounds 4c and 4e against Escherichia
coli, Staphylococcus epidermidus and Staphylococcus aureus compared to the
standard amoxicillin. The most potent penicillin derivative 4e exhibited same
activity as standard amoxicillin against S. aureus. In the enzyme inhibitory
assay the compound 4e inhibited E. coli MurC with an IC50 value of 12.5 μM. The
docking scores of these compounds 4c and 4e also verified their greater
antibacterial potential. The results verified the importance of side chain
functionalities along with the presence of central penam nucleus. The binding
affinities calculated from docking results expressed in the form of binding
energies ranges from -7.8 to -9.2kcal/mol. The carboxylic group of penam nucleus 
in all these compounds is responsible for strong binding with receptor protein
with the bond length ranges from 3.4 to 4.4 Ǻ. The results of present work ratify
that derivatives 4c and 4e may serve as a structural template for the design and 
development of potent antimicrobial agents.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135293 
PMCID: PMC4534092
PMID: 26267242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

