
1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Aug 27;11(8):e1005126. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005126.
eCollection 2015 Aug.

Extracellular Adenosine Protects against Streptococcus pneumoniae Lung Infection 
by Regulating Pulmonary Neutrophil Recruitment.

Bou Ghanem EN(1), Clark S(1), Roggensack SE(2), McIver SR(3), Alcaide P(4),
Haydon PG(3), Leong JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Program in Molecular Microbiology, Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical
Sciences, Tufts University, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America.
(4)Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University School of
Medicine and Molecular Cardiology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

An important determinant of disease following Streptococcus pneumoniae
(pneumococcus) lung infection is pulmonary inflammation mediated by
polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs). We found that upon intratracheal challenge
of mice, recruitment of PMNs into the lungs within the first 3 hours coincided
with decreased pulmonary pneumococci, whereas large numbers of pulmonary PMNs
beyond 12 hours correlated with a greater bacterial burden. Indeed, mice that
survived infection largely resolved inflammation by 72 hours, and PMN depletion
at peak infiltration, i.e. 18 hours post-infection, lowered bacterial numbers and
enhanced survival. We investigated host signaling pathways that influence both
pneumococcus clearance and pulmonary inflammation. Pharmacologic inhibition
and/or genetic ablation of enzymes that generate extracellular adenosine (EAD)
(e.g. the ectoenzyme CD73) or degrade EAD (e.g. adenosine deaminase) revealed
that EAD dramatically increases murine resistance to S. pneumoniae lung
infection. Moreover, adenosine diminished PMN movement across endothelial
monolayers in vitro, and although inhibition or deficiency of CD73 had no
discernible impact on PMN recruitment within the first 6 hours after
intratracheal inoculation of mice, these measures enhanced PMN numbers in the
pulmonary interstitium after 18 hours of infection, culminating in dramatically
elevated numbers of pulmonary PMNs at three days post-infection. When assessed at
this time point, CD73-/- mice displayed increased levels of cellular factors that
promote leukocyte migration, such as CXCL2 chemokine in the murine lung, as well 
as CXCR2 and Î²-2 integrin on the surface of pulmonary PMNs. The enhanced
pneumococcal susceptibility of CD73-/- mice was significantly reversed by PMN
depletion following infection, suggesting that EAD-mediated resistance is largely
mediated by its effects on PMNs. Finally, CD73-inhibition diminished the ability 
of PMNs to kill pneumococci in vitro, suggesting that EAD alters both the
recruitment and bacteriocidal function of PMNs. The EAD-pathway may provide a
therapeutic target for regulating potentially harmful inflammatory host responses
during Gram-positive bacterial pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005126 
PMCID: PMC4552087
PMID: 26313746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

