
1. Stroke. 2015 Oct;46(10):2916-25. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.010620. Epub 2015 Sep
3.

Role of Neutrophils in Exacerbation of Brain Injury After Focal Cerebral Ischemia
in Hyperlipidemic Mice.

Herz J(1), Sabellek P(2), Lane TE(2), Gunzer M(2), Hermann DM(2), Doeppner TR(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Neurology (J.H., P.S., D.M.H., T.R.D.), Department of
Pediatrics I (J.H.), and Institute of Experimental Immunology and Imaging,
University Duisburg-Essen (M.G.), University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany; and 
Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Pathology, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City (T.E.L.). josephine.herz@uk-essen.de
thorsten.doeppner@uk-essen.de.
(2)From the Department of Neurology (J.H., P.S., D.M.H., T.R.D.), Department of
Pediatrics I (J.H.), and Institute of Experimental Immunology and Imaging,
University Duisburg-Essen (M.G.), University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany; and 
Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Pathology, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City (T.E.L.).

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Inflammation-related comorbidities contribute to
stroke-induced immune responses and brain damage. We previously showed that
hyperlipidemia exacerbates ischemic brain injury, which is associated with
elevated peripheral and cerebral granulocyte numbers. Herein, we evaluate the
contribution of neutrophils to the exacerbation of ischemic brain injury.
METHODS: Wild-type mice fed with a normal chow and ApoE knockout mice fed with a 
high cholesterol diet were exposed to middle cerebral artery occlusion. CXCR2 was
blocked using the selective antagonist SB225002 (2 mg/kg) or neutralizing CXCR2
antiserum. Neutrophils were depleted using an anti-Ly6G antibody. At 72 hours
post ischemia, immunohistochemistry, flow cytometry, and real-time polymerase
chain reaction were performed to determine cerebral tissue injury and immunologic
changes in the blood, bone marrow, and brain. Functional outcome was assessed by 
accelerated rota rod and tight rope tests at 4, 7, and 14 days post ischemia.
RESULTS: CXCR2 antagonization reduced neurological deficits and infarct volumes
that were exacerbated in hyperlipidemic ApoE-/- mice. This effect was mimicked by
neutrophil depletion. Cerebral neutrophil infiltration and peripheral
neutrophilia, which were increased on ischemia in hyperlipidemia, were attenuated
by CXCR2 antagonization. This downscaling of neutrophil responses was associated 
with increased neutrophil apoptosis and reduced levels of CXCR2, inducible nitric
oxide synthase, and NADPH oxidase 2 expression on bone marrow neutrophils.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate a role of neutrophils in the exacerbation of
ischemic brain injury induced by hyperlipidemia. Accordingly, CXCR2 blockade,
which prevents neutrophil recruitment into the brain, might be an effective
option for stroke treatment in patients with hyperlipidemia.

Â© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.010620 
PMCID: PMC4589522
PMID: 26337969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

