
1. J Bacteriol. 2015 Nov;197(22):3616-24. doi: 10.1128/JB.00631-15. Epub 2015 Sep 8.

Characterization of 3'-Phosphate RNA Ligase Paralogs RtcB1, RtcB2, and RtcB3 from
Myxococcus xanthus Highlights DNA and RNA 5'-Phosphate Capping Activity of RtcB3.

Maughan WP(1), Shuman S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Molecular Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York, USA 
shuman@ski.mskcc.org.

Escherichia coli RtcB exemplifies a family of GTP-dependent RNA repair/splicing
enzymes that join 3'-PO4 ends to 5'-OH ends via stable RtcB-(histidinyl-N)-GMP
and transient RNA3'pp5'G intermediates. E. coli RtcB also transfers GMP to a DNA 
3'-PO4 end to form a stable "capped" product, DNA3'pp5'G. RtcB homologs are found
in a multitude of bacterial proteomes, and many bacteria have genes encoding two 
or more RtcB paralogs; an extreme example is Myxococcus xanthus, which has six
RtcBs. In this study, we purified, characterized, and compared the biochemical
activities of three M. xanthus RtcB paralogs. We found that M. xanthus RtcB1
resembles E. coli RtcB in its ability to perform intra- and intermolecular
sealing of a HORNAp substrate and capping of a DNA 3'-PO4 end. M. xanthus RtcB2
can splice HORNAp but has 5-fold-lower RNA ligase specific activity than RtcB1.
In contrast, M. xanthus RtcB3 is distinctively feeble at ligating the HORNAp
substrate, although it readily caps a DNA 3'-PO4 end. The novelty of M. xanthus
RtcB3 is its capacity to cap DNA and RNA 5'-PO4 ends to form GppDNA and GppRNA
products, respectively. As such, RtcB3 joins a growing list of enzymes (including
RNA 3'-phosphate cyclase RtcA and thermophilic ATP-dependent RNA ligases) that
can cap either end of a polynucleotide substrate. GppDNA formed by RtcB3 can be
decapped to pDNA by the DNA repair enzyme aprataxin.IMPORTANCE: RtcB enzymes
comprise a widely distributed family of RNA 3'-PO4 ligases distinguished by their
formation of 3'-GMP-capped RNAppG and/or DNAppG polynucleotides. The mechanism
and biochemical repertoire of E. coli RtcB are well studied, but it is unclear
whether its properties apply to the many bacteria that have genes encoding
multiple RtcB paralogs. A comparison of the biochemical activities of three M.
xanthus paralogs, RtcB1, RtcB2, and RtcB3, shows that not all RtcBs are created
equal. The standout findings concern RtcB3, which is (i) inactive as an RNA
3'-PO4 ligase but adept at capping a DNA 3'-PO4 end and (ii) able to cap DNA and 
RNA 5'-PO4 ends to form GppDNA and GppRNA, respectively. The GppDNA and GppRNA
capping reactions are novel nucleic acid modifications.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00631-15 
PMCID: PMC4621082
PMID: 26350128  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

