
1. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 29;10(10):e0141297. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141297.
eCollection 2015.

Solution Structural Studies of GTP:Adenosylcobinamide-Phosphateguanylyl
Transferase (CobY) from Methanocaldococcus jannaschii.

Singarapu KK(1), Otte MM(2), Tonelli M(3), Westler WM(3), Escalante-Semerena
JC(2), Markley JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Magnetic Resonance Facility at Madison and Department of
Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States 
of America; Center for NMR and Structural Chemistry, CSIR-Indian Institute of
Chemical Technology, Tarnaka, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, United
States of America.
(3)National Magnetic Resonance Facility at Madison and Department of
Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States 
of America.

GTP:adenosylcobinamide-phosphate (AdoCbi-P) guanylyl transferase (CobY) is an
enzyme that transfers the GMP moiety of GTP to AdoCbi yielding AdoCbi-GDP in the 
late steps of the assembly of Ado-cobamides in archaea. The failure of repeated
attempts to crystallize ligand-free (apo) CobY prompted us to explore its 3D
structure by solution NMR spectroscopy. As reported here, the solution structure 
has a mixed α/β fold consisting of seven β-strands and five α-helices, which is
very similar to a Rossmann fold. Titration of apo-CobY with GTP resulted in large
changes in amide proton chemical shifts that indicated major structural
perturbations upon complex formation. However, the CobY:GTP complex as followed
by 1H-15N HSQC spectra was found to be unstable over time: GTP hydrolyzed and the
protein converted slowly to a species with an NMR spectrum similar to that of
apo-CobY. The variant CobYG153D, whose GTP complex was studied by X-ray
crystallography, yielded NMR spectra similar to those of wild-type CobY in both
its apo- state and in complex with GTP. The CobYG153D:GTP complex was also found 
to be unstable over time.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141297 
PMCID: PMC4626045
PMID: 26513744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

