
1. Drug Metab Dispos. 2016 Apr;44(4):495-504. doi: 10.1124/dmd.115.068486. Epub 2016
Feb 3.

CYP267A1 and CYP267B1 from Sorangium cellulosum So ce56 are Highly Versatile Drug
Metabolizers.

Kern F(1), Khatri Y(1), Litzenburger M(1), Bernhardt R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saarland University, Saarbruecken, Germany.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Saarland University, Saarbruecken, Germany
ritabern@mx.uni-saarland.de.

The guidelines of the Food and Drug Administration and International Conference
on Harmonization have highlighted the importance of drug metabolites in clinical 
trials. As a result, an authentic source for their production is of great
interest, both for their potential application as analytical standards and for
required toxicological testing. Since we have previously shown promising
biotechnological potential of cytochromes P450 from the soil bacterium Sorangium 
cellulosum So ce56, herein we investigated the CYP267 family and its application 
for the conversion of commercially available drugs including nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory, antitumor, and antihypotensive drugs. The CYP267 family,
especially CYP267B1, revealed the interesting ability to convert a broad range of
substrates. We established substrate-dependent extraction protocols and also
optimized the reaction conditions for the in vitro experiments and Escherichia
coli-based whole-cell bioconversions. We were able to detect activity of CYP267A1
toward seven out of 22 drugs and the ability of CYP267B1 to convert 14 out of 22 
drugs. Moderate to high conversions (up to 85% yield) were observed in our
established whole-cell system using CYP267B1 and expressing the autologous redox 
partners, ferredoxin 8 and ferredoxin-NADP(+) reductase B. With our existing
setup, we present a system capable of producing reasonable quantities of the
human drug metabolites 4'-hydroxydiclofenac, 2-hydroxyibuprofen, and omeprazole
sulfone. Due to the great potential of converting a broad range of substrates,
wild-type CYP267B1 offers a wide scope for the screening of further substrates,
which will draw further attention to future biotechnological usage of CYP267B1
from S. cellulosum So ce56.

Copyright Â© 2016 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/dmd.115.068486 
PMID: 26842594  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

