
1. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2017 Jan;61(1). doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201600252. Epub 2016 Sep 20.

Gut microbiota, diet, and obesity-related disorders-The good, the bad, and the
future challenges.

Portune KJ(1), Benítez-Páez A(1), Del Pulgar EM(1), Cerrudo V(1), Sanz Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Ecology, Nutrition and Health Research Unit, Institute of
Agrochemistry and Food Technology, Spanish National Research Council, Valencia
(IATA-CSIC), C/ Catedràtic Agustín Escardino Benlloch, 7, Valencia, Spain.

Diet has been shown to be a major factor in modulating the structure of the
mammalian gut microbiota by providing specific nutrient sources and inducing
environmental changes (pH, bile acids) in the gut ecosystem. Long-term dietary
patterns and short-term interventions have been shown to induce changes in gut
microbiota structure and function, with several studies revealing metabolic
changes likely resulting from the host microbiota cross-talk, which ultimately
could influence host physiology. However, a more precise identification of the
specific dietary patterns and food constituents that effectively modulate the gut
microbiota and bring a predictable benefit to the host metabolic phenotype is
needed to establish microbiome-based dietary recommendations. Here, we briefly
review the existing data regarding gut microbiota changes induced by different
macronutrients and the resulting metabolites produced via their respective
fermentation, including their potential effects on obesity and associated
metabolic disorders. We also discuss major limitations of current dietary
intervention studies as well as future needs of applying cutting-edge "omic"
techniques and of progressing in functional microbiota gene discovery to
establish robust causal relationships between the dietary microbiota induced
changes and metabolic health or disease.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/mnfr.201600252 
PMID: 27287778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

