
1. Med J Armed Forces India. 2003 Jul;59(3):189-93. doi:
10.1016/S0377-1237(03)80003-5. Epub 2011 Jul 21.

Cryptococcal Meningitis: A Clinicopathological Account of Seven Cases Encountered
in a Military Setting.

Kapila K(1), Sharma YV(2), Kotwal J(3), Banerjee A(4), Kaur J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Associate Professor, Department of Microbiology, Armed Forces Medical College,
Pune - 411 040.
(2)Commandant, Military Hospital, Ambala Cantt - 133 001.
(3)Classified Specialist (Pathology), Armed Forces Transfusion Centre, Delhi
Cantt - 110 010.
(4)Classified Specialist (Medicine and Neurology), INHS Asvini, Pune - 411 040.
(5)Reader, Department of Forensic Medicine, Armed Forces Medical College, Pune - 
411 040.

The clinicopathological profile of 7 cases of Cryptococcal meningitis encountered
over one year period in a military hospital has been described. Severe persistent
headache was the main form of presentation followed by features of progressive
ill-health. Age range of cases was 34-55 years (mean 40.8 years). All were males 
and 6 were serving soldiers. Duration of symptoms ranged from 10 days to 6 weeks.
Six patients were positive for HIV-1 antibodies. This was the initial
presentation of AIDS in 6 patients accounting for 10.34% among all cases of HIV
infection during that year. Both clinical and laboratory findings were subtle.
Nuchal rigidity was rare, cerebro spinal fluid (CSF) cell count and protein level
was normal in 3 out of 7 cases. Although culture for Cryptococcus was positive in
all, it took 10 days to grow in 2 cases. India-ink stain showed scanty number of 
organisms in 3 cases. Low cell counts in CSF and presence of associated
hyponatremia appear to be bad prognostic indicators in Cryptococcal infections of
central nervous system. Latex agglutination test is a worthwhile screening test.

DOI: 10.1016/S0377-1237(03)80003-5 
PMCID: PMC4923687
PMID: 27407512 

