
1. Oncogene. 2017 Apr;36(15):2095-2104. doi: 10.1038/onc.2016.367. Epub 2016 Oct 10.

CXCL2/MIF-CXCR2 signaling promotes the recruitment of myeloid-derived suppressor 
cells and is correlated with prognosis in bladder cancer.

Zhang H(1)(2)(3), Ye YL(1)(2)(4), Li MX(5), Ye SB(1)(2)(3), Huang WR(5), Cai
TT(1)(2)(3), He J(3), Peng JY(3), Duan TH(6), Cui J(6), Zhang XS(1)(2)(3), Zhou
FJ(1)(2)(4), Wang RF(7)(8), Li J(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Collaborative Innovation Center of Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Biotherapy, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Urology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Medical Reprogramming Technology, Shenzhen Second People's
Hospital, First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.
(6)Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the Ministry of Education, State Key
Laboratory of Biocontrol, College of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, China.
(7)Center for Inflammation and Epigenetics, Houston Methodist Research Institute,
Houston, TX, USA.
(8)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College,
Cornell University, New York, NY, USA.

The accumulation of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) has been observed in
solid tumors and is correlated with tumor progression; however, the underlying
mechanism is still poorly understood. In this study, we identified a mechanism by
which tumor cells induce MDSC accumulation and expansion in the bladder cancer
(BC) microenvironment via CXCL2/MIF-CXCR2 signaling. Elevated expression of CXCL2
and MIF and an increased number of CD33+ MDSCs were detected in BC tissues, and
these increases were significantly associated with advanced disease stage and
poor patient prognosis (P<0.01). A positive association was observed between
CXCL2 or MIF expression and the number of tumor-infiltrating CD33+ MDSCs
(P<0.01). Subsequently, we demonstrated that CD45+CD33+CD11b+HLA-DR- MDSCs from
fresh BC tissues displayed high levels of suppressive molecules, including Arg1, 
iNOS, ROS, PDL-1 and P-STAT3, and stronger suppression of T-cell proliferation.
Interestingly, these CD45+CD33+CD11b+HLA-DR- MDSCs exhibited increased CXCR2
expression compared with that in peripheral blood from BC patients or healthy
controls (P<0.05). Chemotaxis assay revealed that bladder cancer cell line J82
induced MDSC migration via CXCL2/MIF-CXCR2 signaling in vitro. Mechanistic
studies demonstrated that J82-induced MDSC trafficking and CXCR2 expression were 
associated with increased phosphorylation of p38, ERK and p65. Conversely,
inhibition of the phosphorylation of p38, ERK or p65 decreased J82-induced MDSC
trafficking and CXCR2 expression. CXCL2/MIF-stimulated activation of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase and nuclear factor kappa B pathways in MDSCs was
MyD88 dependent. Overall, our results identify the CXCL2/MIF-CXCR2 axis as an
important mediator in MDSC recruitment and as predictors and potential
therapeutic targets in BC patients.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2016.367 
PMID: 27721403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

