
1. PLoS One. 2016 Oct 20;11(10):e0165247. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0165247.
eCollection 2016.

Phenotype and Function of CD209+ Bovine Blood Dendritic Cells,
Monocyte-Derived-Dendritic Cells and Monocyte-Derived Macrophages.

Park KT(1)(2), ElNaggar MM(1)(3), Abdellrazeq GS(1)(3), Bannantine JP(4), Mack
V(1), Fry LM(1)(5), Davis WC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA 99164, United States of America.
(2)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul
National University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Alexandria
University, Egypt.
(4)USDA, ARS, National Animal Disease Center, Ames, Iowa, United States of
America.
(5)USDA, ARS, Animal Disease Research Unit, Pullman, WA 99164, United States of
America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2017 Jan 25;12 (1):e0171059.

Phylogenic comparisons of the mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS) of humans and
mice demonstrate phenotypic divergence of dendritic cell (DC) subsets that play
similar roles in innate and adaptive immunity. Although differing in phenotype,
DC can be classified into four groups according to ontogeny and function:
conventional DC (cDC1 and cDC2), plasmacytoid DC (pDC), and monocyte derived DC
(MoDC). DC of Artiodactyla (pigs and ruminants) can also be sub-classified using 
this system, allowing direct functional and phenotypic comparison of MoDC and
other DC subsets trafficking in blood (bDC). Because of the high volume of blood 
collections required to study DC, cattle offer the best opportunity to further
our understanding of bDC and MoDC function in an outbred large animal species. As
reported here, phenotyping DC using a monoclonal antibody (mAb) to CD209 revealed
CD209 is expressed on the major myeloid population of DC present in blood and
MoDC, providing a phenotypic link between these two subsets. Additionally, the
present study demonstrates that CD209 is also expressed on monocyte derived
macrophages (MoΦ). Functional analysis revealed each of these populations can
take up and process antigens (Ags), present them to CD4 and CD8 T cells, and
elicit a T-cell recall response. Thus, bDC, MoDC, and MoΦ pulsed with pathogens
or candidate vaccine antigens can be used to study factors that modulate
DC-driven T-cell priming and differentiation ex vivo.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0165247 
PMCID: PMC5072659
PMID: 27764236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

