
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 May 5;45(8):4708-4721. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw1018.

The RNA ligase RtcB reverses MazF-induced ribosome heterogeneity in Escherichia
coli.

Temmel H(1), Müller C(1), Sauert M(1), Vesper O(1), Reiss A(2), Popow J(2),
Martinez J(2), Moll I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Center for Molecular Biology, Department of
Microbiology, Immunobiology and Genetics, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter 
(VBC), Dr Bohr-Gasse 9/4, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
(IMBA), Vienna Biocenter (VBC), A-1030 Vienna, Austria and Max F. Perutz
Laboratories, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Dr Bohr-Gasse 9/4, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

When Escherichia coli encounters stress, the endoribonuclease MazF initiates a
post-transcriptional response that results in the reprogramming of protein
synthesis. By removing the 3΄-terminus of the 16S rRNA, MazF generates
specialized ribosomes that selectively translate mRNAs likewise processed by
MazF. Given the energy required for de novo ribosome biosynthesis, we considered 
the existence of a repair mechanism operating upon stress relief to recycle the
modified ribosomes. Here, we show that the stress-ribosomes and the 3΄-terminal
16S rRNA fragment are stable during adverse conditions. Moreover, employing in
vitro and in vivo approaches we demonstrate that the RNA ligase RtcB catalyzes
the re-ligation of the truncated 16S rRNA present in specialized ribosomes
Thereby their ability to translate canonical mRNAs is fully restored. Together,
our findings not only provide a physiological function for the RNA ligase RtcB in
bacteria but highlight the reversibility of ribosome heterogeneity, a crucial but
hitherto undescribed concept for translational regulation.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw1018 
PMCID: PMC5416887
PMID: 27789694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

