
1. Acta Clin Belg. 2017 Apr;72(2):91-94. doi: 10.1080/17843286.2016.1249999. Epub
2016 Oct 31.

Evaluation of a new automated microscopy urine sediment analyser - sediMAX
conTRUST®.

Bogaert L(1), Peeters B(1), Billen J(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Laboratory Medicine , University Hospitals Leuven , Leuven ,
Belgium.

This study evaluated the performance of the stand-alone sediMAX conTRUST
(77Elektronika, Budapest, Hungary) analyser as an alternative to microscopic
analysis of urine. The validation included a precision, carry-over, categorical
correlation and diagnostic performance study with manual phase-contrast
microscopy as reference method. A total of 260 routine urine samples were
assessed. The within-run precision was much better at higher concentrations than 
at very low concentrations. The precision met our predefined limits for all the
elements at the different concentrations, with the exception of the lowest RBC,
the WBC, pathological casts and crystals count. There was no sample carry-over.
The analyser showed good categorical agreement with manual microscopy for RBC and
WBC counts, moderate agreement for yeast cells, crystals and squamous epithelial 
cells and bad agreement for non-squamous epithelial cells, bacteria and casts.
Diagnostic performance was satisfying only for RBC, WBC and yeast cells. The
number of false negative results was acceptable (≤4%) for all elements after
connecting the sediMAX conTRUST with an automatic strip reader (AutionMAX) and
after implementation of review rules. We conclude that the sediMAX conTRUST
should be used as a screening tool in combination with an automatic strip reader,
for the identification of normal samples. Therefore, adequate review rules should
be defined. Manual microscopy is still required in 'flagged' pathological
samples. Despite the poor analytical performance on pathological samples, the
images on the screen can be used for interpretation without the microscope and
can be stored as PDF-documents for archiving the results.

DOI: 10.1080/17843286.2016.1249999 
PMID: 27796180  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

