
1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2017 Feb 1;364(3). doi: 10.1093/femsle/fnw286.

Pseudomonas baetica: pathogenicity for marine fish and development of protocols
for rapid diagnosis.

López JR, Lorenzo L, Marcelino-Pozuelo C, Marin-Arjona MC, Navas JI.

Pseudomonas baetica is a pathogen isolated in 2012 from wedge sole
(Dicologoglossa cuneata). The aims of this study were (i) to determine the
influence of temperature on its virulence, and (ii) to develop specific protocols
for rapid diagnosis. Virulence assays carried out by bath using Senegalese sole
fry showed that virulence is strongly influenced by temperature: LD50 at 14°C was
8.5 × 105 cfu ml-1 while at 20°C no mortalities were recorded. On the other hand,
the high mortality rates observed in virulence assays involving intraperitoneal
injection of 2.5 × 105 cfu g-1 suggest that P. baetica may be pathogenic for the 
five fish species tested (wedge sole, Senegalese sole, sea bream, European sea
bass and meagre). Two PCR protocols, using specific primers targeting the gyrB
and rpoD genes, were developed for rapid diagnosis from pure cultures. An
additional protocol, using both primer sets, was also optimized for detection
from fish tissue samples. Specificity was tested using 81 strains from 66
bacterial species, taxonomically and/or ecologically related; only the P. baetica
strains showed the expected DNA amplicons. A specific dot-blot assay using
polyclonal antibodies was also developed for differentiation of P. baetica from
related species. Altogether, the protocols described here will constitute useful 
tools for diagnosis and clarify the relevance of this pathogen.

© FEMS 2016. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/femsle/fnw286 
PMID: 28011698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

