
1. Biochemistry. 1987 Aug 25;26(17):5433-9.

Affinity labeling of Escherichia coli phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase at the binding
site for tRNAPhe.

Hountondji C(1), Schmitter JM, Beauvallet C, Blanquet S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie, Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France.

Periodate-oxidized tRNA(Phe) (tRNA(oxPhe)) behaves as a specific affinity label
of tetrameric Escherichia coli phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase (PheRS). Reaction of 
the alpha 2 beta 2 enzyme with tRNA(oxPhe) results in the loss of tRNAPhe
aminoacylation activity with covalent attachment of 2 mol of tRNA dialdehyde/mol 
of enzyme, in agreement with the stoichiometry of tRNA binding. Sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis analysis of the PheRS-[14C]tRNA(oxPhe)
covalent complex indicates that the large (alpha, Mr 87K) subunit of the enzyme
interacts with the 3'-adenosine of tRNA(oxPhe). The [14C]tRNA-labeled
chymotryptic peptides of PheRS were purified by both gel filtration and
reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography. The radioactivity was
almost equally distributed among three peptides: Met-Lys[Ado]-Phe,
Ala-Asp-Lys[Ado]-Leu, and Lys-Ile-Lys[Ado]-Ala. These sequences correspond to
residues 1-3, 59-62, and 104-107, respectively, in the N-terminal region of the
795 amino acid sequence of the alpha subunit. It is noticeable that the labeled
peptide Ala-Asp-Lys-Leu is adjacent to residues 63-66 (Arg-Val-Thr-Lys). The
latter sequence was just predicted to resemble the proposed consensus tRNA CCA
binding region Lys-Met-Ser-Lys-Ser, as deduced from previous affinity labeling
studies on E. coli methionyl- and tyrosyl-tRNA synthetases [Hountondji, C.,
Dessen, P., & Blanquet, S. (1986) Biochimie 68, 1071-1078].

DOI: 10.1021/bi00391a033 
PMID: 2823880  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

