
1. J Contemp Dent Pract. 2017 Apr 1;18(4):312-316.

Good Bugs vs Bad Bugs: Evaluation of Inhibitory Effect of Selected Probiotics
against Enterococcus faecalis.

Bohora AA(1), Kokate SR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Conservative Dentistry and Endodontics Siddhpur Dental College &
Hospital, Siddhpur, Gujarat, India, Phone: +919766787431, e-mail:
aarti24aab@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Conservative Dentistry and Endodontics YMT Ayurvedic Medical
College, Hospital & PG Institute, Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

INTRODUCTION: The main goal of endodontics is the prevention of apical
periodontitis. This is due to the presence of persistent pathogenic
microorganisms, such as Enterococcus faecalis, and its ability to directly cause 
acute and chronic inflammation in the periapical tissues. Lactobacillus has been 
shown to promote health in the intestines as well as to inhibit the growth of
certain problematic oral bacteria. This study explores shifting the established
paradigm of endodontic treatment, which has focused on eliminating all bacteria
from the canal system and on elimination of the problematic bacteria through
introducing probiotics. A preliminary work was performed to evaluate the possible
effectiveness of probiotics in preventing the growth of E. faecalis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two probiotic cultures Lactobacillus plantarum ATCC 8041
and Lactobacillus rhamnosus ATCC 7408 were selected to check their antimicrobial 
activity against E. faecalis ATCC 29212 by two methods: agar cup/well diffusion
method and deferred antagonism test. Agar cup method: A total of 0.5 mL of
requisite test pathogen culture was inoculated into 20 mL of molten sterile
Mueller and Hinton agar and cooled to 45 ± 2°C. Circular wells of diameter 10 mm 
were punched in each of the poured plates. Appropriately diluted test samples
were added to the above-punched wells. The plates were incubated upright position
at 37°C for 24 hours in aerobic conditions. Postincubation, zone of inhibition
was measured. The cell-free supernatant of Lactobacillus species was also
evaluated for antimicrobial activity. Deferred antagonism test: The test
probiotic strain was standardized to 0.1 optical density (OD) at 600 nm and
inoculated in a 1 cm wide diametric streak across the surface of trypticase soy
agar + yeast extract + calcium carbonate (TSYCa) agar using a sterile cotton
swab. Then, the plate agar containing the test strain was incubated at 37°C for
24 hours under aero-philic condition and then standardized to 0.1 OD at 600 nm
for overnight (18 hours, 37°C). A purified culture of indicator strain (pathogen)
was streaked at right angles to the line of original producer growth.
Postincubation plates were observed for the inhibition zone width of the
indicator strain.
RESULTS: Under the conditions of this study, Lactobacilli had an inhibitory
effect on the growth of E. faecalis by agar cup method but not by deferred
antagonism test.
CONCLUSION: This pilot study demonstrated that probiotics show a potential in
root canal therapy.
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: If probioitcs are effective against end-odontic pathogens,
they can be potentially used as intracanal medicaments. This will be a novel
concept of introducing bac-teriotherapy in endodontics and replacing pathogenic
bacteria by healthy bacteria, normal flora.

DOI: 10.5005/jp-journals-10024-2037 
PMID: 28349910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

