
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jul 12;7(1):5263. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-05662-w.

Vertically and horizontally transmitted microbial symbionts shape the gut
microbiota ontogenesis of a skin-mucus feeding discus fish progeny.

Sylvain FÉ(1), Derome N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de biologie intégrative et des systèmes, Université Laval, Biology
Department, 1030, avenue de la Médecine, Quebec (QC), Canada, G1V 0A6.
(2)Institut de biologie intégrative et des systèmes, Université Laval, Biology
Department, 1030, avenue de la Médecine, Quebec (QC), Canada, G1V 0A6.
nicolas.derome@bio.ulaval.ca.

Fish gut microbial communities play key functions for their hosts, but their
ontogenesis is poorly understood. Recent studies on the zebrafish suggest that
gut symbionts are recruited naturally through horizontal transmission from
environmental water. We used an alternative fish model, the discus (Symphysodon
aequifasciata), to identify the main factors driving fish gut microbiota
ontogenesis. The discus exhibits a unique parenting behavior: both discus parents
vertically feed their fry with a cutaneous mucus secretion during three weeks
post-hatching. We hypothesized that vertical microbial transmission via parental 
mucus feeding, along with horizontal transmission of environmental microbial
symbionts, helps to shape the taxonomic structure of the discus fry gut
microbiota. To assess this premise, we thoroughly documented the gut microbiota
ontogenesis of a discus progeny during 100 days post-hatching. The V4 16S rRNA
gene was sequenced to assess taxonomic structure of fry gut, parent mucus, and
water samples. Our main results suggest that specific microbial symbionts both
from the parents skin mucus and environmental water play important roles in
shaping the structure of the fry gut microbiota.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-05662-w 
PMCID: PMC5507859
PMID: 28701764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

