
1. PLoS Pathog. 2017 Aug 17;13(8):e1006513. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006513.
eCollection 2017 Aug.

Microbiome-mediated neutrophil recruitment via CXCR2 and protection from amebic
colitis.

Watanabe K(1)(2), Gilchrist CA(1), Uddin MJ(1), Burgess SL(1), Abhyankar MM(1),
Moonah SN(1), Noor Z(3), Donowitz JR(1)(4), Schneider BN(1), Arju T(3), Ahmed
E(3), Kabir M(3), Alam M(3), Haque R(3), Pramoonjago P(5), Mehrad B(6), Petri WA 
Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of
Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of
America.
(2)AIDS Clinical Center, National Center for Global Health and Medicine,
Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (icddr, b),
Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(4)Division of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Richmond at Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, United States of America.
(5)Biorepository and Tissue Research Facility, University of Virginia School of
Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America.
(6)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America.

The disease severity of Entamoeba histolytica infection ranges from asymptomatic 
to life-threatening. Recent human and animal data implicate the gut microbiome as
a modifier of E. histolytica virulence. Here we have explored the association of 
the microbiome with susceptibility to amebiasis in infants and in the mouse model
of amebic colitis. Dysbiosis occurred symptomatic E. histolytica infection in
children, as evidenced by a lower Shannon diversity index of the gut microbiota. 
To test if dysbiosis was a cause of susceptibility, wild type C57BL/6 mice (which
are innately resistant to E. histiolytica infection) were treated with
antibiotics prior to cecal challenge with E. histolytica. Compared with untreated
mice, antibiotic pre-treated mice had more severe colitis and delayed clearance
of E. histolytica. Gut IL-25 and mucus protein Muc2, both shown to provide innate
immunity in the mouse model of amebic colitis, were lower in antibiotic
pre-treated mice. Moreover, dysbiotic mice had fewer cecal neutrophils and
myeloperoxidase activity. Paradoxically, the neutrophil chemoattractant
chemokines CXCL1 and CXCL2, as well as IL-1Î², were higher in the colon of mice
with antibiotic-induced dysbiosis. Neutrophils from antibiotic pre-treated mice
had diminished surface expression of the chemokine receptor CXCR2, potentially
explaining their inability to migrate to the site of infection. Blockade of CXCR2
increased susceptibility of control non-antibiotic treated mice to amebiasis. In 
conclusion, dysbiosis increased the severity of amebic colitis due to decreased
neutrophil recruitment to the gut, which was due in part to decreased surface
expression on neutrophils of CXCR2.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006513 
PMCID: PMC5560520
PMID: 28817707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

