
1. J Fish Dis. 2018 Feb;41(2):321-328. doi: 10.1111/jfd.12728. Epub 2017 Oct 24.

Genetic parameters for resistance against Flavobacterium columnare in Nile
tilapia Oreochromis niloticus (Linnaeus, 1758).

Wonmongkol P(1)(2), Sukhavachana S(1), Ampolsak K(3), Srisapoome P(1),
Suwanasopee T(4), Poompuang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquaculture, Faculty of Fisheries, Kasetsart University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Center for Advanced Study in Agriculture and Food, Institute for Advanced
Studies, Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Phathumthani Aquaculture Genetic Research and Development Center, Department
of Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Phathumthani, Thailand.
(4)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Kasetsart University,
Bangkok, Thailand.

Columnaris disease is a major cause of mortality in tilapia hatcheries and
commonly occurs during the summer season in Thailand. One way of reducing the
problem is by selective breeding for increased disease resistance. The objective 
of this study was to estimate quantitative genetic parameters for resistance
against columnaris in the Chitralada 4 strain of Nile tilapia. Data from 43
full-sib families (2,580 records) of fry (age = 32 ± 4 days post-hatch) were used
in the analyses. Initially, fry were subjected to bath challenge with
Flavobacterium columnare (LD50 concentration = 1.2 × 106  CFU/ml) for 14 days.
Disease resistance was defined as the number of days from challenge until death
(DD) or as a binary trait (dead/alive) on day 14. Linear animal and sire-dam
models were used for DD, while threshold animal, threshold sire-dam, binary
linear animal and binary linear sire-dam models were used for binary outcomes.
Covariate effect of age, fixed effect of challenge day and random effects of the 
individual animals or sires and dams were included in the models. Mean survival
was 32.4 ± 11.6%, and survival rates of the best and poorest families were 70%
and 8%, respectively. The highest estimate of heritability (0.30 ± 0.025) was
obtained under the threshold sire-dam model. Heritability estimates for DD
(0.16 ± 0.034 and 0.17 ± 0.046) were comparable to those obtained from the
threshold animal (0.15 ± 0.031) and the binary linear (0.14 ± 0.045 and
0.15 ± 0.044) models. The linear animal and sire-dam models for DD and the
threshold sire-dam models performed equally with similar values of rEBV (0.629,
0.628 and 0.627) and accuracy of selection (0.793, 0.793 and 0.791). This study
reveals the potential of selective breeding to increase disease resistance to
F. columnare in the studied population of Nile tilapia.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.12728 
PMID: 29064113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

