
1. Tunis Med. 2017 Mar;95(3):172-178.

Postoperative Endophtalmities: therapeuthic results and Early vitrectomy.

Zghal I, Souguir A, Fekih O, Chebbi A, Romdhane O, Bouguila H, Nacef L.

BACKGROUND: Postoperative endophthalmitis is a public health issue due to its bad
prognosis; its treatment is both surgical and medical. Classically, surgical
treatment was done if visual acuity is limited to light perception only.
AIM: To evaluate therapeutic results Of postoperative endophtalmitieS and to
Compare therapeutics almost used intravitreal injection of antibiotics versus
early vitrectomy.
METHODS: It's a retrospective comparative study  includIng 120 cases of acute
postoperative endophthalmitis hospitalized in a referral ophthalmology department
between July 2007 and June 2013. A comparison was conducted between two groups of
24 and 94 patients; the first-line treatment was early vitrectomy for the first
group and intravitreal antibiotic injection alone for the second group.
RESULTS: The overall incidence rate was 0.38 %, Streptococcus and Staphylococcus 
Epidermidis where the most common bacterial strain (16 patients each). The
treatment outcome was very favorable for 11 patients with final visual acuity 
higher or equal to 2/10, the outcome was intermediate for 43 patients and poor
for 66 patients because of final visual acuity lower than or equal to 1/20, loss 
of media transparency or anatomical or functional loss of the eye. The prognostic
factors statistically correlated to treatment outcome where intense initial
inflammation (p<0.001), high bacterial virulence (p=0.002), bacteria culture
positive to Streptococcus (p=0.024), a defectuous operative incision (p= 0.012), 
age over 80 (p=0.022) and posterior capsule rupture (p=0.013). Early vitrectomy
group (group1) achieved a higher percentage of good outcome (60% vs 41.5%, 
p=0.098 ).
CONCLUSION: Functional result is better in the Vitrectomy group than in the
antibiotic intravitreal injections group whereas not Statically signifiant.


PMID: 29446810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

