
1. Shock. 2019 Apr;51(4):464-471. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0000000000001161.

Phagocytosis by Fibrocytes as a Mechanism to Decrease Bacterial Burden and
Increase Survival in Sepsis.

Collins D(1), Fry C(2), Moore BB(3), Nemzek JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(2)Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine in the Department of Internal
Medicine and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI.

Fibrocytes are unique cells with innate and adaptive immune functions, but these 
mechanisms have not been fully explored. The aim of this study was to explain the
mechanism by which adoptive transfer of exogenous fibrocytes improved bacterial
clearance and increased sepsis survival. Initial flow cytometry-based, in vitro
assays demonstrated phagocytosis by fibrocytes and intracellular bacterial
killing was confirmed by direct plating of cell lysates after exposure to live
bacteria. Intravenous adoptive transfer of fibrocytes at the time of cecal
ligation and puncture (CLP) or 2 h after CLP in mice increased survivability.
Decreased intraperitoneal bacterial burden was also observed. Quantification of
peritoneal cell populations using flow cytometry demonstrated transferred and
endogenous fibrocytes were significantly increased after CLP, while macrophage
and neutrophil numbers were unchanged. To determine the impact in vivo,
fluorescently labeled, killed bacteria were injected i.p. into mice 10 h after
CLP or sham surgery ± adoptive transfer. Two hours later, flow cytometry of
peritoneal cell populations after CLP alone revealed increased phagocytosis by
macrophages, neutrophils, and endogenous fibrocytes. Transferred fibrocytes had
significantly increased phagocytic activity in the septic peritoneum compared
with sham and greater activity than any other cell type. Therefore, adoptive
transfer may enhance bacterial clearance in early sepsis through the cumulative
effects of endogenous and transferred fibrocytes rather than modulating the
function of other endogenous phagocytes. Direct phagocytic activity coupled with 
previously described influences on T cell responses may explain the benefits of
fibrocyte transfer in sepsis.

DOI: 10.1097/SHK.0000000000001161 
PMCID: PMC6191390
PMID: 29664835  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

