
1. Hum Exp Toxicol. 2019 Jan;38(1):65-81. doi: 10.1177/0960327118777869. Epub 2018
May 24.

Molecular mechanism for the influence of gender dimorphism on alcoholic liver
injury in mice.

Li SQ(1), Wang P(1), Wang DM(1), Lu HJ(1), Li RF(1), Duan LX(1), Zhu S(2), Wang
SL(1), Zhang YY(1), Wang YL(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 The Molecular Medicine Key Laboratory of Liver Injury and Repair, Medical
College, Henan University of Science and Technology, Luoyang, People's Republic
of China.
(2)2 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Basic Medical
Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, People's Republic of China.
(3)3 Henan Bioengineering Research Center, Zhengzhou, People's Republic of China.

It is known that women develop alcoholic liver injury more rapidly and have a
lower alcohol toxic threshold than men. However, the detailed molecular
mechanisms remain unclear. The precise mechanism responsible for the sex
difference needs to be determined. Female and male mice were given ethanol by
intragastric infusion every day for 4 weeks. The pathological changes were
detected by hematoxylin-eosin, Sirius red, oil red O, periodic acid-Schiff, and
Hochest33258 staining in the liver of female and male mice. The related gene and 
protein expression of hepatocytes stress, proliferation and apoptosis, glycogen
synthesis, lipid metabolism, and hepatic fibrosis were also systematically
analyzed in the female and male mice. Livers from ethanol-treated female mice had
more serious hepatocyte necrosis, liver fibrosis ( P < 0.01), substantial
micro/macrovesicular steatosis ( p < 0.01), glycogen consumption ( p < 0.05), and
hepatocytes apoptosis ( p < 0.05) than ethanol-treated male mice. The expression 
of heat shock protein 27 (HSP27), HSP70, proliferating cell nuclear antigen,
B-cell lymphoma/leukemia-2 (Bcl-2), and phosphorylated signal transducer and
activators of transcription 3 (p-STAT3) was higher in ethanol-treated male mice
than ethanol-treated female mice ( P < 0.05 or P < 0.01). But, the expression of 
Bax (Bcl-2-associated X protein), Caspase 3, CYP2E1 (cytochrome P4502E1), and
transforming growth factor Î²l had the contrary results. Our study suggested that 
ethanol treatment induced more expression of HSP27 and HSP70, faster hepatocyte
proliferation, higher level of glycogen, and interleukin-6 signaling pathway
activation, but less hepatocyte apoptosis and CYP2E1 expression in male mice than
female mice, which could be helpful to understand the molecular mechanism for the
influence of sex difference on alcoholic liver injury.

DOI: 10.1177/0960327118777869 
PMID: 29792338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

