
1. Matrix Biol. 2018 Dec;74:35-51. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2018.05.011. Epub 2018 May 
26.

Serglycin promotes breast cancer cell aggressiveness: Induction of epithelial to 
mesenchymal transition, proteolytic activity and IL-8 signaling.

Bouris P(1), Manou D(1), Sopaki-Valalaki A(1), Kolokotroni A(1), Moustakas A(2), 
Kapoor A(3), Iozzo RV(3), Karamanos NK(1), Theocharis AD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry, Biochemical Analysis and Matrix Pathobiology Research Group,
Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, Patras
26110, Greece.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Science for Life
Laboratory, Uppsala University, SE 75123 Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology and the Cancer Cell Biology 
and Signaling Program, Sidney Kimmel Medical College at Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.
(4)Biochemistry, Biochemical Analysis and Matrix Pathobiology Research Group,
Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, Patras
26110, Greece. Electronic address: atheoch@upatras.gr.

Serglycin is an intracellular proteoglycan that is expressed and constitutively
secreted by numerous malignant cells, especially prominent in the
highly-invasive, triple-negative MDA-MB-231 breast carcinoma cells. Notably, de
novo expression of serglycin in low aggressive estrogen receptor α (ERα)-positive
MCF7 breast cancer cells promotes an aggressive phenotype. In this study, we
discovered that serglycin promoted epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in 
MCF7 cells as shown by increased expression of mesenchymal markers vimentin,
fibronectin and EMT-related transcription factor Snail2. These phenotypic traits 
were also associated with the development of drug resistance toward various
chemotherapy agents and induction of their proteolytic potential as shown by the 
increased expression of matrix metalloproteinases, including MMP-1, MMP-2, MMP-9,
MT1-MMP and up-regulation of urokinase-type plasminogen activator. Knockdown of
serglycin markedly reduced the expression of these proteolytic enzymes in
MDA-MB-231 cells. In addition, serglycin expression was closely linked to a
pro-inflammatory gene signature including the chemokine IL-8 in ERα-negative
breast cancer cells and tumors. Notably, serglycin regulated the secretion of
IL-8 in breast cancer cells independently of their ERα status and promoted their 
proliferation, migration and invasion by triggering IL-8/CXCR2 downstream
signaling cascades including PI3K, Src and Rac activation. Thus, serglycin
promotes the establishment of a pro-inflammatory milieu in breast cancer cells
that evokes an invasive mesenchymal phenotype via autocrine activation of
IL-8/CXCR2 signaling axis.

Copyright © 2018 International Society of Matrix Biology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.matbio.2018.05.011 
PMID: 29842969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

