
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2018 Jun 5;8:178. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00178.
eCollection 2018.

New Application of Psoralen and Angelicin on Periodontitis With Anti-bacterial,
Anti-inflammatory, and Osteogenesis Effects.

Li X(1)(2), Yu C(3)(4), Hu Y(1)(2), Xia X(1)(2), Liao Y(1)(2), Zhang J(1)(2),
Chen H(1)(2), Lu W(1)(2), Zhou W(2)(4), Song Z(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Stomatology & Shanghai Research Institute of
Stomatology, National Clinical Research Center of Stomatology, Shanghai, China.
(3)Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.
(4)Laboratory of Oral Microbiota and Systemic Disease, Shanghai Research
Institute of Stomatology, Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Psoralen and angelicin are two effective compounds isolated from psoraleae, a
traditional Chinese medicine. They have a wide range of applications for bone
disease treatment and immune modulation. In this study, we explored their new
applications for the treatment of periodontal diseases. This study aimed to
investigate the effects of psoralen and angelicin on Porphyromonas gingivalis
growth and P. gingivalis-derived lipopolysaccharide (Pg-LPS)-induced
inflammation, and further to evaluate their effects on osteogenesis. Finally, the
effects of angelicin on a mouse model of periodontitis were also investigated.
The results showed that psoralen and angelicin had beneficial dose-dependent
effects regarding the inhibition of planktonic P. gingivalis and biofilms of P.
gingivalis. There were no significant differences in the viability of
monocyte-like THP-1 cells and human periodontal ligament cells (hPDLCs) treated
with either psoralen or angelicin compared to the untreated control cells.
Psoralen and angelicin also markedly decreased the mRNA expression and release of
inflammatory cytokines (interleukin [IL]-1Î² and IL-8) by THP-1 cells in a
dose-dependent manner. They significantly enhanced the alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
activity of hPDLCs and up-regulated the expression of osteogenic proteins
(runt-related transcription factor 2 [RUNX2], distal-less homeobox 5 [DLX5], and 
osteopontin [OPN]). Angelicin significantly attenuated alveolar bone loss and
inflammation response in the mice with periodontitis. In conclusion, our data
demonstrated that psoralen and angelicin could inhibit the growth of planktonic
P. gingivalis and P. gingivalis biofilm. It is also the first report on the
anti-inflammatory effect of psoralen and angelicin against Pg-LPS. They also had 
an osteogenesis-potentiating effect on hPDLCs. The in vivo study also indicated
the effect of angelicin regarding protection against periodontitis. Our study
highlighted the potential ability of psoralen and angelicin to act as novel
natural agents to prevent and treat periodontitis.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00178 
PMCID: PMC5996246
PMID: 29922598  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

