
1. J Fish Dis. 2019 Jan;42(1):75-84. doi: 10.1111/jfd.12902. Epub 2018 Oct 28.

Assessment of cross-protection to heterologous strains of Flavobacterium
psychrophilum following vaccination with a live-attenuated coldwater disease
immersion vaccine.

Ma J(1), Bruce TJ(1), Sudheesh PS(1)(2), Knupp C(3), Loch TP(3)(4), Faisal
M(3)(4), Cain KD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fisheries and Wildlife Sciences and the Aquaculture Research
Institute, College of Natural Resources, University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho.
(2)Bronson Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory, Florida Department of
Agriculture and Consumer Services, Kissimmee, Florida.
(3)Department of Fisheries and Wildlife, College of Agriculture and Natural
Resources, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan.
(4)Department of Pathobiology and Diagnostic Investigation, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan.

Bacterial coldwater disease, caused by Flavobacterium psychrophilum, remains one 
of the most significant bacterial diseases of salmonids worldwide. A previously
developed and reported live-attenuated immersion vaccine (F. psychrophilum;
B.17-ILM) has been shown to confer significant protection to salmonids. To
further characterize this vaccine, a series of experiments were carried out to
determine the cross-protective efficacy of this B.17-ILM vaccine against 9
F. psychrophilum isolates (representing seven sequence types/three clonal
complexes as determined by multilocus sequence typing) in comparison with a
wild-type virulent strain, CSF-259-93. To assess protection, 28-day experimental 
challenges of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) fry were conducted following
immersion vaccinations with the B.17-ILM vaccine. F. psychrophilum strains used
in challenge trials were isolated from several fish species across the globe;
however, all were found to be virulent in rainbow trout. The B.17-ILM vaccine
provided significant protection against all strains, with relative percent
survival values ranging from 51% to 72%. All vaccinated fish developed an
adaptive immune response (as measured by F. psychrophilum-specific antibodies)
that increased out to the time of challenge (8 weeks postimmunization). Previous 
studies have confirmed that antibody plays an important role in protection
against F. psychrophilum challenge; therefore, specific antibodies to the
B.17-ILM vaccine strain appear to contribute to the cross-protection observed to 
heterologous strain. The ability of such antibodies to bind to similar antigenic 
regions for all strains was confirmed by western blot analyses. Results presented
here support the practical application of this live-attenuated vaccine, and
suggest that it will be efficacious even in aquaculture operations affected by
diverse strains of F. psychrophilum.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.12902 
PMID: 30370695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

