
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2018 Dec 4;8:425. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00425.
eCollection 2018.

B. Abortus Modulates Osteoblast Function Through the Induction of Autophagy.

Pesce Viglietti AI(1), Gentilini MV(1), Arriola Benitez PC(1), Giambartolomei
GH(1), Delpino MV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Inmunología, Genética y Metabolismo (INIGEM), Universidad de
Buenos Aires, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.

Osteoarticular brucellosis is the most common localization of human active
disease. Osteoblasts are specialized mesenchymal-derived cells involved in bone
formation and are considered as professional mineralizing cells. Autophagy has
been involved in osteoblast metabolism. The present study demonstrates that
Brucella abortus infection induces the activation of the autophagic pathway in
osteoblast cells. Autophagy was revealed by upregulation of LC3II/LC3I ratio and 
Beclin-1 expression as well as inhibition of p62 expression in infected cells.
Induction of autophagy was also corroborated by using the pharmacological
inhibitors wortmannin, a PI 3-kinase inhibitor, and leupeptin plus E64
(inhibitors of lysosomal proteases). Autophagy induction create a
microenvironment that modifies osteoblast metabolism by the inhibition of the
deposition of organic and mineral matrix, the induction of matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, osteopontin, and RANKL secretion leading to bone loss.
Accordingly, autophagy is also involved in the down-modulation of the master
transcription factor in bone formation osterix during B. abortus infection.
Taking together our results indicate that B. abortus induces the activation of
autophagy pathway in osteoblast cells and this activation is involved in the
modulation of osteoblast function and bone formation.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00425 
PMCID: PMC6288398
PMID: 30564561  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

