
1. Extremophiles. 2019 May;23(3):283-304. doi: 10.1007/s00792-019-01080-0. Epub 2019
Feb 18.

Change in the microbial community of saline geothermal fluids amended with a
scaling inhibitor: effects of heat extraction and nitrate dosage.

Westphal A(1), Eichinger F(2), Eichinger L(2), Würdemann H(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Section 5.3 Geomicrobiology, GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences,
Telegrafenberg, 14473, Potsdam, Germany.
(2)HYDROISOTOP GmbH, Woelkestr. 9, 85301, Schweitenkirchen, Germany.
(3)Section 5.3 Geomicrobiology, GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences,
Telegrafenberg, 14473, Potsdam, Germany. hilke.wuerdemann@hs-merseburg.de.
(4)Department of Engineering and Natural Sciences, University of Applied Science 
Merseburg, Eberhard-Leibnitz-Str. 2, 06217, Merseburg, Germany.
hilke.wuerdemann@hs-merseburg.de.

Geothermal plants are often affected by corrosion caused by microbial metabolites
such as H2S. In the Bad Blumau (Austria) geothermal system, an increase in
microbially produced H2S was observed in the hot (107 °C) and scaling
inhibitor-amended saline fluids and in fluids that had cooled down (45 °C).
Genetic fingerprinting and quantification revealed the dominance, increasing
abundance and diversity of sulfate reducers such as Desulfotomaculum spp. that
accompanied the cooling and processing of the geothermal fluids. In addition, a
δ34S isotopic signature showed the microbial origin of the H2S that has been
produced either chemolithotrophically or chemoorganotrophically. A nitrate
addition test in a test pipe as a countermeasure against the microbial H2S
formation caused a shift from a biocenosis dominated by bacteria of the phylum
Firmicutes to a community of Firmicutes and Proteobacteria. Nitrate supported the
growth of nitrate-reducing sulfur-oxidizing Thiobacillus thioparus, which
incompletely reduced nitrate to nitrite. The addition of nitrate led to a change 
in the composition of the sulfate-reducing community. As a result,
representatives of nitrate- and nitrite-reducing SRB, such as Desulfovibrio and
Desulfonatronum, emerged as additional community members. The interaction of
sulfate-reducing bacteria and nitrate-reducing sulfur-oxidizing bacteria (NR-SOB)
led to the removal of H2S, but increased the corrosion rate in the test pipe.

DOI: 10.1007/s00792-019-01080-0 
PMID: 30778766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

