
1. Plant Dis. 1998 Feb;82(2):262. doi: 10.1094/PDIS.1998.82.2.262A.

Interception of Xanthomonas campestris pv. dieffenbachiae on Anthurium Plants
from the Netherlands.

Sathyanarayana N(1), Reddy OR(1), Latha S(1), Rajak RL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Plant Quarantine Station, No. 6, Clive Battery, Madras 600001, India.
(2)Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage, Faridabad, India.

Xanthomonas campestris pv. dieffenbachiae, the causal agent of anthurium
bacterial blight, is a major concern of the anthurium industry worldwide. This
pathogen has many hosts in the family Araceae (e.g., Anthurium, Dieffenbachia,
Syngonium, Aglaonema, Philodendron, Xanthosoma, Caladium, and Colocasia). Most
anthurium cultivars are susceptible to bacterial blight, making it very difficult
to manage the disease once introduced to a production area. Therefore, sanitation
and exclusion of the pathogen through pathogen-free propagative stock are vital
aspects of anthurium cultivation. The anthurium industry is expanding in India,
and as many new cultivars are being imported, the plant material is subject to
thorough quarantine inspection at the port of arrival. During routine inspections
on three separate occasions, Anthurium andreanum plants imported from The
Netherlands had watersoaked spots at leaf margins bordered by chlorotic or
necrotic zones. Xanthomonas-like colonies were isolated from four different
cultivars with semiselective media (2). Bacteriological tests confirmed that the 
cultures were X. campestris. Pathogenicity tests, performed by rubbing leaves
with a cotton swab dipped into a suspension of the bacteria (approx. 107 CFU/ml),
resulted in production of leafspots in 6 days and early blight symptoms in 10 to 
12 days. The bacterium was further identified as X. campestris by carbon source
utilization (similarity coefficient = 0.582; Biolog, Hayward, CA). Enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay reaction patterns with a panel of monoclonal antibodies for
X. campestris pv. dieffenbachiae designated as Xcd1 (clone 72E-E3-B9-C5, isotype 
IgG2a), Xcd2 (clone 97-2-1-01, isotype IgM), Xcd3 (clone 72B-F9-B6-E9, isotype
IgM), Xcd7 (clone72D-E10-C2-D9, isotype IgM), T1 (clone 92-16, isotype IgM), and 
T2 (clone 92-59-1-1, isotype IgG) showed that the intercepted strain belong to
the serogroup 5 of X. campestris pv. dieffenbachiae (1). This pathogen is not
known to occur in India, and there is high probability of risk of introduction
through large-scale import of anthurium plants with either visible or latent
infections. References: (1) R. L. Lipp et al. Phytopathology 82:677, 1992. (2) D.
J. Norman and A. Alvarez. Plant Dis. 73:654, 1989.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS.1998.82.2.262A 
PMID: 30856813 

