
1. Am J Cancer Res. 2019 Feb 1;9(2):242-249. eCollection 2019.

Interplay between heat shock proteins, inflammation and cancer: a potential
cancer therapeutic target.

Ikwegbue PC(1), Masamba P(1), Mbatha LS(1), Oyinloye BE(2), Kappo AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, College of Sciences, Afe Babalola University
Ado-Ekiti 36000, Ekiti, Nigeria, Africa.

The historical relationship between cancer and inflammation has long been
evaluated, and dates back to the early work of Virchow (1863), where he
hypothesised that chronic inflammation as a direct cause of tissue injury and
infection, could actually promote tissue proliferation. At that period in time
however, the exact mechanisms that mediated this relationship were little
understood. Subsequent studies have since then demonstrated that chronic
inflammation plays significant roles in microenvironments, mostly in the
progression of tumours, probably, through over-secretion of proinflammatory
cytokines and other immune-killing apparatus such as reactive oxygen species
(ROS) which cause damage to normal cells leading to DNA damage and increased
cellular mutation rates. Recently, the identification of DNA lesion
5-chlorocytosine (5-CIC) created by hypochlorous acid (HOCl) secreted to nullify 
or kill infectious agents and toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)-mediated chronic
inflammation in the human gut, has become the latest evidence linking
inflammation directly to cancer. The key to cellular survival and adaptation
under unfavourable or pathological conditions is the expression of heat shock
proteins (HSPs) also called molecular chaperones. These proteins play essential
roles in DNA repair processes by maintaining membrane integrity, orderliness and 
stability of client proteins that play prominent roles in DNA repair mechanisms. 
More so, HSPs have also been shown to modulate the effects of
pro-inflammatory/apoptotic cytokines through the inhibition of cascades leading
to the generation of ROS-mediated DNA damage, while promoting the DNA repair
mechanism, thus playing prominent roles in various stages of DNA repair and
cancer progression. Hence, studies targeting HSPs and their inhibitors in
inflammation, DNA damage, and repair, could improve current cancer therapeutic
efficiency. Here the focus will be on the relationship between HSPs, inflammation
and cancer, as well as roles of HSPs in DNA damage response (DDR).


PMCID: PMC6405974
PMID: 30906626 

Conflict of interest statement: None.

