
1. ACS Synth Biol. 2019 May 17;8(5):962-967. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.9b00058. Epub
2019 Apr 12.

Microfluidic Synchronizer Using a Synthetic Nanoparticle-Capped Bacterium.

Chang Z(1)(2)(3), Shen Y(4)(5)(6)(7), Lang Q(1)(2)(3), Zheng H(1)(2)(3), Tokuyasu
TA(1)(2), Huang S(1)(2)(3), Liu C(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology ,
Chinese Academy of Sciences , Shenzhen 518055 , People's Republic of China.
(2)Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced
Technology , Chinese Academy of Sciences , Shenzhen 518055 , People's Republic of
China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing 100049 , People's Republic
of China.
(4)BGI-Shenzhen , Shenzhen , 518083 , China.
(5)Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory for Innovative Molecular Diagnostics ,
Shenzhen , 518120 , China.
(6)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Genome Read and Write , Shenzhen ,
518120 , China.
(7)Guangdong Provincial Academician Workstation of BGI Synthetic Genomics ,
BGI-Shenzhen , Guangdong , China.

Conventional techniques to synchronize bacterial cells often require manual
manipulations and lengthy incubation lacking precise temporal control. An
automated microfluidic device was recently developed to overcome these
limitations. However, it exploits the stalk property of Caulobacter crescentus
that undergoes asymmetric stalked and swarmer cell cycle stages and is therefore 
restricted to this species. To address this shortcoming, we have engineered
Escherichia coli cells to adhere to microchannel walls via a synthetic and
inducible "stalk". The pole of E. coli is capped by magnetic fluorescent
nanoparticles via a polar-localized outer membrane protein. A mass of cells is
immobilized in a microfluidic chamber by an externally applied magnetic field.
Daughter cells are formed without the induced stalk and hence are flushed out,
yielding a synchronous population of "baby" cells. The stalks can be tracked by
GFP and nanoparticle fluorescence; no fluorescence signal is detected in the
eluted cell population, indicating that it consists solely of daughters. The
collected daughter cells display superb synchrony. The results demonstrate a new 
on-chip method to synchronize the model bacterium E. coli and likely other
bacterial species, and also foster the application of synthetic biology to the
study of the bacterial cell cycle.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.9b00058 
PMID: 30964646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

