
1. Food Funct. 2019 Jul 17;10(7):4102-4112. doi: 10.1039/c9fo00109c.

A surface-layer protein from Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM induces autophagic
death in HCT116 cells requiring ROS-mediated modulation of mTOR and JNK signaling
pathways.

Wang H(1), Cheng X(2), Zhang L(2), Xu S(2), Zhang Q(1), Lu R(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University, 1800 Lihu Avenue, 
Wuxi, Jiangsu 214122, China. lurr@jiangnan.edu.cn.
(2)Jiangsu Institute of Nuclear Medicine, Key Laboratory of Nuclear Medicine,
Ministry of Health, 20 Qian Rong, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214063, China.

A surface-layer protein (Slp) derived from Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM has
been reported to possess multiple biological properties, including
anti-inflammatory, inhibition of apoptosis in pathogen-invaded HT-29 cells and
oxidative stress relief. However, its anti-tumor ability and underlying molecular
mechanism are unknown. Here, we report that Slp suppresses cell proliferation and
induces autophagic cell death in HCT116 cells. Accumulation of Beclin-1 and
microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 from II (LC3-II), and the
degradation of p62 were observed when cells were treated with various
concentrations of Slp (25, 50, 100 Î¼g mL-1) for 24 h. We also found that the
mammalian targets of rapamycin (mTOR) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling
pathways were crucial mediators regulating Slp-induced autophagic cell death.
Additionally, treatment with Slp resulted in the obvious formation of reactive
oxygen species (ROS). SP600125, a JNK inhibitor, and N-acetylcysteine (NAC), a
ROS inhibitor, attenuated Slp-induced autophagic cell death in HCT116 cells.
Furthermore, NAC was found to prevent Slp-induced p70 and JNK phosphorylation.
Taken together, our results suggest a novel mechanism of action of Slp induced
autophagy, acting simultaneously through the ROS-mediated mTOR and JNK signaling 
pathways in HCT116 colon cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1039/c9fo00109c 
PMID: 31233063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

