
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Jun 19;20(12). pii: E2986. doi: 10.3390/ijms20122986.

Differentially Expressed Mitochondrial Proteins in Human MCF7 Breast Cancer Cells
Resistant to Paclitaxel.

Daniel P(1), Halada P(2), Jelínek M(3), Balušíková K(4), Kovář J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology, Third Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University, Ruská 87, 100 00 Prague, Czech Republic.
petr.daniel@lf3.cuni.cz.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Structure Characterization, Institute of Microbiology,
v.v.i., Vídeňská 1083, 142 20 Prague, Czech Republic. halada@biomed.cas.cz.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology, Third Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University, Ruská 87, 100 00 Prague, Czech Republic.
michael.j@email.cz.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology, Third Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University, Ruská 87, 100 00 Prague, Czech Republic.
kamila.balusikova@lf3.cuni.cz.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology, Third Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University, Ruská 87, 100 00 Prague, Czech Republic.
jan.kovar@lf3.cuni.cz.

Identification of novel proteins with changed expression in resistant cancer
cells could be helpful in elucidation mechanisms involved in the development of
acquired resistance to paclitaxel. In this study, we carried out a 2D-PAGE using 
the mitochondrial-enriched fraction from paclitaxel-resistant MCF7/PacR cells
compared to original paclitaxel-sensitive MCF7 breast cancer cells.
Differentially expressed proteins were identified employing mass spectrometry. We
found that lysosomal cathepsin D and mitochondrial abhydrolase-domain containing 
protein 11 (ABHD11) had decreased expression in MCF7/PacR cells. On the other
hand, mitochondrial carbamoyl-phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1) and ATPase family
AAA-domain containing protein 3A and 3B (ATAD3A, ATAD3B) were overexpressed in
MCF7/PacR cells. Further, we showed that there was no difference in localization 
of CPS1 in MCF7 and MCF7/PacR cells. We demonstrated a significant increase in
the number of CPS1 positive MCF7/PacR cells, using FACS analysis, compared to the
number of CPS1 positive MCF7 cells. Silencing of CPS1 expression by specific
siRNA had no significant effect on the resistance of MCF7/PacR cells to
paclitaxel. To summarize, we identified several novel proteins of a mitochondrial
fraction whose role in acquired resistance to paclitaxel in breast cancer cells
should be further assessed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20122986 
PMCID: PMC6628585
PMID: 31248089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

