
1. Odontology. 2020 Jul;108(3):450-461. doi: 10.1007/s10266-019-00467-x. Epub 2019
Oct 22.

Targeted polymerase chain reaction-based expression of putative halitogenic
bacteria and volatile sulphur compound analysis among halitosis patients at a
tertiary hospital in Nigeria.

Adedapo AH(1), Kolude B(1), Dada-Adegbola HO(2), Lawoyin JO(1), Adeola HA(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, College of Medicine, University of Ibadan,
Ibadan, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, College of Medicine,
University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, Faculty of Dentistry,
University of the Western Cape and Tygerberg Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa.
henry.adeola@uct.ac.za.
(4)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences
and Groote Schuur Hospital, University of Cape Town, Observatory 7925, Cape Town,
South Africa. henry.adeola@uct.ac.za.

Halitosis (bad breath) can be a cause of anxiety, depression and psychosocial
stress, with pathological changes in the oral microbiota playing an important
role in its development. Despite its prevalence, studies on the microbiology of
halitosis are rare in Nigeria. This study determines the presence of five
putative periodontal pathogens viz: Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans,
Fusobacterium nucleatum, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Prevotella intermedia and
Treponema denticola on the tongue dorsa of halitosis and non-halitosis patients
using a 16S rDNA-directed polymerase chain reaction assay. Furthermore, an
association of these bacteria with oral malodour [as assessed by volatile sulphur
compounds (VSC) measurements] with a portable sulphide monitor, the Halimeter
(Interscan Corp, Chatsworth, California), was performed. The results showed that 
the prevalence of halitosis in this environment as defined by VSC level above
160Â ppb is 14.9%. Halitosis is affected by gender with males having it more than 
the females. Males also tend to present more with self-reported complaints of
halitosis than females. Age does not appear to contribute to the incidence of
halitosis. Fusobacterium nucleatum, P. gingivalis, P. intermedia are responsible 
for increased production of VSCs in halitosis patients while A.
actinomycetemcomitans and T. denticola appear to play no part in the production
of VSCs. Evaluation of halitogenic bacteria and VSCs may potentially become a
surrogate biomarker for monitoring halitosis. Targeted assessment of putative
halitogenic bacteria may provide a rapid point-of-care diagnostic tool for
halitosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s10266-019-00467-x 
PMID: 31641894  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

