
1. J Theor Biol. 2020 Feb 7;486:110095. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2019.110095. Epub 2019
Nov 26.

Co-evolution as an important component explaining microbial predator-prey
interaction.

Kaitala V(1), Hiltunen T(2), Becks L(3), Scheuerl T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Organismal and Evolutionary Biology Research Programme, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. Electronic address: veijo.kaitala@helsinki.fi.
(2)Department of Food and Environmental Sciences / Microbiology and
Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 56, 00014, Finland; Department of
Biology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. Electronic address:
teppo.hiltunen@helsinki.fi.
(3)Limnology - Aquatic Ecology and Evolution, Limnological Institute, University 
of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany. Electronic address: lutz.becks@uni-konstanz.de.
(4)Amerang Str. 8, 83435 Bad Reichenhall, Germany.

Predator-prey relationships belong to the most important and well-studied
ecological interactions in nature. Understanding the underlying mechanisms is
important to predict community dynamics and to estimate coexistence probability. 
Historically, evolution has been considered to be too slow to affect such
ecological interactions. However, evolution can occur within ecological time
scales, potentially affecting predator-prey communities. In an antagonistic
pair-wise relationship the prey might evolve to minimize the effect caused by the
predator (e.g. mortality), while the predator might evolve to maximize the effect
(e.g. food intake). Evolution of one of the species or even co-evolution of both 
species in predator-prey relationships is often difficult to estimate from
population dynamics without measuring of trait changes in predator and/or prey
population. Particularly in microbial systems, where microorganisms evolve
quickly, determining whether co-evolution occurs in predator-prey systems is
challenging. We simulate observational data using quantitative trait evolution
models and show that the interaction between bacteria and ciliates can be best
explained as a co-evolutionary process, where both the prey and predator evolve. 
Evolution by prey alone explains the data less well, whereas the models with
predator evolution alone or no evolution are both failing. We conclude that that 
ecology and evolution both interact in shaping community dynamics in microcosms. 
Ignoring the contribution of evolution might lead to incorrect conclusions.

Copyright Â© 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2019.110095 
PMID: 31783060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

