
1. Biomolecules. 2020 Mar 11;10(3). pii: E433. doi: 10.3390/biom10030433.

Kinetic Study of the Biodegradation of Acephate by Indigenous Soil Bacterial
Isolates in the Presence of Humic Acid and Metal Ions.

Singh S(1), Kumar V(2), Singla S(1), Sharma M(3), Singh DP(4), Prasad R(5),
Thakur VK(6), Singh J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Lovely Professional University, Phagwara 144411, 
Punjab, India.
(2)Regional Ayurveda Research Institute for Drug Development, Gwalior 474009, MP,
India.
(3)Department of Food Technology, Akal College of Agriculture, Eternal
University, Baru Sahib 173101, HP, India.
(4)Crop Improvement, Division ICAR- Indian Institute of Vegetable Research,
Jakhini (Shahanshapur), Varanasi 221 305, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(5)Department of Botany, Mahatma Gandhi Central University, Motihari 845401,
Bihar, India.
(6)Enhanced Composites and Structures Center, School of Aerospace, Transport and 
Manufacturing, Cranfield University, Bedfordshire MK43 0AL, UK.

Many bacteria have the potential to use specific pesticides as a source of
carbon, phosphorous, nitrogen and sulphur. Acephate degradation by microbes is
considered to be a safe and effective method. The overall aim of the present
study was to identify acephate biodegrading microorganisms and to investigate the
degradation rates of acephate under the stress of humic acid and most common
metal ions Fe(III) and copper Cu(II). Pseudomonas azotoformanss strain ACP1,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain ACP2, and Pseudomonas putida ACP3 were isolated
from acephate contaminated soils. Acephate of concentration 100 ppm was incubated
with separate strain inoculums and periodic samples were drawn for UV-visible,
FTIR (Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy) and MS (Mass Spectrometry)
analysis. Methamidophos, S-methyl O-hydrogen phosphorothioamidate,
phosphenothioic S-acid, and phosphenamide were the major metabolites formed
during the degradation of acephate. The rate of degradation was applied using
pseudo-first-order kinetics to calculate the half-life (t1/2) values, which were 
14.33-16.72 d-1 (strain(s) + acephate), 18.81-21.50 d-1 (strain(s) + acephate +
Cu(II)), 20.06 -23.15 d-1 (strain(s) + acephate + Fe(II)), and 15.05-17.70 d-1
(strains + acephate + HA). The biodegradation efficiency of the three bacterial
strains can be ordered as P. aeruginosa > P. putida > P. azotoformans. The
present study illustrated the decomposition mechanism of acephate under different
conditions, and the same may be applied to the removal of other xenobiotic
compounds.

DOI: 10.3390/biom10030433 
PMCID: PMC7175145
PMID: 32168777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

