
1. Poult Sci. 2020 Oct;99(10):5074-5078. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2020.07.007. Epub 2020
Aug 5.

Research Note: Increase of bad bacteria and decrease of good bacteria in the gut 
of layers with vs. without hepatic steatosis.

Li S(1), Yan C(1), Liu T(1), Xu C(1), Wen K(1), Liu L(1), Zhao M(1), Zhang J(1), 
Geng T(2), Gong D(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou
225009, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou
225009, China. Electronic address: tygeng@yzu.edu.cn.
(3)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou
225009, China. Electronic address: yzgong@163.com.

Fatty liver hemorrhagic syndrome (FLHS), usually occurring in hens in the late
laying period, can lower egg yield and even cause death. Similar to nonalcoholic 
fatty liver disease in humans, FLHS may begin with simple hepatic steatosis. It
is known that gut microbiota is important to the development of nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease, but the relationship between FLHS and gut bacteria remains
unclear. In this study, bacteria compositions in the ileum and cecum were
determined by 16S rDNA sequencing analysis in the groups of hens with vs. without
hepatic steatosis (average liver fat contents were 0.34 mmol/g protein or 2.6%
vs. 0.84 mmol/g protein or 6.0%). These hens were in the 2 tails of the liver fat
content distribution with each tail accounting for 10% of the test population
containing 90 66-wk-old healthy Rhode Island Red laying hens raised under routine
feeding regimen. The results showed that liver weight but not the weights of the 
body, heart and abdominal fat were significantly different between the groups.
Moreover, bacterial diversity was not significantly different between the groups,
but bacterial diversity in the cecum was higher than that in the ileum.
Proteobacteria was the most dominant phylum in the ileum, whereas Proteobacteria,
Firmicutes, and Bacteroidetes were the most dominant phyla in the cecum. Some
bacteria were common to the ileum and cecum, but some were unique. Furthermore,
some bacteria were significantly different in abundance between the groups, that 
is the group without hepatic steatosis had more bacteria inhibiting host energy
absorption or benefiting intestinal health, whereas the group with hepatic
steatosis had more conditionally pathogenic or harmful bacteria. In conclusion,
hepatic steatosis in laying hens is associated with intestinal bacterial
composition (bacterial abundance) but not bacterial diversity. The identified
common and unique bacteria are related to the functional characteristics of the
ileum and cecum. The decrease of beneficial bacteria and the increase of harmful 
bacteria in the intestine of laying hens may increase FLHS incidence by promoting
hepatic steatosis.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2020.07.007 
PMCID: PMC7598321
PMID: 32988545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

