
1. Plant Dis. 2020 Oct 13. doi: 10.1094/PDIS-09-20-1973-PDN. [Epub ahead of print]

First Report of Fire Blight of Apricot (Prunus armeniaca) Caused by Erwinia
amylovora in Korea.

Lee MH(1), Ji S(2), Ham HH(3), Kong GH(4), Park DS(5), Lee YH(6).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Agricultural Sciences, 230986, Crop Protection Division,
Wangju-gun, Jeollabuk-do, Korea (the Republic of); mihyun798@korea.kr.
(2)National Institute of Agricultural Sciences, 230986, Crop Protection Division,
Wanju, Jeollabuk-do, KR 55365, Korea (the Republic of); sanghye@nfri.re.kr.
(3)National Institute of Agricultural Sciences, 230986, Crop Protection Division,
Wanju, Jeollabuk-do, KR 55365, Korea (the Republic of); hhham@korea.kr.
(4)Rural Development Administration, 54670, National Institute of Agricultural
Sciences, Wanju-gun, 54875, South Korea, Jeonju, Korea (the Republic of), 54875; 
khgidea@korea.kr.
(5)Jeonju, Korea (the Republic of); dspark@korea.kr.
(6)National Institute of Agricultural Sciences, 230986, Agro-food Safety & Crop
Protection, 166, Nongsaengmyeong-ro, Iseo-myeon, Wanju, Jeollabuk-do, Korea (the 
Republic of), 55365; leeyhlee@korea.kr.

During a survey in May 2020, symptoms of blight were observed on apricot (Prunus 
armeniaca cv. undetermined) in an orchard (37°06´01.5″N 127°57´44.9″E) in
Chungju, South Korea, where fire blight of apple occurred. Three apricot trees in
the apple orchard were heavily diseased and showed severe shoot blight and stem
canker symptoms. Bacterial isolates were recovered on King's medium B from leaves
and twigs that were surface-sterilized with 70% alcohol. Colonies with uniform
mucoid, smooth surfaces were collected. DNA from nine isolates did not yield an
amplicon in a PCR assay for detection of Erwinia pyrifoliae using primer set
CPS1/CPS2c (Kim et al. 2001). Each isolate was positive in PCR assays for E.
amylovora using primer sets A/B (Bereswill et al. 1992) and AJ75/76 (Llop et al. 
2000) that target pEA29. Sequencing of the PCR products resulted in 99.9% (929 bp
out of 930 bp) and 100% (747 bp out of 747 bp) identity with sequences of E.
amylovora FB20 (GeneBank: CP050240), respectively. Amplifications of the partial 
16S rRNA (GeneBank: LC557153) and hrpN (GeneBank: LC575997) genes were performed,
and the products were sequenced. The primers used to amplify 16S rRNA were 518F: 
5'-CCAGCAGCCGCGGTAATACG-3' and 800R: 5'-TACCAGGGTATCTAATCC-3', and those for the 
hrpN genes were HRPN1: 5'-ATGAGTCTGAATACAAG-3' and HRPN3c:
5'-GCTTGCCAAGTGCCATA-3'. BLAST analyses showed 99.8% (1439 bp out of 1442 bp) and
100% (1136 bp out of 1136 bp) identities, respectively, to the sequences of E.
amylovora FB20. The ability of the isolates to induce a hypersensitive reaction
on tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum cv. Xanthi) leaves was also evaluated. Bacterial
suspensions (1.5 ⅹ 108 CFU) of 2 isolates were injected into tobacco leaves, and 
after 48 h, both isolates caused a hypersensitive response. To confirm
pathogenicity of isolates, 3-mm-deep holes in five immature apricot (cv. Goldcot)
and five immature apple (cv. Fuji) fruits were inoculated with 10 µl bacterial
suspension (1.5 ⅹ 108 CFU/ml). The inoculated fruits were placed in a humid
plastic box. After 7 days at 27℃, severe necrosis and bacterial ooze were present
at the inoculated sites in three repeated tests. No symptoms were observed on
fruits inoculated with sterile water. To complete Koch's postulates, bacteria
were reisolated from the inoculated apricot and apple fruits. PCR using the
specific primer sets stated above confirmed the identity as E. amylovora. Thus,
based on disease symptoms, sequences, and pathogenicity, the bacterium causing
blight of apricot was identified as E. amylovora. Natural infections of E.
amylovora on apricot trees have been reported in the Czech Republic and Hungary
(Korba and Sillerova 2011; Vegh and Palkovics 2013). Fire blight was observed in 
the Czech Republic on apricot trees near pear seedlings, which are highly
susceptible to E. amylovora (Korba and Sillerova 2011). Natural infections of E. 
amylovora on Japanese plum planted adjacent to an apple orchard with severe fire 
blight has been reported in the United States (Mohan and Thomson 1996). Moreover,
susceptibility to fire blight has been reported for apricot and Japanese plum
cultivars (Mohan and Bijman 1999). To our knowledge, this the first report of
fire blight of apricot caused by E. amylovora in Korea. This report is important 
because it provides evidence that apricot may be an overlooked reservoir for E.
amylovora, in addition to apple, pear, and other rosaceous plants, in Korea. An
intensive survey for additional host plants for the fire blight pathogen will be 
continued in Korea. This work was supported by a grant from the Agenda program
(PJ01530202) of Rural Development Administration, Republic of Korea.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS-09-20-1973-PDN 
PMID: 33048592 

