
1. J Periodontal Res. 1995 Mar;30(2):116-23.

Lipopolysaccharides from periodontal pathogens prime neutrophils for enhanced
respiratory burst: differential effect of a synthetic lipid a precursor IVA
(LA-14-PP).

Aida Y(1), Kukita T, Takada H, Maeda K, Pabst MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

When neutrophils are incubated with bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS), they
become primed for enhanced release of superoxide anion (O2-) in response to
stimulation by FMLP. We investigated the human neutrophil-priming activity of LPS
from the periodontal pathogens, Porphyromonas gingivalis (Pg), Prevotella
intermedia (Pi) and Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans (Aa) in comparison with 
that of LPS from Escherichia coli (E. coli). The optimum conditions for LPS to
prime neutrophils were assessed for every LPS and found to be as follows:
Neutrophils were incubated with LPS in the presence of 10% heat-inactivated
plasma and 1 mM EDTA at 37 degrees C for 30 min and then stimulated with 1 microM
FMLP at 37 degrees C for 7 min. Under these conditions, half-maximum priming was 
observed at 6.2 ng/ml Pg-LPS, 45 ng/ml Pi-LPS, 1.5 ng/ml Aa-LPS and 1.5 ng/ml E. 
coli-LPS. The priming activity of each LPS was neutralized by polymyxin B.
Anti-CD14 monoclonal antibody inhibited priming by all LPS. The priming by Aa-LPS
and E. coli-LPS was inhibited by LA-14-PP, a synthetic lipid A precursor IVA, but
that by Pg-LPS and Pi-LPS was not. Priming by tumor necrosis factor alpha was not
affected by polymyxin B, anti-CD14 antibody or LA-14-PP. Gelation of Limulus
amebocyte lysate occurred at 10 pg/ml Pg-LPS, 30 pg/ml Pi-LPS, 3 pg/ml Aa-LPS and
3 pg/ml E. coli-LPS. Thus LPS from different periodontal pathogens primed
neutrophils with different efficacy.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0765.1995.tb01260.x 
PMID: 7539837  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

