
1. Biochemistry. 1994 Mar 1;33(8):2255-61.

In vitro methylation of Escherichia coli 16S rRNA by tRNA
(m5U54)-methyltransferase.

Gu X(1), Ofengand J, Santi DV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San
Francisco 94143.

16S rRNA, isolated from Escherichia coli or synthesized in vitro, is methylated
by tRNA (m5U54)-methyltransferase (RUMT) and S-adenosyl-L-methionine to give
ribothymidine (m5U). By methylation studies of 16S rRNA fragments,
nearest-neighbor analysis, and nuclease protection experiments, the site of
methylation was identified as U788. We have previously shown that the substrate
consensus sequence for the T-arm of tRNA consists of a 2-5 base-pair stem and a
7-base loop, with certain constraints on base substitutions within the loop, and 
in the first two bases which close the loop [Gu, X., & Santi, D. V. (1991)
Biochemistry 30, 2999-3002]. U788 of 16S rRNA is within a 9-base loop of a
predicted stem-loop structure of 16S rRNA. If Ado substitution is allowed at the 
third and seventh positions of the loop and the first and ninth bases of the loop
form an A-C base pair, the resulting stem-loop falls within the RUMT consensus
sequence of the T-arm of tRNA. Individual mutants of the tRNA T-arm at these
positions confirm that the substitutions are allowable, and expand the previous
consensus sequence. Further, prevention of 7-base loop formation by requiring C-C
base-pair formation at the loop closure abolishes substrate activity. RUMT forms 
a complex with Syn 16S rRNA which can be isolated on nitrocellulose filters or by
SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. The enzyme also catalyzes exchange of tritium of
[3H]Ura-16S rRNA for protons of water. By analogy with studies with tRNA [Gu, X.,
& Santi, D. V. (1991) Biochemistry 31, 10295-10302], the mechanism of methylation
is proposed to involve formation of a covalent, albeit reversible, Michael adduct
with the target U788 of 16S rRNA.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00174a036 
PMID: 8117682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

