
1. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 1993 Oct;11(8):424-8.

[Nosocomial bacteremia caused by Enterobacter spp.: epidemiology and prognostic
factors].

[Article in Spanish]

Peña C(1), Pujol M, Pallarés R, Cisnal M, Ariza J, Gudiol F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Hospital de Bellvitge-Prínceps
d'Espanya, Barcelona.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to establish the clinical and epidemiologic
features of nosocomial bacteremia by Enterobacter spp. and to analyse its
prognostic factors.
METHODS: A prospective study of the episodes of nosocomial bacteremia by
Enterobacter spp. with clinical significance, detected in a third level
university hospital from January 1984 to December 1990 was performed.
RESULTS: During the study period, 226 episodes of bacteremia by Enterobacter
spp., of which 184 (81%) were of nosocomial origin (8.1% of all the nosocomial
bacteremias), while 14% were polymicrobial. An increasing trend was observed in
the number of episodes (1984 vs 1990) from 0.9 vs 1.8 episodes per 1,000
admissions, respectively. The mean age was 57 years and the male/female relation 
was 2.4/1. The most frequent focus of origin was infection of the vascular
catheter (43%), followed by intraabdominal catheter (21%), urinary tract (14%),
and other foci (17%). Fifty-four percent of the patients had received antibiotics
prior to the episode of bacteremia. Most of the cases were detected in the
Intensive Care Units (ICU) (41%) and in the gastrointestinal surgery area (24%). 
Global mortality was 23%. Logistic regression analysis selected an entry site
other than infection of the vascular catheter (odds ratio 6.1; CI [95%)]
2.0-18.4), shock (odds ratio, 6; CI [95%], 1.6-21.9) and immunosuppressive
treatment (odds ratio, 5; CI [95%], 1.5-16.2) as independent variables of bad
prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Enterobacter spp. is an important nosocomial pathogen taking fourth 
place in the ranking of nosocomial bacteremia by gram negative bacilli. It
predominantly affects a population of patients admitted in the ICU and surgery.
The intravascular catheter is a frequent entry site for nosocomial bacteremia by 
Enterobacter spp.


PMID: 8260514  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

