
1. Microb Pathog. 1995 Jul;19(1):39-48.

Pathogenesis studies on Vibrio alginolyticus in the grouper, Epinephelus
malabaricus, Bloch et Schneider.

Lee KK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquaculture, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung, R.O.C.

A pathogenic vibrio, strain S3y was isolated from an outbreak of vibriosis in
grouper (Epinephelus malabaricus) fry in Kaohsiung, Southern Taiwan in November
1991. It was identified as Vibrio alginolyticus on the basis of a number of
biochemical tests. The bacterium was therefore identified as Vibrio, a
Gram-negative, straight rod, motile, oxidase and catalase positive, swarming on
TSA plate, fermentative and produced yellow colonies on TCBS agar. It did not
utilise sodium citrate, but it was gelatinase positive and sensitive to the
vibriostatic agent, 0/129. It could grow on TSA with up to 11% NaCl. Its G+C
ratio was 47%. The minimum lethal dose of strain S3y was 500 cfu/g fish body
weight in the grouper (Epinephelus malabaricus). The same bacterial species could
be reisolated from the kidney of moribund fish following bacterial challenge. The
extracellular products (ECP) of S3y were lethal to fish with a minimum lethal
dose of 0.52 microgram/g fish body weight. A 34 kDa protease was purified from
the ECP of S3y and demonstrated to be a toxin by intraperitoneal injection in the
grouper. The minimum lethal dose of the purified protease was 0.17 microgram/g
fish body weight. Intraperitoneal injection of the bacteria, ECP or the 34 kDa
protease all caused slight exophthalmia with corneal opaqueness in moribund and
dead fish. The results suggested that the 34 kDa protease might play an important
role in the pathology of vibriosis caused by this bacterium.

DOI: 10.1016/s0882-4010(85)90000-2 
PMID: 8559039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

