
1. Cell Tissue Res. 1996 Jul;285(1):39-49.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha in macrophages of heart, liver, kidney, and in the
pituitary gland.

Arras M(1), HÃ¶che A, Bohle R, Eckert P, Riedel W, Schaper J.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute, Department of Experimental Cardiology, Benekestrasse 2, 
D-61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) is an important mediator in bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced fever and shock. New data on TNFalpha-producing 
macrophages in heart, pituitary gland, kidneys and liver in correlation with
TNFalpha plasma levels are reported here. In adult rabbits, core temperature and 
TNFalpha plasma levels are significantly increased at 3 and 24 h after treatment 
with LPS. After a delay of 6-12 h, the number of TNFalpha-containing macrophages,
determined by immunohistochemistry, increases more than fivefold in all organs
investigated. With the exception of the pituitary gland, the increase in cell
number is correlated with the degree of cellular injury, indicating the
involvement of TNFalpha in LPS-induced organ damage that is accompanied by the
synthesis of the cytokine. Cortisol levels also increase for at least 24 h after 
LPS treatment, show peak values 6 h after interleukin-1 treatment, and are
unchanged after TNFalpha treatment, indicating the different effects of these
factors on the hypothalamo-hypophyseal-adrenocortical axis. This study provides
evidence that macrophageal TNFalpha of multi-organ origin is involved in
LPS-induced tissue injury and supports the concept of a systemic inflammatory
response syndrome. We also show for the first time that in the anterior lobe of
the pituitary gland TNFalpha is a normal constituent in cells producing growth
hormone but not ACTH. Moreover, most cells of the intermediate lobe are positive 
for TNFalpha.

DOI: 10.1007/s004410050618 
PMID: 8766856  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

