
1. Dev Biol Stand. 1997;90:391-400.

Vaccination strategies in freshwater salmonid aquaculture.

Larsen JL(1), Pedersen K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Royal Veterinary and Agricultural
University, Copenhagen, Denmark.

The focus of this chapter is antibacterial vaccines. The main salmonid species in
freshwater aquaculture is the rainbow trout. Other salmonid species are produced 
on a limited scale. The most important bacterial fish diseases in European
freshwater aquaculture are the rainbow trout fry syndrome-RTFS-(Flavobacterium
psychrophilum) and enteric redmouth disease-ERM-(Yersinia ruckeri) which are
widespread and cause serious epizootics, while furunculosis (Aeromonas
salmonicida) is endemic, only giving overt disease under extremely stressing
conditions. In the hatchery, there is a need for vaccination against RTFS (not
commercially available) and ERM; in the ponds it is urgent to vaccinate against
ERM, while the importance of furunculosis vaccination is not clear. The fish for 
ongrowing in saltwater should be vaccinated against ERM, furunculosis and
vibriosis. Commercial vaccines are available against these diseases, either as
single component or combination vaccines for immersion and injection-and oral
vaccines are under registration. Hitherto, there has not been much strategic
research on vaccination in freshwater; however recent results suggest that with
the regime of vaccines available (and soon available), fish should be vaccinated 
with an ERM immersion vaccine in the hatchery approximately four weeks before
transfer to the ponds. To cover the growth period in fresh water an oral booster 
should be given two to three months later. There is a need for development and
research in strategic use of an RTFS and a furunculosis vaccine in freshwater
aquaculture.


PMID: 9270868  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

