
1. Biochemistry. 1997 Sep 30;36(39):11556-63.

Invariant amino acids in the Mur peptide synthetases of bacterial peptidoglycan
synthesis and their modification by site-directed mutagenesis in the
UDP-MurNAc:L-alanine ligase from Escherichia coli.

Bouhss A(1), Mengin-Lecreulx D, Blanot D, van Heijenoort J, Parquet C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherche Associée 1131 du Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Biochimie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université Paris-Sud, 91405
Orsay, France.

The comparison of the amino acid sequences of 20 cytoplasmic peptidoglycan
synthetases (MurC, MurD, MurE, MurF, and Mpl) from various bacterial organisms
has allowed us to detect common invariants: seven amino acids and the ATP-binding
consensus sequence GXXGKT/S all at the same position in the alignment. The Mur
synthetases thus appeared as a well-defined class of closely functionally related
proteins. The conservation of a constant backbone length between certain
invariants suggested common structural motifs. Among the other enzymes catalyzing
a peptide bond formation driven by ATP hydrolysis to ADP and Pi, only
folylpoly-gamma-l-glutamate synthetases presented the same common conserved amino
acid residues, except for the most N-terminal invariant D50. Site-directed
mutageneses were carried out to replace the K130, E174, H199, N293, N296, R327,
and D351 residues by alanine in the MurC protein from Escherichia coli taken as
model. For this purpose, plasmid pAM1005 was used as template, MurC being highly 
overproduced in this genetic setting. Analysis of the Vmax values of the mutated 
proteins suggested that residues K130, E174, and D351 are essential for the
catalytic process whereas residues H199, N293, N296, and R327 were not. Mutations
K130A, H199A, N293A, N296A, and R327A led to important variations of the Km
values for one or more substrates, thereby indicating that these residues are
involved in the structure of the active site and suggesting that the binding
order of the substrates could be ATP, UDP-MurNAc, and alanine. The various
mutated murC plasmids were tested for their effects on the growth, cell
morphology, and peptidoglycan cell content of a murC thermosensitive strain at 42
degrees C. The observed effects (complementation, altered morphology, and reduced
peptidoglycan content) paralleled more or less the decreased values of the MurC
activity of each mutant.

DOI: 10.1021/bi970797f 
PMID: 9305945  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

