
1. J Med Chem. 1997 Oct 10;40(21):3336-45.

Effect of a chemical modification on the hydrated adenosine intermediate produced
by adenosine deaminase and a model reaction for a potential mechanism of action
of 5-aminoimidazole ribonucleotide carboxylase.

Groziak MP(1), Huan ZW, Ding H, Meng Z, Stevens WC, Robinson PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Southern Illinois University,
Carbondale 62901-4409, USA.

Using the hydrated adenosine intermediate (6R)-6-amino-1,
6-dihydro-6-hydroxy-9-(beta-D-ribofuranosyl)purine (2) produced by adenosine
deaminase (ADA, EC 3.5.4.4) as a starting point, the active site probe and
inhibitor platform 5-(formylamino)imidazole riboside (FAIRs, 4) was designed by
removal of the-C6(OH)(NH2)-molecular fragment of 2 generated by the early events 
of the enzyme-catalyzed hydrolysis. FAIRs was synthesized directly from the
sodium salt of 5-amino-1-(beta-D-ribofuranosyl)imidazole-4-carboxylic acid (CAIR)
along a reaction sequence involving a tandem N-formylation/decarboxylation that
may have a mechanistic connection to the Escherichia coli purE-catalyzed
constitutional isomerization of N5-CAIR to CAIR. The physical and spectral
properties of FAIRs were elucidated, its X-ray crystal and NMR solution
structures were determined, and its interaction with ADA was investigated.
Crystalline FAIRs exists solely as the Z-formamide rotamer and exhibits many of
the same intramolecular hydrogen bonding events known to contribute to the
association of Ado to ADA. In water and various organic solvents, however, FAIRs 
exists as NMR-distinct, slowly interconverting Z and E rotamers. This truncated
enzymatic tetrahedral intermediate analog was determined to be a competitive
inhibitor of ADA with an apparent Ki binding constant of 40 microM, a value quite
close to that (33 microM) of the natural substrate's K(m). The actual species
selected for binding by ADA, though, is likely the minor hydroxyimino prototropic
form of Z-FAIRs possessing a far lower true Ki value. As the structural features 
of FAIRs appear well-suited to support its use as a template for constructing
active site probes of both ADA and AIR carboxylases, a variety of
carbohydrate-protected versions of FAIRs suitable for facile aglycon elaborations
were synthesized. The N3-alkylation, N3-borane complexation, and C4-iodination of
some of these were investigated in order to assess physicochemical properties
that may assist in the elucidation of mechanisms for the AIR carboxylases. The
survey of these properties taken together with a reasonable mechanism for the
model CAIRs-->FAIRs synthetic transformation is interpreted to support a
mechanism for the purE-catalyzed N5-CAIR-->CAIR biosynthetic one that involves a 
carboxylative sp3-rehybridization of the imidazole C4 atom rather than one
possessing a dipole-stabilized C4 sp2 carbanionic intermediate.

DOI: 10.1021/jm970301s 
PMID: 9341908  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

