
1. Microb Pathog. 1999 Jan;26(1):13-23.

Tetranucleotide repeats identify novel virulence determinant homologues in
Neisseria meningitidis.

Peak IR(1), Jennings MP, Hood DW, Moxon ER.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Paediatrics, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford,
OX3 9DS, U.K.peak@biosci.uq.edu.au

Numerous outer membrane components of Neisseria meningitidis and N. gonorrhoeae
exhibit phase variable expression (the rapid, reversible on/off switching of
phenotypic expression). Many of the genes encoding these outer membrane
components contain simple repetitive DNA motifs (mononucleotides, dinucleotides, 
tetranucleotides and other repeats) which mediate this variation. One such repeat
motif, the tetranucleotide 5;-(GCAA)n-3;, is associated with phase-variable LPS
biosynthetic genes in the pathogen Haemophilus influenzae. We have previously
shown that N. meningitidis strain MC58 contains this repeat motif in at least
three distinct genetic loci. In this study all three of these loci were
investigated: two were cloned and identified as novel loci and designated nmrep1 
and nmrep2. The third locus was assigned to a previously cloned gene and here is 
designated nmrep3. The distribution of these loci, and the number of repeat units
at each locus was investigated in a range of strains. This analysis revealed that
the nmrep1 and nmrep2 loci are present in all 45 strains examined, with 41/45
containing nmrep3. Sequences associated with nmrep1 showed no homology with
reported proteins, but amino acid sequences of open reading frames of nmrep2 and 
nmrep3 exhibited sequence homology to the adhesins Aida of Escherichia coli and
Prn of Bordetella sppand IcsA of Shigella flexneri which is involved in
intracellular spread.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/mpat.1998.0243 
PMID: 9973577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

