
1. J Immunol. 1999 Feb 15;162(4):2341-6.

Expression and function of the chemokine receptors CXCR1 and CXCR2 in sepsis.

Cummings CJ(1), Martin TR, Frevert CW, Quan JM, Wong VA, Mongovin SM, Hagen TR,
Steinberg KP, Goodman RB.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Service, Seattle Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Division of
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of
Washington School of Medicine 98195, USA.

Neutrophils (polymorphonuclear neutrophils; PMN) and a redundant system of
chemotactic cytokines (chemokines) have been implicated in the pathogenesis of
the acute respiratory distress syndrome in patients with sepsis. PMN express two 
cell surface receptors for the CXC chemokines, CXCR1 and CXCR2. We investigated
the expression and function of these receptors in patients with severe sepsis.
Compared with normal donors, CXCR2 surface expression was down-regulated by 50%
on PMN from septic patients (p < 0.005), while CXCR1 expression persisted. In
vitro migratory responses to the CXCR1 ligand, IL-8, were similar in PMN from
septic patients and normal donors. By contrast, the migratory response to the
CXCR2 ligands, epithelial cell-derived neutrophil activator (ENA-78) and the
growth-related oncogene proteins, was markedly suppressed in PMN from septic
patients (p < 0.05). Ab specific for CXCR1 blocked in vitro migration of PMN from
septic patients to IL-8 (p < 0.05), but not to FMLP. Thus, functionally
significant down-regulation of CXCR2 occurs on PMN in septic patients. We
conclude that in a complex milieu of multiple CXC chemokines, CXCR1 functions as 
the single dominant CXC chemokine receptor in patients with sepsis. These
observations offer a potential strategy for attenuating adverse inflammation in
sepsis while preserving host defenses mediated by bacteria-derived peptides such 
as FMLP.


PMID: 9973513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

