
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Mar;79(3):1107-17. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01021-10. Epub 2010 Dec
13.

Reticulocyte and erythrocyte binding-like proteins function cooperatively in
invasion of human erythrocytes by malaria parasites.

Lopaticki S(1), Maier AG, Thompson J, Wilson DW, Tham WH, Triglia T, Gout A,
Speed TP, Beeson JG, Healer J, Cowman AF.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria
3050, Australia.

Plasmodium falciparum causes the most severe form of malaria in humans and
invades erythrocytes using multiple ligand-receptor interactions. Two important
protein families involved in erythrocyte binding are the erythrocyte binding-like
(EBL) and the reticulocyte binding-like (RBL or P. falciparum Rh [PfRh])
proteins. We constructed P. falciparum lines lacking expression of EBL proteins
by creating single and double knockouts of the corresponding genes for eba-175,
eba-181, and eba-140 and show that the EBL and PfRh proteins function
cooperatively, consistent with them playing a similar role in merozoite invasion.
We provide evidence that PfRh and EBL proteins functionally interact, as loss of 
function of EBA-181 ablates the ability of PfRh2a/b protein antibodies to inhibit
merozoite invasion. Additionally, loss of function of some ebl genes results in
selection for increased transcription of the PfRh family. This provides a
rational basis for considering PfRh and EBL proteins for use as a combination
vaccine against P. falciparum. We immunized rabbits with combinations of PfRh and
EBL proteins to test the ability of antibodies to block merozoite invasion in
growth inhibition assays. A combination of EBA-175, PfRh2a/b, and PfRh4
recombinant proteins induced antibodies that potently blocked merozoite invasion.
This validates the use of a combination of these ligands as a potential vaccine
that would have broad activity against P. falciparum.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01021-10 
PMCID: PMC3067488
PMID: 21149582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

