
1. Mol Microbiol. 2011 Jan;79(1):205-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07442.x. Epub
2010 Nov 10.

An essential Aurora-related kinase transiently associates with spindle pole
bodies during Plasmodium falciparum erythrocytic schizogony.

Reininger L(1), Wilkes JM, Bourgade H, Miranda-Saavedra D, Doerig C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM-EPFL Joint Laboratory, Global Health Institute, EPFL-SV-GHI, Station
19, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. luc.reininger@epfl.ch

Aurora kinases compose a family of conserved Ser/Thr protein kinases playing
essential roles in eukaryotic cell division. To date, Aurora homologues remain
uncharacterized in the protozoan phylum Apicomplexa. In malaria parasites, the
characterization of Aurora kinases may help understand the cell cycle control
during erythrocytic schizogony where asynchronous nuclear divisions occur. In
this study, we revisited the kinome of Plasmodium falciparum and identified three
Aurora-related kinases, Pfark-1, -2, -3. Among these, Pfark-1 is highly conserved
in malaria parasites and also appears to be conserved across Apicomplexa. By
tagging the endogenous Pfark-1 gene with the green fluorescent protein (GFP) in
live parasites, we show that the Pfark-1-GFP protein forms paired dots associated
with only a subset of nuclei within individual schizonts. Immunofluorescence
analysis using an anti-α-tubulin antibody strongly suggests a recruitment of
Pfark-1 at duplicated spindle pole bodies at the entry of the M phase of the cell
cycle. Unsuccessful attempts at disrupting the Pfark-1 gene with a knockout
construct further indicate that Pfark-1 is required for parasite growth in red
blood cells. Our study provides new insights into the cell cycle control of
malaria parasites and reports the importance of Aurora kinases as potential
targets for new antimalarials.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07442.x 
PMCID: PMC3025120
PMID: 21166904  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

