
1. J Infect Dis. 2011 Feb 15;203(4):561-9. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiq080. Epub 2011 Jan
7.

Placental malaria-associated inflammation disturbs the insulin-like growth factor
axis of fetal growth regulation.

Umbers AJ(1), Boeuf P, Clapham C, Stanisic DI, Baiwog F, Mueller I, Siba P, King 
CL, Beeson JG, Glazier J, Rogerson SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Royal Parade, Parkville Victoria 3050, Australia. a.umbers2@pgrad.unimelb.edu.au

BACKGROUND: The pathogenetic mechanisms of fetal growth restriction associated
with placental malaria are largely unknown. We sought to determine whether
placental malaria and related inflammation were associated with disturbances in
the insulin-like growth factor (IGF) axis, a major regulator of fetal growth.
METHOD: We measured IGF-1 and IGF-2 concentrations in plasma from 88
mother-neonate pairs at delivery and IGF binding proteins 1 and 3 (IGFBP-1 and
IGFBP-3, respectively) in cord plasma from a cohort of Papua New Guinean women
with and without placental malaria. Messenger RNA levels of IGF-1, IGF-2, and the
IGF receptors were measured in matched placental biopsy specimens.
RESULTS: Compared with those for uninfected pregnancies, IGF-1 levels were
reduced by 28% in plasma samples from women with placental Plasmodium falciparum 
infection and associated inflammation (P = .007) and by 25% in their neonates (P 
= .002). Levels of fetal IGFBP-1 were elevated in placental malaria with and
without inflammation (P = .08 and P = .006, respectively) compared with
uninfected controls. IGF-2 and IGFBP-3 plasma concentrations and placental IGF
ligand and receptor messenger RNA transcript levels were similar across groups.
CONCLUSION: Placental malaria-associated inflammation disturbs maternal and fetal
levels of IGFs, which regulate fetal growth. This may be one mechanism by which
placental malaria leads to fetal growth restriction.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiq080 
PMCID: PMC3071224
PMID: 21216864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

