
1. Int J Pharm. 2011 Sep 20;416(2):402-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2011.01.048. Epub
2011 Feb 1.

Cationic nanoemulsion as a delivery system for oligonucleotides targeting
malarial topoisomerase II.

Bruxel F(1), Cojean S, Bochot A, Teixeira H, Bories C, Loiseau PM, Fattal E.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris-Sud, CNRS UMR 8612, Physico-chimie - Pharmacotechnie -
Biopharmacie, Faculté de Pharmacie, 5 Rue Jean-Baptiste Clément, Châtenay-Malabry
F-92296, France.

A promising strategy based on the antisense oligonucleotides against the
Plasmodium falciparum topoisomerase II has been considered using cationic
nanoemulsion as oligonucleotide delivery system. Phosphodiester and chemically
modified phosphorothioate oligonucleotides bearing negative charges were adsorbed
on positively charged emulsion composed of medium chain triglycerides, egg
lecithin, 1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane (DOTAP), and water, at
different +/- charge ratios (positive charges from cationic lipid/negative
charges from oligonucleotide): +0.5/-, +2/-, +4/- and +6/-. The physicochemical
properties of the complexes were determined, as well as their stability in
culture medium. Their interaction with erythrocytes through hemolysis, binding
experiments and confocal microscopy were also evaluated. Finally, the in vitro
evaluation of parasite growth and reinfection capacity was performed. The overall
results showed that antisense oligonucleotides against P. falciparum
topoisomerase II gene can be efficiently adsorbed onto a cationic nanoemulsion
forming complexes. Whereas unloaded nanoemulsion displayed an hemolytic effect
due to the presence of the cationic lipid, this was not the case of loaded
nanoemulsion at low +/- ratios. Oligonucleotide-loaded nanoemulsions were found
to be located inside the infected erythrocytes, inhibiting efficiently parasite
growth (until 80%) and causing a delay in P. falciparum life cycle.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2011.01.048 
PMID: 21291974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

