
1. FEMS Microbiol Rev. 2011 Jul;35(4):609-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6976.2011.00267.x.
Epub 2011 Mar 10.

Phosphoethanolamine methyltransferases in phosphocholine biosynthesis: functions 
and potential for antiparasite therapy.

Bobenchik AM(1), Augagneur Y, Hao B, Hoch JC, Ben Mamoun C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT 06510-3221, USA.

S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferases represent a diverse
group of enzymes that catalyze the transfer of a methyl group from a methyl donor
SAM to nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur or carbon atoms of a large number of biologically
active large and small molecules. These modifications play a major role in the
regulation of various biological functions such as gene expression, signaling,
nuclear division and metabolism. The three-step SAM-dependent methylation of
phosphoethanolamine to form phosphocholine catalyzed by phosphoethanolamine
N-methyltransferases (PMTs) has emerged as an important biochemical step in the
synthesis of the major phospholipid, phosphatidylcholine, in some eukaryotes.
PMTs have been identified in nematodes, plants, African clawed frogs, zebrafish, 
the Florida lancelet, Proteobacteria and human malaria parasites. Data
accumulated thus far suggest an important role for these enzymes in growth and
development. This review summarizes published studies on the biochemical and
genetic characterization of these enzymes, and discusses their evolution and
their suitability as targets for the development of therapies against parasitic
infections, as well as in bioengineering for the development of nutritional and
stress-resistant plants.

Â© 2011 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6976.2011.00267.x 
PMCID: PMC4107886
PMID: 21303393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

