
1. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 4;6(2):e16471. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016471.

Analysis of two novel midgut-specific promoters driving transgene expression in
Anopheles stephensi mosquitoes.

Nolan T(1), Petris E, MÃ¼ller HM, Cronin A, Catteruccia F, Crisanti A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Tissue-specific promoters controlling the expression of transgenes in
Anopheles mosquitoes represent a valuable tool both for studying the interaction 
between these malaria vectors and the Plasmodium parasites they transmit and for 
novel malaria control strategies based on developing Plasmodium-refractory
mosquitoes by expressing anti-parasitic genes. With this aim we have studied the 
promoter regions of two genes from the most important malaria vector, Anopheles
gambiae, whose expression is strongly induced upon blood feeding.
RESULTS: We analysed the A. gambiae Antryp1 and G12 genes, which we have shown to
be midgut-specific and maximally expressed at 24 hours post-bloodmeal (PBM).
Antryp1, required for bloodmeal digestion, encodes one member of a family of 7
trypsin genes. The G12 gene, of unknown function, was previously identified in
our laboratory in a screen for genes induced in response to a bloodmeal. We fused
1.1 kb of the upstream regions containing the putative promoter of these genes to
reporter genes and transformed these into the Indian malaria vector A. stephensi 
to see if we could recapitulate the expression pattern of the endogenous genes.
Both the Antryp1 and G12 upstream regions were able to drive female-predominant, 
midgut-specific expression in transgenic mosquitoes. Expression of the
Antryp1-driven reporter in transgenic A. stephensi lines was low, undetectable by
northern blot analysis, and failed to fully match the induction kinetics of the
endogenous Antryp1 gene in A. gambiae. This incomplete conservation of expression
suggests either subtle differences in the transcriptional machinery between A.
stephensi and A. gambiae or that the upstream region chosen lacked all the
control elements. In contrast, the G12 upstream region was able to faithfully
reproduce the expression profile of the endogenous A. gambiae gene, showing
female midgut specificity in the adult mosquito and massive induction PBM,
peaking at 24 hours.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies on two putative blood-meal induced, midgut-specific
promoters validate the use of G12 upstream regulatory regions to drive targeted
transgene expression coinciding spatially and temporally with pre-sporogonic
stages of Plasmodium parasites in the mosquito, offering the possibility of
manipulating vector competence or performing functional studies on
vector-parasite interactions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016471 
PMCID: PMC3033896
PMID: 21326609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

