
1. Gene. 2011 Jul 1;480(1-2):28-33. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.03.004. Epub 2011 Mar
22.

Characterization of the complete mitochondrial genomes of five Eimeria species
from domestic chickens.

Lin RQ(1), Qiu LL, Liu GH, Wu XY, Weng YB, Xie WQ, Hou J, Pan H, Yuan ZG, Zou FC,
Hu M, Zhu XQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological
Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou
Veterinary Research Institute, CAAS, Lanzhou, Gansu, PR China.

Chicken coccidiosis caused by members of the genus Eimeria causes significant
economic losses worldwide. In the present study we sequenced the complete
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequences of six Eimeria species and analyzed features 
of their gene contents and genome organizations. The complete mt genomes of E.
acervulina, E. brunetti, E. maxima, E. necatrix, E. tenella and E. praecox were
6179bp, 6148bp, 6169bp, 6214bp, 6213bp and 6174bp in size, respectively. All of
the mt genomes consist of 3 genes for proteins (cox1, cox3, and cytb), 12 gene
fragments for the large subunit (LSU) rRNA, and 7 gene fragments for the small
subunit (SSU) rRNA, but no transfer RNA genes. The organization of the mt genomes
is similar to that of Plasmodium, but distinct from Babesia and Theileria. The
putative direction of translation for 3 genes (cox1, cox3, and cytb) was the same
in all six Eimeria species. The contents of A+T of the mt genomes were 65.35% for
E. acervulina, 65.43% for E. brunetti, 64.53% for E. maxima, 65.04% for E.
necatrix, 64.98% for E. tenella and 65.59% for E. praecox. The AT bias has a
significant effect on both the codon usage pattern and amino acid composition of 
proteins. Phylogenetic analyses using concatenated nucleotide sequences of the 2 
protein-coding genes (cytb and cox1), with three different computational
algorithms (Bayesian analysis, maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood), all
revealed distinct groups with high statistical support, indicating that the six
Eimeria spp. represent six distinct but closely-related species. These data
provide novel mtDNA markers for studying the molecular epidemiology and
population genetics of the six Eimeria spp., and should have implications for the
molecular diagnosis, prevention and control of coccidiosis in domestic chickens.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.03.004 
PMID: 21402132  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

