
1. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 7;6(3):e17782. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017782.

Cloning of the repertoire of individual Plasmodium falciparum var genes using
transformation associated recombination (TAR).

Gaida A(1), Becker MM, Schmid CD, BÃ¼hlmann T, Louis EJ, Beck HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Medical Parasitology and Infection Biology, Swiss Tropical and 
Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

One of the major virulence factors of the malaria causing parasite is the
Plasmodium falciparum encoded erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1). It is
translocated to It the membrane of infected erythrocytes and expressed from
approximately 60 var genes in a mutually exclusive manner. Switching of var genes
allows the parasite to alter functional and antigenic properties of infected
erythrocytes, to escape the immune defense and to establish chronic infections.
We have developed an efficient method for isolating VAR genes from telomeric and 
other genome locations by adapting transformation-associated recombination (TAR) 
cloning, which can then be analyzed and sequenced. For this purpose, three
plasmids each containing a homologous sequence representing the upstream regions 
of the group A, B, and C var genes and a sequence homologous to the conserved
acidic terminal segment (ATS) of var genes were generated. Co-transfection with
P. falciparum strain ITG2F6 genomic DNA in yeast cells yielded 200 TAR clones.
The relative frequencies of clones from each group were not biased. Clones were
screened by PCR, as well as Southern blotting, which revealed clones missed by
PCR due to sequence mismatches with the primers. Selected clones were transformed
into E. coli and further analyzed by RFLP and end sequencing. Physical analysis
of 36 clones revealed 27 distinct types potentially representing 50% of the var
gene repertoire. Three clones were selected for sequencing and assembled into
single var gene containing contigs. This study demonstrates that it is possible
to rapidly obtain the repertoire of var genes from P. falciparum within a single 
set of cloning experiments. This technique can be applied to individual isolates 
which will provide a detailed picture of the diversity of var genes in the field.
This is a powerful tool to overcome the obstacles with cloning and assembly of
multi-gene families by simultaneously cloning each member.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017782 
PMCID: PMC3049791
PMID: 21408186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

