
1. BMC Genomics. 2011 Mar 20;12:155. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-155.

Development of the piggyBac transposable system for Plasmodium berghei and its
application for random mutagenesis in malaria parasites.

Fonager J(1), Franke-Fayard BM, Adams JH, Ramesar J, Klop O, Khan SM, Janse CJ,
Waters AP.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden Malaria Research Group, Department of Parasitology, Leiden University
Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The genome of a number of species of malaria parasites (Plasmodium
spp.) has been sequenced in the hope of identifying new drug and vaccine targets.
However, almost one-half of predicted Plasmodium genes are annotated as
hypothetical and are difficult to analyse in bulk due to the inefficiency of
current reverse genetic methodologies for Plasmodium. Recently, it has been shown
that the transposase piggyBac integrates at random into the genome of the human
malaria parasite P. falciparum offering the possibility to develop forward
genetic screens to analyse Plasmodium gene function. This study reports the
development and application of the piggyBac transposition system for the rodent
malaria parasite P. berghei and the evaluation of its potential as a tool in
forward genetic studies. P. berghei is the most frequently used malaria parasite 
model in gene function analysis since phenotype screens throughout the complete
Plasmodium life cycle are possible both in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that piggyBac based gene inactivation and
promoter-trapping is both easier and more efficient in P. berghei than in the
human malaria parasite, P. falciparum. Random piggyBac-mediated insertion into
genes was achieved after parasites were transfected with the piggyBac donor
plasmid either when transposase was expressed either from a helper plasmid or a
stably integrated gene in the genome. Characterization of more than 120 insertion
sites demonstrated that more than 70 most likely affect gene expression
classifying their protein products as non-essential for asexual blood stage
development. The non-essential nature of two of these genes was confirmed by
targeted gene deletion one of which encodes P41, an ortholog of a human malaria
vaccine candidate. Importantly for future development of whole genome phenotypic 
screens the remobilization of the piggyBac element in parasites that stably
express transposase was demonstrated.
CONCLUSION: These data demonstrate that piggyBac behaved as an efficient and
random transposon in P. berghei. Remobilization of piggyBac element shows that
with further development the piggyBac system can be an effective tool to generate
random genome-wide mutation parasite libraries, for use in large-scale phenotype 
screens in vitro and in vivo.

Â© 2011 Fonager et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-155 
PMCID: PMC3073922
PMID: 21418605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

