
1. Heredity (Edinb). 2011 Oct;107(4):283-304. doi: 10.1038/hdy.2011.16. Epub 2011
Mar 23.

Population genetics of malaria resistance in humans.

Hedrick PW(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, USA.
philip.hedrick@asu.edu

Erratum in
    Heredity (Edinb). 2011 Dec;107(6):602.

Comment in
    Heredity (Edinb). 2012 Apr;108(4):456.

The high mortality and widespread impact of malaria have resulted in this disease
being the strongest evolutionary selective force in recent human history, and
genes that confer resistance to malaria provide some of the best-known case
studies of strong positive selection in modern humans. I begin by reviewing JBS
Haldane's initial contribution to the potential of malaria genetic resistance in 
humans. Further, I discuss the population genetics aspects of many of the
variants, including globin, G6PD deficiency, Duffy, ovalocytosis, ABO and human
leukocyte antigen variants. Many of the variants conferring resistance to malaria
are 'loss-of-function' mutants and appear to be recent polymorphisms from the
last 5000-10 000 years or less. I discuss estimation of selection coefficients
from case-control data and make predictions about the change for S, C and
G6PD-deficiency variants. In addition, I consider the predicted joint changes
when the two β-globin alleles S and C are both variable in the same population
and when there is a variation for α-thalassemia and S, two unlinked, but
epistatic variants. As more becomes known about genes conferring genetic
resistance to malaria in humans, population genetics approaches can contribute
both to investigating past selection and predicting the consequences in future
generations for these variants.

DOI: 10.1038/hdy.2011.16 
PMCID: PMC3182497
PMID: 21427751  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

