
1. Tissue Antigens. 2011 Jun;77(6):562-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2011.01661.x.
Epub 2011 Mar 30.

Association of HLA alleles with Plasmodium falciparum severity in Malian
children.

Lyke KE(1), Fernández-Viňa MA, Cao K, Hollenbach J, Coulibaly D, Kone AK, Guindo 
A, Burdett LA, Hartzman RJ, Wahl AR, Hildebrand WH, Doumbo OK, Plowe CV, Sztein
MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Center for Vaccine Development, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Pre-erythrocytic immunity to Plasmodium falciparum malaria is likely to be
mediated by T-cell recognition of malaria epitopes presented on infected host
cells via class I and II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens. To test
for associations of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles with disease severity, 
we performed high-resolution typing of HLA class I and II loci and compared the
distributions of alleles of HLA-A, -B, -C and -DRB1 loci in 359 Malian children
of Dogon ethnicity with uncomplicated or severe malaria. We observed that alleles
A*30:01 and A*33:01 had higher frequency in the group of patients with cerebral
disease compared to patients with uncomplicated disease [A*30:01: gf = 0.2031 vs 
gf = 0.1064, odds ratio (OR) = 3.17, P = 0.004, confidence interval (CI)
(1.94-5.19)] and [A*33:01: gf = 0.0781 vs gf = 0.0266, 4.21, P = 0.005, CI
(1.89-9.84)], respectively. The A*30:01 and A*33:01 alleles share some sequence
motifs and A*30:01 appears to have a unique peptide binding repertoire compared
to other A*30 group alleles. Computer algorithms predicted malaria peptides with 
strong binding affinity for HLA-A*30:01 and HLA-A*33:01 but not to closely
related alleles. In conclusion, we identified A*30:01 and A*33:01 as potential
susceptibility factors for cerebral malaria, providing further evidence that
polymorphism of MHC genes results in altered malaria susceptibility.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2011.01661.x 
PMCID: PMC3152196
PMID: 21447146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

