
1. J Immunol. 2011 May 15;186(10):5873-84. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100194. Epub 2011 
Apr 1.

Plasmodium-host interactions directly influence the threshold of memory CD8 T
cells required for protective immunity.

Schmidt NW(1), Butler NS, Harty JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Plasmodium infections are responsible for millions of cases of malaria and âˆ¼1
million deaths annually. Recently, we showed that sterile protection (95%) in
BALB/c mice required Plasmodium berghei circumsporozoite protein
(CS(252-260))-specific memory CD8 T cells exceeding a threshold of 1% of all
PBLs. Importantly, it is not known if Plasmodium species affect the threshold of 
CS-specific memory CD8 T cells required for protection. Furthermore, C57BL/6 mice
immunized with radiation-attenuated parasites are more difficult to protect
against Plasmodium sporozoite challenge than similarly immunized BALB/c mice;
however, it is not known whether this is the result of different CD8 T cell
specificity, functional attributes of CD8 T cells, or mouse strain-specific
factors expressed in nonhematopoietic cells. In this article, we show that more
CS-specific memory CD8 T cells are required for protection against P. yoelii
sporozoite challenge than for protection against P. berghei sporozoite challenge.
Furthermore, P. berghei CS(252)-specific CD8 T cells exhibit reduced protection
against P. berghei sporozoite challenge in the context of C57BL/6 and C57BL/10
non-MHC-linked genes in CB6F1 and B10.D2 mice, respectively. Generation and
immunization of reciprocal chimeric mice between BALB/c and B10.D2 strains
revealed that B10 background factors expressed by nonhematopoietic cells
increased the threshold required for protection through a CD8 T cell-extrinsic
mechanism. Finally, reduced CS-specific memory CD8 T cell protection in P.
yoelii-infected BALB/c or P. berghei-infected B10.D2 mice correlated with
increased rates of Plasmodium amplification in the liver. Thus, both Plasmodium
species and strain-specific background genes in nonhematopoietic cells determine 
the threshold of memory CD8 T cells required for protection.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100194 
PMCID: PMC3087867
PMID: 21460205  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

