
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2011 Oct;28(10):2855-71. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msr103. Epub 2011 Apr
19.

Jumbled genomes: missing Apicomplexan synteny.

DeBarry JD(1), Kissinger JC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia, USA. 
jdebarry@uga.edu

Whole-genome comparisons provide insight into genome evolution by informing on
gene repertoires, gene gains/losses, and genome organization. Most of our
knowledge about eukaryotic genome evolution is derived from studies of
multicellular model organisms. The eukaryotic phylum Apicomplexa contains
obligate intracellular protist parasites responsible for a wide range of human
and veterinary diseases (e.g., malaria, toxoplasmosis, and theileriosis). We have
developed an in silico protein-encoding gene based pipeline to investigate
synteny across 12 apicomplexan species from six genera. Genome rearrangement
between lineages is extensive. Syntenic regions (conserved gene content and
order) are rare between lineages and appear to be totally absent across the
phylum, with no group of three genes found on the same chromosome and in the same
order within 25 kb up- and downstream of any orthologous genes. Conserved synteny
between major lineages is limited to small regions in Plasmodium and
Theileria/Babesia species, and within these conserved regions, there are a number
of proteins putatively targeted to organelles. The observed overall lack of
synteny is surprising considering the divergence times and the apparent absence
of transposable elements (TEs) within any of the species examined. TEs are
ubiquitous in all other groups of eukaryotes studied to date and have been shown 
to be involved in genomic rearrangements. It appears that there are different
criteria governing genome evolution within the Apicomplexa relative to other
well-studied unicellular and multicellular eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msr103 
PMCID: PMC3176833
PMID: 21504890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

