
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2011 Jul;41(7):484-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2011.03.012. 
Epub 2011 Apr 9.

Identification and distribution of a GABA receptor mutation conferring dieldrin
resistance in the malaria vector Anopheles funestus in Africa.

Wondji CS(1), Dabire RK, Tukur Z, Irving H, Djouaka R, Morgan JC.

Author information: 
(1)Vector Group, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke Place, Liverpool
L3 5QA, United Kingdom. c.s.wondji@liverpool.ac.uk

Growing problems of pyrethroid resistance in Anopheles funestus have intensified 
efforts to identify alternative insecticides. Many agrochemicals target the GABA 
receptors, but cross-resistance from dieldrin resistance may preclude their
introduction. Dieldrin resistance was detected in An. funestus populations from
West (Burkina Faso) and central (Cameroon) Africa, but populations from East
(Uganda) and Southern Africa (Mozambique and Malawi) were fully susceptible to
this insecticide. Partial sequencing of the dieldrin target site, the
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor, identified two amino acid substitutions,
A296S and V327I. The A296S mutation has been associated with dieldrin resistance 
in other species. The V327I mutations was detected in the resistant sample from
Burkina Faso and Cameroon and consistently associated with the A296S
substitution. The full-length of the An. funestus GABA-receptor gene, amplified
by RT-PCR, generated a sequence of 1674 bp encoding 557 amino acid of the protein
in An. funestus with 98% similarity to that of Anopheles gambiae. Two diagnostic 
assays were developed to genotype the A296S mutation (pyrosequencing and
PCR-RFLP), and use of these assays revealed high frequency of the resistant
allele in Burkina Faso (60%) and Cameroon (82%), moderate level in Benin (16%)
while low frequency or absence of the mutation was observed respectively in
Uganda (7.5%) or 0% in Malawi and Mozambique. The distribution of the Rdl(R)
mutation in An. funestus populations in Africa suggests extensive barriers to
gene flow between populations from different regions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2011.03.012 
PMCID: PMC3579012
PMID: 21501685  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

