
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2011 Aug;11(6):1327-39. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.04.023.
Epub 2011 Apr 28.

Genetic diversity of Plasmodium vivax Duffy Binding Protein II (PvDBPII) under
unstable transmission and low intensity malaria in Sri Lanka.

Premaratne PH(1), Aravinda BR, Escalante AA, Udagama PV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, University of Colombo, Colombo 03, 
Sri Lanka.

Elucidating the genetic diversity of the Duffy Binding Protein II (PvDBPII), a
leading vaccine candidate for vivax malaria, in different geographical settings
is vital. In Sri Lanka malaria transmission is unstable with low intensity. A
relatively high level of allelic diversity, with 27 polymorphic nucleotides and
33 (aa) haplotypes was detected among the PvdbpII gene in 100 local Plasmodium
vivax isolates collected from two hypoendemic areas, and from a non endemic area 
of the country. Mutations, recombination and balancing selection seem to maintain
the observed local allelic diversity of PvdbpII. Lack of gene flow was evidenced 
by high Fst values between the two endemic study sites. Some of the aa
polymorphisms may alter the binding and expression capacity of predicted T cell
epitopes in PvDBPII. Of the 8 binding inhibitory linear B cell epitopes, 2 (H2
and M1) in the vicinity of the exact binding region of PvDBPII appeared to be
highly conserved in Sri Lankan, Iran and Colombian isolates, while H3, M2, M3 and
L3 neutralizing epitopes seem to be polymorphic globally, with H1 and L2
conserved in Colombian, South Korean and Iran isolates. In comparison to the
reference Sal-1 strain, among 402 world-wide isolates (302 global and 100 local),
121 aa polymorphisms and 138 haplotypes were recorded of which 3 aa polymorphisms
and 21 haplotypes seem to be unique to Sri Lanka. PvdbpII phylogeny suggests that
local P. vivax parasites represent a sample of the global population. The
ubiquitous presence of some PvDBPII aa haplotypes among both local and global P. 
vivax isolates may aid future vaccination strategies based on PvDBPII.

Copyright Â© 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.04.023 
PMID: 21554998  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

