
1. PLoS One. 2011 May 4;6(5):e19307. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019307.

P. falciparum modulates erythroblast cell gene expression in signaling and
erythrocyte production pathways.

Tamez PA(1), Liu H, Wickrema A, Haldar K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Center for Rare and Neglected Diseases,
University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana, United States of America.

Global, genomic responses of erythrocytes to infectious agents have been
difficult to measure because these cells are e-nucleated. We have previously
demonstrated that in vitro matured, nucleated erythroblast cells at the
orthochromatic stage can be efficiently infected by the human malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum. We now show that infection of orthochromatic cells induces
change in 609 host genes. 592 of these transcripts are up-regulated and
associated with metabolic and chaperone pathways unique to P. falciparum
infection, as well as a wide range of signaling pathways that are also induced in
related apicomplexan infections of mouse hepatocytes or human fibroblast cells.
Our data additionally show that polychromatophilic cells, which precede the
orthochromatic stage and are not infected when co-cultured with P. falciparum,
up-regulate a small set of genes, at least two of which are associated with
pathways of hematopoiesis and/or erythroid cell development. These data support
the idea that P. falciparum affects erythropoiesis at multiple stages during
erythroblast differentiation. Further P. falciparum may modulate gene expression 
in bystander erythroblasts and thus influence pathways of erythrocyte
development. This study provides a benchmark of the host erythroblast cell
response to infection by P. falciparum.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019307 
PMCID: PMC3087761
PMID: 21573240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

