
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2011 Oct;10(10):M111.009035. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M111.009035.
Epub 2011 May 17.

Shared molecular strategies of the malaria parasite P. falciparum and the human
virus HIV-1.

Wuchty S(1), Siwo GH, Ferdig MT.

Author information: 
(1)National Center of Biotechnology Information, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. wuchtys@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov

We augmented existing computationally predicted and experimentally determined
interactions with evolutionarily conserved interactions between proteins of the
malaria parasite, P. falciparum, and the human host. In a validation step, we
found that conserved interacting host-parasite protein pairs were specifically
expressed in host tissues where both the parasite and host proteins are known to 
be active. We compared host-parasite interactions with experimentally verified
interactions between human host proteins and a very different pathogen, HIV-1.
Both pathogens were found to use their protein repertoire in a combinatorial
manner, providing a broad connection to host cellular processes. Specifically,
the two biologically distinct pathogens predominately target central proteins to 
take control of a human host cell, effectively reaching into diversified cellular
host cellular functions. Interacting signaling pathways and a small set of
regulatory and signaling proteins were prime targets of both pathogens,
suggesting remarkably similar patterns of host-pathogen interactions despite the 
vast biological differences of both pathogens. Such an identification of shared
molecular strategies by the virus HIV-1 and the eukaryotic intracellular pathogen
P. falciparum may allow us to illuminate new avenues of disease intervention.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M111.009035 
PMCID: PMC3205867
PMID: 21586753  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

