
1. Parasite Immunol. 2011 Jul;33(7):401-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3024.2011.01299.x.

Antibodies directed against merozoite surface protein-6 are induced by natural
exposure to Plasmodium falciparum in a low transmission environment.

Jordan SJ(1), Oliveira AL, Neal AT, Hernandez JN, Branch OH, Rayner JC.

Author information: 
(1)William C Gorgas Center for Geographic Medicine, Division of Infectious
Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL, USA.

Malaria caused by Plasmodium falciparum is a major cause of global infant
mortality, and there is currently no licensed vaccine that provides protection
against infection or disease. Several P. falciparum vaccine targets have
undergone early testing, but many more candidates remain with little data to
support their development. Plasmodium falciparum Merozoite Surface Protein 6
(PfMSP6) is a candidate of particular interest because it is a member of the
PfMSP3 multi-gene family, raising the possibility that vaccine-induced immune
responses could cross-react across multiple family members. However, few
immunoepidemiological studies of PfMSP6 have been carried out to measure
domain-specific anti-PfMSP6 responses. This study investigated anti-PfMSP6
responses in P. falciparum-infected individuals from the Peruvian Amazon, using
two different PfMSP6 N-terminal allele antigens and a single C-terminal domain
antigen, and compared the responses with both PfMSP6 genotyping data and
anti-PfMSP3 response data that had been previously generated for the same
samples. Anti-PfMSP6 responses were detected despite the low transmission
setting, but were less frequent and of considerably lower intensity than
anti-PfMSP3 responses. There was a positive correlation between anti-PfMSP3 and
PfMSP6 responses, suggesting that the possibility that PfMSP3 family antigens
could induce cross-reactive responses requires further detailed investigation.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3024.2011.01299.x 
PMCID: PMC4552019
PMID: 21585398  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

