
1. Parasitol Res. 2011 Dec;109(6):1647-52. doi: 10.1007/s00436-011-2437-x. Epub 2011
May 20.

Genetic polymorphism at the C-terminal domain (region III) of knob-associated
histidine-rich protein (KAHRP) of Plasmodium falciparum in isolates from Iran.

Mardani A(1), Keshavarz H, Heidari A, Hajjaran H, Raeisi A, Khorramizadeh MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Parasitology and Mycology, School of Public Health and
Institute of Public Health Research, Tehran University of Medical Sciences
(TUMS), P.O. BoxÂ 14155-6446, Tehran, Iran.

The knob-associated histidine-rich protein (KAHRP) plays a major role in the
virulence of Plasmodium falciparum and is one of the targets for molecular
therapy. The primary structure of KAHRP of P. falciparum consists of three
domains (regions I-III), of which the C-terminal domain (region III) is the most 
polymorphic segment of this protein. One of the main obstacles is genetic
diversity in designing and developing of malaria control strategies such as
molecular therapy and vaccines. The primary objective of the present study was to
investigate and analyze the extent of genetic polymorphism at the region III of
KAHRP of P. falciparum in isolates from Iran. A fragment of the kahrp gene
spanning the C-terminal domain was amplified by nested PCR from 50 P. falciparum 
isolates collected from two malaria endemic areas of Iran during 2009 to August
2010 and sequenced. In this study, three allelic types were observed at the
C-terminal domain of KAHRP on the basis of the molecular weight of nested PCR
products and the obtained sequencing data. The presence of multiple alleles of
the kahrp gene indicates that several P. falciparum strains exist in the malaria 
endemic areas of Iran. Our findings will be valuable in the design and the
development of the molecular therapeutic reagents for falciparum malaria.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-011-2437-x 
PMID: 21594767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

