
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19801. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019801. Epub 2011 May 13.

Transmission of Plasmodium vivax in south-western Uganda: report of three cases
in pregnant women.

Dhorda M(1), Nyehangane D, RÃ©nia L, Piola P, Guerin PJ, Snounou G.

Author information: 
(1)Epicentre, Mbarara, Uganda.

Plasmodium vivax is considered to be rare in the predominantly Duffy negative
populations of Sub-Saharan Africa, as this red blood cell surface antigen is
essential for invasion by the parasite. However, despite only very few reports of
molecularly confirmed P. vivax from tropical Africa, serological evidence
indicated that 13% of the persons sampled in Congo had been exposed to P. vivax. 
We identified P. vivax by microscopy in 8 smears from Ugandan pregnant women who 
had been enrolled in a longitudinal study of malaria in pregnancy. A nested
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) protocol was used to detect and identify the
Plasmodium parasites present. PCR analysis confirmed the presence of P. vivax for
three of the women and analysis of all available samples from these women
revealed clinically silent chronic low-grade vivax infections for two of them.
The parasites in one woman carried pyrimethamine resistance-associated double
non-synonymous mutations in the P. vivax dihydrofolate reductase gene. The three 
women found infected with P. vivax were Duffy positive as were nine of 68 women
randomly selected from the cohort. The data presented from these three case
reports is consistent with stable transmission of malaria in a predominantly
Duffy negative African population. Given the substantial morbidity associated
with vivax infection in non-African endemic areas, it will be important to
investigate whether the distribution and prevalence of P. vivax have been
underestimated in Sub-Saharan Africa. This is particularly important in the
context of the drive to eliminate malaria and its morbidity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019801 
PMCID: PMC3094453
PMID: 21603649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

