
1. PLoS Genet. 2011 May;7(5):e1002066. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002066. Epub 2011 
May 19.

A -436C>A polymorphism in the human FAS gene promoter associated with severe
childhood malaria.

Schuldt K(1), Kretz CC, Timmann C, Sievertsen J, Ehmen C, Esser C, Loag W, Ansong
D, Dering C, Evans J, Ziegler A, May J, Krammer PH, Agbenyega T, Horstmann RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical
Medicine, Hamburg, Germany. schuldt@bnitm.de

Human genetics and immune responses are considered to critically influence the
outcome of malaria infections including life-threatening syndromes caused by
Plasmodium falciparum. An important role in immune regulation is assigned to the 
apoptosis-signaling cell surface receptor CD95 (Fas, APO-1), encoded by the gene 
FAS. Here, a candidate-gene association study including variant discovery at the 
FAS gene locus was carried out in a case-control group comprising 1,195 pediatric
cases of severe falciparum malaria and 769 unaffected controls from a region
highly endemic for malaria in Ghana, West Africa. We found the A allele of
c.-436C>A (rs9658676) located in the promoter region of FAS to be significantly
associated with protection from severe childhood malaria (odds ratio 0.71, 95%
confidence interval 0.58-0.88, p(empirical) = 0.02) and confirmed this finding in
a replication group of 1,412 additional severe malaria cases and 2,659 community 
controls from the same geographic area. The combined analysis resulted in an odds
ratio of 0.71 (95% confidence interval 0.62-0.80, p = 1.8×10⁻⁷, n = 6035). The
association applied to c.-436AA homozygotes (odds ratio 0.47, 95% confidence
interval 0.36-0.60) and to a lesser extent to c.-436AC heterozygotes (odds ratio 
0.73, 95% confidence interval 0.63-0.84), and also to all phenotypic subgroups
studied, including severe malaria anemia, cerebral malaria, and other malaria
complications. Quantitative FACS analyses assessing CD95 surface expression of
peripheral blood mononuclear cells of naïve donors showed a significantly higher 
proportion of CD69+CD95+ cells among persons homozygous for the protective A
allele compared to AC heterozygotes and CC homozygotes, indicating a functional
role of the associated CD95 variant, possibly in supporting lymphocyte apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002066 
PMCID: PMC3098189
PMID: 21625619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

