
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19636. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019636. Epub 2011 May 23.

Fitness trade-offs in the evolution of dihydrofolate reductase and drug
resistance in Plasmodium falciparum.

Costanzo MS(1), Brown KM, Hartl DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America. marna.costanzo@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Patterns of emerging drug resistance reflect the underlying adaptive 
landscapes for specific drugs. In Plasmodium falciparum, the parasite that causes
the most serious form of malaria, antifolate drugs inhibit the function of
essential enzymes in the folate pathway. However, a handful of mutations in the
gene coding for one such enzyme, dihydrofolate reductase, confer drug resistance.
Understanding how evolution proceeds from drug susceptibility to drug resistance 
is critical if new antifolate treatments are to have sustained usefulness.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We use a transgenic yeast expression system to
build on previous studies that described the adaptive landscape for the
antifolate drug pyrimethamine, and we describe the most likely evolutionary
trajectories for the evolution of drug resistance to the antifolate
chlorcycloguanil. We find that the adaptive landscape for chlorcycloguanil is
multi-peaked, not all highly resistant alleles are equally accessible by
evolution, and there are both commonalities and differences in adaptive
landscapes for chlorcycloguanil and pyrimethamine.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings suggest that cross-resistance between
drugs targeting the same enzyme reflect the fitness landscapes associated with
each particular drug and the position of the genotype on both landscapes. The
possible public health implications of these findings are discussed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019636 
PMCID: PMC3100297
PMID: 21625425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

