
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2011 Aug;11(6):1419-25. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.05.009.
Epub 2011 May 23.

Genetic diversity of Plasmodium vivax malaria in China and Myanmar.

Zhong D(1), Bonizzoni M, Zhou G, Wang G, Chen B, Vardo-Zalik A, Cui L, Yan G,
Zheng B.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Public Health, College of Health Sciences, University of
California, Irvine, USA. dzhong@uci.edu

Genetic diversity and population structure of Plasmodium vivax parasites are
valuable to the prediction of the origin and spread of novel variants within and 
between populations, and to the program evaluation of malaria control measures.
Using two polymorphic genetic markers, the merozoite surface protein genes
PvMSP-3α and PvMSP-3β, we investigated the genetic diversity of four Southeast
Asian P. vivax populations, representing both subtropical and temperate strains
with dramatically divergent relapse patterns. PCR amplification of PvMSP-3α and
PvMSP-3β genes detected three and four major size polymorphisms among the 235
infections examined, respectively, while restriction analysis detected 15 and 19 
alleles, respectively. Samples from different geographical areas differed
dramatically in their PvMSP-3α and PvMSP-3β allele composition and frequency.
Samples tended to cluster on the basis of their PCR-RFLP polymorphism. These
results indicated that different parasite genotypes were circulating in each
endemic area, and that geographic isolation may exist. Multiple infections were
detected in all four parasite populations, ranging from 20.5% to 31.8%, strongly 
indicating that P. vivax populations were highly diverse and multiple clonal
infections are common in these malaria-hypoendemic regions of Southeast Asia.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.05.009 
PMCID: PMC3143071
PMID: 21624503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

