
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20212. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020212. Epub 2011 May 25.

Novel polymorphisms in Plasmodium falciparum ABC transporter genes are associated
with major ACT antimalarial drug resistance.

Veiga MI(1), Ferreira PE, Jörnhagen L, Malmberg M, Kone A, Schmidt BA, Petzold M,
Björkman A, Nosten F, Gil JP.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research Lab, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. Isabel.veiga@ki.se

Chemotherapy is a critical component of malaria control. However, the most deadly
malaria pathogen, Plasmodium falciparum, has repeatedly mounted resistance
against a series of antimalarial drugs used in the last decades. Southeast Asia
is an epicenter of emerging antimalarial drug resistance, including recent
resistance to the artemisinins, the core component of all recommended
antimalarial combination therapies. Alterations in the parasitic membrane
proteins Pgh-1, PfCRT and PfMRP1 are believed to be major contributors to
resistance through decreasing intracellular drug accumulation. The pfcrt, pfmdr1 
and pfmrp1 genes were sequenced from a set of P.falciparum field isolates from
the Thai-Myanmar border. In vitro drug susceptibility to artemisinin,
dihydroartemisinin, mefloquine and lumefantrine were assessed. Positive
correlations were seen between the in vitro susceptibility responses to
artemisinin and dihydroartemisinin and the responses to the arylamino-alcohol
quinolines lumefantrine and mefloquine. The previously unstudied pfmdr1 F1226Y
and pfmrp1 F1390I SNPs were associated significantly with artemisinin, mefloquine
and lumefantrine in vitro susceptibility. A variation in pfmdr1 gene copy number 
was also associated with parasite drug susceptibility of artemisinin, mefloquine 
and lumefantrine. Our work unveils new candidate markers of P. falciparum
multidrug resistance in vitro, while contributing to the understanding of
subjacent genetic complexity, essential for future evidence-based drug policy
decisions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020212 
PMCID: PMC3102103
PMID: 21633513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

