
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2011 Oct;179(2):69-79. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2011.06.001. Epub 2011 Jun 13.

Characterization of a new phosphatase from Plasmodium.

Hills T(1), Srivastava A, Ayi K, Wernimont AK, Kain K, Waters AP, Hui R, Pizarro 
JC.

Author information: 
(1)The SGC (Structural Genomics Consortium), University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada. juan.pizarro@utoronto.ca

Plasmodium falciparum malaria is the most important parasitic disease worldwide, 
responsible for an estimated 1 million deaths annually. Two P. falciparum genes
code for putative phosphoglycerate mutases (PGMases), a widespread protein group 
characterized by the involvement of histidine residues in their catalytic
mechanism. PGMases are responsible for the interconversion between 2 and
3-phosphoglycerate, an intermediate step in the glycolysis pathway. We have
determined the crystal structures of one of the P. falciparum's PGMases (PfPGM2) 
and a functionally distinct phosphoglycerate mutase from Cryptosporidium parvum, 
a related apicomplexan parasite. We performed sequence and structural comparisons
between the two structures, another P. falciparum enzyme (PfPGM1) and several
other PGM family members from other organisms. The comparisons revealed a
distinct conformation of the catalytically active residues not seen in previously
determined phosphoglycerate mutase structures. Furthermore, characterization of
their enzymatic activities revealed contrasting behaviors between the PfPGM2 and 
the classical cofactor-dependent PGMase from C. parvum, clearly establishing
PfPGM2 as a phosphatase with a residual level of mutase activity. Further support
for this function attribution was provided by our structural comparison with
previously characterized PGM family members. Genetic characterization of PGM2 in 
the rodent parasite Plasmodium berghei indicated that the protein might be
essential to blood stage asexual growth, and a GFP tagged allele is expressed in 
both blood and zygote ookinete development and located in the cytoplasm. The P.
falciparum PGM2 is either an enzyme implicated in the phosphate metabolism of the
parasite or a regulator of its life cycle.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2011.06.001 
PMID: 21689687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

