
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 2;108(31):E374-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1102261108. Epub 2011 Jun 20.

Linkage maps from multiple genetic crosses and loci linked to growth-related
virulent phenotype in Plasmodium yoelii.

Li J(1), Pattaradilokrat S, Zhu F, Jiang H, Liu S, Hong L, Fu Y, Koo L, Xu W, Pan
W, Carlton JM, Kaneko O, Carter R, Wootton JC, Su XZ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Stress Cell Biology, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen
University, Xiamen, Fujian 361005, People's Republic of China.

Plasmodium yoelii is an excellent model for studying malaria pathogenesis that is
often intractable to investigate using human parasites; however, genetic studies 
of the parasite have been hindered by lack of genome-wide linkage resources.
Here, we performed 14 genetic crosses between three pairs of P. yoelii
clones/subspecies, isolated 75 independent recombinant progeny from the crosses, 
and constructed a high-resolution linkage map for this parasite. Microsatellite
genotypes from the progeny formed 14 linkage groups belonging to the 14 parasite 
chromosomes, allowing assignment of sequence contigs to chromosomes.
Growth-related virulent phenotypes from 25 progeny of one of the crosses were
significantly associated with a major locus on chromosome 13 and with two
secondary loci on chromosomes 7 and 10. The chromosome 10 and 13 loci are both
linked to day 5 parasitemia, and their effects on parasite growth rate are
independent but additive. The locus on chromosome 7 is associated with day 10
parasitemia. The chromosome 13 locus spans ~220 kb of DNA containing 51 predicted
genes, including the P. yoelii erythrocyte binding ligand, in which a C741Y
substitution in the R6 domain is implicated in the change of growth rate.
Similarly, the chromosome 10 locus spans ~234 kb with 71 candidate genes,
containing a member of the 235-kDa rhoptry proteins (Py235) that can bind to the 
erythrocyte surface membrane. Atypical virulent phenotypes among the progeny were
also observed. This study provides critical tools and information for genetic
investigations of virulence and biology of P. yoelii.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1102261108 
PMCID: PMC3150948
PMID: 21690382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

