
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 9;108(32):13183-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1109153108. Epub 2011 Jul 5.

Rerooting the evolutionary tree of malaria parasites.

Outlaw DC(1), Ricklefs RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Mississippi State University, Mississippi
State, MS 39762, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 9;108(32):12973-4.

Malaria parasites (Plasmodium spp.) have plagued humans for millennia. Less well 
known are related parasites (Haemosporida), with diverse life cycles and dipteran
vectors that infect other vertebrates. Understanding the evolution of parasite
life histories, including switches between hosts and vectors, depends on
knowledge of evolutionary relationships among parasite lineages. In particular,
inferences concerning time of origin and trait evolution require correct
placement of the root of the evolutionary tree. Phylogenetic reconstructions of
the diversification of malaria parasites from DNA sequences have suffered from
uncertainty concerning outgroup taxa, limited taxon sampling, and selection on
genes used to assess relationships. As a result, inferred relationships among the
Haemosporida have been unstable, and questions concerning evolutionary
diversification and host switching remain unanswered. A recent phylogeny placed
mammalian malaria parasites, as well as avian/reptilian Plasmodium, in a derived 
position relative to the avian parasite genera Leucocytozoon and Haemoproteus,
implying that the ancestral forms lacked merogony in the blood and that their
vectors were non-mosquito dipterans. Bayesian, outgroup-free phylogenetic
reconstruction using relaxed molecular clocks with uncorrelated rates instead
suggested that mammalian and avian/reptilian Plasmodium parasites, spread by
mosquito vectors, are ancestral sister taxa, from which a variety of specialized 
parasite lineages with modified life histories have evolved.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1109153108 
PMCID: PMC3156215
PMID: 21730128  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

