
1. J Parasitol. 2012 Feb;98(1):93-102. doi: 10.1645/GE-2780.1. Epub 2011 Jul 26.

Presence of Plasmodium and Haemoproteus in breeding prothonotary warblers
(Protonotaria citrea: Parulidae): temporal and spatial trends in infection
prevalence.

Grillo EL(1), Fithian RC, Cross H, Wallace C, Viverette C, Reilly R, Mayer DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia
23284-2012, USA.

Prothonotary warbler (Protonotaria citrea) has shown a long-term decline in
abundance in the United States. As a long-range migrant, these warblers are
exposed to parasites in both tropical and temperate regions. The focus of this
study was to use molecular techniques to examine the temporal prevalence patterns
of heamosopridian parasites Plasmodium and Haemoproteus in breeding prothonotary 
warblers. The prevalence (presence or absence) of Plasmodium and Haemoproteus
species was assayed using primer sets for the cytochrome b gene of the
mitochondrial DNA. Blood samples were obtained from 187 adult prothonotary
warblers collected at 3 central Virginia, U.S.A., breeding sites. The
relationship between haemosporidian parasite infections and reproductive success 
also was examined. We found that 71% of captured prothonotary warblers were
infected with haemosporidian parasites, specifically, with 36% prevalence for
Haemoproteus spp. and 44% prevalence for Plasmodium spp., during the 2008
breeding season; for both parasites, prevalence increased throughout the season. 
We found significant variation in haemosporidian parasite prevalence across the
breeding season that was strongly site specific. Conversely, we found no
significant effects of haemosporidian parasite infections on the reproductive
success of prothonotary warblers. This is in sharp contrast to recent reports
suggesting considerable effects of these parasites on the reproductive success of
wild birds.

DOI: 10.1645/GE-2780.1 
PMID: 21790366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

