
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22593. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022593. Epub 2011 Jul 22.

Transcription and expression of Plasmodium falciparum histidine-rich proteins in 
different stages and strains: implications for rapid diagnostic tests.

Baker J(1), Gatton ML, Peters J, Ho MF, McCarthy JS, Cheng Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Resistance and Diagnostics, Australian Army Malaria
Institute, Gallipoli Barracks, Enoggera, Queensland, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Although rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) for Plasmodium falciparum
infection that target histidine rich protein 2 (PfHRP2) are generally sensitive, 
their performance has been reported to be variable. One possible explanation for 
variable test performance is differences in expression level of PfHRP in
different parasite isolates.
METHODS: Total RNA and protein were extracted from synchronised cultures of 7 P. 
falciparum lines over 5 time points of the life cycle, and from synchronised ring
stages of 10 falciparum lines. Using quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction, Western blot analysis and ELISA we investigated variations in the
transcription and protein levels of pfhrp2, pfhrp3 and PfHRP respectively in the 
different parasite lines, over the parasite intraerythrocytic life cycle.
RESULTS: Transcription of pfhrp2 and pfhrp3 in different parasite lines over the 
parasite life cycle was observed to vary relative to the control parasite K1. In 
some parasite lines very low transcription of these genes was observed. The peak 
transcription was observed in ring-stage parasites. Pfhrp2 transcription was
observed to be consistently higher than pfhrp3 transcription within parasite
lines. The intraerythrocytic lifecycle stage at which the peak level of protein
was present varied across strains. Total protein levels were more constant
relative to total mRNA transcription, however a maximum 24 fold difference in
expression at ring-stage parasites relative to the K1 strain was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: The levels of transcription of pfhrp2 and pfhrp3, and protein
expression of PfHRP varied between different P. falciparum strains. This
variation may impact on the detection sensitivity of PfHRP2-detecting RDTs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022593 
PMCID: PMC3142190
PMID: 21799910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

