
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2011 Nov;180(1):17-26. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2011.07.004. Epub 2011 Jul 22.

Biochemical characterisation and novel classification of monofunctional
S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase of Plasmodium falciparum.

Williams M(1), Sprenger J, Human E, Al-Karadaghi S, Persson L, Louw AI, Birkholtz
LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Pretoria, Hatfield, South Africa.

Plasmodium falciparum like other organisms is dependent on polyamines for
proliferation. Polyamine biosynthesis in these parasites is regulated by a unique
bifunctional S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase/ornithine decarboxylase
(PfAdoMetDC/ODC). Only limited biochemical and structural information is
available on the bifunctional enzyme due to the low levels and impurity of an
instable recombinantly expressed protein from the native gene. Here we describe
the high level expression of stable monofunctional PfAdoMetDC from a
codon-harmonised construct, which permitted its biochemical characterisation
indicating similar catalytic properties to AdoMetDCs of orthologous parasites. In
the absence of structural data, far-UV CD showed that at least on secondary
structure level, PfAdoMetDC corresponds well to that of the human protein. The
kinetic properties of the monofunctional enzyme were also found to be different
from that of PfAdoMetDC/ODC as mainly evidenced by an increased K(m). We deduced 
that complex formation of PfAdoMetDC and PfODC could enable coordinated
modulation of the decarboxylase activities since there is a convergence of their 
k(cat) and lowering of their K(m). Such coordination results in the aligned
production of decarboxylated AdoMet and putrescine for the subsequent synthesis
of spermidine. Furthermore, based on the results obtained in this study we
propose a new AdoMetDC subclass for plasmodial AdoMetDCs.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2011.07.004 
PMID: 21803076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

