
1. BMC Genet. 2011 Aug 6;12:69. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-12-69.

Polymorphic variability in the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of IL12B is
associated with susceptibility to severe anaemia in Kenyan children with acute
Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Ong'echa JM(1), Raballah EO, Kempaiah PM, Anyona SB, Were T, Davenport GC, Konah 
S, Vulule JM, Ouma C, Hittner JB, Perkins DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Global Health Research, University of New Mexico Laboratories of
Parasitic and Viral Diseases, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Kisumu, Kenya.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum malaria remains a leading cause of morbidity
and mortality among African children. Innate immunity provides the first line of 
defence against P. falciparum infections, particularly in young children that
lack naturally-acquired malarial immunity, such as the population examined here. 
Consistent with the fact that elevated interleukin (IL)-12 is an important
component of the innate immune response that provides protective immunity against
malaria, we have previously shown that suppression of IL-12 in African children
is associated with the development of severe malarial anaemia (SMA). Since the
role of IL12B variants in conditioning susceptibility to SMA remains largely
unexplored, the association between a single nucleotide polymorphism (1188Aâ†’C,
rs3212227), SMA (Hb<6.0 g/dL), circulating IL-12p40/p70 levels, and longitudinal 
clinical outcomes in Kenyan children (n = 756) residing in a holoendemic
falciparum malaria transmission area were investigated.
RESULTS: Multivariate logistic regression analysis in children with acute malaria
(n = 544) demonstrated that carriers of the C allele had increased susceptibility
to SMA (CC: OR, 1.674; 95% CI, 1.006-2.673; P = 0.047, and AC: OR, 1.410; 95% CI,
0.953-2.087; P = 0.086) relative to wild type (AA). Although children with SMA
had lower IL-12p40/p70 levels than the non-SMA group (P = 0.037), levels did not 
differ significantly according to genotype. Longitudinal analyses in the entire
cohort (n = 756) failed to show any significant relationships between rs3212227
genotypes and either susceptibility to SMA or all-cause mortality throughout the 
three year follow-up.
CONCLUSION: The rs3212227 is a marker of susceptibility to SMA in children with
acute disease, but does not appear to mediate functional changes in IL-12
production or longitudinal outcomes during the acquisition of naturally-acquired 
malarial immunity.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2156-12-69 
PMCID: PMC3166270
PMID: 21819616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

