
1. Hum Genet. 2012 Feb;131(2):289-99. doi: 10.1007/s00439-011-1076-8. Epub 2011 Aug 
5.

Functional haplotypes of Fc gamma (Fcγ) receptor (FcγRIIA and FcγRIIIB) predict
risk to repeated episodes of severe malarial anemia and mortality in Kenyan
children.

Ouma C(1), Davenport GC, Garcia S, Kempaiah P, Chaudhary A, Were T, Anyona SB,
Raballah E, Konah SN, Hittner JB, Vulule JM, Ong'echa JM, Perkins DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Global Health Research, Kenya Medical Research Institute,
University of New Mexico/KEMRI Laboratories of Parasitic and Viral Diseases,
Kisumu, Kenya.

Development of protective immunity against Plasmodium falciparum is partially
mediated through binding of malaria-specific IgG to Fc gamma (γ) receptors.
Variations in human FcγRIIA-H/R-131 and FcγRIIIB-NA1/NA2 affect differential
binding of IgG sub-classes. Since variability in FcγR may play an important role 
in severe malarial anemia (SMA) pathogenesis by mediating phagocytosis of red
blood cells and triggering cytokine production, the relationship between
FcγRIIA-H/R131 and FcγRIIIB-NA1/NA2 haplotypes and susceptibility to SMA
(Hb < 6.0 g/dL) was investigated in Kenyan children (n = 528) with acute malaria 
residing in a holoendemic P. falciparum transmission region. In addition, the
association between carriage of the haplotypes and repeated episodes of SMA and
all-cause mortality were investigated over a 3-year follow-up period. Since
variability in FcγR can alter interferon (IFN)-γ production, a mediator of innate
and adaptive immune responses, functional associations between the haplotypes and
IFN-γ were also explored. During acute malaria, children with SMA had elevated
peripheral IFN-γ levels (P = 0.006). Although multivariate logistic regression
analyses (controlling for covariates) revealed no associations between the FcγR
haplotypes and susceptibility to SMA during acute infection, the
FcγRIIA-131H/FcγRIIIB-NA1 haplotype was associated with decreased peripheral
IFN-γ (P = 0.046). Longitudinal analyses showed that carriage of the
FcγRIIA-131H/FcγRIIIB-NA1 haplotype was associated with reduced risk of SMA (RR
0.65, 95% CI 0.46-0.90; P = 0.012) and all-cause mortality (P = 0.002). In
contrast, carriers of the FcγRIIA-131H/FcγRIIIB-NA2 haplotype had increased
susceptibility to SMA (RR 1.47, 95% CI 1.06-2.04; P = 0.020). Results here
demonstrate that variation in the FcγR gene alters susceptibility to repeated
episodes of SMA and mortality, as well as functional changes in IFN-γ production.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-011-1076-8 
PMCID: PMC3258363
PMID: 21818580  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

