
1. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2011 Feb
28;29(1):37-41.

[Cloning and expression of var2csa DBL domains from Plasmodium falciparum hainan 
isolate and functional analysis of the recombinant protein].

[Article in Chinese]

Kang W(1), Chang ZG, Lu HJ, Jiang N, Yin JG, Chen QJ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Ministry of Education, Jilin University, Changehun
130062, China.

OBJECTIVE: To clone and express three VAR2CSA duffy antigen-binding ligand (DBL) 
domains (DBL4/ 5/6) encoded by var2csa gene of a Hainan isolate of Plasmodium
falciparum, and study the difference of chondroitin sulfate A (CSA)-binding
activity among them.
METHODS: Three DBL domains was amplified by PCR and cloned into the vector
pMD18-T. The recombinant plasmids were identified by enzyme digestion and
sequencing, and then subcloned into the prokaryotic expression vector pET-22b.
The recombinant plasmid was transformed into E. coli BL21 (DE3) and followed by
expression of the protein induced by IPTG. The recombinant protein was purified
with His GraciTrap kit and identified by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting.
CSA-binding activity of the three recombinant DBL domains was assayed by ELISA.
RESULTS: The target genes were amplified with the length of 996 bp, 859 bp and
894 bp. The constructed recombinant plasmids were identified by enzyme digestion 
and DNA sequencing. The recombinant proteins (DBL4/5/6) were purified, the
relative molecular mass of DBLfA, DBL5 and DBL6 was Mr 439 800, Mr 34,500 and Mr 
36,000, respectively. The purified protein has been confirmed with immunogenicity
by Western blotting. The results of adhesion experiment indicated that A405
values of DBL5 domain with different concentration were significantly higher than
that of DBLA and DBL6.
CONCLUSION: The three recombinant proteins (DBLA/5/6) of VAR2CSA DBL domains were
expressed, and DBL5 domain has high binding affinity with CSA.


PMID: 21823322  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

