
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e22269. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022269. Epub 2011 Aug 1.

Multiple independent fusions of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase with enzymes in
the pentose phosphate pathway.

Stover NA(1), Dixon TA, Cavalcanti AR.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Bradley University, Peoria, Illinois, United States of
America.

Fusions of the first two enzymes in the pentose phosphate pathway,
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) and 6-phosphogluconolactonase (6PGL),
have been previously described in two distant clades, chordates and species of
the malarial parasite Plasmodium. We have analyzed genome and expressed sequence 
data from a variety of organisms to identify the origins of these gene fusion
events. Based on the orientation of the domains and range of species in which
homologs can be found, the fusions appear to have occurred independently, near
the base of the metazoan and apicomplexan lineages. Only one of the two metazoan 
paralogs of G6PD is fused, showing that the fusion occurred after a duplication
event, which we have traced back to an ancestor of choanoflagellates and
metazoans. The Plasmodium genes are known to contain a functionally important
insertion that is not seen in the other apicomplexan fusions, highlighting this
as a unique characteristic of this group. Surprisingly, our search revealed two
additional fusion events, one that combined 6PGL and G6PD in an ancestor of the
protozoan parasites Trichomonas and Giardia, and another fusing G6PD with
phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (6PGD) in a species of diatoms. This study extends
the range of species known to contain fusions in the pentose phosphate pathway to
many new medically and economically important organisms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022269 
PMCID: PMC3148214
PMID: 21829610  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

