
1. Mol Microbiol. 2011 Sep;81(6):1511-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2011.07787.x.
Epub 2011 Aug 17.

Inactivation of a Plasmodium apicoplast protein attenuates formation of liver
merozoites.

Haussig JM(1), Matuschewski K, Kooij TW.

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology Unit, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Charitéplatz 1,
10117 Berlin, Germany.

Malaria parasites undergo a population expansion inside the host liver before
disease onset. Developmental arrest inside host hepatocytes elicits protective
immune responses. Therefore, elucidation of the molecular mechanisms leading to
mature hepatic merozoites, which initiate the pathogenic blood phase, also
informs anti-malaria vaccine strategies. Using targeted gene deletion in the
rodent model malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei, we show that a
Plasmodium-specific Apicoplast protein plays an important role for Liver
Merozoite formation (PALM). While the resulting knockout mutants develop normally
for most of the life cycle, merozoite release into the blood stream and the
ability to establish an infection are severely impaired. Presence of a signature 
blood-stage antigen, merozoite surface protein 1 and normal apicoplast morphology
indicate that the inability to finalize merozoite segregation is a direct
consequence of loss of PALM function. Experimental immunization of mice with as
few as two doses of palm(-) sporozoites can elicit sterile protection up to 110
days after final immunization. Our data establish that a tailor-made arrest in
the final steps of hepatic merozoite formation can induce strong protective
immune responses and that malaria parasites employ a distinct apicoplast protein 
for efficient formation of pre-erythrocytic merozoites.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2011.07787.x 
PMCID: PMC3206223
PMID: 21848587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

