
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Nov;79(11):4708-15. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05647-11. Epub 2011 Aug
15.

Infection intensity-dependent responses of Anopheles gambiae to the African
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Mendes AM(1), Awono-Ambene PH, Nsango SE, Cohuet A, Fontenille D, Kafatos FC,
Christophides GK, Morlais I, Vlachou D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Imperial College London, Exhibition
Road, SW7 2AZ, London, UK.

Malaria remains a devastating disease despite efforts at control and prevention. 
Extensive studies using mostly rodent infection models reveal that successful
Plasmodium parasite transmission by the African mosquito vector Anopheles gambiae
depends on finely tuned vector-parasite interactions. Here we investigate the
transcriptional response of A. gambiae to geographically related Plasmodium
falciparum populations at various infection intensities and different infection
stages. These responses are compared with those of mosquitoes infected with the
rodent parasite Plasmodium berghei. We demonstrate that mosquito responses are
largely dependent on the intensity of infection. A major transcriptional
suppression of genes involved in the regulation of midgut homeostasis is detected
in low-intensity P. falciparum infections, the most common type of infection in
Africa. Importantly, genes transcriptionally induced during these infections tend
to be phylogenetically unique to A. gambiae. These data suggest that coadaptation
between vectors and parasites may act to minimize the impact of infection on
mosquito fitness by selectively suppressing specific functional classes of genes.
RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated gene silencing provides initial evidence for
important roles of the mosquito G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) in
controlling infection intensity-dependent antiparasitic responses.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.05647-11 
PMCID: PMC3257935
PMID: 21844236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

