
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2011 Dec;180(2):69-75. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2011.08.002. Epub 2011 Aug 11.

The primase domain of PfPrex is a proteolytically matured, essential enzyme of
the apicoplast.

Lindner SE(1), Llinás M, Keck JL, Kappe SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, 550 Medical Sciences Center, 1300 University Avenue, 
Madison, WI 53706, USA. Scott.Lindner@SeattleBioMed.org

The apicoplast of Plasmodium is an essential organelle with its own circular
genome that must be faithfully replicated and segregated to its progeny during
parasite sporogony and schizogony. DNA replication proteins are not encoded by
its genome. Instead, the replication machinery must be imported from
nuclear-encoded genes. A likely apicoplast DNA replication factor, PfPrex, bears 
a bipartite leader sequence for apicoplast trafficking and contains several DNA
replication-related enzymatic domains. Here we analyze the domain structure of
PfPrex and examine its trafficking and maturation within the parasite. A minimal 
primase domain of PfPrex is shown to contain functional zinc-binding and
TOPRIM-fold domains, which in a recombinant form are sufficient to produce RNA
primers from a single-stranded DNA template. PfPrex is shown to be extensively
proteolytically matured within the parasite, which effectively separates its
functional domains. Gene targeting attempts to knockout the Plasmodium yoelii
ortholog of Prex were unsuccessful, indicating the apparent essentiality of this 
protein to the parasite. Finally, overexpression in Plasmodium falciparum of
PfPrex's trafficking and primase sequences yielded specific and dynamic
localization to foci within the apicoplast. Taken together, these observations
strongly suggest an essential role of PfPrex primase in the production of RNA
primers for lagging strand DNA synthesis of the apicoplast genome.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2011.08.002 
PMCID: PMC3196721
PMID: 21856338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

