
1. Cell Microbiol. 2011 Dec;13(12):1956-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01683.x.
Epub 2011 Oct 14.

Experimentally controlled downregulation of the histone chaperone FACT in
Plasmodium berghei reveals that it is critical to male gamete fertility.

Laurentino EC(1), Taylor S, Mair GR, Lasonder E, Bartfai R, Stunnenberg HG,
Kroeze H, Ramesar J, Franke-Fayard B, Khan SM, Janse CJ, Waters AP.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden Malaria Research Group, Department of Parasitology, Leiden University
Medical, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, the Netherlands.

Human FACT (facilitates chromatin transcription) consists of the proteins SPT16
and SSRP1 and acts as a histone chaperone in the (dis)assembly of nucleosome (and
thereby chromatin) structure during transcription and DNA replication. We
identified a Plasmodium berghei protein, termed FACT-L, with homology to the
SPT16 subunit of FACT. Epitope tagging of FACT-L showed nuclear localization with
high expression in the nuclei of (activated) male gametocytes. The gene encoding 
FACT-L could not be deleted indicating an essential role during blood-stage
development. Using a 'promoter-swap' approach whereby the fact-l promoter was
replaced by an 'asexual blood stage-specific' promoter that is silent in
gametocytes, transcription of fact-l in promoter-swap mutant gametocytes was
downregulated compared with wild-type gametocytes. These mutant male gametocytes 
showed delayed DNA replication and gamete formation. Male gamete fertility was
strongly reduced while female gamete fertility was unaffected; residual ookinetes
generated oocysts that arrested early in development and failed to enter
sporogony. Therefore FACT is critically involved in the formation of fertile male
gametes and parasite transmission. 'Promoter swapping' is a powerful approach for
the functional analysis of proteins in gametocytes (and beyond) that are
essential during asexual blood-stage development.

Â© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01683.x 
PMCID: PMC3429858
PMID: 21899698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

