
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Nov;79(11):4523-32. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05412-11. Epub 2011 Sep
6.

Discovery of GAMA, a Plasmodium falciparum merozoite micronemal protein, as a
novel blood-stage vaccine candidate antigen.

Arumugam TU(1), Takeo S, Yamasaki T, Thonkukiatkul A, Miura K, Otsuki H, Zhou H, 
Long CA, Sattabongkot J, Thompson J, Wilson DW, Beeson JG, Healer J, Crabb BS,
Cowman AF, Torii M, Tsuboi T.

Author information: 
(1)Cell-Free Science and Technology Research Center, Ehime University, 3
Bunkyo-cho, Matsuyama, Ehime 790-8577, Japan.

One of the solutions for reducing the global mortality and morbidity due to
malaria is multivalent vaccines comprising antigens of several life cycle stages 
of the malarial parasite. Hence, there is a need for supplementing the current
set of malaria vaccine candidate antigens. Here, we aimed to characterize
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored micronemal antigen (GAMA) encoded by 
the PF08_0008 gene in Plasmodium falciparum. Antibodies were raised against
recombinant GAMA synthesized by using a wheat germ cell-free system.
Immunoelectron microscopy demonstrated for the first time that GAMA is a
microneme protein of the merozoite. Erythrocyte binding assays revealed that GAMA
possesses an erythrocyte binding epitope in the C-terminal region and it binds a 
nonsialylated protein receptor on human erythrocytes. Growth inhibition assays
revealed that anti-GAMA antibodies can inhibit P. falciparum invasion in a
dose-dependent manner and GAMA plays a role in the sialic acid (SA)-independent
invasion pathway. Anti-GAMA antibodies in combination with anti-erythrocyte
binding antigen 175 exhibited a significantly higher level of invasion
inhibition, supporting the rationale that targeting of both SA-dependent and
SA-independent ligands/pathways is better than targeting either of them alone.
Human sera collected from areas of malaria endemicity in Mali and Thailand
recognized GAMA. Since GAMA in P. falciparum is refractory to gene knockout
attempts, it is essential to parasite invasion. Overall, our study indicates that
GAMA is a novel blood-stage vaccine candidate antigen.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.05412-11 
PMCID: PMC3257921
PMID: 21896773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

