
1. Exp Parasitol. 2011 Nov;129(3):227-33. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2011.08.014. Epub
2011 Aug 28.

Trials for the co-expression of the merozoite surface protein-1 and
circumsporozoite protein genes of Plasmodium vivax.

Lee C(1), Chung KW, Kim TS, Choi KM, Choi YK, Chung NJ, Rhie HG, Lee HS, Lee SJ, 
Lee HW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Global Environment and Department of Biology, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.

Merozoite surface protein-1 (MSP-1), a major asexual blood stage antigen, and
circumsporozoite protein (CSP), a component of sporozoites that includes a
Plasmodium vivax B-cell epitope, are strong candidates for use in a malaria
vaccine. A chimeric recombinant gene containing portions of both msp-1 and csp
from P. vivax separated by Pro-Gly linker motif was generated. The construct gene
was named mlc (msp-1, linker, and csp). The MLC chimeric recombinant protein had 
a molecular weight of approximately 25 kDa when expressed in Escherichia coli, as
determined with sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE) analysis. The purified chimeric protein reacted with the sera of
patients infected with P. vivax but not with the sera of uninfected patients
according to western blot analysis. The chimeric protein reacted well with sera
of malaria patients (109/115, 94.78%) as assessed with enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). BALB/c mice that were orally immunized with the MLC 
chimeric recombinant protein successfully produced antigen-specific antibodies.
Additionally, levels of the Th1-associated cytokines IL-12(p40), TNF-α, and IFN-γ
were significantly increased in the spleens of the BALB/c mice. Therefore, the E.
coli-expressed MLC chimeric recombinant protein might be used as a valuable
vaccine candidate for oral immunization against vivax malaria.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2011.08.014 
PMID: 21907198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

