
1. Parasitol Res. 2012 Apr;110(4):1337-45. doi: 10.1007/s00436-011-2630-y. Epub 2011
Sep 14.

A new malaria antigen produces partial protection against Plasmodium yoelii
challenge.

Zhang Y(1), Qi Y, Li J, Liu S, Hong L, Lin T, Long C, Su XZ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Stress Cell Biology, Xiamen University, 422 Siming
South Road, Xiamen, Fujian 361005, People's Republic of China.

Of all the parasitic diseases, malaria is the number one killer. Despite
tremendous efforts in disease control and research, nearly a million people,
primarily children, still die from the disease each year, partly due to drug
resistance and the lack of an effective vaccine. Many parasite antigens have been
identified and evaluated for vaccine development; however, none has been approved
for human use. Antigenic variation, complex life cycle, and inadequate
understanding of the mechanisms of parasite-host interaction and of host immune
response all contribute to the lack of an effective vaccine for malaria control. 
In a recent search of genome-wide polymorphism in Plasmodium falciparum, several 
molecules were found to be recognized by sera from patients infected with the P. 
falciparum parasite. Here, we have expressed a 350-amino acid N terminus from one
of the homologous candidate antigen genes from the rodent malaria parasite
Plasmodium yoelii (Py01157, a putative dentin phosphorin) in bacteria and
evaluated the immune response and protection generated after immunization with
the recombinant protein. We showed that the recombinant protein was recognized by
sera from both mice and humans infected with malaria parasites. Partial
protection was observed after challenge with non-lethal P. yoelii 17XNL but not
with the lethal P. yoelii 17XL parasite. Further tests using a full-length
protein or the conserved C terminus may provide additional information on whether
this protein has the potential for being a malaria vaccine.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-011-2630-y 
PMCID: PMC3437252
PMID: 21915626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

