
1. Wiley Interdiscip Rev RNA. 2010 Sep-Oct;1(2):287-303. doi: 10.1002/wrna.30. Epub 
2010 Aug 2.

From cradle to grave: RNA biology in malaria parasites.

Hughes KR(1), Philip N, Starnes GL, Taylor S, Waters AP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, Faculty of Biomedical Life Sciences,
Glasgow Biomedical Research Centre, University of Glasgow, 120 University Place, 
Glasgow G12 8TA, Scotland, UK.

Malaria is caused by the unicellular apicomplexan parasites of the genus
Plasmodium, some of which, including the major human parasite Plasmodium
falciparum, have extreme genome compositions (A/T content > 80%). In this
overview of RNA production, roles and degradation, we show that despite their
unusual genome composition these parasites generally exhibit the standard
eukaryotic features of these processes. Thus genes are monocistronic and
transcribed by RNA polymerases that conform to the general categories of I, II,
and III. Plasmodium spp. are unusual in that they possess structurally distinct
rRNA genes that are expressed at different points in the complicated life cycle
of the parasite. Transcription in blood stage asexual parasites follows a cascade
consistent with a dependency upon plant-like apetala 2 (AP2) DNA-binding
proteins. mRNA is transported to, translated and degraded in the cytoplasm and
the transcription pattern is largely inflexible and responsive to temperature and
glucose but not drugs. Furthermore, although Plasmodium spp. undertake controlled
repression of mRNA species at a number of points in their life cycle only one
mechanism, employed by female gametocytes (gamete precursor cells), is clear; it 
resembles that of metazoan female gametes, consisting of a complex of
repression-associated proteins in an architecture formed with the mRNA 5' cap and
dependent on U-rich untranslated region (UTR) elements. Extensive antisense
transcription has been documented resulting in the production of both short and
long transcripts of generally unknown functional significance. This review
attempts to summarize what is currently known about the biology of Plasmodium
RNA.

Copyright Â© 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/wrna.30 
PMID: 21935891  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

