
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Dec;79(12):4923-32. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05601-11. Epub 2011 Oct
3.

Functional promoter haplotypes of interleukin-18 condition susceptibility to
severe malarial anemia and childhood mortality.

Anyona SB(1), Kempaiah P, Raballah E, Ouma C, Were T, Davenport GC, Konah SN,
Vulule JM, Hittner JB, Gichuki CW, Ong'echa JM, Perkins DJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of New Mexico/Kenya Medical Research Institute, Laboratories of
Parasitic and Viral Diseases, Centre for Global Health Research, Kisumu, Kenya.

Severe malarial anemia (SMA) is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in
children residing in regions where Plasmodium falciparum transmission is
holoendemic. Although largely unexplored in children with SMA, interleukin-18
(IL-18) is important for regulating innate and acquired immunity in inflammatory 
and infectious diseases. As such, we selected two functional single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the IL-18 promoter (-137G→C [rs187238] and -607C→A
[rs1946518]) whose haplotypes encompass significant genetic variation due to the 
presence of strong linkage disequilibrium among these variants. The relationship 
between the genotypes/haplotypes, SMA (hemoglobin [Hb], <5.0 g/dl], and
longitudinal clinical outcomes were then investigated in Kenyan children (n =
719). Multivariate logistic regression analyses controlling for age, gender,
sickle cell trait, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, HIV-1,
and bacteremia revealed that carriage of the -607AA genotype was associated with 
protection against SMA (odds ratio [OR] = 0.440 [95% confidence interval {CI} =
0.21 to 0.90], P = 0.031) in children with acute infection. In contrast, carriers
of the -137G/-607C (GC) haplotype had increased susceptibility to SMA (OR = 2.050
[95% CI = 1.04 to 4.05], P = 0.039). Measurement of IL-18 gene expression in
peripheral blood leukocytes demonstrated that elevated IL-18 transcripts were
associated with reduced hemoglobin concentrations (ρ = -0.293, P = 0.010) and
that carriers of the "susceptible" GC haplotype had elevated IL-18 transcripts (P
= 0.026). Longitudinal investigation of clinical outcomes over a 3-year follow-up
period revealed that carriers of the rare CC haplotype (∼1% frequency) had 5.76
times higher mortality than noncarriers (P = 0.001). Results presented here
demonstrate that IL-18 promoter haplotypes that condition elevated IL-18 gene
products during acute infection are associated with increased risk of SMA.
Furthermore, carriage of the rare CC haplotype significantly increases the risk
of childhood mortality.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.05601-11 
PMCID: PMC3232671
PMID: 21969001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

