
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 25;286(47):40824-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.280552. Epub
2011 Sep 29.

Members of the salivary gland surface protein (SGS) family are major immunogenic 
components of mosquito saliva.

King JG(1), Vernick KD, Hillyer JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Institute for Global Health, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, Tennessee 37235, USA.

Mosquitoes transmit Plasmodium and certain arboviruses during blood feeding, when
they are injected along with saliva. Mosquito saliva interferes with the host's
hemostasis and inflammation response and influences the transmission success of
some pathogens. One family of mosquito salivary gland proteins, named SGS, is
composed of large bacterial-type proteins that in Aedes aegypti were implicated
as receptors for Plasmodium on the basal salivary gland surface. Here, we
characterize the biology of two SGSs in the malaria mosquito, Anopheles gambiae, 
and demonstrate their involvement in blood feeding. Western blots and RT-PCR
showed that Sgs4 and Sgs5 are produced exclusively in female salivary glands,
that expression increases with age and after blood feeding, and that protein
levels fluctuate in a circadian manner. Immunohistochemistry showed that SGSs are
present in the acinar cells of the distal lateral lobes and in the salivary ducts
of the proximal lobes. SDS-PAGE, Western blots, bite blots, and immunization via 
mosquito bites showed that SGSs are highly immunogenic and form major components 
of mosquito saliva. Last, Western and bioinformatic analyses suggest that SGSs
are secreted via a non-classical pathway that involves cleavage into a 300-kDa
soluble fragment and a smaller membrane-bound fragment. Combined, these data
strongly suggest that SGSs play an important role in blood feeding. Together with
their role in malaria transmission, we propose that SGSs could be used as markers
of human exposure to mosquito bites and in the development of disease control
strategies.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.280552 
PMCID: PMC3220476
PMID: 21965675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

