
1. J Immune Based Ther Vaccines. 2011 Oct 17;9(1):6. doi: 10.1186/1476-8518-9-6.

Immunization with genetically attenuated P52-deficient Plasmodium berghei
sporozoites induces a long-lasting effector memory CD8+ T cell response in the
liver.

Douradinha B(1), van Dijk M, van Gemert GJ, Khan SM, Janse CJ, Waters AP,
Sauerwein RW, Luty AJ, Silva-Santos B, Mota MM, Epiphanio S.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Malaria, Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Universidade de Lisboa,
Av Professor Egas Moniz, Lisboa, 1649-028, Portugal. b.g.douradinha@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The induction of sterile immunity and long lasting protection against
malaria has been effectively achieved by immunization with sporozoites attenuated
by gamma-irradiation or through deletion of genes. For mice immunized with
radiation attenuated sporozoites (RAS) it has been shown that intrahepatic
effector memory CD8+ T cells are critical for protection. Recent studies have
shown that immunization with genetically attenuated parasites (GAP) in mice is
also conferred by liver effector memory CD8+ T cells.
FINDINGS: In this study we analysed effector memory cell responses after
immunization of GAP that lack the P52 protein. We demonstrate that immunization
with p52-GAP sporozoites also results in a strong increase of effector memory
CD8+ T cells, even 6 months after immunization, whereas no specific CD4+ effector
T cells response could be detected. In addition, we show that the increase of
effector memory CD8+ T cells is specific for the liver and not for the spleen or 
lymph nodes.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that immunization of mice with P. berghei
p52-GAP results in immune responses that are comparable to those induced by RAS
or GAP lacking expression of UIS3 or UIS4, with an important role implicated for 
intrahepatic effector memory CD8+ T cells. The knowledge of the mediators of
protective immunity after immunization with different GAP is important for the
further development of vaccines consisting of genetically attenuated sporozoites.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-8518-9-6 
PMCID: PMC3206817
PMID: 22004696 

