
1. Malar J. 2011 Oct 24;10:314. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-314.

Identification, characterization and antigenicity of the Plasmodium vivax rhoptry
neck protein 1 (PvRON1).

Moreno-Perez DA(1), Montenegro M, Patarroyo ME, Patarroyo MA.

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Instituto de Inmunología de Colombia, Carrera 50 No, 26-20, Bogotá, 
Colombia.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax malaria remains a major health problem in tropical
and sub-tropical regions worldwide. Several rhoptry proteins which are important 
for interaction with and/or invasion of red blood cells, such as PfRONs, Pf92,
Pf38, Pf12 and Pf34, have been described during the last few years and are being 
considered as potential anti-malarial vaccine candidates. This study describes
the identification and characterization of the P. vivax rhoptry neck protein 1
(PvRON1) and examine its antigenicity in natural P. vivax infections.
METHODS: The PvRON1 encoding gene, which is homologous to that encoding the P.
falciparum apical sushi protein (ASP) according to the plasmoDB database, was
selected as our study target. The pvron1 gene transcription was evaluated by
RT-PCR using RNA obtained from the P. vivax VCG-1 strain. Two peptides derived
from the deduced P. vivax Sal-I PvRON1 sequence were synthesized and inoculated
in rabbits for obtaining anti-PvRON1 antibodies which were used to confirm the
protein expression in VCG-1 strain schizonts along with its association with
detergent-resistant microdomains (DRMs) by Western blot, and its localization by 
immunofluorescence assays. The antigenicity of the PvRON1 protein was assessed
using human sera from individuals previously exposed to P. vivax malaria by
ELISA.
RESULTS: In the P. vivax VCG-1 strain, RON1 is a 764 amino acid-long protein. In 
silico analysis has revealed that PvRON1 shares essential characteristics with
different antigens involved in invasion, such as the presence of a secretory
signal, a GPI-anchor sequence and a putative sushi domain. The PvRON1 protein is 
expressed in parasite's schizont stage, localized in rhoptry necks and it is
associated with DRMs. Recombinant protein recognition by human sera indicates
that this antigen can trigger an immune response during a natural infection with 
P. vivax.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows the identification and characterization of the P.
vivax rhoptry neck protein 1 in the VCG-1 strain. Taking into account that PvRON1
shares several important characteristics with other Plasmodium antigens that play
a functional role during RBC invasion and, as shown here, it is antigenic, it
could be considered as a good vaccine candidate. Further studies aimed at
assessing its immunogenicity and protection-inducing ability in the Aotus monkey 
model are thus recommended.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-314 
PMCID: PMC3215230
PMID: 22024312  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

