
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25992. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025992. Epub 2011 Oct 14.

Five years of antimalarial resistance marker surveillance in Gaza Province,
Mozambique, following artemisinin-based combination therapy roll out.

Raman J(1), Mauff K, Muianga P, Mussa A, Maharaj R, Barnes KI.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research Programme, Medical Research Council, Durban, South Africa.
jaishree.raman@mrc.ac.za

Antimalarial drug resistance is a major obstacle to malaria control and eventual 
elimination. The routine surveillance for molecular marker of resistance is an
efficient way to assess drug efficacy, which remains feasible in areas where
malaria control interventions have succeeded in substantially reducing malaria
transmission. Community based asexual parasite prevalence surveys were conducted 
annually in sentinel sites in Gaza Province, Mozambique from 2006 until 2010,
before, during and after antimalarial policy changes to artesunate plus
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine in 2006 and to artemether-lumefantrine in 2008. Genetic
analysis of dhfr, dhps, crt, and mdr1 resistant genes was conducted on 3 331
(14.4%) Plasmodium falciparum PCR positive samples collected over the study
period from 23 229 children aged 2 to 15 years. The quintuple dhfr/dhps mutation 
associated with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine resistance increased from 56.2% at
baseline to 75.8% by 2010. At baseline the crt76T and mdr186Y mutants were
approaching fixation, 96.1% and 74.7%, respectively. Following the deployment of 
artemisinin-based combination therapy, prevalence of both these
chloroquine-resistance markers began declining, reaching 32.4% and 30.9%,
respectively, by 2010. All samples analysed over the 5-year period possessed a
single copy of the mdr1 gene. The high and increasing prevalence of the quintuple
mutation supports the change in drug policy from artesunate plus
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine to artemether-lumefantrine in Mozambique. As
chloroquine related drug pressure decreased in the region, so did the molecular
markers associated with chloroquine resistance (crt76T and mdr186Y). However,
this reversion to the wild-type mdr186N predisposes parasites towards developing 
lumefantrine resistance. Close monitoring of artemether-lumefantrine efficacy is 
therefore essential, particularly given the high drug pressure within the region 
where most countries now use artemether-lumefantrine as first line treatment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025992 
PMCID: PMC3195082
PMID: 22022487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

