
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2012 Feb;181(2):125-33. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2011.10.009. Epub 2011 Oct 25.

Characterization of acyl carrier protein and LytB in Babesia bovis apicoplast.

Caballero MC(1), Pedroni MJ, Palmer GH, Suarez CE, Davitt C, Lau AO.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Genomics, Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology and
Paul G. Allen School for Global Animal Health, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164-7040, USA.

The apicoplast is a highly specialized organelle that mediates required functions
in the growth and replication of apicomplexan parasites. Despite structural
conservation of the apicoplast among different parasite genera and species, there
are also critical differences in the metabolic requirements of different
parasites and at different stages of the life cycle. To specifically compare
apicoplast pathways between parasites that have both common and unique stages, we
characterized the apicoplast in Babesia bovis, which has only intraerythrocytic
asexual stages in the mammalian host, and compared it to that of Plasmodium
falciparum, which has both asexual intraerythrocytic and hepatic stages.
Specifically focusing on the type II fatty acid (FASII) and isoprenoid (MEP)
biosynthesis pathways, we searched for pathway components and retention of active
sites within the genome, localized key components [acyl carrier protein (ACP) and
4-hydroxy-3-methylbut-2-enyl diphosphate reductase (LytB)] to the apicoplast, and
demonstrated that the N-terminal bipartite signals of both proteins are required 
and sufficient for trafficking to the apicoplast lumen. Using specific
pharmacologic inhibition, we demonstrated that MEP biosynthesis may be disrupted 
and its presence is required for intraerythrocytic growth of B. bovis asexual
stages, consistent with the genomic pathway analysis and with its requirement in 
the asexual erythrocytic stages of P. falciparum. In contrast, FASII biosynthesis
may or may not be present and specific drug targets did not have any inhibitory
effect to B. bovis intraerythrocytic growth, which is consistent with the lack of
requirement for P. falciparum intraerythrocytic growth. However, genomic analysis
revealed the loss of FASII pathway components in B. bovis whereas the pathway is 
intact for P. falciparum but regulated to be expressed when needed (hepatic
stages) and silent when not (intraerythrocytic stages). The results indicate
specialized molding of apicoplast biosynthetic pathways to meet the requirements 
of individual apicomplexan parasites and their unique intracellular niches.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2011.10.009 
PMCID: PMC3278595
PMID: 22057350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

