
1. Vet Parasitol. 2012 Apr 30;185(2-4):110-20. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2011.10.008.
Epub 2011 Oct 20.

Phylogenetic and host-parasite relationship analysis of Henneguya
multiplasmodialis n. sp. infecting Pseudoplatystoma spp. in Brazilian Pantanal
wetland.

Adriano EA(1), Carriero MM, Maia AA, Silva MR, Naldoni J, Ceccarelli PS, Arana S.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de São Paulo
(Unifesp), Rua Professor Artur Riedel, 275, Jardim Eldorado, CEP 09972-270
Diadema, SP, Brazil. edapadriano@gmail.com

A new species of the genus Henneguya (Henneguya multiplasmodialis n. sp.) was
found infecting the gills of three of 89 specimens (3.3%) of Pseudoplatystoma
corruscans and two of 79 specimens (2.6%) of Pseudoplatystoma reticulatum from
rivers in the Pantanal wetland, Brazil. Partial sequencing of the 18S rDNA gene
of the spores obtained from one plasmodium from the gills of P. corruscans and
other one from the gills of P. reticulatum, respectively, resulted in a total of 
1560 and 1147 base pairs. As the spores of H. multiplasmodialis n. sp. resemble
those of Henneguya corruscans, which is also a parasite of P. corruscans,
sequencing of the 18S rDNA gene of the spores of H. corruscans found on P.
corruscans caught in the Brazilian Pantanal wetland was also provided to avoid
any taxonomic pendency between these two species, resulting in 1913 base pairs.
The sequences of H. multiplasmodialis n. sp. parasite of P. corruscans and P.
reticulatum and H. corruscans did not match any of the Myxozoa available in the
GenBank. The similarity of H. multiplasmodialis n. sp. obtained from P.
corruscans to that from P. reticulatum was of 99.7%. Phylogeny revealed a strong 
tendency among Henneguya species to form clades based on the order and/or family 
of the host fish. H. multiplasmodialis n. sp. clustered in a clade with Henneguya
eirasi and H. corruscans, which are also parasites of siluriforms of the family
Pimelodidae and, together with the clade composed of Henneguya spp. parasites of 
siluriforms of the family Ictaluridae, formed a monophyletic clade of parasites
of siluriform hosts. The histological study revealed that the wall of the
plasmodia of H. multiplasmodialis n. sp. were covered with a stratified
epithelium rich in club cells and supported by a layer of connective tissue. The 
interior of the plasmodia had a network of septa that divided the plasmodia into 
numerous compartments. The septa were composed of connective tissue also covered 
on both sides with a stratified epithelium rich in club cells. Inflammatory
infiltrate was found in the tissue surrounding the plasmodia as well as in the
septa.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2011.10.008 
PMID: 22051071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

