
1. Scand J Immunol. 2012 Mar;75(3):355-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2011.02661.x.

CD36 c.1264 T>G null mutation impairs acquisition of IgG antibodies to Plasmodium
falciparum MSP1₁₉ antigen and is associated with higher malaria incidences in
Tanzanian children.

Kajeguka D(1), Mwanziva C, Daou M, Ndaro A, Matondo S, Mbugi E, Dolmans W,
Chilongola J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Kilimanjaro Christian
Medical University College, Tumaini University, Moshi, Tanzania.

Polymorphisms in genes that encode crucial signalling molecules have been
proposed as factors that influence susceptibility to, and outcome of malaria. We 
studied the role of a mutation, c.1264 T>G, that causes CD36 deficiency on IgG
responses to MSP-1₁₉ antigen and malaria incidence. Children were genotyped for
the c.1264 T>G mutation at the beginning of the study using PCR-RFLP. IgG levels 
[optical density (OD) readings] and per cent seropositivity to MSP-1₁₉ were
determined at baseline by ELISA. Children were followed for 12 months for
acquisition of anti-MSP-1₁₉ IgG antibody and malaria incidence. We observed a
significant increase in the production of anti-MSP-1₁₉ IgG antibody in normal and
heterozygous children during the 12 months of follow-up, but not in homozygous
mutants. Normal children had a significantly lower malaria incidence rate
compared to other genotypes (χ² = 115.59; P < 0.01). We conclude that the
presence of the c.1264 T>G mutation that leads to CD36 deficiency is closely
associated with reduced IgG production and higher malaria incidence. It is most
likely that deficiency of CD36 which is known to modulate dendritic cell function
suppresses the production of protective IgG antibodies directed to Plasmodium
falciparum MSP-1₁₉ antigen, which predisposes to the acquisition of clinical
malaria in children.

© 2011 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology © 2011 Blackwell
Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2011.02661.x 
PMID: 22050542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

