
1. Trop Med Int Health. 2012 Feb;17(2):153-60. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-3156.2011.02913.x. Epub 2011 Nov 11.

Genetic diversity and genotype multiplicity of Plasmodium falciparum infections
in symptomatic individuals in the maritime region of Togo.

Awaga KL(1), Missihoun TD, Karou SD, Djadou KE, Chabi NW, Akati A,
Lawson-Hukportie A, Amevo K, Djegno K, Guéant JL, Sanni A, Amouzou SK.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biochimie/Nutrition, Faculté de Sciences, Université de Lomé
(FDS-UL), Lomé, Togo.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the genotype prevalence and the multiplicity of Plasmodium
falciparum infections in the maritime region of Togo.
METHODS: We enrolled 309 symptomatic individuals aged from 6 months to 15 years
from Bè/Lomé and Tsévié, two malaria endemic zones. The number and the
proportions of merozoite surface proteins 1, 2 and 3 genotypes in patients were
determined using capillary electrophoresis genotyping. We further investigated
the possible association between transaminases and homocysteine, and the severity
of the disease.
RESULTS: Of the 309 samples genotyped, 210 tested positive to msp-1, 227 to msp-2
and 193 to msp-3. The nested PCR revealed 22 different alleles for the allelic
family msp-1, 33 for msp-2 and 13 for msp-3. At each locus, the family
distribution was 54.58% of K1, 25% of MAD20 and 20.42% of RO33 for msp-1, and
51.71% and 48.29% of FC27 and 3D7, respectively, for msp-2. For all these allelic
variants, the distribution was associated with neither the severity of malaria
nor the zone of habitation. Pearson correlation coefficients between either the
levels of homocysteine or the transaminase and the severity of the disease were
very low.
CONCLUSION: The severity of malaria was not associated with higher multiplicity
of infections and did not appear restricted to particular genotypes. More
comprehensive explorations including immunity, genetic factors, nutritional and
sociologic status of the population could clarify the situation.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3156.2011.02913.x 
PMID: 22074288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

