
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27131. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027131. Epub 2011 Nov 11.

Insufficiently defined genetic background confounds phenotypes in transgenic
studies as exemplified by malaria infection in Tlr9 knockout mice.

Geurts N(1), Martens E, Verhenne S, Lays N, Thijs G, Magez S, Cauwe B, Li S,
Heremans H, Opdenakker G, Van den Steen PE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology, Rega Institute for Medical Research, University
of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

The use of genetically modified mice, i.e. transgenic as well as gene knockout
(KO) and knock-in mice, has become an established tool to study gene function in 
many animal models for human diseases. However, a gene functions in a particular 
genomic context. This implies the importance of a well-defined homogenous genetic
background for the analysis and interpretation of phenotypes associated with
genetic mutations. By studying a Plasmodium chabaudi chabaudi AS (PcAS) malaria
infection in mice bearing a TLR9 null mutation, we found an increased
susceptibility to infection, i.e. higher parasitemia levels and increased
mortality. However, this was not triggered by the deficient TLR9 gene itself.
Instead, this disease phenotype was dependent on the heterogeneous genetic
background of the mice, which appeared insufficiently defined as determined by
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis. Hence, it is of critical
importance to study gene KO phenotypes on a homogenous genetic background
identical to that of their wild type (WT) control counterparts. In particular, to
avoid problems related to an insufficiently defined genetic background, we
advocate that for each study involving genetically modified mice, at least a
detailed description of the origin and genetic background of both the WT control 
and the altered strain of mice is essential.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027131 
PMCID: PMC3214040
PMID: 22096530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

