
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2012 Jan;12(1):127-36. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.10.024. Epub
2011 Nov 17.

Profound population structure in the Philippine Bulbul Hypsipetes philippinus
(Pycnonotidae, Aves) is not reflected in its Haemoproteus haemosporidian
parasite.

Silva-Iturriza A(1), Ketmaier V, Tiedemann R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Evolutionary Biology/Systematic Zoology, Institute of Biochemistry and
Biology, University of Potsdam, Karl-Liebknecht-Strasse 24-25, Haus 25, D-14476
Potsdam, Germany. silvaiturriza@gmail.com

In this study we used molecular markers to screen for the occurrence and
prevalence of the three most common haemosporidian genera (Haemoproteus,
Plasmodium, and Leucocytozoon) in blood samples of the Philippine Bulbul
(Hypsipetes philippinus), a thrush-size passerine bird endemic to the Philippine 
Archipelago. We then used molecular data to ask whether the phylogeographic
patterns in this insular host-parasite system might follow similar evolutionary
trajectories or not. We took advantage of a previous study describing the pattern
of genetic structuring in the Philippine Bulbul across the Central Philippine
Archipelago (6 islands, 7 populations and 58 individuals; three mitochondrial DNA
genes). The very same birds were here screened for the occurrence of parasites by
species-specific PCR assays of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene (471 base
pairs). Twenty-eight out of the 58 analysed birds had Haemoproteus (48%)
infections while just 2% of the birds were infected with either Leucocytozoon or 
Plasmodium. Sixteen of the 28 birds carrying Haemoproteus had multiple
infections. The phylogeography of the Philippine Bulbul mostly reflects the
geographical origin of samples and it is consistent with the occurrence of two
different subspecies on (1) Semirara and (2) Carabao, Boracay, North Gigante,
Panay, and Negros, respectively. Haemoproteus phylogeography shows very little
geographical structure, suggesting extensive gene flow among locations. While
movements of birds among islands seem very sporadic, we found co-occurring
evolutionary divergent parasite lineages. We conclude that historical processes
have played a major role in shaping the host phylogeography, while they have left
no signature in that of the parasites. Here ongoing population processes,
possibly multiple reinvasions mediated by other hosts, are predominant.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.10.024 
PMID: 22108671  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

