
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Dec 13;108(50):20113-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1109621108. Epub 2011 Nov 28.

Fy(a)/Fy(b) antigen polymorphism in human erythrocyte Duffy antigen affects
susceptibility to Plasmodium vivax malaria.

King CL(1), Adams JH, Xianli J, Grimberg BT, McHenry AM, Greenberg LJ, Siddiqui
A, Howes RE, da Silva-Nunes M, Ferreira MU, Zimmerman PA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. cxk21@case.edu

Plasmodium vivax (Pv) is a major cause of human malaria and is increasing in
public health importance compared with falciparum malaria. Pv is unique among
human malarias in that invasion of erythrocytes is almost solely dependent on the
red cell's surface receptor, known as the Duffy blood-group antigen (Fy). Fy is
an important minor blood-group antigen that has two immunologically distinct
alleles, referred to as Fy(a) or Fy(b), resulting from a single-point mutation.
This mutation occurs within the binding domain of the parasite's red cell
invasion ligand. Whether this polymorphism affects susceptibility to clinical
vivax malaria is unknown. Here we show that Fy(a), compared with Fy(b),
significantly diminishes binding of Pv Duffy binding protein (PvDBP) at the
erythrocyte surface, and is associated with a reduced risk of clinical Pv in
humans. Erythrocytes expressing Fy(a) had 41-50% lower binding compared with
Fy(b) cells and showed an increased ability of naturally occurring or
artificially induced antibodies to block binding of PvDBP to their surface.
Individuals with the Fy(a+b-) phenotype demonstrated a 30-80% reduced risk of
clinical vivax, but not falciparum malaria in a prospective cohort study in the
Brazilian Amazon. The Fy(a+b-) phenotype, predominant in Southeast Asian and many
American populations, would confer a selective advantage against vivax malaria.
Our results also suggest that efficacy of a PvDBP-based vaccine may differ among 
populations with different Fy phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1109621108 
PMCID: PMC3250126
PMID: 22123959  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

