
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28347. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028347. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

Nigeria Anopheles vector database: an overview of 100 years' research.

Okorie PN(1), McKenzie FE, Ademowo OG, Bockarie M, Kelly-Hope L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Advanced Medical Research and Training, College of Medicine,
University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria. triciaokoye@yahoo.com

Anopheles mosquitoes are important vectors of malaria and lymphatic filariasis
(LF), which are major public health diseases in Nigeria. Malaria is caused by
infection with a protozoan parasite of the genus Plasmodium and LF by the
parasitic worm Wuchereria bancrofti. Updating our knowledge of the Anopheles
species is vital in planning and implementing evidence based vector control
programs. To present a comprehensive report on the spatial distribution and
composition of these vectors, all published data available were collated into a
database. Details recorded for each source were the locality, latitude/longitude,
time/period of study, species, abundance, sampling/collection methods,
morphological and molecular species identification methods, insecticide
resistance status, including evidence of the kdr allele, and P. falciparum
sporozoite rate and W. bancrofti microfilaria prevalence. This collation resulted
in a total of 110 publications, encompassing 484,747 Anopheles mosquitoes in 632 
spatially unique descriptions at 142 georeferenced locations being identified
across Nigeria from 1900 to 2010. Overall, the highest number of vector species
reported included An. gambiae complex (65.2%), An. funestus complex (17.3%), An. 
gambiae s.s. (6.5%). An. arabiensis (5.0%) and An. funestus s.s. (2.5%), with the
molecular forms An. gambiae M and S identified at 120 locations. A variety of
sampling/collection and species identification methods were used with an increase
in molecular techniques in recent decades. Insecticide resistance to pyrethroids 
and organochlorines was found in the main Anopheles species across 45 locations. 
Presence of P. falciparum and W. bancrofti varied between species with the
highest sporozoite rates found in An. gambiae s.s, An. funestus s.s. and An.
moucheti, and the highest microfilaria prevalence in An. gambiae s.l., An.
arabiensis, and An. gambiae s.s. This comprehensive geo-referenced database
provides an essential baseline on Anopheles vectors and will be an important
resource for malaria and LF vector control programmes in Nigeria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028347 
PMCID: PMC3230596
PMID: 22162764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

