
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Dec;7(12):e1002448. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002448. Epub
2011 Dec 15.

Juxtamembrane shedding of Plasmodium falciparum AMA1 is sequence independent and 
essential, and helps evade invasion-inhibitory antibodies.

Olivieri A(1), Collins CR, Hackett F, Withers-Martinez C, Marshall J, Flynn HR,
Skehel JM, Blackman MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, Mill
Hill, London, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2012 Feb;8(2).
doi:10.1371/annotation/72b02b2e-460a-44f4-bc87-067cfe76bfdb.

The malarial life cycle involves repeated rounds of intraerythrocytic replication
interspersed by host cell rupture which releases merozoites that rapidly invade
fresh erythrocytes. Apical membrane antigen-1 (AMA1) is a merozoite protein that 
plays a critical role in invasion. Antibodies against AMA1 prevent invasion and
can protect against malaria in vivo, so AMA1 is of interest as a malaria vaccine 
candidate. AMA1 is efficiently shed from the invading parasite surface,
predominantly through juxtamembrane cleavage by a membrane-bound protease called 
SUB2, but also by limited intramembrane cleavage. We have investigated the
structural requirements for shedding of Plasmodium falciparum AMA1 (PfAMA1), and 
the consequences of its inhibition. Mutagenesis of the intramembrane cleavage
site by targeted homologous recombination abolished intramembrane cleavage with
no effect on parasite viability in vitro. Examination of PfSUB2-mediated shedding
of episomally-expressed PfAMA1 revealed that the position of cleavage is
determined primarily by its distance from the parasite membrane. Certain
mutations at the PfSUB2 cleavage site block shedding, and parasites expressing
these non-cleavable forms of PfAMA1 on a background of expression of the wild
type gene invade and replicate normally in vitro. The non-cleavable PfAMA1 is
also functional in invasion. However - in contrast to the intramembrane cleavage 
site - mutations that block PfSUB2-mediated shedding could not be stably
introduced into the genomic pfama1 locus, indicating that some shedding of PfAMA1
by PfSUB2 is essential. Remarkably, parasites expressing shedding-resistant forms
of PfAMA1 exhibit enhanced sensitivity to antibody-mediated inhibition of
invasion. Drugs that inhibit PfSUB2 activity should block parasite replication
and may also enhance the efficacy of vaccines based on AMA1 and other merozoite
surface proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002448 
PMCID: PMC3240622
PMID: 22194692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

