
1. Parasitol Int. 2012 Jun;61(2):317-23. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2011.12.003. Epub
2011 Dec 27.

Stable allele frequency distribution of the polymorphic region of SURFIN(4.2) in 
Plasmodium falciparum isolates from Thailand.

Kaewthamasorn M(1), Yahata K, Alexandre JS, Xangsayarath P, Nakazawa S, Torii M, 
Sattabongkot J, Udomsangpetch R, Kaneko O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Protozoology, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN) and the
Global Center of Excellence Program, Nagasaki University, Sakamoto, Nagasaki
852-8523, Japan. morakot.k@chula.ac.th

Plasmodium falciparum SURFIN₄.₂ (PFD1160w) is a polymorphic protein expressed on 
the surface of parasite-infected erythrocytes. Such molecules are expected to be 
under strong host immune pressure, thus we analyzed the nucleotide diversity of
the N-terminal extracellular region of SURFIN₄.₂ using P. falciparum isolates
obtained from a malaria hypoendemic area of Thailand. The extracellular region of
SURFIN₄.₂ was divided into four regions based on the amino acid sequence
conservation among SURFIN members and the level of polymorphism among SURFIN₄.₂
sequences; N-terminal segment (Nter), a cysteine-rich domain (CRD), a variable
region 1 (Var1), and a variable region 2 (Var2). Comparison between synonymous
and non-synonymous substitutions, Tajima's D test, and Fu and Li's D* and F*
tests detected signatures of positive selection on Var2 and to a lesser extent
Var1, suggesting that these regions were likely under host immune pressure.
Strong linkage disequilibrium was detected for nucleotide pairs separated by a
distance of more than 1.5 kb, and 7 alleles among 19 alleles detected in
1988-1989 still circulated 14 years later, suggesting low recombination of the
analyzed surf₄.₂ sequence region in Thailand. The allele frequency distribution
of polymorphic areas in Var2 did not differ between two groups collected in
different time points, suggesting the allele frequency distribution of this
region was stable for 14 years. The observed allele frequency distribution of
SURFIN₄.₂ Var2 may be fixed in Thai P. falciparum population as similar to the
observation for P. falciparum merozoite surface protein 1, for which a stable
allele frequency distribution was reported.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2011.12.003 
PMID: 22212242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

