
1. Vaccine. 2012 Feb 21;30(9):1583-93. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.12.124. Epub 2012
Jan 9.

Geographic differentiation of polymorphism in the Plasmodium falciparum malaria
vaccine candidate gene SERA5.

Tanabe K(1), Arisue N, Palacpac NM, Yagi M, Tougan T, Honma H, Ferreira MU,
Färnert A, Björkman A, Kaneko A, Nakamura M, Hirayama K, Mita T, Horii T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malariology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka
University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. kztanabe@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp

SERA5 is regarded as a promising malaria vaccine candidate of the most virulent
human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. SERA5 is a 120 kDa abundantly
expressed blood-stage protein containing a papain-like protease. Since
substantial polymorphism in blood-stage vaccine candidates may potentially limit 
their efficacy, it is imperative to fully investigate polymorphism of the SERA5
gene (sera5). In this study, we performed evolutionary and population genetic
analysis of sera5. The level of inter-species divergence (kS=0.076) between P.
falciparum and Plasmodium reichenowi, a closely related chimpanzee malaria
parasite is comparable to that of housekeeping protein genes. A signature of
purifying selection was detected in the proenzyme and enzyme domains. Analysis of
445 near full-length P. falciparum sera5 sequences from nine countries in Africa,
Southeast Asia, Oceania and South America revealed extensive variations in the
number of octamer repeat (OR) and serine repeat (SR) regions as well as
substantial level of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in non-repeat regions
(2562 bp). Remarkably, a 14 amino acid sequence of SERA5 (amino acids 59-72) that
is known to be the in vitro target of parasite growth inhibitory antibodies was
found to be perfectly conserved in all 445 worldwide isolates of P. falciparum
evaluated. Unlike other major vaccine target antigen genes such as merozoite
surface protein-1, apical membrane antigen-1 or circumsporozoite protein, no
strong evidence for positive selection was detected for SNPs in the non-repeat
regions of sera5. A biased geographical distribution was observed in SNPs as well
as in the haplotypes of the sera5 OR and SR regions. In Africa, OR- and
SR-haplotypes with low frequency (<5%) and SNPs with minor allele frequency (<5%)
were abundant and were mostly continent-specific. Consistently, significant
genetic differentiation, assessed by the Wright's fixation index (Fst) of
inter-population variance in allele frequencies, was detected for SNPs and both
OR- and SR-haplotypes among almost all parasite populations. The exception was
parasite populations between Tanzania and Ghana, suggesting frequent gene flow in
Africa. The present study points to the importance of investigating whether
biased geographical distribution for SNPs and repeat variants in the OR and SR
regions affect the reactivity of human serum antibodies to variants.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.12.124 
PMID: 22230587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

