
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012 Mar;56(3):1382-9. doi: 10.1128/AAC.05280-11.
Epub 2012 Jan 9.

Discordant temporal evolution of Pfcrt and Pfmdr1 genotypes and Plasmodium
falciparum in vitro drug susceptibility to 4-aminoquinolines after drug policy
change in French Guiana.

Legrand E(1), Yrinesi J, Ekala MT, Péneau J, Volney B, Berger F, Bouchier C,
Bertani S, Musset L, Meynard JB, Mercereau-Puijalon O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur de la Guyane, Centre National de Référence sur la
Chimiorésistance du Paludisme dans la région Antilles—Guyane, Cayenne, French
Guiana. elegrand@pasteur-cayenne.fr

Analysis of the evolution of drug target genes under changing drug policy is
needed to assist monitoring of Plasmodium falciparum drug resistance in the
field. Here we genotype Pfcrt and Pfdmr1 of 700 isolates collected in French
Guiana from 2000 (5 years after withdrawal of chloroquine) to 2008, i.e., the
period when the artemether-lumefantrine combination was progressively introduced 
and mefloquine was abandoned. Gene sequencing showed fixation of the 7G8-type
Pfcrt SMVNT resistance haplotype and near fixation of the NYCDY Pfdmr1 haplotype.
Pfdmr1 gene copy number correlated with 50% inhibitory concentrations of
mefloquine and halofantrine (r = 0.64 and 0.47, respectively, n = 547); its
temporal changes paralleled changes in in vitro mefloquine susceptibility.
However, the molecular parameters studied did not account for the regained in
vitro susceptibility to chloroquine and showed a poor correlation with
susceptibility to artemether, lumefantrine, or quinine. Identification of novel
markers of resistance to these antimalarials is needed in this South American
area.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.05280-11 
PMCID: PMC3294927
PMID: 22232280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

