
1. J Immunol. 2012 Feb 15;188(4):1905-14. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101978. Epub 2012
Jan 11.

IL-12Rβ2 is essential for the development of experimental cerebral malaria.

Fauconnier M(1), Palomo J, Bourigault ML, Meme S, Szeremeta F, Beloeil JC,
Danneels A, Charron S, Rihet P, Ryffel B, Quesniaux VF.

Author information: 
(1)Immunologie et Embryologie Moléculaires, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, 45071 Orléans, France.

A Th1 response is required for the development of Plasmodium berghei ANKA
(PbA)-induced experimental cerebral malaria (ECM). The role of pro-Th1 IL-12 in
malaria is complex and controversial. In this study, we addressed the role of
IL-12Rβ2 in ECM development. C57BL/6 mice deficient for IL-12Rβ2, IL-12p40, or
IL-12p35 were analyzed for ECM development after blood-stage PbA infection in
terms of ischemia and blood flow by noninvasive magnetic resonance imaging and
angiography, T cell recruitment, and gene expression. Without IL-12Rβ2, no
neurologic sign of ECM developed upon PbA infection. Although wild-type mice
developed distinct brain microvascular pathology, ECM-resistant,
IL-12Rβ2-deficient mice showed unaltered cerebral microcirculation and the
absence of ischemia after PbA infection. In contrast, mice deficient for IL-12p40
or IL-12p35 were sensitive to ECM development. The resistance of
IL-12Rβ2-deficient mice to ECM correlated with reduced recruitment of activated T
cells and impaired overexpression of lymphotoxin-α, TNF-α, and IFN-γ in the brain
after PbA infection. Therefore, IL-12Rβ2 signaling is essential for ECM
development but independent from IL-12p40 and IL-12p35. We document a novel link 
between IL-12Rβ2 and lymphotoxin-α, TNF-α, and IFN-γ expression, key cytokines
for ECM pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101978 
PMID: 22238458  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

