
1. Vaccine. 2012 Mar 2;30(11):1972-80. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.01.010. Epub 2012
Jan 14.

Antibodies against a Plasmodium falciparum antigen PfMSPDBL1 inhibit merozoite
invasion into human erythrocytes.

Sakamoto H(1), Takeo S, Maier AG, Sattabongkot J, Cowman AF, Tsuboi T.

Author information: 
(1)Cell-Free Science and Technology Research Center and Ehime University,
Matsuyama, Ehime 790-8577, Japan.

One approach to develop a malaria blood-stage vaccine is to target proteins that 
play critical roles in the erythrocyte invasion of merozoites. The merozoite
surface proteins (MSPs) and the erythrocyte-binding antigens (EBAs) are
considered promising vaccine candidates, for they are known to play important
roles in erythrocyte invasion and are exposed to host immune system. Here we
focused on a Plasmodium falciparum antigen, PfMSPDBL1 (encoded by PF10_0348 gene)
that is a member of the MSP3 family and has both Duffy binding-like (DBL) domain 
and secreted polymorphic antigen associated with merozoites (SPAM) domain.
Therefore, we aimed to characterize PfMSPDBL1 as a vaccine candidate. Recombinant
full-length protein (rFL) of PfMSPDBL1 was synthesized by a wheat germ cell-free 
system, and rabbit antiserum was raised against rFL. We show that rabbit
anti-PfMSPDBL1 antibodies inhibited erythrocyte invasion of wild type parasites
in vitro in a dose dependent manner, and the specificity of inhibitory activity
was confirmed using PfMSPDBL1 knockout parasites. Pre-incubation of the
anti-PfMSPDBL1 antibodies with the recombinant SPAM domain had no effect on the
inhibitory activity suggesting that antibodies to this region were not involved. 
In addition, antibodies to rFL were elicited by P. falciparum infection in
malaria endemic area, suggesting the PfMSLDBL1 is immunogenic to humans. Our
results suggest that PfMSPDBL1 is a novel blood-stage malaria vaccine candidate.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.01.010 
PMID: 22248820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

