
1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2012 Apr;329(1):78-86. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2012.02506.x. Epub 2012 Feb 15.

Futile attempts to differentiate provide molecular evidence for individual
differences within a population of cells during cellular reprogramming.

Hoffmann XK(1), Tesmer J, Souquet M, Marwan W.

Author information: 
(1)Magdeburg Centre for Systems Biology (MaCS), Otto von Guericke University,
Magdeburg, Germany.

The heterogeneity of cell populations and the influence of stochastic noise might
be important issues for the molecular analysis of cellular reprogramming at the
system level. Here, we show that in Physarum polycephalum, the expression
patterns of marker genes correlate with the fate decision of individual
multinucleate plasmodial cells that had been exposed to a
differentiation-inducing photostimulus. For several hours after stimulation, the 
expression kinetics of PI-3-kinase, piwi, and pumilio orthologs and other marker 
genes were qualitatively similar in all stimulated cells but quantitatively
different in those cells that subsequently maintained their proliferative
potential and failed to differentiate accordingly. The results suggest that the
population of nuclei in an individual plasmodium behaves synchronously in terms
of gene regulation to an extent that the plasmodium provides a source for
macroscopic amounts of homogeneous single-cell material for analysing the dynamic
processes of cellular reprogramming. Based on the experimental findings, we
predict that circuits with switch-like behaviour that control the cell fate
decision of a multinucleate plasmodium operate through continuous changes in the 
concentration of cellular regulators because the nuclear population suspended in 
a large cytoplasmic volume damps stochastic noise.

Â© 2012 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2012.02506.x 
PMCID: PMC3505798
PMID: 22269001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

