
1. Malar J. 2012 Feb 8;11:36. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-36.

Human Plasmodium knowlesi infection in Ranong province, southwestern border of
Thailand.

Sermwittayawong N(1), Singh B, Nishibuchi M, Sawangjaroen N, Vuddhakul V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Prince of Songkla University, 
Hat Yai, Songkhla, Thailand. natthawan.k@psu.ac.th

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium knowlesi, a simian malaria parasite, has been reported in 
humans in many Southeast Asian countries. In Thailand, most of the limited
numbers of cases reported so far were from areas near neighbouring countries,
including Myanmar.
METHODS: Blood samples collected from 171 Thai and 248 Myanmese patients
attending a malaria clinic in Ranong province, Thailand, located near the Myanmar
border were investigated for P. knowlesi using nested PCR assays. Positive
samples were also investigated by PCR for Plasmodium falciparum, Plasmodium
vivax, Plasmodium malariae and Plasmodium ovale, and were confirmed by sequencing
the gene encoding the circumsporozoite protein (csp).
RESULTS: Two samples, one obtained from a Thai and the other a Myanmese, were
positive for P. knowlesi only. Nucleotide sequences of the csp gene derived from 
these two patients were identical and phylogenetically indistinguishable from
other P. knowlesi sequences derived from monkeys and humans. Both patients worked
in Koh Song, located in the Kawthoung district of Myanmar, which borders
Thailand.
CONCLUSION: This study indicates that transmission of P. knowlesi is occurring in
the Ranong province of Thailand or the Kawthoung district of Myanmar. Further
studies are required to assess the incidence of knowlesi malaria and whether
macaques in these areas are the source of the infections.

Â© 2012 Sermwittayawong et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-36 
PMCID: PMC3293766
PMID: 22313518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

