
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2012 May;183(1):52-62. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.01.007. Epub 2012 Feb 9.

Biochemical and structural characterization of Plasmodium falciparum glutamate
dehydrogenase 2.

Zocher K(1), Fritz-Wolf K, Kehr S, Fischer M, Rahlfs S, Becker K.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Research Center, Justus Liebig University,
Heinrich-Buff-Ring 26-32, D-35392 Giessen, Germany. kathleen.zocher@gmx.de

Glutamate dehydrogenases (GDHs) play key roles in cellular redox, amino acid, and
energy metabolism, thus representing potential targets for pharmacological
interventions. Here we studied the functional network provided by the three known
glutamate dehydrogenases of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. The
recombinant production of the previously described PfGDH1 as hexahistidyl-tagged 
proteins was optimized. Additionally, PfGDH2 was cloned, recombinantly produced, 
and characterized. Like PfGDH1, PfGDH2 is an NADP(H)-dependent enzyme with a
specific activity comparable to PfGDH1 but with slightly higher K(m) values for
its substrates. The three-dimensional structure of hexameric PfGDH2 was solved to
3.1 Å resolution. The overall structure shows high similarity with PfGDH1 but
with significant differences occurring at the subunit interface. As in mammalian 
GDH1, in PfGDH2 the subunit-subunit interactions are mainly assisted by hydrogen 
bonds and hydrophobic interactions, whereas in PfGDH1 these contacts are mediated
by networks of salt bridges and hydrogen bonds. In accordance with this, the
known bovine GDH inhibitors hexachlorophene, GW5074, and bithionol were more
effective on PfGDH2 than on PfGDH1. Subcellular localization was determined for
all three plasmodial GDHs by fusion with the green fluorescent protein. Based on 
our data, PfGDH1 and PfGDH3 are cytosolic proteins whereas PfGDH2 clearly
localizes to the apicoplast, a plastid-like organelle specific for apicomplexan
parasites. This study provides new insights into the structure and function of
GDH isoenzymes of P. falciparum, which represent potential targets for the
development of novel antimalarial drugs.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.01.007 
PMID: 22342964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

