
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012 May;56(5):2546-52. doi: 10.1128/AAC.05943-11.
Epub 2012 Feb 21.

Lack of association of the S769N mutation in Plasmodium falciparum SERCA (PfATP6)
with resistance to artemisinins.

Cui L(1), Wang Z, Jiang H, Parker D, Wang H, Su XZ, Cui L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

The recent emergence of artemisinin (ART) resistance in Plasmodium falciparum in 
western Cambodia, manifested as delayed parasite clearance, is a big threat to
the long-term efficacy of this family of antimalarial drugs. Among the multiple
candidate genes associated with ART resistance in P. falciparum, the
sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase PfATP6 has been postulated as a 
specific target of ARTs. The PfATP6 gene harbors multiple single-nucleotide
polymorphisms in field parasite populations, and S769N has been associated with
decreased sensitivity to artemether in parasite populations from French Guiana.
In this study, we used an allelic exchange strategy to engineer parasite lines
carrying the S769N mutations in P. falciparum strain 3D7 and evaluated whether
introduction of this mutation modulated parasite sensitivity to ART derivatives. 
Using three transgenic lines carrying the 769N mutation and two transgenic lines 
carrying the wild-type 769S as controls, we found that S769N did not affect
PfATP6 gene expression. We compared the sensitivities of these parasite lines to 
three ART derivatives, artemether, artesunate, and dihydroartemisinin, in 18
biological experiments and detected no significant effect of the S769N mutation
on parasite response to these ART derivatives. This study provides further
evidence for the lack of association of PfATP6 with ART resistance.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.05943-11 
PMCID: PMC3346631
PMID: 22354307  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

