
1. Mol Ecol. 2012 Apr;21(7):1597-616. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2012.05480.x. Epub
2012 Feb 21.

Inferring the evolutionary history of Indian Plasmodium vivax from population
genetic analyses of multilocus nuclear DNA fragments.

Gupta B(1), Srivastava N, DAS A.

Author information: 
(1)Evolutionary Genomics and Bioinformatics Laboratory, Division of Genomics and 
Bioinformatics, National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector-8, Dwarka, New
Delhi 110077, India.

The human malaria parasite Plasmodium vivax is globally widespread, causing high 
malaria morbidity. As P. vivax is highly endemic to India, and previous reports
indicate genetic homogeneity in population samples, we tested the hypothesis of
no genetic structuring in Indian P. vivax. Further, based on the reports of
increasing incidence of Plasmodium falciparum infection in comparison with
P. vivax in recent years in India, it was important to understand whether
reduction in population size has resulted in decrease in P. vivax infection rate 
in India. For this, we utilized recently developed putatively neutral markers
from chromosome 13 of P. vivax to score single nucleotide polymorphisms in 126
P. vivax isolates collected from 10 different places in India. The overall
results indicated that Indian P. vivax bears high nucleotide diversity within
population samples but moderate amount of genetic differentiation between
population samples. STRUCTURE analysis grouped 10 population samples into three
clusters based on the proportion of the genetic ancestries in each population.
However, the pattern of clustering does not correlate with sampling locations in 
India. Furthermore, analyses of past demographic events indicated reduction in
population size in majority of population samples, but when isolates from all the
10 samples were considered as a single population, the data fit to the
demographic equilibrium model. All these observations clearly indicate that
Indian P. vivax presents complex evolutionary history but possesses several
features of being a part of ancestral distribution range of this species.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2012.05480.x 
PMID: 22353169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

