
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31012. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031012. Epub 2012 Feb 21.

An N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU)-induced dominant negative mutation in the JAK3
kinase protects against cerebral malaria.

Bongfen SE(1), Rodrigue-Gervais IG, Berghout J, Torre S, Cingolani P, Wiltshire
SA, Leiva-Torres GA, Letourneau L, Sladek R, Blanchette M, Lathrop M, Behr MA,
Gruenheid S, Vidal SM, Saleh M, Gros P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

Cerebral malaria (CM) is a lethal neurological complication of malaria. We
implemented a genome-wide screen in mutagenized mice to identify host proteins
involved in CM pathogenesis and whose inhibition may be of therapeutic value. One
pedigree (P48) segregated a resistance trait whose CM-protective effect was fully
penetrant, mapped to chromosome 8, and identified by genome sequencing as
homozygosity for a mis-sense mutation (W81R) in the FERM domain of
Janus-associated kinase 3 (Jak3). The causative effect of Jak3(W81R) was verified
by complementation testing in Jak3(W81R/-) double heterozygotes that were fully
protected against CM. Jak3(W81R) homozygotes showed defects in thymic development
with depletion of CD8(+) T cell, B cell, and NK cell compartments, and defective 
T cell-dependent production of IFN-γ. Adoptive transfer of normal splenocytes
abrogates CM resistance in Jak3(W81R) homozygotes, an effect attributed to the
CD8(+) T cells. Jak3(W81R) behaves as a dominant negative variant, with
significant CM resistance of Jak3(W81R/+) heterozygotes, compared to
CM-susceptible Jak3(+/+) and Jak3(+/-) controls. CM resistance in Jak3(W81R/+)
heterozygotes occurs in presence of normal T, B and NK cell numbers. These
findings highlight the pathological role of CD8(+) T cells and Jak3-dependent
IFN-γ-mediated Th1 responses in CM pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031012 
PMCID: PMC3283600
PMID: 22363534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

