
1. Sante. 2011 Oct-Dec;21(4):193-8. doi: 10.1684/san.2011.0263.

[Malaria in Gabon: results of a clinical and laboratory study at the
Chinese-Gabonese Friendship Hospital of Franceville].

[Article in French]

Lekana-Douki JB(1), Pontarollo J, Zatra R, Toure-Ndouo FS.

Author information: 
(1)Centre International de Recherches Médicales de Franceville, Unité de
Parasitologie Médicale, BP 769 Franceville Gabon. Lekana_jb@yahoo.fr

Despite progress in the control of malaria, it remains a serious public health
problem. Substantial declines in malaria transmission, morbidity and mortality
have nonetheless been reported in several countries where new malaria control
strategies have been implemented. We conducted this molecular and epidemiological
analysis of malaria in the pediatric department of the Chinese-Gabon Friendship
Hospital (HCGC) in Franceville in 2010. Franceville is the third largest town in 
Gabon, and malaria transmission is high year-round. We included 945 children, 756
of them febrile. Malaria was diagnosed based on the detection of P. falciparum in
thick blood films, with Lambarene's method. Malaria prevalence among the febrile 
children included in this study was 17.9% (n=135). The burden of malaria is thus 
lower than in the past; it is now the second leading cause of pediatric hospital 
visits, rather than the leading cause as it was in 2004. The children's mean age 
was 48.5 ± 3.9 months, older than in 2004 (p<0.05). We also analysed the
molecular drug resistance marker, Pfmdr1. The prevalence of the wild-type
genotype N86 of Pfmdr1 was 47.4% (n=64), higher than in 2004 (p<0.001). The
increased prevalence of codon 1246 was not significant. Socio-economic factors
and known malaria risk factors were analysed. We found that the use of
Insecticide-treated mosquito nets and the provision of information (education or 
communication) to parents and guardians about malaria were protective factors
against the disease. In conclusion, a larger study of the entire region over a
longer period is necessary to characterise malaria in Franceville today.
Transmission factors must also be studied.

DOI: 10.1684/san.2011.0263 
PMID: 22362010  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

