
1. Autophagy. 2012 Mar;8(3):435-7. doi: 10.4161/auto.19289. Epub 2012 Feb 24.

Role of ATG3 in the parasite Toxoplasma gondii: autophagy in an early branching
eukaryote.

Besteiro S(1).

Author information: 
(1)DIMNP, UMR 5235 CNRS, Universit√© de Montpellier 2, Montpellier, France.
sebastien.besteiro@univ-montp2.fr

Toxoplasma gondii belongs to the phylum Apicomplexa, a diverse group of early
branching unicellular eukaryotes related to dinoflagellates and ciliates. Like
several other Apicomplexa such as Plasmodium (the causative agent of malaria), T.
gondii is a human pathogen responsible for a potentially lethal disease called
toxoplasmosis. Most Apicomplexa have complex life cycles, involving intermediate 
hosts and vectors, which include obligatory intracellular developmental stages.
In the case of malaria and toxoplasmosis, it is that replicative process, leading
to the ultimate lysis of the host cell, which is causing the symptoms of the
disease. For Toxoplasma, the invasive and fast-replicating form of the parasite
is called the tachyzoite. While autophagy has been a fast-growing field of
research in recent years, not much was known about the relevance of this
catabolic process in medically important apicomplexan parasites. Vesicles
resembling autophagosomes had been described in drug-treated Plasmodium parasites
in the early 1970s and a potential role for autophagy in organelle recycling
during differentiation between Plasmodium life stages has also been recently
described. Interestingly, recent database searches have identified putative
orthologs of the core machinery responsible for the formation of autophagosomes
in several protists, including Toxoplasma. In spite of an apparently reduced
machinery (only about one-third of the yeast ATG genes appear to be conserved),
T. gondii seemed thus able to perform macroautophagy, but the cellular functions 
of the pathway for this parasite remained to be demonstrated.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.19289 
PMID: 22361579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

