
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jul;40(12):5313-31. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks202. Epub 2012
Feb 29.

The role of N-terminus of Plasmodium falciparum ORC1 in telomeric localization
and var gene silencing.

Deshmukh AS(1), Srivastava S, Herrmann S, Gupta A, Mitra P, Gilberger TW, Dhar
SK.

Author information: 
(1)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,
India.

Plasmodium falciparum origin recognition complex 1 (ORC1) protein has been
implicated in DNA replication and silencing var gene family. However, the
mechanism and the domain structure of ORC1 related to the regulation of var gene 
family are unknown. Here we show that the unique N-terminus of PfORC1
(PfORC1N(1-238)) is targeted to the nuclear periphery in vivo and this region
binds to the telomeric DNA in vitro due to the presence of a leucine heptad
repeats. Like PfORC1N(1-238), endogenous full length ORC1, was found to be
associated with sub telomeric repeat regions and promoters of various var genes. 
Additionally, binding and propagation of ORC1 to telomeric and subtelomeric
regions was severely compromised in PfSir2 deficient parasites suggesting the
dependence of endogenous ORC1 on Sir2 for var gene regulation. This feature is
not previously described for Plasmodium ORC1 and contrary to yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae where ORC function as a landing pad for Sir proteins. Interestingly,
the overexpression of ORC1N(1-238) compromises the binding of Sir2 at the
subtelomeric loci and var gene promoters consistent with de-repression of some
var genes. These results establish role of the N-terminus of PfORC1 in
heterochromatin formation and regulation of var gene expression in co-ordination 
with Sir2 in P. falciparum.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks202 
PMCID: PMC3384324
PMID: 22379140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

