
1. Parasitol Int. 2012 Sep;61(3):443-9. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2012.02.008. Epub 2012
Feb 25.

Pv12, a 6-Cys antigen of Plasmodium vivax, is localized to the merozoite rhoptry.

Li J(1), Ito D, Chen JH, Lu F, Cheng Y, Wang B, Ha KS, Cao J, Torii M,
Sattabongkot J, Tsuboi T, Han ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Environmental Biology and Tropical Medicine, School of
Medicine, Kangwon National University, Chunchon, Gangwon-do 200-701, Republic of 
Korea.

Pf12 in Plasmodium falciparum has been characterized as a merozoite surface
protein and the Pf12 gene is actively transcribed during schizont stage. An
orthologous gene, Pv12, has been identified in genome of P. vivax, but the
protein product has not been characterized. The Pv12 is a 362 amino acid long
polypeptide encoded by a single exon gene PVX_113775, for which orthologous genes
have been identified in other Plasmodium species by bioinformatic approaches.
Pv12 contains two predicted six-cysteine (6-Cys) domains, which may be
constrained by predicted disulfide bonds, and a transmembrane domain and a
predicted GPI anchor attachment site in C-terminal region. The recombinant Pv12
protein is recognized by serum antibodies of patients naturally exposed to P.
vivax and the native Pv12 protein from parasite extract is also recognized by
immune mouse serum. The Pv12 is localized in rhoptry; an apical organelle of the 
merozoite, and the localization pattern of Pv12 is distinct from that of Pf12 in 
P. falciparum. The present study suggests that Pv12 is immunogenic in humans
during parasite infection and it could play an important role in erythrocyte
invasion.

Crown Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2012.02.008 
PMID: 22394409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

