
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2012 Jul;12(5):978-86. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2012.02.009. Epub
2012 Mar 3.

Evidence of purifying selection on merozoite surface protein 8 (MSP8) and 10
(MSP10) in Plasmodium spp.

Pacheco MA(1), Elango AP, Rahman AA, Fisher D, Collins WE, Barnwell JW, Escalante
AA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Evolutionary Medicine and Informatics, The Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, United States.

Evidence for natural selection, positive or negative, on gene encoding antigens
may indicate variation or functional constraints that are immunologically
relevant. Most malaria surface antigens with high genetic diversity have been
reported to be under positive-diversifying selection. However, antigens with
limited genetic variation are usually ignored in terms of the role that natural
selection may have in generating such patterns. We investigated orthologous genes
encoding two merozoite proteins, MSP8 and MSP10, among several mammalian
Plasmodium spp. These antigens, together with MSP1, are among the few MSPs that
have two epidermal growth factor-like domains (EGF) at the C-terminal. Those EGF 
are relatively conserved (low levels of genetic polymorphism) and have been
proposed to act as ligands during the invasion of RBCs. We use several
evolutionary genetic methods to detect patterns consistent with natural selection
acting on MSP8 and MSP10 orthologs in the human parasites Plasmodium falciparum
and P. vivax, as well as closely related malarial species found in non-human
primates (NHPs). Overall, these antigens have low polymorphism in the human
parasites in comparison with the orthologs from other Plasmodium spp. We found
that the MSP10 gene polymorphism in P. falciparum only harbor non-synonymous
substitutions, a pattern consistent with a gene under positive selection.
Evidence of purifying selection was found on the polymorphism observed in both
orthologs from P. cynomolgi, a non-human primate parasite closely related to P.
vivax, but it was not conclusive in the human parasite. Yet, using phylogenetic
base approaches, we found evidence for purifying selection on both MSP8 and MSP10
in the lineage leading to P. vivax. Such antigens evolving under strong
functional constraints could become valuable vaccine candidates. We discuss how
comparative approaches could allow detecting patterns consistent with negative
selection even when there is low polymorphism in the extant populations.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2012.02.009 
PMCID: PMC4405235
PMID: 22414917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

