
1. Korean J Parasitol. 2012 Mar;50(1):15-21. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2012.50.1.15. Epub
2012 Mar 6.

A recombinant Plasmodium vivax apical membrane antigen-1 to detect human
infection in Iran.

Haghi AM(1), Khoramizade MR, Nateghpour M, Mohebali M, Edrissian GH, Eshraghian
MR, Sepehrizadeh Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Parasitology and Mycology, School of Public Health,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

In Iran, Plasmodium vivax is responsible for more than 80% of the infected cases 
of malaria per year. Control interventions for vivax malaria in humans rely
mainly on developed diagnostic methods. Recombinant P. vivax apical membrane
antigen-1 (rPvAMA-1) has been reported to achieve designing rapid, sensitive, and
specific molecular diagnosis. This study aimed to perform isolation and
expression of a rPvAMA-1, derived from Iranian patients residing in an endemic
area. Then, the diagnostic efficiency of the characterized Iranian PvAMA-1 was
assessed using an indirect ELISA method. For this purpose, a partial region of
AMA-1 gene was amplified, cloned, and expressed in pET32a plasmid. The
recombinant His-tagged protein was purified and used to coat the ELISA plate.
Antibody detection was assessed by indirect ELISA using rPvAMA-1. The validity of
the ELISA method for detection of anti-P. vivax antibodies in the field was
compared to light microscopy on 84 confirmed P. vivax patients and compared to 84
non-P. vivax infected individuals. The ELISA cut-off value was calculated as the 
mean+2SD of OD values of the people living in malaria endemic areas from a south 
part of Iran. We found a cut-off point of OD=0.311 that showed the best
correlation between the sera confirmed with P. vivax infection and healthy
control sera. A sensitivity of 81.0% and specificity of 84.5% were found at this 
cut off titer. A good degree of statistical agreement was found between ELISA
using rPvAMA-1 and light microscopy (0.827) by Kappa analysis.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2012.50.1.15 
PMCID: PMC3309046
PMID: 22451729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

