
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2012 Jul;184(1):13-9. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.03.007. Epub 2012 Apr 3.

The evolution of metabolic enzymes in Plasmodium and trypanosomatids as compared 
to Saccharomyces and Schizosaccharomyces.

Palenchar PM(1), Palenchar JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Villanova University, 800 E. Lancaster Ave.,
Villanova, PA 19805, USA. peter.palenchar@villanova.edu

Understanding how the biological connectivity of genes and gene products affects 
evolution is an important aspect of understanding evolution. Genes encoding
enzymes are frequently used to carry out such analyses. Interestingly, studies
have shown that connectivity in the metabolic networks in parasitic protists,
including Plasmodium falciparum and Trypanosoma brucei, have been substantially
altered as compared to free living eukaryotes, such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
Herein, we have determined K(a) values, which are a measure of the non-synonymous
substitution rate, and used them to examine the differences between the evolution
of genes in T. brucei, P. falciparum, S. cerevisiae, and Schizosaccharomyces
pombe. All four organisms share similar traits with respect to the evolution of
genes encoding metabolic enzymes. First, genes encoding metabolic enzymes have
lower K(a) values than genes encoding non-metabolic proteins. In addition,
perturbations of the metabolic network appear to have limited affects on the
genes encoding enzymes near the perturbation. In most cases, there is a negative 
relationship between connectivity in the metabolic network of the gene product
and the K(a) value for the gene, i.e. examining how much constraint there is on
gene evolution when it is connected to many other genes. In addition, we find
that the K(a) values of orthologs encoding for metabolic enzymes in each organism
are significantly correlated, indicating similar patterns of non-synonymous
substitutions. In total, our results indicate that the evolution of genes
encoding metabolic enzymes do not tend to be greatly affected by changes in the
metabolic network.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.03.007 
PMID: 22498309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

