
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(4):e1002665. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002665. Epub 2012 Apr
19.

Induction of strain-transcending antibodies against Group A PfEMP1 surface
antigens from virulent malaria parasites.

Ghumra A(1), Semblat JP, Ataide R, Kifude C, Adams Y, Claessens A, Anong DN, Bull
PC, Fennell C, Arman M, Amambua-Ngwa A, Walther M, Conway DJ, Kassambara L,
Doumbo OK, Raza A, Rowe JA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunity, Infection and Evolution, Institute of Immunology and
Infection Research, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Sequence diversity in pathogen antigens is an obstacle to the development of
interventions against many infectious diseases. In malaria caused by Plasmodium
falciparum, the PfEMP1 family of variant surface antigens encoded by var genes
are adhesion molecules that play a pivotal role in malaria pathogenesis and
clinical disease. PfEMP1 is a major target of protective immunity, however,
development of drugs or vaccines based on PfEMP1 is problematic due to extensive 
sequence diversity within the PfEMP1 family. Here we identified the PfEMP1
variants transcribed by P. falciparum strains selected for a virulence-associated
adhesion phenotype (IgM-positive rosetting). The parasites transcribed a subset
of Group A PfEMP1 variants characterised by an unusual PfEMP1 architecture and a 
distinct N-terminal domain (either DBLα1.5 or DBLα1.8 type). Antibodies raised in
rabbits against the N-terminal domains showed functional activity (surface
reactivity with live infected erythrocytes (IEs), rosette inhibition and
induction of phagocytosis of IEs) down to low concentrations (<10 µg/ml of total 
IgG) against homologous parasites. Furthermore, the antibodies showed broad
cross-reactivity against heterologous parasite strains with the same rosetting
phenotype, including clinical isolates from four sub-Saharan African countries
that showed surface reactivity with either DBLα1.5 antibodies (variant HB3var6)
or DBLα1.8 antibodies (variant TM284var1). These data show that parasites with a 
virulence-associated adhesion phenotype share IE surface epitopes that can be
targeted by strain-transcending antibodies to PfEMP1. The existence of shared
surface epitopes amongst functionally similar disease-associated P. falciparum
parasite isolates suggests that development of therapeutic interventions to
prevent severe malaria is a realistic goal.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002665 
PMCID: PMC3330128
PMID: 22532802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

