
1. Malar J. 2012 Apr 25;11:129. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-129.

Evidence for in vitro and in vivo expression of the conserved VAR3 (type 3)
plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1.

Wang CW(1), Lavstsen T, Bengtsson DC, Magistrado PA, Berger SS, Marquard AM,
Alifrangis M, Lusingu JP, Theander TG, Turner L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology at Department of International Health,
Immunology, and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen and at Department of
Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital (Rigshospitalet), 1014,
Copenhagen, Denmark. cwang@sund.ku.dk

BACKGROUND: Members of the Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1
(PfEMP1) adhesion antigen family are major contributors to the pathogenesis of P.
falciparum malaria infections. The PfEMP1-encoding var genes are among the most
diverse sequences in nature, but three genes, var1, var2csa and var3 are found
conserved in most parasite genomes. The most severe forms of malaria disease are 
caused by parasites expressing a subset of antigenically conserved PfEMP1
variants. Thus the ubiquitous and conserved VAR3 PfEMP1 is of particular interest
to the research field. Evidence of VAR3 expression on the infected erythrocyte
surface has never been presented, and var3 genes have been proposed to be
transcribed and expressed differently from the rest of the var gene family
members.
METHODS: In this study, parasites expressing VAR3 PfEMP1 were generated using
anti-VAR3 antibodies and the var transcript and PfEMP1 expression profiles of the
generated parasites were investigated. The IgG reactivity by plasma from children
living in malaria-endemic Tanzania was tested to parasites and recombinant VAR3
protein. Parasites from hospitalized children were isolated and the transcript
level of var3 was investigated.
RESULTS: Var3 is transcribed and its protein product expressed on the surface of 
infected erythrocytes. The VAR3-expressing parasites were better recognized by
childrenÂ´s IgG than a parasite line expressing a Group B var gene. Two in 130
children showed increased recognition of parasites expressing VAR3 and to the
recombinant VAR3 protein after a malaria episode and the isolated parasites
showed high levels of var3 transcripts.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, the presented data suggest that var3 is transcribed
and its protein product expressed on the surface of infected erythrocytes in the 
same manner as seen for other var genes both in vitro and in vivo. Only very few 
children exhibit seroconversion to VAR3 following a malaria episode requiring
hospitalization, supporting the previous conclusion drawn from var3 transcript
analysis of parasites collected from children hospitalized with malaria, that
VAR3 is not associated with severe anaemia or cerebral malaria syndromes in
children.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-129 
PMCID: PMC3407477
PMID: 22533832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

