
1. Protist. 2013 Jan;164(1):37-48. doi: 10.1016/j.protis.2012.03.001. Epub 2012 May 
2.

The GPI-anchored 6-Cys protein Pv12 is present in detergent-resistant
microdomains of Plasmodium vivax blood stage schizonts.

Moreno-Pérez DA(1), Areiza-Rojas R, Flórez-Buitrago X, Silva Y, Patarroyo ME,
Patarroyo MA.

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Instituto de Inmunología de Colombia (FIDIC), Carrera 50 No. 26-20, 
Bogotá, Colombia.

Plasmodium vivax malaria remains one of the tropical diseases causing an enormous
burden on global public health. Several proteins located on this parasite
species' merozoite surface have been considered the most suitable antigens for
being included in an anti-malarial vaccine, given the functional role they play
during the parasite's interaction with red blood cells. The present study
identifies and characterizes the P. vivax Pv12 surface protein which was
evaluated by using molecular biology and immunochemistry assays; its antigenic
potential was also examined in natural and experimental P. vivax malaria
infections. The P. vivax VCG-1 strain Pv12 gene encodes a 362 amino acid-long
protein exhibiting a signal peptide, a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor 
sequence and two 6-Cys domains. The presence of the Pv12 protein on the
parasite's surface and its association with detergent-resistant membrane
complexes, together with its antigenic potential, supports the notion that this
antigen could play an important role as a red blood cell binding ligand. Further 
studies aimed at establishing the immunogenicity and protection-inducing ability 
of the Pv12 protein or its products in the Aotus experimental model are thus
suggested.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.protis.2012.03.001 
PMID: 22554829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

