
1. Exp Parasitol. 2012 Jun;131(2):261-6. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2012.04.013. Epub
2012 Apr 27.

Babesia bovis: a bipartite signal directs the glutamyl-tRNA synthetase to the
apicoplast.

Pedroni MJ(1), Luu TN, Lau AO.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Genomics, Department of Veterinary Microbiology & Pathology, Paul
G. Allen School for Global Animal Health, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164-7040, USA.

Babesia bovis contains a prokaryotic derived organelle known as the apicoplast.
Many participants of the metabolic pathways within the apicoplast are encoded in 
the nuclear genome and post-translationally imported with the help of a bipartite
signal. Recently, an all encompassing algorithm was derived to predict apicoplast
targeted proteins for many non-Plasmodium apicomplexans in which it reported the 
presence of 260 apicoplast targeted proteins in Babesia. One of these proteins is
glutamyl tRNA synthetase (GltX). This study investigates if the putative
bipartite signal of GltX alone is sufficient to direct proteins into the
apicoplast. Using a transient transfection system consisting of a green
fluorescent protein as the reporter, we tested the signal and transit portions of
the bipartite signal in apicoplastic transport. We first identified the
transcript of gltX to be expressed during the asexual blood stages and
subsequently confirmed that the complete bipartite signal is responsible for
directing the reporter protein into a compartment distinct from the nucleus and
the mitochondrion. As GltX bipartite signal successfully guided the reporter
protein into the apicoplast, our finding implies that it also directs native GltX
into the same organelle.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2012.04.013 
PMCID: PMC3377962
PMID: 22561041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

