
1. J Control Release. 2012 Aug 20;162(1):242-54. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2012.04.037.
Epub 2012 Apr 28.

Vaccination Strategies against Malaria: novel carrier(s) more than a tour de
force.

Tyagi RK(1), Garg NK, Sahu T.

Author information: 
(1)Global Health Infectious Disease Research Program, Department of Global
Health, College of Public Health, University of South Florida, 3720 Spectrum
Blvd, Tampa, FL 33612-9415, USA. rtyagi@health.usf.edu

The introduction of vaccine technology has facilitated an unprecedented
multi-antigen approach to develop an effective vaccine against complex systemic
inflammatory pathogens such as Plasmodium spp. that cause severe malaria. The
capacity of multi subunit DNA vaccine encoding different stage Plasmodium
antigens to induce CD8(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes and interferon-Î³ responses in
mice, monkeys and humans has been observed. Moreover, genetic vaccination may be 
capable of eliciting both cell mediated and humoral immune responses. The
cytotoxic T cell responses are categorically needed against intracellular hepatic
stage and humoral response with antibodies targeted against antigens from all
stages of malaria parasite life cycle. Therefore, the key to success for any DNA 
based vaccine is to design a vector able to serve as a safe and efficient
delivery system. This has encouraged the development of non-viral DNA-mediated
gene transfer techniques such as liposome, virosomes, microsphere and
nanoparticles. Efficient and relatively safe DNA transfection using lipoplexes
makes them an appealing alternative to be explored for gene delivery. Also,
liposome-entrapped DNA has been shown to enhance the potency of DNA vaccines,
possibly by facilitating uptake of the plasmid by antigen-presenting cells (APC).
Another recent technology using cationic lipids has been deployed and has
generated substantial interest in this approach to gene transfer. In this review 
we discussed various aspects that could be decisive in the formulation of
efficient and stable carrier system(s) for the development of malaria vaccine.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2012.04.037 
PMID: 22564369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

