
1. Infect Immun. 2012 Jul;80(7):2316-22. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00261-12. Epub 2012 May 7.

Interleukin-10 (IL-10) polymorphisms are associated with IL-10 production and
clinical malaria in young children.

Zhang G(1), Manaca MN, McNamara-Smith M, Mayor A, Nhabomba A, Berthoud TK, Khoo
SK, Wiertsema S, Aguilar R, Barbosa A, Quintó L, Candelaria P, Schultz EN, Hayden
CM, Goldblatt J, Guinovart C, Alonso PL, Lesouëf PN, Dobaño C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Western Australia,
Perth, Australia. guicheng.zhang@uwa.edu.au

The role of interleukin-10 (IL-10) in malaria remains poorly characterized. The
aims of this study were to investigate (i) whether genetic variants of the IL-10 
gene influence IL-10 production and (ii) whether IL-10 production as well as the 
genotypes and haplotypes of the IL-10 gene in young children and their mothers
are associated with the incidence of clinical malaria in young children. We
genotyped three IL-10 single nucleotide polymorphisms in 240 children and their
mothers from a longitudinal prospective cohort and assessed the IL-10 production 
by maternal peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and cord blood mononuclear
cells (CBMCs). Clinical episodes of Plasmodium falciparum malaria in the children
were documented until the second year of life. The polymorphism IL-10 A-1082G
(GCC haplotype of three SNPs in IL-10) in children was associated with IL-10
production levels by CBMC cultured with P. falciparum-infected erythrocytes (P = 
0.043), with the G allele linked to low IL-10 production capacity. The G allele
in children was also significantly associated with a decreased risk for clinical 
malaria infection in their second year of life (P = 0.016). Furthermore, IL-10
levels measured in maternal PBMCs cultured with infected erythrocytes were
associated with increased risk of malaria infection in young children (P <
0.001). In conclusion, IL-10 polymorphisms and IL-10 production capacity were
associated with clinical malaria infections in young children. High IL-10
production capacity inherited from parents may diminish immunological protection 
against P. falciparum infection, thereby being a risk for increased malaria
morbidity.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00261-12 
PMCID: PMC3416471
PMID: 22566507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

