
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Mar;97(5):1987-95. doi:
10.1007/s00253-012-4071-7. Epub 2012 May 18.

Heterologous expression of the C-terminal antigenic domain of the malaria vaccine
candidate Pfs48/45 in the green algae Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.

Jones CS(1), Luong T, Hannon M, Tran M, Gregory JA, Shen Z, Briggs SP, Mayfield
SP.

Author information: 
(1)The San Diego Center for Algae Biotechnology and the Division of Biological
Sciences, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, MC0368, La
Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Malaria is a widespread and infectious disease that is a leading cause of death
in many parts of the world. Eradication of malaria has been a major world health 
goal for decades, but one that still remains elusive. Other diseases have been
eradicated using vaccination, but traditional vaccination methods have thus far
been unsuccessful for malaria. Infection by Plasmodium species, the causative
agent of malaria, is currently treated with drug-based therapies, but an increase
in drug resistance has led to the need for new methods of treatment. A promising 
strategy for malaria treatment is to combine transmission blocking vaccines
(TBVs) that prevent spread of disease with drug-based therapies to treat infected
individuals. TBVs can be developed against surface protein antigens that are
expressed during parasite reproduction in the mosquito. When the mosquito ingests
blood from a vaccinated individual harboring the Plasmodium parasite, the
antibodies generated by vaccination prevent completion of the parasites
life-cycle. Animal studies have shown that immunization with Pfs48/45 results in 
the production of malaria transmission blocking antibodies; however, the
development of this vaccine candidate has been hindered by poor expression in
both prokaryotic and eukaryotic hosts. Recently, the chloroplast of Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii has been used to express complex recombinant proteins. In this study,
we show that the C-terminal antigenic region of the Pfs48/45 antigen can be
expressed in the chloroplast of the green algae C. reinhardtii and that this
recombinant protein has a conformation recognized by known transmission blocking 
antibodies. Production of this protein in algae has the potential to scale to the
very large volumes required to meet the needs of millions at risk for contracting
malaria.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-012-4071-7 
PMID: 22592550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

