
1. J Immunol. 2012 Jun 15;188(12):6225-37. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103177. Epub 2012 
May 16.

Passive immunoprotection of Plasmodium falciparum-infected mice designates the
CyRPA as candidate malaria vaccine antigen.

Dreyer AM(1), Matile H, Papastogiannidis P, Kamber J, Favuzza P, Voss TS, Wittlin
S, Pluschke G.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, CH-4051 Basel, Switzerland.

An effective malaria vaccine could prove to be the most cost-effective and
efficacious means of preventing severe disease and death from malaria. In an
endeavor to identify novel vaccine targets, we tested predicted Plasmodium
falciparum open reading frames for proteins that elicit parasite-inhibitory Abs. 
This has led to the identification of the cysteine-rich protective Ag (CyRPA).
CyRPA is a cysteine-rich protein harboring a predicted signal sequence. The
stage-specific expression of CyRPA in late schizonts resembles that of proteins
known to be involved in merozoite invasion. Immunofluorescence staining localized
CyRPA at the apex of merozoites. The entire protein is conserved as shown by
sequencing of the CyRPA encoding gene from a diverse range of P. falciparum
isolates. CyRPA-specific mAbs substantially inhibited parasite growth in vitro as
well as in a P. falciparum animal model based on NOD-scid IL2RÎ³(null) mice
engrafted with human erythrocytes. In contrast to other P. falciparum mouse
models, this system generated very consistent results and evinced a dose-response
relationship and therefore represents an unprecedented in vivo model for
quantitative comparison of the functional potencies of malaria-specific Abs. Our 
data suggest a role for CyRPA in erythrocyte invasion by the merozoite.
Inhibition of merozoite invasion by CyRPA-specific mAbs in vitro and in vivo
renders this protein a promising malaria asexual blood-stage vaccine candidate
Ag.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103177 
PMID: 22593616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

