
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 26;109(26):E1782-90. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1120534109. Epub 2012 May 22.

A restricted subset of var genes mediates adherence of Plasmodium
falciparum-infected erythrocytes to brain endothelial cells.

Avril M(1), Tripathi AK, Brazier AJ, Andisi C, Janes JH, Soma VL, Sullivan DJ Jr,
Bull PC, Stins MF, Smith JD.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98109-5219, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 26;109(26):10130-1.

Cerebral malaria (CM) is a deadly complication of Plasmodium falciparum
infection, but specific interactions involved in cerebral homing of infected
erythrocytes (IEs) are poorly understood. In this study, P. falciparum-IEs were
characterized for binding to primary human brain microvascular endothelial cells 
(HBMECs). Before selection, CD36 or ICAM-1-binding parasites exhibited punctate
binding to a subpopulation of HBMECs and binding was CD36 dependent. Panning of
IEs on HBMECs led to a more dispersed binding phenotype and the selection of
three var genes, including two that encode the tandem domain cassette 8 (DC8) and
were non-CD36 binders. Multiple domains in the DC8 cassette bound to brain
endothelium and the cysteine-rich interdomain region 1 inhibited binding of P.
falciparum-IEs by 50%, highlighting a key role for the DC8 cassette in cerebral
binding. It is mysterious how deadly binding variants are maintained in the
parasite population. Clonal parasite lines expressing the two brain-adherent
DC8-var genes did not bind to any of the known microvascular receptors,
indicating unique receptors are involved in cerebral binding. They could also
adhere to brain, lung, dermis, and heart endothelial cells, suggesting cerebral
binding variants may have alternative sequestration sites. Furthermore, young
African children with CM or nonsevere control cases had antibodies to
HBMEC-selected parasites, indicating they had been exposed to related variants
during childhood infections. This analysis shows that specific P. falciparum
erythrocyte membrane protein 1 types are linked to cerebral binding and suggests 
a potential mechanism by which individuals may build up immunity to severe
disease, in the absence of CM.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1120534109 
PMCID: PMC3387091
PMID: 22619321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

