
1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Infect Immun. 2012 Aug;80(8):2920-8. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00206-12. Epub 2012 May 21.

Fine specificity of Plasmodium vivax Duffy binding protein binding engagement of 
the Duffy antigen on human erythrocytes.

Siddiqui AA(1), Xainli J, Schloegel J, Carias L, Ntumngia F, Shoham M, Casey JL, 
Foley M, Adams JH, King CL.

Author information: 
(1)Case Western Reserve University, Center for Global Health and Diseases,
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Retraction in
    Infect Immun. 2015 Jun;83(6):2593.

Plasmodium vivax invasion of human erythrocytes requires interaction of the P.
vivax Duffy binding protein (PvDBP) with its host receptor, the Duffy antigen
(Fy) on the erythrocyte surface. Consequently, PvDBP is a leading vaccine
candidate. The binding domain of PvDBP lies in a cysteine-rich portion of the
molecule called region II (PvDBPII). PvDBPII contains three distinct subdomains
based upon intramolecular disulfide bonding patterns. Subdomain 2 (SD2) is highly
polymorphic and is thought to contain many key residues for binding to Fy, while 
SD1 and SD3 are comparatively conserved and their role in Fy binding is not well 
understood. To examine the relative contributions of the different subdomains to 
binding to Fy and their abilities to elicit strain-transcending
binding-inhibitory antibodies, we evaluated recombinant proteins from SD1+2, SD2,
SD3, and SD3+, which includes 24 residues of SD2. All of the recombinant
subdomains, except for SD2, bound variably to human erythrocytes, with constructs
containing SD3 showing the best binding. Antisera raised in laboratory animals
against SD3, SD3+, and SD2+3 inhibited the binding of full-length PvDBPII, which 
is strain transcending, whereas antisera generated to SD1+2 and SD2 failed to
generate blocking antibodies. All of the murine monoclonal antibodies generated
to full-length PvDBPII that had significant binding-inhibitory activity
recognized only SD3. Thus, SD3 binds Fy and elicits blocking antibodies,
indicating that it contains residues critical to Fy binding that could be the
basis of a strain-transcending candidate vaccine against P. vivax.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00206-12 
PMCID: PMC3434565
PMID: 22615246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

