
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 10;109(28):E1957-62. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1121183109. Epub 2012 May 23.

Some strains of Plasmodium falciparum, a human malaria parasite, evade the
complement-like system of Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes.

Molina-Cruz A(1), DeJong RJ, Ortega C, Haile A, Abban E, Rodrigues J,
Jaramillo-Gutierrez G, Barillas-Mury C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.

Plasmodium falciparum lines differ in their ability to infect mosquitoes. The
Anopheles gambiae L3-5 refractory (R) line melanizes most Plasmodium species,
including the Brazilian P. falciparum 7G8 line, but it is highly susceptible to
some African P. falciparum strains such as 3D7, NF54, and GB4. We investigated
whether these lines differ in their ability to evade the mosquito immune system. 
Silencing key components of the mosquito complement-like system
[thioester-containing protein 1 (TEP1), leucine-rich repeat protein 1, and
Anopheles Plasmodium-responsive leucine-rich repeat protein 1] prevented
melanization of 7G8 parasites, reverting the refractory phenotype. In contrast,
it had no effect on the intensity of infection with NF54, suggesting that this
line is able to evade TEP1-mediated lysis. When R females were coinfected with a 
line that is melanized (7G8) and a line that survives (3D7), the coinfection
resulted in mixed infections with both live and encapsulated parasites on
individual midguts. This finding shows that survival of individual parasites is
parasite-specific and not systemic in nature, because parasites can evade
TEP1-mediated lysis even when other parasites are melanized in the same midgut.
When females from an extensive genetic cross between R and susceptible A. gambiae
(G3) mosquitoes were infected with P. berghei, encapsulation was strongly
correlated with the TEP1-R1 allele. However, P. falciparum 7G8 parasites were no 
longer encapsulated by females from this cross, indicating that the TEP1-R1
allele is not sufficient to melanize this line. Evasion of the A. gambiae immune 
system by P. falciparum may be the result of parasite adaptation to sympatric
mosquito vectors and may be an important factor driving malaria transmission.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1121183109 
PMCID: PMC3396512
PMID: 22623529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

