
1. Int J Parasitol. 2012 Jun;42(7):693-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2012.04.015. Epub
2012 May 23.

Plasmodium ovale in Bangladesh: genetic diversity and the first known evidence of
the sympatric distribution of Plasmodium ovale curtisi and Plasmodium ovale
wallikeri in southern Asia.

Fuehrer HP(1), Habler VE, Fally MA, Harl J, Starzengruber P, Swoboda P, Bloeschl 
I, Khan WA, Noedl H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Specific Prophylaxis and Tropical Medicine, Medical University of
Vienna, Kinderspitalgasse 15, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

In spite of the high prevalence of malaria in Bangladesh and other southern Asian
countries, there remains a substantial shortage of knowledge about the less
common human malaria parasites. Recent studies indicate that Plasmodium ovale is 
made up of two species, namely Plasmodium ovale wallikeri and Plasmodium ovale
curtisi. Genus- and species-specific nested PCR analyses of the ssrRNA gene was
used to detect P. ovale infections among 2,246 diagnostic samples. Plasmodium
ovale infections were further differentiated by nested PCR of the potra gene and 
multilocus sequence analysis of the cox1, porbp2 and the ssrRNA genes. Both P.
ovale curtisi and P. ovale wallikeri occur sympatrically in the Chittagong Hill
Tracts, Bangladesh and all patients presented with a mild or asymptomatic symptom
complex at the time of diagnosis. The pathogens can be differentiated by nested
PCRs targeting the ssrRNA and potra genes, and display dimorphism in multilocus
sequence analyses. We believe that we report the first evidence of sympatric P.
ovale curtisi and P. ovale wallikeri in southern Asia within a relatively
confined study area of less than 5,000 km(2). High rates of mixed infections, the
emergence of "new" human malaria parasite species and the evidence of zoonotic
capability call for optimised diagnostic strategies for a new era of eradication.

Copyright Â© 2012 Australian Society for Parasitology Inc. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2012.04.015 
PMID: 22633951  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

