
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36419. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036419. Epub 2012 May 23.

Influence of HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQB1 alleles on IgG antibody response to the P.
vivax MSP-1, MSP-3α and MSP-9 in individuals from Brazilian endemic area.

Lima-Junior JC(1), Rodrigues-da-Silva RN, Banic DM, Jiang J, Singh B,
Fabrício-Silva GM, Porto LC, Meyer EV, Moreno A, Rodrigues MM, Barnwell JW,
Galinski MR, de Oliveira-Ferreira J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoparasitology, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fiocruz, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The antibody response generated during malaria infections is of
particular interest, since the production of specific IgG antibodies is required 
for acquisition of clinical immunity. However, variations in antibody responses
could result from genetic polymorphism of the HLA class II genes. Given the
increasing focus on the development of subunit vaccines, studies of the influence
of class II alleles on the immune response in ethnically diverse populations is
important, prior to the implementation of vaccine trials.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: In this study, we evaluated the influence of HLA-DRB1* and 
-DQB1* allelic groups on the naturally acquired humoral response from Brazilian
Amazon individuals (n = 276) against P. vivax Merozoite Surface Protein-1
(MSP-1), MSP-3α and MSP-9 recombinant proteins. Our results provide information
concerning these three P. vivax antigens, relevant for their role as immunogenic 
surface proteins and vaccine candidates. Firstly, the studied population was
heterogeneous presenting 13 HLA-DRB1* and 5 DQB1* allelic groups with a higher
frequency of HLA-DRB1*04 and HLA-DQB1*03. The proteins studied were broadly
immunogenic in a naturally exposed population with high frequency of IgG
antibodies against PvMSP1-19 (86.7%), PvMSP-3 (77%) and PvMSP-9 (76%). Moreover, 
HLA-DRB1*04 and HLA-DQB1*03 alleles were associated with a higher frequency of
IgG immune responses against five out of nine antigens tested, while HLA-DRB1*01 
was associated with a high frequency of non-responders to repetitive regions of
PvMSP-9, and the DRB1*16 allelic group with the low frequency of responders to
PvMSP3 full length recombinant protein.
CONCLUSIONS: HLA-DRB1*04 alleles were associated with high frequency of antibody 
responses to five out of nine recombinant proteins tested in Rondonia State,
Brazil. These features could increase the success rate of future clinical trials 
based on these vaccine candidates.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036419 
PMCID: PMC3359319
PMID: 22649493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

