
1. Mar Drugs. 2012 Apr;10(4):762-74. doi: 10.3390/md10040762. Epub 2012 Mar 28.

Epigenetic tailoring for the production of anti-infective cytosporones from the
marine fungus Leucostoma persoonii.

Beau J(1), Mahid N, Burda WN, Harrington L, Shaw LN, Mutka T, Kyle DE, Barisic B,
van Olphen A, Baker BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Center for Molecular Diversity in Drug Design,
Discovery and Delivery, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620, USA.
jbeau@mail.usf.edu

Recent genomic studies have demonstrated that fungi can possess gene clusters
encoding for the production of previously unobserved secondary metabolites.
Activation of these attenuated or silenced genes to obtain either improved titers
of known compounds or new ones altogether has been a subject of considerable
interest. In our efforts to discover new chemotypes that are effective against
infectious diseases, including malaria and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (MRSA), we have isolated a strain of marine fungus, Leucostoma persoonii, 
that produces bioactive cytosporones. Epigenetic modifiers employed to activate
secondary metabolite genes resulted in enhanced production of known cytosporones 
B (1, 360%), C (2, 580%) and E (3, 890%), as well as the production of the
previously undescribed cytosporone R (4). Cytosporone E was the most bioactive,
displaying an IC(90) of 13 µM toward Plasmodium falciparum, with A549
cytotoxicity IC(90) of 437 µM, representing a 90% inhibition therapeutic index
(TI(90) = IC(90) A459/IC(90)P. falciparum) of 33. In addition, cytosporone E was 
active against MRSA with a minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) of 72 µM and
inhibition of MRSA biofilm at roughly half that value (minimum biofilm
eradication counts, MBEC90, was found to be 39 µM).

DOI: 10.3390/md10040762 
PMCID: PMC3366674
PMID: 22690142  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

