
1. Malar J. 2012 Jun 15;11:201. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-201.

A direct comparison of real time PCR on plasma and blood to detect Plasmodium
falciparum infection in children.

Lamikanra AA(1), Dobaño C, Jiménez A, Nhabomba A, Tsang HP, Guinovart C, Manaca
MN, Quinto L, Aguilar R, Cisteró P, Alonso PL, Roberts DJ, Mayor A.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, University of Oxford, and
National Health Service Blood and Transplant, John Radcliffe Hospital,
Headington, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK. abigail.lamikanra@ndcls.ox.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Estimation of Plasmodium falciparum parasitaemia can vary with the
method used and time of sampling. Quantitative real time PCR (qPCR) on whole
blood or plasma samples has previously been shown to be more sensitive than thick
film microscopy. However the efficiencies of each method have not been compared
using samples obtained from infants less than one year old.
METHODS: A multiple of statistical approaches were used to compare the
performance of qPCR on whole blood or plasma to detect the 18 S ribosomal gene of
P. falciparum in 548 samples from children aged 2.5 or 24 months. Parasite
prevalence in matched samples was compared using Mcnemar's test and agreement of 
positive results quantified as Kappa scores. Parasite prevalences between
different age groups were compared by Fisher's test. Results from analyses by
thick film microscopy were also available from children at 24 months and their
correlation to each qPCR method examined by the Spearman's test. Finally the
association of P. falciparum infection with the incidence of multiple malaria
episodes from contact to 24 months of age was evaluated using negative binomial
regression.
RESULTS: These analyses showed that qPCR from whole blood detected approximately 
3-fold more cases of infection than plasma qPCR. Both qPCR methods agreed well
with each other although qPCR from plasma had a greater agreement with microscopy
(96.85%) than did qPCR from blood (69.7%). At 24 months the prevalence of
infection detected by all methods was associated with anaemia (p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The data presented here demonstrates that low levels of parasitaemia
are better detected by qPCR using parasite DNA from whole blood than from plasma.
However plasma samples provide a viable substitute when parasite smears are
unavailable.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-201 
PMCID: PMC3414736
PMID: 22704637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

