
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2012 Sep;185(1):19-26. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.06.001. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Expansion of experimental genetics approaches for Plasmodium berghei with
versatile transfection vectors.

Kooij TW(1), Rauch MM, Matuschewski K.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Parasitology Unit, Berlin,
Germany. kooij@mpiib-berlin.mpg.de

Experimental reverse genetic approaches have proven powerful in the study of the 
biology of the malaria parasite. The murine malaria model parasite Plasmodium
berghei is the genetically most amendable Plasmodium species and allows full
access to the entire life cycle in vivo. Here, we describe a next-generation,
highly versatile transfection vector set that facilitates advancing experimental 
genetic strategies towards a genome-wide scale. Through 36 consecutive cloning
and 17 subcloning steps an optimized vector set was generated from the standard
transfection plasmid. These targeting vectors, collectively referred to as the
Berghei Adaptable Transfection (pBAT) plasmids, contain key elements that permit 
recycling of the drug-selectable cassette, robust green fluorescent labelling of 
recombinant parasites, carboxy-terminal tagging of target proteins with a red
fluorescent-epitope tag fusion, and expression of heterologous genes. The vectors
were further optimized for small size, versatile restriction endonuclease
recognition sites and potential exchange of individual vector elements. We show
that stable integration into a transgene expression site, an intergenic locus at 
a synteny breakpoint on P. berghei chromosome 6, is phenotypically silent and
generated a bright green fluorescent parasite line for imaging applications. We
provide an example, P. berghei actin 2, for targeted gene deletion and illustrate
that the positive selection marker can be recycled, thereby permitting multiple
rounds of genetic manipulations. We propose that the vectors described herein
will greatly facilitate functional assignment to predicted and orphan Plasmodium 
gene models by multiple experimental genetics approaches.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.06.001 
PMID: 22705315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

