
1. FEBS Lett. 2012 Jul 16;586(15):2157-63. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.01.057. Epub 
2012 Feb 8.

A Synthetic Biology Project - Developing a single-molecule device for screening
drug-target interactions.

Firman K(1), Evans L, Youell J.

Author information: 
(1)IBBS Biophysics Laboratories, School of Biological Sciences, University of
Portsmouth, King Henry Building, King Henry I Street, Portsmouth PO1 2DY, United 
Kingdom.

This review describes a European-funded project in the area of Synthetic Biology.
The project seeks to demonstrate the application of engineering techniques and
methodologies to the design and construction of a biosensor for detecting
drug-target interactions at the single-molecule level. Production of the proteins
required for the system followed the principle of previously described "bioparts"
concepts (a system where a database of biological parts - promoters, genes,
terminators, linking tags and cleavage sequences - is used to construct novel
gene assemblies) and cassette-type assembly of gene expression systems (the
concept of linking different "bioparts" to produce functional "cassettes"), but
problems were quickly identified with these approaches. DNA substrates for the
device were also constructed using a cassette-system. Finally, micro-engineering 
was used to build a magnetoresistive Magnetic Tweezer device for detection of
single molecule DNA modifying enzymes (motors), while the possibility of
constructing a Hall Effect version of this device was explored. The device is
currently being used to study helicases from Plasmodium as potential targets for 
anti-malarial drugs, but we also suggest other potential uses for the device.

Copyright Â© 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.01.057 
PMID: 22710185  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

