
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e40167. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040167. Epub 2012 Jun 27.

Expression and cellular immunogenicity of a transgenic antigen driven by
endogenous poxviral early promoters at their authentic loci in MVA.

Orubu T(1), Alharbi NK, Lambe T, Gilbert SC, Cottingham MG.

Author information: 
(1)The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

CD8(+) T cell responses to vaccinia virus are directed almost exclusively against
early gene products. The attenuated strain modified vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA)
is under evaluation in clinical trials of new vaccines designed to elicit
cellular immune responses against pathogens including Plasmodium spp., M.
tuberculosis and HIV-1. All of these recombinant MVAs (rMVA) utilize the
well-established method of linking the gene of interest to a cloned poxviral
promoter prior to insertion into the viral genome at a suitable locus by
homologous recombination in infected cells. Using BAC recombineering, we show
that potent early promoters that drive expression of non-functional or
non-essential MVA open reading frames (ORFs) can be harnessed for immunogenic
expression of recombinant antigen. Precise replacement of the MVA orthologs of
C11R, F11L, A44L and B8R with a model antigen positioned to use the same
translation initiation codon allowed early transgene expression similar to or
slightly greater than that achieved by the commonly-used p7.5 or short synthetic 
promoters. The frequency of antigen-specific CD8(+) T cells induced in mice by
single shot or adenovirus-prime, rMVA-boost vaccination were similarly equal or
marginally enhanced using endogenous promoters at their authentic genomic loci
compared to the traditional constructs. The enhancement in immunogenicity
observed using the C11R or F11L promoters compared with p7.5 was similar to that 
obtained with the mH5 promoter compared with p7.5. Furthermore, the growth rates 
of the viruses were unimpaired and the insertions were genetically stable.
Insertion of a transgenic ORF in place of a viral ORF by BAC recombineering can
thus provide not only a potent promoter, but also, concomitantly, a suitable
insertion site, potentially facilitating development of MVA vaccines expressing
multiple recombinant antigens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040167 
PMCID: PMC3384612
PMID: 22761956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

