
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38898. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038898. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Humoral immune responses to a single allele PfAMA1 vaccine in healthy
malaria-naïve adults.

Remarque EJ(1), Roestenberg M, Younis S, Walraven V, van der Werff N, Faber BW,
Leroy O, Sauerwein R, Kocken CH, Thomas AW.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Primate Research Centre, Rijswijk, The Netherlands.
Remarque@bprc.nl

Plasmodium falciparum: apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1) is a candidate malaria
vaccine antigen expressed on merozoites and sporozoites. The polymorphic nature
of AMA1 may compromise vaccine induced protection. The humoral response induced
by two dosages (10 and 50 µg) of a single allele AMA1 antigen (FVO) formulated
with Alhydrogel, Montanide ISA 720 or AS02 was investigated in 47 malaria-naïve
adult volunteers. Volunteers were vaccinated 3 times at 4 weekly intervals and
serum samples obtained four weeks after the third immunization were analysed for 
(i) Antibody responses to various allelic variants, (ii) Domain specificity,
(iii) Avidity, (iv) IgG subclass levels, by ELISA and (v) functionality of
antibody responses by Growth Inhibition Assay (GIA). About half of the antibodies
induced by vaccination cross reacted with heterologous AMA1 alleles. The choice
of adjuvant determined the magnitude of the antibody response, but had only a
marginal influence on specificity, avidity, domain recognition or subclass
responses. The highest antibody responses were observed for AMA1 formulated with 
AS02. The Growth Inhibition Assay activity of the antibodies was proportional to 
the amount of antigen specific IgG and the functional capacity of the antibodies 
was similar for heterologous AMA1-expressing laboratory strains.TRIAL
REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00730782.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038898 
PMCID: PMC3387192
PMID: 22768052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

