
1. Acta Trop. 2012 Nov;124(2):133-9. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2012.07.002. Epub
2012 Jul 20.

Assessing the genetic diversity of the vir genes in Indian Plasmodium vivax
population.

Gupta P(1), Das A, Singh OP, Ghosh SK, Singh V.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector-8 Dwarka, New Delhi 110077,
India.

Variant surface antigens (VSAs) present on the surface of parasitized
erythrocytes facilitate many Plasmodium spp. to escape the host immune system
during infection. Multigene families coding for VSAs exist in several Plasmodium 
spp. and are located on telomeric and subtelomeric regions of the chromosomes. P.
vivax genome also contains a multigene superfamily vir (variant interspersed
repeats), present in the subtelomeric region with a possible role in immune
evasion like the var gene in P. falciparum. Blood samples from 148 symptomatic
malaria cases were collected from five different regions of India, viz.
Mangalore, Rourkela, Goa, Delhi and Jabalpur. P. vivax isolates (74 single
infections) were sequenced for four vir genes (viz. vir 27, vir 4, vir 12 and vir
21) and analyzed for the genetic variability existing in different populations of
India. The results indicate that vir genes in different P. vivax populations in
India are highly divergent both within and between the isolates. High levels of
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were observed attributing to the existing 
polymorphism for all the four vir genes studied across the population. Detailed
knowledge of the genetic variation among the vir genes will help in understanding
the evolutionary aspects of vir genes and may also provide basis for
understanding the disease chronicity.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2012.07.002 
PMID: 22820026  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

