
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Aug 7;109(32):13052-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1210585109. Epub 2012 Jul 23.

Sequence-based association and selection scans identify drug resistance loci in
the Plasmodium falciparum malaria parasite.

Park DJ(1), Lukens AK, Neafsey DE, Schaffner SF, Chang HH, Valim C, Ribacke U,
Van Tyne D, Galinsky K, Galligan M, Becker JS, Ndiaye D, Mboup S, Wiegand RC,
Hartl DL, Sabeti PC, Wirth DF, Volkman SK.

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
dpark@broadinstitute.org

Through rapid genetic adaptation and natural selection, the Plasmodium falciparum
parasite--the deadliest of those that cause malaria--is able to develop
resistance to antimalarial drugs, thwarting present efforts to control it.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) provide a critical hypothesis-generating
tool for understanding how this occurs. However, in P. falciparum, the limited
amount of linkage disequilibrium hinders the power of traditional array-based
GWAS. Here, we demonstrate the feasibility and power improvements gained by using
whole-genome sequencing for association studies. We analyzed data from 45
Senegalese parasites and identified genetic changes associated with the
parasites' in vitro response to 12 different antimalarials. To further increase
statistical power, we adapted a common test for natural selection, XP-EHH
(cross-population extended haplotype homozygosity), and used it to identify
genomic regions associated with resistance to drugs. Using this sequence-based
approach and the combination of association and selection-based tests, we
detected several loci associated with drug resistance. These loci included the
previously known signals at pfcrt, dhfr, and pfmdr1, as well as many genes not
previously implicated in drug-resistance roles, including genes in the
ubiquitination pathway. Based on the success of the analysis presented in this
study, and on the demonstrated shortcomings of array-based approaches, we argue
for a complete transition to sequence-based GWAS for small, low
linkage-disequilibrium genomes like that of P. falciparum.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1210585109 
PMCID: PMC3420184
PMID: 22826220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

