
1. Malar J. 2012 Jul 31;11:250. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-250.

The Plasmodium falciparum, Nima-related kinase Pfnek-4: a marker for asexual
parasites committed to sexual differentiation.

Reininger L(1), Garcia M, Tomlins A, MÃ¼ller S, Doerig C.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS USR3151, Station Biologique, Place Georges Teissier, 29680, Roscoff,
France. lreininger@sb-roscoff.fr

BACKGROUND: Malaria parasites undergo, in the vertebrate host, a developmental
switch from asexual replication to sexual differentiation leading to the
formation of gametocytes, the only form able to survive in the mosquito vector.
Regulation of the onset of the sexual phase remains largely unknown and
represents an important gap in the understanding of the parasite's complex
biology.
METHODS: The expression and function of the Nima-related kinase Pfnek-4 during
the early sexual development of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum 
were investigated, using three types of transgenic Plasmodium falciparum 3D7
lines: (i) episomally expressing a Pfnek-4-GFP fusion protein under the control
of its cognate pfnek-4 promoter; (ii) episomally expressing negative or positive 
selectable markers, yeast cytosine deaminase-uridyl phosphoribosyl transferase,
or human dihydrofolate reductase, under the control of the pfnek-4 promoter; and 
(iii) lacking a functional pfnek-4 gene. Parasite transfectants were analysed by 
fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry. In vitro growth rate and gametocyte
formation were determined by Giemsa-stained blood smears.
RESULTS: The Pfnek-4-GFP protein was found to be expressed in stage II to V
gametocytes and, unexpectedly, in a subset of asexual-stage parasites undergoing 
schizogony. Culture conditions stimulating gametocyte formation resulted in
significant increase of this schizont subpopulation. Moreover, sorted asexual
parasites expressing the Pfnek-4-GFP protein displayed elevated gametocyte
formation when returned to in vitro culture in presence of fresh red blood cells,
when compared to GFP- parasites from the same initial population. Negative
selection of asexual parasites expressing pfnek-4 showed a marginal reduction in 
growth rate, whereas positive selection caused a marked reduction in
parasitaemia, but was not sufficient to completely abolish proliferation.
Pfnek-4- clones are not affected in their asexual growth and produced normal
numbers of stage V gametocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that Pfnek-4 is not strictly
gametocyte-specific, and is expressed in a small subset of asexual parasites
displaying high rate conversion to sexual development. Pfnek-4 is not required
for erythrocytic schizogony and gametocytogenesis. This is the first study to
report the use of a molecular marker for the sorting of sexually-committed
schizont stage P. falciparum parasites, which opens the way to molecular
characterization of this pre-differentiated subpopulation.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-250 
PMCID: PMC3495404
PMID: 22849771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

