
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41937. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041937. Epub 2012 Jul 27.

Biochemical and functional analysis of two Plasmodium falciparum blood-stage
6-cys proteins: P12 and P41.

Taechalertpaisarn T(1), Crosnier C, Bartholdson SJ, Hodder AN, Thompson J,
Bustamante LY, Wilson DW, Sanders PR, Wright GJ, Rayner JC, Cowman AF, Gilson PR,
Crabb BS.

Author information: 
(1)Burnet Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The genomes of Plasmodium parasites that cause malaria in humans, other primates,
birds, and rodents all encode multiple 6-cys proteins. Distinct 6-cys protein
family members reside on the surface at each extracellular life cycle stage and
those on the surface of liver infective and sexual stages have been shown to play
important roles in hepatocyte growth and fertilization respectively. However,
6-cys proteins associated with the blood-stage forms of the parasite have no
known function. Here we investigate the biochemical nature and function of two
blood-stage 6-cys proteins in Plasmodium falciparum, the most pathogenic species 
to afflict humans. We show that native P12 and P41 form a stable heterodimer on
the infective merozoite surface and are secreted following invasion, but could
find no evidence that this complex mediates erythrocyte-receptor binding. That
P12 and P41 do not appear to have a major role as adhesins to erythrocyte
receptors was supported by the observation that antisera to these proteins did
not substantially inhibit erythrocyte invasion. To investigate other functional
roles for these proteins their genes were successfully disrupted in P.
falciparum, however P12 and P41 knockout parasites grew at normal rates in vitro 
and displayed no other obvious phenotypic changes. It now appears likely that
these blood-stage 6-cys proteins operate as a pair and play redundant roles
either in erythrocyte invasion or in host-immune interactions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041937 
PMCID: PMC3407074
PMID: 22848665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

