
1. Exp Parasitol. 2012 Nov;132(3):348-54. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2012.08.010. Epub
2012 Aug 24.

Plasmodium vivax: reverse transcriptase real-time PCR for gametocyte detection
and quantitation in clinical samples.

Lima NF(1), Bastos MS, Ferreira MU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

The proportion of Plasmodium vivax-infected subjects that carry mature
gametocytes, and thus are potentially infectious, remains poorly characterized in
endemic settings. Here, we describe a quantitative reverse transcriptase (RT)
real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) that targets transcripts of the mature
gametocyte-specific pvs25 gene. We found mature gametocytes in 42 of 44 (95.4%)
P. vivax infections diagnosed during an ongoing cohort study in northwestern
Brazil. SYBR green qRT-PCR was more sensitive than a conventional RT-PCR that
targets the same gene. Molecular detection of gametocytes failed, however, when
dried bloodspots were used for RNA isolation and complementary DNA synthesis.
Estimating the number of pvs25 gene transcripts allowed for examining the
potential infectiousness of gametocyte carriers in a quantitative way. We found
that most (61.9%) gametocyte carriers were either asymptomatic or had subpatent
parasitemias and would have been missed by routine malaria control strategies.
However, potentially undiagnosed gametocyte carriers usually had low-density
infections and contributed a small fraction (up to 4%) to the overall gametocyte 
burden in the community. Further studies are required to determine the relative
contribution to malaria transmission of long-lasting but low-density
gametocytemias in asymptomatic carriers that are left undiagnosed and untreated.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2012.08.010 
PMCID: PMC3470767
PMID: 22940017  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

