
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e44605. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044605. Epub 2012 Sep 7.

An exported heat shock protein 40 associates with pathogenesis-related knobs in
Plasmodium falciparum infected erythrocytes.

Acharya P(1), Chaubey S, Grover M, Tatu U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka,
India.

Cell surface structures termed knobs are one of the most important pathogenesis
related protein complexes deployed by the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum 
at the surface of the infected erythrocyte. Despite their relevance to the
disease, their structure, mechanisms of traffic and their process of assembly
remain poorly understood. In this study, we have explored the possible role of a 
parasite-encoded Hsp40 class of chaperone, namely PFB0090c/PF3D7_0201800
(KAHsp40) in protein trafficking in the infected erythrocyte. We found the gene
coding for PF3D7_0201800 to be located in a chromosomal cluster together with
knob components KAHRP and PfEMP3. Like the knob components, KAHsp40 too showed
the presence of PEXEL motif required for transport to the erythrocyte
compartment. Indeed, sub-cellular fractionation and immunofluorescence analysis
(IFA) showed KAHsp40 to be exported in the erythrocyte cytoplasm in a stage
dependent manner localizing as punctuate spots in the erythrocyte periphery,
distinctly from Maurer's cleft, in structures which could be the reminiscent of
knobs. Double IFA analysis revealed co-localization of PF3D7_0201800 with the
markers of knobs (KAHRP, PfEMP1 and PfEMP3) and components of the PEXEL
translocon (Hsp101, PTEX150). KAHsp40 was also found to be in a complex with
KAHRP, PfEMP3 and Hsp101 as confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation assay. Our
results suggest potential involvement of a parasite encoded Hsp40 in chaperoning 
knob assembly in the erythrocyte compartment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044605 
PMCID: PMC3436795
PMID: 22970262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

