
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Nov-Dec;1819(11-12):1186-99. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.08.014. Epub 2012 Sep 7.

Plasmodium falciparum Prp16 homologue and its role in splicing.

Singh PK(1), Kanodia S, Dandin CJ, Vijayraghavan U, Malhotra P.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi,
India.

Large numbers of Plasmodium genes have been predicted to have introns. However,
little information exists on the splicing mechanisms in this organism. Here, we
describe the DExD/DExH-box containing Pre-mRNA processing proteins (Prps),
PfPrp2p, PfPrp5p, PfPrp16p, PfPrp22p, PfPrp28p, PfPrp43p and PfBrr2p, present in 
the Plasmodium falciparum genome and characterized the role of one of these
factors, PfPrp16p. It is a member of DEAH-box protein family with nine collinear 
sequence motifs, a characteristic of helicase proteins. Experiments with the
recombinantly expressed and purified PfPrp16 helicase domain revealed binding to 
RNA, hydrolysis of ATP as well as catalytic helicase activities. Expression of
helicase domain with the C-terminal helicase-associated domain (HA2) reduced
these activities considerably, indicating that the helicase-associated domain may
regulate the PfPrp16 function. Localization studies with the PfPrp16 GFP
transgenic lines suggested a role of its N-terminal domain (1-80 amino acids) in 
nuclear targeting. Immunodepletion of PfPrp16p, from nuclear extracts of parasite
cultures, blocked the second catalytic step of an in vitro constituted splicing
reaction suggesting a role for PfPrp16p in splicing catalysis. Further we show by
complementation assay in yeast that a chimeric yeast-Plasmodium Prp16 protein,
not the full length PfPrp16, can rescue the yeast prp16 temperature-sensitive
mutant. These results suggest that although the role of Prp16p in catalytic step 
II is highly conserved among Plasmodium, human and yeast, subtle differences
exist with regards to its associated factors or its assembly with spliceosomes.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.08.014 
PMID: 22982196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

