
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45219. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045219. Epub 2012 Sep 21.

Natural selection mediated association of the Duffy (FY) gene polymorphisms with 
Plasmodium vivax malaria in India.

Chittoria A(1), Mohanty S, Jaiswal YK, Das A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genomics and Bioinformatics, National Institute of Malaria
Research, New Delhi, India.

The Duffy (Fy) antigens act as receptors for chemokines as well as for Plasmodium
vivax to invade human RBCs. A recent study has correlated the occurrence of the
FY*A allele of Duffy gene with decreased susceptibility to vivax malaria, but no 
epidemiological correlation between the distribution of FY*A allele and
incidences of vivax malaria has been established so far. Furthermore, if such
correlations exist, whether natural selection has mediated the association, is an
important question. Since India is highly endemic to P. vivax malaria with
variable eco-climatic and varying vivax malaria epidemiology across different
regions, such a question could well be answered in Indians. For this, we have
genotyped the FY gene at the -33(rd) and the 125(th) nucleotide positions in 250 
Indians sampled from six different zonal plus one tribal population covering the 
whole of India and studied possible correlations with eco-climatic and vivax
malaria incidences. No FY*O allele was found, however, both the FY*A and FY*B
alleles forming FY*A/FY*A, FY*A/FY*B and FY*B/FY*B genotypes were widely
distributed among Indians. Five out of seven population samples significantly
deviated from the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium expectation, and two alleles (FY*A
and FY*B) and the homozygote genotype, FY*B/FY*B were clinically distributed over
the population coordinates. Furthermore, vivax malaria incidences over the past
five years were significantly negatively and positively associated with the
frequencies of the FY*A and FY*B alleles, respectively. The Northern Indians were
highly differentiated from the other zonal population samples at the FY gene, as 
evidenced from the reconstructed Neighbor-Joining phylogenetic tree. The results 
specify the role of natural selection in the distribution of FY gene polymorphism
in India. Furthermore, the hypotheses on the part of the FY*A allele in
conferring protection to vivax malaria could be validated following population
genetic studies in a vivax malaria epidemiological setting, such as India.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045219 
PMCID: PMC3448599
PMID: 23028857  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

