
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(10):e1002958. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002958. Epub 2012
Oct 4.

Molecular basis for genetic resistance of Anopheles gambiae to Plasmodium:
structural analysis of TEP1 susceptible and resistant alleles.

Le BV(1), Williams M, Logarajah S, Baxter RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry, Yale
University, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America.

Thioester-containing protein 1 (TEP1) is a central component in the innate immune
response of Anopheles gambiae to Plasmodium infection. Two classes of TEP1
alleles, TEP1*S and TEP1*R, are found in both laboratory strains and wild
isolates, related by a greater or lesser susceptibility, respectively to both P. 
berghei and P. falciparum infection. We report the crystal structure of the
full-length TEP1*S1 allele which, while similar to the previously determined
structure of full-length TEP1*R1, displays flexibility in the N-terminal fragment
comprising domains MG1-MG6. Amino acid differences between TEP1*R1 and TEP1*S1
are localized to the TED-MG8 domain interface that protects the thioester bond
from hydrolysis and structural changes are apparent at this interface. As a
consequence cleaved TEP1*S1 (TEP1*S1(cut)) is significantly more susceptible to
hydrolysis of its intramolecular thioester bond than TEP1*R1(cut). TEP1*S1(cut)
is stabilized in solution by the heterodimeric LRIM1/APL1C complex, which
preserves the thioester bond within TEP1*S1(cut). These results suggest a
mechanism by which selective pressure on the TEP1 gene results in functional
variation that may influence the vector competence of A. gambiae towards
Plasmodium infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002958 
PMCID: PMC3464232
PMID: 23055931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

