
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;940:269-84. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-110-3_21.

Gene gun immunization to combat malaria.

Bergmann-Leitner ES(1), Leitner WW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Malaria Vaccine Development, United States Military Malaria
Vaccine Program, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, MD, USA. 
Elke.BergmannLeitner@us.army.mil

DNA immunization by gene gun against a variety of infectious diseases has yielded
promising results in animal models. Skin-based DNA vaccination against these
diseases is not only an attractive option for the clinic but can aid in the
discovery and optimization of vaccine candidates. Vaccination against the
protozoan parasite Plasmodium presents unique challenges: (a) most
parasite-associated antigens are stage-specific; (b) antibodies capable of
neutralizing the parasite during the probing of the mosquitoes have to be
available at high titers in order to prevent infection of the liver; (c) immunity
to liver-stage infection needs to be absolute in order to prevent subsequent
blood-stage parasitemia. Gene gun vaccination has successfully been used to
prevent the infection of mice with the rodent malaria strain P. berghei and has
been employed in a macaque model of human P. falciparum. DNA plasmid delivery by 
gene gun offers the opportunity to economically and efficiently test novel
malaria vaccine candidates and vaccination strategies, which include the
evaluation of novel molecular adjuvant strategies. Here we describe the
procedures involved in making and delivering a pre-clinical malaria DNA vaccine
by gene gun as well as the correct approach for the in vivo evaluation of the
vaccine. Furthermore, we discuss various approaches that either have already been
tested or could be employed to improve DNA vaccines against malaria.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-62703-110-3_21 
PMID: 23104349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

