
1. Malar J. 2012 Nov 8;11:371. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-371.

Dual fluorescent labelling of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum
for the analysis of the ABC type transporter pfmdr2.

Rosental B(1), Hadad U, Sinay R, Braiman A, Porgador A, Pollack Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, P,O, Box 653, Beer-Sheva, 84105,
Israel.

BACKGROUND: The study of the Plasmodium falciparum heavy metal transporter gene
pfmdr2 employed radioactive labelled heavy metal. As the use of radioactive
isotopes shrank considerably during the last few years, resulting in the
cessation of the production of some isotopes, amongst them Cadmium109 which was
used for that purpose, a different approach had to be developed. Herein, a dual
fluorescent labelling of heavy metals accumulation in the P. falciparum parasite 
is proposed as an alternative to the use of radioactive labelled heavy metals.
METHODS: Plasmodium falciparum Cd resistant and sensitive strains at the
trophozoite stage were used in this study. The cells were cultured at different
CdCl2 concentrations and for different time periods followed by staining of the
infected red blood cells with Fluo-3/AM for Cd detection and Hoechst 33342 for
parasite DNA labelling. The fluorescent analysis was done by flow cytometry and
confocal microscopy.
RESULTS: The results show that the sensitive strain has a higher Fluo-3/AM
fluorescence in a Cd concentration and time dependent manner, whereas in the
resistant strain Fluo-3/AM fluorescence levels were negligible and increased only
at high concentrations of Cd and at long incubation periods, but to a much lesser
extent than the sensitive strain. No Cd uptake is observed in uninfected red
blood cells populations originating from cultures infected with either sensitive 
or resistant strain. In addition, confocal microscopy overlay of Fluo-3/AM and
Hoechst staining shows that the Cd metal accumulates in the parasite itself.
CONCLUSIONS: The dual fluorescent labelling is a valid method for detecting heavy
metal accumulation in P. falciparum. Furthermore, in contrast to the use of
radioactive labelled heavy metal, the fluorescent labelling enables us to
differentiate between the different populations existing in a P. falciparum
infected red blood cells cultures and thus actually study a phenomenon at the
level of a single cell.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-371 
PMCID: PMC3546028
PMID: 23137170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

