
1. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(11):e1002992. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002992. Epub 2012 Nov
1.

Population genomic scan for candidate signatures of balancing selection to guide 
antigen characterization in malaria parasites.

Amambua-Ngwa A(1), Tetteh KK, Manske M, Gomez-Escobar N, Stewart LB, Deerhake ME,
Cheeseman IH, Newbold CI, Holder AA, Knuepfer E, Janha O, Jallow M, Campino S,
Macinnis B, Kwiatkowski DP, Conway DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Unit, Fajara, Banjul, The Gambia.

Acquired immunity in vertebrates maintains polymorphisms in endemic pathogens,
leading to identifiable signatures of balancing selection. To comprehensively
survey for genes under such selection in the human malaria parasite Plasmodium
falciparum, we generated paired-end short-read sequences of parasites in clinical
isolates from an endemic Gambian population, which were mapped to the 3D7 strain 
reference genome to yield high-quality genome-wide coding sequence data for 65
isolates. A minority of genes did not map reliably, including the hypervariable
var, rifin, and stevor families, but 5,056 genes (90.9% of all in the genome) had
>70% sequence coverage with minimum read depth of 5 for at least 50 isolates, of 
which 2,853 genes contained 3 or more single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for 
analysis of polymorphic site frequency spectra. Against an overall background of 
negatively skewed frequencies, as expected from historical population expansion
combined with purifying selection, the outlying minority of genes with signatures
indicating exceptionally intermediate frequencies were identified. Comparing
genes with different stage-specificity, such signatures were most common in those
with peak expression at the merozoite stage that invades erythrocytes. Members of
clag, PfMC-2TM, surfin, and msp3-like gene families were highly represented, the 
strongest signature being in the msp3-like gene PF10_0355. Analysis of msp3-like 
transcripts in 45 clinical and 11 laboratory adapted isolates grown to
merozoite-containing schizont stages revealed surprisingly low expression of
PF10_0355. In diverse clonal parasite lines the protein product was expressed in 
a minority of mature schizonts (<1% in most lines and âˆ¼10% in clone HB3), and
eight sub-clones of HB3 cultured separately had an intermediate spectrum of
positive frequencies (0.9 to 7.5%), indicating phase variable expression of this 
polymorphic antigen. This and other identified targets of balancing selection are
now prioritized for functional study.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002992 
PMCID: PMC3486833
PMID: 23133397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

