
1. BMC Genomics. 2012;13 Suppl 6:S7. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-S6-S7. Epub 2012 Oct 
26.

Assessing the gain of biological data integration in gene networks inference.

Vicente FF(1), Lopes FM, Hashimoto RF, Cesar RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Federal University of Technology - Paran√°, Brazil. fabiofernandes@utfpr.edu.br

BACKGROUND: A current challenge in gene annotation is to define the gene function
in the context of the network of relationships instead of using single genes. The
inference of gene networks (GNs) has emerged as an approach to better understand 
the biology of the system and to study how several components of this network
interact with each other and keep their functions stable. However, in general
there is no sufficient data to accurately recover the GNs from their expression
levels leading to the curse of dimensionality, in which the number of variables
is higher than samples. One way to mitigate this problem is to integrate
biological data instead of using only the expression profiles in the inference
process. Nowadays, the use of several biological information in inference methods
had a significant increase in order to better recover the connections between
genes and reduce the false positives. What makes this strategy so interesting is 
the possibility of confirming the known connections through the included
biological data, and the possibility of discovering new relationships between
genes when observed the expression data. Although several works in data
integration have increased the performance of the network inference methods, the 
real contribution of adding each type of biological information in the obtained
improvement is not clear.
METHODS: We propose a methodology to include biological information into an
inference algorithm in order to assess its prediction gain by using biological
information and expression profile together. We also evaluated and compared the
gain of adding four types of biological information: (a) protein-protein
interaction, (b) Rosetta stone fusion proteins, (c) KEGG and (d) KEGG+GO.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: This work presents a first comparison of the gain in the
use of prior biological information in the inference of GNs by considering the
eukaryote (P. falciparum) organism. Our results indicates that information based 
on direct interaction can produce a higher improvement in the gain than data
about a less specific relationship as GO or KEGG. Also, as expected, the results 
show that the use of biological information is a very important approach for the 
improvement of the inference. We also compared the gain in the inference of the
global network and only the hubs. The results indicates that the use of
biological information can improve the identification of the most connected
proteins.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-S6-S7 
PMCID: PMC3481449
PMID: 23134775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

