
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2012 Nov 1;8(11):1564-84. doi: 10.4161/hv.22129. Epub 2012
Nov 1.

Clinical trial in healthy malaria-naïve adults to evaluate the safety,
tolerability, immunogenicity and efficacy of MuStDO5, a five-gene,
sporozoite/hepatic stage Plasmodium falciparum DNA vaccine combined with
escalating dose human GM-CSF DNA.

Richie TL(1), Charoenvit Y, Wang R, Epstein JE, Hedstrom RC, Kumar S, Luke TC,
Freilich DA, Aguiar JC, Sacci JB Jr, Sedegah M, Nosek RA Jr, De La Vega P,
Berzins MP, Majam VF, Abot EN, Ganeshan H, Richie NO, Banania JG, Baraceros MF,
Geter TG, Mere R, Bebris L, Limbach K, Hickey BW, Lanar DE, Ng J, Shi M, Hobart
PM, Norman JA, Soisson LA, Hollingdale MR, Rogers WO, Doolan DL, Hoffman SL.

Author information: 
(1)Naval Medical Research Center; Silver Spring, MD, USA.
Thomas.Richie@med.navy.mil

When introduced in the 1990s, immunization with DNA plasmids was considered
potentially revolutionary for vaccine development, particularly for vaccines
intended to induce protective CD8 T cell responses against multiple antigens. We 
conducted, in 1997-1998, the first clinical trial in healthy humans of a DNA
vaccine, a single plasmid encoding Plasmodium falciparum circumsporozoite protein
(PfCSP), as an initial step toward developing a multi-antigen malaria vaccine
targeting the liver stages of the parasite. As the next step, we conducted in
2000-2001 a clinical trial of a five-plasmid mixture called MuStDO5 encoding
pre-erythrocytic antigens PfCSP, PfSSP2/TRAP, PfEXP1, PfLSA1 and PfLSA3.
Thirty-two, malaria-naïve, adult volunteers were enrolled sequentially into four 
cohorts receiving a mixture of 500 μg of each plasmid plus escalating doses (0,
20, 100 or 500 μg) of a sixth plasmid encoding human granulocyte
macrophage-colony stimulating factor (hGM-CSF). Three doses of each formulation
were administered intramuscularly by needle-less jet injection at 0, 4 and 8
weeks, and each cohort had controlled human malaria infection administered by
five mosquito bites 18 d later. The vaccine was safe and well-tolerated, inducing
moderate antigen-specific, MHC-restricted T cell interferon-γ responses but no
antibodies. Although no volunteers were protected, T cell responses were boosted 
post malaria challenge. This trial demonstrated the MuStDO5 DNA and hGM-CSF
plasmids to be safe and modestly immunogenic for T cell responses. It also laid
the foundation for priming with DNA plasmids and boosting with recombinant
viruses, an approach known for nearly 15 y to enhance the immunogenicity and
protective efficacy of DNA vaccines.

DOI: 10.4161/hv.22129 
PMCID: PMC3601132
PMID: 23151451  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

