
1. BMC Genomics. 2012 Nov 14;13:622. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-622.

Novel type of linear mitochondrial genomes with dual flip-flop inversion system
in apicomplexan parasites, Babesia microti and Babesia rodhaini.

Hikosaka K(1), Tsuji N, Watanabe Y, Kishine H, Horii T, Igarashi I, Kita K,
Tanabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malariology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka
University, 3-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial (mt) genomes vary considerably in size, structure and
gene content. The mt genomes of the phylum Apicomplexa, which includes important 
human pathogens such as the malaria parasite Plasmodium, also show marked
diversity of structure. Plasmodium has a concatenated linear mt genome of the
smallest size (6-kb); Babesia and Theileria have a linear monomeric mt genome
(6.5-kb to 8.2-kb) with terminal inverted repeats; Eimeria, which is distantly
related to Plasmodium and Babesia/Theileria, possesses a mt genome (6.2-kb) with 
a concatemeric form similar to that of Plasmodium; Cryptosporidium, the earliest 
branching lineage within the phylum Apicomplexa, has no mt genome. We are
interested in the evolutionary origin of linear mt genomes of Babesia/Theileria, 
and have investigated mt genome structures in members of archaeopiroplasmid, a
lineage branched off earlier from Babesia/Theileria.
RESULTS: The complete mt genomes of archaeopiroplasmid parasites, Babesia microti
and Babesia rodhaini, were sequenced. The mt genomes of B. microti (11.1-kb) and 
B. rodhaini (6.9-kb) possess two pairs of unique inverted repeats, IR-A and IR-B.
Flip-flop inversions between two IR-As and between two IR-Bs appear to generate
four distinct genome structures that are present at an equi-molar ratio. An
individual parasite contained multiple mt genome structures, with 20 copies and 2
- 3 copies per haploid nuclear genome in B. microti and B. rodhaini,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: We found a novel linear monomeric mt genome structure of B. microti
and B. rhodhaini equipped with dual flip-flop inversion system, by which four
distinct genome structures are readily generated. To our knowledge, this study is
the first to report the presence of two pairs of distinct IR sequences within a
monomeric linear mt genome. The present finding provides insight into further
understanding of evolution of mt genome structure.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-622 
PMCID: PMC3546061
PMID: 23151128  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

