
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2013 Apr;68(4):786-8. doi: 10.1093/jac/dks471. Epub 2012 
Nov 20.

Antimalarial activity of isoquine against Kenyan Plasmodium falciparum clinical
isolates and association with polymorphisms in pfcrt and pfmdr1 genes.

Okombo J(1), Kiara SM, Abdirahman A, Mwai L, Ohuma E, Borrmann S, Nzila A, Ward
S.

Author information: 
(1)Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI)/Wellcome Trust Collaborative Research
Program, PO Box 230, 80108 Kilifi, Kenya. jokombo@kemri-wellcome.org

BACKGROUND: The use of amodiaquine in prophylaxis is associated with serious
toxicity, resulting from its metabolic conversion into a reactive quinone-imine
metabolite by the hepatic cytochrome P450. To circumvent this toxicity, several
amodiaquine analogues that lack the potential to form a quinone-imine derivative,
while retaining antimalarial activity, have been designed. Isoquine is one of
these promising molecules that has already reached Phase I clinical trials in
humans.
METHODS: We analysed the in vitro activity of isoquine against 62 Plasmodium
falciparum isolates collected in Kenya and the association of this activity with 
polymorphisms in pfcrt and pfmdr1 genes.
RESULTS: The median concentration of isoquine that inhibited 50% of parasite
growth (IC50) was 9 nM, compared with 56 nM chloroquine, 8 nM amodiaquine, 10 nM 
desethylamodiaquine, 69 nM lumefantrine and 1 nM dihydroartemisinin. Isoquine
activity was correlated with polymorphisms in pfcrt at codon 76, but not in
pfmdr1 at codon 86.
CONCLUSIONS: The high activity of isoquine against field isolates, including
chloroquine-resistant isolates, with IC50 <10 nM, warrants its further
development as an antimalarial.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dks471 
PMID: 23169890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

