
1. Exp Parasitol. 2013 Jan;133(1):101-5. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2012.10.018. Epub
2012 Nov 21.

Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium knowlesi: cloning, expression and functional
analysis of 1-Cys peroxiredoxin.

Hakimi H(1), Asada M, Angeles JM, Kawai S, Inoue N, Kawazu S.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases, Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Inada-cho, Obihiro, Hokkaido 080-8555,
Japan. hassanhakimi@gmail.com

Malaria parasites like other aerobes need to detoxify the reactive oxygen species
(ROS) that are mainly produced from hemoglobin degradation in the food vacuole.
Since Plasmodium lacks catalase and genuine glutathione peroxidase, they are
highly dependent on peroxiredoxins (Prxs) and superoxide dismutases for ROS
detoxification. Prxs are protective antioxidant enzymes that act through
reduction of hydrogen peroxides. In recent years, several studies have been done 
on Prx family of human malaria parasites mainly on Plasmodium falciparum but not 
much on the other human malaria species. In this study 1-Cys peroxiredoxin
(1-Cys-Prx) from Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium knowlesi were cloned and
characterized. The complete genes coding for 1-Cys-Prx of P. vivax (Pv1-Cys-Prx) 
and P. knowlesi (Pk1-Cys-Prx) were PCR amplified and the recombinant proteins
were produced by heterologous over-expression in Escherichia coli. Both
recombinant proteins showed antioxidant activity with the mixed function
oxidation assay. Using specific polyclonal antibodies, it was indicated that
Pv1-Cys-Prx and Pk1-Cys-Prx are expressed in the cytoplasm of the parasite.
Altogether, the results suggested that 1-Cys-Prxs protect the parasites from
oxidative damages.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2012.10.018 
PMID: 23178658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

