
1. Jpn J Infect Dis. 2012;65(6):465-75.

Evolution of Plasmodium falciparum drug resistance: implications for the
development and containment of artemisinin resistance.

Mita T(1), Tanabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Parasitology, Juntendo University School 
of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. tmitaï¼ juntendo.ac.jp

Malaria is a protozoan disease transmitted by the bite of the Anopheles mosquito.
Among five species that can infect humans, Plasmodium falciparum is responsible
for the most severe human malaria. Resistance of P. falciparum to chloroquine and
pyrimethamine/sulfadoxine, conventionally used antimalarial drugs, is already
widely distributed in many endemic areas. As a result, artemisinin-based
combination therapies have been rapidly and widely adopted as first-line
antimalarial treatments since the mid-2000s. Recent population and evolutionary
genetic analyses have proven that the geographic origins of parasite lineages
resistant to the conventional drugs are considerably limited. Almost all
resistance emerged from either Southeast Asia or South America. The Greater
Mekong subregion in Southeast Asia is probably the most alarming source of
resistance, from which P. falciparum resistant to chloroquine and
pyrimethamine/sulfadoxine dispersed to Africa. The emergence of artemisinin
resistance has also recently been confirmed in the Greater Mekong. The WHO Global
Malaria Programme has recently launched a "Global Plan for Artemisinin Resistance
Containment," which aims to prevent the spread of artemisinin resistance while
also stopping the emergence of novel resistance. However, an inadequate
understanding of a mechanism of artemisinin resistance and the lack of reliable
genetic markers to monitor artemisinin resistance make it difficult to survey the
spread of resistance. Elucidation of such markers would substantially contribute 
to the design of an effective policy for the containment of artemisinin
resistance.

DOI: 10.7883/yoken.65.465 
PMID: 23183197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

