
1. J Proteomics. 2013 Jan 14;78:148-58. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.11.020. Epub 2012 
Nov 29.

Systematic analysis of natural antibody responses to P. falciparum merozoite
antigens by protein arrays.

Fan YT(1), Wang Y, Ju C, Zhang T, Xu B, Hu W, Chen JH.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, WHO Collaborating Centre for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and
Filariasis, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology Ministry of Health,
Shanghai 200025, People's Republic of China.

With the completion of the functional genome, merozoite proteome and
stage-specific transcriptomes of the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle of
Plasmoidum falciparum, the development of new vaccine candidates targeting
Plasmodium merozoites is now possible. Here we report using protein array
technology to detect antibody responses to Plasmodium merozoite proteins by
screening the serum of Plasmodium-exposed individuals. A total of 138 genes
encoding P. falciparum merozoite proteins were cloned using the In-Fusion cloning
method and expressed using a wheat germ cell-free system (WGCF). These proteins
were then screened with serum from Plasmodium-exposed individuals and unexposed
subjects using protein arrays. A total of 30 highly immunoreactive merozoite
antigens were identified (21.7% of 138 target proteins), including 10
well-characterized blood-stage vaccine candidates for P. falciparum. In addition,
we report for the first time 7 proteins (MSP3.5, MRSP2, ETRAMP11.2, ETRAMP14.1
and RALP1, and two hypothetical proteins PFA0210c and PF14_0572) as being
immunologically reactive. These novel Plasmodium merozoite antigens may be
potential vaccine candidates for blood-stage malaria, and warrant further study.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.11.020 
PMID: 23201113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

