
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jan 18;288(3):1590-602. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.411934. Epub 2012
Nov 30.

Characterization of Plasmodium falciparum calcium-dependent protein kinase 1
(PfCDPK1) and its role in microneme secretion during erythrocyte invasion.

Bansal A(1), Singh S, More KR, Hans D, Nangalia K, Yogavel M, Sharma A, Chitnis
CE.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), Aruna 
Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 5;288(27):19643.

Calcium-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs) play important roles in the life cycle 
of Plasmodium falciparum and other apicomplexan parasites. CDPKs commonly have an
N-terminal kinase domain (KD) and a C-terminal calmodulin-like domain (CamLD)
with calcium-binding EF hands. The KD and CamLD are separated by a junction
domain (JD). Previous studies on Plasmodium and Toxoplasma CDPKs suggest a role
for the JD and CamLD in the regulation of kinase activity. Here, we provide
direct evidence for the binding of the CamLD with the P3 region (Leu(356) to
Thr(370)) of the JD in the presence of calcium (Ca(2+)). Moreover, site-directed 
mutagenesis of conserved hydrophobic residues in the JD (F363A/I364A, L356A, and 
F350A) abrogates functional activity of PfCDPK1, demonstrating the importance of 
these residues in PfCDPK1 function. Modeling studies suggest that these residues 
play a role in interaction of the CamLD with the JD. The P3 peptide, which
specifically inhibits the functional activity of PfCDPK1, blocks microneme
discharge and erythrocyte invasion by P. falciparum merozoites. Purfalcamine, a
previously identified specific inhibitor of PfCDPK1, also inhibits microneme
discharge and erythrocyte invasion, confirming a role for PfCDPK1 in this
process. These studies validate PfCDPK1 as a target for drug development and
demonstrate that interfering with its mechanistic regulation may provide a novel 
approach to design-specific PfCDPK1 inhibitors that limit blood stage parasite
growth and clear malaria parasite infections.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.411934 
PMCID: PMC3548469
PMID: 23204525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

