
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Feb;57(2):887-92. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00950-12.
Epub 2012 Dec 3.

Assessing the cost-benefit effect of a Plasmodium falciparum drug resistance
mutation on parasite growth in vitro.

Fröberg G(1), Ferreira PE, Mårtensson A, Ali A, Björkman A, Gil JP.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research Group, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. gabrielle.froberg@karolinska.se

Plasmodium falciparum mutations associated with antimalarial resistance may be
beneficial for parasites under drug pressure, although they may also cause a
fitness cost. We herein present an in vitro model showing how this combined
effect on parasite growth varies with the drug concentration and suggest a
calculated drug-specific cost-benefit index, indicating the possible advantage
for mutated parasites. We specifically studied the D-to-Y change at position 1246
encoded by the pfmdr1 gene (pfmdr1 D1246Y) in relation to amodiaquine resistance.
Susceptibilities to amodiaquine, desethylamodiaquine, and chloroquine, as well as
relative fitness, were determined for two modified isogenic P. falciparum clones 
differing only in the pfmdr1 1246 position. Data were used to create a new
comparative graph of relative growth in relation to the drug concentration and to
calculate the ratio between the benefit of resistance and the fitness cost.
Results were related to an in vivo allele selection analysis after amodiaquine or
artesunate-amodiaquine treatment. pfmdr1 1246Y was associated with decreased
susceptibility to amodiaquine and desethylamodiaquine but at a growth fitness
cost of 11%. Mutated parasites grew less in low drug concentrations due to a
predominating fitness cost, but beyond a breakpoint concentration they grew more 
due to a predominating benefit of increased resistance. The cost-benefit indexes 
indicated that pfmdr1 1246Y was most advantageous for amodiaquine-exposed
parasites. In vivo, a first drug selection of mutant parasites followed by a
fitness selection of wild-type parasites supported the in vitro data. This
cost-benefit model may predict the risk for selection of drug resistance
mutations in different malaria transmission settings.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00950-12 
PMCID: PMC3553735
PMID: 23208719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

