
1. Malar J. 2012 Dec 7;11:410. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-410.

Reduction of multiplicity of infections but no change in msp2 genetic diversity
in Plasmodium falciparum isolates from Congolese children after introduction of
artemisinin-combination therapy.

Ibara-Okabande R(1), Koukouikila-Koussounda F, Ndounga M, Vouvoungui J, Malonga
V, Casimiro PN, Ibara JR, Sidibe A, Ntoumi F.

Author information: 
(1)Fondation Congolaise pour la Recherche MÃ©dicale, Brazzaville, Republic of
Congo.

BACKGROUND: In this first study conducted after the introduction of
artemisinin-combination therapy (ACT), the major objective was to evaluate
Plasmodium falciparum genetic diversity and multiplicity of infection in isolates
from Congolese children between one and nine years of age enrolled and followed
up for one year. The secondary objective was to characterize the msp2 profiles of
P. falciparum isolates collected from successive malaria episodes in ten children
who had four or more clinical episodes during the follow up.
METHODS: Three-hundred and thirteen children residing in southern part of
Brazzaville participated in this study. Blood samples were obtained from all
children at enrollment and checked for P. falciparum infection. Based on the one 
year follow-up data, two clinical groups were considered according to the number 
of malaria episodes presented over the follow up period: "protected"(children who
did not experience any episode) and "unprotected" (those who experienced more
that two episodes). Therefore, the msp2 genetic diversity of P. falciparum
isolates collected at enrollment in the two groups was characterized by
allele-specific nested PCR and compared. The msp2 profiles of P. falciparum
isolates collected from successive malaria episodes was also characterized by
allele-specific nested PCR.
RESULTS: Forty-three percent of FC27 and fifty-seven percent of 3D7 in protected 
vs fifty-six percent of FC27 and forty-four percent of 3D7 in isolates from
unprotected children were detected. Seven and two alleles belonging to the FC27, 
and six and three alleles belonging to 3D7 families were distinguished in
isolates from protected and unprotected children respectively. The mean
multiplicity of infection (MOI) values at inclusion for the msp2 locus was 1.29
and 1.43 for protected and unprotected children respectively. 43 isolates were
obtained from the ten children who had four or more clinical episodes during the 
follow up. A total of 63 alleles or fragments corresponding to 57% (36/63) FC27
and 43% (27/63) 3D7 were detected. The variant 400bp of FC27 was the most
prevalent. 46% (20/43), 42% (18/43), 2% (1/43) and 2% (1/43) of isolates were
found to have 1, 2, 3 and 4 parasite genotypes respectively and the mean MOI was 
1.78.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that the introduction of ACT in the Republic of
Congo has reduced the MOI but not the genetic diversity of P. falciparum isolates
from children living in Southern districts of Brazzaville.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-410 
PMCID: PMC3543211
PMID: 23217196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

