
1. Parasitol Res. 2013 Mar;112(3):945-54. doi: 10.1007/s00436-012-3211-4. Epub 2012 
Dec 7.

Identification and expression of maebl, an erythrocyte-binding gene, in
Plasmodium gallinaceum.

Martinez C(1), Marzec T, Smith CD, Tell LA, Sehgal RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA
94132, USA.

Avian malaria is of significant ecological importance and serves as a model
system to study broad patterns of host switching and host specificity. The
erythrocyte invasion mechanism of the malaria parasite Plasmodium is mediated, in
large part, by proteins of the erythrocyte-binding-like (ebl) family of genes.
However, little is known about how these genes are conserved across different
species of Plasmodium, especially those that infect birds. Using bioinformatical 
methods in conjunction with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and genetic
sequencing, we identified and annotated one member of the ebl family, merozoite
apical erythrocyte-binding ligand (maebl), from the chicken parasite Plasmodium
gallinaceum. We then detected the expression of maebl in P. gallinaceum by PCR
analysis of cDNA isolated from the blood of infected chickens. We found that
maebl is a conserved orthologous gene in avian, mammalian, and rodent Plasmodium 
species. The duplicate extracellular binding domains of MAEBL, responsible for
erythrocyte binding, are the most conserved regions. Our combined data
corroborate the conservation of maebl throughout the Plasmodium genus and may
help elucidate the mechanisms of erythrocyte invasion in P. gallinaceum and the
host specificity of Plasmodium parasites.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-012-3211-4 
PMCID: PMC3581715
PMID: 23224610  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

