
1. Gene. 2013 Apr 10;518(1):7-16. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.11.092. Epub 2012 Dec 26.

Co-expression network with protein-protein interaction and transcription
regulation in malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Yu FD(1), Yang SY, Li YY, Hu W.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, 220 Handan Road, Shanghai 200433,
PR China. fudongyu@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Malaria continues to be one of the most severe global infectious
diseases, as a major threat to human health and economic development.
Network-based biological analysis is a promising approach to uncover key genes
and biological processes from a network viewpoint, which could not be recognized 
from individual gene-based signatures.
RESULTS: We integrated gene co-expression profile with protein-protein
interaction and transcriptional regulation information to construct a
comprehensive gene co-expression network of Plasmodium falciparum. Based on this 
network, we identified 10 core modules by using ICE (Iterative Clique
Enumeration) algorithm, which were essential for malaria parasite development in 
intraerythrocytic developmental cycle (IDC) stages. In each module, all genes
were highly correlated probably due to co-regulation or formation of a protein
complex. Some of these genes were recognized to be differentially coexpressed
among three close-by IDC stages. The gene of prpf8 (PFD0265w) encoding pre-mRNA
processing splicing factor 8 product was identified as DCGs (differentially
co-expressed genes) among IDC stages, although this gene function was seldom
reported in previous researches. Integrating the species-specific gene prediction
and differential co-expression gene detection, we found some modules could
perform species-specific functions according to some of genes in these modules
were species-specific genes, like the module 10. Furthermore, in order to reveal 
the underlying mechanisms of the erythrocyte invasion by P. falciparum, Steiner
Tree algorithm was employed to identify the invasion subnetwork from our gene
co-expression network. The subnetwork-based analysis indicated that some
important Plasmodium parasite specific genes could corporate with each other and 
be co-regulated during the parasite invasion process, which including a
head-to-head gene pair of PfRH2a (PF13_0198) and PfRH2b (MAL13P1.176).
CONCLUSIONS: This study based on gene co-expression network could shed new
insights on the mechanisms of pathogenesis, even virulence and P. falciparum
development.

Crown Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.11.092 
PMID: 23274650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

