
1. Vaccine. 2013 Feb 18;31(9):1334-9. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.12.039. Epub 2013 
Jan 4.

Within-population genetic diversity of Plasmodium falciparum vaccine candidate
antigens reveals geographic distance from a Central sub-Saharan African origin.

Tanabe K(1), Mita T, Palacpac NM, Arisue N, Tougan T, Kawai S, Jombart T,
Kobayashi F, Horii T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malariology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka
University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. kztanabe@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp

Populations of Plasmodium falciparum, the most virulent human malaria parasite,
are diverse owing to wide levels of transmission and endemicity of infection.
Genetic diversity of P. falciparum antigens, within and between parasite
populations, remains a confounding factor in malaria pathogenesis as well as
clinical trials of vaccine candidates. Variation of target antigens in parasite
populations may arise from immune pressure depending on the levels of acquired
immunity. Alternatively, similar to our study in housekeeping genes [Tanabe et
al. Curr Biol 2010;70:1-7], within-population genetic diversity of vaccine
candidate antigens may also be determined by geographical distance from a
postulated origin in Central sub-Saharan Africa. To address this question, we
obtained full-length sequences of P. falciparum genes, apical membrane antigen 1 
(ama1) (n=459), circumsporozoite protein (csp) (n=472) and merozoite surface
protein 1 (msp1) (n=389) from seven geographically diverse parasite populations
in Africa, Southeast Asia and Oceania; and, together with previously determined
sequences (n=13 and 15 for csp and msp1, respectively) analyzed within-population
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) diversity. The three antigen genes showed
SNP diversity that supports a model of isolation-by-distance. The standardized
number of polymorphic sites per site, expressed as θ(S), indicates that 77-83%
can be attributed by geographic distance from the African origin, suggesting that
geographic distance plays a significant role in variation in target vaccine
candidate antigens. Furthermore, we observed that a large proportion of SNPs in
the antigen genes were shared between African and non-African parasite
populations, demonstrating long term persistence of those SNPs. Our results
provide important implications for developing effective malaria vaccines and
better understanding of acquired immunity against falciparum malaria.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.12.039 
PMID: 23295064  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

