
1. Exp Parasitol. 2013 Apr;133(4):454-61. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2013.01.008. Epub
2013 Jan 19.

Plasmodium relictum (lineages pSGS1 and pGRW11): complete synchronous sporogony
in mosquitoes Culex pipiens pipiens.

Kazlauskienė R(1), Bernotienė R, Palinauskas V, Iezhova TA, Valkiūnas G.

Author information: 
(1)Nature Research Centre, Akademijos 2, Vilnius 2100, LT 08412, Lithuania.
rita.kazlauskien@gmail.com

Plasmodium relictum is a widespread invasive agent of avian malaria, responsible 
for acute, chronic and debilitating diseases in many species of birds. Recent
PCR-based studies revealed astonishing genetic diversity of avian malaria
parasites (genus Plasmodium), with numerous genetic lineages deposited in
GenBank. Many studies addressed distribution and evolutionary relationships of
avian Plasmodium lineages, but information about patterns of development of
different lineages in mosquito vectors remains insufficient. Here we present data
on sporogonic development of 2 widespread mitochondrial cytochrome b lineages
(cyt b) of P. relictum (pSGS1 and pGRW11) in mosquito Culex pipiens pipiens.
Genetic distance between these lineages is 0.2%; they fall in a well-supported
clade in the phylogenetic tree. Three P. relictum strains were isolated from
common crossbill (Loxia curvirostra, lineage pSGS1), domestic canary (Serinus
canaria domestica, pSGS1) and house sparrow (Passer domesticus, pGRW11). These
strains were multiplied in domestic canaries and used as donors of malarial
gametocytes to infect C. p. pipiens. Mosquitoes were allowed to take blood meal
on infected canaries and then dissected on intervals to study development of
sporogonic stages. All 3 strains developed synchronously and completed sporogony 
in this vector, with infective sporozoites reported in the salivary glands on the
day 14 after infection. Ookinetes, oocysts and sporozoites of all strains were
indistinguishable morphologically. This study shows that patterns of sporogonic
development of the closely related lineages pSGS1 and pGRW11 and different
strains of the lineage pSGS1 of P. relictum are similar indicating that
phylogenetic trees based on the cyt b gene likely can be used for predicting
sporogonic development of genetically similar avian malaria lineages in mosquito 
vectors.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2013.01.008 
PMID: 23337824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

