
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Mar;14:369-74. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2012.12.029. Epub
2013 Jan 17.

A rare non-synonymous c.102C>G SNP in the IFNB1 gene might be a risk factor for
cerebral malaria in Indian populations.

Jha AN(1), Singh VK, Singh R, Pati SS, Patra PK, Singh L, Thangaraj K.

Author information: 
(1)CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India.
adityanjha@ccmb.res.in

Interferon beta1 (IFNB1) is a type I interferon that is mainly known for its
antiviral activity, but it also regulates a number of anti-inflammatory and
immunomodulatory functions. Studies on mouse models of cerebral malaria have
established that IFNB1 regulates severe malaria pathogenesis and increases
overall survival against malaria. It down-regulates pro-inflammatory cytokines:
TNF, IFNG and ICAM-1, resulting in decreased adherence of Plasmodium falciparum
parasitized RBC to capillary wall, entry into the brain and delayed onset of
death. Therefore, we hypothesized that variations in IFNB1 gene could regulate
malarial pathogenesis. We re-sequenced the complete IFNB1 gene along with 900bp
of 5' up-stream and 500bp of 3'-UTR in 437 individuals from malaria endemic
regions of the Orissa and Chhattisgarh states of India. The subjects comprised of
173 cases of severe malaria, 101 of mild malaria, and 156 ethnically matched
asymptomatic controls. Data were statistically compared between cases and
controls for their possible association with P. falciparum malarial outcome. Two 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs): a synonymous c.153C>T (rs1051922) and a
non-synonymous substitution c.102C>G (rs139262191, p.Ser34Arg) were identified.
The genotype and allele distribution of c.153C>T did not differ significantly
between the study groups [mild, χ(2)2=4.10, p-value<0.13 and severe χ(2)2=0.06,
p-value<0.97]. Interestingly, the rare non-synonymous SNP (rs139262191) was
observed only in malaria patients. The differences between all cases and controls
did not reach statistical significance, however, a statistically significant
difference was observed between the asymptomatic control group and the cerebral
malaria group [OR=20.32, 95% CI=1.08-382.63, p-value=0.044]. Moreover, the
genotypes between cerebral malaria positive and negative groups were not
significantly different [OR=5.58, 95% CI=0.61-50.97, p-value=0.123]. Our findings
suggest that the IFNB1 variant, p.Ser34Arg, might be a risk factor for cerebral
malaria in Indian populations.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2012.12.029 
PMID: 23333334  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

