
1. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2013 Mar;20(3):433-42. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00638-12. Epub 2013
Jan 23.

Identification of VAR2CSA domain-specific inhibitory antibodies of the Plasmodium
falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 using a novel flow cytometry assay.

Obiakor H(1), Avril M, Macdonald NJ, Srinivasan P, Reiter K, Anderson C, Holmes
KL, Fried M, Duffy PE, Smith JD, Narum DL, Miller LH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria Immunology and Vaccinology, NIAID/NIH, Rockville, MD,
USA.

VAR2CSA, a member of the Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1
(PfEMP1) family, is a leading candidate for use in vaccines to protect first-time
mothers from placental malaria (PM). VAR2CSA, which is comprised of a series of
six Duffy binding-like (DBL) domains, binds chondroitin sulfate A (CSA) on
placental syncytiotrophoblast. Several recombinant DBL domains have been shown to
bind CSA. In order to identify and develop recombinant proteins suitable for
clinical development, DBL2X and DBL3X, as well as their respective third
subdomain (S3) from the FCR3 parasite clone, were expressed in Escherichia coli, 
refolded, and purified. All but DBL3X-S3 recombinant proteins bound to CSA
expressed on Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)-K1 cells but not to CHO-pgsA745 cells,
which are CSA negative as determined by flow cytometry. All but DBL3X-S3 bound to
CSA on chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan (CSPG) as determined by surface plasmon
resonance (SPR) analysis. Purified IgG from rats and rabbits immunized with these
four recombinant proteins bound homologous and some heterologous
parasite-infected erythrocytes (IE). Using a novel flow cytometry
inhibition-of-binding assay (flow-IBA), antibodies against DBL3X-S3 inhibited 35%
and 45% of IE binding to CSA on CHO-K1 cells compared to results for soluble CSA 
(sCSA) and purified multigravida (MG) IgG, respectively, from areas in Tanzania
to which malaria is endemic. Antibodies generated against the other domains
provided little or no inhibition of IE binding to CSA on CHO-K1 cells as
determined by the flow cytometry inhibition-of-binding assay. These results
demonstrate for the first time the ability to identify antibodies to VAR2CSA DBL 
domains and subdomains capable of inhibiting VAR2CSA parasite-IE binding to CSA
by flow cytometry. The flow cytometry inhibition-of-binding assay was robust and 
provided an accurate, reproducible, and reliable means to identify blocking of IE
binding to CSA and promises to be significant in the development of a vaccine to 
protect pregnant women.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00638-12 
PMCID: PMC3592344
PMID: 23345587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

