
1. Mol Microbiol. 2013 Mar;87(6):1167-82. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12154. Epub 2013 Feb 4.

H2A.Z and H2B.Z double-variant nucleosomes define intergenic regions and
dynamically occupy var gene promoters in the malaria parasite Plasmodium
falciparum.

Petter M(1), Selvarajah SA, Lee CC, Chin WH, Gupta AP, Bozdech Z, Brown GV, Duffy
MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. mpetter@unimelb.edu.au

Histone variants are important components of eukaryotic chromatin and can alter
chromatin structure to confer specialized functions. H2B variant histones are
rare in nature but have evolved independently in the phyla Apicomplexa and
Trypanasomatida. Here, we investigate the apicomplexan-specific Plasmodium
falciparum histone variant Pf H2B.Z and show that within nucleosomes Pf H2B.Z
dimerizes with the H2A variant Pf H2A.Z and that Pf H2B.Z and Pf H2A.Z occupancy 
correlates in the subset of genes examined. These double-variant nucleosomes also
carry common markers of euchromatin like H3K4me3 and histone acetylation. Pf
H2B.Z levels are elevated in intergenic regions across the genome, except in the 
var multigene family, where Pf H2A.Z/Pf H2B.Z double-variant nucleosomes are only
enriched in the promoter of the single active var copy and this enrichment is
developmentally regulated. Importantly, this pattern seems to be specific for var
genes and does not apply to other heterochromatic gene families involved in red
blood cell invasion which are also subject to clonal expression. Thus, Pf
H2A.Z/Pf H2B.Z double-variant nucleosomes appear to have a highly specific
function in the regulation of P. falciparum virulence.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12154 
PMID: 23373537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

