
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Mar 15;432(3):504-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.02.004. Epub 2013 Feb 10.

Experimental cerebral malaria is suppressed by disruption of nucleoside
transporter 1 but not purine nucleoside phosphorylase.

Niikura M(1), Inoue S, Mineo S, Yamada Y, Kaneko I, Iwanaga S, Yuda M, Kobayashi 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Tokyo
181-8611, Japan.

Protozoan parasites rely on purine nucleosides supplied by the host because they 
are unable to synthesise purine rings denovo. Nucleoside transporter 1 (NT1) and 
purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) play an essential role in purine salvage in
Plasmodium. It is unclear whether severe pathology, such as cerebral malaria
(CM), develops in hosts infected with Plasmodium parasites that lack activity of 
NT1 or PNP. Plasmodium berghei (Pb) ANKA-infected mice show features similar to
human CM, such as cerebral paralysis and cerebral haemorrhage. Therefore, Pb ANKA
infection in mice is a good experimental model of CM. In this study, we generated
pbnt1-disrupted Pb ANKA (Δpbnt1 parasites) and pbpnp-disrupted Pb ANKA (Δpbpnp
parasites), and investigated the effect of pbnt1 or pbpnp disruption on the
outcome of infection with Pb ANKA. We showed that the rapid increase of wild-type
Pb ANKA (WT parasites) in mice early in infection was significantly inhibited by 
disruption of pbnt1. Moreover, Δpbnt1 parasite-infected mice showed neither
cerebral paralysis nor cerebral haemorrhage, and all mice spontaneously recovered
from infection. By contrast, mice infected with Δpbpnp parasites showed features 
similar to those of mice infected with WT parasites. In this study, we
demonstrated that the high virulence of Pb ANKA in the asexual phase is
suppressed by disruption of pbnt1 but not pbpnp.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.02.004 
PMID: 23402751  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

