
1. Infect Immun. 2013 May;81(5):1491-501. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01414-12. Epub 2013 Feb
19.

Overcoming allelic specificity by immunization with five allelic forms of
Plasmodium falciparum apical membrane antigen 1.

Miura K(1), Herrera R, Diouf A, Zhou H, Mu J, Hu Z, MacDonald NJ, Reiter K,
Nguyen V, Shimp RL Jr, Singh K, Narum DL, Long CA, Miller LH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
kmiura@niaid.nih.gov

Apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1) is a leading vaccine candidate, but the allelic 
polymorphism is a stumbling block for vaccine development. We previously showed
that a global set of AMA1 haplotypes could be grouped into six genetic
populations. Using this information, six recombinant AMA1 proteins representing
each population were produced. Rabbits were immunized with either a single
recombinant AMA1 protein or mixtures of recombinant AMA1 proteins (mixtures of 4,
5, or 6 AMA1 proteins). Antibody levels were measured by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and purified IgG from each rabbit was used for
growth inhibition assay (GIA) with 12 different clones of parasites (a total of
108 immunogen-parasite combinations). Levels of antibodies to all six AMA1
proteins were similar when the antibodies were tested against homologous
antigens. When the percent inhibitions in GIA were plotted against the number of 
ELISA units measured with homologous AMA1, all data points followed a sigmoid
curve, regardless of the immunogen. In homologous combinations, there were no
differences in the percent inhibition between the single-allele and allele
mixture groups. However, all allele mixture groups showed significantly higher
percent inhibition than the single-allele groups in heterologous combinations.
The 5-allele-mixture group showed significantly higher inhibition to heterologous
parasites than the 4-allele-mixture group. On the other hand, there was no
difference between the 5- and 6-allele-mixture groups. These data indicate that
mixtures with a limited number of alleles may cover a majority of the parasite
population. In addition, using the data from 72 immunogen-parasite combinations, 
we mathematically identified 13 amino acid polymorphic sites which significantly 
impact GIA activities. These results could be a foundation for the rational
design of a future AMA1 vaccine.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01414-12 
PMCID: PMC3648006
PMID: 23429537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

