
1. Biochem J. 2013 May 1;451(3):417-26. doi: 10.1042/BJ20130041.

Rational engineering of plasticity residues of sesquiterpene synthases from
Artemisia annua: product specificity and catalytic efficiency.

Li JX(1), Fang X, Zhao Q, Ruan JX, Yang CQ, Wang LJ, Miller DJ, Faraldos JA,
Allemann RK, Chen XY, Zhang P.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics and National Plant Gene
Research Center, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes
for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 300 Fenglin Road, Shanghai 
200032, China.

Most TPSs (terpene synthases) contain plasticity residues that are responsible
for diversified terpene products and functional evolution, which provide a
potential for improving catalytic efficiency. Artemisinin, a sesquiterpene
lactone from Artemisia annua L., is widely used for malaria treatment and
progress has been made in engineering the production of artemisinin or its
precursors. In the present paper, we report a new sesquiterpene synthase from A. 
annua, AaBOS (A. annua α-bisabolol synthase), which has high sequence identity
with AaADS (A. annua amorpha-4,11-diene synthase), a key enzyme in artemisinin
biosynthesis. Comparative analysis of the two enzymes by domain-swapping and
structure-based mutagenesis led to the identification of several plasticity
residues, whose alteration changed the product profile of AaBOS to include
γ-humulene as the major product. To elucidate the underlying mechanisms, we
solved the crystal structures of AaBOS and a γ-humulene-producing AaBOS mutant
(termed AaBOS-M2). Among the plasticity residues, position 399, located in the
substrate-binding pocket, is crucial for both enzymes. In AaBOS, substitution of 
threonine for leucine (AaBOSL339T) is required for γ-humulene production; whereas
in AaADS, replacing the threonine residue with serine (AaADST399S) resulted in a 
substantial increase in the activity of amorpha-4,11-diene production, probably
as a result of accelerated product release. The present study demonstrates that
substitution of plasticity residues has potential for improving catalytic
efficiency of the enzyme.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20130041 
PMID: 23438177  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

