
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Feb;9(2):e1003170. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003170. Epub 2013
Feb 28.

Dynamic epigenetic regulation of gene expression during the life cycle of malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Gupta AP(1), Chin WH, Zhu L, Mok S, Luah YH, Lim EH, Bozdech Z.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
Singapore.

Epigenetic mechanisms are emerging as one of the major factors of the dynamics of
gene expression in the human malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum. To
elucidate the role of chromatin remodeling in transcriptional regulation
associated with the progression of the P. falciparum intraerythrocytic
development cycle (IDC), we mapped the temporal pattern of chromosomal
association with histone H3 and H4 modifications using ChIP-on-chip. Here, we
have generated a broad integrative epigenomic map of twelve histone modifications
during the P. falciparum IDC including H4K5ac, H4K8ac, H4K12ac, H4K16ac, H3K9ac, 
H3K14ac, H3K56ac, H4K20me1, H4K20me3, H3K4me3, H3K79me3 and H4R3me2. While some
modifications were found to be associated with the vast majority of the genome
and their occupancy was constant, others showed more specific and highly dynamic 
distribution. Importantly, eight modifications displaying tight correlations with
transcript levels showed differential affinity to distinct genomic regions with
H4K8ac occupying predominantly promoter regions while others occurred at the 5'
ends of coding sequences. The promoter occupancy of H4K8ac remained unchanged
when ectopically inserted at a different locus, indicating the presence of
specific DNA elements that recruit histone modifying enzymes regardless of their 
broad chromatin environment. In addition, we showed the presence of multivalent
domains on the genome carrying more than one histone mark, highlighting the
importance of combinatorial effects on transcription. Overall, our work portrays 
a substantial association between chromosomal locations of various epigenetic
markers, transcriptional activity and global stage-specific transitions in the
epigenome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003170 
PMCID: PMC3585154
PMID: 23468622  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

