
1. Evolution. 2013 Mar;67(3):679-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1558-5646.2012.01799.x. Epub
2012 Sep 27.

MHC variation is related to a sexually selected ornament, survival, and parasite 
resistance in common yellowthroats.

Dunn PO(1), Bollmer JL, Freeman-Gallant CR, Whittingham LA.

Author information: 
(1)Behavioral and Molecular Ecology Group, Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, P.O. Box 413, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53201, USA.
pdunn@uwm.edu

Hamilton and Zuk proposed that females choose mates based on ornaments whose
expression is dependent on their genetically based resistance to parasites. The
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) plays an important role in pathogen
recognition and is a good candidate for testing the relationships between immune 
genes and both ornament expression and parasite resistance. We tested the
hypothesis that female common yellowthroats prefer to mate with more ornamented
males, because it is a signal of their MHC-based resistance to parasites and
likelihood of survival. In this species, females prefer males that have larger
black facial masks as extrapair mates. Using pyrosequencing, we found that mask
size was positively related to the number of different MHC class II alleles, as
predicted if greater variation at the MHC allows for the recognition of a greater
variety of pathogens. Furthermore, males with more MHC class II alleles had
greater apparent survival, and resistance to malaria infection was associated
with the presence of a particular MHC class II allele. Thus, extrapair mating may
provide female warblers with immunity genes that are related to parasite
resistance, survival, and the expression of a male ornament, consistent with good
genes models of sexual selection.

© 2012 The Author(s). Evolution© 2012 The Society for the Study of Evolution.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1558-5646.2012.01799.x 
PMID: 23461319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

