
1. Acta Trop. 2013 Jun;126(3):269-79. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2013.02.017. Epub
2013 Mar 4.

Population genetic structure and polymorphism analysis of gene encoding apical
membrane antigen-1 (AMA-1) of Iranian Plasmodium vivax wild isolates.

Zakeri S(1), Sadeghi H, Mehrizi AA, Djadid ND.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran 1316943551, Iran. zakeris@yahoo.com

Plasmodium vivax apical membrane antigen-1 (PvAMA-1) is a major candidate antigen
for human malaria vaccine. In the present study, polymorphism of pvama-1 among
Iranian isolates was investigated to generate useful information on this vaccine 
candidate antigen, which is required for the rational design of a vaccine against
P. vivax. Blood samples were collected from P. vivax-infected Iranian patients
during 2009-2010. Of 99 collected isolates, 37 were analyzed for almost the
entire pvama-1 gene using sequencing. The overall nucleotide diversity (π) was
0.00826 ± 0.0004 and the majority of polymorphic sites were identified in domain 
I (DI) of the pvama-1 gene. Neutrality analysis using Tajima's D, Fu and Li's D* 
and F* and McDonald Kreitman tests showed a significant positive departure from
neutral substitution patterns, indicating a possible balancing selection across
the entire ectodomain and DI sequences of pvama-1 gene. However, no evidence was 
found for the balancing selection in DII and DIII regions of Iranian PvAMA-1.
Also, 29 haplotypes with different frequencies were identified and the overall
haplotype diversity was 0.982 ± 0.012. Epitope mapping prediction of PvAMA-1
showed the potential B-cell epitopes across DI-DIII overlap with E145K, P210S,
R249H, G253E, K352E, R438H and N445D mutations; however, no mutation has been
found in intrinsically unstructured/disordered regions. The fixation index (Fst) 
estimation between Iran and the closest geographical sites such as India (0.0707)
showed a slight geographical genetic differentiation; however, the Fst estimation
between Iran and Thailand (0.1253) suggested a moderate geographical isolation.
In summary, genetic investigation in pvama-1 among Iranian P. vivax isolates
indicates that this antigen showed limited antigenic diversity and most of the
detected mutations are located outside B-cell epitopes. Therefore, the present
results have significant implications in understanding the nature of P. vivax
population circulating in Iran as well as in providing useful information for
malaria vaccine development based on this antigen.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2013.02.017 
PMID: 23467011  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

