
1. Eukaryot Cell. 2013 May;12(5):697-702. doi: 10.1128/EC.00023-13. Epub 2013 Mar 8.

Nuclear pores and perinuclear expression sites of var and ribosomal DNA genes
correspond to physically distinct regions in Plasmodium falciparum.

Guizetti J(1), Martins RM, Guadagnini S, Claes A, Scherf A.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Parasitologie et Mycologie, Unité de Biologie des Interactions 
Hôte-Parasite, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum modifies the erythrocyte it
infects by exporting variant proteins to the host cell surface. The var gene
family that codes for a large, variant adhesive surface protein called P.
falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) plays a particular role in
this process, which is linked to pathogenesis and immune evasion. A single member
of this gene family is highly transcribed while the other 59 members remain
silenced. Importantly, var gene transcription occurs at a spatially restricted,
but yet undefined, perinuclear site that is distinct from repressed var gene
clusters. To advance our understanding of monoallelic expression, we investigated
whether nuclear pores associate with the var gene expression site. To this end,
we studied the nuclear pore organization during the asexual blood stage using a
specific antibody directed against a subunit of the nuclear pore, P. falciparum
Nup116 (PfNup116). Ring and schizont stage parasites showed highly polarized
nuclear pore foci, whereas in trophozoite stage nuclear pores redistributed over 
the entire nuclear surface. Colocalization studies of var transcripts and
anti-PfNup116 antibodies showed clear dissociation between nuclear pores and the 
var gene expression site in ring stage. Similar results were obtained for another
differentially transcribed perinuclear gene family, the ribosomal DNA units.
Furthermore, we show that in the poised state, the var gene locus is not
physically linked to nuclear pores. Our results indicate that P. falciparum does 
form compartments of high transcriptional activity at the nuclear periphery which
are, unlike the case in yeast, devoid of nuclear pores.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.00023-13 
PMCID: PMC3647773
PMID: 23475702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

