
1. Exp Parasitol. 2013 May;134(1):82-91. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2013.02.004. Epub
2013 Feb 24.

Plasmodium vivax: C-terminal diversity in the blood stage SERA genes from Indian 
field isolates.

Rahul CN(1), Shiva Krishna K, Meera Bai N, Kumar V, Phadke S, Rajesh V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, 
Pilani, Hyderabad Campus 500078, Andhra Pradesh, India.

The burden of Plasmodium vivax malaria is huge in India, affecting a large
population annually. Recent reports of P. vivax contributing to severe illness
and death, makes vaccine research on P. vivax malaria, a high priority. Extent of
sequence variation in antigen coding genes is known to be a major hurdle in
vaccine initiatives against malaria. Serine repeat antigens of Plasmodium are
promising asexual blood stage vaccine candidates against malaria and have been
implicated to have a key role in merozoite invasion and egress. Among the P.
vivax SERA proteins, SERA4 and SERA5 are the major transcribed members in
erythrocytic stages, making them encouraging candidates to be explored for their 
polymorphism and vaccine potential. Earlier reports suggest that diversity in
these PvSERA antigens is localized to the C-terminal region of the proteins.
Hence, genetic diversity study of this region seems prudent. Moreover, as there
are no reports available from India, the present study aims to investigate the
polymorphism in the C-terminal region of two highly transcribed members PvSERA4
and PvSERA5 in Indian field isolates. Our result of PvSERA5 demonstrates
extensive genetic diversity, with major deletions, insertions and SNPs and
signifies the gene to be under positive selection. On the other hand, high
sequence conservation was seen in the PvSERA4 C-terminal region in Indian field
isolates which was contrasting to earlier report from Thailand where they have
shown diversity. Research data showcased in this study will greatly aid in
gaining better understanding of antigenic variations, immune mediated selection
mechanisms and the functional significance of these two vivax proteins. This
study also makes a striking contribution towards understanding the antigenic
repertoire of PvSERA genes in Indian isolates.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2013.02.004 
PMID: 23485360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

