
1. Parasit Vectors. 2013 Mar 15;6:66. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-66.

Inoculation of Triatoma virus (Dicistroviridae: Cripavirus) elicits a
non-infective immune response in mice.

Querido JF(1), Agirre J, Marti GA, Gu√©rin DM, Silva MS.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Malaria and Tropical Diseases, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina
Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Dicistroviridae is a new family of small, non-enveloped, +ssRNA
viruses pathogenic to both beneficial arthropods and insect pests. Little is
known about the dicistrovirus replication mechanism or gene function, and any
knowledge on these subjects comes mainly from comparisons with mammalian viruses 
from the Picornaviridae family. Due to its peculiar genome organization and
characteristics of the per os viral transmission route, dicistroviruses make good
candidates for use as biopesticides. Triatoma virus (TrV) is a pathogen of
Triatoma infestans (Hemiptera: Reduviidae), one of the main vectors of the human 
trypanosomiasis disease called Chagas disease. TrV was postulated as a potential 
control agent against Chagas' vectors. Although there is no evidence that TrV nor
other dicistroviruses replicate in species outside the Insecta class, the
innocuousness of these viruses in humans and animals needs to be ascertained.
METHODS: In this study, RT-PCR and ELISA were used to detect the infectivity of
this virus in Mus musculus BALB/c mice.
RESULTS: In this study we have observed that there is no significant difference
in the ratio IgG2a/IgG1 in sera from animals inoculated with TrV when compared
with non-inoculated animals or mice inoculated only with non-infective TrV
protein capsids.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that, under our experimental conditions, TrV is unable
to replicate in mice. This study constitutes the first test to evaluate the
infectivity of a dicistrovirus in a vertebrate animal model.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-66 
PMCID: PMC3605389
PMID: 23497610  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

