
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58318. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058318. Epub 2013 Mar 7.

Deoxyhypusine hydroxylase from Plasmodium vivax, the neglected human malaria
parasite: molecular cloning, expression and specific inhibition by the 5-LOX
inhibitor zileuton.

Atemnkeng VA(1), Pink M, Schmitz-Spanke S, Wu XJ, Dong LL, Zhao KH, May C, Laufer
S, Langer B, Kaiser A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacogenetics, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

Primaquine, an 8-aminoquinoline, is the only drug which cures the dormant
hypnozoites of persistent liver stages from P. vivax. Increasing resistance needs
the discovery of alternative pathways as drug targets to develop novel drug
entities. Deoxyhypusine hydroxylase (DOHH) completes hypusine biosynthesis in
eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF-5A) which is the only cellular protein known to
contain the unusual amino acid hypusine. Modified EIF-5A is important for
proliferation of the malaria parasite. Here, we present the first successful
cloning and expression of DOHH from P. vivax causing tertiary malaria. The
nucleic acid sequence of 1041 bp encodes an open reading frame of 346 amino
acids. Histidine tagged expression of P. vivax DOHH detected a protein of 39.01
kDa in E. coli. The DOHH protein from P. vivax shares significant amino acid
identity to the simian orthologues from P. knowlesi and P. yoelii strain H. In
contrast to P. falciparum only four E-Z-type HEAT-like repeats are present in P. 
vivax DOHH with different homology to phycocyanin lyase subunits from
cyanobacteria and in proteins participating in energy metabolism of Archaea and
Halobacteria. However, phycocyanin lyase activity is absent in P. vivax DOHH. The
dohh gene is present as a single copy gene and transcribed throughout the whole
erythrocytic cycle. Specific inhibition of recombinant P. vivax DOHH is possible 
by complexing the ferrous iron with zileuton, an inhibitor of mammalian
5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX). Ferrous iron in the active site of 5-LOX is coordinated
by three conserved histidines and the carboxylate of isoleucine(673). Zileuton
inhibited the P. vivax DOHH protein with an IC50 of 12,5 nmol determined by a
relative quantification by GC/MS. By contrast, the human orthologue is only less 
affected with an IC50 of 90 nmol suggesting a selective iron-complexing strategy 
for the parasitic enzyme.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058318 
PMCID: PMC3591309
PMID: 23505486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

