
1. Cell Microbiol. 2013 Oct;15(10):1660-73. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12142. Epub 2013 Apr
11.

The prokaryotic ClpQ protease plays a key role in growth and development of
mitochondria in Plasmodium falciparum.

Jain S(1), Rathore S, Asad M, Hossain ME, Sinha D, Datta G, Mohmmed A.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi, 110
067, India.

The ATP-dependent ClpQY system is a prokaryotic proteasome-like multi-subunit
machinery localized in the mitochondrion of malaria parasite. The ClpQY machinery
consists of ClpQ threonine protease and ClpY ATPase. In the present study, we
have assessed cellular effects of transient interference of PfClpQ protease
activity in Plasmodium falciparum using a trans-dominant negative approach
combined with FKBP degradation domain system. A proteolytically inactive mutant
PfClpQ protein [PfClpQ(mut)] fused with FKBP degradation domain was expressed in 
parasites, which gets stabilized by Shield1 drug treatment. We show that the
inactive PfClpQ(mut) interacts with wild-type PfClpQ and associates within
multi-subunit complex in the parasite. Stabilization of the PfClpQ(mut) and its
association in the protease machinery caused dominant negative effect in the
transgenic parasites, which disrupted the growth cycle of asexual blood stage
parasites. The mitochondria in these parasites showed abnormal morphology, these 
mitochondria were not able to grow and divide in the parasite. We further show
that the dominant negative effect of PfClpQ(mut) disrupted transcription of
mitochondrial genome encoded genes, which in turn blocked normal development and 
functioning of the mitochondria.

Â© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12142 
PMID: 23521916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

