
1. Bull Entomol Res. 2013 Oct;103(5):547-54. doi: 10.1017/S0007485313000102. Epub
2013 Mar 22.

Autosomal inheritance of alphamethrin, a synthetic pyrethroid, resistance in
Anopheles stephensi-Liston, a malaria mosquito.

Prasad TP(1), Shetty NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Genetics, Jnana Bharathi, Bangalore University, Bangalore
560 056, India. hariprasad.tpn@gmail.com

Anopheles stephensi–Liston (Culicidae: Diptera) is an important urban malarial
vector in the Indian sub-continent, accounting for about 15% of the total annual 
malaria incidence. Chemical control represents a key strategy in the management
of this insect vector. However, owing to erratic and continuous application of
insecticides, resistance has become a common phenomenon among them and their
control has become an uphill task. The genetics of alphamethrin, a synthetic
pyrethroid resistance was studied to determine its mode of inheritance. The late 
third instar larvae were selectively inbred for 27 and ten generations to
synthesize homozygous resistant (R) and susceptible (S) stocks, respectively, to 
the diagnostic dose of 0.12 mg l−1. The log-dosage probit mortality relationships
and degree of dominance (D) were calculated. Resistance was observed in both
sexes, the dosage-mortality (d-m) line of F 1 was towards the resistant parent
and the ‘D’ value was found to be 0.8 indicating alphamethrin resistant (amr)
gene to be autosomal and incompletely dominant. The d-m lines of F 2/backcross
exhibited a clear plateau of mortality across a range of doses indicating
monogenic resistance. The null hypothesis for monogenic resistance was tested
from mortality data of backcross progeny compared with theoretical expectations
using the χ2 test and was found to be non-significant. Understanding genetics of 
insecticide resistance is significant in prediction and management of resistant
insects. The amr genes can be used as genetic marker in A. stephensi, which can
be used in several applications in conducting basic and applied genetic research.

DOI: 10.1017/S0007485313000102 
PMID: 23521773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

