
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58962. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058962. Epub 2013 Mar 11.

Low level of sequence diversity at merozoite surface protein-1 locus of
Plasmodium ovale curtisi and P. ovale wallikeri from Thai isolates.

Putaporntip C(1), Hughes AL, Jongwutiwes S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology of Malaria and Opportunistic Parasites Research Unit,
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand. p.chaturong@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: The merozoite surface protein-1 (MSP-1) is a candidate target for the
development of blood stage vaccines against malaria. Polymorphism in MSP-1 can be
useful as a genetic marker for strain differentiation in malarial parasites.
Although sequence diversity in the MSP-1 locus has been extensively analyzed in
field isolates of Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax, the extent of variation in 
its homologues in P. ovale curtisi and P. ovale wallikeri, remains unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Analysis of the mitochondrial cytochrome b
sequences of 10 P. ovale isolates from symptomatic malaria patients from diverse 
endemic areas of Thailand revealed co-existence of P. ovale curtisi (n = 5) and
P. ovale wallikeri (n = 5). Direct sequencing of the PCR-amplified products
encompassing the entire coding region of MSP-1 of P. ovale curtisi (PocMSP-1) and
P. ovale wallikeri (PowMSP-1) has identified 3 imperfect repeated segments in the
former and one in the latter. Most amino acid differences between these proteins 
were located in the interspecies variable domains of malarial MSP-1. Synonymous
nucleotide diversity (πS) exceeded nonsynonymous nucleotide diversity (πN) for
both PocMSP-1 and PowMSP-1, albeit at a non-significant level. However, when
MSP-1 of both these species was considered together, πS was significantly greater
than πN (p<0.0001), suggesting that purifying selection has shaped diversity at
this locus prior to speciation. Phylogenetic analysis based on conserved domains 
has placed PocMSP-1 and PowMSP-1 in a distinct bifurcating branch that probably
diverged from each other around 4.5 million years ago.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: The MSP-1 sequences support that P. ovale curtisi and P.
ovale wallikeri are distinct species. Both species are sympatric in Thailand. The
low level of sequence diversity in PocMSP-1 and PowMSP-1 among Thai isolates
could stem from persistent low prevalence of these species, limiting the chance
of outcrossing at this locus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058962 
PMCID: PMC3594193
PMID: 23536840  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

