
1. Biochem J. 2013 Jun 15;452(3):433-41. doi: 10.1042/BJ20130124.

Inhibition of Plasmodium falciparum CDPK1 by conditional expression of its
J-domain demonstrates a key role in schizont development.

Azevedo MF(1), Sanders PR, Krejany E, Nie CQ, Fu P, Bach LA, Wunderlich G, Crabb 
BS, Gilson PR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunology, Macfarlane Burnet Institute of Medical Research and
Public Health, Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia.

PfCDPK1 [Plasmodium falciparum CDPK1 (calcium-dependent protein kinase 1)] is
highly expressed in parasite asexual blood and mosquito stages. Its role is still
poorly understood, but unsuccessful gene knockout attempts suggest that it is
essential for parasite replication and/or RBC (red blood cell) invasion. In the
present study, by tagging endogenous CDPK1 with GFP (green fluorescent protein), 
we demonstrate that CDPK1 localizes to the parasite plasma membrane of
replicating and invasive forms as well as very young intracellular parasites and 
does not appear to be exported into RBCs. Although a knockdown of endogenous
CDPK1 was achieved using a destabilization domain, parasites tolerated reduced
expression without displaying a phenotype. Because of this, the PfCDPK1
auto-inhibitory J (junction) domain was explored as a means of achieving
inducible and specific inhibition. Under inÂ vitro conditions, a fusion protein
comprising a J-GFP fusion specifically bound to PfCDPK1 and inhibited its
activity. This fusion protein was conditionally expressed in P. falciparum
asexual blood stages under the regulation of a DD (destabilization domain)
(J-GFP-DD). We demonstrate that J-GFP-DD binds to CDPK1 and that this results in 
the arrest of parasite development late in the cell cycle during early
schizogony. These data point to an early schizont function for PfCDPK1 and
demonstrate that conditionally expressing auto-inhibitory regions can be an
effective way to address the function of Plasmodium enzymes.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20130124 
PMID: 23548171  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

