
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58984. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058984. Epub 2013 Mar 15.

Historical shifts in Brazilian P. falciparum population structure and drug
resistance alleles.

Griffing SM(1), Viana GM, Mixson-Hayden T, Sridaran S, Alam MT, de Oliveira AM,
Barnwell JW, Escalante AA, Povoa MM, Udhayakumar V.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Previous work suggests that Brazilian Plasmodium falciparum has limited genetic
diversity and a history of bottlenecks, multiple reintroductions due to human
migration, and clonal expansions. We hypothesized that Brazilian P. falciparum
would exhibit clonal structure. We examined isolates collected across two decades
from Amapá, Rondônia, and Pará state (n = 190). By examining more microsatellites
markers on more chromosomes than previous studies, we hoped to define the extent 
of low diversity, linkage disequilibrium, bottlenecks, population structure, and 
parasite migration within Brazil. We used retrospective genotyping of samples
from the 1980s and 1990s to explore the population genetics of SP resistant dhfr 
and dhps alleles. We tested an existing hypothesis that the triple mutant dhfr
mutations 50R/51I/108N and 51I/108N/164L developed in southern Amazon from a
single origin of common or similar parasites. We found that Brazilian P.
falciparum had limited genetic diversity and isolation by distance was rejected, 
which suggests it underwent bottlenecks followed by migration between sites.
Unlike Peru, there appeared to be gene flow across the Brazilian Amazon basin. We
were unable to divide parasite populations by clonal lineages and pairwise FST
were common. Most parasite diversity was found within sites in the Brazilian
Amazon, according to AMOVA. Our results challenge the hypothesis that triple
mutant alleles arose from a single lineage in the Southern Amazon. SP resistance,
at both the double and triple mutant stages, developed twice and potentially in
different regions of the Brazilian Amazon. We would have required samples from
before the 1980s to describe how SP resistance spread across the basin or
describe the complex internal migration of Brazilian parasites after the
colonization efforts of past decades. The Brazilian Amazon basin may have
sufficient internal migration for drug resistance reported in any particular
region to rapidly spread to other parts of basin under similar drug pressure.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058984 
PMCID: PMC3598954
PMID: 23554964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

