
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59288. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059288. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

A systematic in silico search for target similarity identifies several approved
drugs with potential activity against the Plasmodium falciparum apicoplast.

Bispo NA(1), Culleton R, Silva LA, Cravo P.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Patologia Tropical e Saúde Pública/Universidade Federal de
Goiás/Goiânia, Brazil.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(6). doi:10.1371/annotation/0bbd3579-5212-4dcf-a5ef-dd3d8e26f287.

Most of the drugs in use against Plasmodium falciparum share similar modes of
action and, consequently, there is a need to identify alternative potential drug 
targets. Here, we focus on the apicoplast, a malarial plastid-like organelle of
algal source which evolved through secondary endosymbiosis. We undertake a
systematic in silico target-based identification approach for detecting drugs
already approved for clinical use in humans that may be able to interfere with
the P. falciparum apicoplast. The P. falciparum genome database GeneDB was used
to compile a list of ≈600 proteins containing apicoplast signal peptides. Each of
these proteins was treated as a potential drug target and its predicted sequence 
was used to interrogate three different freely available databases (Therapeutic
Target Database, DrugBank and STITCH3.1) that provide synoptic data on drugs and 
their primary or putative drug targets. We were able to identify several drugs
that are expected to interact with forty-seven (47) peptides predicted to be
involved in the biology of the P. falciparum apicoplast. Fifteen (15) of these
putative targets are predicted to have affinity to drugs that are already
approved for clinical use but have never been evaluated against malaria
parasites. We suggest that some of these drugs should be experimentally tested
and/or serve as leads for engineering new antimalarials.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059288 
PMCID: PMC3608639
PMID: 23555651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

