
1. Gene. 2013 Jun 10;522(1):46-59. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.03.063. Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Plasmodium falciparum DOZI, an RNA helicase interacts with eIF4E.

Tarique M(1), Ahmad M, Ansari A, Tuteja R.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
P. O. Box 10504, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India.

DEAD box RNA helicases play crucial roles in RNA metabolism such as splicing,
ribosome biogenesis, RNA transport, degradation and translation. DDX6/DOZI
(development of zygote inhibited) is one of the well characterized member of the 
DEAD box family and is highly conserved from humans to malaria parasite. DDX6 is 
involved in a variety of biological processes, which include the sexual
development of the protozoan parasite. In the present manuscript we report that
P. falciparum DOZI (DDX6 homologue); PfDZ50 contains the characteristic DNA and
RNA binding, nucleic acid-dependent ATPase and RNA unwinding activities.
Enzymatic characterization of truncated derivatives of PfDZ50 such as PfDZ50T1
(domain 1) and PfDZ50T2 (domain 2) shows that none of them contains ATPase
activity. Furthermore, we confirmed that PfDZ50 interacts with PfeIF4E mainly
through domain 1. Using in vitro translation assays we show that PfDZ50 inhibits 
translation. With the same assays we further report that externally added PfeIF4E
restores ~70% of translation. Using immunofluorescence assays we demonstrate that
PfDZ50 is localized mainly in the cytoplasm in the asexual intraerythrocytic
developmental stages of P. falciparum. The localization pattern further suggests 
that PfDZ50 appears typically in granular bodies throughout the cytoplasm. Thus
these studies will advance our knowledge regarding the function of PfDZ50/DDX6 in
general.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.03.063 
PMID: 23562722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

