
1. J Infect Dis. 2013 Jul 15;208(2):260-70. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jit151. Epub 2013
Apr 8.

SHIV antigen immunization alters patterns of immune responses to SHIV/malaria
coinfection and protects against life-threatening SHIV-related malaria.

Frencher JT(1), Ryan-Pasyeur BK, Huang D, Wang RC, McMullen PD, Letvin NL,
Collins WE, Freitag NE, Malkovsky M, Chen CY, Shen L, Chen ZW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Illinois College of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Whether vaccination against a virus can protect against more virulent coinfection
with the virus and additional pathogen(s) remains poorly characterized.
Overlapping endemicity of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and malaria suggests
that HIV/malaria coinfection frequently complicates acute and chronic HIV
infection. Here we showed that vaccination of macaques with recombinant Listeria 
ΔactA prfA* expressing simian/human immunodeficiency virus (SHIV) gag and env
elicited Gag- and Env-specific T-cell responses, and protected against
life-threatening SHIV-related malaria after SHIV/Plasmodium fragile coinfection. 
SHIV antigen immunization reduced peak viremia, resisted SHIV/malaria-induced
lymphoid destruction, and blunted coinfection-accelerated decline of CD4(+)
T-cell counts after SHIV/malaria coinfection. SHIV antigen immunization also
weakened coinfection-driven overreactive proinflammatory interferon-γ (IFNγ)
responses and led to developing T helper cell 17/22 (Th17/Th22) responses after
SHIV/malaria coinfection. The findings suggest that vaccination against AIDS
virus can alter patterns of immune responses to the SHIV/malaria coinfection and 
protect against life-threatening SHIV-related malaria.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jit151 
PMCID: PMC3685226
PMID: 23568175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

