
1. Hum Genet. 2013 Sep;132(9):987-99. doi: 10.1007/s00439-013-1284-5. Epub 2013 Apr 
23.

Patterns of nucleotide and haplotype diversity at ICAM-1 across global human
populations with varying levels of malaria exposure.

Gomez F(1), Tomas G, Ko WY, Ranciaro A, Froment A, Ibrahim M, Lema G, Nyambo TB, 
Omar SA, Wambebe C, Hirbo JB, Rocha J, Tishkoff SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Biology, School of Medicine and School of Arts and 
Sciences, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
fgomez@mail.med.upenn.edu

Malaria is one of the strongest selective pressures in recent human evolution.
African populations have been and continue to be at risk for malarial infections.
However, few studies have re-sequenced malaria susceptibility loci across
geographically and genetically diverse groups in Africa. We examined nucleotide
diversity at Intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), a malaria susceptibility
candidate locus, in a number of human populations with a specific focus on
diverse African ethnic groups. We used tests of neutrality to assess whether
natural selection has impacted this locus and tested whether SNP variation at
ICAM-1 is correlated with malaria endemicity. We observe differing patterns of
nucleotide and haplotype variation in global populations and higher levels of
diversity in Africa. Although we do not observe a deviation from neutrality based
on the allele frequency distribution, we do observe several alleles at ICAM-1,
including the ICAM-1 (Kilifi) allele, that are correlated with malaria
endemicity. We show that the ICAM-1 (Kilifi) allele, which is common in Africa
and Asia, exists on distinct haplotype backgrounds and is likely to have arisen
more recently in Asia. Our results suggest that correlation analyses of allele
frequencies and malaria endemicity may be useful for identifying candidate
functional variants that play a role in malaria resistance and susceptibility.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-013-1284-5 
PMCID: PMC3916218
PMID: 23609612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

