
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 May 24;435(1):88-93. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.04.043. Epub 2013 Apr 22.

Switch-like reprogramming of gene expression after fusion of multinucleate
plasmodial cells of two Physarum polycephalum sporulation mutants.

Walter P(1), Hoffmann XK, Ebeling B, Haas M, Marwan W.

Author information: 
(1)Magdeburg Centre for Systems Biology and Lehrstuhl für Regulationsbiologie,
Otto-von-Guericke-Universität, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany.

Nonlinear dynamic processes involving the differential regulation of
transcription factors are considered to impact the reprogramming of stem cells,
germ cells, and somatic cells. Here, we fused two multinucleate plasmodial cells 
of Physarum polycephalum mutants defective in different sporulation control genes
while being in different physiological states. The resulting heterokaryons
established one of two significantly different expression patterns of marker
genes while the plasmodial halves that were fused to each other synchronized
spontaneously. Spontaneous synchronization suggests that switch-like control
mechanisms spread over and finally control the entire plasmodium as a result of
cytoplasmic mixing. Regulatory molecules due to the large volume of the
vigorously streaming cytoplasm will define concentrations in acting on the
population of nuclei and in the global setting of switches. Mixing of a large
cytoplasmic volume is expected to damp stochasticity when individual nuclei
deliver certain RNAs at low copy number into the cytoplasm. We conclude that
spontaneous synchronization, the damping of molecular noise in gene expression by
the large cytoplasmic volume, and the option to take multiple macroscopic samples
from the same plasmodium provide unique options for studying the dynamics of
cellular reprogramming at the single cell level.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.04.043 
PMID: 23618852  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

