
1. Nat Genet. 2013 Jun;45(6):648-55. doi: 10.1038/ng.2624. Epub 2013 Apr 28.

Multiple populations of artemisinin-resistant Plasmodium falciparum in Cambodia.

Miotto O(1), Almagro-Garcia J, Manske M, Macinnis B, Campino S, Rockett KA,
Amaratunga C, Lim P, Suon S, Sreng S, Anderson JM, Duong S, Nguon C, Chuor CM,
Saunders D, Se Y, Lon C, Fukuda MM, Amenga-Etego L, Hodgson AV, Asoala V, Imwong 
M, Takala-Harrison S, Nosten F, Su XZ, Ringwald P, Ariey F, Dolecek C, Hien TT,
Boni MF, Thai CQ, Amambua-Ngwa A, Conway DJ, Djimd√© AA, Doumbo OK, Zongo I,
Ouedraogo JB, Alcock D, Drury E, Auburn S, Koch O, Sanders M, Hubbart C, Maslen
G, Ruano-Rubio V, Jyothi D, Miles A, O'Brien J, Gamble C, Oyola SO, Rayner JC,
Newbold CI, Berriman M, Spencer CC, McVean G, Day NP, White NJ, Bethell D,
Dondorp AM, Plowe CV, Fairhurst RM, Kwiatkowski DP.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council MRC Centre for Genomics and Global Health, University
of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2013 Jun;45(6):589-90.

We describe an analysis of genome variation in 825 P. falciparum samples from
Asia and Africa that identifies an unusual pattern of parasite population
structure at the epicenter of artemisinin resistance in western Cambodia. Within 
this relatively small geographic area, we have discovered several distinct but
apparently sympatric parasite subpopulations with extremely high levels of
genetic differentiation. Of particular interest are three subpopulations, all
associated with clinical resistance to artemisinin, which have skewed allele
frequency spectra and high levels of haplotype homozygosity, indicative of
founder effects and recent population expansion. We provide a catalog of SNPs
that show high levels of differentiation in the artemisinin-resistant
subpopulations, including codon variants in transporter proteins and DNA mismatch
repair proteins. These data provide a population-level genetic framework for
investigating the biological origins of artemisinin resistance and for defining
molecular markers to assist in its elimination.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.2624 
PMCID: PMC3807790
PMID: 23624527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

