
1. New Phytol. 2013 Jul;199(2):352-66. doi: 10.1111/nph.12274. Epub 2013 May 2.

The metabolite chemotype of Nicotiana benthamiana transiently expressing
artemisinin biosynthetic pathway genes is a function of CYP71AV1 type and
relative gene dosage.

Ting HM(1), Wang B, Rydén AM, Woittiez L, van Herpen T, Verstappen FW,
Ruyter-Spira C, Beekwilder J, Bouwmeester HJ, van der Krol A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Physiology, Wageningen University, Droevendaalsesteeg 1,
6708 PB, Wageningen, the Netherlands.

Artemisia annua, which produces the anti-malaria compound artemisinin, occurs as 
high-artemisinin production (HAP) and low-artemisinin production (LAP)
chemotypes. Understanding the basis of the difference between these chemotypes
would assist breeding and optimising artemisinin biosynthesis. Here we present a 
systematic comparison of artemisinin biosynthesis genes that may be involved in
determining the chemotype (CYP71AV1, DBR2 and ALDH1). These genes were isolated
from the two chemotypes and characterized using transient expression in planta.
The enzyme activity of DBR2 and ALDH1 from the two chemotypes did not differ, but
structural differences in CYP71AV1 from LAP and HAP chemotypes (AMOLAP and
AMOHAP, respectively) resulted in altered enzyme activity. AMOLAP displays a
seven amino acids N-terminal extension compared with AMOHAP. The GFP fusion of
both proteins show equal localization to the ER but AMOHAP may have reduced
stability. Upon transient expression in Nicotiana benthamiana, AMOLAP displayed a
higher enzyme activity than AMOHAP. However, expression in combination with the
other pathway genes also resulted in a qualitatively different product profile
('chemotype'); that is, in a shift in the ratio between the unsaturated and
saturated (dihydro) branch of the pathway.

© 2013 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2013 New Phytologist Trust.

DOI: 10.1111/nph.12274 
PMID: 23638869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

