
1. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 5;8(4):e60898. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060898. Print 2013.

Pharmacologic inhibition of CXCL10 in combination with anti-malarial therapy
eliminates mortality associated with murine model of cerebral malaria.

Wilson NO(1), Solomon W, Anderson L, Patrickson J, Pitts S, Bond V, Liu M, Stiles
JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry, and Immunology, Morehouse School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America. nwilson@msm.edu

Despite appropriate anti-malarial treatment, cerebral malaria (CM)-associated
mortalities remain as high as 30%. Thus, adjunctive therapies are urgently needed
to prevent or reduce such mortalities. Overproduction of CXCL10 in a subset of CM
patients has been shown to be tightly associated with fatal human CM. Mice with
deleted CXCL10 gene are partially protected against experimental cerebral malaria
(ECM) mortality indicating the importance of CXCL10 in the pathogenesis of CM.
However, the direct effect of increased CXCL10 production on brain cells is
unknown. We assessed apoptotic effects of CXCL10 on human brain microvascular
endothelial cells (HBVECs) and neuroglia cells in vitro. We tested the hypothesis
that reducing overexpression of CXCL10 with a synthetic drug during CM
pathogenesis will increase survival and reduce mortality. We utilized
atorvastatin, a widely used synthetic blood cholesterol-lowering drug that
specifically targets and reduces plasma CXCL10 levels in humans, to determine the
effects of atorvastatin and artemether combination therapy on murine ECM outcome.
We assessed effects of atorvastatin treatment on immune determinants of severity,
survival, and parasitemia in ECM mice receiving a combination therapy from onset 
of ECM (day 6 through 9 post-infection) and compared results with controls. The
results indicate that CXCL10 induces apoptosis in HBVECs and neuroglia cells in a
dose-dependent manner suggesting that increased levels of CXCL10 in CM patients
may play a role in vasculopathy, neuropathogenesis, and brain injury during CM
pathogenesis. Treatment of ECM in mice with atorvastatin significantly reduced
systemic and brain inflammation by reducing the levels of the anti-angiogenic and
apoptotic factor (CXCL10) and increasing angiogenic factor (VEGF) production.
Treatment with a combination of atorvastatin and artemether improved survival
(100%) when compared with artemether monotherapy (70%), p<0.05. Thus,
adjunctively reducing CXCL10 levels and inflammation by atorvastatin treatment
during anti-malarial therapy may represent a novel approach to treating CM
patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060898 
PMCID: PMC3618178
PMID: 23630573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

