
1. mBio. 2013 Apr 30;4(3):e00252-13. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00252-13.

Opposing roles for two molecular forms of replication protein A in
Rad51-Rad54-mediated DNA recombination in Plasmodium falciparum.

Gopalakrishnan AM(1), Kumar N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine, Tulane University, School of Public Health
and Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.

Erratum in
    MBio. 2015;6(1). pii: e02515-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02515-14.

The bacterial RecA protein and its eukaryotic homologue Rad51 play a central role
in the homologous DNA strand exchange reaction during recombination and DNA
repair. Previously, our lab has shown that PfRad51, the Plasmodium falciparum
homologue of Rad51, exhibited ATPase activity and promoted DNA strand exchange in
vitro. In this study, we evaluated the catalytic functions of PfRad51 in the
presence of putative interacting partners, especially P. falciparum homologues of
Rad54 and replication protein A. PfRad54 accelerated PfRad51-mediated pairing
between single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) and its homologous linear double-stranded DNA
(dsDNA) in the presence of 0.5 mM CaCl2. We also present evidence that
recombinant PfRPA1L protein serves the function of the bacterial homologue
single-stranded binding protein (SSB) in initiating homologous pairing and strand
exchange activity. More importantly, the function of PfRPA1L was negatively
regulated in a dose-dependent manner by PfRPA1S, another RPA homologue in P.
falciparum. Finally, we present in vivo evidence through comet assays for methyl 
methane sulfonate-induced DNA damage in malaria parasites and accompanying
upregulation of PfRad51, PfRad54, PfRPA1L, and PfRPA1S at the level of transcript
and protein needed to repair DNA damage. This study provides new insights into
the role of putative Rad51-interacting proteins involved in homologous
recombination and emphasizes the physiological role of DNA damage repair during
the growth of parasites.IMPORTANCE: Homologous recombination plays a major role
in chromosomal rearrangement, and Rad51 protein, aided by several other proteins,
plays a central role in DNA strand exchange reaction during recombination and DNA
repair. This study reports on the characterization of the role of P. falciparum
Rad51 in homologous strand exchange and DNA repair and evaluates the functional
contribution of PfRad54 and PfRPA1 proteins. Data presented here provide
mechanistic insights into DNA recombination and DNA damage repair mechanisms in
this parasite. The importance of these research findings in future work will be
to investigate if Rad51-dependent mechanisms are involved in chromosomal
rearrangements during antigenic variation in P. falciparum. A prominent
determinant of antigenic variation, the extraordinary ability of the parasite to 
rapidly change its surface molecules, is associated with var genes, and antigenic
variation presents a major challenge to vaccine development.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00252-13 
PMCID: PMC3648904
PMID: 23631919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

