
1. J Cell Sci. 2013 Jul 15;126(Pt 14):3055-69. doi: 10.1242/jcs.122119. Epub 2013
May 17.

PfSec13 is an unusual chromatin-associated nucleoporin of Plasmodium falciparum
that is essential for parasite proliferation in human erythrocytes.

Dahan-Pasternak N(1), Nasereddin A, Kolevzon N, Pe'er M, Wong W, Shinder V,
Turnbull L, Whitchurch CB, Elbaum M, Gilberger TW, Yavin E, Baum J, Dzikowski R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, The Institute for Medical
Research Israel-Canada, The Kuvin Center for the Study of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

In Plasmodium falciparum, the deadliest form of human malaria, the nuclear
periphery has drawn much attention due to its role as a sub-nuclear compartment
involved in virulence gene expression. Recent data have implicated components of 
the nuclear envelope in regulating gene expression in several eukaryotes. Special
attention has been given to nucleoporins that compose the nuclear pore complex
(NPC). However, very little is known about components of the nuclear envelope in 
Plasmodium parasites. Here we characterize PfSec13, an unusual nucleoporin of P. 
falciparum, which shows unique structural similarities suggesting that it is a
fusion between Sec13 and Nup145C of yeast. Using super resolution fluorescence
microscopy (3D-SIM) and in vivo imaging, we show that the dynamic localization of
PfSec13 during parasites' intra-erythrocytic development corresponds with that of
the NPCs and that these dynamics are associated with microtubules rather than
with F-actin. In addition, PfSec13 does not co-localize with the heterochormatin 
markers HP1 and H3K9me3, suggesting euchromatic location of the NPCs. The
proteins associated with PfSec13 indicate that this unusual Nup is involved in
several cellular processes. Indeed, ultrastructural and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses revealed that, in addition to the NPCs, PfSec13 is
found in the nucleoplasm where it is associated with chromatin. Finally, we used 
peptide nucleic acids (PNA) to downregulate PfSec13 and show that it is essential
for parasite proliferation in human erythrocytes.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.122119 
PMID: 23687383  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

