
1. J Parasitol Res. 2013;2013:429736. doi: 10.1155/2013/429736. Epub 2013 Apr 3.

Treatment of Plasmodium chabaudi Parasites with Curcumin in Combination with
Antimalarial Drugs: Drug Interactions and Implications on the
Ubiquitin/Proteasome System.

Neto Z(1), Machado M, Lindeza A, do Rosário V, Gazarini ML, Lopes D.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Parasitologia, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical (IHMT),
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua da Junqueira 100, 1349-008 Lisbon, Portugal ;
Centro de Malária e Doenças Tropicais (CMDT), Instituto de Higiene e Medicina
Tropical (IHMT), Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua da Junqueira 100, 1349-008
Lisbon, Portugal.

Antimalarial drug resistance remains a major obstacle in malaria control.
Evidence from Southeast Asia shows that resistance to artemisinin combination
therapy (ACT) is inevitable. Ethnopharmacological studies have confirmed the
efficacy of curcumin against Plasmodium spp. Drug interaction assays between
curcumin/piperine/chloroquine and curcumin/piperine/artemisinin combinations and 
the potential of drug treatment to interfere with the ubiquitin proteasome system
(UPS) were analyzed. In vivo efficacy of curcumin was studied in BALB/c mice
infected with Plasmodium chabaudi clones resistant to chloroquine and
artemisinin, and drug interactions were analyzed by isobolograms. Subtherapeutic 
doses of curcumin, chloroquine, and artemisinin were administered to mice, and
mRNA was collected following treatment for RT-PCR analysis of genes encoding
deubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs). Curcumin was found be nontoxic in BALB/c mice.
The combination of curcumin/chloroquine/piperine reduced parasitemia to 37% seven
days after treatment versus the control group's 65%, and an additive interaction 
was revealed. Curcumin/piperine/artemisinin combination did not show a favorable 
drug interaction in this murine model of malaria. Treatment of mice with
subtherapeutic doses of the drugs resulted in a transient increase in genes
encoding DUBs indicating UPS interference. If curcumin is to join the arsenal of 
available antimalarial drugs, future studies exploring suitable drug partners
would be of interest.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/429736 
PMCID: PMC3649349
PMID: 23691276 

