
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Aug;18:183-90. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.05.017. Epub
2013 May 25.

Haplotypes associated with resistance to sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine in Plasmodium 
falciparum in two malaria endemic locations in Colombia.

Hernández DC(1), Guerra AP, Cucunubá ZM, Nicholls RS, Barrera SM.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Bioquímica y Biología Celular, Instituto Nacional de Salud, Bogotá,
Colombia.

Colombia has four main malaria transmission zones. In vivo efficacy studies
carried out in these areas showed big differences in the response of Plasmodium
falciparum to treatment with sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine. In addition, there is
still insufficient information about the genetics of P. falciparum populations.
The objective of this study was to determine the haplotypes in dhfr and dhps
genes of P. falciparum circulating in two distinct endemic zones. Samples from
patients with non-complicated P. falciparum malaria were collected: 135 from
Tumaco and 206 from Tierralta. Alleles 108 and 51 of the dhfr gene, and 437 and
540 of the dhps gene were analyzed by PCR/enzymatic restriction, while alleles 59
and 164 (dhfr), and 581(dhps) by PCR/dot blot/hybridization. Five different
haplotypes were found, of which the triple mutant
51I/C59/108N/I164/437G/K540/A581 was the most frequent (54.6%). In Tumaco, the
parasites with wild haplotype predominated, while mutant parasites predominated
in Tierralta. Another interesting finding is the presence of the C59R mutation in
the dhfr gene in two samples, a mutation rarely found in South America. These
data provide information about parasite population genetics and highlight the
importance of starting a long term molecular surveillance program.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.05.017 
PMID: 23714094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

