
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Aug;18:213-9. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.05.019. Epub
2013 May 30.

Differential sequence diversity at merozoite surface protein-1 locus of
Plasmodium knowlesi from humans and macaques in Thailand.

Putaporntip C(1), Thongaree S, Jongwutiwes S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology of Malaria and Opportunistic Parasites Research Unit,
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok 10330, Thailand. p.chaturong@gmail.com

To determine the genetic diversity and potential transmission routes of
Plasmodium knowlesi, we analyzed the complete nucleotide sequence of the gene
encoding the merozoite surface protein-1 of this simian malaria (Pkmsp-1), an
asexual blood-stage vaccine candidate, from naturally infected humans and
macaques in Thailand. Analysis of Pkmsp-1 sequences from humans (n=12) and
monkeys (n=12) reveals five conserved and four variable domains. Most nucleotide 
substitutions in conserved domains were dimorphic whereas three of four variable 
domains contained complex repeats with extensive sequence and size variation.
Besides purifying selection in conserved domains, evidence of intragenic
recombination scattering across Pkmsp-1 was detected. The number of haplotypes,
haplotype diversity, nucleotide diversity and recombination sites of
human-derived sequences exceeded that of monkey-derived sequences. Phylogenetic
networks based on concatenated conserved sequences of Pkmsp-1 displayed a
character pattern that could have arisen from sampling process or the presence of
two independent routes of P. knowlesi transmission, i.e. from macaques to human
and from human to humans in Thailand.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.05.019 
PMID: 23727342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

