
1. Transfus Med Hemother. 2012 Oct;39(5):308-14. doi: 10.1159/000342534. Epub 2012
Sep 6.

Physiology and pathophysiology of eryptosis.

Lang F(1), Lang E, Föller M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Tübingen, Germany.

SUMMARY: Suicidal erythrocyte death (eryptosis) is characterized by cell
shrinkage, cell membrane blebbing, and cell membrane phospholipid scrambling with
phosphatidylserine exposure at the cell surface. Eryptotic cells adhere to the
vascular wall and are rapidly cleared from circulating blood. Eryptosis is
stimulated by an increase in cytosolic Ca(2)+ activity, ceramide, hyperosmotic
shock, oxidative stress, energy depletion, hyperthermia, and a wide variety of
xenobiotics and endogenous substances. Inhibitors of eryptosis include
erythropoietin and nitric oxide. Enhanced eryptosis is observed in diabetes,
renal insufficiency, hemolytic uremic syndrome, sepsis, mycoplasma infection,
malaria, iron deficiency, sickle cell anemia, beta-thalassemia,
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase-(G6PD) deficiency, hereditary spherocytosis,
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, Wilson's disease, myelodysplastic syndrome, 
and phosphate depletion. Eryptosis is further enhanced in gene-targeted mice with
deficient annexin 7, cGMP-dependent protein kinase type I (cGKI), AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK), anion exchanger 1 (AE1), adenomatous polyposis coli (APC),
and Klotho, as well as in mouse models of sickle cell anemia and thalassemia.
Decreased eryptosis is observed in mice with deficient phosphoinositide-dependent
kinase 1 (PDK1), platelet activating factor (PAF) receptor, transient receptor
potential channel 6 (TRPC6), janus kinase 3 (JAK3), and taurine transporter
(TAUT). Eryptosis may be a useful mechanism to remove defective erythrocytes
prior to hemolysis. Excessive eryptosis may, however, compromise microcirculation
and lead to anemia.

Publisher: Der suizidale Erythrozytentod (Eryptose) ist durch Zellschrumpfung,
Zellmembran-Blebbing und Scrambling der Zellmembranphospholipide mit Exponierung 
von Phosphatidylserin auf der Zelloberfläche gekennzeichnet. Eryptotische Zellen 
haften sich an die Gefäßwand und werden schnell aus dem Blutstrom entfernt.
Eryptose wird durch erhöhte zytosolische Ca2+-Aktivität, Ceramid,
hyperosmotischen Schock, oxidativen Stress, Energie-Depletion, Hyperthermie sowie
ein breites Spektrum an Xenobiotika und endogenen Substanzen stimuliert. Zu den
Eryptosehemmern zählen Erythropoetin und Stickoxid. Gesteigerte Eryptose wird bei
Diabetes, Niereninsuffizienz, hämolytisch-urämischem Syndrom, Sepsis,
Mykoplasmeninfektionen, Malaria, Eisenmangel, Sichelzellanämie, Beta-Thalassämie,
Glukose-6-Phosphat-Dehydrogenase(G6PD)-Mangel, hereditärer Sphäro-zytose,
paroxysmaler nächtlicher Hämoglobinurie, Morbus Wilson, myelodysplastischem
Syndrom und Phosphat-Depletion beobachtet. Des Weiteren ist die Eryptose bei
gentechnisch veränderten Mäusen ohne Annexin 7, cGMP-abhängiger Proteinkinase Typ
I (cGKI), AMP-aktivierter Proteinkinase (AMPK), Anionenaustauscher (AE1),
adenomatöses Polyposis-coli-Protein (APC) und Klotho sowie in Mausmodellen für
Sichelzellanämie und Thalassämie gesteigert. Verminderte Eryptose wird bei Mäusen
mit fehlendem PDK1(phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1)-, PAF(platelet activating
factor)-Rezeptor, TRPC6 (transient receptor potential channel 6), Januskinase 3
(JAK3) und Taurintransporter (TAUT) beobachtet. Eryptose könnte ein hilfreicher
Mechanismus zur Entfernung fehlerhafter Erythrozyten vor Hämolyse sein. Exzessive
Eryptose könnte jedoch die Mikrozirkulation beeinträchtigen und zu Anämie führen.
DOI: 10.1159/000342534 
PMCID: PMC3678267
PMID: 23801921 

