
1. Cell Microbiol. 2013 Nov;15(11):1913-23. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12162. Epub 2013 Jul
19.

Epigenetic switches in clag3 genes mediate blasticidin S resistance in malaria
parasites.

Mira-Martínez S(1), Rovira-Graells N, Crowley VM, Altenhofen LM, Llinás M, Cortés
A.

Author information: 
(1)Barcelona Centre for International Health Research (CRESIB, Hospital
Clínic-Universitat de Barcelona), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

Malaria parasites induce changes in the permeability of the infected erythrocyte 
membrane to numerous solutes, including toxic compounds. In Plasmodium
falciparum, this is mainly mediated by PSAC, a broad-selectivity channel that
requires the product of parasite clag3 genes for its activity. The two paralogous
clag3 genes, clag3.1 and clag3.2, can be silenced by epigenetic mechanisms and
show mutually exclusive expression. Here we show that resistance to the
antibiotic blasticidin S (BSD) is associated with switches in the expression of
these genes that result in altered solute uptake. Low concentrations of the drug 
selected parasites that switched from clag3.2 to clag3.1 expression, implying
that expression of one or the other clag3 gene confers different transport
efficiency to PSAC for some solutes. Selection with higher BSD concentrations
resulted in simultaneous silencing of both clag3 genes, which severely
compromises PSAC formation as demonstrated by blocked uptake of other PSAC
substrates. Changes in the expression of clag3 genes were not accompanied by
large genetic rearrangements or mutations at the clag3 loci or elsewhere in the
genome. These results demonstrate that malaria parasites can become resistant to 
toxic compounds such as drugs by epigenetic switches in the expression of genes
necessary for the formation of solute channels.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12162 
PMCID: PMC4621952
PMID: 23819786  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

