
1. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 25;8(6):e67047. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067047. Print 2013.

Plasmodium falciparum erythrocytic stage parasites require the putative autophagy
protein PfAtg7 for normal growth.

Walker DM(1), Mahfooz N, Kemme KA, Patel VC, Spangler M, Drew ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, The Ohio State University
Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

Analysis of the Plasmodium falciparum genome reveals a limited number of putative
autophagy genes, specifically the four genes involved in ATG8 lipidation, an
essential step in formation of autophagosomes. In yeast, Atg8 lipidation requires
the E1-type ligase Atg7, an E2-type ligase Atg3, and a cysteine protease Atg4.
These four putative P. falciparum ATG (PfATG) genes are transcribed during the
parasite's erythrocytic stages. PfAtg7 has relatively low identity and similarity
to yeast Atg7 (14.7% and 32.2%, respectively), due primarily to long insertions
typical of P. falciparum. Excluding the insertions the identity and similarity
are higher (38.0% and 70.8%, respectively). This and the fact that key residues
are conserved, including the catalytic cysteine and ATP binding domain, we
hypothesize that PfAtg7 is the activating enzyme of PfAtg8. To assess the role of
PfAtg7 we have generated two transgenic parasite lines. In one, the PfATG7 locus 
was modified to introduce a C-terminal hemagglutinin tag. Western blotting
reveals two distinct protein species, one migrating near the predicted 150 kDa
and one at approximately 65 kDa. The second transgenic line introduces an
inducible degradation domain into the PfATG7 locus, allowing us to rapidly
attenuate PfAtg7 protein levels. Corresponding species are also observed in this 
parasite line at approximately 200 kDa and 100 kDa. Upon PfATG7 attenuation
parasites exhibit a slow growth phenotype indicating the essentiality of this
putative enzyme for normal growth.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067047 
PMCID: PMC3692556
PMID: 23825614  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

