
1. Nature. 2013 Jul 11;499(7457):223-7. doi: 10.1038/nature12361. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

PfSETvs methylation of histone H3K36 represses virulence genes in Plasmodium
falciparum.

Jiang L(1), Mu J, Zhang Q, Ni T, Srinivasan P, Rayavara K, Yang W, Turner L,
Lavstsen T, Theander TG, Peng W, Wei G, Jing Q, Wakabayashi Y, Bansal A, Luo Y,
Ribeiro JM, Scherf A, Aravind L, Zhu J, Zhao K, Miller LH.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology & Immunology, Unit of Human Parasite
Molecular and Cell Biology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Shanghai 200031, China.
lbjiang@ips.ac.cn

Comment in
    Nature. 2013 Jul 11;499(7457):156-7.

The variant antigen Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1
(PfEMP1), which is expressed on the surface of P. falciparum-infected red blood
cells, is a critical virulence factor for malaria. Each parasite has 60
antigenically distinct var genes that each code for a different PfEMP1 protein.
During infection the clonal parasite population expresses only one gene at a time
before switching to the expression of a new variant antigen as an immune-evasion 
mechanism to avoid the host antibody response. The mechanism by which 59 of the
60 var genes are silenced remains largely unknown. Here we show that knocking out
the P. falciparum variant-silencing SET gene (here termed PfSETvs), which encodes
an orthologue of Drosophila melanogaster ASH1 and controls histone H3 lysine 36
trimethylation (H3K36me3) on var genes, results in the transcription of virtually
all var genes in the single parasite nuclei and their expression as proteins on
the surface of individual infected red blood cells. PfSETvs-dependent H3K36me3 is
present along the entire gene body, including the transcription start site, to
silence var genes. With low occupancy of PfSETvs at both the transcription start 
site of var genes and the intronic promoter, expression of var genes coincides
with transcription of their corresponding antisense long noncoding RNA. These
results uncover a previously unknown role of PfSETvs-dependent H3K36me3 in
silencing var genes in P. falciparum that might provide a general mechanism by
which orthologues of PfSETvs repress gene expression in other eukaryotes. PfSETvs
knockout parasites expressing all PfEMP1 proteins may also be applied to the
development of a malaria vaccine.

DOI: 10.1038/nature12361 
PMCID: PMC3770130
PMID: 23823717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

