
1. Malar J. 2013 Jul 8;12:230. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-230.

Prevalence and molecular basis of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in
Afghan populations: implications for treatment policy in the region.

Leslie T(1), Moiz B, Mohammad N, Amanzai O, Ur Rasheed H, Jan S, Siddiqi AM,
Nasir A, Beg MA, Vink M.

Author information: 
(1)HealthNet TPO, Kabul, Afghanistan. toby.leslie@lshtm.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PD), an x-linked
inherited enzymopathy, is a barrier to malaria control because primaquine cannot 
be readily applied for radical cure in individuals with the condition. In endemic
areas, including in Afghanistan, the G6PD status of vivax patients is not
routinely determined so the drug is rarely, if ever, prescribed even though it is
included as a recommended treatment in local, regional and global guidelines.
This study assessed the prevalence and genotype of G6PD deficiency in Afghan
populations and examined the need for routine G6PD testing as a malaria treatment
and control tool.
METHODS: A cross-sectional household survey was conducted using random sampling
in five Afghan cities to determine the prevalence of G6PD deficiency in Afghan
ethnic groups. Filter-paper blood spots were analysed for phenotypic G6PD
deficiency using a fluorescent spot test. Molecular analysis was conducted to
identify the genetic basis of the disorder.
RESULTS: Overall, 45/1,436 (3.1%) people were G6PD deficient, 36/728 (5.0%)
amongst males and 9/708 (1.3%) amongst females. Amongst males the prevalence was 
highest in the Pashtun ethnic group (10%, 26/260) while in Tajik males it was
8/250 (3.2%); in Hazara males it was 1/77 (1.3%) and in Uzbek males is was 0/125.
Genetic testing in those with deficiency showed that all were of the
Mediterranean type (Med-) characterized by a C-T change at codon 563 of the G6PD 
gene.
CONCLUSION: Prevalence of G6PD deficiency in Afghanistan varies considerably by
ethnic group and is predominantly of the Mediterranean type. G6PD deficient
individuals are susceptible to potentially severe and life-threatening haemolysis
after standard primaquine treatment. If the aim of increasing access to radical
treatment of vivax is to be successful reliable G6PD testing needs to be made
routinely available within the health system.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-230 
PMCID: PMC3710480
PMID: 23834949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

