
1. BMC Biol. 2013 Jul 9;11:80. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-11-80.

Plasmodium falciparum encodes a conserved active inhibitor-2 for Protein
Phosphatase type 1: perspectives for novel anti-plasmodial therapy.

Fr√©ville A(1), Cailliau-Maggio K, Pierrot C, Tellier G, Kalamou H, Lafitte S,
Martoriati A, Pierce RJ, Bodart JF, Khalife J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity of Lille, Inserm U1019-CNRS UMR 8204,
University of Lille Nord de France, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1 Rue du
Professeur Calmette, 59019 Lille, Cedex, France. jamal.khalife@pasteur-lille.fr

BACKGROUND: It is clear that the coordinated and reciprocal actions of kinases
and phosphatases are fundamental in the regulation of development and growth of
the malaria parasite. Protein Phosphatase type 1 is a key enzyme playing diverse 
and essential roles in cell survival. Its dephosphorylation activity/specificity 
is governed by the interaction of its catalytic subunit (PP1c) with regulatory
proteins. Among these, inhibitor-2 (I2) is one of the most evolutionarily ancient
PP1 regulators. In vivo studies in various organisms revealed a defect in
chromosome segregation and cell cycle progression when the function of I2 is
blocked.
RESULTS: In this report, we present evidence that Plasmodium falciparum, the
causative agent of the most deadly form of malaria, expresses a structural
homolog of mammalian I2, named PfI2. Biochemical, in vitro and in vivo studies
revealed that PfI2 binds PP1 and inhibits its activity. We further showed that
the motifs 12KTISW16 and 102HYNE105 are critical for PfI2 inhibitory activity.
Functional studies using the Xenopus oocyte model revealed that PfI2 is able to
overcome the G2/M cell cycle checkpoint by inducing germinal vesicle breakdown.
Genetic manipulations in P. falciparum suggest an essential role of PfI2 as no
viable mutants with a disrupted PfI2 gene were detectable. Additionally, peptides
derived from PfI2 and competing with RVxF binding sites in PP1 exhibit
anti-plasmodial activity against blood stage parasites in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data suggest that the PfI2 protein could play a 
role in the regulation of the P. falciparum cell cycle through its PfPP1
phosphatase regulatory activity. Structure-activity studies of this regulator led
to the identification of peptides with anti-plasmodial activity against blood
stage parasites in vitro suggesting that PP1c-regulator interactions could be a
novel means to control malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/1741-7007-11-80 
PMCID: PMC3735429
PMID: 23837822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

