
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Sep 27;288(39):27724-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.498410. Epub
2013 Aug 13.

Identification of biochemically distinct properties of the small
ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) conjugation pathway in Plasmodium falciparum.

Reiter K(1), Mukhopadhyay D, Zhang H, Boucher LE, Kumar N, Bosch J, Matunis MJ.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and.

Small ubiquitin-related modifiers (SUMOs) are post-translationally conjugated to 
other proteins and are thereby essential regulators of a wide range of cellular
processes. Sumoylation, and enzymes of the sumoylation pathway, are conserved in 
the malaria causing parasite, Plasmodium falciparum. However, the specific
functions of sumoylation in P. falciparum, and the degree of functional
conservation between enzymes of the human and P. falciparum sumoylation pathways,
have not been characterized. Here, we demonstrate that sumoylation levels peak
during midstages of the intra-erythrocyte developmental cycle, concomitant with
hemoglobin consumption and elevated oxidative stress. In vitro studies revealed
that P. falciparum E1- and E2-conjugating enzymes interact effectively to
recognize and modify RanGAP1, a model mammalian SUMO substrate. However, in
heterologous reactions, P. falciparum E1 and E2 enzymes failed to interact with
cognate human E2 and E1 partners, respectively, to modify RanGAP1. Structural
analysis, binding studies, and functional assays revealed divergent amino acid
residues within the E1-E2 binding interface that define organism-specific enzyme 
interactions. Our studies identify sumoylation as a potentially important
regulator of oxidative stress response during the P. falciparum intra-erythrocyte
developmental cycle, and define E1 and E2 interactions as a promising target for 
development of parasite-specific inhibitors of sumoylation and parasite
replication.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.498410 
PMCID: PMC3784690
PMID: 23943616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

