
1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 12;8(8):e70819. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070819. eCollection
2013.

Protective efficacy of baculovirus dual expression system vaccine expressing
Plasmodium falciparum circumsporozoite protein.

Iyori M(1), Nakaya H, Inagaki K, Pichyangkul S, Yamamoto DS, Kawasaki M, Kwak K, 
Mizukoshi M, Goto Y, Matsuoka H, Matsumoto M, Yoshida S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Vaccinology and Applied Immunology, Kanazawa University School
of Pharmacy, Kanazawa, Japan.

We have previously developed a new malaria vaccine delivery system based on the
baculovirus dual expression system (BDES). In this system, expression of malaria 
antigens is driven by a dual promoter consisting of the baculovirus-derived
polyhedrin and mammal-derived cytomegalovirus promoters. To test this system for 
its potential as a vaccine against human malaria parasites, we investigated
immune responses against the newly developed BDES-based Plasmodium falciparum
circumsporozoite protein vaccines (BDES-PfCSP) in mice and Rhesus monkeys.
Immunization of mice with BDES-PfCSP induced Th1/Th2-mixed type immune responses 
with high PfCSP-specific antibody (Ab) titers, and provided significant
protection against challenge from the bites of mosquitoes infected with a
transgenic P. berghei line expressing PfCSP. Next, we evaluated the
immunogenicity of the BDES-PfCSP vaccine in a rhesus monkey model. Immunization
of BDES-PfCSP elicited high levels of anti-PfCSP Ab responses in individual
monkeys. Moreover, the sera from the immunized monkeys remarkably blocked
sporozoite invasion of HepG2 cells. Taken together with two animal models, our
results indicate that this novel vaccine platform (BDES) has potential clinical
application as a vaccine against malaria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070819 
PMCID: PMC3741388
PMID: 23951015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

