
1. Parasitology. 2013 Dec;140(14):1741-50. doi: 10.1017/S0031182013000905. Epub 2013
Aug 19.

Next-generation sequencing reveals cryptic mtDNA diversity of Plasmodium relictum
in the Hawaiian Islands.

Jarvi SI(1), Farias ME, Lapointe DA, Belcaid M, Atkinson CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Daniel K. Inouye College of Pharmacy,
University of Hawaii at Hilo, 34 Rainbow Drive, Hilo, HI 96720, USA.

Next-generation 454 sequencing techniques were used to re-examine diversity of
mitochondrial cytochrome b lineages of avian malaria (Plasmodium relictum) in
Hawaii. We document a minimum of 23 variant lineages of the parasite based on
single nucleotide transitional changes, in addition to the previously reported
single lineage (GRW4). A new, publicly available portal (Integroomer) was
developed for initial parsing of 454 datasets. Mean variant prevalence and
frequency was higher in low elevation Hawaii Amakihi (Hemignathus virens) with
Avipoxvirus-like lesions (P = 0·001), suggesting that the variants may be
biologically distinct. By contrast, variant prevalence and frequency did not
differ significantly among mid-elevation Apapane (Himatione sanguinea) with or
without lesions (P = 0·691). The low frequency and the lack of detection of
variants independent of GRW4 suggest that multiple independent introductions of
P. relictum to Hawaii are unlikely. Multiple variants may have been introduced in
heteroplasmy with GRW4 or exist within the tandem repeat structure of the
mitochondrial genome. The discovery of multiple mitochondrial lineages of P.
relictum in Hawaii provides a measure of genetic diversity within a
geographically isolated population of this parasite and suggests the origins and 
evolution of parasite diversity may be more complicated than previously
recognized.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182013000905 
PMID: 23953131  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

