
1. J Pharm Pharm Sci. 2013;16(2):217-30.

Optimisation and validation of a high throughput screening compatible assay to
identify inhibitors of the plasma membrane calcium ATPase pump--a novel
therapeutic target for contraception and malaria.

Mohamed TM(1), Zakeri SA, Baudoin F, Wolf M, Oceandy D, Cartwright EJ, Gul S,
Neyses L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Sciences
Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.
tamer.mohamed@manchester.ac.uk

PURPOSE: ATPases, which constitute a major category of ion transporters in the
human body, have a variety of significant biological and pathological roles.
However, the lack of high throughput assays for ATPases has significantly limited
drug discovery in this area. We have recently found that the genetic deletion of 
the ATP dependent calcium pump PMCA4 (plasma membrane calcium/calmodulin
dependent ATPase, isoform 4) results in infertility in male mice due to a
selective defect in sperm motility. In addition, recent discoveries in humans
have indicated that a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the PMCA4 gene
determines the susceptibility towards malaria plasmodium infection. Therefore,
there is an urgent need to develop specific PMCA4 inhibitors. In the current
study, we aim to optimise and validate a high throughput screening compatible
assay using recombinantly expressed PMCA4 and the HTRF® Transcreener® ADP
(TR-FRET) assay to screen a drug library.
METHODS AND RESULTS: PMCA4 membrane microsomes were prepared from HEK293 cells
overexpressing PMCA4. Western blot quantification revealed nearly nine-fold
increased expression of PMCA4 compared to LacZ (control virus)-infected cells.
Maximal PMCA4 microsomal activity was achieved in the TR-FRET assay with 15ng/μl 
microsomal concentration, 30-minute pre-incubation with compounds at 37°C, and
calcium buffering with 1mM EGTA providing 1μM free-calcium. Finally a
dose-response curve for carboxyeosin (a non-specific PMCA inhibitor) under
optimised conditions showed significant PMCA4 inhibition. Upon confirmation that 
the assay was suitable for high-throughput screening, we have screened the
ChemBioNet small molecule library (~21,000 compounds) against the PMCA4 assay to 
identify those that are its apparent inhibitors. This screening yielded 1,494
primary hits.
CONCLUSIONS: We have optimised the HTRF® Transcreener® ADP assay for
high-throughput screening to identify PMCA4 inhibitors. The output of the
screening campaign has provided preliminary chemical starting points that could
be further developed to specific PMCA4 inhibitors for non-hormonal contraception 
or anti-malaria therapy.

DOI: 10.18433/j3pg68 
PMID: 23958191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

