
1. Malar J. 2013 Aug 27;12:294. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-294.

High levels of IgG3 anti ICB2-5 in Plasmodium vivax-infected individuals who did 
not develop symptoms.

Versiani FG(1), Almeida ME, Melo GC, Versiani FO, Orlandi PP, Mariúba LA, Soares 
LA, Souza LP, da Silva Balieiro AA, Monteiro WM, Costa FT, del Portillo HA,
Lacerda MV, Nogueira PA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Leônidas e Maria Deane - Fiocruz, Rua Teresina 476, 69057-070
Manaus, AM, Brazil. paulonogueira@amazonia.fiocruz.br.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax has the potential to infect 2.85 billion individuals
worldwide. Nevertheless, the limited number of studies investigating the immune
status of individuals living in malaria-endemic areas, as well as the lack of
reports investigating serological markers associated with clinical protection,
has hampered development of vaccines for P. vivax. It was previously demonstrated
that naturally total IgG against the N-terminus of P. vivax merozoite surface
protein 1 (Pv-MSP1) was associated with reduced risk of malarial infection.
METHODS: Immune response against Pv-MSP1 (N-terminus) of 313 residents of the Rio
Pardo rural settlement (Amazonas State, Brazil) was evaluated in a
cross-sectional and longitudinal follow up over two months (on site) wherein gold
standard diagnosis by thick blood smear and rRNA gene-based nested real-time PCR 
were used to discriminate symptomless Plasmodium vivax-infected individuals who
did not develop clinical symptoms during a 2-months from those uninfected ones or
who have had acute malaria. The acquisition of antibodies against Pv-MSP1 was
also evaluated as survival analysis by prospective study over a year collecting
information of new malaria infections in surveillance database.
RESULTS: The majority of P. vivax-infected individuals (52-67%) showed immune
recognition of the N-terminus of Pv-MSP1. Interesting data on infected
individuals who have not developed symptoms, total IgG levels against the
N-terminus Pv-MSP1 were age-dependent and the IgG3 levels were significantly
higher than levels of subjects had acute malaria or those uninfected ones. The
total IgG anti ICB2-5 was detected to be an important factor of protection
against new malaria vivax attacks in survival analysis in a prospective survey
(p = 0.029).
CONCLUSIONS: The study findings illustrate the importance of IgG3 associated to
2-months of symptomless in P. vivax infected individuals and open perspectives
for the rationale of malaria vaccine designs capable to sustain high levels of
IgG3 against polymorphic malaria antigens.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-294 
PMCID: PMC3844576
PMID: 23977965  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

