
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2013 Nov;57(10):1409-16. doi: 10.1093/cid/cit556. Epub 2013 Aug 
27.

Breadth of anti-merozoite antibody responses is associated with the genetic
diversity of asymptomatic Plasmodium falciparum infections and protection against
clinical malaria.

Rono J(1), Osier FH, Olsson D, Montgomery S, Mhoja L, Rooth I, Marsh K, FÃ¤rnert
A.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Unit, Department of Medicine, Solna, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Elucidating the mechanisms of naturally acquired immunity to
Plasmodium falciparum infections would be highly valuable for malaria vaccine
development. Asymptomatic multiclonal infections have been shown to predict
protection from clinical malaria in a transmission-dependent manner, but the
mechanisms underlying this are unclear. We assessed the breadth of antibody
responses to several vaccine candidate merozoite antigens in relation to the
infecting parasite population and clinical immunity.
METHODS: In a cohort study in Tanzania, 320 children aged 1-16 years who were
asymptomatic at baseline were included. We genotyped P. falciparum infections by 
targeting the msp2 gene using polymerase chain reaction and capillary
electrophoresis and measured antibodies to 7 merozoite antigens using a multiplex
assay. We assessed the correlation between the number of clones and the breadth
of the antibody response, and examined their effects on the risk of malaria
during 40 weeks of follow-up using age-adjusted multivariate regression models.
RESULTS: The antibody breadth was positively correlated with the number of clones
(RR [risk ratio], 1.63; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.32-2.02). Multiclonal
infections were associated with a nonsignificant reduction in the risk of malaria
in the absence of antibodies (RR, 0.83; 95% CI, .29-2.34). The breadth of the
antibody response was significantly associated with a reduced risk of malaria in 
the absence of infections (RR, 0.25; 95% CI, .09-.66). In combination, these
factors were associated with a lower risk of malaria than they were individually 
(RR, 0.14; 95% CI, .04-.48).
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that malaria vaccines mimicking naturally
acquired immunity should ideally induce antibody responses that can be boosted by
natural infections.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/cit556 
PMCID: PMC3805176
PMID: 23983244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

