
1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 27;8(8):e72771. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072771. eCollection
2013.

Expression profiling of Plasmodium berghei HSP70 genes for generation of bright
red fluorescent parasites.

Hliscs M(1), Nahar C, Frischknecht F, Matuschewski K.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Parasitology Unit, Berlin, Germany
; Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Australia.

Live cell imaging of recombinant malarial parasites encoding fluorescent probes
provides critical insights into parasite-host interactions and life cycle
progression. In this study, we generated a red fluorescent line of the murine
malarial parasite Plasmodium berghei. To allow constitutive and abundant
expression of the mCherry protein we profiled expression of all members of the P.
berghei heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) family. We identified PbHSP70/1, an
invariant ortholog of Plasmodium falciparum HSP70-1, as the protein with the
highest expression levels during Plasmodium blood, mosquito, and liver infection.
Stable allelic insertion of a mCherry expression cassette into the PbHsp70/1
locus created constitutive red fluorescent P. berghei lines, termed Pbred. We
show that these parasites can be used for live imaging of infected host cells and
organs, including hepatocytes, erythrocytes, and whole Anopheles mosquitoes.
Quantification of the fluorescence intensity of several Pbred parasite stages
revealed significantly enhanced signal intensities in comparison to GFP expressed
under the control of the constitutive EF1alpha promoter. We propose that
systematic transcript profiling permits generation of reporter parasites, such as
the Pbred lines described herein.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072771 
PMCID: PMC3754930
PMID: 24013507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

