
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 25;288(43):31127-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.486589. Epub
2013 Sep 10.

Toxoplasma transcription factor TgAP2XI-5 regulates the expression of genes
involved in parasite virulence and host invasion.

Walker R(1), Gissot M, Huot L, Alayi TD, Hot D, Marot G, Schaeffer-Reiss C, Van
Dorsselaer A, Kim K, Tomavo S.

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Infection and Immunity of Lille, CNRS UMR 8204, INSERM
1019, Universit√© Lille Nord de France, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 59 000 Lille,
France.

Gene regulation in apicomplexan parasites, a phylum containing important
protozoan parasites such as Plasmodium and Toxoplasma, is poorly understood. The 
life cycle of Toxoplasma gondii is complex, with multiple proliferation and
differentiation steps, of which tachyzoite proliferation is the most relevant to 
pathogenesis in humans and animals. Tachyzoites express invasion and virulence
factors that are crucial for their survival and manipulation of host cell
functions. The expression of those factors is tightly controlled during the
tachyzoite cell cycle to permit their correct packaging in newly formed apical
secretory organelles named micronemes and rhoptries in the daughter cells.
However, little is known about the factors that control the expression of genes
encoding the virulence factors present in these parasite-specific secretory
organelles. We report that the plant-like nuclear factor TgAP2XI-5 targets more
than 300 gene promoters and actively controls the transcription of these genes.
Most of these target genes, including those that are essential for parasite
virulence, showed a peak of expression in the S and M phases of the cell cycle.
Furthermore, we identified the cis-regulatory element recognized by TgAP2XI-5 and
demonstrated its ability to actively drive gene transcription. Our results
demonstrated that TgAP2XI-5 is a novel DNA sequence-specific transcription factor
associated with promoter activation. TgAP2XI-5 may regulate gene transcription of
crucial virulence factors in T. gondii.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.486589 
PMCID: PMC3829425
PMID: 24025328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

