
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(9):e1003622. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003622. Epub 2013 Sep
5.

The JNK pathway is a key mediator of Anopheles gambiae antiplasmodial immunity.

Garver LS(1), de Almeida Oliveira G, Barillas-Mury C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, United
States of America.

The innate immune system of Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes limits Plasmodium
infection through multiple molecular mechanisms. For example, midgut invasion by 
the parasite triggers an epithelial nitration response that promotes activation
of the complement-like system. We found that suppression of the JNK pathway, by
silencing either Hep, JNK, Jun or Fos expression, greatly enhanced Plasmodium
infection; while overactivating this cascade, by silencing the suppressor
Puckered, had the opposite effect. The JNK pathway limits infection via two
coordinated responses. It induces the expression of two enzymes (HPx2 and NOX5)
that potentiate midgut epithelial nitration in response to Plasmodium infection
and regulates expression of two key hemocyte-derived immune effectors (TEP1 and
FBN9). Furthermore, the An. gambiae L3-5 strain that has been genetically
selected to be refractory (R) to Plasmodium infection exhibits constitutive
overexpression of genes from the JNK pathway, as well as midgut and hemocyte
effector genes. Silencing experiments confirmed that this cascade mediates, to a 
large extent, the drastic parasite elimination phenotype characteristic of this
mosquito strain. In sum, these studies revealed the JNK pathway as a key
regulator of the ability of An. gambiae mosquitoes to limit Plasmodium infection 
and identified several effector genes mediating these responses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003622 
PMCID: PMC3764222
PMID: 24039583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

