
1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 16;8(9):e75888. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075888. eCollection
2013.

Organ-specific splice variants of aquaporin water channel AgAQP1 in the malaria
vector Anopheles gambiae.

Tsujimoto H(1), Liu K, Linser PJ, Agre P, Rasgon JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics and the Huck 
Institutes of the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Aquaporin (AQP) water channels are important for water homeostasis in
all organisms. Malaria transmission is dependent on Anopheles mosquitoes. Water
balance is a major factor influencing mosquito survival, which may indirectly
affect pathogen transmission.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We obtained full-length mRNA sequences for
Anopheles gambiae aquaporin 1 (AgAQP1) and identified two splice variants for the
gene. In vitro expression analysis showed that both variants transported water
and were inhibited by Hg(2+). One splice variant (AgAQP1A) was exclusively
expressed in adult female ovaries indicating a function in mosquito reproduction.
The other splice variant (AgAQP1B) was expressed in the midgut, malpighian
tubules and the head in adult mosquitoes. Immunolabeling showed that in
malpighian tubules, AgAQP1 is expressed in principal cells in the proximal
portion and in stellate cells in the distal portion. Moreover, AgAQP1 is
expressed in Johnston's organ (the "ear"), which is important for courtship
behavior.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest that AgAQP1 may play roles
associated with mating (courtship) and reproduction in addition to water
homeostasis in this important African malaria vector.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075888 
PMCID: PMC3774814
PMID: 24066188  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

