
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Dec;1828(12):2908-15. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamem.2013.04.017.

The roles of intramembrane proteases in protozoan parasites.

Sibley LD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address: sibley@wustl.edu.

Intramembrane proteolysis is widely conserved throughout different forms of life,
with three major types of proteases being known for their ability to cleave
peptide bonds directly within the transmembrane domains of their substrates.
Although intramembrane proteases have been extensively studied in humans and
model organisms, they have only more recently been investigated in protozoan
parasites, where they turn out to play important and sometimes unexpected roles. 
Signal peptide peptidases are involved in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) quality
control and signal peptide degradation from exported proteins. Recent studies
suggest that repurposing inhibitors developed for blocking presenilins may be
useful for inhibiting the growth of Plasmodium, and possibly other protozoan
parasites, by blocking signal peptide peptidases. Rhomboid proteases, originally 
described in the fly, are also widespread in parasites, and are especially
expanded in apicomplexans. Their study in parasites has revealed novel roles that
expand our understanding of how these proteases function. Within this diverse
group of parasites, rhomboid proteases contribute to processing of adhesins
involved in attachment, invasion, intracellular replication, phagocytosis, and
immune evasion, placing them at the vertex of host-parasite interactions. This
article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Intramembrane Proteases.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2013.04.017 
PMCID: PMC3793208
PMID: 24099008  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

