
1. J Microbiol Methods. 2013 Dec;95(3):313-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2013.09.017. Epub
2013 Oct 3.

ApicoAMP: the first computational model for identifying apicoplast-targeted
transmembrane proteins in Apicomplexa.

Cilingir G(1), Lau AO, Broschat SL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA 99164, USA.

BACKGROUND: Computational identification of apicoplast-targeted proteins is
important in drug target determination for diseases such as malaria. While there 
are established methods for identifying proteins with a bipartite signal in
multiple species of Apicomplexa, not all apicoplast-targeted proteins possess
this bipartite signature. The publication of recent experimental findings of
apicoplast membrane proteins, called transmembrane proteins, that do not possess 
a bipartite signal has made it feasible to devise a machine learning approach for
identifying this new class of apicoplast-targeted proteins computationally.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this work, we develop a method for predicting 
apicoplast-targeted transmembrane proteins for multiple species of Apicomplexa,
whereby several classifiers trained on different feature sets and based on
different algorithms are evaluated and combined in an ensemble classification
model to obtain the best expected performance. The feature sets considered are
the hydrophobicity and composition characteristics of amino acids over
transmembrane domains, the existence of short sequence motifs over cytosolically 
disposed regions, and Gene Ontology (GO) terms associated with given proteins.
Our model, ApicoAMP, is an ensemble classification model that combines decisions 
of classifiers following the majority vote principle. ApicoAMP is trained on a
set of proteins from 11 apicomplexan species and achieves 91% overall expected
accuracy.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: ApicoAMP is the first computational model capable of
identifying apicoplast-targeted transmembrane proteins in Apicomplexa. The
ApicoAMP prediction software is available at http://code.google.com/p/apicoamp/
and http://bcb.eecs.wsu.edu.

Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mimet.2013.09.017 
PMID: 24095682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

