
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 15;288(46):33427-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.505289. Epub
2013 Oct 4.

Crystal and solution studies of the "Plus-C" odorant-binding protein 48 from
Anopheles gambiae: control of binding specificity through three-dimensional
domain swapping.

Tsitsanou KE(1), Drakou CE, Thireou T, Vitlin Gruber A, Kythreoti G, Azem A,
Fessas D, Eliopoulos E, Iatrou K, Zographos SE.

Author information: 
(1)From the Institute of Biology, Medicinal Chemistry and Biotechnology, National
Hellenic Research Foundation, 48 Vassileos Constantinou Avenue, 11635 Athens,
Greece.

Much physiological and behavioral evidence has been provided suggesting that
insect odorant-binding proteins (OBPs) are indispensable for odorant recognition 
and thus are appealing targets for structure-based discovery and design of novel 
host-seeking disruptors. Despite the fact that more than 60 putative OBP-encoding
genes have been identified in the malaria vector Anopheles gambiae, the crystal
structures of only six of them are known. It is therefore clear that OBP
structure determination constitutes the bottleneck for structure-based approaches
to mosquito repellent/attractant discovery. Here, we describe the
three-dimensional structure of an A. gambiae "Plus-C" group OBP (AgamOBP48),
which exhibits the second highest expression levels in female antennae. This
structure represents the first example of a three-dimensional domain-swapped
dimer in dipteran species. A combined binding site is formed at the dimer
interface by equal contribution of each monomer. Structural comparisons with the 
monomeric AgamOBP47 revealed that the major structural difference between the two
Plus-C proteins localizes in their N- and C-terminal regions, and their concerted
conformational change may account for monomer-swapped dimer conversion and
furthermore the formation of novel binding pockets. Using a combination of gel
filtration chromatography, differential scanning calorimetry, and analytical
ultracentrifugation, we demonstrate the AgamOBP48 dimerization in solution.
Eventually, molecular modeling calculations were used to predict the binding mode
of the most potent synthetic ligand of AgamOBP48 known so far, discovered by
ligand- and structure-based virtual screening. The structure-aided identification
of multiple OBP binders represents a powerful tool to be employed in the effort
to control transmission of the vector-borne diseases.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.505289 
PMCID: PMC3829188
PMID: 24097978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

