
1. Infect Dis Poverty. 2013 Oct 3;2(1):24. doi: 10.1186/2049-9957-2-24.

Co-infections with Babesia microti and Plasmodium parasites along the
China-Myanmar border.

Zhou X(1), Li SG, Chen SB, Wang JZ, Xu B, Zhou HJ, Ge HX, Chen JH, Hu W.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, WHO Collaborating Centre for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and
Filariasis, Key Laboratory of Parasite & Vector Biology Ministry of Health,
Shanghai 200025, China. huw@fudan.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Babesiosis is an emerging health risk in several parts of the world. 
However, little is known about the prevalence of Babesia in malaria-endemic
countries. The area along the China-Myanmar border in Yunnan is a main endemic
area of malaria in P.R. China, however, human infection with Babesia microti (B. 
microti) is not recognized in this region, and its profile of co-infection is not
yet clear.
METHODS: To understand its profile of co-infections with B. microti, our
investigation was undertaken in the malaria-endemic area along the China-Myanmar 
border in Yunnan between April 2012 and June 2013. Four parasite species,
including B. microti, Plasmodium falciparum (P. falciparum), P. vivax, and P.
malariae, were identified among 449 suspected febrile persons detected by nested 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay based on small subunit ribosomal
ribonucleic acid (RNA) genes of B. microti and Plasmodium spp.
RESULTS: Of all the collected samples from febrile patients, mono-infection with 
B. microti, P. vivax, P. falciparum, and P. malariae accounted for 1.8% (8/449), 
9.8% (44/449), 2.9% (13/449), and 0.2% (1/449), respectively. The rate of mixed
infections of B. microti with P. falciparum or P. vivax are both 0.2% (1/449),
and mixed infections of P. falciparum and P. vivax accounted for 1.1% (5/449).
CONCLUSIONS: This report supports the hypothesis that babesiosis caused by B.
microti is emerging along the China-Myanmar border in the Yunnan province, P.R.
China, but it was ignored because of low parasitemia or mixed infection with
Plasmodium spp. More sensitive and specific diagnosis methods are needed to find 
the rapid response mechanism of emergency for babesiosis and malaria
co-prevalence areas.

DOI: 10.1186/2049-9957-2-24 
PMCID: PMC3819642
PMID: 24090043 

