
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jan;1838(1 Pt B):185-92. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamem.2013.09.014. Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Interaction of Plasmodium falciparum knob-associated histidine-rich protein
(KAHRP) with erythrocyte ankyrin R is required for its attachment to the
erythrocyte membrane.

Weng H(1), Guo X, Papoin J, Wang J, Coppel R, Mohandas N, An X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Membrane Biology, New York Blood Center, New York, NY 10065,
USA; Department of Bioengineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450051, China.

The malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum exports a large number of proteins
into the erythrocyte cytoplasm during the asexual intraerythrocytic stage of its 
life cycle. A subset of these proteins interacts with erythrocyte membrane
skeletal proteins and grossly alters the structure and function of the membrane. 
Several of the exported proteins, such as PfEMP1, PfEMP3, RESA and KAHRP,
interact with the preponderant erythrocyte skeleton protein, spectrin. Here we
have searched for possible interaction of these four malaria proteins with
another major erythrocyte skeleton protein, ankyrin R. We have shown that KAHRP, 
but none of the other three, binds to ankyrin R. We have mapped the binding site 
for ankyrin R to a 79-residue segment of the KAHRP sequence, and the reciprocal
binding site for KAHRP in ankyrin R to a subdomain (D3) of the 89kDa ankyrin R
membrane-binding domain. Interaction of intact ankyrin R with KAHRP was inhibited
by the free D3 subdomain. When, moreover, red cells loaded with the soluble D3
subdomain were infected with P. falciparum, KAHRP secreted by the
intraerythrocytic parasite no longer migrated to the host cell membrane, but
remained diffusely distributed throughout the cytosol. Our findings suggest a
potentially important role for interaction of KAHRP with red cell membrane
skeleton in promoting the adhesion of malaria-infected red cells to endothelial
surfaces, a central element in the pathophysiology of malaria.

Â© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2013.09.014 
PMCID: PMC4403245
PMID: 24090929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

