
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2013 Oct 9;13:469. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-13-469.

Distribution of erythrocyte binding antigen 175 (EBA-175) gene dimorphic alleles 
in Plasmodium falciparum field isolates from Sudan.

Adam AA(1), Amine AA, Hassan DA, Omer WH, Nour BY, Jebakumar AZ, Ibrahim ME,
Abdulhadi NH, Mohamed HS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Endemic Diseases, University of Khartoum, P,O, Box 102, Khartoum,
Sudan. hibasalah@iend.org.

BACKGROUND: The Erythrocyte Binding Antigen (EBA) 175 has been considered as one 
of the most important Plasmodium falciparum (P. falciparum) merozoite ligands
that mediate invasion of the erythrocytes through their sialated receptor:
Glycophorin A (GPA). The effect of the EBA 175 dimorphic alleles (F and C) on the
severity of the disease is not yet fully understood. Therefore this study was
designed to assess the distribution of the divergent dimorphic alleles of P.
falciparum EBA-175 (F and C) in three different geographical areas in Sudan and
the possible association of this dimorphism with the severity of the disease.
METHODS: A sum of 339 field isolates of P. falciparum obtained from patients in
three different geographical areas in Sudan were screened for the dimorphic
alleles (F, C) of the EBA-175 using nested PCR.
RESULTS: The percentage of F, C, and mixed F/C alleles were; 41%, 51%, and 8%
respectively. F and C alleles showed significantly different distributions in the
various geographic areas (p = 0.00). There was no significant association between
malaria clinical manifestation and P. falciparum EBA-175 F and C alleles
frequencies.
CONCLUSIONS: This study showed a significant differential distribution of F and C
alleles in different geographical malaria endemic areas. No significant
association was observed between F and C alleles and different malaria
phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2334-13-469 
PMCID: PMC3851876
PMID: 24103447  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

