
1. Med Sante Trop. 2013 Jul-Sep;23(3):313-9. doi: 10.1684/mst.2013.0229.

[Efficacy and safety of antimalarial combinations for treatment of uncomplicated 
malaria in children in Bangui, Central African Republic].

[Article in French]

Nambei WS(1), Lango Yaya E, Pounguinza S, Achonduh O, Bogon A, Lengande R, Evehe 
MS, Ekollo Mbange AH, Mbacham W.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'immunologie, de biologie moléculaire et de biochimie, Laboratoire
national de biologie et santé publique et de la population, Unité de
chimiorésistance du paludisme, 1426 Bangui, République centrafricaine.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of three
anti-malarial combinations--artemether-lumefantrine (A-L),
amodiaquine-sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (AQ-SP), and artesunate-amodiaquine
(AQ-AS)--in the treatment of uncomplicated malaria in children younger than 5
years in Bangui, Central African Republic.
METHODOLOGY: This study included 186 children aged 6-59 months with uncomplicated
falciparum malaria who were treated at the Bédé Combattant Hospital from July
through October 2010: 63 randomized to receive A-L, 63 AQ-SP, and 60 AQ-AS.
Clinical outcome was classified according to WHO criteria as early treatment
failure (ETF), late clinical failure (LCF), late parasitological failure (LPF),
or adequate clinical and parasitological response (ACPR). The occurrence of
mutations in the pfcrt, pfmdr-1, dhfr and dhps genes was studied by PCR-RFLP.
RESULTS: After PCR correction, ACPR at D28 was 100% for A-L, 96.55% for AQ-SP,
and 100% for AQ-AS, with no significant difference between the three combinations
(p = 0.36). The 2 cases of treatment failure for AQ-SP were associated with
mutations at the following resistance markers: Pfcrt 76T, PfmdrI 86Y, Dhfr 108N, 
and Dhps A437. There was no significant difference in the reduction of anemia,
fever (p = 0.87), or parasitemia (p = 0.63) between the three combinations.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that artemisinin-based combinations are still
effective and tolerated in the treatment of uncomplicated malaria in children
younger than 5 years in Bangui. Treatment failures were due to new infections and
mutations in resistance markers.

DOI: 10.1684/mst.2013.0229 
PMID: 24122669  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

