
1. Eukaryot Cell. 2013 Dec;12(12):1653-63. doi: 10.1128/EC.00222-13. Epub 2013 Oct
11.

Expression of functional Plasmodium falciparum enzymes using a wheat germ
cell-free system.

Mudeppa DG(1), Rathod PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

One decade after the sequencing of the Plasmodium falciparum genome, 95% of
malaria proteins in the genome cannot be expressed in traditional cell-based
expression systems, and the targets of the best new leads for antimalarial drug
discovery are either not known or not available in functional form. For a disease
that kills up to 1 million people per year, routine expression of recombinant
malaria proteins in functional form is needed both for the discovery of new
therapeutics and for identification of targets of new drugs. We tested the
general utility of cell-free systems for expressing malaria enzymes. Thirteen
test enzyme sequences were reverse amplified from total RNA, cloned into a
plant-like expression vector, and subjected to cell-free expression in a wheat
germ system. Protein electrophoresis and autoradiography confirmed the synthesis 
of products of expected molecular masses. In rare problematic cases, truncated
products were avoided by using synthetic genes carrying wheat codons. Scaled-up
production generated 39 to 354 Î¼g of soluble protein per 10 mg of translation
lysate. Compared to rare proteins where cell-based systems do produce functional 
proteins, the cell-free yields are comparable or better. All 13 test products
were enzymatically active, without failure. This general path to produce
functional malaria proteins should now allow the community to access new tools,
such as biologically active protein arrays, and lead to the discovery of new
chemical functions, structures, and inhibitors of previously inaccessible malaria
gene products.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.00222-13 
PMCID: PMC3889570
PMID: 24123271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

