
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Jan;82(1):243-52. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00931-13. Epub 2013 Oct 28.

Characteristic age distribution of Plasmodium vivax infections after malaria
elimination on Aneityum Island, Vanuatu.

Kaneko A(1), Chaves LF, Taleo G, Kalkoa M, Isozumi R, Wickremasinghe R, Perlmann 
H, Takeo S, Tsuboi T, Tachibana S, Kimura M, Bj√∂rkman A, Troye-Blomberg M, Tanabe
K, Drakeley C.

Author information: 
(1)Island Malaria Group, Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Resurgence is a major concern after malaria elimination. After the initiation of 
the elimination program on Aneityum Island in 1991, microscopy showed that
Plasmodium falciparum disappeared immediately, whereas P. vivax disappeared from 
1996 onward, until P. vivax cases were reported in January 2002. By conducting
malariometric surveys of the entire population of Aneityum, we investigated the
age distribution of individuals with parasites during this epidemic in the
context of antimalarial antibody levels and parasite antigen diversity. In July
2002, P. vivax infections were detected by microscopy in 22/759 individuals:
20/298 born after the beginning of the elimination program in 1991, 2/126 born
between 1982 and 1991, and none of 335 born before 1982. PCR increased the number
of infections detected to 77, distributed among all age groups. Prevalences were 
12.1%, 16.7%, and 6.0%, respectively (P < 0.001). In November, a similar age
pattern was found, but with fewer infections: 6/746 and 39/741 individuals were
found to be infected by microscopy and PCR, respectively. The frequencies of
antibody responses to P. vivax were significantly higher in individuals born
before 1991 than in younger age groups and were similar to those on Malakula
Island, an area of endemicity. Remarkably low antigen diversity (h, 0.15) of P.
vivax infections was observed on Aneityum compared with the other islands (h,
0.89 to 1.0). A P. vivax resurgence was observed among children and teenagers on 
Aneityum, an age distribution similar to those before elimination and on islands 
where P. vivax is endemic, suggesting that in the absence of significant
exposure, immunity may persist, limiting infection levels in adults. The limited 
parasite gene pool on islands may contribute to this protection.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00931-13 
PMCID: PMC3911855
PMID: 24166950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

