
1. Malar J. 2013 Oct 30;12:381. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-381.

Identification and characterization of the merozoite surface protein 1 (msp1)
gene in a host-generalist avian malaria parasite, Plasmodium relictum (lineages
SGS1 and GRW4) with the use of blood transcriptome.

Hellgren O(1), Kutzer M, Bensch S, ValkiÅ«nas G, Palinauskas V.

Author information: 
(1)MEEL Department of Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
olof.hellgren@biol.lu.se.

BACKGROUND: The merozoite surface protein 1 (msp1) is one of the most studied
vaccine candidate genes in mammalian Plasmodium spp. to have been used for
investigations of epidemiology, population structures, and immunity to
infections. However methodological difficulties have impeded the use of nuclear
markers such as msp1 in Plasmodium parasites causing avian malaria. Data from an 
infection transcriptome of the host generalist avian malaria parasite Plasmodium 
relictum was used to identify and characterize the msp1 gene from two different
isolates (mtDNA lineages SGS1 and GRW4). The aim was to investigate whether the
msp1 gene in avian malaria species shares the properties of the msp1 gene in
Plasmodium falciparum in terms of block variability, conserved anchor points and 
repeat motifs, and further to investigate the degree to which the gene might be
informative in avian malaria parasites for population and epidemiological
studies.
METHODS: Reads from 454 sequencing of birds infected with avian malaria was used 
to develop Sanger sequencing protocols for the msp1 gene of P. relictum. Genetic 
variability between variable and conserved blocks of the gene was compared within
and between avian malaria parasite species, including P. falciparum. Genetic
variability of the msp1 gene in P. relictum was compared with six other nuclear
genes and the mtDNA gene cytochrome b.
RESULTS: The msp1 gene of P. relictum shares the same general pattern of variable
and conserved blocks as found in P. falciparum, although the variable blocks
exhibited less variability than P. falciparum. The variation across the gene
blocks in P. falciparum spanned from being as conserved as within species
variation in P. relictum to being as variable as between the two avian malaria
species (P. relictum and Plasmodium gallinaceum) in the variable blocks. In P.
relictum the highly conserved p19 region of the peptide was identified, which
included two epidermal growth factor-like domains and a fully conserved GPI
anchor point.
CONCLUSION: This study provides protocols for evaluation of the msp1 gene in the 
avian malaria generalist parasite P. relictum. The msp1 gene in avian Plasmodium 
shares the genetic properties seen in P. falciparum, indicating evolutionary
conserved functions for the gene. The data on the variable blocks of the gene
show that the msp1 gene in P. relictum might serve as a good candidate gene for
future population and epidemiological studies of the parasite.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-381 
PMCID: PMC3827925
PMID: 24172200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

