
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2014 Feb;31(2):288-302. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mst211. Epub 2013 Oct 
30.

Origin and differential selection of allelic variation at TAS2R16 associated with
salicin bitter taste sensitivity in Africa.

Campbell MC(1), Ranciaro A, Zinshteyn D, Rawlings-Goss R, Hirbo J, Thompson S,
Woldemeskel D, Froment A, Rucker JB, Omar SA, Bodo JM, Nyambo T, Belay G, Drayna 
D, Breslin PA, Tishkoff SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania.

Bitter taste perception influences human nutrition and health, and the genetic
variation underlying this trait may play a role in disease susceptibility. To
better understand the genetic architecture and patterns of phenotypic variability
of bitter taste perception, we sequenced a 996 bp region, encompassing the coding
exon of TAS2R16, a bitter taste receptor gene, in 595 individuals from 74 African
populations and in 94 non-Africans from 11 populations. We also performed
genotype-phenotype association analyses of threshold levels of sensitivity to
salicin, a bitter anti-inflammatory compound, in 296 individuals from Central and
East Africa. In addition, we characterized TAS2R16 mutants in vitro to
investigate the effects of polymorphic loci identified at this locus on receptor 
function. Here, we report striking signatures of positive selection, including
significant Fay and Wu's H statistics predominantly in East Africa, indicating
strong local adaptation and greater genetic structure among African populations
than expected under neutrality. Furthermore, we observed a "star-like" phylogeny 
for haplotypes with the derived allele at polymorphic site 516 associated with
increased bitter taste perception that is consistent with a model of selection
for "high-sensitivity" variation. In contrast, haplotypes carrying the
"low-sensitivity" ancestral allele at site 516 showed evidence of strong
purifying selection. We also demonstrated, for the first time, the functional
effect of nonsynonymous variation at site 516 on salicin phenotypic variance in
vivo in diverse Africans and showed that most other nonsynonymous substitutions
have weak or no effect on cell surface expression in vitro, suggesting that one
main polymorphism at TAS2R16 influences salicin recognition. Additionally, we
detected geographic differences in levels of bitter taste perception in Africa
not previously reported and infer an East African origin for high salicin
sensitivity in human populations.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/mst211 
PMCID: PMC3907056
PMID: 24177185  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

