
1. Physiol Genomics. 2014 Jan 1;46(1):1-16. doi: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00044.2013.
Epub 2013 Oct 29.

Host susceptibility to malaria in human and mice: compatible approaches to
identify potential resistant genes.

Hernandez-Valladares M(1), Rihet P, Iraqi FA.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research/Public Health Operations, Granada, Spain;

There is growing evidence for human genetic factors controlling the outcome of
malaria infection, while molecular basis of this genetic control is still poorly 
understood. Case-control and family-based studies have been carried out to
identify genes underlying host susceptibility to malarial infection. Parasitemia 
and mild malaria have been genetically linked to human chromosomes 5q31-q33 and
6p21.3, and several immune genes located within those regions have been
associated with malaria-related phenotypes. Association and linkage studies of
resistance to malaria are not easy to carry out in human populations, because of 
the difficulty in surveying a significant number of families. Murine models have 
proven to be an excellent genetic tool for studying host response to malaria;
their use allowed mapping 14 resistance loci, eight of them controlling parasitic
levels and six controlling cerebral malaria. Once quantitative trait loci or
genes have been identified, the human ortholog may then be identified.
Comparative mapping studies showed that a couple of human and mouse might share
similar genetically controlled mechanisms of resistance. In this way, char8,
which controls parasitemia, was mapped on chromosome 11; char8 corresponds to
human chromosome 5q31-q33 and contains immune genes, such as Il3, Il4, Il5,
Il12b, Il13, Irf1, and Csf2. Nevertheless, part of the genetic factors
controlling malaria traits might differ in both hosts because of specific
host-pathogen interactions. Finally, novel genetic tools including animal models 
were recently developed and will offer new opportunities for identifying genetic 
factors underlying host phenotypic response to malaria, which will help in better
therapeutic strategies including vaccine and drug development.

DOI: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00044.2013 
PMID: 24170032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

