
1. BMC Microbiol. 2013 Nov 6;13:244. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-13-244.

Homology blocks of Plasmodium falciparum var genes and clinically distinct forms 
of severe malaria in a local population.

Rorick MM(1), Rask TS, Baskerville EB, Day KP, Pascual M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, 2019
Kraus Nat, Sci, Bldg,, 830 North University Ave, Ann Arbor 48109-1048, Michigan, 
USA. mmrorick@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The primary target of the human immune response to the malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum, P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1
(PfEMP1), is encoded by the members of the hyper-diverse var gene family. The
parasite exhibits antigenic variation via mutually exclusive expression
(switching) of the ~60 var genes within its genome. It is thought that different 
variants exhibit different host endothelial binding preferences that in turn
result in different manifestations of disease.
RESULTS: Var sequences comprise ancient sequence fragments, termed homology
blocks (HBs), that recombine at exceedingly high rates. We use HBs to define
distinct var types within a local population. We then reanalyze a dataset that
contains clinical and var expression data to investigate whether the HBs allow
for a description of sequence diversity corresponding to biological function,
such that it improves our ability to predict disease phenotype from parasite
genetics. We find that even a generic set of HBs, which are defined for a small
number of non-local parasites: capture the majority of local sequence diversity; 
improve our ability to predict disease severity from parasite genetics; and
reveal a previously hypothesized yet previously unobserved parasite genetic basis
for two forms of severe disease. We find that the expression rates of some HBs
correlate more strongly with severe disease phenotypes than the expression rates 
of classic var DBLÎ± tag types, and principal components of HB expression rate
profiles further improve genotype-phenotype models. More specifically, within the
large Kenyan dataset that is the focus of this study, we observe that HB
expression differs significantly for severe versus mild disease, and for
rosetting versus impaired consciousness associated severe disease. The analysis
of a second much smaller dataset from Mali suggests that these HB-phenotype
associations are consistent across geographically distant populations, since we
find evidence suggesting that the same HB-phenotype associations characterize
this population as well.
CONCLUSIONS: The distinction between rosetting versus impaired consciousness
associated var genes has not been described previously, and it could have
important implications for monitoring, intervention and diagnosis. Moreover, our 
results have the potential to illuminate the molecular mechanisms underlying the 
complex spectrum of severe disease phenotypes associated with malaria--an
important objective given that only about 1% of P. falciparum infections result
in severe disease.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-13-244 
PMCID: PMC3827005
PMID: 24192078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

