
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Dec 10;110(50):20129-34. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1319857110. Epub 2013 Nov 20.

Malaria life cycle intensifies both natural selection and random genetic drift.

Chang HH(1), Moss EL, Park DJ, Ndiaye D, Mboup S, Volkman SK, Sabeti PC, Wirth
DF, Neafsey DE, Hartl DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138.

Analysis of genome sequences of 159 isolates of Plasmodium falciparum from
Senegal yields an extraordinarily high proportion (26.85%) of protein-coding
genes with the ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous polymorphism greater than
one. This proportion is much greater than observed in other organisms. Also
unusual is that the site-frequency spectra of synonymous and nonsynonymous
polymorphisms are virtually indistinguishable. We hypothesized that the
complicated life cycle of malaria parasites might lead to qualitatively different
population genetics from that predicted from the classical Wright-Fisher (WF)
model, which assumes a single random-mating population with a finite and constant
population size in an organism with nonoverlapping generations. This paper
summarizes simulation studies of random genetic drift and selection in malaria
parasites that take into account their unusual life history. Our results show
that random genetic drift in the malaria life cycle is more pronounced than under
the WF model. Paradoxically, the efficiency of purifying selection in the malaria
life cycle is also greater than under WF, and the relative efficiency of positive
selection varies according to conditions. Additionally, the site-frequency
spectrum under neutrality is also more skewed toward low-frequency alleles than
expected with WF. These results highlight the importance of considering the
malaria life cycle when applying existing population genetic tools based on the
WF model. The same caveat applies to other species with similarly complex life
cycles.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1319857110 
PMCID: PMC3864301
PMID: 24259712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

