
1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 18;8(11):e79323. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079323.
eCollection 2013.

Extended safety, immunogenicity and efficacy of a blood-stage malaria vaccine in 
malian children: 24-month follow-up of a randomized, double-blinded phase 2
trial.

Laurens MB(1), Thera MA, Coulibaly D, Ouattara A, Kone AK, Guindo AB, Traore K,
Traore I, Kouriba B, Diallo DA, Diarra I, Daou M, Dolo A, Tolo Y, Sissoko MS,
Niangaly A, Sissoko M, Takala-Harrison S, Lyke KE, Wu Y, Blackwelder WC, Godeaux 
O, Vekemans J, Dubois MC, Ballou WR, Cohen J, Dube T, Soisson L, Diggs CL, House 
B, Bennett JW, Lanar DE, Dutta S, Heppner DG, Plowe CV, Doumbo OK.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Group, Howard Hughes Medical Institute/Center for Vaccine Development,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of 
America.

BACKGROUND: The FMP2.1/AS02A candidate malaria vaccine was tested in a Phase 2
study in Mali. Based on results from the first eight months of follow-up, the
vaccine appeared well-tolerated and immunogenic. It had no significant efficacy
based on the primary endpoint, clinical malaria, but marginal efficacy against
clinical malaria in secondary analyses, and high allele-specific efficacy.
Extended follow-up was conducted to evaluate extended safety, immunogenicity and 
efficacy.
METHODS: A randomized, double-blinded trial of safety, immunogenicity and
efficacy of the candidate Plasmodium falciparum apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1) 
vaccine FMP2.1/AS02A was conducted in Bandiagara, Mali. Children aged 1-6 years
were randomized in a 1∶1 ratio to receive FMP2.1/AS02A or control rabies vaccine 
on days 0, 30 and 60. Using active and passive surveillance, clinical malaria and
adverse events as well as antibodies against P. falciparum AMA1 were monitored
for 24 months after the first vaccination, spanning two malaria seasons.
FINDINGS: 400 children were enrolled. Serious adverse events occurred in nine
participants in the FMP2.1/AS02A group and three in the control group; none was
considered related to study vaccination. After two years, anti-AMA1 immune
responses remained significantly higher in the FMP2.1/AS02A group than in the
control group. For the entire 24-month follow-up period, vaccine efficacy was
7.6% (p = 0.51) against first clinical malaria episodes and 9.9% (p = 0.19)
against all malaria episodes. For the final 16-month follow-up period, vaccine
efficacy was 0.9% (p = 0.98) against all malaria episodes. Allele-specific
efficacy seen in the first malaria season did not extend into the second season
of follow-up.
INTERPRETATION: Allele-specific vaccine efficacy was not sustained in the second 
malaria season, despite continued high levels of anti-AMA1 antibodies. This study
presents an opportunity to evaluate correlates of partial protection against
clinical malaria that waned during the second malaria season.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov NCT00460525 NCT00460525.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079323 
PMCID: PMC3832522
PMID: 24260195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

