
1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 20;8(11):e79059. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079059.
eCollection 2013.

A process similar to autophagy is associated with cytocidal chloroquine
resistance in Plasmodium falciparum.

Gaviria D(1), Paguio MF, Turnbull LB, Tan A, Siriwardana A, Ghosh D, Ferdig MT,
Sinai AP, Roepe PD.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Chemistry and of Biochemistry, Cellular and Molecular Biology, 
Georgetown University, Washington, District of Columbia, United States of
America.

Resistance to the cytostatic activity of the antimalarial drug chloroquine (CQ)
is becoming well understood, however, resistance to cytocidal effects of CQ is
largely unexplored. We find that PfCRT mutations that almost fully recapitulate
P. falciparum cytostatic CQ resistance (CQR(CS)) as quantified by CQ IC50 shift, 
account for only 10-20% of cytocidal CQR (CQR(CC)) as quantified by CQ LD50
shift. Quantitative trait loci (QTL) analysis of the progeny of a chloroquine
sensitive (CQS; strain HB3)Ã—chloroquine resistant (CQR; strain Dd2) genetic cross
identifies distinct genetic architectures for CQR(CS) vs CQR(CC) phenotypes,
including identification of novel interacting chromosomal loci that influence CQ 
LD50. Candidate genes in these loci are consistent with a role for autophagy in
CQR(CC), leading us to directly examine the autophagy pathway in
intraerythrocytic CQR parasites. Indirect immunofluorescence of RBC infected with
synchronized CQS vs CQR trophozoite stage parasites reveals differences in the
distribution of the autophagy marker protein PfATG8 coinciding with CQR(CC).
Taken together, the data show that an unusual autophagy-like process is either
activated or inhibited for intraerythrocytic trophozoite parasites at LD50 doses 
(but not IC50 doses) of CQ, that the pathway is altered in CQR P. falciparum, and
that it may contribute along with mutations in PfCRT to confer the CQR(CC)
phenotype.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079059 
PMCID: PMC3835802
PMID: 24278114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

