
1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 4;8(12):e79861. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079861. eCollection
2013.

Microarray and RNAi analysis of P450s in Anopheles gambiae male and female
steroidogenic tissues: CYP307A1 is required for ecdysteroid synthesis.

Pondeville E(1), David JP, Guittard E, Maria A, Jacques JC, Ranson H, Bourgouin
C, Dauphin-Villemant C.

Author information: 
(1)Biogenèse des Stéroïdes, FRE2852, CNRS-UPMC, Paris, France ; Unit of Insect
Vector Genetics and Genomics, Department of Parasitology and Mycology, CNRS Unit 
URA3012: Hosts, Vectors and Infectious Agents, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

In insects, the steroid hormone 20-hydroxyecdysone (20E) coordinates major
developmental transitions. While the first and the final steps of 20E
biosynthesis are characterized, the pathway from 7-dehydrocholesterol to
5β-ketodiol, commonly referred as the "black box", remains hypothetical and
whether there are still unidentified enzymes is unknown. The black box would
include some oxidative steps, which are believed to be mediated by P450 enzymes. 
To identify new enzyme(s) involved in steroid synthesis, we analyzed by
small-scale microarray the expression of all the genes encoding P450 enzymes of
the malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae in active steroidogenic organs of adults, 
ovaries from blood-fed females and male reproductive tracts, compared to inactive
steroidogenic organs, ovaries from non-blood-fed females. Some genes encoding
P450 enzymes were specifically overexpressed in female ovaries after a blood-meal
or in male reproductive tracts but only three genes were found to be
overexpressed in active steroidogenic organs of both females and males: cyp307a1,
cyp4g16 and cyp6n1. Among these genes, only cyp307a1 has an expression pattern
similar to other mosquito steroidogenic genes. Moreover, loss-of-function by
transient RNAi targeting cyp307a1 disrupted ecdysteroid production demonstrating 
that this gene is required for ecdysteroid biosynthesis in Anopheles gambiae.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079861 
PMCID: PMC3851169
PMID: 24324583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

