
1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 9;8(12):e81329. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081329. eCollection
2013.

CXCL10 gene promoter polymorphism -1447A>G correlates with plasma CXCL10 levels
and is associated with male susceptibility to cerebral malaria.

Wilson N(1), Driss A(1), Solomon W(1), Dickinson-Copeland C(1), Salifu H(1), Jain
V(2), Singh N(3), Stiles J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Immunology, Morehouse School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.
(2)Regional Medical Research Center for Tribals (ICMR), Nagpur Road, Garha,
Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India.
(3)Regional Medical Research Center for Tribals (ICMR), Nagpur Road, Garha,
Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India ; National Institute of Malaria Research Field
Unit (ICMR), Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India.

The risk factors for cerebral malaria (CM) and the wide variation in clinical
manifestations of malaria are poorly understood. Recent studies indicate that
interferon gamma inducible chemokine, CXCL10, is a strong predictor of both human
and experimental cerebral malaria. Increased plasma and cerebrospinal fluid
levels of CXCL10 were tightly associated with fatal CM in Indian and Ghanaian
patients. In the present study, we hypothesized that in a subset of malaria
patients, CM susceptibility is associated with variation in CXCL10 expression. We
determined whether polymorphisms in the CXCL10 gene promoter region played a role
in the clinical status of malaria patients and addressed the genetic basis of
CXCL10 expression during malaria infection. Following extensive bioinformatics
analyses, two reported single nucleotide polymorphisms in the CXCL10 promoter
(-135G>A [rs56061981] and -1447A>G [rs4508917]) were identified among 66 CM and
69 non-CM Indian patients using PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism
assay. Individuals with the -1447(A/G) genotype were susceptible to CM (adjusted 
odds ratio [AOR] = 2.60, 95% CI = 1.51-5.85, p = 0.021). In addition, individuals
with the -1447(A/G) genotype had significantly higher plasma CXCL10 levels than
individuals with the -1447(A/A) genotype. Stratifying patients according to
gender, the observed association of CM with over expression of CXCL10 were more
pronounced in males than in female patients (AOR = 5.47, 95% CI = 1.34-22.29,
p = 0.018). Furthermore, -135G>A polymorphism conferred a decreased risk of CM
among males (AOR = 0.19, 95% CI = 0.05-0.78, p = 0.021). Polymorphisms in the
CXCL10 gene promoter sequence were associated with increased CXCL10 production,
which is linked to severity of CM. These results suggest that the -1447A>G
polymorphism in CXCL10 gene promoter could be partly responsible for the reported
variation underlying severity of CM outcomes particularly in males.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081329 
PMCID: PMC3857834
PMID: 24349056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

