
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2013 Dec 28;13:608. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-13-608.

Natural antibody response to Plasmodium falciparum merozoite antigens MSP5, MSP9 
and EBA175 is associated to clinical protection in the Brazilian Amazon.

Medeiros MM, Fotoran WL, dalla Martha RC, Katsuragawa TH, Pereira da Silva LH,
Wunderlich G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. gwunder@usp.br.

BACKGROUND: Antibodies have an essential role in the acquired immune response
against blood stage P. falciparum infection. Although several antigens have been 
identified as important antibody targets, it is still elusive which antigens have
to be recognized for clinical protection. Herein, we analyzed antibodies from
plasmas from symptomatic or asymptomatic individuals living in the same
geographic area in the Western Amazon, measuring their recognition of multiple
merozoite antigens.
METHODS: Specific fragments of genes encoding merozoite proteins AMA1 and members
of MSP and EBL families from circulating P. falciparum field isolates present in 
asymptomatic and symptomatic patients were amplified by PCR. After cloning and
expression of different versions of the antigens as recombinant GST-fusion
peptides, we tested the reactivity of patients' plasmas by ELISA and the presence
of IgG subclasses in the most reactive plasmas.
RESULTS: 11 out of 24 recombinant antigens were recognized by plasmas from either
symptomatic or asymptomatic infections. Antibodies to MSP9
(X2(DF=1) = 9.26/p = 0.0047) and MSP5 (X2(DF=1) = 8.29/p = 0.0069) were more
prevalent in asymptomatic individuals whereas the opposite was observed for MSP1 
block 2-MAD20 (X2(DF=1) = 6.41/p = 0.0206, Fisher's exact test). Plasmas from
asymptomatic individuals reacted more intensely against MSP4 (U = 210.5,
p < 0.03), MSP5 (U = 212, p < 0.004), MSP9 (U = 189.5, p < 0.002) and EBA175
(U = 197, p < 0.014, Mann-Whitney's U test). IgG1 and IgG3 were predominant for
all antigens, but some patients also presented with IgG2 and IgG4. The
recognition of MSP5 (OR = 0.112, IC95% = 0.021-0.585) and MSP9 (OR = 0.125,
IC95% = 0.030-0.529, cross tab analysis) predicted 8.9 and 8 times less chances, 
respectively, to present symptoms. Higher antibody levels against MSP5 and EBA175
were associated by odds ratios of 9.4 (IC95% = 1.29-69.25) and 5.7
(IC95% = 1.12-29.62, logistic regression), respectively, with an asymptomatic
status.
CONCLUSIONS: Merozoite antigens were targets of cytophilic antibodies and
antibodies against MSP5, MSP9 and EBA175 were independently associated with
decreased symptoms.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2334-13-608 
PMCID: PMC3880555
PMID: 24373342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

