
1. Gene Ther. 2014 Feb;21(2):225-32. doi: 10.1038/gt.2013.81. Epub 2014 Jan 2.

The effect of helper epitopes and cellular localization of an antigen on the
outcome of gene gun DNA immunization.

Smahel M(1), Polakova I(1), Duskova M(1), Ludvikova V(1), Kastankova I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Virology, Institute of Hematology and Blood
Transfusion, Prague 2, Czech Republic.

In DNA vaccination, CD4(+) T-cell help can be enhanced by fusion of a gene
encoding an immunization protein with a foreign gene or its part providing T(h)
epitopes. To study the effect of helper epitope localization in a protein
molecule, the influence of the vicinity of the helper epitope, and the impact of 
chimeric protein cellular localization, we fused the helper epitope p30 from
tetanus toxin (TT, aa 947-967) with the N- or C-terminus of the mutated E7
oncoprotein (E7GGG) of human papillomavirus type 16, enlarged the p30 epitope
with the flanking residues containing potential protease-sensitive sites and
altered the cellular localization of the fusion constructs by signal sequences.
The p30 epitope enhanced the E7-specific response, but only in constructs without
added signal sequences. After localization of the fusion proteins into the
endoplasmic reticulum and endo/lysosomal compartment, the TT-specific T(h)2
response was increased. The synthetic Pan DR epitope (PADRE) induced a stronger
E7-specific response than the p30 epitope and its stimulatory effect was not
limited to nuclear/cytoplasmic localization of the E7 antigen. These results
suggest that in the optimization of immune responses by adding helper epitopes to
DNA vaccines delivered by the gene gun, the cellular localization of the antigen 
needs to be taken into account.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2013.81 
PMID: 24385146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

