
1. Mol Microbiol. 2014 Mar;91(6):1200-13. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12528. Epub 2014 Feb 17.

Post-transcriptional silencing of UIS4 in Plasmodium berghei sporozoites is
important for host switch.

Silvie O(1), Briquet S, Müller K, Manzoni G, Matuschewski K.

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CR7, 75013, Paris, France; INSERM,
U1135, 75013, Paris, France; CNRS, ERL 8255, 75013, Paris, France.

Plasmodium sporozoites are transmitted by mosquitoes and first infect hepatocytes
of their mammalian host, wherein they develop as liver stages, surrounded by the 
parasitophorous vacuole membrane (PVM). The parasite must rapidly adapt to its
changing environment after switching host. Shortly after invasion, the PVM is
remodelled by insertion of essential parasite proteins of the early transcribed
membrane protein family such as UIS4. Here, using the rodent malaria model
Plasmodium berghei, we show that transcripts encoding UIS4 are stored in a
translationally repressed state in sporozoites, allowing UIS4 protein synthesis
only after host cell invasion. Using a series of reporter transgenic parasite
lines we could demonstrate that the open reading frame of UIS4 mRNA is critical
for gene silencing, whereas the 5' and 3' untranslated regions are dispensable.
Our data further indicate that the UIS4 translational repression machinery is
present only in mature sporozoites in the mosquito salivary glands, and that
premature expression of UIS4 protein results in a loss of parasite infectivity.
Our findings reveal the importance of specific post-transcriptional control in
sporozoites, and establish that host switch requires high levels of
translationally silent UIS4 RNA, which permits stage conversion, yet avoids
premature expression of this liver stage-specific protein.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12528 
PMID: 24446886  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

