
1. Exp Parasitol. 2014 Mar;138:40-7. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2014.01.004. Epub 2014
Jan 16.

A transgenic Neospora caninum strain based on mutations of the dihydrofolate
reductase-thymidylate synthase gene.

Pereira LM(1), Baroni L(1), Yatsuda AP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Ciências Farmacêuticas de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São
Paulo, Av do Café, sn/n, 14040-903 Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil; Núcleo de Apoio à 
Pesquisa em Produtos Naturais e Sintéticos, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão
Preto, SP, Brazil.
(2)Faculdade de Ciências Farmacêuticas de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São
Paulo, Av do Café, sn/n, 14040-903 Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil; Núcleo de Apoio à 
Pesquisa em Produtos Naturais e Sintéticos, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão
Preto, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: ayatsuda@fcfrp.usp.br.

Neospora caninum is an Apicomplexa parasite related to abortion and losses of
fertility in cattle. The amenability of Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium to
genetic manipulation offers several tools to determine the invasion and
replication processes, which support posterior strategies related to the combat
of these diseases. For Plasmodium the use of pyrimethamine as an auxiliary drug
on malaria treatment has been affected by the rise of resistant strains and the
analyses on Dihydrofolate reductase-thymidylate synthase (DHFR-TS) gene indicated
several point mutations. In this work we developed a method for stable insertion 
of genes based on resistance to pyrimethamine. For that, the coding sequence of
NcDHFR-TS (Dihydrofolate reductase-thymidylate synthase) was point mutated in two
amino acids, generating DHFRM2M3. The DHFRM2M3 flanked by the promoter and 3'UTR 
of Ncdhfr-ts (Ncdhfr-DHFRM2M3) conferred resistance to pyrimethamine after
transfection. For illustration of stability and expression, the cassette
Ncdhfr-DHFRM2M3 was ligated to the reporter gene Lac-Z (β-galactosidase enzyme)
controlled by the N. caninum tubulin promoter and was transfected and selected in
N. caninum. The cassette was integrated into the genome and the selected
tachyzoites expressed Lac-Z, allowing the detection of tachyzoites by the CPRG
reaction and X-gal precipitation. The obtainment of transgenic N. caninum
resistant to pyrimethamine confirms the effects on DHFR-TS among the Apicomplexa 
members and will support future approaches on pholate inhibitors for N. caninum
prophylaxis. The construction of stable tachyzoites based on vectors with N.
caninum promoters initiates the molecular manipulation of this parasite
independently of T. gondii.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2014.01.004 
PMID: 24440296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

