
1. Malar J. 2014 Jan 23;13:26. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-26.

Polymorphism of the merozoite surface protein-1 block 2 region in Plasmodium
falciparum isolates from Mauritania.

Ahmedou Salem MS, Ndiaye M, OuldAbdallahi M, Lekweiry KM, Bogreau H, Konaté L,
Faye B, Gaye O, Faye O, Mohamed Salem O Boukhary AO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biotechnologie, Faculté des Sciences et Techniques, Université 
des Sciences, de Technologie et de Médecine, Nouakchott, PO Box 5026, Nouakchott,
Mauritanie. alimedsalem@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The genetic diversity of Plasmodium falciparum has been extensively
studied in various parts of the world. However, limited data are available from
Mauritania. The present study examined and compared the genetic diversity of P.
falciparum isolates in Mauritania.
METHODS: Plasmodium falciparum isolates blood samples were collected from 113
patients attending health facilities in Nouakchott and Hodh El Gharbi regions.
K1, Mad20 and RO33 allelic family of msp-1 gene were determined by nested PCR
amplification.
RESULTS: K1 family was the predominant allelic type carried alone or in
association with Ro33 and Mad20 types (90%; 102/113). Out of the 113 P.
falciparum samples, 93(82.3%) harboured more than one parasite genotype. The
overall multiplicity of infection was 3.2 genotypes per infection. There was no
significant correlation between multiplicity of infection and age of patients. A 
significant increase of multiplicity of infection was correlated with parasite
densities.
CONCLUSIONS: The polymorphism of P. falciparum populations from Mauritania was
high. Infection with multiple P. falciparum clones was observed, as well as a
high multiplicity of infection reflecting both the high endemicity level and
malaria transmission in Mauritania.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-26 
PMCID: PMC3902025
PMID: 24456636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

