
1. Parasit Vectors. 2013 Nov 12;6(1):324. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-324.

Systematics of the oswaldoi complex (Anopheles, Nyssorhynchus) in South America.

Ruiz-Lopez F(1), Wilkerson RC, Ponsonby DJ, Herrera M, Sallum MA, Velez ID,
Qui√±ones ML, Flores-Mendoza C, Chadee DD, Alarcon J, Alarcon-Ormasa J, Linton YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian
Institution, Museum Support Center, Suitland, MD 20746, USA.
fredyruiz9@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Effective malaria control relies on accurate identification of those 
Anopheles mosquitoes responsible for the transmission of Plasmodium parasites.
Anopheles oswaldoi s.l. has been incriminated as a malaria vector in Colombia and
some localities in Brazil, but not ubiquitously throughout its Neotropical range.
This evidence together with variable morphological characters and genetic
differences supports that An. oswaldoi s.l. compromises a species complex. The
recent fully integrated redescription of An. oswaldoi s.s. provides a solid
taxonomic foundation from which to molecularly determine other members of the
complex.
METHODS: DNA sequences of the Second Internal Transcribed Spacer (ITS2 - rDNA) (n
= 192) and the barcoding region of the Cytochrome Oxidase I gene (COI - mtDNA) (n
= 110) were generated from 255 specimens of An. oswaldoi s.l. from 33 localities:
Brazil (8 localities, including the lectotype series of An. oswaldoi), Ecuador
(4), Colombia (17), Trinidad and Tobago (1), and Peru (3). COI sequences were
analyzed employing the Kimura-two-parameter model (K2P), Bayesian analysis
(MrBayes), Mixed Yule-Coalescent model (MYC, for delimitation of clusters) and
TCS genealogies.
RESULTS: Separate and combined analysis of the COI and ITS2 data sets
unequivocally supported four separate species: two previously determined (An.
oswaldoi s.s. and An. oswaldoi B) and two newly designated species in the
Oswaldoi Complex (An. oswaldoi A and An. sp. nr. konderi). The COI intra- and
inter-specific genetic distances for the four taxa were non-overlapping,
averaging 0.012 (0.007 to 0.020) and 0.052 (0.038 to 0.064), respectively. The
concurring four clusters delineated by MrBayes and MYC, and four independent TCS 
networks, strongly confirmed their separate species status. In addition, An.
konderi of Sallum should be regarded as unique with respect to the above. Despite
initially being included as an outgroup taxon, this species falls well within the
examined taxa, suggesting a combined analysis of these taxa would be most
appropriate.
CONCLUSIONS: Through novel data and retrospective comparison of available COI and
ITS2 DNA sequences, evidence is shown to support the separate species status of
An. oswaldoi s.s., An. oswaldoi A and An. oswaldoi B, and at least two species in
the closely related An. konderi complex (An. sp. nr. konderi, An. konderi of
Sallum). Although An. oswaldoi s.s. has never been implicated in malaria
transmission, An. oswaldoi B is a confirmed vector and the new species An.
oswaldoi A and An. sp. nr. konderi are circumstantially implicated, most likely
acting as secondary vectors.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-324 
PMCID: PMC3843595
PMID: 24499562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

