
1. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2014 Apr;239(4):489-501. doi: 10.1177/1535370213520108.
Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Attenuation of endoplasmic reticulum stress in Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease by an
anti-malaria drug, chloroquine.

Morimura T(1), Numata Y, Nakamura S, Hirano E, Gotoh L, Goto YI, Urushitani M,
Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Retardation and Birth Defect Research, National Institute
of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry (NCNP), 4-1-1
Ogawahigashi-machi, Kodaira-shi, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan.

Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) is a hypomyelinating disorder caused by the
duplication and missense mutations of the proteolipid protein 1 (PLP1) gene. PLP1
missense proteins accumulate in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of premature
oligodendrocytes and induce severe ER stress followed by apoptosis of the cells. 
Here, we demonstrate that an anti-malaria drug, chloroquine, decreases the amount
of an ER-resident mutant PLP1 containing an alanine-243 to valine (A243V)
substitution, which induces severe PMD in human. By preventing mutant PLP1
translation through enhancing the phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor
2 alpha, chloroquine ameliorated the ER stress induced by the mutant protein in
HeLa cells. Chroloquine also attenuated ER stress in the primary oligodendrocytes
obtained from myelin synthesis deficit (msd) mice, which carry the same PLP1
mutation. In the spinal cords of msd mice, chloroquine inhibited ER stress and
upregulated the expression of marker genes of mature oligodendrocytes.
Chloroquine-mediated attenuation of ER stress was observed in HeLa cells treated 
with tunicamycin, an N-glycosylation inhibitor, but not with thapsigargin, a
sarco/ER Ca(2+)ATPase inhibitor, which confirms its efficacy against ER stress
caused by nascent proteins. These findings indicate that chloroquine is an ER
stress attenuator with potential use in treating PMD and possibly other ER
stress-related diseases.

DOI: 10.1177/1535370213520108 
PMID: 24521562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

