
1. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist. 2013 Aug 12;3:135-42. doi:
10.1016/j.ijpddr.2013.07.001. eCollection 2013 Dec.

Polymorphism in dhfr/dhps genes, parasite density and ex vivo response to
pyrimethamine in Plasmodium falciparum malaria parasites in Thies, Senegal.

Ndiaye D(1), Dieye B(1), Ndiaye YD(1), Van Tyne D(2), Daniels R(2), Bei AK(2),
Mbaye A(1), Valim C(2), Lukens A(2), Mboup S(1), Ndir O(1), Wirth DF(2), Volkman 
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, University Cheikh Anta Diop, Dakar, PO Box
5005, Dakar, Senegal.
(2)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Resistance to sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) in Plasmodium falciparum malaria
parasites is associated with mutations in the dihydrofolate reductase (dhfr) and 
dihydropteroate synthase (dhps) genes, and these mutations have spread resistance
worldwide. SP, used for several years in Senegal, has been recommended for
intermittent preventive treatment for malaria in pregnancy (IPTp) and has been
widely implemented since 2003 in this country. There is currently limited data on
SP resistance from molecular marker genotyping, and no data on pyrimethamine ex
vivo sensitivity in Senegal. Molecular markers of SP resistance and pyrimethamine
ex vivo sensitivity were investigated in 416 parasite samples collected from the 
general population, from the Thies region between 2003 and 2011. The prevalence
of the N51I/C59R/S108N triple mutation in dhfr increased from 40% in 2003 to 93% 
in 2011. Furthermore, the prevalence of the dhfr N51I/C59R/S108N and dhps A437G
quadruple mutation increased, from 20% to 66% over the same time frame, then down
to 44% by 2011. There was a significant increase in the prevalence of the dhfr
triple mutation, as well as an association between dhfr genotypes and
pyrimethamine response. Conversely, dhps mutations in codons 436 and 437 did not 
show consistent variation between 2003 and 2011. These findings suggest that
regular screening for molecular markers of antifolate resistance and ex vivo drug
response monitoring should be incorporated with ongoing in vivo efficacy
monitoring in areas where IPTp-SP is implemented and where pyrimethamine and
sulfa drugs are still widely administered in the general population.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpddr.2013.07.001 
PMCID: PMC3862402
PMID: 24533303 

