
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 May;13(5):1153-64. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.035584. Epub
2014 Feb 16.

The acute transcriptomic and proteomic response of HC-04 hepatoma cells to
hepatocyte growth factor and its implications for Plasmodium falciparum
sporozoite invasion.

Tao D(1), King JG, Tweedell RE, Jost PJ, Boddey JA, Dinglasan RR.

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology and the
Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 615 
North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA;

The routine study of human malaria liver-stage biology in vitro is hampered by
low infection efficiency of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) lines (<0.1%),
poor understanding of steady-state HCC biology, and lack of appropriate tools for
trace sample analysis. HC-04 is the only HCC that supports complete development
of human malaria parasites. We hypothesized that HCCs are in various intermediate
stages of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and HC-04s retain
epithelial characteristics that permit infection. We developed a facile
analytical approach to test this hypothesis viz. the HC-04 response to hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF). We used online two-dimensional liquid chromatography tandem 
mass spectrometry (2D-LC-MS/MS) to quantify protein expression profiles in HC-04 
pre-/post-HGF treatment and validated these results by RT-qPCR and microscopy. We
successfully increased protein identification efficiency over offline-2D methods 
by 12-fold, using less sample material, allowing robust protein quantification.
We observed expected up-regulation and down-regulation of EMT protein markers in 
response to HGF, but also unexpected cellular responses. We also observed that
HC-04 is generally more susceptible to HGF-mediated signaling than what was
observed for HepG2, a widely used, but poor malaria liver stage-HCC model. Our
analytical approach to understanding the basic biology of HC-04 helps us
understand the factors that may influence its utility as a model for malaria
liver-stage development. We observed that HC-04 treatment with HGF prior to the
addition of Plasmodium falciparum sporozoites did not facilitate cell invasion,
which suggests unlinking the effect of HGF on malaria liver stage development
from hepatocyte invasion. Finally, our 2D-LC-MS/MS approach and broadly
applicable experimental strategy should prove useful in the analysis of various
hepatocyte-pathogen interactions, tumor progression, and early disease events.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M113.035584 
PMCID: PMC4014276
PMID: 24532842  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

