
1. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist. 2013 Jun 28;3:119-28. doi:
10.1016/j.ijpddr.2013.06.001. eCollection 2013 Dec.

Proposal for a new therapy for drug-resistant malaria using Plasmodium synthetic 
lethality inference.

Lee SJ(1), Seo E(1), Cho Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biofluid and Biomimic Research, Division of Integrative Biosciences
and Biotechnology, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), San 31,
Hyoja Dong, Namgu, Pohang 790-784, Republic of Korea.
(2)Samsumg SDS, Trade Center ASEM Tower, Samseong 1-dong, Gangnam-gu, Seoul
135-798, Republic of Korea.

Many antimalarial drugs kill malaria parasites, but antimalarial drug resistance 
(ADR) and toxicity to normal cells limit their usefulness. To solve this problem,
we suggest a new therapy for drug-resistant malaria. The approach consists of
data integration and inference through homology analysis of
yeast-human-Plasmodium. If one gene of a Plasmodium synthetic lethal (SL) gene
pair has a mutation that causes ADR, a drug targeting the other gene of the SL
pair might be used as an effective treatment for drug-resistant strains of
malaria. A simple computational tool to analyze the inferred SL genes of
Plasmodium species (malaria parasites Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax 
for human malarial therapy, and rodent parasite Plasmodium berghei for in vivo
studies of human malarias) was established to identify SL genes that can be used 
as drug targets. Information on SL gene pairs with ADR genes and their first
neighbors was inferred from yeast SL genes to search for pertinent antimalarial
drug targets. We not only suggest drug target gene candidates for further
experimental validation, but also provide information on new usage for
already-described drugs. The proposed specific antimalarial drug candidates can
be inferred by searching drugs that cause a fitness defect in yeast SL genes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpddr.2013.06.001 
PMCID: PMC3862410
PMID: 24533301 

