
1. Int J Parasitol. 2014 Apr;44(5):319-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2014.01.003. Epub
2014 Feb 14.

An exported kinase (FIKK4.2) that mediates virulence-associated changes in
Plasmodium falciparum-infected red blood cells.

Kats LM(1), Fernandez KM(1), Glenister FK(1), Herrmann S(1), Buckingham DW(1),
Siddiqui G(1), Sharma L(1), Bamert R(2), Lucet I(2), Guillotte M(3),
Mercereau-Puijalon O(3), Cooke BM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Biomedical Sciences, Monash University, 
Victoria 3800, Australia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Biomedical
Sciences, Monash University, Victoria 3800, Australia.
(3)Institut Pasteur, Unité d'Immunologie Moléculaire des Parasites, Paris,
France; Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, URA 2581, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Microbiology, School of Biomedical Sciences, Monash University, 
Victoria 3800, Australia. Electronic address: brian.cooke@monash.edu.

Alteration of the adhesive and mechanical properties of red blood cells caused by
infection with the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum underpin both its
survival and extreme pathogenicity. A unique family of parasite putative exported
kinases, collectively called FIKK (Phenylalanine (F) - Isoleucine (I) - Lysine
(K) - Lysine (K)), has recently been implicated in these pathophysiological
processes, however, their precise function in P. falciparum-infected red blood
cells or their likely role in malaria pathogenesis remain unknown. Here, for the 
first time, we demonstrate that one member of the FIKK family, FIKK4.2, can
function as an active kinase and is localised in a novel and distinct compartment
of the parasite-infected red blood cell which we have called K-dots. Notably,
targeted disruption of the gene encoding FIKK4.2 (fikk4.2) dramatically alters
the parasite's ability to modify and remodel the red blood cells in which it
multiplies. Specifically, red blood cells infected with fikk4.2 knockout
parasites were significantly less rigid and less adhesive when compared with red 
blood cells infected with normal parasites from which the transgenic clones had
been derived, despite expressing similar levels of the major cytoadhesion ligand,
PfEMP1, on the red blood cell surface. Notably, these changes were accompanied by
dramatically altered knob-structures on infected red blood cells that play a key 
role in cytoadhesion which is responsible for much of the pathogenesis associated
with falciparum malaria. Taken together, our data identifies FIKK4.2 as an
important kinase in the pathogenesis of P. falciparum malaria and strengthens the
attractiveness of FIKK kinases as targets for the development of novel
next-generation anti-malaria drugs.

Copyright © 2014 Australian Society for Parasitology Inc. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2014.01.003 
PMID: 24530877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

