
1. Planta Med. 2014 Mar;80(4):283-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1360391. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Biomarker-guided screening of Juzen-taiho-to, an oriental herbal formulation for 
immunostimulation.

Takaoka A(1), Iacovidou M(1), Hasson TH(1), Montenegro D(1), Li X(2), Tsuji M(2),
Kawamura A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Hunter College of CUNY, New York, NY, USA.
(2)HIV and Malaria Vaccine Program, Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center, Affiliate
of The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.

Juzen-taiho-to is an immunostimulatory herbal formulation that is clinically used
in East Asia for cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy and radiation. The
formulation stimulates various leukocytes, including T, B, and NK cells and
macrophages. Although Juzen-taiho-to is known to contain numerous compounds with 
various pharmacological activities, it is not clear which compounds are
responsible for the stimulation of individual cell types. Here, we conducted what
we call "biomarker-guided screening" to purify compounds responsible for the
macrophages stimulatory activity. To this end, gene expression was analyzed by a 
DNA array for macrophages treated with Juzen-taiho-to and DMSO (vehicle control),
which identified intercellular adhesion molecule 1 as a biomarker of macrophage
stimulation by Juzen-taiho-to. A quantitative reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction assay of intercellular adhesion molecule 1 was then used to guide 
the purification of active compounds. The screening resulted in the purification 
of a glycolipid mixture, containing β-glucosylceramides. The glycolipid mixture
potently stimulated intercellular adhesion molecule 1 expression in primary
dendritic cells as well as in primary CD14+ (macrophages) cells. The
identification of this glycolipid mixture opens up an opportunity for further
studies to understand how plant-derived glycolipids stimulate macrophages and
dendritic cells in a safe and effective manner as demonstrated by Juzen-taiho-to.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0033-1360391 
PMCID: PMC4091913
PMID: 24549928  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

