
1. Parasitology. 2014 Aug;141(9):1177-91. doi: 10.1017/S0031182013002084. Epub 2014 
Feb 21.

Co-chaperones of Hsp90 in Plasmodium falciparum and their concerted roles in
cellular regulation.

Chua CS(1), Low H(1), Sim TS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,National
University of Singapore,5 Science Drive 2, Singapore 117597,Singapore.

Co-chaperones are well-known regulators of heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90). Hsp90
is a molecular chaperone that is essential in the eukaryotes for the folding and 
activation of numerous proteins involved in important cellular processes such as 
signal transduction, growth and developmental regulation. Co-chaperones assist
Hsp90 in the protein folding process by modulating conformational changes to
promote client protein interaction and functional maturation. With the
recognition of Plasmodium falciparum Hsp90 (PfHsp90) as a potential antimalarial 
drug target, there is obvious interest in the study of its co-chaperones in their
partnership in regulating cellular processes in malaria parasite. Previous
studies on PfHsp90 have identified more than 10 co-chaperones in P. falciparum
genome. However, many of them remained annotated as putative proteins as their
functionality has not been validated experimentally. So far, only five
co-chaperones, PfHop, Pfp23, PfAha1, PfPP5 and PfFKBP35 have been characterized
and shown to interact with PfHsp90. This review will summarize current knowledge 
on the co-chaperones in P. falciparum and discuss their regulatory roles on
PfHsp90. As certain eukaryotic co-chaperones have also been implicated in
altering the affinity of Hsp90 for its inhibitor, this review will also examine
plasmodial co-chaperones' potential influence on approaches towards designing
antimalarials targeting PfHsp90.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182013002084 
PMID: 24560171  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

