
1. Infect Immun. 2014 May;82(5):1860-71. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01514-13. Epub 2014 Feb
24.

B-cell responses to pregnancy-restricted and -unrestricted Plasmodium falciparum 
erythrocyte membrane protein 1 antigens in Ghanaian women naturally exposed to
malaria parasites.

Ampomah P(1), Stevenson L, Ofori MF, Barfod L, Hviid L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology, University of Copenhagen and Copenhagen
University Hospital (Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen, Denmark.

Protective immunity to Plasmodium falciparum malaria acquired after natural
exposure is largely antibody mediated. IgG-specific P. falciparum EMP1 (PfEMP1)
proteins on the infected erythrocyte surface are particularly important. The
transient antibody responses and the slowly acquired protective immunity probably
reflect the clonal antigenic variation and allelic polymorphism of PfEMP1.
However, it is likely that other immune-evasive mechanisms are also involved,
such as interference with formation and maintenance of immunological memory. We
measured PfEMP1-specific antibody levels by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) and memory B-cell frequencies by enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot
(ELISPOT) assay in a cohort of P. falciparum-exposed nonpregnant Ghanaian women. 
The antigens used were a VAR2CSA-type PfEMP1 (IT4VAR04) with expression
restricted to parasites infecting the placenta, as well as two commonly
recognized PfEMP1 proteins (HB3VAR06 and IT4VAR60) implicated in rosetting and
not pregnancy restricted. This enabled, for the first time, a direct comparison
in the same individuals of immune responses specific for a clinically important
parasite antigen expressed only during well-defined periods (pregnancy) to
responses specific for comparable antigens expressed independent of pregnancy.
Our data indicate that PfEMP1-specific B-cell memory is adequately acquired even 
when antigen exposure is infrequent (e.g., VAR2CSA-type PfEMP1). Furthermore,
immunological memory specific for VAR2CSA-type PfEMP1 can be maintained for many 
years without antigen reexposure and after circulating antigen-specific IgG has
disappeared. The study provides evidence that natural exposure to P. falciparum
leads to formation of durable B-cell immunity to clinically important PfEMP1
antigens. This has encouraging implications for current efforts to develop
PfEMP1-based vaccines.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01514-13 
PMCID: PMC3993431
PMID: 24566620  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

