
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Mar 26;136(12):4565-74. doi: 10.1021/ja411544w. Epub 2014 Mar
12.

Elucidation of final steps of the marineosins biosynthetic pathway through
identification and characterization of the corresponding gene cluster.

Salem SM(1), Kancharla P, Florova G, Gupta S, Lu W, Reynolds KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Portland State University , Portland, Oregon,
97201-3203, United States.

The marine Streptomyces sp. CNQ-617 produces two diastereomers, marineosins A and
B. These are structurally related to alkyl prodiginines, but with a more complex 
cyclization and an unusual spiroaminal skeleton. We report the identification of 
the mar biosynthetic gene cluster and demonstrate production of marineosins
through heterologous expression in a S. venezuelae host named JND2. The mar
cluster shares the same gene organization and has high homology to the genes of
the red cluster (which directs the biosynthesis of undecylprodiginine) but
contains an additional gene, named marA. Replacement of marA in the JND2 strain
leads to the accumulation of premarineosin, which is identical to marineosin with
the exception that the middle pyrrole (Ring B) has not been reduced. The final
step of the marineosin pathway is thus a MarA catalyzed reduction of this ring.
Replacement of marG (a homologue of redG that directs undecylprodiginine
cyclization to give streptorubin B) in the JND2 strain leads to the loss of all
spiroaminal products and the accumulation of 23-hydroxyundecylprodiginine and a
shunt product, 23-ketoundecylprodiginine. MarG thus catalyzes the penultimate
step of the marineosin pathway catalyzing conversion of
23-hydroxyundecylprodiginine to premarineosin. The preceding steps of the
biosynthetic marineosin pathway likely mirror that in the red-directed
biosynthetic process, with the exception of the introduction of the hydroxyl
functionality required for spiroaminal formation. This work presents the first
experimentally supported scheme for biosynthesis of marineosin and provides a new
biologically active molecule, premarineosin.

DOI: 10.1021/ja411544w 
PMCID: PMC3985843
PMID: 24575817  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

