
1. Parasitol Res. 2014 Apr;113(4):1537-43. doi: 10.1007/s00436-014-3798-8. Epub 2014
Feb 28.

High prevalence and genetic diversity of Plasmodium malariae and no evidence of
Plasmodium knowlesi in Bangladesh.

Fuehrer HP(1), Swoboda P, Harl J, Starzengruber P, Habler VE, Bloeschl I, Haque
R, Matt J, Khan WA, Noedl H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Specific Prophylaxis and Tropical Medicine, Medical University of
Vienna, Kinderspitalgasse 15, 1090, Vienna, Austria.

Although the prevalence of malaria remains high in parts of Bangladesh, there
continues to be a substantial shortage of information regarding the less common
malaria parasites such as Plasmodium malariae or Plasmodium knowlesi. Recent
studies indicate that P. malariae may be extremely rare, and so far, there are no
data on the presence (or absence) of P. knowlesi in southeastern Bangladesh.
Genus- and species-specific nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis of
the small subunit ribosomal RNA gene was performed to assess the presence and
prevalence of P. malariae and P. knowlesi in 2,246 samples originating from
asymptomatic and febrile participants of a cross-sectional and a febrile
illnesses study in the Chittagong Hill Tracts in southeastern Bangladesh. P.
malariae was detected in 60 samples (2.7%) corresponding to 8% of the 746 samples
giving positive PCR results for Plasmodium sp., mainly because of the high
prevalence (9.5%) among asymptomatic study participants testing positive for
malaria. Symptomatic cases were more common (4.3% of all symptomatic malaria
cases) during the dry season. Parasitemias were low (1,120-2,560/μl in
symptomatic and 120-520/μl in asymptomatic carriers). Symptomatic patients
presented mild to moderate symptoms like fever, chills, headache, dizziness,
fatigue and myalgia.Although both the intermediate as well as the definite host
are known to be endemic in southeastern Bangladesh, no evidence for the presence 
of P. knowlesi was found. We conclude that the role of P. malariae is highly
underestimated in rural Bangladesh with major implications for malaria control
and elimination strategies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-014-3798-8 
PMID: 24578257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

