
1. Comput Biol Chem. 2014 Jun;50:3-10. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.01.002. Epub
2014 Jan 23.

Deciphering histone code of transcriptional regulation in malaria parasites by
large-scale data mining.

Chen H(1), Lonardi S(2), Zheng J(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang
Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore. Electronic address: hchen009@e.ntu.edu.sg.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California
Riverside, 900 University Avenue, Riverside, CA 92521, USA. Electronic address:
stelo@cs.ucr.edu.
(3)School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang
Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore; Genome Institute of Singapore, A*STAR
(Agency for Science, Technology, and Research), Biopolis, Singapore 138672,
Singapore. Electronic address: zhengjie@ntu.edu.sg.

Histone modifications play a major role in the regulation of gene expression.
Accumulated evidence has shown that histone modifications mediate biological
processes such as transcription cooperatively. This has led to the hypothesis of 
'histone code' which suggests that combinations of different histone
modifications correspond to unique chromatin states and have distinct functions. 
In this paper, we propose a framework based on association rule mining to
discover the potential regulatory relations between histone modifications and
gene expression in Plasmodium falciparum. Our approach can output rules with
statistical significance. Some of the discovered rules are supported by
literature of experimental results. Moreover, we have also discovered de novo
rules which can guide further research in epigenetic regulation of transcription.
Based on our association rules we build a model to predict gene expression, which
outperforms a published Bayesian network model for gene expression prediction by 
histone modifications. The results of our study reveal mechanisms for histone
modifications to regulate transcription in large-scale. Among our findings, the
cooperation among histone modifications provides new evidence for the hypothesis 
of histone code. Furthermore, the rules output by our method can be used to
predict the change of gene expression.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.01.002 
PMID: 24581698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

