
1. Cell Microbiol. 2014 May;16(5):709-33. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12288. Epub 2014 Apr 4.

Perforin-like protein PPLP2 permeabilizes the red blood cell membrane during
egress of Plasmodium falciparum gametocytes.

Wirth CC(1), Glushakova S, Scheuermayer M, Repnik U, Garg S, Schaack D, Kachman
MM, Weißbach T, Zimmerberg J, Dandekar T, Griffiths G, Chitnis CE, Singh S,
Fischer R, Pradel G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, RWTH Aachen University, Worringerweg 1, 
52074, Aachen, Germany.

Egress of malaria parasites from the host cell requires the concerted rupture of 
its enveloping membranes. Hence, we investigated the role of the plasmodial
perforin-like protein PPLP2 in the egress of Plasmodium falciparum from
erythrocytes. PPLP2 is expressed in blood stage schizonts and mature gametocytes.
The protein localizes in vesicular structures, which in activated gametocytes
discharge PPLP2 in a calcium-dependent manner. PPLP2 comprises a MACPF domain and
recombinant PPLP2 has haemolytic activities towards erythrocytes. PPLP2-deficient
[PPLP2(-)] merozoites show normal egress dynamics during the erythrocytic
replication cycle, but activated PPLP2(-) gametocytes were unable to leave
erythrocytes and stayed trapped within these cells. While the parasitophorous
vacuole membrane ruptured normally, the activated PPLP2(-) gametocytes were
unable to permeabilize the erythrocyte membrane and to release the erythrocyte
cytoplasm. In consequence, transmission of PPLP2(-) parasites to the Anopheles
vector was reduced. Pore-forming equinatoxin II rescued both PPLP2(-) gametocyte 
exflagellation and parasite transmission. The pore sealant Tetronic 90R4, on the 
other hand, caused trapping of activated wild-type gametocytes within the
enveloping erythrocytes, thus mimicking the PPLP2(-) loss-of-function phenotype. 
We propose that the haemolytic activity of PPLP2 is essential for gametocyte
egress due to permeabilization of the erythrocyte membrane and depletion of the
erythrocyte cytoplasm.

© 2014 The Authors. Cellular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12288 
PMCID: PMC4312913
PMID: 24602217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

