
1. Acta Trop. 2014 Jun;134:80-8. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2014.02.014. Epub 2014
Mar 11.

Temporal genetic structure of major dengue vector Aedes aegypti from Manaus,
Amazonas, Brazil.

Mendonça BA(1), de Sousa AC(2), de Souza AP(3), Scarpassa VM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Genética, Conservação e Biologia Evolutiva,
Instituto Nacional Pesquisas da Amazônia, Manaus CEP 69.067-375, Amazonas,
Brazil.
(2)Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal da Paraíba, João Pessoa CEP
58.051-900, Paraíba, Brazil.
(3)Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética, Universidade Estadual de
Campinas, Campinas CEP 13.083-970, São Paulo, Brazil; Departamento de Biologia
Vegetal, Instituto de Biologia, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas CEP
13.083-970, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Genética, Conservação e Biologia Evolutiva,
Instituto Nacional Pesquisas da Amazônia, Manaus CEP 69.067-375, Amazonas,
Brazil; Laboratório de Genética de Populações e Evolução de Mosquitos Vetores de 
Malária e Dengue, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazônia, Manaus CEP
69.067-375, Amazonas, Brazil. Electronic address: vera@inpa.gov.br.

In recent years, high levels of Aedes aegypti infestation and several dengue
outbreaks with fatal outcome cases have been reported in Manaus, State of
Amazonas, Brazil. This situation made it important to understand the genetic
structure and gene flow patterns among the populations of this vector in Manaus, 
vital pieces of information for their management and development of new control
strategies. In this study, we used nine microsatellite loci to examine the effect
of seasonality on the genetic structure and gene flow patterns in Ae. aegypti
populations from four urban neighborhoods of Manaus, collected during the two
main rainy and dry seasons. All loci were polymorphic in the eight samples from
the two seasons, with a total of 41 alleles. The genetic structure analyses of
the samples from the rainy season revealed genetic homogeneity and extensive gene
flow, a result consistent with the abundance of breeding sites for this vector.
However, the samples from the dry season were significantly structured, due to a 
reduction of Ne in two (Praça 14 de Janeiro and Cidade Nova) of the four samples 
analyzed, and this was the primary factor influencing structure during the dry
season. Genetic bottleneck analyses suggested that the Ae. aegypti populations
from Manaus are being maintained continuously throughout the year, with seasonal 
reduction rather than severe bottleneck or extinction, corroborating previous
reports. These findings are of extremely great importance for designing new
dengue control strategies in Manaus.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2014.02.014 
PMID: 24631342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

