
1. J Immunol. 2014 Apr 15;192(8):3719-29. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302960. Epub 2014
Mar 19.

BAFF and BAFF receptor levels correlate with B cell subset activation and
redistribution in controlled human malaria infection.

Scholzen A(1), Teirlinck AC, Bijker EM, Roestenberg M, Hermsen CC, Hoffman SL,
Sauerwein RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud University Medical Center, 6525 GA
Nijmegen, The Netherlands;

Characteristic features of Plasmodium falciparum malaria are polyclonal B cell
activation and an altered composition of the blood B cell compartment, including 
expansion of CD21(-)CD27(-) atypical memory B cells. BAFF is a key cytokine in B 
cell homeostasis, but its potential contribution to the modulation of the blood B
cell pool during malaria remains elusive. In the controlled human malaria model
(CHMI) in malaria-naive Dutch volunteers, we therefore examined the dynamics of
BAFF induction and B cell subset activation and composition, to investigate
whether these changes are linked to malaria-induced immune activation and, in
particular, induction of BAFF. Alterations in B cell composition after CHMI
closely resembled those observed in endemic areas. We further found distinct
kinetics of proliferation for individual B cell subsets across all developmental 
stages. Proliferation peaked either immediately after blood-stage infection or at
convalescence, and for most subsets was directly associated with the peak
parasitemia. Concomitantly, plasma BAFF levels during CHMI were increased and
correlated with membrane-expressed BAFF on monocytes and dendritic cells, as well
as blood-stage parasitemia and parasite-induced IFN-γ. Correlating with increased
plasma BAFF and IFN-γ levels, IgD(-)CD38(low)CD21(-)CD27(-) atypical B cells
showed the strongest proliferative response of all memory B cell subsets. This
provides unique evidence for a link between malaria-induced immune activation and
temporary expansion of this B cell subset. Finally, baseline BAFF-R levels before
CHMI were predictive of subsequent changes in proportions of individual B cell
subsets. These findings suggest an important role of BAFF in facilitating B cell 
subset proliferation and redistribution as a consequence of malaria-induced
immune activation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302960 
PMCID: PMC4028688
PMID: 24646735  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

