
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2014 Jun;31(6):1490-9. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msu106. Epub 2014 Mar
18.

Genome-wide analysis of selection on the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum
in West African populations of differing infection endemicity.

Mobegi VA(1), Duffy CW(2), Amambua-Ngwa A(3), Loua KM(4), Laman E(4), Nwakanma
DC(3), MacInnis B(5), Aspeling-Jones H(2), Murray L(2), Clark TG(2), Kwiatkowski 
DP(6), Conway DJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Pathogen Molecular Biology Department, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, United KingdomMedical Research Council Unit, Fajara, Banjul,
The Gambia.
(2)Pathogen Molecular Biology Department, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Medical Research Council Unit, Fajara, Banjul, The Gambia.
(4)National Institute of Public Health, Conakry, Republic of Guinea.
(5)The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(6)The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United
KingdomWellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom.
(7)Pathogen Molecular Biology Department, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, United KingdomMedical Research Council Unit, Fajara, Banjul,
The Gambia david.conway@lshtm.ac.uk.

Locally varying selection on pathogens may be due to differences in drug
pressure, host immunity, transmission opportunities between hosts, or the
intensity of between-genotype competition within hosts. Highly recombining
populations of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum throughout West
Africa are closely related, as gene flow is relatively unrestricted in this
endemic region, but markedly varying ecology and transmission intensity should
cause distinct local selective pressures. Genome-wide analysis of sequence
variation was undertaken on a sample of 100 P. falciparum clinical isolates from 
a highly endemic region of the Republic of Guinea where transmission occurs for
most of each year and compared with data from 52 clinical isolates from a
previously sampled population from The Gambia, where there is relatively limited 
seasonal malaria transmission. Paired-end short-read sequences were mapped
against the 3D7 P. falciparum reference genome sequence, and data on 136,144
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were obtained. Within-population analyses 
identifying loci showing evidence of recent positive directional selection and
balancing selection confirm that antimalarial drugs and host immunity have been
major selective agents. Many of the signatures of recent directional selection
reflected by standardized integrated haplotype scores were population specific,
including differences at drug resistance loci due to historically different
antimalarial use between the countries. In contrast, both populations showed a
similar set of loci likely to be under balancing selection as indicated by very
high Tajima's D values, including a significant overrepresentation of genes
expressed at the merozoite stage that invades erythrocytes and several previously
validated targets of acquired immunity. Between-population FST analysis
identified exceptional differentiation of allele frequencies at a small number of
loci, most markedly for five SNPs covering a 15-kb region within and flanking the
gdv1 gene that regulates the early stages of gametocyte development, which is
likely related to the extreme differences in mosquito vector abundance and
seasonality that determine the transmission opportunities for the sexual stage of
the parasite.

Â© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msu106 
PMCID: PMC4032133
PMID: 24644299  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

