
1. Curr Top Med Chem. 2014;14(9):1161-71.

Adsorption of antisense oligonucleotides targeting malarial topoisomerase II on
cationic nanoemulsions optimized by a full factorial design.

Bruxel F, Bochot A, Diel D, Wild L, Carvalho EL, Cojean S, Loiseau PM, Fattal E, 
Teixeira HF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Farmácia/ UFRGS, Av. Ipiranga, 2752, 90610-000 Porto Alegre, RS, 
Brazil. helder.teixeira@ufrgs.br.

Cationic nanoemulsions have been recently considered as potential delivery
systems for oligonucleotides (ON) targeting Plasmodium falciparum topoisomerase
II gene. This study is aiming to select the best composition of nanoemulsions
intended to ON adsorption by means of a 2(3) full factorial design. Based on
their physicochemical properties, two formulations were selected for further
studies, both composed by medium chain triglycerides, egg-lecithin, and either
oleylamine (OA) or 1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane (DOTAP). Adsorption
isotherms of phosphodiester or phosphorothioate ON on the optimized nanoemulsions
were obtained (ultrafiltration/centrifugation procedure). They showed a
significant higher amount of ON adsorbed on DOTAP nanoemulsion when compared to
the OA ones. The Langmuir adsorption model provides the most satisfactory
representation of the adsorption data. Evidence of ON adsorption could be
detected by the inversion of the ζ-potential and the morphology of the oil
droplets examined by transmission electron microscopy. Preliminary results
regarding hemolytic effect and P. falciparum survival after exposure to optimized
formulations were related to their physicochemical properties and in vitro
effects. The overall results showed the potential of the optimized nanoemulsions 
as non-viral carriers for antisense ON against malaria parasites.

DOI: 10.2174/1568026614666140329230835 
PMID: 24678706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

