
1. Parasitol Int. 2014 Aug;63(4):584-90. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2014.03.004. Epub
2014 Mar 30.

D-Glucose concentration is the key factor facilitating liver stage maturation of 
Plasmodium.

Itani S(1), Torii M(2), Ishino T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Parasitology, Graduate School of Medicine, Ehime
University, Shitsukawa, Toon, Ehime 791-0295, Japan.
(2)Department of Molecular Parasitology, Graduate School of Medicine, Ehime
University, Shitsukawa, Toon, Ehime 791-0295, Japan; Division of Molecular
Parasitology, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University, Shitsukawa, Toon, Ehime
791-0295, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Parasitology, Graduate School of Medicine, Ehime
University, Shitsukawa, Toon, Ehime 791-0295, Japan; Division of Molecular
Parasitology, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University, Shitsukawa, Toon, Ehime
791-0295, Japan. Electronic address: tishino@m.ehime-u.ac.jp.

The course of malaria infection in mammals begins with transmission of Plasmodium
sporozoites into the skin by Anopheles mosquitoes, followed by migration of the
sporozoites to the liver. As no symptoms present until hepatic merozoites are
released and until they infect erythrocytes in the blood vessels, sporozoites and
liver-stage (LS) parasites are promising targets for anti-malaria drugs aiming to
prevent mosquito-to-mammal transmission. In vitro LS parasite development system 
is useful in the screening of candidate drugs on LS parasite development and the 
elucidation of its underlying molecular mechanisms, which remain unclear. Using
rodent malaria parasites (Plasmodium berghei) as a model, this study aimed to
develop an optimal in vitro LS culture system for the full maturation of the LS
parasite into the hepatic merozoite, the next infective stage in parasite
development. As the development of this system required measurement of
maturation, a novel quantitative index of LS parasite maturation based on the
expression pattern of liver-specific protein 2 (LISP2) was first developed. The
use of this index for comparing the effect of incubation in different culture
media on LS maturation revealed that the d-glucose concentration of the culture
medium is the key factor promoting parasite development in hepatocytes and that a
d-glucose concentration of 2000mg/L/day is the threshold concentration at which
the maturation of P. berghei into infective hepatic merozoites is achieved. These
findings can be utilized to optimize a human malaria LS culture system for drug
discovery.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2014.03.004 
PMID: 24691399  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

