
1. FASEB J. 2014 Jul;28(7):3103-13. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-250399. Epub 2014 Apr 4.

A lysine-rich membrane-associated PHISTb protein involved in alteration of the
cytoadhesive properties of Plasmodium falciparum-infected red blood cells.

Proellocks NI(1), Herrmann S(2), Buckingham DW(1), Hanssen E(3), Hodges EK(1),
Elsworth B(1), Morahan BJ(1), Coppel RL(1), Cooke BM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Victoria, Australia; and.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Victoria, Australia; and Bio21 
Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia.
(3)Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Victoria, Australia; and
brian.cooke@monash.edu.

The genomes of malaria parasites (Plasmodium spp.) contain a family of genes
encoding proteins with a Plasmodium helical interspersed subtelomeric (PHIST)
domain, most of which are predicted to be exported into the parasite-infected
human red blood cell (iRBC). Here, using transgenic parasites and a combination
of cellular, biochemical, and biophysical assays, we have characterized and
determined the function of a novel member of the PHIST protein family in
Plasmodium falciparum, termed lysine-rich membrane-associated PHISTb (LyMP). LyMP
was shown to associate directly with the cytoskeleton of iRBCs where it plays a
role in their abnormal ability to adhere to a protein expressed on vascular
endothelial cells, resulting in sequestration. Deletion of LyMP dramatically
reduced adhesion of iRBCs to CD36 by 55%, which was completely restored to
wild-type levels on complementation. Intriguingly, in the absence of LyMP,
formation of RBC membrane knobs and the level of surface exposure of the
parasites' major cytoadhesive ligand, PfEMP1, were identical to those for the
parental parasite line, demonstrating for the first time an additional mechanism 
that enhances cytoadherence of iRBCs beyond those already recognized. Our
findings identify LyMP as a previously unknown RBC cytoskeletal-binding protein
that is likely to be of major significance in the complex pathophysiology of
falciparum malaria.-Proellocks, N. I., Herrmann, S., Buckingham, D. W., Hanssen, 
E., Hodges, E. K., Elsworth, B., Morahan, B. J., Coppel, R. L., Cooke, B. M. A
lysine-rich membrane-associated PHISTb protein involved in alteration of the
cytoadhesive properties of Plasmodium falciparum infected red blood cells.

Â© FASEB.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.14-250399 
PMID: 24706359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

