
1. Exp Parasitol. 2014 Jul;142:27-37. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2014.04.005. Epub 2014 
Apr 16.

Effects of Microtus fortis lymphocytes on Schistosoma japonicum in a bone marrow 
transplantation model.

Hu Y(1), Xu Y(1), Lu W(1), Quan H(1), Shen Y(1), Yuan Z(1), Zhang J(1), Zang
W(1), He Y(2), Cao J(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of
Health, WHO Collaborating Center for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and Filariasis,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(2)Hunan Institute of Schistosomiasis Control, Yueyang, People's Republic of
China.
(3)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of
Health, WHO Collaborating Center for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and Filariasis,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China. Electronic address: caojp@yahoo.com.

Microtus fortis is a non-permissive host for Schistosoma japonicum. While M.
fortis lymphocytes are known to provide natural resistance against S. japonicum, 
the specific mechanism remains unclear. A bone marrow transplantation (BMT) model
was established using immunodeficient mice, either nude (experiment 1) or V(D)J
recombination activation gene deficient mice (RAG-1(-/-)) (experiment 2) as
recipients and M. fortis or C57BL/6 mice as donors. The growth and development of
S. japonicum were evaluated in each group to assess the role of M. fortis
lymphocytes in the response to infection. Lymphocyte ratios and S.
japonicum-specific antibody production in transplanted groups increased
significantly compared to those in non-transplanted group. Spleen indices and
density of splenic lymphocytes in transplanted RAG-1(-/-) mice were higher than
those in non-transplanted RAG-1(-/-) mice. No difference in the worm burden was
observed among group A (transplants derived from M. fortis), B (transplants
derived from C57BL/6 mouse) and C (non-transplanted mice), although worms in
group A were shorter than those in other groups, except non-transplanted
RAG-1(-/-) mice. Reproductive systems of worms in mice (nude or RAG-1(-/-))
transplanted from M. fortis were not as mature as those in mice (nude or
RAG-1(-/-)) transplanted from C57BL/6 mouse and non-transplanted nude mice, but
they were more mature than worms in non-transplanted RAG-1(-/-) mice. Therefore, 
the transplantation model using nude and RAG-1(-/-) mice was successfully
established. The M. fortis lymphocytes did not appear to affect the S. japonicum 
worm burden, but they led to schistosome shortening and a significant reduction
in parasite spawning. Thus, M. fortis cellular and humoral immunity provides a
defense against schistosomes by negatively impacting the parasite growth and
reproductive development.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2014.04.005 
PMID: 24746640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

