
1. Malar J. 2014 Apr 17;13:148. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-148.

The prevalence of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in Gambian school 
children.

Okebe J(1), Amambua-Ngwa A, Parr J, Nishimura S, Daswani M, Takem EN, Affara M,
Ceesay SJ, Nwakanma D, D'Alessandro U.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Unit, Atlantic Boulevard, Fajara, The Gambia.
jokebe@mrc.gm.

BACKGROUND: Primaquine, the only available drug effective against Plasmodium
falciparum sexual stages, induces also a dose-dependent haemolysis, especially in
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficient (G6PDd) individuals. Therefore, it is
important to determine the prevalence of this deficiency in areas that would
potentially benefit from its use. The prevalence of G6PD deficiency by genotype
and enzyme activity was determined in healthy school children in The Gambia.
METHODS: Blood samples from primary school children collected during a dry season
malaria survey were screened for G6PDd and malaria infection. Genotypes for
allele mutations reported in the country; 376, 202A-, 968A- and 542 were analysed
while enzyme activity (phenotype) was assayed using a semi-quantitative
commercial test kit. Enzyme activity values were fitted in a finite mixture model
to determine the distribution and calculate a cut-off for deficiency. The
association between genotype and phenotype for boys and girls as well as the
association between mutant genotype and deficient phenotype was analysed.
RESULTS: Samples from 1,437 children; 51% boys were analysed. The prevalence of
P. falciparum malaria infection was 14%. The prevalence of the 202A-, 968 and 542
mutations was 1.8%, 2.1% and 1.0%, respectively, and higher in boys than in
girls. The prevalence of G6PDd phenotype was 6.4% (92/1,437), 7.8% (57/728) in
boys and 4.9% (35/709) in girls with significantly higher odds in the former (OR 
1.64, 95% CI 1.05, 2.53, p = 0.026). The deficient phenotype was associated with 
reduced odds of malaria infection (OR 0.77, 95% CI 0.36, 1.62, p = 0.49).
CONCLUSIONS: There is a weak association between genotype and phenotype estimates
of G6PDd prevalence. The phenotype expression of deficiency represents
combinations of mutant alleles rather than specific mutations. Genotype studies
in individuals with a deficient phenotype would help identify alleles responsible
for haemolysis.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-148 
PMCID: PMC3999733
PMID: 24742291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

