
1. Parasitol Res. 2014 Jul;113(7):2587-91. doi: 10.1007/s00436-014-3911-z. Epub 2014
Apr 27.

Performance of a new gelled nested PCR test for the diagnosis of imported
malaria: comparison with microscopy, rapid diagnostic test, and real-time PCR.

Iglesias N(1), Subirats M, Trevisi P, Ramírez-Olivencia G, Castán P, Puente S,
Toro C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Hospital Universitario La Paz-Cantoblanco-Carlos
III, IdiPAZ, Calle Sinesio Delgado 10, Madrid, 28029, Spain.

Microscopy and rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) are the techniques commonly used for
malaria diagnosis but they are usually insensitive at very low levels of
parasitemia. Nested PCR is commonly used as a reference technique in the
diagnosis of malaria due to its high sensitivity and specificity. However, it is 
a cumbersome assay only available in reference centers. We evaluated a new nested
PCR-based assay, BIOMALAR kit (Biotools B&M Labs, Madrid, Spain) which employs
ready-to-use gelled reagents and allows the identification of the main four
species of Plasmodium. Blood samples were obtained from patients with clinical
suspicion of malaria. A total of 94 subjects were studied. Fifty-two (55.3%) of
them were malaria-infected subjects corresponding to 48 cases of Plasmodium
falciparum, 1 Plasmodium malariae, 2 Plasmodium vivax, and 1 Plasmodium ovale.
The performance of the BIOMALAR test was compared with microscopy, rapid
diagnostic test (RDT) (BinaxNOW® Malaria) and real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR). 
The BIOMALAR test showed a sensitivity of 98.1% (95% confidence interval [CI],
89.7-100), superior to microscopy (82.7% [95% CI, 69.7-91.8]) and RDT (94.2% [95%
CI, 84.1-98.8]) and similar to qPCR (100% [95% CI, 93.2-100]). In terms of
specificity, the BIOMALAR assay showed the same value as microscopy and qPCR
(100% [95% CI, 93.2-100]). Nine subjects were submicroscopic carriers of malaria.
The BIOMALAR test identified almost all of them (8/9) in comparison with RDT
(6/9) and microscopy (0/9). In conclusion, the BIOMALAR is a PCR-based assay easy
to use with an excellent performance and especially useful for diagnosis
submicroscopic malaria.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-014-3911-z 
PMID: 24770719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

