
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Aug;82(8):3113-26. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01598-14. Epub 2014 May
12.

Association of heme oxygenase 1 with the restoration of liver function after
damage in murine malaria by Plasmodium yoelii.

Dey S(1), Mazumder S(1), Siddiqui AA(1), Iqbal MS(1), Banerjee C(1), Sarkar S(1),
De R(1), Goyal M(1), Bindu S(1), Bandyopadhyay U(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, CSIR-Indian Institute of
Chemical Biology, Jadavpur, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, CSIR-Indian Institute of
Chemical Biology, Jadavpur, Kolkata, West Bengal, India ubandyo_1964@yahoo.com.

The liver efficiently restores function after damage induced during malarial
infection once the parasites are cleared from the blood. However, the molecular
events leading to the restoration of liver function after malaria are still
obscure. To study this, we developed a suitable model wherein mice infected with 
Plasmodium yoelii (45% parasitemia) were treated with the antimalarial
α/β-arteether to clear parasites from the blood and, subsequently, restoration of
liver function was monitored. Liver function tests clearly indicated that
complete recovery of liver function occurred after 25 days of parasite clearance.
Analyses of proinflammatory gene expression and neutrophil infiltration further
indicated that hepatic inflammation, which was induced immediately after parasite
clearance from the blood, was gradually reduced. Moreover, the inflammation in
the liver after parasite clearance was found to be correlated positively with
oxidative stress and hepatocyte apoptosis. We investigated the role of heme
oxygenase 1 (HO-1) in the restoration of liver function after malaria because
HO-1 normally renders protection against inflammation, oxidative stress, and
apoptosis under various pathological conditions. The expression and activity of
HO-1 were found to be increased significantly after parasite clearance. We even
found that chemical silencing of HO-1 by use of zinc protoporphyrin enhanced
inflammation, oxidative stress, hepatocyte apoptosis, and liver injury. In
contrast, stimulation of HO-1 by cobalt protoporphyrin alleviated liver
inflammation and reduced oxidative stress, hepatocyte apoptosis, and associated
tissue injury. Therefore, we propose that selective induction of HO-1 in the
liver would be beneficial for the restoration of liver function after parasite
clearance.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01598-14 
PMCID: PMC4136231
PMID: 24818663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

