
1. Parasitol Res. 2014 Jul;113(7):2525-33. doi: 10.1007/s00436-014-3902-0. Epub 2014
May 9.

CDPKs of Cryptosporidium parvum--stage-specific expression in vitro.

Etzold M(1), Lendner M, Daugschies A, Dyachenko V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany,
etzold@vetmed.uni-leipzig.de.

Cryptosporidium parvum is a zoonotic agent that bears a high risk for the health 
of particularly immunocompromised humans and animals. As currently available
drugs and therapies against cryptosporidiosis do not turn out satisfactory, more 
intensive research on the control of this parasite is necessary. The genus
Cryptosporidium is unique within the phylum Apicomplexa as its localisation is
intracellular but extracytoplasmatic. Infection of host cells is initially a
parasite-driven process, but the signalling events and their downstream actions
within Cryptosporidium are poorly understood. Calcium-dependent protein kinases
(CDPKs) are probably involved in the regulation of invasion and egress.
Previously described in plants, algae and other Apicomplexa, CDPKs are not found 
in vertebrates. They are thus promising targets for pharmaceutical intervention. 
While CDPK1 is well characterised in Toxoplasma gondii (TgCDPK1) and Plasmodium
falciparum (PfCDPK1), only little information exists about the expression and
function of CDPK in C. parvum. Here, we describe results of the in silico
analysis of seven CpCDPKs. Five CpCDPKs contain potential sites for
N-myristoylation and N-palmitoylation. In a nested 3' rapid amplification of cDNA
ends (RACE)-PCR, expression of six CpCDPKs resulted in distinct bands in infected
cell cultures and extracts of freshly excysted sporozoites. The length of the 3' 
untranslated region (3' UTR) is described as well. Our results indicate CDPK
expression to be stage specific on the mRNA level.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-014-3902-0 
PMID: 24810092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

