
1. Mol Ther. 2014 Sep;22(9):1707-15. doi: 10.1038/mt.2014.85. Epub 2014 May 14.

A next-generation genetically attenuated Plasmodium falciparum parasite created
by triple gene deletion.

Mikolajczak SA(1), Lakshmanan V(1), Fishbaugher M(1), Camargo N(1), Harupa A(1), 
Kaushansky A(1), Douglass AN(1), Baldwin M(1), Healer J(2), O'Neill M(2), Phuong 
T(2), Cowman A(2), Kappe SH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute (Seattle BioMed), Seattle, Washington,
USA.
(2)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Victoria, Australia.
(3)1] Seattle Biomedical Research Institute (Seattle BioMed), Seattle,
Washington, USA [2] Department of Global Health, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, USA.

Immunization with live-attenuated Plasmodium sporozoites completely protects
against malaria infection. Genetic engineering offers a versatile platform to
create live-attenuated sporozoite vaccine candidates. We previously generated a
genetically attenuated parasite (GAP) by deleting the P52 and P36 genes in the
NF54 wild-type (WT) strain of Plasmodium falciparum (Pf p52(-)/p36(-) GAP).
Preclinical assessment of p52(-)/p36(-) GAP in a humanized mouse model indicated 
an early and severe liver stage growth defect. However, human exposure to >200 Pf
p52(-)/p36(-) GAP-infected mosquito bites in a safety trial resulted in
peripheral parasitemia in one of six volunteers, revealing that this GAP was
incompletely attenuated. We have now created a triple gene deleted GAP by
additionally removing the SAP1 gene (Pf p52(-)/p36(-)/sap1(-) GAP) and employed
flippase (FLP)/flippase recognition target (FRT) recombination for drug
selectable marker cassette removal. This next-generation GAP was
indistinguishable from WT parasites in blood stage and mosquito stage
development. Using an improved humanized mouse model transplanted with human
hepatocytes and human red blood cells, we show that despite a high-dose
sporozoite challenge, Pf p52(-)/p36(-)/sap1(-) GAP did not transition to blood
stage infection and appeared to be completely attenuated. Thus, clinical testing 
of Pf p52(-)/p36(-)/sap1(-) GAP assessing safety, immunogenicity, and efficacy
against sporozoite challenge is warranted.

DOI: 10.1038/mt.2014.85 
PMCID: PMC4435496
PMID: 24827907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

