
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2014 Aug;26:153-9. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.05.017. Epub
2014 May 24.

Prevalence of mutations in the antifolates resistance-associated genes (dhfr and 
dhps) in Plasmodium vivax parasites from Eastern and Central Sudan.

Pirahmadi S(1), Talha BA(2), Nour BY(2), Zakeri S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center,
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Pasteur Avenue, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Blue Nile National Institute for Communicable
Diseases, University of Gezira, P.O. Box 20, Wad Medani, Sudan; Department of
Parasitology, Faculty of Medical Laboratory Sciences, University of Gezira, P.O. 
Box 20, Wad Medani, Sudan.
(3)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center,
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Pasteur Avenue, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran.
Electronic address: zakeris@yahoo.com.

Plasmodium vivax is the most geographically widespread species, and its burden
has been increasingly documented in Eastern and Central Sudan. P. vivax becomes
the crucial challenge during elimination programs; thus an effective treatment is
necessary to prevent the development and the spread of resistant parasites.
Therefore, the main objective of the present study was to provide data on the
prevalence of molecular markers in two genes (pvdhfr and pvdhps) associated with 
SP resistance after nine years of AS+SP deployment among P. vivax parasites from 
Eastern and Central Sudan using PCR-RFLP. During 2012-2013, a number of 66 blood 
spots were obtained on filter paper. The samples were collected before treatment 
from febrile patients who were microscopically positive for P. vivax, from three 
states in Eastern and Central Sudan (Gezira, Gedarif, and Kassala). Mutations
were detected in three codons of pvdhfr (I13L, S58R, and S117N) and none in
pvdhps. The majority of P. vivax parasites had double mutations (58R/117N, 58%)
in dhfr gene, while all parasites were wild type in dhps gene. In addition,
limited distinct haplotypes (n=4) were detected. In conclusion, the prevalence of
mutations associated with SP resistance is low in Eastern and Central Sudan. Such
information is necessary for guiding malaria control measures in the frame of
Roll Back Malaria strategies for the elimination of malaria in the world.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.05.017 
PMID: 24861816  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

