
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 Aug;39(2):321-5. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.05.029.
Epub 2014 May 29.

Identification and characterization of a goose-type lysozyme from sewage snail
Physa acuta.

Guo Y(1), He H(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Shanghai 200025, China; Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector
Biology of the Chinese Ministry of Health, WHO Collaborating Centre for Malaria, 
Schistosomiasis and Filariasis, Shanghai 200025, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. Electronic address: 
hehx@ioz.ac.cn.

Freshwater snail Physa acuta has been considered as an important invasive species
and medical mollusc. Field investigation has shown that this snail could survive 
better than other snails in polluted water bodies. To understand the immune
mechanisms of P. acuta, suppression subtractive hybridization hepatopancreas cDNA
library has been constructed with bacterial challenge. In this study, a
full-length cDNA of a novel goose-type lysozyme (PALysG) has been identified from
P. acuta by EST and RACE technique. The conservative structure domains share high
homology with other molluscan g-type lysozymes including the SLT domain, the
substrate binding sites, the catalytic residues, three alpha-helices structures
and six molluscan specific cysteines. Meanwhile, PALysG is the first record of
goose-type lysozyme in Gastropoda. Real-time PCR indicated that PALysG mRNA had
been expressed significantly at high levels in hepatopancreas for 8-48 h. PALysG 
recombinant protein displayed the lytic activity of g-type lysozyme with other
organisms against Micrococcus lysodikicus.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.05.029 
PMID: 24882016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

