
1. Microb Pathog. 2014 Aug;73:37-46. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2014.05.005. Epub 2014
Jun 6.

Leishmania donovani eukaryotic initiation factor 5A: molecular characterization, 
localization and homology modelling studies.

Singh S(1), Raju K(2), Jatekar D(2), Dinesh N(2), Paul MS(3), Sobhia ME(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education
and Research, SAS Nagar, Mohali 160062, Punjab, India. Electronic address:
sushmasingh@niper.ac.in.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education
and Research, SAS Nagar, Mohali 160062, Punjab, India.
(3)Department of Pharmacoinformatics, National Institute of Pharmaceutical
Education and Research, Sector 67, SAS Nagar Mohali 160062, Punjab, India.

Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A (eIF5A) is a small acidic protein
highly conserved from archaea to mammals. eIF5A is the only protein which
undergoes a unique lysine residue modification to hypusine. Hypusinylation is
important for the function of eIF5A which is reported to be essential for cell
viability. eIF5A promotes formation of the first peptide bond at the onset of
protein synthesis. However, its function in Leishmania donovani is unclear. The
present study focuses on the characterization and localization of L. donovani
eIF5A protein. The eIF5A gene contains an ORF of 501×bp encoding 166 amino acid
residues with a predicted molecular mass and isoelectric point of 17.8 kDa and
4.83 respectively. A phylogenetic tree analysis revealed its close proximity to
trypanosomes however it is distantly located from Trichomonas vaginalis and
Plasmodium falciparum. The L. donovani eIF5A was expressed as a 6× His tagged
protein whose identity was confirmed by western blot and MALDI. Biophysical
investigation by CD revealed the predominant presence of 49% β sheet structure
which correlated well with secondary structure prediction. To gain insight into
the role of eIF5A in L. donovani, we investigated the subcellular distribution of
eIF5A. A GFP-fusion of L. donovani eIF5A was found to be localized in cytoplasm
as confirmed by subcellular fractionation. Our studies indicated that eIF5A is
primarily localized to cytoplasm and is undetectable in nuclear fraction. The
homology model of eIF5A of L. donovani was built and the resulting model showed
acceptable Ramachandran statistics. The model is reliable and can be used to
study eIF5A binding with its effector molecules.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2014.05.005 
PMID: 24909104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

