
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2014 Jun;195(1):34-42. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2014.05.006. Epub 2014 Jun 8.

A 2-amino quinoline,
5-(3-(2-(7-chloroquinolin-2-yl)ethenyl)phenyl)-8-dimethylcarbamyl-4,6-dithiaoctan
oic acid, interacts with PfMDR1 and inhibits its drug transport in Plasmodium
falciparum.

Edaye S(1), Reiling SJ(1), Leimanis ML(1), Wunderlich J(1), Rohrbach P(1),
Georges E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitology, McGill University, Ste. Anne de Bellevue, Montréal,
Québec, Canada.
(2)Institute of Parasitology, McGill University, Ste. Anne de Bellevue, Montréal,
Québec, Canada. Electronic address: Elias.Georges@McGill.CA.

Malaria is a major disease in the tropics where chemotherapy remains the main
mode of treatment and as such the rise and spread of drug-resistant malaria can
lead to human tragedy. Two membrane transport proteins, PfMDR1 (Plasmodium
falciparum multidrug resistance protein 1) and PfCRT (P. falciparum chloroquine
resistance transporter), have been shown to cause resistance to several
antimalarials. Both PfMDR1 and PfCRT are localized to the digestive vacuolar
membrane and appear to regulate the transport of drugs and physiological
metabolites. In this study we have used MK571, a 2-amino quinoline, to explore
its interaction with PfMDR1 and PfCRT in chloroquine-sensitive and -resistant
strains of P. falciparum. Our results show that chloroquine-resistant strains
(e.g., K1, Dd2, and 7G8) are consistently more sensitive to MK571 than
chloroquine-sensitive strains (e.g., 3D7, 106/1 and D10). This association,
however, was not maintained with the chloroquine-resistant strain FCB which IC50 
value was similar to chloroquine-sensitive strains. Moreover, the susceptibility 
of chloroquine-sensitive and -resistant strains to MK571 does not correlate with 
mutated PfCRT, nor is it reversible with verapamil; but correlates with mutations
in PfMDR1. Furthermore, MK571 appears to target the parasite's digestive vacuole 
(DV), as demonstrated by the ability of MK571 to: (1) block the accumulation of
the fluorescent dye Fluo-4 AM, a PfMDR1 substrate, into the digestive vacuole;
(2) reduce the transvacuolar pH gradient; and (3) inhibit the formation of
β-hematin in vitro. Moreover, the presence of non-toxic concentrations of MK571
sensitized both chloroquine-sensitive and -resistant parasites to mefloquine and 
halofantrine, likely by competing against PfMDR1-mediated sequestering of the
drugs into the DV compartment and away from the drugs' cytosolic targets. Our
data, nevertheless, found only a minimal decrease in MK571 IC50 value in FCB
parasite which second pfmdr1 copy was inactivated via gene disruption. Taken
together, the findings of this study suggest that MK571 interacts with native and
mutant PfMDR1 and modulates the import of drugs or solutes into the parasite's DV
and, as such, MK571 may be a useful tool in the characterization of PfMDR1 drug
interactions and substrate specificity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2014.05.006 
PMID: 24914817  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

