
1. OMICS. 2014 Jul;18(7):421-37. doi: 10.1089/omi.2014.0007. Epub 2014 Jun 17.

Brain proteomics of Anopheles gambiae.

Dwivedi SB(1), Muthusamy B, Kumar P, Kim MS, Nirujogi RS, Getnet D, Ahiakonu P,
De G, Nair B, Gowda H, Prasad TS, Kumar N, Pandey A, Okulate M.

Author information: 
(1)1 Institute of Bioinformatics , International Technology Park, Bangalore,
Karnataka, India .

Anopheles gambiae has a well-adapted system for host localization, feeding, and
mating behavior, which are all governed by neuronal processes in the brain.
However, there are no published reports characterizing the brain proteome to
elucidate neuronal signaling mechanisms in the vector. To this end, a large-scale
mapping of the brain proteome of An. gambiae was carried out using high
resolution tandem mass spectrometry, revealing a repertoire of >1800 proteins, of
which 15% could not be assigned any function. A large proportion of the
identified proteins were predicted to be involved in diverse biological processes
including metabolism, transport, protein synthesis, and olfaction. This study
also led to the identification of 10 GPCR classes of proteins, which could govern
sensory pathways in mosquitoes. Proteins involved in metabolic and neural
processes, chromatin modeling, and synaptic vesicle transport associated with
neuronal transmission were predominantly expressed in the brain. Proteogenomic
analysis expanded our findings with the identification of 15 novel genes and 71
cases of gene refinements, a subset of which were validated by RT-PCR and
sequencing. Overall, our study offers valuable insights into the brain physiology
of the vector that could possibly open avenues for intervention strategies for
malaria in the future.

DOI: 10.1089/omi.2014.0007 
PMCID: PMC4085979
PMID: 24937107  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

