
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 3;9(7):e101783. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101783. eCollection
2014.

Variation in the circumsporozoite protein of Plasmodium falciparum: vaccine
development implications.

Gandhi K(1), Thera MA(2), Coulibaly D(2), Traor√© K(2), Guindo AB(2), Ouattara
A(1), Takala-Harrison S(1), Berry AA(1), Doumbo OK(2), Plowe CV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute/Center for Vaccine Development, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)Malaria Research and Training Center, University of Science, Techniques and
Technology, Bamako, Mali.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016;11(1):e0148240.

The malaria vaccine candidate RTS,S/AS01 is based on immunogenic regions of
Plasmodium falciparum circumsporozoite protein (CSP) from the 3D7 reference
strain and has shown modest efficacy against clinical disease in African
children. It remains unclear what aspect(s) of the immune response elicited by
this vaccine are protective. The goals of this study were to measure diversity in
immunogenic regions of CSP, and to identify associations between polymorphism in 
CSP and the risk of P. falciparum infection and clinical disease. The present
study includes data and samples from a prospective cohort study designed to
measure incidence of malaria infection and disease in children in Bandiagara,
Mali. A total of 769 parasite-positive blood samples corresponding to both acute 
clinical malaria episodes and asymptomatic infections experienced by 100 children
were included in the study. Non-synonymous SNP data were generated by 454
sequencing for the T-cell epitopes, and repeat length data were generated for the
B-cell epitopes of the cs gene. Cox proportional hazards models were used to
determine the effect of sequence variation in consecutive infections occurring
within individuals on the time to new infection and new clinical malaria episode.
Diversity in the T-cell epitope-encoding regions Th2R and Th3R remained stable
throughout seasons, between age groups and between clinical and asymptomatic
infections with the exception of a higher proportion of 3D7 haplotypes found in
the oldest age group. No associations between sequence variation and hazard of
infection or clinical malaria were detected. The lack of association between
sequence variation and hazard of infection or clinical malaria suggests that
naturally acquired immunity to CSP may not be allele-specific.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101783 
PMCID: PMC4081809
PMID: 24992338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

