
1. Bioconjug Chem. 2014 Aug 20;25(8):1470-8. doi: 10.1021/bc5002246. Epub 2014 Jul
14.

Design of lipid nanocapsule delivery vehicles for multivalent display of
recombinant Env trimers in HIV vaccination.

Pejawar-Gaddy S(1), Kovacs JM, Barouch DH, Chen B, Irvine DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Engineering, #Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer
Research, and ¶Department of Material Science, Engineering, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology , Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States.

Immunization strategies that elicit antibodies capable of neutralizing diverse
virus strains will likely be an important part of a successful vaccine against
HIV. However, strategies to promote robust humoral responses against the native
intact HIV envelope trimer structure are lacking. We recently developed
chemically cross-linked lipid nanocapsules as carriers of molecular adjuvants and
encapsulated or surface-displayed antigens, which promoted follicular helper
T-cell responses and elicited high-avidity, durable antibody responses to a
candidate malaria antigen. To apply this system to the delivery of HIV antigens, 
Env gp140 trimers with terminal his-tags (gp140T-his) were anchored to the
surface of lipid nanocapsules via Ni-NTA-functionalized lipids. Initial
experiments revealed that the large (409 kDa), heavily glycosylated trimers were 
capable of extracting fluid phase lipids from the membranes of nanocapsules.
Thus, liquid-ordered and/or gel-phase lipid compositions were required to stably 
anchor trimers to the particle membranes. Trimer-loaded nanocapsules combined
with the clinically relevant adjuvant monophosphoryl lipid A primed high-titer
antibody responses in mice at antigen doses ranging from 5 μg to as low as 100
ng, whereas titers dropped more than 50-fold over the same dose range when
soluble trimer was mixed with a strong oil-in-water adjuvant comparator.
Nanocapsule immunization also broadened the number of distinct epitopes on the
HIV trimer recognized by the antibody response. These results suggest that
nanocapsules displaying HIV trimers in an oriented, multivalent presentation can 
promote key aspects of the humoral response against Env immunogens.

DOI: 10.1021/bc5002246 
PMCID: PMC4140538
PMID: 25020048  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

