
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 31;9(7):e101484. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101484.
eCollection 2014.

Distribution and frequency of kdr mutations within Anopheles gambiae s.l.
populations and first report of the ace.1 G119S mutation in Anopheles arabiensis 
from Burkina Faso (West Africa).

Dabiré RK(1), Namountougou M(1), Diabaté A(1), Soma DD(1), Bado J(1), Toé HK(2), 
Bass C(3), Combary P(4).

Author information: 
(1)IRSS (Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé), Centre Muraz,
Bobo-Dioulasso, Burkina Faso.
(2)IRSS (Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé), Centre Muraz,
Bobo-Dioulasso, Burkina Faso; Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of
Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(3)Biological Chemistry and Crop Protection Rothamsted Research, Harpenden,
United Kingdom.
(4)National Malaria Control Programme, Ministry of Health, Ouagadougou, Burkina
Faso.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(11):e0141645.

An entomological survey was carried out at 15 sites dispersed throughout the
three eco-climatic regions of Burkina Faso (West Africa) in order to assess the
current distribution and frequency of mutations that confer resistance to
insecticides in An. gambiae s.l. populations in the country. Both knockdown (kdr)
resistance mutation variants (L1014F and L1014S), that confer resistance to
pyrethroid insecticides, were identified concomitant with the ace-1 G119S
mutation confirming the presence of multiple resistance mechanisms in the An.
gambiae complex in Burkina Faso. Compared to the last survey, the frequency of
the L1014F kdr mutation appears to have remained largely stable and relatively
high in all species. In contrast, the distribution and frequency of the L1014S
mutation has increased significantly in An. gambiae s.l. across much of the
country. Furthermore we report, for the first time, the identification of the
ace.1 G119S mutation in An. arabiensis populations collected at 8 sites
[corrected]. This mutation, which confers resistance to organophosphate and
carbamate insecticides, has been reported previously only in the An. gambiae S
and M molecular forms. This finding is significant as organophosphates and
carbamates are used in indoor residual sprays (IRS) to control malaria vectors as
complementary strategies to the use of pyrethroid impregnated bednets. The
occurrence of the three target-site resistance mutations in both An. gambiae
molecular forms and now An. arabiensis has significant implications for the
control of malaria vector populations in Burkina Faso and for resistance
management strategies based on the rotation of insecticides with different modes 
of action.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101484 
PMCID: PMC4117487
PMID: 25077792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

