
1. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2014 Aug;109(5):598-601. Epub 2014 Aug 5.

Antibody recognition of Plasmodium falciparum infected red blood cells by
symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals in the Brazilian Amazon.

Fratus AS(1), Cabral FJ(1), Fotoran WL(1), Medeiros MM(1), Carlos BC(1), Martha
Rd(2), da Silva LH(2), Lopes SC(3), Costa FT(3), Wunderlich G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade 
de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.
(2)Instituto de Pesquisas em Patologias Tropicais, Porto Velho, RO, Brasil.
(3)Departamento de Genética, Evolução e Bioagentes, Instituto de Biologia,
Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brasil.

In the Amazon Region, there is a virtual absence of severe malaria and few fatal 
cases of naturally occurring Plasmodium falciparum infections; this presents an
intriguing and underexplored area of research. In addition to the rapid access of
infected persons to effective treatment, one cause of this phenomenon might be
the recognition of cytoadherent variant proteins on the infected red blood cell
(IRBC) surface, including the var gene encoded P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane
protein 1. In order to establish a link between cytoadherence, IRBC surface
antibody recognition and the presence or absence of malaria symptoms, we
phenotype-selected four Amazonian P. falciparum isolates and the laboratory
strain 3D7 for their cytoadherence to CD36 and ICAM1 expressed on CHO cells. We
then mapped the dominantly expressed var transcripts and tested whether
antibodies from symptomatic or asymptomatic infections showed a differential
recognition of the IRBC surface. As controls, the 3D7 lineages expressing severe 
disease-associated phenotypes were used. We showed that there was no profound
difference between the frequency and intensity of antibody recognition of the
IRBC-exposed P. falciparum proteins in symptomatic vs. asymptomatic infections.
The 3D7 lineages, which expressed severe malaria-associated phenotypes, were
strongly recognised by most, but not all plasmas, meaning that the recognition of
these phenotypes is frequent in asymptomatic carriers, but is not necessarily a
prerequisite to staying free of symptoms.

DOI: 10.1590/0074-0276140027 
PMCID: PMC4156453
PMID: 25099336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

