
1. Biochem J. 2014 Jul 15;461(2):189-203. doi: 10.1042/BJ20140051.

Genetic ablation of plasmoDJ1, a multi-activity enzyme, attenuates parasite
virulence and reduces oocyst production.

Singhal N(1); Atul, Mastan BS(2), Kumar KA(2), Sijwali PS(1).

Author information: 
(1)*CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad-500007, AP, India.
(2)â€ University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad-500046, AP, India.

Malaria parasites must respond to stresses and environmental signals to
perpetuate efficiently during their multistage development in diverse
environments. To gain insights into the parasite's stress response mechanisms, we
investigated a conserved Plasmodium protein, which we have named plasmoDJ1 on the
basis of the presence of a putative cysteine protease motif of the DJ-1/PfpI
superfamily, for its activities, potential to respond to stresses and role in
parasite development. PlasmoDJ1 is expressed in all intraerythrocytic stages and 
ookinetes. Its expression was increased 7-9-fold upon heat shock and oxidative
stress due to H2O2 and artemisinin; its expression in a stress-sensitive
Escherichia coli mutant conferred tolerance against oxidative stress, indicating 
that plasmoDJ1 has the potential to sense and/or protect from stresses.
Recombinant plasmoDJ1 efficiently neutralized H2O2, facilitated renaturation of
denatured citrate synthase and showed protease activity, indicating that
plasmoDJ1 is a multi-activity protein. Mutation of the catalytic cysteine
residue, but not other residues, reduced H2O2-neutralization activity by ~90% and
significantly decreased chaperone and protease activities, indicating that these 
activities are intrinsic to plasmoDJ1. The plasmoDJ1 gene knockout in Plasmodium 
berghei ANKA attenuated virulence and reduced oocyst production, suggesting a
major role for plasmoDJ1 in parasite development, which probably depends on its
multiple activities.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20140051 
PMID: 25091419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

