
1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 7;9(8):e103816. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103816. eCollection
2014.

Salivary gland proteome analysis reveals modulation of anopheline unique proteins
in insensitive acetylcholinesterase resistant Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes.

Cornelie S(1), Rossignol M(1), Seveno M(2), Demettre E(2), Mouchet F(1), Djègbè
I(3), Marin P(2), Chandre F(1), Corbel V(3), Remoué F(3), Mathieu-Daudé F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Maladies Infectieuses et Vecteurs, Ecologie, Génétique, Evolution et Contrôle 
(MIVEGEC), UMR IRD 224-CNRS 5290-UM1-UM2, Institut de Recherche pour le
Développement (IRD), Montpellier, France.
(2)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle (IGF), UMR CNRS 5203-INSERM 661-UM1-UM2,
Montpellier, France.
(3)Maladies Infectieuses et Vecteurs, Ecologie, Génétique, Evolution et Contrôle 
(MIVEGEC), UMR IRD 224-CNRS 5290-UM1-UM2, Institut de Recherche pour le
Développement (IRD), Centre de Recherche Entomologique de Cotonou (CREC),
Cotonou, Bénin.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(11):e113440.

Insensitive acetylcholinesterase resistance due to a mutation in the
acetylcholinesterase (ace) encoding ace-1 gene confers cross-resistance to
organophosphate and carbamate insecticides in Anopheles gambiae populations from 
Central and West Africa. This mutation is associated with a strong genetic cost
revealed through alterations of some life history traits but little is known
about the physiological and behavioural changes in insects bearing the ace-1(R)
allele. Comparative analysis of the salivary gland contents between An. gambiae
susceptible and ace-1(R) resistant strains was carried out to charaterize factors
that could be involved in modifications of blood meal process, trophic behaviour 
or pathogen interaction in the insecticide-resistant mosquitoes. Differential
analysis of the salivary gland protein profiles revealed differences in abundance
for several proteins, two of them showing major differences between the two
strains. These two proteins identified as saglin and TRIO are salivary gland-1
related proteins, a family unique to anopheline mosquitoes, one of them playing a
crucial role in salivary gland invasion by Plasmodium falciparum sporozoites.
Differential expression of two other proteins previously identified in the
Anopheles sialome was also observed. The differentially regulated proteins are
involved in pathogen invasion, blood feeding process, and protection against
oxidation, relevant steps in the outcome of malaria infection. Further functional
studies and insect behaviour experiments would confirm the impact of the
modification of the sialome composition on blood feeding and pathogen
transmission abilities of the resistant mosquitoes. The data supports the
hypothesis of alterations linked to insecticide resistance in the biology of the 
primary vector of human malaria in Africa.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103816 
PMCID: PMC4125145
PMID: 25102176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

