
1. Parasitol Int. 2014 Dec;63(6):858-64. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2014.07.014. Epub
2014 Aug 7.

The association of Duffy binding protein region II polymorphisms and its
antigenicity in Plasmodium vivax isolates from Thailand.

Chootong P(1), McHenry AM(2), Ntumngia FB(3), Sattabongkot J(4), Adams JH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Applied Technology, Faculty of Medical
Technology, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. Electronic address:
pchooton@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Biology, Southwestern Adventist University, Keene, TX, United
States.
(3)Department of Global Health, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, United
States.
(4)Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Plasmodium vivax Duffy binding protein II (DBPII) plays an important role in
reticulocyte invasion and is a potential vaccine candidate against vivax malaria.
However, polymorphisms in DBPII are a challenge for the successful design of a
broadly protective vaccine. In this study, the genetic diversity of DBPII among
Thai isolates was analyzed from Plasmodium vivax-infected blood samples and
polymorphism characters were defined with the MEGA4 program. Sequence analysis
identified 12 variant residues that are common among Thai DBPII haplotypes with
variant residues L333F, L424I, W437R and I503K having the highest frequency.
Variant residue D384K occurs in combination with either E385K or K386N/Q.
Additionally, variant residue L424I occurs in conjunction with W437R in most Thai
DBPII alleles and these variants frequently occur in combination with the I503K
variant. The polymorphic patterns of Thai isolates were defined into 9 haplotypes
(Thai DBL-1, -2, -3, etc.…). Thai DBL-2, -5, -6 haplotypes are the most common
DBPII variants in Thai residents. To study the association of these Thai DBPII
polymorphisms with antigenic character, the functional inhibition of anti-DBPII
monoclonal antibodies against a panel of Thai DBL variants was characterized by
an in vitro erythrocyte binding inhibition assay. The functional inhibition of
anti-DBPII monoclonal antibodies 3C9, 2D10 and 2C6 against Thai variants was
significantly different, suggesting that polymorphisms of Thai DBPII variants
alter the antigenic character of the target epitopes. In contrast, anti-DBPII
monoclonal antibody 2H2 inhibited all Thai DBPII variants equally well. Our
results suggest that the immune efficacy of a DBPII vaccine will depend on the
specificity of the anti-DBPII antibodies induced and that it is preferable to
optimize responses to conserved epitopes for broadly neutralizing protection
against P. vivax.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2014.07.014 
PMCID: PMC4301702
PMID: 25108177  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

