
1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 12;9(8):e104627. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104627.
eCollection 2014.

Depletion of regulatory T cells augments a vaccine-induced T effector cell
response against the liver-stage of malaria but fails to increase memory.

Espinoza Mora MR(1), Steeg C(2), Tartz S(2), Heussler V(2), Sparwasser T(3), Link
A(4), Fleischer B(2), Jacobs T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bernhard Nocht Institut für Tropenmedizin, Abteilung Immunologie, Hamburg,
Germany; Universitätsklinikum des Saarlandes, Klinik für Innere Medizin III,
Homburg, Germany.
(2)Bernhard Nocht Institut für Tropenmedizin, Abteilung Immunologie, Hamburg,
Germany.
(3)TWINCORE, Zentrum für Experimentelle und Klinische Infektionsforschung,
Institut für Infektionsimmunologie, Hannover, Germany.
(4)Universitätsklinikum des Saarlandes, Klinik für Innere Medizin III, Homburg,
Germany.

Regulatory T cells (T(reg)) have been shown to restrict vaccine-induced T cell
responses in different experimental models. In these studies CD4(+)CD25(+) T(reg)
were depleted using monoclonal antibodies against CD25, which might also
interfere with CD25 on non-regulatory T cell populations and would have no effect
on Foxp3(+)CD25(-) T(reg). To obtain more insights in the specific function of
T(reg) during vaccination we used mice that are transgenic for a bacterial
artificial chromosome expressing a diphtheria toxin (DT) receptor-eGFP fusion
protein under the control of the foxp3 gene locus (depletion of regulatory T cell
mice; DEREG). As an experimental vaccine-carrier recombinant Bordetella adenylate
cyclase toxoid fused with a MHC-class I-restricted epitope of the
circumsporozoite protein (ACT-CSP) of Plasmodium berghei (Pb) was used. ACT-CSP
was shown by us previously to introduce the CD8+ epitope of Pb-CSP into the MHC
class I presentation pathway of professional antigen-presenting cells (APC).
Using this system we demonstrate here that the number of CSP-specific T cells
increases when T(reg) are depleted during prime but also during boost
immunization. Importantly, despite this increase of T effector cells no
difference in the number of antigen-specific memory cells was observed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104627 
PMCID: PMC4130546
PMID: 25115805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

