
1. Drug Target Insights. 2014 Jul 28;8:31-8. doi: 10.4137/DTI.S16504. eCollection
2014.

Molecular and Kinetic Characterization of Babesia microti Gray Strain Lactate
Dehydrogenase as a Potential Drug Target.

Vudriko P(1), Masatani T(2), Cao S(2), Terkawi MA(2), Kamyingkird K(2), Mousa
AA(2), Adjou Moumouni PF(2), Nishikawa Y(2), Xuan X(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases (NRCPD), Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Inada-cho, Obihiro, Hokkaido, Japan. ;
Department of Veterinary Pharmacy, Clinics and Comparative Medicine, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Animal Resources and Biosecurity, Makerere University,
Kampala, Uganda.
(2)National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases (NRCPD), Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Inada-cho, Obihiro, Hokkaido, Japan.

Babesia microti is an emerging zoonotic protozoan organism that causes
"malaria-like" symptoms that can be fatal in immunocompromised people. Owing to
lack of specific therapeutic regiment against the disease, we cloned and
characterized B. microti lactate dehydrogenase (BmLDH) as a potential molecular
drug receptor. The in vitro kinetic properties of BmLDH enzyme was evaluated
using nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD(+)) as a co-factor and lactate as a 
substrate. Inhibitory assay was also done using gossypol as BmLDH inhibitor to
determine the inhibitory concentration 50 (IC50). The result showed that the 0.99
kbp BmLDH gene codes for a barely soluble 36 kDa protein (332 amino acids)
localized in both the cytoplasm and nucleus of the parasite. In vitro enzyme
kinetic studies further revealed that BmLDH is an active enzyme with a high
catalytic efficiency at optimal pH of 10.2. The K m values of NAD(+) and lactate 
were 8.7 ± 0.57 mM and 99.9 ± 22.33 mM, respectively. The IC50 value for gossypol
was 0.345 μM, while at 2.5 μM, gossypol caused 100% inhibition of BmLDH catalytic
activity. These findings, therefore, provide initial evidence that BmLDH could be
a potential drug target, although further in vivo studies are needed to validate 
the practical application of lactate dehydrogenase inhibitors against B. microti 
infection.

DOI: 10.4137/DTI.S16504 
PMCID: PMC4125376
PMID: 25125971 

