
1. Cell Microbiol. 2015 Feb;17(2):191-206. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12355. Epub 2014 Sep 24.

An essential role of the basal body protein SAS-6 in Plasmodium male gamete
development and malaria transmission.

Marques SR(1), Ramakrishnan C, Carzaniga R, Blagborough AM, Delves MJ, Talman AM,
Sinden RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College of London, London, SW7 2AZ, UK.

Gametocytes are the sole Plasmodium parasite stages that infect mosquitoes;
therefore development of functional gametes is required for malaria transmission.
Flagellum assembly of the Plasmodium male gamete differs from that of most other 
eukaryotes in that it is intracytoplasmic but retains a key conserved feature:
axonemes assemble from basal bodies. The centriole/basal body protein SAS-6
normally regulates assembly and duplication of these organelles and its depletion
causes severe flagellar/ciliary abnormalities in a diverse array of eukaryotes.
Since basal body and flagellum assembly are intimately coupled to male gamete
development in Plasmodium, we hypothesized that SAS-6 disruption may cause
gametogenesis defects and perturb transmission. We show that Plasmodium berghei
sas6 knockouts display severely abnormal male gametogenesis presenting reduced
basal body numbers, axonemal assembly defects and abnormal nuclear allocation.
The defects in gametogenesis reduce fertilization and render Pbsas6 knockouts
less infectious to mosquitoes. Additionally, we show that lack of Pbsas6 blocks
transmission from mosquito to vertebrate host, revealing an additional yet
undefined role in ookinete to sporulating oocysts transition. These findings
underscore the vulnerability of the basal body/SAS-6 to malaria transmission
blocking interventions.

Â© 2014 The Authors. Cellular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12355 
PMCID: PMC4441282
PMID: 25154861  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

