
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Nov;82(11):4654-65. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01940-14. Epub 2014 Aug
25.

The subcellular location of ovalbumin in Plasmodium berghei blood stages
influences the magnitude of T-cell responses.

Lin JW(1), Shaw TN(2), Annoura T(1), Fougère A(1), Bouchier P(1),
Chevalley-Maurel S(1), Kroeze H(1), Franke-Fayard B(1), Janse CJ(1), Couper
KN(2), Khan SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Leiden Malaria Research Group, Parasitology, Leiden University Medical Centre,
Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom.
(3)Leiden Malaria Research Group, Parasitology, Leiden University Medical Centre,
Leiden, The Netherlands S.M.Khan@lumc.nl.

Model antigens are frequently introduced into pathogens to study determinants
that influence T-cell responses to infections. To address whether an antigen's
subcellular location influences the nature and magnitude of antigen-specific
T-cell responses, we generated Plasmodium berghei parasites expressing the model 
antigen ovalbumin (OVA) either in the parasite cytoplasm or on the
parasitophorous vacuole membrane (PVM). For cytosolic expression, OVA alone or
conjugated to mCherry was expressed from a strong constitutive promoter (OVAhsp70
or OVA::mCherryhsp70); for PVM expression, OVA was fused to HEP17/EXP1
(OVA::Hep17hep17). Unexpectedly, OVA expression in OVAhsp70 parasites was very
low, but when OVA was fused to mCherry (OVA::mCherryhsp70), it was highly
expressed. OVA expression in OVA::Hep17hep17 parasites was strong but
significantly less than that in OVA::mCherryhsp70 parasites. These transgenic
parasites were used to examine the effects of antigen subcellular location and
expression level on the development of T-cell responses during blood-stage
infections. While all OVA-expressing parasites induced activation and
proliferation of OVA-specific CD8(+) T cells (OT-I) and CD4(+) T cells (OT-II),
the level of activation varied: OVA::Hep17hep17 parasites induced significantly
stronger splenic and intracerebral OT-I and OT-II responses than those of
OVA::mCherryhsp70 parasites, but OVA::mCherryhsp70 parasites promoted stronger
OT-I and OT-II responses than those of OVAhsp70 parasites. Despite lower OVA
expression levels, OVA::Hep17hep17 parasites induced stronger T-cell responses
than those of OVA::mCherryhsp70 parasites. These results indicate that
unconjugated cytosolic OVA is not stably expressed in Plasmodium parasites and,
importantly, that its cellular location and expression level influence both the
induction and magnitude of parasite-specific T-cell responses. These parasites
represent useful tools for studying the development and function of
antigen-specific T-cell responses during malaria infection.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01940-14 
PMCID: PMC4249308
PMID: 25156724  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

