
1. Gene. 2014 Oct 25;550(2):245-52. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.08.036. Epub 2014 Aug
20.

Molecular characterization of calreticulin from Anopheles stephensi midgut cells 
and functional assay of the recombinant calreticulin with Plasmodium berghei
ookinetes.

Borhani Dizaji N(1), Basseri HR(2), Naddaf SR(3), Heidari M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Entomology, School of Public Health, Tehran University
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran; Department of Parasitology, Pasteur Institute 
of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Medical Entomology, School of Public Health, Tehran University
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Parasitology, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran; Stem Cell Preparation Unit, Eye Research Center, Farabi Eye Hospital,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
mheidari@sina.tums.ac.ir.

Transmission blocking vaccines (TBVs) that target the antigens on the midgut
epithelium of Anopheles mosquitoes are among the promising tools for the
elimination of the malaria parasite. Characterization and analysis of effective
antigens is the first step to design TBVs. Calreticulin (CRT), a lectin-like
protein, from Anopheles albimanus midgut, has shown antigenic features,
suggesting a promising and novel TBV target. CRT is a highly conserved protein
with similar features in vertebrates and invertebrates including anopheline. We
cloned the full-length crt gene from malaria vector, Anopheles stephensi (AsCrt) 
and explored the interaction of recombinant AsCrt protein, expressed in a
prokaryotic system (pGEX-6p-1), with surface proteins of Plasmodium berghei
ookinetes by immunofluorescence assay. The cellular localization of AsCrt was
determined using the baculovirus expression system. Sequence analysis of the
whole cDNA of AsCrt revealed that AsCrt contains an ORF of 1221 bp. The amino
acid sequence of AsCrt protein obtained in this study showed 64% homology with
similar protein in human. The AsCrt shares the most common features of CRTs from 
other species. This gene encodes a 406 amino-acid protein with a molecular mass
of 46 kDa, which contains a predicted 16 amino-acid signal peptides, conserved
cysteine residues, a proline-rich region, and highly acidic C-terminal domain
with endoplasmic reticulum retrieval sequence HDEL. The production of GST-AsCrt
recombinant protein was confirmed by Western blot analysis using an antibody
against the GST protein. The FITC-labeled GST-AsCrt exhibited a significant
interaction with P. berghei ookinete surface proteins. Purified recombinant
GST-AsCrt, labeled with FITC, displayed specific binding to the surface of P.
berghei ookinetes in comparison with control. Moreover, the expression of AsCrt
in baculovirus expression system indicated that AsCrt was localized on the
surface of Sf9 cells. Our results suggest that AsCrt could be utilized as a
potential target for future studies in TBV area for malaria control.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.08.036 
PMID: 25150160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

