
1. Interdiscip Sci. 2014 Jun;6(2):158-66. doi: 10.1007/s12539-013-0025-8. Epub 2014 
Jun 17.

Exploring putative molecular mechanisms of human pyruvate kinase enzyme
deficiency and its role in resistance against Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Qidwai T(1), Jamal F, Singh S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Engineering & Technology, Raja Balwant
Singh, Engineering Technical Campus, Agra, 283105, U.P., India.

Malaria is the third most prevalent cause of global mortality and is an
interesting case of evolutionary selection. In response to high frequency of
malaria infection, several host genetic factors have been selected, such as
Hemoglobin variants, Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency and
pyruvate kinase deficiency. Among these popular host genetic factors, deficiency 
of pyruvate kinase enzyme is one of the most important factor that provide
resistance against malaria. Regulation of this enzyme at the level of
transcription is important and several factors may play crucial role in
regulation of this enzyme. DNA sequence variation and epigenetic factors
modifying transcriptional regulation of gene have been explored in context of
several diseases. In the present study, we explored the factors modifying
transcription regulation of pyruvate kinase gene with the help of Bioinformatics 
tools. On the basis of our predictions we hypothesize that any factor that
reduces the availability (level) or activity of pyruvate kinase enzyme must play 
a strong role in resistance to malaria. Thus, factors reducing the activity (loss
of function) or level of pyruvate kinase have been selected to provide resistance
against malaria primarily in endemic regions.

DOI: 10.1007/s12539-013-0025-8 
PMID: 25172454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

