
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Nov;82(11):4865-77. doi: 10.1128/IAI.02080-14. Epub 2014 Sep
2.

Functional characterization of Anopheles matrix metalloprotease 1 reveals its
agonistic role during sporogonic development of malaria parasites.

Goulielmaki E(1), Sidén-Kiamos I(2), Loukeris TG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation of Research and
Technology-Hellas, Heraklion, Crete, Greece Biology Department, University of
Crete, Heraklion, Crete, Greece egoulielmaki@gmail.com.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation of Research and
Technology-Hellas, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

The ability to invade tissues is a unique characteristic of the malaria stages
that develop/differentiate within the mosquitoes (ookinetes and sporozoites). On 
the other hand, tissue invasion by many pathogens has often been associated with 
increased matrix metalloprotease (MMP) activity in the invaded tissues. By
employing cell biology and reverse genetics, we studied the expression and
explored putative functions of one of the three MMPs encoded in the genome of the
malaria vector Anopheles gambiae, namely, the Anopheles gambiae MMP1 (AgMMP1)
gene, during the processes of blood digestion, midgut epithelium invasion by
Plasmodium ookinetes, and oocyst development. We show that AgMMP1 exists in two
alternative isoforms resulting from alternative splicing; one secreted (S-MMP1)
and associated with hemocytes, and one membrane type (MT-MMP1) enriched in the
cell attachment sites of the midgut epithelium. MT-MMP1 showed a remarkable
response to ookinete midgut invasion manifested by increased expression, enhanced
zymogen maturation, and subcellular redistribution, all indicative of an
implication in the midgut epithelial healing that accompanies ookinete invasion. 
Importantly, RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated silencing of the AgMMP1 gene
revealed a postinvasion protective function of AgMMP1 during oocyst development. 
The combined results link for the first time an MMP with vector competence and
mosquito-Plasmodium interactions.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.02080-14 
PMCID: PMC4249346
PMID: 25183733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

