
1. Parasit Vectors. 2014 Sep 8;7:433. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-433.

Plasma microRNAs are promising novel biomarkers for the early detection of
Toxoplasma gondii infection.

Jia B, Chang Z, Wei X, Lu H, Yin J, Jiang N(1), Chen Q.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Institute of Zoonosis/College of Veterinary
Medicine, Jilin University, Xi An Da Lu 5333, Changchun 130062, China.
jiangning@jlu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been shown to be present in plasma, which are
remarkably stable, and have been suggested as disease biomarkers. Toxoplasma
gondii (T. gondii) is a protozoan parasite that is infective to a wide range of
animals and human beings. Previous studies have found that the parasite generated
a large number of miRNAs during proliferation and it is known that the spectrum
of miRNA expression in the infected hosts is pathogen-specific. To date, there
are no reports regarding the application of microRNAs as biomarkers for the early
detection of T. gondii infection.
METHODS: In this study, we investigated the expression patterns of 414 murine
miRNAs and tested their expression levels in the plasma after T. gondii infection
by real-time PCR, with an ultimate purpose of identifying infection-related
miRNAs. Three miRNAs in particular, exhibiting prominently elevated expressions, 
were further validated in a large number of infected mice. The Toxoplasma
infection-specific miRNAs were confirmed by comparing their expression levels
with those of mice infected with Plasmodium berghei, P. yoelii, P. chabaudi,
Cryptosporidium parvum, Mouse hepatitis virus, and Staphylococcus aureus.
RESULTS: Among the 414 miRNA candidates identified by a real-time PCR array, 71
were found to be up-regulated in the plasma of T. gondii infected mice. Three of 
those miRNAs (mmu-miR-712-3p, mmu-miR-511-5p and mmu-miR-217-5p) were prominently
expressed in mice infected by both the RH and ME49 strains of T. gondii.
Additionally, the elevated expression of these miRNAs was Toxoplasma-specific.
CONCLUSIONS: The levels of the three miRNAs, mmu-miR-712-3p, mmu-miR-511-5p and
mmu-miR-217-5p miRNAs, were found specifically up-regulated in plasma of mice
after T. gondii infection.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-433 
PMCID: PMC4261535
PMID: 25199527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

