
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 24;289(43):30025-39. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.586735. Epub
2014 Sep 9.

Kinase-associated endopeptidase 1 (Kae1) participates in an atypical
ribosome-associated complex in the apicoplast of Plasmodium falciparum.

Mallari JP(1), Oksman A(1), Vaupel B(1), Goldberg DE(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Medicine and Molecular Microbiology and the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110.
(2)From the Departments of Medicine and Molecular Microbiology and the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110 dgoldberg@wustl.edu.

The universally conserved kinase-associated endopeptidase 1 (Kae1) protein family
has established roles in N(6)-threonylcarbamoyl adenosine tRNA modification,
transcriptional regulation, and telomere homeostasis. These functions are
performed in complex with a conserved core of protein binding partners. Herein we
describe the localization, essentiality, and protein-protein interactions for
Kae1 in the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. We found that the
parasite expresses one Kae1 protein in the cytoplasm and a second protein in the 
apicoplast, a chloroplast remnant organelle involved in fatty acid, heme, and
isoprenoid biosynthesis. To analyze the protein interaction networks for both
Kae1 pathways, we developed a new proteomic cross-validation approach. This
strategy compares immunoprecipitation-MS data sets across different cellular
compartments to enrich for biologically relevant protein interactions. Our
results show that cytoplasmic Kae1 forms a complex with Bud32 and Cgi121 as in
other organisms, whereas apicoplast Kae1 makes novel interactions with multiple
proteins in the apicoplast. Quantitative RT-PCR and immunoprecipitation studies
indicate that apicoplast Kae1 and its partners interact specifically with the
apicoplast ribosomes and with proteins involved in ribosome function. Together,
these data indicate an expanded, apicoplast-specific role for Kae1 in the
parasite.

Â© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.586735 
PMCID: PMC4208010
PMID: 25204654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

