
1. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2014 Dec 1;209:148-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2014.09.002.
Epub 2014 Sep 16.

Evolution of gonadotropin-inhibitory hormone receptor and its ligand.

Ubuka T(1), Tsutsui K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku, Tokyo
162-8480, Japan.
(2)Department of Biology, Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku, Tokyo
162-8480, Japan. Electronic address: k-tsutsui@waseda.jp.

Gonadotropin-inhibitory hormone (GnIH) is a neuropeptide inhibitor of
gonadotropin secretion, which was first identified in the Japanese quail
hypothalamus. GnIH peptides share a C-terminal LPXRFamide (X=L or Q) motif in
most vertebrates. The receptor for GnIH (GnIHR) is the seven-transmembrane G
protein-coupled receptor 147 (GPR147) that inhibits cAMP production. GPR147 is
also named neuropeptide FF (NPFF) receptor 1 (NPFFR1), because it also binds NPFF
that has a C-terminal PQRFamide motif. To understand the evolutionary history of 
the GnIH system in the animal kingdom, we searched for receptors structurally
similar to GnIHR in the genome of six mammals (human, mouse, rat, cattle, cat,
and rabbit), five birds (pigeon, chicken, turkey, budgerigar, and zebra finch),
one reptile (green anole), one amphibian (Western clawed flog), six fishes
(zebrafish, Nile tilapia, Fugu, coelacanth, spotted gar, and lamprey), one
hemichordate (acorn worm), one echinoderm (purple sea urchin), one mollusk
(California sea hare), seven insects (pea aphid, African malaria mosquito, honey 
bee, buff-tailed bumblebee, fruit fly, jewel wasp, and red flour beetle), one
cnidarian (hydra), and constructed phylogenetic trees by neighbor joining (NJ)
and maximum likelihood (ML) methods. A multiple sequence alignment of the
receptors showed highly conserved seven-transmembrane domains as well as
disulfide bridge sites between the first and second extracellular loops,
including the receptor of hydra. Both NJ and ML analyses grouped the receptors of
vertebrates into NPFFR1 and NPFFR2 (GPR74), and the receptors of insects into the
receptor for SIFamide peptides that share a C-terminal YRKPPFNGSIFamide motif.
Although human, quail and zebrafish GnIHR (NPFFR1) were most structurally similar
to SIFamide receptor of fruit fly in the Famide peptide (FMRFamide, neuropeptide 
F, short neuropeptide F, drosulfakinin, myosuppressin, SIFamide) receptor
families, the amino acid sequences and the peptide coding regions of GnIH
precursors were most similar to FMRFamide precursor of fruit fly in the
precursors of Famide peptide families. Chromosome synteny analysis of the
precursor genes of human, quail and zebrafish GnIH and fruit fly Famide peptides 
further identified conserved synteny in vertebrate GnIH and fruit fly FMRFa
precursor genes as well as other Famide peptide precursor genes. These results
suggest that GnIH and its receptor pair and SIFamide and its receptor pair may
have diverged and co-evolved independently in vertebrates and insects,
respectively, from their ancestral Famide peptide and its receptor pair, during
diversification and evolution of deuterostomian and protostomian species.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2014.09.002 
PMID: 25220854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

