
1. Cell Microbiol. 2015 Feb;17(2):254-68. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12363. Epub 2014 Oct 31.

Characterization of Plasmodium developmental transcriptomes in Anopheles gambiae 
midgut reveals novel regulators of malaria transmission.

Akinosoglou KA(1), Bushell ES, Ukegbu CV, Schlegelmilch T, Cho JS, Redmond S,
Sala K, Christophides GK, Vlachou D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.

The passage through the mosquito is a major bottleneck for malaria parasite
populations and a target of interventions aiming to block disease transmission.
Here, we used DNA microarrays to profile the developmental transcriptomes of the 
rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei in vivo, in the midgut of Anopheles
gambiae mosquitoes, from parasite stages in the midgut blood bolus to sporulating
oocysts on the basal gut wall. Data analysis identified several distinct
transcriptional programmes encompassing genes putatively involved in
developmental processes or in interactions with the mosquito. At least two of
these programmes are associated with the ookinete development that is linked to
mosquito midgut invasion and establishment of infection. Targeted disruption by
homologous recombination of two of these genes resulted in mutant parasites
exhibiting notable infection phenotypes. GAMER encodes a short polypeptide with
granular localization in the gametocyte cytoplasm and shows a highly penetrant
loss-of-function phenotype manifested as greatly reduced ookinete numbers, linked
to impaired male gamete release. HADO encodes a putative magnesium phosphatase
with distinctive cortical localization along the concave ookinete periphery.
Disruption of HADO compromises ookinete development leading to significant
reduction of oocyst numbers. Our data provide important insights into the
molecular framework underpinning Plasmodium development in the mosquito and
identifies two genes with important functions at initial stages of parasite
development in the mosquito midgut.

Â© 2014 The Authors. Cellular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12363 
PMCID: PMC4371638
PMID: 25225164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

