
1. Malar J. 2014 Sep 19;13:372. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-372.

Analysis of polymorphisms in Plasmodium falciparum genes related to drug
resistance: a survey over four decades under different treatment policies in
Brazil.

Inoue J(1), Lopes D, do Rosário V, Machado M, Hristov AD, Lima GF,
Costa-Nascimento MJ, Segurado AC, Di Santi SM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Moléstias Infecciosas e Parasitárias, Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade de São Paulo, Av, Dr, Enéas Carvalho de Aguiar, 470 sala 107,
05403-000 São Paulo, SP, Brazil. julianainoue@usp.br.

BACKGROUND: Anti-malarial resistance in Plasmodium falciparum remains an obstacle
for malaria control. Resistance-associated genes were analysed in Brazilian
samples over four decades to evaluate the impact of different treatment regimens 
on the parasite genetic profile.
METHODS: Samples were collected on filter paper from patients infected in the
Amazon region from 1984 to 2011. DNA was extracted with Chelex® 100 and
monoinfection confirmed by PCR. SNPs in the pfcrt, pfmdr1, pfdhfr and pfdhps
genes were assessed by PCR-RFLP. The pfmdr1 copy number was estimated using real 
time quantitative PCR with SYBR® Green. Parasite response was assessed ex vivo
with seven concentrations of each anti-malarial. Patients were treated according 
to Brazilian guidelines: quinine plus tetracycline or mefloquine in period 1 and 
ACT in period 2.
RESULTS: All 96 samples presented the pfcrt 76T mutant throughout the assessed
periods. In addition, all isolates showed ex vivo chloroquine resistance. The
pfmdr1 86Y was detected in 1.5% of samples in period 1, and in 25% in period 2.
All samples presented the pfmdr1 1246Y. The analysis of pfmdr1 copy number showed
amplification in 37.3% in period 1 and in 42% in period 2. Mutations in pfdhfr
were shown as follows: 51I in all samples in period 1 and in 81.2% in period 2;
59R in 6.4% in period 2. The pfdhfr 108N and the pfdhps 437G were seen in all
samples along time; the pfdhps 540E in 93.7% in period 1 and in 75% in period 2.
CONCLUSIONS: The 76T mutation associated to chloroquine resistance is still
present in the parasite population, although this anti-malarial was withdrawn
from the chemotherapy of P. falciparum in Brazil in the mid-1980s. All isolates
assayed ex vivo for chloroquine showed resistant phenotype and 76T. No
association was observed between pfmdr1 mutations and resistance to quinine,
mefloquine and artemisinin derivatives. Additionally, the pfdhfr 108N mutation
was detected in all samples throughout the evaluated periods, demonstrating
fixation of the mutant allele in the parasite population. Changes in Brazilian
national guidelines for the malaria chemotherapy in the last 27 years yielded a
discreet genetic impact in the parasite population.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-372 
PMCID: PMC4177603
PMID: 25239550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

