
1. Malar J. 2014 Sep 19;13:373. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-373.

Detection of Plasmodium knowlesi DNA in the urine and faeces of a Japanese
macaque (Macaca fuscata) over the course of an experimentally induced infection.

Kawai S(1), Sato M, Kato-Hayashi N, Kishi H, Huffman MA, Maeno Y, Culleton R,
Nakazawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology, Dokkyo Medical University,
Mibu, Tochigi 321-0293, Japan. skawai@dokkyomed.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Diagnostic techniques based on PCR for the detection of Plasmodium
DNA can be highly sensitive and specific. The vast majority of these techniques
rely, however, on the invasive sampling of blood from infected hosts. There is,
currently, considerable interest in the possibility of using body fluids other
than blood as sources of parasite DNA for PCR diagnosis.
METHODS: Urine and faeces were obtained from a Plasmodium knowlesi
infected-Japanese macaque (Macaca fuscata) over the course of an experimentally
induced infection. P. knowlesi DNA (PkDNA) extracted from urine and faeces were
monitored by nested PCR targeting the P. knowlesi specific cytochrome b (cytb)
gene.
RESULTS: Urinary PkDNA was detected on day 2, but was not amplified using DNA
templates extracted from the samples on day 4, day 5 and day 6. Subsequently,
urinary PkDNA was detected from day 7 until day 11, and from day 20 until day 30.
PkDNA in faeces was detected from day 7 until day 11, and from day 20 until day
37. Moreover, real-time quantitative PCR showed a remarkable increase in the
amount of urinary PkDNA following anti-malarial treatment. This might have been
due to the release of a large amount of PkDNA from the degraded parasites as a
result of the anti-malarial treatment, leading to excretion of PkDNA in the
urine.
CONCLUSIONS: The cytb-PCR system using urine and faecal samples is of potential
use in molecular epidemiological surveys of malaria. In particular, monkey faecal
samples could be useful for the detection of zoonotic primate malaria in its
natural hosts.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-373 
PMCID: PMC4177170
PMID: 25239687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

