
1. J Infect Dis. 2015 Mar 15;211(6):861-9. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu527. Epub 2014 Sep
19.

New research tools for urogenital schistosomiasis.

Rinaldi G(1), Young ND(2), Honeycutt JD(3), Brindley PJ(1), Gasser RB(4), Hsieh
MH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Tropical Medicine Research Center 
for Neglected Diseases of Poverty, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, George
Washington University, Washington, D.C.
(2)Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, University of Melbourne,
Australia.
(3)Stanford Immunology, Stanford University, California.
(4)Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, University of Melbourne,
Australia Institute of Parasitology and Tropical Veterinary Medicine, Berlin,
Germany.
(5)Biomedical Research Institute, Rockville, Maryland Children's National Health 
System, Washington, D.C.

Approximately 200,000,000 people have schistosomiasis (schistosome infection).
Among the schistosomes, Schistosoma haematobium is responsible for the most
infections, which are present in 110 million people globally, mostly in
sub-Saharan Africa. This pathogen causes an astonishing breadth of sequelae:
hematuria, anemia, dysuria, stunting, uremia, bladder cancer, urosepsis, and
human immunodeficiency virus coinfection. Refined estimates of the impact of
schistosomiasis on quality of life suggest that it rivals malaria. Despite S.
haematobium's importance, relevant research has lagged. Here, we review advances 
that will deepen knowledge of S. haematobium. Three sets of breakthroughs will
accelerate discoveries in the pathogenesis of urogenital schistosomiasis (UGS):
(1) comparative genomics, (2) the development of functional genomic tools, and
(3) the use of animal models to explore S. haematobium-host interactions.
Comparative genomics for S. haematobium is feasible, given the sequencing of
multiple schistosome genomes. Features of the S. haematobium genome that are
conserved among platyhelminth species and others that are unique to S.
haematobium may provide novel diagnostic and drug targets for UGS. Although there
are technical hurdles, the integrated use of these approaches can elucidate
host-pathogen interactions during this infection and can inform the development
of techniques for investigating schistosomes in their human and snail hosts and
the development of therapeutics and vaccines for the control of UGS.

Â© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiu527 
PMCID: PMC4416124
PMID: 25240172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

