
1. Parasitology. 2015 Feb;142 Suppl 1:S57-70. doi: 10.1017/S0031182014001528. Epub
2014 Sep 26.

Large, rapidly evolving gene families are at the forefront of host-parasite
interactions in Apicomplexa.

Reid AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire CB10
1SA,UK.

The Apicomplexa is a phylum of parasitic protozoa, which includes the malaria
parasite Plasmodium, amongst other species that can devastate human and animal
health. The past decade has seen the release of genome sequences for many of the 
most important apicomplexan species, providing an excellent basis for improving
our understanding of their biology. One of the key features of each genome is a
unique set of large, variant gene families. Although closely related species
share the same families, even different types of malaria parasite have distinct
families. In some species they tend to be found at the ends of chromosomes, which
may facilitate aspects of gene expression regulation and generation of sequence
diversity. In others they are scattered apparently randomly across chromosomes.
For some families there is evidence they are involved in antigenic variation,
immune regulation and immune evasion. For others there are no known functions.
Even where function is unknown these families are most often predicted to be
exposed to the host, contain much sequence diversity and evolve rapidly. Based on
these properties it is clear that they are at the forefront of host-parasite
interactions. In this review I compare and contrast the genomic context, gene
structure, gene expression, protein localization and function of these families
across different species.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182014001528 
PMCID: PMC4413850
PMID: 25257746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

