
1. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 25;9(9):e108649. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108649.
eCollection 2014.

Human CD117 (cKit)+ innate lymphoid cells have a discrete transcriptional profile
at homeostasis and are expanded during filarial infection.

Boyd A(1), Ribeiro JM(2), Nutman TB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of
America.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United
States of America.

Since innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) have been found to play a role in the immune
response to helminth parasites in rodents, we sought to determine their role in
human helminth infection. By developing multicolor flow cytometry-based methods
to identify and enumerate circulating ILCs and their subsets, we were able to
identify a subset of cKit+ ILCs defined as Lineage (Lin)-/CD45+/cKit+/CD127+ that
were significantly expanded in the filarial-infected individuals (p=0.0473) as
were those cKit+ ILCs that produced IL-13. Additionally, the frequency of these
cKit+ ILCs correlated with the frequency of IL-17 producing CD4+ T cells (Th17
cells; p=0.025). To investigate the function of cKit+ ILCs, sorted, highly
purified human ILCs were subjected to transcriptional profiling by RNAseq and
compared to appropriate control cells. These cKit+ ILCs expressed TLRs, a broad
range of cytokines/cytokine receptors and MHC Class II molecules suggesting that 
these ILCs sense pathogens independent of other cell types. Functional analysis
revealed expanded cKit+ ILC-specific transcription and ILC-specific microRNA
precursors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108649 
PMCID: PMC4177898
PMID: 25255226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

