
1. Parasitol Int. 2015 Jun;64(3):229-37. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2014.09.008. Epub
2014 Sep 22.

A new model for the origins of allelic dimorphism in Plasmodium falciparum.

Roy SW(1), Ferreira MU(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, 1600 Holloway Avenue,
San Francisco, CA 94132, USA. Electronic address: scottwroy@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes 1374, 05508-900 São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
Electronic address: muferrei@usp.br.

In his landmark 1987 study of the merozoite surface protein-1 locus in Plasmodium
falciparum, Kazuyuki Tanabe and coauthors introduced the phenomenon of allelic
dimorphism, in which antigenic diversity is arranged into two maximally diverged 
haplotypes. Further work has extended this finding to other loci in P.
falciparum. Each of the loci at which allelic dimorphism is observed encodes
major surface antigens of blood-stage malaria parasites, and is consequently a
major vaccine target, thus understanding the origins and implications of allelic 
dimorphism is of crucial importance. Here we examine the essential features of
allelic dimorphism in dimorphic malarial surface antigens. From sequence
analysis, we conclude that the ancestral population may have been
recombining/multimorphic rather than dimorphic. We hypothesize a pathway to
allelic dimorphism in which an ancestral allele-rich recombining population could
have undergone a severe population bottleneck, putatively caused by the lateral
transfer of P. falciparum from apes to humans. This bottleneck produced a
reduction in allelic diversity, favoring the survival of the most divergent
alleles, which in turn led to recombination suppression by strong natural
selection against recombinants.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2014.09.008 
PMID: 25251164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

