
1. BMC Genomics. 2014 Sep 27;15:817. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-817.

The highly polymorphic CYP6M7 cytochrome P450 gene partners with the
directionally selected CYP6P9a and CYP6P9b genes to expand the pyrethroid
resistance front in the malaria vector Anopheles funestus in Africa.

Riveron JM, Ibrahim SS, Chanda E, Mzilahowa T, Cuamba N, Irving H, Barnes KG,
Ndula M, Wondji CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke
place, Liverpool, L3 5QA, UK. c.s.wondji@liverpool.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Pyrethroid resistance in the major malaria vector Anopheles funestus 
is rapidly expanding across Southern Africa. It remains unknown whether this
resistance has a unique origin with the same molecular basis or is
multifactorial. Knowledge of the origin, mechanisms and evolution of resistance
are crucial to designing successful resistance management strategies.
RESULTS: Here, we established the resistance profile of a Zambian An. funestus
population at the northern range of the resistance front. Similar to other
Southern African populations, Zambian An. funestus mosquitoes are resistant to
pyrethroids and carbamate, but in contrast to populations in Mozambique and
Malawi, these insects are also DDT resistant. Genome-wide microarray-based
transcriptional profiling and qRT-PCR revealed that the cytochrome P450 gene
CYP6M7 is responsible for extending pyrethroid resistance northwards. Indeed,
CYP6M7 is more over-expressed in Zambia [fold-change (FC) 37.7; 13.2 for qRT-PCR]
than CYP6P9a (FC15.6; 8.9 for qRT-PCR) and CYP6P9b (FC11.9; 6.5 for qRT-PCR),
whereas CYP6P9a and CYP6P9b are more highly over-expressed in Malawi and
Mozambique. Transgenic expression of CYP6M7 in Drosophila melanogaster coupled
with in vitro assays using recombinant enzymes and assessments of kinetic
properties demonstrated that CYP6M7 is as efficient as CYP6P9a and CYP6P9b in
conferring pyrethroid resistance. Polymorphism patterns demonstrate that these
genes are under contrasting selection forces: the exceptionally diverse CYP6M7
likely evolves neutrally, whereas CYP6P9a and CYP6P9b are directionally selected.
The higher variability of CYP6P9a and CYP6P9b observed in Zambia supports their
lesser role in resistance in this country.
CONCLUSION: Pyrethroid resistance in Southern Africa probably has multiple
origins under different evolutionary forces, which may necessitate the design of 
different resistance management strategies.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-817 
PMCID: PMC4192331
PMID: 25261072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

