
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2014 Dec;20(12):1265-75. doi: 10.1111/1469-0691.12793.
Epub 2014 Dec 14.

Host genetics and parasitic infections.

Mangano VD(1), Modiano D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, University of Rome 'La
Sapienza', Rome, Italy; Istituto Pasteur, Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, University
of Rome 'La Sapienza', Rome, Italy.

Parasites still impose a high death and disability burden on human populations,
and are therefore likely to act as selective factors for genetic adaptations.
Genetic epidemiological investigation of parasitic diseases is aimed at
disentangling the mechanisms underlying immunity and pathogenesis by looking for 
associations or linkages between loci and susceptibility phenotypes. Until
recently, most studies used a candidate gene approach and were relatively
underpowered, with few attempts at replicating findings in different populations.
However, in the last 5 years, genome-wide and/or multicentre studies have been
conducted for severe malaria, visceral leishmaniasis, and cardiac Chagas disease,
providing some novel important insights. Furthermore, studies of helminth
infections have repeatedly shown the involvement of common loci in regulating
susceptibility to distinct diseases such as schistosomiasis, ascariasis,
trichuriasis, and onchocherciasis. As more studies are conducted, evidence is
increasing that at least some of the identified susceptibility loci are shared
not only among parasitic diseases but also with immunological disorders such as
allergy or autoimmune disease, suggesting that parasites may have played a role
in driving the evolution of the immune system.

© 2014 The Authors Clinical Microbiology and Infection © 2014 European Society of
Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/1469-0691.12793 
PMID: 25273270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

