
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 5;289(49):34408-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.615393. Epub 2014
Oct 23.

Targeted disruption of a ring-infected erythrocyte surface antigen (RESA)-like
export protein gene in Plasmodium falciparum confers stable chondroitin 4-sulfate
cytoadherence capacity.

Goel S(1), Muthusamy A(2), Miao J(3), Cui L(3), Salanti A(4), Winzeler EA(5),
Gowda DC(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State 
University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, suchigoel@gmail.com.
(2)From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State 
University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033.
(3)the Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
Pennsylvania 16802.
(4)the Centre for Medical Parasitology at the Department of International Health,
Immunology, and Microbiology, Copenhagen University Hospital, DK 2014 Copenhagen,
Denmark, and.
(5)the Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego School of
Medicine, La Jolla, California 92093.
(6)From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State 
University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, gowda@psu.edu.

The Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) family proteins
mediate the adherence of infected erythrocytes to microvascular endothelia of
various organs, including the placenta, thereby contributing to cerebral,
placental, and other severe malaria pathogenesis. Several parasite proteins,
including KAHRP and PfEMP3, play important roles in the cytoadherence by
mediating the clustering of PfEMP1 in rigid knoblike structures on the infected
erythrocyte surface. The lack of a subtelomeric region of chromosome 2 that
contains kahrp and pfemp3 causes reduced cytoadherence. In this study, microarray
transcriptome analysis showed that the absence of a gene cluster, comprising
kahrp, pfemp3, and four other genes, results in the loss of parasitized
erythrocytes adhering to chondroitin 4-sulfate (C4S). The role of one of these
genes, PF3D7_0201600/PFB0080c, which encodes PHISTb (Plasmodium helical
interspersed subtelomeric b) domain-containing RESA-like protein 1 expressed on
the infected erythrocyte surface, was investigated. Disruption of PFB0080c
resulted in increased var2csa transcription and VAR2CSA surface expression,
leading to higher C4S-binding capacity of infected erythrocytes. Further,
PFB0080c-knock-out parasites stably maintained the C4S adherence through many
generations of growth. Although the majority of PFB0080c-knock-out parasites
bound to C4S even after culturing for 6 months, a minor population bound to both 
C4S and CD36. These results strongly suggest that the loss of PFB0080c markedly
compromises the var gene switching process, leading to a marked reduction in the 
switching rate and additional PfEMP1 expression by a minor population of
parasites. PFB0080c interacts with VAR2CSA and modulates knob-associated Hsp40
expression. Thus, PFB0080c may regulate VAR2CSA expression through these
processes. Overall, we conclude that PFB0080c regulates PfEMP1 expression and the
parasite's cytoadherence.

Â© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.615393 
PMCID: PMC4256368
PMID: 25342752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

