
1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 29;9(10):e110910. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110910.
eCollection 2014.

Islands and stepping-stones: comparative population structure of Anopheles
gambiae sensu stricto and Anopheles arabiensis in Tanzania and implications for
the spread of insecticide resistance.

Maliti D(1), Ranson H(2), Magesa S(3), Kisinza W(4), Mcha J(5), Haji K(5),
Killeen G(6), Weetman D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ifakara Health Institute, Environmental Health and Ecological Sciences
Thematic Group, Ifakara, Morogoro, United Republic of Tanzania; University of
Glasgow, Institute of Biodiversity Animal Health and Comparative Medicine,
Glasgow, Lancashire, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Merseyside, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(3)RTI International, Global Health Division, Dar es Salaam, United Republic of
Tanzania.
(4)National Institute for Medical Research, Amani Research Center, Muheza, Tanga,
United Republic of Tanzania.
(5)Zanzibar Malaria Elimination Programme, Unguja, Zanzibar, United Republic of
Tanzania.
(6)Ifakara Health Institute, Environmental Health and Ecological Sciences
Thematic Group, Ifakara, Morogoro, United Republic of Tanzania; Department of
Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Merseyside, Liverpool,
United Kingdom.

Population genetic structures of the two major malaria vectors Anopheles gambiae 
s.s. and An. arabiensis, differ markedly across Sub-Saharan Africa, which could
reflect differences in historical demographies or in contemporary gene flow.
Elucidation of the degree and cause of population structure is important for
predicting the spread of genetic traits such as insecticide resistance genes or
artificially engineered genes. Here the population genetics of An. gambiae s.s.
and An. arabiensis in the central, eastern and island regions of Tanzania were
compared. Microsatellite markers were screened in 33 collections of female An.
gambiae s.l., originating from 22 geographical locations, four of which were
sampled in two or three years between 2008 and 2010. An. gambiae were sampled
from six sites, An. arabiensis from 14 sites, and both species from two sites,
with an additional colonised insectary sample of each species. Frequencies of the
knock-down resistance (kdr) alleles 1014S and 1014F were also determined. An.
gambiae exhibited relatively high genetic differentiation (average pairwise
FST = 0.131), significant even between nearby samples, but without clear
geographical patterning. In contrast, An. arabiensis exhibited limited
differentiation (average FST = 0.015), but strong isolation-by-distance (Mantel
test r = 0.46, p = 0.0008). Most time-series samples of An. arabiensis were
homogeneous, suggesting general temporal stability of the genetic structure. An. 
gambiae populations from Dar es Salaam and Bagamoyo were found to have high
frequencies of kdr 1014S (around 70%), with almost 50% homozygote but was at much
lower frequency on Unguja Island, with no. An. gambiae population genetic
differentiation was consistent with an island model of genetic structuring with
highly restricted gene flow, contrary to An. arabiensis which was consistent with
a stepping-stone model of extensive, but geographically-restricted gene flow.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110910 
PMCID: PMC4212992
PMID: 25353688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

