
1. Exp Parasitol. 2014 Dec;147:23-32. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2014.10.008. Epub 2014 
Oct 18.

Piperaquine and Lumefantrine resistance in Plasmodium berghei ANKA associated
with increased expression of Ca2+/H+ antiporter and glutathione associated
enzymes.

Kiboi D(1), Irungu B(2), Orwa J(2), Kamau L(3), Ochola-Oyier LI(4), Ngángá J(5), 
Nzila A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and
Technology, P.O. Box 62000-00200, Nairobi, Kenya; KEMRI-Centre for Traditional
Medicine and Drug Research, P.O. Box 54840-00200, Nairobi, Kenya. Electronic
address: muthuikiboi@gmail.com.
(2)KEMRI-Centre for Traditional Medicine and Drug Research, P.O. Box 54840-00200,
Nairobi, Kenya.
(3)KEMRI-Centre for Biotechnology Research and Development, P.O. Box 54840-00200,
Nairobi, Kenya.
(4)KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, P.O. Box 230-80108, Kilifi, Kenya.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and
Technology, P.O. Box 62000-00200, Nairobi, Kenya.
(6)Department of Chemistry, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, P.O. 
Box 468, Dharan 31261, Saudi Arabia.

We investigated the mechanisms of resistance of two antimalarial drugs
piperaquine (PQ) and lumefantrine (LM) using the rodent parasite Plasmodium
berghei as a surrogate of the human parasite, Plasmodium falciparum. We analyzed 
the whole coding sequence of Plasmodium berghei chloroquine resistance
transporter (Pbcrt) and Plasmodium berghei multidrug resistance gene 1(Pbmdr-1)
for polymorphisms. These genes are associated with quinoline resistance in
Plasmodium falciparum. No polymorphic changes were detected in the coding
sequences of Pbcrt and Pbmdr1 or in the mRNA transcript levels of Pbmdr1.
However, our data demonstrated that PQ and LM resistance is achieved by multiple 
mechanisms that include elevated mRNA transcript levels of V-type H(+) pumping
pyrophosphatase (vp2), Ca(2+)/H(+) antiporter (vcx1), gamma glutamylcysteine
synthetase (ggcs) and glutathione-S-transferase (gst) genes, mechanisms also
known to contribute to chloroquine resistance in P. falciparum and rodent malaria
parasites. The increase in ggcs and gst transcript levels was accompanied by high
glutathione (GSH) levels and elevated activity of glutathione-S-transferase (GST)
enzyme. Taken together, these results demonstrate that Pbcrt and Pbmdr1 are not
associated with PQ and LM resistance in P. berghei ANKA, while vp2, vcx1, ggcs
and gst may mediate resistance directly or modulate functional mutations in other
unknown genes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2014.10.008 
PMCID: PMC6128398
PMID: 25448357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

