
1. Int J Parasitol. 2015 Feb;45(2-3):141-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2014.09.003. Epub 
2014 Nov 13.

Knockout of leucine aminopeptidase in Toxoplasma gondii using CRISPR/Cas9.

Zheng J(1), Jia H(2), Zheng Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, CAAS-Michigan State University Joint
Laboratory of Innate Immunity, State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, 
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Maduan Street 427, Nangang District,
Harbin 150001, PR China.
(2)Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, CAAS-Michigan State University Joint
Laboratory of Innate Immunity, State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, 
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Maduan Street 427, Nangang District,
Harbin 150001, PR China. Electronic address: jiahonglin@caas.cn.

Leucine aminopeptidases of the M17 peptidase family represent ideal drug targets 
for therapies directed against the pathogens Plasmodium, Babesia and Trypanosoma.
Previously, we characterised Toxoplasma gondii leucine aminopeptidase and
demonstrated its role in regulating the levels of free amino acids. In this
study, we evaluated the potential of T. gondii leucine aminopeptidase as a drug
target in T. gondii by a knockout method. Existing knockout methods for T. gondii
have many drawbacks; therefore, we developed a new technique that takes advantage
of the CRISPR/Cas9 system. We first chose a Cas9 target site in the gene encoding
T. gondii leucine aminopeptidase and then constructed a knockout vector
containing Cas9 and the single guide RNA. After transfection, single tachyzoites 
were cloned in 96-well plates by limiting dilution. Two transfected strains
derived from a single clone were cultured in Vero cells, and then subjected to
expression analysis by western blotting. The phenotypic analysis revealed that
knockout of T. gondii leucine aminopeptidase resulted in inhibition of
attachment/invasion and replication; both the growth and attachment/invasion
capacity of knockout parasites were restored by complementation with a
synonymously substituted allele of T. gondii leucine aminopeptidase. Mouse
experiments demonstrated that T. gondii leucine aminopeptidase knockout somewhat 
reduced the pathogenicity of T. gondii. An enzymatic activity assay showed that
T. gondii leucine aminopeptidase knockout reduced the processing of a leucine
aminopeptidase-specific substrate in T. gondii. The absence of leucine
aminopeptidase activity could be slightly compensated for in T. gondii. Overall, 
T. gondii leucine aminopeptidase knockout influenced the growth of T. gondii, but
did not completely block parasite development, virulence or enzymatic activity.
Therefore, we conclude that leucine aminopeptidase would be useful only as an
adjunctive drug target in T. gondii.

Copyright Â© 2014 Australian Society for Parasitology Inc. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2014.09.003 
PMID: 25444863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

