
1. Microbiol Insights. 2014 Nov 20;7:35-9. doi: 10.4137/MBI.S20618. eCollection
2014.

Genetic Diversity and Allelic Frequency of Glutamate-Rich Protein (GLURP) in
Plasmodium falciparum Isolates from Sub-Saharan Africa.

Duru KC(1), Thomas BN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Rochester Institute of Technology,
Rochester, NY, USA.

Glutamate-rich protein is a Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) antigen found in all
stages of the parasite and has been reported to induce clinical immunity. The R0 
and R2 regions have been found to exhibit a high degree of conservation,
therefore serving as a good vaccine design material. We assayed the genetic
diversity of Pf glurp genes in the R0 and R2 regions, as well as evaluated the
role of seasonality on allelic frequency. A total of 402 genomic DNA samples,
extracted from filter paper blood samples, were screened by nested polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) analysis of Pf glurp R0 and R2 regions, in addition to
fragment analysis of the polymorphic regions to identify allelic diversity of the
parasite population. We found an extensive heterogeneity in the R2 region in
general, and this heterogeneity is seasonally dependent, indicative of region
plasticity. The R0 region displayed genetic conservation, as expected. We
conclude that positive genotyping results with glurp R0 region should be seen as 
indicative of an active Pf infection, requiring adequate treatment. In addition, 
we advocate extending the possibility that an R0 region genotypic positivity
could serve as diagnostic tool, thereby reducing cases of untreated or poorly
treated infection, contributory to recrudescence or treatment failure.

DOI: 10.4137/MBI.S20618 
PMCID: PMC4240185
PMID: 25452699 

