
1. Innate Immun. 2015 Jul;21(5):546-52. doi: 10.1177/1753425914561277. Epub 2014 Dec
2.

Heightened inflammation in severe malaria is associated with decreased IL-10
expression levels and neutrophils.

Mahanta A(1), Kar SK(2), Kakati S(3), Baruah S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tezpur University, Napaam, 
Tezpur, Assam, India.
(2)School of Biotechnology, KIIT University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India.
(3)Department of Medicine, Assam Medical College & Hospital, Dibrugarh, Assam,
India.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tezpur University, Napaam, 
Tezpur, Assam, India sashibaruah@gmail.com.

Dysregulation of the cytokine network in severe malaria owing to variations in
factors like parasite load, strains and host factors is well documented but the
key cytokines that are dysregulated remain poorly elucidated. Longitudinal
changes in cytokine levels in an individual with parasitemia and disease
resolution is likely to identify the key cytokines. We have analyzed the mRNA
expression of cytokines over a 7-d period in severe (SM) and uncomplicated (UM)
Plasmodium falciparum malaria. We found up-regulated expression of TNF-α, IL-1β, 
IFN-γ and TGF-β in SM, with decreased expression of IL-10 on d 0. Further, we
observed a negative correlation of IL-10 expression with parasitemia and
pro-inflammatory cytokines, suggesting IL-10 to be the key cytokine in tilting
the balance to an inflammatory response. Longitudinal analysis revealed that the 
key cytokines associated with disease were TNF-α, IL-1β, IFN-γ, IL-12α, RANTES
and TGF-β, while TNF-α, IL-10 and TGF-β discriminated between SM and UM. A higher
neutrophil count in SM and its positive association with parasite density and
IL-1β and IL-8 provides support for neutrophils in inflammation in malaria. Our
findings suggest subversion of anti-inflammatory response in SM by parasite
factors towards an exaggerated pro-inflammatory response with involvement of
neutrophils, the classical inflammatory cells.

© The Author(s) 2014 Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav.

DOI: 10.1177/1753425914561277 
PMID: 25466232  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

