
1. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2015 Feb;175(4):2166-77. doi: 10.1007/s12010-014-1428-7.
Epub 2014 Dec 3.

Humoral immune responses to a recombinant Plasmodium vivax tryptophan-rich
antigen among Plasmodium vivax-infected patients and its localization in the
parasite.

Siddiqui AA(1), Khan F, Sharma YD.

Author information: 
(1)Community Health Sciences Department, College of Applied Medical Sciences,
King Saud University, P.O. Box 10219, Riyadh, 11433, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
asi_asid@yahoo.com.

Our recent studies have focused on the identification and characterization of the
tryptophan-rich proteins of the Plasmodium vivax parasite where their role in the
elicitation of humoral and cellular responses and erythrocyte-binding activity
was investigated. Here, we report the humoral responses of a 32.4-kDa P. vivax
tryptophan-rich antigen (PvTRAg32.4) among the sera of P. vivax-infected
patients. PvTRAg32.4 also contains an unusually high percentage of tryptophan
residues (10.7 %) that are positionally conserved with its orthologues in
Plasmodium yoelii (PypAg1 and PypAg2) and Plasmodium falciparum (PfTryThrA and
PfMATRA). Thirty-four of the 40 (85.0 %) P. vivax isolates showed seropositivity 
to recombinant PvTRAg32.4 by ELISA. The mean ± SD values of optical density (OD) 
for P. vivax subjects and naïve individuals were 1.02 ± 0.36 and 0.26 ± 0.11,
respectively. In the Western blot analysis, majority of the subjects studied
(n = 44) showed reactivity to the recombinant, purified PvTRAg32.4. This antigen 
does not show binding to the erythrocytes, but the immunofluorescence data
reveals that it is expressed in the erythrocytic stages of the parasite. Sequence
analysis of the clinical isolates from various parts of the country shows that
PvTRAg32.4 is highly conserved. Functional in-depth characterization of more such
type of novel proteins in the parasite is warranted for the development of
successful malaria intervention methods.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-014-1428-7 
PMID: 25467946  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

