
1. Malar J. 2014 Dec 4;13:472. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-472.

Limited polymorphisms in k13 gene in Plasmodium falciparum isolates from Dakar,
Senegal in 2012-2013.

Torrentino-Madamet M, Fall B, Benoit N, Camara C, Amalvict R, Fall M, Dionne P,
Ba Fall K, Nakoulima A, Diatta B, Diemé Y, Ménard D, Wade B, Pradines B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aix Marseille Université, Unité de Recherche sur les Maladies Infectieuses et 
Tropicales Emergentes, UM 63, CNRS 7278, IRD 198, Inserm 1095, Marseille, France.
bruno.pradines@free.fr.

BACKGROUND: The emergence of Plasmodium falciparum resistance to artemisinin and 
its derivatives, manifested as delayed parasite clearance following the
treatment, has developed in Southeast Asia. The spread of resistance to
artemisinin from Asia to Africa may be catastrophic for malaria control and
elimination worldwide. Recently, mutations in the propeller domain of the Kelch
13 (k13) gene (PF3D71343700) were associated with in vitro resistance to
artemisinin and with delayed clearance after artemisinin treatment in southern
Asia. The aim of the study was to characterize the genetic variability of k13 and
to evaluate the molecular resistance to artemisinin for the first time in
Senegal.
METHODS: Plasmodium falciparum isolates were collected from 138 malaria patients 
in Dakar and its districts during the rainy season of October 2012 to January
2013 at the Hôpital Principal de Dakar. The k13 gene was amplified using nested
PCR and sequenced.
RESULTS: A very limited variability within the k13 gene in Senegalese P.
falciparum isolates was identified. No polymorphism was detected in the six
k13-propeller blades. Only two mutations, T149S (6.3%) and K189T (42.2%), and one
(N) or two (NN) asparagine insertion at the codon 142 (4.7 and 6.3%,
respectively) were detected in the Plasmodium/Apicomplexa-specific domain. None
of the polymorphisms associated with artemisinin resistance in Southeast Asia was
detected in the 138 P. falciparum from Dakar.
DISCUSSION: The present data do not suggest widespread artemisinin resistance in 
Dakar in 2012-2013. Notably, the C580Y, R539T or Y493H substitutions that were
associated with in vitro resistance or delayed parasite clearance in Southeast
Asia were not observed in Dakar, nor were any of the polymorphisms observed in
parasites from Southeast Asia, nor the M476I mutation that was selected in vitro 
with artemisinin pressure in a African parasite line.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-472 
PMCID: PMC4289025
PMID: 25471113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

