
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2015 Apr 15;60(8):1208-15. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciu1160. Epub 2014
Dec 23.

Molecular assessment of artemisinin resistance markers, polymorphisms in the k13 
propeller, and a multidrug-resistance gene in the eastern and western border
areas of Myanmar.

Nyunt MH(1), Hlaing T(2), Oo HW(3), Tin-Oo LL(3), Phway HP(3), Wang B(4), Zaw
NN(3), Han SS(3), Tun T(3), San KK(3), Kyaw MP(3), Han ET(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Research (Lower Myanmar), Yangon, Republic of the Union 
of Myanmar Department of Medical Environmental Biology and Tropical Medicine,
School of Medicine, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Health, Nay Pyi Taw, Republic of the Union of Myanmar.
(3)Department of Medical Research (Lower Myanmar), Yangon, Republic of the Union 
of Myanmar.
(4)Department of Medical Environmental Biology and Tropical Medicine, School of
Medicine, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: As K13 propeller mutations have been recently reported to serve as
molecular markers, assessment of K13 propeller polymorphisms in
multidrug-resistant gene in isolates from Myanmar, especially the eastern and
western border areas, is crucial if we are to understand the spread of
artemisinin resistance.
METHODS: A 3-day surveillance study was conducted in the eastern and western
border areas in Myanmar, and K13 propeller and Plasmodium falciparum multidrug
resistance-associated protein 1 (pfmrp1) mutations were analyzed.
RESULTS: Among the 1761 suspected malaria cases screened, a total of 42
uncomplicated falciparum cases from the eastern border and 49 from the western
border were subjected to 3 days of surveillance after artemether-lumefantrine
treatment. No parasitemic case showing positivity on day 3 was noted from the
western border, but 26.2% (11/42) of cases were positive in the eastern border.
Although we found no marked difference in the prevalence of the pfmrp1 mutation
in the eastern and western borders (36% vs 31%, respectively), K13 mutations were
more frequent in the eastern border area (where the 3-day persistent cases were
detected; 48% vs 14%). C580Y, M476I, A481V, N458Y, R539T, and R516Y accounted for
68.9% of all K13 mutations significantly associated with day 3 parasitaemia.
CONCLUSIONS: The K13 mutations were significantly associated with day 3
parasitaemia, emphasizing the importance of K13 surveillance. The low prevalence 
of K13 mutations and the absence of day 3 parasitaemic cases indicate that
artemisinin resistance may not have spread to the western Myanmar border region. 
Although analysis of multiple K13 mutations is challenging, it should be done at 
various sentinel sites in Myanmar.

Â© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciu1160 
PMID: 25537878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

