
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2015 Apr;32(4):1080-90. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msu397. Epub 2014 Dec 
21.

Pooled sequencing and rare variant association tests for identifying the
determinants of emerging drug resistance in malaria parasites.

Cheeseman IH(1), McDew-White M(2), Phyo AP(3), Sriprawat K(3), Nosten F(4),
Anderson TJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, TX ianc@txbiomedgenetics.org
tanderso@txbiomedgenetics.org.
(2)Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, TX.
(3)Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, 
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot, Thailand.
(4)Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, 
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot, Thailand Centre for
Tropical Medicine, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom.

We explored the potential of pooled sequencing to swiftly and economically
identify selective sweeps due to emerging artemisinin (ART) resistance in a
South-East Asian malaria parasite population. ART resistance is defined by slow
parasite clearance from the blood of ART-treated patients and mutations in the
kelch gene (chr. 13) have been strongly implicated to play a role. We constructed
triplicate pools of 70 slow-clearing (resistant) and 70 fast-clearing (sensitive)
infections collected from the Thai-Myanmar border and sequenced these to high (∼ 
150-fold) read depth. Allele frequency estimates from pools showed almost perfect
correlation (Lin's concordance = 0.98) with allele frequencies at 93 single
nucleotide polymorphisms measured directly from individual infections, giving us 
confidence in the accuracy of this approach. By mapping genome-wide divergence
(FST) between pools of drug-resistant and drug-sensitive parasites, we identified
two large (>150 kb) regions (on chrs. 13 and 14) and 17 smaller candidate genome 
regions. To identify individual genes within these genome regions, we resequenced
an additional 38 parasite genomes (16 slow and 22 fast-clearing) and performed
rare variant association tests. These confirmed kelch as a major molecular marker
for ART resistance (P = 6.03 × 10(-6)). This two-tier approach is powerful
because pooled sequencing rapidly narrows down genome regions of interest, while 
targeted rare variant association testing within these regions can pinpoint the
genetic basis of resistance. We show that our approach is robust to recurrent
mutation and the generation of soft selective sweeps, which are predicted to be
common in pathogen populations with large effective population sizes, and may
confound more traditional gene mapping approaches.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msu397 
PMCID: PMC4379400
PMID: 25534029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

