
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jan 20;112(3):815-20. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1418892112. Epub 2015 Jan 5.

Adaptive introgression in an African malaria mosquito coincident with the
increased usage of insecticide-treated bed nets.

Norris LC(1), Main BJ(2), Lee Y(2), Collier TC(2), Fofana A(3), Cornel AJ(1),
Lanzaro GC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Genetics Laboratory, Department of Entomology and Nematology, and.
(2)Vector Genetics Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and
Immunology, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 and.
(3)Malaria Research and Training Center, University of Bamako, Bamako BP E2528,
Mali.
(4)Vector Genetics Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and
Immunology, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 and gclanzaro@ucdavis.edu.

Animal species adapt to changes in their environment, including man-made changes 
such as the introduction of insecticides, through selection for advantageous
genes already present in populations or newly arisen through mutation. A possible
alternative mechanism is the acquisition of adaptive genes from related species
via a process known as adaptive introgression. Differing levels of insecticide
resistance between two African malaria vectors, Anopheles coluzzii and Anopheles 
gambiae, have been attributed to assortative mating between the two species. In a
previous study, we reported two bouts of hybridization observed in the town of
Selinkenyi, Mali in 2002 and 2006. These hybridization events did not appear to
be directly associated with insecticide-resistance genes. We demonstrate that
during a brief breakdown in assortative mating in 2006, A. coluzzii inherited the
entire A. gambiae-associated 2L divergence island, which includes a suite of
insecticide-resistance alleles. In this case, introgression was coincident with
the start of a major insecticide-treated bed net distribution campaign in Mali.
This suggests that insecticide exposure altered the fitness landscape, favoring
the survival of A. coluzzii/A. gambiae hybrids, and provided selection pressure
that swept the 2L divergence island through A. coluzzii populations in Mali. We
propose that the work described herein presents a unique description of the
temporal dynamics of adaptive introgression in an animal species and represents a
mechanism for the rapid evolution of insecticide resistance in this important
vector of human malaria in Africa.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1418892112 
PMCID: PMC4311837
PMID: 25561525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

