
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2015 Apr;31:33-9. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.01.004. Epub 2015
Jan 8.

Genetic diversity of avian haemosporidians in Malaysia: cytochrome b lineages of 
the genera Plasmodium and Haemoproteus (Haemosporida) from Selangor.

Ivanova K(1), Zehtindjiev P(2), Mariaux J(3), Georgiev BB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Research, Bulgarian Academy of
Sciences, 2 Gagarin Street, 1113 Sofia, Bulgaria. Electronic address:
kari.ivanova89@gmail.com.
(2)Institute of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Research, Bulgarian Academy of
Sciences, 2 Gagarin Street, 1113 Sofia, Bulgaria.
(3)Natural History Museum of Geneva, CP 6434, CH-1211 Geneva 6, Switzerland;
Department of Genetics and Evolution, University of Geneva, CH-1205 Geneva,
Switzerland.

The knowledge of the diversity of haemosporidian parasites is of primary
importance as their representatives include agents of bird malaria. We
investigated the occurrence of Haemoproteus spp. and Plasmodium spp. in bird
populations from a single locality in the State of Selangor, Peninsular Malaysia,
and report on the parasite prevalence of the two genera. A combination of methods
(molecular and morphological) was used for detecting these parasites.
Seventy-nine bird individuals were caught using mist-nets in July and August 2010
at Gombak Field Station of the University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur. In total, 23
birds were identified as positive for Haemoproteus or Plasmodium infection and
one individual was recognized as carrying mixed infection. The total prevalence
of haemosporidians in the collected samples was 30.3%. Infections with parasites 
of the genus Haemoproteus were predominant compared to those of the genus
Plasmodium. In total, 10 new cyt b lineages of Haemoproteus spp. and 3 new cyt b 
lineages of Plasmodium spp. were recorded in this study. From all recorded
haemosporidian lineages (16 in total), 3 were known from previous studies -
hCOLL2, hYWT2 and pNILSUN1. Two of them are linked with their corresponding
morphospecies - Haemoproteus pallidus (COLL2) and Haemoproteus motacillae (YWT2).
The morphological analysis in the present study confirmed the results obtained by
the PCR method relative to prevalence, with 25.3% total prevalence of
Haemoproteus and Plasmodium parasites. The intensities of infection varied
between 0.01% and 19%. Most infections were light, with intensities below 0.1%.
The present study is the first molecular survey of the protozoan blood parasites 
of the order Haemosporida recorded in Malaysia.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.01.004 
PMID: 25577987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

