
1. Mol Microbiol. 2015 Apr;96(2):368-87. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12941. Epub 2015 Feb 11.

Plasmodium falciparum SERA5 plays a non-enzymatic role in the malarial asexual
blood-stage lifecycle.

Stallmach R(1), Kavishwar M, Withers-Martinez C, Hackett F, Collins CR, Howell
SA, Yeoh S, Knuepfer E, Atid AJ, Holder AA, Blackman MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, London,
NW7 1AA, UK.

The malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum replicates in an intraerythrocytic
parasitophorous vacuole (PV). The most abundant P. falciparum PV protein, called 
SERA5, is essential in blood stages and possesses a papain-like domain, prompting
speculation that it functions as a proteolytic enzyme. Unusually however, SERA5
possesses a Ser residue (Ser596) at the position of the canonical catalytic Cys
of papain-like proteases, and the function of SERA5 or whether it performs an
enzymatic role is unknown. In this study, we failed to detect proteolytic
activity associated with the Ser596-containing parasite-derived or recombinant
protein. However, substitution of Ser596 with a Cys residue produced an active
recombinant enzyme with characteristics of a cysteine protease, demonstrating
that SERA5 can bind peptides. Using targeted homologous recombination in
P. falciparum, we substituted Ser596 with Ala with no phenotypic consequences,
proving that SERA5 does not perform an essential enzymatic role in the parasite. 
We could also replace an internal segment of SERA5 with an affinity-purification 
tag. In contrast, using almost identical targeting constructs, we could not
truncate or C-terminally tag the SERA5 gene, or replace Ser596 with a bulky Arg
residue. Our findings show that SERA5 plays an indispensable but non-enzymatic
role in the P. falciparum blood-stage life cycle.

© 2015 The Authors. Molecular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12941 
PMCID: PMC4671257
PMID: 25599609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

