
1. Malar J. 2015 Jan 21;14:9. doi: 10.1186/s12936-014-0522-1.

Remarkable diversity of intron-1 of the para voltage-gated sodium channel gene in
an Anopheles gambiae/Anopheles coluzzii hybrid zone.

Santolamazza F, Caputo B, Nwakanma DC, Fanello C, Petrarca V, Conway DJ, Weetman 
D, Pinto J, Mancini E(1), della Torre A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica e Malattie Infettive, Istituto
Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci-Bolognetti, Università "Sapienza", Piazzale Aldo Moro 5,
Rome, 00185, Italy. emiliano.mancini@uniroma1.it.

BACKGROUND: Genomic differentiation between Anopheles gambiae and Anopheles
coluzzii--the major malaria vectors in sub-Saharan Africa--is localized into
large "islands" toward the centromeres of chromosome-X and the two autosomes.
Linkage disequilibrium between these genomic islands was first detected between
species-specific polymorphisms within ribosomal DNA genes (IGS-rDNA) on the
X-chromosome and a single variant at position 702 of intron 1 (Int-1702) of the
para Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel (VGSC) gene on chromosome arm 2 L. Intron-1
sequence data from West and Central Africa revealed two clearly distinct and
species-specific haplogroups, each characterized by very low polymorphism, which 
has been attributed to a selective sweep. The aim of this study was to analyse
Int-1 sequence diversity in A. gambiae and A. coluzzii populations from the
Far-West of their range, in order to assess whether this selective-sweep
signature could persist in a zone of high interspecific hybridization.
METHODS: A 531 bp region of VGSC Int-1 was sequenced in 21 A. coluzzii, 31 A.
gambiae, and 12 hybrids from The Gambia and Guinea Bissau, located within the
Far-West geographical region, and in 53 A. gambiae s.l. samples from the rest of 
the range.
RESULTS: Far-West samples exhibit dramatic Int-1 polymorphism, far higher within 
each country than observed throughout the rest of the species range. Moreover,
patterning of haplotypes within A. coluzzii confirms previous evidence of a
macro-geographic subdivision into a West and a Central African genetic cluster,
and reveals a possible genetic distinction of A. coluzzii populations from the
Far-West.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest a relaxation of selective pressures acting
across the VGSC gene region in the hybrid zone. Genetic differentiation in the
Far-West could be attributable to a founder effect within A. coluzzii, with
subsequent extensive gene flow with secondarily-colonizing A. gambiae,
potentially yielding a novel insight on the dynamic processes impacting genetic
divergence of these key malaria vectors.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-014-0522-1 
PMCID: PMC4308935
PMID: 25604888  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

