
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2015 Mar 20;10(3):775-83. doi: 10.1021/cb500981y. Epub 2015 Jan
30.

Yeast-based high-throughput screen identifies Plasmodium falciparum equilibrative
nucleoside transporter 1 inhibitors that kill malaria parasites.

Frame IJ, Deniskin R, Rinderspacher A, Katz F, Deng SX, Moir RD, Adjalley SH,
Coburn-Flynn O, Fidock DA, Willis IM, Landry DW, Akabas MH.

Equilibrative transporters are potential drug targets; however, most functional
assays involve radioactive substrate uptake that is unsuitable for
high-throughput screens (HTS). We developed a robust yeast-based growth assay
that is potentially applicable to many equilibrative transporters. As proof of
principle, we applied our approach to Equilibrative Nucleoside Transporter 1 of
the malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum (PfENT1). PfENT1 inhibitors might
serve as novel antimalarial drugs since PfENT1-mediated purine import is
essential for parasite proliferation. To identify PfENT1 inhibitors, we screened 
64 560 compounds and identified 171 by their ability to rescue the growth of
PfENT1-expressing fui1Δ yeast in the presence of a cytotoxic PfENT1 substrate,
5-fluorouridine (5-FUrd). In secondary assays, nine of the highest activity
compounds inhibited PfENT1-dependent growth of a purine auxotrophic yeast strain 
with adenosine as the sole purine source (IC50 0.2-2 μM). These nine compounds
completely blocked [(3)H]adenosine uptake into PfENT1-expressing yeast and
erythrocyte-free trophozoite-stage parasites (IC50 5-50 nM), and inhibited
chloroquine-sensitive and -resistant parasite proliferation (IC50 5-50 μM).
Wild-type (WT) parasite IC50 values were up to 4-fold lower compared to
PfENT1-knockout (pfent1Δ) parasites. pfent1Δ parasite killing showed a
delayed-death phenotype not observed with WT. We infer that, in parasites, the
compounds inhibit both PfENT1 and a secondary target with similar efficacy. The
secondary target identity is unknown, but its existence may reduce the likelihood
of parasites developing resistance to PfENT1 inhibitors. Our data support the
hypothesis that blocking purine transport through PfENT1 may be a novel and
compelling approach for antimalarial drug development.

DOI: 10.1021/cb500981y 
PMCID: PMC4369170
PMID: 25602169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

