
1. J Clin Invest. 2015 Mar 2;125(3):1129-46. doi: 10.1172/JCI78280. Epub 2015 Feb 2.

Antigen expression determines adenoviral vaccine potency independent of IFN and
STING signaling.

Quinn KM, Zak DE, Costa A, Yamamoto A, Kastenmuller K, Hill BJ, Lynn GM, Darrah
PA, Lindsay RW, Wang L, Cheng C, Nicosia A, Folgori A, Colloca S, Cortese R,
Gostick E, Price DA, Gall JG, Roederer M, Aderem A, Seder RA.

Recombinant adenoviral vectors (rAds) are lead vaccine candidates for protection 
against a variety of pathogens, including Ebola, HIV, tuberculosis, and malaria, 
due to their ability to potently induce T cell immunity in humans. However, the
ability to induce protective cellular immunity varies among rAds. Here, we
assessed the mechanisms that control the potency of CD8 T cell responses in
murine models following vaccination with human-, chimpanzee-, and simian-derived 
rAds encoding SIV-Gag antigen (Ag). After rAd vaccination, we quantified Ag
expression and performed expression profiling of innate immune response genes in 
the draining lymph node. Human-derived rAd5 and chimpanzee-derived chAd3 were the
most potent rAds and induced high and persistent Ag expression with low innate
gene activation, while less potent rAds induced less Ag expression and robustly
induced innate immunity genes that were primarily associated with IFN signaling. 
Abrogation of type I IFN or stimulator of IFN genes (STING) signaling increased
Ag expression and accelerated CD8 T cell response kinetics but did not alter
memory responses or protection. These findings reveal that the magnitude of
rAd-induced memory CD8 T cell immune responses correlates with Ag expression but 
is independent of IFN and STING and provide criteria for optimizing protective
CD8 T cell immunity with rAd vaccines.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI78280 
PMCID: PMC4362254
PMID: 25642773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

