
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2015 Apr;31:183-9. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.01.020. Epub
2015 Jan 31.

High prevalence of pfdhfr-pfdhps triple mutations associated with anti-malarial
drugs resistance in Plasmodium falciparum isolates seven years after the adoption
of sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine in combination with artesunate as first-line
treatment in Iran.

Rouhani M(1), Zakeri S(2), Pirahmadi S(1), Raeisi A(3), Djadid ND(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: zakeris@yahoo.com.
(3)National Program Manager for Malaria Control, Ministry of Health and Medical
Education, Tehran, Iran.

The spread of anti-malarial drug resistance will challenge any malaria control
and elimination strategies, and routine monitoring of resistance-associated
molecular markers of commonly used anti-malarial drugs is very important.
Therefore, in the present investigation, the extent of mutations/haplotypes in
dhfr and dhps genes of Plasmodium falciparum isolates (n=72) was analyzed seven
years after the introduction of sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) plus artesunate
(AS) as first-line anti-malarial treatment in Iran using PCR-RFLP methods. The
results showed that the majority of the patients (97.2%) carried both 59R and
108N mutations in pure form with wild-type genotype at positions N51 and I164.
Additionally, a significant increase (P<0.05) was observed in the frequency of
R59N108/G437 haplotype (79.2%) during 2012-2014. This raise was because of the
significant increase (P<0.05) in the frequency of 437G mutation (81.9%), which
more likely was due to more availability of SP as anti-malarial drug for
treatment of falciparum patients in these malaria-endemic areas of Iran. However,
no quintuple mutations associated with treatment failure were detected. In
conclusion, the present results along with in vivo assays suggest that seven
years after the adoption of SP-AS as the first-line treatment in Iran, this drug 
remains efficacious for treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria, as a
partner drug with AS in these malaria-endemic areas.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.01.020 
PMID: 25653131  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

