
1. Mol Ecol. 2015 Mar;24(6):1263-74. doi: 10.1111/mec.13107. Epub 2015 Mar 6.

Whole-genome sequencing reveals absence of recent gene flow and separate
demographic histories for Anopheles punctulatus mosquitoes in Papua New Guinea.

Logue K(1), Small ST, Chan ER, Reimer L, Siba PM, Zimmerman PA, Serre D.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, 44195, USA;
Department of Biology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, 44106,
USA; Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH, 44106, USA.

Anopheles mosquitoes are the vectors of several human diseases including malaria.
In many malaria endemic areas, several species of Anopheles coexist, sometimes in
the form of related sibling species that are morphologically indistinguishable.
Determining the size and organization of Anopheles populations, and possible
ongoing gene flow among them is important for malaria control and, in particular,
for monitoring the spread of insecticide resistance alleles. However, these
parameters have been difficult to evaluate in most Anopheles species due to the
paucity of genetic data available. Here, we assess the extent of contemporary
gene flow and historical variations in population size by sequencing and de novo 
assembling the genomes of wild-caught mosquitoes from four species of the
Anopheles punctulatus group of Papua New Guinea. Our analysis of more than 50 Mb 
of orthologous DNA sequences revealed no evidence of contemporary gene flow among
these mosquitoes. In addition, investigation of the demography of two of the An. 
punctulatus species revealed distinct population histories. Overall, our analyses
suggest that, despite their similarities in morphology, behaviour and ecology,
contemporary sympatric populations of An. punctulatus are evolving independently.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.13107 
PMCID: PMC4504211
PMID: 25677924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

