
1. Phytother Res. 2015 May;29(5):749-56. doi: 10.1002/ptr.5311. Epub 2015 Feb 13.

Artocarpus altilis (Parkinson) Fosberg Extracts and Geranyl Dihydrochalcone
Inhibit STAT3 Activity in Prostate Cancer DU145 Cells.

Jeon YJ(1), Jung SN, Chang H, Yun J, Lee CW, Lee J, Choi S, Nash O, Han DC, Kwon 
BM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Genomics, Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience and Biotechnology, University of Science and Technology, 125 Gwahakro 
Yoosunggu, Daejeon, 305-600, Republic of Korea.

Artocarpus altilis (Parkinson) Fosberg has traditionally been used in Indonesia
for the treatment of liver cirrhosis, hypertension, and diabetes. In many other
countries, it is used for the treatment of malaria, yellow fever, and dengue
fever. It has been reported that A. altilis extracts have antiatherosclerotic and
cytoprotective effects, but its molecular targets in tumor cells are not yet
fully understood. The A. altilis extracts and the partially purified fraction
have been shown to inhibit STAT3 activity and the phosphorylation of STAT3 in a
dose-dependent manner. To identify the active components, a bioassay-guided
isolation of the partially purified fraction resulted in the identification of a 
geranyl dihydrochalcone, CG901. Its chemical structure was established on the
basis of spectroscopic evidence and comparison with published data. The partially
purified fraction and the isolated a geranyl dihydrochalcone, CG901,
down-regulated the expression of STAT3 target genes, induced apoptosis in DU145
prostate cancer cells via caspase-3 and PARP degradation, and inhibited tumor
growth in human prostate tumor (DU145) xenograft initiation model. These results 
suggest that A. altilis could be a good natural source and that the isolated
compound will be a potential lead molecule for developing novel therapeutics
against STAT3-related diseases, including cancer and inflammation.

Copyright Â© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ptr.5311 
PMID: 25682949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

