
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2015 Feb 26;7(3):901-15. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evv041.

Evolution of an epigenetic gene ensemble within the genus Anopheles.

Jenkins AM(1), Muskavitch MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston College.
(2)Department of Biology, Boston College Discovery Research, Biogen Idec,
Cambridge, Massachusetts marc.muskavitch@biogenidec.com.

Epigenetic control of gene expression has important implications for the
regulation of developmental processes, for mediating homeostasis and responses to
the external environment, and for transgenerational inheritance of gene
expression patterns. Genes that mediate epigenetic control have been
well-characterized in Drosophila melanogaster, and we have identified and
analyzed an orthologous gene ensemble in Anopheles gambiae that comprises 169
orthologs related to a 215-member epigenetic gene ensemble in D. melanogaster. We
find that this ensemble is highly conserved among anopheline mosquitoes, as we
identify only seven gene family expansion/contraction events within the ensemble 
among 12 mosquito species we have studied within the genus Anopheles. Comparative
analyses of the epigenetic gene expression across the genera Drosophila and
Anopheles reveal distinct tissue-associated expression patterns in the two
genera, but similar temporal expression patterns. The A. gambiae complex and D.
melanogaster subgroup epigenetic gene ensembles exhibit similar evolutionary
rates, as assessed by their respective dN/dS values. These differences in
tissue-associated expression patterns, in contrast to similarities in
evolutionary rates and temporal expression patterns, may imply that some members 
of the epigenetic gene ensemble have been redeployed within one or both genera,
in comparison to the most recent common ancestor of these two clades. Members of 
this epigenetic gene ensemble may constitute another set of potential targets for
vector control and enable further reductions in the burden of human malaria, by
analogy to recent success in development of small molecule antagonists for
mammalian epigenetic machinery.

Â© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evv041 
PMCID: PMC5322554
PMID: 25724208  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

