
1. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2014 Oct;32(5):344-7.

[Genetic polymorphism of the gene encoding the apical membrane antigen-1 of
Plasmodium falciparum].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou YF, Zhang SY, Lin YY, Yang FZ, Xie HG, Xiao FZ.

OBJECTIVE: To study the genetic diversity of apical membrane antigen-1 gene from 
Plasmodium falciparum (PfAMA-1).
METHODS: Filter paper blood samples were collected from 23 imported P. falciparum
malaria patients who returned to Fujian Province from 2006 to 2012. Nested PCR
were used to amplify the PfAMA-1 gene. The umplified fragments were sequenced,
and analyzed by bioinformatic software.
RESULTS: All 23 samples were amplified a 505 bp band. Thirty-two nucleotides were
found to be variable, resulting in 18 haplotypes. Eight of these 18 halotypes
were being reported here for the first time. The parasites collected from Africa 
showed the higher level of variability [haplotypes diversity (Hd)= 0.0985,
nucleotide diversity (π)=0.0258] as compared to the isolates from Asia (Hd=0.909,
π=0.0221). The average difference of dN-dS for all 23 PfAMA-1 sequences was
0.031±0.006. Sequence-based neutrality tests were not significant in Africa and
Asia (P>0.05). The minimum number of recombination events (Rm) was 10, and the
linkage disequilibrium index (R2) evidently declined with the increase of
nucleotide distance. A molecular phylogenetic tree constructed using the
neighbor-joining method showed that the 23 isolates were assigned to three clades
(G1, G2 and G3). Most samples from Africa formed G1, and G3 contained most of
Asian isolates.
CONCLUSION: Plasmodium falciparum isolates from Africa show a higher genetic
diversity than the isolates from Asia for PfAMA-1 gene.


PMID: 25726595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

