
1. Int J Mol Epidemiol Genet. 2014 Dec 15;5(4):185-94. eCollection 2014.

Red blood cell indices and prevalence of hemoglobinopathies and glucose 6
phosphate dehydrogenase deficiencies in male Tanzanian residents of Dar es
Salaam.

Mwakasungula S(1), Schindler T(2), Jongo S(3), Moreno E(3), Kamaka K(3), Mohammed
M(3), Joseph S(3), Rashid R(3), Athuman T(3), Tumbo AM(3), Hamad A(3), Lweno
O(3), Tanner M(4), Shekalaghe S(3), Daubenberger CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Parasitology and Infection Biology, Swiss Tropical and
Public Health Institute Socinstrasse 57, 4002 Basel, Switzerland ; University of 
Basel Basel, Petersplatz 1, CH-4003 Basel, Switzerland ; Ifakara Health
Institute, Bagamoyo Research and Training Centre Bagamoyo, P.O. Box 74, Tanzania.
(2)Department of Medical Parasitology and Infection Biology, Swiss Tropical and
Public Health Institute Socinstrasse 57, 4002 Basel, Switzerland ; University of 
Basel Basel, Petersplatz 1, CH-4003 Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Ifakara Health Institute, Bagamoyo Research and Training Centre Bagamoyo, P.O.
Box 74, Tanzania.
(4)University of Basel Basel, Petersplatz 1, CH-4003 Basel, Switzerland ;
Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Swiss Tropical and Public Health
Institute Socinstrasse 57, 4002 Basel, Switzerland.

Hemoglobinopathies, disorders of hemoglobin structure and production, are one of 
the most common monogenic disorders in humans. Glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase 
deficiency (G6PD) is an inherited enzymopathy resulting in increased oxygen
stress susceptibility of red blood cells. The distributions of these genetic
traits in populations living in tropical and subtropical regions where malaria
has been or is still present are thought to result from survival advantage
against severe life threatening malaria disease. 384 male Tanzanian volunteers
residing in Dar es Salaam were typed for G6PD, sickle cell disease and
α-thalassemia. The most prominent red blood cell polymorphism was heterozygous
α(+)-thalassemia (37.8%), followed by the G6PD(A) deficiency (16.4%),
heterozygous sickle cell trait (15.9%), G6PD(A-) deficiency (13.5%) and
homozygous α(+)-thalassemia (5.2%). 35%, 45%, 17% and 3% of these volunteers were
carriers of wild type gene loci, one, two or three of these hemoglobinopathies,
respectively. We find that using a cut off value of 28.6 pg. for mean corpuscular
hemoglobin (MCH), heterozygous α(+)-thalassemia can be predicted with a
sensitivity of 84% and specificity of 72% in this male population. All subjects
carrying homozygous α(+)-thalassemia were identified based on their MCH value <
28.6 pg.


PMCID: PMC4348704
PMID: 25755846 

