
1. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 13;5:9103. doi: 10.1038/srep09103.

Tissue- and time-dependent transcription in Ixodes ricinus salivary glands and
midguts when blood feeding on the vertebrate host.

Kotsyfakis M(1), Schwarz A(1), Erhart J(1), Ribeiro JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Center of the Czech Academy of Sciences,
Branisovska 31, 37005 Budweis, Czech Republic.
(2)Section of Vector Biology, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 12735 Twinbrook Parkway room 2E32D,
Rockville MD 20852, USA.

Ixodes ricinus is a tick that transmits the pathogens of Lyme and several
arboviral diseases. Pathogens invade the tick midgut, disseminate through the
hemolymph, and are transmitted to the vertebrate host via the salivary glands;
subverting these processes could be used to interrupt pathogen transfer. Here, we
use massive de novo sequencing to characterize the transcriptional dynamics of
the salivary and midgut tissues of nymphal and adult I. ricinus at various time
points after attachment on the vertebrate host. Members of a number of gene
families show stage- and time-specific expression. We hypothesize that gene
expression switching may be under epigenetic control and, in support of this,
identify 34 candidate proteins that modify histones. I. ricinus-secreted proteins
are encoded by genes that have a non-synonymous to synonymous mutation rate even 
greater than immune-related genes. Midgut transcriptome (mialome) analysis
reveals several enzymes associated with protein, carbohydrate, and lipid
digestion, transporters and channels that might be associated with nutrient
uptake, and immune-related transcripts including antimicrobial peptides. This
publicly available dataset supports the identification of protein and gene
targets for biochemical and physiological studies that exploit the transmission
lifecycle of this disease vector for preventative and therapeutic purposes.

DOI: 10.1038/srep09103 
PMCID: PMC4357865
PMID: 25765539  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

