
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 31;112(13):4038-43. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1502370112. Epub 2015 Mar 16.

Silencing of end-joining repair for efficient site-specific gene insertion after 
TALEN/CRISPR mutagenesis in Aedes aegypti.

Basu S(1), Aryan A(1), Overcash JM(1), Samuel GH(1), Anderson MA(1), Dahlem
TJ(2), Myles KM(3), Adelman ZN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Fralin Life Science Institute and Department of Entomology, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA 24061; and.
(2)Mutation Generation and Detection Core, Health Science Center Core Research
Facility, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132.
(3)Fralin Life Science Institute and Department of Entomology, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA 24061; and mylesk@vt.edu zachadel@vt.edu.

Conventional control strategies for mosquito-borne pathogens such as malaria and 
dengue are now being complemented by the development of transgenic mosquito
strains reprogrammed to generate beneficial phenotypes such as conditional
sterility or pathogen resistance. The widespread success of site-specific
nucleases such as transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) and
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/Cas9 in model 
organisms also suggests that reprogrammable gene drive systems based on these
nucleases may be capable of spreading such beneficial phenotypes in wild mosquito
populations. Using the mosquito Aedes aegypti, we determined that mutations in
the FokI domain used in TALENs to generate obligate heterodimeric complexes
substantially and significantly reduce gene editing rates. We found that
CRISPR/Cas9-based editing in the mosquito Ae. aegypti is also highly variable,
with the majority of guide RNAs unable to generate detectable editing. By first
evaluating candidate guide RNAs using a transient embryo assay, we were able to
rapidly identify highly effective guide RNAs; focusing germ line-based
experiments only on this cohort resulted in consistently high editing rates of
24-90%. Microinjection of double-stranded RNAs targeting ku70 or lig4, both
essential components of the end-joining response, increased recombination-based
repair in early embryos as determined by plasmid-based reporters. RNAi-based
suppression of Ku70 concurrent with embryonic microinjection of site-specific
nucleases yielded consistent gene insertion frequencies of 2-3%, similar to
traditional transposon- or Î¦C31-based integration methods but without the
requirement for an initial docking step. These studies should greatly accelerate 
investigations into mosquito biology, streamline development of transgenic
strains for field releases, and simplify the evaluation of novel Cas9-based gene 
drive systems.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1502370112 
PMCID: PMC4386333
PMID: 25775608  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

