
1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 16;10(3):e0118911. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118911.
eCollection 2015.

Biophysical analysis of anopheles gambiae leucine-rich repeat proteins APL1A1,
APL1B [corrected] and APL1C and their interaction with LRIM1.

Williams M(1), Summers BJ(1), Baxter RH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry, Yale
University, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(4):e0126901.

Natural infection of Anopheles gambiae by malaria-causing Plasmodium parasites is
significantly influenced by the APL1 genetic locus. The locus contains three
closely related leucine-rich repeat (LRR) genes, APL1A, APL1B and APL1C. Multiple
studies have reported the participation of APL1A-C in the immune response of A.
gambiae to invasion by both rodent and human Plasmodium isolates. APL1C forms a
heterodimer with the related LRR protein LRIM1 via a C-terminal coiled-coil
domain that is also present in APL1A and APL1B. The LRIM1/APL1C heterodimer
protects A. gambiae from infection by binding the complement-like protein TEP1 to
form a stable and active immune complex. Here we report solution x-ray scatting
data for the LRIM1/APL1C heterodimer, the oligomeric state of LRIM1/APL1 LRR
domains in solution and the crystal structure of the APL1B LRR domain. The
LRIM1/APL1C heterodimeric complex has a flexible and extended structure in
solution. In contrast to the APL1A, APL1C and LRIM1 LRR domains, the APL1B LRR
domain is a homodimer. The crystal structure of APL1B-LRR shows that the
homodimer is formed by an N-terminal helix that complements for the absence of an
N-terminal capping motif in APL1B, which is a unique distinction within the
LRIM1/APL1 protein family. Full-length APL1A1 and APL1B form a stable complex
with LRIM1. These results support a model in which APL1A1, APL1B and APL1C can
all form an extended, flexible heterodimer with LRIM1, providing a repertoire of 
functional innate immune complexes to protect A. gambiae from a diverse array of 
pathogens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118911 
PMCID: PMC4361550
PMID: 25775123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

