
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015;59(6):3156-67. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00197-15. Epub 
2015 Mar 16.

Artemisinin-resistant Plasmodium falciparum parasites exhibit altered patterns of
development in infected erythrocytes.

Hott A(1), Casandra D(2), Sparks KN(2), Morton LC(2), Castanares GG(2), Rutter
A(2), Kyle DE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Morsani College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(2)Department of Global Health, College of Public Health, University of South
Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(3)Department of Global Health, College of Public Health, University of South
Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA dkyle@health.usf.edu.

Artemisinin derivatives are used in combination with other antimalarial drugs for
treatment of multidrug-resistant malaria worldwide. Clinical resistance to
artemisinin recently emerged in southeast Asia, yet in vitro phenotypes for
discerning mechanism(s) of resistance remain elusive. Here, we describe novel
phenotypic resistance traits expressed by artemisinin-resistant Plasmodium
falciparum. The resistant parasites exhibit altered patterns of development that 
result in reduced exposure to drug at the most susceptible stage of development
in erythrocytes (trophozoites) and increased exposure in the most resistant stage
(rings). In addition, a novel in vitro delayed clearance assay (DCA) that
assesses drug effects on asexual stages was found to correlate with parasite
clearance half-life in vivo as well as with mutations in the Kelch domain gene
associated with resistance (Pf3D7_1343700). Importantly, all of the resistance
phenotypes were stable in cloned parasites for more than 2 years without drug
pressure. The results demonstrate artemisinin-resistant P. falciparum has evolved
a novel mechanism of phenotypic resistance to artemisinin drugs linked to
abnormal cell cycle regulation. These results offer insights into a novel
mechanism of drug resistance in P. falciparum and new tools for monitoring the
spread of artemisinin resistance.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00197-15 
PMCID: PMC4432152
PMID: 25779582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

