
1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 20;10(3):e0119475. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119475.
eCollection 2015.

Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium falciparum at the crossroads of exchange among
islands in Vanuatu: implications for malaria elimination strategies.

Chan CW(1), Sakihama N(2), Tachibana S(2), Idris ZM(1), Lum JK(3), Tanabe K(2),
Kaneko A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Island Malaria Group, Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Laboratory of Malariology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka
University, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Evolutionary Anthropology and Health, Binghamton University,
Binghamton, New York, United States of America; Department of Anthropology,
Binghamton University, Binghamton, New York, United States of America; Department
of Biological Sciences, Binghamton University, Binghamton, New York, United
States of America.
(4)Island Malaria Group, Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Parasitology, Graduate
School of Medicine, Osaka City University, Osaka, Japan; Institute of Tropical
Medicine, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.

Understanding the transmission and movement of Plasmodium parasites is crucial
for malaria elimination and prevention of resurgence. Located at the limit of
malaria transmission in the Pacific, Vanuatu is an ideal candidate for
elimination programs due to low endemicity and the isolated nature of its island 
setting. We analyzed the variation in the merozoite surface protein 1 (msp1) and 
the circumsporozoite protein (csp) of P. falciparum and P. vivax populations to
examine the patterns of gene flow and population structures among seven sites on 
five islands in Vanuatu. Genetic diversity was in general higher in P. vivax than
P. falciparum from the same site. In P. vivax, high genetic diversity was likely 
maintained by greater extent of gene flow among sites and among islands.
Consistent with the different patterns of gene flow, the proportion of genetic
variance found among islands was substantially higher in P. falciparum
(28.81-31.23%) than in P. vivax (-0.53-3.99%). Our data suggest that the current 
island-by-island malaria elimination strategy in Vanuatu, while adequate for P.
falciparum elimination, might need to be complemented with more centrally
integrated measures to control P. vivax movement across islands.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119475 
PMCID: PMC4368729
PMID: 25793260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

