
1. Trop Med Health. 2015 Mar;43(1):53-61. doi: 10.2149/tmh.2014-18. Epub 2014 Nov
20.

Visualization of Malaria Parasites in the Skin Using the Luciferase Transgenic
Parasite, Plasmodium berghei.

Matsuoka H(1), Tomita H(1), Hattori R(1), Arai M(2), Hirai M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Zoology, Jichi Medical University , 3311-1 Yakushiji,
Shimotsuke-shi 329-0498, Japan.
(2)Division of Medical Zoology, Jichi Medical University , 3311-1 Yakushiji,
Shimotsuke-shi 329-0498, Japan ; Department of International Medical Zoology,
Graduate School of Medicine, Kagawa University , Miki-cho 761-0793, Japan.
(3)Division of Medical Zoology, Jichi Medical University , 3311-1 Yakushiji,
Shimotsuke-shi 329-0498, Japan ; Department of Parasitology, School of Medicine, 
Juntendo University , Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.

We produced a transgenic rodent malaria parasite (Plasmodium berghei) that
contained the luciferase gene under a promoter region of elongation factor-1α.
These transgenic (TG) parasites expressed luciferase in all stages of their life 
cycle, as previously reported. However, we were the first to succeed in observing
sporozoites as a mass in mouse skin following their deposition by the probing of 
infective mosquitoes. Our transgenic parasites may have emitted stronger
bioluminescence than previous TG parasites. The estimated number of injected
sporozoites by mosquitoes was between 34 and 775 (median 80). Since luciferase
activity diminished immediately after the death of the parasites, luciferase
activity could be an indicator of the existence of live parasites. Our results
indicated that sporozoites survived at the probed site for more than 42 hours. We
also detected sporozoites in the liver within 15 min of the intravenous
injection. Bioluminescence was not observed in the lung, kidney or spleen. We
confirmed the observation that the liver was the first organ in which malaria
parasites entered and increased in number.

DOI: 10.2149/tmh.2014-18 
PMCID: PMC4361344
PMID: 25859153 

