
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 May 19;43(9):4661-75. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv311. Epub 2015 
Apr 13.

A serine-arginine-rich (SR) splicing factor modulates alternative splicing of
over a thousand genes in Toxoplasma gondii.

Yeoh LM(1), Goodman CD(2), Hall NE(3), van Dooren GG(4), McFadden GI(2), Ralph
SA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010,
Australia School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria
3010, Australia.
(2)School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, 
Australia.
(3)Department of Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La Trobe
University, Bundoora, Victoria 3086, Australia Life Sciences Computation Centre, 
Victorian Life Sciences Computation Initiative, Carlton, Victoria 3010,
Australia.
(4)Research School of Biology, The Australian National University, Acton, ACT
2601, Australia.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010,
Australia saralph@unimelb.edu.au.

Single genes are often subject to alternative splicing, which generates
alternative mature mRNAs. This phenomenon is widespread in animals, and observed 
in over 90% of human genes. Recent data suggest it may also be common in
Apicomplexa. These parasites have small genomes, and economy of DNA is
evolutionarily favoured in this phylum. We investigated the mechanism of
alternative splicing in Toxoplasma gondii, and have identified and localized
TgSR3, a homologue of ASF/SF2 (alternative-splicing factor/splicing factor 2, a
serine-arginine-rich, or SR protein) to a subnuclear compartment. In addition, we
conditionally overexpressed this protein, which was deleterious to growth.
qRT-PCR was used to confirm perturbation of splicing in a known
alternatively-spliced gene. We performed high-throughput RNA-seq to determine the
extent of splicing modulated by this protein. Current RNA-seq algorithms are
poorly suited to compact parasite genomes, and hence we complemented existing
tools by writing a new program, GeneGuillotine, that addresses this deficiency by
segregating overlapping reads into distinct genes. In order to identify the
extent of alternative splicing, we released another program, JunctionJuror, that 
detects changes in intron junctions. Using this program, we identified about 2000
genes that were constitutively alternatively spliced in T. gondii. Overexpressing
the splice regulator TgSR3 perturbed alternative splicing in over 1000 genes.

Â© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv311 
PMCID: PMC4482073
PMID: 25870410  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

