
1. Heredity (Edinb). 2015 Sep;115(3):243-52. doi: 10.1038/hdy.2015.33. Epub 2015 Apr
22.

Target-site resistance mutations (kdr and RDL), but not metabolic resistance,
negatively impact male mating competiveness in the malaria vector Anopheles
gambiae.

Platt N(1), Kwiatkowska RM(1), Irving H(1), DiabatÃ© A(2), Dabire R(2), Wondji
CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Liverpool, UK.
(2)IRSS/Centre Muraz, BP 390 Bobo-Dioulasso, Burkina Faso, Africa.

The implementation of successful insecticide resistance management strategies for
malaria control is currently hampered by poor understanding of the fitness cost
of resistance on mosquito populations, including their mating competiveness. To
fill this knowledge gap, coupled and uncoupled Anopheles gambiae s.l. males (all 
M form (Anopheles coluzzii)) were collected from mating swarms in Burkina Faso.
This multiple insecticide resistant population exhibited high 1014F kdr(R) allele
frequencies (>60%) and RDL(R) (>80%) in contrast to the Ace-1(R) allele (<6%).
Kdr heterozygote males were more likely to mate than homozygote resistant
(OR=2.36; P<0.001), suggesting a negative impact of kdr on An. coluzzii mating
ability. Interestingly, heterozygote males were also more competitive than
homozygote susceptible (OR=3.26; P=0.006), suggesting a heterozygote advantage
effect. Similarly, heterozygote RDL(R)/RDL(S) were also more likely to mate than 
homozygote-resistant males (OR=2.58; P=0.007). Furthermore, an additive mating
disadvantage was detected in male homozygotes for both kdr/RDL-resistant alleles.
In contrast, no fitness difference was observed for the Ace-1 mutation.
Comparative microarray-based genome-wide transcription analysis revealed that
metabolic resistance did not significantly alter the mating competitiveness of
male An. coluzzii mosquitoes. Indeed, no significant difference of expression
levels was observed for the main metabolic resistance genes, suggesting that
metabolic resistance has a limited impact on male mating competiveness. In
addition, specific gene classes/GO terms associated with mating process were
detected including sensory perception and peroxidase activity. The detrimental
impact of insecticide resistance on mating competiveness observed here suggests
that resistance management strategies such as insecticide rotation could help
reverse the resistance, if implemented early.

DOI: 10.1038/hdy.2015.33 
PMCID: PMC4519523
PMID: 25899013  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

