
1. Mol Microbiol. 2015 Jul;97(2):381-95. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13035. Epub 2015 May 20.

Balancing drug resistance and growth rates via compensatory mutations in the
Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter.

Petersen I(1)(2), Gabryszewski SJ(1), Johnston GL(1)(3), Dhingra SK(1)(4), Ecker 
A(1), Lewis RE(1), de Almeida MJ(1), Straimer J(1), Henrich PP(1), Palatulan
E(1), Johnson DJ(1), Coburn-Flynn O(1), Sanchez C(2), Lehane AM(1), Lanzer M(2), 
Fidock DA(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY, 10032, USA.
(2)Hygiene Institut, Abteilung Parasitologie, Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg,
69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)School of International and Public Affairs, Columbia University, New York, NY,
10027, USA.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Binghamton University, Binghamton, NY,
13902, USA.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY, 10032, USA.

The widespread use of chloroquine to treat Plasmodium falciparum infections has
resulted in the selection and dissemination of variant haplotypes of the primary 
resistance determinant PfCRT. These haplotypes have encountered drug pressure and
within-host competition with wild-type drug-sensitive parasites. To examine these
selective forces in vitro, we genetically engineered P. falciparum to express
geographically diverse PfCRT haplotypes. Variant alleles from the Philippines
(PH1 and PH2, which differ solely by the C72S mutation) both conferred a moderate
gain of chloroquine resistance and a reduction in growth rates in vitro. Of the
two, PH2 showed higher IC50 values, contrasting with reduced growth. Furthermore,
a highly mutated pfcrt allele from Cambodia (Cam734) conferred moderate
chloroquine resistance and enhanced growth rates, when tested against wild-type
pfcrt in co-culture competition assays. These three alleles mediated
cross-resistance to amodiaquine, an antimalarial drug widely used in Africa. Each
allele, along with the globally prevalent Dd2 and 7G8 alleles, rendered parasites
more susceptible to lumefantrine, the partner drug used in the leading first-line
artemisinin-based combination therapy. These data reveal ongoing region-specific 
evolution of PfCRT that impacts drug susceptibility and relative fitness in
settings of mixed infections, and raise important considerations about optimal
agents to treat chloroquine-resistant malaria.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13035 
PMCID: PMC4511469
PMID: 25898991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

