
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Jul;59(7):3995-4002. doi: 10.1128/AAC.04961-14.
Epub 2015 Apr 20.

Increasing prevalence of a novel triple-mutant dihydropteroate synthase genotype 
in Plasmodium falciparum in western Kenya.

Lucchi NW(1), Okoth SA(2), Komino F(3), Onyona P(3), Goldman IF(4), Ljolje D(2), 
Shi YP(4), Barnwell JW(4), Udhayakumar V(4), Kariuki S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA
NLucchi@cdc.gov.
(2)Atlanta Research and Education Foundation, Decatur, Georgia, USA.
(3)Kenya Medical Research Institute-Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Collaboration, Kisumu, Kenya.
(4)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

The molecular basis of sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) resistance lies in a
combination of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in two genes coding for
Plasmodium falciparum dihydrofolate reductase (Pfdhfr) and P. falciparum
dihydropteroate synthase (Pfdhps), targeted by pyrimethamine and sulfadoxine,
respectively. The continued use of SP for intermittent preventive treatment in
pregnant women in many African countries, despite SP's discontinuation as a
first-line antimalarial treatment option due to high levels of drug resistance,
may further increase the prevalence of SP-resistant parasites and/or lead to the 
selection of new mutations. An antimalarial drug resistance surveillance study
was conducted in western Kenya between 2010 and 2013. A total of 203 clinical
samples from children with uncomplicated malaria were genotyped for SNPs
associated with SP resistance. The prevalence of the triple-mutant Pfdhfr C50
I51R59N108: I164 genotype and the double-mutant Pfdhps S436 G437E540: A581A613
genotype was high. Two triple-mutant Pfdhps genotypes, S436 G437E540G581: A613
and H436G437E540: A581A613, were found, with the latter thus far being uniquely
found in western Kenya. The prevalence of the S436 G437E540G581: A613 genotype
was low. However, a steady increase in the prevalence of the Pfdhps triple-mutant
H436G437E540: A581A613 genotype has been observed since its appearance in early
2000. Isolates with these genotypes shared substantial microsatellite haplotypes 
with the most common double-mutant allele, suggesting that this triple-mutant
allele may have evolved locally. Overall, these findings show that the prevalence
of the H436G437E540: A581A613 triple mutant may be increasing in this population 
and could compromise the efficacy of SP for intermittent preventive treatment in 
pregnant women if it increases the resistance threshold further.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.04961-14 
PMCID: PMC4468674
PMID: 25896703  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

