
1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2015 Jul 1;23(13):3747-50. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.03.080. Epub 
2015 Apr 11.

Protonography, a powerful tool for analyzing the activity and the oligomeric
state of the γ-carbonic anhydrase identified in the genome of Porphyromonas
gingivalis.

Del Prete S(1), De Luca V(2), Iandolo E(2), Supuran CT(3), Capasso C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Bioscienze e Biorisorse, CNR, Via Pietro Castellino 111, 80131
Napoli, Italy; Laboratorio di Chimica Bioinorganica, Polo Scientifico, Università
degli Studi di Firenze, Sesto Fiorentino, Firenze, Italy.
(2)Istituto di Bioscienze e Biorisorse, CNR, Via Pietro Castellino 111, 80131
Napoli, Italy.
(3)Laboratorio di Chimica Bioinorganica, Polo Scientifico, Università degli Studi
di Firenze, Sesto Fiorentino, Firenze, Italy; Dipartimento di Scienze
Farmaceutiche, Polo Scientifico, Università degli Studi di Firenze, Sesto
Fiorentino, Firenze, Italy.
(4)Istituto di Bioscienze e Biorisorse, CNR, Via Pietro Castellino 111, 80131
Napoli, Italy. Electronic address: clemente.capasso@ibbr.cnr.it.

Carbonic anhydrases (CAs, EC 4.2.1.1) are metalloenzymes, mostly containing zinc 
within their active site, which catalyze a simple but physiologically relevant
reaction in all life kingdoms, carbon dioxide hydration to bicarbonate and
protons. Six CA classes (α, β, γ, δ, ζ and η) and multiple CA isoforms evolved in
organisms all over the phylogenetic tree, for facing the need to efficiently
convert high amounts of CO2 to its hydration products. These enzymes are thus
involved in many physiologic processes, such as photosynthesis, respiration, CO2 
transport, electrolyte secretion in many tissues/organs; biosynthetic reactions
(gluconeogenesis, lipogenesis, ureagenesis), etc. Recently, our group reported a 
new technique to assay CA activity on SDS-PAGE gels, named 'protonography' due to
its similarity to zymography. By using protonography, the conversion of CO2 into 
protons can be visualized as a yellow band on a polyacrylamide gel. By using this
technique we demonstrated the possibility to detect activity of the α-CA from
Vibrio cholerae as well as the β- and γ-CAs present in Escherichia coli extracts.
Furthermore, the activity of the newly discovered η-class enzyme from Plasmodium 
falciparum has also been evidenced with protonography, illustrating its wide use.
Here we show that protonography can be also useful to reveal the oligomeric state
of the γ-CA identified in the genome of the bacterial parasite colonizing the
oral cavity, Porphyromonas gingivalis, possibly allowing for a simple and
efficient diagnostic method.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.03.080 
PMID: 25910585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

