
1. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2015 Sep;75(5):390-7. doi:
10.3109/00365513.2015.1031692. Epub 2015 Apr 30.

Prevalence of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and diagnostic
challenges in 1500 immigrants in Denmark examined for haemoglobinopathies.

Warny M(1), Klausen TW, Petersen J, Birgens H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Herlev Hospital, Copenhagen University Hospital ,
Herlev , Denmark.

Similar to the thalassaemia syndromes, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)
deficiency is highly prevalent in areas historically exposed to malaria. In the
present study, we used quantitative and molecular methods to determine the
prevalence of G6PD deficiency in a population of 1508 immigrants in Denmark. We
found the allele frequency to be between 2.4 and 2.9% in the female immigrants.
Furthermore, the mutation pattern in the studied population showed a high
prevalence of the G6PD A-(202A) variant in African and African-American
immigrants, a high prevalence of the G6PD Mediterranean variant in Mediterranean 
European and Western Asian immigrants, and substantial heterogeneity in the
variants found in the Eastern Asian/Pacific immigrants. Inasmuch as many of the
patients included in this investigation had various thalassaemic syndromes, we
were able to evaluate the effects of the interaction between a low mean
corpuscular haemoglobin (MCH) value and G6PD activity, particularly in
heterozygous females. The activity level was markedly influenced by the MCH value
in females with normal G6PD activity, but not in heterozygous and homozygous
females. Comparison of patients with normal G6PD activity and heterozygous
females indicated considerable overlap in activity levels. To help separating
heterozygous females from females with wild-type genes, a DNA analysis is
necessary when the female activity level is between 4.0 and 4.9 U/g hgb
corresponding to 50-60% of the median activity of unaffected males.

DOI: 10.3109/00365513.2015.1031692 
PMID: 25925739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

