
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2015 Jul;33:189-96. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.05.002. Epub
2015 May 4.

Molecular inference of sources and spreading patterns of Plasmodium falciparum
malaria parasites in internally displaced persons settlements in Myanmar-China
border area.

Lo E(1), Zhou G(1), Oo W(1), Lee MC(1), Baum E(2), Felgner PL(2), Yang Z(3), Cui 
L(4), Yan G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Public Health, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of
California, Irvine, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathogen Biology and Immunology, Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, China.
(4)Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 
USA.
(5)Program in Public Health, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA.
Electronic address: guiyuny@uci.edu.

In Myanmar, civil unrest and establishment of internally displaced persons (IDP) 
settlement along the Myanmar-China border have impacted malaria transmission. The
growing IDP populations raise deep concerns about health impact on local
communities. Microsatellite markers were used to examine the source and spreading
patterns of Plasmodium falciparum between IDP settlement and surrounding villages
in Myanmar along the China border. Genotypic structure of P. falciparum was
compared over the past three years from the same area and the demographic history
was inferred to determine the source of recent infections. In addition, we
examined if border migration is a factor of P. falciparum infections in China by 
determining gene flow patterns across borders. Compared to local community, the
IDP samples showed a reduced and consistently lower genetic diversity over the
past three years. A strong signature of genetic bottleneck was detected in the
IDP samples. P. falciparum infections from the border regions in China were
genetically similar to Myanmar and parasite gene flow was not constrained by
geographical distance. Reduced genetic diversity of P. falciparum suggested
intense malaria control within the IDP settlement. Human movement was a key
factor to the spread of malaria both locally in Myanmar and across the
international border.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.05.002 
PMCID: PMC4679153
PMID: 25952567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

