
1. Parasitology. 2015 Aug;142(9):1215-20. doi: 10.1017/S0031182015000487. Epub 2015 
May 13.

Detecting transmission areas of malaria parasites in a migratory bird species.

Garcia-Longoria L(1), Hellgren O(2), Bensch S(2), de Lope F(1), Marzal A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biolog√≠a Animal,Universidad de Extremadura,E-06071
Badajoz,Spain.
(2)Department of Biology,Molecular Ecology and Evolution Lab,Ecology
Building,Lund University,SE- 22362 Lund,Sweden.

The identification of the regions where vector-borne diseases are transmitted is 
essential to study transmission patterns and to recognize future changes in
environmental conditions that may potentially influence the transmission areas.
SGS1, one of the lineages of Plasmodium relictum, is known to have active
transmission in tropical Africa and temperate regions of Europe. Nuclear sequence
data from isolates infected with SGS1 (based on merozoite surface protein 1
(MSP1) allelic diversity) have provided new insights on the distribution and
transmission areas of these allelic variants. For example, MSP1 alleles
transmitted in Africa differ from those transmitted in Europe, suggesting the
existence of two populations of SGS1 lineages. However, no study has analysed the
distribution of African and European transmitted alleles in Afro-Palearctic
migratory birds. With this aim, we used a highly variable molecular marker to
investigate whether juvenile house martins become infected in Europe before their
first migration to Africa. We explored the MSP1 allelic diversity of P. relictum 
in adult and juvenile house martins. We found that juveniles were infected with
SGS1 during their first weeks of life, confirming active transmission of SGS1 to 
house martins in Europe. Moreover, we found that all the juveniles and most of
adults were infected with one European transmitted MSP1 allele, whereas two adult
birds were infected with two African transmitted MSP1 alleles. These findings
suggest that house martins are exposed to different strains of P. relictum in
their winter and breeding quarters.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182015000487 
PMID: 25968571  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

