
1. Acta Trop. 2015 Sep;149:64-9. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2015.05.011. Epub 2015
May 18.

Use of bacterial surrogates as a tool to explore antimalarial drug interaction:
Synergism between inhibitors of malarial dihydrofolate reductase and
dihydropteroate synthase.

Talawanich Y(1), Kamchonwongpaisan S(1), Sirawaraporn W(2), Yuthavong Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, National Science
and Technology Development Agency, 113 Thailand Science Park, Phahonyothin Road, 
Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Rama VI
Rd., Bangkok 10400, Thailand.
(3)National Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, National Science
and Technology Development Agency, 113 Thailand Science Park, Phahonyothin Road, 
Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand. Electronic address:
yongyuth@biotec.or.th.

Interaction between antimalarial drugs is important in determining the outcome of
chemotherapy using drug combinations. Inhibitors of dihydrofolate reductase
(DHFR) such as pyrimethamine and of dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS) such as sulfa
drugs are known to have synergistic interactions. However, studies of the
synergism are complicated by the fact that the malaria parasite can also salvage 
exogenous folates, and the salvage may also be affected by the drugs. It is
desirable to have a convenient system to study interaction of DHFR and DHPS
inhibitors without such complications. Here, we describe the use of Escherichia
coli transformed with malarial DHFR and DHPS, while its own corresponding genes
have been inactivated by optimal concentration of trimethoprim and genetic
knockout, respectively, to study the interaction of the inhibitors. Marked
synergistic effects are observed for all combinations of pyrimethamine and sulfa 
inhibitors in the presence of trimethoprim. At 0.05μM trimethoprim, sum of
fractional inhibitory concentrations, ΣFIC of pyrimethamine with sulfadoxine,
pyrimethamine with sulfathiazole, pyrimethamine with sulfamethoxazole, and
pyrimethamine with dapsone are in the range of 0.24-0.41. These results show
synergism between inhibitors of the two enzymes even in the absence of folate
transport and uptake. This bacterial surrogate system should be useful as a tool 
for assessing the interactions of drug combinations between the DHFR and DHPS
inhibitors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2015.05.011 
PMID: 25997881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

