
1. Microbiol Immunol. 2015 Jul;59(7):398-409. doi: 10.1111/1348-0421.12266.

Viral protein R of HIV type-1 induces retrotransposition and upregulates
glutamate synthesis by the signal transducer and activator of transcription 1
signaling pathway.

Doi A(1)(2)(3), Iijima K(1), Kano S(2)(4), Ishizaka Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intractable Diseases, Research Institute, National Center for
Global Health and Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 162-0052.
(2)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 
Ten-nodai, Tsukuba, 305-0006.
(3)Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, 5-3-1 Kojimachi, Chiyoda-ku,
Tokyo, 102-0083.
(4)Department of Tropical Medicine and Malaria, Research Institute, National
Center for Global Health and Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo,
162-0052, Japan.

Viral protein R (Vpr) of HIV-1 plays an important role in viral replication in
macrophages. Various lines of evidence suggest that expression of Vpr in
macrophages causes immunopathogenesis; however, the underlying mechanism is not
yet fully understood. In this study, it was shown that recombinant Vpr (rVpr)
induces retrotransposition of long interspersed element-1 in RAW264.7, a
macrophage-like cell line, and activates reverse transcriptase-dependent
immunotoxic cascades including production of IFN-β and phosphorylation of signal 
transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1). Knockout experiments based
on the CRISPR/Cas9 nickase system further demonstrated that cyclic guanosine
monophosphate-adenosine monophosphate synthase (cGAS) and stimulator of
interferon gene (STING) are responsible for IFN-β production and STAT1
phosphorylation, respectively. Moreover, rVpr was found to increase production of
glutaminase C, a regulator of glutamate synthesis, which is also dependent on the
cGAS-STING pathway. Taken together with reports that glutaminase C is involved in
the pathogenesis of HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder (HAND) and that Vpr is
detectable in the cerebrospinal fluid of HIV-1-positive patients, a possible role
of Vpr-induced L1-RTP and immunotoxic cascades in the development of HAND is
discussed.

© 2015 The Societies and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1348-0421.12266 
PMID: 25990091  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

