
1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 May 27;11(5):e1004905. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004905.
eCollection 2015 May.

Genome-Wide Identification of the Target Genes of AP2-O, a Plasmodium AP2-Family 
Transcription Factor.

Kaneko I(1), Iwanaga S(1), Kato T(1), Kobayashi I(2), Yuda M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Zoology, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine,
Tsu, Mie, Japan.
(2)Core-Lab, Graduate School of Regional Innovation Studies, Mie University, Tsu,
Mie, Japan.

Stage-specific transcription is a fundamental biological process in the life
cycle of the Plasmodium parasite. Proteins containing the AP2 DNA-binding domain 
are responsible for stage-specific transcriptional regulation and belong to the
only known family of transcription factors in Plasmodium parasites. Comprehensive
identification of their target genes will advance our understanding of the
molecular basis of stage-specific transcriptional regulation and stage-specific
parasite development. AP2-O is an AP2 family transcription factor that is
expressed in the mosquito midgut-invading stage, called the ookinete, and is
essential for normal morphogenesis of this stage. In this study, we identified
the genome-wide target genes of AP2-O by chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing
and elucidate how this AP2 family transcription factor contributes to the
formation of this motile stage. The analysis revealed that AP2-O binds
specifically to the upstream genomic regions of more than 500 genes, suggesting
that approximately 10% of the parasite genome is directly regulated by AP2-O.
These genes are involved in distinct biological processes such as morphogenesis, 
locomotion, midgut penetration, protection against mosquito immunity and
preparation for subsequent oocyst development. This direct and global regulation 
by AP2-O provides a model for gene regulation in Plasmodium parasites and may
explain how these parasites manage to control their complex life cycle using a
small number of sequence-specific AP2 transcription factors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004905 
PMCID: PMC4446032
PMID: 26018192  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

