
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2015 Aug;79:644-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2015.05.033.
Epub 2015 Jun 3.

Isolation, characterization, interaction of a thiazolekinase (Plasmodium
falciparum) with silver nanoparticles.

Yao J(1), van Marwijk J(1), Wilhelmi B(1), Whiteley CG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Biotechnology, Rhodes University,
P.O. Box 94, Grahamstown 6140, South Africa.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Biotechnology, Rhodes University,
P.O. Box 94, Grahamstown 6140, South Africa. Electronic address:
C.Whiteley@ru.ac.za.

Malaria, a mosquito-borne infectious disease, is caused by the Plasmodium genus, 
and remains one of the greatest health challenges worldwide. The malarial
parasite possess a biosynthetic pathway for the B-group vitamin incorporating the
thiamine metabolizing enzymes; humans on the other hand cannot synthesize the
vitamin and require it from within their diet. The vitamin B1 biosynthetic enzyme
5-(2-hydroxyethyl)-4-methylthioazolekinase [EC. 2.7.1.50] from Plasmodium
(PfThzK) is particularly attractive as a biomedical target since any inhibition
of this enzyme may lead to an effective treatment for malaria. In the present
study, PfThzK was recombinantly produced as a 6× His fusion protein in
Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) and purified using nickel affinity and size exclusion 
chromatography. The enzyme was monomeric with a molecular mass of 34 kDa, a
specific activity of 295.04 nmol min(-1) mg(-1) and showed an optimum temperature
and pH of 37 °C and 7.5, respectively. The purified PfThzK was non-competitively 
inhibited (79%) by silver nanoparticles (2-6 nm); Ki=6.45 μM. A mechanism is
suggested for the interaction of the silver nanoparticle with PfThzK through two 
sulphur bearing amino acids (Met(1), Cys(206)) on the surface of each subunit of 
the enzyme.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2015.05.033 
PMID: 26049116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

