
1. Mol Biosyst. 2015 Aug;11(8):2354-63. doi: 10.1039/c5mb00330j.

An immunomics approach for the analysis of natural antibody responses to
Plasmodium vivax infection.

Chen JH(1), Chen SB, Wang Y, Ju C, Zhang T, Xu B, Shen HM, Mo XJ, Molina DM, Eng 
M, Liang X, Gardner MJ, Wang R, Hu W.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology of the Chinese
Ministry of Health, WHO Collaborating Center for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and
Filariasis, Shanghai 200025, People's Republic of China. junhuchen@hotmail.com
huw@fudan.edu.cn.

High throughput immunomics is a powerful platform to discover potential targets
of host immunity and develop diagnostic tests for infectious diseases. We
screened the sera of Plasmodium vivax-exposed individuals to profile the antibody
response to blood-stage antigens of P. vivax using a P. vivax protein microarray.
A total of 1936 genes encoding the P. vivax proteins were expressed, printed and 
screened with sera from P. vivax-exposed individuals and normal subjects. Total
of 151 (7.8% of the 1936 targets) highly immunoreactive antigens were identified,
including five well-characterized antigens of P. vivax (ETRAMP11.2, Pv34, SUB1,
RAP2 and MSP4). Among the highly immunoreactive antigens, 5 antigens were
predicted as adhesins by MAAP, and 11 antigens were predicted as merozoite
invasion-related proteins based on homology with P. falciparum proteins. There
are 40 proteins that have serodiagnostic potential for antibody surveillance.
These novel Plasmodium antigens identified provide the clues for understanding
host immune response to P. vivax infection and the development of antibody
surveillance tools.

DOI: 10.1039/c5mb00330j 
PMID: 26091354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

