
1. Parasitol Res. 2015 Sep;114(9):3431-8. doi: 10.1007/s00436-015-4568-y. Epub 2015 
Jun 26.

Antimalarial and antioxidant activities of Indigofera oblongifolia on Plasmodium 
chabaudi-induced spleen tissue injury in mice.

Lubbad MY(1), Al-Quraishy S, Dkhil MA.

Author information: 
(1)General Directorate of Environmental and Occupational Health, Ministry of
Health, Public Health Agency, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Malaria is still one of the most common infectious diseases and leads to various 
public health problems worldwide. Medicinal plants are promising sources for
identifying novel agents with potential antimalarial activity. This study aimed
to investigate the antimalarial and the antioxidant activities of Indigofera
oblongifolia on Plasmodium chabaudi-induced spleen tissue injury in mice. Mice
were divided into five groups. The first group served as a vehicle control; the
second, third, fourth, and fifth groups were infected with 1 × 10(6) P.
chabaudi-parasitized erythrocytes. Mice of the last three groups were gavaged
with 100 μl of I. oblongifolia leave extract (IOLE) at a dose of 100, 200, and
300 mg IOLE/kg, respectively, once daily for 7 days. IOLE was significantly able 
to lower the percentage of parasitemia. The most effective dose was the 100 mg
IOLE/kg, which could reduce the parasitemia from about 38 to 12 %. The infection 
induced spleen injury. This was evidenced by disorganization of spleen white and 
red pulps, appearance of hemozoin granules and parasitized erythrocytes. These
changes in spleen led to the increased histological score. Also, the infection
increased the spleen oxidative damage where the levels of nitrite/nitrate,
malondialdehyde, and catalase were significantly altered. All these
infection-induced parameters were significantly improved during IOLE treatment.
In addition, the mRNA expression of inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1beta,
interleukin-6, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha were upregulated after infection
with P. chabaudi, whereas IOLE significantly reduced the expression of these
genes. Our results indicate that I. oblongifolia leaves extract exhibits a
significant antimalarial and antioxidant effects, and protects host spleen tissue
from injuries induced by P. chabaudi.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-015-4568-y 
PMID: 26109255  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

