
1. Korean J Parasitol. 2015 Jun;53(3):259-63. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2015.53.3.259. Epub
2015 Jun 30.

Toxoplasma gondii B1 Gene Detection in Feces of Stray Cats around Seoul, Korea
and Genotype Analysis of Two Laboratory-Passaged Isolates.

Jung BK(1), Lee SE(2), Lim H(1), Cho J(1), Kim DG(1), Song H(1), Kim MJ(1), Shin 
EH(3), Chai JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology and Tropical Medicine, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea.
(2)Division of Malaria and Parasitic Diseases, Korea National Institute of
Health, Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Cheongwon 363-951,
Korea.
(3)Department of Parasitology and Tropical Medicine, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea ; Tropical Medicine, Seoul National
University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam 463-707, Korea.

The increasing prevalence of Toxoplasma gondii infection in the human population 
in the Republic of Korea (= Korea) is due to various reasons such as an increase 
in meat consumption. However, the importance of cats in transmitting T. gondii
infection through oocysts to humans has seldom been assessed. A total of 300
fecal samples of stray cats captured around Seoul from June to August 2013 were
examined for T. gondii B1 gene (indicating the presence of oocysts) using
nested-PCR. Fourteen (4.7%) of 300 cats examined were positive for B1 gene.
Female cats (7.5%) showed a higher prevalence than male cats (1.4%). Cats younger
than 3 months (5.5%) showed a higher prevalence than cats (1.5%) older than 3
months. For laboratory passage of the positive samples, the fecal suspension (0.2
ml) of B1 gene positive cats was orally inoculated into experimental mice. Brain 
tissues of the mice were obtained after 40 days and examined for the presence of 
tissue cysts. Two isolates were successfully passaged (designated KNIH-1 and
KNIH-2) and were molecularly analyzed using the SAG5D and SAG5E gene sequences.
The SAG5D and SAG5E gene sequences showed high homologies with the ME49 strain
(less virulent strain). The results indicated the importance of stray cats in
transmitting T. gondii to humans in Korea, as revealed by detection of B1 gene in
fecal samples. T. gondii isolates from cats were successfully passaged in the
laboratory for the first time in Korea.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2015.53.3.259 
PMCID: PMC4510672
PMID: 26174818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

