
1. Curr Opin Immunol. 2015 Aug;35:113-22. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2015.06.014. Epub 2015 
Jul 14.

Engineering humoral immunity as prophylaxis or therapy.

Deal CE(1), Balazs AB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT & Harvard, 400 Technology Sq., Cambridge, MA
02139, United States.
(2)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT & Harvard, 400 Technology Sq., Cambridge, MA
02139, United States. Electronic address: abalazs@mgh.harvard.edu.

PURPOSE OF THE REVIEW: In this review, we will discuss the field of engineered
humoral immunity with an emphasis on recent work using viral vectors to produce
antibodies in vivo. As an alternative to passive transfer of monoclonal antibody 
protein, a transgene encoding an antibody is delivered to cells via vector
transduction, resulting in expression and secretion by the host cell. This review
will summarize the evidence in support of this strategy as an alternative to
traditional vaccines against infection and as novel therapeutics for a variety of
diseases.
RECENT FINDINGS: Historically, humoral immunity has been engineered through
vaccination and passive transfer of monoclonal antibodies. However, recent work
suggests that vectors can be used to deliver transgenes encoding broadly
neutralizing antibodies to non-hematopoietic tissues and can mediate long-term
expression that is capable of preventing or treating infectious diseases. The
production of engineered monoclonal antibodies allows for precise targeting and
elimination of aberrant self-proteins that are characteristic of certain
neurodegenerative disease. This approach has also been successfully used to
combat cancer and addiction in several animal models. Despite the wide array of
expression platforms that have been described, adeno-associated virus vectors
have emerged as the frontrunner for rapid clinical translation.
SUMMARY: Recent advances in vector-mediated antibody expression have demonstrated
the potential for such interventions to prevent infection and treat disease. As
such, it offers an alternative to immunogen-based vaccine design and a novel
therapeutic intervention by enabling precise manipulation of humoral immunity.
Success translating these approaches to patients may enable the development of
effective prevention against previously intractable pathogens that evade immunity
such as HIV, influenza, malaria or HCV and may also enable new treatment options 
for neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coi.2015.06.014 
PMCID: PMC4553141
PMID: 26183209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

