
1. Parasitol Res. 2015 Oct;114(10):3903-11. doi: 10.1007/s00436-015-4622-9. Epub
2015 Jul 21.

Prevalence and diversity of avian malaria parasites in migratory Black Skimmers
(Rynchops niger, Laridae, Charadriiformes) from the Brazilian Amazon Basin.

Roos FL(1), Belo NO, Silveira P, Braga EM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade 
Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio Carlos 6627, Belo Horizonte, MG, 31270-901, 
Brazil.

The Medium Solimões River region in the Brazilian Amazon Basin is an area
utilized for reproduction and nesting by a variety of species of migratory
aquatic birds such as Black Skimmers (Rynchops niger). These migratory birds form
mixed-species reproductive colonies with high population densities and exhibit a 
large range of migration routes. This study aimed to describe the prevalence and 
diversity of the avian malaria parasites Plasmodium and Haemoproteus in Black
Skimmers, on the basis of the association between microscopic observation of
blood smears and amplification of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene (mtDNA
cyt-b). The overall prevalence rates of the parasites for juvenile and adult bird
specimens were 16% (5/31) and 22% (15/68), respectively. Sequencing the mtDNA
cyt-b marker revealed two Plasmodium lineages, which had been previously
described in different regions of the American continent, including a Neotropical
region in Southeast Brazil, and one Haemoproteus lineage. The fact that avian
malarial parasites have been found infecting the Black Skimmers in the Brazilian 
Amazon ecosystem, which exhibits considerable diversity, highlights the
importance of these migratory birds as a potential source of infection and
dispersion of pathogens to other susceptible birds of the Nearctic and
Neotropical regions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-015-4622-9 
PMID: 26193823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

