
1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Sep 18;290(38):23385-400. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.642991. Epub
2015 Jul 20.

Plasma Membrane Tetraspanin CD81 Complexes with Proprotein Convertase
Subtilisin/Kexin Type 9 (PCSK9) and Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor (LDLR), and 
Its Levels Are Reduced by PCSK9.

Le QT(1), Blanchet M(2), Seidah NG(3), Labonté P(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique-Institut
Armand-Frappier, 531 Boulevard des Prairies, Laval, Quebec H7V 1B7, Canada,
Department of Malaria, Parasitology and Entomology, Vietnam Military Medical
University, 104 Phung Hung Street, Ha Dong District, Hanoi 151000, Vietnam, and.
(2)From the Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique-Institut
Armand-Frappier, 531 Boulevard des Prairies, Laval, Quebec H7V 1B7, Canada.
(3)Laboratory of Biochemical Neuroendocrinology, Clinical Research Institute of
Montreal, 110 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, Quebec H2W 1R7, Canada.
(4)From the Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique-Institut
Armand-Frappier, 531 Boulevard des Prairies, Laval, Quebec H7V 1B7, Canada,
patrick.labonte@iaf.inrs.ca.

Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) is an important factor in
plasma cholesterol regulation through modulation of low density lipoprotein
receptor (LDLR) levels. Naturally occurring mutations can lead to hyper- or
hypocholesterolemia in human. Recently, we reported that PCSK9 was also able to
modulate CD81 in Huh7 cells. In the present study, several gain-of-function and
loss-of-function mutants as well as engineered mutants of PCSK9 were compared for
their ability to modulate the cell surface expression of LDLR and CD81. Although 
PCSK9 gain-of-function D374Y enhanced the degradation both receptors, D374H and
D129N seemed to only reduce LDLR levels. In contrast, mutations in the C-terminal
hinge-cysteine-histidine-rich domain segment primarily affected the PCSK9-induced
CD81 degradation. Furthermore, when C-terminally fused to an ACE2 transmembrane
anchor, the secretory N-terminal catalytic or hinge-cysteine-histidine-rich
domain domains of PCSK9 were able to reduce CD81 and LDLR levels. These data
confirm that PCSK9 reduces CD81 levels via an intracellular pathway as reported
for LDLR. Using immunocytochemistry, a proximity ligation assay, and
co-immunoprecipitation, we found that the cell surface level of PCSK9 was
enhanced upon overexpression of CD81 and that both PCSK9 and LDLR interact with
this tetraspanin protein. Interestingly, using CHO-A7 cells lacking LDLR
expression, we revealed that LDLR was not required for the degradation of CD81 by
PCSK9, but its presence strengthened the PCSK9 effect.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.642991 
PMCID: PMC4645619
PMID: 26195630  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

