
1. Med Microbiol Immunol. 2016 Feb;205(1):85-95. doi: 10.1007/s00430-015-0429-7.
Epub 2015 Aug 5.

Natural acquired inhibitory antibodies to Plasmodium vivax Duffy binding protein 
(PvDBP-II) equally block erythrocyte binding of homologous and heterologous
expressed PvDBP-II on the surface of COS-7 cells.

Valizadeh V(1), Zakeri S(2), Mehrizi AA(1), Mirkazemi S(1), Djadid ND(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Pasteur Avenue, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Pasteur Avenue, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran.
zakerimvrg@gmail.com.

The binding domain of Plasmodium vivax Duffy binding protein (PvDBP-II) is a
promising blood-stage vaccine candidate for vivax malaria. For the development of
a successful vivax malaria vaccine based on DBP-II, the antigenic diversity and
also naturally occurring functional antibodies to different PvDBP-II variant
types in the various populations must be determined. However, similar to other
blood-stage antigens, allelic variation within the PvDBP-II is a fundamental
challenge for the development of a broadly efficient vaccine. The present study
was performed to define whether the polymorphisms in PvDBP-II influence the
nature of functional inhibitory activity of naturally acquired or induced
anti-DBP-II antibodies in mice. In this investigation, five genetically distinct 
variants of PvDBP-II were transiently expressed on the COS-7 cell surface.
Erythrocyte-binding inhibition assay (EBIA) was performed using human sera
infected with corresponding and non-corresponding P. vivax variants as well as by
the use of mice sera immunized with different expressed recombinant PvDBP-IIs.
EBIA results showed that the inhibitory percentage varied between 50 and 63 % by 
using sera from infected individuals, and in case of mouse antisera, inhibition
was in the range of 76-86 %. Interestingly, no significant difference was
detected in red blood cell binding inhibition when different PvDBP-II variants on
the COS-7 cell surfaces were incubated with heterologous and homologous sera
infected with PvDBP-II variants. This suggests that the detected polymorphisms in
all five forms of PvDBP-II may not affect functional activity of anti-DBP-II
antibodies. In conclusion, our results revealed that there are functional
cross-reactive antibody responses to heterologous PvDBP-II variants that might
provide a broader inhibitory response against all, or at least the majority of
strains compared to single allele of this protein that should be considered in
development of PvDBP-II-based vaccine.

DOI: 10.1007/s00430-015-0429-7 
PMID: 26243337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

