
1. Vaccine. 2015 Sep 29;33(40):5316-20. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.07.107. Epub
2015 Aug 6.

Profiling the host response to malaria vaccination and malaria challenge.

Dunachie S(1), Hill AV(2), Fletcher HA(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Jenner Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford,
Churchill Hospital, Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK; Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research
Unit, 3rd Floor, 60th Anniversary Chalermprakiat Building, 420/6 Ratchawithi
Road, Bangkok 10400, Thailand; Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health,
Nuffield Department of Medicine Research Building, University of Oxford, Old Road
Campus, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK. Electronic address:
susie.dunachie@ndm.ox.ac.uk.
(2)The Jenner Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford,
Churchill Hospital, Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK.
(3)London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, W1CE 7HT, UK; The Jenner
Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Churchill
Hospital, Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK.

A vaccine for malaria is urgently required. The RTS,S vaccine represents major
progress, but is only partially effective. Development of the next generation of 
highly effective vaccines requires elucidation of the protective immune response.
Immunity to malaria is known to be complex, and pattern-based approaches such as 
global gene expression profiling are ideal for understanding response to
vaccination and protection against disease. The availability of experimental
sporozoite challenge in humans to test candidate malaria vaccines offers a
precious opportunity unavailable for other current targets of vaccine research
such as HIV, tuberculosis and Ebola. However, a limited number of transcriptional
profiling studies in the context of malaria vaccine research have been published 
to date. This review outlines the background, existing studies, limits and
opportunities for gene expression studies to accelerate malaria vaccine research.

Copyright Â© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.07.107 
PMCID: PMC4582768
PMID: 26256528  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

