
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2015 Dec;36:490-499. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.08.023. Epub
2015 Aug 20.

Dual regulatory effects of non-coding GC-rich elements on the expression of
virulence genes in malaria parasites.

Wei G(1), Zhao Y(1), Zhang Q(2), Pan W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Infectious Diseases and Vaccine Development, Tongji University
School of Medicine, 1239 Siping Road, Shanghai 200092, China.
(2)Institute for Infectious Diseases and Vaccine Development, Tongji University
School of Medicine, 1239 Siping Road, Shanghai 200092, China. Electronic address:
qfzhangsh@aliyun.com.
(3)Institute for Infectious Diseases and Vaccine Development, Tongji University
School of Medicine, 1239 Siping Road, Shanghai 200092, China; Department of
Tropical Infectious Diseases, Second Military Medical University, 800 Xiang Yin
Road, Shanghai 200433, China. Electronic address: wqpan0912@aliyun.com.

As the primary virulence factor of falciparum malaria, var genes harboring
mutually exclusive expression pattern lead to antigenic variation and immune
evasion of this pathogen in human host. Although various mechanisms contribute to
silence of var genes, little is known of transcriptional activation pathways of a
single var gene and maintenance of its active state with other silent var loci.
Here, we report a monoallelic expression pattern of the non-coding GC-elements
flanking chromosomal internal var genes, and transcript from the active one was
required for activation of the var gene in the same array. Meanwhile, GFP
reporter assays revealed a repressive effect on the adjacent gene induced by DNA 
motifs of the insulator-like GC-element, which was linked to heterochromatin
subnuclear localization. Taken together, these data for the first time provide
experimental evidence of the dual cis- and trans-acting regulatory functions of
the GC-elements in both silence and activation of var genes, which would advance 
our understanding of the complex regulatory network of the virulence gene family 
in P. falciparum.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.08.023 
PMID: 26299885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

