
1. Mol Ecol. 2015 Sep;24(18):4711-22. doi: 10.1111/mec.13354. Epub 2015 Sep 7.

Positive selection underlies the species-specific binding of Plasmodium
falciparum RH5 to human basigin.

Forni D(1), Pontremoli C(1), Cagliani R(1), Pozzoli U(1), Clerici M(2)(3), Sironi
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics, Scientific Institute IRCCS E.MEDEA, 23842, Bosisio Parini,
Italy.
(2)Department of Physiopathology and Transplantation, University of Milan, 20090,
Milan, Italy.
(3)Don C. Gnocchi Foundation ONLUS, IRCCS, 20148, Milan, Italy.

Plasmodium falciparum, the causative agent of the deadliest form of malaria, is a
member of the Laverania subgenus, which includes ape-infecting parasites.
P. falciparum is thought to have originated in gorillas, although infection is
now restricted to humans. Laverania parasites display remarkable
host-specificity, which is partially mediated by the interaction between parasite
ligands and host receptors. We analyse the evolution of BSG (basigin) and GYPA
(glycophorin A) in primates/hominins, as well as of their Plasmodium-encoded
ligands, PfRH5 and PfEBA175. We show that, in primates, positive selection
targeted two sites in BSG (F27 and H102), both involved in PfRH5 binding. A
population genetics-phylogenetics approach detected the strongest selection for
the gorilla lineage: one of the positively selected sites (K191) is a major
determinant of PfRH5 binding affinity. Analysis of RH5 genes indicated episodic
selection on the P. falciparum branch; the positively selected W447 site is known
to stabilize the interaction with human basigin. Conversely, we detect no
selection in the receptor-binding region of EBA175 in the P. falciparum lineage. 
Its host receptor, GYPA, shows evidence of positive selection in all hominid
lineages; selected codons include glycosylation sites that modulate PfEBA175
binding affinity. Data herein provide an evolutionary explanation for
species-specific binding of the PfRH5-BSG ligand-receptor pair and support the
hypothesis that positive selection at these genes drove the host shift leading to
the emergence of P. falciparum as a human pathogen.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.13354 
PMID: 26302433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

