
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2015 Dec;36:190-198. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.08.027. Epub
2015 Aug 28.

Emergence of sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine resistance in Indian isolates of
Plasmodium falciparum in the last two decades.

Kumar A(1), Moirangthem R(1), Gahlawat SK(2), Chandra J(3), Gupta P(1), Valecha
N(1), Anvikar A(1), Singh V(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector-8 Dwarka, New Delhi 110077,
India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Chaudhary Devi Lal University, Haryana 125055,
India.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Lady Hardinge Medical College and Kalawati Saran
Children's Hospital, New Delhi-110001, India.
(4)National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector-8 Dwarka, New Delhi 110077,
India. Electronic address: vineetas_2000@yahoo.com.

Genotyping the sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) genes will help in identifying the 
genes under drug selection and the emergence of resistance in dhfr and dhps
genes. India is an important hotspot for studying malaria due to the immense
climatic diversity prevalent in the country. The central and eastern parts of the
country are most vulnerable sites where malaria cases are reported throughout the
year. From different regions of the country 173 field isolates were genotyped at 
various loci in dhfr and dhps genes collected between 1994 and 2013. This
encompasses the period before antimalarial resistance emerged and the period
after the use of combination therapy was made mandatory in the country. We
observed the rise of resistant SP alleles from very low frequencies (in the year 
1994) to steadily rising (in the year 2000) and maintaining this increasing trend
subsequently (in the year 2013) as shown by the sequence analysis of dhfr and
dhps genes. This study assessed the prevalence of mutations in dhfr and dhps
genes associated with SP resistance in samples indicative of increase in
resistance levels of Plasmodium falciparum to SP even after the change in malaria
treatment policy in the country.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.08.027 
PMID: 26319997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

