
1. J Med Entomol. 2015 May;52(3):408-12. doi: 10.1093/jme/tjv007. Epub 2015 Mar 4.

Isolation and Characterization of Polymorphic Microsatellite Markers from the
Malaria Vector Anopheles fluviatilis Species T (Diptera: Culicidae).

Lather M(1), Sharma D(1), Dang AS(2), Adak T(1), Singh OP(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Malaria Research (NIMR), Sector-8, Dwarka, New
Delhi-110077, India.
(2)Maharshi Dayanand University (MDU), Rohtak-124001 (Haryana), India.
(3)National Institute of Malaria Research (NIMR), Sector-8, Dwarka, New
Delhi-110077, India. Singh@mrcindia.org.

Anopheles fluviatilis James is an important malaria vector in India, Pakistan,
Nepal, and Iran. It has now been recognized as a complex of at least four sibling
species-S, T, U, and V, among which species T is the most widely distributed
species throughout India. The taxonomic status of these species is confusing
owing to controversies prevailing in the literature. In addition, chromosomal
inversion genotypes, which were considered species-diagnostic for An. fluviatilis
species T, are unreliable due to the existence of polymorphism in some
populations. To study the genetic diversity at population level, we isolated and 
characterized 20 microsatellite markers from microsatellite-enriched genomic DNA 
library of An. fluviatilis T, of which 18 were polymorphic while two were
monomorphic. The number of alleles per locus among polymorphic markers ranged
from 4 to 19, and values for observed and expected heterozygosities varied from
0.352 to 0.857 and from 0.575 to 0.933, respectively. Thirteen markers had
cross-cryptic species transferability to species S and U of the Fluviatilis
Complex. This study provides a promising genetic tool for the population genetic 
analyses of An. fluviatilis.

Â© The Authors 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Entomological Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jme/tjv007 
PMID: 26334814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

