
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2015 Nov 20;10(11):2480-90. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.5b00523. Epub 
2015 Sep 8.

Two of a Kind--The Biosynthetic Pathways of Chlorotonil and Anthracimycin.

Jungmann K(1), Jansen R(2), Gerth K(2), Huch V(1), Krug D(1), Fenical W(3),
Müller R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Natural Products, Helmholtz Institute for
Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research and
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Saarland University , Saarbrücken, Germany.
(2)Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research , Department of Microbial Drugs,
Braunschweig, Germany.
(3)Center for Marine Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, University of California, San Diego , La Jolla, California, United 
States.

Chlorotonil A is a novel polyketide isolated from the myxobacterium Sorangium
cellulosum So ce1525 that features a unique gem-dichloro-1,3-dione moiety. It
exhibits potent bioactivity, most notably against the problematic malaria
pathogen Plasmodium falciparum in the nanomolar range. In addition, strong
antibacterial and moderate antifungal activity were determined. The outstanding
biological activity of chlorotonil A as well as its unusual chemical structure
triggered our interest in elucidating its biosynthesis, a prerequisite for
alteration of the scaffold by synthetic biology approaches. This endeavor was
facilitated by a recent report describing the strikingly similar structure of
anthracimycin from a marine streptomycete, a compound of considerable interest
due to its potent antibacterial activity. In this study, we report the
identification and characterization of the chlorotonil A biosynthetic gene
cluster from So ce1525 and compare it with that for anthracimycin biosynthesis.
Access to both gene clusters allowed us to highlight commonalities between the
two pathways and revealed striking differences, some of which can plausibly
explain the structural differences observed between these intriguing natural
products.

DOI: 10.1021/acschembio.5b00523 
PMID: 26348978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

