
1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2015 Oct;28(4):987-1004. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00080-14.

Visceral Leishmaniasis in China: an Endemic Disease under Control.

Lun ZR(1), Wu MS(2), Chen YF(2), Wang JY(3), Zhou XN(3), Liao LF(4), Chen JP(5), 
Chow LM(6), Chang KP(7).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Parasitic Organisms, Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the
Ministry of Education, State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life
Sciences, and Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Control of the Ministry of
Education, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou,
People's Republic of China lsslzr@mail.sysu.edu.cn
kwangpoo.chang@rosalindfranklin.edu.
(2)Center for Parasitic Organisms, Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the
Ministry of Education, State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life
Sciences, and Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Control of the Ministry of
Education, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou,
People's Republic of China.
(3)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, the Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology of the Chinese 
Ministry of Health, WHO Collaborating Center for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and
Filariasis, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(4)Center for Disease Control and Prevention of Xinjiang and Research Center for 
Laboratory Animals of Xinjiang, Urumqi, Xinjiang, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Parasitology, West China School of Preclinical and Forensic
Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology and the State Key
Laboratory for Chirosciences, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom,
Kowloon, Hong Kong, People's Republic of China.
(7)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, Chicago Medical School/Rosalind
Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, Illinois, USA
lsslzr@mail.sysu.edu.cn kwangpoo.chang@rosalindfranklin.edu.

Visceral leishmaniasis (VL) caused by Leishmania spp. is an important
vector-borne and largely zoonotic disease. In China, three epidemiological types 
of VL have been described: anthroponotic VL (AVL), mountain-type zoonotic VL
(MT-ZVL), and desert-type ZVL (DT-ZVL). These are transmitted by four different
sand fly species: Phlebotomus chinensis, P. longiductus, P. wui, and P.
alexandri. In 1951, a detailed survey of VL showed that it was rampant in the
vast rural areas west, northwest, and north of the Yangtze River. Control
programs were designed and implemented stringently by the government at all
administrative levels, resulting in elimination of the disease from most areas of
endemicity, except the western and northwestern regions. The control programs
consisted of (i) diagnosis and chemotherapy of patients, (ii) identification,
isolation, and disposal of infected dogs, and (iii) residual insecticide indoor
spraying for vector control. The success of the control programs is attributable 
to massive and effective mobilization of the general public and health workers to
the cause. Nationally, the annual incidence is now very low, i.e., only
0.03/100,000 according to the available 2011 official record. The overwhelming
majority of cases are reported from sites of endemicity in the western and
northwestern regions. Here, we describe in some depth and breadth the current
status of epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of the disease, with
particular reference to the control programs. Pertinent information has been
assembled from scattered literature of the past decades in different languages
that are not readily accessible to the scientific community. The information
provided constitutes an integral part of our knowledge on leishmaniasis in the
global context and will be of special value to those interested in control
programs.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.00080-14 
PMCID: PMC4575399
PMID: 26354822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

