
1. J Med Entomol. 2015 Nov;52(6):1322-32. doi: 10.1093/jme/tjv133. Epub 2015 Sep 4.

Active Compounds Against Anopheles minimus Carboxypeptidase B for Malaria
Transmission-Blocking Strategy.

Mongkol W(1), Arunyawat U(2), Surat W(2), Kubera A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, Bangkok,
10900, Thailand.
(2)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, Bangkok,
10900, Thailand. Centre for Advanced Studies in Tropical Natural Resources,
Kasetsart University, Bangkok, 10900, Thailand.
(3)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, Bangkok,
10900, Thailand. Centre for Advanced Studies in Tropical Natural Resources,
Kasetsart University, Bangkok, 10900, Thailand. fsciacs@ku.ac.th.

Malaria transmission-blocking compounds have been studied to block the
transmission of malaria parasites, especially the drug-resistant Plasmodium.
Carboxypeptidase B (CPB) in the midgut of Anopheline mosquitoes has been
demonstrated to be essential for the sexual development of Plasmodium in the
mosquito. Thus, the CPB is a potential target for blocking compounds. The aim of 
this research was to screen compounds from the National Cancer Institute (NCI)
diversity dataset and U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved drugs that
could reduce the Anopheles CPB activity. The cDNA fragment of cpb gene from An.
minimus (cpbAmi) was amplified and sequenced. The three-dimensional structure of 
CPB was predicted from the deduced amino acid sequence. The virtual screening of 
the compounds from NCI diversity set IV and FDA-approved drugs was performed
against CPBAmi. The inhibition activity against CPBAmi of the top-scoring
molecules was characterized in vitro. Three compounds-NSC-1014, NSC-332670, and
aminopterin with IC50 at 0.99 mM, 1.55 mM, and 0.062 mM, respectively-were found 
to significantly reduce the CPBAmi activity.

© The Authors 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Entomological Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jme/tjv133 
PMID: 26352934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

