
1. Plant Biotechnol J. 2016 Mar;14(3):1034-45. doi: 10.1111/pbi.12476. Epub 2015 Sep
11.

Expression of β-glucosidase increases trichome density and artemisinin content in
transgenic Artemisia annua plants.

Singh ND(1), Kumar S(1), Daniell H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Artemisinin is highly effective against multidrug-resistant strains of Plasmodium
falciparum, the aetiological agent of the most severe form of malaria. However, a
low level of accumulation of artemisinin in Artemisia annua is a major limitation
for its production and delivery to malaria endemic areas of the world. While
several strategies to enhance artemisinin have been extensively explored,
enhancing storage capacity in trichome has not yet been considered. Therefore,
trichome density was increased with the expression of β-glucosidase (bgl1) gene
in A. annua through Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. Transgene (bgl1)
integration and transcript were confirmed by molecular analysis. Trichome density
increased up to 20% in leaves and 66% in flowers of BGL1 transgenic plants than
Artemisia control plants. High-performance liquid chromatography, time of flight 
mass spectrometer data showed that artemisinin content increased up to 1.4% in
leaf and 2.56% in flowers (per g DW), similar to the highest yields achieved so
far through metabolic engineering. Artemisinin was enhanced up to five-fold in
BGL1 transgenic flowers. This study opens the possibility of increasing
artemisinin content by manipulating trichomes' density, which is a major
reservoir of artemisinin. Combining biosynthetic pathway engineering with
enhancing trichome density may further increase artemisinin yield in A. annua.
Because oral feeding of Artemisia plant cells reduced parasitemia more
efficiently than the purified drug, reduced drug resistance and cost of
prohibitively expensive purification process, enhanced expression should play a
key role in making this valuable drug affordable to treat malaria in a large
global population that disproportionally impacts low-socioeconomic areas and
underprivileged children.

© 2015 Society for Experimental Biology, Association of Applied Biologists and
John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pbi.12476 
PMCID: PMC4767539 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26360801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

