
1. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 17;10(9):e0137734. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137734.
eCollection 2015.

Genetic Diversity and Natural Selection of the Plasmodium knowlesi
Circumsporozoite Protein Nonrepeat Regions.

Fong MY(1), Ahmed MA(1), Wong SS(1), Lau YL(1), Sitam F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Wildlife and National Parks Peninsular Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium knowlesi is a simian malaria parasite that has been
identified to cause malaria in humans. To date, several thousand cases of human
knowlesi malaria have been reported around Southeast Asia. Thus far, there is no 
detailed study on genetic diversity and natural selection of P. knowlesi
circumsporozoite protein (CSP), a prominent surface antigen on the sporozoite of 
the parasite. In the present study, the genetic diversity and natural selection
acting on the nonrepeat regions of the gene encoding P. knowlesi CSP were
investigated, focusing on the T-cell epitope regions at the C-terminal of the
protein.
METHODS: Blood samples from 32 knowlesi malaria patients and 2 wild monkeys
(Macaca fascicularis) were used. The CSP of the P. knowlesi isolates was
amplified by PCR, cloned into Escherichia coli, and sequenced. The nonrepeat
regions of the CSP gene were analysed for genetic diversity, natural selection
and haplotypic grouping using MEGA5 and DnaSP version 5.10.00 programmes. A
haplotype network was constructed based on the C-terminal (Th2R/Th3R) T-cell
epitope regions using the Median-Joining method in the NETWORK version 4.6.1.2
programme. Previously published sequences from other regions (Malaysia Borneo,
Singapore) were also included in the analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 123 P. knowlesi CSP sequences were analysed. Multiple
sequence alignment revealed 58 amino acid changes, and 42 novel amino acid
haplotypes were identified. Polymorphism was higher in the C-terminal Th2R/Th3R
epitope (π = 0.0293, n = 123) region compared to the overall combined nonrepeat
regions (π = 0.0120, n = 123). Negative natural selection was observed within the
nonrepeat regions of the CSP gene. Within the C-terminal Th2R/Th3R epitope
regions, there was evidence of slight positive selection. Based on haplotype
network analysis of the Th2R/Th3R regions, five abundant haplotypes were
identified. Sharing of haplotypes between humans and macaques were observed.
CONCLUSION: This study contributes to the understanding of the type and
distribution of naturally occurring polymorphism in the P. knowlesi CSP gene.
This study also provides a measurement of the genetic diversity of P. knowlesi
and identifies the predominant haplotypes within Malaysia based on the C-terminal
Th2R/Th3R regions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137734 
PMCID: PMC4575020
PMID: 26379157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

