
1. Traffic. 2015 Dec;16(12):1254-69. doi: 10.1111/tra.12333. Epub 2015 Nov 2.

Toxoplasma gondii Toc75 Functions in Import of Stromal but not Peripheral
Apicoplast Proteins.

Sheiner L(1)(2), Fellows JD(1), Ovciarikova J(2), Brooks CF(1), Agrawal S(1),
Holmes ZC(1), Bietz I(3), Flinner N(4), Heiny S(3), Mirus O(4), Przyborski JM(3),
Striepen B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases & Department of Cellular
Biology, University of Georgia, 500 D.W. Brooks Drive, Athens, GA, 30602, USA.
(2)Wellcome Trust Centre For Molecular Parasitology, Institute of Infection,
Immunity & Inflammation, College of Medical, Veterinary & Life Sciences, Sir
Graeme Davies Building, University of Glasgow, 120 University Place, Glasgow, G12
8TA, UK.
(3)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Biology, Philipps University Marburg,
Marburg, Germany.
(4)Molecular Cell Biology of Plants, Biocenter N200, 3. OG, Max-von-Laue-Str. 9, 
60438, Frankfurt, Germany.

Apicomplexa are unicellular parasites causing important human and animal
diseases, including malaria and toxoplasmosis. Most of these pathogens possess a 
relict but essential plastid, the apicoplast. The apicoplast was acquired by
secondary endosymbiosis between a red alga and a flagellated eukaryotic protist. 
As a result the apicoplast is surrounded by four membranes. This complex
structure necessitates a system of transport signals and translocons allowing
nuclear encoded proteins to find their way to specific apicoplast
sub-compartments. Previous studies identified translocons traversing two of the
four apicoplast membranes. Here we provide functional support for the role of an 
apicomplexan Toc75 homolog in apicoplast protein transport. We identify two
apicomplexan genes encoding Toc75 and Sam50, both members of the Omp85 protein
family. We localize the respective proteins to the apicoplast and the
mitochondrion of Toxoplasma and Plasmodium. We show that the Toxoplasma Toc75 is 
essential for parasite growth and that its depletion results in a rapid defect in
the import of apicoplast stromal proteins while the import of proteins of the
outer compartments is affected only as the secondary consequence of organelle
loss. These observations along with the homology to Toc75 suggest a potential
role in transport through the second innermost membrane.

Â© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tra.12333 
PMID: 26381927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

