
1. Pathog Glob Health. 2015 Sep;109(6):266-74. doi: 10.1179/2047773215Y.0000000021. 
Epub 2015 Sep 21.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and lovastatin suppress the
inflammatory response to Plasmodium berghei infection and protect against
experimental cerebral malaria.

Canavese M, Crisanti A.

Comment in
    Pathog Glob Health. 2015 Sep;109(6):253-4.

Cerebral malaria (CM) is a severe complication of Plasmodium falciparum
infection, which is associated with high mortality and long-term cognitive
impairment even when effective anti-parasitic treatment is administered. (1 , 2) 
Supportive therapy is needed to improve both morbidity and mortality associated
with this condition. In an accompanying paper, we have demonstrated that in the
Plasmodium berghei ANKA (PbA) rodent model, CM can be effectively prevented by a 
treatment combining sub-lethal doses of lipopolysaccharide S (LPS) and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Since LPS is not suitable for human therapy, we
investigated whether lovastatin would represent a suitable substitute. This
compound, widely used to lower cholesterol levels in plasma, shares with LPS the 
ability to elicit an anti-inflammatory response by activating the Nrf-2 gene, and
when given to P. berghei-infected mice prevents to some extent the onset of CM.
We show here that lovastatin- and VEGF-treated mice did not develop CM and showed
few signs, if any, of endothelial damage and systemic inflammation. The
combination treatment was much more effective than lovastatin and VEGF alone.
Immunohistochemistry and gene expression analysis indicated that VEGF and LPS
together overturned the two pathogenic mechanisms responsible for the development
of CM: endothelial damage and disregulated activation of the inflammatory
response. These findings provide the rationale for investigating the therapeutic 
potential of these compounds in human CM as well as in other inflammatory
pathologies that respond poorly to steroid and non-steroid anti-inflammatory
therapy.

DOI: 10.1179/2047773215Y.0000000021 
PMCID: PMC4727581
PMID: 26392164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

