
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Oct 13;112(41):12824-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1504389112. Epub 2015 Sep 28.

Global transcriptional repression: An initial and essential step for Plasmodium
sexual development.

Yuda M(1), Iwanaga S(2), Kaneko I(2), Kato T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Zoology, Mie University School of Medicine, Mie, Tsu
514-0001, Japan m-yuda@doc.medic.mie-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Medical Zoology, Mie University School of Medicine, Mie, Tsu
514-0001, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2016 Jan;14(1):4.

Gametocytes are nonreplicative sexual forms that mediate malaria transmission to 
a mosquito vector. They are generated from asexual blood-stage parasites that
proliferate in the circulation. However, little is known about how this
transition is genetically regulated. Here, we report that an Apetala2 (AP2)
family transcription factor, AP2-G2, regulates this transition as a
transcriptional repressor. Disruption of AP2-G2 in the rodent malaria parasite
Plasmodium berghei did not prevent commitment to the sexual stage but did halt
development before the appearance of sex-specific morphologies. ChIP-seq analysis
revealed that AP2-G2 targeted ∼1,500 genes and recognized a five-base motif in
their promoters. Most of these target genes are required for asexual
proliferation of the parasites in the blood, suggesting that AP2-G2 blocks the
program that precedes asexual replication to promote conversion to the sexual
stage. Microarray analysis showed that the identified targets constituted ∼70% of
the up-regulated genes in AP2-G2-depleted parasites, suggesting that AP2-G2
actually functions as a repressor in gametocytes. A promoter assay using a
centromere plasmid demonstrated that the binding motif functions as a cis-acting 
negative regulatory element. These results suggest that global transcriptional
repression, which occurs during the initial phase of gametocytogenesis, is an
essential step in Plasmodium sexual development.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1504389112 
PMCID: PMC4611670
PMID: 26417110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

