
1. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 8;10(10):e0138598. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138598.
eCollection 2015.

Acetylcholinesterases from the Disease Vectors Aedes aegypti and Anopheles
gambiae: Functional Characterization and Comparisons with Vertebrate Orthologues.

Engdahl C(1), Knutsson S(1), Fredriksson SÅ(2), Linusson A(1), Bucht G(2),
Ekström F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Swedish Defence Research Agency, CBRN Defence and Security, Umeå, Sweden.

Mosquitoes of the Anopheles (An.) and Aedes (Ae.) genus are principal vectors of 
human diseases including malaria, dengue and yellow fever. Insecticide-based
vector control is an established and important way of preventing transmission of 
such infections. Currently used insecticides can efficiently control mosquito
populations, but there are growing concerns about emerging resistance, off-target
toxicity and their ability to alter ecosystems. A potential target for the
development of insecticides with reduced off-target toxicity is the cholinergic
enzyme acetylcholinesterase (AChE). Herein, we report cloning, baculoviral
expression and functional characterization of the wild-type AChE genes (ace-1)
from An. gambiae and Ae. aegypti, including a naturally occurring
insecticide-resistant (G119S) mutant of An. gambiae. Using enzymatic digestion
and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry we found that the secreted
proteins were post-translationally modified. The Michaelis-Menten constants and
turnover numbers of the mosquito enzymes were lower than those of the orthologous
AChEs from Mus musculus and Homo sapiens. We also found that the G119S
substitution reduced the turnover rate of substrates and the potency of selected 
covalent inhibitors. Furthermore, non-covalent inhibitors were less sensitive to 
the G119S substitution and differentiate the mosquito enzymes from corresponding 
vertebrate enzymes. Our findings indicate that it may be possible to develop
selective non-covalent inhibitors that effectively target both the wild-type and 
insecticide resistant mutants of mosquito AChE.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138598 
PMCID: PMC4598118
PMID: 26447952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

