
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1325:241-53. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2815-6_20.

High-Throughput Testing of Antibody-Dependent Binding Inhibition of Placental
Malaria Parasites.

Nielsen MA(1), Salanti A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of International Health,
Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University
of Copenhagen, CSS Building 22/23, Øster Farimagsgade 5, 2099, Copenhagen K,
1014, Denmark. mortenn@sund.ku.dk.
(2)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of International Health,
Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University
of Copenhagen, CSS Building 22/23, Øster Farimagsgade 5, 2099, Copenhagen K,
1014, Denmark. Salanti@sund.ku.dk.

The particular virulence of Plasmodium falciparum manifests in diverse severe
malaria syndromes as cerebral malaria, severe anemia and placental malaria. The
cause of both the severity and the diversity of infection outcome, is the ability
of the infected erythrocyte (IE) to bind a range of different human receptors
through Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) on the
surface of the infected cell. As the var genes encoding the large PfEMP1 antigens
are extensively polymorphic, vaccine development strategies are focused on
targeting the functional binding epitopes. This involves identification of
recombinant fragments of PfEMP1s that induce antibodies, which hinder the
adhesion of the IE to a given receptor or tissue. Different assays to measure the
blocking of adhesion have been described in the literature, each with different
advantages. This chapter describes a high-throughput assay used in the
preclinical and clinical development of a VAR2CSA based vaccine against placental
malaria.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2815-6_20 
PMID: 26450394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

