
1. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 14;10(10):e0140559. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140559.
eCollection 2015.

Plant Hormone Salicylic Acid Produced by a Malaria Parasite Controls Host
Immunity and Cerebral Malaria Outcome.

Matsubara R(1), Aonuma H(2), Kojima M(3), Tahara M(2), Andrabi SB(2), Sakakibara 
H(3), Nagamune K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases,
Shinjyuku, Tokyo, Japan; Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(2)Department of Parasitology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases,
Shinjyuku, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
(4)Department of Parasitology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases,
Shinjyuku, Tokyo, Japan; Faculty of Life and Environmental Sciences, University
of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

The apicomplexan parasite Toxoplasma gondii produces the plant hormone abscisic
acid, but it is unclear if phytohormones are produced by the malaria parasite
Plasmodium spp., the most important parasite of this phylum. Here, we report
detection of salicylic acid, an immune-related phytohormone of land plants, in P.
berghei ANKA and T. gondii cell lysates. However, addition of salicylic acid to
P. falciparum and T. gondii culture had no effect. We transfected P. falciparum
3D7 with the nahG gene, which encodes a salicylic acid-degrading enzyme isolated 
from plant-infecting Pseudomonas sp., and established a salicylic acid-deficient 
mutant. The mutant had a significantly decreased concentration of
parasite-synthesized prostaglandin E2, which potentially modulates host immunity 
as an adaptive evolution of Plasmodium spp. To investigate the function of
salicylic acid and prostaglandin E2 on host immunity, we established P. berghei
ANKA mutants expressing nahG. C57BL/6 mice infected with nahG transfectants
developed enhanced cerebral malaria, as assessed by Evans blue leakage and brain 
histological observation. The nahG-transfectant also significantly increased the 
mortality rate of mice. Prostaglandin E2 reduced the brain symptoms by induction 
of T helper-2 cytokines. As expected, T helper-1 cytokines including interferon-Î³
and interleukin-2 were significantly elevated by infection with the nahG
transfectant. Thus, salicylic acid of Plasmodium spp. may be a new pathogenic
factor of this threatening parasite and may modulate immune function via
parasite-produced prostaglandin E2.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140559 
PMCID: PMC4605785
PMID: 26466097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

