
1. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2015 Oct;140(21):1614. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-103556. Epub
2015 Oct 21.

[13-year old girl with fever 6 months after returning from sub-Saharan Africa].

[Article in German]

Erhardt J(1), Frank M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Tropenmedizin und Humanparasitologie, Universitätsklinikum
Tübingen.

HISTORY AND ADMISSION FINDINGS: A 13-year-old girl presented with regular fevers,
6 months after a prolonged trip through Africa. The patient reported relapsing
fevers at 48 hour intervals. Each febrile episode was followed by pronounced
fatigue and a subsequent recovery back to her usual state of health. She reported
having taken weekly mefloquine during and after the trip to Africa.
INVESTIGATIONS: Labortory evaluation revealed a hemoltytic anemia (hemoglobin:
10.8 g / dl, normal range: 12.3-16.0; haptoglobin: < 13 mg / dl, normal range
38-205). An abdominal ultrasound showed a marked splenomegaly (diameter:
> 13.1 cm).
DIAGNOSIS, TREATMENT AND COURSE: A peripheral blood film showed Plasmodium
parasites with marked stippling. PCR and sequenicing of the ribosomal RNA gene
identified Plasmodium ovale. The patient responded well to oral chloroquine
therapy and laboratory parameters normalized within 8 days. After determination
of a normal glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase activity a 2-week-long therapy with
primaquine was initiated (0,3 mg / kg per kg bodyweight of primaquine base daily 
for 14 days) to eliminate the hyponozoite stage of the parasite.
CONCLUSIONS: Currently used prophylacic agents against Malaria (mefloquine,
atovaquone / proguanil hydrochloride, doxyxycline) do not prevent chronic liver
stage infection (hypnozoite stage) with Plasmodium ovale or Plasmodium vivax.
After chemoprophylaxis tertian malaria due Plasmodium vivax or Plasmodium ovale
can occur. Therefore, tertian malaria should always be considered in febrile
individuals who returned from a trip to the tropics even if chemoprophylaxis was 
taken.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-103556 
PMID: 26488102  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

