
1. Parasitol Res. 2016 Feb;115(2):663-72.

Increased Gal-9 and Tim-3 expressions during liver damage in a murine malarial
model.

Xiao S, Liu J, Huang S, Lu F.

Malaria has been one of the most devastating tropical parasite infectious
diseases popular around the world. Severe malaria is characterized by multiple
organ dysfunctions, especially liver damage. However, the mechanisms of malarial 
liver injury remain to be better clarified. In this study, Kunming mice
inoculated intraperitoneally (i.p.) with 10(6) Plasmodium berghei ANKA
(PbANKA)-infected red blood cells (iRBCs) were investigated at days 5, 10, 15,
and 20 post-infection (p.i.) to elucidate the profiles of T-cell immunoglobulin
and mucin domain-3 (Tim-3) and its ligand galecin-9 (Gal-9) in the development of
liver injury. The histopathology of livers and spleens from PbANKA-infected mice 
were observed, the parasite burdens of the livers and spleens using quantitative 
real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), Tim-3- and Gal-9-positive cells in the livers and
spleens using immunohistochemical staining, and the mRNA levels of Tim-3, Gal-9, 
and cytokines in both the livers and spleens using qRT-PCR were examined. Our
results showed that parasite burdens in the livers and spleens were significantly
increased with time after PbANKA infection. Histological scores of both the liver
and spleen tissues were significantly increased with time; the numbers of Tim-3- 
and Gal-9-positive cells were significantly increased in both the livers and
spleens using immunohistochemical staining, and the mRNA levels of Tim-3 and
Gal-9 in the livers and spleens were also significantly increased after
infection. Our data suggests that the increase of Tim-3/Gal-9 expressions may
play an important role in the liver damage during P. berghei infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-015-4784-5 
PMID: 26486943  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

