
1. PLoS Genet. 2015 Oct 30;11(10):e1005618. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005618.
eCollection 2015 Oct.

Allelic Variation of Cytochrome P450s Drives Resistance to Bednet Insecticides in
a Major Malaria Vector.

Ibrahim SS(1), Riveron JM(1), Bibby J(2), Irving H(1), Yunta C(1), Paine MJ(1),
Wondji CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool,
United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

Scale up of Long Lasting Insecticide Nets (LLINs) has massively contributed to
reduce malaria mortality across Africa. However, resistance to pyrethroid
insecticides in malaria vectors threatens its continued effectiveness.
Deciphering the detailed molecular basis of such resistance and designing
diagnostic tools is critical to implement suitable resistance management
strategies. Here, we demonstrated that allelic variation in two cytochrome P450
genes is the most important driver of pyrethroid resistance in the major African 
malaria vector Anopheles funestus and detected key mutations controlling this
resistance. An Africa-wide polymorphism analysis of the duplicated genes CYP6P9a 
and CYP6P9b revealed that both genes are directionally selected with alleles
segregating according to resistance phenotypes. Modelling and docking simulations
predicted that resistant alleles were better metabolizers of pyrethroids than
susceptible alleles. Metabolism assays performed with recombinant enzymes of
various alleles confirmed that alleles from resistant mosquitoes had
significantly higher activities toward pyrethroids. Additionally, transgenic
expression in Drosophila showed that flies expressing resistant alleles of both
genes were significantly more resistant to pyrethroids compared with those
expressing the susceptible alleles, indicating that allelic variation is the key 
resistance mechanism. Furthermore, site-directed mutagenesis and functional
analyses demonstrated that three amino acid changes (Val109Ile, Asp335Glu and
Asn384Ser) from the resistant allele of CYP6P9b were key pyrethroid resistance
mutations inducing high metabolic efficiency. The detection of these first DNA
markers of metabolic resistance to pyrethroids allows the design of DNA-based
diagnostic tools to detect and track resistance associated with bednets scale up,
which will improve the design of evidence-based resistance management strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005618 
PMCID: PMC4627800
PMID: 26517127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

