
1. Parasite. 2015;22:31. doi: 10.1051/parasite/2015031. Epub 2015 Nov 9.

Systematic revision of the adeleid haemogregarines, with creation of Bartazoon n.
g., reassignment of Hepatozoon argantis Garnham, 1954 to Hemolivia, and molecular
data on Hemolivia stellata.

Karadjian G(1), Chavatte JM(2), Landau I(1).

Author information: 
(1)UMR 7245 MCAM MNHN CNRS, Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, 61 rue Buffon, 
CP 52, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France.
(2)Malaria Reference Centre - National Public Health Laboratory, Ministry of
Health, 3 Biopolis Drive, Synapse #05-14/16, Singapore 138623.

Life cycles and molecular data for terrestrial haemogregarines are reviewed in
this article. Collection material was re-examined: Hepatozoon argantis Garnham,
1954 in Argas brumpti was reassigned to Hemolivia as Hemolivia argantis (Garnham,
1954) n. comb.; parasite DNA was extracted from a tick crush on smear of an
archived slide of Hemolivia stellata in Amblyomma rotondatum, then the 18S ssrRNA
gene was amplified by PCR. A systematic revision of the group is proposed, based 
on biological life cycles and phylogenetic reconstruction. Four types of life
cycles, based on parasite vector, vertebrate host and the characteristics of
their development, are defined. We propose combining species, based on their
biology, into four groups (types I, II, III and IV). The characters of each type 
are defined and associated with a type genus and a type species. The biological
characters of each type are associated with a different genus and a type species.
The phylogenetic reconstruction with sequences deposited in the databases and our
own new sequence of Hemolivia stellata is consistent with this classification.
The classification is as follows: Type I, Hepatozoon Miller, 1908, type species
H. perniciosum Miller, 1908; Type II, Karyolysus Labbé, 1894, type species K.
lacertae (Danilewsky, 1886) Reichenow, 1913; Type III Hemolivia Petit et al.,
1990, type species H. stellata, Petit et al., 1990; and Type IV: Bartazoon n. g.,
type species B. breinli (Mackerras, 1960).

© G. Karadjian et al., published by EDP Sciences, 2015.

DOI: 10.1051/parasite/2015031 
PMCID: PMC4639712
PMID: 26551414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

