
1. Neurotox Res. 2016 Jan;29(1):155-72. doi: 10.1007/s12640-015-9572-6. Epub 2015
Nov 13.

The Crucial Involvement of Retinoid X Receptors in DDE Neurotoxicity.

Wnuk A(1), Rzemieniec J(1), Litwa E(1), Lasoń W(1), Krzeptowski W(2), Wójtowicz
AK(3), Kajta M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Neuroendocrinology, Institute of Pharmacology,
Polish Academy of Sciences, 12 Smetna Street, 31-343, Kraków, Poland.
(2)Department of Genetics and Evolution, Institute of Zoology, Jagiellonian
University, 9 Gronostajowa Street, 30-387, Kraków, Poland.
(3)Department of Animal Biotechnology, Faculty of Animal Sciences, University of 
Agriculture, Redzina 1B, 30-248, Kraków, Poland.
(4)Department of Experimental Neuroendocrinology, Institute of Pharmacology,
Polish Academy of Sciences, 12 Smetna Street, 31-343, Kraków, Poland.
kajta@if-pan.krakow.pl.

Dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (DDE) is a primary environmental and metabolic
degradation product of the pesticide dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT). It is
one of the most toxic compounds belonging to organochlorines. DDE has never been 
commercially produced; however, the parent pesticide DDT is still used in some
developing countries for disease-vector control of malaria. DDT and DDE remain in
the environment because these chemicals are resistant to degradation and
bioaccumulate in the food chain. Little is known, however, about DDE toxicity
during the early stages of neural development. The results of the present study
demonstrate that DDE induced a caspase-3-dependent apoptosis and caused the
global DNA hypomethylation in mouse embryonic neuronal cells. This study also
provided evidence for DDE-isomer-non-specific alterations of retinoid X receptor 
α (RXRα)- and retinoid X receptor β (RXRβ)-mediated intracellular signaling,
including changes in the levels of the receptor mRNAs and changes in the protein 
levels of the receptors. DDE-induced stimulation of RXRα and RXRβ was verified
using selective antagonist and specific siRNAs. Co-localization of RXRα and RXRβ 
was demonstrated using confocal microscopy. The apoptotic action of DDE was
supported at the cellular level through Hoechst 33342 and calcein AM staining
experiments. In conclusion, the results of the present study demonstrated that
the stimulation of RXRα- and RXRβ-mediated intracellular signaling plays an
important role in the propagation of DDE-induced apoptosis during early stages of
neural development.

DOI: 10.1007/s12640-015-9572-6 
PMCID: PMC4701765
PMID: 26563996  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

