
1. Jpn J Vet Res. 2015 Aug;63(3):95-105.

Quantitative and qualitative morphologic, cytochemical and ultrastructural
characteristics of blood cells in the Crested Serpent eagle and Shikra.

Salakij C, Kasorndorkbua C, Salakij J, Suwannasaeng P, Jakthong P.

The Crested Serpent eagle (Spilornis cheela) is a bird of prey found in the
tropical rain forest in Thailand. The Shikra (Accipiter badius) is a sparrow hawk
and common resident in Thailand. Blood samples from 9 Crested Serpent eagles and 
12 Shikras were obtained from September 2010 to November 2014. They were
clinically healthy and negative for blood parasites detectable by light
microscopy and molecular techniques (partial cytochrome b gene for avian malaria 
and partial 18S rRNA gene for trypanosome). Cytochemical staining (Sudan black B,
peroxidase, α-naphthyl acetate esterase, and β-glucuronidase) and transmission
electron microscopy were performed. Hematological results were reported as the
mean ± standard deviation and median. Heterophils were the most prevalent
leukocytes in the Crested Serpent eagle, but in the Shikra, lymphocytes were the 
most prevalent leukocytes. In the Shikra, some vacuoles were observed in the
cytoplasm of the eosinophils. All blood cells in both types of raptors stained
positively for β-glucuronidase but negatively for peroxidase. The ultrastructure 
of heterophils showed more clearly differentiate long rod granules in Crested
Serpent eagle and spindle-shaped granules in Shikra. The ultrastructure of the
eosinophils in the Crested Serpent eagle revealed varied electron-dense,
round-shaped granules with round, different electron-dense areas in the centers
of some granules, which differed from the structure reported for other raptors.
These quantitative results may be useful for clinical evaluations of Crested
Serpent eagles and Shikras that are undergoing rehabilitation for release.


PMID: 26563029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

