
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Mar 18;44(5):2110-24. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1214. Epub 2015
Nov 17.

The nucleosome landscape of Plasmodium falciparum reveals chromatin architecture 
and dynamics of regulatory sequences.

Kensche PR(1), Hoeijmakers WA(1), Toenhake CG(1), Bras M(1), Chappell L(2),
Berriman M(2), Bártfai R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Radboud University, 6525GA Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.
(2)Parasite Genomics Group, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, CB10 1SA Hinxton,
UK.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, Radboud University, 6525GA Nijmegen, The
Netherlands R.Bartfai@ncmls.ru.nl.

In eukaryotes, the chromatin architecture has a pivotal role in regulating all
DNA-associated processes and it is central to the control of gene expression. For
Plasmodium falciparum, a causative agent of human malaria, the nucleosome
positioning profile of regulatory regions deserves particular attention because
of their extreme AT-content. With the aid of a highly controlled MNase-seq
procedure we reveal how positioning of nucleosomes provides a structural and
regulatory framework to the transcriptional unit by demarcating landmark sites
(transcription/translation start and end sites). In addition, our analysis
provides strong indications for the function of positioned nucleosomes in splice 
site recognition. Transcription start sites (TSSs) are bordered by a small
nucleosome-depleted region, but lack the stereotypic downstream nucleosome
arrays, highlighting a key difference in chromatin organization compared to model
organisms. Furthermore, we observe transcription-coupled eviction of nucleosomes 
on strong TSSs during intraerythrocytic development and demonstrate that
nucleosome positioning and dynamics can be predictive for the functionality of
regulatory DNA elements. Collectively, the strong nucleosome positioning over
splice sites and surrounding putative transcription factor binding sites
highlights the regulatory capacity of the nucleosome landscape in this deadly
human pathogen.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv1214 
PMCID: PMC4797266
PMID: 26578577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

