
1. Nature. 2015 Nov 19;527(7578):S155-60. doi: 10.1038/nature16029.

Reducing neurodevelopmental disorders and disability through research and
interventions.

Boivin MJ(1)(2), Kakooza AM(3), Warf BC(4), Davidson LL(5)(6), Grigorenko EL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, College of Osteopathic Medicine, 965 Fee Road, East 
Fee Hall Room 225, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USA.
(2)International Neurologic and Psychiatric Epidemiology Program (INPEP), West
Fee Hall Room 321, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824-1315, 
USA.
(3)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, School of Medicine, Makerere
University College of Health Sciences, PO Box 7072, Kampala, Uganda.
(4)Boston Children's Hospital, Department of Neurosurgery, 300 Longwood Avenue,
Hunnewell, 2nd Floor, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Mailman School of Public Health, College of
Physicians and Surgeons at the Columbia University Medical Center, 722 West 168
Street 1613, New York, New York 10032, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, College of Physicians and Surgeons at the Columbia
University Medical Center, 722 West 168 Street 1613, New York, New York 10032,
USA.
(7)Yale Child Study Center, Department of Psychology, Department of Epidemiology 
and Public Health, Yale University, PO Box 207900, 230 South Frontage Road, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520-7900, USA.

We define neurodevelopment as the dynamic inter-relationship between genetic,
brain, cognitive, emotional and behavioural processes across the developmental
lifespan. Significant and persistent disruption to this dynamic process through
environmental and genetic risk can lead to neurodevelopmental disorders and
disability. Research designed to ameliorate neurodevelopmental disorders in low- 
and middle-income countries, as well as globally, will benefit enormously from
the ongoing advances in understanding their genetic and epigenetic causes, as
modified by environment and culture. We provide examples of advances in the
prevention and treatment of, and the rehabilitation of those with,
neurodevelopment disorders in low- and middle-income countries, along with
opportunities for further strategic research initiatives. Our examples are not
the only possibilities for strategic research, but they illustrate problems that,
when solved, could have a considerable impact in low-resource settings. In each
instance, research in low- and middle-income countries led to innovations in
identification, surveillance and treatment of a neurodevelopmental disorder.
These innovations have also been integrated with genotypic mapping of
neurodevelopmental disorders, forming important preventative and rehabilitative
interventions with the potential for high impact. These advances will ultimately 
allow us to understand how epigenetic influences shape neurodevelopmental risk
and resilience over time and across populations. Clearly, the most strategic
areas of research opportunity involve cross-disciplinary integration at the
intersection between the environment, brain or behaviour neurodevelopment, and
genetic and epigenetic science. At these junctions a robust integrative
cross-disciplinary scientific approach is catalysing the creation of technologies
and interventions for old problems. Such approaches will enable us to achieve and
sustain the United Nations moral and legal mandate for child health and full
development as a basic global human right.

DOI: 10.1038/nature16029 
PMID: 26580321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

