
1. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 24;10(11):e0143597. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143597.
eCollection 2015.

Cell-Free Expression and In Situ Immobilization of Parasite Proteins from
Clonorchis sinensis for Rapid Identification of Antigenic Candidates.

Catherine C(1), Lee SW(1), Ju JW(2), Kim HC(1), Shin HI(2), Kim YJ(2), Kim DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fine Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, Chungnam
National University, Daejeon 305-764, Korea.
(2)Division of Malaria and Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Health,
Osong 361-951, Korea.

Progress towards genetic sequencing of human parasites has provided the
groundwork for a post-genomic approach to develop novel antigens for the
diagnosis and treatment of parasite infections. To fully utilize the genomic
data, however, high-throughput methodologies are required for functional analysis
of the proteins encoded in the genomic sequences. In this study, we investigated 
cell-free expression and in situ immobilization of parasite proteins as a novel
platform for the discovery of antigenic proteins. PCR-amplified parasite DNA was 
immobilized on microbeads that were also functionalized to capture synthesized
proteins. When the microbeads were incubated in a reaction mixture for cell-free 
synthesis, proteins expressed from the microbead-immobilized DNA were instantly
immobilized on the same microbeads, providing a physical linkage between the
genetic information and encoded proteins. This approach of in situ expression and
isolation enables streamlined recovery and analysis of cell-free synthesized
proteins and also allows facile identification of the genes coding antigenic
proteins through direct PCR of the microbead-bound DNA.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143597 
PMCID: PMC4657965
PMID: 26599101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

