
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Dec 22;112(51):E7128-37. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1521651112. Epub 2015 Nov 30.

Severe infectious diseases of childhood as monogenic inborn errors of immunity.

Casanova JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, New York, NY 10065; Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious
Diseases, Necker Branch, Inserm U1163, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, 75015
Paris, France; Imagine Institute, Paris Descartes University, 75015 Paris,
France; Pediatric Hematology and Immunology Unit, Assistance Publique-HÃ´pitaux de
Paris, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, 75015 Paris, France
jean-laurent.casanova@rockefeller.edu.

This paper reviews the developments that have occurred in the field of human
genetics of infectious diseases from the second half of the 20th century onward. 
In particular, it stresses and explains the importance of the recently described 
monogenic inborn errors of immunity underlying resistance or susceptibility to
specific infections. The monogenic component of the genetic theory provides a
plausible explanation for the occurrence of severe infectious diseases during
primary infection. Over the last 20 y, increasing numbers of life-threatening
infectious diseases striking otherwise healthy children, adolescents, and even
young adults have been attributed to single-gene inborn errors of immunity. These
studies were inspired by seminal but neglected findings in plant and animal
infections. Infectious diseases typically manifest as sporadic traits because
human genotypes often display incomplete penetrance (most genetically predisposed
individuals remain healthy) and variable expressivity (different infections can
be allelic at the same locus). Infectious diseases of childhood, once thought to 
be archetypal environmental diseases, actually may be among the most genetically 
determined conditions of mankind. This nascent and testable notion has
interesting medical and biological implications.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1521651112 
PMCID: PMC4697435
PMID: 26621750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

