
1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Dec 3;11(12):e1005306. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005306.
eCollection 2015 Dec.

An Evolution-Based Screen for Genetic Differentiation between Anopheles Sister
Taxa Enriches for Detection of Functional Immune Factors.

Mitri C(1)(2), Bischoff E(1)(2), Takashima E(1)(2), Williams M(3), Eiglmeier
K(1)(2), Pain A(1)(2), Guelbeogo WM(4), Gneme A(4), Brito-Fravallo E(1)(2), Holm 
I(1)(2), Lavazec C(1)(2), Sagnon N(4), Baxter RH(3), Riehle MM(5), Vernick
KD(1)(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unit of Insect Vector Genetics and Genomics, Department of
Parasites and Insect Vectors, Paris, France.
(2)CNRS, Unit of Hosts, Vectors and Pathogens (URA3012), Paris, France.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry, Yale
University, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America.
(4)Centre National de Recherche et de Formation sur le Paludisme, Burkina Faso.
(5)Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, Minnesota,
United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2016 Aug;12(8):e1005836.

Nucleotide variation patterns across species are shaped by the processes of
natural selection, including exposure to environmental pathogens. We examined
patterns of genetic variation in two sister species, Anopheles gambiae and
Anopheles coluzzii, both efficient natural vectors of human malaria in West
Africa. We used the differentiation signature displayed by a known coordinate
selective sweep of immune genes APL1 and TEP1 in A. coluzzii to design a
population genetic screen trained on the sweep, classified a panel of 26
potential immune genes for concordance with the signature, and functionally
tested their immune phenotypes. The screen results were strongly predictive for
genes with protective immune phenotypes: genes meeting the screen criteria were
significantly more likely to display a functional phenotype against malaria
infection than genes not meeting the criteria (p = 0.0005). Thus, an
evolution-based screen can efficiently prioritize candidate genes for
labor-intensive downstream functional testing, and safely allow the elimination
of genes not meeting the screen criteria. The suite of immune genes with
characteristics similar to the APL1-TEP1 selective sweep appears to be more
widespread in the A. coluzzii genome than previously recognized. The immune gene 
differentiation may be a consequence of adaptation of A. coluzzii to new
pathogens encountered in its niche expansion during the separation from A.
gambiae, although the role, if any of natural selection by Plasmodium is unknown.
Application of the screen allowed identification of new functional immune
factors, and assignment of new functions to known factors. We describe
biochemical binding interactions between immune proteins that underlie functional
activity for malaria infection, which highlights the interplay between pathogen
specificity and the structure of immune complexes. We also find that most
malaria-protective immune factors display phenotypes for either human or rodent
malaria, with broad specificity a rarity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005306 
PMCID: PMC4669117
PMID: 26633695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

