
1. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 9;5:17952. doi: 10.1038/srep17952.

Unexpected diversity of Anopheles species in Eastern Zambia: implications for
evaluating vector behavior and interventions using molecular tools.

Lobo NF(1), St Laurent B(1), Sikaala CH(2), Hamainza B(2), Chanda J(2), Chinula
D(2), Krishnankutty SM(3), Mueller JD(1), Deason NA(1), Hoang QT(1), Boldt HL(1),
Thumloup J(1), Stevenson J(4), Seyoum A(5), Collins FH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eck Institute for Global Health, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA
46556.
(2)National Malaria Control Centre, Chainama Hospital College Grounds, Off Great 
East road, P.O. Box 32509, Lusaka, Zambia.
(3)Western Triangle Research Center, Montana State University, Conrad, MT, USA
59425.
(4)Johns Hopkins Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.; and Macha Research Trust, Choma,
Zambia.
(5)Abt Associates, Africa Indoor Residual Spraying Project Ghana office, Accra,
Ghana.

The understanding of malaria vector species in association with their bionomic
traits is vital for targeting malaria interventions and measuring effectiveness. 
Many entomological studies rely on morphological identification of mosquitoes,
limiting recognition to visually distinct species/species groups. Anopheles
species assignments based on ribosomal DNA ITS2 and mitochondrial DNA COI were
compared to morphological identifications from Luangwa and Nyimba districts in
Zambia. The comparison of morphological and molecular identifications determined 
that interpretations of species compositions, insecticide resistance assays, host
preference studies, trap efficacy, and Plasmodium infections were incorrect when 
using morphological identification alone. Morphological identifications
recognized eight Anopheles species while 18 distinct sequence groups or species
were identified from molecular analyses. Of these 18, seven could not be
identified through comparison to published sequences. Twelve of 18 molecularly
identified species (including unidentifiable species and species not thought to
be vectors) were found by PCR to carry Plasmodium sporozoites - compared to four 
of eight morphological species. Up to 15% of morphologically identified Anopheles
funestus mosquitoes in insecticide resistance tests were found to be other
species molecularly. The comprehension of primary and secondary malaria vectors
and bionomic characteristics that impact malaria transmission and intervention
effectiveness are fundamental in achieving malaria elimination.

DOI: 10.1038/srep17952 
PMCID: PMC4673690
PMID: 26648001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

