
1. J Bone Miner Res. 2016 May;31(5):964-74. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2771. Epub 2016 Jan
20.

Dihydroartemisinin, an Anti-Malaria Drug, Suppresses Estrogen Deficiency-Induced 
Osteoporosis, Osteoclast Formation, and RANKL-Induced Signaling Pathways.

Zhou L(1), Liu Q(1)(2), Yang M(1), Wang T(2), Yao J(1)(2), Cheng J(1)(2), Yuan
J(1), Lin X(2), Zhao J(2), Tickner J(1), Xu J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Western
Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia.
(2)Research Centre for Regenerative Medicine and Guangxi Key Laboratory of
Regenerative Medicine, Guangxi Medical University, Guangxi, China.

Osteoporosis is an osteolytic disease that features enhanced osteoclast formation
and bone resorption. Identification of agents that can inhibit osteoclast
formation and function is important for the treatment of osteoporosis.
Dihydroartemisinin is a natural compound used to treat malaria but its role in
osteoporosis is not known. Here, we found that dihydroartemisinin can suppress
RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption in a dose-dependent manner. 
Dihydroartemisinin inhibited the expression of osteoclast marker genes such as
cathepsin K, calcitonin receptor, and tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase
(TRAcP). Furthermore, dihydroartemisinin inhibited RANKL-induced NF-κB and NFAT
activity. In addition, using an in vivo ovariectomized mouse model, we show that 
dihydroartemisinin is able to reverse the bone loss caused by ovariectomy.
Together, this study shows that dihydroartemisinin attenuates bone loss in
ovariectomized mice through inhibiting RANKL-induced osteoclast formation and
function. This indicates that dihydroartemisinin, the first physiology or
medicine nobel prize discovery of China, is a potential treatment option against 
osteolytic bone disease. © 2015 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2015 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.2771 
PMID: 26684711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

