
1. ACS Infect Dis. 2015 Aug 14;1(8):367-79. doi: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.5b00049. Epub
2015 Aug 3.

Next-Generation Sequencing of Plasmodium vivax Patient Samples Shows Evidence of 
Direct Evolution in Drug-Resistance Genes.

Flannery EL, Wang T, Akbari A, Corey VC, Gunawan F, Bright AT, Abraham M, Sanchez
JF(1), Santolalla ML(1), Baldeviano GC(1), Edgel KA(1), Rosales LA(1), Lescano
AG(1), Bafna V, Vinetz JM, Winzeler EA.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Naval Medical Research Unit No. 6 (NAMRU-6), Avenida Venezuela Cuadra 36 
S/N, Centro MÃ©dico Naval, Lima Callao 02, Peru.

Understanding the mechanisms of drug resistance in Plasmodium vivax, the parasite
that causes the most widespread form of human malaria, is complicated by the lack
of a suitable long-term cell culture system for this parasite. In contrast to P. 
falciparum, which can be more readily manipulated in the laboratory, insights
about parasite biology need to be inferred from human studies. Here we analyze
the genomes of parasites within 10 human P. vivax infections from the Peruvian
Amazon. Using next-generation sequencing we show that some P. vivax infections
analyzed from the region are likely polyclonal. Despite their polyclonality we
observe limited parasite genetic diversity by showing that three or fewer
haplotypes comprise 94% of the examined genomes, suggesting the recent
introduction of parasites into this geographic region. In contrast we find more
than three haplotypes in putative drug-resistance genes, including the gene
encoding dihydrofolate reductase-thymidylate synthase and the P. vivax multidrug 
resistance associated transporter, suggesting that resistance mutations have
arisen independently. Additionally, several drug-resistance genes are located in 
genomic regions with evidence of increased copy number. Our data suggest that
whole genome sequencing of malaria parasites from patients may provide more
insight about the evolution of drug resistance than genetic linkage or
association studies, especially in geographical regions with limited parasite
genetic diversity.

DOI: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.5b00049 
PMCID: PMC4692371
PMID: 26719854 

