
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016 Feb;94(2):322-326. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0532. Epub 2015 
Dec 28.

Use of Blood Smears and Dried Blood Spots for Polymerase Chain Reaction-Based
Detection and Quantification of Bacterial Infection and Plasmodium falciparum in 
Severely Ill Febrile African Children.

Wihokhoen B, Dondorp AM, Turner P, Woodrow CJ, Imwong M.

Molecular approaches offer a means of testing archived samples stored as dried
blood spots in settings where standard blood cultures are not possible.
Peripheral blood films are one suggested source of material, although the
sensitivity of this approach has not been well defined. Thin blood smears and
dried blood spots from a severe pediatric malaria study were assessed using
specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers to detect non-typhoidal
Salmonella (NTS; MisL gene), Streptococcus pneumoniae (lytA), and Plasmodium
falciparum (18S rRNA). Of 16 cases of NTS and S. pneumoniae confirmed on blood
culture, none were positive by PCR using DNA extracts from blood films or dried
blood spots. In contrast, four of 36 dried blood spots and two of 178 plasma
samples were PCR positive for S. pneumoniae, despite negative bacterial blood
cultures, suggesting false positives. Quantitative assessment revealed that the
effective concentration of P. falciparum DNA in blood films was three log orders 
of magnitude lower than for dried blood spots. The P. falciparum kelch13 gene
could not be amplified from blood films. These findings question the value of
blood PCR-based approaches for detection of NTS and S. pneumoniae, and show that 
stored blood films are an inefficient method of studying P. falciparum.

Â© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0532 
PMCID: PMC4751960
PMID: 26711525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

