
1. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Jan 6;12(1):e1005370. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005370.
eCollection 2016 Jan.

UIS2: A Unique Phosphatase Required for the Development of Plasmodium Liver
Stages.

Zhang M(1)(2), Mishra S(3), Sakthivel R(4), Fontoura BM(4), Nussenzweig V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New
York, United States of America.
(2)HIV and Malaria Vaccine Program, Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center, Affiliate
of The Rockefeller University, New York, New York, United States of America.
(3)Division of Parasitology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, Uttar
Pradesh, India.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, United States of America.

Comment in
    Microb Cell. 2016 Apr 05;3(5):227-229.

Plasmodium salivary sporozoites are the infectious form of the malaria parasite
and are dormant inside salivary glands of Anopheles mosquitoes. During dormancy, 
protein translation is inhibited by the kinase UIS1 that phosphorylates serine 59
in the eukaryotic initiation factor 2α (eIF2α). De-phosphorylation of eIF2α-P is 
required for the transformation of sporozoites into the liver stage. In mammalian
cells, the de-phosphorylation of eIF2α-P is mediated by the protein phosphatase 1
(PP1). Using a series of genetically knockout parasites we showed that in malaria
sporozoites, contrary to mammalian cells, the eIF2α-P phosphatase is a member of 
the PP2C/PPM phosphatase family termed UIS2. We found that eIF2α was highly
phosphorylated in uis2 conditional knockout sporozoites. These mutant sporozoites
maintained the crescent shape after delivery into mammalian host and lost their
infectivity. Both uis1 and uis2 were highly transcribed in the salivary gland
sporozoites but uis2 expression was inhibited by the Pumilio protein Puf2. The
repression of uis2 expression was alleviated when sporozoites developed into
liver stage. While most eukaryotic phosphatases interact transiently with their
substrates, UIS2 stably bound to phosphorylated eIF2α, raising the possibility
that high-throughput searches may identify chemicals that disrupt this
interaction and prevent malaria infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005370 
PMCID: PMC4712141
PMID: 26735921  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

