
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2016 Jan 18;8(2):411-25. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evw004.

Dosage Compensation in the African Malaria Mosquito Anopheles gambiae.

Rose G(1), Krzywinska E(2), Kim J(3), Revuelta L(2), Ferretti L(3), Krzywinski
J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Molecular Biology Group, The Pirbright Institute, Pirbright, United
Kingdom Genomics Research Unit, Public Health England, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Vector Molecular Biology Group, The Pirbright Institute, Pirbright, United
Kingdom.
(3)Centre for Integrative Biology, The Pirbright Institute, Pirbright, United
Kingdom.
(4)Vector Molecular Biology Group, The Pirbright Institute, Pirbright, United
Kingdom jaroslaw.krzywinski@pirbright.ac.uk.

Dosage compensation is the fundamental process by which gene expression from the 
male monosomic X chromosome and from the diploid set of autosomes is equalized.
Various molecular mechanisms have evolved in different organisms to achieve this 
task. In Drosophila, genes on the male X chromosome are upregulated to the levels
of expression from the two X chromosomes in females. To test whether a similar
mechanism is operating in immature stages of Anopheles mosquitoes, we analyzed
global gene expression in the Anopheles gambiae fourth instar larvae and pupae
using high-coverage RNA-seq data. In pupae of both sexes, the median expression
ratios of X-linked to autosomal genes (X:A) were close to 1.0, and within the
ranges of expression ratios between the autosomal pairs, consistent with complete
compensation. Gene-by-gene comparisons of expression in males and females
revealed mild female bias, likely attributable to a deficit of male-biased
X-linked genes. In larvae, male to female ratios of the X chromosome expression
levels were more female biased than in pupae, suggesting that compensation may
not be complete. No compensation mechanism appears to operate in male germline of
early pupae. Confirmation of the existence of dosage compensation in A. gambiae
lays the foundation for research into the components of dosage compensation
machinery in this important vector species.

Â© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evw004 
PMCID: PMC4779611
PMID: 26782933  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

