
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016 Feb;94(2):327-35. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0562. Epub 2016
Jan 19.

Molecular Characterization Reveals Diverse and Unknown Malaria Vectors in the
Western Kenyan Highlands.

St Laurent B(1), Cooke M(2), Krishnankutty SM(2), Asih P(2), Mueller JD(2),
Kahindi S(2), Ayoma E(2), Oriango RM(2), Thumloup J(2), Drakeley C(2), Cox J(2), 
Collins FH(2), Lobo NF(2), Stevenson JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Eck Institute for Global Health, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame,
Indiana; Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene
and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom; Centre for Global Health Research,
Kenya Medical Research Institute/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Kisumu, Kenya; Western Triangle Research Center, Montana State University,
Conrad, Montana; Johns Hopkins Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland
brandyce.stlaurent@nih.gov.
(2)Eck Institute for Global Health, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame,
Indiana; Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene
and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom; Centre for Global Health Research,
Kenya Medical Research Institute/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Kisumu, Kenya; Western Triangle Research Center, Montana State University,
Conrad, Montana; Johns Hopkins Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland.

Comment in
    Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016 Feb;94(2):251-2.

The success of mosquito-based malaria control is dependent upon susceptible
bionomic traits in local malaria vectors. It is crucial to have accurate and
reliable methods to determine mosquito species composition in areas subject to
malaria. An unexpectedly diverse set of Anopheles species was collected in the
western Kenyan highlands, including unidentified and potentially new species
carrying the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. This study identified 2,340 
anopheline specimens using both ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacer region 
2 and mitochondrial DNA cytochrome oxidase subunit 1 loci. Seventeen distinct
sequence groups were identified. Of these, only eight could be molecularly
identified through comparison to published and voucher sequences. Of the
unidentified species, four were found to carry P. falciparum by circumsporozoite 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and polymerase chain reaction, the most
abundant of which had infection rates comparable to a primary vector in the area,
Anopheles funestus. High-quality adult specimens of these unidentified species
could not be matched to museum voucher specimens or conclusively identified using
multiple keys, suggesting that they may have not been previously described. These
unidentified vectors were captured outdoors. Diverse and unknown species have
been incriminated in malaria transmission in the western Kenya highlands using
molecular identification of unusual morphological variants of field specimens.
This study demonstrates the value of using molecular methods to compliment vector
identifications and highlights the need for accurate characterization of mosquito
species and their associated behaviors for effective malaria control.

Â© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0562 
PMCID: PMC4751935
PMID: 26787150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

