
1. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2016 Jan 11;55(2):664-8. doi: 10.1002/anie.201509345.
Epub 2015 Nov 24.

Production of New Cladosporin Analogues by Reconstitution of the Polyketide
Synthases Responsible for the Biosynthesis of this Antimalarial Agent.

Cochrane RV(1), Sanichar R(1), Lambkin GR(1), Reiz B(1), Xu W(2), Tang Y(2),
Vederas JC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 2G2
(Canada).
(2)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering and Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095
(USA).
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 2G2
(Canada). john.vederas@ualberta.ca.

The antimalarial agent cladosporin is a nanomolar inhibitor of the Plasmodium
falciparum lysyl-tRNA synthetase, and exhibits activity against both blood- and
liver-stage infection. Cladosporin can be isolated from the fungus Cladosporium
cladosporioides, where it is biosynthesized by a highly reducing (HR) and a
non-reducing (NR) iterative type I polyketide synthase (PKS) pair. Genome
sequencing of the host organism and subsequent heterologous expression of these
enzymes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae produced cladosporin, confirming the identity
of the putative gene cluster. Incorporation of a pentaketide intermediate
analogue indicated a 5+3 assembly by the HR PKS Cla2 and the NR PKS Cla3 during
cladosporin biosynthesis. Advanced-intermediate analogues were synthesized and
incorporated by Cla3 to furnish new cladosporin analogues. A putative lysyl-tRNA 
synthetase resistance gene was identified in the cladosporin gene cluster.
Analysis of the active site emphasizes key structural features thought to be
important in resistance to cladosporin.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/anie.201509345 
PMCID: PMC4906947
PMID: 26783060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

