
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Feb 12;10(2):e0004434. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0004434. eCollection 2016 Feb.

Population Genetics of Plasmodium vivax in Four Rural Communities in Central
Vietnam.

Hong NV(1)(2)(3), Delgado-Ratto C(3), Thanh PV(1), Van den Eede P(2), Guetens
P(2), Binh NT(1), Phuc BQ(1), Duong TT(1), Van Geertruyden JP(3), D'Alessandro
U(2)(4), Erhart A(2), Rosanas-Urgell A(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Malariology, Parasitology and Entomology (NIMPE), Hanoi,
Vietnam.
(2)Institute of Tropical Medicine (ITM), Antwerp, Belgium.
(3)International Health Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Antwerp,
Belgium.
(4)Medical Research Council Unit (MRC Unit), Fajara, The Gambia.

BACKGROUND: The burden of malaria in Vietnam has drastically reduced, prompting
the National Malaria Control Program to officially engage in elimination efforts.
Plasmodium vivax is becoming increasingly prevalent, remaining a major problem in
the country's central and southern provinces. A better understanding of P. vivax 
genetic diversity and structure of local parasite populations will provide
baseline data for the evaluation and improvement of current efforts for control
and elimination. The aim of this study was to examine the population genetics and
structure of P. vivax isolates from four communities in Tra Leng commune, Nam Tra
My district in Quang Nam, Central Vietnam.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: P. vivax mono infections collected from 234
individuals between April 2009 and December 2010 were successfully analyzed using
a panel of 14 microsatellite markers. Isolates displayed moderate genetic
diversity (He = 0.68), with no significant differences between study communities.
Polyclonal infections were frequent (71.4%) with a mean multiplicity of infection
of 1.91 isolates/person. Low but significant genetic differentiation (FST value
from -0.05 to 0.18) was observed between the community across the river and the
other communities. Strong linkage disequilibrium ([Formula: see text] = 0.113, p 
< 0.001) was detected across all communities, suggesting gene flow within and
among them. Using multiple approaches, 101 haplotypes were grouped into two
genetic clusters, while 60.4% of haplotypes were admixed.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In this area of Central Vietnam, where malaria
transmission has decreased significantly over the past decade, there was moderate
genetic diversity and high occurrence of polyclonal infections. Local human
populations have frequent social and economic interactions that facilitate gene
flow and inbreeding among parasite populations, while decreasing population
structure. Findings provide important information on parasites populations
circulating in the study area and are relevant to current malaria elimination
efforts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004434 
PMCID: PMC4752448
PMID: 26872387  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

