
1. Malar J. 2016 Feb 24;15:111. doi: 10.1186/s12936-016-1161-5.

Plasmodium falciparum ookinete expression of plasmepsin VII and plasmepsin X.

Li F(1), Bounkeua V(2), Pettersen K(3), Vinetz JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0760, USA.
f1li@ucsd.edu.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0760, USA.
vbounkeua@uabmc.edu.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0760, USA.
kennypettersen@gmail.com.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0760, USA.
jvinetz@ucsd.edu.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium invasion of the mosquito midgut is a population bottleneck
in the parasite lifecycle. Interference with molecular mechanisms by which the
ookinete invades the mosquito midgut is one potential approach to developing
malaria transmission-blocking strategies. Plasmodium aspartic proteases are one
such class of potential targets: plasmepsin IV (known to be present in the
asexual stage food vacuole) was previously shown to be involved in Plasmodium
gallinaceum infection of the mosquito midgut, and plasmepsins VII and plasmepsin 
X (not known to be present in the asexual stage food vacuole) are upregulated in 
Plasmodium falciparum mosquito stages. These (and other) parasite-derived enzymes
that play essential roles during ookinete midgut invasion are prime candidates
for transmission-blocking vaccines.
METHODS: Reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) was used to determine timing of P.
falciparum plasmepsin VII (PfPM VII) and plasmepsin X (PfPM X) mRNA transcripts
in parasite mosquito midgut stages. Protein expression was confirmed by western
immunoblot and immunofluorescence assays (IFA) using anti-peptide monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) against immunogenic regions of PfPM VII and PfPM X. These
antibodies were also used in standard membrane feeding assays (SMFA) to determine
whether inhibition of these proteases would affect parasite transmission to
mosquitoes. The Mann-Whitney U test was used to analyse mosquito transmission
assay results.
RESULTS: RT-PCR, western immunoblot and immunofluorescence assay confirmed
expression of PfPM VII and PfPM X in mosquito stages. Whereas PfPM VII was
expressed in zygotes and ookinetes, PfPM X was expressed in gametes, zygotes, and
ookinetes. Antibodies against PfPM VII and PfPM X decreased P. falciparum
invasion of the mosquito midgut when used at high concentrations, indicating that
these proteases play a role in Plasmodium mosquito midgut invasion. Failure to
generate genetic knockouts of these genes limited determination of the precise
role of these proteases in parasite transmission but suggests that they are
essential during the intraerythrocytic life cycle.
CONCLUSIONS: PfPM VII and PfPM X are present in the mosquito-infective stages of 
P. falciparum. Standard membrane feeding assays demonstrate that antibodies
against these proteins reduce the infectivity of P. falciparum for mosquitoes,
suggesting their viability as transmission-blocking vaccine candidates. Further
study of the role of these plasmepsins in P. falciparum biology is warranted.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1161-5 
PMCID: PMC4765185
PMID: 26911483  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

