
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Feb 29;10(2):e0004470. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0004470. eCollection 2016 Feb.

Diagnosis of Bacterial Bloodstream Infections: A 16S Metagenomics Approach.

Decuypere S(1), Meehan CJ(2), Van Puyvelde S(2), De Block T(2), Maltha J(3)(4),
Palpouguini L(5), Tahita M(5), Tinto H(5), Jacobs J(3)(6), Deborggraeve S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Kids Institute, University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia.
(2)Biomedical Sciences Department, Institute of Tropical Medicine Antwerp,
Antwerpen, Belgium.
(3)Clinical Sciences Department, Institute of Tropical Medicine Antwerp,
Antwerpen, Belgium.
(4)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Clinical Research Unit of Nanoro (CRUN), Nanoro, Burkina Faso.
(6)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Erratum in
    PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017 Jul 28;11(7):e0005811.

BACKGROUND: Bacterial bloodstream infection (bBSI) is one of the leading causes
of death in critically ill patients and accurate diagnosis is therefore crucial. 
We here report a 16S metagenomics approach for diagnosing and understanding bBSI.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The proof-of-concept was delivered in 75 children
(median age 15 months) with severe febrile illness in Burkina Faso. Standard
blood culture and malaria testing were conducted at the time of hospital
admission. 16S metagenomics testing was done retrospectively and in duplicate on 
the blood of all patients. Total DNA was extracted from the blood and the V3-V4
regions of the bacterial 16S rRNA genes were amplified by PCR and deep sequenced 
on an Illumina MiSeq sequencer. Paired reads were curated, taxonomically labeled,
and filtered. Blood culture diagnosed bBSI in 12 patients, but this number
increased to 22 patients when combining blood culture and 16S metagenomics
results. In addition to superior sensitivity compared to standard blood culture, 
16S metagenomics revealed important novel insights into the nature of bBSI.
Patients with acute malaria or recovering from malaria had a 7-fold higher risk
of presenting polymicrobial bloodstream infections compared to patients with no
recent malaria diagnosis (p-value = 0.046). Malaria is known to affect epithelial
gut function and may thus facilitate bacterial translocation from the intestinal 
lumen to the blood. Importantly, patients with such polymicrobial blood
infections showed a 9-fold higher risk factor for not surviving their febrile
illness (p-value = 0.030).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our data demonstrate that 16S metagenomics is a
powerful approach for the diagnosis and understanding of bBSI. This
proof-of-concept study also showed that appropriate control samples are crucial
to detect background signals due to environmental contamination.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004470 
PMCID: PMC4771206
PMID: 26927306  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

