
1. Mol Ecol. 2016 May;25(10):2210-25. doi: 10.1111/mec.13609. Epub 2016 Mar 31.

Transcriptomic differences between euryhaline and stenohaline malaria vector
sibling species in response to salinity stress.

Uyhelji HA(1)(2)(3), Cheng C(1)(2), Besansky NJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN,
46556, USA.
(2)Eck Institute for Global Health, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN,
46556, USA.
(3)Functional Genomics Team, Civil Aerospace Medical Institute, Federal Aviation 
Administration, Oklahoma City, OK, 73169, USA.

Evolution of osmoregulatory systems is a key factor in the transition of species 
between fresh- and saltwater habitats. Anopheles coluzzii and Anopheles merus are
stenohaline and euryhaline malaria vector mosquitoes belonging to a larger group 
of sibling species, the Anopheles gambiae complex, which radiated in Africa
within the last 2 million years. Comparative ecological genomics of these vector 
species can provide insight into the mechanisms that permitted the rapid
radiation of this species complex into habitats of contrasting salinity. Here, we
use RNA-Seq to investigate gene expression differences between An. coluzzii and
An. merus after briefly exposing both young and old larval instars of each
species to either saltwater (SW) or freshwater (FW). Our study aims to identify
candidate genes and pathways responsible for the greater SW tolerance of
An. merus. Our results are congruent with the ability of gene induction to
mediate salinity tolerance, with both species showing increasing amounts of
differential gene expression between SW and FW as salt concentrations increase.
Besides ion transporters such as AgAE2 that may serve as effectors for
osmoregulation, we also find mitogen-activated protein kinases that may serve in 
a phosphorylation signalling pathway responding to salinity, and report potential
cross-talk between the mosquito immune response and osmoregulation. This study
provides a key step towards applying the growing molecular knowledge of these
malaria vectors to improve understanding of their ecological tolerances and
habitat occupancy.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.13609 
PMCID: PMC4877251
PMID: 26945667  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

