
1. Insect Sci. 2016 Jun;23(3):366-76. doi: 10.1111/1744-7917.12333. Epub 2016 Apr
26.

Genome-wide identification and characterization of odorant-binding protein (OBP) 
genes in the malaria vector Anopheles sinensis (Diptera: Culicidae).

He X(1), He ZB(1), Zhang YJ(1), Zhou Y(1), Xian PJ(1), Qiao L(1), Chen B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Entomology and Molecular Biology, College of Life Sciences,
Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing, 401331, China.

Anopheles sinensis is a major malaria vector. Insect odorant-binding proteins
(OBPs) may function in the reception of odorants in the olfactory system. The
classification and characterization of the An. sinensis OBP genes have not been
systematically studied. In this study, 64 putative OBP genes were identified at
the whole-genome level of An. sinensis based on the comparison between OBP
conserved motifs, PBP_GOBP, and phylogenetic analysis with An. gambiae OBPs. The 
characterization of An. sinensis OBPs, including the motif's conservation, gene
structure, genomic organization and classification, were investigated. A new
gene, AsOBP73, belonging to the Plus-C subfamily, was identified with the support
of transcript and conservative motifs. These An. sinensis OBP genes were
classified into three subfamilies with 37, 15 and 12 genes in the subfamily
Classic, Atypical and Plus-C, respectively. The genomic organization of An.
sinensis OBPs suggests a clustered distribution across nine different scaffolds. 
Eight genes (OBP23-28, OBP63-64) might originate from a single gene through a
series of historic duplication events at least before divergence of Anopheles,
Culex and Aedes. The microsynteny analyses indicate a very high synteny between
An. sinensis and An. gambiae OBPs. OBP70 and OBP71 earlier classified under
Plus-C in An. gambiae are recognized as belonging to the group Obp59a of the
Classic subfamily, and OBP69 earlier classified under Plus-C has been moved to
the Atypical subfamily in this study. The study established a basic information
frame for further study of the OBP genes in insects as well as in An. sinensis.

Â© 2016 Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/1744-7917.12333 
PMID: 26970073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

