
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2016 Jul;41:47-55. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.03.014. Epub
2016 Mar 15.

Comparative assessment on the prevalence of mutations in the Plasmodium
falciparum drug-resistant genes in two different ecotypes of Odisha state, India.

Kar NP(1), Chauhan K(1), Nanda N(1), Kumar A(2), Carlton JM(3), Das A(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Malaria Research, Indian Council of Medical Research,
Sector-8, Dwarka, New Delhi 110077, India.
(2)National Institute of Malaria Research, DHS Building, Campal, Panaji, Field
Unit, Goa 403001, India.
(3)Department of Biology, New York University, 12 Waverly Place, New York, NY
10009, USA.
(4)National Institute of Malaria Research, Indian Council of Medical Research,
Sector-8, Dwarka, New Delhi 110077, India. Electronic address:
aparup@mrcindia.org.

Considering malaria as a local and focal disease, epidemiological understanding
of different ecotypes of malaria can help in devising novel control measures. One
of the major hurdles in malaria control lies on the evolution and dispersal of
the drug-resistant malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum. We herewith present
data on genetic variation at the Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) level in
four different genes of P. falciparum (Pfcrt, Pfmdr1, Pfdhfr, and Pfdhps) that
confer resistance to different antimalarials in two different eco-epidemiological
settings, i.e. Hilly-Forest (HF) and Riverine-Plain (RP), in a high malaria
endemic district of Odisha state, India. Greater frequency of antimalarial
resistance conferring SNPs and haplotypes was observed in all four genes in P.
falciparum, and Pfdhps was the most variable gene among the four. No significant 
genetic differentiation could be observed in isolates from HF and RP ecotypes.
Twelve novel, hitherto unreported nucleotide mutations could be observed in the
Pfmdr1 and Pfdhps genes. While the Pfdhps gene presented highest haplotype
diversity, the Pfcrt gene displayed the highest nucleotide diversity. When the
data on all the four genes were complied, the isolates from HF ecotype were found
to harbour higher average nucleotide diversity than those coming from RP ecotype.
High and positive Tajima's D values were obtained for the Pfcrt and Pfdhfr genes 
in isolates from both the HF and RP ecotypes, with statistically significant
deviation from neutrality in the RP ecotype. Different patterns of Linkage
Disequilibrium (LD) among SNPs located in different drug-resistant genes were
found in the isolates collected from HF and RP ecotypes. Whereas in the HF
ecotype, SNPs in the Pfmdr1 and Pfdhfr were significantly associated, in the RP
ecotype, SNPs located in Pfcrt were associated with Pfmdr1, Pfdhfr and Pfdhps.
These findings provide a baseline understanding on how different micro
eco-epidemiological settings influence evolution and spread of different drug
resistance alleles. Our findings further suggest that drug resistance to
chloroquine and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine is approaching fixation level, which
requires urgent attention of malaria control programme in India.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.03.014 
PMCID: PMC4868809
PMID: 26988711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

