
1. Mol Ecol. 2016 May;25(10):2226-43. doi: 10.1111/mec.13619. Epub 2016 Apr 20.

Identifying targets of selection in mosaic genomes with machine learning:
applications in Anopheles gambiae for detecting sites within locally adapted
chromosomal inversions.

He Q(1), Knowles LL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology, Museum of Zoology, University of
Michigan, 1109 Geddes Ave., Ann Arbor, MI, 48109-1079, USA.

Chromosomal inversions are important structural changes that may facilitate
divergent selection when they capture co-adaptive loci in the face of gene flow. 
However, identifying selection targets within inversions can be challenging. The 
high degrees of differentiation between heterokaryotypes, as well as the
differences in demographic histories of collinear regions compared with inverted 
ones, reduce the power of traditional outlier analyses for detecting selected
loci. Here, we develop a new approach that uses discriminant functions informed
from inversion-specific expectations to classify loci that are under selection
(or drift). Analysis of RAD sequencing data we collected in a classic dipteran
species with polymorphic inversion clines-Anopheles gambiae, a malaria vector
species from sub-Saharan Africa-demonstrates the benefits of the approach
compared with traditional outlier analyses. We focus specifically on two
polymorphic inversions, the 2La and 2Rb arrangements that predominate in dry
habitats and the 2L+(a) and 2R+(b) arrangements in wet habitats, which contrast
with the minimal geographic structure of SNPs from collinear regions. With our
approach, we identify two strongly selected regions within 2La associated with
dry habitat. Moreover, we also show that the prevalence of selection is greater
in the arrangement 2L+(a) that is associated with wet habitat (unlike presumed
importance of selective divergence associated with the shift of the mosquitoes
into dry habitats). We discuss the implications of these results with respect to 
studies of rapid adaptation in these malaria vectors, and in particular, the
insights our newly developed approach offers for identifying not only potential
targets of selection, but also the population that has undergone adaptive change.

Â© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.13619 
PMID: 26994406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

