
1. Parasitol Res. 2016 Jul;115(7):2625-36. doi: 10.1007/s00436-016-5009-2. Epub 2016
Mar 22.

Plasmodium delichoni n. sp.: description, molecular characterisation and remarks 
on the exoerythrocytic merogony, persistence, vectors and transmission.

Valkiūnas G(1), Ilgūnas M(2), Bukauskaitė D(2), Žiegytė R(2), Bernotienė R(2),
Jusys V(3), Eigirdas V(3), Fragner K(4), Weissenböck H(4), Iezhova TA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nature Research Centre, Akademijos 2, LT-08412, Vilnius, Lithuania.
gedvalk@ekoi.lt.
(2)Nature Research Centre, Akademijos 2, LT-08412, Vilnius, Lithuania.
(3)Ventės Ragas Ornithological Station, LT-99361, Kintai, Lithuania.
(4)Institute of Pathology and Forensic Veterinary Medicine, University of
Veterinary Medicine Vienna, 1210, Vienna, Austria.

Malaria parasite Plasmodium (Novyella) delichoni n. sp. (Haemosporida,
Plasmodiidae) was found in a widespread Eurasian songbird, the common house
martin Delichon urbicum (Hirundinidae). It is described based on the morphology
of its blood stages and segments of the mitochondrial cytochrome b and apicoplast
genes, which can be used for molecular identification of this species.
Erythrocytic meronts and gametocytes are strictly nucleophilic, and mature
gametocytes possess pigment granules of markedly variable size, including large
ones (1 μm in length). Due to these features, P. delichoni can be readily
distinguished from all described species of avian malaria parasites belonging to 
subgenus Novyella. Additionally, mature erythrocytic merozoites contain a dense
clump of chromatin, a rare character in avian malaria parasites. Erythrocytic
merogony is asynchronous. Illustrations of blood stages of the new species are
given, and phylogenetic analysis identifies DNA lineages closely related to this 
parasite. Domestic canary Serinus canaria and Eurasian siskin Carduelis spinus
were infected after subinoculation of infected blood obtained from the house
martin. Parasitemia was long lasting in both these hosts, but it was high (up to 
70 %) in Eurasian siskins and low (up to 1 %) in canaries. Mortality was not
observed, and histological examination and chromogenic in situ hybridisation did 
not reveal secondary exoerythrocytic meronts (phanerozoites) in the exposed
birds. It is likely that persistence of this infection occurs due to long-lasting
parasitemia in avian hosts. Sporogony was abortive in mosquitoes Culex pipiens
pipiens form molestus, Culex quinquefasciatus and Aedes aegypti at gametogenesis 
or ookinete stages. The new species is absent from juvenile birds at breeding
sites in Europe, indicating that transmission occurs at African wintering
grounds.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-016-5009-2 
PMID: 27000087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

