
1. Nat Commun. 2016 Mar 22;7:11078. doi: 10.1038/ncomms11078.

Genomes of cryptic chimpanzee Plasmodium species reveal key evolutionary events
leading to human malaria.

Sundararaman SA(1)(2), Plenderleith LJ(3), Liu W(1), Loy DE(1)(2), Learn GH(1),
Li Y(1), Shaw KS(1), Ayouba A(4), Peeters M(4), Speede S(5), Shaw GM(1)(2),
Bushman FD(2), Brisson D(6), Rayner JC(7), Sharp PM(3), Hahn BH(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 19104
Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 19104
Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Institute of Evolutionary Biology and Centre for Immunity, Infection and
Evolution, University of Edinburgh, EH9 3FL Edinburgh, UK.
(4)Unité Mixte Internationale 233, Institut de Recherche pour le Développement
(IRD), INSERM U1175, University of Montpellier, 34394 Montpellier, France.
(5)Sanaga-Yong Chimpanzee Rescue Center, IDA-Africa, Portland, 97204 Oregon, USA.
(6)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 19104
Pennsylvania, USA.
(7)Malaria Programme, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus,
CB10 1SA Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2016 Aug;14 (8):478.

African apes harbour at least six Plasmodium species of the subgenus Laverania,
one of which gave rise to human Plasmodium falciparum. Here we use a selective
amplification strategy to sequence the genome of chimpanzee parasites classified 
as Plasmodium reichenowi and Plasmodium gaboni based on the subgenomic fragments.
Genome-wide analyses show that these parasites indeed represent distinct species,
with no evidence of cross-species mating. Both P. reichenowi and P. gaboni are
10-fold more diverse than P. falciparum, indicating a very recent origin of the
human parasite. We also find a remarkable Laverania-specific expansion of a
multigene family involved in erythrocyte remodelling, and show that a short
region on chromosome 4, which encodes two essential invasion genes, was
horizontally transferred into a recent P. falciparum ancestor. Our results
validate the selective amplification strategy for characterizing cryptic pathogen
species, and reveal evolutionary events that likely predisposed the precursor of 
P. falciparum to colonize humans.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11078 
PMCID: PMC4804174
PMID: 27002652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

