
1. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2016 Mar 3;10:1009-18. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S96863. eCollection
2016.

Plasmodium-infected erythrocytes (pRBC) induce endothelial cell apoptosis via a
heme-mediated signaling pathway.

Liu M(1), Dickinson-Copeland C(1), Hassana S(1), Stiles JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Immunology, Morehouse School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Heme is cytotoxic to the plasmodium parasite, which converts it to an insoluble
crystalline form called hemozoin (malaria pigment) in erythrocytes during
replication. The increased serum levels of free heme cause tissue damage,
activation of microvascular endothelial and glial cells, focal inflammation,
activation of apoptotic pathways, and neuronal tissue damage. Several hypotheses 
have been proposed to explain how these causative factors exacerbate fatal
malaria. However, none of them fully explain the detailed mechanisms leading to
the high morbidity and mortality associated with malaria. We have previously
reported that heme-induced brain microvascular endothelial cell (HBVEC) apoptosis
is a major contributor to severe malaria pathogenesis. Here, we hypothesized that
heme (at clinically relevant levels) induces inflammation and apoptosis in HBVEC,
a process that is mediated by independent proinflammatory and proapoptotic
signaling pathways. In this study, we determined the key signaling molecules
associated with heme-mediated apoptosis in HBVEC in vitro using RT2 profiler
polymerase chain reaction array technology and confirmed results using
immunostaining techniques. While several expressed genes in HBVEC were altered
upon heme stimulation, we determined that the apoptotic effects of heme were
mediated through p73 (tumor protein p73). The results provide an opportunity to
target heme-mediated apoptosis therapeutically in malaria-infected individuals.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S96863 
PMCID: PMC4780719
PMID: 27042002  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

