
1. Open Biol. 2016 Apr;6(4):160034. doi: 10.1098/rsob.160034.

A small mitochondrial protein present in myzozoans is essential for malaria
transmission.

Klug D(1), Mair GR(2), Frischknecht F(2), Douglas RG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Parasitology, Center for Infectious Diseases, Heidelberg
University Medical School, Im Neuenheimer Feld 324, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
dennis.klug@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)Integrative Parasitology, Center for Infectious Diseases, Heidelberg
University Medical School, Im Neuenheimer Feld 324, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Integrative Parasitology, Center for Infectious Diseases, Heidelberg
University Medical School, Im Neuenheimer Feld 324, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
ross.douglas@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

Myzozoans (which include dinoflagellates, chromerids and apicomplexans) display
notable divergence from their ciliate sister group, including a reduced
mitochondrial genome and divergent metabolic processes. The factors contributing 
to these divergent processes are still poorly understood and could serve as
potential drug targets in disease-causing protists. Here, we report the
identification and characterization of a small mitochondrial protein from the
rodent-infecting apicomplexan parasite Plasmodium berghei that is essential for
development in its mosquito host. Parasites lacking the gene mitochondrial
protein ookinete developmental defect (mpodd) showed malformed parasites that
were unable to transmit to mosquitoes. Knockout parasites displayed reduced
mitochondrial mass without affecting organelle integrity, indicating no role of
the protein in mitochondrial biogenesis or morphology maintenance but a likely
role in mitochondrial import or metabolism. Using genetic complementation
experiments, we identified a previously unrecognized Plasmodium falciparum
homologue that can rescue the mpodd(-) phenotype, thereby showing that the gene
is functionally conserved. As far as can be detected, mpodd is found in
myzozoans, has homologues in the phylum Apicomplexa and appears to have arisen in
free-living dinoflagellates. This suggests that the MPODD protein has a conserved
mitochondrial role that is important for myzozoans. While previous studies
identified a number of essential proteins which are generally highly conserved
evolutionarily, our study identifies, for the first time, a non-canonical protein
fulfilling a crucial function in the mitochondrion during parasite transmission.

Â© 2016 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1098/rsob.160034 
PMCID: PMC4852462
PMID: 27053680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

