
1. Trends Parasitol. 2016 Jun;32(6):446-457. doi: 10.1016/j.pt.2016.03.005. Epub
2016 Apr 6.

Illuminating Parasite Protein Production by Ribosome Profiling.

Parsons M(1), Myler PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Research (formerly Seattle Biomedical Research
Institute), 307 Westlake Avenue North STE 500, Seattle, WA 98109 USA; Department 
of Global Health, Box 357965, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
Electronic address: marilyn.parsons@cidresearch.org.
(2)Center for Infectious Disease Research (formerly Seattle Biomedical Research
Institute), 307 Westlake Avenue North STE 500, Seattle, WA 98109 USA; Department 
of Global Health, Box 357965, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA;
Department of Biomedical Informatics and Medical Education, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

While technologies for global enumeration of transcript abundance are
well-developed, those that assess protein abundance require tailoring to
penetrate to low-abundance proteins. Ribosome profiling circumvents this
challenge by measuring global protein production via sequencing small mRNA
fragments protected by the assembled ribosome. This powerful approach is now
being applied to protozoan parasites including trypanosomes and Plasmodium. It
has been used to identify new protein-coding sequences (CDSs) and clarify the
boundaries of previously annotated CDSs in Trypanosoma brucei. Ribosome profiling
has demonstrated that translation efficiencies vary widely between genes and, for
trypanosomes at least, for the same gene across stages. The ribosomal proteins
are themselves subjected to translational control, suggesting a means of
reinforcing global translational regulation.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pt.2016.03.005 
PMCID: PMC4884476
PMID: 27061497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

