
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016 Jul 6;95(1):148-54. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0017. Epub 2016
Apr 11.

No Clinical or Molecular Evidence of Plasmodium falciparum Resistance to
Artesunate-Mefloquine in Northwestern Brazil.

Ladeia-Andrade S(1), de Melo GN(2), de Souza-Lima Rde C(2), Salla LC(3), Bastos
MS(3), Rodrigues PT(3), Luz Fd(4), Ferreira MU(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, Oswaldo Cruz Institute/Oswaldo Cruz
Foundation (Fiocruz), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Amazonian Malaria Initiative/Amazon
Network for the Surveillance of Antimalarial Drug Resistance, Ministry of Health 
of Brazil, Cruzeiro do Sul, Brazil.
(2)Amazonian Malaria Initiative/Amazon Network for the Surveillance of
Antimalarial Drug Resistance, Ministry of Health of Brazil, Cruzeiro do Sul,
Brazil.
(3)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Center for Tropical Medicine, University of Brasília, Brasília, Brazil.
(5)Amazonian Malaria Initiative/Amazon Network for the Surveillance of
Antimalarial Drug Resistance, Ministry of Health of Brazil, Cruzeiro do Sul,
Brazil. Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University 
of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. muferrei@usp.br.

We evaluated the clinical efficacy of artesunate-mefloquine (ASMQ) fixed-dose
combination to treat uncomplicated malaria in Juruá Valley, the main Plasmodium
falciparum transmission hotspot in Brazil. Between November 2010 and February
2013, we enrolled 162 patients aged 4-73 years, with fever or a history of fever,
and a single-species P. falciparum infection confirmed by microscopy and
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). All 154 patients who completed the 42-day
follow-up presented an adequate clinical and parasitologic response. ASMQ was
well tolerated and no adverse event caused treatment interruption. Gametocytes
were detected in 46.3% patients; 35.2% had gametocytes at enrollment, whereas
others developed patent gametocytemia 1-14 days after starting ASMQ. By day 3 of 
treatment, all subjects had cleared asexual parasitemia, but parasite DNA
remained PCR detectable in 37.6% of them. Day-3 PCR positivity was associated
with prolonged gametocyte carriage. We found no molecular evidence of resistance 
to either MQ (pfmdr1 gene amplification) or AS (mutations in selected kelch13
gene domains known to be associated with AS resistance) in the local P.
falciparum population. These results strongly support the use of ASMQ as a
first-line regimen to treat uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria in northwestern
Brazil, but underscore the need for gametocytocidal drugs to reduce the
transmission potential of ASMQ-treated patients (ClinicalTrials.gov number
NCT01144702).

© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0017 
PMCID: PMC4944679
PMID: 27068396  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

