
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Apr 26;113(17):4717-22. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1600476113. Epub 2016 Apr 11.

Apicomplexa-specific tRip facilitates import of exogenous tRNAs into malaria
parasites.

Bour T(1), Mahmoudi N(1), Kapps D(1), Thiberge S(2), Bargieri D(2), MÃ©nard R(2), 
Frugier M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Architecture and Reactivity of RNA, University of Strasbourg, CNRS, Institute 
for Molecular and Cellular Biology, 67084 Strasbourg Cedex, France;
(2)Malaria Biology and Genetics Unit, Pasteur Institute, 75015 Paris, France.
(3)Architecture and Reactivity of RNA, University of Strasbourg, CNRS, Institute 
for Molecular and Cellular Biology, 67084 Strasbourg Cedex, France;
M.Frugier@ibmc-cnrs.unistra.fr.

The malaria-causing Plasmodium parasites are transmitted to vertebrates by
mosquitoes. To support their growth and replication, these intracellular
parasites, which belong to the phylum Apicomplexa, have developed mechanisms to
exploit their hosts. These mechanisms include expropriation of small metabolites 
from infected host cells, such as purine nucleotides and amino acids. Heretofore,
no evidence suggested that transfer RNAs (tRNAs) could also be exploited. We
identified an unusual gene in Apicomplexa with a coding sequence for
membrane-docking and structure-specific tRNA binding. This Apicomplexa
protein-designated tRip (tRNA import protein)-is anchored to the parasite plasma 
membrane and directs import of exogenous tRNAs. In the absence of tRip, the
fitness of the parasite stage that multiplies in the blood is significantly
reduced, indicating that the parasite may need host tRNAs to sustain its own
translation and/or as regulatory RNAs. Plasmodium is thus the first example, to
our knowledge, of a cell importing exogenous tRNAs, suggesting a remarkable
adaptation of this parasite to extend its reach into host cell biology.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1600476113 
PMCID: PMC4855611
PMID: 27071116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

