
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Jul 8;44(W1):W29-34. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw292. Epub 2016
Apr 21.

Companion: a web server for annotation and analysis of parasite genomes.

Steinbiss S(1), Silva-Franco F(2), Brunk B(3), Foth B(4), Hertz-Fowler C(2),
Berriman M(4), Otto TD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Parasite Genomics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10
1SA, UK ss34@sanger.ac.uk.
(2)Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, 
UK.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.
(4)Parasite Genomics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10
1SA, UK.

Currently available sequencing technologies enable quick and economical
sequencing of many new eukaryotic parasite (apicomplexan or kinetoplastid)
species or strains. Compared to SNP calling approaches, de novo assembly of these
genomes enables researchers to additionally determine insertion, deletion and
recombination events as well as to detect complex sequence diversity, such as
that seen in variable multigene families. However, there currently are no
automated eukaryotic annotation pipelines offering the required range of results 
to facilitate such analyses. A suitable pipeline needs to perform
evidence-supported gene finding as well as functional annotation and pseudogene
detection up to the generation of output ready to be submitted to a public
database. Moreover, no current tool includes quick yet informative comparative
analyses and a first pass visualization of both annotation and analysis results. 
To overcome those needs we have developed the Companion web server
(http://companion.sanger.ac.uk) providing parasite genome annotation as a service
using a reference-based approach. We demonstrate the use and performance of
Companion by annotating two Leishmania and Plasmodium genomes as typical parasite
cases and evaluate the results compared to manually annotated references.

Â© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw292 
PMCID: PMC4987884
PMID: 27105845  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

