
1. Sci Rep. 2016 May 5;6:25379. doi: 10.1038/srep25379.

PfCRT and PfMDR1 modulate interactions of artemisinin derivatives and ion channel
blockers.

Eastman RT(1)(2), Khine P(1), Huang R(2), Thomas CJ(2), Su XZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Division of Preclinical Development, National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Treatment of the symptomatic asexual stage of Plasmodium falciparum relies almost
exclusively on artemisinin (ART) combination therapies (ACTs) in endemic regions.
ACTs combine ART or its derivative with a long-acting partner drug to maximize
efficacy during the typical three-day regimen. Both laboratory and clinical
studies have previously demonstrated that the common drug resistance determinants
P. falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter (PfCRT) and multidrug resistance
transporter (PfMDR1) can modulate the susceptibility to many current antimalarial
drugs and chemical compounds. Here we investigated the parasite responses to
dihydroartemisinin (DHA) and various Ca(2+) and Na(+) channel blockers and showed
positively correlated responses between DHA and several channel blockers,
suggesting potential shared transport pathways or mode of action. Additionally,
we demonstrated that PfCRT and PfMDR1 could also significantly modulate the
pharmacodynamic interactions of the compounds and that the interactions were
influenced by the parasite genetic backgrounds. These results provide important
information for better understanding of drug resistance and for assessing the
overall impact of drug resistance markers on parasite response to ACTs.

DOI: 10.1038/srep25379 
PMCID: PMC4857081
PMID: 27147113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

