
1. Malar J. 2016 May 4;15(1):252. doi: 10.1186/s12936-016-1312-8.

Cellular engineering of Artemisia annua and Artemisia dubia with the rol ABC
genes for enhanced production of potent anti-malarial drug artemisinin.

Kiani BH(1)(2), Suberu J(3), Mirza B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
bushrahafeez.kiani@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK.
bushrahafeez.kiani@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Malaria is causing more than half of a million deaths and 214 million
clinical cases annually. Despite tremendous efforts for the control of malaria,
the global morbidity and mortality have not been significantly changed in the
last 50Â years. Artemisinin, extracted from the medicinal plant Artemisia sp. is
an effective anti-malarial drug. In 2015, elucidation of the effectiveness of
artemisinin as a potent anti-malarial drug was acknowledged with a Nobel prize.
Owing to the tight market and low yield of artemisinin, an economical way to
increase its production is to increase its content in Artemisia sp. through
different biotechnological approaches including genetic transformation.
METHODS: Artemisia annua and Artemisia dubia were transformed with rol ABC genes 
through Agrobacterium tumefacienes and Agrobacterium rhizogenes methods. The
artemisinin content was analysed and compared between transformed and
untransformed plants with the help of LC-MS/MS. Expression of key genes
[Cytochrome P450 (CYP71AV1), aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1), amorpha-4, 11
diene synthase (ADS)] in the biosynthetic pathway of artemisinin and gene for
trichome development and sesquiterpenoid biosynthetic (TFAR1) were measured using
Quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR). Trichome density was analysed using
confocal microscope.
RESULTS: Artemisinin content was significantly increased in transformed material 
of both Artemisia species when compared to un-transformed plants. The artemisinin
content within leaves of transformed lines was increased by a factor of nine,
indicating that the plant is capable of synthesizing much higher amounts than has
been achieved so far through traditional breeding. Expression of all artemisinin 
biosynthesis genes was significantly increased, although variation between the
genes was observed. CYP71AV1 and ALDH1 expression levels were higher than that of
ADS. Levels of the TFAR1 expression were also increased in all transgenic lines. 
Trichome density was also significantly increased in the leaves of transformed
plants, but no trichomes were found in control roots or transformed roots. The
detection of significantly raised levels of expression of the genes involved in
artemisinin biosynthesis in transformed roots correlated with the production of
significant amounts of artemisinin in these tissues. This suggests that synthesis
is occurring in tissues other than the trichomes, which contradicts previous
theories.
CONCLUSION: Transformation of Artemisia sp. with rol ABC genes can lead to the
increased production of artemisinin, which will help to meet the increasing
demand of artemisinin because of its diverse pharmacological and anti-malarial
importance.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1312-8 
PMCID: PMC4855502
PMID: 27142388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

