
1. Nat Commun. 2016 May 6;7:11537. doi: 10.1038/ncomms11537.

The TatD-like DNase of Plasmodium is a virulence factor and a potential malaria
vaccine candidate.

Chang Z(1), Jiang N(1), Zhang Y(1), Lu H(1), Yin J(1), Wahlgren M(2), Cheng X(3),
Cao Y(4), Chen Q(1)(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Jilin University, Xi An Da Lu 5333, Changchun
130062, China.
(2)Institute of Microbiology, Tumour and Cellular Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Nobels v√§g 16, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Pathogen Biology, Fudan University, Handan Road 220, Shanghai
200433, China.
(4)Department of Immunology, China Medical University, Puhe Road 77, Shenyang
110122, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Shenyang Agricultural University, Dongling Road
120, Shenyang 10866, China.

Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), composed primarily of DNA and proteases,
are released from activated neutrophils and contribute to the innate immune
response by capturing pathogens. Plasmodium falciparum, the causative agent of
severe malaria, thrives in its host by counteracting immune elimination. Here, we
report the discovery of a novel virulence factor of P. falciparum, a TatD-like
DNase (PfTatD) that is expressed primarily in the asexual blood stage and is
likely utilized by the parasite to counteract NETs. PfTatD exhibits typical
deoxyribonuclease activity, and its expression is higher in virulent parasites
than in avirulent parasites. A P. berghei TatD-knockout parasite displays reduced
pathogenicity in mice. Mice immunized with recombinant TatD exhibit increased
immunity against lethal challenge. Our results suggest that the TatD-like DNase
is an essential factor for the survival of malarial parasites in the host and is 
a potential malaria vaccine candidate.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11537 
PMCID: PMC4859065
PMID: 27151551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

