
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2016 Sep;43:50-7. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.05.015. Epub 2016
May 13.

Worldwide population genetic analysis and natural selection in the Plasmodium
vivax Generative Cell Specific 1 (PvGCS1) as a transmission-blocking vaccine
candidate.

Mehrizi AA(1), Dodangeh F(2), Zakeri S(3), Djadid ND(3).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
abouei@gmail.com.
(2)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran; Department of
Genetics, Tehran Medical Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran.

GENERATIVE CELL SPECIFIC 1 (GCS1) is one of the Transmission Blocking Vaccine
(TBV) candidate antigens, which is expressed on the surface of male gametocytes
and gametes of Plasmodium species. Since antigenic diversity could inhibit the
successful development of a malaria vaccine, it is crucial to determine the
diversity of gcs1 gene in global malaria-endemic areas. Therefore, gene diversity
and selection of gcs1 gene were analyzed in Iranian Plasmodium vivax isolates
(n=52) and compared with the corresponding sequences from worldwide clinical P.
vivax isolates available in PlasmoDB database. Totally 12 SNPs were detected in
the pvgcs1 sequences as compared to Sal-1 sequence. Five out of 12 SNPs including
three synonymous (T797C, G1559A, and G1667T) and two amino acid replacements
(Y133S and Q634P) were detected in Iranian pvgcs1 sequences. According to four
amino acid replacements (Y133S, N575S, Q634P and D637N) observed in all world
PvGCS1 sequences, totally 5 PvGCS1 haplotypes were detected in the world, that
three of them observed in Iranian isolates including the PvGCS-A (133S/634Q,
92.3%), PvGCS-B (133Y/634Q, 5.8%), and PvGCS-C (133S/634P, 1.9%). The overall
nucleotide diversity (π) for all 52 sequences of Iranian pvgcs1 gene was
0.00018±0.00006, and the value of dN-dS (-0.00031) were negative, however, it was
not statistically significant. In comparison with global isolates, Iranian and
PNG pvgcs1 sequences had the lowest nucleotide and haplotype diversity, while the
highest nucleotide and haplotype diversity was observed in China population.
Moreover, epitope prediction in this antigen showed that all B-cell epitopes were
located in conserved regions. However, Q634P (in one Iranian isolate) and D637N
(observed in Thailand, China, Vietnam and North Korea) mutations are involved in 
predicted IURs. The obtained results in this study could be used in development
of PvGCS1 based malaria vaccine.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.05.015 
PMID: 27180894  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

