
1. Malar Res Treat. 2016;2016:9694372. doi: 10.1155/2016/9694372. Epub 2016 Apr 17.

Increased Prevalence of Mutant Allele Pfdhps 437G and Pfdhfr Triple Mutation in
Plasmodium falciparum Isolates from a Rural Area of Gabon, Three Years after the 
Change of Malaria Treatment Policy.

Ndong Ngomo JM(1), Mawili-Mboumba DP(1), M'Bondoukwe NP(1), Nikiéma Ndong Ella
R(1), Bouyou Akotet MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology-Mycology and Tropical Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, Université des Sciences de la Santé, BP 4009, Libreville, Gabon.

In Gabon, sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) is recommended for intermittent
preventive treatment during pregnancy (IPTp-SP) and for uncomplicated malaria
treatment through ACTs drug. P. falciparum strains resistant to SP are frequent
in areas where this drug is highly used and is associated with the occurrence of 
mutations on Plasmodium falciparum dihydrofolate reductase (Pfdhfr) and
dihydropteroate synthetase (Pfdhps) genes. The aim of the study was to compare
the proportion of mutations on Pfdhfr and Pfdhps genes in isolates collected at
Oyem in northern Gabon, in 2005 at the time of IPTp-SP introduction and three
years later. Point mutations were analyzed by nested PCR-RFLP method. Among 91
isolates, more than 90% carried Pfdhfr 108N and Pfdhfr 59R alleles. Frequencies
of Pfdhfr 51I (98%) and Pfdhps 437G (67.7%) mutant alleles were higher in 2008.
Mutations at codons 164, 540, and 581 were not detected. The proportion of the
triple Pfdhfr mutation and quadruple mutation including A437G was high: 91.9% in 
2008 and 64.8% in 2008, respectively. The present study highlights an elevated
frequency of Pfdhfr and Pfdhps mutant alleles, although quintuple mutations were 
not found in north Gabon. These data suggest the need of a continuous monitoring 
of SP resistance in Gabon.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/9694372 
PMCID: PMC4852121
PMID: 27190671 

