
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2016 May 12;8(5):1361-73. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evw081.

The Genome of Haemoproteus tartakovskyi and Its Relationship to Human Malaria
Parasites.

Bensch S(1), Canbäck B(2), DeBarry JD(3), Johansson T(2), Hellgren O(2),
Kissinger JC(4), Palinauskas V(5), Videvall E(2), Valkiūnas G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Lund University, Sweden staffan.bensch@biol.lu.se.
(2)Department of Biology, Lund University, Sweden.
(3)The Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, Athens, Georgia, USA.
(4)The Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, Athens, Georgia, USA
Department of Genetics and Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Georgia.
(5)Nature Research Centre, Vilnius, Lithuania.

The phylogenetic relationships among hemosporidian parasites, including the
origin of Plasmodium falciparum, the most virulent malaria parasite of humans,
have been heavily debated for decades. Studies based on multiple-gene sequences
have helped settle many of these controversial phylogenetic issues. However,
denser taxon sampling and genome-wide analyses are needed to confidently resolve 
the evolutionay relationships among hemosporidian parasites. Genome sequences of 
several Plasmodium parasites are available but only for species infecting
primates and rodents. To root the phylogenetic tree of Plasmodium, genomic data
from related parasites of birds or reptiles are required. Here, we use a novel
approach to isolate parasite DNA from microgametes and describe the first genome 
of a bird parasite in the sister genus to Plasmodium, Haemoproteus tartakovskyi
Similar to Plasmodium parasites, H. tartakovskyi has a small genome (23.2 Mb,
5,990 genes) and a GC content (25.4%) closer to P. falciparum (19.3%) than to
Plasmodium vivax (42.3%). Combined with novel transcriptome sequences of the bird
parasite Plasmodium ashfordi, our phylogenomic analyses of 1,302 orthologous
genes demonstrate that mammalian-infecting malaria parasites are monophyletic,
thus rejecting the repeatedly proposed hypothesis that the ancestor of Laverania 
parasites originated from a secondary host shift from birds to humans. Genes and 
genomic features previously found to be shared between P. falciparum and bird
malaria parasites, but absent in other mammal malaria parasites, are therefore
signatures of maintained ancestral states. We foresee that the genome of H.
tartakovskyi will open new directions for comparative evolutionary analyses of
malarial adaptive traits.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evw081 
PMCID: PMC4898798
PMID: 27190205  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

