
1. Wiley Interdiscip Rev RNA. 2016 Nov;7(6):772-792. doi: 10.1002/wrna.1365. Epub
2016 May 26.

Translational regulation in blood stages of the malaria parasite Plasmodium spp.:
systems-wide studies pave the way.

Vembar SS(1), Droll D(2), Scherf A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unité Biologie des Interactions Hôte-Parasite, Département de Parasites et
Insectes Vecteurs, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
shruthi-sridhar.vembar@pasteur.fr.
(2)Unité Biologie des Interactions Hôte-Parasite, Département de Parasites et
Insectes Vecteurs, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The malaria parasite Plasmodium spp. varies the expression profile of its genes
depending on the host it resides in and its developmental stage. Virtually all
messenger RNA (mRNA) is expressed in a monocistronic manner, with transcriptional
activation regulated at the epigenetic level and by specialized transcription
factors. Furthermore, recent systems-wide studies have identified distinct
mechanisms of post-transcriptional and translational control at various points of
the parasite lifecycle. Taken together, it is evident that 'just-in-time'
transcription and translation strategies coexist and coordinate protein
expression during Plasmodium development, some of which we review here. In
particular, we discuss global and specific mechanisms that control protein
translation in blood stages of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, 
once a cytoplasmic mRNA has been generated, and its crosstalk with mRNA decay and
storage. We also focus on the widespread translational delay observed during the 
48-hour blood stage lifecycle of P. falciparum-for over 30% of transcribed genes,
including virulence factors required to invade erythrocytes-and its regulation by
cis-elements in the mRNA, RNA-processing enzymes and RNA-binding proteins; the
first-characterized amongst these are the DNA- and RNA-binding Alba proteins.
More generally, we conclude that translational regulation is an emerging research
field in malaria parasites and propose that its elucidation will not only shed
light on the complex developmental program of this parasite, but may also reveal 
mechanisms contributing to drug resistance and define new targets for malaria
intervention strategies. WIREs RNA 2016, 7:772-792. doi: 10.1002/wrna.1365 For
further resources related to this article, please visit the WIREs website.

© 2016 The Authors. WIREs RNA published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/wrna.1365 
PMCID: PMC5111744
PMID: 27230797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

