
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2016 Sep;43:239-44. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.05.038. Epub
2016 May 31.

Genetic diversity and multiplicity of infection of Plasmodium falciparum isolates
from Kolkata, West Bengal, India.

Saha P(1), Ganguly S(2), Maji AK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, 108, C. R. Avenue, Kolkata 700 073,
India; Department of Zoology, A. P. C. Roy Govt. College, Himachal Bihar,
Matigara, Siliguri, 734010, West Bengal, India. Electronic address:
pabitra.saha82@gmail.com.
(2)Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, 108, C. R. Avenue, Kolkata 700 073,
India; Department of Microbiology, N. R. S. Medical College & Hospital, Kolkata, 
West Bengal, India. Electronic address: swagatamedicine@gmail.com.
(3)Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, 108, C. R. Avenue, Kolkata 700 073,
India. Electronic address: maji_ardhendu@yahoo.com.

The study of genetic diversity of Plasmodium falciparum is necessary to
understand the distribution and dynamics of parasite populations. The genetic
diversity of P. falciparum merozoite surface protein-1 and 2 has been extensively
studied from different parts of world. However, limited data are available from
India. This study was aimed to determine the genetic diversity and multiplicity
of infection (MOI) of P. falciparum population in Kolkata, West Bengal, India. A 
total of 80day-zero blood samples from Kolkata were collected during a
therapeutic efficacy study in 2008-2009. DNA was extracted; allelic frequency and
diversity were investigated by PCR-genotyping method for msp1 and msp2 gene and
fragment sizing was done by Bio-Rad Gel-Doc system using Image Lab (version 4.1) 
software. P. falciparum msp1 and msp2 markers were highly polymorphic with low
allele frequencies. In Kolkata, 27 msp1 different genotypes (including 11of K1, 6
of MAD20 and 10 of Ro33 allelic families) and 30 different msp2 genotypes (of
which 17 and 13 belonged to the FC27 and 3D7 allelic families, respectively) were
recorded. The majority of these genotypes occurred at a frequency below 10%. The 
mean MOI for msp1 and msp2 gene were 2.05 and 3.72, respectively. The P.
falciparum population of Kolkata was genetically diverse. As the frequencies of
most of the msp1 and msp2 alleles were low, the probability of new infection with
genotype identical to that in pretreatment infection was very rare. This
information will serve as baseline data for evaluation of malaria control
interventions as well as for monitoring the parasite population structure.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.05.038 
PMID: 27259367  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

