
1. Virulence. 2016 Aug 17;7(6):718-28. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2016.1195537. Epub 2016
Jun 3.

FR-900098, an antimalarial development candidate that inhibits the non-mevalonate
isoprenoid biosynthesis pathway, shows no evidence of acute toxicity and
genotoxicity.

Wiesner J(1), Ziemann C(2), Hintz M(3), Reichenberg A(4), Ortmann R(4), Schlitzer
M(4), Fuhst R(2), Timmesfeld N(5), Vilcinskas A(1)(6), Jomaa H(7).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Bioresources , Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and 
Applied Ecology IME , Gießen , Germany.
(2)b Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine ITEM ,
Hannover , Germany.
(3)c Institut für Laboratoriumsmedizin und Pathobiochemie, Molekulare Diagnostik 
am Standort Gießen, Universitätsklinikum Gießen und Marburg GmbH , Gießen ,
Germany.
(4)d Institut für Pharmazeutische Chemie, Philipps-Universität Marburg , Marburg 
, Germany.
(5)e Institut für Medizinische Biometrie und Epidemiologie, Philipps-Universität 
Marburg , Marburg , Germany.
(6)f Institute for Insect Biotechnology, Justus-Liebig-University of Gießen ,
Gießen , Germany.
(7)g Institut für Laboratoriumsmedizin und Pathobiochemie, Molekulare Diagnostik 
am Standort Marburg, Universitätsklinikum Gießen und Marburg GmbH , Marburg ,
Germany.

FR-900098 is an inhibitor of 1-deoxy-d-xylulose-5-phosphate (DXP)
reductoisomerase, the second enzyme in the non-mevalonate isoprenoid biosynthesis
pathway. In previous studies, FR-900098 was shown to possess potent antimalarial 
activity in vitro and in a murine malaria model. In order to provide a basis for 
further preclinical and clinical development, we studied the acute toxicity and
genotoxicity of FR-900098. We observed no acute toxicity in rats, i.e. there were
no clinical signs of toxicity and no substance-related deaths after the
administration of a single dose of 3000 mg/kg body weight orally or 400 mg/kg
body weight intravenously. No mutagenic potential was detected in the Salmonella 
typhimurium reverse mutation assay (Ames test) or an in vitro mammalian cell gene
mutation test using mouse lymphoma L5178Y/TK(+/-) cells (clone 3.7.2C), both with
and without metabolic activation. In addition, FR-900098 demonstrated no
clastogenic or aneugenic capability or significant adverse effects on blood
formation in an in vivo micronucleus test with bone marrow erythrocytes from NMRI
mice. We conclude that FR-900098 lacks acute toxicity and genotoxicity,
supporting its further development as an antimalarial drug.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2016.1195537 
PMCID: PMC4991342
PMID: 27260413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

