
1. Parasitol Int. 2016 Oct;65(5 Pt A):463-71. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2016.06.007.
Epub 2016 Jun 14.

Translational repression of the cpw-wpc gene family in the malaria parasite
Plasmodium.

Rao PN(1), Santos JM(2), Pain A(3), Templeton TJ(4), Mair GR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, NY 10065, USA; Programs in Biochemistry, Cell, and Molecular Biology, Weill
Graduate School of Medical Sciences of Cornell University, New York, NY 10065,
USA.
(2)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de
Lisboa, Av. Prof. Egas Moniz, 1649-028 Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Pathogen Genomics Laboratory, Biological and Environmental Sciences and
Engineering (BESE) Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
(KAUST), Thuwal, Jeddah 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia; Global Station for Zoonosis
Control, Global Institution for Collaborative Research and Education (GI-CoRE),
Hokkaido University, N20 W10 Kita-ku, Sapporo 001-0020, Japan.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, NY 10065, USA; Department of Protozoology, Institute of Tropical Medicine
(NEKKEN), Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan. Electronic address: tjt2001@med.cornell.edu.
(5)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de
Lisboa, Av. Prof. Egas Moniz, 1649-028 Lisbon, Portugal; Parasitology, Center for
Infectious Diseases, University of Heidelberg Medical School, Im Neuenheimer Feld
345, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address: gunnarmair@yahoo.com.

The technical challenges of working with the sexual stages of the malaria
parasite Plasmodium have hindered the characterization of sexual stage antigens
in the quest for a successful malaria transmission-blocking vaccine. One such
predicted and largely uncharacterized group of sexual stage candidate antigens is
the CPW-WPC family of proteins. CPW-WPC proteins are named for a characteristic
domain that contains two conserved motifs, CPxxW and WPC. Conserved across
Apicomplexa, this family is also present earlier in the Alveolata in the
free-living, non-parasitophorous, photosynthetic chromerids, Chromera and
Vitrella. In Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium berghei blood stage parasites, 
the transcripts of all nine cpw-wpc genes have been detected in gametocytes. RNA 
immunoprecipitation followed by reverse transcriptase-PCR reveals all P. berghei 
cpw-wpc transcripts to be bound by the translational repressors DOZI and CITH,
and thus are likely under translational control prior to transmission from the
rodent host to the mosquito vector in P. berghei. The GFP tagging of two
endogenous P. berghei genes confirmed translational silencing in the gametocyte
and translation in ookinetes. By establishing a luciferase transgene assay, we
show that the 3' untranslated region of PF3D7_1331400 controls protein expression
of this reporter in P. falciparum gametocytes. Our analyses suggest that cpw-wpc 
genes are translationally silenced in gametocytes across Plasmodium spp. and
activated during ookinete formation and thus may have a role in transmission to
the mosquito.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2016.06.007 
PMID: 27312996  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

