
1. PLoS One. 2016 Jun 22;11(6):e0157873. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157873.
eCollection 2016.

Development and Application of a Simple Plaque Assay for the Human Malaria
Parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Thomas JA(1), Collins CR(1), Das S(1), Hackett F(1), Graindorge A(2), Bell D(1), 
Deu E(1), Blackman MJ(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill Laboratory, Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA,
United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Microbiology & Molecular Medicine, University of Geneva, Rue
Michel-Servet 1, CH-1211, Geneva 4, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Pathogen Molecular Biology, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, WC1E 7HT, United Kingdom.

Malaria is caused by an obligate intracellular protozoan parasite that replicates
within and destroys erythrocytes. Asexual blood stages of the causative agent of 
the most virulent form of human malaria, Plasmodium falciparum, can be cultivated
indefinitely in vitro in human erythrocytes, facilitating experimental analysis
of parasite cell biology, biochemistry and genetics. However, efforts to improve 
understanding of the basic biology of this important pathogen and to develop
urgently required new antimalarial drugs and vaccines, suffer from a paucity of
basic research tools. This includes a simple means of quantifying the effects of 
drugs, antibodies and gene modifications on parasite fitness and replication
rates. Here we describe the development and validation of an extremely simple,
robust plaque assay that can be used to visualise parasite replication and
resulting host erythrocyte destruction at the level of clonal parasite
populations. We demonstrate applications of the plaque assay by using it for the 
phenotypic characterisation of two P. falciparum conditional mutants displaying
reduced fitness in vitro.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157873 
PMCID: PMC4917082
PMID: 27332706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

