
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Jun 27;10(6):e0004786. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0004786. eCollection 2016 Jun.

Evolution of the Transmission-Blocking Vaccine Candidates Pvs28 and Pvs25 in
Plasmodium vivax: Geographic Differentiation and Evidence of Positive Selection.

Chaurio RA(1), Pacheco MA(2)(3), Cornejo OE(4), Durrego E(1), Stanley CE
Jr(2)(3), Castillo AI(5), Herrera S(6), Escalante AA(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas, Caracas, Venezuela.
(2)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine (iGEM), Temple University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington, United States of America.
(5)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United
States of America.
(6)Centro de Investigación Científica Caucaseco, Cali, Colombia.

Transmission-blocking (TB) vaccines are considered an important tool for malaria 
control and elimination. Among all the antigens characterized as TB vaccines
against Plasmodium vivax, the ookinete surface proteins Pvs28 and Pvs25 are
leading candidates. These proteins likely originated by a gene duplication event 
that took place before the radiation of the known Plasmodium species to primates.
We report an evolutionary genetic analysis of a worldwide sample of pvs28 and
pvs25 alleles. Our results show that both genes display low levels of genetic
polymorphism when compared to the merozoite surface antigens AMA-1 and MSP-1;
however, both ookinete antigens can be as polymorphic as other merozoite antigens
such as MSP-8 and MSP-10. We found that parasite populations in Asia and the
Americas are geographically differentiated with comparable levels of genetic
diversity and specific amino acid replacements found only in the Americas.
Furthermore, the observed variation was mainly accumulated in the EGF2- and
EGF3-like domains for P. vivax in both proteins. This pattern was shared by other
closely related non-human primate parasites such as Plasmodium cynomolgi,
suggesting that it could be functionally important. In addition, examination with
a suite of evolutionary genetic analyses indicated that the observed patterns are
consistent with positive natural selection acting on Pvs28 and Pvs25
polymorphisms. The geographic pattern of genetic differentiation and the evidence
for positive selection strongly suggest that the functional consequences of the
observed polymorphism should be evaluated during development of TBVs that include
Pvs25 and Pvs28.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004786 
PMCID: PMC4922550
PMID: 27347876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

