
1. PLoS One. 2016 Jun 30;11(6):e0158238. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0158238.
eCollection 2016.

A Stem Cell Strategy Identifies Glycophorin C as a Major Erythrocyte Receptor for
the Rodent Malaria Parasite Plasmodium berghei.

Yiangou L(1), Montandon R(1), Modrzynska K(1), Rosen B(2), Bushell W(3), Hale
C(4), Billker O(1), Rayner JC(1), Pance A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Programme, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Mouse Developmental Genetics and ES Cells Mutagenesis, Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Cellular Genetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Microbial Pathogenesis, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.

The clinical complications of malaria are caused by the parasite expansion in the
blood. Invasion of erythrocytes is a complex process that depends on multiple
receptor-ligand interactions. Identification of host receptors is paramount for
fighting the disease as it could reveal new intervention targets, but the
enucleated nature of erythrocytes makes genetic approaches impossible and many
receptors remain unknown. Host-parasite interactions evolve rapidly and are
therefore likely to be species-specific. As a results, understanding of invasion 
receptors outside the major human pathogen Plasmodium falciparum is very limited.
Here we use mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) that can be genetically engineered
and differentiated into erythrocytes to identify receptors for the rodent malaria
parasite Plasmodium berghei. Two proteins previously implicated in human malaria 
infection: glycophorin C (GYPC) and Band-3 (Slc4a1) were deleted in mESCs to
generate stable cell lines, which were differentiated towards erythropoiesis. In 
vitro infection assays revealed that while deletion of Band-3 has no effect,
absence of GYPC results in a dramatic decrease in invasion, demonstrating the
crucial role of this protein for P. berghei infection. This stem cell approach
offers the possibility of targeting genes that may be essential and therefore
difficult to disrupt in whole organisms and has the potential to be applied to a 
variety of parasites in diverse host cell types.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0158238 
PMCID: PMC4928779
PMID: 27362409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

