
1. J Cell Sci. 2016 Aug 15;129(16):3144-52. doi: 10.1242/jcs.186908. Epub 2016 Jul
6.

The RNA-binding protein Puf1 functions in the maintenance of gametocytes in
Plasmodium falciparum.

Shrestha S(1), Li X(1), Ning G(2), Miao J(3), Cui L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA 16802, USA.
(2)Microscopy and Cytometry Facility, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA 16802, USA.
(3)Department of Entomology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA 16802, USA jum23@psu.edu luc2@psu.edu.

Translation control plays an important role in the regulation of gene expression 
in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, especially in transition stages
between the vertebrate host and mosquito vector. Here, we determined the function
of the Puf-family member Puf1 (denoted as PfPuf1 for the P. falciparum protein)
during P. falciparum sexual development. We show that PfPuf1 was expressed in all
gametocyte stages and at higher levels in female gametocytes. PfPuf1 disruption
did not interfere with the asexual erythrocyte cycle of the parasite but resulted
in an approximately tenfold decrease of mature gametocytes. In the
PfPuf1-disrupted lines, gametocytes appeared normal before stage III but
subsequently exhibited a sharp decline in gametocytemia. This was accompanied by 
a concomitant accumulation of dead and dying late-stage gametocytes, which
retained normal gross morphology. In addition, significantly more female
gametocytes were lost in the PfPuf1-disrupted lines during development, resulting
in a reversed male-to-female sex ratio. These results indicate that PfPuf1 is
important for the differentiation and maintenance of gametocytes, especially
female gametocytes.

Â© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.186908 
PMCID: PMC5004898
PMID: 27383769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing or financial
interests.

