
1. Comput Biol Med. 2016 Sep 1;76:24-9. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2016.06.015. Epub 
2016 Jun 17.

Effect of linker length and residues on the structure and stability of a fusion
protein with malaria vaccine application.

Shamriz S(1), Ofoghi H(2), Moazami N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Iranian Research Organization for Science and
Technology, P.O. BOX: 3353-51111, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
Shamriz.sh@irost.ir.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Iranian Research Organization for Science and
Technology, P.O. BOX: 3353-51111, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
Ofoghi@irost.ir.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Iranian Research Organization for Science and
Technology, P.O. BOX: 3353-51111, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
moazami@irost.ir.

BACKGROUND: Recombinant protein technology has revolutionized the world of
biology and medicine. Following this progress, fusion protein technology, as a
novel innovation, has opened new horizons for the development of proteins that do
not naturally exist. Fusion proteins are generated via genetically fusing two or 
more genes coding for separate proteins, thus the product is a single protein
having functional properties of both proteins. As an indispensable element in
fusion protein construction, linkers are used to separate the functional domains 
in order to improve their expression, folding and stability.
METHOD: We computationally fused an antigen and an adjuvant together using
different linkers to obtain a two-domain fusion construct which can potentially
act as an oral vaccine candidate against malaria. We then predicted the
structures computationally to find out the probable folding of each domain in the
designed construct.
RESULTS: One of the fusion constructs was selected based on the highest value for
C-score. Ramchandran Plot analysis represented that most residues were fallen in 
favorable regions.
CONCLUSION: Our in silico analysis showed that (GGGGS)3 linker confers the best
structure and stability for our target fusion protein.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2016.06.015 
PMID: 27393958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

