
1. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2016 Jun 15;8(1):e2016029. doi:
10.4084/MJHID.2016.029. eCollection 2016.

Molecular Heterogeneity of Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency in
Burkina Faso: G-6-PD Betica Selma and Santamaria in People with Symptomatic
Malaria in Ouagadougou.

Ouattara AK(1), Yameogo P(1), Diarra B(1), Obiri-Yeboah D(2), Yonli A(1),
Compaore TR(1), Soubeiga ST(1), Djigma FW(1), Simpore J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Research Center Pietro Annigoni (CERBA) LABIOGENE UFR/SVT,
University of Ouagadougou BP 364 Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Cape Coast, Ghana.

The G-6-PD deficiency has an important polymorphism with genotypic variants such 
as 202A/376G, 376G/542T and 376G/968T known in West African populations. It would
confer protection against severe forms of malaria although there are differences 
between the various associations in different studies. In this study we genotyped
six (06) variants of the G-6-PD gene in people with symptomatic malaria in urban 
areas in Burkina Faso. One hundred and eighty-two (182) patients who tested
positive using rapid detection test and microscopy were included in this study. A
regular PCR with the GENESPARK G6PD African kit was run followed by
electrophoresis, allowing initially to genotype six SNPs (G202A, A376G, A542T,
G680T, C563T and T968C). Women carrying the mutations 202A and/or 376G were
further typed by real-time PCR using TaqMan probes rs1050828 and rs1050829. In
the study population the G-6-PD deficiency prevalence was 9.9%. In addition of
G-6-PD A- (202A/376G) variant, 376G/542T and 376G/968T variants were also
detected. Hemoglobin electrophoresis revealed that 22.5% (41/182) of the
individuals had HbAC compared with2.2% with HbAS and one individual had double
heterozygous HbSC. There was no correlation between the G-6-PD deficiency or
haemoglobinopathies and symptomatic malaria infections in this study. Our study
confirms that the G-6-PD deficiency does not confer protection against Plasmodium
falciparum infections. As opposed to previous genotyping studies carried out in
Burkina Faso, this study shows for the first time the presence of the variant A- 
(376G/968C) and warrants further investigation at the national level and in
specific ethnic groups.

DOI: 10.4084/MJHID.2016.029 
PMCID: PMC4928536
PMID: 27413522 

