
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2017 Jan;114(1):163-171. doi: 10.1002/bit.26048. Epub 2016 Jul
28.

Toward "homolactic" fermentation of glucose and xylose by engineered
Saccharomyces cerevisiae harboring a kinetically efficient l-lactate
dehydrogenase within pdc1-pdc5 deletion background.

Novy V(1), Brunner B(1), Müller G(1), Nidetzky B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graz University of Technology, Institute of Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering, NAWI Graz, Petersgasse 12/I, 8010 Graz, Austria.
(2)Austrian Centre of Industrial Biotechnology, Graz, Austria.

l-Lactic acid is an important platform chemical and its production from the
lignocellulosic sugars glucose and xylose is, therefore, of high interest.
Tolerance to low pH and a generally high robustness make Saccharomyces cerevisiae
a promising host for l-lactic acid fermentation but strain development for
effective utilization of both sugars is an unsolved problem. The herein used S.
cerevisiae strain IBB10B05 incorporates a NADH-dependent pathway for
oxidoreductive xylose assimilation within CEN.PK113-7D background and was
additionally evolved for accelerated xylose-to-ethanol fermentation. Selecting
the Plasmodium falciparum l-lactate dehydrogenase (pfLDH) for its high kinetic
efficiency, strain IBB14LA1 was derived from IBB10B05 by placing the pfldh gene
at the pdc1 locus under control of the pdc1 promotor. Strain IBB14LA1_5
additionally had the pdc5 gene disrupted. With both strains, continued l-lactic
acid formation from glucose or xylose, each at 50 g/L, necessitated stabilization
of pH. Using calcium carbonate (11 g/L), anaerobic shaken bottle fermentations at
pH ≥ 5 resulted in l-lactic acid yields (YLA ) of 0.67 g/g glucose and 0.80 g/g
xylose for strain IBB14LA1_5. Only little xylitol was formed (≤0.08 g/g) and no
ethanol. In pH stabilized aerobic conversions of glucose, strain IBB14LA1_5
further showed excellent l-lactic acid productivities (1.8 g/L/h) without losses 
in YLA (0.69 g/g glucose). In strain IBB14LA1, the YLA was lower (≤0.18 g/g
glucose; ≤0.27 g/g xylose) due to ethanol as well as xylitol formation.
Therefore, this study shows that a S. cerevisiae strain originally optimized for 
xylose-to-ethanol fermentation was useful to implement l-lactic acid production
from glucose and xylose; and with the metabolic engineering strategy applied,
advance toward homolactic fermentation of both sugars was made. Biotechnol.
Bioeng. 2017;114: 163-171. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.26048 
PMID: 27426989  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

