
1. Mol Microbiol. 2016 Oct;102(2):349-363. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13466. Epub 2016 Aug 9.

Invasion of hepatocytes by Plasmodium sporozoites requires cGMP-dependent protein
kinase and calcium dependent protein kinase 4.

Govindasamy K(1), Jebiwott S(1), Jaijyan DK(1), Davidow A(2), Ojo KK(3), Van
Voorhis WC(3), Brochet M(4)(5), Billker O(6), Bhanot P(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Rutgers - New
Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Rutgers - School of Public Health, Newark, NJ,
USA.
(3)Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Center for Emerging and
Re-emerging Infectious Diseases, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)CNRS UMR5235 -Université Montpellier 2, 34095, Montpellier, France.
(5)University of Geneva, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Microbiology and
Molecular Medicine, Switzerland.
(6)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Malaria Programme, CB10 1SA, Hinxton, UK.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Rutgers - New
Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, USA. bhanotpu@njms.rutgers.edu.

Invasion of hepatocytes by sporozoites is essential for Plasmodium to initiate
infection of the mammalian host. The parasite's subsequent intracellular
differentiation in the liver is the first developmental step of its mammalian
cycle. Despite their biological significance, surprisingly little is known of the
signalling pathways required for sporozoite invasion. We report that sporozoite
invasion of hepatocytes requires signalling through two second-messengers - cGMP 
mediated by the parasite's cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG), and Ca2+ ,
mediated by the parasite's calcium-dependent protein kinase 4 (CDPK4).
Sporozoites expressing a mutated form of Plasmodium berghei PKG or carrying a
deletion of the CDPK4 gene are defective in invasion of hepatocytes. Using
specific and potent inhibitors of Plasmodium PKG and CDPK4, we demonstrate that
PKG and CDPK4 are required for sporozoite motility, and that PKG regulates the
secretion of TRAP, an adhesin that is essential for motility. Chemical inhibition
of PKG decreases parasite egress from hepatocytes by inhibiting either the
formation or release of merosomes. In contrast, genetic inhibition of CDPK4 does 
not significantly decrease the number of merosomes. By revealing the requirement 
for PKG and CDPK4 in Plasmodium sporozoite invasion, our work enables a better
understanding of kinase pathways that act in different Plasmodium stages.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13466 
PMID: 27425827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

