
1. Lupus. 2017 Mar;26(3):307-310. doi: 10.1177/0961203316659151. Epub 2016 Jul 20.

Genetic selection pressure in TLR9 gene may enforce risk for SLE in Indian
Tamils.

Yusuf JH(1), Kaliyaperumal D(2), Jayaraman M(1), Ramanathan G(3), Devaraju P(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Genetic Engineering, SRM University, Kattankulathur, Chennai, 
India.
(2)2 Department of Dermatology, Aarupadai Veedu Medical College, Pondicherry,
India.
(3)3 Department of Biomedical Sciences, Sri Ramachandra University, Porur, India.

Comment in
    Lupus. 2018 Mar;27(3):520-521.

Objectives Lupus is a classical systemic autoimmune disease with genetics as one 
of the well known causative factors for the disease pathogenesis. Toll-like
receptors are the major pattern recognition receptors associated with innate
immunity and also act as an interface with the adaptive immunity. Genetic
polymorphisms in genes encoding TLRs were implicated in the development of
infections, malignancies and autoimmune diseases. TLR9 is a member of TLR family,
and recognizes the CpG DNA motifs of pathogens. Though the incidence rate of
lupus in Asians was reported to be low (30 - 50/100,000 population), poor disease
prognosis due to higher incidence of renal complications and aggressive disease
worsens the scenario. The ability of TLR9 to detect and elicit an immune response
against double-stranded DNA makes TLR9 a relevant factor to be tested for its
association with the clinical and serological phenotypes of lupus. However, lack 
of relevant genetic data on normative frequencies of the TLR9 (rs187084)
polymorphism may serve as a constraint to derive the sample size to conduct case 
control association studies. Hence this study was conducted to establish the
normative frequency of TLR9 (rs187084) polymorphism in Indian Tamils. Materials
and methods The TLR9 (rs187084) polymorphism was screened in South Indian Tamils 
( n = 208) by PCR-RFLP. Results and discussion We observed a higher occurrence of
the mutant allele (65%) in South Indian Tamils. No gender disparity with respect 
to the mutant allele frequency was observed. The higher incidence of mutant
allele in both genders suggests that this population had undergone a genetic
selection pressure as an evolutionary genetic measure to withstand the prevailing
endemic infections like TB and malaria. Though the enhanced expression of TLR9
was protective against infections, it may also influence the development of
autoimmune diseases. Conclusion The higher incidence of theTLR9 (rs187084)
over-expression mutation in Indian Tamils is suggestive of a genetic adaptation
or selection pressure to withstand the prevailing endemic infectious and
parasitic diseases. However, this genetic adaptation poses a greater risk to
develop autoimmune diseases like SLE etc through complex gene environment
interactions. The normative frequency of the TLR9 (rs187084) polymorphism
established in our population could now be used to define the sample size for
future case control studies.

DOI: 10.1177/0961203316659151 
PMID: 27432810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

