
1. Mediators Inflamm. 2016;2016:7987686. doi: 10.1155/2016/7987686. Epub 2016 Jun
28.

The Association of High Prevalence of Trophozoites in Peripheral Blood with Lower
Antibody Response to P. falciparum Infected Erythrocytes among Asymptomatic
Children in Sudan.

Mohamed SN(1), Hassan DA(1), El Hussein AM(1), Osman IM(2), Ibrahim ME(3),
Mohamed HS(3), Nour BY(4), Abdulhadi NH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory, Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research,
Khartoum, Sudan.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Al-Zaiem Al Azhari University, Khartoum, Sudan.
(3)Institute of Endemic Diseases, University of Khartoum, 11111 Khartoum, Sudan.
(4)The Blue Nile Institute for Training and Research, Gezira University, Wad
Madani, Sudan.
(5)College of Pharmacy, The National Ribat University, Khartoum, Sudan.

Background. The most prominent variant surface antigens (VSAs) of Plasmodium
falciparum are the var gene-encoded Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane
protein 1 (PfEMP1) family, which serves as a parasite-sequestering ligand to
endothelial cells. In this study we have examined the antibody reactivity of
autologous plasma from symptomatic and asymptomatic malaria infected children
against the infected erythrocytes' surface antigens using flow cytometry.
Methods. Ethidium-bromide-labelled erythrocytic mature forms of P. falciparum
parasites obtained from symptomatic and asymptomatic children were sequentially
incubated with autologous plasma and fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated (FITC)
antihuman IgG. Plasma antibody reactivity was detected by flow cytometry.
Results. Asymptomatic children had more prevalence of trophozoites in peripheral 
blood (66%) compared to symptomatic children (16%), p = 0.002. The mean
percentage of infected RBCs reacting with autologous sera was 89.78 among
symptomatic children compared to 79.62 among asymptomatic children (p = 0.09).
Moreover, the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) in the asymptomatic was
significantly higher compared to symptomatic children (p value = 0.040).
Conclusion. Variant surface antigens on Plasmodium falciparum infected RBCs from 
symptomatic malaria children tend to be better recognized by IgG antibodies. This
may suggest a role of some IgG antibodies in severity of malaria.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/7987686 
PMCID: PMC4940569
PMID: 27433028  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

