
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jul 29;6:30106. doi: 10.1038/srep30106.

Mechanism of artemisinin resistance for malaria PfATP6 L263 mutations and
discovering potential antimalarials: An integrated computational approach.

N N(1), C GP(2), Chakraborty C(3), V K(1), D TK(2), V B(4), R S(2), Lu A(1), Ge
Z(1), Zhu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chinese Medicine, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong
Kong.
(2)School of Biosciences and Technology, VIT University, Vellore 632014, Tamil
Nadu 632014, India.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics, School of Computer and Information Sciences,
Galgotias University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(4)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Christian Medical College, Vellore
632014, Tamil Nadu, India.

Artemisinin resistance in Plasmodium falciparum threatens global efforts in the
elimination or eradication of malaria. Several studies have associated mutations 
in the PfATP6 gene in conjunction with artemisinin resistance, but the underlying
molecular mechanism of the resistance remains unexplored. Associated mutations
act as a biomarker to measure the artemisinin efficacy. In the proposed work, we 
have analyzed the binding affinity and efficacy between PfATP6 and artemisinin in
the presence of L263D, L263E and L263K mutations. Furthermore, we performed
virtual screening to identify potential compounds to inhibit the PfATP6 mutant
proteins. In this study, we observed that artemisinin binding affinity with
PfATP6 gets affected by L263D, L263E and L263K mutations. This in silico
elucidation of artemisinin resistance enhanced the identification of novel
compounds (CID: 10595058 and 10625452) which showed good binding affinity and
efficacy with L263D, L263E and L263K mutant proteins in molecular docking and
molecular dynamics simulations studies. Owing to the high propensity of the
parasite to drug resistance the need for new antimalarial drugs will persist
until the malarial parasites are eventually eradicated. The two compounds
identified in this study can be tested in in vitro and in vivo experiments as
possible candidates for the designing of new potential antimalarial drugs.

DOI: 10.1038/srep30106 
PMCID: PMC4965867
PMID: 27471101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

