
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Jul 14;7:1087. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01087. eCollection
2016.

Protective Vaccination against Blood-Stage Malaria of Plasmodium chabaudi:
Differential Gene Expression in the Liver of Balb/c Mice toward the End of Crisis
Phase.

Al-Quraishy SA(1), Dkhil MA(2), Abdel-Baki AA(3), Delic D(4), Wunderlich F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.
(2)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud UniversityRiyadh, Saudi
Arabia; Department of Zoology and Entomology, Faculty of Science, Helwan
UniversityCairo, Egypt.
(3)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud UniversityRiyadh, Saudi
Arabia; Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Beni-Suef UniversityBeni-Suef,
Egypt.
(4)Boehringer-Ingelheim Pharma Biberach, Germany.
(5)Department of Biology, Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf, Germany.

Protective vaccination induces self-healing of otherwise fatal blood-stage
malaria of Plasmodium chabaudi in female Balb/c mice. To trace processes
critically involved in self-healing, the liver, an effector against blood-stage
malaria, is analyzed for possible changes of its transcriptome in
vaccination-protected in comparison to non-protected mice toward the end of the
crisis phase. Gene expression microarray analyses reveal that vaccination does
not affect constitutive expression of mRNA and lincRNA. However, malaria induces 
significant (p < 0.01) differences in hepatic gene and lincRNA expression in
vaccination-protected vs. non-vaccinated mice toward the end of crisis phase. In 
vaccination-protected mice, infections induce up-regulations of 276 genes and 40 
lincRNAs and down-regulations of 200 genes and 43 lincRNAs, respectively, by
>3-fold as compared to the corresponding constitutive expressions. Massive
up-regulations, partly by >100-fold, are found for genes as RhD, Add2, Ank1,
Ermap, and Slc4a, which encode proteins of erythrocytic surface membranes, and as
Gata1 and Gfi1b, which encode transcription factors involved in erythrocytic
development. Also, Cldn13 previously predicted to be expressed on erythroblast
surfaces is up-regulated by >200-fold, though claudins are known as main
constituents of tight junctions acting as paracellular barriers between
epithelial cells. Other genes are up-regulated by <100- and >10-fold, which can
be subgrouped in genes encoding proteins known to be involved in mitosis, in cell
cycle regulation, and in DNA repair. Our data suggest that protective vaccination
enables the liver to respond to P. chabaudi infections with accelerated
regeneration and extramedullary erythropoiesis during crisis, which contributes
to survival of otherwise lethal blood-stage malaria.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01087 
PMCID: PMC4943960
PMID: 27471498 

