
1. FEBS Open Bio. 2016 Jun 23;6(8):860-72. doi: 10.1002/2211-5463.12093. eCollection
2016 Aug.

A suggested vital function for eIF-5A and dhs genes during murine malaria
blood-stage infection.

Kersting D(1), Kr√ºger M(1), Sattler JM(2), Mueller AK(3), Kaiser A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pharmacogenetics Medical Research Centre University
Duisburg-Essen Germany.
(2)Parasitology Unit Centre for Infectious Diseases University Hospital
Heidelberg Germany; Centre for Infectious Diseases, Integrative Parasitology
University Hospital Heidelberg Germany.
(3)Parasitology Unit Centre for Infectious Diseases University Hospital
Heidelberg Germany; German Center for Infectious Diseases Heidelberg Germany.

The biological function of the post-translational modification hypusine in the
eukaryotic initiation factor 5A (EIF-5A) in eukaryotes is still not understood.
Hypusine is formed by two sequential enzymatic steps at a specific lysine residue
in the precursor protein EIF-5A. One important biological function of EIF-5A
which was recently identified is the translation of polyproline-rich mRNA,
suggesting its biological relevance in a variety of biological processes.
Hypusinated eIF-5A controls the proliferation of cancer cells and inflammatory
processes in malaria. It was shown that pharmacological inhibition of the enzymes
involved in this pathway, deoxyhypusine synthase (DHS) and the deoxyhypusine
hydroxylase (DOHH), arrested the growth of malaria parasites. Down-regulation of 
both the malarial eIF-5A and dhs genes by in vitro and in vivo silencing led to
decreased transcript levels and protein expression and, in turn, to low
parasitemia, confirming a critical role of hypusination in eIF-5A for
proliferation in Plasmodium. To further investigate whether eIF-5A and the
activating enzyme DHS are essential for Plasmodium erythrocytic stages, targeted 
gene disruption was performed in the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei. 
Full disruption of both genes was not successful; instead parasites harboring the
episome for eIF-5A and dhs genes were obtained, suggesting that these genes may
perform vital functions during the pathogenic blood cell stage. Next, a knock-in 
strategy was pursued for both endogenous genes eIF-5A and dhs from P. berghei.
The latter resulted in viable recombinant parasites, strengthening the
observation that they might be essential for proliferation during asexual
development of the malaria parasite.

DOI: 10.1002/2211-5463.12093 
PMCID: PMC4971841
PMID: 27516964 

