
1. Vaccine. 2016 Sep 14;34(40):4827-34. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2016.08.002. Epub
2016 Aug 17.

Increased attenuation but decreased immunogenicity by deletion of multiple
vaccinia virus immunomodulators.

Sumner RP(1), Ren H(1), Ferguson BJ(1), Smith GL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge
CB2 1QP, UK.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge
CB2 1QP, UK. Electronic address: gls37@cam.ac.uk.

Vaccinia virus (VACV)-derived vectors are popular candidates for vaccination
against diseases such as HIV-1, malaria and tuberculosis. However, their genomes 
encode a multitude of proteins with immunomodulatory functions, several of which 
reduce the immunogenicity of these vectors. Hitherto only limited studies have
investigated whether the removal of these immunomodulatory genes in combination
can increase vaccine efficacy further. To this end we constructed viruses based
on VACV strain Western Reserve (WR) lacking up to three intracellular innate
immunomodulators (N1, C6 and K7). These genes were selected because the encoded
proteins had known functions in innate immunity and the deletion of each gene
individually had caused a decrease in virus virulence in the murine intranasal
and intradermal models of infection and an increase in immunogenicity. Data
presented here demonstrate that deletion of two, or three of these genes in
combination attenuated the virus further in an incremental manner. However, when 
vaccinated mice were challenged with VACV WR the double and triple gene deletion 
viruses provided weaker protection against challenge. This was accompanied by
inferior memory CD8(+) T cell responses and lower neutralising antibody titres.
This study indicates that, at least for the three genes studied in the context of
VACV WR, the single gene deletion viruses are the best vaccine vectors, and that 
increased attenuation induced by deletion of additional genes decreased
immunogenicity. These data highlight the fine balance and complex relationship
between viral attenuation and immunogenicity. Given that the proteins encoded by 
the genes examined in this study are known to affect specific aspects of innate
immunity, the set of viruses constructed here are interesting tools to probe the 
role of the innate immune response in influencing immune memory and vaccine
efficacy.

Copyright Â© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2016.08.002 
PMCID: PMC5022402
PMID: 27544585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

