
1. Malar J. 2016 Aug 24;15(1):429. doi: 10.1186/s12936-016-1485-1.

Non-falciparum malaria in Dakar: a confirmed case of Plasmodium ovale wallikeri
infection.

Diallo MA(1), Badiane AS(2), Diongue K(2), Deme A(2), Lucchi NW(3), Gaye M(2),
Ndiaye T(2), Ndiaye M(2), Sene LK(2), Diop A(2), Gaye A(2), Ndiaye YD(2), Samb
D(2), Yade MS(2), Ndir O(2), Udhayakumar V(3), Ndiaye D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Parasitologie-Mycologie, Université Cheikh Anta Diop de Dakar, 
Avenue Cheikh Anta Diop, Fann, BP 5005, Dakar, Senegal.
mamadoualpha.diallo@ucad.edu.sn.
(2)Laboratoire de Parasitologie-Mycologie, Université Cheikh Anta Diop de Dakar, 
Avenue Cheikh Anta Diop, Fann, BP 5005, Dakar, Senegal.
(3)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium ovale is rarely described in Senegal. A case of clinical
malaria due to P. ovale wallikeri in West Central of Senegal is reported.
CASE: A 34-year-old male baker in Dakar, with no significant previous medical
history, was admitted to a health clinic with fever and vomiting. Fever had been 
lasting for 4 days with peaks every 48 h. As monospecific Plasmodium falciparum
HRP-2 RDT was negative, he was treated with antibiotics. However, owing to
persisting symptoms, he was referred to the emergency unit of the Youssou
Mbargane Diop Hospital, Dakar, Senegal. Clinical examination found impaired
general condition. All other physical examinations were normal. Laboratory tests 
showed anaemia (haemoglobin 11.4 g/dl), severe thrombocytopaenia (platelets
30 × 10(9)/mm(3)), leukopenia (3650/mm(3)), lymphocytopenia (650/mm(3)). Renal
function was normal as indicated by creatininaemia and uraemia (11 mg/l and
0.25 g/l, respectively) and liver enzymes were slightly elevated (aspartate
aminotransferase 77 UI/l and alanine aminotransferase 82 UI/l). Blood smear
evaluations in Parasitology Laboratory of Aristide Le Dantec Hospital showed
malaria parasites of the species P. ovale with a 0.08 % parasitaemia. Molecular
confirmation was done by real time PCR targeting the 18S rRNA gene. The P. ovale 
infection was further analysed to species level targeting the potra gene and was 
identified as P. ovale wallikeri. According to the hospital's malaria treatment
guidelines for severe malaria, treatment consisted of intravenous quinine at hour
0 (start of treatment) and 24 h after initial treatment, followed by
artemether-lumefantrine 24 h later. A negative microscopy was noted on day 3
post-treatment and the patient reported no further symptoms.
CONCLUSION: Malaria due to non-falciparum species is probably underestimated in
Senegal. RDTs specific to non-falciparum species and/or pan specific RDTs should 
be included as tools of diagnosis to fight against malaria in Senegal. In
addition, a field-deployable molecular tool such as the loop-mediated isothermal 
amplification can be considered as an additional useful tool to detect low
malaria parasite infections and for speciation. In addition, national malaria
control policies should consider other non-falciparum species in treatment
guidelines, including the provision of primaquine for the treatment of relapsing 
parasites.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1485-1 
PMCID: PMC4997729
PMID: 27557982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

