
1. Parasitol Int. 2016 Dec;65(6 Pt A):641-644. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2016.08.011.
Epub 2016 Aug 30.

Application of the CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing technique to research on functional
genomes of parasites.

Cui Y(1), Yu L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Third People's Hospital of Yancheng,
Affiliated Yancheng Hospital, School of Medicine, Southeast University, Yancheng 
224001, Jiangsu Province, PR China. Electronic address: ybcui1975@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yancheng Health Vocational & Technical
College, Yancheng 224006, Jiangsu Province, PR China.

The clustered regularly-interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) structural
family functions as an acquired immune system in prokaryotes. Gene editing
techniques have co-opted CRISPR and the associated Cas nucleases to allow for the
precise genetic modification of human cells, zebrafish, mice, and other
eukaryotes. Indeed, this approach has been used to induce a variety of
modifications including directed insertion/deletion (InDel) of bases, gene
knock-in, introduction of mutations in both alleles of a target gene, and
deletion of small DNA fragments. Thus, CRISPR technology offers a precise
molecular tool for directed genome modification with a range of potential
applications; further, its high mutation efficiency, simple process, and low cost
provide additional advantages over prior editing techniques. This paper will
provide an overview of the basic structure and function of the CRISPR gene
editing system as well as current and potential applications to research on
parasites.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2016.08.011 
PMID: 27586395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

