
1. Infect Immun. 2016 Oct 17;84(11):3252-3262. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00148-16. Print 2016
Nov.

Distinct Prominent Roles for Enzymes of Plasmodium berghei Heme Biosynthesis in
Sporozoite and Liver Stage Maturation.

Rizopoulos Z(1), Matuschewski K(2)(3), Haussig JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology Unit, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, Germany
rizopoulos@mpiib-berlin.mpg.de.
(2)Parasitology Unit, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin,
Germany.
(3)Department of Molecular Parasitology, Institute of Biology, Humboldt
University, Berlin, Germany.

Malarial parasites have evolved complex regulation of heme supply and disposal to
adjust to heme-rich and -deprived host environments. In addition to its own
pathway for heme biosynthesis, Plasmodium likely harbors mechanisms for heme
scavenging from host erythrocytes. Elaborate compartmentalization of de novo heme
synthesis into three subcellular locations, including the vestigial plastid
organelle, indicates critical roles in life cycle progression. In this study, we 
systematically profile the essentiality of heme biosynthesis by targeted gene
deletion of enzymes in early steps of this pathway. We show that disruption of
endogenous heme biosynthesis leads to a first detectable defect in oocyst
maturation and sporogony in the Anopheles vector, whereas blood stage
propagation, colonization of mosquito midguts, or initiation of oocyst
development occurs indistinguishably from that of wild-type parasites. Although
sporozoites are produced by parasites lacking an intact pathway for heme
biosynthesis, they are absent from mosquito salivary glands, indicative of a
vital role for heme biosynthesis only in sporozoite maturation. Rescue of the
first defect in sporogony permitted analysis of potential roles in liver stages. 
We show that liver stage parasites benefit from but do not strictly depend upon
their own aminolevulinic acid synthase and that they can scavenge aminolevulinic 
acid from the host environment. Together, our experimental genetics analysis of
Plasmodium enzymes for heme biosynthesis exemplifies remarkable shifts between
the use of endogenous and host resources during life cycle progression.

Copyright Â© 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00148-16 
PMCID: PMC5067757
PMID: 27600503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

