
1. Trends Biochem Sci. 2016 Nov;41(11):898-906. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2016.08.009.
Epub 2016 Sep 16.

Coding Regions of Intrinsic Disorder Accommodate Parallel Functions.

Pancsa R(1), Tompa P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Flanders Institute for Biotechnology (VIB), Structural Biology Research
Center, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 1050 Pleinlaan 2, Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Flanders Institute for Biotechnology (VIB), Structural Biology Research
Center, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 1050 Pleinlaan 2, Brussels, Belgium;
Institute of Enzymology, Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Hungarian Academy 
of Sciences, Magyar tudósok körútja 2, 1117 Budapest, Hungary. Electronic
address: ptompa@vub.ac.be.

Numerous DNA- and RNA-level functions are embedded in protein-coding regions,
which constrains their structure, function, and evolution. Accumulating evidence 
suggests that such additional, overlapping functions occur preferentially in the 
coding sequences of intrinsically disordered proteins/regions (IDPs/IDRs),
especially in those that are newly incorporated and thus have reduced selective
pressure. It is the lack of strict structural constraints that makes disordered
proteins more tolerant to mutations and thus more permissive to the appearance of
overlapping functions within their coding sequences than structured domains.
Therefore, IDPs/IDRs are often mosaics of segments fulfilling protein
functionalities and intervening regions primarily carrying nucleotide-level
functions. The ensuing complexification of gene-regulatory circuits may have
contributed to the evolutionary spread of structural disorder in complex
eukaryotic organisms.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tibs.2016.08.009 
PMID: 27647212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

