
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Sep 22;6:33786. doi: 10.1038/srep33786.

Plasmodium falciparum proteins involved in cytoadherence of infected erythrocytes
to chemokine CX3CL1.

Hermand P(1), Cicéron L(2), Pionneau C(3), Vaquero C(1), Combadière C(1), Deterre
P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Inserm, Centre d'Immunologie et des 
Maladies Infectieuses (Cimi-Paris), UMR 1135, ERL CNRS 8255, 91 boulevard de
l'Hôpital F-75013, Paris, France.
(2)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Inserm, Centre d'Immunologie et des 
Maladies Infectieuses (Cimi-Paris), UMR 1135, 91 boulevard de l'Hôpital F-75013, 
Paris, France.
(3)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Plateforme Post-génomique de la
Pitié-Salpêtrière (P3S), UMS 2 Omique, Inserm US029, 91 boulevard de l'Hôpital
F-75013 Paris France.

Malaria caused by Plasmodium falciparum is associated with cytoadherence of
infected red blood cells (iRBC) to endothelial cells. Numerous host molecules
have been involved in cytoadherence, including the adhesive chemokine CX3CL1.
Most of the identified parasite ligands are from the multigenic and hypervariable
Plasmodium falciparum Erythrocyte Membrane Protein 1 (PfEMP1) family which makes 
them poor targets for the development of a broadly protective vaccine. Using
proteomics, we have identified two 25-kDa parasite proteins with adhesive
properties for CX3CL1, called CBP for CX3CL1 Binding Proteins. CBPs are coded by 
single-copy genes with little polymorphic variation and no homology with other P.
falciparum gene products. Specific antibodies raised against epitopes from the
predicted extracellular domains of each CBP efficiently stain the surface of RBC 
infected with trophozoites or schizonts, which is a strong indication of CBP
expression at the surface of iRBC. These anti-CBP antibodies partially neutralize
iRBC adherence to CX3CL1. This adherence is similarly inhibited in the presence
of peptides from the CBP extracellular domains, while irrelevant peptides had no 
such effect. CBP1 and CBP2 are new P. falciparum ligands for the human chemokine 
CX3CL1. The identification of this non-polymorphic P. falciparum factors provides
a new avenue for innovative vaccination approaches.

DOI: 10.1038/srep33786 
PMCID: PMC5031962
PMID: 27653778 

