
1. Malar J. 2016 Sep 23;15(1):492.

Plasmodium vivax msp-3α polymorphisms: analysis in the Indian subcontinent.

Verma A(1), Joshi H(2), Singh V(2), Anvikar A(2), Valecha N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plant Sciences and Bond Life Sciences Center, University of
Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO, 65211, USA. VermaAn@missouri.edu.
(2)National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector 8, Dwarka, Delhi, 110077,
India.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax is the most widely distributed human malaria
parasite and accounts for approximately the same number of malaria cases as
Plasmodium falciparum in India. Compared with P. falciparum, P. vivax is
difficult to eradicate because of its tendency to cause relapses, which impacts
treatment and control strategies. The genetic diversity of these parasites,
particularly of the merozoite surface protein-3 alpha (msp-3α) gene, can be used 
to help develop a potential vaccine. The present study aimed to investigate the
genetic diversity of P. vivax using the highly polymorphic antigen gene msp-3α
and to assess the suitability of using this gene for population genetic studies
of P. vivax isolates and was carried out in 2004-06. No recent study has been
reported for MSP 3α in the recent decade in India. Limited reports are available 
on the genetic diversity of the P. vivax population in India; hence, this report 
aimed to improve the understanding of the molecular epidemiology of the parasite 
by studying the P. vivax msp-3α (Pvmsp-3α) marker from P. vivax field isolates
from India.
METHODS: Field isolates were collected from different sites distributed across
eight states in India. A total of 182 blood samples were analysed by a nested
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP)
technique using the HhaI and AluI restriction enzymes to determine genetic msp-3α
variation among clinical P. vivax isolates.
RESULTS: Based on the length variants of the PCR products of Pvmsp-3α gene, three
allele sizes, Type A (1.8 kb), Type B (1.5 kb) and Type C (1.2 kb) were detected 
among the 182 samples. Type A PCR amplicon was more predominant (75.4 %) in the
samples compared with the Type B (14.3 %) and Type C (10.0 %) polymorphisms.
Among all of the samples analysed, 8.2 % were mixed infections detected by PCR
alone. Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis involving the
restriction enzymes AluI and HhaI generated fragment sizes that were highly
polymorphic and revealed substantial diversity at the nucleotide level.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study is the first extensive study in India using the
Pvmsp-3α marker. The results indicated that Pvmps-3α, a polymorphic genetic
marker of P. vivax, exhibited considerable variability in infection prevalence in
field isolates from India. Additionally, the mean multiplicity of infection
observed at all of the study sites indicated that P. vivax is highly diverse in
nature in India, and Pvmsp-3α is likely an effective and promising
epidemiological marker.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1524-y 
PMCID: PMC5035448
PMID: 27663527 

