
1. Exp Parasitol. 2016 Nov;170:116-124. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2016.09.014. Epub
2016 Sep 28.

Screening and characterization of apical membrane antigen 1 interacting proteins 
in Eimeria tenella.

Han H(1), Xue P(1), Dong H(1), Zhu S(1), Zhao Q(1), Huang B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Key Laboratory of Animal Parasitology of Ministry of Agriculture,
Minhang, Shanghai, 200241, PR China.
(2)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Key Laboratory of Animal Parasitology of Ministry of Agriculture,
Minhang, Shanghai, 200241, PR China; Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention 
and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou,
225009, PR China. Electronic address: hb@shvri.ac.cn.

Avian coccidiosis is a widespread and economically significant disease of
poultry. It is an enteric disease caused by several protozoan Eimeria species.
Eimeria belongs to the phylum Apicomplexa, which exhibits an unusual mechanism of
host cell invasion. During invasion of host cells, the protein apical membrane
antigen 1 (AMA1) is essential for invasion of Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium.
Contrary to the roles of AMA1 during host cell invasion in T. gondii and
Plasmodium, the precise functions of Eimeria AMA1 (EtAMA1) are unclear. In order 
to study the functions of EtAMA1, a yeast two-hybrid cDNA library was constructed
from E. tenella sporozoites. The EtAMA1 ectodomain was cloned into the pGBKT7
vector to construct the bait plasmid pGBKT7- EtAMA1. Autoactivation and toxicity 
of the bait protein in yeast cells were tested by comparison with the pGBKT7
empty vector. Expression of the bait protein was detected by western blots. The
bait plasmid pGBKT7-EtAMA1 was used to screen yeast two-hybrid cDNA library from 
E. tenella sporozoites. After multiple screenings with high-screening-rate medium
and exclusion of false-positive plasmids, positive preys were sequenced and
analyzed using BLAST. We obtained 14 putative EtAMA1-interacting proteins
including E. tenella acidic microneme protein2 (EtMIC2), E. tenella putative
cystathionine beta-synthase, E. tenella Eimeria-specific protein, four E. tenella
conserved hypothetical proteins (one in the serine/threonine protein kinase
family) and seven unknown proteins. Gene Ontology analysis indicated that two
known proteins were associated with metabolic process, pyridoxal phosphate
binding and protein phosphorylation. Functional analysis indicated EtMIC2 was
implicated in parasite motility, migration, recognition and invasion of host
cells. The data suggested that EtAMA1 may be important during host cell invasion,
but also involved in other biological processes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2016.09.014 
PMID: 27693220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

