
1. Glia. 2017 Jan;65(1):75-92. doi: 10.1002/glia.23075. Epub 2016 Oct 3.

Uptake of parasite-derived vesicles by astrocytes and microglial phagocytosis of 
infected erythrocytes may drive neuroinflammation in cerebral malaria.

Shrivastava SK(1), Dalko E(1), Delcroix-Genete D(1), Herbert F(1), Cazenave
PA(2), Pied S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, U1019 - UMR
8204 - CIIL - Centre d'Infection et d'Immunité de Lille, Lille, F-59000, France.
(2)Unité d'Immunophysiopathologie Infectieuse, CRNS URA 1961, UPMC, Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France.

Astrocytes and microglia are activated during cerebral malaria (CM) and
contribute to the production and release of several mediators during
neuroinflammatory processes. Whether these changes are the consequence of a
direct crosstalk between glial cells and the malarial parasite and how these
cells participate in the pathogenesis of CM is not yet clear. We therefore
examined the interaction of astrocytes and microglia with Plasmodium berghei
ANKA-infected red blood cells using primary cell cultures derived from newborn
C57BL/6 mice. We observed a dynamic transfer of vesicles from the parasite to
astrocytes within minutes of contact, and the phagocytosis of infected red blood 
cells by microglia. Differential gene expression studies using the Affymetrix
GeneChip® microarray, and quantitative PCR analyses showed the increase in
expression of the set of genes belonging to the immune response network in
parasite activated astrocytes and microglia. Interestingly, expression of these
genes was also significantly upregulated in brains of mice dying from CM compared
with uninfected mice or infected mice that did not develop the neuropathology.
Accumulation of parasite-derived vesicles within astrocytes, and the phagocytosis
of infected red blood cells by microglia induced a subsequent increase in
interferon gamma inducible protein 10 (IP10) in both the brain and plasma of
infected mice at the onset of CM, confirming a role for this molecule in CM
pathogenesis. Altogether, these observations point to a possible role for glial
cells in the neuropathological processes leading to CM. GLIA 2016 GLIA
2017;65:75-92.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/glia.23075 
PMID: 27696532  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

