
1. Malar J. 2016 Oct 21;15(1):517.

Genetic diversity of the merozoite surface protein-3 gene in Plasmodium
falciparum populations in Thailand.

Pattaradilokrat S(1), Sawaswong V(1), Simpalipan P(1), Kaewthamasorn M(2),
Siripoon N(3), Harnyuttanakorn P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 
10330, Thailand.
(2)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok, 10330, Thailand.
(3)College of Public Health Sciences, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 10330,
Thailand.
(4)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 
10330, Thailand. HPongchai@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: An effective malaria vaccine is an urgently needed tool to fight
against human malaria, the most deadly parasitic disease of humans. One promising
candidate is the merozoite surface protein-3 (MSP-3) of Plasmodium falciparum.
This antigenic protein, encoded by the merozoite surface protein (msp-3) gene, is
polymorphic and classified according to size into the two allelic types of K1 and
3D7. A recent study revealed that both the K1 and 3D7 alleles co-circulated
within P. falciparum populations in Thailand, but the extent of the sequence
diversity and variation within each allelic type remains largely unknown.
METHODS: The msp-3 gene was sequenced from 59 P. falciparum samples collected
from five endemic areas (Mae Hong Son, Kanchanaburi, Ranong, Trat and Ubon
Ratchathani) in Thailand and analysed for nucleotide sequence diversity,
haplotype diversity and deduced amino acid sequence diversity. The gene was also 
subject to population genetic analysis (F st ) and neutrality tests (Tajima's D, 
Fu and Li D* and Fu and Li' F* tests) to determine any signature of selection.
RESULTS: The sequence analyses revealed eight unique DNA haplotypes and seven
amino acid sequence variants, with a haplotype and nucleotide diversity of 0.828 
and 0.049, respectively. Neutrality tests indicated that the polymorphism
detected in the alanine heptad repeat region of MSP-3 was maintained by positive 
diversifying selection, suggesting its role as a potential target of protective
immune responses and supporting its role as a vaccine candidate. Comparison of
MSP-3 variants among parasite populations in Thailand, India and Nigeria also
inferred a close genetic relationship between P. falciparum populations in Asia.
CONCLUSION: This study revealed the extent of the msp-3 gene diversity in P.
falciparum in Thailand, providing the fundamental basis for the better design of 
future blood stage malaria vaccines against P. falciparum.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1566-1 
PMCID: PMC5073822
PMID: 27769257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

