
1. PLoS One. 2016 Oct 25;11(10):e0165358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0165358.
eCollection 2016.

New Assays to Characterise Growth-Related Phenotypes of Plasmodium falciparum
Reveal Variation in Density-Dependent Growth Inhibition between Parasite Lines.

Rovira-Graells N(1), Aguilera-Simón S(1), Tintó-Font E(1), Cortés A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)ISGlobal, Barcelona Ctr. Int. Health Res. (CRESIB), Hospital Clínic -
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)ICREA, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

The growth phenotype of asexual blood stage malaria parasites can influence their
virulence and also their ability to survive and achieve transmission to the next 
host, but there are few methods available to characterise parasite growth
parameters in detail. We developed a new assay to measure growth rates at
different starting parasitaemias in a 96-well format and applied it to
characterise the growth of Plasmodium falciparum lines 3D7-A and 3D7-B,
previously shown to have different invasion rates and to use different invasion
pathways. Using this simple and accurate assay we found that 3D7-B is more
sensitive to high initial parasitaemia than 3D7-A. This result indicates that
different parasite lines show variation in their levels of density-dependent
growth inhibition. We also developed a new assay to compare the duration of the
asexual blood cycle between different parasite lines. The assay is based on the
tight synchronisation of cultures to a 1 h parasite age window and the subsequent
monitoring of schizont bursting and formation of new rings by flow cytometry.
Using this assay we observed differences in the duration of the asexual blood
cycle between parasite lines 3D7 and HB3. These two new assays will be useful to 
characterise variation in growth-related parameters and to identify growth
phenotypes associated with the targeted deletion of specific genes or with
particular genomic, transcriptomic or proteomic patterns. Furthermore, the
identification of density-dependent growth inhibition as an intrinsic parasite
property that varies between parasite lines expands the repertoire of measurable 
growth-related phenotypic traits that have the potential to influence the outcome
of a malarial blood infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0165358 
PMCID: PMC5079629
PMID: 27780272  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

