
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Oct 31;10(10):e0005091. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0005091. eCollection 2016 Oct.

Independent Origin and Global Distribution of Distinct Plasmodium vivax Duffy
Binding Protein Gene Duplications.

Hostetler JB(1)(2), Lo E(3), Kanjee U(4), Amaratunga C(2), Suon S(5), Sreng S(5),
Mao S(6), Yewhalaw D(7), Mascarenhas A(8)(9), Kwiatkowski DP(1), Ferreira MU(10),
Rathod PK(8)(9), Yan G(3), Fairhurst RM(2), Duraisingh MT(4), Rayner JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Programme, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, United
States of America.
(3)Program in Public Health, University of California, Irvine, California, United
States of America.
(4)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(5)National Center for Parasitology, Entomology, and Malaria Control, Phnom Penh,
Cambodia.
(6)Sampov Meas Referral Hospital, Pursat, Cambodia.
(7)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences and Pathology, College of Public
Health and Medical Sciences, Jimma University, Jimma, Ethiopia.
(8)Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United
States of America.
(9)MESA-ICEMR, Goa Medical College and Hospital, Bambolim, Goa, India.
(10)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
SÃ£o Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax causes the majority of malaria episodes outside
Africa, but remains a relatively understudied pathogen. The pathology of P. vivax
infection depends critically on the parasite's ability to recognize and invade
human erythrocytes. This invasion process involves an interaction between P.
vivax Duffy Binding Protein (PvDBP) in merozoites and the Duffy antigen receptor 
for chemokines (DARC) on the erythrocyte surface. Whole-genome sequencing of
clinical isolates recently established that some P. vivax genomes contain two
copies of the PvDBP gene. The frequency of this duplication is particularly high 
in Madagascar, where there is also evidence for P. vivax infection in
DARC-negative individuals. The functional significance and global prevalence of
this duplication, and whether there are other copy number variations at the PvDBP
locus, is unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using whole-genome sequencing and PCR to study
the PvDBP locus in P. vivax clinical isolates, we found that PvDBP duplication is
widespread in Cambodia. The boundaries of the Cambodian PvDBP duplication differ 
from those previously identified in Madagascar, meaning that current molecular
assays were unable to detect it. The Cambodian PvDBP duplication did not
associate with parasite density or DARC genotype, and ranged in prevalence from
20% to 38% over four annual transmission seasons in Cambodia. This duplication
was also present in P. vivax isolates from Brazil and Ethiopia, but not India.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: PvDBP duplications are much more widespread and complex
than previously thought, and at least two distinct duplications are circulating
globally. The same duplication boundaries were identified in parasites from three
continents, and were found at high prevalence in human populations where
DARC-negativity is essentially absent. It is therefore unlikely that PvDBP
duplication is associated with infection of DARC-negative individuals, but
functional tests will be required to confirm this hypothesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005091 
PMCID: PMC5087946
PMID: 27798646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

