
1. Lancet Infect Dis. 2017 Feb;17(2):174-183. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(16)30415-7.
Epub 2016 Nov 3.

A surrogate marker of piperaquine-resistant Plasmodium falciparum malaria: a
phenotype-genotype association study.

Witkowski B(1), Duru V(2), Khim N(1), Ross LS(3), Saintpierre B(4), Beghain J(4),
Chy S(2), Kim S(2), Ke S(2), Kloeung N(2), Eam R(2), Khean C(2), Ken M(2), Loch
K(2), Bouillon A(5), Domergue A(2), Ma L(6), Bouchier C(6), Leang R(7), Huy R(7),
Nuel G(8), Barale JC(5), Legrand E(9), Ringwald P(10), Fidock DA(3),
Mercereau-Puijalon O(4), Ariey F(11), Ménard D(12).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Molecular Epidemiology Unit, Institut Pasteur in Cambodia, Phnom Penh,
Cambodia; Malaria Translational Research Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France;
Institut Pasteur in Cambodia, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(2)Malaria Molecular Epidemiology Unit, Institut Pasteur in Cambodia, Phnom Penh,
Cambodia.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Division of Infectious Diseases,
Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Parasites and Insect Vectors, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(5)Malaria Translational Research Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France; Institut
Pasteur in Cambodia, Phnom Penh, Cambodia; Structural Microbiology Unit, Biology 
of Malaria Targets Group, Department of Structural Biology and Chemistry and
CNRS, UMR3528, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(6)Plate-forme Génomique, Département Génomes et Génétique, Institut Pasteur,
Paris, France.
(7)National Center for Parasitology, Entomology and Malaria Control, Phnom Penh, 
Cambodia.
(8)Laboratoire de Mathématiques Appliquées (MAP5) UMR CNRS 8145, Université Paris
Descartes, Paris, France.
(9)Malaria Translational Research Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France; Institut
Pasteur in Cambodia, Phnom Penh, Cambodia; Department of Parasites and Insect
Vectors, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(10)Global Malaria Programme, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
(11)Department of Parasites and Insect Vectors, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France; 
Institut Cochin Inserm U1016, Université Paris-Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
and Laboratoire de Parasitologie-Mycologie, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.
(12)Malaria Molecular Epidemiology Unit, Institut Pasteur in Cambodia, Phnom
Penh, Cambodia; Malaria Translational Research Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France; Institut Pasteur in Cambodia, Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Electronic address:
dmenard@pasteur-kh.org.

Erratum in
    Lancet Infect Dis. 2018 Aug;18(8):829.

Comment in
    Lancet Infect Dis. 2017 Feb;17(2):119-121.

BACKGROUND: Western Cambodia is the epicentre of Plasmodium falciparum multidrug 
resistance and is facing high rates of dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine treatment
failures. Genetic tools to detect the multidrug-resistant parasites are needed.
Artemisinin resistance can be tracked using the K13 molecular marker, but no
marker exists for piperaquine resistance. We aimed to identify genetic markers of
piperaquine resistance and study their association with
dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine treatment failures.
METHODS: We obtained blood samples from Cambodian patients infected with P
falciparum and treated with dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine. Patients were
followed up for 42 days during the years 2009-15. We established in-vitro and
ex-vivo susceptibility profiles for a subset using piperaquine survival assays.
We determined whole-genome sequences by Illumina paired-reads sequencing, copy
number variations by qPCR, RNA concentrations by qRT-PCR, and protein
concentrations by immunoblotting. Fisher's exact and non-parametric Wilcoxon
rank-sum tests were used to identify significant differences in single-nucleotide
polymorphisms or copy number variants, respectively, for differential
distribution between piperaquine-resistant and piperaquine-sensitive parasite
lines.
FINDINGS: Whole-genome exon sequence analysis of 31 culture-adapted parasite
lines associated amplification of the plasmepsin 2-plasmepsin 3 gene cluster with
in-vitro piperaquine resistance. Ex-vivo piperaquine survival assay profiles of
134 isolates correlated with plasmepsin 2 gene copy number. In 725 patients
treated with dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine, multicopy plasmepsin 2 in the sample
collected before treatment was associated with an adjusted hazard ratio (aHR) for
treatment failure of 20·4 (95% CI 9·1-45·5, p<0·0001). Multicopy plasmepsin 2
predicted dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine failures with 0·94 (95% CI 0·88-0·98)
sensitivity and 0·77 (0·74-0·81) specificity. Analysis of samples collected
across the country from 2002 to 2015 showed that the geographical and temporal
increase of the proportion of multicopy plasmepsin 2 parasites was highly
correlated with increasing dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine treatment failure rates
(r=0·89 [95% CI 0·77-0·95], p<0·0001, Spearman's coefficient of rank
correlation). Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine efficacy at day 42 fell below 90%
when the proportion of multicopy plasmepsin 2 parasites exceeded 22%.
INTERPRETATION: Piperaquine resistance in Cambodia is strongly associated with
amplification of plasmepsin 2-3, encoding haemoglobin-digesting proteases,
regardless of the location. Multicopy plasmepsin 2 constitutes a surrogate
molecular marker to track piperaquine resistance. A molecular toolkit combining
plasmepsin 2 with K13 and mdr1 monitoring should provide timely information for
antimalarial treatment and containment policies.
FUNDING: Institut Pasteur in Cambodia, Institut Pasteur Paris, National
Institutes of Health, WHO, Agence Nationale de la Recherche, Investissement
d'Avenir programme, Laboratoire d'Excellence Integrative "Biology of Emerging
Infectious Diseases".

Copyright This is an Open Access article published under the CC BY 3.0 IGO
license which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. In any use of this article,
there should be no suggestion that WHO endorses any specific organisation,
products or services. The use of the WHO logo is not permitted. This notice
should be preserved along with the article’s original URL.

DOI: 10.1016/S1473-3099(16)30415-7 
PMCID: PMC5266792
PMID: 27818097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

