
1. Cell Microbiol. 2017 Feb;19(2). doi: 10.1111/cmi.12693. Epub 2016 Dec 6.

CRISPR/Cas9-The ultimate weapon to battle infectious diseases?

Doerflinger M(1)(2), Forsyth W(1), Ebert G(1)(2), Pellegrini M(1)(2), Herold
MJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC,
Australia.
(2)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC,
Australia.

Infectious diseases are a leading cause of death worldwide. Novel therapeutics
are urgently required to treat multidrug-resistant organisms such as
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and to mitigate morbidity and mortality caused by
acute infections such as malaria and dengue fever virus as well as chronic
infections such as human immunodeficiency virus-1 and hepatitis B virus. The
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
(CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9) system, which has revolutionized
biomedical research, holds great promise for the identification and validation of
novel drug targets. Since its discovery as an adaptive immune system in
prokaryotes, the CRISPR/Cas9 system has been developed into a multi-faceted
genetic modification tool, which can now be used to induce gene deletions or
specific gene insertions, such as conditional alleles or endogenous reporters in 
virtually any organism. The generation of CRISPR/Cas9 libraries that can be used 
to perform phenotypic whole genome screens provides an important new tool that
will aid in the identification of critical host factors involved in the
pathogenesis of infectious diseases. In this review, we will discuss the
development and recent applications of the CRISPR/Cas9 system used to identify
novel regulators, which might become important in the fight against infectious
diseases.

Â© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12693 
PMID: 27860197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

