
1. Math Biosci Eng. 2017 Feb 1;14(1):i. doi: 10.3934/mbe.201701i.

Preface.

Friedman A(1), Lachowicz M, Ledzewicz U, Piotrowska MJ, Szymanska Z.

Author information: 
(1)Mathematical Biosciences Institute and Department of Mathematics, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH 43210, United States. email:
afriedman@math.osu.edu.

This volume was inspired by the topics presented at the international conference 
"Micro and Macro Systems in Life Sciences" which was held on Jun 8-12, 2015 in
BÄ™dlewo, Poland. System biology is an approach which tries to understand how
micro systems, at the molecular and cellular levels, affect macro systems such as
organs, tissue and populations. Thus it is not surprising that a major theme of
this volume evolves around cancer and its treatment. Articles on this topic
include models for tumor induced angiogenesis, without and with delays,
metastatic niche of the bone marrow, drug resistance and metronomic chemotherapy,
and virotherapy of glioma. Methods range from dynamical systems to optimal
control. Another well represented topic of this volume is mathematical modeling
in epidemiology. Mathematical approaches to modeling and control of more specific
diseases like malaria, Ebola or human papillomavirus are discussed as well as a
more general approaches to the SEIR, and even more general class of models in
epidemiology, by using the tools of optimal control and optimization. The volume 
also brings up challenges in mathematical modeling of other diseases such as
tuberculosis. Partial differential equations combined with numerical approaches
are becoming important tools in modeling not only tumor growth and treatment, but
also other diseases, such as fibrosis of the liver, and atherosclerosis and its
associated blood flow dynamics, and our volume presents a state of the art
approach on these topics. Understanding mathematics behind the cell motion,
appearance of the special patterns in various cell populations, and age
structured mutations are among topics addressed inour volume. A spatio-temporal
models of synthetic genetic oscillators brings the analysis to the gene level
which is the focus of much of current biological research. Mathematics can help
biologists to explain the collective behavior of bacterial, a topic that is also 
presented here. Finally some more across the discipline topics are being
addresses, which can appear as a challenge in studying problems in systems
biology on all, macro, meso and micro levels. They include numerical approaches
to stochastic wave equation arising in modeling Brownian motion, discrete
velocity models, many particle approximations as well as very important aspect on
the connection between discrete measurement and the construction of the models
for various phenomena, particularly the one involving delays. With the variety of
biological topics and their mathematical approaches we very much hope that the
reader of the Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering will find this volume
interesting and inspirational for their own research.

DOI: 10.3934/mbe.201701i 
PMID: 27879115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

