
1. PLoS One. 2016 Dec 1;11(12):e0166135. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0166135.
eCollection 2016.

In Vitro Variant Surface Antigen Expression in Plasmodium falciparum Parasites
from a Semi-Immune Individual Is Not Correlated with Var Gene Transcription.

Bruske EI(1), Dimonte S(1), Enderes C(1), Tschan S(1), Flötenmeyer M(2), Koch
I(2), Berger J(2), Kremsner P(1)(3), Frank M(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Tuebingen, Germany.
(3)CERMEL (Centre de Recherche Médicale de Lambaréné), Lambaréné, Gabon.

Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) is considered to be
the main variant surface antigen (VSA) of Plasmodium falciparum and is mainly
localized on electron-dense knobs in the membrane of the infected erythrocyte.
Switches in PfEMP1 expression provide the basis for antigenic variation and are
thought to be critical for parasite persistence during chronic infections.
Recently, strain transcending anti-PfEMP1 immunity has been shown to develop
early in life, challenging the role of PfEMP1 in antigenic variation during
chronic infections. In this work we investigate how P. falciparum achieves
persistence during a chronic asymptomatic infection. The infected individual
(MOA) was parasitemic for 42 days and multilocus var gene genotyping showed
persistence of the same parasite population throughout the infection. Parasites
from the beginning of the infection were adapted to tissue culture and cloned by 
limiting dilution. Flow cytometry using convalescent serum detected a variable
surface recognition signal on isogenic clonal parasites. Quantitative real-time
PCR with a field isolate specific var gene primer set showed that the surface
recognition signal was not correlated with transcription of individual var genes.
Strain transcending anti-PfEMP1 immunity of the convalescent serum was
demonstrated with CD36 selected and PfEMP1 knock-down NF54 clones. In contrast,
knock-down of PfEMP1 did not have an effect on the antibody recognition signal in
MOA clones. Trypsinisation of the membrane surface proteins abolished the surface
recognition signal and immune electron microscopy revealed that antibodies from
the convalescent serum bound to membrane areas without knobs and with knobs.
Together the data indicate that PfEMP1 is not the main variable surface antigen
during a chronic infection and suggest a role for trypsin sensitive non-PfEMP1
VSAs for parasite persistence in chronic infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0166135 
PMCID: PMC5132323
PMID: 27907004  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

