
1. Hum Gene Ther Methods. 2016 Dec;27(6):238-250.

Preclinical Evaluation of a Replication-Deficient Recombinant Adenovirus Serotype
5 Vaccine Expressing Guanylate Cyclase C and the PADRE T-helper Epitope.

Snook AE(1), Baybutt TR(1), Hyslop T(2), Waldman SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)2 Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke Cancer Institute, Duke 
University , Durham, North Carolina.

There is an unmet need for improved therapeutics for colorectal cancer, the
second leading cause of cancer mortality worldwide. Adjuvant chemotherapy only
marginally improves survival in some patients and has no benefit in others,
underscoring the clinical opportunity for novel immunotherapeutic approaches to
improve survival in colorectal cancer. In that context, guanylate cyclase C
(GUCY2C) is an established biomarker and therapeutic target for metastatic
colorectal cancer with immunological characteristics that promote durable
antitumor efficacy without autoimmunity. Preliminary studies established
non-replicating human type 5 adenovirus (Ad5) expressing GUCY2C as safe and
effective to induce GUCY2C-specific immune responses and antitumor immunity in
mice. This study characterized the biodistribution, immunogenicity, and safety of
a vector expressing GUCY2C fused with the human CD4+ T helper cell epitope PADRE 
(Ad5-GUCY2C-PADRE) to advance this vaccine into clinical trials in colorectal
cancer patients. Ad5-GUCY2C-PADRE levels were highest in the injection site and
distributed in vivo primarily to draining lymph nodes, the liver, spleen and,
unexpectedly, to the bone marrow. Immune responses following Ad5-GUCY2C-PADRE
administration were characterized by PADRE-specific CD4+ T-cell and
GUCY2C-specific B-cell and CD8+ T-cell responses, producing antitumor immunity
targeting GUCY2C-expressing colorectal cancer metastases in the lungs, without
acute or chronic autoimmune or other toxicities. Collectively, these data support
Ad5-GUCY2C-PADRE as a safe and effective vaccination strategy in preclinical
models and position Ad5-GUCY2C-PADRE for Phase I clinical testing in colorectal
cancer patients.

DOI: 10.1089/hgtb.2016.114 
PMCID: PMC5175423
PMID: 27903079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author Disclosure S.A.W. was the Chair of the
Data Safety Monitoring Board for the CHART-1 Trialâ„¢ sponsored by Cardio3
Biosciences, and the Chair (uncompensated) of the Scientific Advisory Board to
Targeted Diagnostics and Therapeutics, Inc., which provided research funding
that, in part, supported this work and has a license to commercialize inventions 
related to this work. No competing financial interests exist for the remaining
authors.

