
1. mBio. 2016 Dec 6;7(6). pii: e02011-16. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02011-16.

Reduced Activity of Mutant Calcium-Dependent Protein Kinase 1 Is Compensated in
Plasmodium falciparum through the Action of Protein Kinase G.

Bansal A(1), Ojo KK(2), Mu J(3), Maly DJ(4), Van Voorhis WC(2), Miller LH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, USA
bansal.abhisheka@gmail.com LMILLER@niaid.nih.gov.
(2)Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, and
Center for Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(4)Departments of Biochemistry and Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.

We used a sensitization approach that involves replacement of the gatekeeper
residue in a protein kinase with one with a different side chain. The activity of
the enzyme with a bulky gatekeeper residue, such as methionine, cannot be
inhibited using bumped kinase inhibitors (BKIs). Here, we have used this approach
to study Plasmodium falciparum calcium-dependent protein kinase 1 (PfCDPK1). The 
methionine gatekeeper substitution, T145M, although it led to a 47% reduction in 
transphosphorylation, was successfully introduced into the CDPK1 locus using
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)/Cas9. As
methionine is a bulky residue, BKI 1294 had a 10-fold-greater effect in vitro on 
the wild-type enzyme than on the methionine mutant. However, in contrast to in
vitro data with recombinant enzymes, BKI 1294 had a slightly greater inhibition
of the growth of CDPK1 T145M parasites than the wild type. Moreover, the CDPK1
T145M parasites were more sensitive to the action of compound 2 (C2), a specific 
inhibitor of protein kinase G (PKG). These results suggest that a reduction in
the activity of CDPK1 due to methionine substitution at the gatekeeper position
is compensated through the direct action of PKG or of another kinase under the
regulation of PKG. The transcript levels of CDPK5 and CDPK6 were significantly
upregulated in the CDPK1 T145M parasites. The increase in CDPK6 or some other
kinase may compensate for decrease in CDPK1 activity during invasion. This study 
suggests that targeting two kinases may be more effective in chemotherapy to
treat malaria so as not to select for mutations in one of the enzymes.IMPORTANCE:
Protein kinases of Plasmodium falciparum are being actively pursued as drug
targets to treat malaria. However, compensatory mechanisms may reverse the drug
activity against a kinase. In this study, we show that replacement of the
wild-type threonine gatekeeper residue with methionine reduces the
transphosphorylation activity of CDPK1. Mutant parasites with methionine
gatekeeper residue compensate the reduced activity of CDPK1 through the action of
PKG possibly by upregulation of CDPK6 or some other kinase. This study highlights
that targeting one enzyme may lead to changes in transcript expression of other
kinases that compensate for its function and may select for mutants that are less
dependent on the target enzyme activity. Thus, inhibiting two kinases is a better
strategy to protect the antimalarial activity of each, similar to artemisinin
combination therapy or malarone (atovaquone and proguanil).

Copyright © 2016 Bansal et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02011-16 
PMCID: PMC5142624
PMID: 27923926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

