
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Dec 6;6:38178. doi: 10.1038/srep38178.

Mining, visualizing and comparing multidimensional biomolecular data using the
Genomics Data Miner (GMine) Web-Server.

Proietti C(1), Zakrzewski M(1), Watkins TS(1), Berger B(2), Hasan S(1)(3),
Ratnatunga CN(1), Brion MJ(3), Crompton PD(4), Miles JJ(1)(5), Doolan DL(1)(5),
Krause L(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(2)Nestl√© Research Centre, Vers-chez-les-Blanc, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, The University of
Queensland, Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(4)Malaria Infection Biology and Immunity Unit, Laboratory of Immunogenetics,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, Maryland 20852, USA.
(5)Centre for Biosecurity and Tropical Infectious Diseases, Australian Institute 
of Tropical Health &Medicine, James Cook University, Cairns, QLD, Australia.

Genomics Data Miner (GMine) is a user-friendly online software that allows
non-experts to mine, cluster and compare multidimensional biomolecular datasets. 
Various powerful visualization techniques are provided, generating high quality
figures that can be directly incorporated into scientific publications. Robust
and comprehensive analyses are provided via a broad range of data-mining
techniques, including univariate and multivariate statistical analysis,
supervised learning, correlation networks, clustering and multivariable
regression. The software has a focus on multivariate techniques, which can
attribute variance in the measurements to multiple explanatory variables and
confounders. Various normalization methods are provided. Extensive help pages and
a tutorial are available via a wiki server. Using GMine we reanalyzed proteome
microarray data of host antibody response against Plasmodium falciparum. Our
results support the hypothesis that immunity to malaria is a higher-order
phenomenon related to a pattern of responses and not attributable to any single
antigen. We also analyzed gene expression across resting and activated T cells,
identifying many immune-related genes with differential expression. This
highlights both the plasticity of T cells and the operation of a hardwired
activation program. These application examples demonstrate that GMine facilitates
an accurate and in-depth analysis of complex molecular datasets, including
genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics data.

DOI: 10.1038/srep38178 
PMCID: PMC5138638
PMID: 27922118  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

