
1. Malar J. 2016 Dec 9;15(1):592.

Plasmodium falciparum genotype and gametocyte prevalence in children with
uncomplicated malaria in coastal Ghana.

Ayanful-Torgby R(1), Oppong A(1), Abankwa J(1), Acquah F(1), Williamson KC(2),
Amoah LE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, University of Ghana, Accra,
Ghana.
(2)Uniform Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, University of Ghana, Accra,
Ghana. levaamoah@noguchi.ug.edu.gh.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum gametocytes are vital to sustaining malaria
transmission. Parasite densities, multiplicity of infection as well as asexual
genotype are features that have been found to influence gametocyte production.
Measurements of the prevalence of Plasmodium sp. gametocytes may serve as a tool 
to monitor the success of malaria eradication efforts.
METHODS: Whole blood was collected from 112 children aged between 6 months and
13 years with uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria attending three health
facilities in southern Ghana from June to August, 2014 before (day 0) and 4 days 
after completion of anti-malaria drug treatment (day 7). Malaria parasites were
observed by microscopy and polymerase chain reaction (PCR); submicroscopic
gametocyte carriage was measured by a Pfs25 (PF3D7_1031000) mRNA real time
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Parasite genotyping was
performed on gDNA extracted from dried filter paper blood blots by amplification 
of the polymorphic regions of msp1 (PF3D7_0930300) and msp2 (PF3D7_0206800) using
PCR.
RESULTS: Microscopy estimated 3.1% (3/96) of the total population to carry
gametocytes on day 0, which decreased to 2.1% (2/96) on day 7. In contrast,
reverse transcriptase-real time PCR (RT-PCR) analysis of a subset of 35 samples
estimated submicroscopic gametocyte carriage to be as high as 77% (27/35) using
primers specific for Pfs25 (CT < 35) on day 0 and by day 7 this only declined to 
60% (21/35). Genotyping the msp2 gene identified higher levels of MOI than the
msp1 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Although below detection by microscopy, gametocyte prevalence at
submicroscopic levels are high in this region and emphasize the need for more
effective elimination approaches like the development of transmission-blocking
vaccines and safer gametocytocidal drugs.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1640-8 
PMCID: PMC5148883
PMID: 27938356  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

