
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Dec 8;10(12):e0005031. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0005031. eCollection 2016 Dec.

Plasmodium vivax but Not Plasmodium falciparum Blood-Stage Infection in Humans Is
Associated with the Expansion of a CD8+ T Cell Population with Cytotoxic
Potential.

Burel JG(1)(2), Apte SH(1), McCarthy JS(2)(3), Doolan DL(1)(2)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Vaccinology Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,
Brisbane, Australia.
(2)School of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(3)Clinical Tropical Medicine Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research
Institute, Brisbane, Australia.
(4)Australian Institute of Tropical Health and Medicine, James Cook University,
Cairns, Australia.
(5)Centre for Biosecurity and Tropical Infectious Disease, James Cook University,
Cairns, Australia.

P. vivax and P. falciparum parasites display different tropism for host cells and
induce very different clinical symptoms and pathology, suggesting that the immune
responses required for protection may differ between these two species. However, 
no study has qualitatively compared the immune responses to P. falciparum or P.
vivax in humans following primary exposure and infection. Here, we show that the 
two species differ in terms of the cellular immune responses elicited following
primary infection. Specifically, P. vivax induced the expansion of a subset of
CD8+ T cells expressing the activation marker CD38, whereas P. falciparum induced
the expansion of CD38+ CD4+ T cells. The CD38+ CD8+ T cell population that
expanded following P. vivax infection displayed greater cytotoxic potential
compared to CD38- CD8+ T cells, and compared to CD38+ CD8+ T cells circulating
during P. falciparum infection. We hypothesize that P. vivax infection leads to a
stronger CD38+ CD8+ T cell activation because of its preferred tropism for
MHC-I-expressing reticulocytes that, unlike mature red blood cells, can present
antigen directly to CD8+ T cells. This study provides the first line of evidence 
to suggest an effector role for CD8+ T cells in P. vivax blood-stage immunity. It
is also the first report of species-specific differences in the subset of T cells
that are expanded following primary Plasmodium infection, suggesting that malaria
vaccine development may require optimization according to the target
parasite.TRIAL REGISTRATION: anzctr.org.au ACTRN12612000814875; anzctr.org.au
ACTRN12613000565741; anzctr.org.au ACTRN12613001040752; ClinicalTrials.gov
NCT02281344; anzctr.org.au ACTRN12612001096842; anzctr.org.au
ACTRN12613001008718.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005031 
PMCID: PMC5145136
PMID: 27930660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

