
1. PLoS One. 2016 Dec 12;11(12):e0167409. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0167409.
eCollection 2016.

Diversity of Cultivable Midgut Microbiota at Different Stages of the Asian Tiger 
Mosquito, Aedes albopictus from Tezpur, India.

Yadav KK(1), Datta S(1), Naglot A(1), Bora A(1), Hmuaka V(1), Bhagyawant S(2),
Gogoi HK(1), Veer V(1), Raju PS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Division, Defence Research Laboratory, DRDO, Tezpur, India.
(2)School of Studies in Biotechnology, Jiwaji University, Gwalior, India.

Aedes aegypti and Ae. albopictus are among the most important vectors of
arboviral diseases, worldwide. Recent studies indicate that diverse midgut
microbiota of mosquitoes significantly affect development, digestion, metabolism,
and immunity of their hosts. Midgut microbiota has also been suggested to
modulate the competency of mosquitoes to transmit arboviruses, malaria parasites 
etc. Interestingly, the midgut microbial flora is dynamic and the diversity
changes with the development of vectors, in addition to other factors such as
species, sex, life-stage, feeding behavior and geographical origin. The aim of
the present study was to investigate the midgut bacterial diversity among larva, 
adult male, sugar fed female and blood fed female Ae. albopictus collected from
Tezpur, Northeastern India. Based on colony morphological characteristics, we
selected 113 cultivable bacterial isolates for 16S rRNA gene sequence based
molecular identification. Of the 113 isolates, we could identify 35 bacterial
species belonging to 18 distinct genera under four major phyla, namely
Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes. Phyla
Proteobacteria and Firmicutes accounted for majority (80%) of the species, while 
phylum Actinobacteria constituted 17% of the species. Bacteroidetes was the least
represented phylum, characterized by a single species- Chryseobacterium
rhizoplanae, isolated from blood fed individuals. Dissection of midgut microbiota
diversity at different developmental stages of Ae. albopictus will be helpful in 
better understanding mosquito-borne diseases, and for designing effective
strategies to manage mosquito-borne diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0167409 
PMCID: PMC5152811
PMID: 27941985  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

