
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2017 Mar;48:27-33. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.12.006. Epub
2016 Dec 9.

Extensive genetic diversity among populations of the malaria mosquito Anopheles
moucheti revealed by population genomics.

Fouet C(1), Kamdem C(2), Gamez S(2), White BJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521,
United States. Electronic address: caroline.fouet@ucr.edu.
(2)Department of Entomology, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521,
United States.
(3)Department of Entomology, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521,
United States; Center for Disease Vector Research, Institute for Integrative
Genome Biology, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, United States.
Electronic address: bwhite@ucr.edu.

Malaria vectors are exposed to intense selective pressures due to large-scale
intervention programs that are underway in most African countries. One of the
current priorities is therefore to clearly assess the adaptive potential of
Anopheline populations, which is critical to understand and anticipate the
response mosquitoes can elicit against such adaptive challenges. The development 
of genomic resources that will empower robust examinations of evolutionary
changes in all vectors including currently understudied species is an inevitable 
step toward this goal. Here we constructed double-digest Restriction Associated
DNA (ddRAD) libraries and generated 6461 Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs)
that we used to explore the population structure and demographic history of
wild-caught Anopheles moucheti from Cameroon. The genome-wide distribution of
allelic frequencies among samples best fitted that of an old population at
equilibrium, characterized by a weak genetic structure and extensive genetic
diversity, presumably due to a large long term effective population size.
Estimates of FST and Linkage Disequilibrium (LD) across SNPs reveal a very low
genetic differentiation throughout the genome and the absence of segregating LD
blocks among populations, suggesting an overall lack of local adaptation. Our
study provides the first investigation of the genetic structure and diversity in 
An. moucheti at the genomic scale. We conclude that, despite a weak genetic
structure, this species has the potential to challenge current vector control
measures and other rapid anthropogenic and environmental changes thanks to its
great genetic diversity.

Copyright Â© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.12.006 
PMID: 27940214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

