
1. Biomed Res Int. 2016;2016:4680812. Epub 2016 Nov 9.

Evaluation of Lethal Giant Larvae as a Schistosomiasis Vaccine Candidate.

Cao Y(1), Qiao H(1), Shi Y(1), Han Y(1), Liu J(1), Li H(1), Lu K(1), Lin J(2),
Jin Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Key Laboratory of Animal Parasitology, Ministry of Agriculture,
Shanghai 200241, China.
(2)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Key Laboratory of Animal Parasitology, Ministry of Agriculture,
Shanghai 200241, China; Jiangsu Coinnovation Center for Prevention and Control of
Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou, Jiangsu Province
225009, China.

Schistosomiasis is a neglected tropical disease of humans, and it is considered
to be the second most devastating parasitic disease after malaria. Eggs produced 
by normally developed female worms are important in the transmission of the
parasite, and they responsible for the pathogenesis of schistosomiasis. The tumor
suppressor gene lethal giant larvae (lgl) has an essential function in
establishing apical-basal cell polarity, cell proliferation, differentiation, and
tissue organization. In our earlier study, downregulation of the lgl gene induced
a significant reduction in the egg hatching rate of Schistosoma japonicum (Sj)
eggs. In this study, the Sjlgl gene was used as a vaccine candidate against
schistosomiasis, and vaccination achieved and maintained a stable reduction of
the egg hatching rate, which is consistent with previous studies, in addition to 
reducing the worm burden and liver egg burden in some trials.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/4680812 
PMCID: PMC5120214
PMID: 27957496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

