
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2017 Jan;34(1):131-144. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msw228. Epub 2016 Oct 
20.

Population Parameters Underlying an Ongoing Soft Sweep in Southeast Asian Malaria
Parasites.

Anderson TJ(1), Nair S(2), McDew-White M(2), Cheeseman IH(2), Nkhoma S(2), Bilgic
F(2), McGready R(3)(4), Ashley E(3)(4)(5), Pyae Phyo A(3)(4), White NJ(4)(5),
Nosten F(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, TX
tanderso@txbiomed.org.
(2)Department of Genetics, Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, TX.
(3)Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, 
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot, Thailand.
(4)Centre for Tropical Medicine, Nuffield Department of Medicine, Churchill
Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Multiple kelch13 alleles conferring artemisinin resistance (ART-R) are currently 
spreading through Southeast Asian malaria parasite populations, providing a
unique opportunity to observe an ongoing soft selective sweep, investigate why
resistance alleles have evolved multiple times and determine fundamental
population genetic parameters for Plasmodium We sequenced kelch13 (n = 1,876),
genotyped 75 flanking SNPs, and measured clearance rate (n = 3,552) in parasite
infections from Western Thailand (2001-2014). We describe 32 independent coding
mutations including common mutations outside the kelch13 propeller associated
with significant reductions in clearance rate. Mutations were first observed in
2003 and rose to 90% by 2014, consistent with a selection coefficient of ∼0.079. 
ART-R allele diversity rose until 2012 and then dropped as one allele (C580Y)
spread to high frequency. The frequency with which adaptive alleles arise is
determined by the rate of mutation and the population size. Two factors drive
this soft sweep: (1) multiple kelch13 amino-acid mutations confer resistance
providing a large mutational target-we estimate the target is 87-163 bp. (2) The 
population mutation parameter (Θ = 2Neμ) can be estimated from the frequency
distribution of ART-R alleles and is ∼5.69, suggesting that short term effective 
population size is 88 thousand to 1.2 million. This is 52-705 times greater than 
Ne estimated from fluctuation in allele frequencies, suggesting that we have
previously underestimated the capacity for adaptive evolution in Plasmodium Our
central conclusions are that retrospective studies may underestimate the
complexity of selective events and the Ne relevant for adaptation for malaria is 
considerably higher than previously estimated.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msw228 
PMCID: PMC5216669
PMID: 28025270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

