
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2017 Mar;212:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2016.12.010.
Epub 2016 Dec 26.

CRISPR/Cas9 mediated sequential editing of genes critical for ookinete motility
in Plasmodium yoelii.

Zhang C(1), Gao H(1), Yang Z(1), Jiang Y(1), Li Z(1), Wang X(1), Xiao B(1), Su
XZ(2), Cui H(3), Yuan J(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signaling Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian
361102, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signaling Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian
361102, China; Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signaling Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian
361102, China. Electronic address: cuihuiting@xmu.edu.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signaling Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian
361102, China. Electronic address: yuanjing@xmu.edu.cn.

CRISPR/Cas9 has been successfully adapted for gene editing in malaria parasites
including Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium yoelii. However, the reported
methods were limited to editing one gene at a time. In practice, it is often
desired to modify multiple genetic loci in a parasite genome. Here we describe a 
CRISPR/Cas9 mediated genome editing method that allows successive modification of
more than one gene in the genome of P. yoelii using an improved single-vector
system (pYCm) we developed previously. Drug resistant genes encoding human
dihydrofolate reductase (hDHFR) and a yeast bifunctional protein (yFCU), with
cytosine deaminase (CD) and uridyl phosphoribosyl transferase (UPRT) activities
in the plasmid, allowed sequential positive (pyrimethamine, Pyr) and negative
(5-fluorocytosine, 5FC) selections and generation of transgenic parasites free of
the episomal plasmid after genetic modification. Using this system, we were able 
to efficiently tag a gene of interest (Pyp28) and subsequently disrupted two
genes (Pyctrp and Pycdpk3) that are individually critical for ookinete motility. 
Disruption of the genes either eliminated (Pyctrp) or greatly reduced (Pycdpk3)
ookinete forward motility in matrigel in vitro and completely blocked oocyst
development in mosquito midgut. The method will greatly facilitate studies of
parasite gene function, development, and disease pathogenesis.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2016.12.010 
PMCID: PMC5580835
PMID: 28034675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

