
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2017 Mar;96(3):624-629. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0668. Epub 2017 
Apr 6.

Influence of the pfmdr1 Gene on In Vitro Sensitivities of Piperaquine in Thai
Isolates of Plasmodium falciparum.

Mungthin M(1), Watanatanasup E(2), Sitthichot N(1), Suwandittakul N(1),
Khositnithikul R(1), Ward SA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Phramongkutklao College of Medicine, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(2)Mahidol University International College, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand.
(3)Division of Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology, Liverpool School of
Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

Piperaquine combined with dihydroartemisinin is one of the artemisinin derivative
combination therapies, which can replace artesunate-mefloquine in treating
uncomplicated falciparum malaria in Thailand. The aim of this study was to
determine the in vitro sensitivity of Thai Plasmodium falciparum isolates against
piperaquine and the influence of the pfmdr1 gene on in vitro response. One
hundred and thirty-seven standard laboratory and adapted Thai isolates of P.
falciparum were assessed for in vitro piperaquine sensitivity. Polymorphisms of
the pfmdr1 gene were determined by polymerase chain reaction methods. The mean
and standard deviation of the piperaquine IC50 in Thai isolates of P. falciparum 
were 16.7 ± 6.3 nM. The parasites exhibiting chloroquine IC50 of ≥ 100 nM were
significantly less sensitive to piperaquine compared with the parasite with
chloroquine IC50 of < 100 nM. No significant association between the pfmdr1 copy 
number and piperaquine IC50 values was found. In contrast, the parasites
containing the pfmdr1 86Y allele exhibited significantly reduced piperaquine
sensitivity. Before nationwide implementation of dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine
as the first-line treatment in Thailand, in vitro and in vivo evaluations of this
combination should be performed especially in areas where parasites containing
the pfmdr1 86Y allele are predominant such as the Thai-Malaysian border.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0668 
PMCID: PMC5361536
PMID: 28044042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

