
1. Ticks Tick Borne Dis. 2017 Feb;8(2):201-207. doi: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2016.08.011.
Epub 2016 Dec 21.

An insight into the sialome of Hyalomma excavatum.

Ribeiro JM(1), Slovák M(2), Francischetti IM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, Bethesda MD 20852, USA. Electronic address:
jribeiro@nih.gov.
(2)Institute of Zoology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Dúbravská cesta 9, 84506,
Bratislava, Slovakia. Electronic address: slovak.mirko@gmail.com.
(3)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, Bethesda MD 20852, USA. Electronic address:
ifrancischetti@niaid.nih.gov.

Tick saliva contains hundreds or thousands of proteins that help blood feeding by
impairing their hosts' hemostasis, inflammation and immunity. Salivary gland
transcriptomes allow the disclosure of this pharmacologically active potion that 
consists of several multi-gene families, many of which are tick-specific. We here
report the "de novo" assembly of ∼138 million reads deriving from a cDNA library 
from salivary glands of adult male and female Hyalomma excavatum leading to the
public deposition of 5337 coding sequences to GenBank. Among the deducted
putative secreted proteins, metalloproteases, glycine rich proteins, mucins,
anticoagulants of the madanin family and lipocalins were the most expressed.
Novel protein families were identified. These sequences will permit proteomic
studies aiming at identification of target antigens, epidemiological markers or
salivary pharmaceuticals of interest, and contribute to our understanding of the 
fast evolution of the tick sialome.

Published by Elsevier GmbH.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2016.08.011 
PMCID: PMC5248969
PMID: 28049606  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

