
1. Vaccine. 2017 Feb 7;35(6):873-881. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.01.001. Epub 2017 
Jan 12.

Antibody profiles to wheat germ cell-free system synthesized Plasmodium
falciparum proteins correlate with protection from symptomatic malaria in Uganda.

Kanoi BN(1), Takashima E(2), Morita M(1), White MT(3), Palacpac NM(4), Ntege
EH(1), Balikagala B(1), Yeka A(5), Egwang TG(6), Horii T(4), Tsuboi T(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Malaria Research, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University,
Matsuyama, Ehime 790-8577, Japan.
(2)Division of Malaria Research, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University,
Matsuyama, Ehime 790-8577, Japan. Electronic address:
takashima.eizo.mz@ehime-u.ac.jp.
(3)Population Health and Immunity Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia; MRC Center for Outbreak Analysis and
Modelling, Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College
London, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Molecular Protozoology, Research Institute for Microbial
Diseases, Osaka University, Suita 565-0871, Japan.
(5)Makerere University College of Health Sciences, School of Public Health,
Kampala, Uganda.
(6)Med Biotech Laboratories, Plot 4-6 Bell Close, Port Bell Road Luzira, Kampala,
Uganda.
(7)Division of Malaria Research, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University,
Matsuyama, Ehime 790-8577, Japan. Electronic address:
tsuboi.takafumi.mb@ehime-u.ac.jp.

The key targets of protective antibodies against Plasmodium falciparum remain
largely unknown. In this study, we determined immunoreactivity to 1827
recombinant proteins derived from 1565 genes representing ∼30% of the entire P.
falciparum genome, for identification of novel malaria vaccine candidates. The
recombinant proteins were expressed by wheat germ cell-free system, a platform
that can synthesize quality plasmodial proteins that elicit biologically active
antibodies in animals. Sera were obtained from indigenous residents of a malaria 
endemic region in Northern Uganda who were enrolled at the start of a rainy
season and prospectively monitored for symptomatic malaria episodes for a year.
Immunoreactivity to sera was determined by AlphaScreen; a homogeneous
high-throughput system that detects protein interactions. Our analysis revealed
antibody responses to 128 proteins that significantly associated with protection 
from symptomatic malaria. From 128 proteins, 53 were down-selected as the most
plausible targets of host protective immune response by virtue of having a
predicted signal peptide and/or transmembrane domain(s), or confirmed
localization on the parasite surface. The 53 proteins comprised of not only
previously characterized vaccine candidates but also uncharacterized proteins.
Proteins involved in erythrocyte invasion; RON4, RON2 and CLAG3.1 and
pre-erythrocytic proteins; SIAP-2, TRAP and CelTOS, were recommended for
prioritization for further evaluation as vaccine candidates. The findings clearly
demonstrate that generation of the protein library using the wheat germ cell-free
system coupled with high throughput immunoscreening with AlphaScreen offers new
options for rational discovery and selection of potential malaria vaccine
candidates.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.01.001 
PMID: 28089547  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

