
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jan 16;7:40655. doi: 10.1038/srep40655.

Epigenetic regulation of Plasmodium falciparum clonally variant gene expression
during development in Anopheles gambiae.

Gómez-Díaz E(1), Yerbanga RS(2), Lefèvre T(2)(3), Cohuet A(2)(3), Rowley MJ(1),
Ouedraogo JB(2), Corces VG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, 1510 Clifton Road NE, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA.
(2)Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé (IRSS), 01 BP 171 Bobo
Dioulasso, Burkina Faso.
(3)Maladies Infectieuses et Vecteurs: Écologie, Génétique, Évolution et Contrôle 
(MIVEGEC, UM -CNRS 5290-IRD 224), Centre IRD, 34394-Montpellier, France.

P. falciparum phenotypic plasticity is linked to the variant expression of clonal
multigene families such as the var genes. We have examined changes in
transcription and histone modifications that occur during sporogonic development 
of P. falciparum in the mosquito host. All var genes are silenced or transcribed 
at low levels in blood stages (gametocyte/ring) of the parasite in the human
host. After infection of mosquitoes, a single var gene is selected for expression
in the oocyst, and transcription of this gene increases dramatically in the
sporozoite. The same PF3D7_1255200 var gene was activated in 4 different
experimental infections. Transcription of this var gene during parasite
development in the mosquito correlates with the presence of low levels of H3K9me3
at the binding site for the PF3D7_1466400 AP2 transcription factor. This
chromatin state in the sporozoite also correlates with the expression of an
antisense long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) that has previously been shown to promote 
var gene transcription during the intraerythrocytic cycle in vitro. Expression of
both the sense protein-coding transcript and the antisense lncRNA increase
dramatically in sporozoites. The findings suggest a complex process for the
activation of a single particular var gene that involves AP2 transcription
factors and lncRNAs.

DOI: 10.1038/srep40655 
PMCID: PMC5238449
PMID: 28091569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

