
1. PLoS Pathog. 2017 Jan 17;13(1):e1006113. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006113.
eCollection 2017 Jan.

Transgenic Expression of the Anti-parasitic Factor TEP1 in the Malaria Mosquito
Anopheles gambiae.

Volohonsky G(1), Hopp AK(1), Saenger M(1), Soichot J(1), Scholze H(2), Boch J(2),
Blandin SA(1), Marois E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Strasbourg, CNRS UPR9022, INSERM U963, Institut de Biologie
Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Strasbourg, France.
(2)Martin-Luther Universität Halle-Wittenberg, Institut für Genetik, Halle
(Saale), Germany.

Mosquitoes genetically engineered to be resistant to Plasmodium parasites
represent a promising novel approach in the fight against malaria. The insect
immune system itself is a source of anti-parasitic genes potentially exploitable 
for transgenic designs. The Anopheles gambiae thioester containing protein 1
(TEP1) is a potent anti-parasitic protein. TEP1 is secreted and circulates in the
mosquito hemolymph, where its activated cleaved form binds and eliminates malaria
parasites. Here we investigated whether TEP1 can be used to create malaria
resistant mosquitoes. Using a GFP reporter transgene, we determined that the fat 
body is the main site of TEP1 expression. We generated transgenic mosquitoes that
express TEP1r, a potent refractory allele of TEP1, in the fat body and examined
the activity of the transgenic protein in wild-type or TEP1 mutant genetic
backgrounds. Transgenic TEP1r rescued loss-of-function mutations, but did not
increase parasite resistance in the presence of a wild-type susceptible allele.
Consistent with previous reports, TEP1 protein expressed from the transgene in
the fat body was taken up by hemocytes upon a challenge with injected bacteria.
Furthermore, although maturation of transgenic TEP1 into the cleaved form was
impaired in one of the TEP1 mutant lines, it was still sufficient to reduce
parasite numbers and induce parasite melanization. We also report here the first 
use of Transcription Activator Like Effectors (TALEs) in Anopheles gambiae to
stimulate expression of endogenous TEP1. We found that artificial elevation of
TEP1 expression remains moderate in vivo and that enhancement of endogenous TEP1 
expression did not result in increased resistance to Plasmodium. Taken together, 
our results reveal the difficulty of artificially influencing TEP1-mediated
Plasmodium resistance, and contribute to further our understanding of the
molecular mechanisms underlying mosquito resistance to Plasmodium parasites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006113 
PMCID: PMC5240933
PMID: 28095489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

