
1. Infect Immun. 2017 Mar 23;85(4). pii: e00841-16. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00841-16. Print
2017 Apr.

The Severity of Plasmodium falciparum Infection Is Associated with Transcript
Levels of var Genes Encoding Endothelial Protein C Receptor-Binding P. falciparum
Erythrocyte Membrane Protein 1.

Mkumbaye SI(1), Wang CW(2), Lyimo E(3), Jespersen JS(2), Manjurano A(3), Mosha
J(3), Kavishe RA(1), Mwakalinga SB(1), Minja DTR(4), Lusingu JP(4), Theander
TG(2), Lavstsen T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Kilimanjaro Christian Medical University College and Kilimanjaro Clinical
Research Institute, Moshi, Tanzania.
(2)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of International Health,
Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, and Department of
Infectious Diseases, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)National Institute for Medical Research, Mwanza Research Centre, Mwanza,
Tanzania.
(4)National Institute for Medical Research, Tanga Research Centre, Tanga,
Tanzania.
(5)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of International Health,
Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, and Department of
Infectious Diseases, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark thomasl@sund.ku.dk.

By attaching infected erythrocytes to the vascular lining, Plasmodium falciparum 
parasites leave blood circulation and avoid splenic clearance. This sequestration
is central to pathogenesis. Severe malaria is associated with parasites
expressing an antigenically distinct P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1
(PfEMP1) subset mediating binding to endothelial receptors. Previous studies
indicate that PfEMP1 adhesins with so-called CIDRα1 domains capable of binding
endothelial protein C receptor (EPCR) constitute the PfEMP1 subset associated
with severe pediatric malaria. To analyze the relative importance of different
subtypes of CIDRα1 domains, we compared Pfemp1 transcript levels in children with
severe malaria (including 9 fatal and 114 surviving cases), children hospitalized
with uncomplicated malaria (n = 42), children with mild malaria not requiring
hospitalization (n = 10), and children with parasitemia and no ongoing fever (n =
12). High levels of transcripts encoding EPCR-binding PfEMP1 were found in
patients with symptomatic infections, and the abundance of these transcripts
increased with disease severity. The compositions of CIDRα1 subtype transcripts
varied markedly between patients, and none of the subtypes were dominant.
Transcript-level analyses targeting other domain types indicated that subtypes of
DBLβ or DBLζ domains might mediate binding phenomena that, in conjunction with
EPCR binding, could contribute to pathogenesis. These observations strengthen the
rationale for targeting the PfEMP1-EPCR interaction by vaccines and adjunctive
therapies. Interventions should target EPCR binding of all CIDRα1 subtypes.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00841-16 
PMCID: PMC5364309
PMID: 28138022  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

