
1. Blood Transfus. 2018 Jan;16(1):93-100. doi: 10.2450/2017.0119-16. Epub 2017 Jan
30.

Molecular basis of the Duffy blood group system.

HÃ¶her G(1), Fiegenbaum M(1)(2), Almeida S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Programme in Biosciences, Federal University of Health Sciences
of Porto Alegre-UFCSPA, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(2)Department of Basic Health Sciences, Federal University of Health Sciences of 
Porto Alegre-UFCSPA, Porto Alegre, Brazil.

ACKR1, located on chromosome 1q23.2, is the gene that encodes a glycoprotein
expressing the Duffy blood group antigens. This gene is transcribed in two mRNA
variants yielding two isoforms, encoding proteins with 338 and 336 amino acids.
This review provides a general overview of the Duffy blood group to characterise 
and elucidate the genetic basis of this system. The Fya and Fyb antigens are
encoded by co-dominant FY*A (FY*01) and FY*B (FY*02) alleles, which differ by
c.125G>A (rs12075), defining the Fy(a+b-), Fy(a-b+) and Fy(a+b+) phenotypes. The 
Fy(a-b-) phenotype that occurs in Africans provides an explanation for the
apparent absence of Plasmodium vivax in this region: this phenotype arises from
homozygosity for the FY*B allele carrying a point mutation c.1-67T>C (rs2814778),
which prevents Fyb antigen expression only in red blood cells. The same mutation 
has also been found on the FY*A allele, but it is very rare. The Fy(a-b-)
phenotype in Europeans and Asians arises from mutations in the coding region of
the FY*A or FY*B allele, preventing Duffy antigen expression on any cell in the
body and thus are true Duffy null phenotypes. According to the International
Society for Blood Transfusion, ten alleles are associated with the null
expression of the Fy antigens. Furthermore, different allelic forms of FY*B
modify Fyb antigen expression, which may result in very weak or equivocal
serology results. The mostly common found variants, c.265C>T (rs34599082) and
c.298G>A (rs13962) -previously defined in combination only with the FY*B allele -
have already been observed in the FY*A allele. Thus, six alleles have been
recognised and associated with weak expression of the Fy antigens. Considering
the importance of the Duffy blood group system in clinical medicine, additional
studies via molecular biology approaches must be performed to resolve and clarify
the discrepant results that are present in the erythrocyte phenotyping.

DOI: 10.2450/2017.0119-16 
PMCID: PMC5770319
PMID: 28151395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

