
1. Biochem Cell Biol. 2017 Apr;95(2):310-317. doi: 10.1139/bcb-2016-0028. Epub 2016 
Aug 12.

Cellular stress associated with the differentiation of Plasmodium berghei
ookinetes.

Duran-Bedolla J(1), Téllez-Sosa J(1), Valdovinos-Torres H(1), Pavón N(2),
Buelna-Chontal M(2), Tello-López AT(1), Argotte-Ramos R(1), Rodríguez MH(1),
Rodríguez MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Centro de Investigación Sobre Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional
de Salud Pública, Avenida Universidad 655, C.P. 62100, Cuernavaca, Morelos,
México.
(2)b Departamento de Farmacología and Departamento de Biomedicina Cardiovascular,
Instituto Nacional de Cardiología, Ignacio Chávez, Juan Badiano # 1, Col. Sección
XVI, C.P. 014080, Tlalpan, D.F., México.

For malaria transmission, Plasmodium parasites must develop in the mosquito
vector. Oxidative stress in the insect midgut, triggered by environmental changes
(e.g., pH and temperature), influences the cellular signaling involved in
differentiation from gametocytes to mobile ookinetes for the purpose of parasite 
survival. Oxidative stress activates the homeostatic response to stress
characterized by the phosphorylation eIF2α, the attenuation of protein synthesis,
and the transcription of genes participating in the unfolded protein response and
antioxidant processes, forming a part of an integrated stress response (ISR). We 
hypothesized that ISR operates during the differentiation of gametocytes to
ookinetes to assure Plasmodium survival. Using in-vitro conditions resembling the
mosquito midgut conditions, we cultured Plasmodium berghei gametocytes to
ookinetes and evaluated the redox balance by detecting reactive oxygen species
and superoxide dismutase activity. Additionally, we evaluated the phosphorylation
of eIF2α, the attenuation of the global protein synthesis, and the gene
expression of cellular stress markers (e.g., endoplasmic reticulum chaperones and
antioxidant molecules, measured by reverse-transcription quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction), finding that these processes were all taking place, probably to 
improve survival during the differentiation of Plasmodium berghei ookinetes.

DOI: 10.1139/bcb-2016-0028 
PMID: 28177775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

