
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Feb 9;7:41772. doi: 10.1038/srep41772.

Involvement of β-defensin 130 (DEFB130) in the macrophage microbicidal mechanisms
for killing Plasmodium falciparum.

Terkawi MA(1)(2), Takano R(1), Furukawa A(3), Murakoshi F(1), Kato K(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases, Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Inada-cho, Obihiro, Hokkaido 080-8555,
Japan.
(2)Frontier Research Center for Advanced Material and Life Science, Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, School of Medicine, Hokkaido University, Kita 21, Nishi 11,
Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 001-0021, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Biomolecular Science, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Kita-12, Nishi-6, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.
(4)Research Center for Global Agromedicine, Obihiro University of Agriculture and
Veterinary Medicine, Inada-cho, Obihiro, Hokkaido 080-8555, Japan.

Understanding the molecular defense mechanism of macrophages and identifying
their effector molecules against malarial parasites may provide important clues
for the discovery of new therapies. To analyze the immunological responses of
malarial parasite-induced macrophages, we used DNA microarray technology to
examine the gene profile of differentiated macrophages phagocytizing Plasmodium
falciparum-parasitized erythrocytes (iRBC). The transcriptional gene profile of
macrophages in response to iRBCs represented 168 down-regulated genes, which were
mainly involved in the cellular immune response, and 216 upregulated genes, which
were involved in cellular proteolysis, growth, and adhesion. Importantly, the
specific upregulation of β-defensin 130 (DEFB130) in these macrophages suggested 
a possible role for DEFB130 in malarial parasite elimination. Differentiated
macrophages phagocytizing iRBCs exhibited an increase in intracellular DEFB130
levels and DEFB130 appeared to accumulate at the site of iRBC engulfment.
Transfection of esiRNA-mediated knockdown of DEFB130 into macrophages resulted in
a remarkable reduction in their antiplasmodial activity in vitro. Furthermore,
DEFB130 synthetic peptide exhibited a modest toxic effect on P. falciparum in
vitro and P. yoelii in vivo, unlike scrambled DEFB130 peptide, which showed no
antiplasmodial activity. Together, these results suggest that DEFB130 might be
one of the macrophage effector molecules for eliminating malarial parasites. Our 
data broaden our knowledge of the immunological response of macrophages to iRBCs 
and shed light on a new target for therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.1038/srep41772 
PMCID: PMC5299406
PMID: 28181499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interests.

