
1. Parasit Vectors. 2017 Feb 10;10(1):75. doi: 10.1186/s13071-017-2013-z.

Genetic diversity and population structure of the primary malaria vector
Anopheles sinensis (Diptera: Culicidae) in China inferred by cox1 gene.

Feng X(1)(2), Huang L(3), Lin L(2), Yang M(2), Ma Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)WHO Collaborating Center for Tropical Diseases, Key Laboratory of Parasite and
Vector Biology, Ministry of Public Health, National Institute of Parasitic
Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shanghai, 200025,
China.
(2)Department of Tropical Infectious Disease, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, 200433, China.
(3)Second Military Medical University Press, Shanghai, 200433, China.
(4)Department of Tropical Infectious Disease, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, 200433, China. yajun_ma@163.com.

Erratum in
    Parasit Vectors. 2017 Mar 2;10 (1):120.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles sinensis is a primary vector for Plasmodium vivax malaria
in most regions of China. A comprehensive understanding of genetic variation and 
structure of the mosquito would be of benefit to the vector control and in a
further attempt to contribute to malaria elimination in China. However, there is 
only inadequate population genetic data pertaining to An. sinensis currently.
METHODS: Genetic variations and structure among populations of An. sinensis was
examined and analyzed based on the nucleotide sequences of a 662 nt variable
region of the mitochondrial cox1 gene among 15 populations from 20 collection
sites in China.
RESULTS: A total of 453 individuals in 15 populations were analyzed. The cox1
gene sequences were aligned, and 247 haplotypes were detected, 41 of these shared
between populations. The range of haplotype diversity was from 0.709 (Yunnan) to 
0.998 (Anhui). The genealogic network showed that the haplotypes were divided
into two clusters, cluster I was at a high level of homoplasy, while cluster II
included almost all individuals from the Yunnan population. The Yunnan population
displayed a significantly high level of genetic differentiation (0.452-0.622) and
a restricted gene flow with other populations. The pairwise F ST values among
other populations were lower. The AMOVA result showed that the percentage of
variation within populations (83.83%) was higher than that among populations
(16.17%). Mantel test suggested that geographical distance did not significantly 
contribute to the genetic differentiation (R 2 = 0.0125, P = 0.59). Neutral test 
and mismatch analysis results showed that the An. sinensis population has
undergone demographic expansions.
CONCLUSIONS: Anopheles sinensis populations showed high genetic polymorphism by
cox1 gene. The weak genetic structure may be a consequence of low genetic
differentiation and high gene flow among populations, except the Yunnan samples. 
The Yunnan population was isolated from the other populations, gene flow limited 
by geographical distance and barriers. These findings will provide a theoretical 
basis for vector surveillance and vector control in China.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-017-2013-z 
PMCID: PMC5439230
PMID: 28183358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

