
1. Mol Ecol. 2017 Jun;26(11):2880-2894. doi: 10.1111/mec.14066. Epub 2017 Mar 15.

Population genetic structure and adaptation of malaria parasites on the edge of
endemic distribution.

Duffy CW(1), Ba H(2), Assefa S(1), Ahouidi AD(3), Deh YB(2), Tandia A(2),
Kirsebom FCM(1), Kwiatkowski DP(4), Conway DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen Molecular Biology, London School of Hygiene & Tropical 
Medicine, Keppel St, London, WC1E 7HT, UK.
(2)Institut National de Recherche en Sante Publique, Nouakchott, Mauritania.
(3)Laboratory of Bacteriology and Virology, Le Dantec Hospital, Cheikh Anta Diop 
University, Dakar, Senegal.
(4)Malaria Programme, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK.

To determine whether the major human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum
exhibits fragmented population structure or local adaptation at the northern
limit of its African distribution where the dry Sahel zone meets the Sahara,
samples were collected from diverse locations within Mauritania over a range of
~1000 km. Microsatellite genotypes were obtained for 203 clinical infection
samples from eight locations, and Illumina paired-end sequences were obtained to 
yield high coverage genomewide single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data for 65
clinical infection samples from four locations. Most infections contained single 
parasite genotypes, reflecting low rates of transmission and superinfection
locally, in contrast to the situation seen in population samples from countries
further south. A minority of infections shared related or identical genotypes
locally, indicating some repeated transmission of parasite clones without
recombination. This caused some multilocus linkage disequilibrium and local
divergence, but aside from the effect of repeated genotypes there was minimal
differentiation between locations. Several chromosomal regions had elevated
integrated haplotype scores (|iHS|) indicating recent selection, including those 
containing drug resistance genes. A genomewide FST scan comparison with previous 
sequence data from an area in West Africa with higher infection endemicity
indicates that regional gene flow prevents genetic isolation, but revealed allele
frequency differentiation at three drug resistance loci and an erythrocyte
invasion ligand gene. Contrast of extended haplotype signatures revealed none to 
be unique to Mauritania. Discrete foci of infection on the edge of the Sahara are
genetically highly connected to the wider continental parasite population, and
local elimination would be difficult to achieve without very substantial
reduction in malaria throughout the region.

© 2017 The Authors. Molecular Ecology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.14066 
PMCID: PMC5485074
PMID: 28214367  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

