
1. PLoS One. 2017 Mar 2;12(3):e0173098. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0173098.
eCollection 2017.

Evidence that agricultural use of pesticides selects pyrethroid resistance within
Anopheles gambiae s.l. populations from cotton growing areas in Burkina Faso,
West Africa.

Hien AS(1), Soma DD(1), Hema O(2), Bayili B(1), Namountougou M(3), Gnankiné O(4),
Baldet T(5), Diabaté A(1), Dabiré KR(1).

Author information: 
(1)IRSS/DRO, Malaria and Tropical Neglected Research Unit, Bobo-Dioulasso,
Burkina Faso.
(2)Programme Coton/INERA/ Farako-Ba, Bobo-Dioulasso, Burkina Faso.
(3)Institute of Rural Development, Université Polytechnique de Bobo-Dioulasso,
Burkina Faso.
(4)UFR/Life Science, Université Joseph Ki-Zerbo, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.
(5)CIRAD, Campus de Baillarguet, Montpellier, France.

Many studies have shown the role of agriculture in the selection and spread of
resistance of Anopheles gambiae s.l. to insecticides. However, no study has
directly demonstrated the presence of insecticides in breeding sources as a
source of selection for this resistance. It is in this context that we
investigated the presence of pesticide residues in breeding habitats and their
formal involvement in vector resistance to insecticides in areas of West Africa
with intensive farming. This study was carried out from June to November 2013 in 
Dano, southwest Burkina Faso in areas of conventional (CC) and biological cotton 
(BC) growing. Water and sediment samples collected from breeding sites located
near BC and CC fields were submitted for chromatographic analysis to research and
titrate the residual insecticide content found there. Larvae were also collected 
in these breeding sites and used in toxicity tests to compare their mortality to 
those of the susceptible strain, Anopheles gambiae Kisumu. All tested mosquitoes 
(living and dead) were analyzed by PCR for species identification and
characterization of resistance genes. The toxicity analysis of water from
breeding sites showed significantly lower mortality rates in breeding site water 
from biological cotton (WBC) growing sites compared to that from conventional
cotton (WCC) sites respective to both An. gambiae Kisumu (WBC: 80.75% vs WCC:
92.75%) and a wild-type strain (49.75% vs 66.5%). The allele frequencies L1014F, 
L1014S kdr, and G116S ace -1R mutations conferring resistance, respectively, to
pyrethroids and carbamates / organophosphates were 0.95, 0.4 and 0.12.
Deltamethrin and lambda-cyhalothrin were identified in the water samples taken in
October/November from mosquitoes breeding in the CC growing area. The
concentrations obtained were respectively 0.0147ug/L and 1.49 ug/L to
deltamethrin and lambdacyhalothrin. Our results provided evidence by direct
analysis (biological and chromatographic tests) of the role of agriculture as a
source of selection pressure on vectors to insecticides used in growing areas.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0173098 
PMCID: PMC5333875
PMID: 28253316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

