
1. PLoS Genet. 2017 Mar 10;13(3):e1006560. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006560.
eCollection 2017 Mar.

Population genetic analysis of the DARC locus (Duffy) reveals adaptation from
standing variation associated with malaria resistance in humans.

McManus KF(1), Taravella AM(2), Henn BM(2), Bustamante CD(1)(3), Sikora M(3)(4), 
Cornejo OE(3)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United
States of America.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolution, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New 
York, United States of America.
(3)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United
States of America.
(4)Centre for Geogenetics, Natural History Museum Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman,
washington, United States of America.

The human DARC (Duffy antigen receptor for chemokines) gene encodes a
membrane-bound chemokine receptor crucial for the infection of red blood cells by
Plasmodium vivax, a major causative agent of malaria. Of the three major allelic 
classes segregating in human populations, the FY*O allele has been shown to
protect against P. vivax infection and is at near fixation in sub-Saharan Africa,
while FY*B and FY*A are common in Europe and Asia, respectively. Due to the
combination of strong geographic differentiation and association with malaria
resistance, DARC is considered a canonical example of positive selection in
humans. Despite this, details of the timing and mode of selection at DARC remain 
poorly understood. Here, we use sequencing data from over 1,000 individuals in
twenty-one human populations, as well as ancient human genomes, to perform a
fine-scale investigation of the evolutionary history of DARC. We estimate the
time to most recent common ancestor (TMRCA) of the most common FY*O haplotype to 
be 42 kya (95% CI: 34-49 kya). We infer the FY*O null mutation swept to fixation 
in Africa from standing variation with very low initial frequency (0.1%) and a
selection coefficient of 0.043 (95% CI:0.011-0.18), which is among the strongest 
estimated in the human genome. We estimate the TMRCA of the FY*A mutation in
non-Africans to be 57 kya (95% CI: 48-65 kya) and infer that, prior to the sweep 
of FY*O, all three alleles were segregating in Africa, as highly diverged
populations from Asia and â‰ Khomani San hunter-gatherers share the same FY*A
haplotypes. We test multiple models of admixture that may account for this
observation and reject recent Asian or European admixture as the cause.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006560 
PMCID: PMC5365118
PMID: 28282382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

