
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2017;1572:431-443. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6911-1_28.

Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification and LFD Combination for Detection of
Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax.

Kongkasuriyachai D(1), Yongkiettrakul S(2), Kiatpathomchai W(2), Arunrut N(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, 113 Phahonyothin
Road, Khlong Nueng, Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani, 12120, Thailand.
darin@biotec.or.th.
(2)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, 113 Phahonyothin
Road, Khlong Nueng, Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani, 12120, Thailand.

Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) has been used to detect several
pathogens including malaria parasites from field and clinical samples. In this
protocol, the malaria LAMP technology is developed to differentiate between
Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) and Plasmodium vivax (Pv) species by targeting the
dihydrofolate reductase thymidylate synthase (dhfr-ts) gene, a known target for
the antifolate class of drugs such as Pyrimethamine. LAMP primer sets are
designed and validated for species specific amplification. Additionally, specific
probes help improve detection and visualization of the products when combined
with lateral flow dipstick-based (LFD) detection. The protocols are further
simplified to eliminate tedious sample preparation steps, such that crude lysis
prepared simply by diluting few microliter (Î¼L) of blood sample with distilled
water is sufficient. The LAMP-LFD malaria dhfr-ts protocols are sensitive and can
detect as little as 1 picogram (pg) of PfDNA and 1 nanogram (ng) of PvDNA, or a
few microliters of crude lysate from infected blood samples (Yongkiettrakul et
al., Parasitol Int 63: 777-784, 2014). These simplified steps not only reduce
cost but also increase the potential for large application in the fields and
clinical settings.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6911-1_28 
PMID: 28299704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

