
1. Exp Parasitol. 2017 Sep;180:33-44. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2017.03.006. Epub 2017 
Mar 27.

Transcript and protein expression analysis of proteases in the blood stages of
Plasmodium falciparum.

Weißbach T(1), Golzmann A(1), Bennink S(1), Pradel G(1), Julius Ngwa C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Applied Infection Biology, Institute of Zoology, RWTH
Aachen University, Worringerweg 1, 52074 Aachen, Germany.
(2)Division of Cellular and Applied Infection Biology, Institute of Zoology, RWTH
Aachen University, Worringerweg 1, 52074 Aachen, Germany. Electronic address:
ngwa.che@bio2.rwth-aachen.de.

Proteases are crucial enzymes with varying roles in living organisms. In the
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, the role of proteases has been deciphered
mainly in the asexual blood stages and shown to represent promising drug targets.
However, little is known about their functions in the sexual blood stages, which 
are important for transmission of the disease from the human to the mosquito
vector. Determination of their stage-specific expression during the malaria
life-cycle is crucial for the effective design of multi-stage anti-malaria drugs 
aimed at eradicating the disease. In this study, we screened the P. falciparum
genome database for putative proteases and determined the transcript and protein 
expression profiles of selected proteases in the plasmodial blood stages using
semi-quantitative RT-PCR and indirect immunofluorescence assay. Database mining
identified a total of 148 putative proteases, out of which 18 were demonstrated
to be expressed in the blood stages on the transcript level; for 12 of these
proteins synthesis was confirmed. While three of these proteases exhibit
gametocyte-specific expression, two are restricted to the asexual blood stages
and seven are found in both stages, making them interesting multi-stage drug
targets.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2017.03.006 
PMID: 28351685  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

