
1. Infect Dis Poverty. 2017 Apr 4;6(1):44. doi: 10.1186/s40249-017-0259-5.

Prolonged parasite clearance in a Chinese splenectomized patient with falciparum 
malaria imported from Nigeria.

Zhang HW(1), Li SJ(2), Hu T(3), Yu YM(2), Yang CY(4), Zhou RM(4), Liu Y(4), Tang 
J(2), Wang JJ(2), Wang XY(2), Sun YX(2), Feng ZC(3), Xu BL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasite Disease Control and Prevention, Henan Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Zhengzhou, People's Republic of China.
Zhwei69@163.com.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, the 6th People's Hospital of Zhengzhou,
Zhengzhou, 450016, People's Republic of China.
(3)School of Medicine and Health Management, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, Hubei, People's Republic of 
China.
(4)Department of Parasite Disease Control and Prevention, Henan Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Zhengzhou, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Parasite Disease Control and Prevention, Henan Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Zhengzhou, People's Republic of China.
Bianlixu@163.com.

BACKGROUND: The spleen plays a pivotal role in the rapid clearance of parasitized
red blood cells in patients with falciparum malaria after artemisinin treatment. 
Prolonged parasite clearance can be found in patients who have had a splenectomy,
or those with hemoglobin abnormalities and/or reduced immunity, which are all
distinguishable from artemisinin resistance. This paper reports on a case of
prolonged parasite clearance in a Chinese splenectomized patient with falciparum 
malaria imported from Nigeria.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 35-year-old Chinese male suffered 2 days of febrile illness 
after returning to Zhumadian city of Henan province from Nigeria on October 1,
2014. The main symptoms were febrile, including the highest axillary temperature 
of 40 °C, headache, and chills. A peripheral blood smear showed parasitemia (53
913 asexual parasites/μl) of Plasmodium falciparum. The patient had not used any 
chemoprophylaxis against malaria in Nigeria when he worked there as a
construction worker between 2009 and 2014. The patient had three episodes of
malaria in Nigeria and had a splenectomy due to a traffic accident 8 years ago
from the time he was admitted to hospital. The patient was orally administrated a
total of 320 mg/2.56 g dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine for 2 days and
intravenously administrated a total of 3 000 mg artesunate for 18 days. The
axillary temperature of the patient ranged between 37.0 and 37.7 °C from Day 0 to
Day 3, and blood microscopy revealed falciparum malaria parasitemia (26 674
asexual parasites/μl) on Day 3. The patient was afebrile on Day 4, falciparum
malaria parasitemia was continuously present and then gradually decreased on the 
next days, and was negative on Day 21. The patient was cured and left hospital on
Day 24 after no plasmodium falciparum was found in the blood on Day 21 to Day 23.
No mutation was found in the K13 propeller gene when compared with the
PF3D7_1343700 K13 propeller gene reference sequence.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first reported case in China of prolonged parasite
clearance in a splenectomized patient with imported falciparum malaria.
Artemisinin resistance should be distinguished when prolonged parasite clearance 
is found in a malaria patient who has had splenectomy.

DOI: 10.1186/s40249-017-0259-5 
PMCID: PMC5379605
PMID: 28372588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

