
1. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2017 Aug 1;7(8). pii: a025577. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a025577.

Immune Responses in Malaria.

Long CA(1), Zavala F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Health, Rockville, Maryland 20852.
(2)Departmentof Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205.

Evidence accumulated through the years clearly indicates that antiparasite immune
responses can efficiently control malaria parasite infection at all development
stages, and under certain circumstances they can prevent parasite infection.
Translating these findings into vaccines or immunotherapeutic interventions has
been difficult in part because of the extraordinary biological complexity of this
parasite, which has several developmental stages expressing unique sets of
stage-specific genes and multiple antigens, most of which are antigenically
diverse. Nevertheless, in the last 30 years major advances have resulted in
characterization of a number of vaccine candidates, exploration of the repertoire
of host immune responses to the various parasite stages, and also identification 
of significant hurdles that need to be overcome. Most important, these advances
strengthened the concept that the induction of host immune responses that target 
all developmental stages of Plasmodium can efficiently control or abrogate
Plasmodium infections and strongly support the notion that an effective vaccine
can be developed. This vaccine would be a critical component for programs aimed
at controlling or eradicating malaria.

Copyright Â© 2017 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a025577 
PMCID: PMC5538407
PMID: 28389518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

