
1. mBio. 2017 Apr 11;8(2). pii: e00172-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00172-17.

Plasmodium falciparum K13 Mutations Differentially Impact Ozonide Susceptibility 
and Parasite Fitness In Vitro.

Straimer J(1), Gnädig NF(1), Stokes BH(1), Ehrenberger M(1), Crane AA(1), Fidock 
DA(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York, USA df2260@cumc.columbia.edu.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Columbia University
College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York, USA.

The emergence and spread in Southeast Asia of Plasmodium falciparum resistance to
artemisinin (ART) derivatives, the cornerstone of first-line artemisinin-based
combination therapies (ACTs), underscore the urgent need to identify suitable
replacement drugs. Discovery and development efforts have identified a series of 
ozonides with attractive chemical and pharmacological properties that are being
touted as suitable replacements. Partial resistance to ART, defined as delayed
parasite clearance in malaria patients treated with an ART derivative or an ACT, 
has been associated with mutations in the P. falciparum K13 gene. In light of
reports showing that ART derivatives and ozonides share similar modes of action, 
we have investigated whether parasites expressing mutant K13 are cross-resistant 
to the ozonides OZ439 (artefenomel) and OZ227 (arterolane). This work used a
panel of culture-adapted clinical isolates from Cambodia that were genetically
edited to express variant forms of K13. Phenotypic analyses employed ring-stage
survival assays (ring-stage survival assay from 0 to 3 h [RSA0-3h]), whose
results have earlier been shown to correlate with parasite clearance rates in
patients. Our results document cross-resistance between OZ277 and
dihydroartemisinin (DHA), a semisynthetic derivative of ART, in parasites
carrying the K13 mutations C580Y, R539T, and I543T. For OZ439, we observed
cross-resistance only for parasites that carried the rare K13 I543T mutation,
with no evidence of cross-resistance afforded by the prevalent C580Y mutation.
Mixed-culture competition experiments with isogenic lines carrying modified K13
revealed variable growth deficits depending on the K13 mutation and parasite
strain and provide a rationale for the broad dissemination of the fitness-neutral
K13 C580Y mutation throughout strains currently circulating in Southeast
Asia.IMPORTANCE ACTs have helped halve the malaria disease burden in recent
years; however, emerging resistance to ART derivatives threatens to reverse this 
substantial progress. Resistance is driven primarily by mutations in the
P. falciparum K13 gene. These mutations pose a threat to ozonides, touted as
promising alternatives to ARTs that share a similar mode of action. We report
that DHA was considerably more potent than OZ439 and OZ277 against ART-sensitive 
asexual blood-stage parasites cultured in vitro We also document that mutant K13 
significantly compromised the activity of the registered drug OZ277. In contrast,
OZ439 remained effective against most parasite lines expressing mutant K13, with 
the exception of I543T that merits further monitoring in field-based OZ439
efficacy studies. K13 mutations differed considerably in their impact on parasite
growth rates, in a strain-dependent context, with the most prevalent C580Y
mutation being fitness neutral in recently culture-adapted strains from Cambodia,
the epicenter of emerging ART resistance.

Copyright © 2017 Straimer et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00172-17 
PMCID: PMC5388803
PMID: 28400526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

