
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Apr 18;7:46482. doi: 10.1038/srep46482.

Rational development of a protective P. vivax vaccine evaluated with transgenic
rodent parasite challenge models.

Salman AM(1)(2), Montoya-Díaz E(1), West H(1), Lall A(1), Atcheson E(1),
Lopez-Camacho C(1), Ramesar J(2), Bauza K(1), Collins KA(1), Brod F(1), Reis
F(3), Pappas L(1), González-Cerón L(4), Janse CJ(2), Hill AVS(1), Khan SM(2),
Reyes-Sandoval A(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Jenner Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford,
The Henry Wellcome Building for Molecular Physiology, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford,
OX3 7BN, UK.
(2)Leiden Malaria Research Group, Department of Parasitology, Center of
Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, (LUMC, L4-Q), Albinusdreef
2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte - MG - Brasil.
(4)Centro Regional de Investigación en Salud Pública, Instituto Nacional de Salud
Pública, 4ta Avenida Norte y Calle 19 Poniente, Tapachula, Chiapas, CP 30740,
Mexico.

Development of a protective and broadly-acting vaccine against the most widely
distributed human malaria parasite, Plasmodium vivax, will be a major step
towards malaria elimination. However, a P. vivax vaccine has remained elusive by 
the scarcity of pre-clinical models to test protective efficacy and support
further clinical trials. In this study, we report the development of a highly
protective CSP-based P. vivax vaccine, a virus-like particle (VLP) known as Rv21,
able to provide 100% sterile protection against a stringent sporozoite challenge 
in rodent models to malaria, where IgG2a antibodies were associated with
protection in absence of detectable PvCSP-specific T cell responses.
Additionally, we generated two novel transgenic rodent P. berghei parasite lines,
where the P. berghei csp gene coding sequence has been replaced with either
full-length P. vivax VK210 or the allelic VK247 csp that additionally express
GFP-Luciferase. Efficacy of Rv21 surpassed viral-vectored vaccination using
ChAd63 and MVA. We show for the first time that a chimeric VK210/247 antigen can 
elicit high level cross-protection against parasites expressing either CSP
allele, which provide accessible and affordable models suitable to support the
development of P. vivax vaccines candidates. Rv21 is progressing to GMP
production and has entered a path towards clinical evaluation.

DOI: 10.1038/srep46482 
PMCID: PMC5394459
PMID: 28417968  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

