
1. Parasitol Res. 2017 Jul;116(7):1887-1897. doi: 10.1007/s00436-017-5465-3. Epub
2017 May 5.

Multidisciplinary re-description of Plasmodium (Novyella) paranucleophilum in
Brazilian wild birds of the Atlantic Forest kept in captivity.

Tostes R(1), Dias RJP(2), Martinele I(2), Senra MVX(2), D'Agosto M(2), Massard
CL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pós-graduação em Ciências Veterinárias, Instituto de Veterinária, Universidade
Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro, Seropédica, Rio de Janeiro, 23890-000, Brazil.
raquelctostes@yahoo.com.br.
(2)Laboratório de Protozoologia, Programa de Pós-graduação em Ciências
Biológicas- Comportamento e Biologia Animal, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Minas Gerais, 36036-900,
Brazil.
(3)Pós-graduação em Ciências Veterinárias, Instituto de Veterinária, Universidade
Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro, Seropédica, Rio de Janeiro, 23890-000, Brazil.

Haemosporidian blood parasites of the Plasmodium genus are the causative agents
of avian malaria in many parts of the world. Despite the great diversity of
Brazilian avifauna, few studies have been conducted to examine the
haemosporidians of wild birds found in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest, especially 
those kept in captivity. This study aimed to re-examine and further characterize 
the South American avian parasite Plasmodium paranucleophilum using a
multidisciplinary approach. Blood samples were collected from 68 captive birds
representing 15 species found in the Atlantic Forest of southeastern Brazil.
Morphometric and morphological characterization was performed, in addition to PCR
and sequencing of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene and subsequent phylogenetic
analysis. The overall prevalence of P. paranucleophilum infection in the study
was 13.23% (n = 9), with a mean parasitemia of 0.58%. We observed the highest
parasitemia of 3.88% in Rupornis magnirostris. In our phylogenetic analysis, P.
paranucleophilum and P lasmodium nucleophilum formed distinct, highly supported
clades, with a mean genetic divergence of 2.48%. This study provides new
morphological and molecular data, expanding our knowledge of the haemosporidians 
of wild birds in Brazil and highlighting the need for further investigation. The 
true depth of diversity in Brazilian avian haemosporidians remains largely
unknown, and given the enormous variety of vectors and avian species, there may
be many more species of these blood parasites yet to be described.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-017-5465-3 
PMID: 28477100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

