
1. J Immunol. 2017 Jun 15;198(12):4716-4727. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1601860. Epub
2017 May 5.

A Schistosoma japonicum Infection Promotes the Expansion of Myeloid-Derived
Suppressor Cells by Activating the JAK/STAT3 Pathway.

Yang Q(1), Qiu H(1), Xie H(2), Qi Y(1), Cha H(1), Qu J(1), Wang M(1), Feng Y(1), 
Ye X(1), Mu J(3)(4), Huang J(3)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology, Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Sino-French Hoffmann Institute,
Second Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, 511436 Guangzhou,
China.
(2)Functional Experiment Center, Guangzhou Medical University, 511436 Guangzhou, 
China.
(3)Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology, Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Sino-French Hoffmann Institute,
Second Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, 511436 Guangzhou,
China; jmu@niaid.nih.gov hj165@sina.com.
(4)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892; and.
(5)Key Laboratory of Protein Modification and Degradation, School of Basic
Medical Sciences, Guangzhou Medical University, 511436 Guangzhou, China.

Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), a heterogeneous group of immune cells
from the myeloid lineage, play an important part in suppression of host immune
responses during many pathologic conditions, including cancer and infectious
diseases. Thus, understanding the functional diversity of these cells as well as 
the underlying mechanisms is crucial for the development of disease control
strategies. The role of MDSCs during Schistosoma japonicum infection, however, is
not clear, and there is a lack of systematic study so far. In this study, we
provide strong evidence that the soluble egg Ag (SEA) and schistosome worm Ag
(SWA) of S. japonicum enhance the accumulation of MDSCs. Ag-induced MDSCs have
more potent suppressive effects on T cell responses than do control MDSCs in both
in vivo S. japonicum infection and in vitro SEA- and SWA-treated mouse bone
marrow cells experiments. Interestingly, the enhanced suppressive activity of
MDSCs by Ag administration was coupled with a dramatic induction of the NADPH
oxidase subunits gp91phox and p47phox and was dependent on the production of
reactive oxygen species. Moreover, mechanistic studies revealed that the Ag
effects are mediated by JAK/STAT3 signaling. Inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation 
by the JAK inhibitor JSI-124 almost completely abolished the Ag effects on the
MDSCs. In summary, this study sheds new light on the immune modulatory role of
SEA and SWA and demonstrates that the expansion of MDSCs may be an important
element of a cellular network regulating immune responses during S. japonicum
infection.

Copyright Â© 2017 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1601860 
PMID: 28476935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

