
1. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2017 Jul;16(7):1-13. doi: 10.1080/14760584.2017.1333426.
Epub 2017 May 30.

The use of transgenic parasites in malaria vaccine research.

Othman AS(1)(2), Marin-Mogollon C(1), Salman AM(3), Franke-Fayard BM(1), Janse
CJ(1), Khan SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Leiden Malaria Research Group, Parasitology , Leiden University Medical
Center (LUMC) , Leiden , the Netherlands.
(2)b Faculty of Health Sciences , Universiti Sultan Zainal Abidin , Terengganu , 
Malaysia.
(3)c The Jenner Institute , University of Oxford , Oxford , UK.

INTRODUCTION: Transgenic malaria parasites expressing foreign genes, for example 
fluorescent and luminescent proteins, are used extensively to interrogate
parasite biology and host-parasite interactions associated with malaria
pathology. Increasingly transgenic parasites are also exploited to advance
malaria vaccine development. Areas covered: We review how transgenic malaria
parasites are used, in vitro and in vivo, to determine protective efficacy of
different antigens and vaccination strategies and to determine immunological
correlates of protection. We describe how chimeric rodent parasites expressing P.
falciparum or P. vivax antigens are being used to directly evaluate and rank
order human malaria vaccines before their advancement to clinical testing. In
addition, we describe how transgenic human and rodent parasites are used to
develop and evaluate live (genetically) attenuated vaccines. Expert commentary:
Transgenic rodent and human malaria parasites are being used to both identify
vaccine candidate antigens and to evaluate both sub-unit and whole organism
vaccines before they are advanced into clinical testing. Transgenic parasites
combined with in vivo pre-clinical testing models (e.g. mice) are used to
evaluate vaccine safety, potency and the durability of protection as well as to
uncover critical protective immune responses and to refine vaccination
strategies.

DOI: 10.1080/14760584.2017.1333426 
PMID: 28525963  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

