
1. Acta Trop. 2017 Sep;173:45-54. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2017.05.026. Epub 2017 
May 23.

Naturally acquired immune responses to thrombospondin-related adhesion protein
(TRAP) of Plasmodium vivax in patients from areas of unstable malaria
transmission.

Nazeri S(1), Zakeri S(2), Mehrizi AA(1), Djadid ND(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: zakeris@yahoo.com.

A key tool for the control, elimination, and eradication of Plasmodium vivax is
the development of an effective vaccine. The thrombospondin-related adhesion
protein (TRAP) is one of the major sporozoite antigens that plays an important
role in the invasion of mosquito salivary glands and hepatocytes by sporozoites. 
The main goal of this study was to evaluate the naturally acquired antibodies to 
the P. vivax TRAP (PvTRAP) in patients from malaria-endemic areas of Iran
(n=116), Afghanistan (n=50), and Pakistan (n=50). The PvTRAP gene was expressed
in Escherichia coli Rosetta (DE3)-pET23a and used as antigen in enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The profile of immunoglobulin G (IgG) isotype and
the avidity of IgG, IgG1, and IgG3 to PvTRAP, as well as the association between 
anti-PvTRAP isotype responses and host age were evaluated. Only 42.24% of
Iranian, 38% of Afghani, and 44% of Pakistani patients infected with P. vivax had
positive anti-PvTRAP IgG, and the prevalence of responders in the three countries
did not differ significantly (P>0.05). Moreover, the prevalence of IgG1 and IgG3 
antibody responses to PvTRAP showed no significant correlation with age (P>0.05).
Individuals exposed to vivax malaria in the unstable malaria transmission areas
are able to produce antibodies to the TRAP antigen at all ages in response to P. 
vivax infections. Finally, the presence of mature IgG1 and IgG3 antibodies with
high to intermediate avidity against PvTRAP antigen (>60%) provide more
information to understand the interactions between the host and P. vivax
parasite. In summary, the present study provides data that support the rational
development of an effective pre-erythrocytic stage vaccine based on PvTRAP
antigen.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2017.05.026 
PMID: 28549910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

