
1. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2017 Mar-Apr;50(2):153-160. doi:
10.1590/0037-8682-0475-2016.

A meta-analysis of TLR4 and TLR9 SNPs implicated in severe malaria.

Dhangadamajhi G(1), Kar A(1), Rout R(2), Dhangadamajhi P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, North Orissa University, Baripada, Odisha, India.
(2)Regional Medical Research Centre (ICMR), Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Ravenshaw University, Cuttack, Odisha, India.

Comment in
    Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2017 Mar-Apr;50(2):151-152.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are critical mediators of the inflammatory response to
malarial infection, and gene polymorphisms affecting TLR function may be
partially responsible for inter-individual variation in disease manifestation.
However, there are inconsistencies in the associations of common genetic variants
of TLR4 (D299G) and TLR9 (T-1237C and T-1486C) with malaria outcome. A
comprehensive search was conducted to identify relevant and independent
Plasmodium falciparum-infected case-control studies, and meta-analysis including 
six studies for each SNP was performed to obtain more precise estimates of the
pooled effects of these variants. The results showed significant associations of 
the -1486C allele with the risk of severe malaria in allele contrast (T vs. C, p 
= 0.004, OR = 1.26) and homozygous (TT vs. CC, p = 0.03, OR = 1.51) genetic
models. There was no association between the D299G or T-1237C variants and
uncomplicated or severe malaria using any of the genetic models tested. However, 
in stratified analysis, -1237C was associated with the risk of severe malaria in 
Indian adults (TT vs. TC, p = 0.06, OR = 2.13; TT vs. TC+CC, p <0.00001, OR =
2.65), suggesting that our results must be considered preliminary. The robustness
of -1486C as a risk factor warrants investigation into its functionality in
malaria pathogenesis. Further, the lack of an association with the T-1237C
variant was weak, and future studies examining more detailed individual data from
different ethnic groups are essential for confirmation of its genetic
contribution to malaria.

DOI: 10.1590/0037-8682-0475-2016 
PMID: 28562749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

