
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2017 Sep;53:239-247. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2017.06.005. Epub
2017 Jun 6.

Limited genetic diversity in the global Plasmodium vivax Cell traversal protein
of Ookinetes and Sporozoites (CelTOS) sequences; implications for PvCelTOS-based 
vaccine development.

Mehrizi AA(1), Torabi F(2), Zakeri S(3), Djadid ND(3).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
abouei@pasteur.ac.ir.
(2)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran; Department of
Genetics, Tehran Medical Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran.

Cell traversal protein of Ookinetes and Sporozoites (CelTOS) is a new malaria
vaccine candidate antigen. Since one of the main challenges in malaria vaccine
development is the extensive antigenic diversity of this parasite, local and
global gene diversity analysis is of particular importance. Therefore, in this
study, the genetic diversity of pvceltos gene was investigated among Iranian P.
vivax isolates (n=46) and compared with available worldwide pvceltos sequences.
One synonymous (C109A) and three amino acid replacements (V118L, K178T, and
G179R) were observed in Iranian pvceltos sequences in compare with Sal-1 sequence
leading to five haplotypes including PvCelt-A (GSVKGL, 13%), PvCelt-B (GSLKGL,
50%), PvCelt-C (GSLTGL, 17.4%), PvCelt-D (GSVTGL, 13%) and PvCelt-E (GSLTRL,
6.5%). However, amino acid replacements were observed in six positions (G10S,
S40N, V118L/M, K178T, G179R/D and L181R) in PvCelTOS antigen of global isolates
leading to 11 distinct haplotypes. PvCelt-A and PvCelt-B haplotypes were the most
common haplotypes in the world. The overall nucleotide diversity for Iranian
isolates was 0.00169, while, the level of nucleotide diversity was ranged from
0.00252 for Thailand to 0.00022 for Peru populations in the world. The analysis
of SNPs in relation with the predicted immunodominant regions revealed that only 
K178T and G179R SNPs are located in putative B-cell epitopes. All replacements
were located in CD4+ and/or CD8+ T-cell epitopes. However, the majority of
epitopes are located in conserved regions. Knowing whether these changes may
alter the affinity of the epitopes for antibodies and/or MHC molecules remains to
be investigated in experimental studies. In conclusion, the present study showed 
a very limited genetic diversity in pvceltos gene among the global clinical
isolates that can be regarded as a potential candidate antigen to apply for
vivax-based malaria vaccine development.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2017.06.005 
PMID: 28600217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

