
1. Pathog Glob Health. 2017 Jul;111(5):225-233. doi: 10.1080/20477724.2017.1337300. 
Epub 2017 Jun 12.

In vitro sensitivity to antimalarial drugs and polymorphisms in Pfg377 gene in
Plasmodium falciparum field isolates from Mewat, India.

Singh V(1), Kumar A(1), Gupta P(1).

Author information: 
(1)a National Institute of Malaria Research [ICMR] , New Delhi , India.

The malaria infection is the interplay of several complex factors, among which
drug resistance and gametocyte biology are the crucial ones. Measurements of the 
drug sensitivity assays and prevalence of gametocyte genes play a major role in
malaria eradication programmes. The purpose of this study was to assess the
current drug sensitivity profile in the field isolates and type the Pfg377 gene. 
In vitro drug sensitivity assay was used to assess the susceptibility of
Plasmodium falciparum field isolates collected from Mewat (Haryana), located in
Northern region of India to four anti-malarial drugs. The inhibitory
concentrations (IC50) for the four drugs viz Chloroquine (CQ), Artesunate (AS),
Sulphadoxine (SD) and Pyrimethamine (PYR) were in the range of 10.11-113.2,
2.26-4.08, 13.31-43.91 and 0.76-4.91 nM respectively in the evaluated 25 field
isolates. The Pfg377 allele typing in the 26 field isolates revealed different
types of haplotypes (A, B, C and D) varying by the size and number of repeats and
deletions. The Pfg377 allelic types in the cryopreserved and adapted isolates of 
P. falciparum were compared to determine the parasite lines in them. The allele
types or presence of different clones in the same sample could not be correlated 
significantly with resistance to any of the four drugs tested in the study. Our
study revealed different drug sensitivity profiles of field isolates from Mewat
region and allele typing of Pfg377 gene revealed different haplotypes of field
isolates were circulating in parasite population.

DOI: 10.1080/20477724.2017.1337300 
PMCID: PMC5560199
PMID: 28605993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

