
1. PLoS One. 2017 Jun 12;12(6):e0176533. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176533.
eCollection 2017.

Lys48 ubiquitination during the intraerythrocytic cycle of the rodent malaria
parasite, Plasmodium chabaudi.

González-López L(1), Carballar-Lejarazú R(1)(2), Arrevillaga Boni G(3),
Cortés-Martínez L(1), Cázares-Raga FE(1), Trujillo-Ocampo A(1), Rodríguez MH(4), 
James AA(2), Hernández-Hernández FC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Infectómica y Patogénesis Molecular, Centro de Investigación y
de Estudios Avanzados del Instituto Politécnico Nacional (CINVESTAV-IPN), México,
D.F., México.
(2)Departments of Molecular Biology & Biochemistry and Microbiology & Molecular
Genetics, University of California, Irvine, California, United States of America.
(3)Departamento de Biomedicina Molecular, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios
Avanzados del Instituto Politécnico Nacional (CINVESTAV-IPN), México, D.F.,
México.
(4)Centro de Investigación Sobre Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional de 
Salud Pública, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.

Ubiquitination tags proteins for different functions within the cell. One of the 
most abundant and studied ubiquitin modification is the Lys48 polyubiquitin chain
that modifies proteins for their destruction by proteasome. In Plasmodium is
proposed that post-translational regulation is fundamental for parasite
development during its complex life-cycle; thus, the objective of this work was
to analyze the ubiquitination during Plasmodium chabaudi intraerythrocytic
stages. Ubiquitinated proteins were detected during intraerythrocytic stages of
Plasmodium chabaudi by immunofluorescent microscopy, bidimensional
electrophoresis (2-DE) combined with immunoblotting and mass spectrometry. All
the studied stages presented protein ubiquitination and Lys48 polyubiquitination 
with more abundance during the schizont stage. Three ubiquitinated proteins were 
identified for rings, five for trophozoites and twenty for schizonts. Only
proteins detected with a specific anti- Lys48 polyubiquitin antibody were
selected for Mass Spectrometry analysis and two of these identified proteins were
selected in order to detect the specific amino acid residues where ubiquitin is
placed. Ubiquitinated proteins during the ring and trophozoite stages were
related with the invasion process and in schizont proteins were related with
nucleic acid metabolism, glycolysis and protein biosynthesis. Most of the
ubiquitin detection was during the schizont stage and the Lys48
polyubiquitination during this stage was related to proteins that are expected to
be abundant during the trophozoite stage. The evidence that these Lys48
polyubiquitinated proteins are tagged for destruction by the proteasome complex
suggests that this type of post-translational modification is important in the
regulation of protein abundance during the life-cycle and may also contribute to 
the parasite cell-cycle progression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176533 
PMCID: PMC5467854
PMID: 28604779  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

