
1. Parasite Immunol. 2017 Sep;39(9). doi: 10.1111/pim.12452. Epub 2017 Aug 3.

RANTES levels as a determinant of falciparum malaria severity or recovery.

Bujarbaruah D(1)(2), Kalita MP(1)(3), Baruah V(1), Basumatary TK(1)(3), Hazarika 
S(2), Begum RH(3), Medhi S(1), Bose S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Gauhati University, Guwahati, Assam, India.
(2)Dimoria College, Khetri, Assam, India.
(3)Diphu Campus, Assam University, Diphu, Assam, India.

The study explored the role of differential RANTES concentrations, its receptor
CCR5 expression and resulting immunomodulation in the pathogenesis and/or
recovery from falciparum malaria. The study population included cases of
uncomplicated malaria (UC-M, N=128, enrolled on follow-up basis), severe malaria 
(SM, N=25), and healthy controls (N=112). Serum RANTES and TNF-α levels were
evaluated by ELISA. Monocyte levels and activation profile were studied by flow
cytometry. Differential mRNA expression profile was studied by real-time PCR.
Blood parasite count was evaluated by registered pathologists. RANTES
concentration was significantly downregulated in SM cases compared to UC-M
(P=.046) and controls (P<.001). Expression of monocyte marker mCD14, activation
markers CCR5 and CD40, and downstream effector cytokine TNF-α was significantly
higher in malaria cases compared to controls, in SM cases compared to UC-M. TNF-α
expression correlated positively with CD40 and CCR5 expressions. Follow-up-based 
analysis showed that RANTES concentrations increased on recovery compared to
baseline in UC-M cases (P=.106) and inversely correlated with malaria parasite
load, mCD14, CCR5 and CD40, and TNF-α expressions. These findings suggest an
important association of RANTES concentrations in Plasmodium falciparum malaria
disease pathogenesis, as well as recovery, mediated through differential
modulation and regulated activation of monocytes and cytokine TNF-α.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pim.12452 
PMID: 28686299  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

