
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jul 12;7(1):5255. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-05234-y.

Structural and Biochemical Characterization of Apicomplexan Inorganic
Pyrophosphatases.

Jamwal A(1)(2), Yogavel M(1), Abdin MZ(2), Jain SK(2)(3), Sharma A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi, 110067, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi, 110063, India.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Hamdard Institute of Medical Sciences, 110063, New
Delhi, India.
(4)Molecular Medicine Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi, 110067, India.
amit.icgeb@gmail.com.

Inorganic pyrophosphatases (PPase) participate in energy cycling and they are
essential for growth and survival of organisms. Here we report extensive
structural and functional characterization of soluble PPases from the human
parasites Plasmodium falciparum (PfPPase) and Toxoplasma gondii (TgPPase). Our
results show that PfPPase is a cytosolic enzyme whose gene expression is
upregulated during parasite asexual stages. Cambialistic PfPPase actively
hydrolyzes linear short chain polyphosphates like PPi, polyP3 and ATP in the
presence of Zn2+. A remarkable new feature of PfPPase is the low complexity
asparagine-rich N-terminal region that mediates its dimerization. Deletion of
N-region has an unexpected and substantial effect on the stability of PfPPase
domain, resulting in aggregation and significant loss of enzyme activity.
Significantly, the crystal structures of PfPPase and TgPPase reveal unusual and
unprecedented dimeric organizations and provide new fundamental insights into the
variety of oligomeric assemblies possible in eukaryotic inorganic PPases.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-05234-y 
PMCID: PMC5507929
PMID: 28701714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

