
1. Mol Med Rep. 2017 Sep;16(3):3299-3307. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2017.6966. Epub 2017 Jul 
13.

Gene microarray analysis of expression profiles in liver ischemia and
reperfusion.

Zheng X(1), Zhou H(2), Qiu Z(1), Gao S(1), Wang Z(1), Xiao L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat‑sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, P.R. China.
(2)Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat‑sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong
510080, P.R. China.

Liver ischemia and reperfusion (I/R) injury is of primary concern in cases of
liver disease worldwide and is associated with hemorrhagic shock, resection and
transplantation. Numerous studies have previously been conducted to investigate
the underlying mechanisms of liver I/R injury, however these have not yet been
fully elucidated. To determine the difference between ischemia and reperfusion in
signaling pathways and the relative pathological mechanisms, the present study
downloaded microarray data GSE10657 from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. A 
total of two data groups from 1‑year‑old mice were selected for further analysis:
i) A total of 90 min ischemia; ii) 90 min ischemia followed by 1 h of
reperfusion, n=3 for each group. The Limma package was first used to identify the
differentially expressed genes (DEGs). DEGs were subsequently uploaded to the
Database for Annotation Visualization and Integrated Discovery online tool for
Functional enrichment analysis. A protein‑protein interaction (PPI) network was
then constructed via STRING version 10.0 and analyzed using Cytoscape software. A
total of 114 DEGs were identified, including 21 down and 93 upregulated genes.
These DEGs were primarily enriched in malaria and influenza A, in addition to the
tumor necrosis factor and mitogen activated protein kinase signaling pathways.
Hub genes identified in the PPI network were C‑X‑C motif chemokine ligand (CXCL) 
1, C‑C motif chemokine ligand (CCL) 2, interleukin 6, Jun proto‑oncogene,
activator protein (AP)‑1 transcription factor subunit, FOS proto‑oncogene, AP‑1
transcription factor subunit and dual specificity phosphatase 1. CXCL1 and CCL2
may exhibit important roles in liver I/R injury, with involvement in the immune
and inflammatory responses and the chemokine‑mediated signaling pathway,
particularly at the reperfusion stage. However, further experiments to elucidate 
the specific roles of these mediators are required in the future.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2017.6966 
PMCID: PMC5548003
PMID: 28713993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

