
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jul 20;7(1):6026. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-05917-6.

Plasmodium berghei P47 is essential for ookinete protection from the Anopheles
gambiae complement-like response.

Ukegbu CV(1), Giorgalli M(1), Yassine H(1), Ramirez JL(2)(3), Taxiarchi C(1),
Barillas-Mury C(2), Christophides GK(4), Vlachou D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Immunogenomics and Infection Laboratory, Department of Life Sciences,
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, United
States of America.
(3)National Center for Agricultural Utilization Research, Crop Bio-protection
Research Unit, Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of
Agriculture, Peoria, Illinois, United States of America.
(4)Vector Immunogenomics and Infection Laboratory, Department of Life Sciences,
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. g.christophides@imperial.ac.uk.
(5)Vector Immunogenomics and Infection Laboratory, Department of Life Sciences,
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. d.vlachou@imperial.ac.uk.

Malaria is a mosquito-borne disease affecting millions of people every year. The 
rodent parasite Plasmodium berghei has served as a model for human malaria
transmission studies and played a pivotal role in dissecting the mosquito immune 
response against infection. The 6-cysteine protein P47, known to be important for
P. berghei female gamete fertility, is shown to serve a different function in
Plasmodium falciparum, protecting ookinetes from the mosquito immune response.
Here, we investigate the function of P. berghei P47 in Anopheles gambiae mosquito
infections. We show that P47 is expressed on the surface of both female
gametocytes and ookinetes where it serves distinct functions in promoting
gametocyte-to-ookinete development and protecting ookinetes from the mosquito
complement-like response, respectively. The latter function is essential, as
ookinetes lacking P47 are targeted for killing while traversing the mosquito
midgut cells and eliminated upon exposure to hemolymph proteins of the
complement-like system. Silencing key factors of the complement-like system
restores oocyst development and disease transmission to rodent hosts. Our data
establish a dual role of P. berghei P47 in vivo and reinforce the use of this
parasite to study the impact of the mosquito immune response on human malaria
transmission.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-05917-6 
PMCID: PMC5519742
PMID: 28729672  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

