
1. Sci Immunol. 2017 Jan;2(7). pii: eaal1505. doi: 10.1126/sciimmunol.aal1505. Epub 
2017 Jan 20.

Activation of mosquito complement antiplasmodial response requires cellular
immunity.

Castillo JC(1), Ferreira ABB(1), Trisnadi N(1), Barillas-Mury C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20892, USA.

The mosquito complement-like system is a major defense mechanism that limits
Plasmodium infection. Ookinete midgut invasion results in irreversible damage to 
invaded cells and triggers epithelial nitration and complement activation.
Several lines of evidence suggest that hemocytes participate in early
antiplasmodial responses that target ookinetes, but their role remains unclear.
The fate of hemocytes in response to Plasmodium infection was investigated by
labeling this cell population in vivo. We found that midgut nitration triggers
the local release of hemocyte-derived microvesicles (HdMv) into the basal
labyrinth of the midgut. Several different strategies, such as gene silencing,
immune priming, or systemic injection of polystyrene beads, were used to either
enhance or reduce HdMv release. We provide direct experimental evidence that
contact of hemocytes with the nitrated midgut basal surface triggers HdMv release
and that this response is necessary for effective activation of mosquito
complement. Our studies suggest that hemocyte-derived microvesicles may deliver
some critical factor(s) that promote activation of thioester-containing protein
1, a key effector of the mosquito antiplasmodial immunity.

DOI: 10.1126/sciimmunol.aal1505 
PMCID: PMC5520810
PMID: 28736767 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare that
they have no competing interests.

