
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2017 Sep;97(3):744-752. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0254. Epub 2017 
Jul 27.

Plasmodium vivax Infections over 3 Years in Duffy Blood Group Negative Malians in
Bandiagara, Mali.

Niangaly A(1), Karthigayan Gunalan(2), Amed Ouattara(3)(1), Coulibaly D(1), SÃ¡
JM(2), Adams M(3), Travassos MA(3), Ferrero J(3), Laurens MB(3), Kone AK(1),
Thera MA(1), Plowe CV(3), Miller LH(2), Doumbo OK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research and Training Center, International Center for Excellence in
Research, University of Sciences, Techniques and Technology of Bamako, Bamako,
Mali.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institutes of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland.
(3)Division of Malaria Research, Institute for Global Health, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.

Plasmodium vivax was thought to infect only the erythrocytes of Duffy blood group
positive people. In the last decade, P. vivax has appeared throughout Africa,
both in areas where Duffy positive and negative people live side by side as in
Madagascar and Ethiopia and in areas where people are primarily Duffy negative,
such as in western Kenya. We performed quantitative polymerase chain reaction on 
blood samples dried onto filter paper to determine the prevalence of P. vivax and
Plasmodium falciparum in a cohort of 300 children (newborn to 6 years of age) in 
Bandiagara, a Sahelian area of Mali, west Africa, where the people are Duffy
negative. We report 1-3 occurrences of P. vivax in each of 25 Duffy-negative
children at six time points over two rainy seasons and the beginning of the third
season. The prevalence of P. vivax infection was 2.0-2.5% at every time point
(June 2009 to June 2010). All children with P. vivax infections were asymptomatic
and afebrile, and parasite densities were extremely low. Anemia, however, was the
main burden of infection. Plasmodium vivax could become a burden to sub-Saharan
Africa, and the evidence of P. vivax existence needs to be taken into
consideration in designing malaria control and elimination strategies in Africa.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0254 
PMCID: PMC5590610
PMID: 28749772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

