
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jul 26;7(1):6493. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-07013-1.

Association of microRNAs with Argonaute proteins in the malaria mosquito
Anopheles gambiae after blood ingestion.

Fu X(1), Dimopoulos G(2), Zhu J(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Interdisciplinary PhD Program in Genetics, Bioinformatics, and
Computational Biology, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA.
(2)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech, 340 West Campus Drive, Blacksburg, 
Virginia, 24061, USA. zhujin@vt.edu.

Drastic changes in gene expression occur after adult female mosquitoes take a
blood meal and use the nutrients for egg maturation. A growing body of evidence
indicates that microRNAs (miRNAs) contribute to this tightly controlled tissue-
and stage-specific gene expression. To investigate the role of miRNAs, we
monitored miRNA expression in the mosquito Anopheles gambiae during the 72-h
period immediately after blood feeding. We also measured the association of
miRNAs with Argonaute 1 (Ago1) and Argonaute 2 (Ago2) to assess the functional
status of individual miRNA species. Overall, 173 mature miRNAs were precipitated 
with Ago1 and Ago2, including 12 new miRNAs, the orthologs of which are found
thus far only in other Anopheles species. Ago1 is the predominant carrier of
miRNAs in Anopheles gambiae. The abundance and Ago loading of most of the mature 
miRNAs were relatively stable after blood ingestion. However, miRNAs of the
miR-309/286/2944 cluster were considerably upregulated after blood feeding.
Injection of the specific antagomir for miR-309 resulted in smaller developing
oocytes and ultimately fewer eggs. In addition, the Ago association of some
miRNAs was not proportional to their cellular abundance, suggesting that
integration of miRNAs into the Ago complexes is regulated by additional
mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-07013-1 
PMCID: PMC5529372
PMID: 28747726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

