
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017 Jul 31;11(7):e0005824. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0005824. eCollection 2017 Jul.

Genome-wide diversity and differentiation in New World populations of the human
malaria parasite Plasmodium vivax.

de Oliveira TC(1), Rodrigues PT(1), Menezes MJ(1), Gonçalves-Lopes RM(1), Bastos 
MS(1), Lima NF(1), Barbosa S(1), Gerber AL(2), Loss de Morais G(2), Berná L(3),
Phelan J(4), Robello C(3), de Vasconcelos ATR(2), Alves JMP(1), Ferreira MU(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Unit of Computational Genomics Darcy Fontoura de Almeida, Laboratory of
Bioinformatics, National Laboratory of Scientific Computation, Petrópolis,
Brazil.
(3)Unit of Molecular Biology, Pasteur Institute of Montevideo, Montevideo,
Uruguay.
(4)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: The Americas were the last continent colonized by humans carrying
malaria parasites. Plasmodium falciparum from the New World shows very little
genetic diversity and greater linkage disequilibrium, compared with its African
counterparts, and is clearly subdivided into local, highly divergent populations.
However, limited available data have revealed extensive genetic diversity in
American populations of another major human malaria parasite, P. vivax.
METHODS: We used an improved sample preparation strategy and next-generation
sequencing to characterize 9 high-quality P. vivax genome sequences from
northwestern Brazil. These new data were compared with publicly available
sequences from recently sampled clinical P. vivax isolates from Brazil (BRA,
total n = 11 sequences), Peru (PER, n = 23), Colombia (COL, n = 31), and Mexico
(MEX, n = 19).
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS/CONCLUSIONS: We found that New World populations of P. vivax
are as diverse (nucleotide diversity π between 5.2 × 10-4 and 6.2 × 10-4) as P.
vivax populations from Southeast Asia, where malaria transmission is
substantially more intense. They display several non-synonymous nucleotide
substitutions (some of them previously undescribed) in genes known or suspected
to be involved in antimalarial drug resistance, such as dhfr, dhps, mdr1, mrp1,
and mrp-2, but not in the chloroquine resistance transporter ortholog (crt-o)
gene. Moreover, P. vivax in the Americas is much less geographically
substructured than local P. falciparum populations, with relatively little
between-population genome-wide differentiation (pairwise FST values ranging
between 0.025 and 0.092). Finally, P. vivax populations show a rapid decline in
linkage disequilibrium with increasing distance between pairs of polymorphic
sites, consistent with very frequent outcrossing. We hypothesize that the high
diversity of present-day P. vivax lineages in the Americas originated from
successive migratory waves and subsequent admixture between parasite lineages
from geographically diverse sites. Further genome-wide analyses are required to
test the demographic scenario suggested by our data.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005824 
PMCID: PMC5552344
PMID: 28759591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

