
1. Parasitol Res. 2017 Sep;116(9):2539-2559. doi: 10.1007/s00436-017-5563-2. Epub
2017 Jul 28.

An in silico strategy for identification of novel drug targets against Plasmodium
falciparum.

Rout S(1), Patra NP(1), Mahapatra RK(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, KIIT University, Bhubaneswar, Orissa, 751024, India.
(2)School of Biotechnology, KIIT University, Bhubaneswar, Orissa, 751024, India. 
rmahapatra@kiitbiotech.ac.in.

The apicomplexan parasite Plasmodium falciparum is responsible for global malaria
burden. With the reported resistance to artemisinin chemotherapy, there is an
urgent need to maintain early phase drug discovery and identify novel drug
targets for successful eradication of the pathogen from the host. In our previous
work on comparative genomics study for identification of putative essential genes
and therapeutic candidates in P. falciparum, we predicted 11 proteins as
anti-malarial drug targets from PlasmoDB database. In this paper, we made an
attempt for identification of novel drug targets in P. falciparum genome using a 
sequence of computational methods from Malaria Parasite Metabolic Pathway
database. The study reported the identification of 71 proteins as potential drug 
targets for anti-malarial interventions. Furthermore, homology modeling and
molecular dynamic simulation study of one of the potential drug targets,
aminodeoxychorismate lyase, was carried to predict the 3D structure of the
protein. Structure and ligand-based drug designing reported MMV019742 from
Pathogen Box and TCAMS-141515 from GSK-TCAMS library as potential hits. The
reliability of the binding mode of the inhibitors is confirmed by GROMACS for a
simulation time of 20Â ns in water environment. This will be helpful for
experimental validation of the small-molecule inhibitor.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-017-5563-2 
PMID: 28755265  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

