
1. Parasit Vectors. 2017 Aug 1;10(1):369. doi: 10.1186/s13071-017-2308-0.

Late-phase immune responses limiting oocyst survival are independent of TEP1
function yet display strain specific differences in Anopheles gambiae.

Kwon H(1), Arends BR(1), Smith RC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, 50011, USA.
(2)Department of Entomology, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, 50011, USA.
smithr@iastate.edu.

BACKGROUND: There is emerging evidence that mosquito anti-Plasmodium immunity is 
multimodal with distinct mechanisms for killing malaria parasites at either the
ookinete or oocyst stages. Early-phase responses targeting the ookinete require
complement-like components circulating in the mosquito hemolymph that result in
TEP1-mediated lysis or melanization. Additional responses mediated by the LL3 and
STAT pathways limit oocyst survival through unknown mechanisms that require
mosquito hemocyte function. While previous experiments argue that these
mechanisms of parasite killing are independent, the transient nature of
gene-silencing has rendered these experiments inconclusive. To address this
issue, we outline experiments using a TALEN-derived TEP1 mutant line to examine
the role of TEP1 in the Anopheles gambiae late-phase immune response.
RESULTS: Despite higher early oocyst numbers in the TEP1 mutant line, no
differences in oocyst survival were observed when compared to control mosquitoes,
suggesting that TEP1 function is independent of the late-phase immune response.
To further validate this phenotype in the TEP1 mutant, oocyst survival was
evaluated in the TEP1 mutant background by silencing either LL3 or STAT-A.
Surprisingly, only STAT-A silenced mosquitoes were able to reconstitute the
late-phase immune phenotype increasing oocyst survival in the TEP1 mutant line.
Additional experiments highlight significant differences in LL3 expression in the
M/S hybrid genetic background of the TEP1 mutant line compared to that of the
Keele strain (M form) of An. gambiae, and demonstrate that LL3 is not required
for granulocyte differentiation in the M/S hybrid G3 genetic background in
response to malaria parasite infection.
CONCLUSIONS: Through the combination of genetic experiments utilizing genetic
mutants and reverse genetic approaches, new information has emerged regarding the
mechanisms of mosquito late-phase immunity. When combined with previously
published experiments, the body of evidence argues that Plasmodium oocyst
survival is TEP1 independent, thus establishing that the mechanisms of early- and
late-phase immunity are distinct. Moreover, we identify that the known components
that mediate oocyst survival are susceptible to strain-specific differences
depending on their genetic background and provide further evidence that the
signals that promote hemocyte differentiation are required to limit oocyst
survival. Together, this study provides new insights into the mechanisms of
oocyst killing and the importance of genetics in shaping mosquito vector
competence.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-017-2308-0 
PMCID: PMC5540282
PMID: 28764765  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

