
1. Parasit Vectors. 2017 Aug 1;10(1):367. doi: 10.1186/s13071-017-2302-6.

Anopheles gambiae larvae mount stronger immune responses against bacterial
infection than adults: evidence of adaptive decoupling in mosquitoes.

League GP(1), Est√©vez-Lao TY(1), Yan Y(1), Garcia-Lopez VA(1), Hillyer JF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA. 
julian.hillyer@vanderbilt.edu.

BACKGROUND: The immune system of adult mosquitoes has received significant
attention because of the ability of females to vector disease-causing pathogens
while ingesting blood meals. However, few studies have focused on the immune
system of larvae, which, we hypothesize, is highly robust due to the high density
and diversity of microorganisms that larvae encounter in their aquatic
environments and the strong selection pressures at work in the larval stage to
ensure survival to reproductive maturity. Here, we surveyed a broad range of
cellular and humoral immune parameters in larvae of the malaria mosquito,
Anopheles gambiae, and compared their potency to that of newly-emerged adults and
older adults.
RESULTS: We found that larvae kill bacteria in their hemocoel with equal or
greater efficiency compared to newly-emerged adults, and that antibacterial
ability declines further with adult age, indicative of senescence. This phenotype
correlates with more circulating hemocytes and a differing spatial arrangement of
sessile hemocytes in larvae relative to adults, as well as with the individual
hemocytes of adults carrying a greater phagocytic burden. The hemolymph of larvae
also possesses markedly stronger antibacterial lytic and melanization activity
than the hemolymph of adults. Finally, infection induces a stronger
transcriptional upregulation of immunity genes in larvae than in adults,
including differences in the immunity genes that are regulated.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that immunity is strongest in larvae and
declines after metamorphosis and with adult age, and suggest that adaptive
decoupling, or the independent evolution of larval and adult traits made possible
by metamorphosis, has occurred in the mosquito lineage.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-017-2302-6 
PMCID: PMC5539753
PMID: 28764812  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

