
1. J Biomed Res. 2017 Jul 13;31(4):321-332. doi: 10.7555/JBR.31.20160025.

Safety, immunogenicity, and cross-species protection of a plasmid DNA encoding
Plasmodium falciparum SERA5 polypeptide, microbial epitopes and chemokine genes
in mice and olive baboons.

Onkoba N(1)(2), M Mumo R(1)(3), Ochanda H(2), Omwandho C(3)(4), S Ozwara H(1), G 
Egwang T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical & Infectious Diseases, Institute of Primate Research,
Nairobi P. O. Box 24481-00502, Kenya.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nairobi, Nairobi P. O. Box
30197-00100, Kenya.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Nairobi, Nairobi
P. O. Box 30197-00100, Kenya.
(4)Kirinyaga University College, Kerugoya P. O. Box 143-10300, Kenya.
(5)Med-Biotech Laboratories, Kampala P. O. Box 9364, Uganda.

Incorporation of biomolecular epitopes to malarial antigens should be explored in
the development of strain-transcending malarial vaccines. The present study
sought to determine safety, immunogenicity and cross-species efficacy
ofPlasmodium falciparum serine repeat antigen 5 polypeptide co-expressed with
epitopes of Bacille-Calmette Guerin (BCG), tetanus toxoid (TT) and a chemokine
gene. Olive baboons and BALB/c mice were randomly assigned into vaccine and
control groups. The vaccine group animals were primed and boosted twice with
pIRES plasmids encoding the SERA5+ BCG+ TT alone, or with either CCL5 or CCL20
and the control group with pIRES plasmid vector backbone. Mice and baboons were
challenged withP. berghei ANKA and P. knowlesi H strain parasites, respectively. 
Safety was determined by observing for injection sites reactogenicities,
hematology and clinical chemistry. Parasitaemia and survivorship profiles were
used to determine cross-species efficacy, and T cell phenotypes, Th1-, Th2-type, 
T-regulatory immune responses and antibody responses were assessed to determine
vaccine immunogenicity. The pSeBCGTT plasmid DNA vaccines were safe and induced
Th1-, Th2-type, and T-regulatory responses vaccinated animals showed enhanced
CD4+ (P<0.01), CD 8+ T cells (P<0.001) activation and IgG anti-SE36 antibodies
responses (P<0.001) at week 4 and 8 post vaccination compared to the control
group. Vaccinated mice had a 31.45-68.69% cumulative parasite load reduction and 
60% suppression in baboons (P<0.05) and enhanced survivorship (P<0.001) with no
clinical signs of malaria compared to the control group. The results showed that 
the vaccines were safe, immunogenic and conferred partial cross-species
protection.

DOI: 10.7555/JBR.31.20160025 
PMCID: PMC5548993
PMID: 28808204 

