
1. Case Rep Infect Dis. 2017;2017:1972587. doi: 10.1155/2017/1972587. Epub 2017 Jul 
18.

Imported Asymptomatic Bancroftian Filariasis Discovered from a Plasmodium vivax
Infected Patient: A Case Report from Singapore.

Chavatte JM(1), Jureen R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Reference Centre, National Public Health Laboratory, Ministry of
Health, 3 Biopolis Drive, Synapse 05-14/16, Singapore 138623.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National University Hospital, 5 Lower Kent 
Ridge Road, Singapore 119074.

Human lymphatic filariasis is a vector-borne disease mainly caused by the
parasitic nematode Wuchereria bancrofti and transmitted worldwide within the
tropical and subtropical regions. Singapore was once endemic for bancroftian
filariasis but recent reports are scarce and the disease is nearly forgotten. The
case report presented here reports the incidental hospital laboratory finding of 
an asymptomatic microfilaremia in a relapsing Plasmodium vivax imported case
during a malaria treatment follow-up appointment. The parasite was identified by 
microscopy as W. bancrofti and retrospective investigation of the sample
collected during malaria onset was found to be also positive. Additional
confirmation was obtained by DNA amplification, sequencing, and phylogenetic
analysis of the mitochondrial cox1 gene that further related the parasite to W.
bancrofti strains from the Indian region. Considering the large proportion of
asymptomatic filariasis with microfilaremia, the high number of migrants and
travellers arriving from the surrounding endemic countries, and the common
presence of local competent mosquito vectors, Singapore remains vulnerable to the
introduction, reemergence, and the spread of lymphatic filariasis. This report
brings out from the shadow the potential risk of lymphatic filariasis in
Singapore and could help to maintain awareness about this parasitic disease and
its public health importance.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/1972587 
PMCID: PMC5540382
PMID: 28804661 

