
1. Acta Trop. 2017 Dec;176:197-205. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2017.08.006. Epub
2017 Aug 16.

Molecular characterization of the gene profile of Bacillus thuringiensis Berliner
isolated from Brazilian ecosystems and showing pathogenic activity against
mosquito larvae of medical importance.

Soares-da-Silva J(1), Queirós SG(2), de Aguiar JS(2), Viana JL(2), Neta MDRAV(2),
da Silva MC(2), Pinheiro VCS(2), Polanczyk RA(3), Carvalho-Zilse GA(4), Tadei
WP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Curso Ciências Naturais, Campus VII, Universidade Federal do Maranhão, Avenida
Dr. José Anselmo, 2008, São Sebastião, Codó, Maranhão, 65400-000, Brazil;
Programa de Pós-Graduação em Entomologia, Laboratório de Malária e Dengue,
Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazônia, Avenida André Araújo, 2936,
Petrópolis, Manaus, Amazonas, 69067-375, Brazil. Electronic address:
joelmasoares12@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratório de Entomologia Médica, Departamento de Química e Biologia, Centro 
de Estudos Superiores de Caxias, Universidade Estadual do Maranhão, Praça Duque
de Caxias, s/n, Morro do Alecrim, Caxias, Maranhão, 65604-380, Brazil.
(3)Laboratório de Controle Microbiano de Artrópodes Praga, Departamento de
Fitossanidade, Universidade Estadual Paulista, Via de Acesso Paulo Donato
Castelllane s/n., Jaboticabal, São Paulo, 14884-900, Brazil.
(4)Grupo de Pesquisas em Abelhas, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazônia,
Programa de Pós-Graduação em Entomologia, Avenida André Araújo, 2936, Petrópolis,
Manaus, Amazonas, 69067-375, Brazil.
(5)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Entomologia, Laboratório de Malária e Dengue,
Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazônia, Avenida André Araújo, 2936,
Petrópolis, Manaus, Amazonas, 69067-375, Brazil.

The occurrence of Aedes aegypti, Culex quinquefasciatus, and mosquitoes of the
genus Anopheles potentiate the spread of several diseases, such as dengue, Zika, 
chikungunya, urban yellow fever, filariasis, and malaria, a situation currently
existing in Brazil and in Latin America. Control of the disease vectors is the
most effective tool for containing the transmission of the pathogens causing
these diseases, and the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis var. israelensis has
been widely used and has shown efficacy over many years. However, new B.
thuringiensis (Bt) strains with different gene combinations should be sought for 
use as an alternative to Bti and to prevent the resistant insects selected.
Aiming to identify diversity in the Bt in different Brazilian ecosystems and to
assess the pathogenicity of this bacterium to larvae of Ae. aegypti, C.
quinquefasciatus, and Anopheles darlingi, Bt strains were obtained from the
Amazon, Caatinga (semi-arid region), and Cerrado (Brazilian savanna) biomes and
tested in pathogenicity bioassays in third-instar larvae of Ae. aegypti under
controlled conditions in the laboratory. The isolates with larvicidal activity to
larvae of Ae. aegypti were used in bioassays with the larvae of C.
quinquefasciatus and An. darlingi and characterized according to the presence of 
14 cry genes (cry1, cry2, cry4, cry10, cry11, cry24, cry32, cry44Aa, cry1Ab,
cry4Aa, cry4Ba, cry10Aa, cry11Aa, and cry11Ba), six cyt genes (cyt1, cyt2,
cyt1Aa, cyt1Ab, cyt2Aa and cyt2Ba), and the chi gene. Four hundred strains of Bt 
were isolated: 244 from insects, 85 from Amazon soil, and 71 from the Caatinga
biome. These strains, in addition to the 153 strains isolated from Cerrado soil
and obtained from the Entomopathogenic Bacillus Bank of Maranhão, were tested in 
bioassays with Ae. aegypti larvae. A total of 37 (6.7%) strains showed larvicidal
activity, with positive amplification of the cry, cyt, and chi genes. The most
frequently amplified genes were cry4Aa and cry4Ba, both occurring in 59.4% in
these strains, followed by cyt1Aa and cyt2Aa, with 56.7% and 48% occurrence,
respectively. Twelve (2.2%) strains that presented 100% mortality within 24h were
used in bioassays to estimate the median lethal concentration (LC50) for Ae.
aegypti larvae. Two strains (BtMA-690 and BtMA-1114) showed toxicity equal to
that of the Bti standard strain, and the same LC50 value (0.003mg/L) was recorded
for the three bacteria after 48h of exposure. Detection of the presence of the Bt
strains that showed pathogenicity for mosquito larvae in the three biomes studied
was possible. Therefore, these strains are promising for the control of insect
vectors, particularly the BtMA-1114 strain, which presents a gene profile
different from that of Bti but with the same toxic effect.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2017.08.006 
PMID: 28823909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

