
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2017 Oct;97(4):1262-1270. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0714. Epub
2017 Aug 18.

Field Trial of the CareStart Biosensor Analyzer for the Determination of
Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Activity in Haiti.

Weppelmann TA(1), von Fricken ME(2), Wilfong TD(3)(4), Aguenza E(2), Philippe
TT(5), Okech BA(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Herbert Wertheim College of Medicine, Florida International University, Miami,
Florida.
(2)Department of Global and Community Health, George Mason University, Fairfax,
Virginia.
(3)Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida.
(4)Department of Environmental and Global Health, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida.
(5)Christianville Foundation Clinic, Gressier, Haiti.

Throughout many developing and tropical countries around the world, malaria
remains a significant threat to human health. One barrier to malaria elimination 
is the ability to safely administer primaquine chemotherapy for the radical cure 
of malaria infections in populations with a high prevalence of
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. In the current study, a
field trial of the world's first quantitative, point-of-care assay for measuring 
G6PD activity was conducted in Haiti. The performance of the CareStart Biosensor 
Analyzer was compared with the gold standard spectrophotometric assay and
genotyping of the G6PD allele in schoolchildren (N = 343) from the Ouest
Department of Haiti. In this population, 19.5% of participants (67/343) had some 
form of G6PD deficiency (< 60% residual activity) and 9.9% (34/343) had
moderate-to-severe G6PD deficiency (< 30% residual activity). Overall, 18.95% of 
participants had the presence of the A-allele (65/343) with 7.87% (27/343)
considered at high risk for drug-induced hemolysis (hemizygous males and
homozygous females). Compared with the spectrophotometric assay, the sensitivity 
and specificity to determine participants with < 60% residual activity were 53.7%
and 94.6%, respectively; for participants with 30% residual activity, the
sensitivity and specificity were 5.9% and 99.7%, respectively. The biosensor
overestimated the activity in deficient individuals and underestimated it in
participants with normal G6PD activity, indicating the potential for a systematic
measurement error. Thus, we suggest that the current version of the biosensor
lacks adequate sensitivity and should be improved prior to its use as a
point-of-care diagnostic for G6PD deficiency.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0714 
PMCID: PMC5637584
PMID: 28820691  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

