
1. Biochim Biophys Acta Gene Regul Mech. 2017 Oct;1860(10):1047-1057. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2017.08.003. Epub 2017 Aug 26.

DNA methyltransferase homologue TRDMT1 in Plasmodium falciparum specifically
methylates endogenous aspartic acid tRNA.

Govindaraju G(1), Jabeena CA(1), Sethumadhavan DV(1), Rajaram N(1), Rajavelu
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Disease Biology Group, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for
Biotechnology, Thycaud PO, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala 695 014, India.
(2)Department of Tropical Disease Biology Group, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for
Biotechnology, Thycaud PO, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala 695 014, India. Electronic 
address: arajavelu@rgcb.res.in.

In eukaryotes, cytosine methylation regulates diverse biological processes such
as gene expression, development and maintenance of genomic integrity. However,
cytosine methylation and its functions in pathogenic apicomplexan protozoans
remain enigmatic. To address this, here we investigated the presence of cytosine 
methylation in the nucleic acids of the protozoan Plasmodium falciparum.
Interestingly, P. falciparum has TRDMT1, a conserved homologue of DNA
methyltransferase DNMT2. However, we found that TRDMT1 did not methylate DNA, in 
vitro. We demonstrate that TRDMT1 methylates cytosine in the endogenous aspartic 
acid tRNA of P. falciparum. Through RNA bisulfite sequencing, we mapped the
position of 5-methyl cytosine in aspartic acid tRNA and found methylation only at
C38 position. P. falciparum proteome has significantly higher aspartic acid
content and a higher proportion of proteins with poly aspartic acid repeats than 
other apicomplexan pathogenic protozoans. Proteins with such repeats are
functionally important, with significant roles in host-pathogen interactions.
Therefore, TRDMT1 mediated C38 methylation of aspartic acid tRNA might play a
critical role by translational regulation of important proteins and modulate the 
pathogenicity of the malarial parasite.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2017.08.003 
PMID: 28847733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

