
1. Trop Dis Travel Med Vaccines. 2017 Feb 10;3:3. doi: 10.1186/s40794-017-0046-0.
eCollection 2017.

Vectored immunoprophylaxis: an emerging adjunct to traditional vaccination.

Sanders JW(1)(2), Ponzio TA(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Medical Center Blvd, Winston-Salem,
NC 27157 USA.
(2)Salisbury Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Salisbury, NC USA.
(3)Naval Medical Research Center, 503 Robert Grant Ave, Silver Spring, MD 20910
USA.
(4)Section on Infectious Diseases and Department of Bio-Engineering, Wake Forest 
University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, USA.

The successful development of effective vaccines has been elusive for many of the
world's most important infectious diseases. Additionally, much of the population,
such as the aged or immunocompromised, are unable to mount an effective
immunologic response for existing vaccines. Vectored Immunoprophylaxis (VIP) is a
novel approach designed to address these challenges. Rather than utilizing an
antigen to trigger a response from the host's immune system as is normally done
with traditional vaccines, VIP genetically engineers the production of tailored
antibodies from non-hematopoietic cells, bypassing the humoral immune system.
Direct administration of genes encoding for neutralizing antibodies has proven to
be effective in both preventing and treating several infectious diseases in
animal models. While, a significant amount of work has focused on HIV, including 
an ongoing clinical trial, the approach has also been shown to be effective for
malaria, dengue, hepatitis C, influenza, and more. In addition to presenting
itself as a potentially efficient approach to solving long-standing vaccine
challenges, the approach may be the best, if not only, method to vaccinate
immunocompromised individuals. Many issues still need to be addressed, including 
which tissue(s) makes the most suitable platform, which vector(s) are most
efficient at transducing the platform tissue used to secrete the antibodies, and 
what are the long-term effects of such a treatment. Here we provide a brief
overview of this approach, and its potential application in treating some of the 
world's most intractable infectious diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/s40794-017-0046-0 
PMCID: PMC5531025
PMID: 28883973 

