
1. Infect Immun. 2017 Nov 17;85(12). pii: e00191-17. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00191-17.
Print 2017 Dec.

Role of Activins in Hepcidin Regulation during Malaria.

Spottiswoode N(1)(2), Armitage AE(1), Williams AR(3)(4), Fyfe AJ(4), Biswas S(4),
Hodgson SH(4), Llewellyn D(4), Choudhary P(4), Draper SJ(4), Duffy PE(2),
Drakesmith H(5).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Immunology Unit, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria Immunology & Vaccinology, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Veterinary Disease Biology, University of Copenhagen,
Frederiksberg, Denmark.
(4)The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)MRC Human Immunology Unit, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom
alexander.drakesmith@imm.ox.ac.uk.

Epidemiological observations have linked increased host iron with malaria
susceptibility, and perturbed iron handling has been hypothesized to contribute
to the potentially life-threatening anemia that may accompany blood-stage malaria
infection. To improve our understanding of these relationships, we examined the
pathways involved in regulation of the master controller of iron metabolism, the 
hormone hepcidin, in malaria infection. We show that hepcidin upregulation in
Plasmodium berghei murine malaria infection was accompanied by changes in
expression of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)/sons of mothers against
decapentaplegic (SMAD) pathway target genes, a key pathway involved in hepcidin
regulation. We therefore investigated known agonists of the BMP/SMAD pathway and 
found that Bmp gene expression was not increased in infection. In contrast,
activin B, which can signal through the BMP/SMAD pathway and has been associated 
with increased hepcidin during inflammation, was upregulated in the livers of
Plasmodium berghei-infected mice; hepatic activin B was also upregulated at peak 
parasitemia during infection with Plasmodium chabaudi Concentrations of the
closely related protein activin A increased in parallel with hepcidin in serum
from malaria-naive volunteers infected in controlled human malaria infection
(CHMI) clinical trials. However, antibody-mediated neutralization of activin
activity during murine malaria infection did not affect hepcidin expression,
suggesting that these proteins do not stimulate hepcidin upregulation directly.
In conclusion, we present evidence that the BMP/SMAD signaling pathway is
perturbed in malaria infection but that activins, although raised in malaria
infection, may not have a critical role in hepcidin upregulation in this setting.

Copyright Â© 2017 Spottiswoode et al.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00191-17 
PMCID: PMC5695100
PMID: 28893916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

