
1. Cell Microbiol. 2018 Jan;20(1). doi: 10.1111/cmi.12789. Epub 2017 Nov 9.

A genetic screen in rodent malaria parasites identifies five new apicoplast
putative membrane transporters, one of which is essential in human malaria
parasites.

Sayers CP(1), Mollard V(1), Buchanan HD(1), McFadden GI(1), Goodman CD(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of BioSciences, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia.

The malaria-causing parasite, Plasmodium, contains a unique non-photosynthetic
plastid known as the apicoplast. The apicoplast is an essential organelle bound
by four membranes. Although membrane transporters are attractive drug targets,
only two transporters have been characterised in the malaria parasite apicoplast 
membranes. We selected 27 candidate apicoplast membrane proteins, 20 of which are
annotated as putative membrane transporters, and performed a genetic screen in
Plasmodium berghei to determine blood stage essentiality and subcellular
localisation. Eight apparently essential blood stage genes were identified, three
of which were apicoplast-localised: PbANKA_0614600 (DMT2), PbANKA_0401200
(ABCB4), and PbANKA_0505500. Nineteen candidates could be deleted at the blood
stage, four of which were apicoplast-localised. Interestingly, three
apicoplast-localised candidates lack a canonical apicoplast targeting signal but 
do contain conserved N-terminal tyrosines with likely roles in targeting. An
inducible knockdown of an essential apicoplast putative membrane transporter,
PfDMT2, was only viable when supplemented with isopentenyl diphosphate. Knockdown
of PfDMT2 resulted in loss of the apicoplast, identifying PfDMT2 as a crucial
apicoplast putative membrane transporter and a candidate for therapeutic
intervention.

Â© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12789 
PMID: 28902970  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

