
1. New Phytol. 2018 Jan;217(1):261-276. doi: 10.1111/nph.14789. Epub 2017 Sep 20.

The roles of AaMIXTA1 in regulating the initiation of glandular trichomes and
cuticle biosynthesis in Artemisia annua.

Shi P(1), Fu X(1), Shen Q(1), Liu M(1), Pan Q(1), Tang Y(1), Jiang W(1), Lv Z(1),
Yan T(1), Ma Y(1), Chen M(1), Hao X(1), Liu P(1), Li L(1), Sun X(1), Tang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South) Ministry of Agriculture, Plant
Biotechnology Research Center, Fudan-SJTU-Nottingham Plant Biotechnology R&D
Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, 200240, China.

The glandular secretory trichomes (GSTs) on Artemisia annua leaves have the
capacity to secrete and store artemisinin, a compound which is the most effective
treatment for uncomplicated malaria. An effective strategy to improve artemisinin
content is therefore to increase the density of GSTs in A. annua. However, the
formation mechanism of GSTs remains poorly understood. To explore the mechanisms 
of GST initiation in A. annua, we screened myeloblastosis (MYB) transcription
factor genes from a GST transcriptome database and identified a MIXTA
transcription factor, AaMIXTA1, which is expressed predominantly in the basal
cells of GST in A. annua. Overexpression and repression of AaMIXTA1 resulted in
an increase and decrease, respectively, in the number of GSTs as well as the
artemisinin content in transgenic plants. Transcriptome analysis and cuticular
lipid profiling showed that AaMIXTA1 is likely to be responsible for activating
cuticle biosynthesis. In addition, dual-luciferase reporter assays further
demonstrated that AaMIXTA1 could directly activate the expression of genes
related to cuticle biosynthesis. Taken together, AaMIXTA1 regulated cuticle
biosynthesis and prompted GST initiation without any abnormal impact on the
morphological structure of the GSTs and so provides a new way to improve
artemisinin content in this important medicinal plant.

© 2017 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2017 New Phytologist Trust.

DOI: 10.1111/nph.14789 
PMID: 28940606  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

