
1. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2017 Jan;42(1):34-40. doi:
10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.20161222.003.

[Progress of gene editing technologies and prospect in traditional Chinese
medicine].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma YY(1), Li JZ(1), Gao EN(1), Qian D(1), Zhong JY(1), Liu CZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Experimental Centre, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100700, China.

Gene editing is a kind of technologies that makes precise modification to the
genome. It can be used to knock out/in and replace the specific DNA fragment, and
make accurate gene editing on the genome level. The essence of the technique is
the DNA sequence change with use of non homologous end link repair and homologous
recombination repair, combined with specific DNA target recognition and
endonuclease.This technology has wide range of development prospects and high
application value in terms of scientific research, agriculture, medical treatment
and other fields. In the field of gene therapy, gene editing technology has
achieved cross-time success in cancers such as leukemia, genetic disorders such
as hemophilia, thalassemia, multiple muscle nutritional disorders and retrovirus 
associated infectious diseases such as AIDS and other diseases. The preparation
work for new experimental methods and animal models combined with gene editing
technology is under rapid development and improvement. Laboratories around the
world have also applied gene editing technique in prevention of malaria, organ
transplantation, biological pharmaceuticals, agricultural breeding improvement,
resurrection of extinct species, and other research areas. This paper summarizes 
the application and development status of gene editing technique in the above
fields, and also preliminarily explores the potential application prospect of the
technology in the field of traditional Chinese medicine, and discusses the
present controversy and thoughts.

CopyrightÂ© by the Chinese Pharmaceutical Association.

DOI: 10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.20161222.003 
PMID: 28945022  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this article and the planning
committee members and staff have no relevant financial relationships with
commercial interests to disclose.

