
1. PLoS Genet. 2017 Sep 28;13(9):e1007023. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007023.
eCollection 2017 Sep.

High rate of adaptation of mammalian proteins that interact with Plasmodium and
related parasites.

Ebel ER(1), Telis N(2), Venkataram S(1), Petrov DA(1), Enard D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United
States of America.
(2)Program in Biomedical Informatics, Stanford University, Stanford, California, 
United States of America.

Plasmodium parasites, along with their Piroplasm relatives, have caused
malaria-like illnesses in terrestrial mammals for millions of years. Several
Plasmodium-protective alleles have recently evolved in human populations, but
little is known about host adaptation to blood parasites over deeper evolutionary
timescales. In this work, we analyze mammalian adaptation in ~500 Plasmodium- or 
Piroplasm- interacting proteins (PPIPs) manually curated from the scientific
literature. We show that (i) PPIPs are enriched for both immune functions and
pleiotropy with other pathogens, and (ii) the rate of adaptation across mammals
is significantly elevated in PPIPs, compared to carefully matched control
proteins. PPIPs with high pathogen pleiotropy show the strongest signatures of
adaptation, but this pattern is fully explained by their immune enrichment.
Several pieces of evidence suggest that blood parasites specifically have imposed
selection on PPIPs. First, even non-immune PPIPs that lack interactions with
other pathogens have adapted at twice the rate of matched controls. Second, PPIP 
adaptation is linked to high expression in the liver, a critical organ in the
parasite life cycle. Finally, our detailed investigation of alpha-spectrin, a
major red blood cell membrane protein, shows that domains with particularly high 
rates of adaptation are those known to interact specifically with P. falciparum. 
Overall, we show that host proteins that interact with Plasmodium and Piroplasm
parasites have experienced elevated rates of adaptation across mammals, and
provide evidence that some of this adaptation has likely been driven by blood
parasites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007023 
PMCID: PMC5634635
PMID: 28957326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

