
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017 Oct 6;11(10):e0005965. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0005965. eCollection 2017 Oct.

The Babesia bovis hap2 gene is not required for blood stage replication, but
expressed upon in vitro sexual stage induction.

Hussein HE(1)(2), Bastos RG(1), Schneider DA(1)(3), Johnson WC(3), Adham FK(2),
Davis WC(1), Laughery JM(1), Herndon DR(3), Alzan HF(1)(4), Ueti MW(1)(3), Suarez
CE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, United States of America.
(2)Department of Entomology, Faculty of Science, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt.
(3)Animal Disease Research Unit, USDA-ARS, Pullman, WA, United States of America.
(4)Parasitology and Animal Diseases Department, National Research Center, Egypt.

Babesia bovis, is a tick borne apicomplexan parasite responsible for important
cattle losses globally. Babesia parasites have a complex life cycle including
asexual replication in the mammalian host and sexual reproduction in the tick
vector. Novel control strategies aimed at limiting transmission of the parasite
are needed, but transmission blocking vaccine candidates remain undefined.
Expression of HAP2 has been recognized as critical for the fertilization of
parasites in the Babesia-related Plasmodium, and is a leading candidate for a
transmission blocking vaccine against malaria. Hereby we identified the B. bovis 
hap2 gene and demonstrated that it is widely conserved and differentially
transcribed during development within the tick midgut, but not by blood stage
parasites. The hap2 gene was disrupted by transfecting B. bovis with a plasmid
containing the flanking regions of the hap2 gene and the GPF-BSD gene under the
control of the ef-1Î±-B promoter. Comparison of in vitro growth between a hap2-KO 
B. bovis clonal line and its parental wild type strain showed that HAP2 is not
required for the development of B. bovis in erythrocytes. However, xanthurenic
acid-in vitro induction experiments of sexual stages of parasites recovered after
tick transmission resulted in surface expression of HAP2 exclusively in sexual
stage induced parasites. In addition, hap2-KO parasites were not able to develop 
such sexual stages as defined both by morphology and by expression of the B.
bovis sexual marker genes 6-Cys A and B. Together, the data strongly suggests
that tick midgut stage differential expression of hap2 is associated with the
development of B. bovis sexual forms. Overall these studies are consistent with a
role of HAP2 in tick stages of the parasite and suggest that HAP2 is a potential 
candidate for a transmission blocking vaccine against bovine babesiosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005965 
PMCID: PMC5646870
PMID: 28985216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

