
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2017 Dec;97(6):1777-1781. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0225. Epub
2017 Oct 5.

Performance of Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification for the Identification of
Submicroscopic Plasmodium falciparum Infection in Uganda.

Katrak S(1), Murphy M(1), Nayebare P(2), Rek J(2), Smith M(3), Arinaitwe E(4)(2),
Nankabirwa JI(5)(2), Kamya M(5)(2), Dorsey G(1), Rosenthal PJ(1), Greenhouse
B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California.
(2)Infectious Diseases Research Collaboration, Kampala, Uganda.
(3)Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University, North Chicago, Illinois.
(4)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(5)School of Medicine, Makerere University College of Health Sciences, Kampala,
Uganda.

Accurately identifying and targeting the human reservoir of malaria parasitemia
is critical for malaria control, and requires a reliable and sensitive diagnostic
method. Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) is increasingly used to
diagnose submicroscopic parasitemia. Although most published studies report the
sensitivity of LAMP compared with nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) as ≥
80%, they have failed to use a consistent, sensitive diagnostic as a comparator. 
We used cross-sectional samples from children and adults in Tororo, Uganda, a
region with high but declining transmission due to indoor residual spraying, to
characterize the sensitivity and specificity of pan-Plasmodium LAMP for detecting
submicroscopic infections. We compared LAMP results targeting a mitochondrial DNA
sequence conserved in all Plasmodium species, performed on DNA extracted from
dried blood spots, to those of a gold standard quantitative PCR assay targeting
the var gene acidic terminal sequence of Plasmodium falciparum (varATS qPCR),
performed on DNA extracted from 200 µL of whole blood. Using LAMP and varATS qPCR
increased the detection of parasitemia 2- to 5-fold, compared with microscopy.
Among microscopy-negative samples, the sensitivity of LAMP was 81.5% for
detecting infection ≥ 1 parasites/µL. However, low density infections were
common, and LAMP failed to identify more than half of all infections diagnosed by
varATS qPCR, performing with an overall sensitivity of 44.7% for detecting
submicroscopic infections ≥ 0.01 parasites/µL. Thus, although the LAMP assay is
more sensitive than microscopy, it missed a significant portion of the
submicroscopic reservoir. These findings have important implications for malaria 
control, particularly in settings where low-density infections predominate.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0225 
PMCID: PMC5805042
PMID: 29016335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

