
1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2017 Dec;96:410-416. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2017.10.018. Epub
2017 Oct 12.

Artesunate attenuates ACLT-induced osteoarthritis by suppressing
osteoclastogenesis and aberrant angiogenesis.

Zhao C(1), Liu Q(2), Wang K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Xi'an Jiaotong University Health Science Center, Xi'an, 710049, China;
Department of Orthopedics, Yan'an University Affiliated Hospital, Yan'an, 716000,
China.
(2)Department of orthopedics, Lianshui County People's Hospital, Huaian, 223400, 
China.
(3)Department of orthopedics, Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, 710004, China. Electronic address: docwangzk@163.com.

Artesunate (ART) is a semi-synthetic derivative of artemisinin and used
preferentially in treatment of malaria in China. ART has strong
anti-inflammatory, anti-tumor, and anti-angiogenic properties. Although the
pharmacological effect of ART in osteoarthritis (OA) is unknown, evidence
suggests that ART might regulate osteoclastogenesis through NF-κB signaling. In
this study we explored the therapeutic effect of ART in an anterior cruciate
ligament transection (ACLT)-induced OA model. We found that ART effectively
relieved ACLT-induced osteoarthritis, as demonstrated by the improvement
expression of pathological genes. We further demonstrated that ART markedly
reduced OA-associated osteoclastogenesis and angiogenesis. In addition, ART also 
regulated inflammatory response and inhibited the activation of Janus
Kinase/Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription (JAK/STAT) signaling in
ACLT rats. Taken together our study has identified a novel function of ART and
provided a molecular basis for ART potential applications in the treatment of OA 
and other joint disorders.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2017.10.018 
PMID: 29031199  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

