
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2017 Sep 20;7:416. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00416.
eCollection 2017.

Pathogenic CD8+ T Cells Cause Increased Levels of VEGF-A in Experimental
Malaria-Associated Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome, but Therapeutic VEGFR
Inhibition Is Not Effective.

Pham TT(1), Verheijen M(1), Vandermosten L(1), Deroost K(1), Knoops S(1), Van den
Eynde K(2), Boon L(3), Janse CJ(4), Opdenakker G(1), Van den Steen PE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rega
Institute for Medical Research, KU Leuven-University of LeuvenLeuven, Belgium.
(2)Translational Cell and Tissue Research, KU Leuven-University of LeuvenLeuven, 
Belgium.
(3)BiocerosUtrecht, Netherlands.
(4)Leiden Malaria Research Group, Department of Parasitology, Leiden University
Medical CenterLeiden, Netherlands.

Malaria is a severe disease and kills over 400,000 people each year. Malarial
complications are the main cause of death and include cerebral malaria and
malaria-associated acute respiratory distress syndrome (MA-ARDS). Despite
antimalarial treatment, lethality rates of MA-ARDS are still between 20 and 80%. 
Patients develop pulmonary edema with hemorrhages and leukocyte extravasation in 
the lungs. The vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) and the placental
growth factor (PlGF) are vascular permeability factors and may be involved in the
disruption of the alveolar-capillary membrane, leading to alveolar edema. We
demonstrated increased pulmonary VEGF-A and PlGF levels in lungs of mice with
experimental MA-ARDS. Depletion of pathogenic CD8+ T cells blocked pulmonary
edema and abolished the increase of VEGF-A and PlGF. However, neutralization of
VEGF receptor-2 (VEGFR-2) with the monoclonal antibody clone DC101 did not
decrease pulmonary pathology. The broader spectrum receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor sunitinib even increased lung pathology. These data suggest that the
increase in alveolar VEGF-A and PlGF is not a cause but rather a consequence of
the pulmonary pathology in experimental MA-ARDS and that therapeutic inhibition
of VEGF receptors is not effective and even contra-indicated.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00416 
PMCID: PMC5627041
PMID: 29034214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

