
1. mBio. 2017 Oct 31;8(5). pii: e01468-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01468-17.

Autophagy-Related Protein ATG18 Regulates Apicoplast Biogenesis in Apicomplexan
Parasites.

Bansal P(1), Tripathi A(1), Thakur V(2), Mohmmed A(2), Sharma P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Gene Expression Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology, New
Delhi, India.
(2)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi,
India.
(3)Eukaryotic Gene Expression Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology, New
Delhi, India pushkar@nii.ac.in.

Mechanisms by which 3'-phosphorylated phosphoinositides (3'-PIPs) regulate the
development of apicomplexan parasites Plasmodium falciparum and Toxoplasma gondii
are poorly understood. The catabolic process of autophagy, which is dependent on 
autophagy-related proteins (ATGs), is one of the major targets of 3'-PIPs in
yeast and mammals. In the present study, we identified autophagy-related protein 
ATG18 as an effector of 3'-PIPs in these parasites. Pfalciparum ATG18 (PfATG18)
and Tgondii ATG18 (TgATG18) interact with 3'-PIPs but exhibited differences in
their specificity of interaction with the ligand PIP. The conditional knockdown
of Tgondii or Pfalciparum ATG18 (Tg/PfATG18) impaired replication of parasites
and resulted in their delayed death. Intriguingly, ATG18 depletion resulted in
the loss of the apicomplexan parasite-specific nonphotosynthetic plastid-like
organelle apicoplast, which harbors the machinery for biosynthesis of key
metabolites, and the interaction of ATG18 to phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate
(PI3P) was critical for apicoplast inheritance. Furthermore, ATG18 regulates
membrane association and apicoplast localization of ATG8. These findings provide 
insights into a novel noncanonical role of ATG18 in apicoplast inheritance. This 
function of ATG18 in organelle biogenesis is unprecedented in any organism and
may be conserved across most apicomplexan parasites.IMPORTANCE Typically,
autophagy is a catabolic process utilized by cells for their survival upon
encountering nutrient-limiting conditions. The autophagy machinery is very
tightly regulated, and autophagy-related genes (ATGs) play a pivotal role in this
process. In the present study, we report a novel noncanonical function of
autophagy-related protein ATG18 in inheritance of the nonphotosynthetic
plastid-like organelle apicoplast in apicomplexan parasites Plasmodium and
Toxoplasma ATG18 depletion in these parasites resulted in "delayed death," which 
was the result of loss of apicoplast and impaired parasite division. Pf/TgATG18
interact with 3'-phosphorylated PIPs, which guide their cellular localization in 
the parasite, which is essential for their function.

Copyright Â© 2017 Bansal et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01468-17 
PMCID: PMC5666157
PMID: 29089429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

