
1. Neurosci Lett. 2018 Jan 1;662:290-294. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2017.10.054. Epub
2017 Oct 28.

AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is decreased in the mouse brain during
experimental cerebral malaria.

Apoorv TS(1), Karthik C(1), Babu PP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences,
University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, 500 046, Telangana State, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences,
University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, 500 046, Telangana State, India. Electronic
address: prakash@uohyd.ac.in.

Cerebral malaria (CM) is a severe form of malaria caused by Plasmodium falciparum
and P.vivax. CM affects the brain leading to coma and is the leading cause of
death in malaria patients. The enzyme, adenosine 5'-monophosphate-activated
protein kinase (AMPK), is an important metabolic sensor that helps in maintaining
energy homeostasis during normal physiological as well as pathological
conditions. In the present study, we studied the status of AMPK in the mouse
model of CM. The C57BL/6 mice infected by rodent-specific P.berghei ANKA were
used for the study. We found a statistically significant reduction in the gene
expressions of Prkaa1 (α1 subunit) and Prkaa2 (α2 subunit) in the brains of CM
mice compared to uninfected control. Also, there was a statistically significant 
reduction in the ratio of phospho-AMPK/AMPK protein levels in CM compared to
uninfected control. There was no statistically significant decrease in
phospho-ACC/ACC ratio in the brain compared to control. As AMPK is downregulated 
in CM, there is a possible involvement in neuronal cell death during CM
pathogenesis, and therefore we feel that novel AMPK activating drugs might be
helpful as an adjunctive therapy for conferring neuroprotection.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2017.10.054 
PMID: 29107705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

