
1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2018 Jan;97:624-632. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2017.10.116. Epub
2017 Nov 6.

Tetrandrine and cancer - An overview on the molecular approach.

N B(1), K R C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Botany, Mangalore University, Mangalagangotri, Mangalore
574 199, Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Applied Botany, Mangalore University, Mangalagangotri, Mangalore
574 199, Karnataka, India. Electronic address: profkrchandrashekar@gmail.com.

Tetrandrine has been known in the treatment of tuberculosis, hyperglycemia,
negative ionotropic and chronotropic effects on myocardium, malaria, cancer and
fever since years together. It has been known that, tetrandrine could modulate
multiple signaling molecules such as kinases of cell cycle and rat sarcoma (RAS) 
pathway along with proteins of tumor suppressor genes, autophagy related,
β-catenins, caspases, and death receptors. Moreover, tetrandrine exhibited
reversal of drug resistance by modulating P-glyco protein (P-gp) expression
levels in different cancers which is an added advantage of this compound compared
to other chemotherapy drugs. Though, bioavailability of tetrandrine is a limiting
factor, the anticancer activity was observed in animal models without changing
any pharmacokinetic parameters. In the present review, role of tetrandrine as
kinase inhibitor, inducer of autophagy and caspase pathways and suppressor of RAS
mediated cell proliferation were discussed along with inhibition of angiogenesis.
It has also been discussed that how tetrandrine potentiate anticancer effect in
different types of cancers by modulating multidrug resistance under in vitro and 
in vivo trials including the available literature on the clinical trials.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2017.10.116 
PMID: 29101806  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

