
1. J Parasit Dis. 2017 Dec;41(4):1132-1138. doi: 10.1007/s12639-017-0946-y. Epub
2017 Jul 20.

Genetic polymorphism of Plasmodium vivax Duffy Binding Protein in malarious areas
in southeastern of Iran.

Nateghpour M(1), Haghi AM(1), Naderi B(1), Sepehrizadeh Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Parasitology and Mycology, School of Public Health,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Medical Biotechnology, School of Advanced Medical Technologies, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Plasmodium vivax parasite causes the largest number of malaria infection in some 
malarious areas of the world including Iran. Considering transfer and genetic
dynamics of the parasite population in a specific area can help us to predict the
spread of the infection either emergence of new cases or drug resistance in the
context of elimination program in the malarious areas. Study on the genetic
diversity of common alleles in a given geographical area, for vaccine and immune 
level studies can be important. The purpose of this study was to know the status 
of P. vivax Duffy Binding Protein (PvDBP) polymorphism in patients infected with 
the parasite in malaria endemic southeastern Iran. The fragment of gene
corresponding to PvDBP of thirty P. vivax malaria infected individuals was
amplified. A 1176Â bp band related to this fragment was purified and PCR-RFLP
method was employed using enzymatic digestion with PstI and RsaI restriction
enzymes. Ten percent of samples were sent for sequencing. PCR-RFLP showed that
99.7% of the samples were cut as the same together, either the PstI enzyme or the
enzyme of RsaI. In each case, only 2 isolates were unlike others. Findings
revealed that there is at least 96% identity among isolates in the nucleotide
level. Amino acid pattern of PvDBP in Iranian isolates showed little
discrepancies with those PvDBP genes that have been recorded in GenBank.
Sequencing of PvDBP isolates of Iranian P. vivax infected patients showed low
level of genetic polymorphism among them. Results of this study can prepare
valuable information for malaria policy makers to intend them in their malaria
control program.

DOI: 10.1007/s12639-017-0946-y 
PMCID: PMC5660046
PMID: 29114153 

