
1. J Invertebr Pathol. 2018 Jan;151:59-75. doi: 10.1016/j.jip.2017.11.002. Epub 2017
Nov 6.

Ultrastructural and molecular characterization of Vairimorpha austropotamobii sp.
nov. (Microsporidia: Burenellidae) and Thelohania contejeani (Microsporidia:
Thelohaniidae), two parasites of the white-clawed crayfish, Austropotamobius
pallipes complex (Decapoda: Astacidae).

Pretto T(1), Montesi F(2), Ghia D(3), Berton V(2), Abbadi M(2), Gastaldelli M(4),
Manfrin A(4), Fea G(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Reference Centre for Crustacean Diseases, Istituto Zooprofilattico
Sperimentale delle Venezie, Via Leonardo da Vinci 39, 45011 Adria, Rovigo, Italy;
Department of Veterinary Medical Sciences, Alma Mater Studiorum University of
Bologna, Via Tolara di Sopra 50, 40064 Ozzano dell'Emilia, Bologna, Italy.
Electronic address: tpretto@izsvenezie.it.
(2)Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, Istituto Zooprofilattico
Sperimentale delle Venezie, Viale dell'Università 10, 35020 Legnaro, Padova,
Italy.
(3)Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Pavia, Via
Adolfo Ferrata 7, I-27100 Pavia, Italy.
(4)National Reference Centre for Crustacean Diseases, Istituto Zooprofilattico
Sperimentale delle Venezie, Via Leonardo da Vinci 39, 45011 Adria, Rovigo, Italy.

The microsporidiosis of the endangered white-clawed crayfish Austropotamobius
pallipes complex has generally been attributed to only one species, Thelohania
contejeani, the agent of porcelain disease. Species identification was mostly
assessed by macroscopic examination or microscopic evaluation of muscle samples
rather than by molecular or ultrastructural analyses. A survey conducted on A.
pallipes complex populations in Northern Italy highlighted the presence of two
different microsporidia causing similar muscular lesions, T. contejeani and an
undescribed octosporoblastic species Vairimorpha austropotamobii sp. nov. Mature 
spores and earlier developmental stages of V. austropotamobii sp. nov. were found
within striated muscle cells of the thorax, abdomen, and appendages of the
crayfish. Only octosporoblastic sporogony within sporophorous vesicles (SPVs) was
observed. Diplokaryotic sporonts separated into two uninucleate daughter cells,
which gave rise to a rosette-shaped plasmodium, and eight uninucleate spores were
produced within the persistent SPV. Ultrastructural features of stages in the
octosporoblastic sequence were similar to those described for Vairimorpha
necatrix, the type species. Mature spores were pyriform in shape and an average
of 3.9 × 2.2 µm in size. The polar filament was coiled 11-14 times, lateral to
the posterior vacuole. The small subunit ribosomal RNA gene (SSU rRNA) and the
large subunit RNA polymerase II gene (RPB1) of V. austropotamobii sp. nov. were
sequenced and compared with other microsporidia. The highest sequence identity of
SSU rRNA (99%) and RPB1 (74%) genes was with the amphipod parasite Nosema
granulosis and subsequently with V. cheracis, which infects the Australian yabby 
Cherax destructor. In our work we discuss about the reasons for placing this new 
species in the genus Vairimorpha. In addition, we provide for T. contejeani a
RPB1 gene sequence, supplemental sequences of SSU rRNA gene and ultrastructural
details of its sporogony in the host A. pallipes complex.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jip.2017.11.002 
PMID: 29122615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

