
1. Exp Parasitol. 2018 Feb;185:29-38. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2018.01.003. Epub 2018 
Jan 5.

Plasmodium falciparum malaria skews globin gene expression balance in in-vitro
haematopoietic stem cell culture system: Its implications in malaria associated
anemia.

Pathak V(1), Colah R(1), Ghosh K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematogenetics, National Institute of Immunohaematology (ICMR),
KEM Hospital, Parel 400012, Mumbai, India.
(2)Surat Raktadan Kendra & Research Centre, Udhna Khatodara Urban Health Centre, 
Udhna Magdalla Road, Surat 395002, Gujrat, India. Electronic address:
kanjakshaghosh@hotmail.com.

Understanding the pathophysiology and associated host parasite interactions of
the malaria infection is the prerequisite for developing effective prevention and
treatment strategies. The exact mechanism underlying malaria associated
ineffective and dyserythropoiesis is not yet fully understood. Being an important
protein, haemoglobin serves as the main amino acid reservoir available to the
intra-erythrocytic plasmodium. It is important to check the expression profiling 
of globin genes which may help us to understand host parasite interactions and
its potential contribution to both infection and disease. Here, an in-vitro
culture system was used to study the effect of different doses of Plasmodium
falciparum on haematopoietic stem cell expansion, differentiation and expression 
of globin genes. Upon exposure to the different doses of P. falciparum parasites 
of strains 3D7, Dd2 and RKL9 (intact and lysed form) at different stages of
erythroid development, cells demonstrated suppression in growth and
differentiation. At almost all stages of erythroid development upon parasite
exposure, the γ globin gene was found to be downregulated and the α/β as well as 
α/non- α globin mRNA ratios in late stage erythroid cells were found to be
reduced (p < .01) compared to the untreated controls. The imbalance in globin
chain expression might be considered as one of the factors involved in malaria
associated inappropriate erythropoietic responses.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2018.01.003 
PMID: 29309785  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

