
1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2018 Feb 15;341:8-15. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2018.01.002.
Epub 2018 Jan 5.

Toxicity and related mechanisms of dihydroartemisinin on porcine oocyte
maturation in vitro.

Luo Y(1), Che MJ(2), Liu C(3), Liu HG(1), Fu XW(4), Hou YP(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.
(2)National Demonstration Center for Experimental Biological Sciences Education, 
College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193,
China.
(3)School of life science, Wuchang University of Technology, Wuhan 430223, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of
Agriculture and National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding, College of
Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193,
China.
(5)State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China. Electronic address:
hou@cau.edu.cn.

Dihydroartemisinin (DHA), the main active metabolite of artemisinin, has been
used to treat malaria and has anticancer activities. Previous work has shown that
DHA has negative impacts on embryos in rodents and primates. However, whether DHA
has adverse effects on oocyte maturation is unknown. In the present study, we
evaluated the toxic effects and possible mechanisms of DHA on porcine oocyte
maturation. The results showed that exposure to DHA inhibited porcine oocyte
polar body extrusion, and blocked cell cycle progression. Meanwhile, early embryo
development after parthenogenetic activation was also impaired. DHA disturbed
spindle morphology and actin assembly in porcine oocytes by reducing
phosphorylation levels of MAPK. Moreover, the ROS content was increased and the
mitochondrial membrane potential decreased in oocytes treated with DHA. DHA also 
increased the levels of intracellular and mitochondrial calcium. Furthermore,
Annexin V-FITC staining showed that early apoptosis occurred in DHA-treated
oocytes. The mRNA levels of apoptosis-related genes BAX and CASP3 were increased,
and the anti-apoptotic gene BCL2 was decreased in oocytes exposed to DHA. Taken
together, these results indicate that DHA exposure impairs porcine oocyte
maturation in vitro via mechanisms involved in cytoskeleton dynamics, oxidative
stress, calcium homeostasis, and apoptosis.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2018.01.002 
PMID: 29309768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

