
1. Malar J. 2018 Jan 9;17(1):16. doi: 10.1186/s12936-017-2157-5.

Global sequence diversity of the lactate dehydrogenase gene in Plasmodium
falciparum.

Simpalipan P(1), Pattaradilokrat S(2)(3), Harnyuttanakorn P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Zoology Ph.D. Programme, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, 10330, Thailand.
(2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 
10330, Thailand.
(3)Veterinary Parasitology Research Group, Department of Pathology, Faculty of
Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 10330, Thailand.
(4)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 
10330, Thailand. HPongchai@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Antigen-detecting rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) have been recommended
by the World Health Organization for use in remote areas to improve malaria case 
management. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of Plasmodium falciparum is one of the
main parasite antigens employed by various commercial RDTs. It has been
hypothesized that the poor detection of LDH-based RDTs is attributed in part to
the sequence diversity of the gene. To test this, the present study aimed to
investigate the genetic diversity of the P. falciparum ldh gene in Thailand and
to construct the map of LDH sequence diversity in P. falciparum populations
worldwide.
METHODS: The ldh gene was sequenced for 50 P. falciparum isolates in Thailand and
compared with hundreds of sequences from P. falciparum populations worldwide.
Several indices of molecular variation were calculated, including the proportion 
of polymorphic sites, the average nucleotide diversity index (Ï€), and the
haplotype diversity index (H). Tests of positive selection and neutrality tests
were performed to determine signatures of natural selection on the gene. Mean
genetic distance within and between species of Plasmodium ldh was analysed to
infer evolutionary relationships.
RESULTS: Nucleotide sequences of P. falciparum ldh could be classified into 9
alleles, encoding 5 isoforms of LDH. L1a was the most common allelic type and was
distributed in P. falciparum populations worldwide. Plasmodium falciparum ldh
sequences were highly conserved, with haplotype and nucleotide diversity values
of 0.203 and 0.0004, respectively. The extremely low genetic diversity was
maintained by purifying selection, likely due to functional constraints.
Phylogenetic analysis inferred the close genetic relationship of P. falciparum to
malaria parasites of great apes, rather than to other human malaria parasites.
CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed the global genetic variation of the ldh gene in 
P. falciparum, providing knowledge for improving detection of LDH-based RDTs and 
supporting the candidacy of LDH as a therapeutic drug target.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-017-2157-5 
PMCID: PMC5761093
PMID: 29316927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

