
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 Feb 23;62(3). pii: e01828-17. doi:
10.1128/AAC.01828-17. Print 2018 Mar.

G-Quadruplex DNA Motifs in the Malaria Parasite Plasmodium falciparum and Their
Potential as Novel Antimalarial Drug Targets.

Harris LM(#)(1), Monsell KR(#)(1), Noulin F(1), Famodimu MT(1), Smargiasso N(2), 
Damblon C(2), Horrocks P(1)(3), Merrick CJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Entomology and Parasitology, Faculty of Natural Sciences,
Keele University, Keele, Staffordshire, United Kingdom.
(2)Molecular Systems Research Unit, University of Liege, Liege, Belgium.
(3)Institute for Science and Technology in Medicine, Keele University, Keele,
Staffordshire, United Kingdom.
(4)Centre for Applied Entomology and Parasitology, Faculty of Natural Sciences,
Keele University, Keele, Staffordshire, United Kingdom c.merrick@keele.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

G-quadruplexes are DNA or RNA secondary structures that can be formed from
guanine-rich nucleic acids. These four-stranded structures, composed of stacked
quartets of guanine bases, can be highly stable and have been demonstrated to
occur in vivo in the DNA of human cells and other systems, where they play
important biological roles, influencing processes such as telomere maintenance,
DNA replication and transcription, or, in the case of RNA G-quadruplexes, RNA
translation and processing. We report for the first time that DNA G-quadruplexes 
can be detected in the nuclei of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum,
which has one of the most A/T-biased genomes sequenced and therefore possesses
few guanine-rich sequences with the potential to form G-quadruplexes. We show
that despite this paucity of putative G-quadruplex-forming sequences, P.
falciparum parasites are sensitive to several G-quadruplex-stabilizing drugs,
including quarfloxin, which previously reached phase 2 clinical trials as an
anticancer drug. Quarfloxin has a rapid initial rate of kill and is active
against ring stages as well as replicative stages of intraerythrocytic
development. We show that several G-quadruplex-stabilizing drugs, including
quarfloxin, can suppress the transcription of a G-quadruplex-containing reporter 
gene in P. falciparum but that quarfloxin does not appear to disrupt the
transcription of rRNAs, which was proposed as its mode of action in both human
cells and trypanosomes. These data suggest that quarfloxin has potential for
repositioning as an antimalarial with a novel mode of action. Furthermore,
G-quadruplex biology in P. falciparum may present a target for development of
other new antimalarial drugs.

Copyright Â© 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01828-17 
PMCID: PMC5826154
PMID: 29311059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

