
1. Vet Parasitol. 2018 Jan 30;250:1-6. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2017.12.006. Epub 2017 
Dec 6.

DNA detection of Trypanosoma evansi: Diagnostic validity of a new assay based on 
loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP).

Tong Q(1), Chen R(2), Kong Q(3), Goossens J(4), Radwanska M(5), Lou D(6), Ding
J(7), Zheng B(8), Fu Y(9), Wang T(10), Stefan M(11), Lu S(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunity and Biochemistry, Institute of Parasitic Disease,
Zhejiang Academy of Medical Sciences, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address:
tongqunbo74@163.com.
(2)Department of Immunity and Biochemistry, Institute of Parasitic Disease,
Zhejiang Academy of Medical Sciences, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address:
chenrui75@163.com.
(3)Department of Immunity and Biochemistry, Institute of Parasitic Disease,
Zhejiang Academy of Medical Sciences, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address:
qmkong@zjams.com.cn.
(4)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: goossensjulie@hotmail.com.
(5)Ghent University Global Campus, Incheon, South Korea. Electronic address:
magdalena.radwanska@ghent.ac.kr.
(6)Department of Immunity and Biochemistry, Institute of Parasitic Disease,
Zhejiang Academy of Medical Sciences, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address:
loudi70@163.com.
(7)Department of Immunity and Biochemistry, Institute of Parasitic Disease,
Zhejiang Academy of Medical Sciences, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address:
dingjianzu@163.com.
(8)Department of Immunity and Biochemistry, Institute of Parasitic Disease,
Zhejiang Academy of Medical Sciences, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address:
bin_zheng@foxmail.com.
(9)Department of Immunity and Biochemistry, Institute of Parasitic Disease,
Zhejiang Academy of Medical Sciences, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address:
yxf900207@163.com.
(10)Anhui Institute of Parasitic Diseases Control and Prevention, Hefei, China.
Electronic address: tpwang906@163.com.
(11)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 
Brussels, Belgium; Ghent University Global Campus, Incheon, South Korea.
Electronic address: stefan.magez@vub.be.
(12)Department of Immunity and Biochemistry, Institute of Parasitic Disease,
Zhejiang Academy of Medical Sciences, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address:
llsshh2003@163.com.

Erratum in
    Vet Parasitol. 2018 Mar 15;252:142. Stefan, Magez [corrected to Magez, Stefan].

Trypanosoma evansi (T. evansi) is the most widely spread pathogenic trypanosome
in the world. The control of trypanosomiasis depends on accurate diagnosis and
effective treatment. Focusing on the presence of T. evansi in Asia, we developed 
a detection assay based on tracing phosphate ions (Pi) generated during LAMP
targeting the variant surface glycoprotein (VSG) gene of Rode Trypanozoon
antigenic type 1.2 (RoTat 1.2 VSG). The diagnostic potential as well as the use
of the assay as a test-of-cure method after berenil treatment, was assessed in
mice at different time points of infection. In addition, 67 buffalo blood
collected from Tongling county, Anhui province, as well as 42 cattle sera from
the Shanghai area, were used to evaluate the diagnostic validity of the test. The
detection limit of the novel LAMP assay was determined to be as low as 1 fg of T.
evansi DNA, while the reaction time for the test was only 30min. Hence it
outperforms both microscopy and PCR. In the test-of-cure assessment, successful
berenil mediated cure could be confirmed within 48h after treatment. This offers 
a tremendous advantage over conventional antibody-based diagnostic tools in which
successful cure only can be confirmed after months. In the cattle and buffalo
screening, the LAMP was able to detect a false-negative determined sample,
wrongly classified in a conventional microscopy and PCR screening. Finally, no
cross-reactivity was observed with other zoonotic parasites, such as T. evansi
type B, T. congolense, T. brucei, Schistosoma japonicum, Plasmodium falciparum,
Leishmania donovani, Toxoplasma gondii and Angiostrongylus cantonensis. We
conclude that the novel LAMP assay is sensitive, specific and convenient for
field use, particularly in areas where infection incidence has become extremely
low. The LAMP assay could be used as a tool for trypanosomiasis control and
elimination strategies in areas where T. evansi Type A infections are causing a
threat to livestock farming.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2017.12.006 
PMID: 29329617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

