
1. Acta Trop. 2018 Apr;180:81-87. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2018.01.006. Epub 2018 
Jan 17.

Molecular monitoring of dihydrofolatereductase (dhfr) and
dihydropteroatesynthetase (dhps) associated with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine
resistance in Plasmodium vivax isolates of Palawan, Philippines.

Bareng AP(1), Espino FE(2), Chaijaroenkul W(3), Na-Bangchang K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Tropical Medicine-Department of Health, Muntinlupa
City, Philippines; Center of Excellence in Pharmacology and Molecular Biology of 
Malaria and Cholangiocarcinoma, Chulabhorn International College of Medicine,
Thammasat University, Pathumthani 12121, Thailand.
(2)Research Institute for Tropical Medicine-Department of Health, Muntinlupa
City, Philippines.
(3)Center of Excellence in Pharmacology and Molecular Biology of Malaria and
Cholangiocarcinoma, Chulabhorn International College of Medicine, Thammasat
University, Pathumthani 12121, Thailand.
(4)Center of Excellence in Pharmacology and Molecular Biology of Malaria and
Cholangiocarcinoma, Chulabhorn International College of Medicine, Thammasat
University, Pathumthani 12121, Thailand. Electronic address: kesaratmu@yahoo.com.

The emergence of drug-resistant Plasmodium vivax poses problems for malaria
control and elimination in some parts of the world, especially in developing
countries where individuals are routinely exposed to the infection. The aim of
this study was to determine the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
dihydropteroate synthase (pvdhps) and dihydrofolate reductase (pvdhfr) genes
associated with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) drug resistance among P. vivax
isolates collected in Palawan, Philippines. Genetic polymorphisms of pvdhps and
pvdhfr were analysed by nested PCR. Analysis at specific codons
I13P33F57S58T61S117I173 associated with pyrimethamine resistance in the pvdhfr
gene revealed that most of the samples (66/87, 75.9%) carried double mutation at 
positions I13P33F57R58T61N117I173, while only 18.4% (16/87) of the isolates
carried the wild-type haplotype (I13P33F57S58T61S117I173). For the pvdhps gene,
the codons involved in sulfadoxine resistance S382A383K512A553V585 were
investigated. Single mutation at position S382G383K512A553V585 was most observed 
in 68.0% (68/100) of the samples, whereas wild-type haplotype was found in 26.0% 
(26/100) of samples. The pvdhps and pvdhfr combination
S382A383K512A553V585/I13P33F57S58T61S117I173 (wild-type),
S382G383K512A553V585/I13P33F57R58T61N117I173, and
S382A383K512A553V585-I13P33F57R58T61N117I173 were the most frequently observed
combination haplotypes from the three study sites. The information on molecular
markers associated with antifolate drug-resistance could help better
understanding ofthe molecular epidemiology and situation of SP resistant P. vivax
malaria in the country. Continuous surveillance of these genetic markers is
necessary to monitor the evolution of SP resistance in the Philippines.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2018.01.006 
PMID: 29352991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

