
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2018 Feb 1;10(2):553-561. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evy017.

PhyloChromoMap, a Tool for Mapping Phylogenomic History along Chromosomes,
Reveals the Dynamic Nature of Karyotype Evolution in Plasmodium falciparum.

Cerón-Romero MA(1)(2), Nwaka E(1), Owoade Z(1), Katz LA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts.
(2)Program in Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, University of Massachusetts
Amherst.

The genome of Plasmodium falciparum, the causative agent of malaria in Africa,
has been extensively studied since it was first fully sequenced in 2002. However,
many open questions remain, including understanding the chromosomal context of
molecular evolutionary changes (e.g., relationship between chromosome map and
phylogenetic conservation, patterns of gene duplication, and patterns of
selection). Here, we present PhyloChromoMap, a method that generates a
phylogenomic map of chromosomes from a custom-built bioinformatics pipeline.
Using P. falciparum 3D7 as a model, we analyze 2,116 genes with homologs in up to
941 diverse eukaryotic, bacterial and archaeal lineages. We estimate the level of
conservation along chromosomes based on conservation across clades, and identify 
"young" regions (i.e., those with recent or fast evolving genes) that are
enriched in subtelomeric regions as compared with internal regions. We also
demonstrate that patterns of molecular evolution for paralogous genes differ
significantly depending on their location as younger paralogs tend to be found in
subtelomeric regions whereas older paralogs are enriched in internal regions.
Combining these observations with analyses of synteny, we demonstrate that
subtelomeric regions are actively shuffled among chromosome ends, which is
consistent with the hypothesis that these regions are prone to ectopic
recombination. We also assess patterns of selection by comparing dN/dS ratios of 
gene family members in subtelomeric versus internal regions, and we include the
important antigenic gene family var. These analyses illustrate the highly dynamic
nature of the karyotype of P. falciparum, and provide a method for exploring
genome dynamics in other lineages.

© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evy017 
PMCID: PMC5800058
PMID: 29365145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

