
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 Mar 27;62(4). pii: e02141-17. doi:
10.1128/AAC.02141-17. Print 2018 Apr.

Emergence and Spread of kelch13 Mutations Associated with Artemisinin Resistance 
in Plasmodium falciparum Parasites in 12 Thai Provinces from 2007 to 2016.

Kobasa T(#)(1), Talundzic E(#)(2)(3), Sug-Aram R(1), Boondat P(4), Goldman IF(4),
Lucchi NW(4), Dharmarak P(5), Sintasath D(5), Fukuda M(5), Whistler T(6),
MacArthur J(6), Udhayakumar V(4), Prempree P(1), Chinanonwait N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bureau of Vector Borne Diseases, Department of Disease Control, Ministry of
Public Health (MOPH), Nonathaburi, Thailand.
(2)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA
etalundzic@cdc.gov.
(3)Atlanta Research and Education Foundation, VAMC, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(4)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(5)U.S. President's Malaria Initiative, USAID/RDMA, Bangkok, Thailand.
(6)Thailand Ministry of Public Health (MOPH)-U.S. CDC Collaboration, Nonathaburi,
Thailand.
(#)Contributed equally

Artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) is the most effective and widely used
treatment for uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria and is a cornerstone
for malaria control and prevention globally. Resistance to artemisinin
derivatives has been confirmed in the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) and
manifests as slow parasite clearance in patients and reduced ring stage
susceptibility to artemisinins in survival assays. The P. falciparumkelch13 gene 
mutations associated with artemisinin-resistant parasites are now widespread in
the GMS. We genotyped 277 samples collected during an observational study from
2012 to 2016 from eight provinces in Thailand to identify P. falciparum kelch13
mutations. The results were combined with previously reported genotyping results 
from Thailand to construct a map illustrating the evolution of P. falciparum
kelch13 mutations from 2007 to 2016 in that country. Different mutant alleles
were found in strains with different geographical origins. The artemisinin
resistance-conferring Y493H and R539T mutations were detected mainly in eastern
Thailand (bordering Cambodia), while P574L was found only in western Thailand and
R561H only in northwestern Thailand. The C580Y mutation was found across the
entire country and was nearing fixation along the Thai-Cambodia border. Overall, 
the prevalence of artemisinin resistance mutations increased over the last 10
years across Thailand, especially along the Thai-Cambodia border. Molecular
surveillance and therapeutic efficacy monitoring should be intensified in the
region to further assess the extent and spread of artemisinin resistance.

Copyright Â© 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02141-17 
PMCID: PMC5914000
PMID: 29378723  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

