
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 Mar 27;62(4). pii: e02309-17. doi:
10.1128/AAC.02309-17. Print 2018 Apr.

Inactivation of Plasmepsins 2 and 3 Sensitizes Plasmodium falciparum to the
Antimalarial Drug Piperaquine.

Mukherjee A(1)(2), Gagnon D(3), Wirth DF(2)(4), Richard D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en infectiologie du CHU de Québec-Université Laval, Québec
City, Québec, Canada angana.mukherjee@crchudequebec.ulaval.ca
dave.richard@crchudequebec.ulaval.ca.
(2)Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachussetts, United
States.
(3)Centre de recherche en infectiologie du CHU de Québec-Université Laval, Québec
City, Québec, Canada.
(4)The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachussetts, United
States.

Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (DHA-PPQ), the current frontline artemisinin
combination therapy used to treat Plasmodium falciparum malaria in multiple
Southeast Asian countries, is now increasingly failing in Cambodia, where
artemisinin resistance is nearly fixed, which suggests that PPQ resistance has
emerged and is spreading rapidly in the Greater Mekong Subregion. Recent reports 
have shown that amplification of the genes encoding plasmepsins 2 and 3 is a
molecular marker of PPQ resistance; however, whether these enzymes play a role in
the mechanism of resistance is currently unknown. We show here that inactivating 
the genes encoding plasmepsin 2 or 3 individually in P. falciparum reference
strain 3D7 results in hypersusceptibility to PPQ. Interestingly, no significant
differences in the susceptibility to other antimalarials were observed, which
suggests specific roles of plasmepsins 2 and 3 in PPQ susceptibility. The
piperaquine hyper-sensitivity of the plasmepsin-2-and-3-inactivated lines
provides direct evidence that these enzymes modulate parasite susceptibility to
PPQ in the context of a single copy of PfMDR1 and independent of Kelch13
mutations conferring artemisinin resistance.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02309-17 
PMCID: PMC5913920
PMID: 29439977  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

