
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 Apr;98(4):1132-1136. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0864. Epub
2018 Feb 8.

Surveillance of Antimalarial Resistance Molecular Markers in Imported Plasmodium 
falciparum Malaria Cases in Anhui, China, 2012-2016.

Zhang T(1), Xu X(1), Jiang J(1), Yu C(1), Tian C(1), Li W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Anhui Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Anhui, China.

Between 2012 and 2016, over 80% of registered malaria cases in Anhui province
were Plasmodium falciparum returned from Africa. However, drug-resistance marker 
polymorphisms in imported P. falciparum cases have not been assessed. This study 
looked at the distribution of antimalarial-drug resistance by evaluating
K13-propeller, pfmdr1, and pfcrt gene mutations. Fourteen synonymous and 15
nonsynonymous mutations in the K13-propeller gene were detected in samples from
nine African countries, yet no candidate and validated K13 resistance mutations
were found. The prevalence of pfcrt K76T and pfmdr1 N86Y mutants was 27.7% and
19.9%, respectively. Six different pfcrt genotypes were found, with
C72V73M74N75T76 being the most common (89.2%). The pfcrt 76-pfmdr1 86 haplotype
combination was evaluated in 173 isolates, and the N86T76 genotype was the most
prevalent (50.3%). Notably, the prevalence of the N86Y mutation in Africa marked 
a decline from 31.0% in 2012 to 8.2% in 2016. Our findings suggest that there is 
no immediate threat to artemisinin efficacy in imported P. falciparum infections 
returned from Africa to Anhui province. Nevertheless, pfcrt K76T and pfmdr1 N86Y 
mutations were modestly prevalent, suggesting the presence of chloroquine
resistance in these cases. Accordingly, dihydroartemisinin + piperaquine may be a
better choice than artesunate + amodiaquine for the treatment of uncomplicated P.
falciparum infections in Anhui province. In addition to, artemether-lumefantrine 
can be introduced as an alternative measure.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0864 
PMCID: PMC5928834
PMID: 29436339  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

