
1. Nat Ecol Evol. 2018 Apr;2(4):713-720. doi: 10.1038/s41559-018-0478-6. Epub 2018
Feb 19.

Patterns of shared signatures of recent positive selection across human
populations.

Johnson KE(1), Voight BF(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Gene Regulation Program, Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate
Group, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
USA.
(2)Department of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
bvoight@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(3)Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. bvoight@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(4)Institute for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
bvoight@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

Signatures of recent positive selection often overlap across human populations,
but the question of how often these overlaps represent a single ancestral event
remains unresolved. If a single selective event spread across many populations,
the same sweeping haplotype should appear in each population and the selective
pressure could be common across populations and environments. Identifying such
shared selective events could identify genomic loci and human traits important in
recent history across the globe. In addition, genomic annotations that recently
became available could help attach these signatures to a potential gene and
molecular phenotype selected across populations. Here, we present a catalogue of 
selective sweeps in humans, and identify those that overlap and share a sweeping 
haplotype. We connect these sweep overlaps with potential biological mechanisms
at several loci, including potential new sites of adaptive introgression, the
glycophorin locus associated with malarial resistance and the alcohol
dehydrogenase cluster associated with alcohol dependency.

DOI: 10.1038/s41559-018-0478-6 
PMCID: PMC5866773
PMID: 29459708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

