
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2018 Feb 8;8:34. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00034.
eCollection 2018.

Plasmodium vivax Biology: Insights Provided by Genomics, Transcriptomics and
Proteomics.

Bourgard C(1), Albrecht L(1)(2), Kayano ACAV(1), Sunnerhagen P(3), Costa FTM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tropical Diseases, Department of Genetics, Evolution,
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Campinas - UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Regulation of Gene Expression, Instituto Carlos Chagas,
Curitiba, Brazil.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden.

During the last decade, the vast omics field has revolutionized biological
research, especially the genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics branches, as
technological tools become available to the field researcher and allow difficult 
question-driven studies to be addressed. Parasitology has greatly benefited from 
next generation sequencing (NGS) projects, which have resulted in a broadened
comprehension of basic parasite molecular biology, ecology and epidemiology.
Malariology is one example where application of this technology has greatly
contributed to a better understanding of Plasmodium spp. biology and
host-parasite interactions. Among the several parasite species that cause human
malaria, the neglected Plasmodium vivax presents great research challenges, as in
vitro culturing is not yet feasible and functional assays are heavily limited.
Therefore, there are gaps in our P. vivax biology knowledge that affect decisions
for control policies aiming to eradicate vivax malaria in the near future. In
this review, we provide a snapshot of key discoveries already achieved in P.
vivax sequencing projects, focusing on developments, hurdles, and limitations
currently faced by the research community, as well as perspectives on future
vivax malaria research.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00034 
PMCID: PMC5809496
PMID: 29473024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

