
1. mBio. 2018 Feb 27;9(1). pii: e00130-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00130-18.

Calcium-Dependent Protein Kinase 5 Is Required for Release of Egress-Specific
Organelles in Plasmodium falciparum.

Absalon S(1)(2), Blomqvist K(#)(1)(2)(3), Rudlaff RM(#)(1)(2)(4), DeLano TJ(5),
Pollastri MP(5), Dvorin JD(6)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA Jeffrey.Dvorin@childrens.harvard.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

The human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum requires efficient egress out of
an infected red blood cell for pathogenesis. This egress event is highly
coordinated and is mediated by several signaling proteins, including the
plant-like Pfalciparum calcium-dependent protein kinase 5 (PfCDPK5). Knockdown of
PfCDPK5 results in an egress block where parasites are trapped inside their host 
cells. The mechanism of this PfCDPK5-dependent block, however, remains unknown.
Here, we show that PfCDPK5 colocalizes with a specialized set of parasite
organelles known as micronemes and is required for their discharge, implicating
failure of this step as the cause of the egress defect in PfCDPK5-deficient
parasites. Furthermore, we show that PfCDPK5 cooperates with the Pfalciparum
cGMP-dependent kinase (PfPKG) to fully activate the protease cascade critical for
parasite egress. The PfCDPK5-dependent arrest can be overcome by hyperactivation 
of PfPKG or by physical disruption of the arrested parasite, and we show that
both treatments facilitate the release of the micronemes required for egress. Our
results define the molecular mechanism of PfCDPK5 function and elucidate the
complex signaling pathway of parasite egress.IMPORTANCE The signs and symptoms of
clinical malaria result from the replication of parasites in human blood.
Efficient egress of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum out of an infected
red blood cell is critical for pathogenesis. The Pfalciparum calcium-dependent
protein kinase 5 (PfCDPK5) is essential for parasite egress. Following PfCDPK5
knockdown, parasites remain trapped inside their host cell and do not egress, but
the mechanism for this block remains unknown. We show that PfCDPK5 colocalizes
with parasite organelles known as micronemes. We demonstrate that PfCDPK5 is
critical for the discharge of these micronemes and that failure of this step is
the molecular mechanism of the parasite egress arrest. We also show that
hyperactivation of the cGMP-dependent kinase PKG can overcome this arrest. Our
data suggest that small molecules that inhibit the egress signaling pathway could
be effective antimalarial therapeutics.

Copyright Â© 2018 Absalon et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00130-18 
PMCID: PMC5829822
PMID: 29487234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

