
1. PLoS One. 2018 Mar 6;13(3):e0193538. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193538.
eCollection 2018.

The cysteine protease dipeptidyl aminopeptidase 3 does not contribute to egress
of Plasmodium falciparum from host red blood cells.

Ghosh S(1), Chisholm SA(1), Dans M(1), Lakkavaram A(1), Kennedy K(2), Ralph
SA(2), Counihan NA(1), de Koning-Ward TF(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Deakin University, Waurn Ponds, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia.

The ability of Plasmodium parasites to egress from their host red blood cell is
critical for the amplification of these parasites in the blood. Previous forward 
chemical genetic approaches have implicated the subtilisin-like protease (SUB1)
and the cysteine protease dipeptidyl aminopeptidase 3 (DPAP3) as key players in
egress, with the final step of SUB1 maturation thought to be due to the activity 
of DPAP3. In this study, we have utilized a reverse genetics approach to engineer
transgenic Plasmodium falciparum parasites in which dpap3 expression can be
conditionally regulated using the glmS ribozyme based RNA-degrading system. We
show that DPAP3, which is expressed in schizont stages and merozoites and
localizes to organelles distinct from the micronemes, rhoptries and dense
granules, is not required for the trafficking of apical proteins or processing of
SUB1 substrates, nor for parasite maturation and egress from red blood cells.
Thus, our findings argue against a role for DPAP3 in parasite egress and indicate
that the phenotypes observed with DPAP3 inhibitors are due to off-target effects.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193538 
PMCID: PMC5839547
PMID: 29509772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

