
1. Zhongguo Xue Xi Chong Bing Fang Zhi Za Zhi. 2017 May 24;29(4):482-485. doi:
10.16250/j.32.1374.2017035.

[Analysis of assessment results of malaria elimination in counties (districts) of
Huai'an City].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Cong-Ying J(1), Wei-Ming W(2), Wen-Zhou Y(1), Hong-Xia G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Huai'an Municipal Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Jiangsu Province,
Huai'an 223001, China.
(2)Jiangsu Institute of Parasitic Diseases, China.

Objective To analyze the results of the assessment of malaria elimination in 8
counties (districts) in Huai'an City, Jiangsu Province, so as to provide
evidences for consolidating the achievement of malaria elimination. Methods The
data from the network reports of malaria epidemic situation, blood examinations
of febrile patients, epidemiological questionnaires of malaria cases,
investigation and disposal of epidemic focuses were collected and analyzed in
Huai'an City from 2010 to 2016. The results of the assessment on the
clinicians'ability of malaria diagnosis and treatment as well as the
inspectors'skill of Plasmodium microscopic examinations were analyzed. In the
natural village where the last local case of malaria was reported, no less than
200 blood filter papers were made for gene detection of Plasmodium. Results From 
2010 to 2016, 308 malaria cases were reported in Huai'an City. Totally 323 002
patients received blood detection of malaria, among which 272 ones were positive 
and the positive rate was 0.08%. The majority of the malaria cases were imported,
except 19 and 3 local infection cases in 2010 and 2011, respectively. Except
Qinghe District, a total of 1 420 blood filter papers from the other 7 counties
(districts) were detected genetically, and the results were all negative. Six of 
the eight counties (districts) gained an average score of 20 points on the
Plasmodium microscopic examination, and Jinhu County and Huai'an District got a
minimum average score of 19.6 points. In capacity assessment of malaria diagnosis
and treatment, Hongze District gained the highest average score of 20 points, and
Huai'an District got the lowest average score of 18.8 points. The malaria
elimination assessment scores of the eight counties (districts) were all above 97
points. All the 8 counties (districts) in Huai'an City passed the malaria
elimination assessment at county (district) level until 2016. Conclusions All the
8 counties (districts) in Huai'an City have passed the malaria elimination
assessment with high scores. After the malaria elimination, the monitoring still 
should continue to consolidate the achievement.

Publisher: ［摘要］目的 分析江苏省淮安市所辖8个县 (区)消除疟疾达标考核结果, 为巩固消除疟疾成果提供依据。方法 对
2010–2016年淮安市网络报告疟疾疫情、发热病人血检、疟疾防治系统中疟疾病例流行病学个案调查表等流行病学调查与处置资料进行分析。对临床医生疟疾诊治知识考核和检
验人员疟原虫镜检技能考核结果进行分析; 对当地最后1例疟疾病例所在自然村, 采制不少于200人份的居民滤纸血样品并进行疟原虫基因检测。结果
2010–2016年淮安市网络报告308例疟疾病例, 疟原虫血检323 002人次, 阳性272例, 阳性率为0.08%;
2010年和2011年分别有19例和3例本地感染病例, 其余均为输入病例。除清河区外, 7个县 (区)采集居民滤纸血样品1 420人份进行疟原虫基因检测,
结果均为阴性。8县 (区)疟原虫镜检技能考核有6家单位平均分为20分, 金湖县和淮安区平均分均为19.6分。疟疾诊治能力考核洪泽区平均分最高, 为20分;
淮安区平均分最低, 为18.8分。淮安市8县 (区)消除疟疾考核总得分均在97分以上。至 2016年, 淮安市所辖县 (区)全部通过县级消除疟疾达标考核。结论
淮安市8县 (区)均以高分通过消除疟疾县级达标考核, 今后应继续做好输入性疟疾的防控监测工作, 巩固已取得的消除疟疾成果。 ［关键词］疟疾; 疫情; 消除;
考核; 监测; 淮安市.
DOI: 10.16250/j.32.1374.2017035 
PMID: 29508586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

