
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2018 Apr 6;498(3):529-536. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.03.014. Epub 2018 Mar 6.

Identification of human Phosphatidyl Inositol 5-Phosphate 4-Kinase as an RNA
binding protein that is imported into Plasmodium falciparum.

Vindu A(1), Dandewad V(1), Seshadri V(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, University of Pune Campus, Ganeshkhind,
Pune, 411007, India; Department of Biotechnology, Savitribai Phule Pune
University, Ganeshkhind, Pune, 411007, India.
(2)National Centre for Cell Science, University of Pune Campus, Ganeshkhind,
Pune, 411007, India. Electronic address: seshadriv@nccs.res.in.

Plasmodium falciparum is a causative agent for malaria and has a complex life
cycle in human and mosquito hosts. Translation repression of specific set of mRNA
has been reported in gametocyte stages of this parasite. A conserved element
present in the 3'UTR of some of these transcripts was identified. Biochemical
studies have identified components of the RNA storage and/or translation
inhibitor complex but it is not yet clear how the complex is specifically
recruited on the RNA targeted for translation regulation. We used the 3'UTR
region of translationally regulated transcripts to identify Phosphatidyl-inositol
5-phosphate 4-kinase (PIP4K2A) as the protein that associates with these RNAs. We
further show that recombinant PIP4K2A has the RNA binding activity and can
associate specifically with Plasmodium 3'UTR RNAs. Immunostainings show that
hPIP4K2A is imported into the Plasmodium parasite from RBC. These results
identify a novel RNA binding role for PIP4K2A that may play a role in Plasmodium 
propagation.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.03.014 
PMID: 29518392  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

