
1. PLoS Pathog. 2018 Mar 8;14(3):e1006898. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006898.
eCollection 2018 Mar.

CRISPR/Cas9 -mediated gene knockout of Anopheles gambiae FREP1 suppresses malaria
parasite infection.

Dong Y(1), Simões ML(1), Marois E(2), Dimopoulos G(1).

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)Inserm, CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

Plasmodium relies on numerous agonists during its journey through the mosquito
vector, and these agonists represent potent targets for transmission-blocking by 
either inhibiting or interfering with them pre- or post-transcriptionally. The
recently developed CRISPR/Cas9-based genome editing tools for Anopheles
mosquitoes provide new and promising opportunities for the study of agonist
function and for developing malaria control strategies through gene deletion to
achieve complete agonist inactivation. Here we have established a modified
CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing procedure for the malaria vector Anopheles gambiae, and 
studied the effect of inactivating the fibrinogen-related protein 1 (FREP1) gene 
on the mosquito's susceptibility to Plasmodium and on mosquito fitness. FREP1
knockout mutants developed into adult mosquitoes that showed profound suppression
of infection with both human and rodent malaria parasites at the oocyst and
sporozoite stages. FREP1 inactivation, however, resulted in fitness costs
including a significantly lower blood-feeding propensity, fecundity and egg
hatching rate, a retarded pupation time, and reduced longevity after a blood
meal.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006898 
PMCID: PMC5843335
PMID: 29518156  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

