
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 Jun;98(6):1683-1691. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0845. Epub
2018 Mar 15.

Insights into the Performance of SD Bioline Malaria Ag P.f/Pan Rapid Diagnostic
Test and Plasmodium falciparum Histidine-Rich Protein 2 Gene Variation in
Madagascar.

Willie N(1), Mehlotra RK(1), Howes RE(2)(1), Rakotomanga TA(3)(4), Ramboarina
S(3)(1), Ratsimbasoa AC(3)(4), Zimmerman PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Health and Diseases, School of Medicine, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio.
(2)Nuffield Department of Medicine, Oxford Big Data Institute, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Faculty of Sciences, University of Antananarivo, Antananarivo, Madagascar.
(4)National Malaria Control Programme, Ministry of Health, Antananarivo,
Madagascar.

Plasmodium falciparum histidine-rich protein 2 (PfHRP2) forms the basis of many
current malaria rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs). However, the parasites lacking
part or all of the pfhrp2 gene do not express the PfHRP2 protein and are,
therefore, not identifiable by PfHRP2-detecting RDTs. We evaluated the
performance of the SD Bioline Malaria Ag P.f/Pan RDT together with pfhrp2
variation in Madagascar. Genomic DNA isolated from 260 patient blood samples were
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplified for the parasite 18S rRNA and pfhrp2
genes. Post-PCR ligation detection reaction-fluorescent microsphere assay
(LDR-FMA) was performed for the identification of parasite species. Plasmodium
falciparum histidine-rich protein 2 amplicons were sequenced. Polymerase chain
reaction diagnosis of patient samples showed that 29% (75/260) were infected and 
P. falciparum was present in 95% (71/75) of these PCR-positive samples. Comparing
RDT and P. falciparum detection by LDR-FMA, eight samples were RDT negative but
P. falciparum positive (false negatives), all of which were pfhrp2 positive. The 
sensitivity and specificity of the RDT were 87% and 90%, respectively.
Seventy-three samples were amplified for pfhrp2, from which nine randomly
selected amplicons were sequenced, yielding 13 sequences. Amplification of
pfhrp2, combined with RDT analysis and P. falciparum detection by LDR-FMA, showed
that there was no indication of pfhrp2 deletion. Sequence analysis of pfhrp2
showed that the correlation between pfhrp2 sequence structure and RDT detection
rates was unclear. Although the observed absence of pfhrp2 deletion from the
samples screened here is encouraging, continued monitoring of the efficacy of the
SD Bioline Malaria Ag P.f/Pan RDT for malaria diagnosis in Madagascar is
warranted.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0845 
PMCID: PMC6086193
PMID: 29557337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

