
1. Parasitol Int. 2018 Aug;67(4):375-385. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2018.03.001. Epub
2018 Mar 14.

Structural modeling identifies Plasmodium vivax
4-diphosphocytidyl-2C-methyl-d-erythritol kinase (IspE) as a plausible new
antimalarial drug target.

Kadian K(1), Vijay S(1), Gupta Y(1), Rawal R(1), Singh J(1), Anvikar A(2), Pande 
V(3), Sharma A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Protein Biochemistry and Structural Biology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Malaria Research (ICMR), Sector-8, Dwarka, New Delhi, India.
(2)Epidemiology and Clinical Research, National Institute of Malaria Research
(ICMR), Sector-8, Dwarka, New Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Kumaun University, Nainital, Uttarakhand, India.
(4)Protein Biochemistry and Structural Biology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Malaria Research (ICMR), Sector-8, Dwarka, New Delhi, India. Electronic address: 
arushar@gmail.com.

Malaria parasites utilize Methylerythritol phosphate (MEP) pathway for synthesis 
of isoprenoid precursors which are essential for maturation and survival of
parasites during erythrocytic and gametocytic stages. The absence of MEP pathway 
in the human host establishes MEP pathway enzymes as a repertoire of essential
drug targets. The fourth enzyme, 4-diphosphocytidyl-2C-methyl-d-erythritol kinase
(IspE) has been proved essential in pathogenic bacteria, however; it has not yet 
been studied in any Plasmodium species. This study was undertaken to investigate 
genetic polymorphism and concomitant structural implications of the Plasmodium
vivax IspE (PvIspE) by employing sequencing, modeling and bioinformatics
approach. We report that PvIspE gene displayed six non-synonymous mutations which
were restricted to non-conserved regions within the gene from seven
topographically distinct malaria-endemic regions of India. Phylogenetic studies
reflected that PvIspE occupies unique status within Plasmodia genus and reflects 
that Plasmodium vivax IspE gene has a distant and non-conserved relation with
human ortholog Mevalonate Kinase (MAVK). Structural modeling analysis revealed
that all PvIspE Indian isolates have critically conserved canonical
galacto-homoserine-mevalonate-phosphomevalonate kinase (GHMP) domain within the
active site lying in a deep cleft sandwiched between ATP and CDPME-binding
domains. The active core region was highly conserved among all clinical isolates,
may be due to >60% β-pleated rigid architecture. The mapped structural analysis
revealed the critically conserved active site of PvIspE, both sequence, and
spacially among all Indian isolates; showing no significant changes in the active
site. Our study strengthens the candidature of Plasmodium vivax IspE enzyme as a 
future target for novel antimalarials.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2018.03.001 
PMID: 29550587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

