
1. Mamm Genome. 2018 Aug;29(7-8):507-522. doi: 10.1007/s00335-018-9744-9. Epub 2018 
Mar 28.

Host genetics in malaria: lessons from mouse studies.

Huang HM(1), McMorran BJ(1), Foote SJ(1), Burgio G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Disease, John Curtin School of Medical
Research, Australian National University, 131 Garran Road, Canberra, ACT, 2601,
Australia.
(2)Department of Immunology and Infectious Disease, John Curtin School of Medical
Research, Australian National University, 131 Garran Road, Canberra, ACT, 2601,
Australia. Gaetan.burgio@anu.edu.au.

Malaria remains a deadly parasitic disease caused by Plasmodium, claiming almost 
half a million lives every year. While parasite genetics and biology are often
the major targets in many studies, it is becoming more evident that host genetics
plays a crucial role in the outcome of the infection. Similarly, Plasmodium
infections in mice also rely heavily on the genetic background of the mice, and
often correlate with observations in human studies, due to their high genetic
homology with humans. As such, murine models of malaria are a useful tool for
understanding host responses during Plasmodium infections, as well as dissecting 
host-parasite interactions through various genetic manipulation techniques.
Reverse genetic approach such as quantitative trait loci studies and random
mutagenesis screens have been employed to discover novel host genes that affect
malaria susceptibility in mouse models, while other targeted studies utilize
mouse models to validate observation from human studies. Herein, we review the
findings from the past and present studies on murine models of hepatic and
erythrocytic stages of malaria and speculate on how the current mouse models
benefit from the recent development in CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing technology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00335-018-9744-9 
PMID: 29594458  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

