
1. Malar J. 2018 Apr 2;17(1):137. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2287-4.

Streamlined, PCR-based testing for pfhrp2- and pfhrp3-negative Plasmodium
falciparum.

Parr JB(1), Anderson O(2), Juliano JJ(3)(2)(4), Meshnick SR(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of North
Carolina, 130 Mason Farm Rd, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA.
jonathan_parr@med.unc.edu.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health,
University of North Carolina, 135 Dauer Dr, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of North
Carolina, 130 Mason Farm Rd, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA.
(4)Curriculum in Genetics and Microbiology, University of North Carolina, 321
South Columbia Street, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA.

BACKGROUND: Rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) that detect histidine-rich protein 2
(PfHRP2) are used throughout Africa for the diagnosis of Plasmodium falciparum
malaria. However, recent reports indicate that parasites lacking the pfhrp2
and/or histidine-rich protein 3 (pfhrp3) genes, which produce antigens detected
by these RDTs, are common in select regions of South America, Asia, and Africa.
Proving the absence of a gene is challenging, and multiple PCR assays targeting
these genes have been described. A detailed characterization and comparison of
published assays is needed to facilitate robust and streamlined testing
approaches.
RESULTS: Among six pfhrp2 and pfhrp3 PCR assays tested, the lower limit of
detection ranged from 0.01 pg/µL to 0.1 ng/µL of P. falciparum 3D7 strain DNA, or
approximately 0.4-4000 parasite genomes/µL. By lowering the elongation
temperature to 60 °C, a tenfold improvement in the limit of detection and/or
darker bands for all exon 1 targets and for the first-round reaction of a single 
exon 2 target was achieved. Additionally, assays targeting exon 1 of either gene 
yielded spurious amplification of the paralogous gene. Using these data, an
optimized testing algorithm for the detection of pfhrp2- and pfhrp3-negative P.
falciparum is proposed.
CONCLUSIONS: Surveillance of pfhrp2- and pfhrp3-negative P. falciparum requires
careful laboratory workflows. PCR-based testing methods coupled with microscopy
and/or antigen testing serve as useful tools to support policy development.
Standardized approaches to the detection of pfhrp2- and pfhrp3-negative P.
falciparum should inform efforts to define the impact of these parasites.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2287-4 
PMCID: PMC5879555
PMID: 29609602  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

