
1. Parasit Vectors. 2018 Apr 4;11(1):225. doi: 10.1186/s13071-018-2817-5.

Genetic variation associated with increased insecticide resistance in the malaria
mosquito, Anopheles coluzzii.

Main BJ(1), Everitt A(2), Cornel AJ(3), Hormozdiari F(4), Lanzaro GC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, UC Davis, Davis, CA,
95616, USA. bradmain@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, UC Davis, Davis, CA,
95616, USA.
(3)Department of Entomology and Nematology, University of California, Davis, CA, 
95616, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, MIND Institute and UC-Davis
Genome Center, University of California, Davis, CA, 95616, USA.

BACKGROUND: Malaria mortality rates in sub-Saharan Africa have declined
significantly in recent years as a result of increased insecticide-treated bed
net (ITN) usage. A major challenge to further progress is the emergence and
spread of insecticide resistance alleles in the Anopheles mosquito vectors, like 
An. coluzzii. A non-synonymous mutation in the para voltage-gated sodium channel 
gene reduces pyrethroid-binding affinity, resulting in knockdown resistance
(kdr). Metabolic mechanisms of insecticide resistance involving detoxification
genes like cytochrome P450 genes, carboxylesterases, and glutathione
S-transferases are also important. As some gene activity is tissue-specific
and/or environmentally induced, gene regulatory variation may be overlooked when 
comparing expression from whole mosquito bodies under standard rearing
conditions.
RESULTS: We detected complex insecticide resistance in a 2014 An. coluzzii colony
from southern Mali using bottle bioassays. Additional bioassays involving
recombinant genotypes from a cross with a relatively susceptible 1995 An.
coluzzii colony from Mali confirmed the importance of kdr and associated
increased permethrin resistance to the CYP9K1 locus on the X chromosome.
Significant differential expression of CYP9K1 was not observed among these
colonies in Malpighian tubules. However, the P450 gene CYP6Z1 was overexpressed
in resistant individuals following sublethal permethrin exposure and the
carboxylesterase gene COEAE5G was constitutively overexpressed.
CONCLUSIONS: The significant P450-related insecticide resistance observed in the 
2014 An. coluzzii colony indicates that ITNs treated with the P450 inhibitor
piperonyl butoxide (PBO) would be more effective in this region. The known
insecticide resistance gene CYP6Z1 was differentially expressed exclusively in
the context of sublethal permethrin exposure, highlighting the importance of
tissue-specificity and environmental conditions in gene expression studies. The
increased activity of the carboxylesterase COEAE5G in the resistant An. coluzzii 
colony suggests resistance to other insecticides like organophosphates.
Additional gene expression studies involving other tissues (e.g. fat body) would 
provide a more comprehensive view of genes underlying metabolic insecticide
resistance in An. coluzzii from Mali. Identifying genetic markers linked to these
regulatory alleles is an important next step that would substantially improve
insecticide resistance surveillance and population genetic studies in this
important vector species.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-018-2817-5 
PMCID: PMC5885317
PMID: 29618373  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

