
1. J Biol Chem. 2018 May 25;293(21):8128-8137. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.002552. Epub
2018 Apr 6.

The mitochondrial ribosomal protein L13 is critical for the structural and
functional integrity of the mitochondrion in Plasmodium falciparum.

Ke H(1), Dass S(2), Morrisey JM(2), Mather MW(2), Vaidya AB.

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Molecular Parasitology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19129 hk84@drexel.edu.
(2)From the Center for Molecular Parasitology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19129.

The phylum Apicomplexa contains a group of protozoa causing diseases in humans
and livestock. Plasmodium spp., the causative agent of malaria, contains a
mitochondrion that is very divergent from that of their hosts. The malarial
mitochondrion is a clinically validated target for the antimalarial drug
atovaquone, which specifically blocks the electron transfer activity of the bc1
complex of the mitochondrial electron transport chain (mtETC). Most mtETC
proteins are nuclear-encoded and imported from the cytosol, but three key protein
subunits are encoded in the Plasmodium mitochondrial genome: cyt b, COXI, and
COXIII. They are translated inside the mitochondrion by mitochondrial ribosomes
(mitoribosomes). Here, we characterize the function of one large mitoribosomal
protein in Plasmodium falciparum, PfmRPL13. We found that PfmRPL13 localizes to
the parasite mitochondrion and is refractory to genetic knockout. Ablation of
PfmRPL13 using a conditional knockdown system (TetR-DOZI-aptamer) caused a series
of adverse events in the parasite, including mtETC deficiency, loss of
mitochondrial membrane potential (Δψm), and death. The PfmRPL13 knockdown
parasite also became hypersensitive to proguanil, a drug proposed to target an
alternative process for maintaining Δψm Surprisingly, transmission EM revealed
that PfmRPL13 disruption also resulted in an unusually elongated and branched
mitochondrion. The growth arrest of the knockdown parasite could be rescued with 
a second copy of PfmRPL13, but not by supplementation with decylubiquinone or
addition of a yeast dihydroorotate dehydrogenase gene. In summary, we provide
first and direct evidence that mitoribosomes are essential for malaria parasites 
to maintain the structural and functional integrity of the mitochondrion.

© 2018 Ke et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.002552 
PMCID: PMC5971461
PMID: 29626096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

