
1. Acta Trop. 2018 Jul;183:78-83. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2018.04.012. Epub 2018 
Apr 5.

Plasmodium falciparum merozoite protein-1 genetic diversity and multiplicity of
infection in isolates from Congolese children consulting in a pediatric hospital 
in Brazzaville.

Gueye NSG(1), Ntoumi F(2), Vouvoungui C(3), Kobawila SC(4), NKombo M(3), Mouanga 
AM(1), Deibert J(5), Koukouikila-Koussounda F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fondation Congolaise pour la Recherche Médicale, Campus WHO/AFRO, Brazzaville,
Congo; Faculté des Sciences et Techniques, Université Marien Ngouabi,
Brazzaville, Congo.
(2)Fondation Congolaise pour la Recherche Médicale, Campus WHO/AFRO, Brazzaville,
Congo; Faculté des Sciences et Techniques, Université Marien Ngouabi,
Brazzaville, Congo; Institute for Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany. Electronic address: fntoumi@fcrm-congo.com.
(3)Fondation Congolaise pour la Recherche Médicale, Campus WHO/AFRO, Brazzaville,
Congo.
(4)Faculté des Sciences et Techniques, Université Marien Ngouabi, Brazzaville,
Congo.
(5)Institute for Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

As in many sub-Saharan African countries, the burden of malaria has been reduced 
in the Republic of Congo as a result of massive deployment of insecticide treated
nets and availability of artemisinin-combinations therapies (ACTs). High to
moderate genetic diversity of msp-1 gene of Plasmodium falciparum (P. falciparum)
has been reported from different parts of the world but limited data are
available from Central Africa including the Republic of Congo. For this reason,
the aim of study was to investigate the P. falciparum genetic diversity and to
determine the multiplicity of infection in P. falciparum isolates from Congolese 
children in order to dispose of an additional parameter to measure the impact
malaria control intervention. A total of 229 blood samples were collected from
September 2014 to February 2015 in children aged from one to ten years presenting
a paediatric hospital Marien NGOUABI located in Northern part of Brazzaville.
Inclusion criterion was fever (axillary temperature ≥ 37.5 °C) or history of
fever in the preceding 48 h before inclusion in this study. Then thick and thin
blood smears were done to detect malaria parasites, to determine parasite density
and to identify plasmodial species. Sub-microscopic infection was detected by PCR
using the P. falciparum msp-1 gene as molecular marker. The prevalence of
microscopic and sub-microscopic infection in this cohort was 10% and 27.5%,
respectively. The K1 allelic family was predominant (45% of isolates) whereas the
RO33 and MAD20 represented 35% and 20%, respectively of isolates. In this study
48% (38/79) of isolates harbored more than one parasite clone. Overall the
multiplicity of infection (MOI) was 1.7. According to type of infection, the MOI 
was significantly higher in children with microscopic infection (2.5 vs 1.4 for
submicroscopic infection, P = .001). When considering age, hemoglobin genotype
(AA or AS) and level and parasite density, no association was observed with the
MOI. This study reveals that the P. falciparum genetic diversity in isolates from
Congolese children is high but with low multiplicity of infection.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2018.04.012 
PMID: 29626433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

