
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Mar 26;9:564. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00564. eCollection
2018.

Adjuvant-Associated Peripheral Blood mRNA Profiles and Kinetics Induced by the
Adjuvanted Recombinant Protein Candidate Tuberculosis Vaccine M72/AS01 in
Bacillus Calmette-Guérin-Vaccinated Adults.

van den Berg RA(1), De Mot L(1), Leroux-Roels G(2), Bechtold V(1), Clement F(2), 
Coccia M(1), Jongert E(1), Evans TG(3), Gillard P(1), van der Most RG(1).

Author information: 
(1)GSK, Wavre, Belgium.
(2)Centre for Vaccinology (CEVAC), Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)AERAS, Rockville, MD, United States.

Systems biology has the potential to identify gene signatures associated with
vaccine immunogenicity and protective efficacy. The main objective of this study 
was to identify optimal postvaccination time points for evaluating peripheral
blood RNA expression profiles in relation to vaccine immunogenicity and potential
efficacy in recipients of the candidate tuberculosis vaccine M72/AS01. In this
phase II open-label study (NCT01669096; https://clinicaltrials.gov/), healthy
Bacillus Calmette-Guérin-primed, HIV-negative adults were administered two doses 
(30 days apart) of M72/AS01. Twenty subjects completed the study and 18 subjects 
received two doses. Blood samples were collected pre-dose 1, pre-dose 2, and 1,
7, 10, 14, 17, and 30 days post-dose 2. RNA expression in whole blood (WB) and
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) was quantified using microarray
technology. Serum interferon-gamma responses and M72-specific CD4+ T cell
responses to vaccination, and the observed safety profile were similar to
previous trials. Two different approaches were utilized to analyze the RNA
expression data. First, a kinetic analysis of RNA expression changes using blood 
transcription modules revealed early (1 day post-dose 2) activation of several
pathways related to innate immune activation, both in WB and PBMC. Second, using 
a previously identified gene signature as a classifier, optimal postvaccination
time points were identified. Since M72/AS01 efficacy remains to be established, a
PBMC-derived gene signature associated with the protective efficacy of a
similarly adjuvanted candidate malaria vaccine was used as a proxy for this
purpose. This approach was based on the assumption that the AS01 adjuvant used in
both studies could induce shared innate immune pathways. Subjects were classified
as gene signature positive (GS+) or gene signature negative (GS-). Assignments of
subjects to GS+ or GS- groups were confirmed by significant differences in RNA
expression of the gene signature genes in PBMCs at 14 days post-dose 2 relative
to prevaccination and in WB samples at 7, 10, 14, and 17 days post-dose 2
relative to prevaccination. Hence, in comparison with a prevaccination, 7, 10,
14, and 17 days postvaccination appeared to be suitable time points for
identifying potentially clinically relevant transcriptome responses to M72/AS01
in WB samples.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00564 
PMCID: PMC5879450
PMID: 29632533  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

