
1. Microb Pathog. 2018 Jun;119:170-182. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2018.04.009. Epub
2018 Apr 6.

Indigofera oblongifolia regulates the hepatic gene expression profile induced by 
blood stage malaria.

Al-Shaebi EA(1), Dkhil MA(2), Al-Quraishy S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia.
(2)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia; Department of Zoology and Entomology, College of Science, Helwan
University, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia. Electronic address: squraishy@ksu.edu.sa.

Malaria is still a major health problem worldwide. This study aimed to
investigate the hepatoprotective role of Indigofera oblongifolia leaf extracts
(ILE) against mice hepatic injury induced by Plasmodium chabaudi. Female C57BL/6 
mice were treated with 100 mg/kg of ILE after infection with erythrocytes
parasitized by P. chabaudi. On day 7 post-infection, the extract improved the
histological alteration induced by the parasite. This was evidenced by the
decreased histological index induced by ILE. Moreover, ILE was able to increase
the hepatic antioxidant capacity and could significantly improve the decrease in 
erythrocyte count and hemoglobin content in mice blood plasma due to infection.
ILE was also able to upregulate the expression of 24 genes related to metabolism 
and of 3 genes related to the immune response. Furthermore, the extract was able 
to downregulate the expression of 35 genes related to metabolism and of 82 genes 
related to immune response. Moreover, the microarray study showed that ILE
regulated the change in gene expression induced by the parasite. Among these
genes, we quantified the expression of cd209f, cyp7a1, Hsd3b5, Sult2a3, Lcn2,
CcI8, Nos2, and saa3-mRNAs. These genes were regulated by ILE. Therefore, our
results revealed the protective role of Indigofera oblongifolia against hepatic
injury induced by blood stage malaria.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2018.04.009 
PMID: 29630927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

