
1. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2018 Apr;37(2):87-90. doi:
10.1089/mab.2017.0068. Epub 2018 Apr 10.

Quantification of Histidine-Rich Protein 3 of Plasmodium falciparum.

Palani B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Government Thirumagal Mills College , Gudiyattam, India
.

Malaria is a life-threatening infectious disease and continues to be a major
public health crisis in many parts of the tropical world. Plasmodium falciparum
is responsible for the majority of mortality and morbidity associated with
malaria. During the intraerythrocytic cycle, P. falciparum releases three
proteins with high histidine content as follows: histidine-rich protein 1 (HRP1),
histidine-rich protein 2 (HRP2), and histidine-rich protein 3 (HRP3). Currently, 
most of the diagnostic tests of P. falciparum infection target HRP2, and a number
of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against HRP2 have been developed for use in HRP2 
detection and quantification. When parasites have HRP2 deletions, the detection
of HRP3 could augment the sensitivity of the detection system. The combination of
both HRP2 and HRP3 mAbs in the detection system will enhance the test
sensitivity. In the HRP quantitative enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA),
both HRP2 and HRP3 contribute to the result, but the relative contribution of
HRP2 and HRP3 was unable to investigate, because of the nonavailability of HRP3
specific antibody ELISA. Hence an ELISA test system based on HRP3 is also
essential for detection and quantification. There is not much documented in the
literature on HRP3 antigen and HRP3 specific mAbs and polyclonal antibodies
(pAbs). In the present study, recombinant HRP3 was expressed in Escherichia coli 
and purified with Ni-NTA agarose column. The purified rHRP3 was used for the
generation and characterization of monoclonal and pAbs. The purification of
monoclonal and pAbs was done using a mixed-mode chromatography sorbent,
phenylpropylamine HyperCelâ„¢. With the purified antibodies, a sandwich ELISA was
developed. The sandwich ELISA method was explored to detect and quantify HRP3 of 
P. falciparum in the spent medium. The generated mAbs could be potentially used
for the detection and quantification of P. falciparum HRP3.

DOI: 10.1089/mab.2017.0068 
PMID: 29634395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

