
1. Molecules. 2018 Apr 6;23(4). pii: E841. doi: 10.3390/molecules23040841.

Treatment of Multidrug-Resistant Leukemia Cells by Novel Artemisinin-, Egonol-,
and Thymoquinone-Derived Hybrid Compounds.

Gruber L(1), Abdelfatah S(2), Fr√∂hlich T(3), Reiter C(4), Klein V(5), Tsogoeva
SB(6), Efferth T(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, Institute of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, 
Johannes Gutenberg University, 55128 Mainz, Germany. gruber.lisa@googlemail.com.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, Institute of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, 
Johannes Gutenberg University, 55128 Mainz, Germany. saabdelf@uni-mainz.de.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Organic Chemistry Chair I and
Interdisciplinary Center for Molecular Materials (ICMM), University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, 91058 Erlangen, Germany. tony.froehlich@fau.de.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Organic Chemistry Chair I and
Interdisciplinary Center for Molecular Materials (ICMM), University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, 91058 Erlangen, Germany. christoph.reiter@fau.de.
(5)Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Organic Chemistry Chair I and
Interdisciplinary Center for Molecular Materials (ICMM), University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, 91058 Erlangen, Germany. volker.klein@fau.de.
(6)Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Organic Chemistry Chair I and
Interdisciplinary Center for Molecular Materials (ICMM), University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, 91058 Erlangen, Germany. svetlana.tsogoeva@fau.de.
(7)Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, Institute of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, 
Johannes Gutenberg University, 55128 Mainz, Germany. efferth@uni-mainz.de.

Two major obstacles for successful cancer treatment are the toxicity of
cytostatics and the development of drug resistance in cancer cells during
chemotherapy. Acquired or intrinsic drug resistance is responsible for almost 90%
of treatment failure. For this reason, there is an urgent need for new anticancer
drugs with improved efficacy against cancer cells, and with less toxicity on
normal cells. There are impressive examples demonstrating the success of natural 
plant compounds to fight cancer, such as Vinca alkaloids, taxanes, and
anthracyclines. Artesunic acid (ARTA), a drug for malaria treatment, also exerts 
cytotoxic activity towards cancer cells. Multidrug resistance often results from 
drug efflux pumps (ABC-transporters) that reduce intracellular drug levels.
Hence, it would be interesting to know, whether ARTA could overcome drug
resistance of tumor cells, and in what way ABC-transporters are involved.
Different derivatives showing improved features concerning cytotoxicity and
pharmacokinetic behavior have been developed. Considering both drug sensitivity
and resistance, we chose a sensitive and a doxorubicin-resistant leukemia cell
line and determined the killing effect of ARTA on these cells. Molecular docking 
and doxorubicin efflux assays were performed to investigate the interaction of
the derivatives with P-glycoprotein. Using single-cell gel electrophoresis
(alkaline comet assay), we showed that the derivatives of ARTA induce DNA
breakage and accordingly programmed cell death, which represents a promising
strategy in cancer treatment. ARTA activated apoptosis in cancer cells by the
iron-mediated generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). In conclusion, ARTA
derivatives may bear the potential to be further developed as anticancer drugs.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules23040841 
PMCID: PMC6017613
PMID: 29642419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

