
1. Microb Cell Fact. 2018 Apr 11;17(1):59. doi: 10.1186/s12934-018-0905-z.

L-Lactic acid production from glucose and xylose with engineered strains of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae: aeration and carbon source influence yields and
productivities.

Novy V(1), Brunner B(1), Nidetzky B(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering, NAWI Graz, Graz
University of Technology, Petersgasse 12/I, 8010, Graz, Austria.
(2)Institute of Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering, NAWI Graz, Graz
University of Technology, Petersgasse 12/I, 8010, Graz, Austria.
bernd.nidetzky@tugraz.at.
(3)Austrian Centre of Industrial Biotechnology, Graz, Austria.
bernd.nidetzky@tugraz.at.

BACKGROUND: Saccharomyces cerevisiae, engineered for L-lactic acid production
from glucose and xylose, is a promising production host for
lignocellulose-to-lactic acid processes. However, the two principal engineering
strategies-pyruvate-to-lactic acid conversion with and without disruption of the 
competing pyruvate-to-ethanol pathway-have not yet resulted in strains that
combine high lactic acid yields (YLA) and productivities (QLA) on both sugar
substrates. Limitations seemingly arise from a dependency on the carbon source
and the aeration conditions, but the underlying effects are poorly understood. We
have recently presented two xylose-to-lactic acid converting strains, IBB14LA1
and IBB14LA1_5, which have the L-lactic acid dehydrogenase from Plasmodium
falciparum (pfLDH) integrated at the pdc1 (pyruvate decarboxylase) locus.
IBB14LA1_5 additionally has its pdc5 gene knocked out. In this study, the
influence of carbon source and oxygen on YLA and QLA in IBB14LA1 and IBB14LA1_5
was investigated.
RESULTS: In anaerobic fermentation IBB14LA1 showed a higher YLA on xylose
(0.27 g g Xyl-1 ) than on glucose (0.18 g g Glc-1 ). The ethanol yields (YEtOH,
0.15 g g Xyl-1 and 0.32 g g Glc-1 ) followed an opposite trend. In IBB14LA1_5,
the effect of the carbon source on YLA was less pronounced (~ 0.80 g g Xyl-1 ,
and 0.67 g g Glc-1 ). Supply of oxygen accelerated glucose conversions
significantly in IBB14LA1 (QLA from 0.38 to 0.81 g L-1 h-1) and IBB14LA1_5 (QLA
from 0.05 to 1.77 g L-1 h-1) at constant YLA (IBB14LA1 ~ 0.18 g g Glc-1 ;
IBB14LA1_5 ~ 0.68 g g Glc-1 ). In aerobic xylose conversions, however, lactic
acid production ceased completely in IBB14LA1 and decreased drastically in
IBB14LA1_5 (YLA aerobic ≤ 0.25 g g Xyl-1 and anaerobic ~ 0.80 g g Xyl-1 ) at
similar QLA (~ 0.04 g L-1 h-1). Switching from aerobic to microaerophilic
conditions (pO2 ~ 2%) prevented lactic acid metabolization, observed for fully
aerobic conditions, and increased QLA and YLA up to 0.11 g L-1 h-1 and 0.38 g g
Xyl-1 , respectively. The pfLDH and PDC activities in IBB14LA1 were measured and 
shown to change drastically dependent on carbon source and oxygen.
CONCLUSION: Evidence from conversion time courses together with results of
activity measurements for pfLDH and PDC show that in IBB14LA1 the distribution of
fluxes at the pyruvate branching point is carbon source and oxygen dependent.
Comparison of the performance of strain IBB14LA1 and IBB14LA1_5 in conversions
under different aeration conditions (aerobic, anaerobic, and microaerophilic)
further suggest that xylose, unlike glucose, does not repress the respiratory
response in both strains. This study proposes new genetic engineering targets for
rendering genetically engineering S. cerevisiae better suited for lactic acid
biorefineries.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-018-0905-z 
PMCID: PMC5894196
PMID: 29642896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

