
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018 Apr 12;12(4):e0006413. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0006413. eCollection 2018 Apr.

Insulin receptor knockdown blocks filarial parasite development and alters egg
production in the southern house mosquito, Culex quinquefasciatus.

Nuss AB(1)(2), Brown MR(3), Murty US(4), Gulia-Nuss M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agriculture, Nutrition, and Veterinary Sciences, University of
Nevada, Reno, Nevada, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nevada, Reno, 
Nevada, United States of America.
(3)Department of Entomology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, United
States of America.
(4)Department of Biology, Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad,
India.

Lymphatic filariasis, commonly known as elephantiasis, is a painful and
profoundly disfiguring disease. Wuchreria bancrofti (Wb) is responsible for >90% 
of infections and the remainder are caused by Brugia spp. Mosquitoes of the
genera Culex (in urban and semi-urban areas), Anopheles (in rural areas of Africa
and elsewhere), and Aedes (in Pacific islands) are the major vectors of W.
bancrofti. A preventive chemotherapy called mass drug administration (MDA),
including albendazole with ivermectin or diethylcarbamazine citrate (DEC) is used
in endemic areas. Vector control strategies such as residual insecticide spraying
and long-lasting insecticidal nets are supplemental to the core strategy of MDA
to enhance elimination efforts. However, increasing insecticide resistance in
mosquitoes and drug resistance in parasite limit the effectiveness of existing
interventions, and new measures are needed for mosquito population control and
disruption of mosquito-parasite interactions to reduce transmission. Mosquito
insulin signaling regulates nutrient metabolism and has been implicated in
reduced prevalence and intensity of malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum,
infection in mosquitoes. Currently no data are available to assess how insulin
signaling in mosquitoes affects the development of multi-cellular parasites, such
as filarial nematodes. Here, we show that insulin receptor knockdown in blood fed
C. quinquefasciatus, the major vector of Wb in India, completely blocks the
development of filarial nematode parasite to the infective L3 stage, and results 
in decreased ecdysteroid production and trypsin activity leading to fewer
mosquito eggs. These data indicate that a functional mosquito insulin receptor
(IR) is necessary for filarial parasite development and mosquito reproduction.
Therefore, insulin signaling may represent a new target for the development of
vector control or parasite blocking strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006413 
PMCID: PMC5918164
PMID: 29649225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

