
1. J Eukaryot Microbiol. 2018 Nov;65(6):843-853. doi: 10.1111/jeu.12625. Epub 2018
May 7.

Characterization of the Catalytic Subunits of the RNA Exosome-like Complex in
Plasmodium falciparum.

Jiang N(1), Yu S(2), Yang N(1), Feng Y(1), Sang X(1), Wang Y(1), Wahlgren M(3),
Chen Q(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Shenyang Agricultural University, 120 Dongling
Road, Shenyang, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Jilin University, 53333 Xi An Da Lu, Changchun,
130062, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Tumour and Cellular Biology, Karolinska
Institutet, Nobels väg 16, Stockholm, Sweden.

The eukaryotic ribonucleic acid (RNA) exosome is a versatile multiribonuclease
complex that mediates the processing, surveillance, and degradation of virtually 
all classes of RNA in both the nucleus and cytoplasm. The complex, composed of 10
to 11 subunits, has been widely described in many organisms. Bioinformatic
analyses revealed that there may be also an exosome-like complex in Plasmodium
falciparum, a parasite of great importance in public health, with eight predicted
subunits having high sequence similarity to their counterparts in yeast and
human. In this work, the putative RNA catalytic components, designated as PfRrp4,
PfRrp41, PfDis3, and PfRrp6, were identified and systematically analyzed.
Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (QPCR) analyses suggested that all of them
were transcribed steadily throughout the asexual stage. The expression of these
proteins was determined by Western blot, and their localization narrowed to the
cytoplasm of the parasite by indirect immunofluorescence. The recombinant
proteins of PfRrp41, PfDis3, and PfRrp6 exhibited catalytic activity for
single-stranded RNA (ssRNA), whereas PfRrp4 showed no processing activity of both
ssRNA and dsRNA. The identification of these putative components of the RNA
exosome complex opens up new perspectives for a deep understanding of RNA
metabolism in the malarial parasite P. falciparum.

© 2018 The Authors Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology published by Wiley
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of International Society of Protistologists.

DOI: 10.1111/jeu.12625 
PMCID: PMC6282785
PMID: 29664138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

