
1. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 2018 Apr 25;82(2). pii: e00071-17. doi:
10.1128/MMBR.00071-17. Print 2018 Jun.

Transcriptomic Studies of Malaria: a Paradigm for Investigation of Systemic
Host-Pathogen Interactions.

Lee HJ(#)(1), Georgiadou A(#)(2), Otto TD(3), Levin M(2), Coin LJ(1), Conway
DJ(4), Cunnington AJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Australia.
(2)Section of Paediatrics, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Centre of Immunobiology, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Pathogen Molecular Biology, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Section of Paediatrics, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom
a.cunnington@imperial.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Transcriptomics, the analysis of genome-wide RNA expression, is a common approach
to investigate host and pathogen processes in infectious diseases. Technical and 
bioinformatic advances have permitted increasingly thorough analyses of the
association of RNA expression with fundamental biology, immunity, pathogenesis,
diagnosis, and prognosis. Transcriptomic approaches can now be used to realize a 
previously unattainable goal, the simultaneous study of RNA expression in host
and pathogen, in order to better understand their interactions. This exciting
prospect is not without challenges, especially as focus moves from interactions
in vitro under tightly controlled conditions to tissue- and systems-level
interactions in animal models and natural and experimental infections in humans. 
Here we review the contribution of transcriptomic studies to the understanding of
malaria, a parasitic disease which has exerted a major influence on human
evolution and continues to cause a huge global burden of disease. We consider
malaria a paradigm for the transcriptomic assessment of systemic host-pathogen
interactions in humans, because much of the direct host-pathogen interaction
occurs within the blood, a readily sampled compartment of the body. We illustrate
lessons learned from transcriptomic studies of malaria and how these lessons may 
guide studies of host-pathogen interactions in other infectious diseases. We
propose that the potential of transcriptomic studies to improve the understanding
of malaria as a disease remains partly untapped because of limitations in study
design rather than as a consequence of technological constraints. Further
advances will require the integration of transcriptomic data with analytical
approaches from other scientific disciplines, including epidemiology and
mathematical modeling.

Copyright Â© 2018 Lee et al.

DOI: 10.1128/MMBR.00071-17 
PMCID: PMC5968457
PMID: 29695497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

