
1. Microb Pathog. 2018 Jul;120:97-108. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2018.04.042. Epub 2018
Apr 25.

18S and 28S rDNA identity and phylogeny of two novel myxosporeans infecting gills
of cyprinid carps inhabiting a cold water wetland in northern India.

Gupta A(1), Kaur H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Sant Baba Bhag Singh University, Jalandhar, 144030,
Punjab, India.
(2)Department of Zoology, Panjab University, Chandigarh, 160014, Chandigarh,
India. Electronic address: harpreetbimbra@gmail.com.

The sequences of 18S and 28S rDNA have been extensively used as molecular markers
to resolve phylogenetic relationships among various myxosporeans infecting
fishes. Two novel myxosporeans have been identified during the present study
namely, Henneguya latiusii sp. nov. infecting gills of Crossocheilus latius and
Myxobolus atkinsoni sp. nov. infecting gills of Labeo rohita inhabiting Ranjit
Sagar Wetland, Punjab (India). These myxosporeans formed plasmodia in the gill
arch and gill lamellae respectively and infection was moderate (gill plasmodium
index, GPI: 2). Myxospores of both the species possessed distinct morphological
and morphometric characteristics hence validated as new species.
Phylogenetically, H. latiusii sp. nov. was closest to H. doneci infecting gill
filaments of Carassius auratus gibelio, with 96% and 74% similarity in 18S and
28S rDNA respectively. Similarly, M. atkinsoni sp. nov. showed close homogeneity 
of 90% with M. turpisrotundus and 83% with M. nielii infecting gills of Carassius
auratus. The phylogenetic analyses of species of Myxobolus and Henneguya showed a
tendency to cluster according to the order or family of the host, tissue and
geographical location. This study is the first report on LSU gene marker (28S
rDNA) standardized on myxozoans infecting fresh water fishes from Indian
subcontinent.

Copyright Â© 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2018.04.042 
PMID: 29704669  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

