
1. Adv Parasitol. 2018;100:29-38. doi: 10.1016/bs.apar.2018.03.002. Epub 2018 Apr 5.

Human Parasitology and Parasitic Diseases: Heading Towards 2050.

Hotez PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)National School of Tropical Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX,
United States; Department of Pediatrics, Department of Molecular Virology and
Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States; Department 
of Biology, Baylor University, Waco, TX, United States. Electronic address:
hotez@bcm.edu.

By 2050 our civilized planet may be comprised predominantly of networked
megacities embedded in warm subtropical and tropical climates, and under stress
from climate change and catastrophic weather events. Urban slum areas in these
cities, including those found in wealthier middle- and high-income nations (blue 
marble health), will be especially vulnerable to disease. Moreover, regional
conflicts fought over shifting and limited resources, including water, will
collapse health systems infrastructures to further promote disease emergence and 
reemergence. Thus while by 2050 we might congratulate ourselves for successfully 
eliminating some key parasitic and neglected tropical diseases such as
dracunculiasis, lymphatic filariasis, onchocerciasis, and human African
trypanosomiasis, there could be a commensurate rise in other parasitic diseases
based on the scenarios highlighted above. Of particular concern are urban and
newly urbanized helminth infections, including schistosomiasis and some
soil-transmitted helminth infections, as well zoonotic helminthiases, such as
toxocariasis, food-borne trematodiases, and cysticercosis. Protozoan infections
persisting in urban environments, including leishmaniasis, Chagas disease,
malaria, and intestinal protozoan infections, will also remain, as will zoonotic 
diseases such as toxoplasmosis. Our best hope to counteract the parasitic
diseases emerging in our steaming 21st century megacities is to develop new and
innovative technologies through gene editing, systems biology, and immunology,
and the new single-celled OMICs. However, success on this front will require our 
ability to contain the globalization of antiscience beliefs and sentiments.

Â© 2018 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.apar.2018.03.002 
PMID: 29753341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

