
1. Malar J. 2018 May 15;17(1):197. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2347-9.

Phenotypic and genotypic characterization of Thai isolates of Plasmodium
falciparum after an artemisinin resistance containment project.

Thita T(1), Jadsri P(1), Thamkhantho J(1), Ruang-Areerate T(2), Suwandittakul
N(2), Sitthichot N(2), Mahotorn K(1), Tan-Ariya P(1), Mungthin M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Phramongkutklao College of Medicine, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(3)Department of Parasitology, Phramongkutklao College of Medicine, Bangkok,
Thailand. mathirut@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: In Thailand, artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) has been
used to treat uncomplicated falciparum malaria since 1995. Unfortunately,
artemisinin resistance has been reported from Thailand and other Southeast Asian 
countries since 2003. MalaroneÂ®, a combination of atovaquone-proguanil (ATQ-PG), 
has been used to cease artemisinin pressure in some areas along Thai-Cambodia
border, as part of an artemisinin resistance containment project since 2009. This
study aimed to determine genotypes and phenotypes of Plasmodium falciparum
isolates collected from the Thai-Cambodia border after the artemisinin resistance
containment project compared with those collected before.
RESULTS: One hundred and nine of P. falciparum isolates collected from
Thai-Cambodia border from Chanthaburi and Trat provinces during 1988-2016 were
used in this study. Of these, 58 isolates were collected after the containment.
These parasite isolates were characterized for in vitro antimalarial
sensitivities including chloroquine (CQ), quinine (QN), mefloquine (MQ),
piperaquine (PPQ), artesunate (AS), dihydroartemisinin (DHA), ATQ and PG and
genetic markers for drug resistance including the Kelch13 (k13), Plasmodium
falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter (pfcrt), P. falciparum multidrug
resistance 1 (pfmdr1) and cytochrome b (cytb) genes. Mean CQ, QN, MQ, PPQ and AS 
IC50s of the parasite isolates collected from 2009 to 2016 exhibited
significantly higher than those of parasites collected before 2009. Approximately
57% exhibited in vitro MQ resistance. Approximately 94% of the isolates collected
from 2009 to 2016 contained the pfmdr1 184F allele. Mutations of the k13 gene
were detected in approximately 90% of the parasites collected from 2009 to 2016
which were significantly higher than the parasite isolates collected before. No
ATQ-resistant genotype and phenotype of P. falciparum were found among the
isolates collected after the containment project.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the containment project had been implemented in this area, 
the expansion of artemisinin-resistant parasites did not decline. In addition,
reduced sensitivity of the partner drugs of ACT including MQ and PPQ were
identified.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2347-9 
PMCID: PMC5952644
PMID: 29764451  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

