
1. Parasite Epidemiol Control. 2017 Apr 6;2(2):70-76. doi:
10.1016/j.parepi.2017.04.001. eCollection 2017 May.

A sensitive species-specific reverse transcription real-time PCR method for
detection of Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax.

Gavina K(1), Arango E(2), Larrotta CA(2), Maestre A(2), Yanow SK(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 
Alberta, Canada.
(2)Grupo Salud y Comunidad, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia.
(3)School of Public Health, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

As the global burden of malaria decreases and countries strive towards disease
elimination, there is a greater demand for sensitive diagnostics to target the
submicroscopic reservoir of infection. We describe here a sensitive
species-specific RT-qPCR method to differentiate between Plasmodium falciparum
and P. vivax infections at the submicroscopic level. With amplification of the
18S rRNA genes from total nucleic acids (both DNA and RNA), we discern P.
falciparum and P. vivax with a limit of detection of 10 parasites/mL and
18 copies/μL, respectively. This assay was validated with 519 blood samples,
negative by thick-smear, from febrile and asymptomatic cohorts from Colombia.
These results were directly compared to a qPCR-based method (DNA only) as the
gold standard. Of the samples from patients who presented with fever (n = 274),
34 infections were identified by RT-qPCR (16 P. falciparum, 15 P. vivax, and 3
mixed), of which only 10 infections were identified at the species level by qPCR.
Within the asymptomatic cohort (n = 245), 13 infections were identified by
RT-qPCR (3 P. falciparum, 3 P. vivax, and 7 mixed), whereas the species for only 
one infection was determined by qPCR. We conclude that this species-specific
RT-qPCR method provides a more sensitive tool for species identification compared
to DNA based qPCR methods.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parepi.2017.04.001 
PMCID: PMC5952667
PMID: 29774283 

