
1. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist. 2018 Aug;8(2):320-328. doi:
10.1016/j.ijpddr.2018.05.003. Epub 2018 May 22.

Longitudinal surveillance of drug resistance in Plasmodium falciparum isolates
from the China-Myanmar border reveals persistent circulation of multidrug
resistant parasites.

Bai Y(1), Zhang J(2), Geng J(2), Xu S(2), Deng S(3), Zeng W(2), Wang Z(4), Ngassa
Mbenda HG(4), Zhang J(2), Li N(1), Wu Y(5), Li C(2), Liu H(2), Ruan Y(3), Cao
Y(6), Yang Z(7), Cui L(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology and Immunology, Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, China; Department of Pharmacology, Kunming Medical University, Kunming, 
China.
(2)Department of Pathogen Biology and Immunology, Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Kunming Medical University, Kunming, China.
(4)Department of Entomology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA 16802, USA.
(5)Department of Cell Biology and Medical Genetics, Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, Yunnan Province 650500, China.
(6)Department of Immunology, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110122 
China.
(7)Department of Pathogen Biology and Immunology, Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, China. Electronic address: zhaoqingy92@hotmail.com.
(8)Department of Pathogen Biology and Immunology, Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, China; Department of Entomology, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA 16802, USA. Electronic address: luc2@psu.edu.

Multidrug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum in the Greater Mekong Subregion of
Southeast Asia is a major threat to malaria elimination and requires close
surveillance. In this study, we collected 107 longitudinal clinical samples of P.
falciparum in 2007-2012 from the malaria hypoendemic region of the China-Myanmar 
border and measured their in vitro susceptibilities to 10 antimalarial drugs.
Overall, parasites had significantly different IC50 values to all the drugs
tested as compared to the reference 3D7 strain. Parasites were also genotyped in 
seven genes that were associated with drug resistance including pfcrt, pfmdr1,
pfmrp1, pfdhfr, pfdhps, pfnhe1, and PfK13 genes. Despite withdrawal of
chloroquine and antifolates from treating P. falciparum, parasites remained
highly resistant to these drugs and mutations in pfcrt, pfdhfr, and pfdhps genes 
were highly prevalent and almost reached fixation in the study parasite
population. Except for pyronaridine, quinine and lumefantrine, all other tested
drugs exhibited significant temporal variations at least between some years, but 
only chloroquine and piperaquine had a clear temporal trend of continuous
increase of IC50s. For the pfmrp1 gene, several mutations were associated with
altered sensitivity to a number of drugs tested including chloroquine,
piperaquine, lumefantrine and dihydroartemisinin. The association of PfK13
mutations with resistance to multiple drugs suggests potential evolution of PfK13
mutations amid multidrug resistance genetic background. Furthermore, network
analysis of drug resistance genes indicated that certain haplotypes associated
multidrug resistance persisted in these years, albeit there were year-to-year
fluctuations of the predominant haplotypes.

Copyright Â© 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpddr.2018.05.003 
PMCID: PMC6039318
PMID: 29793059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

