
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2018 Sep;63:285-290. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.05.025. Epub
2018 May 26.

Spatio-temporal distribution of PfMDR1 polymorphism among uncomplicated
Plasmodium falciparum malaria cases along international border of north east
India.

Goomber S(1), Mishra N(2), Anvikar A(2), Yadav CP(2), Valecha N(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Malaria Research, Indian Council of Medical Research,
Sector - 8, Dwarka, New Delhi, India. Electronic address:
shelly.sahni@rediffmail.com.
(2)National Institute of Malaria Research, Indian Council of Medical Research,
Sector - 8, Dwarka, New Delhi, India.

PfMDR1 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) are good correlate markers for
antimalarial drug resistance worldwide. Present study is a comprehensive view of 
screening of PfMDR1 polymorphism to antimalarials practiced with geography and
time. Study sites Mizoram, Tripura, Meghalaya chosen are at multivariate drug
pressure due to cross border migration and transmission. Mizoram is gateway to
south east Asia through Myanmar whereas Tripura, Meghalaya share porous border
with Bangladesh. Baseline finger pricked blood stained filter paper for confirmed
uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum infected patients (year 2015) were obtained
from National Institute of Malaria Research, New Delhi, India. PfMDR1
polymorphism for codon N86Y, Y184F, D1246Y was determined by PCR-RFLP, further
confirmed by sequencing. There observed marked predominance of Plasmodium
isolates with PfMDR1 wild type alleles for all codons under study i.e. 86, 184,
1246. Spatially, Plasmodium isolates from Mizoram were most diverse with
co-existence of PfMDR1 genotype with NYD, YYD, NFD haplotypes, followed by
Tripura. Isolates from Meghalaya were of all NYD haplotype. Reports, referring to
screening of PfMDR1 SNPs to CQ/SP/AS-SP across India, were archived. Temporal
study show distinct rise in proportion of PfMDR1 wild type N86 allele since
introduction of Artemether-Lumefantrine as first line antimalarial. Hence
spatio-temporal screening of Plasmodium population with PfMDR1 single nucleotide 
polymorphism accounts for its association with antimalarial susceptibility and
validate PfMDR1 SNPs as antimalarial drug resistant marker.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.05.025 
PMID: 29842979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

