
1. Parasit Vectors. 2018 May 30;11(1):323. doi: 10.1186/s13071-018-2895-4.

Plasmodium falciparum msp1 and msp2 genetic diversity and allele frequencies in
parasites isolated from symptomatic malaria patients in Bobo-Dioulasso, Burkina
Faso.

Somé AF(1), Bazié T(2), Zongo I(2), Yerbanga RS(2), Nikiéma F(2), Neya C(2), Taho
LK(2), Ouédraogo JB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé, Direction Régionale de l'Ouest,
399 Avenue de la Liberté, 01 BP 545, Bobo-Dioulasso, 01, Burkina Faso.
afabricesome@yahoo.fr.
(2)Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé, Direction Régionale de l'Ouest,
399 Avenue de la Liberté, 01 BP 545, Bobo-Dioulasso, 01, Burkina Faso.

BACKGROUND: In Burkina Faso, malaria remains the overall leading cause of
morbidity and mortality accounting for 35.12% of consultations, 40.83% of
hospitalizations and 37.5% of deaths. Genotyping of malaria parasite populations 
remains an important tool to determine the types and number of parasite clones in
an infection. The present study aimed to evaluate the merozoite surface protein 1
(msp1) and merozoite surface protein 2 (msp2) genetic diversity and allele
frequencies in Bobo-Dioulasso, Burkina Faso.
METHOD: Dried blood spots (DBS) were collected at baseline from patients with
uncomplicated malaria in urban health centers in Bobo-Dioulasso. Parasite DNA was
extracted using chelex-100 and species were identified using nested PCR.
Plamodium falciparum msp1 and msp2 genes were amplified by nested polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) and PCR products were analyzed by electrophoresis on a 2.5% 
agarose gel. Alleles were categorized according to their molecular weight.
RESULTS: A total of 228 blood samples were analyzed out of which 227 (99.9%) were
confirmed as P. falciparum-positive and one sample classified as mixed infection 
for P. malaria and P. falciparum. In msp1, the K1 allelic family was predominant 
with 77.4% (162/209) followed respectively by the MAD20 allelic family with 41.3%
and R033 allelic family with 36%. In msp2, the 3D7 allelic family was the most
frequently detected with 93.1 % compared to FC27 with 41.3%. Twenty-one different
alleles were observed in msp1 with 9 alleles for K1, 8 alleles for MAD20 and 4
alleles for R033. In msp2, 25 individual alleles were detected with 10 alleles
for FC27 and 15 alleles for 3D7. The mean multiplicity of falciparum infection
was 1.95 with respectively 1.8 (1.76-1.83) and 2.1 (2.03-2.16) for msp1 and msp2 
(P = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study showed high genetic diversity and allelic frequencies of
msp1 and msp2 in Plasmodium falciparum isolates from symptomatic malaria patients
in Bobo-Dioulasso.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-018-2895-4 
PMCID: PMC5975679
PMID: 29843783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

