
1. Front Plant Sci. 2018 May 18;9:641. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2018.00641. eCollection
2018.

Detailed Phytochemical Analysis of High- and Low Artemisinin-Producing Chemotypes
of Artemisia annua.

Czechowski T(1), Larson TR(1), Catania TM(1), Harvey D(1), Wei C(2), Essome M(2),
Brown GD(2), Graham IA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Centre for Novel Agricultural Products, University of
York, York, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Reading, Reading, United Kingdom.

Chemical derivatives of artemisinin, a sesquiterpene lactone produced by
Artemisia annua, are the active ingredient in the most effective treatment for
malaria. Comprehensive phytochemical analysis of two contrasting chemotypes of A.
annua resulted in the characterization of over 80 natural products by NMR, more
than 20 of which are novel and described here for the first time. Analysis of
high- and low-artemisinin producing (HAP and LAP) chemotypes of A. annua
confirmed the latter to have a low level of DBR2 (artemisinic aldehyde Î”11(13)
reductase) gene expression. Here we show that the LAP chemotype accumulates high 
levels of artemisinic acid, arteannuin B, epi-deoxyarteannuin B and other
amorpha-4,11-diene derived sesquiterpenes which are unsaturated at the
11,13-position. By contrast, the HAP chemotype is rich in sesquiterpenes
saturated at the 11,13-position (dihydroartemisinic acid, artemisinin and
dihydro-epi-deoxyarteannunin B), which is consistent with higher expression
levels of DBR2, and also with the presence of a HAP-chemotype version of CYP71AV1
(amorpha-4,11-diene C-12 oxidase). Our results indicate that the conversion steps
from artemisinic acid to arteannuin B, epi-deoxyarteannuin B and artemisitene in 
the LAP chemotype are non-enzymatic and parallel the non-enzymatic conversion of 
DHAA to artemisinin and dihyro-epi-deoxyarteannuin B in the HAP chemotype.
Interestingly, artemisinic acid in the LAP chemotype preferentially converts to
arteannuin B rather than the endoperoxide bridge containing artemisitene. In
contrast, in the HAP chemotype, DHAA preferentially converts to artemisinin.
Broader metabolomic and transcriptomic profiling revealed significantly different
terpenoid profiles and related terpenoid gene expression in these two
morphologically distinct chemotypes.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2018.00641 
PMCID: PMC5968107
PMID: 29868094 

