
1. Front Physiol. 2018 May 23;9:577. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2018.00577. eCollection
2018.

A Synergistic Transcriptional Regulation of Olfactory Genes Drives Blood-Feeding 
Associated Complex Behavioral Responses in the Mosquito Anopheles culicifacies.

Das De T(1)(2), Thomas T(1), Verma S(1), Singla D(1), Chauhan C(1), Srivastava
V(1), Sharma P(1), Kumari S(1), Tevatiya S(1), Rani J(1), Hasija Y(2), Pandey
KC(1)(3), Dixit R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Host-Parasite Interaction Studies, National Institute of Malaria
Research, Dwarka, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Delhi Technological University, Rohini, India.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, National Institute for Research in Environmental
Health, Indian Council of Medical Research, Bhopal, India.

Decoding the molecular basis of host seeking and blood feeding behavioral
evolution/adaptation in the adult female mosquitoes may provide an opportunity to
design new molecular strategy to disrupt human-mosquito interactions. Although
there is a great progress in the field of mosquito olfaction and chemo-detection,
little is known about the sex-specific evolution of the specialized olfactory
system of adult female mosquitoes that enables them to drive and manage the
complex blood-feeding associated behavioral responses. A comprehensive RNA-Seq
analysis of prior and post blood meal olfactory system of An. culicifacies
mosquito revealed a minor but unique change in the nature and regulation of key
olfactory genes that may play a pivotal role in managing diverse behavioral
responses. Based on age-dependent transcriptional profiling, we further
demonstrated that adult female mosquito's chemosensory system gradually learned
and matured to drive the host-seeking and blood feeding behavior at the age of
5-6 days. A time scale expression analysis of Odorant Binding Proteins (OBPs)
unravels unique association with a late evening to midnight peak biting time.
Blood meal-induced switching of unique sets of OBP genes and Odorant Receptors
(Ors) expression coincides with the change in the innate physiological status of 
the mosquitoes. Blood meal follows up experiments further provide enough evidence
that how a synergistic and concurrent action of OBPs-Ors may drive "prior and
post blood meal" associated complex behavioral events. A dominant expression of
two sensory appendages proteins (SAP-1 & SAP2) in the legs of An. culicifacies
suggests that this mosquito species may draw an extra advantage of having more
sensitive appendages than An. stephensi, an urban malarial vector in the Indian
subcontinents. Finally, our molecular modeling analysis predicts crucial amino
acid residues for future functional characterization of the sensory appendages
proteins which may play a central role in regulating multiple behaviors of An.
culicifacies mosquito. SIGNIFICANCEÂ  Evolution and adaptation of blood feeding
behavior not only favored the reproductive success of adult female mosquitoes but
also make them important disease-transmitting vectors. An environmental exposure 
after emergence may favor the broadly tuned olfactory system of mosquitoes to
drive complex behavioral responses. But, how these olfactory derived genetic
factors manage female specific "pre and post" blood meal associated complex
behavioral responses are not well known. Our findings suggest that a synergistic 
action of olfactory factors may govern an innate to prime learning strategy to
facilitate rapid blood meal acquisition and downstream behavioral activities. A
species-specific transcriptional profiling and an in-silico analysis predict that
"sensory appendages protein" may be a unique target to design disorientation
strategy against the mosquito Anopheles culicifacies.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2018.00577 
PMCID: PMC5974117
PMID: 29875685 

