
1. Malar J. 2018 Jun 19;17(1):235. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2381-7.

In situ loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) for identification of
Plasmodium species in wide-range thin blood smears.

Hashimoto M(1), Sakamoto H(2)(3), Ido Y(2), Tanaka M(2), Yatsushiro S(2),
Kajimoto K(2), Kataoka M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Health Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
and Technology (AIST), 2217-14, Hayashi-cho, Takamatsu, Kagawa, 761-0301, Japan. 
muneaki-hashimoto@aist.go.jp.
(2)Health Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
and Technology (AIST), 2217-14, Hayashi-cho, Takamatsu, Kagawa, 761-0301, Japan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School and Faculty 
of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Five species of Plasmodium are known to infect humans. For proper
treatment of malaria, accurate identification of the parasite species is crucial.
The current gold standard for malaria diagnosis is microscopic examination of
Giemsa-stained blood smears. Since the parasite species are identified by
microscopists who manually search for the parasite-infected red blood cells
(RBCs), misdiagnosis due to human error tends to occur in case of low
parasitaemia or mixed infection. Then, molecular methods, such as polymerase
chain reaction or loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP), are required for
conclusive identification of the parasite species. However, since molecular
methods are highly sensitive, false-positive results tend to occur due to
contamination (carry over) or the target gene products may be detected even after
clearance of the parasites from the patient's blood. Therefore, accurate
detection of parasites themselves by microscopic examination is essential for the
definitive diagnosis. Thus, the method of in situ LAMP for the parasites was
developed.
RESULTS: Red blood cell suspensions, including cultured Plasmodium falciparum,
strain 3D7, infected-RBCs, were dispersed on cyclic olefin copolymer (COC) plate 
surfaces rendered hydrophilic by reactive ion-etching treatment using a SAMCO RIE
system (hydrophilic-treated), followed by standing for 10Â min to allow the RBCs
to settle down on the plate surface. By rinsing the plate with RPMI 1640 medium, 
monolayers of RBCs formed on almost the entire plate surface. The plate was then 
dried with a hair drier. The RBCs were fixed with formalin, followed by
permeabilization with Triton X-100. Then, amplification of the P. falciparum 18S 
rRNA gene by the LAMP reaction with digoxigenin (DIG)-labelled dUTP and a
specific primer set was performed. Infected RBCs as fluorescence-positive cells
with anti-DIG antibodies conjugated with fluorescein using fluorescent microscopy
could be detected.
CONCLUSIONS: The present work shows that the potential of in situ LAMP for the
identification of Plasmodium species at the single cell level on
hydrophilic-treated COC palates, allowing highly sensitive and accurate malaria
diagnosis. The findings will improve the efficacy of the gold standard method for
malaria diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2381-7 
PMCID: PMC6006833
PMID: 29914490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

