
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2018 Nov;65:35-42. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.07.015. Epub
2018 Jul 20.

Variation in intronic microsatellites and exon 2 of the Plasmodium falciparum
chloroquine resistance transporter gene during modification of artemisinin
combination therapy in Thailand.

Seethamchai S(1), Buppan P(2), Kuamsab N(2), Teeranaipong P(2), Putaporntip C(3),
Jongwutiwes S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Naresuan University, Pitsanulok Province 65000,
Thailand.
(2)Molecular Biology of Malaria and Opportunistic Parasites Research Unit,
Department of Parasitology, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
(3)Molecular Biology of Malaria and Opportunistic Parasites Research Unit,
Department of Parasitology, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
Electronic address: p.chaturong@gmail.com.
(4)Molecular Biology of Malaria and Opportunistic Parasites Research Unit,
Department of Parasitology, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
Electronic address: jongwutiwes@gmail.com.

The amino acid substitution at residue 76 of the food vacuolar transmembrane
protein encoded by the chloroquine resistance transporter gene of Plasmodium
falciparum (Pfcrt) is an important, albeit imperfect, determinant of chloroquine 
susceptibility status of the parasite. Other mutations in Pfcrt can modulate
susceptibility of P. falciparum to other antimalarials capable of interfering
with heme detoxification process, and may exert compensatory effect on parasite
growth rate. To address whether nationwide implementation of artemisinin
combination therapy (ACT) in Thailand could affect sequence variation in exon 2
and introns of Pfcrt, we analyzed 136 P. falciparum isolates collected during
1997 and 2016 from endemic areas bordering Myanmar, Cambodia and Malaysia.
Results revealed 6 haplotypes in exon 2 of Pfcrt with 2 novel substitutions at
c.243A > G (p.R81) and c.251A > T (p.N84I). Positive selection was observed at
amino acid residues 75, 76 and 97. Four, 3, and 2 alleles of microsatellite
(AT/TA) repeats occurred in introns 1, 2 and 4, respectively, resulting in 7
different 3-locus haplotypes. The number of haplotypes and haplotype diversity of
exon 2, and introns 1, 2 and 4 were significantly greater among isolates
collected during 2009 and 2016 than those collected during 1997 and 2008 when
3-day ACT and 2-day ACT regimens were implemented nationwide, respectively
(p < 0.05). By contrast, the number of haplotypes and haplotype diversity of the 
merozoite surface proteins 1 and 2 of these parasite populations did not differ
significantly between these periods. Therefore, the Pfcrt locus of P. falciparum 
in Thailand continues to evolve and could have been affected by selective
pressure from modification of ACT regimen.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.07.015 
PMID: 30016713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

