
1. Acta Trop. 2018 Nov;187:65-71. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2018.07.020. Epub 2018 
Jul 25.

Effects of cross-mating on susceptibility of synonymous mosquitoes, Anopheles
paraliae and Anopheles lesteri to infection with nocturnally subperiodic Brugia
malayi.

Dedkhad W(1), Bartholomay LC(2), Christensen BM(3), Joshi D(4), Taai K(5),
Hempolchom C(6), Saeung A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate PhD's Degree Program in Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai
University, Chiang Mai, 50200, Thailand. Electronic address:
wd.dedkhad@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, University of Wisconsin, 1656 Linden
Drive, Madison, WI, 53706, USA. Electronic address: lyric.bartholomay@wisc.edu.
(3)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, University of Wisconsin, 1656 Linden
Drive, Madison, WI, 53706, USA. Electronic address: bruce.christensen@wisc.edu.
(4)Department of Entomology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, 40546-0091,
USA. Electronic address: deepak.joshi@uky.edu.
(5)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Western University, Kanchanaburi, 71170,
Thailand. Electronic address: kritsana_taai@hotmail.com.
(6)Graduate PhD's Degree Program in Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai
University, Chiang Mai, 50200, Thailand. Electronic address:
chayanit.hem@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Chiang
Mai, 50200, Thailand. Electronic address: atisaeung.noi@gmail.com.

In Southeast Asia, Anopheles lesteri (recently synonymized with An. paraliae) is 
a competent vector for Plasmodium parasites, but its ability to transmit
parasites that cause lymphatic filariasis has yet to be determined. In this
study, the susceptibility of An. lesteri and An. paraliae to Brugia malayi
parasites was determined by comparing with the control mosquito, Aedes togoi. We 
found that the infection prevalence per infected mosquito in An. paraliae was
significantly lower than that in Ae. togoi in all experiments (p <  0.05).
Reciprocal crosses (female An. paraliae x male An. lesteri) produced highly
susceptible F1-hybrid progeny, with increased infection prevalence when compared 
to parental stocks (p <  0.05). Subsequently, the possibilities of introgression 
between high and low/moderate parasite susceptibility genes were investigated by 
cross-mating experiments (parental, reciprocal crosses, back crosses and repeated
backcrosses). The results showed the possibility of introgression of B.
malayi-susceptible genes between An. paraliae (low/moderate susceptibility) and
An. lesteri (high susceptibility) based on increasing or decreasing
susceptibility and normal larval development in the thoracic muscles of
F3-hybrids. Additionally, melanization, an innate immune response with proven
involvement in the susceptibility or refractoriness of mosquitoes to B. malayi
parasites, was examined. Parasite degeneration and cell aggregation, and
melanization were observed for first-stage larvae in the thoracic muscle fibers
of hybrid mosquitoes.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2018.07.020 
PMID: 30055175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

