
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018 Aug 6;12(8):e0006673. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006673.
eCollection 2018 Aug.

Screening of the Pathogen Box for inhibitors with dual efficacy against Giardia
lamblia and Cryptosporidium parvum.

Hennessey KM(1), Rogiers IC(2)(3)(4), Shih HW(1), Hulverson MA(2), Choi R(2),
McCloskey MC(2), Whitman GR(2), Barrett LK(2), Merritt EA(4), Paredez AR(1), Ojo 
KK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United
States of America.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Center
for Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases (CERID), University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(3)Faculty of Pharmaceutical, Biomedical and Veterinary Sciences, University of
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
United States of America.

There is need for a more efficient cell-based assay amenable to high-throughput
drug screening against Giardia lamblia. Here, we report the development of a
screening method utilizing G. lamblia engineered to express red-shifted firefly
luciferase. Parasite growth and replication were quantified using D-luciferin as 
a substrate in a bioluminescent read-out plateform. This assay was validated for 
reproducibility and reliability against the Medicines for Malaria Venture (MMV)
Pathogen Box compounds. For G. lamblia, forty-three compounds showed ≥ 75%
inhibition of parasite growth in the initial screen (16 μM), with fifteen showing
≥ 95% inhibition. The Pathogen Box was also screened against Nanoluciferase
expressing (Nluc) C. parvum, yielding 85 compounds with ≥ 75% parasite growth
inhibition at 10 μM, with six showing ≥ 95% inhibition. A representative set of
seven compounds with activity against both parasites were further analyzed to
determine the effective concentration that causes 50% growth inhibition (EC50)
and cytotoxicity against mammalian HepG2 cells. Four of the seven compounds were 
previously known to be effective in treating either Giardia or Cryptosporidium.
The remaining three shared no obvious chemical similarity with any previously
characterized anti-parasite diarrheal drugs and offer new medicinal chemistry
opportunities for therapeutic development. These results suggest that the
bioluminescent assays are suitable for large-scale screening of chemical
libraries against both C. parvum and G. lamblia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006673 
PMCID: PMC6095626
PMID: 30080847  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

