
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Nov 2;46(19):10417-10431. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky710.

Identification of clustered organellar short (cos) RNAs and of a conserved family
of organellar RNA-binding proteins, the heptatricopeptide repeat proteins, in the
malaria parasite.

Hillebrand A(1), Matz JM(2), Almendinger M(1), MÃ¼ller K(2), Matuschewski K(2),
Schmitz-Linneweber C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Humboldt University Berlin, Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Humboldt University, Department of Molecular Parasitology, Berlin, Germany.

Gene expression in mitochondria of Plasmodium falciparum is essential for
parasite survival. The molecular mechanisms of Plasmodium organellar gene
expression remain poorly understood. This includes the enigmatic assembly of the 
mitochondrial ribosome from highly fragmented rRNAs. Here, we present the
identification of clustered organellar short RNA fragments (cosRNAs) that are
possible footprints of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) in Plasmodium organelles. In
plants, RBPs of the pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) class produce footprints as a 
consequence of their function in processing organellar RNAs. Intriguingly, many
of the Plasmodium cosRNAs overlap with 5'-ends of rRNA fragments. We hypothesize 
that these are footprints of RBPs involved in assembling the rRNA fragments into 
a functioning ribosome. A bioinformatics search of the Plasmodium nuclear genome 
identified a hitherto unrecognized organellar helical-hairpin-repeat protein
family that we term heptatricopeptide repeat (HPR) proteins. We demonstrate that 
selected HPR proteins are targeted to mitochondria in P. berghei and that one of 
them, PbHPR1, associates with RNA, but not DNA in vitro. A phylogenetic search
identified HPR proteins in a wide variety of eukaryotes. We hypothesize that HPR 
proteins are required for processing and stabilizing RNAs in Apicomplexa and
other taxa.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky710 
PMCID: PMC6212722
PMID: 30102371  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

