
1. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2018 Dec;53:90-97. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2018.07.008. Epub 2018
Aug 10.

The demographic and adaptive history of central African hunter-gatherers and
farmers.

Patin E(1), Quintana-Murci L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Human Evolutionary Genetics, Department of Genomes and Genetics,
Institut Pasteur, 75015 Paris, France; Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS), UMR2000, 75015 Paris, France; Center of Bioinformatics,
Biostatistics and Integrative Biology, Institut Pasteur, 75015 Paris, France.
Electronic address: epatin@pasteur.fr.
(2)Unit of Human Evolutionary Genetics, Department of Genomes and Genetics,
Institut Pasteur, 75015 Paris, France; Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS), UMR2000, 75015 Paris, France; Center of Bioinformatics,
Biostatistics and Integrative Biology, Institut Pasteur, 75015 Paris, France.
Electronic address: quintana@pasteur.fr.

Central Africa, a forested region that supports an exceptionally high
biodiversity, hosts the world's largest group of hunter-gatherers, who live in
close proximity with groups that have adopted agriculture over the past 5000
years. Our understanding of the prehistory of these populations has been
dramatically hampered by the almost total absence of fossil remains in this
region, a limitation that has recently been circumvented by population genomics
approaches. Different studies have estimated that ancestors of rainforest
hunter-gatherers and Bantu-speaking farmers separated more than 60 000 years ago,
supporting the occurrence of ancient population structure in Africa since the
Late Pleistocene. Conversely, the Holocene in central Africa was characterized by
large-scale population migrations associated with the emergence of agriculture,
and increased genetic interactions between autochthonous rainforest
hunter-gatherers and expanding Bantu-speaking farmers. Genomic scans have
detected numerous candidate loci for positive selection in these populations,
including convergent adaptation for short stature in groups of rainforest
hunter-gatherers and local adaptation to endemic malaria in western and central
Africans. Furthermore, there is recent increasing evidence that adaptive
variation has been acquired by various African populations through admixture,
suggesting a previously unappreciated role of intraspecies gene flow in local
adaptation. Ancient and modern DNA studies will greatly broaden, and probably
challenge, our view on the past history of central Africa, where introgression
from yet uncharacterized archaic hominins and long-term adaptation to distinct
ecological niches are suspected.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gde.2018.07.008 
PMID: 30103089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

