
1. Parasitol Int. 2018 Dec;67(6):787-792. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2018.08.004. Epub
2018 Aug 14.

Characterization of Plasmodium knowlesi dihydrofolate reductase-thymidylate
synthase and sensitivity to antifolates.

Ittarat W(1), Pornthanakasem W(1), Mungthin M(2), Suwandittakul N(2), Leelayoova 
S(2), Tarnchompoo B(1), Yuthavong Y(1), Kongkasuriyachai D(1), Leartsakulpanich
U(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, 113 Phahonyothin
Road, Khlong Nueng, Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Phramongkutklao College of Medicine, Bangkok
10400, Thailand.
(3)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, 113 Phahonyothin
Road, Khlong Nueng, Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand. Electronic
address: ubolsree@biotec.or.th.

Malaria caused by an infection of Plasmodium knowlesi can result in high
parasitemia and deaths. Therefore, effective and prompt treatment is necessary to
reduce morbidity and mortality. The study aims to characterize P. knowlesi
dihydrofolate reductase-thymidylate synthase enzyme (PkDHFR-TS) and its
sensitivity to antifolates. The putative Pkdhfr gene was PCR amplified from field
isolates collected from the Southern Thailand. Molecular analysis showed 11
polymorphisms in the dhfr domain of the bifunctional dhfr-ts gene. Of these, 1
polymorphism was a non-synonymous substitution (R34L) that had previously been
reported but not associated with antifolate resistance. The recombinant PkDHFR-TS
enzyme was found to be sensitive to standard antifolates-pyrimethamine and
cycloguanil-as well as P218, a registered candidate drug currently first in human
clinical trial. Results suggest that antifolates class of compounds should be
effective against P. knowlesi infection.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2018.08.004 
PMID: 30114522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

