
1. PLoS One. 2018 Aug 23;13(8):e0202905. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0202905.
eCollection 2018.

Mitochondrial variation in subpopulations of Anopheles balabacensis Baisas in
Sabah, Malaysia (Diptera: Culicidae).

Manin BO(1), Drakeley CJ(2), Chua TH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology and Medical Diagnostics, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia.
(2)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

Anopheles balabacensis, the primary vector of Plasmodium knowlesi in Sabah,
Malaysia, is both zoophilic and anthropophilic, feeding on macaques as well as
humans. It is the dominant Anopheles species found in Kudat Division where it is 
responsible for all the cases of P. knowlesi. However there is a paucity of basic
biological and ecological information on this vector. We investigated the genetic
variation of this species using the sequences of cox1 (1,383 bp) and cox2 (685
bp) to gain an insight into the population genetics and inter-population gene
flow in Sabah. A total of 71 An. balabacensis were collected from seven districts
constituting 14 subpopulations. A total of 17, 10 and 25 haplotypes were detected
in the subpopulations respectively using the cox1, cox2 and the combined
sequence. Some of the haplotypes were common among the subpopulations due to gene
flow occurring between them. AMOVA showed that the genetic variation was high
within subpopulations as compared to between subpopulations. Mantel test results 
showed that the variation between subpopulations was not due to the geographical 
distance between them. Furthermore, Tajima's D and Fu's Fs tests showed that An. 
balabacensis in Sabah is experiencing population expansion and growth. High gene 
flow between the subpopulations was indicated by the low genetic distance and
high gene diversity in the cox1, cox2 and the combined sequence. However the
population at Lipasu Lama appeared to be isolated possibly due to its higher
altitude at 873 m above sea level.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0202905 
PMCID: PMC6107281
PMID: 30138386  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

