
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 Oct;99(4):987-994. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.18-0401.

Multiple Novel Mutations in Plasmodium falciparum Chloroquine Resistance
Transporter Gene during Implementation of Artemisinin Combination Therapy in
Thailand.

Buppan P(1)(2), Seethamchai S(3), Kuamsab N(1), Harnyuttanakorn P(4), Putaporntip
C(1), Jongwutiwes S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology of Malaria and Opportunistic Parasites Research Unit,
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Inter-Department Program of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Graduate School,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Naresuan University, Pitsanulok
Province, Thailand.
(4)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 
Thailand.

Mutations in the chloroquine resistance transporter gene of Plasmodium falciparum
(Pfcrt) are associated with drug susceptibility status of chloroquine and other
antimalarials that interfere with heme detoxification process including
artemisinin. We aim to investigate whether an increase in duration of artemisinin
combination therapy (ACT) in Thailand could affect mutations in Pfcrt. The
complete coding sequences of Pfcrt and dihydrofolate reductase (Pfdhfr), and size
polymorphisms of the merozoite surface proteins-1 and 2 (Pfmsp-1 and Pfmsp-2) of 
189 P. falciparum isolates collected during 1991 and 2016 were analyzed. In
total, 12 novel amino acid substitutions and 13 novel PfCRT haplotypes were
identified. The most prevalent haplotype belonged to the Dd2 sequence and no wild
type was found. A significant positive correlation between the frequency of Pfcrt
mutants and the year of sample collection was observed during nationwide ACT
implementation (r = 0.780; P = 0.038). The number of haplotypes and nucleotide
diversity of isolates collected during 3-day ACT (2009-2016) significantly
outnumbered those collected before this treatment regimen. Positive Darwinian
selection occurred in the transmembrane domains only among isolates collected
during 3-day ACT but not among those collected before this period. No remarkable 
change was observed in the molecular indices for other loci analyzed when similar
comparisons were performed. An increase in the duration of artesunate in
combination therapy in Thailand could exert selective pressure on the Pfcrt
locus, resulting in emergence of novel variants. The impact of these novel
haplotypes on antimalarial susceptibilities requires further study.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.18-0401 
PMCID: PMC6159576
PMID: 30141388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

