
1. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2016 Dec;34(6):489-92.

[Mutations of Plasmodium falciparum Multidrug Resistance 1 Gene in Imported
Plasmodium falciparum in Wuhan].

[Article in Chinese]

Jia XS, Zhou SM, Xu MX, Yang Y, Wu K.

Objective: To identify Plasmodium falciparum multidrug resistance 1（Pfmdr1） point
mutations in imported Plasmodium falciparum in Wuhan.
Methods: Blood samples were collected from returnees infected with P. falciparum 
in endemic areas of Africa and Myanmar during 2010-2015 in Wuhan City. Nested PCR
primers were specifically designed for Pfmdr1 gene loci 86, 1042 and 1246 of P.
falciparum. The Pfmdr1 gene was then amplified by nested PCR, and the products
were digested by restriction enzyme ApoⅠ, AseⅠ and EcoRⅤ, respectively. The
mutation rate for loci 86, 1042 and 1246 was analyzed. Results A total of 187
patients with falciparum malaria were involved in the study. Pfmdr1 was amplified
from all the blood samples. Restriction enzyme digestion revealed mutation rate
of 19.3%（36/187）, 4.3% （8/187） and 9.6%（18/187） for loci 86, 1042 and 1246,
respectively. In detail, the mutation rate for loci 86, 1042 and 1246 was
20.6%（36/175）, 2.9%（5/175） and 10.3%（18/175） respectively in the 175 samples from
Africa, and only 3 cases with locus 1042 mutation were found in the 12 samples
from Myanmar.
Results: A total of 187 patients with falciparum malaria were involved in the
study. Pfmdr1 was amplified from all the blood samples. Restriction enzyme
digestion revealed mutation rate of 19.3%（36/187）, 4.3% （8/187） and 9.6%（18/187） 
for loci 86, 1042 and 1246, respectively. In detail, the mutation rate for loci
86, 1042 and 1246 was 20.6%（36/175）, 2.9%（5/175） and 10.3%（18/175） respectively
in the 175 samples from Africa, and only 3 cases with locus 1042 mutation were
found in the 12 samples from Myanmar.
Conclusion: The loci 86, 1042 and 1246 mutations of Pfmdr1 have all been found in
the samples from Africa, with only one point mutation （locus 1042） found in
samples from Myanmar.


PMID: 30141588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

