
1. mBio. 2018 Sep 4;9(5). pii: e01627-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01627-18.

Functional Conservation of P48/45 Proteins in the Transmission Stages of
Plasmodium vivax (Human Malaria Parasite) and P. berghei (Murine Malaria
Parasite).

Cao Y(1)(2), Hart RJ(1)(2), Bansal GP(1)(2), Kumar N(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine, School of Public Health and Tropical
Medicine, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.
(2)Vector-Borne Infectious Diseases Research Center, Tulane University, New
Orleans, Louisiana, USA.
(3)Department of Tropical Medicine, School of Public Health and Tropical
Medicine, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA nkumar@tulane.edu.

Sexual-stage proteins have a distinct function in the mosquito vector during
transmission and also represent targets for the development of malaria
transmission-blocking vaccine. P48/45, a leading vaccine candidate, is critical
for male gamete fertility and shows >50% similarity across various species of
Plasmodium We evaluated functional conservation of P48/45 in Plasmodium vivax and
P. berghei with the motivation to establish transgenic P. berghei strains
expressing P. vivax P48/45 (Pvs48/45) in an in vivo assay to evaluate the
transmission-blocking activity of antibodies elicited by Pvs48/45. Homologous
recombination was employed to target P. bergheis48/45 (pbs48/45) for knockout
(KO) or for its replacement by two different forms of P. vivaxs48/45 (pvs48/45)
(the full-length gene and a chimeric gene consisting of pbs48/45 5' signal and 3'
anchor sequences flanking pvs48/45). Expression of Pvs48/45 in transgenic
parasites and lack of expression of any P48/45 in KO parasites were confirmed by 
reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) and Western blotting. Both transgenic and
knockout parasites revealed asexual growth kinetics in mice comparable to that
seen with wild-type parasites. When employed in mosquito infection experiments,
both transgenic parasite strains remained transmission competent and developed
into infectious sporozoites, whereas the knockout parasites were incapable of
establishing mosquito-stage infection. These results indicate the functional
conservation of P48/45 protein during transmission, and the transgenic parasites 
generated in this study represent a valuable tool to evaluate the protective
efficacy of transmission-blocking antibodies elicited by Pvs48/45-based vaccines 
using an in vivo mouse animal assay instead of ex vivo membrane feeding assays
(MFA) relying on access to P. vivax gametocytes from infected patients.IMPORTANCE
Malaria transmission depends upon successful sexual differentiation and
maturation of parasites in the vertebrate host and further development in the
mosquito midgut. Stage-specific proteins in the sexual stages have been shown to 
play a critical role in development and successful transmission through the
anopheline mosquito vector. Studies presented in the current manuscript evaluated
functional conservation of one such protein, P48/45, in two diverse species
(P. berghei and P. vivax). Replacement of endogenous pbs48/45 in P. berghei with 
pvs48/45 (P. vivax homologue) did not affect the viability of the parasites, and 
the transgenic parasites expressing Pvs48/45 remained transmission competent.
These studies establish not only the functional conservation of P48/45 in
P. berghei and P. vivax but also offer an opportunity to develop an in vivo test 
model for Pvs48/45-based P. vivax transmission-blocking vaccines, currently under
development.

Copyright © 2018 Cao et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01627-18 
PMCID: PMC6123445
PMID: 30181253  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

