
1. Biomedica. 2018 Aug 1;38(0):117-126. doi: 10.7705/biomedica.v38i0.4055.

Genetic diversity and population structure of Anopheles triannulatus s. l. in the
department of Córdoba, Colombia, using DNA barcoding

Atencia M(1), Toro-Cantillo A, Hoyos-López R.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Investigaciones en Enfermedades Tropicales y Resistencia Bacteriana, 
Universidad del Sinú, Montería, Colombia. mariclau_1112@hotmail.com.

Introduction: Anopheles triannulatus is not incriminated as a vector of malaria
transmission in Colombia despite recent reports of infection with Plasmodium spp.
in populations related to the northwestern and southeastern lineages. Genetic
diversity can delimit information about gene flow and population differentiation 
in localities with malaria. Objective: To estimate the genetic diversity of An.
triannulatus in five municipalities with high and low incidence of malaria in the
department of Córdoba. Materials and methods: The entomological collections were 
done between August and November, 2016, in Tierralta, Puerto Libertador,
Montelíbano, Sahagún, and Planeta Rica. We used the COI barcoding fragment as
molecular marker. The genetic analysis included the estimation of genetic
parameters such as the diversity haplotype, the genetic structure, the gene flow,
the Tajima’s D test, the haplotype network, and the phylogenetic relationship.
Results: We obtained 148 sequences with a length of 655 nucleotides of the COI
gene, from which we derived 44 haplotypes. The H2 and H21 haplotypes were the
most frequent in the populations. The values of the Tajima’s D test were negative
and not significant (p>0.10). The genetic structure index (FST=0.01427) and the
gene flow (Nm=17.27) evidenced no differentiation between sampled populations due
to the high exchange of migrants. Using phylogenetic inferences and the haplotype
network, we identified one single species without geographic differentiation or
lineages in the geographic range studied. Conclusions: The genetic diversity
calculated for An. triannulatus in this context indicated stable populations in
constant exchange.

DOI: 10.7705/biomedica.v38i0.4055 
PMID: 30184372  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

