
1. J Med Virol. 2019 Feb;91(2):163-170. doi: 10.1002/jmv.25307. Epub 2018 Sep 24.

Epidemiological trends and molecular dynamics of dengue, chikungunya virus
infection, coinfection, and other undifferentiated fever during 2015-2016 in
Odisha, India.

Saswat T(1), Sahoo N(2), Muduli S(1), Debata NK(2), Chattopadhyay S(3),
Chattopadhyay S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease Biology, Institute of Life Sciences,
Bhubaneswar, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, IMS & Sum Hospital, Bhubaneswar, India.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, National Institute of Science Education &
Research, Bhubaneswar, India.

Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) infection is spatiotemporally related to dengue virus
(DENV) infection and mostly undiagnosed due to similar primary symptoms. In 2013,
a high rate (36%) of coinfection of DENV and CHIKV was reported in Odisha. Hence,
the hospital-based study was continued to synthesis current epidemiological
understanding of their single distribution or coinfection. Suspected DENV
patients serum samples were tested for DENV and CHIKV by serology and
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. The positive samples were used
for analysis of mutation, selection pressure, and phylogenetic relationship.
Clinical information was also analyzed. Among 648 (2015 and 2016) suspected DENV 
patients, 141 (21.7%) were positive for DENV (serotypes 1-3), 22 (3.4%) were
positive for CHIKV (ECSA) and 4 (2.8%) were coinfected with both. Sequence
analysis showed four consistent mutations (M104V, V112A, K166N, and F169L) in
CprM gene of DENV 2 and two consistent mutations (M269V, D284E) in E1 gene of
CHIKV. Interestingly, the CHIKV- E1 A226V mutation was absent in the studied
population. It was also noticed that the peak incidence of both the infections
occurs in August-September in 2015-16. Moreover, Plasmodium species, Salmonella
typhi, and Rickettsial typhi infections were also observed in DENV patients.
Different etiology was also detected in other undifferentiated fever patients as 
mixed infections (malaria, S. typhi, and R. typhi ). Hence, this investigation
shows the significant reduction of DENV-CHIKV coinfection as compared with
previous report, the burden of arboviruses and acute undifferentiated fever in
Odisha in 2015-2016, highlighting the importance of epidemiological picture of
febrile patients for appropriate patient management.

Â© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.25307 
PMID: 30192396  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

