
1. Parasit Vectors. 2018 Sep 12;11(1):510. doi: 10.1186/s13071-018-3091-2.

Molecular surveillance and phylogenetic traits of Babesia bigemina and Babesia
bovis in cattle (Bos taurus) and water buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis) from Colombia.

Jaimes-Dueñez J(1), Triana-Chávez O(1), Holguín-Rocha A(2), Tobon-Castaño A(2),
Mejía-Jaramillo AM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo BCEI, Universidad de Antioquia UdeA, Calle 70 No. 52-21, Medellín,
Colombia.
(2)Grupo Malaria, Universidad de Antioquia UdeA, Calle 70 No. 52-21, Medellín,
Colombia.
(3)Grupo BCEI, Universidad de Antioquia UdeA, Calle 70 No. 52-21, Medellín,
Colombia. anamejia25@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Babesia bigemina and B. bovis are two economically important
hemoparasites affecting both cattle and buffaloes involved in dairy and beef
production. In Colombia, although some parasitological and serological studies
suggest an endemicity of these pathogens in areas under 1000 m, little is known
about its molecular prevalence in different host. The objective of this study was
to estimate the prevalence and molecular traits of these parasites in cattle and 
buffaloes from two Colombian regions.
METHODS: Between 2014 and 2016, a three-point longitudinal survey was designed in
farms from Caribbean and Orinoquia regions to evaluate the molecular prevalence
of B. bigemina and B. bovis using a nested PCR (n-PCR) targeting hypothetical
protein (hyp) and rhoptry-associated protein (RAP-1) genes, respectively. A total
of 1432 cattle, 152 buffalo and 1439 Rhipicephalus microplus samples were
analyzed. Moreover, phylogenetic relationship of isolates was analyzed using the 
18S rRNA gene.
RESULTS: A molecular prevalence of 31.6% (24.2% for B. bigemina and 14.4% for B. 
bovis), 23.6% (6.5% for B. bigemina and 17.7% for B. bovis) and 4.3% (3.5% for B.
bigemina and 1.0% for B. bovis) was observed in cattle, buffaloes and
Rhipicephalus microplus, respectively. Higher values of infection were observed
during the wet season and late wet season; nevertheless, other variables such as 
age, production type, sex, breed and babesiosis control were also significantly
associated with infection. Prevalence analysis showed that B. bovis infection was
higher in cattle that coexist with buffaloes, when compared to those which did
not. For each species, phylogenetic analyses revealed a high genetic diversity of
isolates without clusters related to the isolation source.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first longitudinal survey that
evaluates through molecular methods, the infection of B. bigemina and B. bovis in
two important livestock regions from Colombia. This study reveals that the
prevalence of infection by Babesia spp., in cattle and buffaloes are modulated by
seasonal variations, host factors and vector traits. Our results provide new
insights on the epidemiological aspects of infection of Babesia spp., in cattle
and buffaloes, which must be taken into consideration when babesiosis control
programs are implemented in the study area.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-018-3091-2 
PMCID: PMC6136160
PMID: 30208941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

