
1. PLoS One. 2018 Sep 11;13(9):e0203455. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0203455.
eCollection 2018.

Females of HbAS genotype have reduced concentration of the malaria protective
deoxyhemoglobin S than males.

Waitumbi JN(1), Kifude CM(1), Hunja CW(2), Ogutu BR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Walter Reed Project, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Kisumu, Kenya.
(2)South Eastern Kenya University, School of Pure and Applied Sciences,
Department of Biology, Kitui, Kenya.

The quantity of the intra-erythrocytic deoxyhemoglobin S (Hb S) affects the level
of protection against malaria and also the sickling phenomenon. This study
reports on significantly lower concentration of Hb S in females than males. Data 
came from 350 children, aged 12-47 months who participated in a phase 2b malaria 
vaccine trial. Hemoglobinopathy and G6PD deficiency typing was necessary to
ascertain equal representation of these malaria protective traits across the
vaccine cohorts. Hemoglobin types (HbAA, HbAS) and % Hb S were evaluated by HPLC.
Alpha thalassemia (alpha-thal) and G6PD genotypes were evaluated by PCR. The
overall prevalence for HbAS was 20%, 46% for 3 alpha genes and 10% for 2 alpha
genes and 14% for G6PD A-. More females of HbAS/αα/αα genotype had low Hb S than 
males and had mean % Hb S of 37.5% ± 5.4 SD, compared to 42.0% ± 2.5 SD in males 
of same genotype (P = 0.018). Consistent with reduction of the malaria protective
Hb S in females, parasite load in females was nearly twice that of males but the 
difference was not statistically significant. The X-chromosome linked G6PD
deficiency did not influence the level of Hb S. We conclude that, the low Hb S in
these females explains the resultant higher malaria parasite load. We speculate
that the low Hb S in females could also explain observations suggesting that the 
sickling phenomenon tends to be less severe in females than males.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0203455 
PMCID: PMC6133351
PMID: 30204801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

