
1. J Cell Sci. 2018 Oct 22;131(20). pii: jcs210971. doi: 10.1242/jcs.210971.

A synthetic promoter for multi-stage expression to probe complementary functions 
of Plasmodium adhesins.

Klug D(1), Kehrer J(2), Frischknecht F(2), Singer M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Parasitology, Center for Infectious Diseases, Heidelberg
University Medical School, Im Neuenheimer Feld 324, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
mirko.singer@lmu.de dklug@ibmc-cnrs.unistra.fr.
(2)Integrative Parasitology, Center for Infectious Diseases, Heidelberg
University Medical School, Im Neuenheimer Feld 324, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Gene expression of malaria parasites is mediated by the apicomplexan Apetala2
(ApiAP2) transcription factor family. Different ApiAP2s control gene expression
at distinct stages in the complex life cycle of the parasite, ensuring timely
expression of stage-specific genes. ApiAP2s recognize short cis-regulatory
elements that are enriched in the upstream/promoter region of their target genes.
This should, in principle, allow the generation of 'synthetic' promoters that
drive gene expression at desired stages of the Plasmodium life cycle. Here we
test this concept by combining cis-regulatory elements of two genes expressed
successively within the mosquito part of the life cycle. Our tailored 'synthetic'
promoters, named Spooki 1.0 and Spooki 2.0, activate gene expression in early and
late mosquito stages, as shown by the expression of a fluorescent reporter. We
used these promoters to address the specific functionality of two related
adhesins that are exclusively expressed either during the early or late mosquito 
stage. By modifying the expression profile of both adhesins in absence of their
counterpart we were able to test for complementary functions in gliding and
invasion. We discuss the possible advantages and drawbacks of our approach.This
article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the
paper.

Â© 2018. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.210971 
PMID: 30237220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no
competing or financial interests.

