
1. PLoS One. 2018 Oct 3;13(10):e0204143. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0204143.
eCollection 2018.

Detection and serotyping of dengue viruses in febrile patients consulting at the 
New-Bell District Hospital in Douala, Cameroon.

Yousseu FBS(1)(2), Nemg FBS(1), Ngouanet SA(2), Mekanda FMO(1), Demanou M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, National Reference Laboratory for Chikungunya and
Dengue, Centre Pasteur of Cameroon (CPC), Yaoundé, Centre, Cameroon.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Dschang, Dschang, West,
Cameroon.

Arboviruses are a major public health problem worldwide and are predominantly
present in intertropical areas. Chikungunya, dengue and zika viruses have been
implicated in recent epidemics in Asia, America and Africa. In Cameroon, data on 
these viruses are fragmentary. The purpose of this study was to determine the
frequency of detection of these three viruses in febrile patients in Douala,
Cameroon. A cross-sectional and descriptive study was conducted from March to
April 2017 at the New-Bell District Hospital in Douala. Blood samples were
collected from febrile patients and tested for malaria infections using Rapid
Diagnostic test. Plasma harvested was later analyzed for the presence of
chikungunya, dengue and zika viruses by a Trioplex real-time RT-PCR at Centre
Pasteur of Cameroon. A total of 114 participants were included, of which 63.2%
were females, reflecting a sex ratio (female/male) of 1.7. The median age was 26 
years, range [0.25-81]. Eight (7%) of the 114 participants were infected with
Dengue virus (DENV) among which 5 were identified as serotype 1. No cases of
infection by either Zika virus or Chikungunya virus were detected. Three cases of
dengue-malaria co-infection (13%) were recorded. No association was found between
socio-demographic factors and dengue infection. The phylogenetic analysis of the 
partial envelope E gene showed that all the five DENV serotype 1 samples belonged
to subtype V, similarly to strains from West African countries, particularly
those from Nigeria, Senegal and Côte d'Ivoire. This study showed the circulation 
of DENV serotype 1 in febrile patients and raises the alarm for the establishment
of a sustained surveillance system to detect cases and prevent potential
outbreaks in Cameroon. The existence of dengue-malaria co-infections suggests
that surveillance of arboviruses should not be limited to febrile, non-malarial
cases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0204143 
PMCID: PMC6169880
PMID: 30281633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

