
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2018 Nov 30;506(3):471-477. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.10.072. Epub 2018 Oct 21.

Identification of potential whole blood MicroRNA biomarkers for the blood stage
of adult imported falciparum malaria through integrated mRNA and miRNA expression
profiling.

Li JJ(1), Huang MJ(1), Li Z(1), Li W(1), Wang F(1), Wang L(1), Li XL(1), Zheng
X(1), Zou Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Tropical Medicine, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, PR China; Beijing Key Laboratory for Research on
Prevention and Treatment of Tropical Diseases, Capital Medical University,
Beijing, PR China.
(2)Beijing Institute of Tropical Medicine, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, PR China; Beijing Key Laboratory for Research on
Prevention and Treatment of Tropical Diseases, Capital Medical University,
Beijing, PR China. Electronic address: zouyang.bfh@outlook.com.

Correlating aberrant miRNA levels with imported malaria during the blood stage is
required to better understand the in vivo biological and molecular processes that
are involved in the response to Plasmodium falciparum infection and to find new
biomarkers and diagnosis tools. We used a parallel microarray-based approach to
investigate an integrated view of how the host miRNA expression profile changes
in response to P. falciparum infection in whole blood obtained from six subjects 
with adult imported falciparum malaria (AIFM) and six normal subjects. We first
investigated the functions of 1007 significantly differentially expressed genes
from microarrays and predicted 56 putative pathways participating in malaria
pathogenesis, which reflected systemic changes in the host under falciparum
infection. Then, we validated the in silico-predicted targets of 50
differentially modulated miRNAs (7 upregulated and 43 downregulated) by examining
the actual mRNA expression of these particular genes in our gene expression
profile database; putative target gene sets were grouped into functional
categories to investigate the roles of differentially expressed miRNAs. We
considered 36 intersecting putative pathways, most of which were involved in
multiple immune response processes, such as cell defense response, immune
response, TNF signaling pathway, and T cell receptor signaling pathway, which may
actually be regulated by differentially expressed miRNAs. Additionally, we
identified five enriched upregulated miRNA sets (miR-3135b, miR-6780b-5p,
miR-1246, miR-6126, and miR-3613-5p) as potential blood biomarkers of
immunopathological status and prediction of early host responses, disease
prognosis, and severe outcomes in AIFM.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.10.072 
PMID: 30352683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

