
1. Acta Trop. 2019 Feb;190:210-219. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2018.10.008. Epub
2018 Oct 22.

Identification, characterization and expression analysis of Anopheles stephensi
double peroxidase.

Choudhury TP(1), Gupta L(2), Kumar S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan,
India.
(2)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan,
India; Department of Zoology, Ch. Bansi Lal University, Bhiwani, Haryana, India.
(3)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan,
India; Department of Biotechnology, Ch. Bansi Lal University, Bhiwani, Haryana,
India. Electronic address: sanjeevnih@gmail.com.

Peroxidases catalyze the reduction of peroxides and that, in turn, oxidize
various substrates. They have been widely reported to play an important role in
mosquito innate immunity against various pathogens. Here, we have characterized
double heme peroxidase (AsDBLOX) gene from the Indian malaria vector Anopheles
stephensi. It is a true ortholog of An. gambiae DBLOX. This 4209 bp AsDBLOX gene 
encodes for a protein of 1402 amino acids that has two duplicated peroxidase
domains, domain I (from amino acid 61 to 527) and domain II (from amino acid 714 
to 1252). The first domain has only substrate binding sites and lacks all other
motifs of a functional heme peroxidase (e.g. heme binding site, calcium binding
site and homodimer interface). Instead, it has two integrin binding motifs-LDV
(Leu-Asp-Val) and RGD (Arg-Gly-Asp). The second peroxidase domain, however, has
all the features of a complete heme peroxidase along with an integrin binding
motif LDI (Leu-Asp-Ile). Thus, AsDBLOX gene is a unique type of peroxinectin as
these groups of proteins are characterized by integrin binding motifs along with 
a heme peroxidase domain. We also observed that the AsDBLOX gene is expressed in 
all the life cycle stages of mosquito and is highly induced in the pupal stage of
development which indicates its possible role in development.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2018.10.008 
PMID: 30352205  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

