
1. Mol Cell Biochem. 2019 Apr;454(1-2):153-163. doi: 10.1007/s11010-018-3460-3. Epub
2018 Oct 22.

Dopamine promotes cathepsin B-mediated amyloid precursor protein degradation by
reactive oxygen species-sensitive mechanism in neuronal cell.

Kumari S(1)(2), Mukherjee A(1), Mukhopadhyay CK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,
110067, India.
(2)National Institute of Malaria Research, New Delhi, India.
(3)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,
110067, India. ckm2300@mail.jnu.ac.in.

Recent literature suggested an important function of native amyloid precursor
protein (APP) as amine oxidase implicating in protection of brain cells from
catecholamine-induced toxicity. However, any role of catecholamines on regulation
of native APP has not been explored. Here we report that dopamine (DA), one of
the most prominent catecholamine neurotransmitters in brain, down-modulates
native APP protein in several neuronal cell types. Using SH-SY5Y cells as model, 
we detected no alteration of transcript expression and unaffected translation
suggested that DA might induce APP degradation. We actually found that DA
treatment decreased the stability of APP. Lysosomal blockers inhibited DA-induced
APP degradation, but specific proteasomal blocker failed to do so. We detected
the role of cathepsin B in DA-induced APP degradation by using pharmacological
inhibitor and specific siRNA. We also revealed that DA could increase cathepsin B
expression at both transcript and protein levels. Using antioxidant N-acetyl
cysteine, we detected increased level of reactive oxygen species generation that 
was found responsible for induced cathepsin B expression by DA and resultant APP 
degradation. Our study reveals the existence of reciprocal regulation of a
catecholamine and an amine oxidase implicating in brain catecholamine
homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1007/s11010-018-3460-3 
PMID: 30350305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

