
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Oct 29;8(1):15984. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-34404-9.

Forces acting on codon bias in malaria parasites.

Sinha I(1)(2), Woodrow CJ(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Mahidol University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.
(3)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit (MORU), Mahidol University,
Bangkok, Thailand. charlie.woodrow@ouh.nhs.uk.
(4)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK. charlie.woodrow@ouh.nhs.uk.

Malaria parasite genomes have a range of codon biases, with Plasmodium falciparum
one of the most AT-biased genomes known. We examined the make up of synonymous
coding sites and stop codons in the core genomes of representative malaria
parasites, showing first that local DNA context influences codon bias similarly
across P. falciparum, P. vivax and P. berghei, with suppression of CpG
dinucleotides and enhancement of CpC dinucleotides, both within and aross codons.
Intense asexual phase gene expression in P. falciparum and P. berghei is
associated with increased A3:G3 bias but reduced T3:C3 bias at 2-fold sites,
consistent with adaptation of codons to tRNA pools and avoidance of wobble tRNA
interactions that potentially slow down translation. In highly expressed genes,
the A3:G3 ratio can exceed 30-fold while the T3:C3 ratio can be less than 1,
according to the encoded amino acid and subsequent base. Lysine codons (AAA/G)
show distinctive behaviour with substantially reduced A3:G3 bias in highly
expressed genes, perhaps because of selection against frameshifting when the AAA 
codon is followed by another adenine. Intense expression is also associated with 
a strong bias towards TAA stop codons (found in 94% and 89% of highly expressed
P. falciparum and P. berghei genes respectively) and a proportional rise in the
TAAA stop 'tetranucleotide'. The presence of these expression-linked effects in
the relatively AT-rich malaria parasite species adds weight to the suggestion
that AT-richness in the Plasmodium genus might be a fitness adaptation. Potential
explanations for the relative lack of codon bias in P. vivax include the distinct
features of its lifecycle and its effective population size over evolutionary
time.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-34404-9 
PMCID: PMC6206010
PMID: 30374097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

