
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Oct 15;9:2277. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02277. eCollection
2018.

NK1.1 Expression Defines a Population of CD4+ Effector T Cells Displaying Th1 and
Tfh Cell Properties That Support Early Antibody Production During Plasmodium
yoelii Infection.

Wikenheiser DJ(1), Brown SL(1), Lee J(1), Stumhofer JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States.

Early plasmablast induction is a hallmark of Plasmodium infection and is thought 
to contribute to the control of acute parasite burden. Although long understood
to be a T-cell dependent phenomenon, regulation of early plasmablast
differentiation, however, is poorly understood. Here, we identify a population of
CD4+ T cells that express the innate NK cell marker NK1.1 as an important source 
of T cell help for early plasmablast and parasite-specific Ab production.
Interestingly, NK1.1+ CD4+ T cells arise from conventional, naive NK1.1- CD4+ T
cells, and their generation is independent of CD1d but critically reliant on
MHC-II. CD4+ T cells that express NK1.1 early after activation produce IFN-Î³ and 
IL-21, and express the follicular helper T (Tfh) cell markers ICOS, PD-1 and
CXCR5 more frequently than NK1.1- CD4+ T cells. Further analysis of this
population revealed that NK1.1+ Tfh-like cells were more regularly complexed with
plasmablasts than NK1.1- Tfh-like cells. Ultimately, depletion of NK1.1+ cells
impaired class-switched parasite-specific antibody production during early
Plasmodium yoelii infection. Together, these data suggest that expression of
NK1.1 defines a population of rapidly expanding effector CD4+ T cells that
specifically promote plasmablast induction during Plasmodium infection and
represent a subset of T cells whose modulation could promote effective vaccine
design.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02277 
PMCID: PMC6196288
PMID: 30374346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

