
1. Mol Ecol. 2018 Dec;27(24):4978-4990. doi: 10.1111/mec.14947.

The fate of genes that cross species boundaries after a major hybridization event
in a natural mosquito population.

Hanemaaijer MJ(1), Collier TC(2), Chang A(1), Shott CC(1), Houston PD(1), Schmidt
H(1), Main BJ(1), Cornel AJ(1)(3)(4), Lee Y(1), Lanzaro GC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Genetics Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Microbiology and
Immunology, UC Davis, Davis, California.
(2)Daniel K. Inouye US Pacific Basin Agricultural Research Center (PBARC), United
States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Hilo, Hawaii.
(3)Mosquito Control Research Laboratory, Department of Entomology and Nematology,
University of California, Parlier, California.
(4)School of Health Systems & Public Health, University of Pretoria, Pretoria,
South Africa.

Comment in
    Mol Ecol. 2018 Dec;27(24):4973-4975.

Animal species are able to acquire new genetic material via hybridization and
subsequent introgression. However, little is known about how foreign genomic
material is incorporated into a population over time and what genes are
susceptible to introgression. Here, we follow the closely related mosquito sister
species Anopheles coluzzii and Anopheles gambiae in a sympatric natural
population in Mali at multiple time points spanning a period of 25 years. During 
this period, we observed the temporary breakdown of mating barriers, which
allowed us to explore the fate of alleles that crossed the species boundary in a 
natural population. Whole genome sequencing of 74 individuals revealed
introgression within only 34 genes (0.26% of total genes) from A. gambiae to
A. coluzzii, the majority contained within a 4 Mb region on the 2L chromosome
which includes the insecticide resistance gene (AGAP004707). We designed a
genotyping assay to follow 25 of the 34 introgressed alleles over time and found 
that all A. gambiae alleles, except four, reached a frequency of 50% in the
A. coluzzii population within 4 years (~50 generations) and increased to ~80%
within 6 years (~75 generations). However, the frequency of all introgressed
alleles, except three, decreased to ~60% in 2016. This suggests an ongoing
process of purifying selection in the population against DNA of foreign ancestry,
except for alleles that are under positive selection, resulting in a complex
genomic landscape. This study shows that stable introgression is limited to only 
specific genes even within closely related species.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.14947 
PMID: 30447117  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

