
1. Curr Genet. 2019 Apr;65(2):435-443. doi: 10.1007/s00294-018-0903-z. Epub 2018 Nov
15.

Chromatin architecture and virulence-related gene expression in eukaryotic
microbial pathogens.

Juárez-Reyes A(1), Castaño I(2).

Author information: 
(1)División de Biología Molecular, IPICYT, Instituto Potosino de Investigación
Científica y Tecnológica, Camino a la Presa San José 2055, 78216, San Luis
Potosí, SLP, Mexico.
(2)División de Biología Molecular, IPICYT, Instituto Potosino de Investigación
Científica y Tecnológica, Camino a la Presa San José 2055, 78216, San Luis
Potosí, SLP, Mexico. icastano@ipicyt.edu.mx.

A fundamental question in biology is to understand how appropriate
transcriptional regulation and dense packaging of the genetic material within the
eukaryotic nucleus are achieved. The exquisite gene expression control and other 
metabolic processes of DNA require a highly complex, multilayered,
three-dimensional architecture of the chromatin and its specific
compartmentalization within the nucleus. Some of these architectural and
sub-nuclear positioning mechanisms have been extensively co-opted by eukaryotic
pathogens to keep fine expression control and expansion of virulence-related gene
families in Plasmodium falciparum, Trypanosoma brucei and Candida glabrata. For
example non-linear interactions between distant cis-acting regions and the
formation of chromatin loops are required for appropriate regulation of the
expression of virulence-related multi-gene families encoding cell surface
proteins. These gene families are located near the chromosome ends and tethered
to the nuclear periphery. Consequently, only one or very few genes of the family 
are expressed at a time. These genes are involved in antigenic variation in
parasites and the generation of subpopulations of cells with diverse antigenic
proteins at the surface in some pathogenic fungi, making them highly efficient
pathogens.

DOI: 10.1007/s00294-018-0903-z 
PMID: 30443783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

