
1. BMC Genomics. 2018 Dec 6;19(1):881. doi: 10.1186/s12864-018-5307-4.

Proto-oncogenes in a eukaryotic unicellular organism play essential roles in
plasmodial growth in host cells.

Bi K(1)(2), Chen T(2), He Z(1)(2), Gao Z(1)(2), Zhao Y(1)(2), Fu Y(2), Cheng
J(1)(2), Xie J(1)(2), Jiang D(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agriculture Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, 430070, Hubei Province, People's Republic of China.
(2)Provincial Key Laboratory of Plant Pathology of Hubei Province, College of
Plant Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070,
Hubei Province, People's Republic of China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Agriculture Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, 430070, Hubei Province, People's Republic of China.
daohongjiang@mail.hzau.edu.cn.
(4)Provincial Key Laboratory of Plant Pathology of Hubei Province, College of
Plant Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070,
Hubei Province, People's Republic of China. daohongjiang@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

Erratum in
    BMC Genomics. 2019 May 8;20(1):346.

BACKGROUND: The eukaryotic unicellular protist Plasmodiophora brassicae is an
endocellular parasite of cruciferous plants. In host cortical cells, this protist
develops a unicellular structure that is termed the plasmodium. The plasmodium is
actually a multinucleated cell, which subsequently splits and forms resting
spores. The mechanism for the growth of this endocellular parasite in host cell
is unclear.
RESULTS: Here, combining de novo genome sequence and transcriptome analysis of
strain ZJ-1, we identified top five significant enriched KEGG pathways of
differentially expressed genes (DEGs), namely translation, cell growth and death,
cell communication, cell motility and cancers. We detected 171 proto-oncogenes
from the genome of P. brassicae that were implicated in cancer-related pathways, 
of which 46 were differential expression genes. Three predicted proto-oncogenes
(Pb-Raf1, Pb-Raf2, and Pb-MYB), which showed homology to the human
proto-oncogenes Raf and MYB, were specifically activated during the plasmodial
growth in host cortical cells, demonstrating their involvement in the
multinucleate development stage of the unicellular protist organism. Gene
networks involved in the tumorigenic-related signaling transduction pathways and 
the activation of 12 core genes were identified. Inhibition of
phosphoinositol-3-kinase relieved the clubroot symptom and significantly
suppressed the development process of plasmodia.
CONCLUSIONS: Proto-oncogene-related regulatory mechanisms play an important role 
in the plasmodial growth of P. brassicae.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-018-5307-4 
PMCID: PMC6282348
PMID: 30522435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

