
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Nov 26;9:2741. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02741. eCollection
2018.

Leptin Functions in Infectious Diseases.

Maurya R(1), Bhattacharya P(2), Dey R(2), Nakhasi HL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Life Science, University of Hyderabad,
Hyderabad, India.
(2)Division of Emerging and Transfusion Transmitted Diseases, Center for
Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring,
MD, United States.

Leptin, a pleiotropic protein has long been recognized to play an important role 
in the regulation of energy homeostasis, metabolism, neuroendocrine function, and
other physiological functions through its effects on the central nervous system
(CNS) and peripheral tissues. Leptin is secreted by adipose tissue and encoded by
the obese (ob) gene. Leptin acts as a central mediator which regulates immunity
as well as nutrition. Importantly, leptin can modulate both innate and adaptive
immune responses. Leptin deficiency/resistance is associated with dysregulation
of cytokine production, increased susceptibility toward infectious diseases,
autoimmune disorders, malnutrition and inflammatory responses. Malnutrition
induces a state of immunodeficiency and an inclination to death from communicable
diseases. Infectious diseases are the disease of poor who invariably suffer from 
malnutrition that could result from reduced serum leptin levels. Thus, leptin has
been placed at the center of many interrelated functions in various pathogenic
conditions, such as bacterial, viruses and parasitic infections. We review
herein, the recent advances on the role of leptin in malnutrition in pathogenesis
of infectious diseases with a particular emphasis on parasitic diseases such as
Leishmaniasis, Trypanosomiasis, Amoebiasis, and Malaria.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02741 
PMCID: PMC6275238
PMID: 30534129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

