
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2018 Nov 27;8:413. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00413.
eCollection 2018.

The Micronemal Plasmodium Proteins P36 and P52 Act in Concert to Establish the
Replication-Permissive Compartment Within Infected Hepatocytes.

Arredondo SA(1), Swearingen KE(2), Martinson T(1), Steel R(1), Dankwa DA(1),
Harupa A(1), Camargo N(1), Betz W(1), Vigdorovich V(1), Oliver BG(1),
Kangwanrangsan N(3), Ishino T(4), Sather N(1), Mikolajczak S(1), Vaughan AM(1),
Torii M(4), Moritz RL(2), Kappe SHI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Infectious Disease Research, Seattle Children's Research
Institute, Seattle, WA, United States.
(2)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, United States.
(3)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(4)Department of Molecular Parasitology, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University,
Shitsukawa, Toon, Japan.

Within the liver, Plasmodium sporozoites traverse cells searching for a
"suitable" hepatocyte, invading these cells through a process that results in the
formation of a parasitophorous vacuole (PV), within which the parasite undergoes 
intracellular replication as a liver stage. It was previously established that
two members of the Plasmodium s48/45 protein family, P36 and P52, are essential
for productive invasion of host hepatocytes by sporozoites as their simultaneous 
deletion results in growth-arrested parasites that lack a PV. Recent studies
point toward a pathway of entry possibly involving the interaction of P36 with
hepatocyte receptors EphA2, CD81, and SR-B1. However, the relationship between
P36 and P52 during sporozoite invasion remains unknown. Here we show that
parasites with a single P52 or P36 gene deletion each lack a PV after hepatocyte 
invasion, thereby pheno-copying the lack of a PV observed for the P52/P36 dual
gene deletion parasite line. This indicates that both proteins are equally
important in the establishment of a PV and act in the same pathway. We created a 
Plasmodium yoelii P36mCherry tagged parasite line that allowed us to visualize
the subcellular localization of P36 and found that it partially co-localizes with
P52 in the sporozoite secretory microneme organelles. Furthermore, through
co-immunoprecipitation studies in vivo, we determined that P36 and P52 form a
protein complex in sporozoites, indicating a concerted function for both proteins
within the PV formation pathway. However, upon sporozoite stimulation, only P36
was released as a secreted protein while P52 was not. Our results support a model
in which the putatively glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored P52 may serve
as a scaffold to facilitate the interaction of secreted P36 with the host cell
during sporozoite invasion of hepatocytes.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00413 
PMCID: PMC6280682
PMID: 30547015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

