
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Jan 2;116(1):255-260. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1813542116. Epub 2018 Dec 24.

Epigenetic editing by CRISPR/dCas9 in Plasmodium falciparum.

Xiao B(1), Yin S(1), Hu Y(1), Sun M(1)(2), Wei J(1), Huang Z(1), Wen Y(1), Dai
X(1), Chen H(1), Mu J(3), Cui L(4), Jiang L(5)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Human Parasite Molecular and Cell Biology, Key Laboratory of Molecular
Virology and Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, P.R. China.
(2)School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai
201210, P.R. China.
(3)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-8132.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of
South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612.
(5)Unit of Human Parasite Molecular and Cell Biology, Key Laboratory of Molecular
Virology and Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, P.R. China;
lbjiang@ips.ac.cn.

Genetic manipulation remains a major obstacle for understanding the functional
genomics of the deadliest malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum Although the
CRISPR/Cas9 (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeat/CRISPR-associated protein 9) system has been successfully applied to
introduce permanent changes in the parasite genome, its use is still limited.
Here we show that fusing different epigenetic effector domains to a Cas9 null
mutant efficiently and specifically reprograms the expression of target genes in 
P. falciparum By precisely writing and erasing histone acetylation at the
transcription start site regions of the invasion-related genes reticulocyte
binding protein homolog 4 (rh4) and erythrocyte binding protein 175 (eba-175),
respectively, we achieved significant activation of rh4 and repression of
eba-175, leading to the switch of the parasite invasion pathways into human
erythrocytes. By using the epigenetic knockdown system, we have also
characterized the effects of PfSET1, previously identified as an essential gene, 
on expression of mainly trophozoite- and schizont-specific genes, and therefore
regulation of the growth of the mature forms of P. falciparum This epigenetic
CRISPR/dCas9 system provides a powerful approach for regulating gene expression
at the transcriptional level in P. falciparum.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1813542116 
PMCID: PMC6320497
PMID: 30584102  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

