
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2019 Mar;68:221-230. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.12.032. Epub
2018 Dec 27.

Selective sweep and phylogenetic models for the emergence and spread of
pyrimethamine resistance mutations in Plasmodium vivax.

Shaukat A(1), Ali Q(2), Connelley T(3), Khan MAU(1), Saleem MA(1), Evans M(3),
Rashid I(2), Sargison ND(3), Chaudhry U(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Central Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Parasitology, University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences
Lahore, Pakistan.
(3)University of Edinburgh, The Roslin Institute, Easter Bush Veterinary Centre, 
Roslin, Midlothian EH25 9RG, UK.
(4)University of Edinburgh, The Roslin Institute, Easter Bush Veterinary Centre, 
Roslin, Midlothian EH25 9RG, UK. Electronic address: uchaudhr@exseed.ed.ac.uk.

Pyrimethamine resistance is a major concern for the control of human
haemoprotozoa, especially Plasmodium species. Currently, there is little
understanding of how pyrimethamine resistance developed in Plasmodium vivax in
the natural field conditions. Here, we present for the first time evidence of
positive selection pressure on a dihydrofolate reductase locus and its
consequences on the emergence and the spread of pyrimethamine resistance in P.
vivax in the Punjab province of Pakistan. First, we examined the dihydrofolate
reductase locus in 38 P. vivax isolates to look for evidence of positive
selection pressure in human patients. The S58R (AGA)/S117N (AAC) double mutation 
was most common, being detected in 10/38 isolates. Single mutation S117N (AAC),
I173L (CTT) and S58R (AGA) SNPs were detected in 8/38, 2/38 and 1/38 isolates,
respectively. The F57L/I (TTA/ATA) and T61M (ATG) SNPs were not detected in any
isolates examined. Although both soft and hard selective sweeps have occurred
with striking differences between isolates, there was a predominance of hard
sweeps. A single resistance haplotype was present at high frequency in 9/14
isolates, providing a strong evidence for single emergence of resistance by the
single mutation, characteristics of hard selective sweeps. In contrast, 5/14
isolates carried multiple resistance haplotypes at high frequencies, providing an
evidence of the emergence of resistance by recurrent mutations, characteristics
of soft selective sweeps. Our phylogenetic relationship analysis suggests that
S58R (AGA)/S117N (AAC) and S117N (AAC) mutations arose multiple times from a
single origin and spread to multiple different cities in the Punjab province
through gene flow. Interestingly, the I173L (CTT) mutation was present on a
single haplotype, suggesting that it arises rarely and has not spread between
cities. Our work shows the need for responsible use of existing and new
antimicrobial drugs and their combinations, control the movement of infected
patients and mosquito vector control strategies.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.12.032 
PMID: 30594654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

