
1. Int J Parasitol Parasites Wildl. 2018 Dec 8;8:36-44. doi:
10.1016/j.ijppaw.2018.12.002. eCollection 2019 Apr.

Occurrence and diversity of avian haemosporidia in Afrotropical landbirds.

Chaisi ME(1), Osinubi ST(2), Dalton DL(1), Suleman E(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Scientific Services, National Zoological Garden,
South African National Biodiversity Institute (SANBI), 232 Boom Street, Pretoria,
0001, South Africa.
(2)FitzPatrick Institute of African Ornithology, University of Cape Town, Private
Bag X3, Rondebosch, 7701, Cape Town, South Africa.
(3)Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), P.O. Box 395, Pretoria,
0001, South Africa.

Avian haemosporidian infections are widespread and can result in the decline of
wild bird populations or in some cases contribute to extinction of species. We
determined the prevalence and genetic diversity of avian haemosporidia in 93
samples from 22 landbird species from South Africa (N = 76) and West Africa
(N = 17), of which six are intra-African migrants and one is a Palearctic
migrant. The samples were analysed for the presence of avian haemosporidian DNA
using real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) and nested PCR assays targeting specific 
mitochondrial genes of these parasites. The cytochrome b (cytb) gene was
sequenced for all samples that tested positive and phylogenetic analysis was
conducted in order to determine the relationship of the new sequences with
previously published sequences from the MalAvi database. The overall prevalence
of avian haemosporidiosis was 68.82% (95% CI: 56.4%-78.87%) and 82.80% (95% CI:
65.68%-86.11%) as determined by qPCR and nested PCR respectively. Eighteen
(19.36%; 95% CI; 10.78%-29.97%) samples had mixed infections. Infection
prevalence of all haemosporidian spp. were significantly higher (p < 0.05) in
samples from West Africa. Forty-six mitochondrial sequences obtained from 14
avian species grouped into three distinct clusters of Haemoproteus (36),
Leucocytozoon (8) and Plasmodium (2). These represent eight published and nine
new cytb lineages. The most common lineage was Haemoproteus sp. (VIMWE1) which
was identified in two bird species from West Africa and seven bird species from
South Africa. This study adds to our knowledge of host-parasite relationships of 
avian haemosporidia of Afrotropical birds.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijppaw.2018.12.002 
PMCID: PMC6312862
PMID: 30619708 

