
1. EMBO Mol Med. 2019 Feb;11(2). pii: e9164. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201809164.

Cerebral malaria is associated with differential cytoadherence to brain
endothelial cells.

Storm J(1)(2)(3), Jespersen JS(4)(5), Seydel KB(3)(6)(7), Szestak T(8), Mbewe
M(2), Chisala NV(2), Phula P(2), Wang CW(4)(5), Taylor TE(6)(7), Moxon CA(9)(10),
Lavstsen T(4)(5), Craig AG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, 
UK janet.storm@lstmed.ac.uk Alister.Craig@lstmed.ac.uk.
(2)Malawi-Liverpool-Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Programme, Blantyre, Malawi.
(3)College of Medicine, University of Malawi, Blantyre, Malawi.
(4)Department of International Health, Immunology & Microbiology, Centre for
Medical Parasitology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Blantyre Malaria Project, College of Medicine, University of Malawi, Blantyre,
Malawi.
(7)Department of Osteopathic Medical Specialties, College of Osteopathic
Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(8)Department of Parasitology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, 
UK.
(9)Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, 
UK.
(10)Wellcome Centre for Molecular Parasitology, Institute of Infection, Immunity 
and Inflammation, College of Medical Veterinary & Life Sciences, University of
Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.

Sequestration of Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes (IE) within the
brain microvasculature is a hallmark of cerebral malaria (CM). Using a
microchannel flow adhesion assay with TNF-activated primary human microvascular
endothelial cells, we demonstrate that IE isolated from Malawian paediatric CM
cases showed increased binding to brain microvascular endothelial cells compared 
to IE from uncomplicated malaria (UM) cases. Further, UM isolates showed
significantly greater adhesion to dermal than to brain microvascular endothelial 
cells. The major mediator of parasite adhesion is P. falciparum erythrocyte
membrane protein 1, encoded by var genes. Higher levels of var gene transcripts
predicted to bind host endothelial protein C receptor (EPCR) and ICAM-1 were
detected in CM isolates. These data provide further evidence for differential
tissue binding in severe and uncomplicated malaria syndromes, and give additional
support to the hypothesis that CM pathology is based on increased cytoadherence
of IE in the brain microvasculature.

© 2019 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/emmm.201809164 
PMCID: PMC6365927
PMID: 30610112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

