
1. Parasit Vectors. 2019 Jan 15;12(1):33. doi: 10.1186/s13071-018-3227-4.

Wolbachia introduction into Lutzomyia longipalpis (Diptera: Psychodidae) cell
lines and its effects on immune-related gene expression and interaction with
Leishmania infantum.

da Silva Gonçalves D(1), Iturbe-Ormaetxe I(2), Martins-da-Silva A(3), Telleria
EL(3), Rocha MN(1), Traub-Csekö YM(3), O'Neill SL(2), Sant'Anna MRV(4), Moreira
LA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo Mosquitos Vetores: Endossimbiontes e Interação Patógeno Vetor, Centro de
Pesquisas René Rachou - Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Av. Augusto de Lima 1715,
30190-002. Belo Horizonte, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(2)World Mosquito Program, Institute of Vector-Borne Disease, Monash University, 
12 Innovation Walk, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia.
(3)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular de Parasitos e Vetores, Instituto Oswaldo
Cruz - Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Av. Brasil, 4365, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 21040-900,
Brazil.
(4)Laboratório de Insetos Hematófagos, Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto
de Ciências Biológicas/UFMG, Av. Antônio Carlos, 6627, 31270-901. Belo Horizonte,
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(5)Grupo Mosquitos Vetores: Endossimbiontes e Interação Patógeno Vetor, Centro de
Pesquisas René Rachou - Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Av. Augusto de Lima 1715,
30190-002. Belo Horizonte, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil. luciano@minas.fiocruz.br.

BACKGROUND: The leishmaniases are important neglected diseases caused by
Leishmania spp. which are transmitted by sand flies, Lutzomyia longipalpis being 
the main vector of visceral leishmaniasis in the Americas. The methodologies for 
leishmaniasis control are not efficient, causing 1.5 million reported cases
annually worldwide, therefore showing the need for development of novel
strategies and interventions to control transmission of the disease. The
bacterium Wolbachia pipientis is being used to control viruses transmitted by
mosquitoes, such as dengue and Zika, and its introduction in disease vectors has 
been effective against parasites such as Plasmodium. Here we show the first
successful establishment of Wolbachia into two different embryonic cell lines
from L. longipalpis, LL-5 and Lulo, and analysed its effects on the sand fly
innate immune system, followed by in vitro Leishmania infantum interaction.
RESULTS: Our results show that LL-5 cells respond to wMel and wMelPop-CLA strains
within the first 72 h post-infection, through the expression of antimicrobial
peptides and inducible nitric oxide synthase resulting in a decrease of Wolbachia
detection in the early stages of infection. In subsequent passages, the wMel
strain was not able to infect any of the sand fly cell lines while the
wMelPop-CLA strain was able to stably infect Lulo cells and LL-5 at lower levels.
In Wolbachia stably infected cells, the expression of immune-related genes
involved with downregulation of the IMD, Toll and Jak-Stat innate immune pathways
was significantly decreased, in comparison with the uninfected control,
suggesting immune activation upon Wolbachia transinfection. Furthermore,
Wolbachia transinfection did not promote a negative effect on parasite load in
those cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Initial strong immune responses of LL5 cells might explain the
inefficiency of stable infections in these cells while we found that Lulo cells
are more permissive to infection with Wolbachia causing an effect on the cell
immune system, but not against in vitro L. infantum interaction. This establishes
Lulo cells as a good system for the adaptation of Wolbachia in L. longipalpis.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-018-3227-4 
PMCID: PMC6332621
PMID: 30646951  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

