
1. BMC Med. 2019 Jan 17;17(1):1. doi: 10.1186/s12916-018-1207-3.

Association of mutations in the Plasmodium falciparum Kelch13 gene
(Pf3D7_1343700) with parasite clearance rates after artemisinin-based
treatments-a WWARN individual patient data meta-analysis.

WWARN K13 Genotype-Phenotype Study Group.

Collaborators: Amaratunga C, Andrianaranjaka VH, Ashley E, Bethell D, Björkman A,
Bonnington CA, Cooper RA, Dhorda M, Dondorp A, Erhart A, Fairhurst RM, Faiz A,
Fanello C, Fukuda MM, Guérin P, van Huijsduijnen RH, Hien TT, Hong NV, Htut Y,
Huang F, Humphreys G, Imwong M, Kennon K, Lim P, Lin K, Lon C, Mårtensson A,
Mayxay M, Mokuolu O, Morris U, Ngasala BE, Amambua-Ngwa A, Noedl H, Nosten F,
Onyamboko M, Phyo AP, Plowe CV, Pukrittayakamee S, Randrianarivelojosia M,
Rosenthal PJ, Saunders DL, Sibley CH, Smithuis F, Spring MD, Sondo P, Sreng S,
Starzengruber P, Stepniewska K, Suon S, Takala-Harrison S, Thriemer K, Thuy-Nhien
N, Tun KM, White NJ, Woodrow C.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum infections with slow parasite clearance
following artemisinin-based therapies are widespread in the Greater Mekong
Subregion. A molecular marker of the slow clearance phenotype has been
identified: single genetic changes within the propeller region of the Kelch13
protein (pfk13; Pf3D7_1343700). Global searches have identified almost 200
different non-synonymous mutant pfk13 genotypes. Most mutations occur at low
prevalence and have uncertain functional significance. To characterize the impact
of different pfk13 mutations on parasite clearance, we conducted an individual
patient data meta-analysis of the associations between parasite clearance
half-life (PC1/2) and pfk13 genotype based on a large set of individual patient
records from Asia and Africa.
METHODS: A systematic literature review following the PRISMA protocol was
conducted to identify studies published between 2000 and 2017 which included
frequent parasite counts and pfk13 genotyping. Four databases (Ovid Medline,
PubMed, Ovid Embase, and Web of Science Core Collection) were searched. Eighteen 
studies (15 from Asia, 2 from Africa, and one multicenter study with sites on
both continents) met inclusion criteria and were shared. Associations between the
log transformed PC1/2 values and pfk13 genotype were assessed using multivariable
regression models with random effects for study site.
RESULTS: Both the pfk13 genotypes and the PC1/2 were available from 3250 (95%)
patients (n = 3012 from Asia (93%), n = 238 from Africa (7%)). Among Asian
isolates, all pfk13 propeller region mutant alleles observed in five or more
specific isolates were associated with a 1.5- to 2.7-fold longer geometric mean
PC1/2 compared to the PC1/2 of wild type isolates (all p ≤ 0.002). In addition,
mutant allele E252Q located in the P. falciparum region of pfk13 was associated
with 1.5-fold (95%CI 1.4-1.6) longer PC1/2. None of the isolates from four
countries in Africa showed a significant difference between the PC1/2 of
parasites with or without pfk13 propeller region mutations. Previously, the
association of six pfk13 propeller mutant alleles with delayed parasite clearance
had been confirmed. This analysis demonstrates that 15 additional pfk13 alleles
are associated strongly with the slow-clearing phenotype in Southeast Asia.
CONCLUSION: Pooled analysis associated 20 pfk13 propeller region mutant alleles
with the slow clearance phenotype, including 15 mutations not confirmed
previously.

DOI: 10.1186/s12916-018-1207-3 
PMCID: PMC6335805
PMID: 30651111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

