
1. PLoS One. 2019 Jan 30;14(1):e0210586. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0210586.
eCollection 2019.

Contrasting patterns of gene expression indicate differing pyrethroid resistance 
mechanisms across the range of the New World malaria vector Anopheles albimanus.

Mackenzie-Impoinvil L(1), Weedall GD(2)(3), Lol JC(4), Pinto J(5), Vizcaino L(1),
Dzuris N(1), Riveron J(2)(6), Padilla N(4), Wondji C(2)(6), Lenhart A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Entomology Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for
Global Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia,
United States of America.
(2)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool,
United Kingdom.
(3)School of Natural Sciences and Psychology, Liverpool John Moores University,
Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(4)Centro de Estudios en Salud, Universidad del Valle de Guatemala, Guatemala.
(5)Instituto Nacional de Salud Lima, Lima, Peru.
(6)Centre for Research in Infectious Diseases (CRID), Yaound√©, Cameroon.

Decades of unmanaged insecticide use and routine exposure to agrochemicals have
left many populations of malaria vectors in the Americas resistant to multiple
classes of insecticides, including pyrethroids. The molecular basis of pyrethroid
resistance is relatively uncharacterised in American malaria vectors, preventing 
the design of suitable resistance management strategies. Using whole
transcriptome sequencing, we characterized the mechanisms of pyrethroid
resistance in Anopheles albimanus from Peru and Guatemala. An. albimanus were
phenotyped as either deltamethrin or alpha-cypermethrin resistant. RNA from 1)
resistant, 2) unexposed, and 3) a susceptible laboratory strain of An. albimanus 
was sequenced and analyzed using RNA-Seq. Expression profiles of the three groups
were compared based on the current annotation of the An. albimanus reference
genome. Several candidate genes associated with pyrethroid resistance in other
malaria vectors were found to be overexpressed in resistant An. albimanus. In
addition, gene ontology terms related to serine-type endopeptidase activity,
extracellular activity and chitin metabolic process were also commonly
overexpressed in the field caught resistant and unexposed samples from both Peru 
and Guatemala when compared to the susceptible strain. The cytochrome P450 CYP9K1
was overexpressed 14x in deltamethrin and 8x in alpha-cypermethrin-resistant
samples from Peru and 2x in deltamethrin-resistant samples from Guatemala,
relative to the susceptible laboratory strain. CYP6P5 was overexpressed 68x in
deltamethrin-resistant samples from Peru but not in deltamethrin-resistant
samples from Guatemala. When comparing overexpressed genes between
deltamethrin-resistant and alpha-cypermethrin-resistant samples from Peru, a
single P450 gene, CYP4C26, was overexpressed 9.8x (p<0.05) in
alpha-cypermethrin-resistant samples. In Peruvian deltamethrin-resistant samples,
the knockdown resistance mutation (kdr) variant alleles at position 1014 were
rare, with approximately 5% frequency, but in the alpha-cypermethrin-resistant
samples, the frequency of these alleles was approximately 15-30%. Functional
validation of the candidate genes and the kdr mutation as a resistance marker for
alpha-cypermethrin will confirm the role of these mechanisms in conferring
pyrethroid resistance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0210586 
PMCID: PMC6353143
PMID: 30699158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

