
1. Parasitol Res. 2019 Mar;118(3):1011-1018. doi: 10.1007/s00436-019-06210-3. Epub
2019 Jan 31.

Effects of MAO-A and CYP450 on primaquine metabolism in healthy volunteers.

Ariffin NM(1), Islahudin F(2), Kumolosasi E(1), Makmor-Bakry M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Jalan Raja Muda Abdul Aziz, Abdul Aziz, 50300, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, Jalan Raja Muda Abdul Aziz, Abdul Aziz, 50300, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia. faridaislahudin@yahoo.com.

Eliminating the Plasmodium vivax malaria parasite infection remains challenging. 
One of the main problems is its capacity to form hypnozoites that potentially
lead to recurrent infections. At present, primaquine is the only drug used for
the management of hypnozoites. However, the effects of primaquine may differ from
one individual to another. The aim of this work is to determine new measures to
reduce P. vivax recurrence, through primaquine metabolism and host genetics. A
genetic study of MAO-A, CYP2D6, CYP1A2 and CYP2C19 and their roles in primaquine 
metabolism was undertaken of healthy volunteers (n = 53). The elimination rate
constant (Ke) and the metabolite-to-parent drug concentration ratio (Cm/Cp) were 
obtained to assess primaquine metabolism. Allelic and genotypic analysis showed
that polymorphisms MAO-A (rs6323, 891G>T), CYP2D6 (rs1065852, 100C>T) and CYP2C19
(rs4244285, 19154G>A) significantly influenced primaquine metabolism. CYP1A2
(rs762551, -163C>A) did not influence primaquine metabolism. In haplotypic
analysis, significant differences in Ke (p = 0.00) and Cm/Cp (p = 0.05) were
observed between individuals with polymorphisms, GG-MAO-A (891G>T), CT-CYP2D6
(100C>T) and GG-CYP2C19 (19154G>A), and individuals with polymorphisms, TT-MAO-A 
(891G>T), TT-CYP2D6 (100C>T) and AA-CYP2C19 (19154G>A), as well as polymorphisms,
GG-MAO-A (891G>T), TT-CYP2D6 (100C>T) and GA-CYP2C19 (19154G>A). Thus,
individuals with CYP2D6 polymorphisms had slower primaquine metabolism activity. 
The potential significance of genetic roles in primaquine metabolism and
exploration of these might help to further optimise the management of P. vivax
infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-019-06210-3 
PMID: 30706164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

