
1. Biotechnol Appl Biochem. 2019 May;66(3):369-375. doi: 10.1002/bab.1733. Epub 2019
Feb 13.

Jasmonic acid-responsive AabHLH1 positively regulates artemisinin biosynthesis in
Artemisia annua.

Li L(1), Hao X(1), Liu H(1), Wang W(1), Fu X(1), Ma Y(1), Shen Q(1), Chen M(1),
Tang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic and Developmental
Sciences, Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South) Ministry of Agriculture,
Plant Biotechnology Research Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China.

Artemisia annua is the only natural source of the sesquiterpenoid artemisinin,
which is widely used to treat malaria. The phytohormone jasmonic acid (JA) can
significantly promote artemisinin biosynthesis in A. annua. AabHLH1 can bind and 
activate artemisinin biosynthetic genes, such as AaADS and AaCYP71AV1. In this
study, we proved that AabHLH1 was responsive to MeJA treatment and highly
expressed in glandular trichome-enriched tissues, and that its expression profile
was similar to that of AaADS. Yeast two-hybrid assays showed that AabHLH1
interacted with all nine AaJAZ proteins in A. annua. Functional analysis with
transgenic plants showed that several artemisinin biosynthetic genes were
upregulated in AabHLH1-OE transgenic A. annua lines and downregulated in
AabHLH1-EAR lines; furthermore, the artemisinin content was increased in the
AabHLH1-OE lines and decreased in the AabHLH1-EAR lines. These results
demonstrate that the JA-induced AabHLH1 positively regulates artemisinin
biosynthesis by regulating the biosynthetic genes, and thus provide new insight
into the regulatory mechanism of JA-induced artemisinin biosynthesis in A. annua.

Â© 2019 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bab.1733 
PMID: 30719762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

