
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2019 Jun;70:114-122. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.02.030. Epub
2019 Feb 26.

Correlation between genotypes and geographic distribution of Entamoeba nuttalli
isolates from wild long-tailed macaques in Central Thailand.

Feng M(1), Yanagi T(2), Putaporntip C(3), Pattanawong U(3), Cheng X(1),
Jongwutiwes S(3), Tachibana H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara,
Kanagawa 259-1193, Japan; Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology,
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.
(2)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.
(3)Molecular Biology of Malaria and Opportunistic Parasites Research Unit,
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
(4)Department of Parasitology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara,
Kanagawa 259-1193, Japan. Electronic address: htachiba@is.icc.u-tokai.ac.jp.

Entamoeba nuttalli found in non-human primates is the phylogenetically closest
species to Entamoeba histolytica and is potentially pathogenic. However,
infection of wild long-tailed macaques (Macaca fascicularis) with E. nuttalli has
not been found. In this study, the prevalence of Entamoeba infections in wild
long-tailed macaques was examined in seven locations in six provinces of
Thailand. The positive rate for E. nuttalli in 214 fecal samples was 43.9% using 
PCR, but no infection with E. histolytica or Entamoeba dispar was found,
demonstrating that long-tailed macaque is one of the natural hosts for E.
nuttalli. Twenty-four E. nuttalli isolates were successfully cultured and four of
them were axenized. The sequences of the 18S ribosomal RNA genes of E. nuttalli
from long-tailed macaques differed from those of E. nuttalli isolates from other 
species of wild macaques. Eleven types of sequences in serine-rich protein genes 
were identified in the 24 isolates and these were specific for each location in
Thailand. By analysis of six tRNA-linked short tandem repeat loci, these isolates
were divided into 14 types, and each type was also location-specific.
Phylogenetic analysis revealed correlation between genotypes of the parasite and 
the geographic distribution of the host macaques. Genetic distance and geographic
distance correlated significantly in a Mantel test, with r values of 0.888 based 
on the tRNA-linked short tandem repeat loci and 0.815 based on the serine-rich
protein genes. These results suggest that genetic divergence and co-evolution of 
the parasite occurred during dispersion and colonization of the host macaque, and
that genotypic analysis of the parasite may enable identification of the
geographic localization of the host.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.02.030 
PMID: 30822548  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

