
1. Am J Hum Genet. 2019 Mar 7;104(3):553-561. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.02.007. Epub 
2019 Feb 28.

Recent Adaptive Acquisition by African Rainforest Hunter-Gatherers of the Late
Pleistocene Sickle-Cell Mutation Suggests Past Differences in Malaria Exposure.

Laval G(1), Peyrégne S(2), Zidane N(3), Harmant C(3), Renaud F(4), Patin E(3),
Prugnolle F(4), Quintana-Murci L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Human Evolutionary Genetics Unit, Institut Pasteur, UMR 2000 Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris 75015, France; Center of Bioinformatics,
Biostatistics and Integrative Biology, Institut Pasteur, Paris 75015, France.
Electronic address: glaval@pasteur.fr.
(2)Human Evolutionary Genetics Unit, Institut Pasteur, UMR 2000 Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris 75015, France; Center of Bioinformatics,
Biostatistics and Integrative Biology, Institut Pasteur, Paris 75015, France;
Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Anthropology, Leipzig 04103, Germany.
(3)Human Evolutionary Genetics Unit, Institut Pasteur, UMR 2000 Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris 75015, France; Center of Bioinformatics,
Biostatistics and Integrative Biology, Institut Pasteur, Paris 75015, France.
(4)Laboratory MIVEGEC (Maladies Infectieuses et Vecteurs : Ecologie, Génétique,
Evolution et Contrôle), UMR 5290 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
Institut de Rechereche pour le Développement, Montpellier 34394, France.
(5)Human Evolutionary Genetics Unit, Institut Pasteur, UMR 2000 Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris 75015, France; Center of Bioinformatics,
Biostatistics and Integrative Biology, Institut Pasteur, Paris 75015, France.
Electronic address: quintana@pasteur.fr.

The hemoglobin βS sickle mutation is a textbook case in which natural selection
maintains a deleterious mutation at high frequency in the human population.
Homozygous individuals for this mutation develop sickle-cell disease, whereas
heterozygotes benefit from higher protection against severe malaria. Because the 
overdominant βS allele should be purged almost immediately from the population in
the absence of malaria, the study of the evolutionary history of this iconic
mutation can provide important information about the history of human exposure to
malaria. Here, we sought to increase our understanding of the origins and time
depth of the βS mutation in populations with different lifestyles and ecologies, 
and we analyzed the diversity of HBB in 479 individuals from 13 populations of
African farmers and rainforest hunter-gatherers. Using an approximate Bayesian
computation method, we estimated the age of the βS allele while explicitly
accounting for population subdivision, past demography, and balancing selection. 
When the effects of balancing selection are taken into account, our analyses
indicate a single emergence of βS in the ancestors of present-day agriculturalist
populations ∼22,000 years ago. Furthermore, we show that rainforest
hunter-gatherers have more recently acquired the βS mutation from the ancestors
of agriculturalists through adaptive gene flow during the last ∼6,000 years.
Together, our results provide evidence for a more ancient exposure to malarial
pressures among the ancestors of agriculturalists than previously appreciated,
and they suggest that rainforest hunter-gatherers have been increasingly exposed 
to malaria during the last millennia.

Copyright © 2019 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2019.02.007 
PMCID: PMC6407493
PMID: 30827499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

