
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Mar 5;9(1):3470. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-39143-z.

A retinal model of cerebral malaria.

Paquet-Durand F(1), Beck SC(2), Das S(3), Huber G(2), Le Chang(4)(5), Schubert
T(4)(5), Tanimoto N(2), Garcia-Garrido M(2), Mühlfriedel R(2), Bolz S(4),
Hoffmann W(6), Schraermeyer U(7), Mordmüller B(6), Seeliger MW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Death Mechanisms Lab, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. francois.paquet-durand@klinikum.uni-tuebingen.de.
(2)Division of Ocular Neurodegeneration, Institute for Ophthalmic Research,
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Cell Death Mechanisms Lab, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(5)Centre for Integrative Neuroscience (CIN), University of Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany.
(6)Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(7)Experimental Vitreoretinal Surgery, Institute for Ophthalmic Research,
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Malaria is a causative factor in about 500.000 deaths each year world-wide.
Cerebral malaria is a particularly severe complication of this disease and thus
associated with an exceedingly high mortality. Malaria retinopathy is an ocular
manifestation often associated with cerebral malaria, and presumably shares a
substantial part of its pathophysiology. Here, we describe that indeed murine
malaria retinopathy reproduced the main hallmarks of the corresponding human
disease. In the living animal, we were able to follow the circulation and
cellular localization of malaria parasites transgenically labelled with GFP via
non-invasive in vivo retinal imaging. We found that malaria parasites cross the
blood-retinal-barrier and infiltrate the neuroretina, concomitant with an
extensive, irreversible, and long-lasting retinal neurodegeneration. Furthermore,
anti-malarial treatment with dihydroartemisinin strongly diminished the load of
circulating parasites but resolved the symptoms of the retinopathy only in part. 
In summary, we introduce here a novel preclinical model for human cerebral
malaria that is much more directly accessible for studies into disease
pathophysiology and development of novel treatment approaches. In vivo retinal
imaging may furthermore serve as a valuable tool for the early diagnosis of the
human disease.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-39143-z 
PMCID: PMC6401001
PMID: 30837488  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

