
1. Glycobiology. 2019 May 1;29(5):385-396. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwz011.

An updated view of the oligosaccharyltransferase complex in Plasmodium.

Tamana S(1), Promponas VJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Research Laboratory, Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Cyprus, CY, Nicosia, Cyprus.

Despite the controversy regarding the importance of protein N-linked
glycosylation in species of the genus Plasmodium, genes potentially encoding core
subunits of the oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) complex have already been
characterized in completely sequenced genomes of malaria parasites. Nevertheless,
the currently established notion is that only four out of eight subunits of the
OST complex-which is considered conserved across eukaryotes-are present in
Plasmodium species. In this study, we carefully conduct computational analysis to
provide unequivocal evidence that all components of the OST complex, with the
exception of Swp1/Ribophorin II, can be reliably identified within completely
sequenced plasmodial genomes. In fact, most of the subunits currently considered 
as absent from Plasmodium refer to uncharacterized protein sequences already
existing in sequence databases. Interestingly, the main reason why the unusually 
short Ost4 subunit (36 residues long in yeast) has not been identified so far in 
plasmodia (and possibly other species) is the failure of gene-prediction
pipelines to detect such a short coding sequence. We further identify elusive OST
subunits in select protist species with completely sequenced genomes. Thus, our
work highlights the necessity of a systematic approach towards the
characterization of OST subunits across eukaryotes. This is necessary both for
obtaining a concrete picture of the evolution of the OST complex but also for
elucidating its possible role in eukaryotic pathogens.

Â© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwz011 
PMID: 30835280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

