
1. Mol Plant. 2019 May 6;12(5):704-714. doi: 10.1016/j.molp.2019.02.011. Epub 2019
Mar 6.

Artemisinin Biosynthesis in Non-glandular Trichome Cells of Artemisia annua.

Judd R(1), Bagley MC(2), Li M(1), Zhu Y(1), Lei C(1), Yuzuak S(1), Ekelöf M(2),
Pu G(1), Zhao X(1), Muddiman DC(2), Xie DY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, NC, USA. Electronic address: dxie@ncsu.edu.

Artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) forms the first line of malaria
treatment. However, the yield fluctuation of artemisinin has remained an unsolved
problem in meeting the global demand for ACT. This problem is mainly caused by
the glandular trichome (GT)-specific biosynthesis of artemisinin in all currently
used Artemisia annua cultivars. Here, we report that non-GT cells of
self-pollinated inbred A. annua plants can express the artemisinin biosynthetic
pathway. Gene expression analysis demonstrated the transcription of six known
pathway genes in GT-free leaves and calli of inbred A. annua plants.
LC-qTOF-MS/MS analysis showed that these two types of GT-free materials produce
artemisinin, artemisinic acid, and arteannuin B. Detailed IR-MALDESI image
profiling revealed that these three metabolites and dihydroartemisinin are
localized in non-GT cells of leaves of inbred A. annua plants. Moreover, we
employed all the above approaches to examine artemisinin biosynthesis in the
reported A. annua glandless (gl) mutant. The resulting data demonstrated that
leaves of regenerated gl plantlets biosynthesize artemisinin. Collectively, these
findings not only add new knowledge leading to a revision of the current dogma of
artemisinin biosynthesis in A. annua but also may expedite innovation of novel
metabolic engineering approaches for high and stable production of artemisinin in
the future.

Copyright © 2019 The Author. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molp.2019.02.011 
PMID: 30851440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

