
1. IUBMB Life. 2019 Sep;71(9):1293-1301. doi: 10.1002/iub.2036. Epub 2019 Mar 13.

Molecular characterization and expression profile of an alternate proliferating
cell nuclear antigen homolog PbPCNA2 in Plasmodium berghei.

Pradhan S(1), Kalia I(2), Roy SS(1), Singh OP(3), Adak T(3), Singh AP(2), Dhar
SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,
India.
(2)National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, India.
(3)National Institute of Malaria Research, New Delhi, India.

Proliferative cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) is the processivity factor for various 
DNA polymerases and it functions in response to DNA damage in eukaryotic system. 
Plasmodium falciparum contains two PCNAs, while PCNA1 has been attributed to DNA 
replication, the role of PCNA2 has been assigned to DNA damage response in
erythrocytic developmental stages. Although a recent transposon mediated knockout
strategy qualified pcna2 as a nonessential gene in Plasmodium berghei, a
conventional homologous recombination-based knockout strategy has not been
employed for this gene yet. Moreover, the cellular dynamics of PCNA2 in
extraerythrocytic stages still remain elusive in Plasmodium. We attempted
multiple times to knock out PbPCNA2 from the parasite genome using homologous
recombination strategy without much success. However, we were able to generate
PbPCNA2-GFP tagged transgenic parasites confirming that the pcna2 locus is
amenable to genetic manipulation. The GFP-tagged parasites showed similar growth 
phenotype, compared to wild-type parasites, in both erythrocytic and sporogonic
cycle, suggesting that tagging had no effect on parasite physiology. PbPCNA2
expression was also observed during the sporogonic cycle in midgut oocyst and
salivary gland sporozoites. The PbPCNA2 expression was upregulated in the
presence of DNA damaging agents like hydroxyurea and methyl methanesulphonate.
Our inability to knock out PCNA2 suggested its essentiality in the parasite
development and elevated expression during DNA damaging condition hint at a
critical role of the protein in parasite physiology. © 2019 IUBMB Life,
71(9):1293-1301, 2019.

© 2019 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/iub.2036 
PMID: 30865364  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

