
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2019 Apr 1;11(4):1136-1151. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evz058.

Fine-Scale Characterization of Genomic Structural Variation in the Human Genome
Reveals Adaptive and Biomedically Relevant Hotspots.

Lin YL(1), Gokcumen O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University at Buffalo.

Genomic structural variants (SVs) are distributed nonrandomly across the human
genome. The "hotspots" of SVs have been implicated in evolutionary innovations,
as well as medical conditions. However, the evolutionary and biomedical features 
of these hotspots remain incompletely understood. Here, we analyzed data from
2,504 genomes to construct a refined map of 1,148 SV hotspots in human genomes.
We confirmed that segmental duplication-related nonallelic homologous
recombination is an important mechanistic driver of SV hotspot formation.
However, to our surprise, we also found that a majority of SVs in hotspots do not
form through such recombination-based mechanisms, suggesting diverse mechanistic 
and selective forces shaping hotspots. Indeed, our evolutionary analyses showed
that the majority of SV hotspots are within gene-poor regions and evolve under
relaxed negative selection or neutrality. However, we still found a small subset 
of SV hotspots harboring genes that are enriched for anthropologically crucial
functions and evolve under geography-specific and balancing adaptive forces.
These include two independent hotspots on different chromosomes affecting alpha
and beta hemoglobin gene clusters. Biomedically, we found that the SV hotspots
coincide with breakpoints of clinically relevant, large de novo SVs,
significantly more often than genome-wide expectations. For example, we showed
that the breakpoints of multiple large SVs, which lead to idiopathic short
stature, coincide with SV hotspots. Therefore, the mutational instability in SV
hotpots likely enables chromosomal breaks that lead to pathogenic structural
variation formations. Overall, our study contributes to a better understanding of
the mutational and adaptive landscape of the genome.

Â© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evz058 
PMCID: PMC6475128
PMID: 30887040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

