
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2019 Mar 29;15(3):e1006898. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006898. 
eCollection 2019 Mar.

Bayes-optimal estimation of overlap between populations of fixed size.

Larremore DB(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder,
Colorado, United States of America.
(2)BioFrontiers Institute, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado,
United States of America.

Measuring the overlap between two populations is, in principle, straightforward. 
Upon fully sampling both populations, the number of shared objects-species,
taxonomical units, or gene variants, depending on the context-can be directly
counted. In practice, however, only a fraction of each population's objects are
likely to be sampled due to stochastic data collection or sequencing techniques. 
Although methods exists for quantifying population overlap under subsampled
conditions, their bias is well documented and the uncertainty of their estimates 
cannot be quantified. Here we derive and validate a method to rigorously estimate
the population overlap from incomplete samples when the total number of objects, 
species, or genes in each population is known, a special case of the more general
Î²-diversity problem that is particularly relevant in the ecology and genomic
epidemiology of malaria. By solving a Bayesian inference problem, this method
takes into account the rates of subsampling and produces unbiased and
Bayes-optimal estimates of overlap. In addition, it provides a natural framework 
for computing the uncertainty of its estimates, and can be used prospectively in 
study planning by quantifying the tradeoff between sampling effort and
uncertainty.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006898 
PMCID: PMC6440621
PMID: 30925165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author has declared that no competing
interests exist.

