
1. Parasite Immunol. 2019 Aug;41(8):e12628. doi: 10.1111/pim.12628. Epub 2019 May 9.

Immune effector mechanisms in malaria: An update focusing on human immunity.

Moormann AM(1), Nixon CE(2), Forconi CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Department of Medicine,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Pathology and Lab Medicine, Brown University, Providence, Rhode 
Island.

The past decade has witnessed dramatic decreases in malaria-associated mortality 
and morbidity around the world. This progress has largely been due to intensified
malaria control measures, implementation of rapid diagnostics and establishing a 
network to anticipate and mitigate antimalarial drug resistance. However, the
ultimate tool for malaria prevention is the development and implementation of an 
effective vaccine. To date, malaria vaccine efforts have focused on determining
which of the thousands of antigens expressed by Plasmodium falciparum are
instrumental targets of protective immunity. The antigenic variation and
antigenic polymorphisms arising in parasite genes under immune selection present 
a daunting challenge for target antigen selection and prioritization, and is a
given caveat when interpreting immune recall responses or results from monovalent
vaccine trials. Other immune evasion strategies executed by the parasite
highlight the myriad of ways in which it can become a recurrent infection. This
review provides an update on immune effector mechanisms in malaria and focuses on
our improved ability to interrogate the complexity of human immune system,
accelerated by recent methodological advances. Appreciating how the human immune 
landscape influences the effectiveness and longevity of antimalarial immunity
will help explain which conditions are necessary for immune effector mechanisms
to prevail.

Â© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pim.12628 
PMID: 30972776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

