
1. Elife. 2019 May 2;8. pii: e40339. doi: 10.7554/eLife.40339.

Impact of seasonal variations in Plasmodium falciparum malaria transmission on
the surveillance of pfhrp2 gene deletions.

Watson OJ(1), Verity R(1), Ghani AC(1), Garske T(1), Cunningham J(2), Tshefu
A(3), Mwandagalirwa MK(3)(4), Meshnick SR(4)(5), Parr JB(5), Slater HC(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, Department of Infectious
Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Global Malaria Programme, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)School of Public Health, University of Kinshasa, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School for Global Public Health,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, United States.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, United States.

Ten countries have reported pfhrp2/pfhrp3 gene deletions since the first
observation of pfhrp2-deleted parasites in 2012. In a previous study (Watson et
al., 2017), we characterised the drivers selecting for pfhrp2/3 deletions and
mapped the regions in Africa with the greatest selection pressure. In February
2018, the World Health Organization issued guidance on investigating suspected
false-negative rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) due to pfhrp2/3 deletions. However, 
no guidance is provided regarding the timing of investigations. Failure to
consider seasonal variation could cause premature decisions to switch to
alternative RDTs. In response, we have extended our methods and predict that the 
prevalence of false-negative RDTs due to pfhrp2/3 deletions is highest when
sampling from younger individuals during the beginning of the rainy season. We
conclude by producing a map of the regions impacted by seasonal fluctuations in
pfhrp2/3 deletions and a database identifying optimum sampling intervals to
support malaria control programmes.

Â© 2019, Watson et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.40339 
PMCID: PMC6533063
PMID: 31045490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: OW, RV, AG, TG, JC, AT, MM, SM, JP, HS No
competing interests declared

