
1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Jun 14;294(24):9555-9566. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.007121. Epub
2019 May 1.

Ribozyme-mediated, multiplex CRISPR gene editing and CRISPR interference
(CRISPRi) in rodent-infectious Plasmodium yoelii.

Walker MP(1), Lindner SE(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Huck Center for
Malaria Research, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania
16802.
(2)From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Huck Center for
Malaria Research, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania
16802 Scott.Lindner@psu.edu.

Malaria remains a major global health issue, affecting millions and killing
hundreds of thousands of people annually. Efforts to break the transmission cycle
of the causal Plasmodium parasite, and to cure those that are afflicted, rely
upon functional characterization of genes essential to the parasite's growth and 
development. These studies are often based upon manipulations of the parasite
genome to disrupt or modify a gene of interest to understand its importance and
function. However, these approaches can be limited by the availability of
selectable markers and the time required to generate transgenic parasites.
Moreover, there also is a risk of disrupting native gene regulatory elements with
the introduction of exogenous sequences. To address these limitations, we have
developed CRISPR-RGR, a Streptococcus pyogenes (Sp)Cas9-based gene editing system
for Plasmodium that utilizes a ribozyme-guide-ribozyme (RGR) single guide RNA
(sgRNA) expression strategy with RNA polymerase II promoters. Using
rodent-infectious Plasmodium yoelii, we demonstrate that both gene disruptions
and coding sequence insertions are efficiently generated, producing marker-free
parasites with homology arms as short as 80-100 bp. Additionally, we find that
the common practice of using one sgRNA can produce both unintended plasmid
integration and desired locus replacement editing events, whereas the use of two 
sgRNAs results in only locus replacement editing. Lastly, we show that CRISPR-RGR
can be used for CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) by binding catalytically dead
SpCas9 (dSpCas9) to the region upstream of a gene of interest, resulting in a
position-dependent, but strand-independent reduction in gene expression. This
robust and flexible system facilitates efficient genetic characterizations of
rodent-infectious Plasmodium species.

Â© 2019 Walker and Lindner.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.007121 
PMCID: PMC6579477
PMID: 31043479  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

