
1. Brief Funct Genomics. 2019 Sep 24;18(5):313-357. doi: 10.1093/bfgp/elz007.

The second life of Plasmodium in the mosquito host: gene regulation on the move.

Ruiz JL(1), Gómez-Díaz E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López-Neyra (IPBLN), Consejo Superior
de Investigaciones Científicas, Granada, Spain.

Malaria parasites face dynamically changing environments and strong selective
constraints within human and mosquito hosts. To survive such hostile and shifting
conditions, Plasmodium switches transcriptional programs during development and
has evolved mechanisms to adjust its phenotype through heterogeneous patterns of 
gene expression. In vitro studies on culture-adapted isolates have served to set 
the link between chromatin structure and functional gene expression. Yet,
experimental evidence is limited to certain stages of the parasite in the
vertebrate, i.e. blood, while the precise mechanisms underlying the dynamic
regulatory landscapes during development and in the adaptation to within-host
conditions remain poorly understood. In this review, we discuss available data on
transcriptional and epigenetic regulation in Plasmodium mosquito stages in the
context of sporogonic development and phenotypic variation, including both
bet-hedging and environmentally triggered direct transcriptional responses. With 
this, we advocate the mosquito offers an in vivo biological model to investigate 
the regulatory networks, transcription factors and chromatin-modifying enzymes
and their modes of interaction with regulatory sequences, which might be
responsible for the plasticity of the Plasmodium genome that dictates stage- and 
cell type-specific blueprints of gene expression.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bfgp/elz007 
PMID: 31058281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

