
1. Mycoses. 2019 Sep;62(9):835-846. doi: 10.1111/myc.12929. Epub 2019 Jun 9.

Comparison of fks gene mutations and minimum inhibitory concentrations for the
detection of Candida glabrata resistance to micafungin: A systematic review and
meta-analysis.

Bienvenu AL(1)(2)(3), Leboucher G(1), Picot S(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Groupement Hospitalier Nord, Service Pharmacie, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon,
France.
(2)ICBMS CNRS 5246, SMITh, Malaria Research Unit, Université de Lyon,
Villeurbanne, France.
(3)Groupement Hospitalier Nord, Service Hématologie, Hospices Civils de Lyon,
Lyon, France.
(4)Groupement Hospitalier Nord, Institut de Parasitologie et Mycologie Médicale, 
Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.

Candida resistance to antifungals impaired invasive candidiasis outcome. In a
context of echinocandin resistance development, we aimed to evaluate the
association between phenotypic resistance to micafungin and fks mutations of
Candida glabrata. For this systematic review and meta-analysis, we searched
MEDLINE, Scopus and Web of Science for reports published up to December 2017.
Studies of C glabrata candidiasis with minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC)
determination of micafungin and fks genotyping were included. Reviews, studies
not using reference methods, non-glabrata Candida, experimental isolates and
undetailed mutations were excluded. Two authors independently assessed the
eligibility of articles and extracted data. The main outcome was the diagnostic
accuracy of fks mutations compared to micafungin MIC for C glabrata, measured as 
fixed-effect odd ratio. Heterogeneity was calculated with the I2 statistic. This 
study is registered with PROSPERO (CRD42018082023). Twenty-four studies were
included in the meta-analysis. Pooled analysis found that S663P (OR 7.25, 95% CI 
3.50-15.00; P < 0.00001), S629P (OR 3.70, 1.64-8.33; P = 0.002) and F659del (OR
5.66, 1.22-26.18; P = 0.03) were associated with increased risk of having a
resistant isolate according to authors' interpretation of MICs. In sensitivity
analysis based on new CLSI clinical breakpoints, the ORs for S663P and S629P
remained significant. Genotyping of isolates of C glabrata for S663P and S629P
mutations is an effective alternative to micafungin susceptibility tests.
Relevant molecular markers of drug resistance will significantly improve the
management of C glabrata infections.

© 2019 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/myc.12929 
PMID: 31077631  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

