
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 May 10;16(9). pii: E1635. doi:
10.3390/ijerph16091635.

Development and Evaluation of a Novel HNB Based Isothermal Amplification Assay
for Fast Detection of Pyrimethamine Resistance (S108N) in Plasmodium falciparum.

Chahar M(1), Anvikar A(2), Valecha N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology and Clinical Research, National Institute of Malaria 
Research, Sector-8 Dwarka, New Delhi 110077, India. madhvi23rana@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Epidemiology and Clinical Research, National Institute of Malaria 
Research, Sector-8 Dwarka, New Delhi 110077, India. anvikar@gmail.com.
(3)Division of Epidemiology and Clinical Research, National Institute of Malaria 
Research, Sector-8 Dwarka, New Delhi 110077, India. neenavalecha@gmail.com.

Sulphadoxine and pyrimethamine (SP) have been used as long-acting partner
antimalarial drugs in artemisinin combination therapy (ACT) for falciparum
malaria. The emergence and increasing spread of SP resistance in malaria-endemic 
areas have become a challenge for the control of malaria. Therefore, regular
monitoring of the mutation status of partner drugs is important for the better
management of drug policy. There are limitations with traditional molecular
methods and there is an urgent need for an easy method for diagnosis of drug
resistance. In this study we have introduced and developed a novel single
nucleotide polymorphism loop-mediated isothermal amplification (SNP-LAMP)
approach based on a hydroxynaphthol blue (HNB) indicator for the easier and
quicker detection of pyrimethamine resistance in Plasmodium falciparum malaria.
To implement this novel approach, many sets of LAMP primers were designed and
tested. Finally, one set of forward inner primer M1 (FIPM1) of LAMP primer was
selected that specifically distinguishes pyrimethamine-resistant P. falciparum
malaria. The LAMP reactions were optimized at 60-66 °C for 45 min. High
sensitivity (7 parasites/µL) was observed with 10-4 fold dilutions (<2 ng DNA) of
genomic DNA. Moreover, this approach has the potential to be applied even in
laboratories unfamiliar with PCR or other molecular methods, and in future, this 
can be helpful for the better management of anti-malarial policy.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph16091635 
PMCID: PMC6539687
PMID: 31083343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

