
1. J Vector Ecol. 2019 Jun;44(1):48-56. doi: 10.1111/jvec.12328.

Estimated resistance of the malaria mosquito Anopheles messeae s.l. to the
insecticide malathion.

Vaulin OV(1), Karagodin DA(1), Baricheva EM(1), Zakharov IK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Federal Research Center Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of
Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia.

Resistance to agricultural pesticides is an important and insufficiently studied 
concern for pest and disease vector research. We determined the malathion
resistance of species in the Anopheles maculipennis mosquito group in a habitat
near Novosibirsk, Russia. Most of the 851 individuals we measured were members of
the Anopheles messeae s.l. complex (An. messeae and An. daciae species). The LC50
value for malathion was 0.052 mg/L for the mixed specimens, and we failed to find
any differences between species. The LC50 value was within the range of values
for malathion resistance of Anopheles stephensi and Culex quinquefasciatus. As
the main resistance mechanism to organophosphate and carbamate insecticides is a 
single mononucleotide substitution in the ace-1 gene, we searched for this
mutation in An. messeae s.l. and An. beklemishevi by restriction analysis. This
mutation was not found in 347 of the specimens. We sequenced the ace-1 gene
fragment for 24 specimens from four species of the Anopheles maculipennis group, 
including An. messeae, An. daciae, An. atroparvus, and An. beklemishevi. These
specimens harbored a nucleotide substitution in the triplet where a mutation can 
lead to insecticide resistance, but this substitution would make it difficult for
the resistance to develop. Since the studied specimens belong to branches of the 
Palearctic portion of the Anopheles maculipennis group, we suspect that all other
Palearctic species of this group would have difficulties harboring the ace-1
mutation that would lead to organophosphate and carbamate resistance.

Â© 2019 The Society for Vector Ecology.

DOI: 10.1111/jvec.12328 
PMID: 31124233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

