
1. Ecol Evol. 2019 Apr 23;9(10):6082-6095. doi: 10.1002/ece3.5192. eCollection 2019 
May.

Transstadial immune activation in a mosquito: Adults that emerge from infected
larvae have stronger antibacterial activity in their hemocoel yet increased
susceptibility to malaria infection.

Brown LD(1)(2), Shapiro LLM(1), Thompson GA(1), Est√©vez-Lao TY(1), Hillyer JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences Vanderbilt University Nashville Tennessee.
(2)Present address: Department of Biology Georgia Southern University Statesboro 
Georgia.

Larval and adult mosquitoes mount immune responses against pathogens that invade 
their hemocoel. Although it has been suggested that a correlation exists between 
immune processes across insect life stages, the influence that an infection in
the hemocoel of a larva has on the immune system of the eclosed adult remains
unknown. Here, we used Anopheles gambiae to test whether a larval infection
influences the adult response to a subsequent bacterial or malaria parasite
infection. We found that for both female and male mosquitoes, a larval infection 
enhances the efficiency of bacterial clearance following a secondary infection in
the hemocoel of adults. The adults that emerge from infected larvae have more
hemocytes than adults that emerge from naive or injured larvae, and individual
hemocytes have greater phagocytic activity. Furthermore, mRNA abundance of immune
genes-such as cecropin A, Lysozyme C1, Stat-A, and Tep1-is higher in adults that 
emerge from infected larvae. A larval infection, however, does not have a
meaningful effect on the probability that female adults will survive a systemic
bacterial infection, and increases the susceptibility of females to Plasmodium
yoelii, as measured by oocyst prevalence and intensity in the midgut. Finally,
immune proficiency varies by sex; females exhibit increased bacterial killing,
have twice as many hemocytes, and more highly express immune genes. Together,
these results show that a larval hemocoelic infection induces transstadial immune
activation-possibly via transstadial immune priming-but that it confers both
costs and benefits to the emerged adults.

DOI: 10.1002/ece3.5192 
PMCID: PMC6540708
PMID: 31161020 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

