
1. Parasit Vectors. 2019 Jun 15;12(1):303. doi: 10.1186/s13071-019-3550-4.

Investigating immune responses to parasites using transgenesis.

Tedla MG(1), Every AL(2)(3), Scheerlinck JY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Animal Biotechnology, Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural
Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, 3010, Australia.
mebvet2002@gmail.com.
(2)Centre for Animal Biotechnology, Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural
Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, 3010, Australia.
(3)College of Science, Health and Engineering, La Trobe University, Melbourne,
VIC, 3086, Australia.

Parasites comprise diverse and complex organisms, which substantially impact
human and animal health. Most parasites have complex life-cycles, and by virtue
of co-evolution have developed multifaceted, often life-cycle stage-specific
relationships with the immune system of their hosts. The complexity in the
biology of many parasites often limits our knowledge of parasite-specific immune 
responses, to in vitro studies only. The relatively recent development of methods
to stably manipulate the genetic make-up of many parasites has allowed a better
understanding of host-parasite interactions, particularly in vivo. In this
regard, the use of transgenic parasites can facilitate the study of
immunomodulatory mechanisms under in vivo conditions. Therefore, in this review, 
we specifically highlighted the current developments in the use of transgenic
parasites to unravel the host's immune response to different life-cycle stages of
some key parasite species such as Leishmania, Schistosoma, Toxoplasma, Plasmodium
and Trypanosome and to some degree, the use of transgenic nematode parasites is
also briefly discussed.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-019-3550-4 
PMCID: PMC6570953
PMID: 31202271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

