
1. Int J Parasitol. 2019 Aug;49(9):685-695. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2019.03.007. Epub 
2019 Jun 13.

Plasmodium berghei serine/threonine protein phosphatase PP5 plays a critical role
in male gamete fertility.

Zhu X(1), Sun L(1), He Y(1), Wei H(1), Hong M(1), Liu F(1), Liu Q(1), Cao Y(2),
Cui L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Science, China Medical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110122, China.
(2)Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Science, China Medical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110122, China. Electronic address:
ymcao@cmu.edu.cn.
(3)Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Science, China Medical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110122, China; Department of Internal Medicine,
Morsani College of Medicine, University of South Florida, 3720 Spectrum
Boulevard, Suite 304, Tampa, FL 33612-9415, USA. Electronic address:
lcui@health.usf.edu.

Sexual development in malaria parasites involves multiple signal transduction
pathways mediated by reversible protein phosphorylation. Here, we functionally
characterised a protein phosphatase, Ser/Thr protein phosphatase 5 (PbPP5),
during sexual development of the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei. The 
recombinant protein phosphatase domain displayed obvious protein phosphatase
activity and was sensitive to PP1/PP2A inhibitors including cantharidic acid
(IC50 = 122.2 nM), cantharidin (IC50 = 74.3 nM), endothall (IC50 = 365.5 nM) and 
okadaic acid (IC50 = 1.3 nM). PbPP5 was expressed in both blood stages and
ookinetes with more prominent expression during sexual development. PbPP5 was
localised in the cytoplasm of the parasite and highly concentrated beneath the
parasite plasma membrane in free merozoites and ookinetes. Targeted deletion of
the pbpp5 gene had no influence on asexual blood-stage parasite multiplication or
the survival curve of the infected hosts. However, male gamete formation and
fertility were severely affected, resulting in almost complete blockade of
ookinete conversion and oocyst development in the Δpbpp5 lines. This sexual
development defect was rescued by crossing Δpbpp5 with the female defective
Δpbs47 parasite line, but not with the male defective Δpbs48/45 line, thus
confirming the essential function of the pbpp5 gene in male gamete fertility.
Furthermore, the aforementioned PP1/PP2A inhibitors all had inhibitory effects on
exflagellation of male gametocytes and ookinete conversion. In particular,
endothall, a selective inhibitor of PP2A, completely blocked exflagellation and
ookinete conversion at ∼548.3 nM. This study elucidated an essential function of 
PbPP5 during male gamete development and fertility.

Copyright © 2019 Australian Society for Parasitology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2019.03.007 
PMID: 31202684  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

