
1. Bull Soc Pathol Exot. 2019;112(1):8-11. doi: 10.3166/bspe-2019-0074.

High Frequency of Pfcrt-76T Allele in Plasmodium falciparum Isolates From Gabon
and Ivory Coast After the Withdrawal of Chloroquine.

Ndong Ngomo JM(1)(2), Amiah Ahou M(3)(2), Yavo W(3)(2), Karine Bouyou-Akotet
M(1), Mawili-Mboumba DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculté de médecine, Département de parasitologie et de mycologie, Université 
des sciences de la Santé, BP 4009, Libreville, Gabon.
(2)Laboratoire de génétique, UFR biosciences, Université Félix Houphouët-Boigny, 
BPV 34, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.
(3)Centre de recherche et de lutte contre le paludisme, Institut national de
santé publique, BPV 47, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.

The aim of this study was to assess the proportion of Pfcrt-76T mutant allele
four years after the adoption of new malaria control guidelines in Gabon and
Ivory Coast. Frequency of K76T mutation of Pfcrt gene was compared between
Plasmodium falciparum isolates from Gabon and Ivory Coast. Samples were collected
in 2008 in Gabon and in 2009 in Ivory Coast. In total, 151 isolates were selected
and analysed by nested-PCR-RFLP for Pfcrt-76 allele identification: 63 in Abobo
(Ivory Coast) and 78 in Oyem (Gabon). The proportion of Pfcrt-76T mutant allele
was higher in Oyem (70%) compared to Abobo (46%) (p=0.005). This allele was more 
frequently detected in patients less than 5 years old in Oyem (75 %) compared to 
Abobo (52%) (p<0.01). The present work showed different prevalence of Pfcrt-76T
allele between both sites probably due to a different drug pressure on P.
falciparum strains circulating in these areas. Moreover, a decrease of the
mutation frequency is observed compared to data obtained in 2005. Therefore, a
continuous monitoring of this allele and other drug resistance molecular markers 
is required in these countries.

Publisher: Le but de cette étude était d’évaluer la proportion de l’allèle mutant
Pfcrt-76T quatre ans après l’adoption de nouvelles stratégies de contrôle du
paludisme au Gabon et en Côte d’Ivoire. La fréquence de la mutation K76T du gène 
Pfcrt a été comparée entre les isolats de P. falciparum du Gabon et de Côte
d’Ivoire. Des échantillons ont été prélevés en 2008 au Gabon et en 2009 en Côte
d’Ivoire. Au total, 151 isolats ont été sélectionnés et analysés par
PCR-nichée-RFLP pour l’identification de l’allèle Pfcrt-76: 63 à Abobo (Côte
d’Ivoire) et 78 à Oyem (Gabon). La proportion de l’allèle mutant Pfcrt-76T était 
plus élevée à Oyem (70 %) comparée à Abobo (46 %) (p = 0,005). Cet allèle était
plus fréquemment détecté chez les patients de moins de 5 ans à Oyem (75 %)
comparé à Abobo (52 %) (p < 0,01). Le présent travail a montré une prévalence
différente de l’allèle Pfcrt-76T entre les deux sites, probablement en raison
d’une pression médicamenteuse différente sur les souches de P. falciparum
circulant dans ces zones. Une diminution de la fréquence de cette mutation est
observée par rapport aux résultats de 2005. Par conséquent, un suivi continu de
cet allèle et d’autres marqueurs moléculaires de la résistance aux antipaludiques
est recommandé dans ces pays.
DOI: 10.3166/bspe-2019-0074 
PMID: 31225725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare

