
1. Folia Parasitol (Praha). 2019 May 24;66. pii: 2019.006. doi:
10.14411/fp.2019.006.

K13 propeller domain mutations and pfmdr1 amplification in isolates of Plasmodium
falciparum collected from Thai-Myanmar border area in 2006-2010.

Phompradit P(1), Chaijaroenkul W(1), Muhamad P(2), Na-Bangchang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Pharmacology and Molecular Biology of Malaria and
Cholangiocarcinoma, Chulabhorn International College of Medicine, Thammasat
University, Thailand.
(2)Drug Discovery and Development Center, Office of Advanced Science and
Technology Thammasat University, Thailand.

The K13 propeller domain mutation and pfmdr1 amplification have been proposed as 
useful molecular markers for detection and monitoring of artemisinin resistant
Plasmodium falciparum Welch, 1897. Genomic DNA isolates of P. falciparum was
extracted from 235 dried blood spot or whole blood samples collected from
patients with uncomplicated falciparum malaria residing in areas along the
Thai-Myanmar border during 2006-2010. Nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and 
sequencing were performed to detect mutations in K13 propeller domain of P.
falciparum at codon 427-709. Pfmdr1 gene copy number was determined by SYBR Green
I real-time PCR. High prevalence of pfmdr1 multiple copies was observed (42.5% of
isolates). The presence of K13 mutations was low (40/235, 17.2%). Seventeen
mutations had previously been reported and six mutations were newly detected. The
C580Y was found in two isolates (0.9%). The F446I, N458Y and P574L mutations were
commonly detected. Seven isolates had both K13 mutation and pfmdr1 multiple
copies. It needs to be confirmed whether parasites harbouring both K13 mutation
and pfmdr1 multiple copies and/or the observed new mutations of K13 propeller
domain are associated with clinical artemisinin resistance.

DOI: 10.14411/fp.2019.006 
PMID: 31239407  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

