
1. J Cell Biochem. 2019 Oct;120(10):18128-18141. doi: 10.1002/jcb.29116. Epub 2019
Jun 25.

Differential protein expression profiling by iTRAQ-2D-LC-MS/MS of rats treated
with oxaliplatin.

Sun X(1)(2), Lv Y(1)(2), Wang J(2), Cheng H(3), Huang J(1)(2), Du Y(1)(2), Dong
J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Medicine, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.
(2)Qingpu Chinese Medicine Hospital, Institutes of Integrative Medicine, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Prevention and Healthcare, Yangpu Daqiao Community Health
Service Center, Shanghai, China.

Clinical application of oxaliplatin, a platinum-based chemotherapeutic agent, in 
cancer, especially colorectal cancer, is widely used. However,
oxaliplatin-induced peripheral neurotoxicity (OIPN) has a high incidence, and to 
date, there have been few detailed studies on pathogenesis and treatment
mechanisms. The present study was performed by using a proteomic approach to
explore protein expression profiling of rats treated with oxaliplatin by
multiplex isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification labeling and
two-dimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. There were 74
proteins that showed different expression in sciatic nerve between control rats
and OIPN model rats, with 53 upregulated proteins and 21 downregulated proteins
detected in OIPN groups compared with control groups. On the basis of Gene
Ontology clustering, these proteins were associated with biological processes
(eg, muscle contraction, muscle system process, and skeletal muscle contraction),
cellular component (eg, myofibril, contractile fiber, and contractile fiber part)
and molecular function (structural constituent of muscle, hydro-lyase activity,
and calcium ion binding). On the basis of Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
pathway database, these proteins were associated with African trypanosomiasis,
malaria, nitrogen metabolism, etc. Real-time polymerase chain reaction, Western
blot as well as immunohistochemistry analysis was performed to examine the
expression of partially differential protein. In conclusion, our study
establishes a protein expression profile of oxaliplatin-induced rats and
mechanisms leading to OIPN development, and will be useful for developing novel
diagnostic biomarkers and aiding in the prevention and control of OIPN.

Â© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.29116 
PMID: 31237037  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

