
1. Mol Microbiol. 2019 Dec;112(6):1627-1631. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14340. Epub 2019 Jul
18.

Plasmodium sexual differentiation: how to make a female.

Ralph SA(1), Cortés A(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(2)ISGlobal, Hospital Clínic - Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia,
08036, Spain.
(3)ICREA, Barcelona, Catalonia, 08010, Spain.

Sexual development is integral to the transmission of Plasmodium parasites
between vertebrates and mosquitos. Recent years have seen great advances in
understanding the gene expression that underlies commitment of asexual parasites 
to differentiate into sexual gametocyte stages, then how they mature and form
gametes once inside a mosquito. Less well understood is how parasites
differentially control development to become males or females. Plasmodium
parasites are haploid at the time of sexual differentiation, but a clonal haploid
line can produce both male and female gametocytes, so they presumably lack the
sex-determining alleles present in some other eukaryotes. Though the molecular
switch to initiate male or female development remains hidden, recent studies
reveal regulatory proteins needed for the sex-specific maturation of male and
female gametocytes. Yuda and collaborators report the characterization of a
transcription factor necessary for female gametocyte maturation. With renewed
attention on malaria elimination, sex has been an increasing focus because
transmission-blocking strategies are likely to be an important component of
elimination efforts.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14340 
PMID: 31271672  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

