
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2019 Nov;75:103952. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.103952. Epub
2019 Jul 4.

Genetic diversity of Plasmodium knowlesi among human and long-tailed macaque
populations in Peninsular Malaysia: The utility of microsatellite markers.

Saleh Huddin A(1), Md Yusuf N(2), Razak MRMA(3), Ogu Salim N(1), Hisam S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology Unit, Infectious Disease Research Centre, Institute for Medical
Research, Jalan Pahang, 50588 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Parasitology Unit, Infectious Disease Research Centre, Institute for Medical
Research, Jalan Pahang, 50588 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Electronic address:
noorazian@imr.gov.my.
(3)Bioassay Unit, Herbal Medicine Research Centre, Jalan Pahang, 50588 Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.

It has been discovered that Plasmodium knowlesi (P. knowlesi) is transmitted from
macaque to man. Thus, the aim of the present study was to determine P. knowlesi
genetic diversity in both human (n = 147) and long-tailed macaque (n = 26)
samples from high- and low-endemicity localities. Genotyping was performed using 
seven neutral microsatellite loci markers. The size of the alleles, multiplicity 
of infection (MOI), mean number of alleles (Na), expected heterozygosity (HE),
linkage disequilibrium (LD), and genetic differentiation (FST) were determined.
In highly endemic P. knowlesi localities, the MOI for human and long-tailed
macaque isolates was 1.04 and 1.15, respectively, while the Na was 11.14 and
7.86, respectively. Based on the allele frequency distribution for all loci, and 
with FST < 0.1, no genetic differentiation was seen between human and long-tailed
macaque. In localities characterised by lower P. knowlesi endemicity, the MOI for
human and long-tailed macaque isolates was 1.05 and 1.11, respectively, while the
Na was 6.14 and 2.71, respectively. Further molecular analysis of the allele
frequencies indicated that there was a significant genetic differentiation in
human P. knowlesi isolates as compared to long-tailed macaque isolates, with a
very low fixation index (FST = 0.016, p < .05) based on multiple loci analysis.
Our results further indicate that, in Peninsular Malaysia, humans are mostly
affected by P. knowlesi of a single genotype, while long-tailed macaque tend to
acquire polyclonal infections, which supports the assumption that there is a
higher rate of transmission among long-tailed macaque. Understanding the genetic 
diversity of P. knowlesi isolates can provide invaluable information for
characterising patterns of the population structure and the migration rate of P. 
knowlesi in peninsular Malaysia.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.103952 
PMID: 31279818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

