
1. Cell Microbiol. 2019 Oct;21(10):e13082. doi: 10.1111/cmi.13082. Epub 2019 Jul 23.

Systematic analysis of Plasmodium myosins reveals differential expression,
localisation, and function in invasive and proliferative parasite stages.

Wall RJ(1), Zeeshan M(1), Katris NJ(2), Limenitakis R(3), Rea E(1), Stock J(1),
Brady D(1), Waller RF(2), Holder AA(4), Tewari R(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Queens Medical Centre, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, UK.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Malaria Parasitology, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK.

The myosin superfamily comprises of actin-dependent eukaryotic molecular motors
important in a variety of cellular functions. Although well studied in many
systems, knowledge of their functions in Plasmodium, the causative agent of
malaria, is restricted. Previously, six myosins were identified in this genus,
including three Class XIV myosins found only in Apicomplexa and some Ciliates.
The well characterized MyoA is a Class XIV myosin essential for gliding motility 
and invasion. Here, we characterize all other Plasmodium myosins throughout the
parasite life cycle and show that they have very diverse patterns of expression
and cellular location. MyoB and MyoE, the other two Class XIV myosins, are
expressed in all invasive stages, with apical and basal locations, respectively. 
Gene deletion revealed that MyoE is involved in sporozoite traversal, MyoF and
MyoK are likely essential in the asexual blood stages, and MyoJ and MyoB are not 
essential. Both MyoB and its essential light chain (MCL-B) are localised at the
apical end of ookinetes but expressed at completely different time points. This
work provides a better understanding of the role of actomyosin motors in
Apicomplexan parasites, particularly in the motile and invasive stages of
Plasmodium during sexual and asexual development within the mosquito.

Â© 2019 The Authors Cellular Microbiology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.13082 
PMCID: PMC6851706
PMID: 31283102  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

