
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2019 Jul 9;19(1):600. doi: 10.1186/s12879-019-4221-y.

Severe oxidative stress in sickle cell disease patients with uncomplicated
Plasmodium falciparum malaria in Kampala, Uganda.

Atiku SM(1), Louise N(1), Kasozi DM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Sports Science, School of Biosciences, College 
of Natural Sciences, Makerere University Kampala, P.O. BOX 7062, Kampala, Uganda.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Sports Science, School of Biosciences, College 
of Natural Sciences, Makerere University Kampala, P.O. BOX 7062, Kampala, Uganda.
dkasozi@cns.mak.ac.ug.

BACKGROUND: Oxidative stress plays a vital role in the pathogenesis of both
Sickle Cell Disease (SCD) and Plasmodium falciparum malaria. However, there are
limited studies on the effect of P. falciparum malaria infection on oxidative
stress in SCD patients.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was undertaken to compare levels of biomarkers
of oxidative stress in isolates from SCD patients with uncomplicated P.falciparum
malaria. The biomarkers namely: malondialdehyde (MDA), reduced glutathione (GSH),
catalase (CAT) and glutathione peroxidase (GPx) were determined in plasma samples
from SCD malaria positive, malaria positive, SCD malaria negative and healthy
control participants. The genetic diversity of P.falciparum was determined by
nested polymerase chain reaction of merozoite surface protein-2 (MSP-2) gene.
RESULTS: Out of 207 participants, 54 (26%) were SCD malaria positive, 51 (24%)
malaria positive, 51 (24%) SCD controls and 51 (24%) healthy control individuals.
The mean concentration of MDA was significantly higher in SCD malaria positive
than SCD controls (P < 0.0001). In contrast, the mean concentration of GSH
(P < 0.0001) and GPx (P < 0.0001) were significantly lower in SCD malaria than
SCD controls. Although not significantly different, the mean concentration of MDA
was higher (P = 0.0478), but the geometric mean parasite density (P = 0.2430) and
multiplicity of infection (P = 0.3478) were lower in SCD malaria samples than in 
malaria samples. The most prevalent MSP2 allelic family was IC3D7 in SCD malaria 
(72%) and Malaria (76%) samples. The biomarkers of oxidative stress were not
significantly different between IC3D7 and FC27 allelic families of MSP2.
CONCLUSION: We identified severe oxidative stress in Sickle cell disease patients
with uncomplicated P.falciparum malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-019-4221-y 
PMCID: PMC6617886
PMID: 31288760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

