
1. Infect Drug Resist. 2019 Jul 5;12:1941-1949. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S190386.
eCollection 2019.

Epidemiology of Plasmodium falciparum infection and drug resistance markers in
Ota Area, Southwestern Nigeria.

Olasehinde GI(1), Diji-Geske RI(1), Fadina I(1), Arogundade D(1), Darby P(1),
Adeleke A(1), Dokunmu TM(2), Adebayo AH(2), Oyelade J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences.
(2)Department of Biochemistry.
(3)Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Covenant University, Ota,
Ogun State, Nigeria.

Purpose: Effective routine monitoring and surveillance of parasite genes is a
necessary strategy in the control of parasites' resistance to antimalarial drugs,
according to the WHO's recommendation. This cross-sectional study therefore aimed
at carrying out an epidemiological analysis on malaria incidence in Ado-Odo/Ota, 
Ogun State. Patients and methods: Blood and corresponding saliva samples were
collected from 1,243 subjects of all ages and sex presenting with fever and a
parasitemia level â‰¥2,000 between September 2016 and March 2018. Samples were
collected from selected health facilities in the study area of Ogun state to
establish the prevalence of falciparum malaria and determine resistance genes
harbored by the parasites. The overall prevalence of falciparum malaria in the
study site by microscopic examination was 45.86%. The highest incidence of 57.42%
was recorded among male subjects. Point mutations of K76T and N86Y in the Pfcrt
and pfmdr-1 genes, as well as non-synonymous mutations in Pfk13 genes, were
screened for and sequenced for further analysis. Results: Pfcrt was detectable in
57.42% of blood and 51.02% of saliva samples, respectively. About 34.78% of the
subjects that were confirmed microscopically harbored the Pfmdr-1 mutated gene
while 26.67% of the saliva samples revealed Pfmdr-1. Epidemiological studies
identified the presence of wild-type Pfk13 genes in 21.84% of blood and 44.44% of
saliva samples correspondingly. For each of the genes evaluated, saliva portrayed
great diagnostic performance when compared with blood. Conclusion: Findings from 
this study have established the prevalence of malaria and the resistance pattern 
of P. falciparum in the study area. The findings may help in formulating drug
policies and suggest the use of saliva as a noninvasive point-of-care method of
diagnosing malaria potentially deployable to rural endemic areas.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S190386 
PMCID: PMC6616117
PMID: 31308714 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.

