
1. Pan Afr Med J. 2019 Apr 12;32:183. doi: 10.11604/pamj.2019.32.183.15694.
eCollection 2019.

Genetic diversity of Plasmodium falciparum infection among children with
uncomplicated malaria living in Pointe-Noire, Republic of Congo.

Singana BP(1), Mayengue PI(1)(2), Niama RF(1)(2), Ndounga M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculté des Sciences et Techniques, Université Marien Ngouabi, BP 69
Brazzaville, République du Congo.
(2)Laboratoire National de Santé Publique, BP 120 Brazzaville, République du
Congo.
(3)Programme National de Lutte contre le Paludisme, Direction Générale de
l'Epidémiologie de la Maladie, Ministère de la Santé et de la Population,
République du Congo.

Introduction: Molecular characterization of malaria parasites from different
localities is important to improve understanding of acquisition of natural
immunity to Plasmodium falciparum, to assist in identifying the most appropriate 
strategies for control and to evaluate the impact of control interventions. This 
study aimed to determine the genetic diversity and the multiplicity of infection 
in Plasmodium falciparum isolates from Pointe-Noire, Republic of Congo.
Methods: Plasmodium falciparum isolates were collected from 71 children with
uncomplicated malaria; enrolled into the study for evaluating the therapeutic
efficacy of artemether-lumefantrine combination. Both msp-1 and msp-2 genes were 
genotyped.
Results: From 296 distinct fragments detected, 13 msp-1 and 27 msp-2 different
alleles were identified. For msp-1, RO33 family was poorly polymorphic. The K1
family has shown the trend of predominance (41%), followed by Mad20 (35%).
Comparatively to msp-2, 49.6% and 48.8% fragments belonged to 3D7 and FC27
respectively. Taking together msp-1 and msp-2 genes, the overall multiplicity of 
infection has been increased to 2.64 and 86% harbored more than one parasite
genotype. Parasite density was not influenced by age as well as the multiplicity 
of infection which was not influenced neither by age nor by parasite density.
Conclusion: Genetic diversity of Plasmodium falciparum in isolates from patients 
with uncomplicated malaria in Pointe-Noire is high and consisted mainly of
multiple clones. The overall multiplicity of infection has been largely increased
when considering msp-1 and msp-2 genes together. With the changes in malaria
epidemiology, the use of both msp-1 and msp-2 genes in the characterization of
Plasmodium falciparum infection is recommended.

DOI: 10.11604/pamj.2019.32.183.15694 
PMCID: PMC6620066
PMID: 31312296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

