
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 Sep 23;63(10). pii: e00101-19. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00101-19. Print 2019 Oct.

Decreased In Vitro Artemisinin Sensitivity of Plasmodium falciparum across India.

Chakrabarti R(1)(2)(3), White J(1)(2), Babar PH(1)(2)(3), Kumar S(1)(2), Mudeppa 
DG(1)(2), Mascarenhas A(1)(2)(3), Pereira L(1)(2)(3), Dash R(1)(2)(3), Maki
JN(1)(2), Sharma A(1)(2)(3), Gogoi K(4), Sarma DK(4), Pal Bhowmick I(4),
Manoharan SK(1)(2)(3), Gomes E(3), Mahanta J(4), Mohapatra PK(4), Chery L(1)(2), 
Rathod PK(5)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Goa Medical College and Hospital, Bambolim, Goa,
India.
(4)Regional Medical Research Center-Northeast Region (RMRC-NE), Dibrugarh, Assam,
India.
(5)Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
rathod@uw.edu.

Artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) has been used to treat uncomplicated 
Plasmodium falciparum infections in India since 2004. Since 2008, a decrease in
artemisinin effectiveness has been seen throughout the Greater Mekong Subregion. 
The geographic proximity and ecological similarities of northeastern India to
Southeast Asia may differentially affect the long-term management and
sustainability of ACT in India. In order to collect baseline data on variations
in ACT sensitivity in Indian parasites, 12 P. falciparum isolates from northeast 
India and 10 isolates from southwest India were studied in vitro Ring-stage
survival assay (RSA) showed reduced sensitivity to dihydroartemisinin in 50% of
the samples collected in northeast India in 2014 and 2015. Two of the 10 assayed 
samples from the southwest region of India from as far back as 2012 also showed
decreased sensitivity to artemisinin. In both these regions, kelch gene sequences
were not predictive of reduced artemisinin sensitivity, as measured by RSA. The
present data justify future investments in integrated approaches involving
clinical follow-up studies, in vitro survival assays, and molecular markers for
tracking potential changes in the effectiveness of artemisinin against P.
falciparum throughout India.

Copyright Â© 2019 Chakrabarti et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00101-19 
PMCID: PMC6761557
PMID: 31332065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

