
1. Genome Res. 2019 Aug;29(8):1250-1261. doi: 10.1101/gr.245795.118. Epub 2019 Jul
25.

Whole-genome sequencing reveals high complexity of copy number variation at
insecticide resistance loci in malaria mosquitoes.

Lucas ER(1), Miles A(2)(3), Harding NJ(3), Clarkson CS(2), Lawniczak MKN(2),
Kwiatkowski DP(2)(3), Weetman D(1), Donnelly MJ(1)(2); Anopheles gambiae 1000
Genomes Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool L3 5QA, United Kingdom.
(2)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, United Kingdom.
(3)Big Data Institute, University of Oxford, Li Ka Shing Centre for Health
Information and Discovery, Oxford OX3 7LF, United Kingdom.

Polymorphisms in genetic copy number can influence gene expression, coding
sequence, and zygosity, making them powerful actors in the evolutionary process. 
Copy number variants (CNVs) are however understudied, being more difficult to
detect than single-nucleotide polymorphisms. We take advantage of the intense
selective pressures on the major malaria vector Anopheles gambiae, caused by the 
widespread use of insecticides for malaria control, to investigate the role of
CNVs in the evolution of insecticide resistance. Using the whole-genome
sequencing data from 1142 samples in the An. gambiae 1000 genomes project, we
identified 250 gene-containing CNVs, encompassing a total of 267 genes of which
28 were in gene families linked to metabolic insecticide resistance, representing
significant enrichment of these families. The five major gene clusters for
metabolic resistance all contained CNVs, with 44 different CNVs being found
across these clusters and multiple CNVs frequently covering the same genes. These
44 CNVs are widespread (45% of individuals carry at least one of them) and have
been spreading through positive selection, indicated by their high local
frequencies and extended haplotype homozygosity. Our results demonstrate the
importance of CNVs in the response to selection, highlighting the urgent need to 
identify the contribution of each CNV to insecticide resistance and to track
their spread as the use of insecticides in malaria endemic countries intensifies 
and as the operational deployment of next-generation bed nets targeting metabolic
resistance gathers pace. Our detailed descriptions of CNVs found across the
species range provide the tools to do so.

Â© 2019 Lucas et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.245795.118 
PMCID: PMC6673711
PMID: 31345938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

