
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 Sep 23;63(10). pii: e01234-19. doi:
10.1128/AAC.01234-19. Print 2019 Oct.

The Diversity of the Plasmodium falciparum K13 Propeller Domain Did Not Increase 
after Implementation of Artemisinin-Based Combination Therapy in Uganda.

Conrad MD(1), Nsobya SL(2)(3), Rosenthal PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, USA melissa.conrad@ucsf.edu philip.rosenthal@ucsf.edu.
(2)Infectious Disease Research Collaboration, Kampala, Uganda.
(3)Department of Pathology, Makerere University College of Health Sciences,
Kampala, Uganda.

Artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs) are the standard of care to treat 
uncomplicated falciparum malaria. However, resistance to artemisinins, defined as
delayed parasite clearance after therapy, has emerged in Southeast Asia, and the 
spread of resistance to sub-Saharan Africa could have devastating consequences.
Artemisinin resistance has been associated in Southeast Asia with multiple
nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (NS-SNPs) in the propeller domain
of the gene encoding the Plasmodium falciparum K13 protein (K13PD). Some K13PD
NS-SNPs have been seen in Africa, but the relevance of these mutations is
unclear. To assess whether ACT use has selected for specific K13PD mutations, we 
compared the K13PD genetic diversity in clinical isolates collected before and
after the implementation of ACT use from seven sites across Uganda. We detected
K13PD NS-SNPs in 16 of 683 (2.3%) clinical isolates collected between 1999 and
2004 and in 26 of 716 (3.6%) isolates collected between 2012 and 2016 (P = 0.16),
representing a total of 29 different polymorphisms at 27 codons. Individual
NS-SNPs were usually detected only once, and none were found in more than 0.7% of
the isolates. Three SNPs (C469F, P574L, and A675V) associated with delayed
clearance in Southeast Asia were seen in samples collected between 2012 and 2016,
each in a single isolate. No differences in diversity following implementation of
ACT use were found at any of the seven sites, nor was there evidence of selective
pressures acting on the locus. Our results suggest that selection by ACTs is not 
impacting on K13PD diversity in Uganda.

Copyright Â© 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01234-19 
PMCID: PMC6761569
PMID: 31358588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

