
1. EMBO J. 2019 Aug 1;38(15):e100984. doi: 10.15252/embj.2018100984. Epub 2019 May
24.

Microtubule number and length determine cellular shape and function in
Plasmodium.

Spreng B(1), Fleckenstein H(1), Kübler P(1), Di Biagio C(1), Benz M(1), Patra
P(2), Schwarz US(2), Cyrklaff M(1), Frischknecht F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Parasitology, Center for Infectious Diseases, Heidelberg
University Medical School, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Institute for Theoretical Physics and Bioquant, Heidelberg University,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Microtubules are cytoskeletal filaments essential for many cellular processes,
including establishment and maintenance of polarity, intracellular transport,
division and migration. In most metazoan cells, the number and length of
microtubules are highly variable, while they can be precisely defined in some
protozoan organisms. However, in either case the significance of these two key
parameters for cells is not known. Here, we quantitatively studied the impact of 
modulating microtubule number and length in Plasmodium, the protozoan parasite
causing malaria. Using a gene deletion and replacement strategy targeting one out
of two α-tubulin genes, we show that chromosome segregation proceeds in the
oocysts even in the absence of microtubules. However, fewer and shorter
microtubules severely impaired the formation, motility and infectivity of
Plasmodium sporozoites, the forms transmitted by the mosquito, which usually
contain 16 microtubules. We found that α-tubulin expression levels directly
determined the number of microtubules, suggesting a high nucleation barrier as
supported by a mathematical model. Infectious sporozoites were only formed in
parasite lines featuring at least 10 microtubules, while parasites with 9 or
fewer microtubules failed to transmit.

© 2019 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.2018100984 
PMCID: PMC6669926
PMID: 31368598  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

