
1. BMJ Glob Health. 2019 Jul 29;4(4):e001582. doi: 10.1136/bmjgh-2019-001582.
eCollection 2019.

False-negative malaria rapid diagnostic test results and their impact on
community-based malaria surveys in sub-Saharan Africa.

Watson OJ(#)(1), Sumner KM(#)(2), Janko M(3), Goel V(4), Winskill P(1), Slater
HC(1), Ghani A(1), Meshnick SR(2), Parr JB(5).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, Imperial College London,
London, UK.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Global Health Institute, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(4)Department of Geography, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, USA.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Surveillance and diagnosis of Plasmodium falciparum malaria relies predominantly 
on rapid diagnostic tests (RDT). However, false-negative (FN) RDT results are
known to occur for a variety of reasons, including operator error, poor storage
conditions, pfhrp2/3 gene deletions, poor performance of specific RDT brands and 
lots, and low-parasite density infections. We used RDT and microscopy results
from 85 000 children enrolled in Demographic Health Surveys and Malaria Indicator
Surveys from 2009 to 2015 across 19 countries to explore the distribution of and 
risk factors for FN-RDTs in sub-Saharan Africa, where malaria's impact is
greatest. We sought to (1) identify spatial and demographic patterns of FN-RDT
results, defined as a negative RDT but positive gold standard microscopy test,
and (2) estimate the percentage of infections missed within community-based
malaria surveys due to FN-RDT results. Across all studies, 19.9% (95% CI 19.0% to
20.9%) of microscopy-positive subjects were negative by RDT. The distribution of 
FN-RDT results was spatially heterogeneous. The variance in FN-RDT results was
best explained by the prevalence of malaria, with an increase in FN-RDT results
observed at lower transmission intensities, among younger subjects, and in urban 
areas. The observed proportion of FN-RDT results was not predicted by differences
in RDT brand or lot performance alone. These findings characterise how the
probability of detection by RDTs varies in different transmission settings and
emphasise the need for careful interpretation of prevalence estimates based on
surveys employing RDTs alone. Further studies are needed to characterise the
cost-effectiveness of improved malaria diagnostics (eg, PCR or highly sensitive
RDTs) in community-based surveys, especially in regions of low transmission
intensity or high urbanicity.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjgh-2019-001582 
PMCID: PMC6666813
PMID: 31406591 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: JBP and SRM report a
non-financial interaction with Abbott, which has performed laboratory testing
in-kind as part of their hepatitis research.

