
1. Parasitol Int. 2020 Feb;74:101961. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2019.101961. Epub 2019
Aug 19.

Isolation and characterization of antiprotozoal compound-producing Streptomyces
species from Mongolian soils.

Pagmadulam B(1), Tserendulam D(2), Rentsenkhand T(2), Igarashi M(3), Sawa R(3),
Nihei CI(3), Nishikawa Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases, Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Inada-Cho, Obihiro, Hokkaido 080-8555,
Japan; Laboratory of Microbial Synthesis, Institute of General and Experimental
Biology, Mongolian Academy of Sciences, Ulaanbaatar, Peace avenue-54b, Mongolia.
(2)Laboratory of Microbial Synthesis, Institute of General and Experimental
Biology, Mongolian Academy of Sciences, Ulaanbaatar, Peace avenue-54b, Mongolia.
(3)Institute of Microbial Chemistry (BIKAKEN), 3-14-23 Kamiosaki, Shinagawa-ku,
Tokyo 141-0021, Japan.
(4)National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases, Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Inada-Cho, Obihiro, Hokkaido 080-8555,
Japan. Electronic address: nisikawa@obihiro.ac.jp.

Natural resources are recognized as important sources of potential drugs for
treating various infections, and microorganisms are a rich natural source of
diverse compounds. Among the world's microorganisms, actinomycetes, which are
abundant in soil and marine, are the well-known producers of a wide range of
bioactive secondary metabolites and antibiotics. In the present study, four
actinomycetes (samples N25, N6, N18, and N12) were isolated from soil samples in 
Mongolia. Phylogenetic analysis of these isolates revealed that they share the
highest similarity with Streptomyces canus (N25), S. cirratus (N6), S. bacillaris
(N18) and S. peucetius (N12), based on 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Crude extracts
were obtained from them using ethyl acetate, and the crude fractions were
separated by thin layer chromatography. The fractions were then evaluated for
their cytotoxicities and their anti-Toxoplasma and antimalarial activities in
vitro. The S. canus (N25) crude extract was selected for further chemical
characterization based on its antiprotozoal activities. Using liquid
chromatography-high resolution mass spectrometry, phenazine-1-carboxylic acid
(PCA) was detected and identified in the active fractions of the metabolites from
strain N25. We next confirmed that commercially available PCA possesses
antiprotozoal activity against T. gondii (IC50: 55.5 μg/ml) and Plasmodium
falciparum (IC50: 6.4 μg/ml) in vitro. The results of this study reveal that soil
actinomycetes are potential sources of antiprotozoal compounds, and that PCA
merits further investigation as an anti-protozoal agent.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2019.101961 
PMID: 31437553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

