
1. Nat Commun. 2019 Sep 2;10(1):3950. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-11819-0.

Innate immunity limits protective adaptive immune responses against
pre-erythrocytic malaria parasites.

Minkah NK(1), Wilder BK(1)(2), Sheikh AA(1), Martinson T(1)(2), Wegmair L(1)(3), 
Vaughan AM(1), Kappe SHI(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Infectious Disease Research, Seattle Children's Research
Institute, 307 Westlake Ave N, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute, Oregon Health and Science University,
Portland, OR, USA.
(3)Santis GmbH/Astrazeneca, Leverkusenstasse 54, 22761, Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Center for Global Infectious Disease Research, Seattle Children's Research
Institute, 307 Westlake Ave N, Seattle, WA, USA.
stefan.kappe@seattlechildrens.org.
(5)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
stefan.kappe@seattlechildrens.org.

Immunization with attenuated whole Plasmodium sporozoites constitutes a promising
vaccination strategy. Compared to replication-deficient parasites, immunization
with replication-competent parasites confers better protection and also induces a
type I IFN (IFN-1) response, but whether this IFN-1 response has beneficial or
adverse effects on vaccine-induced adaptive immunity is not known. Here, we show 
that IFN-1 signaling-deficient mice immunized with replication-competent
sporozoites exhibit superior protection against infection. This correlates with
superior CD8 T cell memory including reduced expression of the exhaustion markers
PD-1 and LAG-3 on these cells and increased numbers of memory CD8 T cells in the 
liver. Moreover, the adoptive transfer of memory CD8 T cells from the livers of
previously immunized IFN-1 signaling-deficient mice confers greater protection
against liver stage parasites. However, the detrimental role of IFN-1 signaling
is not CD8 T cell intrinsic. Together, our data demonstrate that liver
stage-engendered IFN-1 signaling impairs hepatic CD8 T cell memory via a CD8 T
cell-extrinsic mechanism.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-019-11819-0 
PMCID: PMC6718385
PMID: 31477704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

