
1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Sep 6;15(9):e1008049. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008049.
eCollection 2019 Sep.

The Plasmodium falciparum rhoptry bulb protein RAMA plays an essential role in
rhoptry neck morphogenesis and host red blood cell invasion.

Sherling ES(1), Perrin AJ(1), Knuepfer E(2), Russell MRG(3), Collinson LM(3),
Miller LH(4), Blackman MJ(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Biochemistry Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United
Kingdom.
(2)Malaria Parasitology Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United
Kingdom.
(3)Electron Microscopy Science Technology Platform, The Francis Crick Institute, 
London, United Kingdom.
(4)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, United
States of America.
(5)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene &
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

The malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum invades, replicates within and
destroys red blood cells in an asexual blood stage life cycle that is responsible
for clinical disease and crucial for parasite propagation. Invasive malaria
merozoites possess a characteristic apical complex of secretory organelles that
are discharged in a tightly controlled and highly regulated order during
merozoite egress and host cell invasion. The most prominent of these organelles, 
the rhoptries, are twinned, club-shaped structures with a body or bulb region
that tapers to a narrow neck as it meets the apical prominence of the merozoite. 
Different protein populations localise to the rhoptry bulb and neck, but the
function of many of these proteins and how they are spatially segregated within
the rhoptries is unknown. Using conditional disruption of the gene encoding the
only known glycolipid-anchored malarial rhoptry bulb protein, rhoptry-associated 
membrane antigen (RAMA), we demonstrate that RAMA is indispensable for blood
stage parasite survival. Contrary to previous suggestions, RAMA is not required
for trafficking of all rhoptry bulb proteins. Instead, RAMA-null parasites
display selective mislocalisation of a subset of rhoptry bulb and neck proteins
(RONs) and produce dysmorphic rhoptries that lack a distinct neck region. The
mutant parasites undergo normal intracellular development and egress but display 
a fatal defect in invasion and do not induce echinocytosis in target red blood
cells. Our results indicate that distinct pathways regulate biogenesis of the two
main rhoptry sub-compartments in the malaria parasite.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008049 
PMCID: PMC6750612
PMID: 31491036  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

