
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2019 Sep 16;13(9):e0007665. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0007665. eCollection 2019 Sep.

Fast emerging insecticide resistance in Aedes albopictus in Guangzhou, China:
Alarm to the dengue epidemic.

Su X(1), Guo Y(1), Deng J(1), Xu J(1), Zhou G(2), Zhou T(1), Li Y(1), Zhong D(2),
Kong L(1), Wang X(1), Liu M(1), Wu K(1), Yan G(2), Chen XG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology, School of Public Health, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Program in Public Health, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, United
States of America.

Dengue is one of the most serious mosquito-borne infectious diseases in the
world. Aedes albopictus is the most invasive mosquito and one of the primary
vectors of dengue. Vector control using insecticides is the only viable strategy 
to prevent dengue virus transmission. In Guangzhou, after the 2014 pandemic,
massive insecticides have been implemented. Massive insecticide use may lead to
the development of resistance, but few reports are available on the status of
insecticide resistance in Guangzhou after 2014. In this study, Ae. albopictus
were collected from four districts with varied dengue virus transmission
intensity in Guangzhou from 2015 to 2017. Adult Ae. albopictus insecticide
susceptibility to deltamethrin (0.03%), permethrin(0.25%), DDT(4%), malathion
(0.8%) and bendiocarb (0.1%) was determined by the standard WHO tube test, and
larval resistance bioassays were conducted using temephos, Bacillus thuringiensis
israelensis (Bti), pyriproxyfen (PPF) and hexaflumuron. Mutations at the
voltage-gated sodium channel (VGSC) gene and acetylcholinesterase (AChE) gene
were analyzed. The effect of cytochrome P450s on the resistance of Ae. albopictus
to deltamethrin was tested using the synergistic agent piperonyl butoxide (PBO). 
The results showed that Ae. albopictus populations have rapidly developed very
high resistances to multiple commonly used insecticides at all study areas except
malathion, Bti and hexaflumuron. We found 1534 codon mutations in the VGSC gene
that were significantly correlated with the resistance to pyrethroids and DDT,
and 11 synonymous mutations were also found in the gene. The resistance to
deltamethrin can be significantly reduced by PBO but may generated
cross-resistance to PPF. Fast emerging resistance in Ae. albopictus may affect
mosquito management and threaten the prevention and control of dengue, similar to
the resistance in Anopheles mosquitoes has prevented the elimination of malaria
and call for timely and guided insecticide management.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0007665 
PMCID: PMC6762209
PMID: 31525199  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

