
1. PLoS One. 2019 Sep 19;14(9):e0222681. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0222681.
eCollection 2019.

Distribution of the Duffy genotypes in Malaysian Borneo and its relation to
Plasmodium knowlesi malaria susceptibility.

de Silva JR(1), Amir A(1), Lau YL(1), Ooi CH(2), Fong MY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Sarawak State Health Department, Jalan Diplomatik, Off Jalan Bako, Kuching,
Sarawak, Malaysia.

The Duffy blood group plays a key role in Plasmodium knowlesi and Plasmodium
vivax invasion into human erythrocytes. The geographical distribution of the
Duffy alleles differs between regions with the FY*A allele having high
frequencies in many Asian populations, the FY*B allele is found predominately in 
European populations and the FY*Bes allele found predominantly in African
regions. A previous study in Peninsular Malaysia indicated high homogeneity of
the dominant FY*A/FY*A genotype. However, the distribution of the Duffy genotypes
in Malaysian Borneo is currently unknown. In the present study, the distribution 
of Duffy blood group genotypes and allelic frequencies among P. knowlesi infected
patients as well as healthy individuals in Malaysian Borneo were determined. A
total of 79 P. knowlesi patient blood samples and 76 healthy donor samples were
genotyped using allele specific polymerase chain reaction (ASP-PCR). Subsequently
a P. knowlesi invasion assay was carried out on FY*AB/ FY*A and FY*A/ FY*A Duffy 
genotype blood to investigate if either genotype conferred increased
susceptibility to P. knowlesi invasion. Our results show almost equal
distribution between the homozygous FY*A/FY*A and heterozygous FY*A/FY*B
genotypes. This is in stark contrast to the Duffy distribution in Peninsular
Malaysia and the surrounding Southeast Asian region which is dominantly
FY*A/FY*A. The mean percent invasion of FY*A/FY*A and FY*A/FY*B blood was not
significantly different indicating that neither blood group confers increased
susceptibility to P. knowlesi invasion.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0222681 
PMCID: PMC6752761
PMID: 31536563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

