
1. J Glob Infect Dis. 2019 Jul-Sep;11(3):118-122. doi: 10.4103/jgid.jgid_154_18.

Hemoglobin S and Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency Coinheritance in AS
and SS Individuals in Malaria-Endemic Region: A Study in Calabar, Nigeria.

Okafor IM(1), Okoroiwu HU(1), Ekechi CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Science, Hematology Unit, College of Medical 
Sciences, University of Calabar, Calabar, Nigeria.

Background: Malaria placed a huge burden on human life and has been reported to
be a key health problem affecting developing countries. This study was designed
to assay for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) status and malaria parasite
density of individuals with sickle cell gene in University of Calabar Teaching
Hospital, Calabar.
Subjects and Methods: The methemoglobin method was used to determine the G6PD
status. Thick blood films were used to ascertain the malaria parasite density
while hemoglobin genotype was determined using cellulose acetate paper
electrophoresis with tris ethylenediaminetetracetic acid borate buffer (pH 8.6). 
Thirty hemoglobin SS (HbSS) and 30 hemoglobin AS (HbAS) individuals were
recruited for the study while 30 hemoglobin AA (HbAA) individuals were recruited 
as control.
Results: The study showed a high frequency of G6PD deficiency (17.78%) in the
study area while G6PD deficiency was significantly (P < 0.05) higher in HbAA
individuals (33.33%) when compared to HbSS (10.00%) and HbAS (10.00%)
individuals. The prevalence of malaria parasitemia and parasite density was
comparable in the three hemoglobin variants. The distribution of malaria
parasitemia and parasite density in both gender among the various hemoglobin
variants showed no association (P > 0.05). G6PD deficiency distribution in both
gender were found to be comparable (P > 0.05). The distribution of malaria
parasitemia in the various hemoglobin variants in the G6PD-deficient individuals 
showed no significant difference (P > 0.5). However, the parasite density of the 
HbAS (3100 ± 1828.48 μL) and HbSS (2400 ± 1687.06 μL) were significantly lower
than that of HbAA (4040 ± 1529.44 μL).
Conclusion: The result of this study supports the hypothesis that inheriting the 
G6PD deficiency gene and sickle cell gene (both in homozygous and heterozygous
form) reduces the severity of malaria parasite infection and hence protects
against severe acute malaria while having less effect on infection.

DOI: 10.4103/jgid.jgid_154_18 
PMCID: PMC6733195
PMID: 31543654 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

