
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Sep 4;10:2087. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02087. eCollection
2019.

NK Cell IL-10 Production Requires IL-15 and IL-10 Driven STAT3 Activation.

Clark SE(1), Burrack KS(2), Jameson SC(2), Hamilton SE(2), Lenz LL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Center for Immunology,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States.

Natural killer (NK) cells can produce IFNγ or IL-10 to regulate inflammation and 
immune responses but the factors driving NK cell IL-10 secretion are
poorly-defined. Here, we identified NK cell-intrinsic STAT3 activation as vital
for IL-10 production during both systemic Listeria monocytogenes (Lm) infection
and following IL-15 cytokine/receptor complex (IL15C) treatment for experimental 
cerebral malaria (ECM). In both contexts, conditional Stat3 deficiency in NK
cells abrogated production of IL-10. Initial NK cell STAT3 phosphorylation was
driven by IL-15. During Lm infection, this required capture or presentation of
IL-15 by NK cell IL-15Rα. Persistent STAT3 activation was required to drive
measurable IL-10 secretion and required NK cell expression of IL-10Rα.
Survival-promoting effects of IL-15C treatment in ECM were dependent on NK cell
Stat3 while NK cell-intrinsic deficiency for Stat3, Il15ra, or Il10ra abrogated
NK cell IL-10 production and increased resistance against Lm. NK cell Stat3
deficiency did not impact production of IFNγ, indicating the STAT3 activation
initiated by IL-15 and amplified by IL-10 selectively drives the production of
anti-inflammatory IL-10 by responding NK cells.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02087 
PMCID: PMC6736993
PMID: 31552035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

