
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Sep 12;10:2150. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02150. eCollection
2019.

Application of Modeling Approaches to Explore Vaccine Adjuvant Mode-of-Action.

Buckley PR(1)(2), Alden K(2), Coccia M(3), Chalon A(3), Collignon C(3), Temmerman
ST(3), Didierlaurent AM(3), van der Most R(3), Timmis J(2)(4), Andersen CA(3),
Coles MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Electronic Engineering, University of York, York, United
Kingdom.
(3)GSK, Rixensart, Belgium.
(4)Faculty of Technology, University of Sunderland, Sunderland, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    Front Immunol. 2019 Dec 02;10:2905.

Novel adjuvant technologies have a key role in the development of next-generation
vaccines, due to their capacity to modulate the duration, strength and quality of
the immune response. The AS01 adjuvant is used in the malaria vaccine RTS,S/AS01 
and in the licensed herpes-zoster vaccine (Shingrix) where the vaccine has proven
its ability to generate protective responses with both robust humoral and T-cell 
responses. For many years, animal models have provided insights into adjuvant
mode-of-action (MoA), generally through investigating individual genes or
proteins. Furthermore, modeling and simulation techniques can be utilized to
integrate a variety of different data types; ranging from serum biomarkers to
large scale "omics" datasets. In this perspective we present a framework to
create a holistic integration of pre-clinical datasets and immunological
literature in order to develop an evidence-based hypothesis of AS01 adjuvant MoA,
creating a unified view of multiple experiments. Furthermore, we highlight how
holistic systems-knowledge can serve as a basis for the construction of models
and simulations supporting exploration of key questions surrounding adjuvant MoA.
Using the Systems-Biology-Graphical-Notation, a tool for graphical representation
of biological processes, we have captured high-level cellular behaviors and
interactions, and cytokine dynamics during the early immune response, which are
substantiated by a series of diagrams detailing cellular dynamics. Through
explicitly describing AS01 MoA we have built a consensus of understanding across 
multiple experiments, and so we present a framework to integrate modeling
approaches into exploring adjuvant MoA, in order to guide experimental design,
interpret results and inform rational design of vaccines.

Copyright Â© 2019 Buckley, Alden, Coccia, Chalon, Collignon, Temmerman,
Didierlaurent, van der Most, Timmis, Andersen and Coles.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02150 
PMCID: PMC6751289
PMID: 31572370 

Conflict of interest statement: CA, RM, AD, MC, and ST report ownership of GSK
shares and/or restricted GSK shares.

