
1. PLoS One. 2019 Oct 2;14(10):e0222915. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0222915.
eCollection 2019.

Application of metagenomic shotgun sequencing to detect vector-borne pathogens in
clinical blood samples.

Vijayvargiya P(1), Jeraldo PR(2)(3), Thoendel MJ(1), Greenwood-Quaintance KE(4), 
Esquer Garrigos Z(1), Sohail MR(1), Chia N(2)(3), Pritt BS(4), Patel R(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United
States of America.
(2)Department of Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United States of
America.
(3)Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United 
States of America.
(4)Division of Clinical Microbiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United
States of America.

BACKGROUND: Vector-borne pathogens are a significant public health concern
worldwide. Infections with these pathogens, some of which are emerging, are
likely under-recognized due to the lack of widely-available laboratory tests.
There is an urgent need for further advancement in diagnostic modalities to
detect new and known vector-borne pathogens. We evaluated the utility of
metagenomic shotgun sequencing (MGS) as a pathogen agnostic approach for
detecting vector-borne pathogens from human blood samples.
METHODS: Residual whole blood samples from patients with known infection with
Babesia microti, Borrelia hermsii, Plasmodium falciparum, Mansonella perstans,
Anaplasma phagocytophilum or Ehrlichia chaffeensis were studied. Samples
underwent DNA extraction, removal of human DNA, whole genome amplification, and
paired-end library preparation, followed by sequencing on Illumina HiSeq 2500.
Bioinformatic analysis was performed using the Livermore Metagenomics Analysis
Toolkit (LMAT), Metagenomic Phylogenetic Analysis (MetaPhlAn2), Genomic Origin
Through Taxonomic CHAllenge (GOTTCHA) and Kraken 2.
RESULTS: Eight samples were included in the study (2 samples each for P.
falciparum and A. phagocytophilum). An average of 27.5 million read pairs was
generated per sample (range, 18.3-38.8 million) prior to removal of human reads. 
At least one of the analytic tools was able to detect four of six organisms at
the genus level, and the organism present in five of eight specimens at the
species level. Mansonella and Ehrlichia species were not detected by any of the
tools; however, mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I amino acid sequence 
analysis suggested the presence of M. perstans genetic material.
CONCLUSIONS: MGS is a promising tool with the potential to evolve as a
non-hypothesis driven diagnostic test to detect vector-borne pathogens, including
protozoa and helminths.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0222915 
PMCID: PMC6774502
PMID: 31577814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have read the journal's policy and
the authors of this manuscript have the following competing interests: RP reports
grants from CD Diagnostics, Merck, Hutchison Biofilm Medical Solutions,
Accelerate Diagnostics, ContraFect, TenNor Therapeutics Limited and Shionogi. RP 
is a paid consultant of Curetis, Specific Technologies, Next Gen Diagnostics,
PathoQuest, and Qvella; monies are paid to Mayo Clinic. RP receives travel
reimbursement from ASM and IDSA, an editorâ€™s stipend from ASM and IDSA, and
honoraria from the NBME, Up-to-Date and the Infectious Diseases Board Review
Course. The authors would like to declare the following patents/patent
applications, none of which are associated with this research: Bordetella
pertussis/parapertussis PCR issued [8507201], a patent on a device/method for
sonication with royalties paid by Samsung to Mayo Clinic [8076117], and a patent 
on an anti-biofilm substance issued [8802414]. This does not alter our adherence 
to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.

