
1. Swiss Med Wkly. 2019 Oct 27;149:w20138. doi: 10.4414/smw.2019.20138. eCollection 
2019 Oct 7.

The role of autophagy in HER2-targeted therapy.

Janser FA(1), Tschan MP(1), Langer R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Bern, Switzerland / Graduate School for 
Cellular and Biomedical Sciences, University of Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Pathology, University of Bern, Switzerland.

Macroautophagy (hereafter referred to as autophagy) is a highly conserved,
intracellular degradation process characterised by de novo formation of
autophagosomes. These double membraned organelles engulf and deliver cargo, for
example damaged organelles and protein aggregates, to lysosomes for degradation
and recycling. Autophagy is primarily a stress response mechanism activated to
survive unfavourable conditions such as starvation or hypoxia. In addition,
autophagy functions in differentiation, immune responses against invading
microorganisms and tissue remodelling in mammalian cells. Besides its
cytoprotective nature, and depending on the context, autophagy can as well
support cell death. Based on autophagy&rsquo;s cytoprotective, cytotoxic and
developmental influences, it does not come as a surprise that this mechanism is
involved in tumourigenesis, tumour development and the response to anticancer
therapies. HER2 is a receptor tyrosine kinase that activates downstream
signalling pathways involved in cellular survival, growth and proliferation.
Amplification of the gene and subsequent overexpression of the HER2 protein lead 
to increased activation of downstream signalling and are implicated in several
cancer types. HER2-targeted therapies are valuable treatment options for HER2
amplified cancers. However, pre-existing and acquired resistance remain a
clinical challenge. Autophagy has been discussed in several scenarios in HER2
amplified cancers. Generally, HER2+ tumours have been shown to exhibit low levels
of proteins essential for autophagy. Moreover, a protein involved in autophagy
activation, Beclin-1, was shown to interact directly with HER2 at the cellular
membrane. The signalling cascade activated by HER2 also activates mTOR, a
negative regulator of autophagy. In the context of resistance formation against
HER2-targeting treatment, autophagy has often been reported to be upregulated,
and resistance has been shown to be abrogated through autophagy inhibition. Since
the autophagy inhibitors chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are approved drugs
for the treatment of malaria, autophagy inhibition is discussed as an option to
enhance the effect of certain anticancer treatments or to overcome resistance
against cancer therapies. In this review we focus on autophagy and its role in
the response to HER2-targeted therapies for breast and gastrointestinal tumours.

DOI: 10.4414/smw.2019.20138 
PMID: 31656036  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

