
1. Acta Trop. 2020 Feb;202:105252. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.105252. Epub 2019
Oct 31.

First report of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) variants (Mahidol and
Acores) from malaria-endemic regions of northeast India and their functional
evaluations in-silico.

Bharti RS(1), Vashisht K(1), Ahmed N(1), Nayak A(1), Pande V(2), Mishra N(3).

Author information: 
(1)ICMR-National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector - 8, Dwarka, New Delhi
110077, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Kumaun University, Nainital, Uttarakhand, India.
(3)ICMR-National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector - 8, Dwarka, New Delhi
110077, India. Electronic address: neelima@mrcindia.org.

G6PD deficiency results from numerous mutations in the G6PD gene and can cause
alterations in enzyme function up to varying degrees. P. vivax malaria infections
require G6PD deficiency screening because of the potential risk of haemolysis by 
the gametocytocidal drug (primaquine) during the radical treatment. The present
study investigated the incidence of G6PD deficiency from northeast India and
further, molecular characterization was performed. During 2014-16, a total of
1,015 patients from four north-eastern states of India (Tripura, Mizoram,
Meghalaya & Arunachal Pradesh), were screened for G6PD deficiency, using
Beutler's fluorescence spot test (FST) and confirmed with SPAN G6PD kit. The
deficient individuals (55/1015, 5.4%) were further characterized by PCR-RFLP and 
DNA sequencing except one case of lost to follow up. As observed by FST, the
frequency of G6PD deficient males (42/538, 7.8%) were found to be higher than
females (13/477, 2.73%), (p < 0.0001). Two non-synonymous mutations; G6PD-D
(Mahidol)487A (48/54, 88.9%; 36 hemizygous males, 8 homozygous and 4 heterozygous
females) and G6PD-D (Acores)595T (2/54, 3.7%) were identified. Remaining (4/54,
7.4%) individuals could not be characterized. Molecular modeling and dynamic
simulations were performed for the G6PD wild-type (G6PD-WT) enzyme and its
variants. The in-silico results demonstrated alterations in the secondary
structures & crucial loss of ligand-protein interactions, which might result in
reduced enzyme function, leading to enzyme deficiency. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first report to document G6PD-Mahidol and G6PD-Acores
variants from malaria-endemic regions of northeast India, and provided molecular 
insights on the varied genetic makeup of the studied population.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.105252 
PMID: 31678235  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no competing interests.

