
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2019 Nov 15;13(11):e0007850. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0007850. eCollection 2019 Nov.

A glance of the blood stage transcriptome of a Southeast Asian Plasmodium ovale
isolate.

Brashear AM(1)(2), Roobsoong W(3), Siddiqui FA(2), Nguitragool W(4), Sattabongkot
J(3), LÃ³pez-Uribe MM(1), Miao J(2), Cui L(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania State University, Department of
Entomology, University Park, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, 
United States of America.
(3)Mahidol Vivax Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University,
Thailand.
(4)Department of Molecular Tropical Medicine and Genetics, Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Thailand.

Plasmodium ovale accounts for a disproportionate number of travel-related malaria
cases. This parasite is understudied since there is a reliance on clinical
samples. We collected a P. ovale curtisi parasite isolate from a clinical case in
western Thailand and performed RNA-seq analysis on the blood stage
transcriptomes. Using both de novo assembly and alignment-based methods, we
detected the transcripts for 6628 out of 7280 annotated genes. For those lacking 
evidence of expression, the vast majority belonged to the PIR and STP1 gene
families. We identified new splicing patterns for over 2500 genes, and mapped at 
least one untranslated region for over half of all annotated genes. Our analysis 
also detected a notable presence of anti-sense transcripts for over 10% of P.
ovale curtisi genes. This transcriptomic analysis provides new insights into the 
blood-stage biology of this neglected parasite.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0007850 
PMCID: PMC6881071
PMID: 31730621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

