
1. Immunol Rev. 2020 Jan;293(1):25-37. doi: 10.1111/imr.12798. Epub 2019 Nov 24.

Differentiation and adaptation of natural killer cells for anti-malarial
immunity.

Goodier MR(1), Wolf AS(1)(2), Riley EM(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, UK.
(2)Department of Infection and Immunity, University College London, London, UK.
(3)The Roslin Institute and Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, University
of Edinburgh, Midlothian, UK.

Natural killer cells employ a diverse arsenal of effector mechanisms to target
intracellular pathogens. Differentiation of natural killer (NK) cell activation
pathways occurs along a continuum from reliance on innate pro-inflammatory
cytokines and stress-induced host ligands through to interaction with signals
derived from acquired immune responses. Importantly, the degree of functional
differentiation of the NK cell lineage influences the magnitude and specificity
of interactions with host cells infected with viruses, bacteria, fungi, and
parasites. Individual humans possess a vast diversity of distinct NK cell clones,
each with the capacity to vary along this functional differentiation pathway,
which - when combined - results in unique individual responses to different
infections. Here we summarize these NK cell differentiation events, review
evidence for direct interaction of malaria-infected host cells with NK cells and 
assess how innate inflammatory signals induced by malaria parasite-associated
molecular patterns influence the indirect activation and function of NK cells.
Finally, we discuss evidence that anti-malarial immunity develops in parallel
with advancing NK differentiation, coincident with a loss of reliance on
inflammatory signals, and a refined capacity of NK cells to target malaria
parasites more precisely, particularly through antibody-dependent mechanisms.

Â© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imr.12798 
PMID: 31762040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

