
1. J Int Med Res. 2019 Nov 28:300060519887637. doi: 10.1177/0300060519887637. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Bioinformatics analysis reveals 6 key biomarkers associated with non-small-cell
lung cancer.

Dai B(1), Ren LQ(1), Han XY(1), Liu DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Regulation and Breeding of Grassland
Livestock, School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, P. R.
China.

OBJECTIVE: Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for >85% of lung cancers, 
and its incidence is increasing. We explored expression differences between NSCLC
and normal cells and predicted potential target sites for detection and diagnosis
of NSCLC.
METHODS: Three microarray datasets from the Gene Expression Omnibus database were
analyzed using GEO2R. Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
enrichment analysis were conducted. Then, the String database, Cytoscape, and
MCODE plug-in were used to construct a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network 
and screen hub genes. Overall and disease-free survival of hub genes were
analyzed using Kaplan-Meier curves, and the relationship between expression
patterns of target genes and tumor grades were analyzed and validated. Gene set
enrichment analysis and receiver operating characteristic curves were used to
verify enrichment pathways and diagnostic performance of hub genes.
RESULTS: In total, 293 differentially expressed genes were identified and mainly 
enriched in cell cycle, ECM-receptor interaction, and malaria. In the PPI
network, 36 hub genes were identified, of which 6 were found to play significant 
roles in carcinogenesis of NSCLC: CDC20, ECT2, KIF20A, MKI67, TPX2, and TYMS.
CONCLUSION: The identified target genes can be used as biomarkers for the
detection and diagnosis of NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1177/0300060519887637 
PMID: 31775549 

