
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Dec 4;9(1):18333. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-54854-z.

Overexpression of the HECT ubiquitin ligase PfUT prolongs the intraerythrocytic
cycle and reduces invasion efficiency of Plasmodium falciparum.

Jankowska-DÃ¶llken M(1), Sanchez CP(1), Cyrklaff M(1), Lanzer M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infectious Diseases, Parasitology, Heidelberg University Hospital,
Im Neuenheimer Feld 324, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Center of Infectious Diseases, Parasitology, Heidelberg University Hospital,
Im Neuenheimer Feld 324, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
michael_lanzer@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

The glms ribozyme system has been used as an amenable tool to conditionally
control expression of genes of interest. It is generally assumed that insertion
of the ribozyme sequence does not affect expression of the targeted gene in the
absence of the inducer glucosamine-6-phosphate, although experimental support for
this assumption is scarce. Here, we report the unexpected finding that
integration of the glms ribozyme sequence in the 3' untranslated region of a gene
encoding a HECT E3 ubiquitin ligase, termed Plasmodium falciparum ubiquitin
transferase (PfUT), increased steady state RNA and protein levels 2.5-fold in the
human malaria parasite P. falciparum. Overexpression of pfut resulted in an S/M
phase-associated lengthening of the parasite's intraerythrocytic developmental
cycle and a reduced merozoite invasion efficiency. The addition of glucosamine
partially restored the wild type phenotype. Our study suggests a role of PfUT in 
controlling cell cycle progression and merozoite invasion. Our study further
raises awareness regarding unexpected effects on gene expression when inserting
the glms ribozyme sequence into a gene locus.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-54854-z 
PMCID: PMC6893019
PMID: 31797898 

