
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;11(12):3523-3528. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evz262.

COUSIN (COdon Usage Similarity INdex): A Normalized Measure of Codon Usage
Preferences.

Bourret J(1), Alizon S(1), Bravo IG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Laboratory MIVEGEC (CNRS, IRD,
Uni Montpellier), Montpellier, France.

Codon Usage Preferences (CUPrefs) describe the unequal usage of synonymous codons
at the gene, chromosome, or genome levels. Numerous indices have been developed
to evaluate CUPrefs, either in absolute terms or with respect to a reference. We 
introduce the normalized index COUSIN (for COdon Usage Similarity INdex), that
compares the CUPrefs of a query against those of a reference and normalizes the
output over a Null Hypothesis of random codon usage. The added value of COUSIN is
to be easily interpreted, both quantitatively and qualitatively. An eponymous
software written in Python3 is available for local or online use
(http://cousin.ird.fr). This software allows for an easy and complete analysis of
CUPrefs via COUSIN, includes seven other indices, and provides additional
features such as statistical analyses, clustering, and CUPrefs optimization for
gene expression. We illustrate the flexibility of COUSIN and highlight its
advantages by analyzing the complete coding sequences of eight divergent genomes.
Strikingly, COUSIN captures a bimodal distribution in the CUPrefs of human and
chicken genes hitherto unreported with such precision. COUSIN opens new
perspectives to uncover CUPrefs specificities in genomes in a practical,
informative, and user-friendly way.

Â© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evz262 
PMCID: PMC6934141
PMID: 31800035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

