
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Dec 17;116(51):25764-25772. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1914633116. Epub 2019 Dec 4.

Functional genetic validation of key genes conferring insecticide resistance in
the major African malaria vector, Anopheles gambiae.

Adolfi A(1), Poulton B(1), Anthousi A(1), Macilwee S(1), Ranson H(1), Lycett
GJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, L3 5QA
Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(2)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, L3 5QA
Liverpool, United Kingdom Gareth.Lycett@lstmed.ac.uk.

Resistance in Anopheles gambiae to members of all 4 major classes (pyrethroids,
carbamates, organochlorines, and organophosphates) of public health insecticides 
limits effective control of malaria transmission in Africa. Increase in
expression of detoxifying enzymes has been associated with insecticide
resistance, but their direct functional validation in An. gambiae is still
lacking. Here, we perform transgenic analysis using the GAL4/UAS system to
examine insecticide resistance phenotypes conferred by increased expression of
the 3 genes-Cyp6m2, Cyp6p3, and Gste2-most often found up-regulated in resistant 
An. gambiae We report evidence in An. gambiae that organophosphate and
organochlorine resistance is conferred by overexpression of GSTE2 in a broad
tissue profile. Pyrethroid and carbamate resistance is bestowed by similar Cyp6p3
overexpression, and Cyp6m2 confers only pyrethroid resistance when overexpressed 
in the same tissues. Conversely, such Cyp6m2 overexpression increases
susceptibility to the organophosphate malathion, presumably due to conversion to 
the more toxic metabolite, malaoxon. No resistant phenotypes are conferred when
either Cyp6 gene overexpression is restricted to the midgut or oenocytes,
indicating that neither tissue is involved in insecticide resistance mediated by 
the candidate P450s examined. Validation of genes conferring resistance provides 
markers to guide control strategies, and the observed negative cross-resistance
due to Cyp6m2 gives credence to proposed dual-insecticide strategies to overcome 
pyrethroid resistance. These transgenic An. gambiae-resistant lines are being
used to test the "resistance-breaking" efficacy of active compounds early in
their development.

Copyright Â© 2019 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1914633116 
PMCID: PMC6926047
PMID: 31801878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.

