
1. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 2019 Jun 24;13(2):206-213. eCollection 2019 Jun.

Identification of Alleles in the MSP1 Gene Related to Complicated Malaria in
Patients Infected with Plasmodium falciparum in Southeast of Iran.

Habibi-Shorkaei BH(1), Motevalli-Haghi A(1), Nateghpour M(1)(2), Farivar L(1),
Hajjaran H(1), Etemadi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology and Mycology, School of Public Health, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Center for Research of Endemic Parasites of Iran, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Background: To overcome human malaria problem several solutions have been
employed including extensive studies in the field of Plasmodia relevant antigens.
The aim of this study was to determine allelic variation in the MSP1 gene of
Plasmodium falciparum among some falciparum malaria-infected patients in
Southeastern Iran.
Methods: Twenty P. falciparum positive cases were enrolled from Sistan and
Baluchistan Province, southeastern Iran in 2013-15. From each case, 1.5ml of
peripheral blood was collected into EDTA contained tubes. Thick and thin blood
smears were stained with standard Giemsa stain and were checked with conventional
microscopical method. DNA was extracted from blood samples and amplification of
block 2 MSP1 was performed using specific primers. Gel electrophoresis was done
and results showed some amplification fragments corresponding to block 2 regions 
of Pf MSP1 gene. Finally, four samples from different allelic types were sent for
sequencing process.
Results: Fragments were different in size, so classified into six allelic types
as kinds of 1-6 based on happening frequencies. Digestion of PCR products
revealed two sub allelic types (A and B) within allelic types 2 and 3, but not in
allelic types 1, 4, 5 and 6. Twenty percent of samples were sent for sequencing. 
Sequence alignment showed 78.95% to 91.83% identity between samples.
Conclusion: Identity between samples and phylogenetic tree revealed that there is
an extensive diversity range among isolates. Fifty percent of the isolates were
under the risk of complicated malaria. Two of these patients (10%) needed special
care and recovery was obtained after getting hospital services.

CopyrightÂ© Iranian Society of Medical Entomology & Tehran University of Medical
Sciences.


PMCID: PMC6885142
PMID: 31803782 

