
1. Microorganisms. 2019 Dec 4;7(12). pii: E649. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms7120649.

Blastocystis Colonization Is Associated with Increased Diversity and Altered Gut 
Bacterial Communities in Healthy Malian Children.

Kodio A(1)(2), Coulibaly D(3), Koné AK(3), Konaté S(3), Doumbo S(3), Guindo A(3),
Bittar F(2)(4), Gouriet F(2)(4), Raoult D(2)(4), Thera MA(3), Ranque S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Aix Marseille Université, Institut de Recherche pour le Développement,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, Service de Santé des Armées, VITROME: 
Vecteurs - Infections Tropicales et Méditerranéennes, 19-21 Boulevard Jean
Moulin, 13005 Marseille, France.
(2)IHU Méditerranée Infection, 19-21 Bd Jean Moulin, 13005 Marseille, France.
(3)Malaria Research and Training Centre-International Center for Excellence in
Research (MRTC-ICER), Department of Epidemiology of Parasitic Diseases, Faculty
of Medicine and Dentistry, Université des Sciences, des Techniques et des
Technologies de Bamako, Point G, BP 1805 Bamako, Mali.
(4)Aix Marseille Université, Institut de Recherche pour le Développement,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, Service de Santé des Armées, MEPHI:
Microbes, Evolution, Phylogénie et Infection, 19-21 Boulevard Jean Moulin, 13005 
Marseille, France.

Blastocystis is the most common protozoan colonizing the gut of vertebrates. It
modulates the human digestive microbiota in the absence of inflammation and
gastrointestinal disease. Although it has been associated with human diseases,
including inflammatory bowel disease, its pathogenicity remains controversial.
This study aimed to assess the influence of Blastocystis on the gut bacterial
communities in healthy children. We conducted a cross-sectional study on 147
Blastocystis-colonized and 149 Blastocystis-noncolonized Malian children, with
Blastocystis colonization assessed by real-time PCR and gut microbial communities
characterized via 16S rRNA gene (Illumina MiSeq) sequencing and bioinformatics
analysis. The gut microbiota diversity was higher in Blastocystis-colonized
compared to Blastocystis-noncolonized children. The phyla Firmicutes,
Elusimicrobia, Lentisphaerae, and Euryarchaeota were higher in
Blastocystis-colonized children, whereas Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria,
unassigned bacteria, and Deinococcus-Thermus were higher in
Blastocystis-noncolonized children. Moreover, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii
(family Ruminococcaceae) and Roseburia sp. (family Lachnospiraceae) abundance was
higher in Blastocystis-colonized children. We conclude that Blastocystis
colonization is significantly associated with a higher diversity of the gut
bacterial communities in healthy children, while it is not associated with the
presence of potentially pathogenic bacteria in the human gut.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms7120649 
PMCID: PMC6956266
PMID: 31817168 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

