
1. Vet Res. 2019 Dec 11;50(1):108. doi: 10.1186/s13567-019-0716-1.

Functional analysis of the Frzb2 gene in Schistosoma japonicum.

Cheng G(1)(2), Li X(2)(3), Qin F(2)(3), Xu R(1)(2), Zhang Y(1)(2), Liu J(2), Gu
S(4), Jin Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shanxi Agricultural
University, Shanxi, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Parasitology, Ministry of Agriculture of China,
Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Shanghai, China.
(3)College of Life Sciences, Shanghai Normal University, Shanghai, China.
(4)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shanxi Agricultural
University, Shanxi, China. shpgu@163.com.
(5)Key Laboratory of Animal Parasitology, Ministry of Agriculture of China,
Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Shanghai, China. yameijin@shvri.ac.cn.

Schistosomiasis is a globally important helminthic disease of humans and animals,
and it is the second most common parasitic disease after malaria. Eggs produced
by mature females are responsible for the disease's occurrence and spread. Frzb2,
a secreted frizzled-related protein, can inhibit Wnt signalling by competitive
binding to the specific frizzled protein receptor. In this study, the complete
gene sequence of SjFrzb2 was obtained by using 3'-rapid amplification of cDNA
ends technology. SjFrzb2 transcript levels at different stages of S. japonicum
maturation were evaluated by quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis. SjFrzb2 was 
expressed at all developmental stages examined and exhibited the highest
transcription level in 7-day-old worms, then gradually decreased during the
growth and developmental stages to reach the lowest level at 18Â days
post-infection. SjFrzb2 gene expression was higher in female worms than in male
worms and was significantly higher in female worms from a single-sex infection
than in female worms from a bisexual infection. The functions of SjFrzb2 were
explored via a small interfering RNA-based gene silencing approach and the
soaking method. The results showed that SjFrzb2 gene knockdown impaired the
growth and development of S. japonicum in mice, affecting not only the survival
and morphological structure of the worms but also their reproductive ability and 
the viability of the produced eggs. Collectively, these observations imply that
Frzb2 may be a novel target for the development of immuno- and/or small
molecule-based therapeutics to control schistosomiasis fecundity and
transmission.

DOI: 10.1186/s13567-019-0716-1 
PMCID: PMC6907234
PMID: 31829289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

