
1. Int J Parasitol. 2020 Jan;50(1):1-18. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2019.10.004. Epub
2019 Dec 16.

Detecting sequence variants in clinically important protozoan parasites.

Calarco L(1), Barratt J(2), Ellis J(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Technology Sydney, PO Box 123,
Broadway, NSW 2007, Australia. Electronic address:
Larissa.M.Calarco@student.uts.edu.au.
(2)School of Life Sciences, University of Technology Sydney, PO Box 123,
Broadway, NSW 2007, Australia.

Second and third generation sequencing methods are crucial for population genetic
studies, and variant detection is a popular approach for exploiting this sequence
data. While mini- and microsatellites are historically useful markers for
studying important Protozoa such as Toxoplasma and Plasmodium spp., detecting
non-repetitive variants such as those found in genes can be fundamental to
investigating a pathogen's biology. These variants, namely single nucleotide
polymorphisms and insertions and deletions, can help elucidate the genetic basis 
of an organism's pathogenicity, identify selective pressures, and resolve
phylogenetic relationships. They also have the added benefit of possessing a
comparatively low mutation rate, which contributes to their stability. However,
there is a plethora of variant analysis tools with nuanced pipelines and
conflicting recommendations for best practise, which can be confounding. This
lack of standardisation means that variant analysis requires careful parameter
optimisation, an understanding of its limitations, and the availability of high
quality data. This review explores the value of variant detection when applied to
non-model organisms such as clinically important protozoan pathogens. The
limitations of current methods are discussed, including special considerations
that require the end-users' attention to ensure that the results generated are
reproducible, and the biological conclusions drawn are valid.

Copyright Â© 2019 Australian Society for Parasitology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2019.10.004 
PMID: 31857072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

