
1. ACS Infect Dis. 2020 Feb 14;6(2):205-214. doi: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.9b00203. Epub 
2020 Jan 13.

Impact of Field Isolate Identified Nonsynonymous Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms 
on Plasmodium falciparum Equilibrative Nucleoside Transporter 1 Inhibitor
Efficacy.

Sosa Y, Egbo D, Akabas MH.

Plasmodium falciparum causes the most severe form of malaria and causes
approximately 500â€¯000 deaths per year. P. falciparum parasites resistant to
current antimalarial treatments are spreading. Therefore, it is imperative to
develop new antimalarial drugs. Malaria parasites are purine auxotrophic. They
rely on purine import from the host erythrocyte via Equilibrative Nucleoside
Transporters (ENTs). Recently, inhibitors of the P. falciparum ENT1 (PfENT1) that
inhibit proliferation of malaria parasites in culture have been identified as
promising starting points for antimalarial drug development. Genome sequencing of
P. falciparum field isolates has identified nonsynonymous single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the gene encoding PfENT1. Here we evaluate the impact of 
these PfENT1 SNPs on purine substrate affinity and inhibitor efficacy. We
expressed each PfENT1-SNP in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Using
PfENT1-SNP-expressing yeast, we characterized the PfENT1 purine substrate
affinity using radiolabeled substrate uptake inhibition experiments. Four of the 
13 SNPs altered affinity for one or more purines by up to 7-fold. Three of the
SNPs reduced the potency of a subset of the inhibitors by up to 7-fold. One SNP, 
Q284E, reduced the potency of all six inhibitor chemotypes. We tested drug
efficacy in available parasite strains containing PfENT1 SNPs. While
PfENT1-SNP-expressing yeast had decreased sensitivity to PfENT1 inhibitors,
parasite strains containing SNPs showed similar or more potent inhibition of
proliferation with all PfENT1 inhibitors. Thus, parasite strains bearing PfENT1
SNPs are not resistant to these PfENT1 inhibitors. This supports PfENT1 as a
promising target for further development of novel antimalarial drugs.

DOI: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.9b00203 
PMID: 31876139 

