
1. Parasitol Res. 2020 Feb;119(2):447-463. doi: 10.1007/s00436-019-06558-6. Epub
2019 Dec 27.

High prevalence and genetic diversity of Haemoproteus columbae (Haemosporida:
Haemoproteidae) in feral pigeons Columba livia in Cape Town, South Africa.

Nebel C(1), Harl J(2), Pajot A(1)(3), Weissenböck H(2), Amar A(1), Sumasgutner
P(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)FitzPatrick Institute of African Ornithology, DST-NRF Centre of Excellence,
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)Institute of Pathology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Bordeaux Sciences Agro, 1 Cours du Général de Gaulle, Gradignan, France.
(4)FitzPatrick Institute of African Ornithology, DST-NRF Centre of Excellence,
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. petra.sumasgutner@univie.ac.at.
(5)Konrad Lorenz Forschungsstelle, Core Facility for Behaviour and Cognition,
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. petra.sumasgutner@univie.ac.at.

In this study, we explore blood parasite prevalence, infection intensity, and
co-infection levels in an urban population of feral pigeons Columba livia in Cape
Town. We analyze the effect of blood parasites on host body condition and the
association between melanin expression in the host's plumage and parasite
infection intensity and co-infection levels. Relating to the haemosporidian
parasite itself, we study their genetic diversity by means of DNA barcoding
(cytochrome b) and show the geographic and host distribution of related parasite 
lineages in pigeons worldwide. Blood from 195 C. livia individuals was collected 
from April to June 2018. Morphometric measurements and plumage melanism were
recorded from every captured bird. Haemosporidian prevalence and infection
intensity were determined by screening blood smears and parasite lineages by DNA 
sequencing. Prevalence of Haemoproteus spp. was high at 96.9%. The body condition
of the hosts was negatively associated with infection intensity. However,
infection intensity was unrelated to plumage melanism. The cytochrome b sequences
revealed the presence of four Haemoproteus lineages in our population of pigeons,
which show high levels of co-occurrence within individual birds. Three lineages
(HAECOL1, COLIV03, COQUI05) belong to Haemoproteus columbae and differ only by
0.1% to 0.8% in the cytochrome b gene. Another lineage (COLIV06) differs by 8.3% 
from the latter ones and is not linked to a morphospecies, yet. No parasites of
the genera Leucocytozoon and Plasmodium were detected.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-019-06558-6 
PMCID: PMC6985069
PMID: 31883048  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

