
1. mSphere. 2020 Jan 8;5(1). pii: e00921-19. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00921-19.

Influence of Plasmodium falciparum Calcium-Dependent Protein Kinase 5 (PfCDPK5)
on the Late Schizont Stage Phosphoproteome.

Blomqvist K(1)(2)(3)(4), Helmel M(5)(6), Wang C(7), Absalon S(1)(2)(3), Labunska 
T(1)(2)(3), Rudlaff RM(1)(2)(3), Adapa S(7), Jiang R(7), Steen H(5)(6), Dvorin
JD(8)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(7)Center for Global Health & Infectious Diseases Research, Department of Global 
Health, College of Public Health, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida,
USA.
(8)Division of Infectious Diseases, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA jeffrey.dvorin@childrens.harvard.edu.

Protein kinases are important mediators of signal transduction in cellular
pathways, and calcium-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs) compose a unique class of
calcium-dependent kinases present in plants and apicomplexans, including
Plasmodium parasites, the causative agents of malaria. During the asexual stage
of infection, the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum grows inside red
blood cells, and P. falciparum calcium-dependent protein kinase 5 (PfCDPK5) is
required for egress from the host cell. In this paper, we characterize the
late-schizont-stage P. falciparum phosphoproteome by performing large-scale
phosphoproteomic profiling on tightly synchronized parasites just prior to
egress, identifying 2,704 phosphorylation sites on 919 proteins. Using a
conditional knockdown of PfCDPK5, we identify 58 phosphorylation sites on 50
proteins with significant reduction in levels of PfCDPK5-deficient parasites.
Furthermore, gene ontology analysis of the identified proteins reveals enrichment
in transmembrane- and membrane-associated proteins and in proteins associated
with transport activity. Among the identified proteins is PfNPT1, a member of the
apicomplexan-specific novel putative transporter (NPT) family of proteins. We
show that PfNPT1 is a potential substrate of PfCDPK5 and that PfNPT1 localizes to
the parasite plasma membrane. Importantly, P. falciparum egress relies on many
proteins unique to Apicomplexa that are therefore attractive targets for
antimalarial therapeutics.IMPORTANCE The malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum
is a major cause of morbidity and mortality globally. The P. falciparum parasite 
proliferates inside red blood cells during the blood stage of infection, and
egress from the red blood cell is critical for parasite survival. P. falciparum
calcium-dependent protein kinase 5 (PfCDPK5) is essential for egress; parasites
deficient in PfCDPK5 remain trapped inside their host cells. We have used a
label-free quantitative mass spectrometry approach to identify the
phosphoproteome of schizont-stage parasites just prior to egress and identify 50 
proteins that display a significant reduction in phosphorylation in
PfCDPK5-deficient parasites. We show that a member of the Apicomplexan-specific
transport protein family, PfNPT1 is a potential substrate of PfCDPK5 and is
localized to the parasite plasma membrane. P. falciparum egress requires several 
proteins not present in human cells, thus making this pathway an ideal target for
new therapeutics.

Copyright Â© 2020 Blomqvist et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00921-19 
PMCID: PMC6952208
PMID: 31915223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

