
1. J Immunol Res. 2019 Dec 22;2019:2691808. doi: 10.1155/2019/2691808. eCollection
2019.

TLR7 Modulated T Cell Response in the Mesenteric Lymph Node of Schistosoma
japonicum-Infected C57BL/6 Mice.

Qu J(1), Yu X(1), Jin C(1), Feng Y(1), Xie S(1), Xie H(1), Yang Q(1), Qi Y(1),
Qiu H(1), Chen H(2), Mu J(3), Zhou Y(4), Huang J(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Second Affiliated Hospital, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Allergy
& Clinical Immunology, The State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou
Medical University, Guangzhou 510260, China.
(2)Guangdong Pharmaceutical University, Guangzhou 510006, China.
(3)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(4)College of Pharmacy, Guangzhou Medical University, 510182 Guangzhou, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Tropical Diseases Control (Sun Yat-sen University), Ministry
of Education, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, China.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play an important role in regulating immune responses 
during pathogen infection. However, roles of TLRs on T cells reside in the
mesenteric lymph node (MLN) were not be fully elucidated in the course of S.
japonicum infection. In this study, T lymphocytes from the mesenteric lymph node 
(MLN) of S. japonicum-infected mice were isolated and the expression and roles of
TLR2, TLR3, TLR4, and TLR7 on both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were compared. We found 
that the expression of TLR7 was increased in the MLN cells of S.
japonicum-infected mice, particularly in CD4+ and CD8+ T cells (P < 0.05). R848, 
a TLR7 agonist, could enhance the production of IFN-γ from MLN T cells of
infected mice (P < 0.05), especially in CD8+ T cells (P < 0.01). In TLR7 gene
knockedout (KO) mice, the S. japonicum infection caused a significant decrease (P
< 0.05) of the expression of CD25 and CD69, as well as the production of IFN-γ
and IL-4 inducted by PMA plus ionomycin on both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.
Furthermore, the decreased level of IFN-γ and IL-4 in the supernatants of SEA- or
SWA-stimulated mesenteric lymphocytes was detected (P < 0.05). Our results
indicated that S. japonicum infection could induce the TLR7 expression on T cells
in the MLN of C57BL/6 mice, and TLR7 mediates T cell response in the early phase 
of infection.

Copyright © 2019 Jiale Qu et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/2691808 
PMCID: PMC6942828
PMID: 31930147  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

