
1. Microorganisms. 2020 Jan 25;8(2). pii: E174. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8020174.

Stringent Selection of Knobby Plasmodium falciparum-Infected Erythrocytes during 
Cytoadhesion at Febrile Temperature.

Dörpinghaus M(1), Fürstenwerth F(1), Roth LK(1), Bouws P(1), Rakotonirinalalao
M(1), Jordan V(1), Sauer M(1), Rehn T(1), Pansegrau E(1), Höhn K(1),
Mesén-Ramírez P(1), Bachmann A(1), Lorenzen S(1), Roeder T(2), Metwally NG(1),
Bruchhaus I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, 20359 Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Molecular Physiology Department, Zoological Institute, Christian-Albrechts
University Kiel, 24118 Kiel, Germany.

Changes in the erythrocyte membrane induced by Plasmodium falciparum invasion
allow cytoadhesion of infected erythrocytes (IEs) to the host endothelium, which 
can lead to severe complications. Binding to endothelial cell receptors (ECRs) is
mainly mediated by members of the P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1
(PfEMP1) family, encoded by var genes. Malaria infection causes several common
symptoms, with fever being the most apparent. In this study, the effects of
febrile conditions on cytoadhesion of predominately knobless erythrocytes
infected with the laboratory isolate IT4 to chondroitin-4-sulfate A (CSA),
intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1), and CD36 were investigated. IEs
enriched for binding to CSA at 40 °C exhibited significantly increased binding
capacity relative to parasites enriched at 37 °C. This interaction was due to
increased var2csa expression and trafficking of the corresponding PfEMP1 to the
IE surface as well as to a selection of knobby IEs. Furthermore, the enrichment
of IEs to ICAM-1 at 40 °C also led to selection of knobby IEs over knobless IEs, 
whereas enrichment on CD36 did not lead to a selection. In summary, these
findings demonstrate that knobs are crucial for parasitic survival in the host,
especially during fever episodes, and thus, that selection pressure on the
formation of knobs could be controlled by the host.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8020174 
PMCID: PMC7074740
PMID: 31991814 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

