
1. Gene. 2020 Apr 30;736:144414. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.144414. Epub 2020 Jan 30.

Exploration of copy number variation in genes related to anti-malarial drug
resistance in Plasmodium falciparum.

Qidwai T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biotechnology, Institute of Biosciences and Technology,
Shriramswaroop Memorial University Lucknow-Deva Road, Barabanki, U.P., India.
Electronic address: tabish.iet@gmail.com.

Development of drug resistance in P. falciparum is one of the major problems
associated with malaria treatment. Parasite genetic factors such as single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and copy number variations (CNV) have shown their
role in drug resistance. Most of the studies have focused on the role of SNPs and
drug resistance in parasite. However, it has also been shown that CNV is
associated with adaptation and drug resistance in parasite. Hence, exploration of
copy number polymorphism in essential genes of P. falciparum and their role in
anti-malarial resistance is important. This review provides the recent
information related to genetic profile of CNV marker in plasmepsin and other
genes associated with drugresistanceinP. falciparum. It may be suggested that
CNVs in plasmepsin genes are the major driver of piperaquine resistance.
Moreover, CNVs in pfcrt and pfmdr1genes appear to play important role in
adaptation and hence survival of the parasite. It may be hypothesized that
targeting of CNV formation in the parasite could be beneficial for breakdown of
its adaption in response to drug pressure.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.144414 
PMID: 32006594  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The author
declares that he has no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

