
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jan 17;10:3024. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.03024. eCollection 
2019.

Comprehensive and Durable Modulation of Growth, Development, Lifespan and
Fecundity in Anopheles stephensi Following Larval Treatment With the Stress
Signaling Molecule and Novel Antimalarial Abscisic Acid.

Taylor DM(1), Olds CL(1), Haney RS(1), Torrevillas BK(1), Luckhart S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Plant Pathology and Nematology, University of Idaho,
Moscow, ID, United States.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID, United
States.

The larval environment of holometabolous insects determines many adult life
history traits including, but not limited to, rate and success of development and
adult lifespan and fecundity. The ancient stress signaling hormone abscisic acid 
(ABA), released by plants inundated with water and by leaf and root fragments in 
water, is likely ubiquitous in the mosquito larval environment and is well known 
for its wide ranging effects on invertebrate biology. Accordingly, ABA is a
relevant stimulus and signal for mosquito development. In our studies, the
addition of ABA at biologically relevant levels to larval rearing containers
accelerated the time to pupation and increased death of A. stephensi pupae. We
could not attribute these effects, however, to ABA-dependent changes in JH
biosynthesis-associated gene expression, 20E titers or transcript patterns of
insulin-like peptide genes. Adult females derived from ABA-treated larvae had
reduced total protein content and significantly reduced post blood meal
transcript expression of vitellogenin, effects that were consistent with variably
reduced egg clutch sizes and oviposition success from the first through the third
gonotrophic cycles. Adult female A. stephensi derived from ABA-treated larvae
also exhibited reduced lifespans relative to controls. Collectively, these
effects of ABA on A. stephensi life history traits are robust, durable and
predictive of multiple impacts of an important malaria vector spreading to new
malaria endemic regions.

Copyright Â© 2020 Taylor, Olds, Haney, Torrevillas and Luckhart.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.03024 
PMCID: PMC6979008
PMID: 32010091 

