
1. Genes (Basel). 2020 Jan 29;11(2). pii: E143. doi: 10.3390/genes11020143.

An Experimental Hut Evaluation of PBO-Based and Pyrethroid-Only Nets against the 
Malaria Vector Anopheles funestus Reveals a Loss of Bed Nets Efficacy Associated 
with GSTe2 Metabolic Resistance.

Menze BD(1)(2), Kouamo MF(2)(3), Wondji MJ(1)(2), Tchapga W(2), Tchoupo M(2),
Kusimo MO(2), Mouhamadou CS(4), Riveron JM(5), Wondji CS(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke
Place, Liverpool L3 5QA, UK.
(2)Centre for Research in Infectious Diseases (CRID), LSTM Research Unit, Yaoundé
13591, Cameroon.
(3)Faculty of Sciences, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé 337, Cameroon.
(4)Centre Suisse de Recherches scientifiques (CSRS), Yopougon 1303, Abidjan, Cote
d'ivoire.
(5)Syngenta UK Limited, CPC4 Capital Park, Fulbourn, Cambridgeshire CB21 5XE, UK.

Growing insecticide resistance in malaria vectors is threatening the
effectiveness of insecticide-based interventions, including Long Lasting
Insecticidal Nets (LLINs). However, the impact of metabolic resistance on the
effectiveness of these tools remains poorly characterized. Using experimental hut
trials and genotyping of a glutathione S-transferase resistance marker
(L119F-GSTe2), we established that GST-mediated resistance is reducing the
efficacy of LLINs against Anopheles funestus. Hut trials performed in Cameroon
revealed that Piperonyl butoxide (PBO)-based nets induced a significantly higher 
mortality against pyrethroid resistant An. funestus than pyrethroid-only nets.
Blood feeding rate and deterrence were significantly higher in all LLINs than
control. Genotyping the L119F-GSTe2 mutation revealed that, for permethrin-based 
nets, 119F-GSTe2 resistant mosquitoes have a greater ability to blood feed than
susceptible while the opposite effect is observed for deltamethrin-based nets.
For Olyset Plus, a significant association with exophily was observed in
resistant mosquitoes (OR = 11.7; p < 0.01). Furthermore, GSTe2-resistant
mosquitoes (cone assays) significantly survived with PermaNet 2.0 (OR = 2.1; p < 
0.01) and PermaNet 3.0 (side) (OR = 30.1; p < 0.001) but not for Olyset Plus.
This study shows that the efficacy of PBO-based nets (e.g., blood feeding
inhibition) against pyrethroid resistant malaria vectors could be impacted by
other mechanisms including GST-mediated metabolic resistance not affected by the 
synergistic action of PBO. Mosaic LLINs incorporating a GST inhibitor (diethyl
maleate) could help improve their efficacy in areas of GST-mediated resistance.

DOI: 10.3390/genes11020143 
PMCID: PMC7073577
PMID: 32013227 

