
1. PLoS One. 2020 Feb 12;15(2):e0228576. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0228576.
eCollection 2020.

Characterising the effect of Akirin knockdown on Anopheles arabiensis (Diptera:
Culicidae) reproduction and survival, using RNA-mediated interference.

LetiniÄ‡ BD(1)(2), Dahan-Moss Y(1)(2), Koekemoer LL(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wits Research Institute for Malaria, School of Pathology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(2)Centre for Emerging Zoonotic and Parasitic Diseases, National Institute for
Communicable Diseases of the National Health Laboratory Service, Johannesburg,
South Africa.

Anopheles arabiensis is an opportunistic malaria vector that rests and feeds
outdoors, circumventing current vector control methods. Furthermore, this vector 
will readily feed on animal as well as human hosts. Targeting the vector, while
feeding on animals, can provide an additional intervention for the current vector
control activities. Agricultural animals are regularly vaccinated with
recombinant proteins for the control of multiple endo- and ecto-parasitic
infestations. The use of a Subolesin-vaccine showed a mark reduction in tick
reproductive fitness. The orthologous gene of Subolesin, called Akirin in
insects, might provide a valuable species-specific intervention against outdoor
biting An. arabiensis. However, the biological function of this nuclear protein
has not yet been investigated in this mosquito. The effects on An. arabiensis
lifetable parameters were evaluated after Akirin was knocked down using
commercial small-interfering RNA (siRNA) and in vitro transcribed double-stranded
RNA (dsRNA). The siRNA mediated interference of Akirin significantly reduced
fecundity by 17%, fertility by 23% and longevity by 32% when compared to the
controls in the female mosquitoes tested. Similarly, dsRNA treatment had a 25%
decrease in fecundity, 29% decrease in fertility, and 48% decrease in longevity, 
when compared to the control treatments. Mosquitoes treated with Akirin dsRNA had
a mean survival time of 15-days post-inoculation, which would impact on their
ability to transmit malaria parasites. These results strongly suggest that Akirin
has a pleiotropic function in An. arabiensis longevity and reproductive fitness.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0228576 
PMCID: PMC7015393
PMID: 32049962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

