
1. Life Sci Alliance. 2020 Mar 16;3(4). pii: e201900626. doi:
10.26508/lsa.201900626. Print 2020 Apr.

Simultaneous multiple allelic replacement in the malaria parasite enables
dissection of PKG function.

Koussis K(1), Withers-Martinez C(2), Baker DA(3), Blackman MJ(4)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Biochemistry Laboratory, Francis Crick Institute, London, UK
konstantinos.kousis@crick.ac.uk.
(2)Malaria Biochemistry Laboratory, Francis Crick Institute, London, UK.
(3)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene &
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(4)Malaria Biochemistry Laboratory, Francis Crick Institute, London, UK
mike.blackman@crick.ac.uk.

Over recent years, a plethora of new genetic tools has transformed conditional
engineering of the malaria parasite genome, allowing functional dissection of
essential genes in the asexual and sexual blood stages that cause pathology or
are required for disease transmission, respectively. Important challenges remain,
including the desirability to complement conditional mutants with a correctly
regulated second gene copy to confirm that observed phenotypes are due solely to 
loss of gene function and to analyse structure-function relationships. To meet
this challenge, here we combine the dimerisable Cre (DiCre) system with the use
of multiple lox sites to simultaneously generate multiple recombination events of
the same gene. We focused on the Plasmodium falciparum cGMP-dependent protein
kinase (PKG), creating in parallel conditional disruption of the gene plus up to 
two allelic replacements. We use the approach to demonstrate that PKG has no
scaffolding or adaptor role in intraerythrocytic development, acting solely at
merozoite egress. We also show that a phosphorylation-deficient PKG is
functionally incompetent. Our method provides valuable new tools for analysis of 
gene function in the malaria parasite.

Â© 2020 Koussis et al.

DOI: 10.26508/lsa.201900626 
PMCID: PMC7081069
PMID: 32179592 

