
1. PeerJ. 2020 Mar 12;8:e8082. doi: 10.7717/peerj.8082. eCollection 2020.

A seven-year surveillance of epidemiology of malaria reveals travel and gender
are the key drivers of dispersion of drug resistant genotypes in Kenya.

Maraka M(1)(2), Akala HM(2), Amolo AS(1), Juma D(2), Omariba D(2), Cheruiyot
A(2), Opot B(2), Okello Okudo C(2), Mwakio E(2), Chemwor G(2), Juma JA(2), Okoth 
R(2), Yeda R(2), Andagalu B(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, Jaramogi Oginga Odinga University of Science and
Technology, Bondo, Siaya, Kenya.
(2)Department of Emerging Infectious Diseases (DEID), United States Army Medical 
Research Directorate-Africa Kenya (USAMRD-A Kenya)/Kenya Medical Research
Institute (KEMRI), Kisumu, Kisumu, Kenya.

Malaria drug resistance is a global public health concern. Though parasite
mutations have been associated with resistance, other factors could influence the
resistance. A robust surveillance system is required to monitor and help contain 
the resistance. This study established the role of travel and gender in
dispersion of chloroquine resistant genotypes in malaria epidemic zones in Kenya.
A total of 1,776 individuals presenting with uncomplicated malaria at hospitals
selected from four malaria transmission zones in Kenya between 2008 and 2014 were
enrolled in a prospective surveillance study assessing the epidemiology of
malaria drug resistance patterns. Demographic and clinical information per
individual was obtained using a structured questionnaire. Further, 2 mL of blood 
was collected for malaria diagnosis, parasitemia quantification and molecular
analysis. DNA extracted from dried blood spots collected from each of the
individuals was genotyped for polymorphisms in Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine 
transporter gene (Pfcrt 76), Plasmodium falciparum multidrug resistant gene 1
(Pfmdr1 86 and Pfmdr1 184) regions that are putative drug resistance genes using 
both conventional polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and real-time PCR. The
molecular and demographic data was analyzed using Stata version 13 (College
Station, TX: StataCorp LP) while mapping of cases at the selected geographic
zones was done in QGIS version 2.18. Chloroquine resistant (CQR) genotypes across
gender revealed an association with chloroquine resistance by both univariate
model (p = 0.027) and by multivariate model (p = 0.025), female as reference
group in both models. Prior treatment with antimalarial drugs within the last 6
weeks before enrollment was associated with carriage of CQR genotype by
multivariate model (p = 0.034). Further, a significant relationship was observed 
between travel and CQR carriage both by univariate model (p = 0.001) and
multivariate model (p = 0.002). These findings suggest that gender and travel are
significantly associated with chloroquine resistance. From a gender perspective, 
males are more likely to harbor resistant strains than females hence involved in 
strain dispersion. On the other hand, travel underscores the role of transport
network in introducing spread of resistant genotypes, bringing in to focus the
need to monitor gene flow and establish strategies to minimize the introduction
of resistance strains by controlling malaria among frequent transporters.

©2020 Maraka et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.8082 
PMCID: PMC7073242
PMID: 32201636 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing
interests.

