
1. 3 Biotech. 2020 Mar;10(3):143. doi: 10.1007/s13205-020-2096-7. Epub 2020 Feb 28.

Unraveling CAF-1 family in Plasmodium falciparum: comparative genome-wide
identification and phylogenetic analysis among eukaryotes, expression profiling
and protein-protein interaction studies.

Kaushik M(1), Nehra A(1), Gill SS(1), Gill R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biotechnology, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, Haryana 124
001 India.

The present research reports a detailed in silico analysis of chromatin assembly 
factor-1 (CAF-1) family in human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Our
analysis revealed five chromatin assembly factor-1 genes in P. falciparum
(PfCAF-1) and the PfCAF-1 family was divided into two classes where, Class A
belongs to the CAF-1 complex and others are kept in Class B. For comparative
studies, orthologs of PfCAF-1 family were identified across 53 eukaryotic species
and evolutionary relationships were drawn for different CAF-1 subfamilies. The
phylogenetic analysis revealed grouping of evolutionary-related species together,
although, divergence was observed in branching pattern. A detailed analysis of
domain composition highlighted species-specific features viz. species-specific
KDDS repeats of 84 amino acids were identified in PfCAF-1A whereas, members of
CAF-1C/RbAp48 and RbAp46 subfamily exhibited least variation in size and domain
composition. The qRT-PCR analysis revealed upregulation of PfCAF-1 members in
trophozoite or schizont stage. Furthermore, a comparative expression analysis of 
the available transcriptome and proteome data along with qRT-PCR analysis
revealed mixed expression patterns (coordination as well as non-coordination
between different studies). Protein-protein interaction network analyses of
PfCAF-1 family were carried out highlighting important complexes based on
interologs. The PfRbAp48 was found to be highly connected with a total of 108
PPIs followed by PfRbAp46. The results unravel insights into the PfCAF-1 family
and identify unique features, thus opening new perspectives for further targeted 
developments to understand and combat malaria menace.

Â© King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology 2020.

DOI: 10.1007/s13205-020-2096-7 
PMCID: PMC7048900 [Available on 2021-03-01]
PMID: 32206492 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestAll the authors declare no
competing interests.

