
1. Biomed Res Int. 2020 Mar 15;2020:8475246. doi: 10.1155/2020/8475246. eCollection 
2020.

Sequence Analysis of the K13-Propeller Gene in Artemisinin Challenging Plasmodium
falciparum Isolates from Malaria Endemic Areas of Odisha, India: A Molecular
Surveillance Study.

Rana R(1), Ranjit M(1), Bal M(1), Khuntia HK(1), Pati S(1), Krishna S(2), Das
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Epidemiology and Public Health, ICMR-Regional Medical
Research Centre, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India.
(2)Division of Vector Borne Diseases, ICMR-National Institute of Research in
Tribal Health, Jabalpur, India.

Estimation of the spread and advancement of Plasmodium falciparum
artemisinin-resistant parasites can be done by probing polymorphisms in the kelch
(Pfk13) domain (a validated molecular marker). This study aimed to provide
baseline information for future artemisinin surveillance by analyzing the
k13-propeller domain in P. falciparum field isolates collected from 24 study
areas in 14 malaria hot spots of Odisha (previously Orissa) during July
2018-January 2019. A total of 178 P. falciparum mono infections were assessed. An
849-base pair fragment encoding the Pfk13 propeller was amplified by nested
polymerase chain reaction and sequenced in both directions (PCR). After DNA
alignment with the 3D7 reference sequence, all samples were found to be wild
type. It can be anticipated that malaria public health is not under direct threat
in Odisha relating to ART resistance.

Copyright Â© 2020 Ramakanta Rana et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/8475246 
PMCID: PMC7102476
PMID: 32258150 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest regarding the publication of this manuscript.

