
1. Res Policy. 2020 Apr;49(3):103917. doi: 10.1016/j.respol.2019.103917.

The development of complex and controversial innovations. Genetically modified
mosquitoes for malaria eradication.

Cisnetto V(1), Barlow J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College London, Department of Life Sciences, South Kensington Campus,
London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom.
(2)Imperial College Business School, South Kensington Campus, London, SW7 2AZ,
United Kingdom.

When there is significant uncertainty in an innovation project, research
literature suggests that strictly sequencing actions and stages may not be an
appropriate mode of project management. We use a longitudinal process approach
and qualitative system dynamics modelling to study the development of genetically
modified (GM) mosquitoes for malaria eradication in an African country. Our data 
were collected in real time, from early scientific research to deployment of the 
first prototype mosquitoes in the field. The 'gene drive' technology for
modifying the mosquitoes is highly complex and controversial due to risks
associated with its characteristics as a living, self-replicating technology. We 
show that in this case the innovation journey is linear and highly structured,
but also embedded within a wider system of adoption that displays emergent
behaviour. Although the need to control risks associated with the technology
imposes a linearity to the NPD process, there are possibilities for deviation
from a more structured sequence of stages. This arises from the effects of
feedback loops in the wider system of evidence creation and learning at the
population and governance levels, which cumulatively impact on acceptance of the 
innovation. The NPD and adoption processes are therefore closely intertwined,
meaning that the endpoint for R&D and beginning of 'mainstream' adoption and
diffusion are unclear. A key challenge for those responsible for NPD and its
regulation is to plan for the adoption of the technology while simultaneously
conducting its scientific and technical development.

Â© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.respol.2019.103917 
PMCID: PMC7104890
PMID: 32255861 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

