
1. Parasit Vectors. 2020 Apr 6;13(1):170. doi: 10.1186/s13071-020-04044-y.

Characteristic features of the SERA multigene family in the malaria parasite.

Arisue N(1), Palacpac NMQ(2), Tougan T(3), Horii T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Infectious Disease Control, Research Institute for
Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
arisue@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Malaria Vaccine Development, Research Institute for Microbial
Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
(3)Research Center for Infectious Disease Control, Research Institute for
Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

Serine repeat antigen (SERA) is conserved among species of the genus Plasmodium. 
Sera genes form a multigene family and are generally tandemly clustered on a
single chromosome. Although all Plasmodium species encode multiple sera genes,
the number varies between species. Among species, the members share similar
sequences and gene organization. SERA possess a central papain-like cysteine
protease domain, however, in some members, the active site cysteine residue is
substituted with a serine. Recent studies implicate this gene family in a number 
of aspects in parasite biology and induction of protective immune response. This 
review summarizes the current understanding on this important gene family in
several Plasmodium species. The Plasmodium falciparum (Pf)-sera family, for
example, consists of nine gene members. Unlike other multigene families in
Plasmodium species, Pf-sera genes do not exhibit antigenic variation. Pf-sera5
nucleotide diversity is also low. Moreover, although Pf-sera5 is highly
transcribed during the blood stage of malaria infection, and a large amount is
released into the host blood following schizont rupture, in malaria endemic
countries the sero-positive rates for Pf-SERA5 are low, likely due to Pf-SERA5
binding of host proteins to avoid immune recognition. As an antigen, the
N-terminal 47Â kDa domain of Pf-SERA5 is a promising vaccine candidate currently
undergoing clinical trials. Pf-SERA5 and Pf-SERA6, as well as P. berghei
(Pb)-SERA3, and Pb-SERA5, have been investigated for their roles in parasite
egress. Two P. yoelii SERA, which have a serine residue at the protease active
center, are implicated in parasite virulence. Overall, these studies provide
insight that during the evolution of the Plasmodium parasite, the sera gene
family members have increased by gene duplication, and acquired various functions
that enable the parasite to survive and successfully maintain infection in the
host.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-020-04044-y 
PMCID: PMC7132891
PMID: 32252804 

