
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2020 Mar 20;10:114. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00114.
eCollection 2020.

Molecular Characterization and Immuno-Reactivity Patterns of a Novel Plasmodium
falciparum Armadillo-Type Repeat Protein, PfATRP.

Amlabu E(1)(2), Ilani P(1), Opoku G(1), Nyarko PB(1), Quansah E(1), Thiam LG(1), 
Anim M(1), Ayivor-Djanie R(1)(3), Akuh OA(1), Mensah-Brown H(1), Rayner JC(4),
Awandare GA(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)West African Center for Cell Biology of Infectious Pathogens, University of
Ghana, Accra, Ghana.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Kogi State University, Anyigba, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, SBBS, University of Health and Allied
Sciences, Ho, Ghana.
(4)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology, College of Basic and
Applied Sciences, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.

Nearly half of the genes in the Plasmodium falciparum genome have not yet been
functionally investigated. We used homology-based structural modeling to identify
multiple copies of Armadillo repeats within one uncharacterized gene expressed
during the intraerythrocytic stages, PF3D7_0410600, subsequently referred to as
P. falciparum Armadillo-Type Repeat Protein (PfATRP). Soluble recombinant PfATRP 
was expressed in a bacterial expression system, purified to apparent homogeneity 
and the identity of the recombinant PfATRP was confirmed by mass spectrometry.
Affinity-purified α-PfATRP rabbit antibodies specifically recognized the
recombinant protein. Immunofluorescence assays revealed that α-PfATRP rabbit
antibodies reacted with P. falciparum schizonts. Anti-PfATRP antibody exhibited
peripheral staining patterns around the merozoites. Given the localization of
PfATRP in merozoites, we tested for an egress phenotype during schizont arrest
assays and demonstrated that native PfATRP is inaccessible on the surface of
merozoites in intact schizonts. Dual immunofluorescence assays with markers for
the inner membrane complex (IMC) and microtubules suggest partial colocalization 
in both asexual and sexual stage parasites. Using the soluble recombinant PfATRP 
in a screen of plasma samples revealed that malaria-infected children have
naturally acquired PfATRP-specific antibodies.

Copyright © 2020 Amlabu, Ilani, Opoku, Nyarko, Quansah, Thiam, Anim,
Ayivor-Djanie, Akuh, Mensah-Brown, Rayner and Awandare.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00114 
PMCID: PMC7100384
PMID: 32266165 

