
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Apr 14;10(1):6307. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-62850-x.

Glutamate dehydrogenase: a novel candidate to diagnose Plasmodium falciparum
through rapid diagnostic test in blood specimen from fever patients.

Kori LD(1), Valecha N(2), Anvikar AR(3).

Author information: 
(1)ICMR-National Institute of Malaria Research, Dwarka-8, New Delhi, 110077,
India.
(2)Former Director, ICMR-National Institute of Malaria Research, Dwarka-8, New
Delhi, 110077, India.
(3)ICMR-National Institute of Malaria Research, Dwarka-8, New Delhi, 110077,
India. anvikar@gmail.com.

In recent years, Plasmodium falciparum histidine-rich protein 2 gene deletion has
been reported in India. Such isolates are prone to selective transmission and
thus form a challenge to case management. As most of the rapid malaria diagnostic
tests are based on the detection of HRP2 protein in the blood, we attempted to
use Glutamate Dehydrogenase (GDH) as a biomarker for the diagnosis of P.
falciparum. Recombinant PfGDH was successfully cloned, expressed and purified
using the Ni-NTA approach. Polyclonal antibodies were raised against full-length 
rPfGDH and its peptides. Antibodies for rPfGDH showed a strong immune response
against the recombinant protein. However, antibody showed no affinity towards the
peptides, which suggests they failed as antigen. Antibodies for rPfGDH
significantly detected the GDH in human blood specimens. This is the first report
where P. falciparum GDH was detected in malaria cases from various parts of
India. The raised polyclonal antibodies had shown an affinity for PfGDH in
quantitative ELISA and are capable to be exploited for RDTs. This research needs 
further statistical validation on a large number and different sample types from 
candidates infected with P. falciparum and other species.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-62850-x 
PMCID: PMC7156408
PMID: 32286365 

