
1. mSphere. 2020 Apr 15;5(2). pii: e00983-19. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00983-19.

20-Hydroxyecdysone Primes Innate Immune Responses That Limit Bacterial and
Malarial Parasite Survival in Anopheles gambiae.

Reynolds RA(1), Kwon H(1), Smith RC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA.
(2)Department of Entomology, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA
smithr@iastate.edu.

Blood feeding is an integral behavior of mosquitoes to acquire nutritional
resources needed for reproduction. This requirement also enables mosquitoes to
serve as efficient vectors to acquire and potentially transmit a multitude of
mosquito-borne diseases, most notably malaria. Recent studies suggest that
mosquito immunity is stimulated following a blood meal, independent of infection 
status. Since blood feeding promotes production of the hormone 20-hydroxyecdysone
(20E), we hypothesized that 20E plays an important role in priming the immune
response for pathogen challenge. Here, we examine the immunological effects of
priming Anopheles gambiae with 20E prior to pathogen infection, demonstrating a
significant reduction in bacteria and Plasmodium berghei survival in the mosquito
host. Transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis following 20E treatment
identifies several known 20E-regulated genes, as well as several immune genes
with previously reported function in antipathogen defense. Together, these data
demonstrate that 20E influences cellular immune function and antipathogen
immunity following mosquito blood feeding, arguing the importance of hormones in 
the regulation of mosquito innate immune function.IMPORTANCE Blood feeding is
required to provide nutrients for mosquito egg production and serves as a
mechanism to acquire and transmit pathogens. Shortly after a blood meal is taken,
there is a peak in the production of 20-hydroxyecdysone (20E), a mosquito hormone
that initiates physiological changes, including yolk protein production and
mating refractoriness. Here, we examine additional roles of 20E in the regulation
of mosquito immunity, demonstrating that priming the immune system with 20E
increases mosquito resistance to pathogens. We identify differentially expressed 
genes in response to 20E treatment, including several involved in innate immune
function as well as lipid metabolism and transport. Together, these data argue
that 20E stimulates mosquito cellular immune function and innate immunity shortly
after blood feeding.

Copyright Â© 2020 Reynolds et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00983-19 
PMCID: PMC7160685
PMID: 32295874 

