
1. Parasitology. 2020 Aug;147(9):985-993. doi: 10.1017/S0031182020000566. Epub 2020 
Apr 27.

Morphological and molecular characterization of Plasmodium cathemerium (lineage
PADOM02) from the sparrow Passer domesticus with complete sporogony in Culex
pipiens complex.

Aly MZY(1), Mohamed III(1), Sebak SI(1), Vanstreels RET(2)(3), El Gendy AM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science, Department of Zoology, South Valley University, Qena,
Egypt.
(2)Marine Apex Predator Research Units (MAPRU), Institute for Coastal and Marine 
Research, Nelson Mandela University, South Africa.
(3)Department of Zoology, DST-NRF Centre of Excellence at the Fitz Patrick
Institute for African Ornithology, Nelson Mandela University, South Africa.
(4)Faculty of Science, Department of Entomology, Cairo University, Giza, PO Box
12613, Egypt.

Avian malaria is a mosquito-borne disease caused by Plasmodium spp. protozoa.
Although these parasites have been extensively studied in North America and
Eurasia, knowledge on the diversity of Plasmodium, its vectors and avian hosts in
Africa is scarce. In this study, we report on natural malarial infections in
free-ranging sparrows (Passer domesticus) sampled at Giza Governorate, Egypt.
Parasites were morphologically characterized as Plasmodium cathemerium based on
the examination of thin blood smears from the avian host. Sequencing a fragment
of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene showed that the parasite corresponded to
lineage PADOM02. Phylogenetic analysis showed that this parasite is closely
related to the lineages SERAU01 and PADOM09, both of which are attributed to P.
cathemerium. Experimental infection of Culex pipiens complex was successful, with
ookinetes first detected at 1-day post infection (dpi), oocysts at 4 dpi and
sporozoites at 6 dpi. The massive infection of the salivary glands by sporozoites
corroborates that Cx. pipiens complex is a competent vector of PADOM02. Our
findings confirm that Plasmodium lineage PADOM02 infects sparrows in urban areas 
along the Nile River, Egypt, and corroborate that Cx. pipiens complex is a highly
competent vector for these parasites. Furthermore, our results demonstrate that
this lineage corresponds to the morphospecies P. cathemerium and not P. relictum 
as previously believed.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182020000566 
PMID: 32338240 

