
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2020 Jun 23;64(7). pii: e02484-19. doi:
10.1128/AAC.02484-19. Print 2020 Jun 23.

Experimentally Engineered Mutations in a Ubiquitin Hydrolase, UBP-1, Modulate In 
Vivo Susceptibility to Artemisinin and Chloroquine in Plasmodium berghei.

Simwela NV(1), Hughes KR(1), Roberts AB(1), Rennie MT(1), Barrett MP(1), Waters
AP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, Wellcome Centre for
Integrative Parasitology, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, United
Kingdom.
(2)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, Wellcome Centre for
Integrative Parasitology, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, United
Kingdom Andy.Waters@glasgow.ac.uk.

As resistance to artemisinins (current frontline drugs in malaria treatment)
emerges in Southeast Asia, there is an urgent need to identify the genetic
determinants and understand the molecular mechanisms underpinning such
resistance. Such insights could lead to prospective interventions to contain
resistance and prevent the eventual spread to other regions where malaria is
endemic. Reduced susceptibility to artemisinin in Southeast Asia has been
primarily linked to mutations in the Plasmodium falciparum Kelch-13 gene, which
is currently widely recognized as a molecular marker of artemisinin resistance.
However, two mutations in a ubiquitin hydrolase, UBP-1, have been previously
associated with reduced artemisinin susceptibility in a rodent model of malaria, 
and some cases of UBP-1 mutation variants associated with artemisinin treatment
failure have been reported in Africa and SEA. In this study, we employed
CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing and preemptive drug pressures to test these
artemisinin susceptibility-associated mutations in UBP-1 in Plasmodium berghei
sensitive lines in vivo Using these approaches, we show that the V2721F UBP-1
mutation results in reduced artemisinin susceptibility, while the V2752F mutation
results in resistance to chloroquine (CQ) and moderately impacts tolerance to
artemisinins. Genetic reversal of the V2752F mutation restored chloroquine
sensitivity in these mutant lines, whereas simultaneous introduction of both
mutations could not be achieved and appears to be lethal. Interestingly, these
mutations carry a detrimental growth defect, which would possibly explain their
lack of expansion in natural infection settings. Our work provides independent
experimental evidence on the role of UBP-1 in modulating parasite responses to
artemisinin and chloroquine under in vivo conditions.

Copyright Â© 2020 Simwela et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02484-19 
PMCID: PMC7318008
PMID: 32340987 

