
1. PLoS Biol. 2020 May 4;18(5):e3000711. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000711.
eCollection 2020 May.

Single-cell transcription analysis of Plasmodium vivax blood-stage parasites
identifies stage- and species-specific profiles of expression.

SÃ  JM(1), Cannon MV(2), Caleon RL(1), Wellems TE(1), Serre D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United
States of America.
(2)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Plasmodium vivax and P. falciparum, the parasites responsible for most human
malaria worldwide, exhibit striking biological differences, which have important 
clinical consequences. Unfortunately, P. vivax, unlike P. falciparum, cannot be
cultivated continuously in vitro, which limits our understanding of its biology
and, consequently, our ability to effectively control vivax malaria. Here, we
describe single-cell gene expression profiles of 9,215 P. vivax parasites from
bloodstream infections of Aotus and Saimiri monkeys. Our results show that
transcription of most P. vivax genes occurs during short periods of the
intraerythrocytic cycle and that this pattern of gene expression is conserved in 
other Plasmodium species. However, we also identify a strikingly high proportion 
of species-specific transcripts in late schizonts, possibly associated with the
specificity of erythrocyte invasion. Our findings provide new and robust markers 
of blood-stage parasites, including some that are specific to the elusive P.
vivax male gametocytes, and will be useful for analyzing gene expression data
from laboratory and field samples.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000711 
PMCID: PMC7224573
PMID: 32365102  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

