
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2020 Apr 21;10:162. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00162.
eCollection 2020.

A New Hope for CD56negCD16pos NK Cells as Unconventional Cytotoxic Mediators: An 
Adaptation to Chronic Diseases.

Forconi CS(1), Oduor CI(2)(3), Oluoch PO(1)(3), Ong'echa JM(3), Münz C(4), Bailey
JA(2), Moormann AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
Massachusetts, Worcester, MA, United States.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Warren Alpert Medical School,
Brown University, Providence, RI, United States.
(3)Center for Global Health Research, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Kisumu,
Kenya.
(4)Laboratory of Viral Immunology, Experimental Immunology Institute, University 
of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Natural Killer (NK) cells play an essential role in antiviral and anti-tumoral
immune responses. In peripheral blood, NK cells are commonly classified into two 
major subsets: CD56brightCD16neg and CD56dimCD16pos despite the characterization 
of a CD56negCD16pos subset 25 years ago. Since then, several studies have
described the prevalence of an CD56negCD16pos NK cell subset in viral
non-controllers as the basis for their NK cell dysfunction. However, the
mechanistic basis for their cytotoxic impairment is unclear. Recently, using a
strict flow cytometry gating strategy to exclude monocytes, we reported an
accumulation of CD56negCD16pos NK cells in Plasmodium falciparum malaria-exposed 
children and pediatric cancer patients diagnosed with endemic Burkitt lymphoma
(eBL). Here, we use live-sorted cells, histological staining, bulk RNA-sequencing
and flow cytometry to confirm that this CD56negCD16pos NK cell subset has the
same morphological features as the other NK cell subsets and a similar
transcriptional profile compared to CD56dimCD16pos NK cells with only 120 genes
differentially expressed (fold change of 1.5, p < 0.01 and FDR<0.05) out of 9235 
transcripts. CD56negCD16pos NK cells have a distinct profile with significantly
higher expression of MPEG1 (perforin 2), FCGR3B (CD16b), FCGR2A, and FCGR2B
(CD32A and B) as well as CD6, CD84, HLA-DR, LILRB1/2, and PDCD1 (PD-1), whereas
Interleukin 18 (IL18) receptor genes (IL18RAP and IL18R1), cytotoxic genes such
as KLRF1 (NKp80) and NCR1 (NKp46), and inhibitory HAVCR2 (TIM-3) are
significantly down-regulated compared to CD56dimCD16pos NK cells. Together, these
data confirm that CD56negCD16pos cells are legitimate NK cells, yet their
transcriptional and protein expression profiles suggest their cytotoxic potential
is mediated by pathways reliant on antibodies such as antibody-dependent cell
cytotoxicity (ADCC), antibody-dependent respiratory burst (ADRB), and enhanced by
complement receptor 3 (CR3) and FAS/FASL interaction. Our findings support the
premise that chronic diseases induce NK cell modifications that circumvent
proinflammatory mediators involved in direct cytotoxicity. Therefore, individuals
with such altered NK cell profiles may respond differently to NK-mediated
immunotherapies, infections or vaccines depending on which cytotoxic mechanisms
are being engaged.

Copyright © 2020 Forconi, Oduor, Oluoch, Ong'echa, Münz, Bailey and Moormann.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00162 
PMCID: PMC7186373
PMID: 32373555 

