
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Apr 16;11:702. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00702. eCollection
2020.

Acute Plasmodium berghei Mouse Infection Elicits Perturbed Erythropoiesis With
Features That Overlap With Anemia of Chronic Disease.

Lakkavaram A(1), Lundie RJ(2), Do H(1), Ward AC(1), de Koning-Ward TF(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Deakin University, Waurn Ponds, VIC, Australia.
(2)Infection and Immunity Program, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC,
Australia.

Severe malaria anemia is one of the most common causes of morbidity and mortality
arising from infection with Plasmodium falciparum. The pathogenesis of malarial
anemia is complex, involving both parasite and host factors. As mouse models of
malaria also develop anemia, they can provide a useful resource to study the
impact of Plasmodium infections and the resulting host innate immune response on 
erythropoiesis. In this study, we have characterized the bone marrow and splenic 
responses of the erythroid as well as other hematopoietic lineages after an acute
infection of Balb/c mice with Plasmodium berghei. Such characterization of the
hematopoietic changes is critical to underpin future studies, using knockout mice
and transgenic parasites, to tease out the interplay between host genes and
parasite modulators implicated in susceptibility to malaria anemia. P. berghei
infection led to a clear perturbation of steady-state erythropoiesis, with the
most profound defects in polychromatic and orthochromatic erythroblasts as well
as erythroid colony- and burst-forming units (CFU-E and BFU-E), resulting in an
inability to compensate for anemia. The perturbation in erythropoiesis was not
attributable to parasites infecting erythroblasts and affecting differentiation, 
nor to insufficient erythropoietin (EPO) production or impaired activation of the
Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) downstream of the EPO 
receptor, indicating EPO-signaling remained functional in anemia. Instead, the
results point to acute anemia in P. berghei-infected mice arising from increased 
myeloid cell production in order to clear the infection, and the concomitant
release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines from myeloid cells that
inhibit erythroid development, in a manner that resembles the pathophysiology of 
anemia of chronic disease.

Copyright Â© 2020 Lakkavaram, Lundie, Do, Ward and de Koning-Ward.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00702 
PMCID: PMC7176981
PMID: 32373101 

