
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2020 Jul 22;64(8). pii: e02539-19. doi:
10.1128/AAC.02539-19. Print 2020 Jul 22.

Plasmodium falciparum Isolates Carrying pfk13 Polymorphisms Harbor the SVMNT
Allele of pfcrt in Northwestern Indonesia.

Lubis IND(1)(2), Wijaya H(2), Lubis M(2), Lubis CP(2), Beshir KB(1), Sutherland
CJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, University of Sumatera Utara, Medan, Indonesia.
(3)Department of Infection Biology, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom
colin.sutherland@lshtm.ac.uk.

Artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) is the first-line antimalarial
regimen in Indonesia. Susceptibility of Plasmodium falciparum to artemisinin is
falling in the Greater Mekong subregion, but it is not known whether the efficacy
of current combinations is also threatened in nearby Sumatera. We evaluated the
genetic loci pfcrt, pfmdr1, and pfk13, considered to be under selection by
artemisinin combination therapy, among 404 P. falciparum infections identified by
PCR detection in a cross-sectional survey of 3,731 residents of three regencies. 
The pfcrt haplotype SVMNT (codons 72 to 76) was the most prevalent and displayed 
significant linkage disequilibrium with the pfmdr1 haplotype YY (codons 86 and
184) (odds ratio [OR] 26.7; 95% confidence interval [CI], 5.96 to 239.4;
P < 0.001). This contrasts with Mekong countries, where the CVIET haplotype of
pfcrt predominates. Among 231 evaluable isolates, only 9 (3.9%) showed any
evidence of nonsynonymous gene variants in the propeller domain of pfk13 The
Thr474Ala variant was seen in six individuals, and Cys580Tyr was identified with 
low confidence in only a single isolate from an asymptomatic individual. Among a 
subset of 117 symptomatic P. falciparum-infected individuals randomized to
receive either dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine or artemether-lumefantrine, the
treatment outcome was not associated with pretreatment genotype. However,
submicroscopic persistent parasites at day 28 or day 42 of follow-up were
significantly more likely to harbor the pfmdr1 haplotype NF (codons 86 and 184)
than were pretreatment isolates (P < 0.001 for both treatment groups). Current
ACT regimens appear to be effective in Sumatera, but evidence of persistent
submicroscopic infection in some patients suggests further detailed studies of
drug susceptibility should be undertaken.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02539-19 
PMCID: PMC7526839 [Available on 2021-01-22]
PMID: 32393498 

