
1. Parasit Vectors. 2020 May 13;13(1):246. doi: 10.1186/s13071-020-04117-y.

Insecticide susceptibility of the sand fly leishmaniasis vector Phlebotomus
argentipes in Sri Lanka.

Pathirage DRK(1), Karunaratne SHPP(2), Senanayake SC(1), Karunaweera ND(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo,
Colombo, Sri Lanka.
(2)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, University of Peradeniya,
Peradeniya, Sri Lanka.
(3)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo,
Colombo, Sri Lanka. nadira@parasit.cmb.ac.lk.

BACKGROUND: Leishmania donovani-induced and sand fly-transmitted leishmaniasis is
a growing health problem in Sri Lanka. Limited knowledge on biological and
behavioral characteristics of probable vector Phlebotomus argentipes hinders
disease control. Here, insecticide susceptibility patterns of P. argentipes were 
investigated with exploration of probable underlying resistance mechanisms.
METHODS: Adult sand flies were collected using standard cattle baited net traps
and CDC light traps from selected sites in four districts. Adult F1 progeny of P.
argentipes were exposed to different concentrations of DDT, malathion,
deltamethrin and propoxur using WHO susceptibility bioassay kits. Post-1-h
knockdown and post-24-h mortality were recorded and analyzed. Metabolic enzyme
activity and the sensitivity of the acetylcholinesterase target-site were
determined by biochemical assays using wild-caught flies. Extracted fly DNA
samples were tested for the presence of knockdown-resistance (kdr) type
mutations.
RESULTS: The LC100 values for DDT, malathion, propoxur and deltamethrin were
0.8-1.5%, 0.9-2.0%, 0.017-0.03% and 0.007% respectively.
Insecticide-susceptibility levels were higher than the discriminating dosages
established for Aedes mosquitoes, except for malathion. The lowest susceptibility
levels (except for deltamethrin) were detected in the Mamadala population,
whereas the highest levels were detected in the Mirigama population. The
percentage of knocked-down sand flies was < 75% at any tested concentration,
including those, which exhibited 100% mortality after 24 h. Elevated activity
levels of glutathione S-transferase (3%, 7%, 12.5% and 14%) and esterase (2%, 5%,
5.5% and 6.5%) were detected in flies that originated from Mirigama, Pannala,
Thalawa and Mamadala respectively, while monooxygenase quantities remained below 
the cut-off level. Ten to 34.5% of flies were heterozygous for
acetylcholinesterases target-site insensitivity, associated with organophosphate 
and carbamate resistance. Pyrethroid-resistance-associated L1014F kdr-type
mutation in the voltage gated sodium channel gene was detected in 30/53 flies.
CONCLUSIONS: Populations of P. argentipes in Sri Lanka are largely susceptible to
common insecticides, except for malathion (used extensively in the past for
malaria control). Their insecticide susceptibility appears negatively associated 
with past malaria endemicity of the study sites, with signs of early insecticide 
tolerance. Presence of insecticide target site insensitivity in a notable
proportion of flies and enhanced insecticide metabolizing enzyme activities imply
potential future challenges for leishmaniasis control, with a call for urgent
proactive measures for its containment.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-020-04117-y 
PMCID: PMC7218544
PMID: 32404115 

