
1. Parasite. 2020;27:34. doi: 10.1051/parasite/2020034. Epub 2020 May 15.

Genome-wide microsatellite characteristics of five human Plasmodium species,
focusing on Plasmodium malariae and P. ovale curtisi.

Mathema VB(1), Nakeesathit S(2), White NJ(3), Dondorp AM(3), Imwong M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Tropical Medicine and Genetics, Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, 10400 Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, 10400 Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, 10400 Bangkok, Thailand - Centre for Tropical Medicine and
Global Health, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, OX1 2JD
Oxford, United Kingdom.

Microsatellites can be utilized to explore genotypes, population structure, and
other genomic features of eukaryotes. Systematic characterization of
microsatellites has not been a focus for several species of Plasmodium, including
P. malariae and P. ovale, as the majority of malaria elimination programs are
focused on P. falciparum and to a lesser extent P. vivax. Here, five human
malaria species (P. falciparum, P. vivax, P. malariae, P. ovale curtisi, and P.
knowlesi) were investigated with the aim of conducting in-depth categorization of
microsatellites for P. malariae and P. ovale curtisi. Investigation of reference 
genomes for microsatellites with unit motifs of 1-10 base pairs indicates high
diversity among the five Plasmodium species. Plasmodium malariae, with the
largest genome size, displays the second highest microsatellite density (1421
No./Mbp; 5% coverage) next to P. falciparum (3634 No./Mbp; 12% coverage). The
lowest microsatellite density was observed in P. vivax (773 No./Mbp; 2%
coverage). A, AT, and AAT are the most commonly repeated motifs in the Plasmodium
species. For P. malariae and P. ovale curtisi, microsatellite-related sequences
are observed in approximately 18-29% of coding sequences (CDS). Lysine,
asparagine, and glutamic acids are most frequently coded by
microsatellite-related CDS. The majority of these CDS could be related to the
gene ontology terms "cell parts," "binding," "developmental processes," and
"metabolic processes." The present study provides a comprehensive overview of
microsatellite distribution and can assist in the planning and development of
potentially useful genetic tools for further investigation of P. malariae and P. 
ovale curtisi epidemiology.

Publisher: Caractéristiques à l'échelle du génome des microsatellites de cinq
espèces humaines de Plasmodium, spécialement Plasmodium malariae et P. ovale
curtisi.Les microsatellites peuvent être utilisés pour explorer les génotypes, la
structure de la population et d’autres caractéristiques génomiques des
eucaryotes. La caractérisation systématique des microsatellites n’a pas été
étudiée pour plusieurs espèces de Plasmodium, dont P. malariae et P. ovale, car
la majorité des programmes d’élimination du paludisme se concentrent sur P.
falciparum et, dans une moindre mesure, P. vivax. Dans cet article, cinq espèces 
causant le paludisme humain (P. falciparum, P. vivax, P. malariae, P. ovale
curtisi et P. knowlesi) ont été étudiées dans le but de procéder à une
catégorisation approfondie des microsatellites pour P. malariae et P. ovale
curtisi. L’étude des génomes de référence pour les microsatellites avec des
motifs unitaires de 1 à 10 paires de bases indique une grande diversité parmi les
cinq espèces de Plasmodium. Plasmodium malariae, avec la plus grande taille de
génome, affiche la deuxième densité de microsatellites la plus élevée (1421
No./Mpb ; 5 % de couverture) après P. falciparum (3634 No./Mpb ; 12 % de
couverture). La plus faible densité de microsatellites a été observée chez P.
vivax (773 No./Mpb ; 2 % de couverture). A, AT et AAT sont les motifs les plus
fréquemment répétés chez les espèces de Plasmodium. Pour P. malariae et P. ovale 
curtisi, des séquences liées aux microsatellites sont observées dans environ 18 à
29 % des séquences codantes (CDS). La lysine, l’asparagine et les acides
glutamiques sont les plus souvent codés par les CDS liés aux microsatellites. La 
majorité de ces CDS pourrait être liée aux termes d’ontologie génétique « parties
cellulaires », « liaison », « processus de développement » et « processus
métaboliques ». Cette étude fournit un aperçu complet de la distribution des
microsatellites et peut aider à la planification et au développement d’outils
génétiques potentiellement utiles pour une étude plus approfondie de
l’épidémiologie de P. malariae et P. ovale curtisi.
© V.B. Mathema et al., published by EDP Sciences, 2020.

DOI: 10.1051/parasite/2020034 
PMCID: PMC7227371
PMID: 32410726 

