
1. Diseases. 2020 May 20;8(2). pii: E15. doi: 10.3390/diseases8020015.

Plasmodium falciparum Histidine-Rich Protein 2 and 3 Gene Deletions and Their
Implications in Malaria Control.

Nyataya J(1), Waitumbi J(1), Mobegi VA(2), Noreddin A(3)(4), El Zowalaty
ME(3)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Basic Science Laboratory, US Army Medical Research Directorate-Africa/Kenya
Medical Research Institute, P.O. Box 54-40100, Kisumu, Kenya.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Nairobi, P.O.
Box 30197-00100, Nairobi, Kenya.
(3)Infectious Diseases and Anti-Infective Research Group, College of Pharmacy and
Sharjah Medical Research Institute, University of Sharjah, Sharjah 27272, UAE.
(4)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, 
CA 92868, USA.
(5)Zoonosis Science Center, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, 
Uppsala University, SE-75123 Uppsala, Sweden.

Malaria remains the biggest threat to public health, especially among pregnant
women and young children in sub-Saharan Africa. Prompt and accurate diagnosis is 
critical for effective case management and detection of drug resistance.
Conventionally, microscopy and rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) are the tools of
choice for malaria diagnosis. RDTs are simple to use and have been extensively
used in the diagnosis of malaria among travelers to malaria-endemic regions,
routine case management, and surveillance studies. Most RDTs target the
histidine-rich protein (PfHRP) which is exclusively found in Plasmodium
falciparum and a metabolic enzyme Plasmodium lactate dehydrogenase (pLDH) which
is common among all Plasmodium species. Other RDTs incorporate the enzyme
aldolase that is produced by all Plasmodium species. Recently, studies have
reported false-negative RDTs primarily due to the deletion of the histidine-rich 
protein (pfhrp2 and pfhrp3) genes in field isolates of P. falciparum. Herein, we 
review published literature to establish pfhrp2/pfhrp3 deletions, the extent of
these deletions in different geographical regions, and the implication in malaria
control. We searched for publications on pfhrp2/pfhrp3 deletions and retrieved
all publications that reported on this subject. Overall, 20 publications reported
on pfhrp2/pfhrp3 deletions, and most of these studies were done in Central and
South America, with very few in Asia and Africa. The few studies in Africa that
reported on the occurrence of pfhrp2/pfhrp3 deletions rarely evaluated deletions 
on the flanking genes. More studies are required to evaluate the existence and
extent of these gene deletions, whose presence may lead to delayed or missed
treatment. This information will guide appropriate diagnostic approaches in the
respective areas.

DOI: 10.3390/diseases8020015 
PMCID: PMC7349124
PMID: 32443811 

