
1. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2020 May 30. pii: S0169-409X(20)30043-0. doi:
10.1016/j.addr.2020.05.010. [Epub ahead of print]

In vitro transcribed mRNA for expression of designer nucleases: Advantages as a
novel therapeutic for the management of chronic HBV infection.

Ely A(1), Singh P(1), Smith TS(1), Arbuthnot P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wits/SAMRC Antiviral Gene Therapy Research Unit, Department of Molecular
Medicine and Haematology, School of Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa.
(2)Wits/SAMRC Antiviral Gene Therapy Research Unit, Department of Molecular
Medicine and Haematology, School of Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa. Electronic address:
patrick.arbuthnot@wits.ac.za.

Chronic infection with the hepatitis B virus (HBV) remains a significant
worldwide medical problem. While diseases caused by HIV infection, tuberculosis
and malaria are on the decline, new cases of chronic hepatitis B are on the rise.
Because often fatal complications of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma are
associated with chronic hepatitis B, the need for a cure is as urgent as ever.
Currently licensed therapeutics fail to eradicate the virus and this is
attributable to persistence of the viral replication intermediate comprising
covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA). Elimination or inactivation of the viral
cccDNA is thus a goal of research aimed at hepatitis B cure. The ability to
engineer nucleases that are capable of specific cleavage of a DNA sequence now
provides the means to disable cccDNA permanently. The scientific literature is
replete with many examples of using designer zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs),
transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) and RNA-guided
endonucleases (RGENs) to inactivate HBV. However, important concerns about
safety, dose control and efficient delivery need to be addressed before the
technology is employed in a clinical setting. Use of in vitro transcribed mRNA to
express therapeutic gene editors goes some way to overcoming these concerns. The 
labile nature of RNA limits off-target effects and enables dose control.
Compatibility with hepatotropic non-viral vectors is convenient for the large
scale preparation that will be required for advancing gene editing as a mode of
curing chronic hepatitis B.

Copyright Â© 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.addr.2020.05.010 
PMID: 32485207 

