
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Jun 1;10(1):8907. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-65553-5.

Efficacy and safety of artemisinin-based combination therapy and the implications
of Pfkelch13 and Pfcoronin molecular markers in treatment failure in Senegal.

Diallo MA(1), Yade MS(2), Ndiaye YD(2), Diallo I(3), Diongue K(2), Sy SA(2), Sy
M(2), Seck MC(2), Ndiaye M(2), Dieye B(2), Gomis JF(2), Sow D(2), Dème AB(2),
Badiane AS(2), Ndiaye D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology and Mycology, Cheikh Anta Diop University, Avenue
Cheikh Anta Diop, BP 5005 Fann, Dakar, Senegal. mamadoualpha.diallo@ucad.edu.sn.
(2)Department of Parasitology and Mycology, Cheikh Anta Diop University, Avenue
Cheikh Anta Diop, BP 5005 Fann, Dakar, Senegal.
(3)National Malaria Control Program (NMCP), Rue Aimé Césaire, Fann Résidence,
Dakar, Senegal.

In 2006, Senegal adopted artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) as
first-line treatment in the management of uncomplicated malaria. This study aimed
to update the status of antimalarial efficacy more than ten years after their
first introduction. This was a randomized, three-arm, open-label study to
evaluate the efficacy and safety of artemether-lumefantrine (AL),
artesunate-amodiaquine (ASAQ) and dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (DP) in Senegal.
Malaria suspected patients were screened, enrolled, treated, and followed for 28 
days for AL and ASAQ arms or 42 days for DP arm. Clinical and parasitological
responses were assessed following antimalarial treatment. Genotyping (msp1, msp2 
and 24 SNP-based barcode) were done to differentiate recrudescence from
re-infection; in case of PCR-confirmed treatment failure, Pfk13 propeller and
Pfcoronin genes were sequenced. Data was entered and analyzed using the WHO
Excel-based application. A total of 496 patients were enrolled. In Diourbel, PCR 
non-corrected/corrected adequate clinical and parasitological responses (ACPR)
was 100.0% in both the AL and ASAQ arms. In Kedougou, PCR corrected ACPR values
were 98.8%, 100% and 97.6% in AL, ASAQ and DP arms respectively. No Pfk13 or
Pfcoronin mutations associated with artemisinin resistance were found. This study
showed that AL, ASAQ and DP remain efficacious and well-tolerated in the
treatment of uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria in Senegal.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-65553-5 
PMCID: PMC7264303
PMID: 32483161 

