
1. Nat Commun. 2020 Jun 9;11(1):2911. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-16665-z.

ADP binding by the Culex quinquefasciatus mosquito D7 salivary protein enhances
blood feeding on mammals.

Martin-Martin I(1), Paige A(1), Valenzuela Leon PC(1), Gittis AG(1), Kern O(1),
Bonilla B(1), Chagas AC(1), Ganesan S(1), Smith LB(1), Garboczi DN(1), Calvo
E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, 20852, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, 20852, USA.
ecalvo@niaid.nih.gov.

During blood-feeding, mosquito saliva is injected into the skin to facilitate
blood meal acquisition. D7 proteins are among the most abundant components of the
mosquito saliva. Here we report the ligand binding specificity and physiological 
relevance of two D7 long proteins from Culex quinquefasciatus mosquito, the
vector of filaria parasites or West Nile viruses. CxD7L2 binds biogenic amines
and eicosanoids. CxD7L1 exhibits high affinity for ADP and ATP, a binding
capacity not reported in any D7. We solve the crystal structure of CxD7L1 in
complex with ADP to 1.97 Å resolution. The binding pocket lies between the two
protein domains, whereas all known D7s bind ligands either within the N- or the
C-terminal domains. We demonstrate that these proteins inhibit hemostasis in ex
vivo and in vivo experiments. Our results suggest that the ADP-binding function
acquired by CxD7L1 evolved to enhance blood-feeding in mammals, where ADP plays a
key role in platelet aggregation.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-16665-z 
PMCID: PMC7283271
PMID: 32518308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

