
1. Gene X. 2019 Nov 12;4:100024. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.100024. eCollection 2019
Dec.

Putative circumsporozoite protein (CSP) of Plasmodium vivax is considerably
distinct from the well-known CSP and plays a role in the protein ubiquitination
pathway.

Dash M(1), Pande V(2), Sinha A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology and Clinical Research, ICMR-National Institute of
Malaria Research, New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Bhimtal Campus, Kumaun University, Nainital,
Uttarakhand, India.

Amidst technical challenges which limit successful culture and genetic
manipulation of P. vivax parasites, we used a computational approach to identify 
a critical target with evolutionary significance. The putative circumsporozoite
protein on chromosome 13 of P. vivax (PvpuCSP)is distinct from the well-known
vaccine candidate PfCSP. The aim of this study was to understand the role of
PvpuCSP and its relatedness to the well-known CSP. The study revealed PvpuCSP as 
a membrane bound E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in ubiquitination. It has a
species-specific tetra-peptide unit which is differentially repeated in various
P. vivax strains. The PvpuCSP is different from CSP in terms of stage-specific
expression and function. Since E3 ubiquitin ligases are known antimalarial drug
targets targeting the proteasome pathway, PvpuCSP, with evolutionary connotation 
and a key role in orchestrating protein degradation in P. vivax, can be explored 
as a potential drug target.

Â© 2019 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.100024 
PMCID: PMC7285988
PMID: 32550551 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

