
1. Acta Trop. 2020 Nov;211:105594. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2020.105594. Epub 2020
Jun 26.

Genetic polymorphism in IL17RA induces susceptibility to Toxoplasma gondii
infection in Brazilian pregnant women.

Andrade JMA(1), de Oliveira CBS(2), Meurer YDSR(3), Santana JE(4), de Almeida
YGB(4), Vilela Dos Santos P(5), de Souza DMS(5), Costa GP(5), Talvani A(5),
Palomino GM(6), Freitas JCOC(6), de Andrade-Neto VF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Toxoplasmosis Biology/LABMAT, Department of
Microbiology and Parasitology, Bioscience Center, Federal University of the Rio
Grande do Norte. Natal, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil; Postgraduate Program of
Biological Science, Bioscience Center, Federal University of the Rio Grande do
Norte. Natal, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Toxoplasmosis Biology/LABMAT, Department of
Microbiology and Parasitology, Bioscience Center, Federal University of the Rio
Grande do Norte. Natal, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil.
(3)Department of Psychology, Federal University of Paraíba, João Pessoa, Paraíba,
Brazil.
(4)UNINASSAU Faculty, Natal, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil.
(5)Laboratory of Immunobiology of Inflammation, DECBI/ICEB and Post-graduate
Program of Health and Nutrition, Federal University of Ouro Preto, Minas Gerais, 
Brazil.
(6)Department of Clinical Analysis, School of Pharmacy, Federal University of the
Rio Grande do Norte. Natal, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil.

Congenital toxoplasmosis is a parasitic disease caused by Toxoplasma gondii, an
obligate intracellular parasite which can cause fetal death/abortion and can
induce damage in the brain and eyes of the infected babies. The environmental and
genetic factors associated with T. gondii and the maternal immune response, drive
part of the pathogenesis of congenital toxoplasmosis. Thus, in this study, we
aimed to investigate the allelic and genotypic frequencies of specific single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the IL17A and IL17RA genes, as well as the
production of IL-17A, IL-33, and CCL2 in pregnant women, from the State of Rio
Grande do Norte, Brazil, further relating these along with the clinical
parameters, to the toxoplasmosis infection. Through PCR-RFLP techniques, two SNPs
implicated in Th17 immune response, IL17A rs2275913 (G> A) and IL17RA rs4819554
(A> G) modulation were evaluated in pregnant women, either infected or not
infected by T. gondii. These women were also evaluated in terms of plasma release
of CCL2, IL-33, and IL-17A which relate to hypertension, number of abortions, and
ethnic pattern. The results showed that the G-allele of the SNP rs2275913 (IL17A)
appeared to be protective in this population, while the rs4819554 (IL17RA) SNP G 
allele was associated with greater susceptibility to T. gondii infection [ρ
value = 0.025; OR = 2.815 (1.118-7.089); CI = 95%]. None of the cytokines had any
influence on the analyzed parameters (abortion and hypertension). In conclusion, 
our data suggest an immunogenic evidence of susceptibility to T. gondii infection
driven by the rs4819554 (IL17RA) SNP G allele in Brazilian pregnant women.
Further studies are needed to reinforce this trial marker in populations from
distinct geographical areas as well as to confirm the protective pattern related 
to the G-allele of the SNP rs2275913 (IL17A) in pregnant women.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2020.105594 
PMID: 32598917 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

