
1. Exp Parasitol. 2020 Sep;216:107944. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2020.107944. Epub 2020
Jun 30.

Measuring of IgG2c isotype instead of IgG2a in immunized C57BL/6 mice with
Plasmodium vivax TRAP as a subunit vaccine candidate in order to correct
interpretation of Th1 versus Th2 immune response.

Nazeri S(1), Zakeri S(2), Mehrizi AA(2), Sardari S(3), Djadid ND(2).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
s.nazeri62@gmail.com.
(2)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Biotechnology Research Center (BRC), Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.

Evaluation of the murine isotype antibodies is essential in subunit vaccine
development because inbred mouse strains with diverse genetic backgrounds respond
different to recombinant proteins. In this regard, the main goal of this study
was to measuring and comparing the profile of IgG isotype responses in C57BL/6
mice. For this purpose, the extracellular region of plasmodium vivax
thrombospondin-related adhesive protein (PvTRAP) gene was expressed in
Escherichia coli Rosetta (DE3)-pET23a. Then, the recombinant PvTRAP alone or
emulsified with Freund's complete adjuvant were applied for immunization of the
C57BL/6 mice. The role of antibodies and cellular immune responses induced by
recombinant PvTRAP were evaluated. The results showed the level of anti-rPvTRAP
IgG2c was significantly higher than IgG2a in the groups that received rPvTRAP
alone (mean OD490 = 0.798 ± 0.12 and 0.39 ± 0.1, respectively) and emulsified
with CFA/IFA (mean OD490 = 1.48 ± 0.07 and 0.605 ± 0.13, respectively; P < 0.05, 
independent sample t-test). Additionally, the immunized mice with rPvTRAP and
rPvTRAP + CFA/IFA had an intermediate-avidity IgG2a antibody but high-avidity
IgG2c antibody as well as the mean of serum antibody titers results exhibited
that in both rPvTRAP and rPvTRAP + CFA/IFA mouse groups, IgG2a end-point titer
(1:3200 and 1:25,600, respectively) was noteworthy lower than IgG2c (1:25,600 and
1:102,400, respectively). Moreover, the results revealed the eliciting
significant levels of IFN-γ (P < 0.05, independent sample t-test) and no
detectable level of IL-4 in the mouse groups received rPvTRAP alone and
emulsified with CFA/IFA as compared to the mouse control groups. In general, our 
results showed that for correctly interpreting of Th1 immune responses in C57BL/6
mouse strain it is critical to measure IgG2c instead of IgG2a along with IFN-γ.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2020.107944 
PMID: 32619431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

