
1. Malar J. 2020 Jul 14;19(1):254. doi: 10.1186/s12936-020-03332-3.

The skeletal muscles of mice infected with Plasmodium berghei and Plasmodium
chabaudi reveal a crosstalk between lipid mediators and gene expression.

Marrelli MT(1)(2), Wang Z(3), Huang J(3), Brotto M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of São Paulo, 
Avenida Dr. Arnaldo 715, São Paulo, SP, 01246-904, Brazil.
mauro.marrelli@uta.edu.
(2)Bone-Muscle Research Center, College of Nursing and Health Innovation,
University of Texas-Arlington, 655 W. Mitchell Street, Arlington, TX, 76010, USA.
mauro.marrelli@uta.edu.
(3)Bone-Muscle Research Center, College of Nursing and Health Innovation,
University of Texas-Arlington, 655 W. Mitchell Street, Arlington, TX, 76010, USA.

BACKGROUND: Malaria is one of the most prevalent infectious disease in the world 
with 3.2 billion humans at risk. Malaria causes splenomegaly and damage in other 
organs including skeletal muscles. Skeletal muscles comprise nearly 50% of the
human body and are largely responsible for the regulation and modulation of
overall metabolism. It is essential to understand how malaria damages muscles in 
order to develop effective preventive measures and/or treatments. Using a
pre-clinical animal model, the potential molecular mechanisms of Plasmodium
infection affecting skeletal muscles of mice were investigated.
METHODS: Mouse Signal Transduction Pathway Finder PCR Array was used to monitor
gene expression changes of 10 essential signalling pathways in skeletal muscles
from mice infected with Plasmodium berghei and Plasmodium chabaudi. Then, a new
targeted-lipidomic approach using liquid chromatography with tandem mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to profile 158 lipid signalling mediators (LMs), mostly
eicosanoids derived from arachidonic acid (AA), eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), was applied. Finally, 16 key LMs directly associated 
with inflammation, oxidative stress, and tissue healing in skeletal muscles, were
quantified.
RESULTS: The results showed that the expression of key genes altered by
Plasmodium infection is associated with inflammation, oxidative stress, and
atrophy. In support to gene profiling results, lipidomics revealed higher
concentrations of LMs in skeletal muscles directly related to inflammatory
responses, while on the levels of LMs crucial in resolving inflammation and
tissue repair reduced significantly.
CONCLUSION: The results provide new insights into the molecular mechanisms of
malaria-induced muscle damage and revealed a potential mechanism modulating
inflammation in malarial muscles. These pre-clinical studies should help with
future clinical studies in humans aimed at monitoring of disease progression and 
development of specific interventions for the prevention and mitigation of
long-term chronic effects on skeletal muscle function.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-020-03332-3 
PMCID: PMC7362477
PMID: 32664933 

