
1. Rev Bras Parasitol Vet. 2020;29(3):e000920. doi: 10.1590/s1984-29612020042. Epub 
2020 Jul 10.

First molecular detection of Haemoproteus spp. and Plasmodium spp. in eared doves
(Zenaida auriculata) in Brazil.

Taroda A(1), Barros LD(1), Seixas M(1), Cardim ST(1), Sasse JP(1), Minutti AF(1),
Vidotto O(1), Garcia JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina Veterinária Preventiva, Laboratório de Protozoologia 
Animal, Universidade Estadual de Londrina, Londrina, PR, Brasil.

The aim of this study was to verify the presence and identify the species of
haemosporidian parasites in eared doves (Zenaida auriculata) in Brazil. Two
hundred and eleven male and female eared doves were trap-captured in four
different regions of Londrina city, in southern Brazil. Whole blood was collected
in EDTA tubes through heart puncture after euthanasia in a CO2 chamber. A nested 
PCR targeting the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene (cyt b) of Haemoproteus
spp./Plasmodium spp. was performed, followed by an enzymatic digestion to
identify the genus. Phylogenetic trees were constructed to determine the closely 
related species. Out of 211 eared doves, 209 (99.05%) were positive for
Haemoproteus spp. and/or Plasmodium spp. RFLP analysis showed that 72.72%
(152/209) of eared doves were positive only for Haemoproteus spp., 6.22% (13/209)
were positive only for Plasmodium spp., and 21.05% (44/209) of eared doves had
mixed infections. Genetic analysis found four samples that were homologous with
Haemoproteus multipigmentatus and one that was homologous with Plasmodium sp.
This is the first molecular study of hemoparasites from eared doves in Brazil,
and it is also the first description of H. multipigmentatus and Plasmodium spp.
infection in eared doves in Brazil.

DOI: 10.1590/s1984-29612020042 
PMID: 32667500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

