
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2020 Jul 22;20(1):530. doi: 10.1186/s12879-020-05253-7.

Occurrence of septuple and elevated Pfdhfr-Pfdhps quintuple mutations in a
general population threatens the use of sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine for malaria
prevention during pregnancy in eastern-coast of Tanzania.

Bwire GM(1), Mikomangwa WP(2), Kilonzi M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Muhimbili University of Health and 
Allied Sciences, P.O. Box 65013, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. georgebwire@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, Muhimbili University of
Health and Allied Sciences, P.O. Box 65013, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum dihydrofolate reductase (Pfdhfr) and
dihydropteroate synthetase (Pfdhps) mutations compromise the effectiveness of
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) for treatment of uncomplicated malaria, and are
likely to impair the efficiency of intermittent preventive treatment during
pregnancy (IPTp). This study was conducted to determine the level of
Pfdhfr-Pfdhps mutations, a decade since SP was limited for IPTp use in pregnant
women in Tanzania.
METHODS: P. falciparum genomic DNA was extracted from dried blood spots prepared 
from a finger prick. Extracted DNA were sequenced using a single MiSeq lane by
combining all PCR products. Genotyping of Pfdhfr and Pfdhps mutations were done
using bcftools whereas custom scripts were used to filter and translate genotypes
into SP resistance haplotypes.
RESULTS: The Pfdhfr was analyzed from 445 samples, the wild type (WT) Pfdhfr
haplotype NCSI was detected in 6 (1.3%) samples. Triple PfdhfrIRNI (mutations are
bolded and underlined) haplotype was dominant, contributing to 84% (number
[n] = 374) of haplotypes while 446 samples were studied for Pfdhps, WT for Pfdhps
(SAKAA) was found in 6.7% (n = 30) in samples. Double Pfdhps haplotype (SGEAA)
accounted for 83% of all mutations at Pfdhps gene. Of 447 Pfdhfr-Pfdhps combined 
genotypes, only 0.9% (n = 4) samples contained WT gene (SAKAA-NCSI). Quintuple
(five) mutations, SGEAA-IRNI accounted for 71.4% (n = 319) whereas 0.2% (n = 1)
had septuple (seven) mutations (AGKGS-IRNI). The overall prevalence of Pfdhfr
K540E was 90.4% (n = 396) while Pfdhps A581G was 1.1% (n = 5).
CONCLUSIONS: This study found high prevalence of Pfdhfr-Pfdhps quintuple and
presence of septuple mutations. Mutations at Pfdhfr K540E and Pfdhps A581G, major
predictors for IPTp-SP failure were within the recommended WHO range. Abandonment
of IPTp-SP is recommended in settings where the Pfdhfr K540E prevalence is > 95% 
and Pfdhps A581G is > 10% as SP is likely to be not effective. Nonetheless,
saturation in Pfdhfr and Pfdhps haplotypes is alarming, a search for alternative 
antimalarial drug for IPTp in the study area is recommended.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-020-05253-7 
PMCID: PMC7374904
PMID: 32698764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

