
1. mSphere. 2020 Aug 19;5(4). pii: e00325-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00325-20.

Detection of the Rhoptry Neck Protein Complex in Plasmodium Sporozoites and Its
Contribution to Sporozoite Invasion of Salivary Glands.

Nozaki M(1), Baba M(1), Tachibana M(1), Tokunaga N(1), Torii M(1)(2), Ishino
T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Parasitology, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University,
Matsuyama, Ehime, Japan.
(2)Division of Malaria Research, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University,
Matsuyama, Ehime, Japan.
(3)Division of Molecular Parasitology, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University,
Matsuyama, Ehime, Japan tishino@m.ehime-u.ac.jp.

In the Plasmodium life cycle, two infectious stages of parasites, merozoites and 
sporozoites, share rhoptry and microneme apical structures. A crucial step during
merozoite invasion of erythrocytes is the discharge to the host cell membrane of 
some rhoptry neck proteins as a complex, followed by the formation of a moving
junction involving the parasite-secreted protein AMA1 on the parasite membrane.
Components of the merozoite rhoptry neck protein complex are also expressed in
sporozoites, namely, RON2, RON4, and RON5, suggesting that invasion mechanism
elements might be conserved between these infective stages. Recently, we
demonstrated that RON2 is required for sporozoite invasion of mosquito salivary
gland cells and mammalian hepatocytes, using a sporozoite stage-specific gene
knockdown strategy in the rodent malaria parasite model, Plasmodium berghei Here,
we use a coimmunoprecipitation assay and oocyst-derived sporozoite extracts to
demonstrate that RON2, RON4, and RON5 also form a complex in sporozoites. The
sporozoite stage-specific gene knockdown strategy revealed that both RON4 and
RON5 have crucial roles during sporozoite invasion of salivary glands, including 
a significantly reduced attachment ability required for the onset of gliding.
Further analyses indicated that RON2 and RON4 reciprocally affect trafficking to 
rhoptries in developing sporozoites, while RON5 is independently transported.
These findings indicate that the interaction between RON2 and RON4 contributes to
their stability and trafficking to rhoptries, in addition to involvement in
sporozoite attachment.IMPORTANCE Sporozoites are the motile infectious stage that
mediates malaria parasite transmission from mosquitoes to the mammalian host.
This study addresses the question whether the rhoptry neck protein complex forms 
and functions in sporozoites, in addition to its role in merozoites. By applying 
coimmunoprecipitation and sporozoite stage-specific gene knockdown assays, it was
demonstrated that RON2, RON4, and RON5 form a complex and are involved in
sporozoite invasion of salivary glands via their attachment ability. These
findings shed light on the conserved invasion mechanisms among apicomplexan
infective stages. In addition, the sporozoite stage-specific gene knockdown
system has revealed for the first time in Plasmodium that the RON2 and RON4
interaction reciprocally affects their stability and trafficking to rhoptries.
Our study raises the possibility that the RON complex functions during sporozoite
maturation as well as migration toward and invasion of target cells.

Copyright Â© 2020 Nozaki et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00325-20 
PMCID: PMC7440843
PMID: 32817376 

