
1. mSphere. 2020 Aug 12;5(4). pii: e00457-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00457-20.

Redesigned TetR-Aptamer System To Control Gene Expression in Plasmodium
falciparum.

Rajaram K(1), Liu HB(1), Prigge ST(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA sprigge2@jhu.edu.

One of the most powerful approaches to understanding gene function involves
turning genes on and off at will and measuring the impact at the cellular or
organismal level. This particularly applies to the cohort of essential genes
where traditional gene knockouts are inviable. In Plasmodium falciparum,
conditional control of gene expression has been achieved by using multicomponent 
systems in which individual modules interact with each other to regulate DNA
recombination, transcription, or posttranscriptional processes. The recently
devised TetR-DOZI aptamer system relies on the ligand-regulatable interaction of 
a protein module with synthetic RNA aptamers to control the translation of a
target gene. This technique has been successfully employed to study essential
genes in P. falciparum and involves the insertion of several aptamer copies into 
the 3' untranslated regions (UTRs), which provide control over mRNA fate.
However, aptamer repeats are prone to recombination and one or more copies can be
lost from the system, resulting in a loss of control over target gene expression.
We rectified this issue by redesigning the aptamer array to minimize
recombination while preserving the control elements. As proof of concept, we
compared the original and modified arrays for their ability to knock down the
levels of a putative essential apicoplast protein (PF3D7_0815700) and
demonstrated that the modified array is highly stable and efficient. This
redesign will enhance the utility of a tool that is quickly becoming a favored
strategy for genetic studies in P. falciparum IMPORTANCE Malaria elimination
efforts have been repeatedly hindered by the evolution and spread of
multidrug-resistant strains of Plasmodium falciparum The absence of a
commercially available vaccine emphasizes the need for a better understanding of 
Plasmodium biology in order to further translational research. This has been
partly facilitated by targeted gene deletion strategies for the functional
analysis of parasite genes. However, genes that are essential for parasite
replication in erythrocytes are refractory to such methods, and require
conditional knockdown or knockout approaches to dissect their function. One such 
approach is the TetR-DOZI system that employs multiple synthetic aptamers in the 
untranslated regions of target genes to control their expression in a
tetracycline-dependent manner. Maintaining modified parasites with intact aptamer
copies has been challenging since these repeats can be lost by recombination. By 
interspacing the aptamers with unique sequences, we created a stable genetic
system that remains effective at controlling target gene expression.

Copyright Â© 2020 Rajaram et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00457-20 
PMCID: PMC7426165
PMID: 32817449 

