
1. mSphere. 2020 Aug 12;5(4). pii: e00671-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00671-20.

Novel Method for the Separation of Male and Female Gametocytes of the Malaria
Parasite Plasmodium falciparum That Enables Biological and Drug Discovery.

Ridgway MC(1), Shea KS(1), Cihalova D(1), Maier AG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research School of Biology, The Australian National University, Canberra,
Australia.
(2)Research School of Biology, The Australian National University, Canberra,
Australia alex.maier@anu.edu.au.

We developed a flow-cytometry-based method to separate and collect cocultured
male and female Plasmodium falciparum gametocytes responsible for malaria
transmission. The purity of the collected cells was estimated at >97% using flow 
cytometry, and sorted cells were observed by Giemsa-stained thin-smear and
live-cell fluorescence microscopy. The expression of validated sex-specific
markers corroborated the sorting strategy. Collected male and female gametocytes 
were used to confirm three novel sex-specific markers by quantitative real-time
PCR that were more enriched in sorted male and female gametocyte populations than
existing sex-specific markers. We also applied the method as a proof-of-principle
drug screen that allows the identification of drugs that kill gametocytes in a
sex-specific manner. Since the developed method allowed for the separation of
male and female parasites from the same culture, we observed for the first time a
difference in development time between the sexes: females developed faster than
males. Hence, the ability to separate male and female gametocytes opens the door 
to a new field of sex-specific P. falciparum gametocyte biology to further our
understanding of malaria transmission.IMPORTANCE The protozoan Plasmodium
falciparum causes the most severe form of human malaria. The development of
sexual forms (so-called gametocytes) is crucial for disease transmission.
However, knowledge of these forms is severely hampered by the paucity of
sex-specific markers and the inability to extract single sex gametocytes in high 
purity. Moreover, the identification of compounds that specifically affect one
sex is difficult due to the female bias of the gametocytes. We have developed a
system that allows for the separation of male and female gametocytes from the
same population. Applying our system, we show that male and female parasites
mature at different rates, which might have implications for transmission. We
also identified new sex-specific genes that can be used as sex markers or to
unravel sex-specific functions. Our system will not only aid in the discovery of 
much needed gametocidal compounds, but it also represents a valuable tool for
exploring malaria transmission biology.

Copyright Â© 2020 Ridgway et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00671-20 
PMCID: PMC7426174
PMID: 32817458 

