
1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 Aug 31;16(8):e1008131. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008131.
eCollection 2020 Aug.

Overlapping and distinct roles of CDPK family members in the pre-erythrocytic
stages of the rodent malaria parasite, Plasmodium berghei.

Govindasamy K(1), Bhanot P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry
and Molecular Genetics, Newark, New Jersey, United States of America.

Invasion of hepatocytes by Plasmodium sporozoites initiates the pre-erythrocytic 
step of a malaria infection. Subsequent development of the parasite within
hepatocytes and exit from them is essential for starting the disease-causing
erythrocytic cycle. Identification of signaling pathways that operate in
pre-erythrocytic stages provides insight into a critical step of infection and
potential targets for chemoprotection from malaria. We demonstrate that P.
berghei homologs of Calcium Dependent Protein Kinase 1 (CDPK1), CDPK4 and CDPK5
play overlapping but distinct roles in sporozoite invasion and parasite egress
from hepatocytes. All three kinases are expressed in sporozoites. All three are
required for optimal motility of sporozoites and consequently their invasion of
hepatocytes. Increased cGMP can compensate for the functional loss of CDPK1 and
CDPK5 during sporozoite invasion but cannot overcome loss of CDPK4. CDPK1 and
CDPK5 expression is downregulated after sporozoite invasion. CDPK5 reappears in a
subset of late stage liver stages and is present in all merosomes. Chemical
inhibition of CDPK4 and depletion of CDPK5 in liver stages implicate these
kinases in the formation and/or release of merosomes from mature liver stages.
Furthermore, depletion of CDPK5 in merosomes significantly delays initiation of
the erythrocytic cycle without affecting infectivity of hepatic merozoites. These
data suggest that CDPK5 may be required for the rupture of merosomes. Our work
provides evidence that sporozoite invasion requires CDPK1 and CDPK5, and suggests
that CDPK5 participates in the release of hepatic merozoites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008131 
PMCID: PMC7485973
PMID: 32866196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

