
1. Rev Peru Med Exp Salud Publica. 2020 Apr-Jun;37(2):220-228. doi:
10.17843/rpmesp.2020.372.4759. Epub 2020 Aug 28.

Submicroscopic placental malaria: histopathology and expression of physiological 
process mediators.

[Article in English, Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

López-Guzmán C(1), Carmona-Fonseca J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo Salud y Comunidad-César Uribe Piedrahíta, Universidad de Antioquia,
Medellín, Colombia.
(2)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia.

OBJETIVES: To relate histopathological events of placental malaria (PM), immune
cell behavior and gene expression associated with cytokines, hypoxia,
inflammation and angiogenesis in placentas with or without plasmodial infection.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Transversal design, with three independent groups. Women
were recruited, and their placentas were collected in 2009-2016, in the hospitals
of Puerto Libertador and Tierralta, northwestern Colombia. The sample size was
defined by convenience. The malaria diagnosis was based on real-time quantitative
PCR.
RESULTS: We studied 20 cases of PM by P. vivax (PM-V), 20 cases of PM by P.
falciparum (PM-F) and 19 without PM; 95% of the cases of PM are submicroscopic
placental plasmodial infection (SPPI). The three groups differ in frequency and
number of histopathological events. Physiological process mediators showed
significant difference between groups, except IL-2, VEGF, VEGFR-1 and C5a.
CONCLUSIONS: Infected placentas are clearly different from uninfected ones. P.
vivax behaves as pathogenic as P. falciparum. The approximation to the integral
approach of the problem of PM is underlined. Submicroscopic placental plasmodial 
infection causes tissue and physiological mediator alterations as does
microscopic infection, although probably to a lesser degree.

Publisher: Relacionar entre sí los eventos histopatológicos de malaria
placentaria (MP), el comportamiento de células inmunitarias y la expresión de
genes asociados a citoquinas, hipoxia, inflamación y angiogénesis en placentas
con o sin infección plasmodial.Diseño transversal, con tres grupos
independientes. Las mujeres y sus placentas fueron captadas en 2009-2016, en los 
hospitales de Puerto Libertador y Tierralta, noroccidente de Colombia. El tamaño 
muestral se definió por conveniencia. El diagnóstico malárico se basó en PCR
cuantitativa en tiempo real.Se estudiaron 20 casos con MP por P. vivax (MP-V), 20
casos de MP por P. falciparum (MP-F) y 19 sin MP; 95% de los casos de MP son
infección plasmodial placentaria submicroscópica (IPPS). Los tres grupos difieren
en frecuencia y cantidad de eventos histopatológicos. Los mediadores de procesos 
fisiológicos presentaron diferencia significativa entre grupos, excepto IL-2,
VEGF, VEGFR-1 y C5a.Las placentas con infección difieren claramente de las no
infectadas. P. vivax se comporta tan patógeno como P. falciparum. Se resalta la
aproximación al abordaje integral del problema de MP. La infección plasmodial
placentaria submicroscópica causa alteraciones tisulares y en mediadores
fisiológicos como lo hace la infección microscópica, aunque probablemente en
menor grado.
DOI: 10.17843/rpmesp.2020.372.4759 
PMID: 32876209 

