
1. Malar J. 2020 Sep 14;19(1):334. doi: 10.1186/s12936-020-03410-6.

No evidence of amplified Plasmodium falciparum plasmepsin II gene copy number in 
an area with artemisinin-resistant malaria along the China-Myanmar border.

Huang F(1), Shrestha B(2), Liu H(3), Tang LH(4), Zhou SS(4), Zhou XN(4),
Takala-Harrison S(2), Ringwald P(5), Nyunt MM(6), Plowe CV(6).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. huangfang@nipd.chinacdc.cn.
(2)Center for Vaccine Development and Global Health, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Yunnan Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Puer, People's Republic of China.
(4)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(5)Global Malaria Programme, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
(6)Duke Global Health Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: The emergence and spread of artemisinin resistance in Plasmodium
falciparum poses a threat to malaria eradication, including China's plan to
eliminate malaria by 2020. Piperaquine (PPQ) resistance has emerged in Cambodia, 
compromising an important partner drug that is widely used in China in the form
of dihydroartemisinin (DHA)-PPQ. Several mutations in a P. falciparum gene
encoding a kelch protein on chromosome 13 (k13) are associated with artemisinin
resistance and have arisen spread in the Great Mekong subregion, including the
China-Myanmar border. Multiple copies of the plasmepsin II/III (pm2/3) genes,
located on chromosome 14, have been shown to be associated with PPQ resistance.
METHODS: The therapeutic efficacy of DHA-PPQ for the treatment of uncomplicated
P. falciparum was evaluated along the China-Myanmar border from 2010 to 2014. The
dry blood spots samples collected in the efficacy study prior DHA-PPQ treatment
and from the local hospital by passive detection were used to amplify k13 and
pm2. Polymorphisms within k13 were genotyped by capillary sequencing and pm2 copy
number was quantified by relative-quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction. Treatment outcome was evaluated with the World Health Organization
protocol. A linear regression model was used to estimate the association between 
the day 3 positive rate and k13 mutation and the relationship of the pm2 copy
number variants and k13 mutations.
RESULTS: DHA-PPQ was effective for uncomplicated P. falciparum infection in
Yunnan Province with cure rates > 95%. Twelve non synonymous mutations in the k13
domain were observed among the 268 samples with the prevalence of 44.0% and the
predominant mutation was F446I with a prevalence of 32.8%. Only one sample was
observed with multi-copies of pm2, including parasites with and
without k13 mutations. The therapeutic efficacy of DHA-PPQ was > 95% along the
China-Myanmar border, consistent with the lack of amplification of pm2.
CONCLUSION: DHA-PPQ for uncomplicated P. falciparum infection still showed
efficacy in an area with artemisinin-resistant malaria along the China-Myanmar
border. There was no evidence to show PPQ resistance by clinical study and
molecular markers survey. Continued monitoring of the parasite population using
molecular markers will be important to track emergence and spread of resistance
in this region.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-020-03410-6 
PMCID: PMC7488220
PMID: 32928233 

