
1. Acta Trop. 2020 Sep 23;212:105719. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2020.105719. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Detection and molecular identification of Leucocytozoon and Plasmodium species
from village chickens in different areas of Myanmar.

Win SY(1), Chel HM(2), Hmoon MM(1), Htun LL(1), Bawm S(3), Win MM(4), Murata
S(5), Nonaka N(6), Nakao R(6), Katakura K(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Parasitology, University of Veterinary Science,
Yezin, Nay Pyi Taw, 15013, Myanmar.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Parasitology, University of Veterinary Science,
Yezin, Nay Pyi Taw, 15013, Myanmar; Laboratory of Parasitology, University of
Veterinary Science, Yezin, Nay Pyi Taw, 15013, Myanmar.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Parasitology, University of Veterinary Science,
Yezin, Nay Pyi Taw, 15013, Myanmar; Department of International Relations and
Information Technology.
(4)Rector office, University of Veterinary Science, Yezin, Nay Pyi Taw, 15013,
Myanmar.
(5)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, Graduate School of Infectious Diseases,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0818, Japan.
(6)Laboratory of Parasitology, University of Veterinary Science, Yezin, Nay Pyi
Taw, 15013, Myanmar.
(7)Laboratory of Parasitology, University of Veterinary Science, Yezin, Nay Pyi
Taw, 15013, Myanmar. Electronic address: kenkata@vetmed.hokudai.ac.jp.

Village chicken production, a traditional, small-scale, and extensive backyard
poultry industry, has been profitable for local farmers in Myanmar. However,
there is scanty information available concerning the infection of these chickens 
with avian pathogens, including haemoprotozoan parasites. In the present study,
we provide the first report of microscopic detection and molecular identification
of Leucocytozoon and Plasmodium parasites from seven different areas of Myanmar. 
Leucocytozoon gametocytes were detected in 17.6% (81/461) of the blood smears
from village chickens. The nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for targeting
Leucocytozoon mitochondrial cytochrome b (cyt b) genes had a 17.6% positive rate.
Although the positive rate of nested PCR targeting Plasmodium/Haemoproteus cyt b 
was 34.3%, the PCR protocol was observed to possibly amplify DNA of a certain
species of Leucocytozoon. There were no obvious clinical signs in the infected
birds. Statistical analysis of the microscopic detection and PCR detection rates 
using the age and sex of birds as internal factors revealed that the statistical 
significances differed according to the study area. The sequencing of 32 PCR
products obtained from each study area revealed infection by Leucocytozoon
caulleryi in three birds, Leucocytozoon sabrazesi in two birds, Leucocytozoon
schoutedeni in two birds, Leucocytozoon sp. in eighteen birds, and Plasmodium
juxtanucleare in seven birds; however, Haemoproteus infection was not detected.
While L. sabrazesi was detected in chickens from the central region of Myanmar,
the other haemosporidians were detected in those from different areas. In the
haplotype analysis, we detected 17 haemosporidian cyt b haplotypes, including two
for L. caulleryi, one for L. sabrazesi, two for L. schoutedeni, nine for
Leucocytozoon sp., and three for P. juxtanucleare. Phylogenetic analysis of the
cyt b haplotypes revealed a considerably close genetic relationship among chicken
haemosporidians detected in Myanmar, Thailand, and Malaysia. These results
indicate that well-recognized widespread species of chicken Leucocytozoon and
Plasmodium are distributed nationwide in Myanmar, providing new insights into the
ecosystem and control strategies of haemosporidian parasites in domesticated
chickens in Myanmar.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2020.105719 
PMID: 32976841 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

