
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2020 Oct 1. pii: S0006-291X(20)31868-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.09.115. [Epub ahead of print]

LncRNA ST8SIA6-AS1 promotes hepatocellular carcinoma progression by regulating
MAGEA3 and DCAF4L2 expression.

Zhang X(1), Xu S(2), Hu C(1), Fang K(1), Zhou J(3), Guo Z(4), Zhu G(5), Li L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Institute, The Affiliated Hospital of Jiangnan University, Wuxi,
214062, China.
(2)Department of Malaria Control, Jiangsu Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Wuxi, 
214064, China.
(3)Department of Oncological Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital of Jiangnan
University, Wuxi, 214062, China.
(4)Department of Oncological Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital of Jiangnan
University, Wuxi, 214062, China. Electronic address: gzjwxsy@sina.com.
(5)Department of Malaria Control, Jiangsu Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Wuxi, 
214064, China. Electronic address: jipdzhu@hotmail.com.
(6)Oncology Institute, The Affiliated Hospital of Jiangnan University, Wuxi,
214062, China. Electronic address: LLHWXSY@aliyun.com.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most prevalent type of liver cancer. In
this study, we aimed to explore the role and mechanism of lncRNA ST8SIA6-AS1 in
HCC. We found that ST8SIA6-AS1 was upregulated in HCC tissues and associated with
poorer overall survival of HCC patients from TCGA. Moreover, ST8SIA6-AS1 was
highly expressed in HCC in-house tissues and cells, and ST8SIA6-AS1 upregulation 
was related to aggressive tumor phenotypes and the poor overall survival of HCC
patients. Downregulation of ST8SIA6-AS1 suppressed HCC cell proliferation,
migration and invasion in vitro and restrained HCC tumorigenesis in vivo. In
terms of mechanism, ST8SIA6-AS1 regulated melanoma-associated antigen (MAGE)-A3
(MAGEA3) and DDB1-and Cul4-associated factor 4-like 2 (DCAF4L2) expression, and
rescue experiments verified that ST8SIA6-AS1 played a protumorigenic role in HCC 
via the regulation of MAGEA3 and DCAF4L2. ST8SIA6-AS1 partly directly bound to
miR-129-5p and functioned as a competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA), subsequently
facilitating the expression of the miR-129-5p target gene DCAF4L2 to play its
role in HCC. In summary, our results identified ST8SIA6-AS1 as an oncogenic
lncRNA predicting poor clinical outcomes of patients with HCC. These findings
suggest that ST8SIA6-AS1 is a potential therapeutic target for HCC.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.09.115 
PMID: 33012505 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

