
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2020 Sep 3;10:464. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00464.
eCollection 2020.

Host Porphobilinogen Deaminase Deficiency Confers Malaria Resistance in
Plasmodium chabaudi but Not in Plasmodium berghei or Plasmodium falciparum During
Intraerythrocytic Growth.

Schnider CB(1)(2), Yang H(1), Starrs L(1), Ehmann A(1), Rahimi F(3), Di Pierro
E(4), Graziadei G(4), Matthews K(5), De Koning-Ward T(5), Bauer DC(6), Foote
SJ(1), Burgio G(1), McMorran BJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Disease, John Curtin School of Medical
Research, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Research School of Biology, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT,
Australia.
(4)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda - Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Internal Medicine
Unit, Department of Medicine and Medical Specialties, Rare Diseases Center,
Milan, Italy.
(5)School of Medicine, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC, Australia.
(6)Health and Biosecurity, CSIRO, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

An important component in host resistance to malaria infection are inherited
mutations that give rise to abnormalities and deficiencies in erythrocyte
proteins and enzymes. Understanding how such mutations confer protection against 
the disease may be useful for developing new treatment strategies. A mouse
ENU-induced mutagenesis screen for novel malaria resistance-conferring mutations 
identified a novel non-sense mutation in the gene encoding porphobilinogen
deaminase (PBGD) in mice, denoted here as Pbgd MRI58155. Heterozygote Pbgd
MRI58155 mice exhibited ~50% reduction in cellular PBGD activity in both mature
erythrocytes and reticulocytes, although enzyme activity was ~10 times higher in 
reticulocytes than erythrocytes. When challenged with blood-stage P. chabaudi,
which preferentially infects erythrocytes, heterozygote mice showed a modest but 
significant resistance to infection, including reduced parasite growth. A series 
of assays conducted to investigate the mechanism of resistance indicated that
mutant erythrocyte invasion by P. chabaudi was normal, but that following
intraerythrocytic establishment a significantly greater proportions of parasites 
died and therefore, affected their ability to propagate. The Plasmodium
resistance phenotype was not recapitulated in Pbgd-deficient mice infected with
P. berghei, which prefers reticulocytes, or when P. falciparum was cultured in
erythrocytes from patients with acute intermittent porphyria (AIP), which had
modest (20-50%) reduced levels of PBGD. Furthermore, the growth of Pbgd-null P.
falciparum and Pbgd-null P. berghei parasites, which grew at the same rate as
their wild-type counterparts in normal cells, were not affected by the
PBGD-deficient background of the AIP erythrocytes or Pbgd-deficient mice. Our
results confirm the dispensability of parasite PBGD for P. berghei infection and 
intraerythrocytic growth of P. falciparum, but for the first time identify a
requirement for host erythrocyte PBGD by P. chabaudi during in vivo blood stage
infection.

Copyright Â© 2020 Schnider, Yang, Starrs, Ehmann, Rahimi, Di Pierro, Graziadei,
Matthews, De Koning-Ward, Bauer, Foote, Burgio and McMorran.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00464 
PMCID: PMC7495142
PMID: 33014890 

