
1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2020 Oct 9:106190. doi:
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2020.106190. [Epub ahead of print]

Absence of association between polymorphisms in the pfcoronin and pfk13 genes and
the presence of Plasmodium falciparum parasites after treatment with artemisinin 
derivatives in Senegal.

Delandre O(1), Daffe SM(2), Gendrot M(1), Diallo MN(2), Madamet M(3), Kounta
MB(4), Diop MN(5), Bercion R(6), Sow A(7), Ngom PM(7), Lo G(8), Benoit N(3),
Amalvict R(3), Fonta I(3), Mosnier J(3), Diawara S(2), Wade KA(4), Fall M(5),
Fall KB(9), Fall B(2), Pradines B(10).

Author information: 
(1)Unité Parasitologie et entomologie, Département Microbiologie et maladies
infectieuses, Institut de recherche biomédicale des armées, Marseille, France;
Aix Marseille Univ, IRD, SSA, AP-HM, VITROME, Marseille, France; IHU Méditerranée
Infection, Marseille, France.
(2)Fédération des laboratories, Hôpital Principal de Dakar, Dakar, Sénégal.
(3)Unité Parasitologie et entomologie, Département Microbiologie et maladies
infectieuses, Institut de recherche biomédicale des armées, Marseille, France;
Aix Marseille Univ, IRD, SSA, AP-HM, VITROME, Marseille, France; IHU Méditerranée
Infection, Marseille, France; Centre national de reference du paludisme,
Marseille, France.
(4)Service des urgences, Hôpital Principal de Dakar, Dakar, Sénégal.
(5)Service de réanimation médicale, Hôpital Principal de Dakar, Dakar, Sénégal.
(6)Laboratoire d'analyses médicales, Institut Pasteur de Dakar, Dakar, Sénégal.
(7)Service de maternité, Hôpital Principal de Dakar, Dakar, Sénégal.
(8)Centre medical inter-armées Lemonier, Dakar, Sénégal; Institut de recherche en
santé, de surveillance épidémiologique et de formation (IRESSEF), Dakar, Sénégal.
(9)Service de pathologies infectieuses, Hôpital Principal de Dakar, Dakar,
Sénégal.
(10)Unité Parasitologie et entomologie, Département Microbiologie et maladies
infectieuses, Institut de recherche biomédicale des armées, Marseille, France;
Aix Marseille Univ, IRD, SSA, AP-HM, VITROME, Marseille, France; IHU Méditerranée
Infection, Marseille, France; Centre national de reference du paludisme,
Marseille, France. Electronic address: bruno.pradines@gmail.com.

Due to resistance to chloroquine and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, treatment for
uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria switched to artemisinin-based
combination therapy (ACT) in 2006 in Senegal. Several mutations in the gene
coding the kelch13 helix (pfk13-propeller) were identified to be associated with 
in vitro and in vivo artemisinin resistance in Southeast Asia. Additionally,
three mutations in the pfcoronin gene (G50E, R100K and E107V) have been
identified in two culture-adapted Senegalese field isolates which became
resistant in vitro to artemisinin after 4 years of intermittent selection with
dihydroartemisinin. The aims of this study were first to assess the prevalence of
pfcoronin and pfk13 mutations in Senegalese field isolates from Dakar and then to
investigate their association with artemisinin derivatives clinical failures. A
total of 348 samples of P. falciparum from 327 patients, collected from 2015 to
2019 in the Hôpital Principal de Dakar, were successfully analyzed. All sequences
had wild-type pfk13 allele. The three mutations (G50E, R100K and E107V),
previously identified in reduced susceptibility parasites to artemisinin, were
not found in the present study but a new mutation P76S was detected (mean
prevalence 16.2%). The P76S mutation was identified in 5 of the 16 isolates
(31.3%) collected from patients still parasitaemic on Day 3 after ACT treatment
and in 31 samples among the 203 patients considered as successfully cured
(15.3%). There was no significant association between in vivo reduced efficacy to
artemisinin derivatives and the P76S mutation (p = 0.151; Fisher's exact test).
The present data suggest that polymorphisms on pfk13 and pfcoronin are not the
best predictive markers for artemisinin resistance in Senegal.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2020.106190 
PMID: 33045351 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests None declared.

