
1. Pathog Glob Health. 2020 Oct;114(7):370-378. doi: 10.1080/20477724.2020.1803628.

Cellular mechanisms regulating synthetic sex ratio distortion in the Anopheles
gambiae germline.

Haghighat-Khah RE(1), Sharma A(2), Wunderlich MR(1), Morselli G(1), Marston
LA(1), Bamikole C(1), Hall A(1), Kranjc N(1), Taxiarchi C(1), Sharakhov I(2)(3), 
Galizi R(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London , London, UK.
(2)Department of Entomology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University 
, Blacksburg, VA, USA.
(3)Department of Cytology and Genetics, Tomsk State University , Tomsk, Russian
Federation.
(4)Centre for Applied Entomology and Parasitology, School of Life Sciences, Keele
University , UK.

Genetic control strategies aimed to bias the sex of progenies towards males
present a promising new paradigm to eliminate malaria-transmitting mosquitoes. A 
synthetic sex-ratio distortion (SD) system was successfully engineered in
Anopheles gambiae by exploiting the meiotic activity of the I-PpoI endonuclease
targeting ribosomal DNA (rDNA) repeats, exclusively located on the X chromosome. 
Males carrying the SD construct produce highly male-biased progenies without
evident reduction in fertility. In this study, we investigated the fate of X and 
Y chromosomes in these SD males and found that ratios of mature X:Y-bearing sperm
were comparable to wild-type insects, indicating absence of selection mechanisms 
during sperm maturation. We therefore tested the effect of meiotic cleavage of
both X and Y chromosomes in a lab-generated SD strain carrying rDNA on both sex
chromosomes, showing fertility comparable to wild-type and a reduced male-bias
compared to SD males in which only the X is targeted. Exposure of Y-linked rDNA
to I-PpoI cleavage for consecutive generations rapidly restored the male-bias to 
typical high frequencies, indicating a correlation between the number of
cleavable targets in each sex chromosome and the sex-ratios found in the progeny.
Altogether our results indicate that meiotic cleavage of rDNA repeats, located in
the sex chromosomes of A. gambiae SD males, affects the competitiveness of mature
sperm to fertilize the female oocyte, thereby generating sex-biased progenies. We
also show that the presence of rDNA copies on the Y chromosome does not impair
the effectiveness of engineered synthetic SD systems for the control of human
malaria mosquitoes.

DOI: 10.1080/20477724.2020.1803628 
PMID: 33043870 

