
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 1;279(40):41444-52. Epub 2004 Jul 21.

Plasmodium induces swelling-activated ClC-2 anion channels in the host
erythrocyte.

Huber SM(1), Duranton C, Henke G, Van De Sand C, Heussler V, Shumilina E, Sandu
CD, Tanneur V, Brand V, Kasinathan RS, Lang KS, Kremsner PG, Hübner CA, Rust MB, 
Dedek K, Jentsch TJ, Lang F.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Physiology and Parasitology, Institute of Tropical Medicine,
University of Tübingen, 72076 Germany. stephan.huber@uni-tuebingen.de

Intraerythrocytic growth of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum
depends on delivery of nutrients. Moreover, infection challenges cell volume
constancy of the host erythrocyte requiring enhanced activity of cell volume
regulatory mechanisms. Patch clamp recording demonstrated inwardly and outwardly 
rectifying anion channels in infected but not in control erythrocytes. The
molecular identity of those channels remained elusive. We show here for one
channel type that voltage dependence, cell volume sensitivity, and activation by 
oxidation are identical to ClC-2. Moreover, Western blots and FACS analysis
showed protein and functional ClC-2 expression in human erythrocytes and
erythrocytes from wild type (Clcn2(+/+)) but not from Clcn2(-/-) mice. Finally,
patch clamp recording revealed activation of volume-sensitive inwardly rectifying
channels in Plasmodium berghei-infected Clcn2(+/+) but not Clcn2(-/-)
erythrocytes. Erythrocytes from infected mice of both genotypes differed in cell 
volume and inhibition of ClC-2 by ZnCl(2) (1 mm) induced an increase of cell
volume only in parasitized Clcn2(+/+) erythrocytes. Lack of ClC-2 did not inhibit
P. berghei development in vivo nor substantially affect the mortality of infected
mice. In conclusion, activation of host ClC-2 channels participates in the
altered permeability of Plasmodium-infected erythrocytes but is not required for 
intraerythrocytic parasite survival.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M407618200 
PMID: 15272009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

