
1. Int J Parasitol. 2004 Dec;34(13-14):1501-16.

Malarial anaemia: mechanisms and implications of insufficient erythropoiesis
during blood-stage malaria.

Chang KH(1), Stevenson MM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Host-Parasite Interactions, Institute of Parasitology, McGill
University, Ste. Anne de Bellevue, Que., Canada.

It has been proposed that the basis of severe malarial anaemia, a major cause of 
morbidity and mortality in endemic areas, is multifactorial. Inappropriately low 
reticulocytosis is observed in malaria patients suggesting that insufficient
erythropoiesis is a major factor. Clinical studies provide conflicting data
concerning the production of adequate levels of erythropoietin (EPO) during
malaria. Plasmodium chabaudi AS causes non-lethal infection in resistant C57BL/6 
mice, and lethal infection in susceptible A/J mice. In P. chabaudi AS infected
C57BL/6 and A/J mice, which experience varying degrees of severity of anaemia,
kidney EPO production is appropriate to the severity of anaemia and is regulated 
by haematocrit level. Neutralisation of endogenous EPO during infection leads to 
lethal anaemia while timely administration of exogenous EPO rescues mice although
reticulocytosis is suppressed in proportion to the parasitemia level.
Characterisation of alterations in splenic erythroid compartments in naive and P.
chabaudi AS infected A/J mice revealed that infection, with or without EPO
treatment, leads to sub-optimal increases in TER119+ erythroblasts compared to
EPO-treated naive mice. A lower percentage of TER119+ erythroblasts in infected
mice undergo terminal differentiation to become mature haemoglobin-producing
cells. Furthermore, there is a shift in transferrin receptor (CD71) expression
from TER119+ cells to a non-erythroid population. Deficiencies in the number and 
maturation of TER119+ erythroblasts during infection coincide with blunted
proliferation to EPO stimulation in vitro by splenocytes, although a high
frequency express EPO receptor (EPOR). Together, these data suggest that during
malaria, EPO-induced proliferation of early EPOR+ erythroid progenitors is
suppressed, leading to sub-optimal generation of TER119+ erythroblasts. Moreover,
a shift in CD71 expression may result in impaired terminal maturation of
erythroblasts. Thus, suppressed proliferation, differentiation, and maturation of
erythroid precursors in association with inadequate reticulocytosis may be the
basis of insufficient erythropoiesis during malaria.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2004.10.008 
PMID: 15582527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

