
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 2;280(35):31166-71. Epub 2005 Jul 8.

Structural and functional studies of interaction between Plasmodium falciparum
knob-associated histidine-rich protein (KAHRP) and erythrocyte spectrin.

Pei X(1), An X, Guo X, Tarnawski M, Coppel R, Mohandas N.

Author information: 
(1)Red Cell Physiology Laboratory, New York Blood Center, New York, New York,
10021, USA.

Plasmodium falciparum dramatically modifies the structure and function of the
membrane of the parasitized host erythrocyte. Altered membrane properties are the
consequence of the interaction of a group of exported malaria proteins with host 
cell membrane proteins. KAHRP (the knob-associated histidine-rich protein), a
member of this group, has been shown to interact with erythrocyte membrane
skeletal protein spectrin. However, the molecular basis for this interaction has 
yet to be defined. In the present study, we defined the binding motifs in both
KAHRP and spectrin and identified a functional role for this interaction. We
showed that spectrin bound to a 72-amino-acid KAHRP fragment (residues 370-441). 
Among nine-spectrin fragments, which encompass the entire alpha and beta spectrin
molecules (four alpha spectrin and five beta spectrin fragments), KAHRP bound
only to one, the alpha N-5 fragment. The KAHRP-binding site within the alpha N-5 
fragment was localized uniquely to repeat 4. The interaction of full-length
spectrin dimer to KAHRP was inhibited by repeat 4 of alpha spectrin. Importantly,
resealing of this repeat peptide into erythrocytes mislocalized KAHRP in the
parasitized cells. We concluded that the interaction of KAHRP with spectrin is
critical for appropriate membrane localization of KAHRP in parasitized
erythrocytes. As the presence of KAHRP at the erythrocyte membrane is necessary
for cytoadherence in vivo, our findings have implications for the development of 
new therapies for mitigating the severity of malaria infection.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M505298200 
PMID: 16006556  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

