
1. Vet Parasitol. 2005 Nov 25;134(1-2):77-85. Epub 2005 Aug 19.

Clinicopathological findings in naturally occurring cases of babesiosis caused by
large form Babesia from dogs of northeastern Italy.

Furlanello T(1), Fiorio F, Caldin M, Lubas G, Solano-Gallego L.

Author information: 
(1)Clinica Veterinaria Privata San Marco, Laboratorio Privato d'Analisi
Veterinarie San Marco, Padova, Italy.

There are few extensive studies about clinicopathological findings of spontaneous
canine babesiosis caused by a large form of the parasite found in Europe. To
further characterize and describe clinicopathological findings in dogs affected
with this large form of Babesia in northeastern Italy, we evaluated 23 Italian
dogs with canine babesiosis by means of clinical history, physical examination,
hematological, biochemical, hemostatic tests, serum electrophoresis and
urinalysis. Seventeen dogs (74%) had recently traveled on a hunting trip (within 
5-15 days of being presented to the clinic) to Bosnia and Herzegovina (n=7), to
Croatia (n=8) and to Hungary (n=2). The duration of clinical signs ranged from 1 
to 5 days prior to the arrival at the clinic. The main clinical signs were
dehydration (100%), apathy (74%), anorexia or decrease appetite (70%) and fever
(68%). The anemia was present in 74% of the dogs and classified as mild (35%),
moderate (59%) and severe (6%). In all cases, the anemia was normocytic and
normochromic. Only three dogs presented erythrocyte regeneration. Seventy percent
of dogs had hemolytic anemia and 30% had non-hemolytic anemia. Sixty-nine percent
of dogs showed leucopenia and 74% neutropenia. Leucocitosis, due to mature
neutrophilia and lymphocytosis, was present in one dog. Activated lymphocytes
were noted in 61% of dogs. In all dogs, thrombocytopenia and an elevated
hyperfibrinogenemia were present. Significant prolonged activated partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT) was only found in one case. In four dogs, both plasma 
fibrinogen/fibrin degradation products (FDPs) and D-Dimer were increased.
Antithrombin (AT) was slightly decreased in 11 of the 23 dogs. In the majority of
cases, mild elevation of aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine
aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), creatinekinase (CK), total
bilirubin and lactic acid and decrease of total iron and total iron binding
capacity (TIBC) were present. In conclusion, the main clinicopathological
findings were a mild to severe thrombocytopenia, a mild to moderate hemolytic
anemia, neutropenia and hyperfibrinogenemia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2005.07.016 
PMID: 16112810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

