
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jul 24;104(30):12560-4. Epub 2007 Jul 16.

Aquaporin 9 is the major pathway for glycerol uptake by mouse erythrocytes, with 
implications for malarial virulence.

Liu Y(1), Promeneur D, Rojek A, Kumar N, Fr√∏kiaer J, Nielsen S, King LS, Agre P, 
Carbrey JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Aug 28;104(35):13855-6.

Human and rodent erythrocytes are known to be highly permeable to glycerol.
Aquaglyceroporin aquaporin (AQP)3 is the major glycerol channel in human and rat 
erythrocytes. However, AQP3 expression has not been observed in mouse
erythrocytes. Here we report the presence of an aquaglyceroporin, AQP9, in mouse 
erythrocytes. AQP9 levels rise as reticulocytes mature into erythrocytes and as
neonatal pups develop into adult mice. Mice bearing targeted disruption of both
alleles encoding AQP9 have erythrocytes that appear morphologically normal.
Compared with WT cells, erythrocytes from AQP9-null mice are defective in rapid
glycerol transport across the cell membrane when measured by osmotic lysis,
[(14)C]glycerol uptake, or stopped-flow light scattering. In contrast, the water 
and urea permeabilities are intact. Although the physiological role of glycerol
in the normal function of erythrocytes is not clear, plasma glycerol is an
important substrate for lipid biosynthesis of intraerythrocytic malarial
parasites. AQP9-null mice at the age of 4 months infected with Plasmodium berghei
survive longer during the initial phase of infection compared with WT mice. We
conclude that AQP9 is the major glycerol channel in mouse erythrocytes and
suggest that this transport pathway may contribute to the virulence of
intraerythrocytic stages of malarial infection.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0705313104 
PMCID: PMC1941508
PMID: 17636116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

