
1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2008 Jan;40(1):47-53.

Studies on correlations among parasitaemia and some hemolytic indices in two
tropical diseases (theileriosis and anaplasmosis) in Fars province of Iran.

Nazifi S(1), Razavi SM, Mansourian M, Nikahval B, Moghaddam M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Studies, School of Veterinary Medicine, Shiraz
University, P.O. Box 1731, Shiraz 71345, Iran. nazifi@shirazu.ac.ir

This study was carried out in two observational clinical studies. Study 1
comprised 50 adult crossbred cattle naturally infected by Theileria annulata.
Infected animals were divided into 4 subgroups with different parasitaemia (<1%, 
1-3%, 3-5% and >5%). Study 2 comprised 20 adult crossbred cattle naturally
infected by Anaplasma marginale. Infected animals were divided into 3 subgroups
with different parasitaemia (<10%, 10-20% and 20-30%). In study 1, a significant 
negative correlation (P<0.001) was observed between parasitaemia and superoxide
dismutase (SOD). Positive correlations (P<0.001) were observed between
parasitaemia and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and mean corpuscular fragility
(MCF). In study 2 positive correlations (P<0.05) were observed among parasitaemia
and MCF and LDH activity. SOD activity had a negative correlation with
parasitaemia in cattle with parasitaemia lower than 10% but no significant
correlation (P>0.05) was observed between SOD activity and parasitaemia in cattle
with 10-20 and 20-30% parasitaemia. In comparison of both studies we came to the 
conclusion that in theileriosis as the severity of disease increased the anaemia,
MCF and LDH activity increased and SOD activity decreased at any parasitaemia,
but in anaplasmosis the anaemia, MCF and LDH activity increased at any
parasitaemia but SOD activity decreased only in early but not in advanced stages 
of disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-007-9052-y 
PMID: 18551778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

