
1. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4953. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004953. Epub 2009 Mar 24.

C5a enhances dysregulated inflammatory and angiogenic responses to malaria in
vitro: potential implications for placental malaria.

Conroy A(1), Serghides L, Finney C, Owino SO, Kumar S, Gowda DC, Liles WC, Moore 
JM, Kain KC.

Author information: 
(1)McLaughlin-Rotman Centre for Global Health, Toronto General Hospital,
McLaughlin Centre for Molecular Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Placental malaria (PM) is a leading cause of maternal and infant
mortality. Although the accumulation of parasitized erythrocytes (PEs) and
monocytes within the placenta is thought to contribute to the pathophysiology of 
PM, the molecular mechanisms underlying PM remain unclear. Based on the
hypothesis that excessive complement activation may contribute to PM, in
particular generation of the potent inflammatory peptide C5a, we investigated the
role of C5a in the pathogenesis of PM in vitro and in vivo.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using primary human monocytes, the
interaction between C5a and malaria in vitro was assessed. CSA- and CD36-binding 
PEs induced activation of C5 in the presence of human serum. Plasmodium
falciparum GPI (pfGPI) enhanced C5a receptor expression (CD88) on monocytes, and 
the co-incubation of monocytes with C5a and pfGPI resulted in the synergistic
induction of cytokines (IL-6, TNF, IL-1beta, and IL-10), chemokines (IL-8, MCP-1,
MIP1alpha, MIP1beta) and the anti-angiogenic factor sFlt-1 in a time and
dose-dependent manner. This dysregulated response was abrogated by C5a receptor
blockade. To assess the potential role of C5a in PM, C5a plasma levels were
measured in malaria-exposed primigravid women in western Kenya. Compared to
pregnant women without malaria, C5a levels were significantly elevated in women
with PM.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest that C5a may contribute to
the pathogenesis of PM by inducing dysregulated inflammatory and angiogenic
responses that impair placental function.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004953 
PMCID: PMC2655724
PMID: 19308263  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

