
1. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Aug;5(8):e1000559. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000559. Epub 2009
Aug 21.

Malarial hemozoin activates the NLRP3 inflammasome through Lyn and Syk kinases.

Shio MT(1), Eisenbarth SC, Savaria M, Vinet AF, Bellemare MJ, Harder KW,
Sutterwala FS, Bohle DS, Descoteaux A, Flavell RA, Olivier M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Microbiology and Immunology, Centre for the Study of
Host Resistance, The Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,
Montr√©al, Quebec, Canada.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2009 Sep;5(9). doi:
10.1371/annotation/abca067d-b82b-4de6-93c5-0fcc38e3df05. Tiemi Shio, Marina
[corrected to Shio, Marina Tiemi].

The intraerythrocytic parasite Plasmodium -- the causative agent of malaria --
produces an inorganic crystal called hemozoin (Hz) during the heme detoxification
process, which is released into the circulation during erythrocyte lysis. Hz is
rapidly ingested by phagocytes and induces the production of several
pro-inflammatory mediators such as interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta). However, the
mechanism regulating Hz recognition and IL-1beta maturation has not been
identified. Here, we show that Hz induces IL-1beta production. Using knockout
mice, we showed that Hz-induced IL-1beta and inflammation are dependent on
NOD-like receptor containing pyrin domain 3 (NLRP3), ASC and caspase-1, but not
NLRC4 (NLR containing CARD domain). Furthermore, the absence of NLRP3 or IL-1beta
augmented survival to malaria caused by P. chabaudi adami DS. Although much has
been discovered regarding the NLRP3 inflammasome induction, the mechanism whereby
this intracellular multimolecular complex is activated remains unclear. We
further demonstrate, using pharmacological and genetic intervention, that the
tyrosine kinases Syk and Lyn play a critical role in activation of this
inflammasome. These findings not only identify one way by which the immune system
is alerted to malarial infection but also are one of the first to suggest a role 
for tyrosine kinase signaling pathways in regulation of the NLRP3 inflammasome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000559 
PMCID: PMC2722371
PMID: 19696895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

