
1. J Immunol. 2009 Oct 15;183(8):5208-20. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0713552. Epub 2009
Sep 25.

Pure Hemozoin is inflammatory in vivo and activates the NALP3 inflammasome via
release of uric acid.

Griffith JW(1), Sun T, McIntosh MT, Bucala R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT 06511, USA.

The role of proinflammatory cytokine production in the pathogenesis of malaria is
well established, but the identification of the parasite products that initiate
inflammation is not complete. Hemozoin is a crystalline metabolite of hemoglobin 
digestion that is released during malaria infection. In the present study, we
characterized the immunostimulatory activity of pure synthetic hemozoin (sHz) in 
vitro and in vivo. Stimulation of naive murine macrophages with sHz results in
the MyD88-independent activation of NF-kappaB and ERK, as well as the release of 
the chemokine MCP-1; these responses are augmented by IFN-gamma. In macrophages
prestimulated with IFN-gamma, sHz also results in a MyD88-dependent release of
TNF-alpha. Endothelial cells, which encounter hemozoin after schizont rupture,
respond to sHz by releasing IL-6 and the chemokines MCP-1 and IL-8. In vivo, the 
introduction of sHz into the peritoneal cavity produces an inflammatory response 
characterized by neutrophil recruitment and the production of MCP-1, KC, IL-6,
IL-1alpha, and IL-1beta. MCP-1 and KC are produced independently of MyD88, TLR2/4
and TLR9, and components of the inflammasome; however, neutrophil recruitment,
the localized production of IL-1beta, and the increase in circulating IL-6
require MyD88 signaling, the IL-1R pathway, and the inflammasome components ICE
(IL-1beta-converting enzyme), ASC (apoptosis-associated, speck-like protein
containing CARD), and NALP3. Of note, inflammasome activation by sHz is reduced
by allopurinol, which is an inhibitor of uric acid synthesis. These data suggest 
that uric acid is released during malaria infection and may serve to augment the 
initial host response to hemozoin via activation of the NALP3 inflammasome.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0713552 
PMCID: PMC3612522
PMID: 19783673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

