
1. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol. 2010;2010. pii: 317430. doi: 10.1155/2010/317430. Epub
2010 Jul 12.

Elevated levels of IL-10 and G-CSF associated with asymptomatic malaria in
pregnant women.

Wilson NO(1), Bythwood T, Solomon W, Jolly P, Yatich N, Jiang Y, Shuaib F, Adjei 
AA, Anderson W, Stiles JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry & Immunology, Morehouse School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30310, USA.

In sub-Saharan Africa, approximately 30 million pregnant women are at risk of
contracting malaria annually. Nearly 36% of healthy pregnant women receiving
routine antenatal care tested positive for Plasmodium falciparum HRP-II antigen
in Ghana. We tested the hypothesis that asymptomatic HRP II positive pregnant
women expressed a unique Th1 and Th2 phenotype that differs from healthy
controls. Plasma from healthy (n = 15) and asymptomatic (n = 25) pregnant women
were evaluated for 27 biomarkers (IL-1b, IL-1ra, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7,
IL-8, IL-9, IL-10, IL-12, IL-13, IL-15, IL- 17, Eotaxin, bFGF-2, G-CSF, GM-CSF,
IFN-gamma, IP-10, MCP-1, MIP-1alpha, MIP-1beta, PDGF-bb, RANTES, TNF, and VEGF)
associated with Th1 and Th2 cytokine homeostasis. IL-10 and G-CSF levels were
elevated in the asymptomatic group when compared with the healthy group (P = .031
and .041, resp.). The median ratios of IL-1beta:5, IL-1beta:10, IL-1beta:G-CSF,
IL-1beta:Eotaxin, IL-12:G-CSF, IL-15:10, IL-17:G-CSF, IL-17:Eotaxin, TNF:IL-4,
TNF:IL-5, and TNF:G-CSF were significantly different among the two groups. Thus, 
asymptomatic malaria carriage may be linked to circulating levels of IL-10 and
G-CSF.

DOI: 10.1155/2010/317430 
PMCID: PMC2913525
PMID: 20706538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

