
1. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 23;5(11):e15007. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015007.

Distinct kinetics of memory B-cell and plasma-cell responses in peripheral blood 
following a blood-stage Plasmodium chabaudi infection in mice.

Nduati EW(1), Ng DH, Ndungu FM, Gardner P, Urban BC, Langhorne J.

Author information: 
(1)KEMRI/Wellcome Trust Collaborative Research Programme, Centre for Geographical
Medicine Research Coast, Kilifi, Kenya.

B cell and plasma cell responses take place in lymphoid organs, but because of
the inaccessibility of these organs, analyses of human responses are largely
performed using peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). To determine whether
PBMC are a useful source of memory B cells and plasma cells in malaria, and
whether they reflect Plasmodium-specific B cell responses in spleen or bone
marrow, we have investigated these components of the humoral response in PBMC
using a model of Plasmodium chabaudi blood-stage infections in C57BL/6 mice. We
detected memory B cells, defined as isotype-switched IgD(-) IgM(-) CD19(+) B
cells, and low numbers of Plasmodium chabaudi Merozoite Surface Protein-1
(MSP1)-specific memory B cells, in PBMC at all time points sampled for up to 90
days following primary or secondary infection. By contrast, we only detected
CD138(+) plasma cells and MSP1-specific antibody-secreting cells within a narrow 
time frame following primary (days 10 to 25) or secondary (day 10) infection.
CD138(+) plasma cells in PBMC at these times expressed CD19, B220 and MHC class
II, suggesting that they were not dislodged bone-marrow long-lived plasma cells, 
but newly differentiated migratory plasmablasts migrating to the bone marrow;
thus reflective of an ongoing or developing immune response. Our data indicates
that PBMC can be a useful source for malaria-specific memory B cells and plasma
cells, but extrapolation of the results to human malaria infections suggests that
timing of sampling, particularly for plasma cells, may be critical. Studies
should therefore include multiple sampling points, and at times of
infection/immunisation when the B-cell phenotypes of interest are likely to be
found in peripheral blood.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015007 
PMCID: PMC2990717
PMID: 21124900  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

