
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Mar;79(3):1166-75. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00694-10. Epub 2010 Dec
13.

Destabilization of YopE by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway fine-tunes Yop
delivery into host cells and facilitates systemic spread of Yersinia
enterocolitica in host lymphoid tissue.

Gaus K(1), Hentschke M, Czymmeck N, Novikova L, Tr√ºlzsch K, Valentin-Weigand P,
Aepfelbacher M, Ruckdeschel K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Virology and Hygiene, University Medical
Center Eppendorf, Martinistr. 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.

Pathogenic Yersinia species inject a panel of Yop virulence proteins by type III 
protein secretion into host cells to modulate cellular defense responses. This
enables the survival and dissemination of the bacteria in the host lymphoid
tissue. We have previously shown that YopE of the Y. enterocolitica serogroup O8 
is degraded in the host cell through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. YopE
normally manipulates rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton and triggers
phagocytosis resistance. To shed light into the physiological role of YopE
inactivation, we mutagenized the lysine polyubiquitin acceptor sites of YopE in
the Y. enterocolitica serogroup O8 virulence plasmid. The resulting mutant strain
escaped polyubiquitination and degradation of YopE and displayed increased
intracellular YopE levels, which was accompanied by a pronounced cytotoxic effect
on infected cells. Despite its intensified activity on cultured cells, the
Yersinia mutant with stabilized YopE showed reduced dissemination into liver and 
spleen following enteral infection of mice. Furthermore, the accumulation of
degradation-resistant YopE was accompanied by the diminished delivery of YopP and
YopH into cultured, Yersinia-infected cells. A role of YopE in the regulation of 
Yop translocation has already been described. Our results imply that the
inactivation of YopE by the proteasome could be a tool to ensure intermediate
intracellular YopE levels, which may effectuate optimized Yop injection into host
cells. In this regard, Y. enterocolitica O8 appears to exploit the host ubiquitin
proteasome system to destabilize YopE and to fine-tune the activities of the Yop 
virulence arsenal on the infected host organism.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00694-10 
PMCID: PMC3067501
PMID: 21149597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

