
1. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 15;186(2):869-77. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003252. Epub 2010
Dec 13.

The C5a receptor impairs IL-12-dependent clearance of Porphyromonas gingivalis
and is required for induction of periodontal bone loss.

Liang S(1), Krauss JL, Domon H, McIntosh ML, Hosur KB, Qu H, Li F, Tzekou A,
Lambris JD, Hajishengallis G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Oral Health and Systemic Disease, University of Louisville Health
Sciences Center, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

The C5a anaphylatoxin receptor (C5aR; CD88) is activated as part of the
complement cascade and exerts important inflammatory, antimicrobial, and
regulatory functions, at least in part, via crosstalk with TLRs. However, the
periodontal pathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis can control C5aR activation by
generating C5a through its own C5 convertase-like enzymatic activity. In this
paper, we show that P. gingivalis uses this mechanism to proactively and
selectively inhibit TLR2-induced IL-12p70, whereas the same pathogen-instigated
C5aR-TLR2 crosstalk upregulates other inflammatory and bone-resorptive cytokines 
(IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α). In vivo, the ability of P. gingivalis to manipulate
TLR2 activation via the C5a-C5aR axis allowed it to escape IL-12p70-dependent
immune clearance and to cause inflammatory bone loss in a murine model of
experimental periodontitis. In the latter regard, C5aR-deficient or
TLR2-deficient mice were both resistant to periodontal bone loss, in stark
contrast with wild-type control mice, which is consistent with the interdependent
interactions of C5aR and TLR2 in P. gingivalis immune evasion and induction of
bone-resorptive cytokines. In conclusion, P. gingivalis targets C5aR to promote
its adaptive fitness and cause periodontal disease. Given the current
availability of safe and effective C5aR antagonists, pharmacological blockade of 
C5aR could act therapeutically in human periodontitis and reduce associated
systemic risks.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003252 
PMCID: PMC3075594
PMID: 21149611  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

