
1. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 15;186(2):1032-43. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001893. Epub 2010
Dec 13.

Infection-induced myelopoiesis during intracellular bacterial infection is
critically dependent upon IFN-γ signaling.

MacNamara KC(1), Oduro K, Martin O, Jones DD, McLaughlin M, Choi K, Borjesson DL,
Winslow GM.

Author information: 
(1)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, Albany, NY 12201, USA.

Although microbial infections can alter steady-state hematopoiesis, the
mechanisms that drive such changes are not well understood. We addressed a role
for IFN-γ signaling in infection-induced bone marrow suppression and anemia in a 
murine model of human monocytic ehrlichiosis, an emerging tick-borne disease.
Within the bone marrow of Ehrlichia muris-infected C57BL/6 mice, we observed a
reduction in myeloid progenitor cells, as defined both phenotypically and
functionally. Infected mice exhibited a concomitant increase in developing
myeloid cells within the bone marrow, an increase in the frequency of circulating
monocytes, and an increase in splenic myeloid cells. The infection-induced
changes in progenitor cell phenotype were critically dependent on IFN-γ, but not 
IFN-α, signaling. In mice deficient in the IFN-γ signaling pathway, we observed
an increase in myeloid progenitor cells and CDllb(lo)Gr1(lo) promyelocytic cells 
within the bone marrow, as well as reduced frequencies of mature granulocytes and
monocytes. Furthermore, E. muris-infected IFN-γR-deficient mice did not exhibit
anemia or an increase in circulating monocytes, and they succumbed to infection. 
Gene transcription studies revealed that IFN-γR-deficient CDllb(lo)Gr1(lo)
promyelocytes from E. muris-infected mice exhibited significantly reduced
expression of irf-1 and irf-8, both key transcription factors that regulate the
differentiation of granulocytes and monocytes. Finally, using mixed bone marrow
chimeric mice, we show that IFN-γ-dependent infection-induced myelopoiesis occurs
via the direct effect of the cytokine on developing myeloid cells. We propose
that, in addition to its many other known roles, IFN-γ acts to control infection 
by directly promoting the differentiation of myeloid cells that contribute to
host defense.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001893 
PMCID: PMC3178067
PMID: 21149601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

