
1. Cell Microbiol. 2011 May;13(5):752-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01574.x.
Epub 2011 Feb 16.

Gene profiling analysis reveals the contribution of CD24 and P2Y6R to the
susceptibility of young rats to Plasmodium berghei infection.

Pierrot C(1), dit Vampouille AA, Vandomme A, Lafitte S, Pierce RJ, Hot D, Khalife
J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity of Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, INSERM 
U1019, CNRS UMR8204, University Lille Nord de France, IFR 142, 1 rue du
Professeur A. Calmette, 59019 Lille, France.

Our previous studies have shown that Plasmodium berghei infection induces
distinct clinical, parasitological and immunological states in young susceptible 
rats versus adult resistant rats. This susceptibility was mainly found to be
related to inadequate cellular responses. In this study we first identified the
altered genes in young susceptible rats. Unexpectedly, transcriptome analysis did
not reveal any alteration of effector cytokines or their receptors. At day
13 p.i., six transcripts corresponding to faim3, mesothelin, gas3 (PMP22), gas7, 
CD24 and P2Y6R were significantly decreased in young infected rats when compared 
with adult infected rats. Because CD24 and P2Y6R participate in cellular immune
responses, we next evaluated their role in the course of infection. Adoptive
transfer experiments showed a transient but robust participation of CD24+ cells
in the control of parasitaemia. The role of P2Y6R was investigated via its
specific ability to be activated by Uridine di-Phosphate (UDP). Young rats
treated with UDP partially restored the expression of P2Y6R, controlled
parasitaemia and survived thereafter. In conclusion, this study contributes to
the discovery of novel biomarkers in young susceptible rats and suggests that the
decrease in their expression could be among the reasons for the development of
severe pathology in malaria.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01574.x 
PMID: 21323829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

