
1. IUBMB Life. 2012 Feb;64(2):187-93. doi: 10.1002/iub.592. Epub 2011 Nov 30.

Iκb-ζ plays an important role in the ERK-dependent dysregulation of malaria
parasite GPI-induced IL-12 expression.

Zhu J(1), Weinberg R, Wu X, Gowda NM, Muta T, Gowda DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA.

Plasmodium falciparum glycosylphosphatidylinositols (GPIs) have been proposed as 
malaria pathogenic factors based on their ability to induce proinflammatory
responses in macrophages and malaria-like symptoms in mice. Parasite GPIs induce 
the production of inflammatory cytokines by activating the mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) and NF-κB signaling pathways. Importantly, inhibition of
the extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway upregulates a subset of
cytokines, including IL-12. We investigated the role of nuclear transcription
factor, IκB-ζ, in the GPI-induced dysregulated expression of IL-12 on inhibition 
of the ERK pathway. GPIs efficiently induced the expression of IκB-ζ in
macrophages regardless of whether cells were pretreated or untreated with ERK
inhibitors, indicating that ERK has no role in IκB-ζ expression. However, on ERK 
inhibition followed by stimulation with GPIs, NF-κB binding to Il12b promoter κB 
site was markedly increased, suggesting that the ERK pathway regulates Il12b
transcription. Knockdown of IκB-ζ using siRNA markedly reduced the GPI-induced
IL-12 production and abrogated the dysregulated IL-12 production in ERK inhibited
cells. Together these results demonstrate that ERK modulates IL-12 expression by 
regulating IκB-ζ-dependent binding of NF-κB transcription factors to Il12b gene
promoter. Additionally, our finding that IκB-ζ can be knocked down efficiently in
primary macrophages is valuable for studies aimed at gaining further insights
into IκB-ζ function.

Copyright © 2011 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/iub.592 
PMID: 22131231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

