
1. Am J Hematol. 2012 Aug;87(8):782-9. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23253. Epub 2012 Jun 23.

Reduced systemic bicyclo-prostaglandin-E2 and cyclooxygenase-2 gene expression
are associated with inefficient erythropoiesis and enhanced uptake of monocytic
hemozoin in children with severe malarial anemia.

Anyona SB(1), Kempaiah P, Raballah E, Davenport GC, Were T, Konah SN, Vulule JM, 
Hittner JB, Gichuki CW, Ong'echa JM, Perkins DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Parasitic and Viral Diseases, Centre for Global Health
Research, Kenya Medical Research Institute, University of New Mexico, Kisumu,
Kenya.

In holoendemic Plasmodium falciparum transmission areas, severe malaria primarily
occurs in children aged <48 months and manifests as severe malarial anemia [SMA; 
hemoglobin (Hb) < 6.0 g/dL]. Induction of high levels of prostaglandin-E(2)
(PGE(2)) through inducible cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is an important host-defense 
mechanism against invading pathogens. We have previously shown that COX-2-derived
PGE(2) levels are reduced in children residing in hyperendemic transmission
regions with cerebral malaria and in those with mixed sequelae of anemia and
hyperparasitemia. Our in vitro studies further demonstrated that reduced PGE(2)
was due to downregulation of COX-2 gene products following phagocytosis of
malarial pigment (hemozoin, PfHz). However, as COX-2-PGE(2) pathways and the
impact of naturally acquired PfHz on erythropoietic responses have not been
determined in children with SMA, plasma and urinary bicyclo-PGE(2)/creatinine and
leukocytic COX-2 transcripts were determined in parasitized children (<36 months)
stratified into SMA (n = 36) and non-SMA (Hb ≥ 6.0 g/dL; n = 38). Children with
SMA had significantly reduced plasma (P = 0.001) and urinary (P < 0.001)
bicyclo-PGE(2)/creatinine and COX-2 transcripts (P = 0.007). There was a
significant positive association between Hb and both plasma (r = 0.363, P =
0.002) and urinary (r = 0.500, P = 0.001)] bicyclo-PGE(2)/creatinine.
Furthermore, decreased systemic bicyclo-PGE(2)/creatinine was associated with
inefficient erythropoiesis (i.e., reticulocyte production index; RPI < 2.0, P =
0.026). Additional analyses demonstrated that plasma (P = 0.031) and urinary (P =
0.070) bicyclo-PGE(2)/creatinine and COX-2 transcripts (P = 0.026) progressively 
declined with increasing concentrations of naturally acquired PfHz by monocytes. 
Results presented here support a model in which reduced COX-2-derived PGE(2),
driven in part by naturally acquired PfHz by monocytes, promotes decreased
erythropoietic responses in children with SMA.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.23253 
PMCID: PMC4703400
PMID: 22730036  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

