
1. J Membr Biol. 2012 Dec;245(12):797-805. doi: 10.1007/s00232-012-9482-y. Epub 2012
Jul 27.

Decreased redox-sensitive erythrocyte cation channel activity in aquaporin
9-deficient mice.

Kucherenko YV(1), Huber SM, Nielsen S, Lang F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Tübingen, Gmelinstr. 5, 72076
Tübingen, Germany.

Survival of the malaria pathogen Plasmodium falciparum in host erythrocytes
requires the opening of new permeability pathways (NPPs) in the host cell
membrane, accomplishing entry of nutrients, exit of metabolic waste products such
as lactate and movement of inorganic ions such as Cl⁻, Na⁺ and Ca²⁺. The
molecular identity of NPPs has remained largely elusive but presumably involves
several channels, which partially can be activated by oxidative stress in
uninfected erythrocytes. One NPP candidate is aquaporin 9 (AQP9), a
glycerol-permeable water channel expressed in erythrocytes. Gene-targeted mice
lacking functional AQP9 (aqp⁻/⁻) survive infection with the malaria pathogen
Plasmodium berghei better than their wild-type littermates (aqp9⁺/⁺). In the
present study whole-cell patch-clamp recordings were performed to explore whether
ion channel activity is different in erythrocytes from aqp⁻/⁻ and aqp9⁺/⁺ mice.
As a result, the cation conductance (K⁺ > Na⁺ > Ca²⁺ ≫ NMDG⁺) was significantly
lower in erythrocytes from aqp⁻/⁻ than in erythrocytes from aqp9⁺/⁺ mice.
Oxidative stress by exposure for 15-30 min to 1 mM H₂O₂ or 1 mM
tert-butyl-hydroperoxide enhanced the cation conductance and increased cytosolic 
Ca²⁺ concentration, effects significantly less pronounced in erythrocytes from
aqp⁻/⁻ than in erythrocytes from aqp9⁺/⁺ mice. In conclusion, lack of AQP9
decreases the cation conductance of erythrocytes, an effect that possibly
participates in the altered susceptibility of AQP9-deficient mice to infection
with P. berghei.

DOI: 10.1007/s00232-012-9482-y 
PMID: 22836670  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

