
1. Exp Mol Pathol. 2013 Feb;94(1):228-38. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2012.08.008. Epub
2012 Sep 7.

MDM2 regulates a novel form of incomplete neoplastic transformation of Theileria 
parva infected lymphocytes.

Hayashida K(1), Kajino K, Hattori M, Wallace M, Morrison I, Greene MI, Sugimoto
C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Collaboration and Education, Hokkaido University, Research Center 
for Zoonosis Control, Sapporo 001-0020, Japan.

Our efforts are concerned with identifying features of incomplete malignant
transformation caused by non viral pathogens. Theileria parva (T. parva) is a
tick-transmitted protozoan parasite that can cause a fatal lymphoproliferative
disease in cattle. The T. parva-infected lymphocytes display a transformed
phenotype and proliferate in culture media like the other tumor cells, however
those cells will return to normal after antiprotozoal treatment reflecting the
incomplete nature of transformation. To identify signaling pathways involved in
this form of transformation of T. parva-infected cells, we screened a library of 
anticancer compounds. Among these, TIBC, a specific inhibitor of MDM2, markedly
inhibited proliferation of T. parva-infected lymphocytes and promoted apoptosis. 
Therefore we analyzed MDM2 function in T. parva-infected cells. Several T.
parva-infected cell lines showed increased expression level of MDM2 with
alternatively spliced isoforms compared to the lymphoma cells or ConA blasts. In 
addition, buparvaquone affected MDM2 expression in T. parva transformed cells.
Moreover, p53 protein accumulation and function were impaired in T.
parva-infected cells after cisplatin induced DNA damage despite the increased p53
transcription level. Finally, the treatment of T. parva-infected cells with
boronic-chalcone derivatives TIBC restored p53 protein accumulation and induced
Bax expression. These results suggest that the overexpression of MDM2 is closely 
linked to the inhibition of p53-dependent apoptosis of T. parva-infected
lymphocytes. Aberrant expression of host lymphocyte MDM2 induced by cytoplasmic
existence of T. parva, directly and/or indirectly, is associated with aspects of 
this type of transformation of T. parva-infected lymphocytes. This form of
transformation shares features of oncogene induced malignant phenotype
acquisition.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2012.08.008 
PMID: 22981919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

