
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jan 15;110(3):1035-40. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1220566110. Epub 2012 Dec 31.

Protective role of brain water channel AQP4 in murine cerebral malaria.

Promeneur D(1), Lunde LK, Amiry-Moghaddam M, Agre P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins Malaria
Research Institute, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. dpromene@jhsph.edu

Tragically common among children in sub-Saharan Africa, cerebral malaria is
characterized by rapid progression to coma and death. In this study, we used a
model of cerebral malaria appearing in C57BL/6 WT mice after infection with the
rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei ANKA. Expression and cellular
localization of the brain water channel aquaporin-4 (AQP4) was investigated
during the neurological syndrome. Semiquantitative real-time PCR comparing
uninfected and infected mice showed a reduction of brain AQP4 transcript in
cerebral malaria, and immunoblots revealed reduction of brain AQP4 protein.
Reduction of brain AQP4 protein was confirmed in cerebral malaria by quantitative
immunogold EM; however, polarized distribution of AQP4 at the perivascular and
subpial astrocyte membranes was not altered. To further examine the role of AQP4 
in cerebral malaria, WT mice and littermates genetically deficient in AQP4 were
infected with P. berghei. Upon development of cerebral malaria, WT and AQP4-null 
mice exhibited similar increases in width of perivascular astroglial end-feet in 
brain. Nevertheless, the AQP4-null mice exhibited more severe signs of cerebral
malaria with greater brain edema, although disruption of the blood-brain barrier 
was similar in both groups. In longitudinal studies, cerebral malaria appeared
nearly 1 d earlier in the AQP4-null mice, and reduced survival was noted when
chloroquine rescue was attempted. We conclude that the water channel AQP4 confers
partial protection against cerebral malaria.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1220566110 
PMCID: PMC3549120
PMID: 23277579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

