
1. Korean J Parasitol. 2013 Feb;51(1):133-7. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2013.51.1.133. Epub
2013 Feb 18.

Increased cytokine and nitric oxide levels in serum of dogs experimentally
infected with Rangelia vitalii.

Paim FC(1), Da Silva AS, Paim CB, França RT, Costa MM, Duarte MM, Sangoi MB,
Moresco RN, Monteiro SG, Lopes ST.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Clinical Analysis-LACVet, Universidade Federal de
Santa Maria, 97105-900 Santa Maria, RS, Brazil. franchimelo@gmail.com

This study aimed to measure the levels of interferon-gamma (IFN-γ), tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), interleukin 1 (IL-1), interleukin 6 (IL-6), and
nitrite/nitrate (NO x ) in serum of dogs experimentally infected with Rangelia
vitalii. Twelve female mongrel dogs were divided into 2 groups; group A
(uninfected controls) composed by healthy dogs (n=5) and group B consisting of
dogs inoculated with R. vitalii (n=7). Animals were monitored by blood smear
examinations, which showed intraerythrocytic forms of the parasite on day 5
post-infection (PI). Blood samples were collected through the jugular vein on
days 0, 10, and 20 PI to determine the serum levels of IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-1, IL-6, 
and NO x . Cytokines were assessed by ELISA quantitative sandwich technique, and 
NO x was measured by the modified Griess method. Cytokine levels (IFN-γ, TNF-α,
IL-1, and IL-6) were increased (P<0.01) in serum of infected animals. Serum
levels of NO x were also increased on days 10 PI (P<0.01) and 20 PI (P<0.05) in
infected animals. Therefore, the infection with R. vitalii causes an increase in 
proinflammatory cytokines and nitric oxide content. These alterations may be
associated with host immune protection against the parasite.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2013.51.1.133 
PMCID: PMC3587743
PMID: 23467990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

