
1. Parasitol Res. 2013 Jul;112(7):2713-9. doi: 10.1007/s00436-013-3442-z. Epub 2013 
May 8.

Expression of Tim-1 and Tim-3 in Plasmodium berghei ANKA infection.

Huang B(1), Liu M, Huang S, Wu B, Guo H, Su XZ, Lu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province 510080, China.

Cerebral malaria (CM) is a serious and often fatal complication of Plasmodium
falciparum infections; however, the precise mechanisms leading to CM is poorly
understood. Mouse malaria models have provided insight into the key events in
pathogenesis of CM. T-cell immune response is known to play an important role in 
malaria infection, and members of the T-cell immunoglobulin- and
mucin-domain-containing molecule (Tim) family have roles in T-cell-mediated
immune responses. Tim-1 and Tim-3 are expressed on terminally differentiated Th2 
and Th1 cells, respectively, and participate in the regulation of Th immune
response. Until now, the role of Tim family proteins in Plasmodium infection
remains unclear. In the present study, the mRNA levels of Tim-1, Tim-3, and some 
key Th1 and Th2 cytokines in the spleen of Kunming outbred mice infected with
Plasmodium berghei ANKA (PbANKA) were determined using real-time polymerase chain
reaction (qRT-PCR). Compared with uninfected controls, Tim-1 expression was
significantly decreased in infected mice with CM at day 10 postinfection (p.i.)
but significantly increased in infected mice with non-CM at day 22 p.i.; in
contrast, Tim-3 expression was significantly increased in infected mice both with
CM at day 10 p.i. and with non-CM at day 22 p.i. The expressions of IFN-γ, TNF-α,
IL-10, and IL-12 were significantly increased but IL-4 was significantly
decreased in infected mice with CM at days 10 p.i., whereas the expressions of
IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-4, IL-10, and TGF-β were significantly increased but IL-12 was
significantly decreased in infected mice with non-CM at days 22 p.i. Furthermore,
the expression of Tim-1 and Tim-3 could reflect Th2 and Th1 immune response in
the spleen of PbANKA-infected mice, respectively. Our data suggest that PbANKA
infection could inhibit the differentiation of T lymphocytes toward Th2 cells,
promote the Th1 cell differentiation, and induce Th1-biased immune response in
the early infective stage, whereas the infection could promote Th2 cell
differentiation and induce Th2-biased immune response in the late infective
stage. Our data indicate that both Tim-1 and Tim-3 may play a role in the process
of PbANKA infection, which may represent a potential therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-013-3442-z 
PMCID: PMC4521769
PMID: 23653017  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

