
1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 15;8(8):e71010. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071010. eCollection
2013.

CD36 and Fyn kinase mediate malaria-induced lung endothelial barrier dysfunction 
in mice infected with Plasmodium berghei.

Anidi IU(1), Servinsky LE, Rentsendorj O, Stephens RS, Scott AL, Pearse DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Severe malaria can trigger acute lung injury characterized by pulmonary edema
resulting from increased endothelial permeability. However, the mechanism through
which lung fluid conductance is altered during malaria remains unclear. To define
the role that the scavenger receptor CD36 may play in mediating this response,
C57BL/6J (WT) and CD36-/- mice were infected with P. berghei ANKA and monitored
for changes in pulmonary endothelial barrier function employing an isolated
perfused lung system. WT lungs demonstrated a >10-fold increase in two measures
of paracellular fluid conductance and a decrease in the albumin reflection
coefficient (σalb) compared to control lungs indicating a loss of barrier
function. In contrast, malaria-infected CD36-/- mice had near normal fluid
conductance but a similar reduction in σalb. In WT mice, lung sequestered iRBCs
demonstrated production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). To determine whether
knockout of CD36 could protect against ROS-induced endothelial barrier
dysfunction, mouse lung microvascular endothelial monolayers (MLMVEC) from WT and
CD36-/- mice were exposed to H2O2. Unlike WT monolayers, which showed
dose-dependent decreases in transendothelial electrical resistance (TER) from
H2O2 indicating loss of barrier function, CD36-/- MLMVEC demonstrated
dose-dependent increases in TER. The differences between responses in WT and
CD36-/- endothelial cells correlated with important differences in the
intracellular compartmentalization of the CD36-associated Fyn kinase. Malaria
infection increased total lung Fyn levels in CD36-/- lungs compared to WT, but
this increase was due to elevated production of the inactive form of Fyn further 
suggesting a dysregulation of Fyn-mediated signaling. The importance of Fyn in
CD36-dependent endothelial signaling was confirmed using in vitro Fyn knockdown
as well as Fyn-/- mice, which were also protected from H2O2- and malaria-induced 
lung endothelial leak, respectively. Our results demonstrate that CD36 and Fyn
kinase are critical mediators of the increased lung endothelial fluid conductance
caused by malaria infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071010 
PMCID: PMC3744507
PMID: 23967147  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

