
1. Cell Microbiol. 2014 Feb;16(2):269-79. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12218. Epub 2013 Oct 21.

The level of H₂O₂ type oxidative stress regulates virulence of
Theileria-transformed leukocytes.

Metheni M(1), Echebli N, Chaussepied M, Ransy C, Chéreau C, Jensen K, Glass E,
Batteux F, Bouillaud F, Langsley G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire Comparative des Apicomplexes, Faculté de
Médicine, Université Paris Descartes - Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France; Inserm
U1016, Cnrs UMR8104, Cochin Institute, Paris, 75014, France.

Theileria annulata infects predominantly macrophages, and to a lesser extent B
cells, and causes a widespread disease of cattle called tropical theileriosis.
Disease-causing infected macrophages are aggressively invasive, but this
virulence trait can be attenuated by long-term culture. Attenuated macrophages
are used as live vaccines against tropical theileriosis and via their
characterization one gains insights into what host cell trait is altered
concomitant with loss of virulence. We established that sporozoite infection of
monocytes rapidly induces hif1-α transcription and that constitutive induction of
HIF-1α in transformed leukocytes is parasite-dependent. In both infected
macrophages and B cells induction of HIF-1α activates transcription of its target
genes that drive host cells to perform Warburg-like glycolysis. We propose that
Theileria-infected leukocytes maintain a HIF-1α-driven transcriptional programme 
typical of Warburg glycolysis in order to reduce as much as possible host cell H2
O2 type oxidative stress. However, in attenuated macrophages H2O2 production
increases and HIF-1α levels consequently remained high, even though adhesion and 
aggressive invasiveness diminished. This indicates that Theileria infection
generates a host leukocytes hypoxic response that if not properly controlled
leads to loss of virulence.

© 2013 The Authors. Cellular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12218 
PMCID: PMC3906831
PMID: 24112286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

