
1. Parasitol Res. 2014 Mar;113(3):1019-27. doi: 10.1007/s00436-013-3736-1. Epub 2013
Dec 21.

Alpha-tocopherol transfer protein gene inhibition enhances the acquired immune
response during malaria infection in mice.

Herbas MS(1), Natama MH, Suzuki H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit for Functional Genomics, National Research Center for Protozoan 
Diseases, Obihiro University of Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Nishi 2-13, 
Inada, Obihiro, 080-8555, Japan.

Immune response to malaria infection is complex and seems to be regulated by
innate and adaptive immune response as well as environmental factors such as host
genetics and nutritional status. Previously, we have reported that α-tocopherol
transfer protein knockout (α-ttp(Δ)) mice, showing low concentrations of
α-tocopherol in circulation, infected with Plasmodium berghei NK65 survived
significantly longer as compared with the wild-type mice. In addition, Plasmodium
yoelii XL-17, a lethal strain, showed non-lethal virulence in α-ttp(Δ) mice.
Thus, we hypothesized that the ability of the α-ttp(Δ) mice to control P. yoelli 
XL-17 proliferation may allow them to build an efficient immune response against 
murine malaria infection. On 15 days after infection with P. yoelli XL-17,
α-ttp(Δ) mice were challenged to infection with P. berghei NK65. Results
indicated that α-ttp(Δ) mice infected with P. yoelli XL-17 built a protective
immunity against P. berghei NK65 associated to extremely low levels of
parasitemia, a controlled inflammatory response, and a robust antibody response. 
Moreover, the importance of α-tocopherol for parasite proliferation was
remarkable. The results suggest that inhibition of α-tocopherol transfer protein 
activity is effective for the enhancement of acquired immunity in murine malaria 
infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-013-3736-1 
PMID: 24363183  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

