
1. Acta Parasitol. 2014 Jun;59(2):206-12. doi: 10.2478/s11686-014-0227-1. Epub 2014 
May 15.

Clinico-pathological studies of Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax -
malaria in India and Saudi Arabia.

Khan W(1), Zakai HA, Umm-E-Asma.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah,
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, wajihullahkhan@yahoo.co.in.

Malaria is one of the most devastating diseases of tropical countries with
clinical manifestations such as anaemia, splenomegaly, thrombocytopenia,
hepatomegaly and acute renal failures. In this study, cases of thrombocytopenia
and haemoglobinemia were more prominent in subjects infected with Plasmodium
falciparum (Welch, 1897) than those with Plasmodium vivax (Grassi et Feletti,
1890). However, anaemia, jaundice, convulsions and acute renal failure were
significantly high (3-4 times) in subjects infected with P. falciparum than those
infected with P. vivax. The incidence of splenomegaly and neurological sequelae
were 2 and 6 times higher in P. falciparum infections compared to the infections 
of P. vivax. Both in P. vivax and P. falciparum malaria, the cases of
splenomegaly, jaundice and neurological sequelae were almost double in children
(<10 years) compared to older patients. The liver enzymes were generally in
normal range in cases of low and mild infections. However, the AST, ALT, ALP
activities and serum bilirubin, creatinine, and the urea content were increased
in P. falciparum and P. vivax malaria patients having high parasitaemia,
confirming liver dysfunction and renal failures in few cases of severe malaria
both in India and Saudi Arabia.

DOI: 10.2478/s11686-014-0227-1 
PMID: 24827088  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

