
1. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 1989 Nov-Dec;83(6):762-6.

Activation of the coagulation cascade in falciparum malaria.

Pukrittayakamee S(1), White NJ, Clemens R, Chittamas S, Karges HE, Desakorn V,
Looareesuwan S, Bunnag D.

Author information: 
(1)Bangkok Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol 
University, Thailand.

The incidence and progression of coagulation abnormalities were studied in 52
patients with acute falciparum malaria. The patients were prospectively divided
into 3 groups; severe (parasitaemia greater than or equal to 5% or vital organ
dysfunction), 12 patients; moderate (parasitaemia 1%- less than 5% without
complications), 16 patients; and mild (parasitaemia less than 1%), 24 patients.
No case died or developed clinical evidence of disseminated intravascular
coagulation. Conventional indices of coagulation (prothrombin time, partial
thromboplastin time, fibrinogen, fibrin degradation products) were usually within
the normal range but reduced plasma concentrations of antithrombin III (AT-III)
levels were noted in all groups, and the incidence was significantly higher in
patients with severe and moderate malaria (83% and 81%) compared with the mild
group (37%; P less than 0.005). Depletion of AT-III was associated with
thrombocytopenia, decreased AT-III activity and elevated plasma concentrations of
thrombin-antithrombin III complexes (P less than 0.01), confirming activation of 
the coagulation cascade and increased clotting factor consumption. AT-III levels 
returned to normal coincident with clinical improvement. Activation of
coagulation is a common and sensitive measure of disease activity in acute
falciparum malaria. It is not a specific feature, nor is there evidence to
suggest it has a primary pathological role in severe infections.

DOI: 10.1016/0035-9203(89)90321-0 
PMID: 2482560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

