
1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Apr 15;7(5):2056-67. eCollection 2014.

Electron microscopic features of brain edema in rodent cerebral malaria in
relation to glial fibrillary acidic protein expression.

Ampawong S(1), Chaisri U(1), Viriyavejakul P(1), Nontprasert A(2), Grau GE(3),
Pongponratn E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Pathology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol
University 420/6, Ratchawithi Road, Ratchathewi, Bangkok, 10400, Thailand.
(2)Department of Clinical Tropical Medicine, Faculty of Tropical Medicine,
Mahidol University 420/6, Ratchawithi Road, Ratchathewi, Bangkok, 10400,
Thailand.
(3)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Bosch Institute, University
of Sydney 92-94, Parramatta Road, Camperdown, NSW, 2050, Australia.

The mechanisms leading to cerebral malaria (CM) are not completely understood.
Brain edema has been suggested as having an important role in experimental CM. In
this study, CBA/CaH mice were infected with Plasmodium berghei ANKA blood-stage
and when typical symptoms of CM developed on day 7, brain tissues were processed 
for electron-microscopic and immunohistochemical studies. The study demonstrated 
ultrastructural hallmarks of cerebral edema by perivascular edema and astroglial 
dilatation confirming existing evidence of vasogenic and cytogenic edema. This
correlates closely with the clinical features of CM. An adaptive response of
astrocytic activity, represented by increasing glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP) expression in the perivascular area and increasing numbers of large
astrocyte clusters were predominately found in the CM mice. The presence of
multivesicular and lamellar bodies indicates the severity of cerebral damage in
experimental CM. Congestion of the microvessels with occluded white blood cells
(WBCs), parasitized red blood cells (PRBCs) and platelets is also a crucial
covariate role for CM pathogenesis.


PMCID: PMC4069908
PMID: 24966914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

