
1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2014 Oct;75:210-21. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.07.004. Epub 2014 Jul 10.

Malarial pigment hemozoin impairs chemotactic motility and transendothelial
migration of monocytes via 4-hydroxynonenal.

Skorokhod OA(1), Barrera V(1), Heller R(2), Carta F(3), Turrini F(1), Arese P(1),
Schwarzer E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Torino, 10126 Torino, Italy.
(2)Institute for Molecular Cell Biology, Center for Molecular Biomedicine,
Friedrich Schiller University of Jena, 07745 Jena, Germany.
(3)Nurex srl, 07100 Sassari, Italy.
(4)Department of Oncology, University of Torino, 10126 Torino, Italy. Electronic 
address: evelin.schwarzer@unito.it.

Natural hemozoin, nHZ, is avidly phagocytosed in vivo and in vitro by human
monocytes. The persistence of the undigested β-hematin core of nHZ in the
phagocyte lysosome for long periods of time modifies several cellular immune
functions. Here we show that nHZ phagocytosis by human primary monocytes severely
impaired their chemotactic motility toward MCP-1, TNF, and FMLP, by approximately
80% each, and their diapedesis across a confluent human umbilical vein
endothelial cell layer toward MCP-1 by 45±5%. No inhibition was observed with
latex-fed or unfed monocytes. Microscopic inspection revealed polarization
defects in nHZ-fed monocytes due to irregular actin polymerization. Phagocytosed 
nHZ catalyzes the peroxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids and generation of
the highly reactive derivative 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE). Similar to nHZ
phagocytosis, the exposure of monocytes to in vivo-compatible 4-HNE
concentrations inhibited cell motility in both the presence and the absence of
chemotactic stimuli, suggesting severe impairment of cytoskeleton dynamics.
Consequently, 4-HNE conjugates with the cytoskeleton proteins β-actin and
coronin-1A were immunochemically identified in nHZ-fed monocytes and mass
spectrometrically localized in domains of protein-protein interactions involved
in cytoskeleton reorganization and cell motility. The molecular and functional
modifications of actin and coronin by nHZ/4-HNE may also explain impaired
phagocytosis, another motility-dependent process previously described in nHZ-fed 
monocytes. Further studies will show whether impaired monocyte motility may
contribute to the immunodepression and the frequent occurrence of secondary
infections observed in malaria patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.07.004 
PMID: 25017964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

