
1. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 2014 Sep;45(5):973-83.

Cellular-mediated immune responses in the liver tissue of patients with severe
Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Punsawadl C, Setthapramote C, Viriyavejakul P.

The immune responses against Plasmodiumfalciparum malaria infections are complex 
and poorly understood. No published studies have yet reported the lymphocyte
subsets involved in the human liver tissue of P. falciparum malaria patients. To 
understand the cellular-mediated immune responses in the liver during malaria
infection, we determined the numbers of the various lymphocyte subsets in tissue 
samples obtained at autopsy from patients who died with P. falciparum malaria
infection. All the liver tissue specimens had been stored at the Department of
Tropical Pathology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Thailand.
On the basis of total bilirubin (TB) levels prior to death, patients were divided
into 2 groups: those with hyperbilirubinemia [total bilirubin (TB) > or =51.3
micromol/l) (n = 9)] and those without hyperbilirubinemia (TB < 51.3 micromol/l) 
(n = 12). Normal liver specimens (n = 10) were used as controls. An
immunohistochemistry method was used to analyze the types and numbers of
lymphocytes (T and B lymphocytes), and Kupffer cells, using specific antibodies
against CD3+, CD4+, CD8+, CD20+, and CD68+. Our findings reveal the numbers of T 
lymphocytes (CD3+ T-cells) and their subsets (CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells) were
significantly greater in the portal tracts and sinusoids of liver tissue obtained
from P. falciparum malaria cases with hyperbilirubinemia than those without
hyperbilirubinemia or controls. CD8+ T-cells were the major lymphocyte subset in 
the liver tissue of patients with severe falciparum malaria. A significant
positive correlation was seen between the numbers of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells and
the liver enzyme levels among P. falciparum malaria patients. The number of CD68+
cells (Kupffer cells) was significantly greater in the liver sinusoids of P.
falciparum malaria cases with hyperbilirubinemia than those without
hyperbilirubinemia. These findings suggest T-cells, especially CD8+ T-cells and
Kupffer cells are an important part of the cellular immune response in the liver 
tissue of P. falciparum infected patients.


PMID: 25417496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

