
1. Infect Immun. 2015 Mar;83(3):1172-80. doi: 10.1128/IAI.02796-14. Epub 2015 Jan
12.

Innate immunity induced by Plasmodium liver infection inhibits malaria
reinfections.

Liehl P(1), Meireles P(2), Albuquerque IS(2), Pinkevych M(3), Baptista F(2), Mota
MM(2), Davenport MP(3), Prudêncio M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal pliehl@medicina.ulisboa.pt
mprudencio@medicina.ulisboa.pt.
(2)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Centre for Vascular Research, UNSW Australia, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Following transmission through a mosquito bite to the mammalian host, Plasmodium 
parasites first invade and replicate inside hepatocytes before infecting
erythrocytes and causing malaria. The mechanisms limiting Plasmodium reinfections
in humans living in regions of malaria endemicity have mainly been explored by
studying the resistance induced by the blood stage of infection. However,
epidemiologic studies have suggested that in high-transmission areas,
preerythrocytic stages also activate host resistance to reinfection. This, along 
with the recent discovery that liver infections trigger a specific and effective 
type I interferon (IFN) response, prompted us to hypothesize that this
pre-erythrocyte-stage-induced resistance is linked to liver innate immunity.
Here, we combined experimental approaches and mathematical modeling to
recapitulate field studies and understand the molecular basis behind such
resistance. We present a newly established mouse reinfection model and
demonstrate that rodent malaria liver-stage infection inhibits reinfection. This 
protection relies on the activation of innate immunity and involves the type I
IFN response and the antimicrobial cytokine gamma IFN (IFN-γ). Importantly,
mathematical simulations indicate that the predictions based on our experimental 
murine reinfection model fit available epidemiological data. Overall, our study
revealed that liver-stage-induced innate immunity may contribute to the
preerythrocytic resistance observed in humans in regions of malaria
hyperendemicity.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.02796-14 
PMCID: PMC4333462
PMID: 25583524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

