
1. Mol Biol Rep. 2015 Aug;42(8):1247-55. doi: 10.1007/s11033-015-3865-y. Epub 2015
Feb 20.

The mRNA expression of immune-related genes in crossbred and Tharparkar cattle in
response to in vitro infection with Theileria annulata.

Dewangan P(1), Panigrahi M, Kumar A, Saravanan BC, Ghosh S, Asaf VN, Parida S,
Gaur GK, Sharma D, Bhushan B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Genetics, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, 
Bareilly, 243122, UP, India, prashant2687dew@gmail.com.

Tropical theileriosis is a major protozoan disease of cattle and is associated
with high rates of morbidity and mortality. Indigenous cattle (Bos indicus) are
less affected by this disease than exotic and crossbred cattle. Genetic basis of 
resistance to tropical theileriosis in indigenous cattle is not well studied.
Recent reports suggest that number of immune response genes expressed
differentially in exotic and indigenous breeds play an important role in breed
specific resistance to tropical theileriosis. Such studies comparing expression
of these genes in crossbred cattle and indigenous cattle are lacking. The present
study compares the mRNA expression of immune-related genes in response to
Theileria annulata infection in indigenous and crossbred cattle. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from blood samples of indigenous
(Tharparkar) and crossbred (HF/BS/Jersey × Hariana) cattle and challenged with
prepared ground-up tick supernatant carrying Theileria annulata sporozoites in
vitro. qPCR was employed to measure relative mRNA expression of toll-like
receptor 10 (TLR10), signal-regulatory protein alpha (SIRPA), MHC class II DQα
(BoLA-DQA), musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma (MAF) and prion protein (PRNP) genes 
in infected and control PBMCs from crossbred and indigenous cattle. On the basis 
of comparative fold change analysis, significant up-regulation in SIRPA, PRNP and
MHC DQα genes and significant down-regulation in TLR10, cMAF and MAFB genes in
crossbreds as compared to indigenous cattle was observed. Results of the present 
study suggest that breed specific differential expression of the genes under
study may contribute to the breed specific resistance to Theileria annulata
infection in indigenous cattle compared to crossbred cattle.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-015-3865-y 
PMID: 25697418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

