
1. Hepatology. 2015 Sep;62(3):900-14. doi: 10.1002/hep.27792. Epub 2015 Apr 22.

The receptor tyrosine kinase EphB2 promotes hepatic fibrosis in mice.

Mimche PN(1), Brady LM(1), Bray CF(1), Lee CM(2), Thapa M(3), King TP(1), Quicke 
K(1), McDermott CD(1), Mimche SM(2), Grakoui A(3), Morgan ET(2), Lamb TJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA.
(3)Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory Vaccine Center, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2015 Sep;62(3):680-3.

Beyond the well-defined role of the Eph (erythropoietin-producing hepatocellular)
receptor tyrosine kinases in developmental processes, cell motility, cell
trafficking/adhesion, and cancer, nothing is known about their involvement in
liver pathologies. During blood-stage rodent malaria infection we have found that
EphB2 transcripts and proteins were up-regulated in the liver, a result likely
driven by elevated surface expression on immune cells including macrophages. This
was significant for malaria pathogenesis because EphB2(-/-) mice were protected
from malaria-induced liver fibrosis despite having a similar liver parasite
burden compared with littermate control mice. This protection was correlated with
a defect in the inflammatory potential of hepatocytes from EphB2(-/-) mice
resulting in a reduction in adhesion molecules, chemokine/chemokine receptor RNA 
levels, and infiltration of leukocytes including macrophages/Kupffer cells, which
mediate liver fibrosis during rodent malaria infections. These observations are
recapitulated in the well-established carbon tetrachloride model of liver
fibrosis in which EphB2(-/-) carbon tetrachloride-treated mice showed a
significant reduction of liver fibrosis compared to carbon tetrachloride-treated 
littermate mice. Depletion of macrophages by clodronate-liposomes abrogates liver
EphB2 messenger RNA and protein up-regulation and fibrosis in malaria-infected
mice.CONCLUSION: During rodent malaria, EphB2 expression promotes
malaria-associated liver fibrosis; to our knowledge, our data are the first to
implicate the EphB family of receptor tyrosine kinases in liver fibrosis or in
the pathogenesis of malaria infection.

Â© 2015 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.27792 
PMCID: PMC4549176
PMID: 25784101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

