
1. Vet J. 2015 Sep;205(3):387-92. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2015.05.008. Epub 2015 May 20.

Platelet activation and platelet-leukocyte interaction in dogs naturally infected
with Babesia rossi.

Goddard A(1), Leisewitz AL(2), Kristensen AT(3), Schoeman JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Companion Animal Clinical Studies, Faculty of Veterinary
Science, University of Pretoria, South Africa. Electronic address:
amelia.goddard@up.ac.za.
(2)Department of Companion Animal Clinical Studies, Faculty of Veterinary
Science, University of Pretoria, South Africa.
(3)Department of Veterinary Clinical and Animal Sciences, Faculty of Health and
Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

Using flow cytometry, platelet-leukocyte aggregate (PLA) formation has previously
been documented in dogs with a variety of systemic inflammatory disorders and
immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia. Platelet activation and subsequent
interaction between platelets and leukocytes are important for regulating innate 
immunity and systemic inflammation. The objective of this study was to
investigate PLA formation in canine babesiosis and to determine whether it was
associated with outcome. Blood was collected from 36 client-owned dogs diagnosed 
with Babesia rossi infection and 15 healthy controls using EDTA as anticoagulant.
Activated platelets and PLA formation were detected by measuring surface
expression of P-selectin (CD62P) on platelets, monocytes and neutrophils. Of the 
Babesia-infected dogs, 29 survived and seven died. The percentage of
CD62P-positive monocytes was significantly higher (P = 0.036) in the
Babesia-infected dogs (54%) than in healthy control dogs (35.3%). However, there 
were no significant differences between the Babesia-infected and control groups
for CD62P-positive platelets (4.9% and 1.2%, respectively) and CD62P-positive
neutrophils (28.3% and 17.9%, respectively). The percentage of CD62P-positive
monocytes was significantly higher (P = 0.019) in the survivors (58.9%) than in
healthy control dogs; however, there were no significant differences between the 
non-survivors (39.2%) and the controls or between survivors and non-survivors.
There were no significant differences between groups for the percentage of
CD62P-positive platelets (survivors 4.8%; non-survivors 5.3%; controls 1.2%) or
CD62P-positive neutrophils (survivors 31.6%; non-survivors 5.6%; controls 17.9%).
In conclusion, Babesia-infected dogs, specifically dogs that survived, had a
significantly increased percentage of platelet-monocyte aggregates compared to
healthy control dogs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2015.05.008 
PMID: 26088270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

