
1. Nature. 2015 Oct 8;526(7572):253-7. doi: 10.1038/nature15390. Epub 2015 Sep 30.

A novel locus of resistance to severe malaria in a region of ancient balancing
selection.

Malaria Genomic Epidemiology Network, Band G, Rockett KA, Spencer CC, Kwiatkowski
DP.

Collaborators: Band G, Si Le Q, Clarke GM, Kivinen K, Leffler EM, Rockett KA,
Kwiatkowski DP, Spencer CC, Rockett KA, Spencer CC, Cornelius V, Conway DJ,
Williams TN, Taylor T, Kwiatkowski DP, Conway DJ, Bojang KA, Doumbo O, Thera MA, 
Modiano D, Sirima SB, Wilson MD, Koram KA, Agbenyega T, Achidi E, Williams TN,
Marsh K, Reyburn H, Drakeley C, Riley E, Taylor T, Molyneux M, Jallow M, Bojang
KA, Conway DJ, Pinder M, Doumbo O, Thera MA, Toure OB, Konate S, Sissoko S,
Bougouma EC, Mangano VD, Modiano D, Sirima SB, Amenga-Etego LN, Ghansah AK,
Hodgson AV, Koram KA, Wilson MD, Agbenyega T, Ansong D, Enimil A, Evans J, Achidi
E, Apinjoh TO, Macharia A, Marsh K, Ndila CM, Newton C, Peshu N, Uyoga S,
Williams TN, Drakeley C, Manjurano A, Reyburn H, Riley E, Kachala D, Molyneux M, 
Nyirongo V, Taylor T, Rockett KA, Kivinen K, Mead D, Drury E, Auburn S, Campino
SG, MacInnis B, Stalker J, Gray E, Hubbart C, Jeffreys AE, Rowlands K, Mendy A,
Craik R, Fitzpatrick K, Molloy S, Hart L, Hutton R, Kerasidou A, Johnson KJ,
Cornelius V.

Comment in
    Trends Parasitol. 2016 Jan;32(1):5-7.

The high prevalence of sickle haemoglobin in Africa shows that malaria has been a
major force for human evolutionary selection, but surprisingly few other
polymorphisms have been proven to confer resistance to malaria in large
epidemiological studies. To address this problem, we conducted a multi-centre
genome-wide association study (GWAS) of life-threatening Plasmodium falciparum
infection (severe malaria) in over 11,000 African children, with replication data
in a further 14,000 individuals. Here we report a novel malaria resistance locus 
close to a cluster of genes encoding glycophorins that are receptors for
erythrocyte invasion by P. falciparum. We identify a haplotype at this locus that
provides 33% protection against severe malaria (odds ratio = 0.67, 95% confidence
interval = 0.60-0.76, P value = 9.5 × 10(-11)) and is linked to polymorphisms
that have previously been shown to have features of ancient balancing selection, 
on the basis of haplotype sharing between humans and chimpanzees. Taken together 
with previous observations on the malaria-protective role of blood group O, these
data reveal that two of the strongest GWAS signals for severe malaria lie in or
close to genes encoding the glycosylated surface coat of the erythrocyte cell
membrane, both within regions of the genome where it appears that evolution has
maintained diversity for millions of years. These findings provide new insights
into the host-parasite interactions that are critical in determining the outcome 
of malaria infection.

DOI: 10.1038/nature15390 
PMCID: PMC4629224
PMID: 26416757  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

