
1. Immun Inflamm Dis. 2015 Nov 6;4(1):24-34. doi: 10.1002/iid3.89. eCollection 2016 
Mar.

Inflammatory cytokine and humoral responses to Plasmodium falciparum
glycosylphosphatidylinositols correlates with malaria immunity and pathogenesis.

Mbengue B(1), Niang B(2), Niang MS(3), Varela ML(4), Fall B(5), Fall MM(2),
Diallo RN(6), Diatta B(2), Gowda DC(7), Dieye A(1), Perraut R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Immunologie Université Cheikh Anta Diop de DakarUCADDakarSenegal;
Unité d'ImmunogénétiqueInstitut Pasteur de Dakar, IPDDakarSenegal.
(2)Service de Réanimation Hôpital Principal de Dakar, HPD Dakar Senegal.
(3)Service d'Immunologie Université Cheikh Anta Diop de Dakar UCAD Dakar Senegal.
(4)Unité d'Immunologie Institut Pasteur de Dakar, IPD Dakar Senegal.
(5)Fédération des laboratoires Hôpital Principal de Dakar, HPD Dakar Senegal.
(6)Unité d'Immunogénétique Institut Pasteur de Dakar, IPD Dakar Senegal.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Milton S. Hershey Medical Center Pennsylvania Hershey USA.

Pro-inflammatory cytokines induced by glycosylphosphatidylinositols (GPIs) of
Plasmodium falciparum contribute to malaria pathogenesis and hence, the naturally
acquired anti-GPI antibody thought to provide protection against severe malaria
(SM) by neutralizing the stimulatory activity of GPIs. In previous studies, the
anti-GPI antibody levels increased with age in parallel with the development of
acquired immunity, and high levels of anti-GPI antibodies were associated with
mild malaria (MM) cases. In the present study, the relationship between the
levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and anti-GPI IgG antibody responses,
parasitemia, and the clinical outcomes were evaluated in SM and mild malaria (MM)
patients. Sera from a total of 110 SM and 72 MM cases after excluding of
ineligible patients were analyzed for the levels of anti-GPI antibodies, IgG
subclasses, and cytokine responses by ELISA. While the total anti-GPI antibody
levels were similar in overall SM and MM groups, they were significantly higher
in surviving SM patients than in fatal SM cases. In the case of cytokines, the
TNF-α and IL-6 levels were significantly higher in SM compared to MM, whereas the
IL-10 levels were similar in both groups. The data presented here demonstrate
that high levels of the circulatory pro-inflammatory, TNF-α, and IL-6, are
indicators of malaria severity, whereas anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 level
does not differentiate SM and MM cases. Further, among SM patients, relatively
low levels of anti-GPI antibodies are indicators of fatal outcomes compared to
survivors, suggesting that anti-GPI antibodies provide some level of protection
against SM fatality.

DOI: 10.1002/iid3.89 
PMCID: PMC4768067
PMID: 27042299 

