
1. Vet Parasitol. 2016 Jun 15;223:127-32. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2016.04.033. Epub
2016 Apr 22.

Involvement of TLR6 in the induction of COX-2, PGE2 and IL-10 in macrophages by
lipids from virulent S2P and attenuated R1A Babesia bovis strains.

Gimenez G(1), Belaunzarán ML(2), Magalhães KG(3), Poncini CV(2), Lammel EM(2),
González Cappa SM(2), Bozza PT(4), Isola EL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones en Microbiología y Parasitología Médica, UBA,
CONICET, Facultad de Medicina, Paraguay 2155 piso 13, C1121ABG Buenos Aires,
Argentina. Electronic address: paradife@fmed.uba.ar.
(2)Instituto de Investigaciones en Microbiología y Parasitología Médica, UBA,
CONICET, Facultad de Medicina, Paraguay 2155 piso 13, C1121ABG Buenos Aires,
Argentina.
(3)Laboratório de Imunologia e Inflamação, Departamento de Biologia Celular,
Instituto de Biologia, Universidade de Brasília, Distrito Federal, Brazil.
(4)Laboratório de Imunofarmacologia, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz-Fundaçao Oswaldo
Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Toll like receptors (TLRs) are involved in the modulation of diverse host genes
expression through a complex network of signalling events that allow for an
appropriate response to a microbial pathogen. In the present work we used TLR6KO 
mice in order to study the role of TLR6 in the immune discrimination of lipids
from two Babesia bovis strains, attenuated R1A (LA) and virulent S2P (LV), and
the consequent macrophage activation. We demonstrated that TLR6 is required for
lipid body induction in murine peritoneal macrophages by both LA and LV.
Interestingly, as regards IL-10 and COX-2/PGE2 pathway induction by LA and LV, we
observed differences in the biological effects produced by these lipid extracts. 
Our results indicate a role of TLR6 in the down-modulation of these
immunoregulators only in the case of LA, whereas this receptor was not implicated
in pro-inflammatory TNFα, IL-6 and KC release induced by LA. Remarkably, LV did
not exert the down-modulatory effect observed for LA, supporting the notion that 
LA and LV possess different lipid composition that could correlate with the polar
pathogenic effect of both B. bovis strains.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2016.04.033 
PMID: 27198789  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

