
1. mBio. 2016 Jul 12;7(4). pii: e00615-16. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00615-16.

Interaction between Endothelial Protein C Receptor and Intercellular Adhesion
Molecule 1 to Mediate Binding of Plasmodium falciparum-Infected Erythrocytes to
Endothelial Cells.

Avril M(1), Bernabeu M(1), Benjamin M(1), Brazier AJ(1), Smith JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Research (formerly Seattle Biomedical Research
Institute), Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Center for Infectious Disease Research (formerly Seattle Biomedical Research
Institute), Seattle, Washington, USA Department of Global Health, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA joe.smith@cidresearch.org.

Intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) and the endothelial protein C receptor
(EPCR) are candidate receptors for the deadly complication cerebral malaria.
However, it remains unclear if Plasmodium falciparum parasites with dual binding 
specificity are involved in cytoadhesion or different parasite subpopulations
bind in brain microvessels. Here, we investigated this issue by studying
different subtypes of ICAM-1-binding parasite lines. We show that two parasite
lines expressing domain cassette 13 (DC13) of the P. falciparum erythrocyte
membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) family have dual binding specificity for EPCR and
ICAM-1 and further mapped ICAM-1 binding to the first DBLβ domain following the
PfEMP1 head structure in both proteins. As PfEMP1 head structures have diverged
between group A (EPCR binders) and groups B and C (CD36 binders), we also
investigated how ICAM-1-binding parasites with different coreceptor binding
traits influence P. falciparum-infected erythrocyte binding to endothelial cells.
Whereas levels of binding to tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α)-stimulated
endothelial cells from the lung and brain by all ICAM-1-binding parasite lines
increased, group A (EPCR and ICAM-1) was less dependent than group B (CD36 and
ICAM-1) on ICAM-1 upregulation. Furthermore, both group A DC13 parasite lines had
higher binding levels to brain endothelial cells (a microvascular niche with
limited CD36 expression). This study shows that ICAM-1 is a coreceptor for a
subset of EPCR-binding parasites and provides the first evidence of how EPCR and 
ICAM-1 interact to mediate parasite binding to both resting and TNF-α-activated
primary brain and lung endothelial cells.IMPORTANCE: Cerebral malaria is a severe
neurological complication of P. falciparum infection associated with infected
erythrocyte (IE) binding in cerebral vessels. Yet little is known about the
mechanisms by which parasites adhere in the brain or other microvascular sites.
Here, we studied parasite lines expressing group A DC13-containing PfEMP1
variants, a subset that has previously been shown to have high brain cell- and
other endothelial cell-binding activities. We show that DC13-containing PfEMP1
variants have dual EPCR- and ICAM-1-binding activities and that both receptors
are involved in parasite adherence to lung and brain endothelial cells. As both
EPCR and ICAM-1 are implicated in cerebral malaria, these findings suggest the
possibility that parasites with dual binding activities are involved in parasite 
sequestration to microvascular beds with low CD36 expression, such as the brain, 
and we urge more research into the multiadhesive properties of PfEMP1 variants.

Copyright © 2016 Avril et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00615-16 
PMCID: PMC4958245
PMID: 27406562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

