
1. Biochem Mol Biol J. 2016;2(2). pii: 10. Epub 2016 Aug 14.

Hemozoin Regulates iNOS Expression by Modulating the Transcription Factor NF-κB
in Macrophages.

Ranjan R(1), Karpurapu M(2), Rani A(1), Chishti AH(3), Christman JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care
and Sleep, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(3)Department of Developmental, Molecular and Chemical Biology, Tufts University 
School of Medicine, Boston, USA.

Hemozoin (Hz) is released from ruptured erythrocytes during malaria infection
caused by Plasmodium sp., in addition the malaria infected individuals are prone 
to bacterial sepsis. The molecular interactions between Hz, bacterial components 
and macrophages remains poorly investigated. In this report, we investigated the 
combinatorial immune-modulatory effects of phagocytosed Hz, Interferon gamma
(IFNγ) or lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in macrophages. Macrophages were treated with 
various concentrations of commercial synthetic Hz, and surprisingly it did not
result in inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) expression. However, when
macrophages were pretreated with Hz and then challenged with IFNγ or LPS, there
was a differential impact on iNOS expression. There was an increase in iNOS
expression when macrophages were pre-treated with Hz and subsequently treated
with IFNγ when compared to IFNγ alone. Whereas iNOS expression was reduced when
Hz phagocytosed macrophages were stimulated with LPS compared to LPS alone.
Furthermore, there was an increased activation of NF-κB in Hz phagocytosed
macrophages that were challenged with IFNγ. The interaction between Hz and
macrophages has an impact on iNOS expression.

DOI: 10.21767/2471-8084.100019 
PMCID: PMC5079181
PMID: 27790644 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest/Disclosures The authors
associated with this manuscript declare that there is no conflict of interest.

