
1. Blood. 1993 Dec 15;82(12):3637-47.

Platelet activation and inhibition of malarial cytoadherence by the anti-CD36 IgM
monoclonal antibody NL07.

Alessio M(1), Greco NJ, Primo L, Ghigo D, Bosia A, Tandon NN, Ockenhouse CF,
Jamieson GA, Malavasi F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica, Biologia e Chimica Medica, Universit√† di Torino,
Italy.

The surface glycoprotein CD36 (GPIV) is known to mediate the adhesion of
Plasmodium falciparum malaria-infected red blood cells and to be a receptor for
extracellular matrix proteins such as collagen and thrombospondin. The murine
monoclonal IgM antibody NL07, which is specific for CD36, has now been shown to
also be a potent inhibitor of the adhesion of P falciparum malaria-infected red
blood cells to C32 melanoma cells. Treatment of platelets with NL07 monoclonal
antibody resulted in rapid degranulation, release of ATP and serotonin, increase 
in [Ca2+]i, and tyrosine phosphorylation of a substrate protein of 130 kD. In
about one-half of the experiments, activation with NL07 resulted in the formation
of small aggregates of 10 to 30 platelets, whereas in the other half of the
experiments, large aggregates were seen similar to those induced by adenosine
diphosphate (ADP) and these large aggregates could be converted to the small
aggregates by ATP alpha S or by AP-2 or other antibodies against GPIIb and/or
IIIa. Microaggregates of 2 to 5 platelets were seen with Glanzmann's platelets
that constitutively lack GPIIb/IIIa. Aggregate formation was not seen with
heat-treated serum, in the presence of anti C1q antibodies, or when using C5-,
C8-, or C9-deficient human sera. Although activation of platelets with purified
complement components results in a slow morphologic change without aggregation,
involvement of CD36 results in rapid complement-mediated activation leading to
formation of small aggregates that is largely independent of GPIIb/IIIa and that,
under certain circumstances, proceeds to the formation of large ADP-dependent
aggregates.


PMID: 7505121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

