
1. Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung. 1994;41(2):153-61.

The role of free radicals and antioxidative enzymes in erythrocytes and liver
cells in the course of Plasmodium berghei and Plasmodium vinckei infection of
mice.

Földes J(1), Matyi A, Matkovics B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, A. Szent-Györgyi University Medical
School, Szeged, Hungary.

Blood schisontocidal test of D0 + D3 type revealed different characteristics of
the Plasmodium berghei and Plasmodium vinckei infection. Both types of the rodent
plasmodia kill the untreated mice. Chloroquine treatment alone does not prevent
the death of the P. berghei infected animals and they died at a low level of
parasitaemia. The animals cured with chloroquine plus MAP survive. The infection 
with P. vinckei produces a high level of parasitaemia and the chloroquine
treatment alone prevents the death of mice. The difference in the pathogenic
characteristics between P. berghei and P. vinckei is manifested in the results
measuring the kinetics of the activity of antioxidative enzymes in the red blood 
and liver cells of the infected mice: lipid peroxidation (LPO), superoxide
dismutases (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GP), catalase (CAT) and reduced
glutathione (GSH). The rapid increase of the LPO in the RBC in particular in the 
P. vinckei infected animals indicates the prevailing role of the membrane
detoxification process. A continuous increase in the activity of enzymes of
cytoplasmic origin, e.g. SOD and GP was also observed. A powerful increase in GSH
distinguishes the erythrocytes of P. vinckei infected animals. Similar but not
identical data characterize the enzyme activities of the liver cells of the
plasmodia infected animals.


PMID: 7804719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

