
1. Scand J Immunol. 1996 Nov;44(5):444-52.

Bovine gamma/delta TcR+ T lymphocytes are stimulated to proliferate by autologous
Theileria annulata-infected cells in the presence of interleukin-2.

Collins RA(1), Sopp P, Gelder KI, Morrison WI, Howard CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Pathology, Institute for Animal Health, Compton,
Newbury, UK.

An in vitro model system has been developed in which freshly isolated resting
WC1+ gamma/delta TcR+ T cells proliferate in response to cells transformed by the
protozoan parasite Theileria annulata, providing a strategy in which the basis of
activation of naive gamma/delta T cells can be investigated. Irradiated
parasite-transformed cells stimulate the proliferation, but not cytolytic
activity, of autologous peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from non-immune
animals. The proliferating cells are mainly WC1+ gamma/delta T cells. The
majority of WC1+ gamma/delta T cells in freshly isolated PBMC express CD25 at a
low level that increases when stimulated with T. annulata-infected cells.
Purified WC1+ gamma/delta T cells fail to proliferate when cultured with
irradiated T. annulata-infected cells and produce a small proliferative response 
to IL-2, but proliferate strongly to irradiated or lightly fixed
Theileria-infected cells in combination with IL-2. The Theileria-infected cells
express cytokine transcripts encoding IL-1 alpha, IL-1 beta, IL-6 and IL-10, but 
not IFN gamma, IL-2, IL-4 and IL-7. Purified WC1+ gamma/delta T cells stimulated 
with T. annulata-infected cells with or without IL-2 fail to produce IL-2
transcripts, but do produce those for TNF alpha. These experiments show that WC1+
gamma/delta T cells recognize a surface determinant on T. annulata-infected
cells, that together with a second signal, which can be provided by exogenous
IL-2, stimulates their proliferation.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3083.1996.d01-332.x 
PMID: 8947595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

