
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 May 13;94(10):5119-24.

Jun NH2-terminal kinase is constitutively activated in T cells transformed by the
intracellular parasite Theileria parva.

Galley Y(1), Hagens G, Glaser I, Davis W, Eichhorn M, Dobbelaere D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Pathology, University of Berne, Postfach 2735, CH-3001
Berne, Switzerland.

When T cells become infected by the parasite Theileria parva, they acquire a
transformed phenotype and no longer require antigen-specific stimulation or
exogenous growth factors. This is accompanied by constitutive interleukin 2
(IL-2) and IL-2 receptor expression. Transformation can be reversed entirely by
elimination of the parasites using the specific drug BW720c. Extracellular
signal-regulated kinase and jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) are members of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase family, which play a central role in the
regulation of cellular differentiation and proliferation and also participate in 
the regulation of IL-2 and IL-2 receptor gene expression. T. parva was found to
induce an unorthodox pattern of mitogen-activated protein kinase expression in
infected T cells. JNK-1 and JNK-2 are constitutively active in a
parasite-dependent manner, but have altered properties. In contrast,
extracellular signal-regulated kinase-2 is not activated even though its
activation pathway is functionally intact. Different components of the T cell
receptor (TCR)-dependent signal transduction pathways also were examined. The
TCRzeta or CD3epsilon chains were found not to be phosphorylated and T.
parva-transformed T cells were resistant to inhibitors that block the early steps
of T cell activation. Compounds that inhibit the progression of T cells to
proliferation, however, were inhibitory. Our data provide the first example, to
our knowledge, for parasite-mediated JNK activation, and our findings strongly
suggest that T. parva not only lifts the requirement for antigenic stimulation
but also entirely bypasses early TCR-dependent signal transduction pathways to
induce continuous proliferation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.10.5119 
PMCID: PMC24641
PMID: 9144200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

