
1. Cell Immunol. 1998 Feb 25;184(1):12-25.

The immunomodulator AS101 restores T(H1) type of response suppressed by Babesia
rodhaini in BALB/c mice.

Rosenblatt-Bin H(1), Kalechman Y, Vonsover A, Xu RH, Da JP, Shalit F, Huberman M,
Klein A, Strassmann G, Albeck M, Sredni B.

Author information: 
(1)CAIR Institute, Marilyn Finkler Cancer Research Center, Bar Ilan University,
Ramat Gan, Israel.

The immunomodulator AS101 has been previously shown to confer protection upon
BALB/c mice infected with the intraerythrocytic parasite Babesia rodhaini (B.
rodhaini). The present study focuses on the effect of AS101 administration on the
acute phase of babesial infection where T helper cell subset
patterns-TH1/TH2-were assessed in heavily infected mice. Secretion of cytokines
of the TH1 subset (IL-2, IFN-gamma, IL-12) and of the TH2 subset (IL-10, IL-4) as
well as TGF-beta was measured following the administration of AS101 2 weeks
before parasite infection. Our results demonstrate that the parasites suppress
IL-2 protein and IL-12 mRNA and that AS101 upregulates their secretion: IL-2, 8
u/ml vs 34 u/ml, respectively; IFN-gamma protein, 2370 pg/ml vs 4777 pg/ml,
respectively. Conversely, babesial infection results in the upregulation of IL-10
and IL-4 proteins and TGF-beta transcripts, whereas AS101 downregulates their
production: IL-10, 1800 pg/ml vs 360 pg/ml, respectively; IL-4, 58.3 pg/ml vs
24.5 pg/ml, respectively. A possible escape mechanism induced by B. rodhaini is
suggested, starting with IL-10 inhibition of macrophage activities leading to a
suppression of the TH1 response and of IL-2 in particular. It is therefore
possible that AS101 may protect infected mice by activating cellular-mediated
immunity and concurrently balancing the TH subset responses. It is suggested that
AS101 may be effective as an antiparasitic drug.

DOI: 10.1006/cimm.1998.1251 
PMID: 9626331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

