
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1998 Jul;59(1):77-9.

Short report: Plasmodium falciparum: cytoadherence to alpha(v)beta3 on human
microvascular endothelial cells.

Siano JP(1), Grady KK, Millet P, Wick TM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta
30332-0100, USA.

Sequestration of infected erythrocytes in brain microvasculature contributes to
cerebral malaria, a severe complication of Plasmodium falciparum infection.
Sequestration likely involves cytoadherence of parasitized erythrocytes to
cerebral microvascular endothelium. Elucidation of the receptors and ligands
involved in cytoadherence will likely contribute to a more complete understanding
of malaria pathophysiology. The integrin receptor alpha(v)beta3 is involved in
several physiologic and pathologic adherence processes, but its role in
cytoadherence has not been investigated. In this study, the ability of
erythrocytes infected with P. falciparum to adhere to alpha(v)beta3 on human
microvascular endothelium was investigated. Cytoadherence was quantified under
continuous flow at a shear stress of 1.0 dyne/cm2 to mimic shear forces in the
cerebral microcirculation. Adherence of erythrocytes infected with P. falciparum 
to human microvascular endothelial cells was 7-270-fold greater than uninfected
erythrocytes. Pretreatment of microvascular endothelial cells with anti-alpha(v) 
antibody inhibited P. falciparum-infected erythrocyte adherence by 45 +/- 6%
(mean +/- SEM). These data suggest that in addition to other endothelial
receptors previously described, P. falciparum parasitized red blood cells may
bind to the integrin alpha(v)beta3 on microvascular endothelial cells.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.1998.59.77 
PMID: 9684632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

