
1. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 1999 Aug;25(4):331-40.

Evidence of blood-brain barrier dysfunction in human cerebral malaria.

Brown H(1), Hien TT, Day N, Mai NT, Chuong LV, Chau TT, Loc PP, Phu NH, Bethell
D, Farrar J, Gatter K, White N, Turner G.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Cellular Science, Clinical Biochemistry, Oxford
Wellcome Centre for Tropical and Infectious Diseases, John Radcliffe Hospital,
Oxford, UK.

Patients infected with the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum may develop a
diffuse reversible encephalopathy, termed cerebral malaria. It is unclear how the
intraerythrocytic parasite, which sequesters in the cerebral microvasculature but
does not enter the brain parenchyma, induces this neurological syndrome. Adhesion
of parasitized red blood cells in the brain microvasculature is mediated by
specific receptors on the host endothelium, including intercellular adhesion
molecule (ICAM)-1, CD36 and CD31. Leucocyte binding to cerebral endothelial cells
in culture induces intracellular signalling via ICAM-1. The hypothesis that
parasitized red blood cells binding to receptors on cerebral endothelial cells
causes changes in the integrity of the blood-brain barrier was tested.
Immunohistochemistry was used to examine the blood-brain barrier in human
cerebral malaria, with antibodies to macrophage and endothelial activation
markers, intercellular junction proteins, and plasma proteins. The distribution
of the cell junction proteins occludin, vinculin and ZO-1 were altered in
cerebral malaria cases compared to controls. While fibrinogen was the only plasma
protein detected in the perivascular space, there was widespread perivascular
macrophage activation, suggesting that these cells had been exposed to plasma
proteins. It was concluded that functional changes to the blood-brain barrier
occur in cerebral malaria, possibly as a result of the binding of parasitized red
blood cells to cerebral endothelial cells. These changes require further
examination in vitro.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2990.1999.00188.x 
PMID: 10476050  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

