
1. Infect Immun. 2000 Jun;68(6):3455-62.

A model for sequestration of the transmission stages of Plasmodium falciparum:
adhesion of gametocyte-infected erythrocytes to human bone marrow cells.

Rogers NJ(1), Hall BS, Obiero J, Targett GA, Sutherland CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Unit, Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London WC1E 7HT, United Kingdom.

With the aim of developing an appropriate in vitro model of the sequestration of 
developing Plasmodium falciparum sexual-stage parasites, we have investigated the
cytoadherence of gametocytes to human bone marrow cells of stromal and
endothelial origin. Developing stage III and IV gametocytes, but not mature stage
V gametocytes, adhere to bone marrow cells in significantly higher densities than
do asexual-stage parasites, although these adhesion densities are severalfold
lower than those encountered in classical CD36-dependent assays of P. falciparum 
cytoadherence. This implies that developing gametocytes undergo a transition from
high-avidity, CD36-mediated adhesion during stages I and II to a lower-avidity
adhesion during stages III and IV. We show that this adhesion is CD36
independent, fixation sensitive, stimulated by tumor necrosis factor alpha, and
dependent on divalent cations and serum components. These data suggest that
gametocytes and asexual parasites utilize distinct sets of receptors for adhesion
during development in their respective sequestered niches. To identify receptors 
for gametocyte-specific adhesion of infected erythrocytes to bone marrow cells,
we tested a large panel of antibodies for the ability to inhibit cytoadherence.
Our results implicate ICAM-1, CD49c, CD166, and CD164 as candidate bone marrow
cell receptors for gametocyte adhesion.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.68.6.3455-3462.2000 
PMCID: PMC97624
PMID: 10816498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

