
1. Cell Microbiol. 2000 Apr;2(2):91-9.

Theileria parva: taking control of host cell proliferation and survival
mechanisms.

Dobbelaere DA(1), Fernandez PC, Heussler VT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Pathology, Molecular Pathology, Berne, Switzerland.
dirk.dobbelaere@itpa.unibe.ch

The intracellular parasite Theileria parva infects and transforms bovine T-cells,
inducing their uncontrolled proliferation and spread in non-lymphoid as well as
lymphoid tissues. This parasite-induced transformation is the predominant factor 
contributing to the pathogenesis of a lymphoproliferative disease, called East
Coast fever. T. parva-transformed cells become independent of antigenic
stimulation or exogenous growth factors. A dissection of the signalling pathways 
that are activated in T. parva-infected cells shows that the parasite bypasses
signalling pathways that normally emanate from the T-cell antigen receptor to
induce continuous proliferation. This review concentrates on the influence of the
parasite on the state of activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK), NF-kappaB and phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3-K) pathways in the host
cell. Of the MAPKs, JNK, but not ERK or p38, is active, inducing constitutive
activation of the transcription factors AP-1 and ATF-2. A crucial step in the
transformation process is the persistent activation of the transcription factor
NF-kappaB, which protects T. parva-transformed cells from spontaneous apoptosis
accompanying the transformation process. Inhibitor studies also suggest an
important role for the lipid kinase, PI-3K, in the continuous proliferation of T.
parva-transformed lymphocytes.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1462-5822.2000.00045.x 
PMID: 11207566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

