
1. Infect Immun. 2003 Apr;71(4):2002-8.

Resistance to acute babesiosis is associated with interleukin-12- and gamma
interferon-mediated responses and requires macrophages and natural killer cells.

Aguilar-Delfin I(1), Wettstein PJ, Persing DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, MN 55905,
USA.

We examined the role of the cytokines gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) and
interleukin-12 (IL-12) in the model of acute babesiosis with the WA1 Babesia.
Mice genetically deficient in IFN-gamma-mediated responses (IFNGR2KO mice) and
IL-12-mediated responses (Stat4KO mice) were infected with the WA1 Babesia, and
observations were made on the course of infection and cytokine responses. Levels 
of IFN-gamma and IL-12 in serum increased 24 h after parasite inoculation. The
augmented susceptibility observed in IFNGR2KO and Stat-4KO mice suggests that the
early IL-12- and IFN-gamma-mediated responses are involved in protection against 
acute babesiosis. Resistance appears to correlate with an increase in nitric
oxide (NO) production. In order to assess the contribution of different cell
subsets to resistance against the parasite, we also studied mice lacking B cells,
CD4+ T cells, NK cells, and macrophages. Mice genetically deficient in B
lymphocytes or CD4+ T lymphocytes were able to mount protective responses
comparable to those of immunosufficient mice. In contrast, in vivo depletion of
macrophages or NK cells resulted in elevated susceptibility to the infection. Our
observations suggest that a crucial part of the response that protects from the
pathogenic Babesia WA1 is mediated by macrophages and NK cells, probably through 
early production of IL-12 and IFN-gamma, and induction of macrophage-derived
effector molecules like NO.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.71.4.2002-2008.2003 
PMCID: PMC152030
PMID: 12654819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

