
1. J Immunol. 2004 Mar 1;172(5):3101-10.

Hemozoin-inducible proinflammatory events in vivo: potential role in malaria
infection.

Jaramillo M(1), Plante I, Ouellet N, Vandal K, Tessier PA, Olivier M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Infectiologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Quebec, Pavillon Centre Hospitalier de l'Université Laval, and Département de
Biologie Médicale, Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, Ste-Foy, Quebec,
Canada.

During malaria infection, high levels of proinflammatory molecules (e.g.,
cytokines, chemokines) correlate with disease severity. Even if their role as
activators of the host immune response has been studied, the direct contribution 
of hemozoin (HZ), a parasite metabolite, to such a strong induction is not fully 
understood. Previous in vitro studies demonstrated that both Plasmodium
falciparum HZ and synthetic HZ (sHZ), beta-hematin, induce macrophage/monocyte
chemokine and proinflammatory cytokine secretion. In the present study, we
investigated the proinflammatory properties of sHZ in vivo. To this end,
increasing doses of sHZ were injected either i.v. or into an air pouch generated 
on the dorsum of BALB/c mice over a 24-h period. Our results showed that sHZ is a
strong modulator of leukocyte recruitment and more specifically of neutrophil and
monocyte populations. In addition, evaluation of chemokine and cytokine mRNA and 
protein expression revealed that sHZ induces the expression of chemokines,
macrophage-inflammatory protein (MIP)-1alpha/CCL3, MIP-1beta/CCL4, MIP-2/CXCL2,
and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1/CCL2; chemokine receptors, CCR1, CCR2,
CCR5, CXCR2, and CXCR4; cytokines, IL-1beta and IL-6; and myeloid-related
proteins, S100A8, S100A9, and S100A8/A9, in the air pouch exudates. Of interest, 
chemokine and cytokine mRNA up-regulation were also detected in the liver of i.v.
sHZ-injected mice. In conclusion, our study demonstrates that sHZ is a potent
proinflammatory agent in vivo, which could contribute to the immunopathology
related to malaria.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.172.5.3101 
PMID: 14978116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

