
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 4;280(9):8606-16. Epub 2004 Dec 28.

Induction of proinflammatory responses in macrophages by the
glycosylphosphatidylinositols of Plasmodium falciparum: cell signaling receptors,
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) structural requirement, and regulation of GPI 
activity.

Krishnegowda G(1), Hajjar AM, Zhu J, Douglass EJ, Uematsu S, Akira S, Woods AS,
Gowda DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033-0850, USA.

The glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors of Plasmodium falciparum have been
proposed to be the major factors that contribute to malaria pathogenesis through 
their ability to induce proinflammatory responses. In this study we identified
the receptors for P. falciparum GPI-induced cell signaling that leads to
proinflammatory responses and studied the GPI structure-activity relationship.
The data show that GPI signaling is mediated mainly through recognition by TLR2
and to a lesser extent by TLR4. The activity of sn-2-lyso-GPIs is comparable with
that of the intact GPIs, whereas the activity of Man(3)-GPIs is about 80% that of
the intact GPIs. The GPIs with three (intact GPIs and Man(3)-GPIs) and two fatty 
acids (sn-2-lyso-GPIs) appear to differ considerably in the requirement of the
auxiliary receptor, TLR1 or TLR6, for recognition by TLR2. The former are
preferentially recognized by TLR2/TLR1, whereas the latter are favored by
TLR2/TLR6. However, the signaling pathways initiated by all three GPI types are
similar, involving the MyD88-dependent activation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase, c-Jun N-terminal kinase, and p38 and NF-kappaB-signaling
pathways. The signaling molecules of these pathways differentially contribute to 
the production of various cytokines and nitric oxide (Zhu, J., Krishnegowda, G., 
and Gowda, D. C. (2004) J. Biol. Chem. 280, 8617-8627). Our data also show that
GPIs are degraded by the macrophage surface phospholipases predominantly into
inactive species, indicating that the host can regulate GPI activity at least in 
part by this mechanism. These results imply that macrophage surface
phospholipases play important roles in the GPI-induced innate immune responses
and malaria pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M413541200 
PMCID: PMC4984258
PMID: 15623512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

