
1. Microbes Infect. 2005 Mar;7(3):399-409. Epub 2005 Feb 26.

Testosterone responsiveness of spleen and liver in female lymphotoxin beta
receptor-deficient mice resistant to blood-stage malaria.

Wunderlich F(1), Dkhil MA, Mehnert LI, Braun JV, El-Khadragy M, Borsch E, Hermsen
D, Benten WP, Pfeffer K, Mossmann H, Krücken J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Parasitology and Biological and Medical Research Center,
Heinrich-Heine-University, Universitätsstr. 1, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

Disrupted signaling through lymphotoxin beta receptor (LTbetaR) results in severe
defects of the spleen and even loss of all other secondary lymphoid tissues,
making mice susceptible to diverse infectious agents. Surprisingly, however, we
find that female LTbetaR-deficient mice are even more resistant to blood stages
of Plasmodium chabaudi malaria than wild-type C57BL/6 mice. Higher resistance of 
LTbetaR-deficient mice correlates with an earlier onset of reticulocytosis, and
the period of anemia is shorter. After surviving fulminant parasitemias of about 
35%, mice develop long-lasting protective immunity against homologous
rechallenge, with both spleen and liver acting as anti-malaria effectors.
Testosterone suppresses resistance, i.e. all mice succumb to infections during or
shortly after peak parasitemia. At peak parasitemia, testosterone does not
essentially affect cellularity and apoptosis in the spleen, but aggravates liver 
pathology in terms of increased cell swelling, numbers of apoptotic and
binucleated cells and reduced serum alkaline phosphatase levels, and conversely, 
reduces inflammatory lymphocytic infiltrates in the liver. In the spleen,
hybridization of cDNA arrays identified only a few testosterone-induced changes
in gene expression, in particular upregulation of INFgamma and IFN-regulated
genes. By contrast, a much larger number of testosterone-affectable genes was
observed in the liver, including genes involved in regulation of the
extracellular matrix, in chemokine and cytokine signaling, and in cell cycle
control. Collectively, our data suggest that testosterone dysregulates the
inflammatory response in spleen and liver during their differentiation to
anti-malaria effectors in malaria-resistant female LTbetaR-deficient mice, thus
contributing to the testosterone-induced lethal outcome of malaria.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2004.11.016 
PMID: 15788153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

