
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Apr 12;102(15):5552-7. Epub 2005 Apr 1.

Domain III of Plasmodium falciparum apical membrane antigen 1 binds to the
erythrocyte membrane protein Kx.

Kato K(1), Mayer DC, Singh S, Reid M, Miller LH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research and Malaria Vaccine Development
Branch, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-8132, USA.

Plasmodium falciparum apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1) is located in the
merozoite micronemes, an organelle that contains receptors for invasion,
suggesting that AMA1 may play a role in this process. However, direct evidence
that P. falciparum AMA1 binds to human erythrocytes is lacking. In this study, we
determined that domain III of AMA1 binds to the erythrocyte membrane protein, Kx,
and that the rate of invasion of Kx(null) erythrocytes is reduced, indicating a
significant but not unique role of AMA1 and Kx in parasite invasion of
erythrocytes. Domains I/II/III, domains I/II and domain III of AMA1 were
expressed on the surface of CHO-K1 cells, and their ability to bind erythrocytes 
was determined. We observed that each of these domains failed to bind untreated
human erythrocytes. In contrast, domain III, but not the other domains of AMA1,
bound to trypsin-treated human erythrocytes. We tested the binding of AMA1 to
trypsin-treated genetically mutant human erythrocytes, missing various
erythrocyte membrane proteins. AMA1 failed to bind trypsin-treated Kx(null)
(McLeod) erythrocytes, which lack the Kx protein. Furthermore, treatment of human
erythrocytes with trypsin, followed by alpha-chymotrypsin, cleaved Kx and
destroyed the binding of AMA1 to human erythrocytes. Lastly, the rate of invasion
of Kx null erythrocytes by P. falciparum was significantly lower than
Kx-expressing erythrocytes. Taken together, our data suggest that AMA1 plays an
important, but not exclusive, role in invasion of human erythrocytes through a
process that involves exposure or modification of the erythrocyte surface
protein, Kx, by a trypsin-like enzyme.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0501594102 
PMCID: PMC556269
PMID: 15805191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

