
1. Int J Parasitol. 2006 May 1;36(5):569-82. Epub 2006 Mar 20.

Immunopathogenesis of cerebral malaria.

Hunt NH(1), Golenser J, Chan-Ling T, Parekh S, Rae C, Potter S, Medana IM, Miu J,
Ball HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunopathology Unit, Institute for Biomedical Research, University 
of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. nhunt@med.usyd.edu.au

Malaria is one of the most important global health problems, potentially
affecting more than one third of the world's population. Cerebral malaria (CM) is
a deadly complication of Plasmodium falciparum infection, yet its pathogenesis
remains incompletely understood. In this review, we discuss some of the principal
pathogenic events that have been described in murine models of the disease and
relate them to the human condition. One of the earliest events in CM pathogenesis
appears to be a mild increase in the permeability to protein of the blood-brain
barrier. Recent studies have shown a role for CD8+T cells in mediating damage to 
the microvascular endothelium and this damage can result in the leakage of
cytokines, malaria antigens and other potentially harmful molecules across the
blood-brain barrier into the cerebral parenchyma. We suggest that this, in turn, 
leads to the activation of microglia and the activation and apoptosis of
astrocytes. The role of hypoxia in the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria is also
discussed, with particular reference to the local reduction of oxygen consumption
in the brain as a consequence of vascular obstruction, to cytokine-driven changes
in glucose metabolism, and to cytopathic hypoxia. Interferon-gamma, a cytokine
known to be produced in malaria infection, induces increased expression, by
microvascular endothelial cells, of the haem enzyme indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase, 
the first enzyme in the kynurenine pathway of tryptophan metabolism. Enhanced
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase expression leads to increased production of a range
of biologically active metabolites that may be part of a tissue protective
response. Damage to astrocytes may result in reduced production of the
neuroprotectant molecule kynurenic acid, leading to a decrease in its ratio
relative to the neuroexcitotoxic molecule quinolinic acid, which might contribute
to some of the neurological symptoms of cerebral malaria. Lastly, we discuss the 
role of other haem enzymes, cyclooxygenase-2, inducible nitric oxide synthase and
haem oxygenase-1, as potentially being components of mechanisms that protect host
tissue against the effects of cytokine- and leukocyte-mediated stress induced by 
malaria infection.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2006.02.016 
PMID: 16678181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

