
1. Eur J Immunol. 1991 May;21(5):1249-53.

Transient depletion of T cells with high LFA-1 expression from peripheral
circulation during acute Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Hviid L(1), Theander TG, Abdulhadi NH, Abu-Zeid YA, Bayoumi RA, Jensen JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Acute P. falciparum malaria is associated with loss of in vitro T cell
responsiveness to antigenic stimulation, and with high plasma levels of soluble
interleukin 2 receptor (IL 2R). In the present study peripheral T cells from
acute P. falciparum malaria patients from a malaria-endemic area of Sudan were
analyzed for expression of cell surface antigens associated with T lymphocyte
adhesion, activation and maturation. The results were compared to results from T 
cells obtained from the same donors either before the attack, or during
convalescence. Most donors showed a remarkable loss of T cells with high
expression of the surface marker LFA-1 (CD11a/CD18) during the clinical episode, 
in addition to the functional changes described above. Two donors that did not
show phenotypic changes were furthermore characterized by having an unabated
proliferative response and normal plasma IL 2R levels. All peripheral CD3+ T
lymphocytes expressed LFA-1, which had a clearly bimodal distribution on these
cells. The T cell subpopulation having high LFA-1 expression (LFA-1++) was
composed of both memory and unprimed T cells, according to their expression of
CD45RA and CD45R0. Analysis of expression of membrane-bound IL 2R (CD25) and
ICAM-1 (CD54) did not reveal in vivo activated T cells in the peripheral blood of
the patients. Taken together, these data suggest that circulating T cells
recognizing parasite antigens are temporarily withdrawn from peripheral
circulation during P. falciparum malaria.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830210523 
PMID: 1674690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

