
1. J Immunol. 2006 Nov 1;177(9):6344-52.

Disruption of JNK2 decreases the cytokine response to Plasmodium falciparum
glycosylphosphatidylinositol in vitro and confers protection in a cerebral
malaria model.

Lu Z(1), Serghides L, Patel SN, Degousee N, Rubin BB, Krishnegowda G, Gowda DC,
Karin M, Kain KC.

Author information: 
(1)Tropical Disease Unit, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of
Medicine, University Health Network-Toronto General Hospital, 200 Elizabeth
Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Host inflammatory responses to Plasmodium falciparum GPI (pfGPI) anchors are
believed to play an important role in the pathophysiology of severe malaria.
However, relatively little is known about the signal transduction pathways
involved in pfGPI-stimulated inflammatory response and its potential contribution
to severe malaria syndromes. In this study, we investigated the role of MAPK
activation in pfGPI-induced cytokine secretion and examined the role of selected 
MAPKs in a model of cerebral malaria in vivo. We demonstrate that ERK1/2, JNK,
p38, c-Jun, and activating transcription factor-2 became phosphorylated in
pfGPI-stimulated macrophages. A JNK inhibitor (1,9-pyrazoloanthrone) inhibited
pfGPI-induced phosphorylation of JNK, c-Jun, and activating transcription
factor-2 and significantly decreased pfGPI-induced TNF-alpha secretion.
pfGPI-stimulated JNK and c-Jun phosphorylation was absent in Jnk2(-/-)
macrophages but unchanged in Jnk1(-/-) and Jnk3(-/-) macrophages compared with
wild-type macrophages. Jnk2(-/-) macrophages secreted significantly less
TNF-alpha in response to pfGPI than macrophages from Jnk1(-/-), Jnk3(-/-), and
wild-type counterparts. Furthermore, we demonstrate a role for JNK2 in mediating 
inflammatory responses and severe malaria in vivo. In contrast to wild-type or
Jnk1(-/-) mice, Jnk2(-/-) mice had lower levels of TNF-alpha in vivo and
exhibited significantly higher survival rates when challenged with Plasmodium
berghei ANKA. These results provide direct evidence that pfGPI induces TNF-alpha 
secretion through activation of MAPK pathways, including JNK2. These results
suggest that JNK2 is a potential target for therapeutic interventions in severe
malaria.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.9.6344 
PMID: 17056565  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

