
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Apr;81(4):1102-10. Epub 2007 Jan 2.

IL-4 induces a wide-spectrum intracellular signaling cascade in CD8+ T cells.

Acacia de Sa Pinheiro A(1), Morrot A, Chakravarty S, Overstreet M, Bream JH,
Irusta PM, Zavala F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Malaria Research
Institute, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, 615 N.
Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

IL-4 has distinct effects on the differentiation and functional properties of
CD8+ T cells. In vivo studies have shown that it is critical for the development 
of protective memory responses against tumors and infections by Leishmania and
Plasmodium parasites. The intracellular signaling events mediated by IL-4/IL-4
receptor (IL-4R) interactions on CD4+ T cells have been studied extensively;
however, the nature of IL-4-induced signaling on CD8+ T cells has not been
characterized. Using naïve, activated, as well as differentiated CD8+ T cells, we
show that IL-4 has a strong in vivo and in vitro antiapoptotic effect on
activated and resting CD8+ T cells. We demonstrate that IL-4 induces the
phosphorylation of the IL-4R, which is followed by the activation of at least two
distinct intracellular signaling cascades: the Jak1/STAT6 and the insulin
receptor substrate/PI-3K/protein kinase B pathways. We also found that IL-4
induces the Jak3-mediated phosphorylation and nuclear migration of STAT1, STAT3, 
and STAT5 in naïve, activated, as well as differentiated, IFN-gamma-producing
CD8+ T cells. The induction of this broad signaling activity in CD8+ T cells
coincides with a transcriptional activity of suppressors of cytokine signaling
genes, which are decreased significantly in comparison with CD4+ T cells. To our 
knowledge, this report constitutes the first comprehensive analysis of the
signaling events that shape CD8+ T cell responses to IL-4.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0906583 
PMID: 17200144  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

