
1. Malar J. 2007 Nov 12;6:147.

Cerebrospinal fluid and serum biomarkers of cerebral malaria mortality in
Ghanaian children.

Armah HB(1), Wilson NO, Sarfo BY, Powell MD, Bond VC, Anderson W, Adjei AA, Gyasi
RK, Tettey Y, Wiredu EK, Tongren JE, Udhayakumar V, Stiles JK.

Author information: 
(1)Morehouse School of Medicine, Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and
Immunology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. hbaarmah@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum can cause a diffuse encephalopathy known as
cerebral malaria (CM), a major contributor to malaria associated mortality.
Despite treatment, mortality due to CM can be as high as 30% while 10% of
survivors of the disease may experience short- and long-term neurological
complications. The pathogenesis of CM and other forms of severe malaria is
multi-factorial and appear to involve cytokine and chemokine homeostasis,
inflammation and vascular injury/repair. Identification of prognostic markers
that can predict CM severity will enable development of better intervention.
METHODS: Postmortem serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples were obtained
within 2-4 hours of death in Ghanaian children dying of CM, severe malarial
anemia (SMA), and non-malarial (NM) causes. Serum and CSF levels of 36 different 
biomarkers (IL-1beta, IL-1ra, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-9, IL-10,
IL-12 (p70), IL-13, IL-15, IL-17, Eotaxin, FGF basic protein, CRP, G-CSF, GM-CSF,
IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha, IP-10, MCP-1 (MCAF), MIP-1alpha, MIP-1beta, RANTES,
SDF-1alpha, CXCL11 (I-TAC), Fas-ligand [Fas-L], soluble Fas [sFas], sTNF-R1
(p55), sTNF-R2 (p75), MMP-9, TGF-beta1, PDGF bb and VEGF) were measured and the
results compared between the 3 groups.
RESULTS: After Bonferroni adjustment for other biomarkers, IP-10 was the only
serum biomarker independently associated with CM mortality when compared to SMA
and NM deaths. Eight CSF biomarkers (IL-1ra, IL-8, IP-10, PDGFbb, MIP-1beta,
Fas-L, sTNF-R1, and sTNF-R2) were significantly elevated in CM mortality group
when compared to SMA and NM deaths. Additionally, CSF IP-10/PDGFbb median ratio
was statistically significantly higher in the CM group compared to SMA and NM
groups.
CONCLUSION: The parasite-induced local cerebral dysregulation in the production
of IP-10, 1L-8, MIP-1beta, PDGFbb, IL-1ra, Fas-L, sTNF-R1, and sTNF-R2 may be
involved in CM neuropathology, and their immunoassay may have potential utility
in predicting mortality in CM.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-6-147 
PMCID: PMC2186349
PMID: 17997848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

