
1. Res Vet Sci. 2008 Aug;85(1):120-4. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2007.09.001. Epub 2008 Apr
18.

Erythrocytic antioxidant defense, lipid peroxides level and blood iron, zinc and 
copper concentrations in dogs naturally infected with Babesia gibsoni.

Chaudhuri S(1), Varshney JP, Patra RC.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Diagnosis Laboratory, Referral Veterinary Polyclinic, Indian
Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar 243 122, UP, India.

Babesiosis is a common tick borne disease of dogs in tropical and subtropical
regions of the world caused by different species of Babesia. The present study
aimed to examine erythrocyte lipid peroxide and erythrocytic antioxidant levels
in dogs with clinical babesiosis, caused by Babesia gibsoni, and impact of the
disease on blood iron, zinc and copper levels. The study was conducted on 10
naturally occurring cases of canine babesiosis with the history of tick
infestation, erratic pyrexia, and prolonged illness. Microscopic examination of
Giemsa stained peripheral blood smears confirmed B. gibsoni infection in the
erythrocytes. Six apparently healthy dogs of different age, sex and breeds,
brought for either health checkup or vaccination were used for comparison. Levels
of erythrocytic antioxidant enzymes were significantly (P<0.01) higher in sick
dogs than those of cytologically negative dogs (catalase: 0.192+/-0.024 units/mg 
Hb vs 0.074+/-0.004 units/mg Hb; superoxide dismutase: 0.014+/-0.0009 units/mg Hb
vs 0.006+/-0.0008 units/mg Hb and lipid peroxide: 6.01+/-0.30 nmol MDA/mg Hb vs
1.89+/-0.10 nmol MDA/mg Hb). The levels of blood micronutrients were
significantly low in these dogs (iron: 89.87+/-8.12 microg/g vs 126.44+/-14.65
microg/g; zinc: 3.67+/-1.85 microg/g vs 5.62+/-1.83 microg/g and copper:
0.55+/-0.63 microg/g vs 0.65+/-0.04 microg/g). The study demonstrated oxidative
damage in dogs naturally infected with B. gibsoni. Low level of blood iron, zinc 
and copper seems to have an additional role in the genesis of anaemia and
oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2007.09.001 
PMID: 18378268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

