
1. Malar J. 2008 Apr 22;7:63. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-7-63.

Role of Plasmodium falciparum thrombospondin-related anonymous protein in
host-cell interactions.

Akhouri RR(1), Sharma A, Malhotra P, Sharma A.

Author information: 
(1)Structural and Computational Biology Group, International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi, India. rrakhouri@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Thrombospondin-related anonymous protein (TRAP) is essential for
sporozoite motility and for liver cell invasion. TRAP is a type 1 membrane
protein that possesses multiple adhesive domains in its extracellular region.
METHODS: Plasmodium falciparum TRAP (PfTRAP) and its subdomains were expressed in
a mammalian expression system, and eleven different mutants generated to study
interaction of PfTRAP with liver cells. Binding studies between HepG2 cell
extracts and PfTRAP were performed using co-immunoprecipitation protocols.
RESULTS: Five different amino acid residues of PfTRAP that are involved in liver 
cell binding have been identified. These PfTRAP mutants bound to heparin like the
wild type PfTRAP thereby suggesting a non-heparin mediated binding of PfTRAP to
liver cells. Three Src family proteins -Lyn, Lck and CrkL which interact with
PfTRAP are also identified. Liver cell extracts and immunoprecipitated Src family
kinases phosphorylated PfTRAP at multiple sites. An analysis of multiple TRAP
sequences revealed Src homology 3 domain (SH3) binding motifs.
CONCLUSION: Binding of PfTRAP to SH3-domain containing proteins like Src-family
kinases and their ability to phosphorylate PfTRAP suggests a novel role for
PfTRAP in cell signaling during sporozoite invasion and homing inside the liver
cells. These data shed new light on TRAP-liver cell interactions.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-7-63 
PMCID: PMC2373790
PMID: 18426606  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

