
1. Hum Genet. 2008 Dec;124(5):499-506. doi: 10.1007/s00439-008-0575-8. Epub 2008 Oct
26.

Association of the GNAS locus with severe malaria.

Auburn S(1), Diakite M, Fry AE, Ghansah A, Campino S, Richardson A, Jallow M,
Sisay-Joof F, Pinder M, Griffiths MJ, Peshu N, Williams TN, Marsh K, Molyneux ME,
Taylor TE, Koram KA, Oduro AR, Rogers WO, Rockett KA, Haldar K, Kwiatkowski DP.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, OX3 7BN,
UK. sa3@sanger.ac.uk

Functional studies have demonstrated an interaction between the stimulatory G
protein alpha subunit (G-alpha-s) and the malaria parasite at a cellular level.
Obstruction of signal transduction via the erythrocyte G-alpha-s subunit reduced 
invasion by Plasmodium falciparum parasites. We sought to determine whether this 
signal pathway had an impact at the disease level by testing polymorphisms in the
gene encoding G-alpha-s (GNAS) for association with severe malaria in a large
multi-centre study encompassing family and case-control studies from The Gambia, 
Kenya and Malawi, and a case-control study from Ghana. We gained power to detect 
association using meta-analysis across the seven studies, with an overall sample 
size approximating 4,000 cases and 4,000 controls. Out of 12 SNPs investigated in
the 19 kb GNAS region, four presented signals of association (P < 0.05) with
severe malaria. The strongest single-locus association demonstrated an odds ratio
of 1.13 (1.05-1.21), P = 0.001. Three of the loci presenting significant
associations were clustered at the 5-prime end of the GNAS gene. Accordingly,
haplotypes constructed from these loci demonstrated significant associations with
severe malaria [OR = 0.88 (0.81-0.96), P = 0.005 and OR = 1.12 (1.03-1.20), P =
0.005]. The evidence presented here indicates that the influence of G-alpha-s on 
erythrocyte invasion efficacy may, indeed, alter individual susceptibility to
disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-008-0575-8 
PMCID: PMC2661463
PMID: 18951142  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

