
1. Infect Immun. 1991 Jan;59(1):51-8.

CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes both contribute to acquired immunity to blood-stage
Plasmodium chabaudi AS.

Podoba JE(1), Stevenson MM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for the Study of Host Resistance, Montreal General Hospital Research
Institute, Quebec, Canada.

In the present study, the contribution of CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes to acquired
immunity to blood-stage infection with the murine malaria species Plasmodium
chabaudi AS was investigated. C57BL/6 mice, which are genetically resistant to
infection with this hemoprotozoan parasite and exhibit a transient course of
infection, were treated intraperitoneally with monoclonal antibodies to T-cell
epitopes, either anti-Thy-1, anti-CD4, or anti-CD8. After intraperitoneal
infection with 10(6) parasitized erythrocytes, control C57BL/6 mice exhibited a
peak parasitemia on day 9 of approximately 35% parasitized erythrocytes and
eliminated the infection within 4 weeks. Mice depleted of Thy-1+ or CD4+ T cells 
had significantly higher parasitemias on day 7 as well as significantly higher
peak parasitemias. These mice were unable to control the infection and developed 
a persistent, high parasitemia that fluctuated between 40 and 60% until the
experiment was terminated on day 56 postinfection. Depletion of CD8+ T
lymphocytes was found to have no effect on the early course of parasitemia or on 
the level of peak parasitemia. However, mice depleted of CD8+ T cells experienced
two recurrent bouts of parasitemia during the later stage of the infection and
required more than 5 weeks to eliminate the parasites. After the peak
parasitemia, which occurred in control and experimental animals on day 9, there
was a sharp drop in parasitemia coinciding with a wave of reticulocytosis.
Therefore, the contribution of the influx of reticulocytes, which are not the
preferred host cell of this hemoprotozoan parasite, to limiting the parasitemia
was also examined by determining the course of reticulocytosis during infection
in control and T cell-depleted animals. Early in infection, there was a marked
and comparable reticulocytosis in the peripheral blood of control and T
cell-depleted mice; the reticulocytosis peaked on day 12 and coincided with the
dramatic and sudden reduction in parasitemia occurring in all groups. In both
control and CD8-depleted mice the percentage of reticulocytes decreased as the
infection was resolved, whereas in CD4-depleted mice marked reticulocytosis
correlated with high, persistent parasitemia. These results thus demonstrate that
both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells are involved in acquired immunity to blood-stage P.
chabaudi AS and that the influx of reticulocytes into the blood that occurs just 
after the peak parasitemia may contribute temporarily to limiting the
parasitemia.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.59.1.51-58.1991 
PMCID: PMC257704
PMID: 1898902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

