
1. Chem Res Toxicol. 2009 Mar 16;22(3):433-45. doi: 10.1021/tx8002752.

Comparative analysis of gene expression changes mediated by individual
constituents of hemozoin.

Schrimpe AC(1), Wright DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37235,
USA.

Plasmodium protozoa, the source of malarial infections, catabolize large
quantities of hemoglobin during an intraerythrocytic phase. During this process, 
free heme is detoxified through biomineralization into an insoluble heme
aggregate, hemozoin (Hz). In its native state, Hz is associated with a variety of
lipid peroxidation products including 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE). In the present
study, gene expression profiles were used to compare responses to two of the
individual components of Hz in a model macrophage cell line. LPS-stimulated RAW
264.7 cells were exposed to HNE and the synthetic form of Hz, beta-hematin (BH), 
for 6 or 24 h. Microarray analysis identified alterations in gene expression
induced by exposure to HNE and opsonized BH (fold change, > or = 1.8; p value, < 
or = 0.01). Patterns of gene expression were compared to changes induced by an
opsonized control latex bead challenge in LPS-stimulated cells and revealed that 
the BH response was predominantly phagocytic. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
demonstrated that HNE mediated a short-term oxidative stress response and had a
prolonged effect on the expression of genes associated with categories of "Cell
Cycle", "Cellular Assembly and Organization", "DNA Replication, Recombination,
and Repair", and "Cellular Development". Comparisons of expression changes caused
by BH and HNE with those observed during malarial infection suggest that BH and
HNE are involved in inflammatory response modulation, altered NF-kappaB signal
transduction, extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation, and dyserythropoiesis. HNE 
exposure led to several significant steady-state expression changes including
repressed chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 5 (Ccl5), indicative of dyserythropoiesis,
and a severe matrix metalloproteinase 9 (Mmp9)/tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase 1 (Timp1) imbalance in favor of ECM proteolysis.

DOI: 10.1021/tx8002752 
PMCID: PMC4208677
PMID: 19191707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

