
1. PLoS One. 2010 Jun 16;5(6):e11141. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011141.

Transforming growth factor beta 2 and heme oxygenase 1 genes are risk factors for
the cerebral malaria syndrome in Angolan children.

Sambo MR(1), Trovoada MJ, Benchimol C, Quinhentos V, Gonçalves L, Velosa R,
Marques MI, Sepúlveda N, Clark TG, Mustafa S, Wagner O, Coutinho A,
Penha-Gonçalves C.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Cerebral malaria (CM) represents a severe outcome of the Plasmodium
falciparum infection. Recent genetic studies have correlated human genes with
severe malaria susceptibility, but there is little data on genetic variants that 
increase the risk of developing specific malaria clinical complications.
Nevertheless, susceptibility to experimental CM in the mouse has been linked to
host genes including Transforming Growth Factor Beta 2 (TGFB2) and Heme
oxygenase-1 (HMOX1). Here, we tested whether those genes were governing the risk 
of progressing to CM in patients with severe malaria syndromes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We report that the clinical outcome of P.
falciparum infection in a cohort of Angolan children (n = 430) correlated with
nine TGFB2 SNPs that modify the risk of progression to CM as compared to other
severe forms of malaria. This genetic effect was explained by two haplotypes
harboring the CM-associated SNPs (Pcorrec. = 0.035 and 0.036). In addition, one
HMOX1 haplotype composed of five CM-associated SNPs increased the risk of
developing the CM syndrome (Pcorrec. = 0.002) and was under-transmitted to
children with uncomplicated malaria (P = 0.036). Notably, the HMOX1-associated
haplotype conferred increased HMOX1 mRNA expression in peripheral blood cells of 
CM patients (P = 0.012).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results represent the first report on CM genetic 
risk factors in Angolan children and suggest the novel hypothesis that genetic
variants of the TGFB2 and HMOX1 genes may contribute to confer a specific risk of
developing the CM syndrome in patients with severe P. falciparum malaria. This
work may provide motivation for future studies aiming to replicate our findings
in larger populations and to confirm a role for these genes in determining the
clinical course of malaria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011141 
PMCID: PMC2886838
PMID: 20585394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

