
1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Nov 18;6(11):e1001197. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001197.

TGF-b2 induction regulates invasiveness of Theileria-transformed leukocytes and
disease susceptibility.

Chaussepied M(1), Janski N, Baumgartner M, Lizundia R, Jensen K, Weir W, Shiels
BR, Weitzman JB, Glass EJ, Werling D, Langsley G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Universit√© Paris-Descartes, Paris, France.

Theileria parasites invade and transform bovine leukocytes causing either East
Coast fever (T. parva), or tropical theileriosis (T. annulata). Susceptible
animals usually die within weeks of infection, but indigenous infected cattle
show markedly reduced pathology, suggesting that host genetic factors may cause
disease susceptibility. Attenuated live vaccines are widely used to control
tropical theileriosis and attenuation is associated with reduced invasiveness of 
infected macrophages in vitro. Disease pathogenesis is therefore linked to
aggressive invasiveness, rather than uncontrolled proliferation of
Theileria-infected leukocytes. We show that the invasive potential of
Theileria-transformed leukocytes involves TGF-b signalling. Attenuated live
vaccine lines express reduced TGF-b2 and their invasiveness can be rescued with
exogenous TGF-b. Importantly, infected macrophages from disease susceptible
Holstein-Friesian (HF) cows express more TGF-b2 and traverse Matrigel with great 
efficiency compared to those from disease-resistant Sahiwal cattle. Thus, TGF-b2 
levels correlate with disease susceptibility. Using fluorescence and time-lapse
video microscopy we show that Theileria-infected, disease-susceptible HF
macrophages exhibit increased actin dynamics in their lamellipodia and podosomal 
adhesion structures and develop more membrane blebs. TGF-b2-associated
invasiveness in HF macrophages has a transcription-independent element that
relies on cytoskeleton remodelling via activation of Rho kinase (ROCK). We
propose that a TGF-b autocrine loop confers an amoeboid-like motility on
Theileria-infected leukocytes, which combines with MMP-dependent motility to
drive invasiveness and virulence.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001197 
PMCID: PMC2987823
PMID: 21124992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

