
1. Mol Med. 2011;17(7-8):717-25. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2010.00214. Epub 2011 May 5.

S1P is associated with protection in human and experimental cerebral malaria.

Finney CA(1), Hawkes CA, Kain DC, Dhabangi A, Musoke C, Cserti-Gazdewich C,
Oravecz T, Liles WC, Kain KC.

Author information: 
(1)SA Rotman Laboratories, McLaughlin-Rotman Centre for Global Health, University
Health Network and University of Toronto, Canada Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Toronto, Canada.

Cerebral malaria (CM) is associated with excessive inflammatory responses and
endothelial activation. Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) is a signaling sphingolipid
implicated in regulating vascular integrity, inflammation and T-cell migration.
We hypothesized that altered S1P signaling during malaria contributes to
endothelial activation and inflammation, and show that plasma S1P levels were
decreased in Ugandan children with CM compared with children with uncomplicated
malaria. Using the Plasmodium berghei ANKA (PbA) model of experimental CM (ECM), 
we demonstrate that humanized S1P lyase (hS1PL)(-/-) mice with reduced S1P lyase 
activity (resulting in increased bio-available S1P) had improved survival
compared with wild-type littermates. Prophylactic and therapeutic treatment of
infected mice with compounds that modulate the S1P pathway and are in human
trials for other conditions (FTY720 or LX2931) significantly improved survival in
ECM. FTY720 treatment improved vascular integrity as indicated by reduced levels 
of soluble intercellular adhesion molecule (sICAM), increased angiopoietin 1
(Ang1) (regulator of endothelial quiescence) levels, and decreased Evans blue dye
leakage into brain parenchyma. Furthermore, treatment with FTY720 decreased IFNÎ³ 
levels in plasma as well as CD4(+) and CD8(+) T-cell infiltration into the brain.
Finally, when administered during infection in combination with artesunate,
FTY720 treatment resulted in increased survival to ECM. These findings implicate 
dysregulation of the S1P pathway in the pathogenesis of human and murine CM and
suggest a novel therapeutic strategy to improve clinical outcome in severe
malaria.

DOI: 10.2119/molmed.2010.00214 
PMCID: PMC3146616
PMID: 21556483  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

