
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24985. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024985. Epub 2011 Sep 22.

Circulating soluble endoglin levels in pregnant women in Cameroon and
Malawi--associations with placental malaria and fetal growth restriction.

Silver KL(1), Conroy AL, Leke RG, Leke RJ, Gwanmesia P, Molyneux ME, Taylor DW,
Rogerson SJ, Kain KC.

Author information: 
(1)Sandra A. Rotman Laboratories, McLaughlin-Rotman Centre for Global Health,
University Health Network-Toronto General Hospital, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2011;6(10).
doi:10.1371/annotation/e9946f72-821d-45ea-bcd4-3fa3ff89a5fe. Wallace, Diane
Taylor [corrected to Taylor, Diane Wallace].

Placental infections with Plasmodium falciparum are associated with fetal growth 
restriction resulting in low birth weight (LBW). The mechanisms that mediate
these effects have yet to be completely described; however, they are likely to
involve inflammatory processes and dysregulation of angiogenesis. Soluble
endoglin (sEng), a soluble receptor of transforming growth factor (TGF)-Î²
previously associated with preeclampsia in pregnant women and with severe malaria
in children, regulates the immune system and influences angiogenesis. We
hypothesized that sEng may play a role in development of LBW associated with
placental malaria (PM). Plasma levels of sEng were measured in women (i) followed
prospectively throughout pregnancy in Cameroon (n = 52), and (ii) in a
case-control study at delivery in Malawi (n = 479). The relationships between
sEng levels and gravidity, peripheral and placental parasitemia, gestational age,
and adverse outcomes of PM including maternal anemia and LBW were determined. In 
the longitudinal cohort from Cameroon, 28 of 52 women (54%) experienced at least 
one malaria infection during pregnancy. In Malawi we enrolled two aparasitemic
gravidity-matched controls for every case with PM. sEng levels varied over the
course of gestation and were significantly higher in early and late gestation as 
compared to delivery (P<0.006 and P<0.0001, respectively). Circulating sEng
levels were higher in primigravidae than multigravidae from both Cameroon and
Malawi, irrespective of malarial infection status (p<0.046 and p<0.001,
respectively). Peripheral parasitemia in Cameroonian women and PM in Malawian
women were each associated with elevated sEng levels following correction for
gestational age and gravidity (p = 0.006 and p = 0.033, respectively). Increased 
sEng was also associated with the delivery of LBW infants in primigravid Malawian
women (p = 0.017); the association was with fetal growth restriction (p = 0.003) 
but not pre-term delivery (p = 0.286). Increased circulating maternal sEng levels
are associated with P. falciparum infection in pregnancy and with fetal growth
restriction in primigravidae with PM.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024985 
PMCID: PMC3178568
PMID: 21966395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

