
1. Vet Parasitol. 2012 Apr 30;185(2-4):124-30. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2011.10.001.
Epub 2011 Oct 8.

Evaluation of antioxidant status and oxidative stress in sheep naturally infected
with Babesia ovis.

Esmaeilnejad B(1), Tavassoli M, Asri-Rezaei S, Dalir-Naghadeh B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Urmia University, 
P.O. Box 1177, Urmia, Iran.

The present study aimed to assess antioxidant status and oxidative stress in
sheep naturally infected with Babesia ovis. Red blood cell (RBC) count,
hemoglobin (Hb) concentration, packed cell volume (PCV), piroplasm parasitemia
percentage, malondialdehyde (MDA) concentration, erythrocyte superoxide dismutase
(SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px), catalase (CAT) activities and total
antioxidant capacity (TAC) were determined in 52 sheep naturally infected with B.
ovis as well as same number of healthy sheep in West-Azerbaijan province, Iran.
Microscopic examination of Giemsa-stained peripheral blood smears revealed B.
ovis infection. The parasitological diagnosis was confirmed using polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) analysis by amplifying a partial small subunit ribosomal RNA
(ssu rRNA) gene sequence of B. ovis of 52 diseased sheep, 18 (34.61%), 11
(21.15%), 16 (30.76%) and 7 (13.48%) had <1%, 1-2%, 2-3% and >3% parasitemia,
respectively. Compared to controls, the activities of erythrocyte GSH-Px, SOD,
TAC and CAT showed a significant decrease, whereas the concentration of MDA in
erythrocytes of infected sheep increased significantly. Parasitemia rate was
positively correlated with MDA and negatively correlated with PCV, SOD, CAT,
GSH-Px and TAC. Also, MDA was negatively correlated with PCV, SOD, catalase,
GSH-Px and TAC. The study demonstrated that B. ovis plays an important role in
the occurrence of oxidative damage to RBCs and anemia in ovine babesiosis.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2011.10.001 
PMID: 22030375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

