
1. Scand J Immunol. 2012 Jun;75(6):606-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2012.02690.x.

FcγRIIa polymorphism and anti-malaria-specific IgG and IgG subclass responses in 
populations differing in susceptibility to malaria in Burkina Faso.

Cherif MK(1), Sanou GS, Maiga B, Israelsson E, Ouédraogo AL, Bougouma EC, Diarra 
A, Ouédraogo A, Ouattara AS, Troye-Blomberg M, Dolo A, Cavanagh DR, Theisen M,
Modiano D, Sirima SB, Nebié I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de Recherche et de Formation sur le Paludisme, Burkina Faso
Université de Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.

FcγRIIa is known to be polymorphic; and certain variants are associated with
different susceptibilities to malaria. Studies involving the Fulani ethnic group 
reported an ethnic difference in FcγRIIa-R131H genotype frequencies between the
Fulani and other sympatric groups. No previous studies have addressed these
questions in Burkina Faso. This study aimed to assess the influence of
FcγRIIa-R131H polymorphism on anti-falciparum malaria IgG and IgG subclass
responses in the Fulani and the Mossi ethnic groups living in Burkina Faso.
Healthy adults more than 20 years old belonging to the Mossi or the Fulani ethnic
groups were enrolled for the assessment of selected parasitological,
immunological and genetic variables in relation to their susceptibility to
malaria. The prevalence of the Plasmodium falciparum infection frequency was
relatively low in the Fulani ethnic group compared to the Mossi ethnic group. For
all tested antigens, the Fulani had higher antibody levels than the Mossi group. 
In both ethnic groups, a similar distribution of FcγRIIa R131H polymorphism was
found. Individuals with the R allele of FcγRIIa had higher antibody levels than
those with the H allele. This study confirmed that malaria infection affected
less the Fulani group than the Mossi group. FcγRIIa-R131H allele distribution is 
similar in both ethnic groups, and higher antibody levels are associated with the
FcγRIIa R allele compared to the H allele.

© 2012 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology © 2012 Blackwell
Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2012.02690.x 
PMID: 22268665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

