
1. Res Vet Sci. 2012 Dec;93(3):1309-13. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2012.02.001. Epub 2012
Mar 3.

Relationship between oxidative stress and clinical-pathological aspects in dogs
experimentally infected with Rangelia vitalii.

França RT(1), Da Silva AS, Costa MM, Paim FC, Paim CB, Thomé GR, Wolkmer P,
Pereira ME, Schetinger MR, Moresco RN, Mazzanti CM, Monteiro SG, Lopes ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Small Animals, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to evaluate lipid peroxidation, protein oxidation and
activity of enzymes that are indicators of oxidative stress in Rangelia vitalii
infection in dogs. Animals were divided into two groups: negative control (n=5)
and infected with R. vitalii (n=7). After inoculation, the parasitemia was
estimated daily by microscopic examination of smears. Lipid peroxidation (TBARS) 
and advanced oxidation protein products (AOPP); and delta-aminolevulinate
dehydratase (δ-ALA-D), superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) activities
in blood were evaluated. The samples were collected at days 10 and 20
post-inoculation (PI). TBARS and AOPP levels were higher in the infected group in
both analyzed periods (P<0.01). The δ-ALA-D activity was reduced in blood of dogs
infected with R. vitalii on days 10 and 20 PI. SOD activity was significantly
increased (P<0.01) in the blood of dogs infected with R. vitalii at days 10 and
20 PI, while CAT activity was significantly increased (P<0.01) only at day 20 PI 
when compared to non-infected animals. A positive correlation was observed
between the degree of parasitemia and TBARS and AOPP levels and activity of
antioxidant enzymes. The δ-ALA-D activity was negatively correlated with the
degree of parasitemia. Based on the increased levels of TBARS, AOPP, SOD and CAT 
activities, and inhibition δ-ALA-D activity, we concluded that dogs
experimentally infected with R. vitalii develop a state of redox unbalance and
that these changes might be involved in the pathophysiology of disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2012.02.001 
PMID: 22387140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

