
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2012 Jul;12(5):1037-45. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2012.02.019.
Epub 2012 Mar 8.

The SLC4A1 gene is under differential selective pressure in primates infected by 
Plasmodium falciparum and related parasites.

Steiper ME(1), Walsh F, Zichello JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, Hunter College of the City University of New York,
695 Park Avenue, NY, NY 10065, USA. msteiper@hunter.cuny.edu

Malaria is a disease caused by Plasmodium parasites and is responsible for high
mortality in humans. This disease is caused by four different species of
Plasmodium though the main source of mortality is Plasmodium falciparum. Humans
have a number of genetic adaptations that act to combat Plasmodium. One
adaptation is a deletion in the SLC4A1 gene that leads to Southeast Asian
ovalocytosis (SAO). There is evidence that SAO erythrocytes are resistant to
multiple Plasmodium species. Here we analyze SLC4A1 in 23 primates and mammals to
test for differential selective pressures among different primate lineages.
Because primates are infected with both human Plasmodium parasites and their
relatives, this analysis can be used to test which human Plasmodium parasite is
the likely target of SAO. A significantly different pattern of molecular
evolution was found in humans and African apes, species that are infected by P.
falciparum and its relatives. This effect was restricted to the cytosolic domain 
of the SLC4A1 gene. The evidence is consistent with a different selective regime 
operating on this gene domain in humans and African apes, when compared to other 
primates and mammals. Alternatively, this pattern is consistent with a relaxation
of selection or weak adaptive evolution operating on a small number of amino
acids. The adaptive interpretation of the results is consistent with the SAO
allele of the SLC4A1 gene interacting with P. falciparum in humans, rather than
other Plasmodium parasites. However, additional investigation of the relationship
between SLC4A1 variants and Plasmodium in humans and African apes is required to 
test whether the different selective regime in humans and African apes is due to 
natural selection or relaxed constraint.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2012.02.019 
PMCID: PMC4076009
PMID: 22426110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

