
1. J Immunol. 2012 May 15;188(10):5073-85. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102143. Epub 2012 
Apr 18.

TLR9 and MyD88 are crucial for the development of protective immunity to malaria.

Gowda NM(1), Wu X, Gowda DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA. gowda@psu.edu

Effective resolution of malaria infection by avoiding pathogenesis requires
regulated pro- to anti-inflammatory responses and the development of protective
immunity. TLRs are known to be critical for initiating innate immune responses,
but their roles in the regulation of immune responses and development of
protective immunity to malaria remain poorly understood. In this study, using
wild-type, TLR2(-/-), TLR4(-/-), TLR9(-/-), and MyD88(-/-) mice infected with
Plasmodium yoelii, we show that TLR9 and MyD88 regulate pro/anti-inflammatory
cytokines, Th1/Th2 development, and cellular and humoral responses. Dendritic
cells from TLR9(-/-) and MyD88(-/-) mice produced significantly lower levels of
proinflammatory cytokines and higher levels of anti-inflammatory cytokines than
dendritic cells from wild-type mice. NK and CD8(+) T cells from TLR9(-/-) and
MyD88(-/-) mice showed markedly impaired cytotoxic activity. Furthermore, mice
deficient in TLR9 and MyD88 showed higher Th2-type and lower Th1-type IgGs.
Consequently, TLR9(-/-) and MyD88(-/-) mice exhibited compromised ability to
control parasitemia and were susceptible to death. Our data also show that TLR9
and MyD88 distinctively regulate immune responses to malaria infection. TLR9(-/-)
but not MyD88(-/-) mice produced significant levels of both pro- and
anti-inflammatory cytokines, including IL-1Î² and IL-18, by other
TLRs/inflammasome- and/or IL-1R/IL-18R-mediated signaling. Thus, whereas
MyD88(-/-) mice completely lacked cell-mediated immunity, TLR9(-/-) mice showed
low levels of cell-mediated immunity and were slightly more resistant to malaria 
infection than MyD88(-/-) mice. Overall, our findings demonstrate that TLR9 and
MyD88 play central roles in the immune regulation and development of protective
immunity to malaria, and have implications in understanding immune responses to
other pathogens.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102143 
PMCID: PMC3345097
PMID: 22516959  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

