
1. Malar J. 2012 Jun 28;11:216. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-216.

Erythropoietin treatment alleviates ultrastructural myelin changes induced by
murine cerebral malaria.

Hempel C(1), Hyttel P, Staalsø T, Nyengaard JR, Kurtzhals JA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of International Health,
Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen University
Hospital, Denmark. casperhempel@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Cerebral malaria (CM) is a severe complication of malaria with
considerable mortality. In addition to acute encephalopathy, survivors frequently
suffer from neurological sequelae. The pathogenesis is incompletely understood,
hampering the development of an effective, adjunctive therapy, which is not
available at present. Previously, erythropoietin (EPO) was reported to
significantly improve the survival and outcome in a murine CM model. The study
objectives were to assess myelin thickness and ultrastructural morphology in the 
corpus callosum in murine CM and to adress the effects of EPO treatment in this
context.
METHODS: The study consisted of two groups of Plasmodium berghei-infected mice
and two groups of uninfected controls that were either treated with EPO or
placebo (n = 4 mice/group). In the terminal phase of murine CM the brains were
removed and processed for electron microscopy. Myelin sheaths in the corpus
callosum were analysed with transmission electron microscopy and stereology.
RESULTS: The infection caused clinical CM, which was counteracted by EPO. The
total number of myelinated axons was identical in the four groups and mice with
CM did not have reduced mean thickness of the myelin sheaths. Instead, CM mice
had significantly increased numbers of abnormal myelin sheaths, whereas
EPO-treated mice were indistinguishable from uninfected mice. Furthermore, mice
with CM had frequent and severe axonal injury, pseudopodic endothelial cells,
perivascular oedemas and intracerebral haemorrhages.
CONCLUSIONS: EPO treatment reduced clinical signs of CM and reduced cerebral
pathology. Murine CM does not reduce the general thickness of myelin sheaths in
the corpus callosum.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-216 
PMCID: PMC3502138
PMID: 22741599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

