
1. Parasitology. 2013 Apr;140(4):530-40. doi: 10.1017/S003118201200193X. Epub 2013
Jan 3.

Babesia bovis: lipids from virulent S2P and attenuated R1A strains trigger
differential signalling and inflammatory responses in bovine macrophages.

Gimenez G(1), Belaunzarán ML, Poncini CV, Blanco FC, Echaide I, Zamorano PI,
Lammel EM, González Cappa SM, Isola EL.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Microbiología y Parasitología Médica, Universidad de Buenos
Aires-Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Tecnológicas, Facultad de
Medicina, Paraguay 2155 piso 13, C1121ABG Buenos Aires, Argentina.
paradife@fmed.uba.ar

The intra-erythrocytic protozoan Babesia bovis is an economically important
pathogen that causes an acute and often fatal infection in adult cattle.
Babesiosis limitation depends on the early activation of macrophages, essential
cells of the host innate immunity, which can generate an inflammatory response
mediated by cytokines and nitric oxide (NO). Herein, we demonstrate in bovine
macrophages that lipids from B. bovis attenuated R1A strain (LA) produced a
stronger NO release, an early TNFα mRNA induction and 2-fold higher IL-12p35 mRNA
levels compared to the lipids of virulent S2P strain (LV). Neither LA nor LV
induced anti-inflammatory IL-10. Regarding signalling pathways, we here report
that LA induced a significant phosphorylation of p38 and extracellular
signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) whereas LV only induced a reduced
activation of ERK1/2. Besides, NF-κB was activated by LA and LV, but LA produced 
an early degradation of the inhibitor IκB. Interestingly, LV and the majority of 
its lipid fractions, exerted a significant inhibition of concanavalin A-induced
peripheral blood mononuclear cell proliferation with respect to LA and its
corresponding lipid fractions. In addition, we determined that animals infected
with R1A developed a higher increase in IgM anti-phosphatidylcholine than those
inoculated with S2P. Collectively, S2P lipids generated a decreased inflammatory 
response contributing to the evasion of innate immunity. Moreover, since R1A
lipids induced a pro-inflammatory profile, we propose these molecules as good
candidates for immunoprophylactic strategies against babesiosis.

DOI: 10.1017/S003118201200193X 
PMID: 23286221  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

