
1. Parasitol Res. 2013 Nov;112(11):3757-70. doi: 10.1007/s00436-013-3565-2. Epub
2013 Aug 16.

Genome-wide screening identifies Plasmodium chabaudi-induced modifications of DNA
methylation status of Tlr1 and Tlr6 gene promoters in liver, but not spleen, of
female C57BL/6 mice.

Al-Quraishy S(1), Dkhil MA, Abdel-Baki AA, Delic D, Santourlidis S, Wunderlich F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, P.O. Box:
2455, Riyadh, 11451, Saudi Arabia, guraishi@yahoo.com.

Epigenetic reprogramming of host genes via DNA methylation is increasingly
recognized as critical for the outcome of diverse infectious diseases, but
information for malaria is not yet available. Here, we investigate the effect of 
blood-stage malaria of Plasmodium chabaudi on the DNA methylation status of host 
gene promoters on a genome-wide scale using methylated DNA immunoprecipitation
and Nimblegen microarrays containing 2,000 bp oligonucleotide features that were 
split into -1,500 to -500 bp Ups promoters and -500 to +500 bp Cor promoters,
relative to the transcription site, for evaluation of differential DNA
methylation. Gene expression was analyzed by Agilent and Affymetrix microarray
technology. Challenging of female C57BL/6 mice with 10(6) P. chabaudi-infected
erythrocytes resulted in a self-healing outcome of infections with peak
parasitemia on day 8 p.i. These infections induced organ-specific modifications
of DNA methylation of gene promoters. Among the 17,354 features on Nimblegen
arrays, only seven gene promoters were identified to be hypermethylated in the
spleen, whereas the liver exhibited 109 hyper- and 67 hypomethylated promoters at
peak parasitemia in comparison with non-infected mice. Among the identified genes
with differentially methylated Cor-promoters, only the 7 genes Pigr, Ncf1, Klkb1,
Emr1, Ndufb11, and Tlr6 in the liver and Apol6 in the spleen were detected to
have significantly changed their expression. Remarkably, the Cor promoter of the 
toll-like receptor Tlr6 became hypomethylated and Tlr6 expression increased by
3.4-fold during infection. Concomitantly, the Ups promoter of the Tlr1 was
hypermethylated, but Tlr1 expression also increased by 11.3-fold. TLR6 and TLR1
are known as auxillary receptors to form heterodimers with TLR2 in plasma
membranes of macrophages, which recognize different pathogen-associated molecular
patterns (PAMPs), as, e.g., intact 3-acyl and sn-2-lyso-acyl
glycosylphosphatidylinositols of P. falciparum, respectively. Our data suggest
therefore that malaria-induced epigenetic fine-tuning of Tlr6 and Tlr1 through
DNA methylation of their gene promoters in the liver is critically important for 
initial recognition of PAMPs and, thus, for the final self-healing outcome of
blood-stage infections with P. chabaudi malaria.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-013-3565-2 
PMID: 23949311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

