
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 28;111(4):E511-20. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1316467111. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Strain-specific innate immune signaling pathways determine malaria parasitemia
dynamics and host mortality.

Wu J(1), Tian L, Yu X, Pattaradilokrat S, Li J, Wang M, Yu W, Qi Y, Zeituni AE,
Nair SC, Crampton SP, Orandle MS, Bolland SM, Qi CF, Long CA, Myers TG, Coligan
JE, Wang R, Su XZ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, and Laboratory of Immunogenetics,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Malaria infection triggers vigorous host immune responses; however, the parasite 
ligands, host receptors, and the signaling pathways responsible for these
reactions remain unknown or controversial. Malaria parasites primarily reside
within RBCs, thereby hiding themselves from direct contact and recognition by
host immune cells. Host responses to malaria infection are very different from
those elicited by bacterial and viral infections and the host receptors
recognizing parasite ligands have been elusive. Here we investigated mouse
genome-wide transcriptional responses to infections with two strains of
Plasmodium yoelii (N67 and N67C) and discovered differences in innate response
pathways corresponding to strain-specific disease phenotypes. Using in vitro
RNAi-based gene knockdown and KO mice, we demonstrated that a strong type I IFN
(IFN-I) response triggered by RNA polymerase III and melanoma
differentiation-associated protein 5, not Toll-like receptors (TLRs), binding of 
parasite DNA/RNA contributed to a decline of parasitemia in N67-infected mice. We
showed that conventional dendritic cells were the major sources of early IFN-I,
and that surface expression of phosphatidylserine on infected RBCs might promote 
their phagocytic uptake, leading to the release of parasite ligands and the IFN-I
response in N67 infection. In contrast, an elevated inflammatory response
mediated by CD14/TLR and p38 signaling played a role in disease severity and
early host death in N67C-infected mice. In addition to identifying cytosolic
DNA/RNA sensors and signaling pathways previously unrecognized in malaria
infection, our study demonstrates the importance of parasite genetic backgrounds 
in malaria pathology and provides important information for studying human
malaria pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1316467111 
PMCID: PMC3910569
PMID: 24474800  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

