
1. Cell Rep. 2014 Apr 24;7(2):436-447. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.03.018. Epub 2014 
Apr 3.

Interferon-mediated innate immune responses against malaria parasite liver
stages.

Miller JL(1), Sack BK(1), Baldwin M(1), Vaughan AM(1), Kappe SHI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, 307 Westlake Avenue North, Suite 500,
Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(2)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, 307 Westlake Avenue North, Suite 500,
Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Department of Global Health, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA. Electronic address: stefan.kappe@seattlebiomed.org.

Mosquito-transmitted malaria parasites infect hepatocytes and asymptomatically
replicate as liver stages. Using RNA sequencing, we show that a rodent malaria
liver-stage infection stimulates a robust innate immune response including type I
interferon (IFN) and IFNγ pathways. Liver-stage infection is suppressed by these 
infection-engendered innate responses. This suppression was abrogated in mice
deficient in IFNγ, the type I IFN α/β receptor (IFNAR), and interferon regulatory
factor 3. Natural killer and CD49b(+)CD3(+) natural killer T (NKT) cells
increased in the liver after a primary infection, and CD1d-restricted NKT cells, 
which secrete IFNγ, were critical in reducing liver-stage burden of a secondary
infection. Lack of IFNAR signaling abrogated the increase in NKT cell numbers in 
the liver, showing a link between type I IFN signaling, cell recruitment, and
subsequent parasite elimination. Our findings demonstrate innate immune sensing
of malaria parasite liver-stage infection and that the ensuing innate responses
can eliminate the parasite.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.03.018 
PMID: 24703850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

