
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 10;112(10):3062-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1418144112. Epub 2015 Feb 23.

CD47 regulates the phagocytic clearance and replication of the Plasmodium yoelii 
malaria parasite.

Banerjee R(1), Khandelwal S(2), Kozakai Y(1), Sahu B(1), Kumar S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Emerging Pathogens, Division of Emerging and Transfusion
Transmitted Diseases, Office of Blood Research and Review, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD 20993;
and.
(2)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710.
(3)Laboratory of Emerging Pathogens, Division of Emerging and Transfusion
Transmitted Diseases, Office of Blood Research and Review, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD 20993;
and sanjai.kumar@fda.hhs.gov.

Several Plasmodium species exhibit a strong age-based preference for the red
blood cells (RBC) they infect, which in turn is a major determinant of disease
severity and pathogenesis. The molecular basis underlying this age constraint on 
the use of RBC and its influence on parasite burden is poorly understood. CD47 is
a marker of self on most cells, including RBC, which, in conjunction with signal 
regulatory protein alpha (expressed on macrophages), prevents the clearance of
cells by the immune system. In this report, we have investigated the role of CD47
on the growth and survival of nonlethal Plasmodium yoelii 17XNL (PyNL) malaria in
C57BL/6 mice. By using a quantitative biotin-labeling procedure and a
GFP-expressing parasite, we demonstrate that PyNL parasites preferentially infect
high levels of CD47 (CD47(hi))-expressing young RBC. Importantly, C57BL/6
CD47(-/-) mice were highly resistant to PyNL infection and developed a 9.3-fold
lower peak parasitemia than their wild-type (WT) counterparts. The enhanced
resistance to malaria observed in CD47(-/-) mice was associated with a higher
percentage of splenic F4/80(+) cells, and these cells had a higher percentage of 
phagocytized parasitized RBC than infected WT mice during the acute phase of
infection, when parasitemia was rapidly rising. Furthermore, injection of
CD47-neutralizing antibody caused a significant reduction in parasite burden in
WT C57BL/6 mice. Together, these results strongly suggest that CD47(hi) young RBC
may provide a shield to the malaria parasite from clearance by the phagocytic
cells, which may be an immune escape mechanism used by Plasmodium parasites that 
preferentially infect young RBC.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1418144112 
PMCID: PMC4364205
PMID: 25713361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

