
1. Angiogenesis. 2016 Jan;19(1):9-24. doi: 10.1007/s10456-015-9485-2. Epub 2015 Sep 
28.

The decrease in histone methyltransferase EZH2 in response to fluid shear stress 
alters endothelial gene expression and promotes quiescence.

Maleszewska M(1)(2), Vanchin B(3), Harmsen MC(3), Krenning G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Regenerative Medicine Research Group, Department of Pathology
and Medical Biology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Hanzeplein 1 (EA11), 9713 GZ, Groningen, The Netherlands.
m.maleszewska@gmail.com.
(2)Max Planck Research Group Chromatin and Ageing, Max Planck Institute for
Biology of Ageing, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b, 50931, Cologne, Germany.
m.maleszewska@gmail.com.
(3)Cardiovascular Regenerative Medicine Research Group, Department of Pathology
and Medical Biology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Hanzeplein 1 (EA11), 9713 GZ, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Cardiovascular Regenerative Medicine Research Group, Department of Pathology
and Medical Biology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Hanzeplein 1 (EA11), 9713 GZ, Groningen, The Netherlands.
g.krenning@umcg.nl.

High uniform fluid shear stress (FSS) is atheroprotective and preserves the
endothelial phenotype and function through activation of downstream mediators
such as MAPK7 (Erk5). Endothelial cells respond to FSS thanks to
mechanotransduction. However, how the resulting signaling is integrated and
resolved at the epigenetic level remains elusive. We hypothesized that Polycomb
methyltransferase EZH2 is involved in the effects of FSS in human endothelial
cells. We showed that FSS decreases the expression of the Polycomb
methyltransferase EZH2. Despite simultaneous activation of MAPK7, MAPK7 pathway
does not directly influence the transcription of EZH2. Interestingly though, the 
knockdown of EZH2 activates the protective MAPK7 signaling in endothelial cells, 
even in the absence of FSS. To understand the influence of the FSS-decreased
expression of EZH2 on endothelial transcriptome, we performed RNA-seq and
differential gene expression analysis. We identified candidate groups of genes
dependent on both EZH2 and FSS. Among those, Gene Ontology overrepresentation
analysis revealed highly significant enrichment of the cell cycle-related genes, 
suggesting changes in proliferation. Indeed, the depletion of EZH2 strongly
inhibited endothelial proliferation, indicating cell cycle arrest. The
concomitant decrease in CCNA expression suggests the transition of endothelial
cells into a quiescent phenotype. Further bioinformatical analysis suggested
TXNIP as a possible mediator between EZH2 and cell cycle-related gene network.
Our data show that EZH2 is a FSS-responsive gene. Decreased EZH2 levels enhance
the activation of the atheroprotective MAPK7 signaling. Decrease in EZH2 under
FSS mediates the decrease in the expression of the network of cell cycle-related 
genes, which allows the cells to enter quiescence. EZH2 is therefore important
for the protective effects of FSS in endothelium.

DOI: 10.1007/s10456-015-9485-2 
PMCID: PMC4700080
PMID: 26416763  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

