
1. J Parasit Dis. 2016 Jun;40(2):268-72. doi: 10.1007/s12639-014-0491-x. Epub 2014
Jun 8.

Clinical and laboratory findings of Babesia infection in dogs.

Sudhakara Reddy B(1), Sivajothi S(2), Varaprasad Reddy LS(3), Solmon Raju KG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Teaching Veterinary Clinical Complex, College of Veterinary Science, Sri
Venkateswara Veterinary University, Y. S. R. District, Proddatur, 516360 Andhra
Pradesh India.
(2)Department of Veterinary Parasitology, College of Veterinary Science, Sri
Venkateswara Veterinary University, Y. S. R. District, Proddatur, 516360 Andhra
Pradesh India.
(3)Department of Veterinary Physiology, College of Veterinary Science, Sri
Venkateswara Veterinary University, Y. S. R. District, Proddatur, 516360 Andhra
Pradesh India.

Canine babesiosis is a worldwide tick borne disease. Dogs with fever, in
appetence and enlarged lymph nodes were screened for the presence of
haemoprotozoan parasites during the one year period of studyÂ at T.V.C.C.,
C.V.Sc., Proddatur. Based on the stained peripheral blood smears examination, six
dogs were found to be affected with babesiosis. Clinical examination of the dogs 
revealed ticks over the body, congested conjunctival mucus membranes, dullness,
fever, tachycardia, tachypnoea in all the dogs. Some of the dogs had icterus,
lymphadenopathy, haemoglobinuria. Laboratory examination of the clinical samples 
revealed reduction in haemoglobin concentration, erythrocyte count, platelet
count, serum total protein, serum albumin and glucose levels. Increased serum
SGPT, creatinine, BUN levels were recorded. Dogs were treated with inj.
Diminazene aceturate (Berenil RTU) @ 5 mg/kg body weight, single dose along with 
supportive and symptomatic therapy in individual cases.

DOI: 10.1007/s12639-014-0491-x 
PMCID: PMC4927473
PMID: 27413291 

