
1. Blood. 2016 Sep 1;128(9):1290-301. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-09-666834. Epub 2016
Jul 27.

Adenosine monophosphate deaminase 3 activation shortens erythrocyte half-life and
provides malaria resistance in mice.

Hortle E(1), Nijagal B(2), Bauer DC(3), Jensen LM(1), Ahn SB(4), Cockburn IA(1), 
Lampkin S(1), Tull D(2), McConville MJ(5), McMorran BJ(1), Foote SJ(1), Burgio
G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Disease, John Curtin School of Medical
Research, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia;
(2)Metabolomics Australia, Bio21 Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
VIC, Australia;
(3)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, Sydney, NSW,
Australia;
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia; and.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.

The factors that determine red blood cell (RBC) lifespan and the rate of RBC
aging have not been fully elucidated. In several genetic conditions, including
sickle cell disease, thalassemia, and G6PD deficiency, erythrocyte lifespan is
significantly shortened. Many of these diseases are also associated with
protection from severe malaria, suggesting a role for accelerated RBC senescence 
and clearance in malaria resistance. Here, we report a novel,
N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea-induced mutation that causes a gain of function in
adenosine 5'-monophosphate deaminase (AMPD3). Mice carrying the mutation exhibit 
rapid RBC turnover, with increased erythropoiesis, dramatically shortened RBC
lifespan, and signs of increased RBC senescence/eryptosis, suggesting a key role 
for AMPD3 in determining RBC half-life. Mice were also found to be resistant to
infection with the rodent malaria Plasmodium chabaudi. We propose that resistance
to P. chabaudi is mediated by increased RBC turnover and higher rates of
erythropoiesis during infection.

Â© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2015-09-666834 
PMCID: PMC5009516
PMID: 27465915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

