
1. Parasit Vectors. 2016 Nov 14;9(1):577.

A recombinant multi-antigen vaccine formulation containing Babesia bovis
merozoite surface antigens MSA-2a1, MSA-2b and MSA-2c elicits invasion-inhibitory
antibodies and IFN-γ producing cells.

Gimenez AM(1), Françoso KS(2), Ersching J(1), Icimoto MY(3), Oliveira V(3),
Rodriguez AE(4), Schnittger L(4)(5), Florin-Christensen M(4)(5), Rodrigues MM(1),
Soares IS(6).

Author information: 
(1)CTCMOL, Departamento de Microbiologia, Imunologia e Parasitologia,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo-Escola Paulista de Medicina, Rua Mirassol, 207,
São Paulo, 04044-010, SP, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Análises Clínicas e Toxicológicas, Faculdade de Ciências
Farmacêuticas, Universidade de São Paulo, 05508-900, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Biofísica, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, CEP 04023-062,
São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Instituto de Patobiologia, CICVyA, INTA-Castelar, 1686, Hurlingham, Argentina.
(5)CONICET, C1033AAJ, Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(6)Departamento de Análises Clínicas e Toxicológicas, Faculdade de Ciências
Farmacêuticas, Universidade de São Paulo, 05508-900, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
isoares@usp.br.

BACKGROUND: Babesia bovis is a tick-transmitted protozoan hemoparasite and the
causative agent of bovine babesiosis, a potential risk to more than 500 million
cattle worldwide. The vaccines currently available are based on attenuated
parasites, which are difficult to produce, and are only recommended for use in
bovines under one year of age. When used in older animals, these vaccines may
cause life-threatening clinical symptoms and eventually death. The development of
a multi-subunit recombinant vaccine against B. bovis would be attractive from an 
economic standpoint and, most importantly, could be recommended for animals of
any age. In the present study, recombinant ectodomains of MSA-2a1, MSA-2b and
MSA-2c antigens were expressed in Pichia pastoris yeast as secreted soluble
peptides.
RESULTS: The antigens were purified to homogeneity, and biochemically and
immunologically characterized. A vaccine formulation was obtained by emulsifying 
a mixture of the three peptides with the adjuvant Montanide ISA 720, which
elicited high IgG antibody titers against each of the above antigens. IgG
antibodies generated against each MSA-antigen recognized merozoites and
significantly inhibited the invasion of bovine erythrocytes. Cellular immune
responses were also detected, which were characterized by splenic and lymph node 
CD4+ T cells producing IFN-γ and TNF-α upon stimulation with the antigens MSA-2a1
or MSA-2c.
CONCLUSIONS: These data strongly suggest the high protective potential of the
presented formulation, and we propose that it could be tested in vaccination
trials of bovines challenged with B. bovis.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-016-1862-1 
PMCID: PMC5109680
PMID: 27842609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

