
1. Mol Immunol. 1984 Feb;21(2):145-50.

Complement activation by the surface of Plasmodium falciparum infected
erythrocytes.

Stanley HA, Mayes JT, Cooper NR, Reese RT.

The surface of trophozoite-stage Plasmodium falciparum infected erythrocytes
will, in the presence of immune human or owl monkey serum, activate the classical
complement pathway. This was demonstrated with a sensitive, enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay which detects the complex, C1s-C1 inhibitor, which is only
generated when the classical pathway is activated. A second enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay, as well as Covaspheres coated with affinity-purified
anti-C3, showed that immune activation of the classical pathway by infected
erythrocytes resulted in the accumulation of significant amounts of C3b on the
erythrocyte surface. During the development of the parasite to the trophozoite
stage, the erythrocyte membrane is also transformed from a non-activator into a
surface capable of activating complement by the alternative pathway. Erythrocytes
infected with trophozoite-stage parasites directly activated the alternative
complement pathway. This activation led to the specific binding of an average of 
15,000 C3b molecules per infected cell. Alternative pathway activation was
augmented by anti-parasite antibody. Such conditions mediated the accumulation of
an average of 36,000 C3b molecules per infected erythrocyte. The amounts of C3b
on the infected erythrocyte surface did not lead to cellular lysis. They are,
however, likely to have a major impact on the total in vivo response to this
parasite.

DOI: 10.1016/0161-5890(84)90129-9 
PMID: 6369119  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

