
1. Thromb Haemost. 1997 Feb;77(2):289-93.

Plasma macrophage colony-stimulating factor and P-selectin levels in
malaria-associated thrombocytopenia.

Lee SH(1), Looareesuwan S, Chan J, Wilairatana P, Vanijanonta S, Chong SM, Chong 
BH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Haematology, National University Hospital, Singapore.

Thrombocytopenia is a common finding in malaria. In clinical trials, recombinant 
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) causes a reversible, dose-dependent 
thrombocytopenia, and high M-CSF has been reported in autoimmune
thrombocytopenias. P-selectin, which is secreted into the plasma following
platelet/endothelial activation or damage, is elevated in certain consumptive
thrombocytopenic disorders. The relationships between thrombocytopenia, M-CSF and
P-selectin were analysed in 63 patients with severe (n = 13) or uncomplicated (n 
= 26) P. falciparum (PF) or P. vivax (PV) malaria (n = 24). On admission, 69% of 
PF patients and 75% of PV patients were thrombocytopenic (platelets < 150 x
10(9)/l). M-CSF was elevated in PF (3021 +/- 1844 pg/ml) and PV (2602 +/- 1668
pg/ml) patients, compared to controls (589 +/- 200 pg/ml). The platelet count was
inversely correlated with M-CSF in PF (r = -0.681), and in PV malaria (r =
-0.548). Elevated P-selectin was found in severe PF malaria, but not in PV
malaria. Severe PF malaria was associated with marked thrombocytopenia, very high
M-CSF, elevated P-selectin and compelling evidence of disseminated intravascular 
coagulopathy (DIC). Platelet counts, M-CSF and P-selectin returned to control
values in 7-14 days. These data suggest that elevated M-CSF in malaria, by
enhancing macrophage activity, may result in increased macrophage-mediated
platelet destruction. Further, platelet/endothelial activation or damage, as
measured by P-selectin, or DIC could intensify thrombocytopenia in severe PF
malaria, but does not appear to contribute to thrombocytopenia in uncomplicated
PF or PV malaria.


PMID: 9157583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

