
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1997 Oct;57(4):383-8.

Regulation of leukocyte adhesion molecules CD11b/CD18 and leukocyte adhesion
molecule-1 on phagocytic cells activated by malaria pigment.

Pichyangkul S(1), Saengkrai P, Yongvanitchit K, Heppner DG, Kyle DE, Webster HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Parasitology, U.S. Army Medical Component, Armed 
Forces Research Institute of Medical Sciences, Bangkok, Thailand.

There is increasing evidence that inappropriate immune activation induced by
parasite products occurs in malaria disease. To further elucidate the role of
Plasmodium falciparum-derived products on host immune activation, we studied the 
expression of leukocyte adhesion molecules (CD11b/CD18 and LAM-1) on neutrophils 
and monocytes in response to malaria pigment using flow cytometry. Exposure of
leukocytes to isolated malaria pigment derived from ruptured schizonts resulted
in significant up-regulation of CD11b/CD18 expression and down-regulation of
LAM-1 on both neutrophils and monocytes. In contrast, culture supernatants
(pigment free) from ruptured schizonts did not alter the expression of CD11b/CD18
and LAM-1. The increase of CD11b/CD18 and the loss of LAM-1 expression occurred
simultaneously with the earliest response detected at 10 min and a plateau
reached by 60 min. The effect of malaria pigment on leukocyte adhesion molecules 
was inhibited by EDTA in a dose-dependent manner. Phagocytosis of malaria pigment
was also suppressed by EDTA. This observation suggests that phagocytosis of
malaria pigment may be a prerequisite for the effect of malaria pigment on the
regulation of CD11b/CD18 and LAM-1 expression. Regulation of leukocyte adhesion
molecules through up-regulation of CD11b/CD18 and down-regulation of LAM-1 by
malaria pigment could promote leukocyte adherence to endothelium in vivo. This
increased adherence of malaria pigment-activated leukocytes might induce cytokine
(tumor necrosis factor alpha and interleukin-1beta)-mediated increases in
capillary permeability resulting in local tissue edema, and a cytokine-mediated
increase in adhesion molecule expression causing vascular clogging by adherent
red blood cells, and in severe disease by adherent leukocytes.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.1997.57.383 
PMID: 9347950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

