
1. Blood. 2002 Aug 1;100(3):1048-54.

Plasmodium falciparum cysteine protease falcipain-2 cleaves erythrocyte membrane 
skeletal proteins at late stages of parasite development.

Hanspal M(1), Dua M, Takakuwa Y, Chishti AH, Mizuno A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Research, St Elizabeth's Medical Center, Tufts
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02135, USA. manjit_hanspal@cchcs.org

Plasmodium falciparum-derived cysteine protease falcipain-2 cleaves host
erythrocyte hemoglobin at acidic pH and specific components of the membrane
skeleton at neutral pH. Analysis of stage-specific expression of these 2
proteolytic activities of falcipain-2 shows that hemoglobin-hydrolyzing activity 
is maximum in early trophozoites and declines rapidly at late stages, whereas the
membrane skeletal protein hydrolyzing activity is markedly increased at the late 
trophozoite and schizont stages. Among the erythrocyte membrane skeletal
proteins, ankyrin and protein 4.1 are cleaved by native and recombinant
falcipain-2 near their C-termini. To identify the precise peptide sequence at the
hydrolysis site of protein 4.1, we used a recombinant construct of protein 4.1 as
substrate followed by MALDI-MS analysis of the cleaved product. We show that
falcipain-2-mediated cleavage of protein 4.1 occurs immediately after lysine 437,
which lies within a region of the spectrin-actin-binding domain critical for
erythrocyte membrane stability. A 16-mer peptide containing the cleavage site
completely inhibited the enzyme activity and blocked falcipain-2-induced
fragmentation of erythrocyte ghosts. Based on these results, we propose that
falcipain-2 cleaves hemoglobin in the acidic food vacuole at the early
trophozoite stage, whereas it cleaves specific components of the red cell
skeleton at the late trophozoite and schizont stages. It is the proteolysis of
skeletal proteins that causes membrane instability, which, in turn, facilitates
parasite release in vivo.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2002-01-0101 
PMID: 12130521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

