
1. Infect Immun. 2004 Oct;72(10):5768-74.

CD28 costimulation is required for the expression of T-cell-dependent
cell-mediated immunity against blood-stage Plasmodium chabaudi malaria parasites.

Rummel T(1), Batchelder J, Flaherty P, LaFleur G, Nanavati P, Burns JM, Weidanz
WP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin
Medical School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Mice suppress the parasitemia of acute blood-stage Plasmodium chabaudi malaria by
an antibody- or T-cell-dependent cell-mediated mechanism of immunity (AMI and
CMI, respectively) or by both mechanisms. To determine whether CD28 costimulation
is required for expression of these polar immune responses, we first compared the
time courses of P. chabaudi malaria in CD28-deficient (CD28(-/-)) and CD28-intact
(CD28(+/+)) mice. Acute infections in both knockout (KO) and control mice
followed similar time courses, with the period of descending parasitemia being
prolonged approximately 2 weeks in KO mice followed by intermittent low-grade
chronic parasitemia. Infected CD28(-/-) mice produced primarily the
immunoglobulin M antibody, which upon passive transfer provided partial
protection against P. chabaudi challenge, suggesting that the elimination of
blood-stage parasites by CD28(-/-) mice was achieved by AMI. To determine whether
CD28(-/-) costimulation is required for the expression of CMI against the
parasite, we compared the time courses of parasitemia in B-cell-deficient
double-KO (J(H)(-/-) x CD28(-/-)) mice and control (J(H)(-/-) x CD28(+/+)) mice. 
Whereas control mice suppressed parasitemia to subpatent levels within
approximately 2 weeks postinoculation, double-KO mice developed high levels of
parasitemia of long-lasting duration. Although not required for the suppression
of acute P. chabaudi parasitemia by AMI, CD28 costimulation is essential for the 
elimination of blood-stage parasites by CMI.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.72.10.5768-5774.2004 
PMCID: PMC517583
PMID: 15385476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

