
1. Metabolism. 2005 Jan;54(1):60-6.

Adiponectin and glucose production in patients infected with Plasmodium
falciparum.

Bl√ºmer RM(1), van Thien H, Ruiter AF, Weverling GJ, vinh Thuan D, Endert E, Kager
PA, Sauerwein HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Academic Medical Center, PO Box
22660, 1100 DD Amsterdam, The Netherlands. r.blumer@amc.uva.nl

Infections are often complicated by an increase in glucose production due to
stimulation of the secretion of glucose counter-regulatory hormones and
cytokines. Adiponectin, a fat-derived hormone with insulin-sensitizing
properties, could play a regulatory role in the degree of stimulation of glucose 
production by the infectious agent. Therefore, we investigated the possible
correlation between glucose production and plasma adiponectin levels in 25
subjects: 7 patients with cerebral malaria, 6 with uncomplicated malaria, and 12 
matched controls. Glucose production was significantly higher in patients with
malaria compared to healthy controls (P < .001). Adiponectin levels were not
different between the patients with malaria and the control group. However,
patients with cerebral malaria had significantly higher values for adiponectin
than the patients with uncomplicated malaria (P < .005). Glucose production and
gluconeogenesis were positively correlated to plasma adiponectin in the patients 
(r = 0.835, P < .001 and r = 0.846, P < .001, respectively), whereas these
correlations were absent in the controls (r = -0.329, NS and r = -0.028, NS,
respectively). In conclusion, adiponectin levels were not different between
patients with malaria and their matched controls. However, patients infected with
Plasmodium falciparum who have higher glucose production also have higher
adiponectin levels. In healthy subjects such a correlation was not found. As
adiponectin is known to inhibit glucose production, stimulation of adiponectin
secretion during infection could be intended to restrain the glucose production
stimulating properties of hormones and cytokines secreted during infection.

DOI: 10.1016/j.metabol.2004.07.011 
PMID: 15562381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

