
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2005 Mar;140(1):13-21.

Erythrocyte surface glycosylphosphatidyl inositol anchored receptor for the
malaria parasite.

Rungruang T(1), Kaneko O, Murakami Y, Tsuboi T, Hamamoto H, Akimitsu N, Sekimizu 
K, Kinoshita T, Torii M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Parasitology, Ehime University School of Medicine,
Toon, Ehime 791-0295, Japan.

Parasitophorous vacuole formation is a critical step for the successful invasion 
of host erythrocytes by the malaria parasite. Rhoptry proteins are believed to
have essential roles in vacuole formation, although their biological roles are
poorly understood. To understand the molecular interactions between parasite
rhoptry proteins and the erythrocyte during invasion, we have characterized the
binding specificity of the high molecular mass rhoptry protein (RhopH) complex to
erythrocytes using the rodent malaria parasite, Plasmodium yoelii. RhopH complex 
binding to erythrocytes was species-specific, observed with mouse but not rabbit 
or human erythrocytes. Binding is abolished following treatment of erythrocytes
with trypsin or chymotrypsin. Because host cell cholesterol-rich membrane domains
are recruited into the nascent parasitophorous vacuole, we evaluated a possible
role of RhopH complex binding to the cholesterol-rich membrane domain-associated 
glycosylphosphatidyl inositol (GPI)-anchored protein. Using chimeric mice
harboring GPI-deficient erythrocytes, RhopH complex binding to GPI-deficient
mouse erythrocytes was undetectable, indicating involvement of GPI-anchored
protein in PyRhopH complex binding. Furthermore, a significant reduction of P.
yoelii parasite infection of GPI-deficient erythrocytes was observed in vivo,
probably due to inefficient invasion. We conclude that the major erythrocyte
receptor for PyRhopH complex is a protein attached to the erythrocyte surface via
GPI-anchor and that GPI-deficient erythrocytes are resistant to P. yoelii
invasion.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2004.11.017 
PMID: 15694483  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

