
1. Malar J. 2005 Dec 16;4:63.

Plasmodium yoelii 17XL infection up-regulates RANTES, CCR1, CCR3 and CCR5
expression, and induces ultrastructural changes in the cerebellum.

Sarfo BY(1), Armah HB, Irune I, Adjei AA, Olver CS, Singh S, Lillard JW Jr,
Stiles JK.

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology Unit, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, University
of Ghana, P.O. Box LG581, Legon, Accra, Ghana. bsarfo@noguchi.mimcom.net

BACKGROUND: Malaria afflicts 300-500 million people causing over 1 million deaths
globally per year. The immunopathogenesis of malaria is mediated partly by co
mplex cellular and immunomodulator interactions involving co-regulators such as
cytokines and adhesion molecules. However, the role of chemokines and their
receptors in malaria immunopathology remains unclear. RANTES (Regulated on
Activation Normal T-Cell Expressed and Secreted) is a chemokine involved in the
generation of inflammatory infiltrates. Recent studies indicate that the
degradation of cell-cell junctions, blood-brain barrier dysfunction, recruitment 
of leukocytes and Plasmodium-infected erythrocytes into and occlusion of
microvessels relevant to malaria pathogenesis are associated with RANTES
expression. Additionally, activated lymphocytes, platelets and endothelial cells 
release large quantities of RANTES, thus suggesting a unique role for RANTES in
the generation and maintenance of the malaria-induced inflammatory response. The 
hypothesis of this study is that RANTES and its corresponding receptors (CCR1,
CCR3 and CCR5) modulate malaria immunopathogenesis. A murine malaria model was
utilized to evaluate the role of this chemokine and its receptors in malaria.
METHODS: The alterations in immunomodulator gene expression in brains of
Plasmodium yoelii 17XL-infected mice was analysed using cDNA microarray
screening, followed by a temporal comparison of mRNA and protein expression of
RANTES and its corresponding receptors by qRT-PCR and Western blot analysis,
respectively. Plasma RANTES levels was determined by ELISA and ultrastructural
studies of brain sections from infected and uninfected mice was conducted.
RESULTS: RANTES (p < 0.002), CCR1 (p < 0.036), CCR3 (p < 0.033), and CCR5 (p <
0.026) mRNA were significantly upregulated at peak parasitaemia and remained high
thereafter in the experimental mouse model. RANTES protein in the brain of
infected mice was upregulated (p < 0.034) compared with controls. RANTES plasma
levels were significantly upregulated; two to three fold in infected mice
compared with controls (p < 0.026). Some distal microvascular endothelium in
infected cerebellum appeared degraded, but remained intact in controls.
CONCLUSION: The upregulation of RANTES, CCR1, CCR3, and CCR5 mRNA, and RANTES
protein mediate inflammation and cellular degradation in the cerebellum during P.
yoelii 17XL malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-4-63 
PMCID: PMC1343570
PMID: 16359553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

