
1. J Soc Biol. 2005;199(3):199-206.

Immunopathological consequences of the loss of engulfment genes: the case of
ABCA1.

Grau GE(1), Chimini G.

Author information: 
(1)Immunopathology Group, Faculté de Médecine, IFR48, 27, boulevard Jean Moulin, 
F-13385 Marseille Cedex 5, France.

Programmed cell death plays a crucial role in the maintenance of cell
homeostasis. An initial, effector phase leads to the generation of apoptotic
corpses and is closely followed by a swift clearance by professional or amateur
phagocytes. Several aspects distinguish this latter process of engulfment of
dying cells from the classical forms of phagocytosis. They concern all aspects of
the process from the recognition of the prey to the final outcome, i.e.
immunological silence. The engulfment of dead cells is a process highly conserved
through evolution and it has been studied in parallel in two systems, mammalian
cells and the nematode C. elegans. ABCA1 and its ortholog CED-7 in the nematode
are key players of engulfment. Their mode of action is somehow original in the
panorama of engulfment receptors since they act as lipid transporters. While in
the worm the loss of CED-7 has phenotypic consequences exclusively on engulfment,
in the mouse the deletion of ABCA1 by homologous recombination has highlighted
broad consequences on macrophage biology. Among those we will discuss here the
aberrant responses of ABCA1-/- mice to Plasmodium berghei ANKA infection,
concerning in particular the development of cerebral malaria (CM), a
cytokine-induced immunopathology. This syndrome involves a central role of
monocytes and, as shown recently, high levels of circulating microparticles. It
was found that ABCA1 loss completely protects against CM and its associated
mortality. This observation, together with the demonstration of quantitative and 
functional modifications of microparticles, suggests that microparticles may be
involved in CM pathogenesis. The ABCA1 transporter thus appears to control
susceptibility to CM, thereby providing new insights in its pathophysiological
mechanisms and potential new therapeutic avenues.

DOI: 10.1051/jbio:2005020 
PMID: 16471259  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

