
1. APMIS. 2006 Dec;114(12):842-50.

Levels and interactions of plasma xanthine oxidase, catalase and liver function
parameters in Nigerian children with Plasmodium falciparum infection.

Iwalokun BA(1), Bamiro SB, Ogunledun A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Biochemistry, Lagos State University, Apapa, Lagos, Nigeria.
bamwal@yahoo.com

Elevated plasma levels of xanthine oxidase and liver function parameters have
been associated with inflammatory events in several human diseases. While
xanthine oxidase provides in vitro protection against malaria, its
pathophysiological functions in vivo and interactions with liver function
parameters remain unclear. This study examined the interactions and plasma levels
of xanthine oxidase (XO) and uric acid (UA), catalase (CAT) and liver function
parameters GOT, GPT and bilirubin in asymptomatic (n=20), uncomplicated (n=32),
and severe (n=18) falciparum malaria children aged 3-13 years. Compared to
age-matched control (n=16), significant (p<0.05) elevation in xanthine oxidase by
100-550%, uric acid by 15.4-153.8%, GOT and GPT by 22.1-102.2%, and total
bilirubin by 2.3-86% according to parasitaemia (geometric mean parasite density
(GMPD)=850-87100 parasites/microL) was observed in the malarial children. Further
comparison with control revealed higher CAT level (16.2+/-0.5 vs 14.6+/-0.4 U/L; 
p<0.05) lacking significant (p>0.05) correlation with XO, but lower CAT level
(13.4-5.4 U/L) with improved correlations (r=-0.53 to -0.91; p<0.05) with XO
among the asymptomatic and symptomatic malaria children studied. 75% of control, 
45% of asymptomatic, 21.9% of uncomplicated, and none of severe malaria children 
had Hb level>11.0 g/dL. Multivariate analyses further revealed significant
(p<0.05) correlations between liver function parameters and xanthine oxidase
(r=0.57-0.64) only in the severe malaria group. We conclude that elevated levels 
of XO and liver enzymes are biochemical features of Plasmodium falciparum
parasitaemia in Nigerian children, with both parameters interacting differently
to modulate the catalase response in asymptomatic and symptomatic falciparum
malaria.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2006.apm_457.x 
PMID: 17207084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

