
1. J Exp Med. 2007 Mar 19;204(3):511-24. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Complex genetic control of susceptibility to malaria: positional cloning of the
Char9 locus.

Min-Oo G(1), Fortin A, Pitari G, Tam M, Stevenson MM, Gros P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Research Institute of McGill University Health
Centre, McGill University, Montreal H3G-1Y6, Quebec, Canada.

Mouse strains AcB55 and AcB61 are resistant to malaria by virtue of a mutation in
erythrocyte pyruvate kinase (Pklr(I90N)). Linkage analysis in [AcB55 x A/J] F2
mice detected a second locus (Char9; logarithm of odds = 4.74) that regulates the
blood-stage replication of Plasmodium chabaudi AS independently of Pklr. We
characterized the 77 genes of the Char9 locus for tissue-specific expression,
strain-specific alterations in gene expression, and polymorphic variants that are
possibly associated with differential susceptibility. We identified Vnn1/Vnn3 as 
the likely candidates responsible for Char9. Vnn3/Vnn1 map within a conserved
haplotype block and show expression levels that are strictly cis-regulated by
this haplotype. The absence of Vnn messenger RNA expression and lack of
pantetheinase protein activity in tissues are associated with susceptibility to
malaria and are linked to a complex rearrangement in the Vnn3 promoter region.
The A/J strain also carries a unique nonsense mutation that leads to a truncated 
protein. Vanin genes code for a pantetheinase involved in the production of
cysteamine, a key regulator of host responses to inflammatory stimuli.
Administration of cystamine in vivo partially corrects susceptibility to malaria 
in A/J mice, as measured by reduced blood parasitemia and decreased mortality.
These studies suggest that pantetheinase is critical for the host response to
malaria.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20061252 
PMCID: PMC2137903
PMID: 17312006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

