
1. Vet Parasitol. 2007 Sep 1;148(2):75-82. Epub 2007 Jul 5.

Endocrine predictors of mortality in canine babesiosis caused by Babesia canis
rossi.

Schoeman JP(1), Rees P, Herrtage ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Companion Animal Clinical Studies, Faculty of Veterinary
Science, University of Pretoria, Onderstepoort 0110, South Africa.
johanp.schoeman@up.ac.za

This prospective, cross-sectional, observational study was designed to determine 
the association between the hormones of the pituitary-adrenal and
pituitary-thyroid axes and outcome in dogs with naturally occurring Babesia canis
rossi babesiosis. Ninety-five dogs with canine babesiosis were studied and blood 
samples were obtained from the jugular vein in each dog prior to treatment at
admission to hospital. Serum cortisol, adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH),
thyroxine, free thyroxine and thyrotropin (TSH) concentrations were measured.
Diagnosis was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction and reverse line blot and
dogs infected with Babesia canis vogeli or Ehrlichia canis were excluded. Three
outcomes were defined: hospitalization with subsequent death (n=7);
hospitalization followed by recovery (n=56); and treatment as an outpatient
(n=32). Serum cortisol and ACTH concentrations were significantly higher in the
dogs that died, compared to hospitalized dogs that survived and compared to dogs 
treated as outpatients. Serum T4 and free T4 concentrations were significantly
lower in the dogs that died, compared to the hospitalized dogs that survived and 
compared to dogs treated as outpatients. Serum TSH concentrations were not
significantly different between any of the groups. Mortality was significantly
associated with high cortisol and high ACTH concentrations and with low T4 and
fT4 concentrations in dogs suffering from B. canis rossi babesiosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2007.06.010 
PMID: 17614201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

