
1. J Immunol. 2007 Aug 15;179(4):2467-76.

Icsbp1/IRF-8 is required for innate and adaptive immune responses against
intracellular pathogens.

Turcotte K(1), Gauthier S, Malo D, Tam M, Stevenson MM, Gros P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The chronic myeloid leukemia syndrome of the BXH-2 mouse strain (Mus musculus) is
caused by a recessive mutation (R294C) in the transcriptional regulator
Icsbp1/IRF-8. In trans activation assays using an IL-12p40 gene reporter
construct introduced in RAW 264.7 mouse macrophages, we show that the
Icsbp1(C294) isoform behaves as a partial loss-of-function. The Icsbp1(C294)
hypomorph allele appears to have a threshold effect on IL-12 production, with
pleiotropic consequences on resistance to different types of infections in vivo. 
Despite the presence of a resistance Nramp1(G169) allele, BXH-2 mice
(Icsbp1(C294)) show impaired control of Mycobacterium bovis (bacille
Calmette-Gu√©rin) multiplication both early and late during infection, with
uncontrolled replication linked to inability to form granulomas in infected liver
and spleen. Studies in informative (BXH-2 x BALB/cJ)F(2) mice show that
homozygosity for Icsbp1(C294) causes susceptibility to Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhimurium to a level comparable to that seen for mice lacking
functional Nramp1 or TLR4. Finally, impaired Icsbp1(C294) function is associated 
with the following: 1) increased replication of the Plasmodium chabaudi AS
malarial parasite during the first burst of blood parasitemia, and 2) recurring
waves of high blood parasitemia late during infection. These results show that
Icsbp1 is required for orchestrating early innate responses and also long-term
immune protection against unrelated intracellular pathogens.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.179.4.2467 
PMID: 17675508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

