
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jan 15;105(2):646-51. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0709969105. Epub 2008 Jan 3.

Functional deficit of T regulatory cells in Fulani, an ethnic group with low
susceptibility to Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Torcia MG(1), Santarlasci V, Cosmi L, Clemente A, Maggi L, Mangano VD, Verra F,
Bancone G, Nebie I, Sirima BS, Liotta F, Frosali F, Angeli R, Severini C,
Sannella AR, Bonini P, Lucibello M, Maggi E, Garaci E, Coluzzi M, Cozzolino F,
Annunziato F, Romagnani S, Modiano D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Physiopathology, University of Firenze, Viale
Pieraccini 6, 50139 Firenze, Italy. g.torcia@dfc.unifi.it

Previous interethnic comparative studies on the susceptibility to malaria
performed in West Africa showed that Fulani are more resistant to Plasmodium
falciparum malaria than are sympatric ethnic groups. This lower susceptibility is
not associated to classic malaria-resistance genes, and the analysis of the
immune response to P. falciparum sporozoite and blood stage antigens, as well as 
non-malaria antigens, revealed higher immune reactivity in Fulani. In the present
study we compared the expression profile of a panel of genes involved in immune
response in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from Fulani and sympatric
Mossi from Burkina Faso. An increased expression of T helper 1 (TH1)-related
genes (IL-18, IFNgamma, and TBX21) and TH2-related genes (IL-4 and GATA3) and a
reduced expression of genes distinctive of T regulatory activity (CTLA4 and
FOXP3) were observed in Fulani. Microarray analysis on RNA from CD4+ CD25+ (T
regulatory) cells, performed with a panel of cDNA probes specific for 96 genes
involved in immune modulation, indicated obvious differences between the two
ethnic groups with 23% of genes, including TGFbeta, TGFbetaRs, CTLA4, and FOXP3, 
less expressed in Fulani compared with Mossi and European donors not exposed to
malaria. As further indications of a low T regulatory cell activity, Fulani
showed lower serum levels of TGFbeta and higher concentrations of the
proinflammatory chemokines CXCL10 and CCL22 compared with Mossi; moreover, the
proliferative response of Fulani to malaria antigens was not affected by the
depletion of CD25+ regulatory cells whereas that of Mossi was significantly
increased. The results suggest that the higher resistance to malaria of the
Fulani could derive from a functional deficit of T regulatory cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0709969105 
PMCID: PMC2206590
PMID: 18174328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

