
1. Parasitol Res. 2009 Jul;105(1):41-6. doi: 10.1007/s00436-009-1360-x. Epub 2009
Feb 24.

Study on acute phase proteins (haptoglobin, serum amyloid A, fibrinogen, and
ceruloplasmin) changes and their diagnostic values in bovine tropical
theileriosis.

Nazifi S(1), Razavi SM, Esmailnejad Z, Gheisari H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Studies, Shiraz University, Iran. nazifi@shirazu.ac.ir

This study was conducted to assess the pattern of changes and the relative value 
of acute phase proteins (haptoglobin (Hp), serum amyloid A (SAA), ceruloplasmin
and fibrinogen) in bovine tropical theileriosis. The diseased group comprised 50 
dairy Holstein cattle, 2-3 years old, naturally infected with Theileria annulata.
Infected animals were divided into four subgroups with different parasitemia
rates (<1%, 1-3%, 3-5%, >5%). As a control group, 20 uninfected cattle were also 
sampled. Blood samples were collected and all measurements were done using
validated methods. There were significant differences in red blood cells (RBCs), 
packed cell volume (PCV), hemoglobin (Hb) and concentrations of Hp, SAA,
ceruloplasmin and fibrinogen between healthy cattle and those infected with T.
annulata with different parasitemia rates (P < 0.05). As the parasitemia rate
increased in infected cattle, a significant decrease was observed in RBCs, PCV,
and Hb. In contrast, with increase in the parasitemia rate, a significant
increase in the mean corpuscular volume (MCV), mean corpuscular hemoglobin
concentration (MCHC), Hp, SAA, ceruloplasmin, and fibrinogen was evident. The
optimal cut-off point was set by the receiver operating characteristics (ROC)
method to >5.68 microg/ml for SAA, >0.16 g/l for Hp, >0.064 g/l for ceruloplasmin
and >4.00 g/l for fibrinogen with corresponding 84% sensitivity and 100%
specificity for SAA, 76% sensitivity and 100% specificity for Hp, 84% sensitivity
and 80% specificity for ceruloplasmin and 40% sensitivity and 100% specificity
for fibrinogen. SAA had the highest sensitivity and specificity and was diagnosed
to be a suitable indicator of APPs changes in bovine theileriosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-009-1360-x 
PMID: 19238441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

