
1. Vet Pathol. 2009 Nov;46(6):1197-204. doi: 10.1354/vp.08-VP-0132-B-FL. Epub 2009
Jul 15.

An in situ hybridization and immunohistochemical study of cytauxzoonosis in
domestic cats.

Susta L(1), Torres-Velez F, Zhang J, Brown C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University
of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602-7388, USA. lsusta@uga.edu

Cytauxzoonosis, caused by the protozoan parasite, Cytauxzoon felis, is a
tick-borne disease of domestic cats causing high mortality. The reservoir is wild
felids. In this study, 7 archived cases of the disease were examined through in
situ hybridization for localization of the parasite and by immunohistochemistry
for various cell markers to characterize infected cells. The riboprobe used was
specific for the 16S-like rRNA subunit of Babesia microti, which shares 91%
identity with the same gene for C. felis. In situ hybridization highlighted the
presence of the organism in several tissues, most prominently lung and spleen,
and, in general, there were 2 to 10 times more infected cells seen with in situ
hybridization than with HE. Parasite-laden cells were usually found within
vessels. These cells were often tightly packed and frequently formed parasitic
thrombi. Immunohistochemistry with an antilysozyme antibody confirmed the
macrophage origin of the infected cells. Using an antibody specific for
calprotectin (Mac387), parasitized cells were markedly devoid of this protein,
which may explain the lack of diapedesis and vascular crowding of parasitized
cells, providing more circulating parasites for the tick vector.
Immunohistochemical labeling for 2 proliferation markers, proliferating cell
nuclear antigen (PCNA) and p53, indicated that parasitized cells have a
heightened replicative ability, which is probably an additional parasite-driven
modification to facilitate survival and transmission.

DOI: 10.1354/vp.08-VP-0132-B-FL 
PMID: 19605894  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

