
1. Mol Immunol. 2010 Jan;47(4):747-55. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.10.014. Epub 2009 
Nov 12.

Lipids from attenuated and virulent Babesia bovis strains induce differential
TLR2-mediated macrophage activation.

Gimenez G(1), Magalhães KG, Belaunzarán ML, Poncini CV, Lammel EM, Gonzalez Cappa
SM, Bozza PT, Isola EL.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiología, Parasitología e Inmunología, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
paradife@fmed.uba.ar

Babesia bovis is an intraerythrocytic apicomplexan protozoa of cattle that causes
an acute infection with parasite persistence. Babesiosis limitation depends on
macrophages, essential effector cells of the host innate defense, which generate 
inflammatory cytokines and nitric oxide. Herein, we report quantitative
differences in the lipid composition of merozoites from two B. bovis strains with
polar behaviour: attenuated R1A and virulent S2P. Accordingly, we observed a
distinct inflammatory response induced by the total lipids of R1A (L(A)) and S2P 
(L(V)) in murine peritoneal macrophages. L(A) and particularly its fractions
phosphatidic acid and phosphatidylserine+phosphatidylinositol (PS+PI), produced a
strong activation of these cells with lipid body formation, cyclooxygenase-2
expression and pro-inflammatory TNFalpha, IL-6 and KC secretion. Although L(V)
did not activate these cells, the corresponding PS+PI fraction induced TNFalpha, 
IL-6 and KC release. Therefore, these facts might be suggesting the presence of
an inhibitor in L(V). Furthermore, the employment of wild type and toll like
receptor 2 knockout (TLR2KO) mice allowed us to demonstrate that macrophage
activation by the stimulating lipid fractions was mediated through TLR2.
Interestingly, only L(A) activated the extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1
and 2 (ERK1/2). Inhibitory studies employing UO126, indicated that the ERK
pathway was required for TNFalpha, IL-6 and KC release. In conclusion, the
absence of inflammatory response observed with the lipids of S2P virulent strain 
could constitute an evasion mechanism of the innate immune response enabling
parasite establishment in the host.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.10.014 
PMID: 19910051  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

