
1. Malar J. 2010 Jan 29;9:36. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-9-36.

Uptake of purines in Plasmodium falciparum-infected human erythrocytes is mostly 
mediated by the human equilibrative nucleoside transporter and the human
facilitative nucleobase transporter.

Quashie NB(1), Ranford-Cartwright LC, de Koning HP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Division of Infection and Immunity,
Glasgow Biomedical Research Centre, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G128TA, UK.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium parasites are unable to synthesize purines de novo and
have to salvage them from the host. Due to this limitation in the parasite,
purine transporters have been an area of focus in the search for anti-malarial
drugs. Although the uptake of purines through the human equilibrative nucleoside 
transporter (hENT1), the human facilitative nucleobase transporter (hFNT1) and
the parasite-induced new permeation pathway (NPP) has been studied, no
information appears to exist on the relative contribution of these three
transporters to the uptake of adenosine and hypoxanthine. Using the appropriate
transporter inhibitors, the role of each of these salvage pathways to the overall
purine transport in intraerythrocytic Plasmodium falciparum was systematically
investigated.
METHODS: The transport of adenosine, hypoxanthine and adenine into uninfected and
P. falciparum-infected human erythrocytes was investigated in the presence or
absence of classical inhibitors of the hFNT1, hENT1 and NPP. The effective
inhibition of the various transporters by the classical inhibitors was verified
using appropriate known substrates. The ability of high concentration of
unlabelled substrates to saturate these transporters was also studied.
RESULTS: Transport of exogenous purine into infected or uninfected erythrocytes
occurred primarily through saturable transporters rather than through the NPP.
Hypoxanthine and adenine appeared to enter erythrocytes mainly through the hFNT1 
nucleobase transporter whereas adenosine entered predominantly through the hENT1 
nucleoside transporter. The rate of purine uptake was approximately doubled in
infected cells compared to uninfected erythrocytes. In addition, it was found
that the rate of adenosine uptake was considerably higher than the rate of
hypoxanthine uptake in infected human red blood cells (RBC). It was also
demonstrated that furosemide inhibited the transport of purine bases through
hFNT1.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, the data obtained in this study clearly show that the
endogenous host erythrocyte transporters hENT1 and hFNT1, rather than the NPP,
are the major route of entry of purine into parasitized RBC. Inhibitors of hENT1 
and hFNT1, as well as the NPP, should be considered in the development of
anti-malarials targeted to purine transport.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-9-36 
PMCID: PMC2825241
PMID: 20113503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

