
1. Histopathology. 2010 Aug;57(2):282-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2010.03619.x.

Induction of the vascular endothelial growth factor pathway in the brain of
adults with fatal falciparum malaria is a non-specific response to severe
disease.

Medana IM(1), Day NP, Roberts R, Sachanonta N, Turley H, Pongponratn E, Hien TT, 
White NJ, Turner GD.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Oxford, UK. isabelle.medana@ndcls.ox.ac.uk

AIMS: Pathological or neuroprotective mechanisms in the brain in severe malaria
may arise from microvascular obstruction with malaria-parasitized erythrocytes.
This study aimed to investigate the role of hypoxia and induction of the vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathway in the neuropathophysiology of severe
malaria.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry was performed on post mortem brain
tissue sections from 20 cases of severe malaria and examined for the expression
of transcriptional regulators of VEGF [hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha
(HIF-1alpha), HIF-2alpha], DEC-1, VEGF, VEGF receptors 1 and 2, and the
activated, phosphorylated VEGF receptor 2 (pKDR). HIFs showed limited protein
expression and/or translocation to cell nuclei in severe malaria, but DEC-1,
which is more stable and regulated by HIF-1alpha, was observed. There was
heterogeneous expression of VEGF and its receptors in severe malaria and
non-malarial disease controls. pKDR expression on vessels was greater in malaria 
cases than in controls but did not correlate with parasite sequestration. VEGF
uptake by malaria parasites was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: VEGF and its receptor expression levels in severe malaria reflect a 
non-specific response to severe systemic disease. Potential manipulation of
events at the vasculature by the parasite requires further investigation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2010.03619.x 
PMCID: PMC2941727
PMID: 20716170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

