
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Feb;79(2):970-81. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00891-10. Epub 2010 Dec 13.

Characterization of diverse subvariants of the meningococcal factor H (fH)
binding protein for their ability to bind fH, to mediate serum resistance, and to
induce bactericidal antibodies.

Seib KL(1), Brunelli B, Brogioni B, Palumbo E, Bambini S, Muzzi A, DiMarcello F, 
Marchi S, van der Ende A, Aricó B, Savino S, Scarselli M, Comanducci M, Rappuoli 
R, Giuliani MM, Pizza M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Unit, Novartis Vaccines, Via Fiorentina, 1, 53100 Siena,
Italy. Kate.Seib@novartis.com

Neisseria meningitidis is a commensal of the human nasopharynx but is also a
major cause of septicemia and meningitis. The meningococcal factor H binding
protein (fHbp) binds human factor H (fH), enabling downregulation of complement
activation on the bacterial surface. fHbp is a component of two serogroup B
meningococcal vaccines currently in clinical development. Here we characterize 12
fHbp subvariants for their level of surface exposure and ability to bind fH, to
mediate serum resistance, and to induce bactericidal antibodies. Flow cytometry
and Western analysis revealed that all strains examined expressed fHbp on their
surface to different extents and bound fH in an fHbp-dependent manner. However,
differences in fH binding did not always correlate with the level of fHbp
expression, indicating that this is not the only factor affecting the amount of
fH bound. To overcome the issue of strain variability in fHbp expression, the
MC58ΔfHbp strain was genetically engineered to express different subvariants from
a constitutive heterologous promoter. These recombinant strains were
characterized for fH binding, and the data confirmed that each subvariant binds
different levels of fH. Surface plasmon resonance revealed differences in the
stability of the fHbp-fH complexes that ranged over 2 orders of magnitude,
indicating that differences in residues between and within variant groups can
influence fH binding. Interestingly, the level of survival in human sera of
recombinant MC58 strains expressing diverse subvariants did not correlate with
the level of fH binding, suggesting that the interaction of fHbp with fH is not
the only function of fHbp that influences serum resistance. Furthermore,
cross-reactive bactericidal activity was seen within each variant group, although
the degree of activity varied, suggesting that amino acid differences within each
variant group influence the bactericidal antibody response.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00891-10 
PMCID: PMC3028832
PMID: 21149595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

