
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Mar;79(3):1244-53. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00964-10. Epub 2010 Dec
13.

Molecular correlates of experimental cerebral malaria detectable in whole blood.

Oakley MS(1), Anantharaman V, Venancio TM, Zheng H, Mahajan B, Majam V, McCutchan
TF, Myers TG, Aravind L, Kumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bacterial, Parasitic, and Allergenic Products Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Rockville, Maryland, USA.

Cerebral malaria (CM) is a primary cause of deaths caused by Plasmodium
falciparum in young children in sub-Saharan Africa. Laboratory tests based on
early detection of host biomarkers in patient blood would help in the prognosis
and differential diagnosis of CM. Using the Plasmodium berghei ANKA murine model 
of experimental cerebral malaria (ECM), we have identified over 300 putative
diagnostic biomarkers of ECM in the circulation by comparing the whole-blood
transcriptional profiles of resistant mice (BALB/c) to those of two susceptible
strains (C57BL/6 and CBA/CaJ). Our results suggest that the transcriptional
profile of whole blood captures the molecular and immunological events associated
with the pathogenesis of disease. We find that during ECM, erythropoiesis is
dysfunctional, thrombocytopenia is evident, and glycosylation of cell surface
components may be modified. Furthermore, analysis of immunity-related genes
suggests that slightly distinct mechanisms of immunopathogenesis may operate in
susceptible C57BL/6 and CBA/CaJ mice. Furthermore, our data set has allowed us to
create a molecular signature of ECM composed of a subset of circulatory markers. 
Complement component C1q, Î²-chain, nonspecific cytotoxic cell receptor protein 1,
prostate stem cell antigen, DnaJC, member 15, glutathione S-transferase omega-1, 
and thymidine kinase 1 were overexpressed in blood during the symptomatic phase
of ECM, as measured by quantitative real-time PCR analysis. These studies provide
the first host transcriptome database that is uniquely altered during the
pathogenesis of ECM in blood. A subset of these mediators of ECM warrant
validation in P. falciparum-infected young African children as diagnostic markers
of CM.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00964-10 
PMCID: PMC3067492
PMID: 21149594  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

