
1. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 14;6(1):e15983. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015983.

A positive correlation between atypical memory B cells and Plasmodium falciparum 
transmission intensity in cross-sectional studies in Peru and Mali.

Weiss GE(1), Clark EH, Li S, Traore B, Kayentao K, Ongoiba A, Hernandez JN,
Doumbo OK, Pierce SK, Branch OH, Crompton PD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: Antibodies that protect against Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) malaria
are only acquired after years of repeated infections. The B cell biology that
underlies this observation is poorly understood. We previously reported that
"atypical" memory B cells are increased in children and adults exposed to intense
Pf transmission in Mali, similar to what has been observed in individuals
infected with HIV. In this study we examined B cell subsets of Pf -infected
adults in Peru and Mali to determine if Pf transmission intensity correlates with
atypical memory B cell expansion.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this cross-sectional study venous blood was
collected from adults in areas of zero (U.S., n = 10), low (Peru, n = 18) and
high (Mali, n = 12) Pf transmission. Adults in Peru and Mali were infected with
Pf at the time of blood collection. Thawed lymphocytes were analyzed by flow
cytometry to quantify B cell subsets, including atypical memory B cells, defined 
by the cell surface markers CD19(+) CD20(+) CD21(-) CD27(-) CD10(-). In Peru, the
mean level of atypical memory B cells, as a percent of total B cells, was higher 
than U.S. adults (Peru mean: 5.4% [95% CI: 3.61-7.28]; U.S. mean: 1.4% [95% CI:
0.92-1.81]; p<0.0001) but lower than Malian adults (Mali mean 13.1% [95% CI:
10.68-15.57]; p = 0.0001). In Peru, individuals self-reporting ≥1 prior malaria
episodes had a higher percentage of atypical memory B cells compared to those
reporting no prior episodes (≥1 prior episodes mean: 6.6% [95% CI: 4.09-9.11]; no
prior episodes mean: 3.1% [95% CI: 1.52-4.73]; p = 0.028).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Compared to Pf-naive controls, atypical memory B cells 
were increased in Peruvian adults exposed to low Pf transmission, and further
increased in Malian adults exposed to intense Pf transmission. Understanding the 
origin, function and antigen specificity of atypical memory B cells in the
context of Pf infection could contribute to our understanding of
naturally-acquired malaria immunity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015983 
PMCID: PMC3021525
PMID: 21264245  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

