
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Jul;79(7):2727-36. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00649-10. Epub 2011 Apr 4.

Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes and beta-hematin induce partial
maturation of human dendritic cells and increase their migratory ability in
response to lymphoid chemokines.

Giusti P(1), Urban BC, Frascaroli G, Albrecht L, Tinti A, Troye-Blomberg M,
Varani S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm University,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Acute and chronic Plasmodium falciparum infections alter the immune competence of
the host possibly through changes in dendritic cell (DC) functionality. DCs are
the most potent activators of T cells, and migration is integral to their
function. Mature DCs express lymphoid chemokine receptors (CCRs), expression of
which enables them to migrate to the lymph nodes, where they encounter naïve T
cells. The present study aimed to investigate the impact of the synthetic analog 
to malaria parasite pigment hemozoin, i.e., β-hematin, or infected erythrocytes
(iRBCs) on the activation status of human monocyte-derived DCs and on their
expression of CCRs. Human monocyte-derived DCs partially matured upon incubation 
with β-hematin as indicated by an increased expression of CD80 and CD83. Both
β-hematin and iRBCs provoked the release of proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory
cytokines, such as interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-10, and tumor necrosis factor alpha, 
but not IL-12, and induced upregulation of the lymphoid chemokine receptor CXCR4,
which was coupled to an increased migration to lymphoid ligands. Taken together, 
these results suggest that the partial and transient maturation of human myeloid 
DCs upon stimulation with malaria parasite-derived products and the increased
IL-10 but lack of IL-12 secretion may lead to suboptimal activation of T cells.
This may in turn lead to impaired adaptive immune responses and therefore
insufficient clearance of the parasites.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00649-10 
PMCID: PMC3191978
PMID: 21464084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

