
1. Placenta. 2011 Aug;32(8):579-85. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2011.05.003. Epub 2011
May 31.

Natural hemozoin stimulates syncytiotrophoblast to secrete chemokines and recruit
peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

Lucchi NW(1), Sarr D, Owino SO, Mwalimu SM, Peterson DS, Moore JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Placental malaria is associated with local accumulation of
parasitized erythrocytes, deposition of the parasite hemoglobin metabolite,
hemozoin, and accumulation of mononuclear cells in the intervillous space. Fetal 
syncytiotrophoblast cells in contact with maternal blood are known to respond
immunologically to cytoadherent Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes, but 
their responsiveness to hemozoin, a potent pro-inflammatory stimulator of
monocytes, macrophages and dendritic cells, is not known.
METHODS: The biochemical and immunological changes induced in primary
syncytiotrophoblast by natural hemozoin was assessed. Changes in
syncytiotrophoblast mitogen-activated protein kinase activation was assessed by
immunoblotting and secreted cytokine and chemokine proteins were assayed by
ELISA. Chemotaxis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells was assessed using a
two-chamber assay system and flow cytometry was used to assess the activation of 
primary monocytes by hemozoin-stimulated syncytiotrophoblast conditioned medium.
RESULTS: Hemozoin stimulation induced ERK1/2 phosphorylation. Treated cells
secreted CXCL8, CCL3, CCL4, and tumor necrosis factor and released soluble
intercellular adhesion molecule-1. Furthermore, the dependence of the hemozoin
responses on ERK1/2 stimulation was confirmed by inhibition of chemokine release 
in syncytiotrophoblast treated with an ERK pathway inhibitor. Hemozoin-stimulated
cells elicited the specific migration of PBMCs, and conditioned medium from the
cells induced the upregulation of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 on primary
monocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings confirm an immunostimulatory role for hemozoin and
expand the cell types known to be responsive to hemozoin to include fetal
syncytiotrophoblast. The results provide further evidence that
syncytiotrophoblast cells can influence the local maternal immune response to
placental malaria.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.placenta.2011.05.003 
PMCID: PMC3142316
PMID: 21632106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

