
1. Parasitol Res. 2012 Feb;110(2):545-56. doi: 10.1007/s00436-011-2521-2. Epub 2011 
Jul 9.

Plasmodium falciparum infection-induced changes in erythrocyte membrane proteins.

Fontaine A(1), Bourdon S, Belghazi M, Pophillat M, Fourquet P, Granjeaud S,
Torrentino-Madamet M, Rogier C, Fusai T, Almeras L.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Parasitologie, Institut de Recherche Biomédicale des Armées (IRBA),
antenne Marseille, IFR48, Allée du Médecin colonel Eugène Jamot, Parc du Pharo,
BP 60 109, 13262, Marseille Cedex 07, France.

Over the past decade, advances in proteomic and mass spectrometry techniques and 
the sequencing of the Plasmodium falciparum genome have led to an increasing
number of studies regarding the parasite proteome. However, these studies have
focused principally on parasite protein expression, neglecting parasite-induced
variations in the host proteome. Here, we investigated P. falciparum-induced
modifications of the infected red blood cell (iRBC) membrane proteome, taking
into account both host and parasite proteome alterations. Furthermore, we also
determined if some protein changes were associated with genotypically distinct P.
falciparum strains. Comparison of host membrane proteomes between iRBCs and
uninfected red blood cells using fluorescence-based proteomic approaches, such as
2D difference gel electrophoresis revealed that more than 100 protein spots were 
highly up-represented (fold change increase greater than five) following P.
falciparum infection for both strains (i.e. RP8 and Institut Pasteur Pregnancy
Associated Malaria). The majority of spots identified by mass spectrometry
corresponded to Homo sapiens proteins. However, infection-induced changes in host
proteins did not appear to affect molecules located at the outer surface of the
plasma membrane. The under-representation of parasite proteins could not be
attributed to deficient parasite protein expression. Thus, this study describes
for the first time that considerable host protein modifications were detected
following P. falciparum infection at the erythrocyte membrane level. Further
analysis of infection-induced host protein modifications will improve our
knowledge of malaria pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-011-2521-2 
PMID: 21744020  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

