
1. Am J Pathol. 2011 Oct;179(4):1939-50. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.06.027. Epub
2011 Aug 18.

CNS hypoxia is more pronounced in murine cerebral than noncerebral malaria and is
reversed by erythropoietin.

Hempel C(1), Combes V, Hunt NH, Kurtzhals JA, Grau GE.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of Clinical Microbiology,
Copenhagen University Hospital (Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen, Denmark.
casperhempel@gmail.com

Cerebral malaria (CM) is associated with high mortality and risk of sequelae, and
development of adjunct therapies is hampered by limited knowledge of its
pathogenesis. To assess the role of cerebral hypoxia, we used two experimental
models of CM, Plasmodium berghei ANKA in CBA and C57BL/6 mice, and two models of 
malaria without neurologic signs, P. berghei K173 in CBA mice and P. berghei ANKA
in BALB/c mice. Hypoxia was demonstrated in brain sections using intravenous
pimonidazole and staining with hypoxia-inducible factor-1α-specific antibody.
Cytopathic hypoxia was studied using poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) gene
knockout mice. The effect of erythropoietin, an oxygen-sensitive cytokine that
mediates protection against CM, on cerebral hypoxia was studied in C57BL/6 mice. 
Numerous hypoxic foci of neurons and glial cells were observed in mice with CM.
Substantially fewer and smaller foci were observed in mice without CM, and
hypoxia seemed to be confined to neuronal cell somas. PARP-1-deficient mice were 
not protected against CM, which argues against a role for cytopathic hypoxia.
Erythropoietin therapy reversed the development of CM and substantially reduced
the degree of neural hypoxia. These findings demonstrate cerebral hypoxia in
malaria, strongly associated with cerebral dysfunction and a possible target for 
adjunctive therapy.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.06.027 
PMCID: PMC3181359
PMID: 21854739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

