
1. Brain Res. 2011 Oct 12;1417:103-14. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.08.025. Epub
2011 Aug 19.

Proteolytic breakdown of cytoskeleton induces neurodegeneration during pathology 
of murine cerebral malaria.

Eeka P(1), Chaitanya GV, Babu PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of
Hyderabad, India.

Fatal murine cerebral malaria is known to induce cellular degeneration by
altering cellular morphology and integrity of cell. The morphology and integrity 
of the cell mainly depends on the cytoskeletal network of the cell. Increased
proteolysis of cytoskeletal proteins accompanied by aggravated suicidal proteases
activation leads to cellular degeneration. In the present study, we investigated 
the roles of apoptotic and necrotic cell death proteases, caspase-3, calpain-1
and cathepsin-b in the proteolysis of neuronal cytoskeletal proteins in mouse
model of fatal cerebral malaria. We found increased levels of calpain-1,
cathepsin-b and caspase-3, with extensive cross talks between these suicidal
proteases. Increased levels of these proteases correlated with the enhanced
proteolysis of several cytoskeletal proteins including neuronal cytoskeleton
proteolytic signature fragments. Further, we also observed that increased levels 
of these proteases correlated with the appearance of neuronal death that
exhibited apo-necrotic continuum. Our results confirm that activation of multiple
suicidal proteases, their cross talks and breakdown of the cytoskeletal proteins 
increase neuronal degeneration and lead to exacerbation of cerebral malaria
pathology.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.08.025 
PMID: 21914552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

