
1. Malar J. 2011 Dec 23;10:383. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-383.

Plasma levels of angiopoietin-1 and -2 predict cerebral malaria outcome in
Central India.

Jain V(1), Lucchi NW, Wilson NO, Blackstock AJ, Nagpal AC, Joel PK, Singh MP,
Udhayakumar V, Stiles JK, Singh N.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Medical Research Center for Tribals (ICMR), Nagpur Road, Garha,
482003 Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India.

BACKGROUND: The mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria (CM)
syndrome are not well understood. Previous studies have shown a strong
association of inflammatory chemokines, apoptotic markers and angiogenic
molecules with CM associated mortality. Recognizing the importance of
angiopoietins (ANG) in the pathogenesis of CM, a retrospective investigation was 
carried out in a hospital cohort of malaria patients with Plasmodium infection in
central India to determine if these factors could be suitable markers of CM
associated severity.
METHODS: Patients enrolled in the study were clinically characterized as healthy 
controls (HC), mild malaria (MM), CM survivors (CMS) and CM non-survivors (CMNS) 
based on their malaria status and hospital treatment outcome. Plasma ANG-1 and
ANG-2 levels were assessed using sandwich ELISA. Receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was used to calculate area under the curve
(AUC) for each biomarker in order to assess predictive accuracy of individual
biomarkers.
RESULTS: The plasma levels of ANG-1 were lower in CMS and CMNS compared to
control groups (mild malaria and healthy controls) at the time of hospital
admission. On the contrary, ANG-2 levels positively correlated with malaria
severity and were significantly higher in CMNS. The ratio of ANG-2/ANG-1 was
highest in CMNS compared to other groups. Receiver operating characteristic
curves revealed that compared to ANG-1 (AUC = 0.35), ANG-2 (AUC = 0.95) and ratio
of ANG-2/ANG-1 (AUC = 0.90) were better markers to discriminate CMNS from MM
cases. However, they were less specific in predicting fatal outcome amongst CM
cases at the time of hospital admission.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that at the time of admission plasma levels of 
ANG-2 and ratio of ANG-2/ANG-1 are clinically informative biomarkers to predict
fatal CM from MM cases while they have limited usefulness in discriminating fatal
CM outcomes in a pool of CM cases in endemic settings of Central India.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-383 
PMCID: PMC3286486
PMID: 22192385  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

