
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012 Feb;8(2):e1002504. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002504. Epub 2012
Feb 2.

The CTLA-4 and PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitory pathways independently regulate host
resistance to Plasmodium-induced acute immune pathology.

Hafalla JC(1), Claser C, Couper KN, Grau GE, Renia L, de Souza JB, Riley EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infection, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
Julius.Hafalla@lshtm.ac.uk

The balance between pro-inflammatory and regulatory immune responses in
determining optimal T cell activation is vital for the successful resolution of
microbial infections. This balance is maintained in part by the negative
regulators of T cell activation, CTLA-4 and PD-1/PD-L, which dampen effector
responses during chronic infections. However, their role in acute infections,
such as malaria, remains less clear. In this study, we determined the
contribution of CTLA-4 and PD-1/PD-L to the regulation of T cell responses during
Plasmodium berghei ANKA (PbA)-induced experimental cerebral malaria (ECM) in
susceptible (C57BL/6) and resistant (BALB/c) mice. We found that the expression
of CTLA-4 and PD-1 on T cells correlates with the extent of pro-inflammatory
responses induced during PbA infection, being higher in C57BL/6 than in BALB/c
mice. Thus, ECM develops despite high levels of expression of these inhibitory
receptors. However, antibody-mediated blockade of either the CTLA-4 or
PD-1/PD-L1, but not the PD-1/PD-L2, pathways during PbA-infection in
ECM-resistant BALB/c mice resulted in higher levels of T cell activation,
enhanced IFN-γ production, increased intravascular arrest of both parasitised
erythrocytes and CD8(+) T cells to the brain, and augmented incidence of ECM.
Thus, in ECM-resistant BALB/c mice, CTLA-4 and PD-1/PD-L1 represent essential,
independent and non-redundant pathways for maintaining T cell homeostasis during 
a virulent malaria infection. Moreover, neutralisation of IFN-γ or depletion of
CD8(+) T cells during PbA infection was shown to reverse the pathologic effects
of regulatory pathway blockade, highlighting that the aetiology of ECM in the
BALB/c mice is similar to that in C57BL/6 mice. In summary, our results
underscore the differential and complex regulation that governs immune responses 
to malaria parasites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002504 
PMCID: PMC3271068
PMID: 22319445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

