
1. Exp Parasitol. 2012 Jun;131(2):252-7. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2012.03.012. Epub
2012 Mar 27.

Activities of ectonucleotidases and adenosine deaminase in platelets of dogs
experimentally infected with Rangelia vitalii.

Paim CB(1), Da Silva AS, Paim FC, França RT, Costa MM, Souza VC, Pimentel VC,
Jaques JA, Mazzanti CM, Leal DB, Monteiro SG, Schetinger MR, Lopes ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Small Animals, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, Brazil.
brenopaim@ufsm.br

Rangeliosis is a disease which affects dogs in Brazil, caused by a piroplasm
known as Rangelia vitalii. This disease causes a lot of clinico-pathological
features, including the coagulation disorders associated with bleeding. The cause
of these changes has not yet been determined. Considering the association of
purinergic system and hemostasis this study aimed to evaluate the activity of
enzymes that hydrolyze ATP, ADP and AMP; and deamination of adenosine in
platelets from dogs experimentally infected with R. vitalii. For this study, 12
healthy young dogs (females) were used, separated in two groups. Group A (n=5)
were uninfected controls, and group B were experimentally infected with R.
vitalii (n=7). After being inoculated with R. vitalii-infected blood, animals
were monitored by blood smear examinations, which showed intra-erythrocytic forms
of the parasite after five days post-inoculation (PI). Blood samples were
collected to quantitate and separate platelets (Day 0, 12 and 21 PI) and to
measure the enzymatic activities (Day 12 and 21 PI). The activity of NTPDase,
5'-nucleotidase and adenosine deaminase (ADA) was measured in platelets. A
reduction (P<0.01) in the number of platelets was observed in R. vitalii-infected
blood at Days 12 and 21 PI. At Day 12 PI, a reduction (P<0.01) in the hydrolysis 
of ATP, ADP and AMP, and deamination of adenosine was observed in dogs infected
with R. vitalii. At Day 21 PI the ADA activity remained decreased, unlike the
activity of NTPDase which increased (P<0.05). Based on these results we can
conclude that ATP, ADP and AMP hydrolysis and adenosine deamination were altered 
in platelets of R. vitalii-infected dogs. Considering the importance of the
purinergic system in hemostasis, it is believed that those changes contribute to 
the coagulation disorders and bleeding observed in R. vitalii-infected dogs and
discussed in this manuscript.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2012.03.012 
PMID: 22475775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

