
1. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Aug 15;523(2):104-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.06.051. Epub 
2012 Jun 27.

Effects of experimental cerebral malaria in memory, brain-derived neurotrophic
factor and acetylcholinesterase activity [correction for acitivity] in the
hippocampus of survivor mice.

Comim CM(1), Reis PA, Frutuoso VS, Fries GR, Fraga DB, Kapczinski F, Zugno AI,
Barichello T, Quevedo J, Castro-Faria-Neto HC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences and National Institute for Translational Medicine 
(INCT-TM), Postgraduate Program in Health Sciences, Health Sciences Unit,
University of Southern Santa Catarina, 88806-000 Criciúma, SC, Brazil.
clarissamc@terra.com.br

Malaria is the most important human parasitic disease and cerebral malaria (CM), 
its main neurological complication, is characterized by neurological and
cognitive damage in both human and animal survivors. The brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) appears to be involved with activity-dependent
synaptic plasticity. There is great interest regarding its role in learning and
memory as well as acetylcholinesterase activity (AChE) that is implicated in many
cognitive functions and probably plays important roles in neurodegenerative
disorders. In the present work, we evaluated BDNF protein levels and AChE
activity in the hippocampus and habituation in an animal model of CM using
C57BL/6 mice after fifteen days of the induction. The results demonstrated that
there was a decrease in BDNF levels in the hippocampus of C57BL/6 mice infected
with PbA when compared with C57BL/6 non-infected mice and C57BL/6 non-infected
mice that received treatment with chloroquine. However, no difference was
observed in AChE activity in the hippocampus. When habituation was evaluated
there was memory impairment in the C57BL/6 mice infected with Plasmodium berghei 
ANKA (PbA). In conclusion, we believe that the decreased BDNF levels in the
hippocampus may be related with memory impairment without alterations on AChE
activity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.06.051 
PMID: 22750161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

