
1. Acta Parasitol. 2012 Sep;57(3):228-34. doi: 10.2478/s11686-012-0038-1. Epub 2012 
Aug 9.

Status of lipid peroxidation and antioxidant enzymes in goats naturally infected 
with Babesia ovis.

Esmaeilnejad B(1), Tavassoli M, Asri-Rezaei S, Dalir-Naghadeh B, Malekinejad H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Urmia University, 
Iran.

This study aimed to assess lipid peroxidation and antioxidant enzymes in goats
naturally infected with Babesia ovis. Red blood cell count (RBC), hemoglobin (Hb)
concentration, packed cell volume (PCV), malondialdehyde (MDA) concentration,
erythrocyte superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px), catalase
(CAT) activities and total antioxidant capacity (TAC) were determined in 15 goats
naturally infected with B. ovis as well as same number of healthy goats. The
parasitological diagnosis was confirmed using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
analysis by amplifying a partial 18S rRNA gene sequence of B. ovis. Percentage of
parasitemia varied from 0.01 to 1%. The activities of erythrocyte GSH-Px, SOD,
CAT and TAC were significantly lower (p<0.05) in the infected goats than in
healthy ones. MDA concentration in erythrocytes of infected goats was
significantly higher in infected goats than in healthy ones (p<0.05). Severity of
parasitemia showed a positive correlation with the MDA and negative correlation
with PCV, SOD, CAT, GSH-Px and TAC. Also, MDA was negatively correlated with PCV,
SOD, CAT, GSH-Px and TAC. The results of this study suggested that oxidative
damage to RBCs may contribute to the pathogenesis of anemia in caprine
babesiosis.

DOI: 10.2478/s11686-012-0038-1 
PMID: 22875672  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

