
1. J Immunol. 2013 May 15;190(10):5128-41. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203396. Epub 2013 
Apr 15.

The survival of memory CD8 T cells that is mediated by IL-15 correlates with
sustained protection against malaria.

Zarling S(1), Berenzon D, Dalai S, Liepinsh D, Steers N, Krzych U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Immunology, Malaria Vaccine Branch, Walter Reed Army
Institute of Research, Silver Spring, MD 20910, USA.

Ag-specific memory T cell responses elicited by infections or vaccinations are
inextricably linked to long-lasting protective immunity. Studies of protective
immunity among residents of malaria endemic areas indicate that memory responses 
to Plasmodium Ags are not adequately developed or maintained, as people who
survive episodes of childhood malaria are still vulnerable to either persistent
or intermittent malaria infections. In contrast, multiple exposures to
radiation-attenuated Plasmodium berghei sporozoites (Pb γ-spz) induce
long-lasting protective immunity to experimental sporozoite challenge. We
previously demonstrated that sterile protection induced by Pb γ-spz is MHC class 
I-dependent and CD8 T cells are the key effectors. IFN-γ(+) CD8 T cells that
arise in Pb γ-spz-immunized B6 mice are found predominantly in the liver and are 
sensitive to levels of liver-stage Ag depot and they express CD44(hi)CD62L(lo)
markers indicative of effector/effector memory phenotype. The developmentally
related central memory CD8 T (TCM) cells express elevated levels of CD122
(IL-15Rβ), which suggests that CD8 TCM cells depend on IL-15 for maintenance.
Using IL-15-deficient mice, we demonstrate in this study that although protective
immunity is inducible in these mice, protection is short-lived, mainly owing to
the inability of CD8 TCM cells to survive in the IL-15-deficient milieu. We
present a hypothesis consistent with a model whereby intrahepatic CD8 TCM cells, 
being maintained by IL-15-mediated survival and basal proliferation, are
conscripted into the CD8 effector/effector memory T cell pool during subsequent
infections.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203396 
PMCID: PMC3646969
PMID: 23589611  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

