
1. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013 Jun;97(6):1364-74. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.112.050302. Epub 2013
Apr 24.

Effects of inflammation and Plasmodium falciparum infection on soluble
transferrin receptor and plasma ferritin concentration in different age groups: a
prospective longitudinal study in Côte d'Ivoire.

Righetti AA(1), Wegmüller R, Glinz D, Ouattara M, Adiossan LG, N'Goran EK,
Utzinger J, Hurrell RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Swiss Tropical and Public Health
Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Iron deficiency (ID) is a major cause of anemia, along with other
nutritional, parasitic, and genetic factors. Accurate biomarkers are needed to
estimate the relative contribution of ID to anemia. Soluble transferrin receptor 
(sTfR) is thought to be unaffected by inflammation.
OBJECTIVES: The objectives were to determine the difference in sTfR and plasma
ferritin (PF) concentrations among infants (6-23 mo of age), school-age children 
(6-8 y of age), and women (15-25 y of age) with and without inflammation and with
and without Plasmodium falciparum infection and to assess the effect of adjusting
sTfR and PF for inflammation or for P. falciparum infection on the estimated
prevalence of ID.
DESIGN: The data were derived from a 14-mo prospective longitudinal survey on
anemia, which was conducted in the Taabo area, south-central Côte d'Ivoire.
RESULTS: At baseline, sTfR concentration was significantly higher in infants and 
school-age children with either inflammation or P. falciparum infection than in
control individuals without inflammation or without P. falciparum infection.
Individuals with inflammation had significantly higher PF concentrations than did
subjects without inflammation. Adjustments in sTfR concentrations for
inflammation or P. falciparum infection in infants and school-age children
resulted in significantly lower ID prevalence. Adjustment of PF for inflammation 
and Plasmodium infection resulted in a higher ID prevalence in infants and women.
CONCLUSIONS: In Ivorian infants and school-age children, ID prevalence was
considerably lower after adjustment of sTfR for inflammation. However, as the
prevalence estimates for ID differed widely if based on sTfR or PF, caution is
still needed when estimating ID prevalence in areas with a high prevalence of
inflammation or malaria. This trial was registered at controlled-trials.com as
ISRCTN02181959.

DOI: 10.3945/ajcn.112.050302 
PMID: 23615827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

