
1. Epilepsia. 2013 Jun;54(6):990-1001. doi: 10.1111/epi.12173. Epub 2013 Apr 24.

The genetic risk of acute seizures in African children with falciparum malaria.

Kariuki SM(1), Rockett K, Clark TG, Reyburn H, Agbenyega T, Taylor TE, Birbeck
GL, Williams TN, Newton CR.

Author information: 
(1)Kenya Medical Research Institute, Centre for Geographic Medicine Research
Coast, Kilifi, Kenya. skariuki@kemri-wellcome.org

PURPOSE: It is unclear why some children with falciparum malaria develop acute
seizures and what determines the phenotype of seizures. We sought to determine if
polymorphisms of malaria candidate genes are associated with acute seizures.
METHODS: Logistic regression was used to investigate genetic associations with
malaria-associated seizures (MAS) and complex MAS (repetitive, prolonged, or
focal seizures) in four MalariaGEN African sites, namely: Blantyre, Malawi;
Kilifi, Kenya; Kumasi, Ghana; and Muheza, Tanzania. The analysis was repeated for
five inheritance models (dominant, heterozygous, recessive, additive, and
general) and adjusted for potential confounders and multiple testing.
KEY FINDINGS: Complex phenotypes of seizures constituted 71% of all admissions
with MAS across the sites. MAS were strongly associated with cluster of
differentiation-ligand-rs3092945 in females in Kilifi (p = 0.00068) and
interleukin (IL)-17 receptor E-rs708567 in the pooled analysis across the sites
(p = 0.00709). Complex MAS were strongly associated with epidermal growth factor 
module-containing mucin-like hormone receptor (EMR)1-rs373533 in Kumasi (p =
0.00033), but none in the pooled analysis. Focal MAS were strongly associated
with IL-20 receptor A-rs1555498 in Muheza (p = 0.00016), but none in the pooled
analysis. Prolonged MAS were strongly associated with complement receptor
1-rs17047660 in Kilifi (p = 0.00121) and glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase-rs1050828 in females in the pooled analysis (p = 0.00155).
Repetitive MAS were strongly associated with EMR1-rs373533 in Kumasi (p =
0.00003) and cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance receptor-rs17140229 in the
pooled analysis (p = 0.00543). MAS with coma/cerebral malaria were strongly
associated with EMR1-rs373533 in Kumasi (p = 0.00019) and IL10-rs3024500 in the
pooled analysis across the sites (p = 0.00064).
SIGNIFICANCE: We have identified a number of genetic associations that may
explain the risk of seizures in >2,000 cases admitted to hospitals with MAS
across four sites in Africa. These associations differed according to phenotype
of seizures and site.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Â© 2013 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.12173 
PMCID: PMC3734649
PMID: 23614351  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

