
1. Oncogene. 2014 Apr 3;33(14):1809-17. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.134. Epub 2013 May 13.

Theileria induces oxidative stress and HIF1α activation that are essential for
host leukocyte transformation.

Medjkane S(1), Perichon M(1), Marsolier J(1), Dairou J(2), Weitzman JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)University Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Epigenetics and Cell Fate, UMR 
7216 CNRS, Paris, France.
(2)University Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Laboratoire de Biologie
Fonctionnelle et adaptative (Equipe: RMCX), Paris, France.

Complex links between infection and cancer suggest that we still can learn much
about tumorigenesis by studying how infectious agents hijack the host cell
machinery. We studied the effects of an intracellular parasite called Theileria
that infects bovine leukocytes and turns them into invasive cancer-like cells. We
investigated the host cells pathways that are deregulated in infected leukocytes 
and might link infection and lymphoproliferative disease. We show that
intracellular Theileria parasites drive a Warburg-like phenotype in infected host
leukocytes, characterized by increased expression of metabolic regulators,
increased glucose uptake and elevated lactate production, which were lost when
the parasite was eliminated. The cohabitation of the parasites within the host
cells leads to disruption of the redox balance (as measured by reduced/oxidized
glutathione ratio) and elevated ROS (reactive oxygen species) levels, associated 
with chronic stabilization of the hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF1α).
Inhibition of HIF1α (pharmacologically or genetically), or treatment with
antioxidants, led to a marked reduction in expression of aerobic glycolytic genes
and inhibited the transformed phenotype. These data show that stabilization of
HIF1α, following increased ROS production, modulates host glucose metabolism and 
is critical for parasite-induced transformation. Our study expands knowledge
about the molecular strategy used by the parasite Theileria to induce the
transformed phenotypes of infected cells via reprogramming of glucose metabolism 
and redox signaling.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2013.134 
PMID: 23665677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

