
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(7):e1003491. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003491. Epub 2013 Jul
11.

Irf8-regulated genomic responses drive pathological inflammation during cerebral 
malaria.

Berghout J(1), Langlais D, Radovanovic I, Tam M, MacMicking JD, Stevenson MM,
Gros P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Complex Traits Group, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2015 Mar;11(3):e1004719.

Interferon Regulatory Factor 8 (IRF8) is required for development, maturation and
expression of anti-microbial defenses of myeloid cells. BXH2 mice harbor a
severely hypomorphic allele at Irf8 (Irf8(R294C)) that causes susceptibility to
infection with intracellular pathogens including Mycobacterium tuberculosis. We
report that BXH2 are completely resistant to the development of cerebral malaria 
(ECM) following Plasmodium berghei ANKA infection. Comparative transcriptional
profiling of brain RNA as well as chromatin immunoprecipitation and
high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) was used to identify IRF8-regulated genes
whose expression is associated with pathological acute neuroinflammation. Genes
increased by infection were strongly enriched for IRF8 binding sites, suggesting 
that IRF8 acts as a transcriptional activator in inflammatory programs. These
lists were enriched for myeloid-specific pathways, including interferon
responses, antigen presentation and Th1 polarizing cytokines. We show that
inactivation of several of these downstream target genes (including the Irf8
transcription partner Irf1) confers protection against ECM. ECM-resistance in
Irf8 and Irf1 mutants is associated with impaired myeloid and lymphoid cells
function, including production of IL12p40 and IFNÎ³. We note strong overlap
between genes bound and regulated by IRF8 during ECM and genes regulated in the
lungs of M. tuberculosis infected mice. This IRF8-dependent network contains
several genes recently identified as risk factors in acute and chronic human
inflammatory conditions. We report a common core of IRF8-bound genes forming a
critical inflammatory host-response network.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003491 
PMCID: PMC3708918
PMID: 23853600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

