
1. J Immunol. 2014 Apr 15;192(8):3686-96. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301863. Epub 2014
Mar 14.

MAPK phosphotase 5 deficiency contributes to protection against blood-stage
Plasmodium yoelii 17XL infection in mice.

Cheng Q(1), Zhang Q, Xu X, Yin L, Sun L, Lin X, Dong C, Pan W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Disease and Vaccine Development, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China;

Cell-mediated immunity plays a crucial role in the development of host resistance
to asexual blood-stage malaria infection. However, little is known of the
regulatory factors involved in this process. In this study, we investigated the
impact of MAPK phosphotase 5 (MKP5) on protective immunity against a lethal
Plasmodium yoelii 17XL blood-stage infection using MKP5 knockout C57BL/6 mice.
Compared with wild-type control mice, MKP5 knockout mice developed significantly 
lower parasite burdens with prolonged survival times. We found that this
phenomenon correlated with a rapid and strong IFN-γ-dependent cellular immune
response during the acute phase of infection. Inactivation of IFN-γ by the
administration of a neutralizing Ab significantly reduced the protective effects 
in MKP5 knockout mice. By analyzing IFN-γ production in innate and adaptive
lymphocyte subsets, we observed that MKP5 deficiency specifically enhanced the
IFN-γ response mediated by CD4+ T cells, which was attributable to the increased 
stimulatory capacity of splenic CD11c+ dendritic cells. Furthermore, following
vaccination with whole blood-stage soluble plasmodial Ag, MKP5 knockout mice
acquired strongly enhanced Ag-specific immune responses and a higher level of
protection against subsequent P. yoelii 17XL challenge. Finally, we found the
enhanced response mediated by MKP5 deficiency resulted in a lethal consequence in
mice when infected with nonlethal P. yoelii 17XNL. Thus, our data indicate that
MKP5 is a potential regulator of immune resistance against Plasmodium infection
in mice, and that an understanding of the role of MKP5 in manipulating
anti-malaria immunity may provide valuable information on the development of
better control strategies for human malaria.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301863 
PMID: 24634491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

