
1. BMC Vet Res. 2014 May 12;10:111. doi: 10.1186/1746-6148-10-111.

Identification of serum biomarkers in dogs naturally infected with Babesia canis 
canis using a proteomic approach.

Kuleš J, Mrljak V, Barić Rafaj R, Selanec J, Burchmore R, Eckersall PD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, College of Medical,
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
David.Eckersall@glasgow.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Canine babesiosis is a tick-borne disease that is caused by the
haemoprotozoan parasites of the genus Babesia. There are limited data on serum
proteomics in dogs, and none of the effect of babesiosis on the serum proteome.
The aim of this study was to identify the potential serum biomarkers of
babesiosis using proteomic techniques in order to increase our understanding
about disease pathogenesis.
RESULTS: Serum samples were collected from 25 dogs of various breeds and sex with
naturally occurring babesiosis caused by B. canis canis. Blood was collected on
the day of admission (day 0), and subsequently on the 1st and 6th day of
treatment. Two-dimensional electrophoresis (2DE) of pooled serum samples of dogs 
with naturally occurring babesiosis (day 0, day 1 and day 6) and healthy dogs
were run in triplicate. 2DE image analysis showed 64 differentially expressed
spots with p ≤ 0.05 and 49 spots with fold change ≥2. Six selected spots were
excised manually and subjected to trypsin digest prior to identification by
electrospray ionisation mass spectrometry on an Amazon ion trap tandem mass
spectrometry (MS/MS). Mass spectrometry data was processed using Data Analysis
software and the automated Matrix Science Mascot Daemon server. Protein
identifications were assigned using the Mascot search engine to interrogate
protein sequences in the NCBI Genbank database. A number of differentially
expressed serum proteins involved in inflammation mediated acute phase response, 
complement and coagulation cascades, apolipoproteins and vitamin D metabolism
pathway were identified in dogs with babesiosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings confirmed two dominant pathogenic mechanisms of
babesiosis, haemolysis and acute phase response. These results may provide
possible serum biomarker candidates for clinical monitoring of babesiosis and
this study could serve as the basis for further proteomic investigations in
canine babesiosis.

DOI: 10.1186/1746-6148-10-111 
PMCID: PMC4045879
PMID: 24885808  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

