
1. Malar J. 2014 Jun 16;13:236. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-236.

Association of candidate gene polymorphisms and TGF-beta/IL-10 levels with
malaria in three regions of Cameroon: a case-control study.

Apinjoh TO, Anchang-Kimbi JK, Njua-Yafi C, Ngwai AN, Mugri RN, Clark TG, Rockett 
KA, Kwiatkowski DP, Achidi EA(1); MalariaGEN Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Buea, Buea,
Cameroon. achidi_e@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum malaria is one of the most widespread and
deadliest infectious diseases in children under five years in endemic areas. The 
disease has been a strong force for evolutionary selection in the human genome,
and uncovering the critical host genetic factors that confer resistance to the
disease would provide clues to the molecular basis of protective immunity and
improve vaccine development initiatives.
METHODS: The effect of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and plasma
transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) and interleukin 10 (IL-10) levels on
malaria pathology was investigated in a case-control study of 1862 individuals
from two major ethnic groups in three regions with intense perennial P.
falciparum transmission in Cameroon. Thirty-four malaria candidate polymorphisms,
including the sickle cell trait (HbS), were assayed on the Sequenom iPLEX
platform while plasma TGF-β and IL-10 levels were measured by sandwich ELISA.
RESULTS: The study confirms the known protective effect of HbS against severe
malaria and also reveals a protective effect of SNPs in the nitrogen oxide
synthase 2 (NOS2) gene against malaria infection, anaemia and uncomplicated
malaria. Furthermore, ADCY9 rs10775349 (additive G) and ABO rs8176746 AC
individuals were associated with protection from hyperpyrexia and
hyperparasitaemia, respectively. Meanwhile, individuals with the EMR1 rs373533
GT, EMR1 rs461645 CT and RTN3 rs542998 (additive C) genotypes were more
susceptible to hyperpyrexia while both females and males with the rs1050828 and
rs1050829 SNPs of G6PD, respectively, were more vulnerable to anaemia. Plasma
TGF-β levels were strongly correlated with heterozygosity for the ADCY9 rs2230739
and HBB rs334 SNPs while individuals with the ABO rs8176746 AC genotype had lower
IL-10 levels.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, this study suggests that some rare polymorphisms in
candidate genes may have important implications for the susceptibility of
Cameroonians to severe malaria. Moreover using the uncomplicated malaria
phenotype may permit the identification of novel pathways in the early
development of the disease.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-236 
PMCID: PMC4077225
PMID: 24934404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

