
1. Hum Genet. 2015 Apr;134(4):375-92. doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1525-2. Epub 2015 Jan 
30.

Differential positive selection of malaria resistance genes in three indigenous
populations of Peninsular Malaysia.

Liu X(1), Yunus Y, Lu D, Aghakhanian F, Saw WY, Deng L, Ali M, Wang X, Nor FM,
Rahman TA, Shaari SA, Salleh MZ, Phipps ME, Ong RT, Xu S, Teo YY, Hoh BP.

Author information: 
(1)NUS Graduate School for Integrative Science and Engineering, National
University of Singapore, Singapore, 117456, Singapore.

Erratum in
    Hum Genet. 2015 Jun;134(6):677. Ghazali, Fadzilah [corrected to Nor, Fadzilah
Mohd].

The indigenous populations from Peninsular Malaysia, locally known as Orang Asli,
continue to adopt an agro-subsistence nomadic lifestyle, residing primarily
within natural jungle habitats. Leading a hunter-gatherer lifestyle in a tropical
jungle environment, the Orang Asli are routinely exposed to malaria. Here we
surveyed the genetic architecture of individuals from four Orang Asli tribes with
high-density genotyping across more than 2.5 million polymorphisms. These tribes 
reside in different geographical locations in Peninsular Malaysia and belong to
three main ethno-linguistic groups, where there is minimal interaction between
the tribes. We first dissect the genetic diversity and admixture between the
tribes and with neighboring urban populations. Later, by implementing five
metrics, we investigated the genome-wide signatures for positive natural
selection of these Orang Asli, respectively. Finally, we searched for evidence of
genomic adaptation to the pressure of malaria infection. We observed that
different evolutionary responses might have emerged in the different Orang Asli
communities to mitigate malaria infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-014-1525-2 
PMID: 25634076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

