
1. Int J Parasitol. 2015 Oct;45(12):797-808. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2015.07.003. Epub
2015 Aug 19.

The HFE genotype and a formulated diet controlling for iron status attenuate
experimental cerebral malaria in mice.

Leitner DF(1), Stoute JA(2), Landmesser M(2), Neely E(1), Connor JR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Neurosurgery, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine,
Hershey, PA 17033, USA.
(2)Dept of Medicine, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey, 
PA 17033, USA.
(3)Dept of Neurosurgery, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine,
Hershey, PA 17033, USA. Electronic address: jconnor@hmc.psu.edu.

Plasmodium falciparum infects approximately 500million individuals each year. A
small but significant number of infections lead to complications such as cerebral
malaria. Cerebral malaria is associated with myelin damage and neurological
deficits in survivors, and iron status is thought to impact the outcome of
infection. We evaluated whether a mouse model of experimental cerebral malaria
with Plasmodium berghei ANKA strain was altered by dietary iron deficiency or
genetic iron overload (H67D HFE). We found that H67D mice had increased survival 
over H67H (wild type) mice. Moreover, a specifically designed formulation diet
increased survival regardless of whether the diet was iron deficient or iron
adequate. To determine potential mechanisms underlying demyelination in
experimental cerebral malaria, we measured Semaphorin4A (Sema4A) protein levels
in the brain because we found it is cytotoxic to oligodendrocytes. Sema4A was
increased in wild type mice that developed experimental cerebral malaria while
consuming standard rodent chow, consistent with a decrease in myelin basic
protein, an indicator of myelin integrity. The brains of iron deficient and H67D 
mice had lower levels of Sema4A. Myelin basic protein was decreased in brains of 
mice fed the iron deficient diet as has been previously reported. We also
examined erythropoietin, which is under consideration for treatment of cerebral
malaria, and IL-6, which is known to increase during infection. We found that
plasma erythropoietin was elevated and IL-6 was low in H67D mice and in the mice 
fed the formulation diets. These data reveal a paradigm-shifting concept that
maintaining iron status may not increase the mortality associated with malaria
and provide a dietary strategy for further examination. Moreover, the data
provide clues for exploring the mechanism to limit the co-morbidity associated
with experimental cerebral malaria that appears to include decreased Sema4A in
brain as well as elevated erythropoietin and lower IL-6 in plasma.

Copyright Â© 2015 Australian Society for Parasitology Inc. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2015.07.003 
PMID: 26296689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

