
1. Orthopedics. 2015 Sep;38(9):e852-5. doi: 10.3928/01477447-20150902-92.

Transfusion-Transmitted Babesiosis During Total Hip Arthroplasty.

Carnevale J, Feller R, Shalvoy RM.

Babesiosis is a potentially life-threatening zoonotic disease that is endemic to 
the northeastern United States and increasing in prevalence worldwide.
Transmitted by the same Ixodes tick responsible for Lyme disease, the
intraerythrocytic parasite Babesia causes a wide range of clinical
presentations--from asymptomatic carriage to a fulminant course with rapid
deterioration. Symptoms typically present 1 to 6 weeks after inoculation, with
the gradual onset of fatigue, malaise, weakness, and intermittent or sustained
fever as high as 40.9°C. Severe cases are associated with parasitemia greater
than 4%, alkaline phosphatase greater than 125 U/L, and white blood cell counts
greater than 5×10(9)/L. Definitive diagnosis is made by microscopic examination
of thin blood smears, polymerase chain reaction, and indirect immunofluorescent
antibody testing. The increasing frequency of babesiosis paired with a lack of
blood-donor screening assays poses a serious threat to the safety of the US blood
supply. Although babesiosis is responsible for 3.6% of transfusion-related
deaths, the Food and Drug Administration has yet to approve mandatory screening
for the parasite in donated blood. Historically, transfusion-transmitted
babesiosis has been thought to be isolated to the immunocompromised patient
population. However, a recent case of transfusion-transmitted babesiosis in an
immunocompetent patient following total hip arthroplasty is the first reported in
the literature and may represent a growing risk to a far greater segment of the
population than previously thought. This article summarizes the current state of 
transfusion-transmitted babesiosis and the detrimental impact of this infection
on blood transfusion safety.

Copyright 2015, SLACK Incorporated.

DOI: 10.3928/01477447-20150902-92 
PMID: 26375547  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

