
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 2;6:19766. doi: 10.1038/srep19766.

Quantitative phospho-proteomics reveals the Plasmodium merozoite triggers
pre-invasion host kinase modification of the red cell cytoskeleton.

Zuccala ES(1)(2), Satchwell TJ(3), Angrisano F(1)(2), Tan YH(1)(2), Wilson MC(3),
Heesom KJ(3), Baum J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia.
(3)School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, South Kensington,
London, United Kingdom.

The invasive blood-stage malaria parasite - the merozoite - induces rapid
morphological changes to the target erythrocyte during entry. However, evidence
for active molecular changes in the host cell that accompany merozoite invasion
is lacking. Here, we use invasion inhibition assays, erythrocyte resealing and
high-definition imaging to explore red cell responses during invasion. We show
that although merozoite entry does not involve erythrocyte actin reorganisation, 
it does require ATP to complete the process. Towards dissecting the ATP
requirement, we present an in depth quantitative phospho-proteomic analysis of
the erythrocyte during each stage of invasion. Specifically, we demonstrate
extensive increased phosphorylation of erythrocyte proteins on merozoite
attachment, including modification of the cytoskeletal proteins beta-spectrin and
PIEZO1. The association with merozoite contact but not active entry demonstrates 
that parasite-dependent phosphorylation is mediated by host-cell kinase activity.
This provides the first evidence that the erythrocyte is stimulated to respond to
early invasion events through molecular changes in its membrane architecture.

DOI: 10.1038/srep19766 
PMCID: PMC4735681
PMID: 26830761  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

