
1. Interdiscip Perspect Infect Dis. 2016;2016:5954394. doi: 10.1155/2016/5954394.
Epub 2016 Mar 9.

Parasitaemia and Its Relation to Hematological Parameters and Liver Function
among Patients Malaria in Abs, Hajjah, Northwest Yemen.

Al-Salahy M(1), Shnawa B(2), Abed G(1), Mandour A(3), Al-Ezzi A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Zoology Department, Faculty of Science, Assiut University, Assiut 71516,
Egypt.
(2)Biology Department, Faculty of Science, Soran University, Kurdistan, Iraq.
(3)Parasitology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Assiut University, Assiut 71516,
Egypt.
(4)Biology Department, Faculty of Education, Aden University, Aden, Yemen.

Plasmodium falciparum malaria is the most common infection in Yemen. The present 
study aims to investigate changes in hematological and hepatic function indices
of P. falciparum infected individuals. This study included 67 suspected
falciparum malarial patients attended in clinics and rural Abs Hospital (Tehama, 
Hajjah), Yemen, from October 2013 to April 2014. The diagnosis of malaria was
confirmed by thick and thin film with Giemsa staining of malaria parasite.
Hematological parameters and serum levels of aspartate transaminase (AST),
alanine transaminase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and bilirubin (total and 
direct) as test indicators of liver function were studied. Patients with
parasitaemia tended to have significantly lower hemoglobin, hematocrit, white
blood cell count, lymphocytes, and platelets, compared with healthy normal
subjects. Neutrophils levels were significantly higher in cases of falciparum
malaria in comparison to healthy normal subjects. Serums AST, ALT, ALP, and
bilirubin (total and direct) in falciparum malaria patients were significantly
higher (p < 0.0001) than those of falciparum malaria of free individuals.
Hematological and liver dysfunctions measured parameters were seen associated
with moderate and severe parasitaemia infection. This study concludes that
hematological and hepatic dysfunction parameters could be indicator of malaria in
endemic regions.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/5954394 
PMCID: PMC4804037
PMID: 27051422 

