
1. J Parasit Dis. 2016 Sep;40(3):605-10. doi: 10.1007/s12639-014-0545-0. Epub 2014
Sep 11.

Theileriasis in crossbred cows and its therapeutic management: first report from 
Lushai hill district of Mizoram.

Sarma K(1), Prasad H(1), Das G(1), Behera P(1), Behera SK(1), Rajesh JB(1),
Borthakur SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Sciences and Animal
Husbandry, Central Agricultural University, Selesih, Aizawl, Mizoram India.
(2)Department of Veterinary Parasitology, College of Veterinary Sciences and
Animal Husbandry, Central Agricultural University, Selesih, Aizawl, Mizoram
India.

To know the prevalence of theileriosis infection, haemato-biochemical alteration 
and efficacy of Oxytetracycline in combination with Diaminazene aceturate
injection against theileriosis in Lushai hill district of Mizoram; fifty five
cross bred cattle were screened during July, 2013 to November, 2013. The
prevalence of tropical theileriosis was 9.09 % based on blood smear examination. 
Clinical features of the disease were manifested by high rise of body temperature
104.8 ± 1.2 °F, lymphadenopathy, inability to walk, anorexia, listlessness,
moderate anaemia, nasal discharge, edema of eye and corneal opacity. There were
marked decline (P < 0.01) in the haemoglobin 5.28 ± 1.81 gm/dl, total
erythrocytic count 2.14 ± 0.7 × 10(6)/ul, packed cell volume 18.10 ± 0.8 % and
total leukocyte count 6.95 ± 1.05 × 10(3)/ul, respectively. Erythrocyte
sedimentation rate was significantly increased (P < 0.01) up to
104.5 ± 12.4 mm/1st hour. The percentage of neutrophils increased 62.75 ± 2.77
and lymphocytes decreased drastically 28.69 ± 1.45 as compared with un-infected
cross bred cattle. Clinically infected cattle with Theileria annulata had
significantly low levels of total proteins and albumin, (P < 0.05) but AST,
total, direct and indirect bilirubin, BUN, creatinine levels and Ck-MB activity
were significantly high (P < 0.05). Oxytetracycline in combination with
Diaminazene aceturate was found effective against T. annulata and could control
fever and temperature returns to normalcy by 7th day post treatment along with
some haemato-biochemical profiles. In brief, the study revealed that tropical
theileriosis was prevalent in Lushai hill district of Mizoram especially among
cross breed cattle and had effect on hepatic, renal and cardiac function which
can be effectively controlled by Oxytetracycline and Diaminazene aceturate
injection.

DOI: 10.1007/s12639-014-0545-0 
PMCID: PMC4996158
PMID: 27605754 

