
1. Am J Pathol. 2016 Nov;186(11):2957-2969. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2016.07.020. Epub 
2016 Sep 15.

Endothelin-1 Treatment Induces an Experimental Cerebral Malaria-Like Syndrome in 
C57BL/6 Mice Infected with Plasmodium berghei NK65.

Martins YC(1), Freeman BD(1), Akide Ndunge OB(1), Weiss LM(2), Tanowitz HB(2),
Desruisseaux MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York.
(2)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York;
Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York.
(3)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York;
Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York.
Electronic address: m.desruis@einstein.yu.edu.

Plasmodium berghei ANKA infection of C57BL/6 mice is a widely used model of
experimental cerebral malaria (ECM). By contrast, the nonneurotropic P. berghei
NK65 (PbN) causes severe malarial disease in C57BL/6 mice but does not cause ECM.
Previous studies suggest that endothelin-1 (ET-1) contributes to the pathogenesis
of ECM. In this study, we characterize the role of ET-1 on ECM vascular
dysfunction. Mice infected with 106 PbN-parasitized red blood cells were treated 
with either ET-1 or saline from 2 to 8 days postinfection (dpi). Plasmodium
berghei ANKA-infected mice served as the positive control. ET-1-treated
PbN-infected mice exhibited neurological signs, hypothermia, and behavioral
alterations characteristic of ECM, dying 4 to 8 dpi. Parasitemia was not affected
by ET-1 treatment. Saline-treated PbN-infected mice did not display ECM,
surviving until 12 dpi. ET-1-treated PbN-infected mice displayed leukocyte
adhesion to the vascular endothelia and petechial hemorrhages throughout the
brain at 6 dpi. Intravital microscopic images demonstrated significant brain
arteriolar vessel constriction, decreased functional capillary density, and
increased blood-brain barrier permeability. These alterations were not present in
either ET-1-treated uninfected or saline-treated PbN-infected mice. In summary,
ET-1 treatment of PbN-infected mice induced an ECM-like syndrome, causing brain
vasoconstriction, adherence of activated leukocytes in the cerebral
microvasculature, and blood-brain barrier leakage, indicating that ET-1 is
involved in the genesis of brain microvascular alterations that are the hallmark 
of ECM.

Copyright © 2016 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2016.07.020 
PMCID: PMC5222963
PMID: 27640146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

