
1. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Nov 11;12(11):e1006011. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006011.
eCollection 2016 Nov.

Cytoadhesion to gC1qR through Plasmodium falciparum Erythrocyte Membrane Protein 
1 in Severe Malaria.

Magallón-Tejada A(1), Machevo S(2), Cisteró P(1), Lavstsen T(3), Aide P(2), Rubio
M(1), Jiménez A(1)(4), Turner L(3), Valmaseda A(1), Gupta H(1), De Las Salas
B(5), Mandomando I(2), Wang CW(3), Petersen JE(3), Muñoz J(1), Gascón J(1),
Macete E(2), Alonso PL(1)(2), Chitnis CE(6)(7), Bassat Q(1)(2)(8), Mayor A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)ISGlobal, Barcelona Ctr. Int. Health Res. (CRESIB), Hospital
Clínic-Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigação em Saúde da Manhiça, Maputo, Mozambique.
(3)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of International Health,
Immunology, and Microbiology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, and Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital
(Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Consorcio de Investigación Biomédica y Salud Pública, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia.
(6)Department of Parasites and Insect Vectors, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(7)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
New Delhi, India.
(8)ICREA, Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain.

Cytoadhesion of Plasmodium falciparum infected erythrocytes to gC1qR has been
associated with severe malaria, but the parasite ligand involved is currently
unknown. To assess if binding to gC1qR is mediated through the P. falciparum
erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) family, we analyzed by static binding
assays and qPCR the cytoadhesion and var gene transcriptional profile of 86 P.
falciparum isolates from Mozambican children with severe and uncomplicated
malaria, as well as of a P. falciparum 3D7 line selected for binding to gC1qR
(Pf3D7gC1qR). Transcript levels of DC8 correlated positively with cytoadhesion to
gC1qR (rho = 0.287, P = 0.007), were higher in isolates from children with severe
anemia than with uncomplicated malaria, as well as in isolates from Europeans
presenting a first episode of malaria (n = 21) than Mozambican adults (n = 25),
and were associated with an increased IgG recognition of infected erythrocytes by
flow cytometry. Pf3D7gC1qR overexpressed the DC8 type PFD0020c (5.3-fold
transcript levels relative to Seryl-tRNA-synthetase gene) compared to the
unselected line (0.001-fold). DBLβ12 from PFD0020c bound to gC1qR in ELISA-based 
binding assays and polyclonal antibodies against this domain were able to inhibit
binding to gC1qR of Pf3D7gC1qR and four Mozambican P. falciparum isolates by 50%.
Our results show that DC8-type PfEMP1s mediate binding to gC1qR through conserved
surface epitopes in DBLβ12 domain which can be inhibited by strain-transcending
functional antibodies. This study supports a key role for gC1qR in
malaria-associated endovascular pathogenesis and suggests the feasibility of
designing interventions against severe malaria targeting this specific
interaction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006011 
PMCID: PMC5106025
PMID: 27835682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

