
1. Mol Biol Cell. 2017 Mar 15;28(6):726-735. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E16-07-0531. Epub 2017
Jan 25.

Sequestration of cholesterol within the host late endocytic pathway restricts
liver-stage Plasmodium development.

Petersen W(1)(2), Stenzel W(3), Silvie O(4), Blanz J(5), Saftig P(5),
Matuschewski K(1)(2), Ingmundson A(6)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Parasitology, Humboldt University, 10115 Berlin, Germany.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, 10117 Berlin, Germany.
(3)Institute for Neuropathology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin, 10117 Berlin,
Germany.
(4)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U1135, Centre
d'Immunologie et des Maladies Infectieuses, F-75013 Paris, France.
(5)Institute of Biochemistry, Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, 24098 Kiel,
Germany.
(6)Molecular Parasitology, Humboldt University, 10115 Berlin, Germany
alyssa.ingmundson@hu-berlin.de.

While lysosomes are degradative compartments and one of the defenses against
invading pathogens, they are also hubs of metabolic activity. Late endocytic
compartments accumulate around Plasmodium berghei liver-stage parasites during
development, and whether this is a host defense strategy or active recruitment by
the parasites is unknown. In support of the latter hypothesis, we observed that
the recruitment of host late endosomes (LEs) and lysosomes is reduced in uis4-
parasites, which lack a parasitophorous vacuole membrane protein and arrest
during liver-stage development. Analysis of parasite development in host cells
deficient for late endosomal or lysosomal proteins revealed that the Niemann-Pick
type C (NPC) proteins, which are involved in cholesterol export from LEs, and the
lysosome-associated membrane proteins (LAMP) 1 and 2 are important for robust
liver-stage P. berghei growth. Using the compound U18666A, which leads to
cholesterol sequestration in LEs similar to that seen in NPC- and LAMP-deficient 
cells, we show that the restriction of parasite growth depends on cholesterol
sequestration and that targeting this process can reduce parasite burden in vivo.
Taken together, these data reveal that proper LE and lysosome function positively
contributes to liver-stage Plasmodium development.

© 2017 Petersen et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for
Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is
available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E16-07-0531 
PMCID: PMC5349780
PMID: 28122820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

