
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2017 May;188(2):283-292. doi: 10.1111/cei.12936. Epub 2017 Feb 
28.

Sickle cell trait is associated with controlled levels of haem and mild
proinflammatory response during acute malaria infection.

Ademolue TW(1)(2), Amodu OK(2), Awandare GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)West African Centre for Cell Biology of Infectious Pathogens, Department of
Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology, College of Basic and Applied Sciences, 
University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana.
(2)Institute of Child Health, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.

The controlled induction of haemoxygenase-1 (HO-1), an enzyme that catabolizes
haem, has been shown to reduce haem, preventing pathologies associated with haem 
toxicity. The hemoglobin genotype HbAS confers reduced susceptibility to severe
complications of malaria by a mechanism that is not well understood. Using a
longitudinal approach, we investigated the effect of baseline concentrations of
HO-1 on the accumulation of haem during acute Plasmodium falciparum malaria in
HbAS and HbAA genotypes. Plasma concentrations of haem, HO-1 and cytokines were
quantified in venous blood obtained from children (9 months-5 years of age)
during malaria infection, and at convalescence (baseline levels). Parasitaemia
was determined during malaria infection. In patients with the HbAA genotype,
there was a significant elevation in the plasma concentration of haem
(P = 0.002), and a consequent increased induction of HO-1 (P < 0.001) during
falciparum malaria compared with levels at convalescence. Contrary to HbAA,
plasma concentration of haem did not change in the HbAS genotypical group
(P = 0·110), and the induction of HO-1 was reduced during malaria compared with
levels at convalescence (P = 0·006). Higher plasma levels of haem were observed
in HbAS compared with HbAA at convalescence (P = 0·010), but this difference did 
not affect the levels of HO-1 within each genotype (P = 0·450). Relatively milder
proinflammatory responses were observed in HbAS children during malaria infection
compared to HbAA children. Our findings suggest that a mechanism of reduced
susceptibility to severe malaria pathologies by the HbAS genotype may involve the
control of haem, leading to controlled levels of HO-1 and milder proinflammatory 
responses during acute malaria.

© 2017 The Authors. Clinical & Experimental Immunology published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of British Society for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/cei.12936 
PMCID: PMC5383446
PMID: 28142190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

