
1. Cell Immunol. 1995 Jan;160(1):79-90.

Plasmodium yoelii in mice: differential induction of cytokine gene expression
during hyporesponsiveness induction and restimulation.

Lucas B(1), Smith K, Haque A.

Author information: 
(1)Unit√© Mixte INSERM U 167, CNRS 624, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

Acute Plasmodium yoelii murine malaria is associated with a marked depression of 
splenic T cell responses. The present study was undertaken to address the
question if a defect in T cell proliferation results from a relative increase of 
a non-T cell population in the spleen or real biological changes occurring in T
cells of the spleen after infection. When animals were acutely infected, the
splenic cells responded poorly to cross-linked anti-CD3 mAb, Con A, and PWM
stimulation. At this stage, a very limited array of cytokine was expressed. We
failed to detect the transcripts for IL-2R p55, IL-2, IL-6, IL-10, and IFN-gamma 
in mice with acute P. yoelii malaria irrespective of the number of splenocytes
subjected to RT-PCR. In contrast, late in the infection when mice cleared the
parasites and became resistant to reinfection, mRNAs for the above cytokines as
well as for IL-4, IL-5, GM-CSF, and TNF-alpha were detectable. During this late
phase of infection, lymphocytes proliferated vigorously in response to TCR- and T
cell mitogen-mediated stimulation. Surprisingly, during an early phase (as early 
as 3 days postinfection) with low parasitemia, before the establishment of T cell
unresponsiveness, a broad array of cytokine expression including IL-2 and
IFN-gamma expression as well as marked lymphoproliferative response upon T cell
mitogen- and TCR-mediated stimulation was observed. When the expression of
cytokine gene in freshly isolated (ex vivo) splenocytes from P. yoelii-infected
animals was investigated, a similar pattern of cytokine profile was detected. We 
devised a methodology in which RNA from an increasing number of splenocytes
(ranging from 1 to 16 million) was used to compensate for any difference in the
frequency of splenic T cells between immune and acutely infected mice and to
augment target molecules which could be measured simultaneously by PCR. The data 
presented in this study led us to speculate that "anergy" or relative increase of
a non-T cell population cannot account solely for the T cell unresponsiveness in 
the acute phase of infection. We suggest that inactivation or/and ablation of
reactive T cells may explain T cell hyporesponsiveness during acute malaria.

DOI: 10.1016/0008-8749(95)80012-8 
PMID: 7842488  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

