
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1993 Dec;49(6):720-5.

Plasma antioxidants and lipid peroxidation products in falciparum malaria.

Das BS(1), Patnaik JK, Mohanty S, Mishra SK, Mohanty D, Satpathy SK, Bose TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Ispat General Hospital, Rourkela, Orissa, India.

To investigate the influence of Plasmodium falciparum malaria on plasma
antioxidants and lipid peroxidation, plasma ascorbate, urate, total protein and
albumin, ceruloplasmin and malondialdehyde (MDA) were determined in two groups of
42 patients each, one with mild and the other with severe falciparum malaria, and
in an equal number of age- and sex-matched control subjects. Plasma MDA was found
to be significantly higher in malaria patients, and the increase was proportional
to the severity of the disease. Of the antioxidants, ascorbate and albumin
decreased with severity of disease while urate and ceruloplasmin increased. Only 
ascorbate correlated inversely with MDA both in mild (r = -0.341, P < 0.05) and
severe malaria (r = 0.545, P < 0.01). While plasma albumin correlated inversely
(r = -0.442, P < 0.01), urate and ceruloplasmin correlated directly (r = 0.419, P
< 0.01 and r = 0.349, P < 0.05, respectively) only in patients with severe
malaria. These antioxidants also correlated well with markers of disease
severity, indicating the influence of disease severity in regulating their levels
in plasma. The presence of significant quantities of ascorbate and albumin, along
with increases in some of the other antioxidants and MDA, indicates
ineffectiveness of the antioxidant defense system in controlling plasma lipid
peroxide content. Increased amounts of thiobarbituric acid-reactive material
could have been the result of spillover from increased tissue peroxidation or the
presence of pro-oxidants in malarial plasma.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.1993.49.720 
PMID: 8279640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

