
1. EMBO J. 1993 Apr;12(4):1621-31.

Evidence for the induction of casein kinase II in bovine lymphocytes transformed 
by the intracellular protozoan parasite Theileria parva.

ole-MoiYoi OK(1), Brown WC, Iams KP, Nayar A, Tsukamoto T, Macklin MD.

Author information: 
(1)International Laboratory for Research on Animal Diseases, (ILRAD), Nairobi,
Kenya.

Theileria parva is an obligate, intracellular, parasitic protozoan that causes
East Coast fever, an acute leukemia-like disease of cattle. T. parva and the
related parasite, Theileria annulata, are unique among protozoa in that their
intralymphocytic stages induce transformation of bovid lymphocytes. Comparison of
in vitro protein kinase activities between uninfected IL-2-dependent T
lymphoblasts and T. parva-infected lymphocytes revealed a 4.7- to 12-fold
increase in total phosphorylation and the induction of a group of Theileria
infection-specific phosphoproteins. The enzyme that phosphorylates these
substrates is a serine/threonine kinase with substrate and effector specificities
of casein kinase (CK) II. Northern blot analyses revealed a 3.9- to 6.0-fold
increase in CKII alpha mRNA in the infected cells relative to the controls.
Furthermore, a marked increase of CKII antigen was observed on Western blots of
materials prepared from the infected cell lines. The antibovine CKII antibody
used in these studies immunoprecipitated a protein kinase that phosphorylated
casein in a reaction that was inhibited by low (nM) quantities of heparin. Our
data show marked increases of bovine CKII at the transcriptional, translational
and functional levels in T. parva-infected lymphocytes, relative to quiescent
cells or IL-2-dependent parental lymphoblasts. Bovine CKII thus appears to be
constitutively activated in these cells and we propose that this kinase may be an
important element in the signal-transducing pathways activated by Theileria in
bovid lymphocytes and perhaps in some leukemic cells.


PMCID: PMC413376
PMID: 8467809  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

