
1. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 1995 Oct;15(10):915-22.

Interleukin-10 downregulates proliferation and expression of interleukin-2
receptor p55 chain and interferon-gamma, but not interleukin-2 or interleukin-4, 
by parasite-specific helper T cell clones obtained from cattle chronically
infected with Babesia bovis or Fasciola hepatica.

Chitko-McKown CG(1), Ruef BJ, Rice-Ficht AC, Brown WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Texas A&M University, College Station
77843, USA.

Human recombinant interleukin-10 (IL-10) was previously shown to inhibit
accessory cell (AC)-dependent proliferation of bovine parasite-specific T helper 
1 (Th1), Th2, and Th0 cells in an IL-2-reversible manner (Brown, W.C., Woods,
V.M., Chitko-McKown, C.G., Hash, S.M., and Rice-Ficht, A.C., 1994. Infect. Immun.
62, 4697-4708). The present study was therefore designed to determine whether the
effect of IL-10 on T cell proliferation corresponded with downregulated
expression of cytokines, or their receptors, important for T cell growth. The
effects of IL-10 on cellular proliferation and expression of IL-2, IL-4, IL-2
receptor (IL-2R; p55), and IFN-gamma by Babesia bovis- or Fasciola
hepatica-specific Th cell clones were simultaneously evaluated. As shown
previously, IL-10 strongly inhibited proliferation of all types of Th cell
clones, although this did not correspond with reduced expression of IL-2 or IL-4 
mRNA or their products. In contrast, expression of IL-2R mRNA was consistently
reduced in the IL-10-treated clones. These results indicate that IL-10 does not
inhibit AC-dependent proliferation of bovine Th cells by downregulating T cell
cytokines; rather, IL-10 may act by downregulating IL-2R p55 expression and
subsequent signal transduction leading to decreased cellular proliferation.
IFN-gamma production was also consistently downregulated in the presence of
IL-10.

DOI: 10.1089/jir.1995.15.915 
PMID: 8564714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

