
1. J Leukoc Biol. 1997 Apr;61(4):459-68.

Macrophage-parasite relationship in theileriosis. Reversible phenotypic and
functional dedifferentiation of macrophages infected with Theileria annulata.

Sager H(1), Davis WC, Dobbelaere DA, Jungi TW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Virology, University of Bern, Switzerland.

Theileria annulata is a tick-transmitted protozoan parasite of cattle, which
transforms cells of macrophage (Mphi) or B cell lineage. Bone marrow cells, bone 
marrow cell-derived, and monocyte-derived Mphi were infected with T. annulata
sporozoites, and the resulting cell lines were assessed for surface marker
expression and function. Transformed lines expressed histocompatibility complex
(MHC) class-I and II, CD44, CD45, and the myeloid marker DH598-surface markers
CD14, CD11b, M-M7, TH57A, and to a lesser extent CD11a/CD18, CD11c, and ACT(B),
were down-regulated. Likewise, transformed cells failed to express Mphi functions
(Fc-receptor-mediated phagocytosis, phorbol myristate acetate-induced oxidative
burst, lipopolysaccharide-induced tumor necrosis factor alpha, and nitric oxide
generation and procoagulant activity up-regulation). Mphi origin was assured by
homogeneity of the starting population, cloning of cells by limiting dilution,
and repeated microscopic and flow cytometric monitoring of the cell lines.
Elimination of the parasite by treatment with BW720c resulted in the
re-acquisition of monocyte lineage properties, as evidenced by up-regulation of
CD14, and by re-acquisition of the capacity to ingest opsonized sheep red blood
cells and bacteria. Thus, Mphi transformed by T. annulata appear to undergo a
process of parasite-induced dedifferentiation but reassume the differentiated
phenotype upon elimination of the parasite.

DOI: 10.1002/jlb.61.4.459 
PMID: 9103233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

