
1. Parasitol Res. 1997;83(6):526-32.

Theileria-mediated constitutive expression of the casein kinase II-alpha subunit 
in bovine lymphoblastoid cells.

Shayan P(1), Ahmed JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Veterinary Infectiology and Immunology, Forschungszentrum Borstel,
Germany.

Theileria-infected cells are induced to undergo a transformation that is
reversible, since their proliferation is inhibited after elimination of the
schizonts by the theilericidal drug buparvaquone. The molecular mechanisms of the
transformation remain unknown. The experiments described in the present report
deal with the role of casein kinase (CK) II, a serine/threonine protein kinase,
in the permanent proliferation of the parasitized cells and show that the CK
II-alpha subunit is expressed in both T. annulata- and T. parva-infected cells
and that its expression is closely related to the presence of the parasites in
the host-cell cytoplasm. Thus, elimination of the schizonts by buparvaquone leads
to the inhibition of CK II-alpha subunit mRNA expression without affecting the
expression of actin. Cells treated with
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB) are inhibited in a
dose-dependent manner from under-going DNA synthesis as measured by
[3H]-thymidine incorporation and from expressing CK II. Furthermore, a
host-cell-specific CK II-alpha antisense inhibits DNA synthesis in a
dose-dependent manner. In the present study, 6 microM antisense reduced
[3H]-thymidine incorporation by Theileria-infected bovine cells to about 50%.
Using a primer derived from T. parva CK II, we detected a parasite-specific CK II
mRNA in T. parva-infected cell lines. Interestingly. DRB also inhibited the
expression of the parasite-specific CK II. However, to date we have not detected 
a target sequence for this primer in T. annulata schizonts.

DOI: 10.1007/s004360050293 
PMID: 9211502  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

