
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Nov 11;94(23):12527-32.

Parasite-mediated nuclear factor kappaB regulation in lymphoproliferation caused 
by Theileria parva infection.

Palmer GH(1), Machado J Jr, Fernandez P, Heussler V, Perinat T, Dobbelaere DA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Pathology, University of Bern, Bern 3012, Switzerland.

Infection of cattle with the protozoan Theileria parva results in uncontrolled T 
lymphocyte proliferation resulting in lesions resembling multicentric lymphoma.
Parasitized cells exhibit autocrine growth characterized by persistent
translocation of the transcriptional regulatory factor nuclear factor kappaB
(NFkappaB) to the nucleus and consequent enhanced expression of interleukin 2 and
the interleukin 2 receptor. How T. parva induces persistent NFkappaB activation, 
required for T cell activation and proliferation, is unknown. We hypothesized
that the parasite induces degradation of the IkappaB molecules which normally
sequester NFkappaB in the cytoplasm and that continuous degradation requires
viable parasites. Using T. parva-infected T cells, we showed that the parasite
mediates continuous phosphorylation and proteolysis of IkappaBalpha. However,
IkappaBalpha reaccumulated to high levels in parasitized cells, which indicated
that T. parva did not alter the normal NFkappaB-mediated positive feedback loop
which restores cytoplasmic IkappaBalpha. In contrast, T. parva mediated
continuous degradation of IkappaBbeta resulting in persistently low cytoplasmic
IkappaBbeta levels. Normal IkappaBbeta levels were only restored following T.
parva killing, indicating that viable parasites are required for IkappaBbeta
degradation. Treatment of T. parva-infected cells with pyrrolidine
dithiocarbamate, a metal chelator, blocked both IkappaB degradation and
consequent enhanced expression of NFkappaB dependent genes. However treatment
using the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine had no effect on either IkappaB levels or 
NFkappaB activation, indicating that the parasite subverts the normal IkappaB
regulatory pathway downstream of the requirement for reactive oxygen
intermediates. Identification of the critical points regulated by T. parva may
provide new approaches for disease control as well as increase our understanding 
of normal T cell function.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.23.12527 
PMCID: PMC25026
PMID: 9356483  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

