
1. Rev Sci Tech. 1999 Apr;18(1):214-27.

Successful aquatic animal disease emergency programmes.

HÃ¥stein T(1), Hill BJ, Winton JR.

Author information: 
(1)National Veterinary Institute, Oslo, Norway.

The authors provide examples of emergency programmes which have been successful
in eradicating or controlling certain diseases of aquatic animals. The paper is
divided into four parts. The first part describes the initial isolation of viral 
haemorrhagic septicaemia (VHS) virus in North America in the autumn of 1988 from 
feral adult chinook (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) and coho salmon (O. kisutch)
returning for spawning. The fish disease control policies at both State and
Federal levels in the United States of America required quarantine and emergency 
eradication measures upon the finding of certain exotic fish pathogens, including
VHS virus. The procedures for emergency plans, destruction of stocks and
disinfection of facilities are described, as well as challenge experiments with
the North American strains of VHS virus and the detection of the virus in marine 
fish species (cod [Gadus macrocephalus] and herring [Clupea harengus pallasi]) in
the Pacific Ocean. The second part of the paper outlines the aquatic animal
legislation in Great Britain and within the European Union, in regard to
contingency plans, initial investigations, action on the suspicion of notifiable 
disease and action on confirmation of infection. The legal description is
followed by an account of an outbreak of viral haemorrhagic septicaemia in turbot
(Scophthalmus maximus) in Great Britain, including the stamping-out process at
the affected farm and investigations conducted to screen other farms in the
vicinity for possible infection. The third part provides a historical review of
the build-up of infectious salmon anaemia (ISA) in Norway and the attempts to
control the disease using legal measures in the absence of detailed knowledge of 
the aetiology, epizootiology, pathogenesis, etc. of the disease. The measures
taken show that the spread of ISA can be controlled using restrictions on the
movement of fish, disinfection procedures, etc. However, acceptance and
understanding of the chosen strategy by the fish farmers is a pre-requisite to
reach that goal. Finally, the paper summarises future needs for national and
international legislation, including the development of standard approaches for
control, the creation of appropriate infrastructures and a better understanding
of the epidemiology of aquatic animal diseases.

DOI: 10.20506/rst.18.1.1161 
PMID: 10190216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

