
1. J Pharm Sci. 1999 May;88(5):530-4.

Influence of the treatment protocol upon the in vivo efficacy of cidofovir
(HPMPC) and of acyclovir (ACV) formulations in topical treatment of cutaneous
HSV-1 infection in hairless mice.

Afouna MI(1), Mehta SC, Ghanem AH, Higuchi WI, Kern ER, DeClercq E, El-Shattawy
HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Utah, 
30 So. 2000 E, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

In recent studies we found that the topical effectiveness of acyclovir (ACV)
formulations was a single-valued function of C-the target site free drug
concentration. The topical efficacy was the same when the therapy was initiated
0, 1, or 2 days after intracutaneous herpes simplex virus type-1 (HSV-1)
inoculation in hairless mice. The purpose of the present study was to examine the
hypothesis that the topical effectiveness of cidofovir (HPMPC) would not be a
single valued function of C and that it would be dependent upon when the therapy 
was initiated relative to the time of viral infection. Formulations of HPMPC and 
ACV in 95% DMSO as a vehicle were used. Hairless mice intracutaneously infected
with HSV-1 were used, and 20 microL of the test formulation was topically applied
twice a day. In protocol A, the treatment was continued until the fourth day
after virus inoculation, whereas in protocol B the treatment was terminated on
the day of virus inoculation. Treatment was initiated on various days ranging
from day -6 to day 4, and the lesions were scored on day 5. Treatment of ACV
according to protocol A proved efficacious whether started as early as 6 days
before virus inoculation or later, whereas the efficacy of ACV was annihilated if
applied following protocol B. For HPMPC, on the other hand, the in vivo
efficacies were found to be strongly dependent on how early the therapy was
initiated, and significant efficacy was observed even when the treatment was
terminated on the day of virus inoculation. This difference was attributed to the
virus-independent intracellular phosphorylation of HPMPC and slow clearance of
its metabolites from the cell. It was also noted that, similar to ACV, for HPMPC 
the topical efficacy is likely to be a function of C for a fixed protocol.
However, unlike for ACV, for HPMPC the efficacy was not a single-valued function 
of C.

DOI: 10.1021/js980406y 
PMID: 10229644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

