
1. Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Paulo. 1998 Nov-Dec;40(6):351-4.

IL-2 and IFN-gamma, but not IL-4 secretion by peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
(PBMC) are related to CD4+ T cells and clinical status in Brazilian
HIV-1-infected subjects.

Hong MA(1), Wakim VL, Salomão SJ, Camargo LS, Casseb J, Duarte AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Imunogenética e Transplante Experimental, Faculdade de Medicina
da Universidade de São Paulo, Brasil.

It has been reported that production of IL-2 and IFN-gamma, known as T-helper
type 1 cytokines, by peripheral mononuclear cells (PBMC) decreases with
progression of HIV infection. In contrast, IL-4 and IL-10 production, Th2
cytokine profile, increases with HIV disease progression. PBMC were evaluated
from 55 HIV-infected subjects from Divisão de Imunologia, Hospital das Clínicas, 
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, to "in vitro" cytokines
production after 24 hours of stimulation with PHA. Low levels of IL-4 production 
in both HIV-infected patients and normal subjects, were detected. The patients
with CD4+ T cell counts < 200 showed a significant decrease of IL-2 and IFN-gamma
production compared to controls. Patients with higher counts of CD4+ T cells
(either between 200-500 or > 500 cells/mm3) also showed decreased production of
IL-2 that was not statistically significant. There was a correlation between IL-2
and IFN-gamma release with CD4+ T cells counts. HIV-1-infected individuals with
CD4+ T cells > 500 cells/mm3 showed increased levels of IL-2 and IFN-gamma, than 
individuals with CD4+ T cells < 500 cells/mm3. In conclusion, we observed a
decline of IL-2 and IFN-gamma production at advanced HIV disease. IL-4 production
was not affected during HIV infection. Taken together, these findings suggest
that the cytokine profile might be influenced by the HIV infection rather than
the cause of disease progression.

DOI: 10.1590/s0036-46651998000600003 
PMID: 10436654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

