
1. J Virol. 1999 Sep;73(9):7891-8.

Resistance against syncytium-inducing human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
in selected CD4(+) T cells from an HIV-1-infected nonprogressor: evidence of a
novel pathway of resistance mediated by a soluble factor(s) that acts after virus
entry.

Saha K(1), Volsky DJ, Matczak E.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical
Genetics, Division of Molecular Medicine, Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43205, USA.
sahak@pediatrics.ohio-state.edu

A panel of CD4(+) T-cell clones were generated from peripheral blood lymphocytes 
from a patient with a nonprogressing infection of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) by using herpesvirus saimiri as described recently. By and large, 
all of the clones expressed an activated T-cell phenotype (Th class 1) and grew
without any further stimulation in interleukin-2-containing medium. None of these
clones produced HIV-1, and all clones were negative for HIV-1 DNA. When these
clones were infected with primary and laboratory (IIIB) strains of HIV-1 with
syncytium-inducing (SI) phenotypes, dramatic variation of virus production was
observed. While two clones were highly susceptible, other clones were relatively 
or completely resistant to infection with SI viruses. The HIV-resistant clones
expressed CXCR4 coreceptors and were able to fuse efficiently with SI virus
env-expressing cells, indicating that no block to virus entry was present in the 
resistant clones. Additionally, HIV-1 DNA was detectable after infection of the
resistant clones, further suggesting that HIV resistance occurred in these clones
after virus entry and probably after integration. We further demonstrate that the
resistant clones secrete a factor(s) that can inhibit SI virus production from
other infected cells and from a chronically infected producer cell line. Finally,
we show that the resistant clones do not express an increased amount of ligands
(stromal-derived factor SDF-1) of CXCR4 or other known HIV-inhibitory cytokines. 
Until now, the ligands of HIV coreceptors were the only natural substances that
had been shown to play antiviral roles of any real significance in vivo. Our data
from this study show that differential expression of another anti-HIV factor(s)
by selected CD4(+) T cells may be responsible for the protection of these cells
against SI viruses. Our results also suggest a novel mechanism of inhibition of
SI viruses that acts at a stage after virus entry.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.73.9.7891-7898.1999 
PMCID: PMC104324
PMID: 10438887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

