
1. Nature. 1999 Sep 16;401(6750):272-6.

Expression of the transcription factor deltaFosB in the brain controls
sensitivity to cocaine.

Kelz MB(1), Chen J, Carlezon WA Jr, Whisler K, Gilden L, Beckmann AM, Steffen C, 
Zhang YJ, Marotti L, Self DW, Tkatch T, Baranauskas G, Surmeier DJ, Neve RL,
Duman RS, Picciotto MR, Nestler EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Psychiatry and Yale Center for Genes and Behavior,
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06508, USA.

Acute exposure to cocaine transiently induces several Fos family transcription
factors in the nucleus accumbens, a region of the brain that is important for
addiction. In contrast, chronic exposure to cocaine does not induce these
proteins, but instead causes the persistent expression of highly stable isoforms 
of deltaFosB. deltaFosB is also induced in the nucleus accumbens by repeated
exposure to other drugs of abuse, including amphetamine, morphine, nicotine and
phencyclidine. The sustained accumulation of deltaFosB in the nucleus accumbens
indicates that this transcription factor may mediate some of the persistent
neural and behavioural plasticity that accompanies chronic drug exposure. Using
transgenic mice in which deltaFosB can be induced in adults in the subset of
nucleus accumbens neurons in which cocaine induces the protein, we show that
deltaFosB expression increases the responsiveness of an animal to the rewarding
and locomotor-activating effects of cocaine. These effects of deltaFosB appear to
be mediated partly by induction of the AMPA
(alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole) glutamate receptor subunit GluR2 in 
the nucleus accumbens. These results support a model in which deltaFosB, by
altering gene expression, enhances sensitivity to cocaine and may thereby
contribute to cocaine addiction.

DOI: 10.1038/45790 
PMID: 10499584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

