
1. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 1999 Oct;17(8):390-3.

[Acyclovir may modulate clonal expansion of cd8+ lymphocytes induced by the
Cytomegalovirus antigen].

[Article in Spanish]

Gavilán F(1), Caballero J, Cárdenas M, Moreno J, Martínez L, Gallego C,
Sánchez-Guijo P, Torre-Cisneros J.

Author information: 
(1)Sección de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía,
Córdoba.

BACKGROUND: Although the potent antiviral effect of acyclovir on the
Herpes-simplex (HSV) and Varicela-zoster (VZV) virus and the scarce effectiveness
versus Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is known, some data suggest that it may have an
immunodulator implicated in the control of these viral disease. The aim of this
study was to characterize this possible effect of acyclovir versus the CMV
antigen.
METHODS: We stimulated cultures of mononuclear cells obtained in 7 healthy
patients who were seropositive for CMV and HSV with CMV antigen, HSV and with
phitohemaglutinine (PHA). The proliferation index and culture cell phenotype were
later determined in the absence and presence of acyclovir (2 micrograms/ml). In
another group the proliferation index and cell phenotype following stimulation
with the CMV antigen were studied prior to and after treating the same volunteers
with acyclovir for one week (800 mg/6h).
RESULTS: The CMV antigen and HSV induced T cell proliferation predominantly
involving the CD8+ subpopulation leading to an inversion of the CD4/CD8 quotient.
On addition of acyclovir to the cell culture a moderate reduction was produced in
lymphoproliferative response versus the CMV antigen and HVS, characteristically
modulating CD8+ cell proliferation, thereby leading to reestablishment of the
CD4/CD8 quotient. However, the proliferation induced by PHA was not inhibited.
These results were produced on oral administration of acyclovir.
CONCLUSIONS: Acyclovir modulates the lymphoproliferative response induced by CMV 
antigen. Based on this observation, the authors hypothesize that this
immunomodulation may be related to its preventive effect on CMV disease in
transplanted patients.


PMID: 10563086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

