
1. J Virol. 2000 May;74(9):4004-16.

Role of the cytoplasmic tail of pseudorabies virus glycoprotein E in virion
formation.

Brack AR(1), Klupp BG, Granzow H, Tirabassi R, Enquist LW, Mettenleiter TC.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Molecular Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institutes, Federal
Research Centre for Virus Diseases of Animals, D-17498 Insel Riems, Germany.

Glycoproteins M (gM), E (gE), and I (gI) of pseudorabies virus (PrV) are required
for efficient formation of mature virions. The simultaneous absence of gM and the
gE/gI complex results in severe deficiencies in virion morphogenesis and
cell-to-cell spread, leading to drastically decreased virus titers and a
small-plaque phenotype (A. Brack, J. Dijkstra, H. Granzow, B. G. Klupp, and T. C.
Mettenleiter, J. Virol. 73:5364-5372, 1999). Serial passaging in noncomplementing
cells of a virus mutant unable to express gM, gE, and gI resulted in a reversion 
of the small-plaque phenotype and restoration of infectious virus formation to
the level of a gM(-) mutant. Genetic analyses showed that reversion of the
phenotype was accompanied by a genomic rearrangement which led to the fusion of a
portion of the gE gene encoding the cytoplasmic domain to the 3' end of the
glycoprotein D gene, resulting in expression of a chimeric gD-gE protein. Since
this indicated that the intracytoplasmic domain of gE was responsible for the
observed phenotypic alterations, the UL10 (gM) gene was deleted in a PrV mutant, 
PrV-107, which specifically lacked the cytoplasmic tail of gE. Regarding one-step
growth, plaque size, and virion formation as observed under the electron
microscope, the mutant lacking gM and the gE cytoplasmic tail proved to be very
similar to the gE/I/M triple mutant. Thus, our data indicate that it is the
cytoplasmic tail of gE which is responsible for the observed phenotypic effects
in conjunction with deletion of gM. We hypothesize that the cytoplasmic domain of
gE specifically interacts with components of the capsid and/or tegument, leading 
to efficient secondary envelopment of intracytoplasmic capsids.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.74.9.4004-4016.2000 
PMCID: PMC111914
PMID: 10756012  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

