
1. Parasite Immunol. 2000 Apr;22(4):201-6.

Inhibition of the antiviral action of interferon by tick salivary gland extract.

Hajnick√° V(1), Kocakova P, Slovak M, Labuda M, Fuchsberger N, Nuttall PA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Preventive and Clinical Medicine, Bratislava, Slovakia.

The saliva of haematophagous arthropods (e.g. mosquitoes, sandflies and ticks)
contains potent immunomodulatory activities that counter their hosts'
haemostatic, inflammatory and immune responses to facilitate blood-feeding. Such 
effects are exploited by arthropod-transmitted pathogens to promote their
transmission. We investigated the ability of tick saliva to enhance
arthropod-borne virus (arbovirus) transmission by determining its effect on the
antiviral action of murine interferon (IFN alpha/beta). Salivary gland extract
(SGE) was prepared from partially fed adult female Dermacentor reticulatus ticks 
that had been feeding on mice for either 3 or 5 days (SGED3 and SGED5,
respectively). We demonstrated that SGE inhibits the antiviral effect of IFN as
measured by a biological assay using vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), and by
two-dimensional electrophoretic analysis of the appearance of selected VSV
proteins. The most pronounced effect was observed when mouse L cells were treated
with SGE prior to IFN treatment. Following pretreatment with SGE, virus
multiplication (which was fully blocked by IFN treatment alone) achieved yields
similar to those obtained from infected cells not treated with IFN.
Contemporaneous treatment, or treatment with SGE after IFN, was less effective.
In parallel with these findings, formation of early viral proteins, N
(nucleocapsid protein) and P (phosphoprotein), which was blocked by IFN, was
detectable following pretreatment with SGE. The ability to inhibit the antiviral 
action of IFN was higher for SGED3 compared to SGED5. Demonstration that tick SGE
can promote virus replication by suppressing the action of IFN helps explain why 
ticks are such efficient vectors of arboviruses.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3024.2000.00296.x 
PMID: 10760186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

