
1. Cancer Gene Ther. 2000 Feb;7(2):215-23.

Comparative in vitro and in vivo cytotoxic activity of
(E)-5-(2-bromovinyl)-2'-deoxyuridine (BVDU) and its arabinosyl derivative,
(E)-5-(2-bromovinyl)-1-beta-D-arabinofuranosyluracil (BVaraU), against tumor
cells expressing either the Varicella zoster or the Herpes simplex virus
thymidine kinase.

Grignet-Debrus C(1), Cool V, Baudson N, Degrève B, Balzarini J, De Leval L,
Debrus S, Velu T, Calberg-Bacq CM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fundamental Virology and Immunology, University of Liège,
Sart-Tilman, Belgium. C.Grignet@ulg.ac.be

The inhibitory effects of (E)-5-(2-bromovinyl)-2'-deoxyuridine (BVDU) and its
arabinosyl derivative (E)-5-(2-bromovinyl)-1-beta-D-arabinofuranosyluracil
(BVaraU) on the growth of both MDA-MB-435 human breast carcinoma and 9L rat
gliosarcoma cells expressing the thymidine kinase (tk)-encoding gene of the
Varicella zoster virus (VZV) or the Herpes simplex virus (HSV) were evaluated. In
vitro, BVDU and BVaraU effectively killed both cell types expressing VZVtk, with 
50% inhibitory concentration values ranging from 0.06 to 0.4 microM, whereas
ganciclovir (GCV) lacked activity. On HSVtk+ cells, BVDU had high cytotoxic
activity, with 50% inhibitory concentration values that were similar to those of 
GCV, whereas BVaraU was inactive. In vivo, BVDU applied intraperitoneally caused 
a 50% tumor growth inhibition in nude mice inoculated subcutaneously with VZVtk+ 
as well as HSVtk+ mammary tumor cells. In mice and at variance with the in vitro 
results, BVaraU had very little activity against the VZVtk+ mammary cells; GCV
had the highest activity on the HSVtk+ cells, resulting in a 50% eradication of
the tumors. With the 9L rat gliosarcoma model, the VZVtk/BVDU system completely
failed to inhibit the development of VZVtk+ glioma tumors induced subcutaneously 
in syngeneic rats, although BVDU had a similar 45-minute half-life in both rats
and mice. Factors other than degradation of the prodrug and related to the mode
of action of these analogs are possibly involved in the observed discrepancies
between the in vitro and in vivo results.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.cgt.7700108 
PMID: 10770629  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

