
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 May 9;97(10):5534-9.

Production of infectious bovine papillomavirus from cloned viral DNA by using an 
organotypic raft/xenograft technique.

McBride AA(1), Dlugosz A, Baker CC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, Division of Basic Sciences, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. alison_mcbride@nih.gov

Bovine papillomavirus type 1 (BPV-1) induces fibropapillomas in its natural host 
and can transform fibroblasts in culture. The viral genome is maintained as an
episome within fibroblasts, which has allowed extensive genetic analyses of the
viral functions required for DNA replication, gene expression, and
transformation. Much less is known about BPV-1 gene expression and replication in
bovine epithelial cells because the study of the complete viral life cycle
requires an experimental system capable of generating a fully differentiated
stratified bovine epithelium. Using a combination of organotypic raft cultures
and xenografts on nude mice, we have developed a system in which BPV-1 can
replicate and produce infectious viral particles. Organotypic cultures were
established with bovine keratinocytes plated on a collagen raft containing
BPV-1-transformed fibroblasts. These keratinocytes were infected with virus
particles isolated from a bovine wart or were transfected with cloned BPV-1 DNA. 
Several days after the rafts were lifted to the air interface, they were grafted 
on nude mice. After 6-8 weeks, large xenografts were produced that exhibited a
hyperplastic and hyperkeratotic epithelium overlying a large dermal fibroma.
These lesions were strikingly similar to a fibropapilloma caused by BPV-1 in the 
natural host. Amplified viral DNA and capsid antigens were detected in the
suprabasal cells of the epithelium. Moreover, infectious virus particles could be
isolated from these lesions and quantitated by a focus formation assay on mouse
cells in culture. Interestingly, analysis of grafts produced with infected and
uninfected fibroblasts indicated that the fibroma component was not required for 
productive infection or morphological changes characteristic of
papillomavirus-infected epithelium. This system will be a powerful tool for the
genetic analysis of the roles of the viral gene products in the complete viral
life cycle.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.97.10.5534 
PMCID: PMC25863
PMID: 10805809  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

