
1. Hepatol Res. 2000 Aug;18(2):141-151.

HCV in serum, peripheral blood mononuclear cells and lymphocyte subpopulations in
C-hepatitis patients.

Torres B(1), Mart√≠n JL, Caballero A, Villalobos M, Olea N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Investigations, School of Medicine, University of
Granada, 18071-, Granada, Spain

To define the best marker for the follow-up and evaluation of HCV infections we
determined anti-HCV antibodies, serum transaminases and HCV RNA in patients
diagnosed with chronic hepatitis for C virus and treated with alpha-interferon.
The presence/absence of HCV RNA was determined in serum, peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) and lymphocyte subpopulations. Samples were submitted to
RT-PCR and subsequent nested PCR. Treatment with alpha-interferon induced a fall 
in the number of HCV RNA positive patients from an initial 88 to 25% at the end
of the treatment. The withdrawal of treatment was associated with a significant
increase in the number of HCV RNA positive patients (43% at the 12-month
follow-up). In 61% of the patients the PCR analysis of the PBMC population
detected the presence of HCV RNA. In 87% of cases the cell fraction identified as
CD19 resulted positive in the PCR test and the viral genome was undetectable in
PBMC subpopulations in only 13% of cases. In one third of the patients whose
serum was negative for PCR the analysis demonstrated the presence of HCV RNA in
PBMC. Conclusions: The disappearance of the viral genome in serum, a criterion of
treatment response, is not necessarily followed by its disappearance in PBMC. The
joint determination of HCV by PCR technique in serum and blood cells should be
used as a particular instrument with each patient.

DOI: 10.1016/s1386-6346(99)00098-4 
PMID: 10936565 

