
1. Int Immunol. 2000 Dec;12(12):1741-7.

Dendritic cells efficiently cross-prime HLA class I-restricted cytolytic T
lymphocytes when pulsed with both apoptotic and necrotic cells but not with
soluble cell-derived lysates.

Ferlazzo G(1), Semino C, Spaggiari GM, Meta M, Mingari MC, Melioli G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, 16132 Genova, Italy.
Dipartimento di Oncologia, Biologia e Genetica, Universit√† degli Studi di Genova,
161321 Genova, Italy.

Dendritic cells (DC) have been shown to efficiently present antigen to CD8(+)
cytolytic T cells (CTL) when pulsed with apoptotic cells as a source of
cell-derived antigen. Such cross-priming could not be detected by the use of
necrotic cells, while conflicting results have been reported for cell-derived
soluble lysates. In this study, we reinvestigated this issue by using autologous 
Epstein-Barr virus-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCL) as a source of
antigen to pulse monocyte-derived DC. Both autologous and HLA-mismatched
allogeneic LCL have been used either in the form of apoptotic or of necrotic
cells or of soluble cell lysates. At day 7, DC were co-cultured with the
autologous CD8(+) lymphocyte fraction for an additional 9 days, in the presence
of exogenous IL-2 (added after 48 h). At the end of the culture period, CD8(+)
CTL efficiently lysed autologous LCL only when they had been co-cultured with DC 
pulsed with necrotic or apoptotic cells. That an efficient cross-priming of
autologous CD8(+) cells could be induced by DC pulsed with apoptotic or necrotic 
LCL but not with cell lysates was further demonstrated in assays of IFN-gamma
production in response to short-term re-stimulation of CD8(+) cells with LCL. In 
addition, LCL-specific CD8(+) cells could specifically lyse autologous DC that
had been pulsed with LCL-derived antigens, further suggesting that DC presented
exogenous antigens on HLA class I molecules.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/12.12.1741 
PMID: 11099314  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

