
1. Plant Physiol. 2001 Jan;125(1):318-28.

Free and conjugated benzoic acid in tobacco plants and cell cultures. Induced
accumulation upon elicitation of defense responses and role as salicylic acid
precursors.

Chong J(1), Pierrel MA, Atanassova R, Werck-Reichhart D, Fritig B, Saindrenan P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes du Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Université Louis Pasteur, 67084 Strasbourg cedex, France.

Salicylic acid (SA) is a key endogenous component of local and systemic disease
resistance in plants. In this study, we investigated the role of benzoic acid
(BA) as precursor of SA biosynthesis in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum cv Samsun NN) 
plants undergoing a hypersensitive response following infection with tobacco
mosaic virus or in tobacco cell suspensions elicited with beta-megaspermin, an
elicitor from Phytophthora megasperma. We found a small pool of conjugated BA in 
healthy leaves and untreated cell suspensions of tobacco, whereas free BA levels 
were barely detectable. Infection of plants with tobacco mosaic virus or
elicitation of cells led to a rapid de novo synthesis and accumulation of
conjugated BA, whereas free BA was weakly induced. In presence of diphenylene
iodonium, an inhibitor of superoxide anion formation, SA accumulation was
abolished in elicited cells and much higher BA levels were concomitantly induced,
mainly as a conjugated form. Furthermore, piperonylic acid, an inhibitor of
cinnamate-4-hydroxylase was used as a powerful tool to redirect the metabolic
flow from the main phenylpropanoid pathway into the SA biosynthetic branch. Under
these conditions, in vivo labeling and radioisotope dilution experiments with
[(14)C]trans-cinnamic acid as precursor clearly indicated that the free form of
BA produced in elicited tobacco cells is not the major precursor of SA
biosynthesis. The main conjugated form of BA accumulating after elicitation of
tobacco cells was identified for the first time as benzoyl-glucose. Our data
point to the likely role of conjugated forms of BA in SA biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.125.1.318 
PMCID: PMC61012
PMID: 11154339  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

