
1. J Mol Biol. 2001 Mar 2;306(4):783-97.

Structural analysis of the N-terminal domain of the human T-cell leukemia virus
capsid protein.

Cornilescu CC(1), Bouamr F, Yao X, Carter C, Tjandra N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biophysical Chemistry, Bldg. 3, NHLBI, NIH, Bethesda, MD,
20892-0380, USA

The N-terminal domain of the retroviral capsid (CA) protein is one of the least
conserved regions encoded in the genome. Surprisingly, the three-dimensional
structures of the CA from different genera exhibit alpha-helical structural
features that are highly conserved. The N-terminal residues of the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) and Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) capsid
proteins form a beta-hairpin. To determine if this feature is conserved in the
retroviral family, we cloned, expressed, purified, and solved the structure of a 
N-terminal 134 amino acid fragment (CA(134)) from the human T-cell leukemia virus
type 1 (HTLV-I) using high resolution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy. The CA(134) fragment contains an N-terminal beta-hairpin and a
central coiled-coil-like structure composed of six alpha-helices. The N-terminal 
Pro1 residue contacts Asp54 in the helical cluster through a salt bridge. Thus,
the beta-hairpin is conserved and the helical cluster is structurally similar to 
other retroviral CA domains. However, although the same Asp residue defines the
orientation of the hairpin in both the HTLV-1 and HIV-1 CA proteins, the HTLV-I
hairpin is oriented away, rather than towards, the helical core. Significant
differences were also detected in the spatial orientation and helical content of 
the long centrally located loop connecting the helices in the core. It has been
proposed that the salt bridge allows the formation of a CA-CA interface that is
important for the assembly of the conical cores that are characteristic of HIV-1.
As HTLV-I forms spherical cores, the salt-bridge feature is apparently not
conserved for this function although its role in determining the orientation of
the beta-hairpin may be critical, along with the central loop. Comparison of
three-dimensional structures is expected to elucidate the relationships between
the retroviral capsid protein structure and its function.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2000.4395 
PMID: 11243788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

