
1. J Virol. 2001 Apr;75(8):3613-25.

Degradation of p21cip1 in cells productively infected with human cytomegalovirus.

Chen Z(1), Knutson E, Kurosky A, Albrecht T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston,
Texas 77555-1019, USA.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) stimulates arrested cells to enter the cell cycle by
activating cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), notably Cdk2. Several mechanisms are 
involved in the activation of Cdk2. HCMV causes a substantial increase in the
abundance of cyclin E and stimulates translocation of Cdk2 from the cytoplasm to 
the nucleus. Further, the abundance of the Cdk inhibitors (CKIs) p21cip1/waf1
(p21cip1) and p27kip1 is substantially reduced. The activity of cyclin E/Cdk2
increases as levels of CKIs, particularly p21cip1, fall. We have previously shown
that these phenomena contribute to priming the cell for efficient replication of 
HCMV. In this study, the mechanisms responsible for the decrease in p21cip1
levels after HCMV infection were investigated by measuring p21cip1 RNA and
protein levels in permissive human lung (LU) fibroblasts after HCMV infection.
Northern blot analysis revealed that p21cip1 RNA levels increased briefly at 3 h 
after HCMV infection and then decreased to their nadir at 24 h; thereafter, RNA
levels increased to about 60% of the preinfection level. Western blot analysis
demonstrated that the relative abundance of p21cip1 protein roughly paralleled
the observed changes in initial RNA levels; however, the final levels of protein 
were much lower than preinfection levels. After a transient increase at 3 h
postinfection, p21cip1 abundance declined sharply over the next 24 h and remained
at a very low level through 96 h postinfection. The disparity between p21cip1 RNA
and protein levels suggested that the degradation of p21cip1 might be affected in
HCMV-infected cells. Treatment of HCMV-infected cells with MG132, an inhibitor of
proteasome-mediated proteolysis, provided substantial protection of p21cip1 in
mock-infected cells, but MG132 was much less effective in protecting p21cip1 in
HCMV-infected cells. The addition of E64d or Z-Leu-Leu-H, each an inhibitor of
calpain activity, to HCMV-infected cells substantially increased the abundance of
p21cip1 in a concentration-dependent manner. To verify that p21cip1 was a
substrate for calpain, purified recombinant p21cip1 was incubated with either
m-calpain or mu-calpain, which resulted in rapid proteolysis of p21cip1. E64d
inhibited the proteolysis of p21cip1 catalyzed by either m-calpain or mu-calpain.
Direct measurement of calpain activity in HCMV-infected LU cells indicated that
HCMV infection induced a substantial and sustained increase in calpain activity, 
although there was no change in the abundance of either m- or mu-calpain or the
endogenous calpain inhibitor calpastatin. The observed increase of calpain
activity was consistent with the increases in intracellular free Ca2+ and
phospholipid degradation in HCMV-infected LU cells reported previously from our
laboratory. Considered together, these results suggest that the increase in
calpain activity observed following HCMV infection contributes significantly to
the reduction of p21cip1 levels and the resultant cell cycle progression.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.8.3613-3625.2001 
PMCID: PMC114853
PMID: 11264351  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

