
1. Pathologica. 2001 Apr;93(2):112-7.

[Demonstration of TT virus in liver tissue fixed in formalin and embedded in
paraffin].

[Article in Italian]

Foschini MP(1), Morandi L, Macchia S, Dal Monte PR, Pession A.

Author information: 
(1)Sezione di Anatomia Patologica, Istologia e Citologia Patologica M. Malpighi, 
Dipartimento di Oncologia, Ospedale Bellaria, Via Altura 3, I-40139 Bologna.
mariapia.foschini@ausl.bologna.it

INTRODUCTION: TT virus has been recently isolated in Japan in patients with acute
and chronic non-A/non-G hepatitis. Its possible etiopathogenetic role in causing 
hepatitis has been initially taken in consideration. On the contrary, more recent
studies deny the importance of TT virus in causing liver damage. Most of the
studies are based on serological data or on viral detection from frozen liver
tissue.
AIM OF THE STUDY: In the present paper we describe a method to detect viral
genome from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded liver tissue.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twelve needle biopsies from liver were studied. Six cases 
were selected on the basis of serological negativity for HBV and HCV markers.
Five cases of HCV-related chronic hepatitis and one HCV- and HIV-positive
intravenous drug abuser were also included. All patients underwent liver biopsy, 
performed with a 14-G needle. Liver specimens were formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded as routine. From each block, sections were cut and stained for 
histopathologic examination. Additional 5 microns sections were employed to
extract DNA for nested PCR.
RESULTS: In 2 of 12 cases studied, TT virus genome was found. In both cases the
presence of viral DNA was confirmed by sequencing. Both patients were male. The
first patient was a 39-year-old HIV- and HCV-positive intravenous drug abuser.
The second patient was a 60-year-old heavy alcohol drinker. In both cases the
presence of TT virus apparently did not affect the histological picture.
CONCLUSION: It is possible to detect TT virus genome from formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded tissue. This method offers the possibility to perform
retrospective studies.


PMID: 11428287  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

