
1. J Virol. 2001 Nov;75(22):11079-87.

Replication-competent or attenuated, nonpropagating vesicular stomatitis viruses 
expressing respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) antigens protect mice against RSV
challenge.

Kahn JS(1), Roberts A, Weibel C, Buonocore L, Rose JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA. jeffrey.kahn@yale.edu

Foreign glycoproteins expressed in recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV)
can elicit specific and protective immunity in the mouse model. We have
previously demonstrated the expression of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) G
(attachment) and F (fusion) glycoprotein genes in recombinant VSV. In this study,
we demonstrate the expression of RSV F and G glycoproteins in attenuated,
nonpropagating VSVs which lack the VSV G gene (VSVDeltaG) and the incorporation
of these RSV proteins into recombinant virions. We also show that intranasal
vaccination of mice with nondefective VSV recombinants expressing RSV G (VSV-RSV 
G) or RSV F (VSV-RSV F) elicited RSV-specific antibodies in serum (by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA]) as well as neutralizing antibodies to 
RSV and afford complete protection against RSV challenge. In contrast,
VSVDeltaG-RSV F induced detectable serum antibodies to RSV by ELISA, but no
detectable neutralizing antibodies, yet it still protected from RSV challenge.
VSVDeltaG-RSV G failed to induce any detectable serum (by ELISA) or neutralizing 
antibodies and failed to protect from RSV challenge. The attenuated,
nonpropagating VSVDeltaG-RSV F is a particularly attractive candidate for a live 
attenuated recombinant RSV vaccine.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.22.11079-11087.2001 
PMCID: PMC114687
PMID: 11602747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

