
1. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2001;2(4):239-51.

Oral cancer. The importance of early diagnosis and treatment.

Sciubba JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dental and Oral Medicine Division, Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery,
Johns Hopkins Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. jsciubb@jhmi.edu

Oral cancer is an important health issue. The WHO predicts a continuing worldwide
increase in the number of patients with oral cancer, extending this trend well
into the next several decades. In the US the projected number of new cases of
oral and oropharyngeal cancer will exceed 31,000 per year. Mortality due to
cancers in this region exceeds the annual death rate is the US caused by either
cutaneous melanoma or cervical cancer. Significant agents involved in the
etiology of oral cancer in Western countries include sunlight exposure, smoking
and alcohol consumption. Use of the areca or betel nut in many cultures is a
major etiological factor outside of the USA. Other etiologic factors associated
with oral squamous cell carcinoma, but far less significant statistically,
include syphilis and sideropenic dysphagia. Recently, strong evidence for an
etiological relationship between human papilloma virus and a subset of head and
neck cancers has been noted. It is generally accepted that most sporadic tumors
are the result of a multi-step process of accumulated genetic alterations. These 
alterations affect epithelial cell behavior by way of loss of chromosomal
heterozygosity which in turn leads to a series of events progressing to the
ultimate stage of invasive squamous cell carcinoma. The corresponding genetic
alterations are reflected in clinical and microscopic pathology from hyperplasia 
through invasiveness. A wide range of mucosal alternations fall within the rubric
of leukoplakia. Proliferative verrucous leukoplakia represents a relatively new
type of leukoplakia that is separate from the more common or less innocuous form 
of this condition. Erythroplakia is particularly relevant considering its almost 
certain relationship with dysplasia or invasive carcinoma. Squamous cell
carcinoma will develop from antecedent dysplastic oral mucosal lesions if an
early diagnosis has not been made and treatment given. Early diagnosis within
stages I and II correspond to a vastly improved 5-year survival rate when
compared with more advanced stage III and IV lesions. Surgical management of this
disease remains the mainstay of treatment. Other therapies include radiation and 
chemotherapy options that may be used adjunctively and palliatively. Following
treatment, it is important to understand the significant risks of second primary 
cancers developing within the upper aerodigestive tract as a result of field
cancerization. The most important message is that early detection of the
asymptomatic early stage oral cancer translates in general terms to satisfactory 
clinical outcome and cure in most patients.

DOI: 10.2165/00128071-200102040-00005 
PMID: 11705251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

