
1. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2001 Nov;80(11):1036-8.

Is preeclampsia an infectious disease?

Trogstad LI(1), Eskild A, Bruu AL, Jeansson S, Jenum PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Health, National Institute of Public Health, P.O. Box
4404 Nydalen, 0403 Oslo, Norway. lill.trogstad@folkehelsa.no

BACKGROUND: Studies have suggested a strong paternal factor in the etiology of
preeclampsia. If preeclampsia is caused by an infectious agent transmitted by the
woman's partner, seronegative women who may experience primary infection in
pregnancy should be at increased risk of preeclampsia as compared to previously
infected women. The aim of this study was to assess the impact of being
seronegative for some viruses transmitted by close contact on the risk of
developing preeclampsia.
METHODS: Nine hundred and seventy-eight women were randomly drawn from a basic
study population of 35,940 pregnant women in Norway. A serum sample drawn at the 
first antenatal visit was analyzed for specific IgG antibodies against herpes
simplex virus type-2, cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr virus. For comparison,
antibody status against Toxoplasma gondii was also assessed. Information on
preeclampsia in pregnancy was obtained through linkage to the Medical Birth
Registry of Norway.
RESULTS: Thirty-three (3%) women developed preeclampsia. The risk of developing
preeclampsia seemed to be increased for women who were seronegative for the
viruses studied. Seronegativity for Toxoplasma gondii did not show such a
pattern.
INTERPRETATION: Women who are seronegative for antibodies against viral agents
transmitted through close contact seem more likely to develop preeclampsia. This 
finding indicates that women who are seronegative to such agents may acquire
primary infection in pregnancy, and subsequently be at increased risk of
preeclampsia. This hypothesis could represent a new approach to the causes of
preeclampsia, and encourage search for yet unidentified microbes as a possible
causal factor.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-0412.2001.801112.x 
PMID: 11703202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

