
1. J Med Virol. 2002 Feb;66(2):263-8.

Virological and serological analysis of rhinovirus infections during the first
two years of life in a cohort of children.

Blomqvist S(1), Roivainen M, Puhakka T, Kleemola M, Hovi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland.
soile.blomqvist@ktl.fi

The occurrence of rhinovirus infections in a cohort of 329 children during the
first 2 years of life was determined by virus detection and serological methods. 
Rhinovirus detection on nasopharyngeal aspirates and middle ear fluids comprised 
a combination of virus isolation in HeLa Ohio cells and a reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)-hybridization assay on the
inoculated cell cultures. Nasopharyngeal aspirates were collected when the child 
was referred to the study clinic because of respiratory symptoms. Nasopharyngeal 
aspirates and middle ear fluids were collected after clinical diagnosis of an
acute otitis media. Complement-fixing antibodies to rhinovirus were determined
from scheduled serum specimens collected at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months of age and
from paired sera taken in the cases of acute otitis media. Rhinovirus infections 
were shown to be common in infants, 24% of the children had complement-fixing
antibodies at the age of 6 months and 22% had had at least one rhinovirus episode
indicated by virus detection. At the age of 2 years, 91.3% of the children had
rhinovirus-specific antibodies, while 79% of the children had experienced
rhinovirus infection as judged by the virus detection tests. However, the
complement-fixation assay was poor as a diagnostic test. Of 458 acute otitis
media episodes studied, 41% were shown to be associated with a rhinovirus by
RT-PCR-hybridization, while significant fourfold rise in rhinoviral antibodies
was detected only in 7% of the cases.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.2140 
PMID: 11782938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

