
1. Qual Life Res. 2001;10(6):517-31.

Validation of the HIV treatment satisfaction questionnaire (HIVTSQ).

Woodcock A(1), Bradley C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of London, Egham, Surrey, England, UK.
a.woodcock@rhul.ac.uk

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) therapies need to be both effective and
acceptable. The 10-item HIV Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire (HIVTSQ) was
validated amongst 150 HIV-1 sero-positive individuals, receiving one of two
protease inhibitors as part of combined therapy in an open-label randomised
trial. Scale and subscale scoring was determined psychometrically. It was
hypothesised that satisfaction with control would be greater amongst those with
lower viral loads, satisfaction with side-effects would be inversely related to
severity of adverse events and satisfaction with the new treatment would be
greater than with the control treatment. Principal components analyses suggested 
that patient ratings of nine items can be summed to compute the total
satisfaction scale (Cronbach's alpha 0.82), and/or divided into subscales:
general satisfaction/clinical (alpha 0.80) and lifestyle/ease (alpha 0.74). One
item (asking how demanding the treatment was) needs modification before
inclusion. The HIVTSQ showed construct validity: viral load correlated negatively
(Spearman's r - 0.33 p < 0.01) with satisfaction with HIV control; those with
<400 copies HIV-1 RNA/ml were more satisfied with HIV control than those with
higher viral loads (Mann-Whitney p < 0.01); adverse event grade correlated r -
0.18 (p < 0.05) with satisfaction with side-effects. The HIVTSQ was sensitive to 
differences between groups: compared with patients in the control group, those
receiving the new treatment had significantly higher perceived flexibility and
lifestyle/ease scores at week 8 (Mann-Whitney p < 0.01). Patient perceptions did 
not simply mirror clinical measures, highlighting the importance of measuring
patient views.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1013050904635 
PMID: 11789552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

