
1. Hum Gene Ther. 2002 Feb 10;13(3):469-81.

Self-assembly of a virus-mimicking nanostructure system for efficient
tumor-targeted gene delivery.

Xu L(1), Frederik P, Pirollo KF, Tang WH, Rait A, Xiang LM, Huang W, Cruz I, Yin 
Y, Chang EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical 
Center, Washington, D.C. 20007, USA.

Molecular therapy, including gene therapy, is a promising strategy for the
treatment of human disease. However, delivery of molecular therapeutics
efficiently and specifically to the target tissue remains a significant
challenge. A human transferrin (Tf)-targeted cationic liposome-DNA complex,
Tf-lipoplex, has shown high gene transfer efficiency and efficacy with human head
and neck cancer in vitro and in vivo (Xu, L., Pirollo, K.F., Tang, W.H., Rait,
A., and Chang, E.H. Hum. Gene Ther. 1999;10:2941-2952). Here we explore the
structure, size, formation process, and structure-function relationships of
Tf-lipoplex. We have observed Tf-lipoplex to have a highly compact structure,
with a relatively uniform size of 50-90 nm. This nanostructure is novel in that
it resembles a virus particle with a dense core enveloped by a membrane coated
with Tf molecules spiking the surface. More importantly, compared with unliganded
lipoplex, Tf-lipoplex shows enhanced stability, improved in vivo gene transfer
efficiency, and long-term efficacy for systemic p53 gene therapy of human
prostate cancer when used in combination with conventional radiotherapy. On the
basis of our observations, we propose a multistep self-assembly process and
Tf-facilitated DNA cocondensation model that may provide an explanation for the
resultant small size and effectiveness of our nanostructural Tf-lipoplex system.

DOI: 10.1089/10430340252792594 
PMID: 11860713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

