
1. Virology. 2001 Dec 20;291(2):260-71.

Poliovirus 3C protease-mediated degradation of transcriptional activator p53
requires a cellular activity.

Weidman MK(1), Yalamanchili P, Ng B, Tsai W, Dasgupta A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, School of
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, 10833 Le Conte Avenue, Los
Angeles, CA 90095-1747, USA.

Infection of HeLa cells with poliovirus leads to rapid shut-off of host cell
transcription by RNA polymerase II. Previous results have suggested that both the
basal transcription factor TBP (TATA-binding protein) and transcription activator
proteins such as CREB (cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding protein) and Oct-1
(the octamer-binding factor) are cleaved by the viral-encoded protease, 3C(Pro). 
Here we demonstrate that the transcriptional activator (and tumor suppressor) p53
is degraded by the viral protease 3C both in vivo and in vitro. Unlike other
transcription factors that are directly cleaved by 3C(pro), degradation of p53
requires a HeLa cell activity in addition to 3C(Pro). The degradation of p53 by
3C(Pro) does not appear to involve the ubiquitin pathway of protein degradation. 
Vaccinia virus infection of HeLa cells leads to inactivation of the cellular
activity required for 3C(Pro)-mediated degradation of p53. The vaccinia-encoded
protein (CrmA) is known to inhibit caspase I (ICE protease) that converts
inactive IL-1beta to an active secreted form. Incubation of HeLa cells with
caspase I inhibitor Z-VAD-fmk does not interfere with 3C(Pro)-mediated
degradation of p53. The cellular activity present in extracts of HeLa cells can
be fractionated through phosphocellulose. A partially purified fraction that
elutes at 0.6 M KCl from phosphocellulose contains the activity that degrades p53
in a 3C(Pro)-dependent manner. These results suggest that both poliovirus-encoded
protease 3C(Pro) and a cellular activity are required for the degradation of p53 
observed in cells infected with poliovirus.

(C)2001 Elsevier Science

DOI: 10.1006/viro.2001.1215 
PMID: 11878895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

