
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2002 Jun;40(6):1958-62.

High-sensitivity PCR detection of parvovirus B19 in plasma.

Daly P(1), Corcoran A, Mahon BP, Doyle S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, National University of Ireland, Maynooth, County
Kildare, Ireland.

Parvovirus B19 (B19) is a human pathogen transmitted to susceptible individuals
via respiratory secretions and contaminated blood or blood products. B19 levels
in pooled plasma of less than 10(4) genome equivalents/ml may not be infectious, 
while those greater than 10(7)/ml are capable of transmitting infection. A World 
Health Organization (WHO) B19 DNA international standard has been recently
introduced. The purpose of the present work was to develop a PCR-enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (PCR-ELISA) calibrated against the WHO B19 DNA international 
standard which could easily and reliably detect B19 DNA levels in plasma above
10(4) IU/ml (6.5 x 10(3) genome equivalents/ml). A B19 PCR-ELISA system was
developed which uses a dinitrophenylated oligonucleotide probe to detect
immobilized biotinylated amplicons following single-round PCR amplification. The 
level of B19 DNA (in international units per milliliter) in individual and pooled
plasma specimens was evaluated. Proteinase K treatment of plasma was found to be 
sufficient to quantitatively release B19 DNA. The B19 PCR-ELISA had a sensitivity
of detection of 1.6 x 10(3) IU/ml B19 DNA and a dynamic range extending from 8 to
1,000 IU of B19 DNA (equivalent to 1.6 x 10(3) to 2 x 10(5) IU of B19 DNA/ml).
Furthermore, the antibody profile of pooled plasma products was determined in
terms of B19 immunoglobulin G (IgG) (in international units per milliliter). The 
B19 IgG level was found to be 64.7 +/- 17.5 IU/ml (mean +/- standard deviation). 
The B19 PCR-ELISA, which is calibrated against the B19 DNA international
standard, may have an application for the rapid screening of plasma minipools for
B19 DNA, thereby leading to an improvement in blood product safety.

DOI: 10.1128/jcm.40.6.1958-1962.2002 
PMCID: PMC130782
PMID: 12037048  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

