
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jun 21;294(4):854-63.

Dual regulatory role of human cytomegalovirus immediate-early protein in IL1B
transcription is dependent upon Spi-1/PU.1.

Yang Z(1), Wara-aswapati N, Yoshida Y, Walker N, Galson DL, Listman J, Auron PE.

Author information: 
(1)The New England Baptist Bone and Joint Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

Activation of IL1B gene transcription has been shown to play a crucial role in
human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection. We previously reported that HCMV
immediate-early (IE) proteins vigorously transactivate IL1B expression without
the need for a normally essential upstream enhancer. This activation appears to
depend upon protein-protein tethering between IE2, which provides a transcription
activation domain (TAD), and the DNA-binding domain of the transcription factor
Spi-1. We now show a distinct mechanism by which IE1 and IE2 mediate both weak
Spi-1-independent and vigorous Spi-1-dependent IL1B transcription from the -59 to
+12 IL1B core promoter. These results demonstrate that in contrast to non-viral, 
enhancer-mediated, transactivation of IL1B, the IE mechanism is not absolutely
dependent upon Spi-1. However, Spi-1 is required for vigorous transcription.
Additionally, we have discovered that IE1, which cooperates with IE2 to
transactivate IL1B, has minimal activity in the absence of IE2 and Spi-1.
Furthermore, IE1 is a dual-acting factor, which can either activate or repress
IL1B, depending on the presence of both IE2 and the Spi-1 TADs. Therefore, the
relative expression of IE1 and IE2, which varies during HCMV infection, may
provide a molecular mechanism by which IL1B can be repressed, thus, avoiding
clearance by the host.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

DOI: 10.1016/S0006-291X(02)00562-4 
PMID: 12061786  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

