
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2002 Jan;66(1):56-60.

HIV infection, malaria, and pregnancy: a prospective cohort study in Kigali,
Rwanda.

Ladner J(1), Leroy V, Simonon A, Karita E, Bogaerts J, De Clercq A, Van De Perre 
P, Dabis F; Pregnancy and HIV Study Group (EGE).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Information Unit, Centre Hospitalier de Kigali, Rwanda.

In order to study the relation between human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection and malaria in women, during and after pregnancy, a prospective cohort 
study was initiated at the Centre Hospitalier de Kigali in Rwanda through routine
voluntary and confidential HIV screening in antenatal clinics. At inclusion in
the cohort of all HIV-positive and an equivalent number of HIV-negative pregnant 
women, between 21 and 28 weeks of gestation, sociodemographic characteristics and
medical history during the current pregnancy were collected; screening for
malaria (tick blood smear) and anemia and a CD4 lymphocyte count were
systematically performed. Each woman enrolled had a monthly follow-up until 6
months after delivery. A clinic was implemented that was accessible and free of
charge to every woman during the study period between scheduled visits. Malaria
infection was systematically screened in case of fever or other compatible
symptoms. The cohort included 228 HIV-positive and 229 HIV-negative women. At
inclusion, malaria prevalence was 8.0% in HIV-positive women and 3.5% in
HIV-negative women (P < 0.04). Over the study period, the incidence of malaria
was 6.2 per 100 women-months in the HIV-positive group and 3.5 in the
HIV-negative group (relative risk [RR] = 1.7, 95% confidence interval [CI] =
1.4-2.3). The bulk of the difference occurred postpartum. The Kaplan-Meier
9-month probability of remaining free of malaria infection was 51.8% in
HIV-positive women and 65.2% in HIV-negative women (P = 0.013). When taking
account in the same multivariate model (including HIV infection, primiparity, CD4
lymphocytes, anemia, and education level), positive HIV serostatus remained the
only factor significantly associated with malaria infection (RR = 1.4, CI =
1.1-1.6; P = 0.016). Our study prospectively documents the association between
malaria and maternal HIV infection and highlights the increased risk of malaria
occurrence in all HIV-infected women. Strategies to reduce the malaria morbidity 
during pregnancy should be reinforced in areas of high HIV seroprevalence.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.2002.66.56 
PMID: 12135269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

