
1. Virus Genes. 2002;25(1):95-100.

Sequence analysis of the S3 gene from a turkey reovirus.

Kapczynski DR(1), Sellers HS, Simmons V, Schultz-Cherry S.

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture,
Athens, Georgia 30605, USA. dkapczynski@seprl.usda.gov

The deduced sigma-2 protein sequence from the S3 gene segment of a novel turkey
reovirus, designated NC98, isolated from the bursa of birds exhibiting poult
enteritis and mortality syndrome was determined. The isolate, serologically
distinct from other avian reoviruses, was isolated in turkey embryo kidney cells 
and RNA was purified for cDNA synthesis. Oligonucleotide primers were designed
based on conserved avian S3 nucleotide sequence data. The NC98 S3 open reading
frame comprised 1,101 base pairs and encoded 366 amino acids with a predicated
molecular mass of 40.5 kDa. Although the S3 nucleotide sequence from several
chicken isolates share at least 86% identity, they share only 64% with the NC98
turkey isolate. Interestingly, the S3 nucleotide sequence from a muscovy duck
reovirus shares 55% identity with NC98 and 53% identity with chicken isolates. As
observed in other avian reovirus sigma2 protein sequences, a zinc-binding motif
and double-stranded RNA binding domain were found within the predicted amino acid
sequence of NC98. Phylogenetic analysis of the deduced sigma2 sequence
demonstrated that NC98 separated as a distinct virus relative to other avian
strains. The results of this study indicate that NC98 is a novel turkey reovirus 
that shares limited genomic sequence identity to isolates of chicken and duck
origin and should be considered a separate virus species within subgroup 2 of the
Orthoreovirus genus.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1020130410601 
PMCID: PMC7089376
PMID: 12206313  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

