
1. EPI Newsl. 1998 Aug;20(4):1.

Measles update.

[No authors listed]

PIP: Beginning May 19, 1998, and lasting through the middle of June, a follow-up 
vaccination campaign which used measles-mumps-rubella vaccine targeted 2,223,210 
children, 1-4 years of age, in Venezuela. The vaccinations were performed at day 
care centers, health posts, and orphanages; door-to-door vaccination was
conducted in rural areas. The measles epidemic began in 1992, with 22,321
confirmed cases of measles and 77 deaths; it lasted until early 1994, when there 
were 16,561 cases and 47 deaths. In 1994, the country launched a "catch-up"
vaccination campaign which targeted all children between 9 months and 14 years of
age; 98% coverage was reached. Between 1994 and 1996, when routine immunization
services were used, the average coverage was 75%. Since the catch-up campaign,
the number of confirmed measles cases decreased from 172 in 1995, to 89 in 1996, 
and to 27 in 1997. As of July 18, 1998, (epidemiological week 28), 452 suspected 
cases of measles were reported; none were confirmed. Another follow-up campaign
will be conducted. In Bolivia, the measles outbreak began May 21, 1998, in areas 
bordering Argentina. The municipality of Yacuiba, in the department of Tarija, is
primarily affected. The municipality, especially the localities of Yacuiba and
Pocitos, borders the province of Salta in Argentina, and people cross the border 
often to shop. As of July 24, 1998, there were 49 suspected measles cases: 22 in 
Pocitos; 24 in Yacuiba; and 3 in El Palmar. 28 had serum samples taken, and 18
tested positive. The population group most affected were those between 1-4 years 
of age. A follow-up measles vaccination campaign, which targeted all children
under 6 years of age regardless of their vaccination history, was conducted from 
June 1 to 21, 1998, in Salvador Masa (Argentina), in Pocitos, and in Yacuiba. As 
of August 10, 1998, in Argentina, 1874 confirmed measles cases and 11 deaths (6
under the age of 1 year) were reported. The first cases appeared in August 1997, 
in the province of Misiones, which borders Paraguay and Brazil, then spread to
Buenos Aires.

PMID: 12348763  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

