
1. Enfoques Aten Prim. 1991 Mar;6(1):33-6.

[AIDS in Chile: a problem with multiple facets].

[Article in Spanish]

Ormazabal B.

PIP: Chile's 1st case of AIDS was diagnosed in 1984. Some 250 AIDS cases and 1600
HIV positive persons have since been reported, although the actual number by some
estimates may reach 5000. Chile, although in the initial stages of the epidemic, 
already has a serious problem which at present can only be combatted through
education. It will be necessary to convince the population that significant
modifications of sexual behavior are needed to control the spread of the disease.
Education for AIDS prevention is a priority of the National Commission on AIDS
(CONASIDA), which is basing its program on the premise that stable monogamy is
the most natural form of expression of a couple. Manuals for prevention are under
development, and the 1st, for health workers and the general population, is in
process of publication. A series of pamphlets and educational videos for workers 
in sexually transmitted disease clinics are under development. Educational
materials are also being created for specific groups such as university students 
and agricultural workers and for groups at high risk. A social communications
campaign has been prepared and approved by the authorities, and is awaiting
funding for dissemination. Education of the population is also a concern for the 
Catholic Church, which views reinforcement of the family and its mission of
providing sex education as a primary means of preventing AIDS. CONASIDA is also
responsible for epidemiological study of AIDS in Chile through surveillance of
sentinel groups and in quality control of the blood supply. Condoms are to be
distributed in sexually transmitted disease clinics for the purpose of AIDS
prevention.

PMID: 12343309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

