
1. Blood. 2003 Feb 1;101(3):961-9. Epub 2002 Sep 5.

ICSBP/IRF-8 retrovirus transduction rescues dendritic cell development in vitro.

Tsujimura H(1), Tamura T, Gongora C, Aliberti J, Reis e Sousa C, Sher A, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

Dendritic cells (DCs) develop from bone marrow (BM) progenitor cells and mature
in response to external signals to elicit functions important for innate and
adaptive immunity. Interferon consensus sequence binding protein (ICSBP; also
called interferon regulatory factor 8 [IRF-8]) is a hematopoietic cell-specific
transcription factor expressed in BM progenitor cells that contributes to myeloid
cell development. In light of our earlier observation that ICSBP(-/-) mice lack
CD8alpha(+) DCs, we investigated the role of ICSBP in DC development in vitro in 
the presence of Flt3 ligand. Immature ICSBP(-/-) DCs developed from BM progenitor
cells showed assorted defects, did not mature in response to activation signals, 
and failed to express CD8alpha and interleukin 12 (IL-12) p40, a feature
consistent with ICSBP(-/-) DCs in vivo. We show that retroviral introduction of
ICSBP restores the development of immature DCs that can fully mature on
activation signals. All the defects seen with ICSBP(-/-) DCs were corrected after
ICSBP transduction, including the expression of CD8alpha and IL-12 p40 as well as
major histocompatability complex class II and other costimulatory molecules.
ICSBP is known to regulate gene expression by interacting with partner proteins
PU.1 and IRFs, thereby binding to target elements ISRE and EICE. Analysis of a
series of ICSBP mutants showed that the intact DNA-binding activity as well as
the ability to interact with partner proteins are required for the restoration of
DC development/maturation, pointing to the transcriptional function of ICSBP as a
basis of restoration. Taken together, this study identifies ICSBP as a factor
critical for both early differentiation and final maturation of DCs.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2002-05-1327 
PMID: 12393459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

