
1. Curr Treat Options Gastroenterol. 2002 Dec;5(6):451-463.

Prevention of Viral Hepatitis.

Koff RS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 55
Lake Avenue North, Worcester, MA 01655, USA. koffr@UMMHC.org

Despite the availability of vaccines against hepatitis A and B, acute viral
hepatitis due to these agents continues to be among the most commonly reported
notifiable infectious diseases in the United States. Currently available
hepatitis A and B vaccines are highly immunogenic and well tolerated, but vaccine
coverage needs to be expanded. Use of the hepatitis A vaccine in children age 2
years and older should be more widespread than is currently the case. Hepatitis A
vaccine has been shown to be cost effective when given to children in regions
with high attack rates and to patients with chronic hepatitis C. Routine newborn 
immunization against hepatitis B has been a successful approach to disease
control and is among the most cost-effective interventions. Use of the hepatitis 
B vaccine for all sexually active individuals with more than one sex partner
should be recommended for this sexually transmitted disease. The availability of 
a combined hepatitis A and B vaccine should facilitate vaccine coverage in those 
individuals at risk for both infections. For those hepatitis infections for which
no vaccine is currently available, namely hepatitis C, D, and E, reducing
exposure risk by modifying lifestyle behaviors is the only control measure
available. Early education and counseling about high-risk behaviors for the
acquisition of blood-borne hepatitis viruses needs to be expanded to young
children and adolescents. The eventual eradication of hepatitis virus infections 
through universal immunization is plausible for those agents for whom human
beings are the only host and effective vaccines have been developed. If hepatitis
E is shown to be a zoonosis with an extensive reservoir in pigs, eradication of
this agent may be very difficult.

DOI: 10.1007/s11938-002-0033-y 
PMID: 12408782 

