
1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2001 Nov;1(1):49-60.

The role of natural killer cells in adenovirus-mediated p53 gene therapy.

Carroll JL(1), Nielsen LL, Pruett SB, Mathis JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cellular Biology and Anatomy, Feist-Weiller Cancer Center,
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana 71130,
USA.

Adenovirus-mediated gene therapy is a promising new approach for treatment of
ovarian cancer. In animal models, complete elimination of cancer cells is often
achieved, although the therapeutic gene has not been delivered to all these
cells. This is referred to as a bystander effect, because tumor cells near those 
that receive the therapeutic gene are also eliminated. Several mechanisms have
been proposed for the bystander effect, including intercellular communication
within the tumor via gap junctions, apoptosis, antiangiogenesis, cytokines or
other soluble mediators, and immunological mechanisms. There are two
well-documented antitumor effector cell populations in athymic nude mice:
macrophages and natural killer (NK) cells. We hypothesize that peritoneal
populations of NK cells in nude mice treated with adenoviruses are involved in
the observed bystander effect in this in vivo model. We investigated the role of 
NK cells as immunological mediators for the bystander effect using the p53 tumor 
suppressor as the therapeutic anticancer gene. Most ovarian cancer cell lines
tested were sensitive to lysis by NK cells, although different ovarian cancer
cell lines exhibited different sensitivities to NK cell-mediated lysis. To
determine the importance of NK cells in the overall efficacy and in the bystander
effect of gene therapy, NK cells were depleted in mice by administration of
anti-NK1.1 monoclonal antibodies. To study the efficacy of NK depletion, C57BL/6 
(nu/nu) mice were given injections i.v. by a single tail vein injection or i.p.
with increasing doses of anti-NK1.1 IgG. All doses of anti-NK1.1 antibody, from
100-500 micrograms, essentially eliminated cytotoxic NK activity. To assess the
duration of depletion after a single dose of anti-NK1.1 IgG, a time-course
experiment was performed. NK 1.1 antibody was effective in completely depleting
cytotoxic NK cell activity in the mice for up to 7 days, whether given as 500
micrograms (i.p.) or 200 micrograms (i.v.). Flow cytometric analysis performed on
peritoneal cell populations confirmed depletion of NK cells by approximately 80%.
Finally, a survival study was performed, in which animals were depleted of NK
cells. In this experiment, NK cell-depleted mice were injected with anti-NK1.1
IgG, and control mice were mice were treated with normal saline. Two days later, 
all mice were inoculated with a lethal i.p. dose of NIH:OVCAR-3 ovarian cancer
cells. After 3 days, the mice were divided into two treatment groups; one
treatment group received three consecutive daily i.p. injections of Ad-CMV-p53
(SCH58500), and the second treatment group received three consecutive daily i.p. 
injections of control adenovirus construct, rAd-null. All of the NK cell-depleted
animals, whether treated with rAd-null or with Ad-CMV-p53 (SCH58500) were dead of
disease by 116 and 138 days, respectively, after initiation of adenovirus
treatment, and no statistically significant difference in survival was observed
(P = 0.349). A significant survival advantage was seen in control (NK-competent) 
mice treated with rAd-null (P = 0.04), although all were dead of disease by day
184. Importantly, control NK-competent mice treated with Ad-CMV-p53 (SCH58500)
showed no tumor growth or ascites production, and all animals survived. These
results indicate that immunological mechanisms involving natural killer cells
play an important role in the bystander effect involving adenovirus-p53 gene
therapy for ovarian cancer.


PMID: 12467238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

