
1. J Neurosci. 2003 Apr 1;23(7):2824-32.

The predominant neural stem cell isolated from postnatal and adult forebrain but 
not early embryonic forebrain expresses GFAP.

Imura T(1), Kornblum HI, Sofroniew MV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Brain Research Institute, University of
California, Los Angeles, California 90095-1763, USA.

Periventricular germinal zones (GZs) of developing and adult brain contain neural
stem cells (NSCs), the cellular identities and origins of which are not defined
completely. We used tissue culture techniques and transgenic mice expressing
herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase (HSV-TK) from the mouse glial fibrillary
acid protein (GFAP) promoter to test the hypothesis that certain NSCs express
GFAP. To do so, we determined the relative proportions of multipotent
neurospheres that are formed by GFAP-expressing cells derived from GZs at
different stages of development. In this transgenic model, dividing
GFAP-expressing cells are ablated selectively by treatment with the antiviral
agent ganciclovir (GCV). Single-cell analysis showed that transgene-derived
HSV-TK was present only in GFAP-expressing cells. GCV applied in vitro eliminated
growth of multipotent neurospheres from GZs of postnatal and adult transgenic
mice but not early embryonic (embryonic day 12.5) transgenic mice. GCV prevented 
growth of secondary multipotent neurospheres prepared after passage of primary
transgenic neurospheres derived from all three of these developmental stages. In 
addition, GCV prevented growth of multipotent neurospheres from transgenic
astrocyte-enriched cell cultures derived from postnatal GZ, and elaidic acid GCV 
given for 4 d to adult transgenic mice in vivo abolished the ability to grow
multipotent neurospheres from GZ. Extensive control experiments, including clonal
analysis, demonstrated that failure of neurosphere growth was not merely
secondary to loss of GFAP-expressing support cells or the result of a nonspecific
toxic effect. Our findings demonstrate that the predominant multipotent NSCs
isolated from postnatal and adult but not early embryonic GZs express GFAP, and
that NSCs exhibit heterogeneous expression of intermediate filaments during
developmental maturation.


PMCID: PMC6742109
PMID: 12684469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

