
1. Hepatol Res. 2003 Mar;25(3):226-233.

Long-term follow-up of chronic hepatitis C patients treated with oral lactoferrin
for 12 months.

Ishii K(1), Takamura N, Shinohara M, Wakui N, Shin H, Sumino Y, Ohmoto Y,
Teraguchi S, Yamauchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Toho University School of Medicine,
6-11-1, Omori-nishi, Ota-ku, 143, Tokyo, Japan

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Bovine lactoferrin (bLF) has been shown to prevent the infection
of cultured hepatocytes by hepatitis C virus (HCV). The present study attempted
to clarify the effects of long-term administration of bLF on serum parameters,
including immunomodulatory cytokines, in patients with chronic hepatitis C (CHC).
METHODS: Sixty-three CHC patients were randomly assigned into 2 groups. At an
oral dose of 600 mg/day, bLF was administered for 12 months to 36 patients (bLF
group), while no bLF was given to the remaining 27 patients (control group. Serum
levels of alanine aminotransferase, HCV-RNA, IL-10, and IL-18 were evaluated, as 
well as CD4-positive T cell subsets in the peripheral blood. RESULTS: The serum
IL-18 level was increased by bLF administration, but not in the control group.
After 3 months of bLF treatment, it was significantly higher than before bLF
administration, but it decreased gradually thereafter. The percentage of
interferon (IFN)-gamma+ and IL-4- (Th1) cells in the peripheral blood increased
along with the serum IL-18 level, although the change was not statistically
significant. The other parameters did not change significantly during the study
period in both groups. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that oral
administration of bLF to CHC patients for up to 3 months can produce a
Th1-cytokine dominant environment in the peripheral blood that favors the
eradication of HCV by IFN therapy.

DOI: 10.1016/s1386-6346(02)00279-6 
PMID: 12697243 

