
1. Plant J. 2003 Apr;34(2):149-60.

Interaction between two mitogen-activated protein kinases during tobacco defense 
signaling.

Liu Y(1), Jin H, Yang KY, Kim CY, Baker B, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri-Columbia, 117 Schweitzer
Hall, 65211, USA.

Plant mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) represented by tobacco
wounding-induced protein kinase (WIPK) have unique regulation at the level of
transcription in response to stresses. By using transcriptional and translational
inhibitors, it has been shown previously that WIPK gene expression and de novo
protein synthesis are required for the high-level activity of WIPK in cells
treated with elicitins from Phytophthora spp. However, regulation of WIPK
expression and the role(s) of WIPK in plant disease resistance are unknown. In
this report, we demonstrate that WIPK gene transcription is regulated by
phosphorylation and de-phosphorylation events. Interestingly, salicylic
acid-induced protein kinase (SIPK) was identified as the kinase involved in
regulating WIPK gene expression based on both gain-of-function and
loss-of-function analyses. This finding revealed an additional level of
interaction between SIPK and WIPK, which share an upstream MAPKK, NtMEK2.
Depending on whether WIPK shares its downstream targets with SIPK, it could
either function as a positive feed-forward regulator of SIPK or initiate a new
pathway. Consistent with the first scenario, co-expression of WIPK with the
active mutant of NtMEK2 leads to accelerated hypersensitive response (HR)-like
cell death in which SIPK also plays a role. Mutagenesis analysis revealed that
the conserved common docking domain in WIPK is required for its function.
Together with prior reports that (i) WIPK is activated in NN tobacco infected
with tobacco mosaic virus, and (ii) PVX virus-induced gene silencing of WIPK
attenuated N gene-mediated resistance, we concluded that WIPK plays a positive
role in plant disease resistance, possibly through accelerating the
pathogen-induced HR cell death.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2003.01709.x 
PMID: 12694591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

