
1. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2003 May;228(5):576-83.

Heme oxygenase-1 gene expression attenuates angiotensin II-mediated DNA damage in
endothelial cells.

Mazza F(1), Goodman A, Lombardo G, Vanella A, Abraham NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Pharmacology, New York Medical College, Valhalla,
New York 10595, USA.

Heme oxygenase (HO) catalyzes the conversion of heme to biliverdin with the
release of iron and carbon monoxide. HO-1 is inducible by inflammatory
conditions, which cause oxidative stress in endothelial cells. Overexpression of 
human HO-1 in endothelial cells may have the potential to provide protection
against a variety of agents that cause oxidative stress. We investigated the
physiological significance of human HO-1 overexpression using a retroviral vector
on attenuation of angiotensin II (Ang II)-mediated oxidative stress. Comet and
glutathione (GSH) levels were used as indicators of the levels of oxidative
stress. Comet assay was performed to evaluate damage on DNA, whereas GSH levels
were measured to determine the unbalance of redox potential. Pretreatments with
inducers, such as heme 10 microM, SnCl(2) 10 microM, and inhibitors, such as
tin-mesoporphyrin 10 microM was followed by treatment with Ang II 200 ng/ml.
Pretreatment with heme or SnCl(2) provoked significant reductions (P < 0.01) of
tail moment in the comet assay. Opposite effects were evident by pretreatment for
16 hr with tin-mesoporphyrin. A decrease in tail moment levels was found in human
endothelial cells transduced with the human HO-1 gene. The addition of Ang II
(200 ng/ml) to human dermal microvessel endothelial cell-1 for 16 hr resulted in 
a significant (P < 0.05) reduction of GSH contents control endothelial cells but 
not in endothelial cells transduced with HO-1 gene. The results presented
indicated that stimulation or overexpression of HO-1 attenuated DNA damages
caused by exposures of Ang II.

DOI: 10.1177/15353702-0322805-31 
PMID: 12709590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

