
1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2003 Jun;44(6):2803-8.

Aquaporin-1 channels in human retinal pigment epithelium: role in transepithelial
water movement.

Stamer WD(1), Bok D, Hu J, Jaffe GJ, McKay BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona
85711-1824, USA. dstamer@eyes.arizona.edu

PURPOSE: Aquaporin (AQP) is a hexahelical integral membrane protein that
functions as a constitutive channel for water and regulated channel for cations
in fluid transporting tissues, including many in the eye. Although AQP1 has been 
cloned from a cDNA library prepared from cultures of retinal pigment epithelial
(RPE) cells isolated from human fetal tissue, three separate studies failed with 
various immunochemical techniques to detect AQP1 protein in adult human or rat
RPE preparations. The purpose of this study was to examine specifically the
expression and distribution of AQP1 in adult human RPE in situ by using
alternative methodologies and model systems and to determine the contribution of 
AQP1 to water movement across cultured RPE cells isolated from human cadaveric
and fetal eyes.
METHODS: AQP1 in human RPE in situ was determined after biotinylation of proteins
on cell surfaces and streptavidin chromatography, followed by immunoblot
analyses. AQP1 distribution in a polarized in vitro RPE model was determined with
indirect immunofluorescence confocal microscopy. The role of channel-mediated
transport of water across RPE cell monolayers on filters was assessed by osmotic 
challenge assay. Expression levels of AQP1 were controlled with an adenovirus
expression system and monitored by immunoblot analyses.
RESULTS: AQP1 protein was detected in human RPE in situ and in cultures of human 
adult and fetal RPE cells. In functional assays, AQP1 facilitated water movement 
across RPE monolayers in an expression-dependent manner in two complementary
model systems.
CONCLUSION: The expression of AQP1 by RPE in vivo probably contributes to the
efficient transepithelial water transport across RPE, maintains retinal
attachment, and prevents subretinal edema.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.03-0001 
PMID: 12766090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

