
1. J Hosp Infect. 2003 May;54(1):68-73.

A survey of doctors' and nurses' knowledge, attitudes and compliance with
infection control guidelines in Birmingham teaching hospitals.

Stein AD(1), Makarawo TP, Ahmad MF.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, The University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
adamdstein@hotmail.com

This study investigated knowledge about infection control amongst doctors and
nurses through a cross-sectional survey conducted between March and May 2001 in
three Birmingham, UK teaching hospitals. Seventy-five doctors and 143 nurses,
representing 7% and 4%, respectively, of potential respondents, participated in
the study measuring knowledge of, attitudes towards, and compliance with
universal precautions. Overall knowledge of risks of blood-borne virus (BBV)
transmission from an infected patient after needlestick injury was low [44.0% for
hepatitis B virus (HBV), 38.1% for hepatitis C virus (HCV), 54.6% for human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)]. There were significant differences between doctors
and nurses concerning the estimations of HBV (e-antigen +) (P=0.006) and HIV
(P<0.001) transmission risks. Eighty-six percent of nurses stated that they treat
each patient as if they are carrying a BBV compared with 41% of doctors. Doctors 
and nurses differed significantly in their attitudes about and reported
compliance with washing hands before and after patient contact and with wearing
gloves when taking blood (P<0.001 for all). Doctors consistently de-emphasized
the importance of, and reported poor compliance with, these procedures. Doctors
were also more likely to state that they re-sheath used needles manually than
were nurses (P<0.001). Thirty-seven percent of respondents reported that they had
suffered a needlestick injury with a used needle, with doctors more likely to be 
injured than nurses (P=0.005). Twenty-eight percent of these doctors and 2% of
the nurses did not report their needlestick injuries (P=0.004). Education,
monitoring, improved availability of resources, and disciplinary measures for
poor compliance are necessary to improve infection control in hospitals,
especially amongst doctors.

DOI: 10.1016/s0195-6701(03)00074-4 
PMID: 12767850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

