
1. Mod Pathol. 1992 May;5(3):283-91.

Conditions affecting the immunohistochemical detection of HIV in fixed and
embedded renal and nonrenal tissues.

Nadasdy T(1), Hanson-Painton O, Davis LD, Miller KW, DeBault LE, Burns DK, Silva 
FG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City.

A number of studies have suggested that HIV infection can be detected in a
variety of routinely fixed archival tissues using antibodies to various viral
proteins. In order to study this immunocytochemical approach, paraffin sections
were examined with a large panel of commercially available monoclonal antibodies 
against the various HIV proteins (5 antibodies to p24, 1 to p17, 1 to gp41, and 1
to gp120) using a streptavidin-biotin method. A polyclonal antibody against p24
was also tested. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded HIV infected CEM E5 T cells
were used as positive controls. Tissues from AIDS patients included 31 kidneys, 8
lymph nodes, 2 spleens and 3 brains. Non-AIDS tissues examined were 6 renal
biopsies with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, 5 with interstitial nephritis, 
6 reactive lymph nodes, and a brain with encephalitis, all from patients not
known to be at high risk for HIV infection. Additional negative controls
included: 1) replacement of primary antibody with a hybridoma derived mouse
monoclonal IgG1 standard, 2) omission of the primary antibody, and 3) sections of
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded CEM E5 T cells cultures not infected with HIV.
Competition experiments with excess recombinant p24 protein were also performed. 
False positive staining with the IgG1 standard or with the antibodies to HIV
proteins was frequently seen in tissues with pathologic findings (inflammation,
hyalin degeneration), particularly following protein digestion. Protein digestion
also had a major impact on specific staining. Digestion with proteinase K
abolished specific staining for the core proteins of the virus (p17, p24) on the 
positive control sections.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 1379713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

