
1. J Clin Invest. 1992 Aug;90(2):342-8.

Retroviral-mediated transfer of the human glucocerebrosidase gene into cultured
Gaucher bone marrow.

Nolta JA(1), Yu XJ, Bahner I, Kohn DB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Research Immunology/Bone Marrow Transplantation, Children's
Hospital of Los Angeles, California 90027.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest 1992 Oct;90(4):following 1634.

Gaucher disease, a lysosomal glycolipid storage disorder, results from the
genetic deficiency of an acidic glucosidase, glucocerebrosidase (GC). The
beneficial effects of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT) for Gaucher
disease suggest that GC gene transduction and the transplantation of autologous
hematopoietic stem cells (gene therapy) may similarly alleviate symptoms. We have
constructed a retroviral vector, L-GC, produced by a clone of the amphotropic
packaging cell line PA317, which transduces the normal human GC cDNA with high
efficiency. Whole-marrow mononuclear cells and CD34-enriched cells from a
4-yr-old female with type 3 Gaucher disease were transduced by the L-GC vector
and studied in long-term bone marrow culture (LTBMC). Prestimulation of marrow
with IL-3 and IL-6, followed by co-cultivation with vector-producing fibroblasts,
produced gene transfer into 40-45% of the hematopoietic progenitor cells. The
levels of GC expression in progeny cells (primarily mature myelomonocytic)
produced by the LTBMC were quantitatively analyzed by Northern blot, Western
blot, and glucocerebrosidase enzyme assay. Normal levels of GC RNA,
immunoreactive protein, and enzymatic activity were detected throughout the
duration of culture. These studies demonstrate that retroviral vectors can
efficiently transfer the GC gene into long-lived hematopoietic progenitor cells
from the bone marrow of patients with Gaucher disease and express physiologically
relevant levels of GC enzyme activity.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI115868 
PMCID: PMC443108
PMID: 1379609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

