
1. J Cutan Pathol. 1992 Aug;19(4):315-24.

Cutaneous manifestations of measles in AIDS.

McNutt NS(1), Kindel S, Lugo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York Hospital, Cornell University Medical Center,
NY 10021.

In immunocompetent patients, infection by the measles (rubeola) paramyxovirus
produces fever, cough, coryza, Koplik's spots, and, on the skin, a macular
erythema that can become confluent. The erythema has a striking cephalocaudal
spread and clearing. The diagnosis of measles on a skin biopsy and the
distinction from an erythema multiforme type of drug eruption can be difficult.
We studied a skin biopsy from a patient with the acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS) who presented with measles. In contrast to erythema multiforme,
the measles biopsy has necrosis of clusters of keratinocytes in the high spinous 
layer and granular layer of the epidermis, whereas erythema multiforme has
necrosis of basal keratinocytes. Multinucleated keratinocytes may or may not be
prominent in the measles biopsy. Cytoplasmic swelling of the keratinocytes in the
granular layer may be present even when multinucleated cells are sparse.
Immunoperoxidase reactivity for measles virus protein is present in intranuclear 
inclusions and in the cytoplasm of infected upper spinous keratinocytes. There
were more cells with positive staining in the biopsy from the AIDS patient than
in another biopsy from an immunocompetent patient with measles. The AIDS patient 
was seronegative for measles throughout the course of the illness. The
examination of the skin biopsy can be very important in the diagnosis of measles 
in AIDS patients or immunocompromised patients who may not develop the usual
diagnostic serology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0560.1992.tb01368.x 
PMID: 1430471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

