
1. Immunogenetics. 2003 Nov;55(8):521-9. Epub 2003 Oct 18.

The IDDM-associated solitary retroviral promoters DQ-LTR3 and DQ-LTR13 have a
distinct impact on the expression of selected DQB1 genes in different cell lines 
in vitro.

Krach K(1), Badenhoop K, TÃ¶njes RR.

Author information: 
(1)Paul-Ehrlich-Institut Langen, Paul-Ehrlich-Str. 51-59, 63225 Langen, Germany.

The HLA complex on chromosome 6, especially of the HLA class II genes, plays an
important role in the pathogenesis of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM).
Three solitary long terminal repeats (LTRs) have been described in the vicinity
of HLA DQ, two of them modifying the genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes on
high-risk HLA DQ haplotypes. Therefore, we have investigated the putative
regulatory properties of these retroviral promoters in different cell lines,
including a number of B- and T-lymphoblastoid cell lines bearing different DQ
haplotypes, employing a transient reporter gene assay. The transcriptional
activity of appropriate constructs harboring an LTR linked to the luciferase
reporter gene revealed different expression patterns which varied considerably
between the investigated cell lines. DQ-LTR3 showed clear activities, whereby the
levels of luciferase gene expression were also increased approximately 200-fold
in the teratocarcinoma cell line GH. For the different B- and T-cell lines, no
significant activity was detected for any of the investigated LTRs. Furthermore, 
we have analyzed the effect of DQ-LTR13 on distinct DQB1 promoters and could show
an increased activity of the DQB1*0302 promoter under the influence of DQ-LTR13. 
It varied from 1.5- to 6-fold in different cell lines depending on the
transcriptional orientation and position of the LTR and was independent of
DQ-LTR3. Moreover, the impact of the LTR was different for the DQB1*0201 promoter
demonstrating a decreasing effect. These data indicate that a DQ-LTR13-mediated
impact on the DQB1 promoter activity exists which differs clearly between
selected promoters.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-003-0614-5 
PMID: 14566435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

