
1. Microbiol Immunol. 1992;36(9):947-59.

Phage pattern and antibiotic resistance pattern of coagulase-negative
staphylococci obtained from immunocompromised patients.

Barcs I(1), Herendi A, Lipcsey A, Bogn√°r C, Hashimoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Bacteriophage Department, B. Johan National Institute for Public Health,
Budapest, Hungary.

A total of 152 coagulase-negative staphylococcal strains were isolated from
clinical samples of 14 patients hospitalized after bone-marrow transplantation in
a specialized hospital ward in Hungary, during an 18-month period between 1987
and 1989. Two species, Staphylococcus epidermidis and Staphylococcus
haemolyticus, predominated (each, 45%). Using Pulverer and co-workers' phage set 
for typing, 68% of the isolates were typable; 16 phage patterns were observed. A 
characteristic long pattern with phages Ph10/Ph13/Ph15/U4/U15/U16/U20/U33 /U46
appeared only in S. epidermidis, among 5 of 11 colonized patients (8.5% of all
strains). Single lysis with phage Ph13 was observed in 7 of the 14 patients (49% 
of all strains), in species S. capitis, S. epidermidis, S. haemolyticus, S.
hominis, and S. warneri. In S. haemolyticus, non-typable strains predominated
(66%); this character occurred only in 2% among other species. The strains
colonizing the immunocompromised patients differed from each other in phage
pattern, antibiotic resistance pattern, and/or slime production. No hospital
infection was suggested. On the other hand, high incidence of two well-definable 
phage patterns raises some relationship between phage receptors or some
regulatory systems in phage multiplication and factors responsible for special
colonization as common surface properties.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.1992.tb02098.x 
PMID: 1461152  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

