
1. J Virol. 2004 Jan;78(2):683-91.

The spacing between cysteines two and three of the LDL-A module of Tva is
important for subgroup A avian sarcoma and leukosis virus entry.

Rai T(1), Marble D, Rihani K, Rong L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Rong et al. have demonstrated previously that with a few substitutions, the
fourth repeat of human low-density lipoprotein (hLDL-A4) receptor can
functionally replace the LDL-A module of Tva, the cellular receptor for subgroup 
A avian sarcoma and leukosis virus (ASLV-A), in viral entry (L. Rong, K. Gendron,
and P. Bates, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95:8467-8472, 1998). Here we have shown 
that swapping the amino terminus of hLDL repeat 5 (hLDL-A5) with that of Tva, in 
addition to the corresponding substitutions made in human LDL-A4, was required to
convert hLDL-A5 into an efficient ASLV-A receptor. These results substantiated
our previous findings regarding the role of the specific residues in the viral
interaction domain of Tva and demonstrated the critical role of the amino
terminus of the Tva LDL-A module in ASLV-A infection. Furthermore, we have shown 
that the residues between cysteines 2 and 3 of the Tva LDL-A module in a
Tva/LDL-A5 chimeric protein can be functionally replaced by the corresponding
region of another LDL-A module, human LDL receptor-related protein repeat 22
(LDL-A22), to mediate efficient ASLV-A entry. Since the only conserved feature
between the C2-C3 region of LDL-A22 and the Tva LDL-A module is that both contain
nine amino acids of which none are conserved, we conclude that the spacing
between C2 and C3 of the LDL-A module of Tva is an important determinant for
ASLV-A entry. Thus, the present study provides strong evidence to support our
hypothesis that one role of the N terminus of the LDL-A module of Tva is to allow
proper folding and conformation of the protein for optimal interaction with the
viral glycoprotein EnvA in ASLV-A entry.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.78.2.683-691.2004 
PMCID: PMC368809
PMID: 14694099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

