
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2004 Jan 20;85(2):138-46.

Large-scale expansion of cytomegalovirus-specific cytotoxic T cells in suspension
culture.

Foster AE(1), Forrester K, Gottlieb DJ, Barton GW, Romagnoli JA, Bradstock KF.

Author information: 
(1)Westmead Institute for Cancer Research, Westmead Millennium Institute,
University of Sydney, NSW 2145, Australia. aaron_foster@wmi.usyd.edu.au

Clinical trials in recent years involving the adoptive transfer of
antigen-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) have shown promise in restoring
immunity against viral infection and reducing tumor burden in patients with solid
and hematological malignancies. However, the large cell number required to
achieve efficacy, 10(9) to 10(11), makes routine application of adoptive
immunotherapy impractical. Investigation into new methods of CTL expansion may be
useful in addressing this problem. Use of stirred suspension bioreactors are one 
such method that may allow large-scale T-cell expansion. Suspension cultures
offer advantages over conventional static culture methods, including providing a 
homogeneous culture environment, and the potential for optimization and control
of culture conditions. We generated cytomegalovirus (CMV)-specific CTL and
investigated the potential of stirred bioreactor systems for expansion of large
cell numbers. We found that CTL can be readily expanded ( > 200-fold) from
cryopreserved stocks by nonspecific stimulation in the presence of allogeneic
feeder cells and interleukin-2 (IL-2). Activated CTL inoculated into either
suspension or static cultures could be subsequently expanded tenfold, and showed 
similar growth kinetics and metabolism independent of the culture vessel used.
Furthermore, CTL remained specific for CMVpp65 peptide through the expansion
phases, as demonstrated by pp65-tetramer staining ( > 95% tetramer(+)) and
cytotoxicity assays. This study indicates that suspension reactor systems may be 
useful in large-scale expansion of antigen-specific CTL lines or clones, and may 
facilitate the advancement of routine adoptive immunotherapy.

Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.10801 
PMID: 14704996  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

