
1. J Gene Med. 2004 Jan;6(1):43-54.

Gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy for prostate cancer in a mouse model that
imitates the development of human disease.

Martiniello-Wilks R(1), Dane A, Voeks DJ, Jeyakumar G, Mortensen E, Shaw JM, Wang
XY, Both GW, Russell PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research Centre, Prince of Wales Hospital Clinical School of
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, The University of New South Wales, Prince of Wales
Hospital, Randwick, NSW 2031, Australia. r.martiniello@centenary.usyd.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy (GDEPT) based on the E. coli
enzyme purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) represents a new approach for
treating slow growing tumours like prostate cancer (PCa). Expressed enzyme
converts a systemically administered prodrug, fludarabine phosphate, to a toxic
metabolite, 2-fluoroadenine. Infected and neighbouring cells are killed by a
bystander effect that results from the inhibition of DNA and RNA synthesis.
METHODS: These studies were carried out using the transgenic adenocarcinoma of
the prostate (TRAMP) model that mimics human PCa development and progression.
Control TRAMP mice were injected intraprostatically with vector vehicle and
thereafter intraperitoneally with saline or fludarabine phosphate ( approximately
600 mg/m(2)/day) once daily for 5 consecutive days. Treated mice received a
single intraprostatic injection containing 10(10) particles of OAdV220, an ovine 
atadenovirus which expresses the E. coli PNP gene under the control of the Rous
sarcoma virus promoter, followed by systemic fludarabine treatment. The weight of
the genitourinary tract, seminal vesicles and the prostate as well as animal
survival were monitored. Tumours were also analysed histologically.
RESULTS: Preliminary studies showed that fludarabine alone caused no significant 
change in genitourinary (GU) tract weight in TRAMP mice. Animals injected with
vector and prodrug showed a significant reduction (36-47%) in GU tract weight
(ANOVA p = 0.0002) and a 35-50% reduction in seminal vesicle weight (ANOVA p =
0.0007). In particular, the target organ showed a significant 57% reduction in
prostate weight (ANOVA p = 0.0007). PNP-GDEPT mice also showed a survival
advantage over control mice. Histological analysis suggested that the cancer
progression was slowed in GDEPT-treated animals.
CONCLUSION: A single course of GDEPT based on OAdV-delivered PNP and fludarabine 
produced highly significant suppression of PCa progression in immune-competent
TRAMP mice.

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jgm.474 
PMID: 14716676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

