
1. J Virol. 2004 Apr;78(7):3578-600.

Differential tissue-specific regulation of antiviral CD8+ T-cell immune responses
during chronic viral infection.

Zhou S(1), Ou R, Huang L, Price GE, Moskophidis D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

The hallmarks of the immune response to viral infections are the expansion of
antigen-specific CD8(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) after they encounter
antigen-presenting cells in the lymphoid tissues and their subsequent
redistribution to nonlymphoid tissues to deal with the pathogen. Control
mechanisms exist within CTL activation pathways to prevent inappropriate CTL
responses against disseminating infections with a broad distribution of pathogen 
in host tissues. This is demonstrated during overwhelming infection with the
noncytolytic murine lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus, in which clonal
exhaustion (anergy and/or deletion) of CTLs prevents immune-mediated pathology
but allows persistence of the virus. The mechanism by which the immune system
determines whether or not to mount a full response to such infections is unknown.
Here we present data showing that the initial encounter of specific CTLs with
infected cells in lymphoid tissues is critical for this decision. Whether the
course of the viral infection is acute or persistent for life primarily depends
on the degree and kinetics of CTL exhaustion in infected lymphoid tissues.
Virus-driven CTL expansion in lymphoid tissues resulted in the migration of large
quantities of CTLs to nonlymphoid tissues, where they persisted at stable levels.
Surprisingly, although virus-specific CTLs were rapidly clonally exhausted in
lymphoid tissues under conditions of chronic infection, a substantial number of
them migrated to nonlymphoid tissues, where they retained an effector phenotype
for a long time. However, these cells were unable to control the infection and
progressively lost their antiviral capacities (cytotoxicity and cytokine
secretion) in a hierarchical manner before their eventual physical elimination.
These results illustrate the differential tissue-specific regulation of antiviral
T-cell responses during chronic infections and may help us to understand the
dynamic relationship between antigen and T-cell populations in many persistent
infections in humans.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.78.7.3578-3600.2004 
PMCID: PMC371037
PMID: 15016881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

