
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Apr 7;126(13):4453-60.

NMR-based characterization of phenothiazines as a RNA binding scaffold.

Mayer M(1), James TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, San
Francisco, California 94143-2280, USA.

Phenothiazines were identified by virtual screening as promising ligands for
HIV-1 TAR RNA and A-site ribosomal RNA, and binding in each case was verified
experimentally. Consequently, since phenothiazines generally possess high
bioavailability and low toxicity, we used several NMR techniques to explore the
binding characteristics of acetopromazine with a total of five different RNA
constructs: four as potential drug targets plus one control RNA construct.
Acetopromazine was able to bind to various internal bulges and terminal loops
containing both purines and pyrimidines, but no binding could be detected with
double-stranded RNA or tetraloops. Dissociation constants determined via NMR
varied from 0.27 to >3 mM. Analysis of differential saturation transfer
difference (STD) NMR effects of acetopromazine suggests that the phenothiazine
moiety has the closest contact to the binding sites of TAR and A-site RNA while
the flexible N,N-dimethylpropylamino side chain contributes less to binding. NMR 
studies on A-site ribosomal RNA binding by six commercially available
phenothiazines, while too few to establish a true structure-activity
relationship, revealed a distinct dependence on aromatic ring and side chain
substituents. Substituted phenothiazines have low molecular weight, are not
highly charged, and have an inherent affinity for irregular tertiary RNA folds,
suggesting that they can serve as a novel scaffold for constructing RNA-binding
ligands.

DOI: 10.1021/ja0398870 
PMID: 15053636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

