
1. Biometals. 2004 Jun;17(3):295-9.

Antiviral activity of lactoferrin towards naked viruses.

Seganti L(1), Di Biase AM, Marchetti M, Pietrantoni A, Tinari A, Superti F.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Sciences Department, University La Sapienza, P.le A. Moro 5,
00185 Rome, Italy.

It is well known that lactoferrin (Lf) is a potent inhibitor towards several
enveloped and naked viruses, such as rotavirus, enterovirus and adenovirus. Lf is
resistant to tryptic digestion and breast-fed infants excrete high levels of
faecal Lf, so that its effect on viruses replicating in the gastrointestinal
tract is of great interest. In this report, we analysed the mechanism of the
antiviral action of this protein in three viral models which, despite
representing different genoma and replication strategies, share the ability to
infect the gut. Concerning the mechanism of action against rotavirus, Lf from
bovine milk (BLf) possesses a dual role, preventing virus attachment to
intestinal cells by binding to viral particles, and inhibiting a post adsorption 
step. The BLf effect towards poliovirus is due to the interference with an early 
infection step but, when the BLf molecule is saturated with Zn+2 ions, it is also
capable of inhibiting viral replication after the viral adsorption phase. The
anti-adenovirus action of BLf takes place on virus attachment to cell membranes
through competition for common glycosaminoglycan receptors and a specific
interaction with viral structural polypeptides. Taken together, these findings
provide further evidence that Lf is an excellent candidate in the search of
natural agents against viral enteric diseases, as it mainly acts by hindering
adsorption and internalisation into cells through specific binding to cell
receptors and/or viral particles.

DOI: 10.1023/b:biom.0000027708.27142.bc 
PMID: 15222481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

