
1. Blood. 2004 Oct 15;104(8):2523-31. Epub 2004 Jun 29.

Transcriptional activation of hTERT through the NF-kappaB pathway in
HTLV-I-transformed cells.

Sinha-Datta U(1), Horikawa I, Michishita E, Datta A, Sigler-Nicot JC, Brown M,
Kazanji M, Barrett JC, Nicot C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Kansas Medical Center, Department of Microbiology, Immunology,
and Molecular Genetics, 3025 Wahl Hall West, 3901 Rainbow Blvd, Kansas City, KS
66160, USA.

In immortal cells, the existence of a mechanism for the maintenance of telomere
length is critical. In most cases this is achieved by the reactivation of
telomerase, a cellular reverse transcriptase that prevents telomere shortening.
Here we report that the telomerase gene (hTERT) promoter is up-regulated during
transmission of human T-cell lymphotropic virus type-I (HTLV-I) to primary T
cells in vitro and in ex vivo adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL) samples, but 
not asymptomatic carriers. Although Tax impaired induction of human telomerase
reverse transcriptase (hTERT) mRNA in response to mitogenic stimulation,
transduction of Tax into primary lymphocytes was sufficient to activate and
maintain telomerase expression and telomere length when cultured in the absence
of any exogenous stimulation. Transient transfection assays revealed that Tax
stimulates the hTERT promoter through the nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB)
pathway. Consistently, Tax mutants inactive for NF-kappaB activation could not
activate the hTERT or sustain telomere length in transduced primary lymphocytes. 
Analysis of the hTERT promoter occupancy in vivo using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays suggested that an increased binding of c-Myc and Sp1
is involved in the NF-kappaB-mediated activation of the hTERT promoter. This
study establishes the role of Tax in regulation of telomerase expression, which
may cooperate with other functions of Tax to promote HTLV-I-associated adult
T-cell leukemia.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2003-12-4251 
PMID: 15226182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

