
1. J Virol. 2004 Sep;78(18):10074-85.

Transcriptional activation by the Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus
latency-associated nuclear antigen is facilitated by an N-terminal
chromatin-binding motif.

Wong LY(1), Matchett GA, Wilson AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, New York University School of Medicine, 550 First 
Ave., New York, NY 10016, USA.

In immunocompromised patients, infection with Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus (KSHV) can give rise to Kaposi's sarcoma and several
lymphoproliferative disorders. In these tumors, KSHV establishes a latent
infection in many of the rapidly proliferating and morphologically abnormal
cells. Only a few viral gene products are expressed by the latent virus, and one 
of the best characterized is the latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA), a
nuclear protein required for the maintenance of viral episomal DNA in the
dividing host cell. LANA can also activate or repress an assortment of cellular
and viral promoters and may contribute to pathogenesis by allowing the
proliferation and survival of host cells. Here we show that activation of the
human E2F1 and cyclin-dependent kinase-2 (CDK2) promoters requires elements from 
both the N- and C-terminal regions of LANA. Deletion of the first 22 amino acids,
which are necessary for episome tethering, does not affect nuclear localization
but significantly reduces transactivation. Within the deleted peptide, we have
identified a short sequence, termed the chromatin-binding motif (CBM), that binds
tightly to interphase and mitotic chromatin. A second chromatin-binding activity 
resides in the C terminus but is not sufficient for optimal transactivation.
Alanine substitutions within the CBM reveal a close correlation between the
transactivation and chromatin binding activities, implying a mechanistic link. In
contrast to promoter activation, we find that the 223 amino acids of the LANA C
terminus are sufficient to inhibit p53-mediated activation of the human BAX
promoter, indicating that the CBM is not required for all transcription-related
functions.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Microbiology

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.18.10074-10085.2004 
PMCID: PMC514975
PMID: 15331740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

