
1. Eur J Cancer. 2004 Sep;40(14):2135-42.

Adenoviral-mediated gene transduction of the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)
antagonist, NK4, suppresses peritoneal metastases of gastric cancer in nude mice.

Ueda K(1), Iwahashi M, Matsuura I, Nakamori M, Nakamura M, Ojima T, Naka T,
Ishida K, Matsumoto K, Nakamura T, Yamaue H.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Wakayama Medical University,
811-1 Kimiidera, 641-8510, Japan.

The competitive inhibitory effects of NK4 (a specific hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF)-antagonist) on the interaction between HGF and the c-Met/HGF receptor has
been shown in HGF-mediated invasion of some distinct types of human cancer cells.
Furthermore, NK4 has inhibitory effects on the angiogenic pathways driven by
basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), as well as by HGF. In this study, to evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of
adenoviral-mediated NK4 gene treatment, we employed animal models of peritoneal
metastasis using two gastric cancer cell lines, the strongly c-Met expressing
MKN45 cell line and the weakly c-Met-expressing cell line, TMK1. In both models, 
the total number and weight of peritoneal tumours per mouse and ascites treated
early with AxCANK4 (administered 3 times 2, 7 and 12 days after the tumour
inoculation) were significantly reduced compared with those treated with
phosphate-buffered solution (PBS) and AxCALacZ (P < 0.05). In
Factor-VIII-related-antigen-stained sections from peritoneal metastatic tumours, 
the inhibition of intratumour vessels was observed in tissues from tumours of
MKN45 and TMK1 treated with AxCANK4. We also compared the therapeutic effect of
early AxCANK4 treatment with that of late treatment (at 7, 12 and 17 days).
Peritoneal metastases and ascites treated late with AxCANK4 showed less of an
improvement than those treated early with AxCANK4 in both models. In addition,
the inhibitory effect of cisplatin (CDDP) on peritoneal metastasis was
significantly enhanced by AxCANK4, suggesting that the combination of
intraperitoneal (i.p.) chemotherapy with NK4 gene therapy might be effective,
even in cases of advanced peritoneal metastasis from gastric cancer. To conclude,
these results show clearly that NK4 gene therapy inhibits peritoneal metastases
from gastric cancer, regardless of the level of c-Met/HGF receptor expression in 
the tumour cells, and especially in the early stages of peritoneal metastasis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2004.05.006 
PMID: 15341989  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

