
1. Mol Immunol. 2005 Feb;42(2):239-49.

Mutual interference of HIV and natural killer cell-mediated immune response.

Jacobs R(1), Heiken H, Schmidt RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover,
Germany. jacobs.roland@mh-hannover.de

Natural killer (NK) cells represent important early effector cells in innate
immune defense as they exert their functions without prior sensitization. They
participate in regulation of innate and adaptive immune responses and
hematopoiesis by producing various cytokines and chemokines. In addition, NK
cells lyse virally infected and malignant cells raising them to multifunctional
members of the first line of defense. Unlike other lymphocytes they lack specific
antigen receptors. They rather bind cells using ubiquitous molecules and
communicate via a pattern of receptors specific for MHC-I molecules with their
counterparts. In general, successful binding of the receptors delivers an
inhibitory signal to NK cells thus sparing the target cell from lysis. In
contrast, down-regulated or altered MHC-I expression as frequently observed
during virus infection or on malignant cells prevents ligation of inhibitory
receptors and MHC-I paralyzing inhibition and thus inducing lysis of the target
cell. In human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection NK cells are of central
importance since they can combat viral infection itself and opportunistic
pathogens like fungi and protozoa that usually spread during the course of HIV
infection. However, various studies have reported alterations in HIV patients
affecting NK cell numbers and functions that might negatively influence course
and severity of the disease. This review will focus on the mutual interference of
NK cells and the HI virus.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2004.06.021 
PMID: 15488611  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

