
1. J Virol. 1992 Apr;66(4):2170-9.

Novel human endogenous sequences related to human immunodeficiency virus type 1.

Horwitz MS(1), Boyce-Jacino MT, Faras AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455.

Endogenous retrovirus-related sequences exist within the normal genomic DNA of
all eukaryotes, and these endogenous sequences have been shown to be important to
the nature and biology of related exogenous retroviruses and may also play a role
in cellular functions. To date, no endogenous sequences related to human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) have been reported. Herein we describe the 
first report of the presence of nucleotide sequences related to HIV-1 in human,
chimpanzee, and rhesus monkey DNAs from normal uninfected individuals. We also
present the isolation and characterization of two of these endogenous
HIV-1-related sequences, EHS-1 and EHS-2. With use of low-stringency Southern
blot hybridization, complex banding patterns were detected in human DNA with 5'
and 3' HIV-1-derived probes. When an HIV-1 env region probe was used, we detected
a less complex, conserved banding pattern in human DNA as well as a related but
distinct banding pattern in chimpanzee and rhesus monkey DNAs. EHS-1 and -2 were 
cloned from normal human genomic DNA libraries by using the env region probe.
Clone EHS-1 shows sequence similarity with the domain of the envelope cellular
protease cleavage site of HIV-1, while EHS-2 has sequence similarity to the
overlapping reading frame for Rev and gp41. Stringent hybridization of EHS-1 back
to primate genomic DNA indicates two distinct EHS-1 loci in normal human DNA, an 
identical band pattern in chimpanzee DNA, and a single locus in rhesus monkey
DNA. Likewise, EHS-2 is present as a single highly conserved locus in all three
species. An oligonucleotide derived from EHS-2 across a region of near identity
to HIV-1 detects a complex banding pattern in all primates tested similar to that
seen with the 3' HIV-1 probe. These data suggest that most of the HIV-1-related
sequences identified in primate DNA share a common core of nucleic acid sequence 
found in both EHS-2 and rev and that some of these HIV-1-related sequences have
additional larger regions of sequence similarity to HIV-1.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.66.4.2170-2179.1992 
PMCID: PMC289009
PMID: 1548756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

