
1. Transplant Proc. 2004 Sep;36(7):2116-7.

Polymerase chain reaction for the diagnosis of human polyomavirus-associated
nephropathy in renal transplant recipients.

Lee KW(1), Lee HH, Lee DS, Kim SJ, Joh JW, Oh HY, Kim JW, Kim YG, Huh WS, Kim DJ,
Lee SK, Lee BB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University, School
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Human polyomavirus type BK may be related to interstitial nephropathy or
renal-allograft dysfunction. Patients with nephropathy due to infection with
human polyomavirus may be identified early using the polymerase chain
reaction(PCR). We attempted to evaluate whether the positive response in the PCR 
test of BK virus DNA in the plasma of renal transplant recipients affects the
function of the renal allograft. Seventy-seven patients were prospectively
analyzed according to the operative sex, age, sources of allograft, serum
creatinine levels during PCR test for BK virus, postoperative type of
immunosuppressant, and presence of graft rejection. Two groups were distinguished
according to the PCR result for BK virus: group 1 (n = 12) positive PCR reaction 
and group 2 (n = 65) negative reaction. The mean follow-up was 32.6 weeks. The
incidence of positive PCR tests for BK virus replication after renal
transplantation was 15.6%. Decoy cells in the urine were detected in 20.7%. The
incidence of BK virus nephropathy was 1.3%. The mean serum creatinine levels of
group 1 and 2 at the time of the PCR tests were 1.34 and 1.22, respectively. The 
rejection rates in group 1 and 2 were 8% and 4.5%, respectively (P > .05). We
consider that a PCR assay to detect BK virus in renal recipients blood may be
useful to identify patients at risk for nephropathy. It may serve as a
noninvasive indicator of BK virus replication, although this study is limited by 
the short follow-up and small numbers.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2004.08.081 
PMID: 15518766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

