
1. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2004 Jun;50(4):419-27.

Virus stability and protein-nucleic acid interaction as studied by high-pressure 
effects on nodaviruses.

Schwarcz WD(1), Barroso SP, Gomes AM, Johnson JE, Schneemann A, Oliveira AC,
Silva JL.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Biologia Estrutural, Instituto de Bioquímica Médica, Universidade 
Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil.

In this work, we evaluate the stability, dynamics and protein-nucleic acid
interaction in Flock House virus (FHV). FHV is an RNA insect virus,
non-enveloped, member of the family Nodaviridae. It is composed of a bipartite
single-stranded RNA genome packaged in an icosahedral capsid of 180 copies of an 
identical protein (alpha protein). A fundamental property of many animal viruses 
is the post-assembly maturation required for infectivity. FHV is constructed as a
provirion, which matures to an infectious virion by cleavage of alpha protein
into beta and gamma subunits. We used high pressure, temperature and chemical
denaturing agents to promote perturbation of the viral capsid. These effects were
monitored by spectroscopy measurements (fluorescence, light scattering and CD)
and size-exclusion chromatography. The data showed that FHV was stable to
pressures up to 310 MPa at room temperature. The fluorescence emission and light 
scattering values showed small changes that were reversible after decompression. 
When we combined pressure and sub-denaturing urea concentrations (1 M), the
changes were more drastic, suggesting dissociation of the capsid. However, these 
changes were reversible after pressure release. The complete dissociation of FHV 
could be observed only under high urea concentrations (10 M). There were no
significant changes in emission spectra up to 5 M urea. FHV also was stable when 
we used temperature treatments (high and low). We also compared the effects of
urea and pressure on FHV wild type and cleavage-defective mutant VLPs (virus-like
particles). The VLPs and authentic particles are distinguishable by protein-RNA
interactions, since VLPs pack cellular RNA and native particles contain viral
RNA. Our results demonstrated that native particles are more stable than VLPs to 
physical and chemical treatments. Our data point to the specificity of the
interaction between the capsid protein and the viral RNA. This specificity is
crucial to the stability of the particle, which makes this interaction an
excellent target for drug development.


PMID: 15529751  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

