
1. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2000 Mar 31;49(RR-2):37-55.

Implementing recommendations for the early detection of breast and cervical
cancer among low-income women.

Lawson HW(1), Henson R, Bobo JK, Kaeser MK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Prevention and Control, National Center for Chronic Disease
Prevention and Health Promotion, USA.

SCOPE OF THE PROBLEM: Among U.S. women, breast cancer is the most commonly
diagnosed cancer and remains second only to lung cancer as a cause of
cancer-related mortality. The American Cancer Society (ACS) estimates that
182,800 new cases of female breast cancer and 41,200 deaths from breast cancer
will occur in 2000. Since the 1950s, the incidence of invasive cervical cancer
and mortality from this disease have decreased substantially; much of the decline
is attributed to widespread use of the Papanicolaou (Pap) test. ACS estimates
that 12,800 new cases of invasive cervical cancer will be diagnosed, and 4,600
deaths from this disease will occur in the United States in 2000.
ETIOLOGIC FACTORS: The risk for breast cancer increases with advancing age; other
risk factors include personal or family history of breast cancer, certain benign 
breast diseases, early age at menarche, late age at menopause, white race,
nulliparity, and igher socioeconomic status. Risk factors for cervical cancer
include certain human papilloma virus infections, early age at first intercourse,
multiple male sex partners, a history of sexually transmitted diseases, and low
socioeconomic status. Black, Hispanic, or American Indian racial/ethnic
background is considered a risk factor because cervical cancer detection and
death rates are higher among these women.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PREVENTION: Because studies of the etiology of breast cancer 
have failed to identify feasible primary prevention strategies suitable for use
in the general population, reducing mortality from breast cancer through early
detection has become a high priority. The potential for reducing death rates from
breast cancer is contingent on increasing mammography screening rates and
subsequently detecting the disease at an early stage--when more treatment options
are available and survival rates are higher. Effective control of cervical cancer
depends primarily on early detection of precancerous lesions through use of the
Papanicolaou test, followed by timely evaluation and treatment. Thus, the
intended outcome of cervical cancer screening differs from that of breast cancer 
screening. In 1991, the National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection
Program (NBCCEDP) was implemented to increase breast and cervical cancer
screening among uninsured, low-income women.
RESEARCH AGENDA: To support recommended priority activities for NBCCEDP, CDC has 
developed a research agenda comprising six priorities. These six priorities are
a) determining effective strategies to communicate changes in NBCCEDP policy to
cancer screening providers and women enrolled in the program; b) identifying
effective strategies to increase the proportion of enrolled women who complete
routine breast and cervical cancer rescreening according to NBCCEDP policy; c)
identifying effective strategies to increase NBCCEDP enrollment among eligible
women who have never received breast or cervical cancerscreening; d) evaluating
variations in clinical practice patterns among providers of NBCCEDP screening
services; e) determining optimal models for providing case-management services to
women in NBCCEDP who have an abnormal screening result, precancerous breast or
cervical lesion, or a diagnosis of cancer; and f) conducting economic analyses to
determine costs of providing screening services in NBCCEDP.
CONCLUSION: The NBCCEDP, through federal, state, territorial, and tribal
governments, in collaboration with national and community-based organizations,
has increased access to breast and cervical cancer screening among low-income and
uninsured women. This initiative enabled the United States to make substantial
progress toward achieving the Healthy People 2000 objectives for breast and
cervical cancer control among racial/ethnic minorities and persons who are
medically underserved. A continuing challenge for the future is to increase
national commitment to providing screening services for all eligible uninsured
women to ultimately reduce morbidity and mortality from breast and cervical
cancer.


PMID: 15580731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

