
1. J Virol. 2005 Mar;79(5):3127-38.

The latency-associated nuclear antigen of rhesus monkey rhadinovirus inhibits
viral replication through repression of Orf50/Rta transcriptional activation.

DeWire SM(1), Damania B.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, CB #7295, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. damania@med.unc.edu

Rhesus monkey rhadinovirus (RRV) is a gamma-2-herpesvirus that is closely related
to Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus/human herpesvirus-8. We have
previously reported that the transcript for RRV latency-associated nuclear
antigen (R-LANA) is expressed during lytic replication in rhesus fibroblasts. In 
this article, we report the development of a latent culture system for RRV and
show that mRNA specific for R-LANA is expressed during latency as well. We have
characterized the R-LANA protein and demonstrate that it exhibits a nuclear
speckled localization and possesses the ability to homodimerize. When expressed
in rhesus fibroblasts, R-LANA can inhibit RRV lytic replication in vitro. We have
investigated the mechanism behind this inhibition and find that, while R-LANA
itself has very little effect on lytic promoters, it can dramatically decrease
the transactivation function of RRV Orf50 (Rta), which is the major viral
transcription factor. We further show that the mechanism for this repression
involves the recruitment of histone deacetylase complexes (HDACs), because
R-LANA's ability to repress Orf50 transactivation is completely reversed by the
addition of the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA). We also report that TSA
alone can significantly reactivate RRV from latently infected cells. We propose
that the repressive effects of R-LANA on RRV Orf50 transactivation serve to
downregulate the transcription of early genes at late times during the lytic
cycle and also help to maintain viral latency by preventing viral reactivation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.5.3127-3138.2005 
PMCID: PMC548439
PMID: 15709032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

