
1. Cancer Res. 2005 Mar 15;65(6):2457-64.

Increased populations of regulatory T cells in peripheral blood of patients with 
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Ormandy LA(1), Hillemann T, Wedemeyer H, Manns MP, Greten TF, Korangy F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Medizinische
Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Germany.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common cancer worldwide with a
poor prognosis and one for which immunotherapy remains a viable option.
Experimental tumor models have shown that regulatory T cells, a functionally
unique subset of T cells, can suppress effective antitumor immune responses. This
suppression might explain the poor outcome of some of the immunotherapy protocols
currently being used. A better understanding of the role of regulatory T cells in
HCC is important for design of future immunotherapy-based clinical protocols. We 
have studied regulatory T cells from 84 patients with HCC and 74 controls,
including healthy donors, patients with chronic hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C
virus infection and nonviral liver cirrhosis. Regulatory T cells were identified 
by fluorescence-activated cell sorting using a panel of antibodies and by
real-time PCR analysis for Foxp3 expression. Functional studies were done to
analyze their inhibitory role. Finally, regulatory T cells were analyzed in
tumors and ascites from patients with HCC. Patients with HCC have increased
numbers of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells in their peripheral blood, which express 
high levels of HLA-DR, GITR, and low or no CD45RA. These cells were anergic
toward T-cell receptor stimulation and, when cocultured with activated CD4+CD25- 
cells, potently suppressed their proliferation and cytokine secretion. There were
also high numbers of regulatory T cells in tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes of HCC 
patients comparable with the increase in their peripheral blood. Our data suggest
that the increase in frequency of regulatory T cells might play a role in
modulation of the immune response against HCC and could be important in design of
immunotherapeutic approaches.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-3232 
PMID: 15781662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

