
1. Immunology. 2005 May;115(1):136-49.

Induction of human papillomavirus type 16-specific immunologic responses in a
normal and an human papillomavirus-infected populations.

Cheng WF(1), Lee CN, Su YN, Chang MC, Hsiao WC, Chen CA, Hsieh CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, especially with the oncogenic genotypes, is
the most important risk factor for developing cervical cancer. We focused on
generating HPV16 E7-specific cytotoxic CD8(+) T lymphocytes and evaluating HPV16 
E7-specific immune responses in HPV16-infected and uninfected populations.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were first collected from an
uninfected group with an human lymphocyte antigen (HLA) A2 haplotype (four
volunteers). Mature monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DCs) were generated from
the PBMCs and pulsed with one of two HLA-A2-restricted E7 peptides, aa 11-20
[YMLDLQPETT] and aa 86-93 [TLGIVCPI], as antigen presenting cells. The autologous
naive or cultured PBMCs were then cultured with peptide-pulsed DCs to detect the 
HPV16 E7-specific immune responses by a variety of techniques such as
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT)
assay and cytotoxic T lymphocyte assay. Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) from
E7-specific cytotoxic CD8(+) T lymphocytes stimulated with the respective peptide
was detected by ELISA. Using ELISPOT analysis, a marked increase in the number of
IFN-gamma-secreting CD8(+) E7-specific lymphocytes was observed following peptide
stimulation. Cultured CD8(+) T lymphocytes were highly cytotoxic against the
CaSki cells. PBMCs were then collected from an HPV16-infected population of the
HLA-A2 haplotype, including four persons of HPV16 infection only, four with
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) lesions, and four cervical cancer
patients. We then compared the immunologic responses to E7 between HPV16-infected
and uninfected populations by ELISA and ELISPOT assay. The E7-specific
immunologic responses of the HPV16-infected populations were significantly higher
than those of the uninfected population. In addition, persons with an HPV16
infection only or those with CIN lesions generated higher E7-specific immunologic
responses than cervical cancer patients. Our results demonstrate methods for
evaluating E7-specific immunologic responses and reflect the biological responses
of HPV16-infected people during different periods of cervical disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2005.02126.x 
PMCID: PMC1782130
PMID: 15819706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

