
1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2005 Oct;54(10):988-98. Epub 2005 May 12.

Anti-tumor immune responses following neoadjuvant immunotherapy with a
recombinant adenovirus expressing HSP72 to rodent tumors.

Krewet JA(1), Ren W, Huang XF, Chen SY, Shah MR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Anatomic Studies, Saint Louis University, USA.

Gene modification of tumor cells is commonly utilized in various strategies of
immunotherapy preventive both as treatment and a means to modify tumor growth.
Gene transfer prior to surgery as neoadjuvant therapy has not been studied
systematically. We addressed, whether direct intra-tumoral injection of a
recombinant adenovirus expressing the immunomodulatory molecule, heat shock
protein 72 (ADHSP72), administered prior to surgery could result in sustainable
anti-tumor immune responses capable of affecting tumor progression and survival
in a number of different murine and rat tumor models. Using intra-dermal murine
models of melanoma (B16), colorectal carcinoma (CT26), prostate cancer (TrampC2) 
and a rat model of glioblastoma (9L), tumors were treated with vehicle or GFP
expressing adenovirus (ADGFP) or ADHSP72. Tumors were surgically excised after 72
h. Approximately 25-50% of animals in the ADHSP72 treatment group but not in
control groups showed sustained resistance to subsequent tumor challenge. Tumor
resistance was associated with development of anti-tumor cellular immune
responses. Efficacy of ADHSP72 as neoadjuvant therapy was dependent on the size
of the initial tumor with greater likelihood of immune response generation and
tumor resistance associated with smaller tumor size at initial treatment. ADHSP72
neoadjuvant therapy resulted in prolonged survival of animals upon re-challenge
with autologous tumor cells compared to ADGFP or vehicle control groups. To study
the effects on tumor progression of distant metastases, a single tumor focus of
animals with multifocal intra-dermal tumors was treated. ADHSP72 diminished
progression of the secondary tumor focus and prolonged survival, but only when
the secondary tumor focus was <50 mm3 . Our results indicate that gene
modification of tumors prior to surgical intervention may be beneficial to
prevent recurrence in specific circumstances.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-005-0683-4 
PMID: 15889253  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

