
1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2005 Jun;20(6):833-43.

Chronic hepatitis B virus infection in the Asia-Pacific region and Africa: review
of disease progression.

Lin X(1), Robinson NJ, Thursz M, Rosenberg DM, Weild A, Pimenta JM, Hall AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Fudan University Medical 
Center, Shanghai, China.

Countries in the the Asia-Pacific region and Africa tend to have the highest
prevalence of hepatitis B infection worldwide. Hepatitis B infection progresses
from an asymptomatic persistently infected status to chronic hepatitis B,
cirrhosis, decompensated liver disease and/or hepatocellular carcinoma. The aim
of this review was to summarize rates and risk factors for progression between
disease states in the Asia-Pacific region and Africa. A literature search was
conducted employing MEDLINE and EMBASE (1975-2003) using the following key words:
hepatitis B, natural history, disease progression, cirrhosis, hepatocellular
carcinoma, mortality, Africa and the Asia-Pacific region. Bibliographies of
articles reviewed were also searched. Ranges for annual progression rates were:
(i) asymptomatic persistent infection to chronic hepatitis B, 0.84-2.7%; (ii)
chronic hepatitis B to cirrhosis, 1.0-2.4%; and (iii) cirrhosis to hepatocellular
carcinoma, 3.0-6.6%. Patients with asymptomatic persistent infection and chronic 
hepatitis B had relatively low 5-year mortality rates (<4%); rates (>50%) were
much higher in patients with decompensated liver disease and hepatocellular
carcinoma. No data were found for progression rates in African populations.
Hepatitis B e antigen was a risk factor for chronic hepatitis B, and bridging
hepatic necrosis in chronic hepatitis B increased the risk of cirrhosis. Risk
factors for hepatocellular carcinoma included cirrhosis, co-infection with
hepatitis C virus, and genetic and environmental factors. In this review, wide
ranges of disease progression estimates are documented, emphasizing the need for 
further studies, particularly in Africa, where progression rates are largely not 
available. Summarizing information on factors associated with disease progression
should assist in focusing efforts to arrest the disease process in those at most 
risk.

(c) 2005 Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2005.03813.x 
PMID: 15946129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

