
1. Virus Genes. 2005 Aug;31(1):73-80.

Characterization of a very virulent Marek's disease virus mutant expressing the
pp38 protein from the serotype 1 vaccine strain CVI988/Rispens.

Lee LF(1), Cui X, Cui Z, Gimeno I, Lupiani B, Reddy SM.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Avian Disease
and Oncology Laboratory, East Lansing, MI 48823, USA. leelu@msu.edu

Marek's disease virus (MDV), a highly cell-associated oncogenic chicken
herpesvirus, causes Marek's disease in domestic chickens. A unique phosphoprotein
of MDV, pp38, has previously been associated with the maintenance of
transformation in MDV-induced tumor cell lines. However, recently, the biological
properties of a deletion mutant virus (rMd5Deltapp38) revealed that pp38 is
involved in early cytolytic infection in lymphocytes but not in the induction of 
tumors. Thus, pp38 is important for early cytolytic infection and not for
transformation. The pp38 protein of the MDV serotype 1 vaccine strain
CVI988/Rispens differs by one amino acid when compared to the pathogenic strains 
of MDV. Monoclonal antibody, H19, recognizes all serotype 1 MDV strains except
CVI988/Rispens. Previous studies have also shown that the unique pp38 epitope in 
CVI988/Rispens induced high antibody response. In order to study the role of this
epitope in the protective properties of CVI988/Rispens, we generated a mutant
rMd5 virus in which the wild type pp38 gene has been substituted with that of
CVI988/Rispens (rMd5/pp38CVI). The replication properties of rMd5/pp38CVI, both
in vitro and in vivo, and tumor induction were examined. We found that the
biological properties of rMd5/pp38CVI were similar to the wild type rMd5 virus
with regards to in vivo replication, antibody response and tumor induction. This 
shows that the pp38 derived from CVI988/Rispens is not involved in protective
properties as was previously suggested.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-005-2202-2 
PMID: 15965611  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

