
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Jul 12;102(28):9918-23. Epub 2005 Jun 28.

A tumor necrosis factor receptor family protein serves as a cellular receptor for
the macrophage-tropic equine lentivirus.

Zhang B(1), Jin S, Jin J, Li F, Montelaro RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

Characterization of cellular receptors for human, simian, and feline
immunodeficiency viruses that are tropic for lymphocytes and macrophages have
revealed a common theme of a sequential binding of viral envelope proteins with
two coreceptors to mediate virus infection of target cells. In contrast to these 
dual tropic immunodeficiency viruses, the ungulate lentiviruses, including equine
infectious anemia virus (EIAV), exclusively infect cells of the
monocyte-macrophage lineage to cause progressive degenerative diseases without
clinical immunodeficiency. EIAV causes a uniquely dynamic disease that is
characterized by recurrent disease episodes including fever, diarrhea, lethargy, 
anemia, and thrombocytopenia. Although EIAV provides an important animal model
for lentivirus disease resulting from macrophage infection, to date there has
been no definition of the specific cellular receptor(s) used by the equine
lentivirus to infect target cells. In the current study, we have identified and
cloned a functional receptor for EIAV, designated equine lentivirus receptor-1
(ELR1), related to the family of TNF receptor (TNFR) proteins. ELR1 was shown to 
be expressed in various equine cells permissive for EIAV replication in vitro,
including monocytes and macrophages. In contrast, EIAV-resistant human, murine,
and simian cells were negative for ELR1 expression but became susceptible to
virus infection when transduced with a recombinant murine retrovirus expressing
the ELR1. Thus, these results identify a specific functional receptor for a
macrophagetropic lentivirus and indicate that infection by EIAV may be mediated
by a single receptor, in contrast to coreceptors used by the lymphotropic
immunodeficiency lentiviruses.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0501560102 
PMCID: PMC1174982
PMID: 15985554  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

