
1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2005 Jul-Sep;6(3):364-9.

Increasing incidence of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in Karachi, 1995-2002.

Bhurgri Y(1), Pervez S, Bhurgri A, Faridi N, Usman A, Kazi LA, Ahmed R, Kayani N,
Hasan SH.

Author information: 
(1)Karachi Cancer Registry, Department of Pathology, Sindh Medical College,
Karachi 74800, Pakistan.

This first population-based study of non- Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) from any region 
in Pakistan, provides an overview of the incidence pattern and time trends in
Karachi and generates hypotheses for future experimental research.
Epidemiological data for 429 incident (1(st) Jan 1995 to 31(st) Dec 2002),
microscopically verified nodal and extra-nodal NHL cases, registered at the
Karachi Cancer Registry (KCR) for Karachi South, were reviewed. The age
standardized incidence rate (ASIR) was 5.3/100,000 in males (M) and 4.1/100,000
in females (F), in 1995. A gradual increase in the annual incidence was observed 
during the study period, with NHL incidence rate increasing in 2002 to
8.4/100,000 in men and 6.5/100,000 in women, almost double the 1995 rates. NHL
affected all age groups in both genders and for each group the ASIR was higher
among men than women, with an overall gender ratio of 1.9. The mean ages of the
patients were 41.5 years (95% CI 39.1; 43.8) in males and 44.0 years (95% CI
40.8; 47.1) in females. The adult to childhood ratios were 8.6 (M) and 10.7 (F). 
B-cell NHL comprised 81.0% of NHL in males and 87.3% in females. One fourth of
the NHL cases were extra-nodal, the largest group was of gastrointestinal origin 
(54.1% M, 38.5% F). The gastric component was 21% M and 25.6% F. Odds Ratios for 
sex, age-groups, ethnicity, religion, and subdivision by socio-economic
categories were calculated by considering all malignancies, except
lymphoproliferative disorders as controls. The odds ratio (OR) in men was 2.2
(95% CI 0.6; 3.0). Children and adolescents were at the highest risk of
developing NHL, especially the 5-9 year olds, in both genders. A marginally
higher risk was observed for the lower socioeconomic categories and for
ethnicities belonging to Northern and North Western Pakistan (Punjabi, Pushtu and
Baluch) residing in Karachi South. The incidence rates of NHL registered in
Karachi South are likely to be a reflection of non-AIDS-associated NHL. Estimated
HIV/AIDS incidence was too low during the study period in this population to have
an impact on NHL incidence. The preponderance of low and intermediate grade
lymphomas, paucity of central nervous system NHL and a higher childhood NHL
component support this hypothesis. As yet unpublished reports, however, are
raising the alarm on rising HIV positivity. NHL correlation with HIV/AIDS status 
and studies identifying risk factors of non- HIV/AIDS associated NHL (childhood
viral infections, Hepatitis C virus, and Helicobacter pylori) are potential areas
for future experimental and epidemiological research.


PMID: 16236001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

