
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2005 Dec 1;40(4):388-97.

A transcription inhibitor, actinomycin D, enhances HIV-1 replication through an
interleukin-6-dependent pathway.

Imamichi T(1), Conrads TP, Zhou M, Liu Y, Adelsberger JW, Veenstra TD, Lane HC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Retrovirology, Science Applications International
Corporation (SAIC)-Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA.
timamichi@niaid.nih.gov

We previously demonstrated that Actinomycin D (ActD) enhanced HIV-1 replication
in the MT-2 cell, a human T-cell leukemia virus type-1-infected cell line. The
MT-2 cell is known to produce multiple cytokines spontaneously. In this study, we
investigated the impact of ActD on the cytokine production from MT-2 cells and
HIV-1 replication in a latently infected cell line, U1. MT-2 cells were
pulse-treated with 0 or 200 nM of ActD, and culture supernatants were collected 3
days after incubation. Supernatants from untreated cells (Sup0) induced HIV-1
replication by 150-fold in U1 cells. Culture supernatants from ActD-treated cells
(Sup200) enhanced HIV-1 replication by 1200-fold. A combination of a sequential
chromatographic approach and mass spectrometric analysis identified that the
HIV-inducing factors in Sup200 were interleukin (IL)-6 and tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF)-beta. Quantitative analysis revealed that ActD treatment increased the
concentration of IL-6 in Sup200 by 600% compared with that in Sup0 but decreased 
the amount of TNFbeta in Sup200 by 85%. Northern blot analysis showed that ActD
treatment increased IL-6 transcripts; however, no change was seen in TNFbeta
transcripts. These results suggest that ActD induces replication of HIV-1 through
modulation of cytokine production.

DOI: 10.1097/01.qai.0000179466.25700.2f 
PMID: 16280692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

