
1. J Virol. 2006 Feb;80(3):1087-97.

Bidirectional virus secretion and nonciliated cell tropism following Andes virus 
infection of primary airway epithelial cell cultures.

Rowe RK(1), Pekosz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Campus Box 8230, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) is an acute disease resulting from infection 
with any one of a number of New World hantaviruses. HPS has a mortality rate of
40% and, unlike many other severe respiratory diseases, often occurs in young,
healthy adults. Infection is usually initiated after inhalation of rodent excreta
containing virus particles, but human-to-human transmission has been documented. 
Postmortem tissue samples show high levels of viral antigen within the
respiratory endothelium, but it is not clear how the virus can traverse the
respiratory epithelium in order to initiate infection in the microvasculature. We
have utilized Andes virus infection of primary, differentiated airway epithelial 
cells to investigate the ability of the virus to interact with and cross the
respiratory epithelium. Andes virus infects the Clara and goblet cell populations
but not the ciliated cells, and this infection pattern corresponds to the
expression of beta(3) integrin, the viral receptor. The virus can infect via the 
apical or basolateral membrane, and progeny virus particles are secreted
bidirectionally. There is no obvious cytopathology associated with infection, and
beta(3) integrins do not appear to be critical for respiratory epithelial cell
monolayer integrity. Our data suggest that hantavirus infection of the
respiratory epithelium may play an important role in the early or prodrome phase 
of disease as well as serving as a source of virus involved in transmission.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.80.3.1087-1097.2006 
PMCID: PMC1346943
PMID: 16414986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

