
1. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 5;281(18):12729-35. Epub 2006 Feb 27.

Membrane fusion by single influenza hemagglutinin trimers. Kinetic evidence from 
image analysis of hemagglutinin-reconstituted vesicles.

Imai M(1), Mizuno T, Kawasaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biological Resources and Functions, National Institute of
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan.

Influenza hemagglutinin, the receptor-binding and membrane fusion protein of the 
virus, is a prototypic model for studies of biological membrane fusion in
general. To elucidate the minimum number of hemagglutinin trimers needed for
fusion, the kinetics of fusion induced by reconstituted vesicles of hemagglutinin
was studied by using single-vesicle image analysis. The surface density of
hemagglutinin fusion-activity sites on the vesicles was varied, while keeping the
surface density of receptor-binding activity sites constant, by co-reconstitution
of the fusogenic form of hemagglutinin, HA(1,2), and the non-fusogenic form,
HA(0), at various HA(1,2):(HA(1,2) + HA(0)) ratios. The rate of fusion between
the hemagglutinin vesicles containing a fluorescent lipid probe,
octadecylrhodamine B, and red blood cell ghost membranes was estimated from the
time distribution of fusion events of single vesicles observed by fluorescence
microscopy. The best fit of a log-log plot of fusion rate versus the surface
density of HA(1,2) exhibited a slope of 0.85, strongly supporting the hypothesis 
that single hemagglutinin trimers are sufficient for fusion. When only HA(1,2)
(without HA(0)) was reconstituted on vesicles, the dependence of fusion rate on
the surface density of HA(1,2) was distinct from that for the HA(1,2)-HA(0)
co-reconstitution. The latter result suggested interference with fusion activity 
by hemagglutinin-receptor binding, without having to assume a fusion mechanism
involving multiple hemagglutinin trimers.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M600902200 
PMID: 16505474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

