
1. J Immunol Methods. 2006 Apr 20;311(1-2):71-80. Epub 2006 Feb 20.

Development of a quantitative cell-based ELISA, for a humanized anti-IL-2/IL-15
receptor beta antibody (HuMikbeta(1)), and correlation with functional activity
using an antigen-transfected murine cell line.

Yang XY(1), Chen E, Jiang H, Hartmann WK, Mitra G, Hecht T, Soman G.

Author information: 
(1)Bioanalytical Development Laboratory, Biopharmaceutical Development Program,
SAIC Frederick Inc., NCI-Frederick, FortDetrick, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

The HuMikbeta(1), a humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody directed toward the
IL-2/IL-15 receptor beta-chain (CD122), inhibits the actions of the inflammatory 
cytokine IL-15, and may be useful for immunotherapy of an array of autoimmune
disorders as well as diseases associated with the retrovirus human T-cell
lymphotrophic virus 1 (HTLV-1). In order to facilitate the production of material
for clinical investigation, we developed a cell-based ELISA (CbELISA) for
measuring the binding activity, as a potential biological activity marker, of the
HuMikbeta(1) monoclonal antibody to a transfected 32D mouse cell line (32Dbeta)
expressing IL-2Rbeta antigen on the cell surface. There is specific binding of
HuMikbeta(1) to the transfected cell line, titrating out in the concentration
range of 1-1,000 ng/ml. Under identical conditions, there was no binding of
HuMikbeta(1) to the parent cell line 32D. Satisfactory binding curves with
HuMikbeta(1) were obtained with 32Dbeta cells grown between 3 and 19 passages in 
culture and at seed densities of 2 x 10(5)-4 x 10(6) cells/well. The binding was 
specific for Mikbeta antibodies recognizing the IL-2/IL-15 receptor beta subunit 
as demonstrated by binding of HuMikbeta(1), Mikbeta(2) and Mikbeta(3) antibodies,
and lack of binding of irrelevant humanized and chimeric antibodies and
isotype-matched human IgG1 to the 32Dbeta cell. Also, the human IgG1 and
irrelevant humanized and chimeric antibodies did not interfere with the
HuMikbeta(1) binding. The assay could detect changes in binding activity of
HuMikbeta(1) antibody under stressful conditions (heat and low pH) and the
results paralleled the effect of stress on the physicochemical characteristics.
More importantly, the binding activity shows an apparent correlation to
inhibition of IL-15-induced proliferation of 32Dbeta cells with HuMikbeta(1). In 
conclusion, the cell-based ELISA method represents a simple, reproducible
accurate quantitative assay for monitoring HuMikbeta(1) activity and could be
used as a potency marker assay for monitoring the lot-lot consistency and
functional stability of HuMikbeta(1) product.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2006.01.014 
PMID: 16564055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

