
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2006 Jun;79(6):1166-72. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

Naltrexone inhibits alcohol-mediated enhancement of HIV infection of T
lymphocytes.

Wang X(1), Douglas SD, Peng JS, Metzger DS, O'Brien CP, Zhang T, Ho WZ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Joseph Stokes Jr. Research Institute at
the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 34th Street & Civic Center Boulevard,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Acute and chronic alcohol abuse impairs various functions of the immune system
and thus, has been implicated as a cofactor in the immunopathogenesis of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) disease progression. We determined whether
naltrexone, an opioid receptor antagonist widely used in the treatment of
alcoholism, inhibits alcohol-mediated enhancement of HIV infection of T cells.
Alcohol enhanced HIV infection of peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) and a human 
lymphoid cell line (CEMX174). Alcohol increased HIV X4 envelope (Env), not murine
leukemia virus Env-pseudotyped infection of CEMX174 cells. Naltrexone antagonized
the enhancing effect of alcohol on HIV infection of PBL and CEMX174 cells. The
specific mu-opioid receptor antagonist, Cys2, Tyr3, Arg5, Pen7 (CTAP) amide, also
blocked the enhancing effect of alcohol on HIV infection. Investigation of the
underlying mechanism for the alcohol action showed that alcohol significantly
increased endogenous beta-endorphin production and induced mu-opioid receptor
mRNA expression in PBL and CEMX174 cells. The role of beta-endorphin in
alcohol-mediated enhancement of HIV infection was indicated by the observations
that naltrexone and CTAP antagonized ether alcohol- or exogenous
beta-endorphin-mediated enhancement of HIV infection. These findings suggest a
biological mechanism for the potential therapeutic benefit of naltrexone in
treating HIV-infected alcoholics.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.1105642 
PMID: 16574767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

