
1. Mol Endocrinol. 1991 Jul;5(7):890-6.

Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) attenuation of growth hormone is enhanced by
overexpression of pituitary IGF-I receptors.

Yamasaki H(1), Prager D, Gebremedhin S, Melmed S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center-University of California, 
Los Angeles School of Medicine 90048.

Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) attenuates GH gene expression by a
receptor-mediated mechanism in pituitary cells. We, therefore, isolated
neomycin-resistant stable GC cell transfectants over-expressing human IGF-I
receptor cDNA (IGFIR-cDNA) cloned in an Rous sarcoma virus-directed expression
vector. A transfection control contained the IGFIR-cDNA cloned in the reverse
orientation. Southern analysis confirmed incorporation of human IGFIR-cDNA
sequences into rat genomic DNA. Immunoprecipitation of metabolically labeled
[35S]methionine stably transfected cells revealed a 200-kDa human IGF-I receptor 
precursor protein. Growth rate and basal GH secretion were not altered in
transfected cells. Although transfected and control cells had a similar Kd for
IGF-I binding (0.43 and 0.40 nM, respectively), IGF-I-binding sites were induced 
17-fold (384,000 vs. 22,000 sites/cell). Treatment of cells with IGF-I (6.5 nM)
maximally attenuated GH secretion by 80% compared to 40% attenuation in control
cells (P less than 0.0001). Maximal suppression of GH in transfectants occurred
within 15 h of treatment, and GH secretion by control cells was only maximally
suppressed after 42 h. The ED50 of IGF-I suppression of GH secretion in
transfectants after 15 h was 0.5 nM. These results demonstrate that transfectants
overexpressing human IGF-I receptor are hyperresponsive to exogenous IGF-I. These
data indicate that IGF-I receptor number plays an important role in mediating the
signal transduction of IGF-I to the GH gene.

DOI: 10.1210/mend-5-7-890 
PMID: 1658632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

