
1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 14;281(28):19688-99. Epub 2006 May 11.

Beta8 integrin binds Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor-1 and activates Rac1 to
inhibit mesangial cell myofibroblast differentiation.

Lakhe-Reddy S(1), Khan S, Konieczkowski M, Jarad G, Wu KL, Reichardt LF, Takai Y,
Bruggeman LA, Wang B, Sedor JR, Schelling JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Rammelkamp Center for Education and Research, MetroHealth Medical Center,
Cleveland, Ohio 44109, USA.

Alpha(v)beta8 integrin expression is restricted primarily to kidney, brain, and
placenta. Targeted alpha(v) or beta8 deletion is embryonic lethal due to
defective placenta and brain angiogenesis, precluding investigation of kidney
alpha(v)beta8 function. We find that kidney beta8 is localized to glomerular
mesangial cells, and expression is decreased in mouse models of
glomerulosclerosis, suggesting that beta8 regulates normal mesangial cell
differentiation. To interrogate beta8 signaling pathways, yeast two-hybrid and
co-precipitation studies demonstrated beta8 interaction with Rho guanine
nucleotide dissociation inhibitor-1 (GDI). Selective beta8 stimulation enhanced
beta8-GDI interaction as well as Rac1 (but not RhoA) activation and lamellipodia 
formation. Mesangial cells from itgb8-/- mice backcrossed to a genetic background
that permitted survival, or gdi-/- mice, which develop glomerulosclerosis,
demonstrated RhoA (but not Rac1) activity and alpha-smooth muscle actin assembly,
which characterizes mesangial cell myofibroblast transformation in renal disease.
To determine whether Rac1 directly modulates RhoA-associated myofibroblast
differentiation, mesangial cells were transduced with inhibitory Rac peptide
fused to human immunodeficiency virus-Tat, resulting in enhanced alpha-smooth
muscle actin organization. We conclude that the beta8 cytosolic tail in mesangial
cells organizes a signaling complex that culminates in Rac1 activation to mediate
wild-type differentiation, whereas decreased beta8 activation shifts mesangial
cells toward a RhoA-dependent myofibroblast phenotype.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M601110200 
PMCID: PMC2711893
PMID: 16690620  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

