
1. Blood. 2006 Nov 1;108(9):3085-93. Epub 2006 Jun 20.

Hypogammaglobulinemia and exacerbated CD8 T-cell-mediated immunopathology in
SAP-deficient mice with chronic LCMV infection mimics human XLP disease.

Crotty S(1), McCausland MM, Aubert RD, Wherry EJ, Ahmed R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 
9420 Athena Circle, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. shane@liai.org

The human genetic disease X-linked lymphoproliferative disease (XLP), which is
caused by mutations in SH2D1A/SAP that encode SLAM-associated protein (SAP), is
characterized by an inability to control Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and
hypogammaglobulinemia. It is unclear which aspects of XLP disease are specific to
herpesvirus infection and which reflect general immunologic functions performed
by SAP. We examined SAP- mice during a chronic LCMV infection, specifically to
address the following question: Which SAP deficiency immunologic problems are
general, and which are EBV specific? Illness, weight loss, and prolonged viral
replication were much more severe in SAP- mice. Aggressive immunopathology was
observed. This inability to control chronic LCMV was associated with both CD8
T-cell and B-cell response defects. Importantly, we demonstrate that SAP- CD8 T
cells are the primary cause of the immunopathology and clinical illness, because 
depletion of CD8 T cells blocked disease. This is the first direct demonstration 
of SAP- CD8 T-cell-mediated immunopathology, confirming 30 years of XLP clinical 
observations and indirect experimentation. In addition, germinal center formation
was extremely defective in chronically infected SAP- animals, and
hypogammaglobulinemia was observed. These findings in a chronic viral infection
mouse model recapitulate key features of human XLP and clarify SAP's critical
role regulating both cellular and humoral immunity.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2006-04-018929 
PMID: 16788096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

