
1. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Jun;14(3):525-8.

[Transfection efficiency of adenoviral vector AD5/F35 to malignant hematopoietic 
cells of different origins].

[Article in Chinese]

Wabg K(1), Peng JQ, Yuan ZH, Wu XB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Xianya Hospital, Changsha 410008, China.

This study was aimed to investigate the transfection efficiency of adenoviral
vector AD5/F35 to hematopoietic malignant cells lines of various origins and
AD5/F35 cytotoxicity. The hematologic malignant cell lines of various origins
were transfected by AD5/F35-EGFP at different multiple of infection (MOI) and
AD5-EGFP was used as control; the proportion of fluorescence positive cells was
detected by flow cytometry; the killing effect of virus on infective target cells
was assayed by MTT and observed by fluorescence microscopy. The results showed
that the transfection efficiency of AD5/F35 vector to cell line of myeloid origin
was > 99% at MOI = 30, the transfective efficiency of AD5 vector was 26.4% at MOI
= 1,000; the transfection efficiency of AD5/F35 vector and AD5 vector to cell
line of B cell origin were 11.7% and 5.7%, respectively, at MOI = 1,000. AD5/F35 
and AD5 vectors could not effectively transfect cells of T cell origin, no
fluorescence positive cells were detected at MOI = 1,000; no significant killing 
effect of AD5/F35 vector on infective target cells was observed at MOI = 1,000.
It is concluded that AD5/F35 vector infection has definite selectivity to
hematologic malignant cells of various origin, the infection ability of AD5/F35
vector to cells of myeloid origin is stronger than that to cells of B cell
origin, the cytotoxicity of AD5/F35 vector to infective target cells is small.
The AD5/F35 vector is preferable to AD5 vector in respect of infection ability
and offers good prospects of application in gene therapy for myeloid leukemia
cells as target cells.


PMID: 16800935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

