
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2006 Sep;44(9):3130-3.

Quantitative assessment of serum NV-F virus DNA concentrations in samples from
patients coinfected with hepatitis B or C virus.

Hsu CW(1), Cheng JC, Yeh CT.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Research Unit, Chang Gung Medical Center, 199, Tung Hwa North Road,
Taipei, Taiwan.

A novel hepatotropic virus, named NV-F virus, was recently identified. The
clinical information for this virus is still scarce. Using PCR assay, NV-F viral 
DNA (NV-F-DNA) was detected in 12 of 50 (24%) hepatitis C virus (HCV)-infected
patients (HCV-coinfected [HCVCI] group), 34 of 250 (13.6%) hepatitis B virus
(HBV)-infected patients (HBV-coinfected [HBVCI] group), and 28 of 100 (28%)
non-A-to-E (NAE) hepatitis patients. Basic clinical parameters were not
significantly different among the three groups. By use of a PCR-based
quantitative assay, the NV-F-DNA concentration was found to be above the
detection limit (1.2 x 10(5) copies/ml) in 12/12 (100%) HCVCI patients, 14/34
(41.2%) HBVCI patients, and 4/28 (14.3%) NAE patients. The median serum NV-F-DNA 
concentration was 9.3 x 10(5) copies/ml in HCVCI patients, but it was below the
detection limit in HBVCI and NAE patients (P values were 0.0045 and 0.0001,
respectively). Stepwise multiple regression analysis identified the presence of
anti-HCV as an independent factor for NV-F-DNA concentrations (beta = 6.2 x
10(9); P = 0.0245). In HBVCI patients, the NV-F-DNA concentration was inversely
correlated with the HBV DNA concentration. The median NV-F-DNA concentration was 
below the detection limit in patients with HBV DNA concentrations above 1.4 x
10(5) copies/ml, but it was 1.58 x 10(6) copies/ml in patients with HBV DNA
concentrations below 1.4 x 10(5) copies/ml (P = 0.030). In conclusion, NV-F-DNA
concentrations were higher in HCVCI patients. A reciprocal relationship was found
between NV-F-DNA and HBV DNA concentrations in HBVCI patients, indicating the
presence of viral interference between these two DNA viruses.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00984-06 
PMCID: PMC1594680
PMID: 16954237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

