
1. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2006 Oct;18(10):1047-51.

Pathogenesis of diarrhea in the adult: diagnostic challenges and life-threatening
conditions.

Payne CM(1), Fass R, Bernstein H, Giron J, Bernstein C, Dvorak K, Garewal H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, College of Medicine, University of
Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85724-5044, USA. cpayne@email.arizona.edu

Comment on
    Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2006 May;18(5):557-9.

The mechanisms that regulate ionic balance, fluid absorption and secretion in the
gastrointestinal tract are complex. Disturbance of this homeostatic state by bile
acids, bacterial enterotoxins and neoplasm-derived secretagogues, for example,
can lead to diarrhea. Determining the causes of chronic diarrhea in individual
patients may, therefore, represent a diagnostic challenge. The gastrointestinal
tract has finely tuned mechanisms to maintain ionic balance, fluid absorption and
secretion. To achieve this homeostasis, various ionic transport
proteins/complexes are targeted to the apical, basal or basolateral membranes of 
epithelial cells. Na, K and Cl ion transport proteins are regulated by endogenous
activators (e.g. cAMP, PGE2, Ca), dietary-related factors (e.g. bile acids) and
through post-translational modifications (e.g. phosphorylation). In certain
pathophysiologic states, this homeostatic ionic/fluid exchange becomes
dysfunctional as a result of failure of compensatory
pro-absorptive/anti-secretory mechanisms. The excessive secretion of Na and Cl
ions followed by the release of a large amount of H2O into the colonic lumen
results in diarrhea, which may be acute or chronic, and can be life-threatening
if not ameliorated. Diverse infectious organisms (e.g. bacteria, protozoa,
viruses) utilize different mechanisms to cause intestinal disease and diarrhea.
These pathophysiologic mechanisms include alterations in ion transport,
disruption of tight junctions and elicitation of inflammatory responses. Studies 
of patients infected with certain pathogens, those with ulcerative colitis and
those harboring extra-colonic or colonic neoplasms have elucidated some of these 
pathophysiologic mechanisms of diarrhea. Determining the etiology of chronic
diarrhea in specific cases may be a diagnostic challenge for both
gastroenterologists and primary care physicians.

DOI: 10.1097/01.meg.0000231748.60889.be 
PMID: 16957509  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

