
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Jan;81(1):6-14. Epub 2006 Sep 27.

The influence on the immunomodulatory effects of dying and dead cells of Annexin 
V.

Munoz LE(1), Franz S, Pausch F, FÃ¼rnrohr B, Sheriff A, Vogt B, Kern PM, Baum W,
Stach C, von Laer D, Brachvogel B, Poschl E, Herrmann M, Gaipl US.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Immunology, Department of Internal Medicne 3,
Friedrich-Alexander-University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Glueckstrasse 4a, 91054
Erlangen, Germany.

Apoptotic and necrotic cells expose phosphatidylserine (PS). This membrane
modification ensures a swift recognition and uptake by phagocytes of the dying
and dead cells. Annexin V (AxV) preferentially binds to anionic phospholipids and
thereby, modulates the clearance process. First, we analyzed the influence of AxV
on the immunogenicity of apoptotic cells. The addition to apoptotic cells of AxV 
prior to their injection into mice increased their immunogenicity significantly. 
Next, we studied the influence of endogenous AxV on the allogeneic reaction
against apoptotic and necrotic cells. To preserve heat-labile, short-lived
"danger signals," we induced necrosis by mechanical stress. Wild-type mice showed
a strong, allogeneic delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) reaction. In contrast,
AxV-deficient animals showed almost no allogeneic DTH reaction, indicating that
endogenous AxV increases the immune response against dead cells. Furthermore,
AxV-deficient macrophages had a higher immunosuppressive potential in vitro.
Next, we analyzed the influence of AxV on chronic macrophage infection with
HIV-1, known to expose PS on its surface. The infectivity in human macrophages of
HIV-1 was reduced significantly in the presence of AxV. Finally, we show that AxV
also blocked the in vitro uptake by macrophages of primary necrotic cells.
Similar to apoptotic cells, necrotic cells generated by heat treatment displayed 
an anti-inflammatory activity. In contrast, mechanical stress-induced necrotic
cells led to a decreased secretion of IL-10, indicating a more inflammatory
potential. From the experiments presented above, we conclude that AxV influences 
the clearance of several PS-exposing particles such as viruses, dying, and dead
cells.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0306166 
PMID: 17005907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

