
1. J Gen Virol. 2006 Nov;87(Pt 11):3307-16.

Molecular analysis of duck hepatitis virus type 1 reveals a novel lineage close
to the genus Parechovirus in the family Picornaviridae.

Kim MC(1), Kwon YK, Joh SJ, Lindberg AM, Kwon JH, Kim JH, Kim SJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Veterinary Research and Quarantine Service, 480 Anyang 6 dong,
Manan-gu, Anyang, Gyeonggi-do 420-824, Republic of Korea.

Duck hepatitis virus type 1 (DHV-1) was previously classified as an enterovirus, 
based primarily on observed morphology and physicochemical properties of the
virion. The complete nucleotide sequences of two strains (DRL-62 and R85952) of
DHV-1 have been determined. Excluding the poly(A) tail, the genomes are 7691 and 
7690 nt, respectively, and contain a single, large open reading frame encoding a 
polyprotein of 2249 aa. The genome of DHV-1 is organized as are those of members 
of the family Picornaviridae: 5' untranslated region
(UTR)-VP0-VP3-VP1-2A1-2A2-2B-2C-3A-3B-3C-3D-3' UTR. Analysis of the genomic and
predicted polyprotein sequences revealed several unusual features, including the 
absence of a predicted maturation cleavage of VP0, the presence of two unrelated 
2A protein motifs and a 3' UTR extended markedly compared with that of any other 
picornavirus. The 2A1 protein motif is related to the 2A protein type of the
genus Aphthovirus and the adjacent 2A2 protein is related to the 2A protein type 
present in the genus Parechovirus. Phylogenetic analysis using the 3D protein
sequence shows that the two DHV-1 strains are related more closely to members of 
the genus Parechovirus than to other picornaviruses. However, the two DHV-1
strains form a monophyletic group, clearly distinct from members of the genus
Parechovirus.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.81804-0 
PMID: 17030865  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

