
1. Exp Eye Res. 2007 Jan;84(1):44-52. Epub 2006 Nov 1.

Preservation of photoreceptor morphology and function in P23H rats using an
allele independent ribozyme.

Gorbatyuk M(1), Justilien V, Liu J, Hauswirth WW, Lewin AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida, Box 
100266, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. mari543@ufl.edu

To develop an allele independent ribozyme for the treatment of autosomal dominant
retinitis pigmentosa (ADRP) associated with mutations in the rhodopsin (RHO)
gene, a ribozyme targeting dog, mouse, human but not rat rhodopsin (RHO) mRNA was
designed and tested in vitro. Activity of this ribozyme was tested in tissue
culture by co-transfection of HEK 293 cells with plasmids expressing opsin mRNA
and ribozyme, followed by quantitative RT-PCR to evaluate the level of RHO mRNA. 
For experiments in vivo, Rz525 driven by the mouse opsin proximal promoter was
inserted in plasmids with AAV 2 terminal repeats (TR) and packaged in AAV
serotype 5 capsids. AAV-Rz525 was injected subretinally into the right eyes of
P23H rat pups. Left eyes were injected with virus expressing GFP from the
identical promoter. Animals were analyzed at 4, 8 and 12 weeks post-injection by 
full field scotopic electroretinography (ERG). After 12 weeks, animals were
sacrificed and retinas were dissected, fixed and sectioned. Rz525 had high
catalytic activity in vitro and led to a 50% reduction of RHO mRNA in cells.
AAV-Rz525 injection into P23H transgenic rats led to significant preservation
(about 50%) of scotopic ERG a- and b-wave amplitudes. Histological analysis
showed an increased number of ONL nuclei in the central and superior retina of
treated eyes relative to control eyes. RT-PCR analysis revealed 46% reduction of 
transgenic (mouse) RHO mRNA in right eyes relative to left eyes and no change in 
rat RHO mRNA. AAV5 delivery of Rz525 resulted in a partial rescue of the light
response and structural preservation of photoreceptors in transgenic rats. This
ribozyme may be a useful component of an RNA replacement gene therapy for ADRP.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2006.08.014 
PMCID: PMC1778459
PMID: 17083931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

