
1. J Immunol. 1991 Sep 1;147(5):1512-21.

HIV-1 gag-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes recognize multiple highly conserved
epitopes. Fine specificity of the gag-specific response defined by using
unstimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells and cloned effector cells.

Johnson RP(1), Trocha A, Yang L, Mazzara GP, Panicali DL, Buchanan TM, Walker BD.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114.

CTL directed at the highly conserved HIV-1 gag protein have been described in
HIV-1 seropositive persons and may be an important host defense against this
retrovirus. Presently only limited data are available regarding the specific
epitopes recognized by these CTL. In this study, we have performed a detailed
examination of the gag-specific CTL response in three HIV-1 seropositive
subjects, using both unstimulated PBMC and cloned CTL. Lysis of gag-expressing
targets was found to be mediated by CD3+CD8+ lymphocytes and restricted by class 
I Ag. Multiple class I Ag were found to restrict gag epitopes in each subject
studied, with as many as three of these Ag involved in presenting gag CTL
epitopes in a single subject. The majority of gag-specific CTL activity was found
to be directed against epitopes in the p24 subunit of the gag protein, with at
least seven different HLA class I-restricted CTL p24 epitopes identified in these
three subjects. Less CTL activity was directed against p17 subunit of gag and two
CTL epitopes were identified in this protein. Although as many as four different 
epitopes in gag were recognized using CTL from a single subject, none of the
epitopes was recognized by CTL from more than one subject. Analysis of gag
epitope recognition using cloned CTL demonstrated heterogeneity and specificity
not appreciated using unstimulated PBMC. The identification of multiple
relatively conserved epitopes in the HIV-1 gag protein and the heterogeneity of
CTL responses to this protein may have important implications for vaccine
development and our understanding of AIDS pathogenesis.


PMID: 1715361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

