
1. J Virol Methods. 2007 Apr;141(1):34-40. Epub 2006 Dec 21.

Development of degenerate and species-specific primers for the differential and
simultaneous RT-PCR detection of grapevine-infecting nepoviruses of subgroups A, 
B and C.

Digiaro M(1), Elbeaino T, Martelli GP.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Agronomico Mediterraneo di Bari (IAMB), Via Ceglie 9, 70010
Valenzano-Bari, Italy. digiaro@iamb.it

Based on the nucleotide sequence homology of RNA-1 and RNA-2 of nepoviruses
isolated from grapevines, three sets of degenerate primers, one for each of the
three subgroups of the genus (A, B and C), were designed and proved effective for
RT-PCR detection of subgroups in infected grapevines and herbaceous hosts.
Primers designed specifically for detecting subgroup A species amplified a
fragment of 255 bp from samples infected by Grapevine fanleaf virus (GFLV),
Arabis mosaic virus (ArMV), Tobacco ringspot virus (TRSV) and Grapevine
deformation virus (GDefV), but not from samples infected by other nepovirus
species. Similarly, primers for detection of subgroup B nepoviruses amplified a
390 bp product from samples infected by Grapevine chrome mosaic virus (GCMV),
Tomato black ring virus (TBRV), Grapevine Anatolian ringspot virus (GARSV) and
Artichoke Italian latent virus (AILV). The third set of primers amplified a 640
bp fragment, only from samples infected by subgroup C nepoviruses, i.e Tomato
ringspot virus (ToRSV) Grapevine Bulgarian latent virus (GBLV), and Grapevine
Tunisian ringspot virus (GTRSV). These primers were able to detect simultaneously
all viral species belonging to the same subgroup and to discriminate species of
different subgroups. Multiplex-PCR detection of subgroup A and B nepoviruses was 
obtained using a specific primer (sense for subgroup A and antisense for subgroup
B) for each of the species of the same subgroup in combination with the
degenerate subgroup-specific primers. In this way it was possible to detect four 
different viral species in single samples containing mixtures of viruses of the
same subgroup. In particular, for viruses of subgroup A (TRSV, GFLV, ArMV and
GDefV) amplicons of 190, 259, 301 and 371 bp were obtained, whereas amplicons of 
190, 278, 425 and 485 bp, respectively, were obtained from samples infected with 
viruses of subgroup B (GCMV, AILV, GARSV and TBRV).

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2006.11.033 
PMID: 17187868  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

