
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2007 Jan 19;3(1):e11. Epub 2006 Dec 8.

Evolutionary interactions between N-linked glycosylation sites in the HIV-1
envelope.

Poon AF(1), Lewis FI, Pond SL, Frost SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California, United States of America. afpoon@ucsd.edu

The addition of asparagine (N)-linked polysaccharide chains (i.e., glycans) to
the gp120 and gp41 glycoproteins of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
envelope is not only required for correct protein folding, but also may provide
protection against neutralizing antibodies as a "glycan shield." As a result,
strong host-specific selection is frequently associated with codon positions
where nonsynonymous substitutions can create or disrupt potential N-linked
glycosylation sites (PNGSs). Moreover, empirical data suggest that the individual
contribution of PNGSs to the neutralization sensitivity or infectivity of HIV-1
may be critically dependent on the presence or absence of other PNGSs in the
envelope sequence. Here we evaluate how glycan-glycan interactions have shaped
the evolution of HIV-1 envelope sequences by analyzing the distribution of PNGSs 
in a large-sequence alignment. Using a "covarion"-type phylogenetic model, we
find that the rates at which individual PNGSs are gained or lost vary
significantly over time, suggesting that the selective advantage of having a PNGS
may depend on the presence or absence of other PNGSs in the sequence.
Consequently, we identify specific interactions between PNGSs in the alignment
using a new paired-character phylogenetic model of evolution, and a Bayesian
graphical model. Despite the fundamental differences between these two methods,
several interactions are jointly identified by both. Mapping these interactions
onto a structural model of HIV-1 gp120 reveals that negative (exclusive)
interactions occur significantly more often between colocalized glycans, while
positive (inclusive) interactions are restricted to more distant glycans. Our
results imply that the adaptive repertoire of alternative configurations in the
HIV-1 glycan shield is limited by functional interactions between the N-linked
glycans. This represents a potential vulnerability of rapidly evolving HIV-1
populations that may provide useful glycan-based targets for neutralizing
antibodies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030011 
PMCID: PMC1779302
PMID: 17238283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

