
1. Ther Drug Monit. 2007 Feb;29(1):110-7.

Nevirapine concentration in nonstimulated saliva: an alternative to plasma
sampling in children with human immunodeficiency virus infection.

Rakhmanina NY(1), Capparelli EV, van den Anker JN, Williams K, Sever JL, Spiegel 
HM, Soldin SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Disease, The George Washington University School of
Medicine, Washington, DC 20010, USA. nrakhman@cnmc.org

BACKGROUND: The monitoring of nevirapine (NVP) concentrations in pediatric
patients has gained interest since the introduction of NVP as part of the
preferred first-line antiretroviral regimen for human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV)-infected children in resource-limited settings. Adequate trough
concentrations of NVP predict successful therapy, whereas subtherapeutic levels
are correlated with virologic failure and development of resistance. The aim of
this study was to determine the extent of agreement between total and free plasma
NVP concentrations and nonstimulated saliva NVP concentrations and to evaluate
the feasibility of saliva sampling as an alternative tool for therapeutic drug
monitoring of NVP in children.
DESIGN AND METHODS: The study was designed as an observational cohort analysis.
NVP concentrations were obtained in paired plasma and saliva samples of pediatric
patients receiving antiretroviral therapy, including NVP. NVP plasma and saliva
concentrations were determined by a tandem-mass spectrometric method. The
intraclass correlation coefficient and Bland-Altman analysis were used to
evaluate agreement and to assess pattern in any discrepancies between
measurements.
RESULTS: For the random paired plasma and saliva NVP sampling, 19
African-American children (8 boys, 11 girls) with a median age of 8.0 years were 
enrolled. Two male subjects were recruited for the 12 hour NVP plasma and saliva 
pharmacokinetics study. The intraclass correlations between saliva and serum
measurements of NVP concentrations indicated >90% agreement between these two
modes of measurement. The saliva concentrations reflected the free concentrations
very closely but were on average 34% higher. The Bland-Altman plots indicated
that the discrepancy between saliva and plasma measures is consistent across the 
range of average NVP concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study results strongly indicate agreement between saliva and
plasma NVP concentrations in pediatric patients with HIV infection, on the basis 
of Bland-Altman analysis. Nonstimulated NVP saliva concentrations can be used as 
an alternative noninvasive, reliable, cost-effective method for direct
measurement of adherence and application of therapeutic drug monitoring in NVP
therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/FTD.0b013e31803258ed 
PMID: 17304158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

