
1. J Endocrinol. 2007 Jun;193(3):323-30.

Critical role of toll-like receptors and nucleotide oligomerisation domain in the
regulation of health and disease.

Mitchell JA(1), Paul-Clark MJ, Clarke GW, McMaster SK, Cartwright N.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiothoracic Pharmacology, Unit of Critical Care Medicine, Cardiac Medicine,
Royal Brompton Hospital, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College,
London SW3 6LY, UK. j.a.mitchell@imperial.ac.uk

Pathogens are sensed by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), which are germ
line-encoded receptors, including transmembrane Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and
cytosolic nucleotide oligomerisation domain (NOD) proteins, containing
leucine-rich repeats (NLRs). Activation of PRRs by specific pathogen-associated
molecular patterns (PAMPs) results in genomic responses in host cells involving
activation transcription factors and the induction of genes. There are now at
least 10 TLRs in humans and 13 in mice, and 2 NLRs (NOD1 and NOD2). TLR
signalling is via interactions with adaptor proteins including MyD88 and
toll-receptor associated activator of interferon (TRIF). NOD signalling is via
the inflammasome and involves activation of Rip-like interactive clarp kinase
(RICK). Bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from Gram-negative bacteria is the
best-studied PAMP and is activated by or 'sensed' by TLR4. Lipoteichoic acid
(LTA) from Gram-positive bacteria is sensed by TLR2. TLR4 and TLR2 have different
signalling cascades, although activation of either results in symptoms of sepsis 
and shock. This review describes the rapidly expanding field of pathogen-sensing 
receptors and uses LPS and LTA as examples of how these pathways parallel and
diverge from each other. The role of pathogen-sensing pathways in disease is also
discussed.

DOI: 10.1677/JOE-07-0067 
PMID: 17535871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

