
1. Kobe J Med Sci. 2007;53(3):125-34.

Adenoviral transfer of rho family proteins to lung cancer cells ameliorates cell 
proliferation and motility and increases apoptotic change.

Shimada T(1), Nishimura Y, Nishiuma T, Rikitake Y, Hirase T, Yokoyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular and Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

Lung cancer is still a very severe disease which has a low survival rate due to
local invasion and metastasis potentials in spite of many clinical challenges
using anti-cancer drugs. Rho family small GTPases play pivotal roles in cell
invasion and metastasis during carcinogenesis. In this study, we explored the
inhibitory effect of adenoviral vector encoding dominant negative mutants of Rac,
RhoA, and ROCK in human non-small cell lung carcinoma cell lines (A549 and SQ5)
and mouse carcinoma cell line (Lewis lung carcinoma, LLC). These cells showed
high expression of Rac, Rho, and ROCK, whereas only faint bands were detected in 
normal human lung epithelial cells, BET-1A. The efficiency of adenoviral vector
transfer was stronger in A549 and SQ5 cells than LLC cells. Dominant negative
forms of RhoA (Rho-DN) and Rac (Rac-DN) decreased cell proliferation in WST-8
assay and increased the number of apoptotic cells in both A549 and SQ5 cells by
Hoechst 33258 and TUNEL staining. On the other hand, DN form of ROCK (ROCK-DN)
did not show any apparent changes compared with the other proteins. Transwell
chamber analysis showed that migration/invasion activity was significantly
suppressed by gene transfection both in A549 and SQ5 cells and that ROCK-DN gene 
transfer required a higher multiplicity of infection to show effects similar to
Rho and Rac. Although the effect of gene therapy is cell-dependent, these data
suggest that adenoviral gene transfer with Rho family small GTPases is one good
approach to lung cancer therapy.


PMID: 17684444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

