
1. J Gen Virol. 2008 Jan;89(Pt 1):78-86. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.83278-0.

Dendritic cell-induced apoptosis of human cytomegalovirus-infected fibroblasts
promotes cross-presentation of pp65 to CD8+ T cells.

Mandron M(1), Martin H(1), Bonjean B(1), Lulé J(1), Tartour E(2)(3), Davrinche
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U563, Centre de Physiopathologie de Toulouse Purpan, F-31300 Toulouse,
France.
(2)EA4054, Université René Descartes-Paris 5, Paris, France.
(3)Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France.

An efficient host response to human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection may depend
on rapid sensing of the infection by the innate immune response prior to
deployment of viral immunosubversive functions. Control of HCMV dissemination
could be ensured by apoptosis of cells immediately following infection. In the
present report, it is demonstrated that changes in the ratio of c-FLIP to FLICE
contributed to early sensitivity of HCMV-infected MRC5 fibroblasts to tumour
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), providing an innate response to infection.
Dendritic cells (DCs) co-cultured with HCMV-infected MRC5 cells acquired the
ability to secrete TNF-alpha in an amount sufficient to kill infected
fibroblasts. Blockage of TNF-alpha binding to its receptor on MRC5 cells with
soluble TNF-R reduced the number of dead, HCMV-infected fibroblasts ingested by
DCs, thus highlighting the impact of the apoptotic state of infected cells for
efficient loading of DCs. Those DCs loaded with antigens available early in
infection, such as input virion-associated pp65, could then engage antigen
processing for cross-presentation to specific CD8(+) T cells. Cross-presentation 
was impaired when MRC5 cells were treated with the pan-caspase inhibitor ZVAD
before co-culture with DCs. Altogether, our data suggest that the innate killing 
capacity of DCs at the early stage of infection plays a role in the activation of
anti-HCMV CD8(+) T cells.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.83278-0 
PMID: 18089731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

