
1. Thorax. 2008 Jun;63(6):519-25. doi: 10.1136/thx.2007.081752. Epub 2008 Feb 1.

Rhinovirus exposure impairs immune responses to bacterial products in human
alveolar macrophages.

Oliver BG(1), Lim S, Wark P, Laza-Stanca V, King N, Black JL, Burgess JK, Roth M,
Johnston SL.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Pharmacology, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006,
Australia. boliver@med.usyd.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Rhinovirus infection is responsible for considerable morbidity and
mortality as the major cause of exacerbations of asthma, and is also known to
induce exacerbations of cystic fibrosis and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Exacerbations of these diseases are also frequently associated with
bacterial and atypical bacterial infection. Alveolar macrophages are the major
immune cells in the airways and are important in defence against bacterial
infections.
METHODS: The authors investigated whether rhinovirus modifies cytokine release,
the pattern recognition receptor expression and phagocytosis by human alveolar
macrophages in response to bacterial products.
RESULTS: Viable rhinovirus was detected in macrophages up to 3 days after
exposure and viral RNA expression persisted for 10 days. Infectious but not UV
inactivated rhinovirus increased tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) and
interleukin (IL)8 release by macrophages. In contrast, infectious rhinovirus
impaired lipopolysaccharide and lipoteichoic acid induced TNFalpha and IL8
secretion by macrophages. Rhinovirus induced impairment of macrophage
antibacterial immune responses did not involve IL10, prostaglandin E(2) or
downregulation of Toll-like receptor 2. Furthermore, the macrophage phagocytic
response to labelled bacterial particles, but not to latex beads, was impaired.
CONCLUSION: The authors have identified impairment of cytokine responses to
bacterial lipopolysaccharide and lipoteichoic acid by alveolar macrophages in
response to infectious rhinovirus. Virus induced impairment of antibacterial host
defence has important implications in the pathogenesis of exacerbations of
respiratory diseases.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2007.081752 
PMID: 18245149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

