
1. Acta Trop. 2008 Mar;105(3):269-73. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2007.12.004. Epub
2007 Dec 23.

A survey of abortifacient infectious agents in livestock in Luzon, the
Philippines, with emphasis on the situation in a cattle herd with abortion
problems.

Konnai S(1), Mingala CN, Sato M, Abes NS, Venturina FA, Gutierrez CA, Sano T,
Omata Y, Cruz LC, Onuma M, Ohashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Disease Control, Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0818, Japan.
konnai@vetmed.hokudai.ac.jp <konnai@vetmed.hokudai.ac.jp>

In the Philippines, insufficient consideration has been given to the
implementation of systematic control measures against major abortifacient
infectious agents in livestock. To elucidate the epidemiology of abortifacient
infectious agents in livestock, the prevalence of four abortifacient agents was
assessed. Initially, a total of 96 cattle including 17 cows with history of
abortion were examined in a herd in Luzon at the request of the farm owner. Six
(35.3%) of the 17 aborting cows were found to be serologically positive for
Neospora caninum (N. caninum), whereas the seroprevalence in non-aborting cows
was 15.9% (10/63). Four of the 6 serologically positive aborting cows were also
RT-PCR-positive for bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV). Two (12.5%) of the 16
bulls examined were also found to be infected with BVDV, suggesting a putative
risk factor of transmission via semen. Based on sequence analysis, the isolates
detected belong to BVDV type 1b group. Furthermore, an epidemiological survey of 
abortifacient infectious agents was conducted with various species of livestock
from herds located in Luzon. Out of the 105 water buffalo samples collected, 4
(3.8%) were indicated positive to N. caninum, 2 (1.9%) to Toxoplasma gondii (T.
gondii) and 2 (1.9%) to Trypanosoma evansi (T. evansi). The overall
seroprevalence of N. caninum in goat and sheep were 23.6% (21/89) and 26.3%
(10/38), respectively. BVDV was not detected in these herds. The findings of this
exploratory study indicate a relationship between infection and bovine abortion
and that a lager study is required to statistically confirm this relationship.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2007.12.004 
PMID: 18243149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

