
1. Biophys J. 2008 Jun;94(12):4737-50. doi: 10.1529/biophysj.107.126896. Epub 2008
Mar 13.

Interaction of the most membranotropic region of the HCV E2 envelope glycoprotein
with membranes. Biophysical characterization.

Pérez-Berná AJ(1), Guillén J, Moreno MR, Gómez-Sánchez AI, Pabst G, Laggner P,
Villalaín J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular, Universidad Miguel Hernández,
Elche-Alicante, Spain.

The previously identified membrane-active regions of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) 
E1 and E2 envelope glycoproteins led us to identify different segments that might
be implicated in viral membrane fusion, membrane interaction, and/or
protein-protein binding. HCV E2 glycoprotein contains one of the most
membranotropic segments, segment 603-634, which has been implicated in CD81
binding, E1/E2 and E2/E2 dimerization, and membrane interaction. Through a series
of complementary experiments, we have carried out a study of the binding and
interaction with the lipid bilayer of a peptide corresponding to segment 603-634,
peptide E2(FP), as well as the structural changes induced by membrane binding
that take place in both the peptide and the phospholipid molecules. Here, we
demonstrate that peptide E2(FP) binds to and interacts with phospholipid model
membranes, modulates the polymorphic phase behavior of membrane phospholipids, is
localized in a shallow position in the membrane, and is probably oligomerized in 
the presence of membranes. These data support the role of E2(FP) in HCV-mediated 
membrane fusion, and sustain the notion that this segment of the E2 envelope
glycoprotein, together with other segments of E2 and E1 glycoproteins, provides
the driving force for the merging of the viral and target cell membranes.

DOI: 10.1529/biophysj.107.126896 
PMCID: PMC2397335
PMID: 18339752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

