
1. Br J Exp Pathol. 1976 Aug;57(4):443-54.

Organ culture studies on the efficiency of infection of chicken tissues with
avian infectious bronchitis virus.

Darbyshire JH, Cook JK, Peters RW.

Long-term organ cultures of a range of tissues collected from specific
pathogen-free chickens were employed to determine their susceptibility, and their
capacity for subsequent virus production, following inoculation with avian
infectious bronchitis (AIB) virus. When inoculated with approximately 2-0 log10
median ciliostatic doses (CD50) of a classical highly egg-adapted vaccine strain 
(H120) of AIB virus, 9 of 23 tissues were shown to be susceptible, namely the
nasal turbinates, trachea, air sac membranes,lungsasal turbinates, trachea, air
sac membranes, lungs, proventriculus mucosa, thyroid, kidney, ovary and oviduct. 
When the remaining 14 tissues were inoculated with a high dose of virus (6.8
log10 CD50), the conjunctiva, caecel tonsil, testis and bursa of Fabricius were
susceptible whereas the oesophagus and cloaca responded minimally. Inoculation of
the same range of tissues with a high or low dose of a field strain (HVI9) of AIB
virus produced similar results, except for a number of individual variations in
response, due possibly to strain differences in pathogenicity. Determinations of 
the minimal infectious dose requirements of the susceptible tissues revealed that
the efficiency of infection with the H120 strain was highest for the nasal
turbinate and tracheal tissues, and thereafter, in order of decreasing
efficiency, were the air sac membranes, lung, oviduct, proventriculus mucosa,
conjunctiva, kidney, ovary, bursa of Fabricius, thyroid, testis, caecal tonsil,
cloaca and oesophagus. The relevance of these results is discussed in connection 
with the early events in the pathogenesis and the clinical syndrome of AIB
infection in chickens.


PMCID: PMC2041156
PMID: 183805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

