
1. Anal Chem. 2008 Jul 1;80(13):5197-202. doi: 10.1021/ac8003538. Epub 2008 May 20.

Sizing of single globular DNA molecules by using a circular acceleration
technique with laser trapping.

Hirano K(1), Nagata H, Ishido T, Tanaka Y, Baba Y, Ishikawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Health Technology Research Center, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology, 2217-14, Hayashi-cho, Takamatsu, Kagawa, 761-0395, Japan.
hirano-ken@aist.go.jp

We describe a method for in situ sizing individual huge DNA molecules by laser
trapping. Single DNA molecules are reversibly transformed, without mechanical
fragmentation of fragile huge-sized DNA, from their random coil state into their 
globular state induced by condensing agents poly(ethylene glycol) and Mg(2+).
With the use of a globular DNA molecule folded by condensation, the critical
velocity of the circularly accelerated single globular DNA molecule by laser
trapping was found to be proportional to the size of the DNA. Yeast,
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, chromosome III (285 kbp) was successfully sized (281
+/- 40 kbp) from a calibration curve scaled using lambda, T4, and yeast
chromosome VI (48.5, 166, and 385 kbp, respectively). The use of critical
velocity as a sizing parameter makes it possible to size single DNA molecules
without prior conformational information, i.e., the radius of a single globular
huge DNA molecule as a nanoparticle. A sized single globular DNA molecule could
be trapped again for subsequent manipulation, such as transportation of it
anywhere. We also investigated a possibility of reusing the globular DNA
molecules condensed by PEG and Mg(2+) for PCR and found that PCR efficiency was
not deteriorated in the presence of the condensation agents.

DOI: 10.1021/ac8003538 
PMID: 18489123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

