
1. Mol Immunol. 2008 Jul;45(12):3494-501. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.02.004. Epub
2008 Jun 6.

Teleostean IL11b exhibits complementing function to IL11a and expansive
involvement in antibacterial and antiviral responses.

Santos MD(1), Yasuike M, Kondo H, Hirono I, Aoki T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genome Science, Tokyo University of Marine Science and
Technology, Tokyo 108-8477, Japan.

Interleukin 11 is a class-1 helical cytokine, having the four-helix bundle
structure, possessing pleiotropic characteristics involved in physiological
processes including blood production, bone formation and placentation. The
interleukin 11 paralogues (IL11a and IL11b) have been identified in fish with
only IL11a from carp and trout have been characterized and analyzed for its
expression thus far. Here, we cloned and studied the structure and expression of 
IL11b in Japanese flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus), and compared this with the
existing information on fish IL11 paralogues. Japanese flounder IL11b (poIL11b)
cDNA is composed of 1536 bp encoding for 201 aa residues with a 23 aa leader
peptide, three cysteine residues (C12, C183 and C198) and four potential N-linked
glycosylation sites. poIL11b does not show constitutive expression in tissues of 
adult fish except for the very slight expression in kidney and spleen, and the
very high expression in peripheral blood leukocytes (PBLs). poIL11b is
transiently up-regulated by bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and increasingly
stimulated by the IFN inducer poly I:C in kidney, spleen and peripheral blood
leukocytes of adult fish in vitro. It is likewise slightly stimulated by
Edwardsiella tarda infection but is highly expressed after hirame rhabdovirus
(HIRRV) infection in kidney of juvenile fish. The stimulation studies suggest
that poIL11b, aside from its role in bacterial infection, is well involved in
antiviral responses. Moreover, poIL11b structure and expression pattern appears
to be slightly distinct and opposite to IL11a, respectively, suggesting a
complementation of function of the duplicate fish IL11 genes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.02.004 
PMID: 18538848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

