
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 Sep;84(3):631-43. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1207830. Epub 2008 Jun 13.

Induction of IL-33 expression and activity in central nervous system glia.

Hudson CA(1), Christophi GP, Gruber RC, Wilmore JR, Lawrence DA, Massa PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Interest Group in Neuro-Immune Interactions, SUNY 
Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.

Erratum in
    J Leukoc Biol. 2011 Feb;89(2):319.
    J Leukoc Biol. 2011 Feb;89(2):319.

IL-33 is a novel member of the IL-1 cytokine family and a potent inducer of type 
2 immunity, as mast cells and Th2 CD4+ T cells respond to IL-33 with the
induction of type 2 cytokines such as IL-13. IL-33 mRNA levels are extremely high
in the CNS, and CNS glia possess both subunits of the IL-33R, yet whether IL-33
is produced by and affects CNS glia has not been studied. Here, we demonstrate
that pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) significantly increase IL-33 
mRNA and protein expression in CNS glia. Interestingly, IL-33 was localized to
the nucleus of astrocytes. Further, CNS glial and astrocyte-enriched cultures
treated with a PAMP followed by an ATP pulse had significantly higher levels of
supernatant IL-1beta and IL-33 than cultures receiving any single treatment (PAMP
or ATP). Supernatants from PAMP + ATP-treated glia induced the secretion of IL-6,
IL-13, and MCP-1 from the MC/9 mast cell line in a manner similar to exogenous
recombinant IL-33. Further, IL-33 levels and activity were increased in the
brains of mice infected with the neurotropic virus Theiler's murine
encephalomyelitis virus. IL-33 also had direct effects on CNS glia, as IL-33
induced various innate immune effectors in CNS glia, and this induction was
greatly amplified by IL-33-stimulated mast cells. In conclusion, these results
implicate IL-33-producing astrocytes as a potentially critical regulator of
innate immune responses in the CNS.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.1207830 
PMCID: PMC2516894
PMID: 18552204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

