
1. Mol Imaging Biol. 2008 Sep;10(5):253-63. doi: 10.1007/s11307-008-0147-2. Epub
2008 Jun 17.

Human breast tumor cells express multimodal imaging reporter genes.

Lin KM(1), Hsu CH, Chang WS, Chen CT, Lee TW, Chen CT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Engineering Research, National Health Research Institutes,
R1-1027, No. 35, Keyan Road, Zhunan Town, Miaoli County 350, Taiwan, Republic of 
China. klin@nhri.org.tw

OBJECTIVE: Human ZR75-1 cells were among the first few characterized
estrogen-dependent mammary gland carcinoma cell lines and had been utilized in
various studies for the pro- or antitumor effect of xenoestrogens and
antiestrogens. The objective of this study was to establish a breast tumor model 
in ZR75-1 cells bearing multimodal reporter genes to allow noninvasive imaging of
tumor growth using fluorescence and nuclear imaging platforms.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) cDNA was fused at 
the C-terminus with herpes simplex virus type 1 thymidine kinase (HSV1-tk) to
form the fusion reporter gene (eGFP-tk). In vitro proliferation, migration, and
invasion assays revealed that eGFP-tk-transfected ZR75-1 cells exhibited
decreased proliferation rate, migratory activity, and invasion ability compared
to the wild-type cells. The functional HSV1-tk enzymatic activity in stably
transfected cells were confirmed by in vitro ganciclovir (GCV) sensitivity and
[123I]2-fluoro-2-deoxy-1-beta-D-arabinofuranosyl-5-iodouracil (FIAU) accumulation
assays. In vivo fluorescence and nuclear imaging were performed on nude mice
bearing multiple subcutaneous xenografts established from ZR75-1-eGFP-tk and
wild-type cells. Optical imaging was able to detect the green fluorescence of
eGFP-tk tumor. The eGFP-tk reporter gene-specific imaging was achieved by single 
photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) using [123I]FIAU as a radiotracer and
demonstrated decreased FIAU uptake in eGFP-tk tumor by GCV treatment. Probably
due to a flare reaction after GCV treatment, micro-positron emission tomography
(micro-PET) imaging using 2-deoxy-2-[18F]fluoro-D-glucose (FDG) could not
demonstrate decreases in FDG uptake. However, in vitro metabolic assay also
revealed that eGFP-tk cells transiently increased [3H]-deoxyglucose uptake in
response to GCV treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirmed the usefulness of eGFP-tk in many applications 
by providing, in vitro and in vivo, the sensitive and reporter gene-specific
imaging. ZR75-1-eGFP-tk cells that are ready to incorporate in various imaging
platforms constitute a useful model in breast cancer research.

DOI: 10.1007/s11307-008-0147-2 
PMID: 18560942  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

