
1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008 Jul;23(7 Pt 1):1000-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1746.2008.05489.x.

HIV and hepatitis C coinfection.

Matthews GV(1), Dore GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Hepatitis Program, National Centre in HIV Epidemiology and Clinical
Research, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
gmatthews@nchecr.unsw.edu.au

The significant burden of HIV/hepatitis C virus (HCV) coinfection is increasingly
recognized worldwide, and in particular within the Asia-Pacific region.
Individuals who are coinfected with both viruses are at risk from accelerated
liver disease and consequently cirrhosis, liver failure, and hepatocellular
carcinoma. In addition, coinfected individuals may have altered immunological
responses to HAART and are at increased risk of highly active antiretroviral
therapy (HAART)-related hepatotoxicity. Treatment for HCV infection in
HIV-infected individuals is with standard pegylated interferon and ribavirin
therapy, and all HIV/HCV coinfected subjects should undergo suitability for HCV
treatment assessment. Response rates to HCV therapy are generally 10-15% lower
than in HCV monoinfection, and therapy may be complicated by issues of drug
interactions and significant toxicity. However, greater understanding of baseline
factors can contribute to better prediction of treatment outcome, and monitoring 
of on-treatment virological responses increasingly allows individualization of
therapy. Where possible, treatment of HCV is often advisable before HAART is
required to avoid the issues of drug interactions on HCV therapy and the risk of 
HAART-related hepatotoxicity. Early diagnosis of both HIV and HCV infection is
essential to most effectively manage HIV-HCV-coinfected individuals. New
therapies, including HCV protease and polymerase inhibitors, are in development
and may widen therapeutic options for HIV-HCV-coinfected individuals into the
future.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2008.05489.x 
PMID: 18707597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

