
1. Cell Prolif. 2008 Oct;41(5):755-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2184.2008.00550.x.

Caspase-3 activation as a key factor for HBx-transformed cell death.

Kim A(1), Kwon OS, Kim SO, He L, Bae EY, Lee MS, Jeong SJ, Shim JH, Yoon DY, Kim 
CH, Moon A, Kim KE, Ahn JS, Kim BY.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Metabolomics Research Center, Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon, Yuseong, South Korea.

OBJECTIVES: Nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB) activation has been associated
with the tumorigenic growth of hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx)-transformed
cells. This study was aimed to find a key target for treatment of HBx-mediated
cancers.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: NF-kappaB activation, endoplasmic reticulum-stress
(ER-stress), caspase-3 activation, and cell proliferation were evaluated after
Chang/HBx cells permanently expressing HBx viral protein were treated with
inhibitors of NF-kappaB, proteasome and DNA topoisomerase.
RESULTS: Inhibition of NF-kappaB transcriptional activity by transient
transfection with mutant plasmids encoding Akt1 and glycogen synthase
kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta), or by treatment with chemical inhibitors, wortmannin
and LY294002, showed little effect on the survival of Chang/HBx cells.
Furthermore, IkappaBalpha (S32/36A) mutant plasmid or other NF-kappaB inhibitors,
1-pyrrolidinecarbonidithioic acid and sulphasalazine, were also shown to have
little effect on the cell proliferation. By contrast, proteasome inhibitor-1
(Pro1) and MG132 enhanced the HBx-induced ER-stress response and the subsequent
activation of caspase-12, -9 and -3 and reduced cell proliferation. Camptothecin 
(CPT), however, triggered activation of caspase-3 without induction of
caspase-12, and reduced cell proliferation. In addition, CPT-induced cell death
was reversed by pre-treatment with z-DEVD, a caspase-3-specific inhibitor.
CONCLUSIONS: Detailed exploitation of the regulators of caspase-3 activation
could open the gate for finding an efficient target for development of anticancer
therapeutics against HBx-transformed hepatocellular carcinoma.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2184.2008.00550.x 
PMCID: PMC6496125
PMID: 18700866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

