
1. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2009 Jan;73(1):53-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1747-0285.2008.00746.x.

Peptide nanoparticles as novel immunogens: design and analysis of a prototypic
severe acute respiratory syndrome vaccine.

Pimentel TA(1), Yan Z, Jeffers SA, Holmes KV, Hodges RS, Burkhard P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Materials Science, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT
06269-3136, USA.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) is an infectious disease caused by a
novel coronavirus that cost nearly 800 lives. While there have been no recent
outbreaks of the disease, the threat remains as SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) like 
strains still exist in animal reservoirs. Therefore, the development of a vaccine
against SARS is in grave need. Here, we have designed and produced a prototypic
SARS vaccine: a self-assembling polypeptide nanoparticle that repetitively
displays a SARS B-cell epitope from the C-terminal heptad repeat of the virus'
spike protein. Biophysical analyses with circular dichroism, transmission
electron microscopy and dynamic light scattering confirmed the computational
design showing alpha-helcial nanoparticles with sizes of about 25 nm.
Immunization experiments with no adjuvants were performed with BALB/c mice. An
investigation of the binding properties of the elicited antibodies showed that
they were highly conformation specific for the coiled-coil epitope because they
specifically recognized the native trimeric conformation of C-terminal heptad
repeat region. Consequently, the antisera exhibited neutralization activity in an
in vitro infection inhibition assay. We conclude that these peptide nanoparticles
represent a promising platform for vaccine design, in particular for diseases
that are characterized by neutralizing epitopes with coiled-coil conformation
such as SARS-CoV or other enveloped viruses.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1747-0285.2008.00746.x 
PMCID: PMC2756483
PMID: 19152635  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

