
1. J Med Virol. 2009 Mar;81(3):391-9. doi: 10.1002/jmv.21414.

Genetic variability of human immunodeficiency virus-1 in Bahia state, Northeast, 
Brazil: high diversity of HIV genotypes.

Monteiro JP(1), Alcantara LC, de Oliveira T, Oliveira AM, Melo MA, Brites C,
Galvão-Castro B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório Avançado de Saúde Pública, CPqGM/FIOCRUZ, Salvador, Bahia, Brazil.

The HIV-1 genetic variability in Bahia state, Brazil, was investigated. DNA
samples from 229 and 213 HIV-1-infected individuals were analyzed using the
heteroduplex mobility assay (HMA) in gag and env fragments, respectively. One
hundred seventy-five samples were characterized in both genes. Thirty-two subtype
F and BF recombinant viruses were sequenced and analyzed by phylogenetic methods.
The combination of HMA and sequencing results showed that seven different HIV-1
genotypes comprised this sample: 147 (84%) B/B, 4 (2.3%) F/F, 3 (1.7%) B/F, 1
(0.6%) F/B, 1 (0.6%) F/D, 1 (0.6%) BF/F, and 18 (10.3%) BF/B. A significant
divergence was observed between these two techniques results (84.4%). This is
explained by the low accuracy of the HMA for detecting recombinant viruses. These
recombinants were unrelated to CRF12, while two sequences were related to CRF28
and CRF29. Nineteen BF mosaics shared the same gag breakpoint. In conclusion, the
use of HMA may be inappropriate in regions where different subtypes are
co-circulating. Subtype B is the most common genotype, however, an increased
prevalence (13.1%) of different BF variants and a potentially new CRF suggest
that recombination is occurring frequently in Bahia. These viruses were
associated with women infected heterosexually. Finally, this study identified the
presence of an F/D recombinant HIV-1 in Brazil.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.21414 
PMID: 19152417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

