
1. J Virol. 2009 Jun;83(11):5388-400. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02598-08. Epub 2009 Mar 25.

Improved survival in rhesus macaques immunized with modified vaccinia virus
Ankara recombinants expressing simian immunodeficiency virus envelope correlates 
with reduction in memory CD4+ T-cell loss and higher titers of neutralizing
antibody.

Ourmanov I(1), Kuwata T, Goeken R, Goldstein S, Iyengar R, Buckler-White A,
Lafont B, Hirsch VM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

Previous studies demonstrated that immunization of macaques with simian
immunodeficiency virus (SIV) Gag-Pol and Env recombinants of the attenuated
poxvirus modified vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA) provided protection from high
viremia and AIDS following challenge with a pathogenic strain of SIV. Although
all animals became infected, plasma viremia was significantly reduced in animals 
that received the MVA-SIV recombinant vaccines compared with animals that
received nonrecombinant MVA. Most importantly, the reduction in viremia resulted 
in a significant increase in median and cumulative survival. Continued analysis
of these animals over the subsequent 9 years has shown that they maintain a
survival advantage, although all but two of the macaques have progressed to AIDS.
Importantly, improved survival correlated with preservation of memory CD4(+) T
cells in the peripheral blood. The greatest survival advantage was observed in
macaques immunized with regimens containing SIV Env, and the titer of
neutralizing antibodies to the challenge virus prior to or shortly following
challenge correlated with preservation of CD4(+) T cells. These data are
consistent with a role for neutralizing antibodies in nonsterilizing protection
from high viremia and associated memory CD4(+) T-cell loss.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02598-08 
PMCID: PMC2681965
PMID: 19321617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

