
1. Retrovirology. 2009 Apr 3;6:31. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-6-31.

A novel HIV-1 restriction factor that is biologically distinct from APOBEC3
cytidine deaminases in a human T cell line CEM.NKR.

Zhou T(1), Han Y, Dang Y, Wang X, Zheng YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI 48824-4320, USA. taoz@msu.edu

BACKGROUND: Isolation of novel retroviral restriction factors will open new
avenues for anti-HIV/AIDS treatment. Although HIV-1 replication is restricted by 
APOBEC3G/APOBEC3F, TRIM5alpha, and CD317, none defend HIV-1 infection under
natural conditions. Previously, we demonstrated a host factor from the human T
cell line CEM.NKR that potently restricted wild-type HIV-1 replication.
Interestingly, this restriction resembled the APOBEC3G/APOBEC3F pattern in that
viral replication was inhibited from the second round of replication cycle at a
post-entry step.
RESULTS: Here, we further characterized this factor and found it distinguishable 
from the known anti-HIV APOBEC3 proteins. Although CEM.NKR cells expressed both
APOBEC3G and APOBEC3F, their levels were at least 10 or 4-fold lower than those
in H9 cells, and importantly, Vif effectively neutralized their activity. Among
eight subclones isolated from CEM.NKR cells, one was relatively permissive, four 
were semi-permissive, and three were completely non-permissive for HIV-1
replication. When the levels of APOBEC3 expression were determined, all these
clones retained similar low levels of APOBEC3DE, APOBEC3F, APOBEC3G and APOBEC3H 
expression, and no APOBEC3B expression was detected. Since the vif from SIVmac
can effectively neutralize APOBEC3B and APOBEC3H, recombinant HIV-1 expressing
this SIV gene were created. However, these viruses still failed to replicate in
CEM.NKR cells. We also confirmed that HIV-1 restriction in CEM.NKR was not due to
a loss of calnexin expression.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these results not only demonstrate that all these
aforementioned anti-HIV APOBEC3 proteins do not contribute to this HIV-1
restriction, but also shed light on a novel and potent HIV-1 inhibitor in CEM.NKR
cells.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-6-31 
PMCID: PMC2676246
PMID: 19344514  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

