
1. J Virol. 2009 Jul;83(13):6446-56. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02556-08. Epub 2009 Apr 15.

NFX1-123 increases hTERT expression and telomerase activity posttranscriptionally
in human papillomavirus type 16 E6 keratinocytes.

Katzenellenbogen RA(1), Vliet-Gregg P, Xu M, Galloway DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109, USA. rkatzen@u.washington.edu

High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) E6 protein induces telomerase activity
through transcriptional activation of hTERT, the catalytic subunit of telomerase.
HPV type 16 (HPV16) E6 interacts with two splice variants of NFX1 to increase
hTERT expression. NFX1-91 is a transcriptional repressor of hTERT that is
polyubiquitinated and targeted for degradation by HPV16 E6 in concert with
E6-associated protein. We previously showed that NFX1-123 augments hTERT
expression through binding to cytoplasmic poly(A) binding proteins (PABPCs). In
this study, we determined that unlike NFX1-91, NFX1-123 is a cytoplasmic protein 
that colocalized with PABPCs but does not shuttle with PABPCs between the nucleus
and cytoplasm. NFX1-123 requires both its PAM2 motif, with which it binds PABPCs,
and its R3H domain, which has putative nucleic acid binding capabilities, to
increase hTERT mRNA levels and telomerase activity in keratinocytes expressing
HPV16 E6. In keratinocytes expressing HPV16 E6 and overexpressing NFX1-123, there
was increased protein expression from in vitro-transcribed RNA fused with the 5' 
untranslated region (5' UTR) of hTERT. This posttranscriptional increase in
expression required the PAM2 motif and R3H domain of NFX1-123 as well as the
coexpression of HPV16 E6. NFX1-123 bound endogenous hTERT mRNA and increased its 
stability in HPV16 E6-expressing human foreskin keratinocytes, and NFX1-123
increased the stability of in vitro-transcribed RNA fused with the 5' UTR of
hTERT. Together, these studies describe the first evidence of posttranscriptional
regulation of hTERT, through the direct interaction of the cytoplasmic protein
NFX1-123 with hTERT mRNA, in HPV16 E6-expressing keratinocytes.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02556-08 
PMCID: PMC2698580
PMID: 19369336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

