
1. Transfusion. 2009 Feb;49(2):301-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2008.01966.x.

Sensitivity of two hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus (HCV), and human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) nucleic acid test systems relative to hepatitis B
surface antigen, anti-HCV, anti-HIV, and p24/anti-HIV combination assays in
seroconversion panels.

Assal A(1), Barlet V, Deschaseaux M, Dupont I, Gallian P, Guitton C, Morel P, van
Drimmelen H, David B, Lelie N, De Micco P.

Author information: 
(1)Etablissement Fran√ßais du Sang , La Plaine Saint Denis, France.
azzedine.assal@efs.sante.fr

BACKGROUND: Accurate determination of the infectious window period (IWP) that
remains with individual-donation (ID) or minipool (MP) NAT compared to those with
serology assays is essential for residual risk estimations.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: The relative sensitivity of the Procleix Tigris system 
(Gen-Probe/Chiron) used in ID-NAT format and cobas s 201 (Roche Molecular
Systems) applied in 1:6 diluted samples to mimic six-minipool (MP6) nucleic acid 
test (NAT) was assessed by quadruplicate testing of five seroconversion panels
per marker. A mathematical analysis based on the log-linear increase of viremia
in the ramp-up phase, as established with bDNA 3.0 assays enabled estimation of
the IWP for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis B virus (HBV)
assays.
RESULTS: The mean IWPs were Tigris HIV RNA 5.5 days, s 201 (1:6) HIV RNA 7.4
days, GenScreen Plus p24/anti-HIV 17.8 days, PRISM anti-HIV 19.0 days, Tigris HBV
DNA 20.6 days, s 201 (1:6) HBV DNA 22.6 days, Bio-Rad hepatitis B surface antigen
(HBsAg) 37.8 days, and PRISM HBsAg 35.5 days. At estimated 50 percent NAT
seroconversion rates, s 201 (1:6) and Tigris showed mean window-period reduction 
times (WPRTs) of 30.5 to 35.5 days to hepatitis C virus antibody (anti-HCV)
assays, 10.4 to 13.5 days to anti-HIV, or combination p24/anti-HIV assays and
12.8 to 17.2 days to HBsAg assays.
CONCLUSIONS: Tigris ID-NAT detected HIV RNA 2 days earlier than s 201 MP6-NAT,
but the difference in sensitivity between the two NAT systems was not significant
in HBV seroconversion panels. Insufficient seroconversion samples were available 
for reliable modeling of WPRT in early HCV infection, but 1.4 to 2.0 days could
be predicted by translating analytical sensitivity data. Both multiplex NAT
systems demonstrate significant WPRTs compared to (combined) antigen and antibody
assays.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2008.01966.x 
PMID: 19389212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

