
1. J Virol Methods. 2009 Oct;161(1):30-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2009.05.009. Epub 
2009 May 20.

Down-regulation of CXCR4 expression by SDF-KDEL in CD34(+) hematopoietic stem
cells: An anti-human immunodeficiency virus strategy.

Zhang JC(1), Sun L, Nie QH, Huang CX, Jia ZS, Wang JP, Lian JQ, Li XH, Wang PZ,
Zhang Y, Zhuang Y, Sun YT, Bai X.

Author information: 
(1)PLA Center for the Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth
Military Medical University, 1 XinSi Road, BaQiao District, Xi'an, China.

CXCR4 plays an essential role as the first discovered coreceptor for the entry of
T cell tropic isolates of HIV-1. Blocking the surface expression of this receptor
may be a potential strategy to prevent HIV-1 infection. A lentiviral vector,
pLenti6/V5-S-K, expressing a SDF-KDEL fusion protein was constructed and a
replication-incompetent lentiviral stock was produced. The lentiviral stock was
transduced into CD34(+) hHSC and the transient expression of the recombinant
protein, SDF-1, was assayed using indirect immunofluorescence. The surface
expression of CXCR4 in CD34(+) hHSC pretreated with different amounts of
recombinant lentiviral vectors was detected by flow cytometric analysis. A marked
down-regulation of CXCR4 expression in the cells transduced with recombinant
lentiviral vectors pLenti6/V5-S-K was observed by flow cytometry with
PE-conjugated anti-human CXCR4 monoclonal antibodies which showed the percentages
of the inhibition effects of CXCR4-SDF-1 mediated syncytium formation are
presented by concentration. P24 antigen levels of cell culture supernatants were 
detected on the 4th, 7th, and 10th day, with 10(3) TCID50 HIV-1 infected CD34(+) 
hHSC to evaluate the inhibitory effect of pLenti6/V5-S-K transduction on HIV-1
infection. The cells transfected with pLenti6/V5-S-K had a significant reduction 
of HIV-1 DP27 infection compared to controls (P<0.05).

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2009.05.009 
PMID: 19463855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

