
1. BMC Mol Biol. 2009 Jun 16;10:58. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-10-58.

Improved long-term expression from helper virus-free HSV-1 vectors packaged using
combinations of mutated HSV-1 proteins that include the UL13 protein kinase and
specific components of the VP16 transcriptional complex.

Liu M(1), Wang X, Geller AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, West Roxbury VA Hospital/Harvard Medical School, W
Roxbury, MA 02132, USA. meng_liu@hms.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV-1) gene expression is thought to shut off
recombinant gene expression from HSV-1 vectors; however, in a helper virus-free
HSV-1 vector system, a number of promoters support only short-term expression.
These results raise the paradox that recombinant gene expression remains
short-term even in the absence of almost all (approximately 99%) of the HSV-1
genome, HSV-1 genes, and HSV-1 gene expression. To resolve this paradox, we
hypothesized that specific proteins in the HSV-1 virus particle shut off
recombinant gene expression. In two earlier studies, we examined the effects on
recombinant gene expression of packaging vectors using specific mutated HSV-1
proteins. We found that vectors packaged using mutated UL13 (a protein kinase),
or VP16, or UL46 and/or UL47 (components of the VP16 transcriptional complex)
supported improved long-term expression, and vectors packaged using mutated UL46 
and/or UL47 also supported improved gene transfer (numbers of cells at 4 days).
These results suggested the hypothesis that specific proteins in the HSV-1
particle act by multiple pathways to reduce recombinant gene expression. To test 
this hypothesis, we examined combinations of mutated proteins that included both 
UL13 and specific components of the VP16 transcriptional complex.
RESULTS: A HSV-1 vector containing a neuronal-specific promoter was packaged
using specific combinations of mutated proteins, and the resulting vector stocks 
were tested in the rat striatum. For supporting long-term expression, the
preferred combination of mutated HSV-1 proteins was mutated UL13, UL46, and UL47.
Vectors packaged using this combination of mutated proteins supported a higher
efficiency of gene transfer and high levels expression for 3 months, the longest 
time examined.
CONCLUSION: Vector particles containing this combination of mutated HSV-1
proteins improve recombinant gene expression. Implications of these results for
strategies to further improve long-term expression are discussed. Moreover,
long-term expression will benefit specific gene therapy applications.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2199-10-58 
PMCID: PMC2709626
PMID: 19531264  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

