
1. Clin Transplant. 2010 Mar-Apr;24(2):252-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0012.2009.01068.x.
Epub 2009 Aug 27.

Hepatocellular MxA protein expression supports the differentiation of recurrent
hepatitis C disease from acute cellular rejection after liver transplantation.

MacQuillan GC(1), de Boer WB, Allan JE, Platten MA, Reed WD, Jeffrey GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, 
Nedlands, WA, Australia. Gerry.MQuillan@health.wa.gov.au

Differentiation of recurrent hepatitis C virus (HCV) disease from acute cellular 
rejection (ACR) following liver transplantation can be difficult. Previously, we 
have found that MxA protein, a specific and sensitive marker for type 1
interferon production, is strongly expressed in chronic HCV disease. Here, we
investigate MxA expression as a marker for recurrent HCV disease in the livers of
14 adult HCV patients who underwent liver transplantation. Serial liver biopsies 
available for 12 of these patients were stained for MxA protein and scored using 
a semi-quantitative approach. Hepatocellular MxA protein levels were
significantly up-regulated (p = 0.025) in recurrent HCV disease in comparison to 
ACR. In biopsies that showed histological changes consistent with recurrent HCV
disease, strong hepatocellular MxA staining was present in 14/18 (78%). In the
liver biopsies with histological evidence of ACR, strong MxA hepatocellular
staining was present in only three of 10 (30%). Thus, assessment of
hepatocellular MxA protein expression can contribute to the differential
diagnosis of ACR and recurrent HCV disease following liver transplantation. In
conclusion, analysis of intrahepatic MxA levels has the potential to reduce the
inappropriate use with high-dose pulsing of steroids post-operatively.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0012.2009.01068.x 
PMID: 19712085  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

