
1. Int J Epidemiol. 2009 Dec;38(6):1624-33. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyp306. Epub 2009 Oct
9.

Mortality of HIV-infected patients starting potent antiretroviral therapy:
comparison with the general population in nine industrialized countries.

Antiretroviral Therapy Cohort Collaboration, Zwahlen M, Harris R, May M, Hogg R, 
Costagliola D, de Wolf F, Gill J, Fätkenheuer G, Lewden C, Saag M, Staszewski S, 
d'Arminio Monforte A, Casabona J, Lampe F, Justice A, von Wyl V, Egger M.

Collaborators: Casabona J, Chêne G, Costagliola D, Dabis F, d'Arminio Montforte
A, de Wolf F, Egger M, Fätkenheuer G, Gill J, Hogg R, Justice A, Kithata M, Lampe
F, Ledergerber B, Leport C, May M, Saag M, Sabin C, Staszewski S, Sterne J,
Harris R, Beckhthold B, Yip B, Dauer B, Fusco J, Darney E, Rickenbach M,
Lavignolle V, van Leth F, Pereira E, Pezzotti P, Phillips A, Sabin C.

BACKGROUND: Mortality in HIV-infected patients has declined substantially with
combination antiretroviral therapy (ART), but it is unclear whether it has
reached that of the general population. We compared mortality in patients
starting ART in nine countries of Europe and North America with the corresponding
general population, taking into account their response to ART.
METHODS: Eligible patients were enrolled in prospective cohort studies
participating in the ART Cohort Collaboration. We calculated the ratio of
observed to expected deaths from all causes [standardized mortality ratio (SMR)],
measuring time from 6 months after starting ART, according to risk group,
clinical stage at the start of ART and CD4 cell count and viral load at 6 months.
Expected numbers of deaths were obtained from age-, sex- and country-specific
mortality rates.
RESULTS: Among 29 935 eligible patients, 1134 deaths were recorded in 131 510
person-years of follow-up. The median age was 37 years, 8162 (27%) patients were 
females, 4400 (15%) were injecting drug users (IDUs) and 6738 (23%) had AIDS when
starting ART. At 6 months, 23 539 patients (79%) had viral load measurements
<or=500 copies/ml. The lowest SMR, 1.05 [95% confidence interval (CI) 0.82-1.35] 
was found for men who have sex with men (MSM) who started ART free of AIDS,
reached a CD4 cell count of >or=350 cells/microL and suppressed viral replication
to <or=500 copies/ml by the sixth month. In contrast, the SMR was 73.7 (95% CI
46.4-116.9) in IDUs who failed to suppress viral replication and had CD4 cell
counts <50 cells/microL at 6 months. The percentage of patients with SMRs <2 was 
46% for MSM, 42% for heterosexually infected patients and 0% for patients with a 
history of injection drug use. Corresponding percentages for SMRs >10 were 4, 14 
and 47%.
CONCLUSIONS: In industrialized countries, the mortality experience of
HIV-infected patients who start ART and survive the first 6 months continues to
be higher than in the general population, but for many patients excess mortality 
is moderate and comparable with patients having other chronic conditions. Much of
the excess mortality might be prevented by earlier diagnosis of HIV followed by
timely initiation of ART.

DOI: 10.1093/ije/dyp306 
PMCID: PMC3119390
PMID: 19820106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

