
1. Int J Cancer. 2010 Jul 1;127(1):93-100. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25023.

No role for human papillomavirus in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma in China.

Koshiol J(1), Wei WQ, Kreimer AR, Chen W, Gravitt P, Ren JS, Abnet CC, Wang JB,
Kamangar F, Lin DM, von Knebel-Doeberitz M, Zhang Y, Viscidi R, Wang GQ, Gillison
ML, Roth MJ, Dong ZW, Kim E, Taylor PR, Qiao YL, Dawsey SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, Department of Health and Human
Services, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20852-7248, USA. koshiolj@mail.nih.gov

Certain regions of China have high rates of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC). Previous studies of human papillomavirus (HPV), a proposed causal factor,
have produced highly variable results. We attempted to evaluate HPV and ESCC more
definitively using extreme care to prevent DNA contamination. We collected tissue
and serum in China from 272 histopathologically-confirmed ESCC cases with
rigorous attention to good molecular biology technique. We tested for HPV DNA in 
fresh-frozen tumor tissue using PCR with PGMY L1 consensus primers and HPV16 and 
18 type-specific E6 and E7 primers, and in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor
tissue using SPF(10) L1 primers. In HPV-positive cases, we evaluated p16(INK4a)
overexpression and HPV E6/E7 seropositivity as evidence of carcinogenic HPV
activity. beta-globin, and thus DNA, was adequate in 98.2% of the frozen tumor
tissues (267/272). Of these, 99.6% (95% confidence interval (CI) = 97.9-100.0%)
were negative for HPV DNA by PGMY, and 100% (95% CI = 98.6-100%) were negative by
HPV16/18 E6/E7 PCR. In the corresponding formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor
specimens, 99.3% (95% CI = 97.3-99.9%) were HPV negative by SPF(10). By PGMY, 1
case tested weakly positive for HPV89, a noncancer causing HPV type. By SPF(10), 
2 cases tested weakly positive: 1 for HPV16 and 1 for HPV31. No HPV DNA-positive 
case had evidence of HPV oncogene activity as measured by p16(INK4a)
overexpression or E6/E7 seropositivity. This study provides the most definitive
evidence to date that HPV is not involved in ESCC carcinogenesis in China. HPV
DNA contamination cannot be ruled out as an explanation for high HPV prevalence
in ESCC tissue studies with less stringent tissue procurement and processing
protocols.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.25023 
PMCID: PMC3069961
PMID: 19918949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

