
1. J Biotechnol. 2010 Jan 15;145(2):139-42. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2009.11.009. Epub
2009 Nov 20.

Effects of catalytic site mutations on active expression of phage fused
penicillin acylase.

Shi YF(1), Soumillion P, Ueda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Biological and Food Engineering, Dalian
Polytechnic University, No. 1 Qinggongyuan, Ganjingzi District, Dalian 116034,
Liaoning, China. yifengshi@yahoo.cn

Penicillin G acylase (EC 3.5.1.11) is 86-kDa large heterodimeric protein
comprising two peptide A 23-kDa and peptide B 62-kDa, produced by intein-mediated
auto-splicing of a 92-kDa precursor. Since penicillin G acylase was potentially
employed in the preparation of a wide range of semi-synthetic beta-lactam
antibiotics from acyl side-chain precursors and beta-lactam nucleus, directed
evolution of penicillin acylase using phage display technology for extending its 
novel specificity is an interesting topic both of industry and academic. We fused
the penicillin acylase to fd phage coat protein III and used pIII secretion
signal sequence instead of penicillin acylase, which coupled gene and enzyme on
phage particle and will be useful for directed evolution of penicillin acylase.
Western blotting and enzyme activity assay were performed to demonstrate
penicillin acylase has been functionally displayed on phage surface. Owing to the
intimate association of enzyme activity and precursor processing in penicillin
acylase, alterations of protein residues to make a phage library should be
careful not to lead to processing defects. By site-directed mutagenesis, we have 
then identified effect of Ser B1 and Asn B241 variants on post-translational
maturation of phage fused penicillin acylase.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2009.11.009 
PMID: 19932137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

