
1. Blood. 2010 Apr 15;115(15):3008-16. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-08-231613. Epub 2009 
Dec 18.

Rituximab plus concurrent infusional EPOCH chemotherapy is highly effective in
HIV-associated B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

Sparano JA(1), Lee JY, Kaplan LD, Levine AM, Ramos JC, Ambinder RF, Wachsman W,
Aboulafia D, Noy A, Henry DH, Von Roenn J, Dezube BJ, Remick SC, Shah MH,
Leichman L, Ratner L, Cesarman E, Chadburn A, Mitsuyasu R; AIDS Malignancy
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Montefiore-Einstein Cancer Center, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY 10461,
USA. jsparano@montefiore.org

Comment in
    Blood. 2010 Apr 15;115(15):2986-7.

Rituximab plus intravenous bolus chemotherapy is a standard treatment for
immunocompetent patients with B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). Some studies
have suggested that rituximab is associated with excessive toxicity in
HIV-associated NHL, and that infusional chemotherapy may be more effective. We
performed a randomized phase 2 trial of rituximab (375 mg/m(2)) given either
concurrently before each infusional etoposide, vincristine, doxorubicin,
cyclophosphamide, and prednisone (EPOCH) chemotherapy cycle or sequentially
(weekly for 6 weeks) after completion of all chemotherapy in HIV-associated NHL. 
EPOCH consisted of a 96-hour intravenous infusion of etoposide, doxorubicin, and 
vincristine plus oral prednisone followed by intravenous bolus cyclophosphamide
given every 21 days for 4 to 6 cycles. In the concurrent arm, 35 of 48 evaluable 
patients (73%; 95% confidence interval, 58%-85%) had a complete response. In the 
sequential arm, 29 of 53 evaluable patients (55%; 95% confidence interval,
41%-68%) had a complete response. The primary efficacy endpoint was met for the
concurrent arm only. Toxicity was comparable in the 2 arms, although patients
with a baseline CD4 count less than 50/microL had a high infectious death rate in
the concurrent arm. We conclude that concurrent rituximab plus infusional EPOCH
is an effective regimen for HIV-associated lymphoma.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2009-08-231613 
PMCID: PMC2858478
PMID: 20023215  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

