
1. Paediatr Child Health. 2002 Nov;7(9):623-32.

Immunization and children at risk for autism.

Roberts W(1), Harford M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Toronto;

Possible connections between immunization and developmental disorders, most
notably autistic disorders, have been the subject of a great deal of debate and
have caused much concern for parents who want to make the safest choices for
their children. Anxiety has risen steadily since the mid-1990s, when a medical
investigative team led by A Wakefield postulated that the measles-mumps-rubella
(MMR) vaccine may be a causative factor in the development of autism spectrum
disorder. Since this initial publication, immunization remains controversial for 
some parents and the uptake of the MMR vaccine has fallen in some countries,
despite much discussion regarding the safety of MMR, a lack of evidence for an
association between MMR and autism, and the risks of insufficient protection
against wild measles virus infection. The Canadian uptake of MMR in 1998 was 95%,
but data do not exist to document any change in Canada since that time. Many
clinicians are concerned that the uptake in younger siblings of children with
autism is considerably lower.Further anxiety for parents has been caused by the
suggested association between developmental disorders and mercury toxicity due to
thimerosal, which is used as a preservative in some vaccines. Many Canadian
parents, while continuing to seek chelation therapy in response to this
suggestion, are not aware that, in Canada, thimerosal has never been added to
MMR, and has not been present in diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus-poliomyelitis or
pentavalent vaccines since 1992. It is found in only Hepatitis B vaccine in some 
provinces.The present article is intended to be a guide for physicians as they
counsel parents.

DOI: 10.1093/pch/7.9.623 
PMCID: PMC2796520
PMID: 20046442 

