
1. Respir Med. 2010 Apr;104(4):584-92. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2009.12.008. Epub 2010
Jan 8.

Community-acquired pneumonia and nursing home-acquired pneumonia in the very
elderly patients.

Maruyama T(1), Gabazza EC, Morser J, Takagi T, D'Alessandro-Gabazza C, Hirohata
S, Nakayama S, Ramirez AY, Fujiwara A, Naito M, Nishikubo K, Yuda H, Yoshida M,
Takei Y, Taguchi O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Mie University Graduate
School of Medicine, Edobashi 2-174, Tsu City, Mie Prefecture, Japan.

Comment in
    Respir Med. 2010 Jul;104(7):1079-80.

The rapid increase in the elderly population is leading to a corresponding
increase in the number of people requiring medical care. To date no comparative
study between community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) and nursing home-acquired
pneumonia (NHAP) has been reported in the very elderly non-intubated patients.
The present study was undertaken to compare the clinical characteristics and
microbial etiology between CAP and NHAP in elderly patients >/=85-years old.
There were 54 patients with NHAP and 47 with CAP. Performance status was
significantly worse in the NHAP than in the CAP group. Among all patients, the
most frequent pathogens were Chlamydophilia pneumoniae followed by Streptococcus 
pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae influenza virus and Staphylococcus aureus. The 
frequency of S. peumoniae was significantly higher in NHAP patients than in CAP
patients after adjusting for age and sex. Physical activity, nutrition status and
dehydration were significant prognostic factors of pneumonia among all patients. 
In-hospital mortality was significantly higher in NHAP than in CAP after
adjusting for age and sex. This study demonstrated that the etiology and clinical
outcome differ between CAP and NHAP patients in the very elderly non-intubated
population.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2009.12.008 
PMID: 20060700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

