
1. Arch Virol. 2010;155(1):37-46. doi: 10.1007/s00705-009-0548-9. Epub 2009 Nov 22.

Two distinct nanovirus species infecting faba bean in Morocco.

Abraham AD(1), Bencharki B, Torok V, Katul L, Varrelmann M, Josef Vetten H.

Author information: 
(1)Julius Kühn Institute, Bundesforschungsinstitut für Kulturpflanzen, Institut
für Epidemiologie und Pathogendiagnostik, Messeweg 11-12, 38104 Braunschweig,
Germany.

Erratum in
    Arch Virol. 2010 Nov;155(11):1921-2.

Using monoclonal antibodies raised against a Faba bean necrotic yellows virus
(FBNYV) isolate from Egypt and a Faba bean necrotic stunt virus (FBNSV) isolate
from Ethiopia, a striking serological variability among nanovirus isolates from
faba bean in Morocco was revealed. To obtain a better understanding of this
nanovirus variability in Morocco, the entire genomes of two serologically
contrasting isolates referred to as Mor5 and Mor23 were sequenced. The eight
circular ssDNA components, each identified from Mor5- and Mor23-infected tissues 
and thought to form the complete nanovirus genome, ranged in size from 952 to
1,005 nt for Mor5 and from 980 to 1,004 nt for Mor23 and were structurally
similar to previously described nanovirus DNAs. However, Mor5 and Mor23 differed 
from each other in overall nucleotide and amino acid sequences by 25 and 26%,
respectively. Mor23 was most closely related to typical FBNYV isolates described 
earlier from Egypt and Syria, with which it shared a mean amino acid sequence
identity of about 94%. On the other hand, Mor5 most closely resembled a FBNSV
isolate from Ethiopia, with which it shared a mean amino acid sequence identity
of approximately 89%. The serological and genetic differences observed for Mor5
and Mor23 were comparable to those observed earlier for FBNYV, FBNSV, and Milk
vetch dwarf virus. Following the guidelines on nanovirus species demarcation,
this suggests that Mor23 and Mor5 represent isolates of FBNYV and FBNSV,
respectively. This is the first report not only on the presence of FBNSV in a
country other than Ethiopia but also on the occurrence and complete genome
sequences of members of two nanovirus species in the same country, thus providing
evidence for faba bean crops being infected by members of two distinct nanovirus 
species in a restricted geographic area.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-009-0548-9 
PMCID: PMC3128733
PMID: 20069400  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

