
1. Plant Cell. 2010 Mar;22(3):918-36. doi: 10.1105/tpc.109.071662. Epub 2010 Mar 23.

Endosome-associated CRT1 functions early in resistance gene-mediated defense
signaling in Arabidopsis and tobacco.

Kang HG(1), Oh CS, Sato M, Katagiri F, Glazebrook J, Takahashi H, Kachroo P,
Martin GB, Klessig DF.

Author information: 
(1)Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant Research, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

Resistance gene-mediated immunity confers protection against pathogen infection
in a wide range of plants. A genetic screen for Arabidopsis thaliana mutants
compromised for recognition of turnip crinkle virus previously identified CRT1, a
member of the GHKL ATPase/kinase superfamily. Here, we demonstrate that CRT1
interacts with various resistance proteins from different structural classes, and
this interaction is disrupted when these resistance proteins are activated. The
Arabidopsis mutant crt1-2 crh1-1, which lacks CRT1 and its closest homolog,
displayed compromised resistance to avirulent Pseudomonas syringae and
Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis. Additionally, resistance-associated
hypersensitive cell death was suppressed in Nicotiana benthamiana silenced for
expression of CRT1 homolog(s). Thus, CRT1 appears to be a general factor for
resistance gene-mediated immunity. Since elevation of cytosolic calcium triggered
by avirulent P. syringae was compromised in crt1-2 crh1-1 plants, but cell death 
triggered by Nt MEK2(DD) was unaffected in CRT1-silenced N. benthamiana, CRT1
likely functions at an early step in this pathway. Genome-wide transcriptome
analysis led to identification of CRT1-Associated genes, many of which are
associated with transport processes, responses to (a)biotic stress, and the
endomembrane system. Confocal microscopy and subcellular fractionation revealed
that CRT1 localizes to endosome-like vesicles, suggesting a key process in
resistance protein activation/signaling occurs in this subcellular compartment.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.109.071662 
PMCID: PMC2861469
PMID: 20332379  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

