
1. J Exp Med. 2010 Apr 12;207(4):823-36. doi: 10.1084/jem.20091627. Epub 2010 Mar
29.

Peripheral CD103+ dendritic cells form a unified subset developmentally related
to CD8alpha+ conventional dendritic cells.

Edelson BT(1), KC W, Juang R, Kohyama M, Benoit LA, Klekotka PA, Moon C, Albring 
JC, Ise W, Michael DG, Bhattacharya D, Stappenbeck TS, Holtzman MJ, Sung SS,
Murphy TL, Hildner K, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Although CD103-expressing dendritic cells (DCs) are widely present in nonlymphoid
tissues, the transcription factors controlling their development and their
relationship to other DC subsets remain unclear. Mice lacking the transcription
factor Batf3 have a defect in the development of CD8alpha+ conventional DCs
(cDCs) within lymphoid tissues. We demonstrate that Batf3(-/-) mice also lack
CD103+CD11b- DCs in the lung, intestine, mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs), dermis,
and skin-draining lymph nodes. Notably, Batf3(-/-) mice displayed reduced priming
of CD8 T cells after pulmonary Sendai virus infection, with increased pulmonary
inflammation. In the MLNs and intestine, Batf3 deficiency resulted in the
specific lack of CD103+CD11b- DCs, with the population of CD103+CD11b+ DCs
remaining intact. Batf3(-/-) mice showed no evidence of spontaneous
gastrointestinal inflammation and had a normal contact hypersensitivity (CHS)
response, despite previous suggestions that CD103+ DCs were required for immune
homeostasis in the gut and CHS. The relationship between CD8alpha+ cDCs and
nonlymphoid CD103+ DCs implied by their shared dependence on Batf3 was further
supported by similar patterns of gene expression and their shared developmental
dependence on the transcription factor Irf8. These data provide evidence for a
developmental relationship between lymphoid organ-resident CD8alpha+ cDCs and
nonlymphoid CD103+ DCs.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20091627 
PMCID: PMC2856032
PMID: 20351058  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

