
1. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 1;5(4):e9936. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009936.

High GUD incidence in the early 20 century created a particularly permissive time
window for the origin and initial spread of epidemic HIV strains.

de Sousa JD(1), MÃ¼ller V, Lemey P, Vandamme AM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Clinical and Evolutionary Virology, Rega Institute for Medical 
Research, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
joao.sousa@rega.kuleuven.be

The processes that permitted a few SIV strains to emerge epidemically as HIV
groups remain elusive. Paradigmatic theories propose factors that may have
facilitated adaptation to the human host (e.g., unsafe injections), none of which
provide a coherent explanation for the timing, geographical origin, and scarcity 
of epidemic HIV strains. Our updated molecular clock analyses established
relatively narrow time intervals (roughly 1880-1940) for major SIV transfers to
humans. Factors that could favor HIV emergence in this time frame may have been
genital ulcer disease (GUD), resulting in high HIV-1 transmissibility (4-43%),
largely exceeding parenteral transmissibility; lack of male circumcision
increasing male HIV infection risk; and gender-skewed city growth increasing
sexual promiscuity. We surveyed colonial medical literature reporting incidences 
of GUD for the relevant regions, concentrating on cities, suffering less
reporting biases than rural areas. Coinciding in time with the origin of the
major HIV groups, colonial cities showed intense GUD outbreaks with incidences
1.5-2.5 orders of magnitude higher than in mid 20(th) century. We surveyed
ethnographic literature, and concluded that male circumcision frequencies were
lower in early 20(th) century than nowadays, with low rates correlating spatially
with the emergence of HIV groups. We developed computer simulations to model the 
early spread of HIV-1 group M in Kinshasa before, during and after the estimated 
origin of the virus, using parameters derived from the colonial literature. These
confirmed that the early 20(th) century was particularly permissive for the
emergence of HIV by heterosexual transmission. The strongest potential
facilitating factor was high GUD levels. Remarkably, the direct effects of city
population size and circumcision frequency seemed relatively small. Our results
suggest that intense GUD in promiscuous urban communities was the main factor
driving HIV emergence. Low circumcision rates may have played a role, probably by
their indirect effects on GUD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009936 
PMCID: PMC2848574
PMID: 20376191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

