
1. AIDS Care. 2010 Feb;22(2):146-51. doi: 10.1080/09540120903039844.

Promoting vulnerability or resilience to HIV? A qualitative study on polygamy in 
Maiduguri, Nigeria.

Saddiq A(1), Tolhurst R, Lalloo D, Theobald S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Services, MoH, Maiduguri, Nigeria.

Literature on the links between polygamy and HIV and AIDS is limited and the
findings inconclusive. Literature to date in Sub-Saharan Africa has relied mainly
on case-control studies and surveys. This qualitative study aimed to explore
different community members' perceptions of the links between the practice of
polygamy and vulnerability or resilience to HIV and AIDS in Maiduguri,
north-eastern Nigeria. The study used focus group discussions and in-depth
interviews with religious and community leaders and different groups of women and
men in the community. Participant views on the links between polygamy and HIV
were varied. However, one clear emerging theme was that it is not the practice of
polygamy per se that shapes vulnerability to HIV and AIDS but the dynamics of
sexual relations and practices both within and beyond the marital union--whether 
monogamous or polygamous. The ways in which these social relationships are
negotiated and experienced are in turn shaped by religious traditions, gender
roles and relations, education and socio-economic status. Within the religious
environment of north-eastern Nigeria, where asymmetrical gender roles and
relations and connotations of morality shape experiences of sexual interactions, 
windows of opportunity to promote behaviour-change strategies to support women
and men's resilience to HIV need to be carefully created. Health practitioners
and planners should develop partnerships with religious and community leaders and
women's groups to construct and deliver behaviour-changes strategies.

DOI: 10.1080/09540120903039844 
PMID: 20390493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

