
1. ISME J. 2010 Nov;4(11):1431-42. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2010.65. Epub 2010 May 20.

Links between viral and prokaryotic communities throughout the water column in
the (sub)tropical Atlantic Ocean.

De Corte D(1), Sintes E, Winter C, Yokokawa T, Reinthaler T, Herndl GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Oceanography, Royal Netherlands Institute for Sea
Research (NIOZ), Den Burg, The Netherlands.

Viral and prokaryotic abundance, production and diversity were determined
throughout the water column of the subtropical Atlantic Ocean to assess potential
variations in the relation between viruses and prokaryotes. Prokaryotic abundance
and heterotrophic activity decreased by one and three orders of magnitude,
respectively, from the epi- to the abyssopelagic layer. Although the lytic viral 
production (VP) decreased with depth, lysogenic VP was variable throughout the
water column and did not show any trend with depth. The bacterial, archaeal and
viral community composition were depth-stratified as determined by the automated 
ribosomal intergenic spacer analysis, terminal-restriction fragment length
polymorphism and randomly amplified polymorphic DNA-PCR, respectively. Generally,
the number of operational taxonomic units (OTUs) did not reveal consistent trends
throughout the water column. Viral and prokaryotic abundance were strongly
related to heterotrophic prokaryotic production, suggesting similar linkage
strength between the viral and prokaryotic communities from the lower epi- to the
abyssopelagic layer in the Atlantic Ocean. Strikingly, the prokaryotic and viral 
parameters exhibited a similar variability throughout the water column down to
the abyssopelagic layers, suggesting that the dark ocean is as dynamic a system
as is the lower epipelagic layer. It also indicates that viruses are apparently
having a similar role for prokaryotic mortality in the dark oceanic realm as in
surface waters. The more than twofold increase in bacterial OTUs from 2750 m
depth to >5000 m depth and the concurrent decrease in viral OTUs, however,
suggests that viruses might exhibit a wider host range in deep waters than in
surface waters.

DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2010.65 
PMID: 20485386  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

