
1. Virol J. 2010 May 26;7:107. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-7-107.

Proteome changes of lungs artificially infected with H-PRRSV and N-PRRSV by
two-dimensional fluorescence difference gel electrophoresis.

Xiao S(1), Wang Q, Jia J, Cong P, Mo D, Yu X, Qin L, Li A, Niu Y, Zhu K, Wang X, 
Liu X, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome with PRRS virus (PRRSV)
infection, which causes significant economic losses annually, is one of the most 
economically important diseases affecting swine industry worldwide. In 2006 and
2007, a large-scale outbreak of highly pathogenic porcine reproductive and
respiratory syndrome (PRRS) happened in China and Vietnam. However little data is
available on global host response to PRRSV infection at the protein level, and
similar approaches looking at mRNA is problematic since mRNA levels do not
necessarily predict protein levels. In order to improve the knowledge of host
response and viral pathogenesis of highly virulent Chinese-type PRRSV (H-PRRSV)
and Non-high-pathogenic North American-type PRRSV strains (N-PRRSV), we analyzed 
the protein expression changes of H-PRRSV and N-PRRSV infected lungs compared
with those of uninfected negative control, and identified a series of proteins
related to host response and viral pathogenesis.
RESULTS: According to differential proteomes of porcine lungs infected with
H-PRRSV, N-PRRSV and uninfected negative control at different time points using
two-dimensional fluorescence difference gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) and mass
spectrometry identification, 45 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were
identified. These proteins were mostly related to cytoskeleton, stress response
and oxidation reduction or metabolism. In the protein interaction network
constructed based on DEPs from lungs infected with H-PRRSV, HSPA8, ARHGAP29 and
NDUFS1 belonged to the most central proteins, whereas DDAH2, HSPB1 and FLNA
corresponded to the most central proteins in those of N-PRRSV infected.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study is the first attempt to provide the complex picture of
pulmonary protein expression during H-PRRSV and N-PRRSV infection under the in
vivo environment using 2D-DIGE technology and bioinformatics tools, provides
large scale valuable information for better understanding host proteins-virus
interactions of these two PRRSV strains.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-7-107 
PMCID: PMC2887434
PMID: 20504321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

