
1. Virology. 1991 Jul;183(1):133-42.

Analysis of splice junctions and in vitro and in vivo translation potential of
the small, abundant B19 parvovirus RNAs.

St Amand J(1), Beard C, Humphries K, Astell CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Two parvovirus B19 cDNA libraries have been constructed; one from COS-7 cells
transfected with a B19/pSVOd hybrid vector and the other from B19-infected human 
erythroid leukemic cells. We have used these libraries to investigate the
expression of the abundant classes of polyadenylated B19 RNAs; the 700- and
800-nt class which terminates in the middle of the genome and the 500- and 600-nt
class which contains an ORF from the extreme right-hand end of the genome. The
700- and 800-nt RNA species were not found in the COS cell library, suggesting
that a variant polyadenylation signal (ATTAAA or AATAAC) in the middle of the
genome is not efficiently recognized in these cells. In contrast, the 700- and
800-nt class was highly represented in the human library, confirming the use of
this variant polyadenylation signal in the normal host cell of the virus. In COS 
cells the middle exon of the 500- and 600-nt class of RNA exhibited variability
in both splice donor and acceptor sites. However, in human cells there were only 
two splice acceptor sites nt 1910 and 2030, and a single splice donor site nt
2183 for this exon. Antisera, prepared against a peptide derived from the 94-aa
potential protein encoded by the 500- and 600-nt class of RNA, recognized, on a
Western blot, a polypeptide of approximately 11 kDa that was translated in vitro 
from these cDNAs and in vivo in pSVOd/B19 transfected COS cells.
Immunoprecipitation revealed that two proteins were made from this ORF,
suggesting the use of internal translation initiation site(s). Another antisera, 
raised against a second peptide corresponding to an antigenic region of the
potential protein encoded by the 700- and 800-nt class of RNA, failed to detect a
15-kDa protein by Western blotting or immunoprecipitation of labeled proteins
both in vitro and in vivo in COS cells.

DOI: 10.1016/0042-6822(91)90126-v 
PMID: 2053277  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

