
1. Am J Pathol. 2010 Sep;177(3):1274-85. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.091288. Epub 2010 
Jul 29.

Simian immunodeficiency virus infection alters chemokine networks in lung tissues
of cynomolgus macaques: association with Pneumocystis carinii infection.

Qin S(1), Fallert Junecko BA, Trichel AM, Tarwater PM, Murphey-Corb MA, Kirschner
DE, Reinhart TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, Graduate School of Public 
Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

Infection by HIV-1 frequently leads to pulmonary complications, including
alterations to local immune environments. To better understand these alterations,
we have examined in detail the patterns and levels of expression of chemokine,
cytokine, and chemokine receptor mRNAs in lung tissues from 16 uninfected or
simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV)/DeltaB670 infected cynomolgus macaques at
different stages of infection. Among the most up-regulated immune genes were
interferon (IFN)-gamma, IFN-gamma-inducible CXCR3 ligands, and CCR5 ligands, as
well as the cognate chemokine receptors. These changes were greatest in animals
with clear Pneumocystis carinii coinfection. Immunohistochemistry and in situ
hybridization revealed monocytes/macrophages to be the predominant type of cell
infiltrating into lung tissues and serving as the major cellular source of
chemokines. To explore the causes of chemokine alterations, we treated macaque
lung cells with IFN-gamma, lipopolysaccharide, Poly(I:C), and P. carinii in
vitro, and results revealed that these stimuli can induce the expression of CXCR3
ligand and/or CCR5 ligand mRNAs. Taken together, these studies provide a
comprehensive definition of the chemokine networks available to modulate cellular
recruitment to lung tissues during SIV infection and implicate both cytokines
(IFN-gamma) and pathogens (SIV and P. carinii) as contributors to increased
expression of pro-inflammatory chemokines.

DOI: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.091288 
PMCID: PMC2928961
PMID: 20671263  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

