
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Jul 15;88(14):6082-6.

Hyperimmune antisera against synthetic peptides representing the glycoprotein of 
human immunodeficiency virus type 2 can mediate neutralization and
antibody-dependent cytotoxic activity.

Bj√∂rling E(1), Broliden K, Bernardi D, Utter G, Thorstensson R, Chiodi F, Norrby 
E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

Twenty-five 13- to 35-amino-acid-long peptides representing regions of human
immunodeficiency virus type 2 (HIV-2), strain SBL6669, envelope proteins were
evaluated for their immunogenic activity in guinea pigs. The peptides were
selected to provide homologous representation of sites in the HIV-1 envelope
proteins that were previously documented to have a particular immunogenic
importance. A number of the HIV-2 peptides were found to be capable of inducing
strain SBL6669 neutralizing and antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC)
antibodies. Two overlapping peptides covering amino acids 311-337 representing
the central and C-terminal part of the variable third (V3) region, terminology
according to Modrow et al. [Modrow, S., Hahn, B., Shaw, G. M., Gallo, R. C.,
Wong-Staal, F. & Wolf, H. (1987) J. Virol. 61, 570-578], showed the most
pronounced capacity to induce neutralizing antibodies. One of the peptides (amino
acids 318-337) also induced antibodies mediating ADCC. Two additional regions in 
the large glycoprotein, gp125, containing linear sites reacting with neutralizing
antibodies were identified (amino acids, 119-137 and 472-509). The transmembrane 
protein, gp36, of HIV-2 harbored two regions of importance for induction of
neutralizing antibodies (amino acids 595-614 and 714-729). ADCC activity was
induced by two additional gp125-specific peptides (amino acids 291-311 and
446-461). Thus, except for the single V3-specific site there was no correlation
between linear immunogenic sites stimulating neutralizing antibody and ADCC
activity. These findings pave the way for development of synthetic vaccines
against HIV-2 and possibly also simian immunodeficiency virus infections. The
capacity of such a product to induce protective immunity can be evaluated in
macaque monkeys.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.88.14.6082 
PMCID: PMC52026
PMID: 2068087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

