
1. Mol Endocrinol. 1991 May;5(5):619-27.

Concerted stimulation of transcription by glucocorticoid receptors and basal
transcription factors: limited transcriptional synergism suggests mediation by
coactivators/adaptors.

Bastian LS(1), Nordeen SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver
80262.

Steroid receptors have been reported to stimulate transcription in a manner
synergistic with other transcription factors. We have examined this synergism or 
functional cooperativity between glucocorticoid receptors and basal transcription
factors in a variety of promoter and reporter gene contexts. A fragment
containing a hormone response element from mouse mammary tumor virus was fused to
well characterized promoters from the herpes virus thymidine kinase and mouse
beta-globin genes and to related mutant promoters altered by inactivation of
transcription factor-binding sites through point mutagenesis or deletion. These
constructs were transfected into glucocorticoid-sensitive fibroblasts, and
reporter gene activity was assessed with or without hormonal stimulation. In
contrast to previous studies, we found little indication of synergistic
interaction between elements mediating a hormone response and adjacent basal
promoters. In fact, we observed that inactivating basal factor-binding sites,
thereby decreasing promoter strength, actually increased hormone inducibility. We
suggest that the inverse relationship between basal promoter strength and the
induction ratio attained upon hormonal stimulation may be due to limitation of a 
common factor, an "adaptor" through which glucocorticoid receptor and basal
transcription factors interact with the components of the RNA polymerase II
complex to stimulate rates of transcription.

DOI: 10.1210/mend-5-5-619 
PMID: 2072921  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

