
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Sep 7;107(36):15910-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1002346107. Epub 2010 Aug 23.

Structure-based modeling of the functional HIV-1 intasome and its inhibition.

Krishnan L(1), Li X, Naraharisetty HL, Hare S, Cherepanov P, Engelman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The intasome is the basic recombination unit of retroviral integration,
comprising the integrase protein and the ends of the viral DNA made by reverse
transcription. Clinical inhibitors preferentially target the DNA-bound form of
integrase as compared with the free protein, highlighting the critical
requirement for detailed understanding of HIV-1 intasome structure and function. 
Although previous biochemical studies identified integrase residues that contact 
the DNA, structural details of protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions
within the functional intasome were lacking. The recent crystal structure of the 
prototype foamy virus (PFV) integrase-viral DNA complex revealed numerous details
of this related integration machine. Structures of drug-bound PFV intasomes
moreover elucidated the mechanism of inhibitor action. Herein we present a model 
for the HIV-1 intasome assembled using the PFV structure as template. Our results
pinpoint previously identified protein-DNA contacts within the quaternary
structure and reveal hitherto unknown roles for Arg20 and Lys266 in DNA binding
and integrase function. Models for clinical inhibitors bound at the HIV-1
integrase active site were also constructed and compared with previous studies.
Our findings highlight the structural basis for HIV-1 integration and define the 
mechanism of its inhibition, which should help in formulating new drugs to
inhibit viruses resistant to first-in-class compounds.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1002346107 
PMCID: PMC2936642
PMID: 20733078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

