
1. Biomed Environ Mass Spectrom. 1990 Nov;19(11):646-54.

Role of mass spectrometry in mapping strain variation and post-translational
modifications of viral proteins.

Gorman JJ(1), Corino GL, Shiell BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Commonwealth Scientific Industrial Research Organization, Australian Animal
Health Laboratory, Victoria.

Enzymatically derived fragments of the nucleocapsid protein from one strain (V4) 
of the paramyxovirus, New castle disease virus (NDV), have been aligned with the 
sequence deduced for a related strain (D26) by gene sequence analysis. This
process involved extensive use of fast atom bombardment (FAB) mass spectrometry
of unfractionated tryptic digests and fragments separated from tryptic or AspN
protease digests by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Amino acid
analysis and stepwise Edman degradation sequence analysis were used to complement
FAB mass spectral data or as alternatives where no ions were produced by FAB. The
nature of biosynthetic processing and blockage (acetylation) at the N-terminus of
the protein were confirmed using collision-induced dissociation. Data obtained by
direct analysis of the V4 nucleocapsid protein facilitated mapping of sequence
variations within the nucleocapsid protein of the antigenically distinct WA2116
strain of NDV. Most of the WA2116 protein was mapped by FAB mass spectrometric
analysis of HPLC fractions, thus amino acid analysis or stepwise sequence
analysis were only required where FAB mass spectral data were inconclusive or
indicated amino acid variations. This approach to comparison of NDV nucleocapsid 
proteins is proposed as a general strategy for mapping strain variation and
post-translational modifications of viral proteins.

DOI: 10.1002/bms.1200191104 
PMID: 2076463  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

