
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Dec 28;107(52):22687-92. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1012851108. Epub 2010 Dec 13.

CBP gene transfer increases BDNF levels and ameliorates learning and memory
deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Caccamo A(1), Maldonado MA, Bokov AF, Majumder S, Oddo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, and Barshop Institute for Longevity and Aging
Studies, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA.

Cognitive dysfunction and memory loss are common features of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). Abnormalities in the expression profile of immediate early genes that play 
a critical role in memory formation, such as the cAMP-response element binding
protein (CREB), have been reported in the brains of AD patients. Here we show
that amyloid-β (Aβ) accumulation, which plays a primary role in the cognitive
deficits of AD, interferes with CREB activity. We further show that restoring
CREB function via brain viral delivery of the CREB-binding protein (CBP) improves
learning and memory deficits in an animal model of AD. Notably, such improvements
occur without changes in Aβ and tau pathology, and instead are linked to an
increased level of brain-derived neurotrophic factor. The resulting data suggest 
that Aβ-induced learning and memory deficits are mediated by alterations in CREB 
function, based on the finding that restoring CREB activity by directly
modulating CBP levels in the brains of adult mice is sufficient to ameliorate
learning and memory. Therefore, increasing CBP expression in adult brains may be 
a valid therapeutic approach not only for AD, but also for various brain
disorders characterized by alterations in immediate early genes, further
supporting the concept that viral vector delivery may be a viable therapeutic
approach in neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1012851108 
PMCID: PMC3012497
PMID: 21149712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

