
1. Hepatology. 2011 May;53(5):1446-54. doi: 10.1002/hep.24263.

Estimating the net contribution of interleukin-28B variation to spontaneous
hepatitis C virus clearance.

di Iulio J(1), Ciuffi A, Fitzmaurice K, Kelleher D, Rotger M, Fellay J, Martinez 
R, Pulit S, Furrer H, Günthard HF, Battegay M, Bernasconi E, Schmid P, Hirschel
B, Barnes E, Klenerman P, Telenti A, Rauch A; Swiss HIV Cohort Study.

Collaborators: Battegay M, Bernasconi E, Boni J, Bucher H, Burgisser P, Calmy A, 
Cattacin S, Cavassini M, Dubs R, Egger M, Elzi L, Fischer M, Flepp M, Fontana A, 
Francioli P, Furrer H, Fux C, Gorgievski M, Gu H, Hirsch H, Hirschel B, Ho I,
Kahlert C, Kaiser L, Karrer U, Kind C, Klimkait T, Ledergerber B, Martinetti G,
Martinez B, Mu N, Nadal D, Opravil M, Paccaud F, Pantaleo G, Rauch A, Regenass S,
Rickenbach M, Rudin C, Schmid P, Schultze D, Schupbach J, Speck R, Taffe P,
Telenti A, Trkola A, Vernazza P, Weber R, Yerly S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, University Hospital Center, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland.

The identification of associations between interleukin-28B (IL-28B) variants and 
the spontaneous clearance of hepatitis C virus (HCV) raises the issues of
causality and the net contribution of host genetics to the trait. To estimate
more precisely the net effect of IL-28B genetic variation on HCV clearance, we
optimized genotyping and compared the host contributions in multiple- and
single-source cohorts to control for viral and demographic effects. The analysis 
included individuals with chronic or spontaneously cleared HCV infections from a 
multiple-source cohort (n = 389) and a single-source cohort (n = 71). We
performed detailed genotyping in the coding region of IL-28B and searched for
copy number variations to identify the genetic variant or haplotype carrying the 
strongest association with viral clearance. This analysis was used to compare the
effects of IL-28B variation in the two cohorts. Haplotypes characterized by
carriage of the major alleles at IL-28B single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
were highly overrepresented in individuals with spontaneous clearance versus
those with chronic HCV infections (66.1% versus 38.6%, P = 6 × 10(-9) ). The odds
ratios for clearance were 2.1 [95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.6-3.0] and 3.9
(95% CI = 1.5-10.2) in the multiple- and single-source cohorts, respectively.
Protective haplotypes were in perfect linkage (r(2) = 1.0) with a nonsynonymous
coding variant (rs8103142). Copy number variants were not detected.CONCLUSION: We
identified IL-28B haplotypes highly predictive of spontaneous HCV clearance. The 
high linkage disequilibrium between IL-28B SNPs indicates that association
studies need to be complemented by functional experiments to identify single
causal variants. The point estimate for the genetic effect was higher in the
single-source cohort, which was used to effectively control for viral diversity, 
sex, and coinfections and, therefore, offered a precise estimate of the net host 
genetic contribution.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.24263 
PMCID: PMC3128709
PMID: 21360716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

