
1. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 2;6(3):e16986. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016986.

Viral linkage in HIV-1 seroconverters and their partners in an HIV-1 prevention
clinical trial.

Campbell MS(1), Mullins JI, Hughes JP, Celum C, Wong KG, Raugi DN, Sorensen S,
Stoddard JN, Zhao H, Deng W, Kahle E, Panteleeff D, Baeten JM, McCutchan FE,
Albert J, Leitner T, Wald A, Corey L, Lingappa JR; Partners in Prevention HSV/HIV
Transmission Study Team.

Collaborators: Celum C, Wald A, Lingappa J, Baeten JM, Campbell MS, Coombs RW,
Corey L, Hughes JP, Magaret A, McElrath MJ, Morrow R, Mullins JI, Whittington WL,
Coetzee D, Fife K, Were E, Essex M, Makhema J, Katabira E, Ronald A, Allen S,
Kayitenkore K, Karita E, Bukusi E, Cohen C, Allen S, Kanweka W, Allen S, Vwalika 
B, Kapiga S, Manongi R, Farquhar C, John-Stewart G, Kiarie J, Allen S, Inambao M,
Delany-Moretlwe S, Rees H, de Bruyn G, Gray G, McIntyre J, Mugo NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, 
Washington, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Characterization of viruses in HIV-1 transmission pairs will help
identify biological determinants of infectiousness and evaluate candidate
interventions to reduce transmission. Although HIV-1 sequencing is frequently
used to substantiate linkage between newly HIV-1 infected individuals and their
sexual partners in epidemiologic and forensic studies, viral sequencing is seldom
applied in HIV-1 prevention trials. The Partners in Prevention HSV/HIV
Transmission Study (ClinicalTrials.gov #NCT00194519) was a prospective randomized
placebo-controlled trial that enrolled serodiscordant heterosexual couples to
determine the efficacy of genital herpes suppression in reducing HIV-1
transmission; as part of the study analysis, HIV-1 sequences were examined for
genetic linkage between seroconverters and their enrolled partners.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We obtained partial consensus HIV-1 env and gag
sequences from blood plasma for 151 transmission pairs and performed deep
sequencing of env in some cases. We analyzed sequences with phylogenetic
techniques and developed a Bayesian algorithm to evaluate the probability of
linkage. For linkage, we required monophyletic clustering between enrolled
partners' sequences and a Bayesian posterior probability of â‰¥ 50%. Adjudicators
classified each seroconversion, finding 108 (71.5%) linked, 40 (26.5%) unlinked, 
and 3 (2.0%) indeterminate transmissions, with linkage determined by consensus
env sequencing in 91 (84%). Male seroconverters had a higher frequency of
unlinked transmissions than female seroconverters. The likelihood of transmission
from the enrolled partner was related to time on study, with increasing numbers
of unlinked transmissions occurring after longer observation periods. Finally,
baseline viral load was found to be significantly higher among linked
transmitters.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In this first use of HIV-1 sequencing to establish
endpoints in a large clinical trial, more than one-fourth of transmissions were
unlinked to the enrolled partner, illustrating the relevance of these methods in 
the design of future HIV-1 prevention trials in serodiscordant couples. A
hierarchy of sequencing techniques, analysis methods, and expert adjudication
contributed to the linkage determination process.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016986 
PMCID: PMC3047537
PMID: 21399681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

