
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19664. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019664. Epub 2011 May 26.

Tim-3 negatively regulates IL-12 expression by monocytes in HCV infection.

Zhang Y(1), Ma CJ, Wang JM, Ji XJ, Wu XY, Jia ZS, Moorman JP, Yao ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, James H.
Quillen College of Medicine, East Tennessee State University, Johnson City,
Tennessee, United States of America.

T cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain-containing protein 3 (Tim-3) is a newly
identified negative immunomodulator that is up-regulated on dysfunctional T cells
during viral infections. The expression and function of Tim-3 on human innate
immune responses during HCV infection, however, remains poorly characterized. In 
this study, we report that Tim-3 is constitutively expressed on human resting
CD14(+) monocyte/macrophages (M/M(Ø)) and functions as a cap to block IL-12, a
key pro-inflammatory cytokine linking innate and adaptive immune responses. Tim-3
expression is significantly reduced and IL-12 expression increased upon
stimulation with Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) ligand--lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and
TLR7/8 ligand--R848. Notably, Tim-3 is over-expressed on un-stimulated as well as
TLR-stimulated M/M(Ø), which is inversely associated with the diminished IL-12
expression in chronically HCV-infected individuals when compared to healthy
subjects. Up-regulation of Tim-3 and inhibition of IL-12 are also observed in
M/M(Ø) incubated with HCV-expressing hepatocytes, as well as in primary M/M(Ø) or
monocytic THP-1 cells incubated with HCV core protein, an effect that mimics the 
function of complement C1q and is reversible by blocking the HCV core/gC1qR
interaction. Importantly, blockade of Tim-3 signaling significantly rescues
HCV-mediated inhibition of IL-12, which is primarily expressed by Tim-3 negative 
M/M(Ø). Tim-3 blockade reduces HCV core-mediated expression of the negative
immunoregulators PD-1 and SOCS-1 and increases STAT-1 phosphorylation.
Conversely, blocking PD-1 or silencing SOCS-1 gene expression also decreases
Tim-3 expression and enhances IL-12 secretion and STAT-1 phosphorylation. These
findings suggest that Tim-3 plays a crucial role in negative regulation of innate
immune responses, through crosstalk with PD-1 and SOCS-1 and limiting STAT-1
phosphorylation, and may be a novel target for immunotherapy to HCV infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019664 
PMCID: PMC3102652
PMID: 21637332  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

