
1. J Interferon Res. 1990 Aug;10(4):435-46.

Sequential enrichment and immunocytochemical visualization of human
interferon-alpha-producing cells.

Feldman M(1), Fitzgerald-Bocarsly P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey-New Jersey Medical School, Newark 07103.

Human HLA-DR+ peripheral mononuclear cells (PBMC) produce interferon-alpha
(IFN-alpha) in response to herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) or HSV-1-infected 
fibroblasts (HSV-FS). We have developed a protocol, based partly on a technique
known to enrich for dendritic cells, that allows for a greater than 125-fold
enrichment of these IFN-alpha-producing cells. Nylon wood nonadherent PBMC (NWNA)
were fractionated on a 48% Percoll gradient into low-density (LD) and
high-density (HD) populations. The LD cells were 10- to 30-fold enriched for the 
production of IFN-alpha compared to PBMC when stimulated with HSV-FS. LD cells
were treated further to deplete any contaminating monocytes, CD3+ T cells and
CD56+ natural killer (NK) cells. The resulting population (CD3/CD56-depleted)
produced approximately 30,000 IU/ml IFN-alpha compared to 3,000-10,000 IU/ml for 
the corresponding LD cells and 30-300 IU/ml for PBMC. Immunocytochemistry to
detect cytoplasmic IFN-alpha indicated that PBMC, NWNA, HD, LD, and
CD3/CD56-depleted populations contained an average of less than 0.1%, 0.3%, less 
than 0.1%, 3%, and 12% IFN-alpha-producing cells, respectively. The cells
responsible for IFN-alpha production in response to HSV-1 were of medium to large
diameter and possessed eccentric nuclei that were often indented, with lightly
staining perinuclear areas. The CD3/CD56-depleted populations were fivefold
enriched for HLA-DR+ cells. This enrichment procedure partially overcomes the
barrier of low frequency that has contributed to the elusive identification of
these cells.

DOI: 10.1089/jir.1990.10.435 
PMID: 2172409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

