
1. Vaccine. 2011 Oct 19;29(45):7936-41. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.08.070. Epub
2011 Aug 25.

In-depth process understanding of RECOMBIVAX HB® maturation and potential epitope
improvements with redox treatment: multifaceted biochemical and immunochemical
characterization.

Zhao Q(1), Towne V, Brown M, Wang Y, Abraham D, Oswald CB, Gimenez JA, Washabaugh
MW, Kennedy R, Sitrin RD.

Author information: 
(1)Merck Research Laboratories, Merck & Co, Inc., West Point, PA 19486, USA.
qinjian_zhao@merck.com

Recombinant Hepatitis B surface antigen virus-like particles (VLPs) produced in
yeast undergo spontaneous maturation during the vaccine production process, and
the biophysical characteristics of the particles with respect to maturation were 
described in Zhao et al. (2006) [13]. Here we report additional biochemical and
immunochemical characterization by various techniques, including the use of a
panel of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) that differ in their selectivity and
conformation-sensitivity, for probing surface epitope structures. Crosslinking
via interchain disulfide formation and binding of conformational specific
antibodies in the mature particles were shown to be progressively enhanced. We
show that redox-mediated VLP maturation is superior to heat-induced maturation in
terms of generating VLPs which exhibit more complete crosslinking (>95%) and 2-
to 3-fold higher antigenicity as defined by conformational antibodies. Therefore,
the resulting VLPs from redox treatment resemble more closely their
plasma-derived counterparts. The value of using multiple mAbs for probing surface
epitopes was clearly demonstrated as different mAbs showed different degrees of
sensitivity to the structural changes during HBsAg VLP maturation. The rapid,
label-free technology of surface plasmon resonance performed at a single antigen 
concentration was shown to correlate well with a sandwich ELISA using parallel
line analysis, currently implemented for product release and stability testing of
RECOMBIVAX HB(®). Surface plasmon resonance offers both convenience and
flexibility; multiple mAbs can be tested one at a time in the same set of
experiments, providing a means to assess changes to individual epitopes. Taken
together, these quantitative analytical tools enable more rapid, in-depth, and
comprehensive process monitoring, process optimization, and assessment of product
consistency and stability.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.08.070 
PMID: 21871939  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

