
1. FEBS J. 2011 Nov;278(21):4100-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08316.x. Epub
2011 Sep 23.

Biological characteristics of two lysines on human serum albumin in the
high-affinity binding of 4Z,15Z-bilirubin-IXα revealed by phage display.

Minomo A(1), Ishima Y, Kragh-Hansen U, Chuang VT, Uchida M, Taguchi K, Watanabe
H, Maruyama T, Morioka H, Otagiri M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

4Z,15Z-bilirubin-IXα (4Z,15Z-BR), an endogenous compound that is sparingly
soluble in water, binds human serum albumin (HSA) with high affinity in a
flexible manner. A phage library displaying recombinant HSA domain II was
constructed, after three rounds of panning against immobilized 4Z,15Z-BR, and
eight clones with high affinity for the pigment were found to contain conserved
basic residues, such as lysine or arginine, at positions 195 and 199. The wild
type and two mutants, K195A and K199A, of whole HSA as well as stand-alone domain
II were expressed in Pichia pastoris for ligand-binding studies. The binding of
4Z,15Z-BR to the K195A and K199A mutants was decreased in both whole HSA and the 
domain II proteins. The P-helicity conformer (P-form) of 4Z,15Z-BR was found to
preferentially bind to the wild types and the K195A mutants, whereas the M-form
bound to the K199A mutants. Photoconversion experiments showed that the P-form of
4Z,15Z-BR was transformed into highly water-soluble isomers at a much faster rate
than the M-form. In addition, the M-form of 4Z,15Z-BR showed higher affinity for 
domain I than for domain II. The present findings suggest that, whereas both
Lys195 and Lys199 in subdomain IIA are important for the high-affinity binding of
4Z,15Z-BR, Lys199 plays a more prominent role in the elimination of 4Z,15Z-BR.

© 2011 The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08316.x 
PMID: 21883930  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

