
1. J Neurol Sci. 2011 Dec 15;311(1-2):98-102. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.09.001. Epub
2011 Oct 1.

Herpesvirus active replication in multiple sclerosis: a genetic control?

Garcia-Montojo M(1), Martinez A, De Las Heras V, Dominguez-Mozo MI, Cenit Mdel C,
López-Cavanillas M, Garcia-Martinez A, Arias-Leal AM, Gomez de la Concha E,
Urcelay E, Arroyo R, Alvarez-Lafuente R.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid 28040, Spain.

Although the etiology of multiple sclerosis (MS) is unknown, it is generally
believed that genetic, immunologic, and environmental factors are involved. The
objectives of this study were: 1. to analyze if a genetic control could explain
why HHV-6 would be able to actively replicate in a subset of MS patients but not 
in controls; 2. to study if MS patients with HHV-6 active replication are
clinically different from those without HHV-6 active replication. A total of 195 
MS patients and 195 controls were analyzed for two SNPs at the MHC2TA locus and
two SNPs at the CD46 locus. Furthermore, the MS cohort was analyzed by PCR for
the detection of HHV-6 genomes in five serum samples collected every six months
along two-year follow-up. We found that 59/195 (30.2%) MS patients had at least
one HHV-6 positive serum sample. No statistical significant difference was found 
for the two genes when the comparison was made between MS patients and controls; 
however, a statistical significance was found for the two polymorphisms of MHC2TA
when we compared MS patients with active replication and controls (p=0.0000004
for rs4774C and p=0.011 for rs3087456G). Furthermore, increased significant
differences were found for MHC2TA and CD46 when we compared interferon beta
responders and non-responders within MS patients. In conclusion, we describe a
gene-environment interaction in MS patients between HHV-6 and MHC2TA and CD46
that should be further studied to clarify if that interaction could be a genetic 
control. The results show that MS patients without HHV-6 active replication are
better responders to interferon beta treatment than those with HHV-6 active
replication.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.09.001 
PMID: 21962857  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

