
1. Med Health Care Philos. 2012 Aug;15(3):337-46. doi: 10.1007/s11019-011-9351-y.

On decoding and rewriting genomes: a psychoanalytical reading of a scientific
revolution.

Zwart H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science, Institute for Science, Innovation and Society, Radboud
University Nijmegen, P.O. Box 9010, 6500 GL Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
h.zwart@science.ru.nl

In various documents the view emerges that contemporary biotechnosciences are
currently experiencing a scientific revolution: a massive increase of pace, scale
and scope. A significant part of the research endeavours involved in this
scientific upheaval is devoted to understanding and, if possible, ameliorating
humankind: from our genomes up to our bodies and brains. New developments in
contemporary technosciences, such as synthetic biology and other genomics and
"post-genomics" fields, tend to blur the distinctions between prevention, therapy
and enhancement. An important dimension of this development is "biomimesis": i.e.
the tendency of novel technologies and materials to mimic or plagiarize nature on
a molecular and microscopic level in order to optimise prospects for the
embedding of technological artefacts in natural systems such as human bodies and 
brains. In this paper, these developments are read and assessed from a
psychoanalytical perspective. Three key concepts from psychoanalysis are used to 
come to terms with what is happening in research laboratories today. After
assessing the general profile of the current revolution in this manner, I will
focus on a particular case study, a line of research that may serve as
exemplification of the vicissitudes of contemporary technosciences, namely viral 
biomaterials. Viral life forms can be genetically modified (their genomes can be 
rewritten) in such a manner that they may be inserted in human bodies in order to
produce substances at specific sites such as hormones (testosterone),
neurotransmitters (dopamine), enzymes (insulin) or bone and muscle tissue.
Notably, certain target groups such as top athletes, soldiers or patients
suffering from degenerative diseases may become the pioneers serving as research 
subjects for novel applications. The same technologies can be used for various
purposes ranging from therapy up to prevention and enhancement.

DOI: 10.1007/s11019-011-9351-y 
PMCID: PMC3384779
PMID: 21968838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

