
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2012 Jan;32(1):211-8. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2011.10.021.
Epub 2011 Oct 29.

Molecular characterization and expression analysis of interferon regulatory
factor 5 (IRF-5) in turbot, Scophthalmus maximus.

Xia J(1), Hu GB, Dong XZ, Liu QM, Zhang SC.

Author information: 
(1)College of Marine Life Sciences, Ocean University of China, 5# Yushan Road,
Qingdao 266003, China.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF-5) plays a role both in the antiviral and
inflammatory responses. In this study, we described the structure, mRNA tissue
distribution and regulation of an IRF-5 gene from turbot, Scophthalmus maximus
(SmIRF-5). The gene sequence of SmIRF-5 is 4275 bp long, composed of 9 exons and 
8 introns similar to known IRF-5 genes of vertebrates, and encodes a peptide of
487 amino acids. The deduced protein sequence shares the highest identity of
∼60-70% with fish IRF-5 and possesses a DNA-binding domain (DBD), a middle region
(MR), an IRF association domain (IAD) and a virus activated domain (VAD) known to
be important for the functions of IRF-5 in mammals. Phylogenetic analysis grouped
SmIRF-5 with other IRF-5s of vertebrates. SmIRF-5 transcripts were detectable in 
a wide range of tissue types of healthy fish with higher levels observed in the
head kidney, kidney and spleen. The SmIRF-5 was transcriptionally up-regulated by
turbot reddish body iridovirus (TRBIV) but not by polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid
(poly I:C) in the gills, head kidney, spleen and muscle. Both the highest
inducibility and earliest induction of SmIRF-5 expression were observed in the
spleen where it reached a maximum level at day 1 after infection, prior to that
of turbot Mx. These findings may help to better understand the roles of SmIRF-5
in antiviral response.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2011.10.021 
PMID: 22062122  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

