
1. J Virol. 2012 Feb;86(3):1589-607. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05754-11. Epub 2011 Nov 30.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus latency-associated nuclear antigen and
angiogenin interact with common host proteins, including annexin A2, which is
essential for survival of latently infected cells.

Paudel N(1), Sadagopan S, Balasubramanian S, Chandran B.

Author information: 
(1)H. M. Bligh Cancer Research Laboratories, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and 
Science, North Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) infection and latency-associated
nuclear antigen (LANA-1) upregulate the multifunctional protein angiogenin (ANG).
Our studies demonstrate that silencing ANG or inhibiting its nuclear
translocation downregulates KSHV LANA-1 expression and ANG is necessary for KSHV 
latency, anti-apoptosis and angiogenesis (Sadagopan et al., J. Virol.
83:3342-3364, 2009; Sadagopan et al., J Virol. 85:2666-2685, 2011). Here we show 
that LANA-1 interacts with ANG and colocalizes in latently infected endothelial
telomerase-immortalized human umbilical vein endothelial (TIVE-LTC) cells. Mass
spectrometric analyses of TIVE-LTC proteins immunoprecipitated by anti-LANA-1 and
ANG antibodies identified 28 common cellular proteins such as ribosomal proteins,
structural proteins, tRNA synthetases, metabolic pathway enzymes, chaperons,
transcription factors, antioxidants, and ubiquitin proteosome proteins. LANA-1
and ANG interaction with one of the proteins, annexin A2, was validated. Annexin 
A2 has been shown to play roles in cell proliferation, apoptosis, plasmin
generation, exocytosis, endocytosis, and cytoskeleton reorganization. It is also 
known to associate with glycolytic enzyme 3-phosphoglyceratekinase in the primer 
recognition protein (PRP) complex that interacts with DNA polymerase α in the
lagging strand of DNA during replication. A higher level of annexin A2 is
expressed in KSHV+ but not in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)+ B-lymphoma cell lines.
Annexin A2 colocalized with several LANA-1 punctate spots in KSHV+ body cavity
B-cell lymphoma (BCBL-1) cells. In triple-staining analyses, we observed annexin 
A2-ANG-LANA-1, annexin A2-ANG, and ANG-LANA-1 colocalizations. Annexin A2
appeared as punctate nuclear dots in LANA-1-positive TIVE-LTC cells. In
LANA-1-negative TIVE-LTC cells, annexin A2 was detected predominately in the
cytoplasm, with some nuclear spots, and colocalization with ANG was observed
mostly in the cytoplasm. Annexin A2 coimmunoprecipitated with LANA-1 and ANG in
TIVE-LTC and BCBL-1 cells and with ANG in 293T cells independent of LANA-1. This 
suggested that annexin A2 forms a complex with LANA-1 and ANG as well as a
separate complex with ANG. Silencing annexin A2 in BCBL-1 cells resulted in
significant cell death, downregulation of cell cycle-associated Cdk6 and of
cyclin D, E, and A proteins, and downregulation of LANA-1 and ANG expression. No 
effect was seen in KSHV⁻ lymphoma (BJAB and Ramos) and 293T cells. These studies 
suggest that LANA-1 association with annexin A2/ANG could be more important than 
ANG association with annexin A2, and KSHV probably uses annexin A2 to maintain
the viability and cell cycle regulation of latently infected cells. Since the
identified LANA-1- and ANG-interacting common cellular proteins are hitherto
unknown to KSHV and ANG biology, this offers a starting point for further
analysis of their roles in KSHV biology, which may lead to identification of
potential therapeutic targets to control KSHV latency and associated
malignancies.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.05754-11 
PMCID: PMC3264333
PMID: 22130534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

