
1. J Gen Virol. 1990 Oct;71 ( Pt 10):2243-9.

Nucleotide sequence and evolutionary relationships of cucumber mosaic virus (CMV)
strains: CMV RNA 3.

Owen J(1), Shintaku M, Aeschleman P, Ben Tahar S, Palukaitis P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853.

The nucleotide sequence of RNA 3 of two subgroup I strains of cucumber mosaic
virus (CMV), Fny-CMV and M-CMV, was determined and compared at both the nucleic
acid and protein level with the previously determined, corresponding (partial)
sequences of RNA 3 of five other subgroup I strains: C-CMV, D-CMV, I17F-CMV,
O-CMV and Y-CMV. Fny-CMV RNA 3 is composed of 2216 nucleotides (nt) and M-CMV RNA
3 2214 nt. Both RNAs contain two open reading frames, the 3a gene and the coat
protein gene. These RNAs showed very little nucleotide sequence divergence,
either from each other or from the five other subgroup I strains. The nucleotide 
sequence variation observed was two to 13 differences in the 120 to 123 nt 5'
non-translated regions, six to 17 differences in the 840 nt 3a genes, two to 15
differences in the 296 to 299 nt intergenic regions, three to 25 differences in
the 657 nt coat protein genes and two to 10 differences in the 299 to 303 nt 3'
non-translated regions. Protein sequence similarity was also high, with one to
four differences in the 279 amino acids of the 3a proteins and two to 13
differences in the 218 amino acids of the coat proteins. Limited nucleotide
sequence variation among nine strains of CMV was also shown using an RNA
protection assay and a probe specific for Fny-CMV RNA 3. The limited variation
shown by RNA 3 of strains of CMV with different passage histories, isolated in
different countries over a 50 year period, suggests that the maintenance of the
highly conserved nucleotide sequence may be important for other viral RNA
functions or interactions.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-71-10-2243 
PMID: 2230731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

