
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Nov;10(11):5736-46.

On the mechanism for efficient repression of the interleukin-6 promoter by
glucocorticoids: enhancer, TATA box, and RNA start site (Inr motif) occlusion.

Ray A(1), LaForge KS, Sehgal PB.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10021-6399.

The feedback inhibition of interleukin-6 (IL-6) gene expression by
glucocorticoids represents a regulatory link between the endocrine and immune
systems. The mechanism of the efficient repression of the IL-6 promoter by
dexamethasone (Dex) was investigated in HeLa cells transiently transfected with
plasmid constructs containing different IL-6 promoter elements linked to the
herpesvirus thymidine kinase gene (tk) promoter and the bacterial chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase gene (cat) and cotransfected with cDNA vectors constitutively
expressing either the active wild-type or inactive mutant human glucocorticoid
receptor (GR). The induction by interleukin-1, tumor necrosis factor, phorbol
ester, or forskolin of IL-6-tk-cat chimeric constructs containing a single copy
of the IL-6 DNA segment from -173 to -151 (MRE I) or from -158 to -145 (MRE II), 
which derive from within the multiple cytokine- and second-messenger-responsive
enhancer (MRE) region, was strongly repressed by Dex in a wild-type GR-dependent 
fashion irrespective of the inducer used. The induction by pseudorabies virus of 
an IL-6 construct containing the IL-6 TATA box and the RNA start site
("initiator" or Inr element) but not the MRE region was also repressed by Dex in 
the presence of wild-type GR. DNase I footprinting showed that the purified
DNA-binding fragment of GR bound across the MRE, the TATA box, and the Inr site
in the IL-6 promoter; this footprint overlapped that produced by proteins present
in nuclear extracts from uninduced or induced HeLa cells. Imperfect palindromic
nucleotide sequence motifs moderately related to the consensus GR-responsive
element (GRE) motif were present at the Inr, the TATA box, and the MRE II site in
the IL-6 promoter; although MRE I and a GR-binding site between -201 and -210 in 
IL-6 both lacked a discernible inverted repeat motif, their sequences showed
considerable similarity with negative GRE sequences in other Dex-repressed genes.
Surprisingly, chimeric genes containing MRE II, which lacks a recognizable
GACGTCA cyclic AMP- and phorbol ester-responsive motif, were strongly induced by 
both phorbol ester and forskolin, suggesting that MRE II (ACATTGCACAATCT) may be 
the prototype of a novel cyclic AMP- and phorbol ester-responsive element. Taken 
together, these observations suggest that ligand-activated GR represses the IL-6 
gene by occlusion not only of the inducible IL-6 MRE enhancer region but also of 
the basal IL-6 promoter elements.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.10.11.5736 
PMCID: PMC361346
PMID: 2233715  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

