
1. Tissue Cell. 2012 Jun;44(3):137-42. doi: 10.1016/j.tice.2011.11.007. Epub 2012
Mar 3.

Characterization of a new insect cell line that is derived from the neonate
larvae of Papilio xuthus (Lepidoptera: Papilionidae) and its susceptibility to
AcNPV.

Zhang X(1), Feng Y, Ding WF, Chen XM, Wang CY, Ma T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Resource Insects, Chinese Academy of Forestry, The Key
Laboratory of Cultivating and Utilization of Resource Insects of State Forestry
Administration, Kunming 650224, Yunnan, China.

The cell line RIRI-PX1 was established from neonate larval tissues of Papilio
xuthus by performing primary cultures in the modified Grace medium that was
supplemented with 20% fetal bovine serum (FBS). The cell line primarily consisted
of spindle-shaped and spherical cells which attached themselves to the flask. The
population-doubling times (PDTs) at the 50th and 60th passage were 42.5 h and
42.1 h respectively. The average chromosome numbers of RIRI-PX1 cell line from
passage 5 to passage 50 ranged from 103 to 199. It was confirmed that RIRI-PX1
cell line was derived from P. xuthus by comparing the mitochondrial cytochrome c 
oxidase subunit I gene (COI) of RIRI-PX1 cells and P. xuthus eggs. This cell line
was susceptible to the Autographa californica nucleopolyhedrovirus (AcNPV) and
produced high yield of polyhedral occlusion bodies (43.9OBs/cell) after 10 days
of infection by AcNPV. The virus titer of AcNPV infected RIRI-PX1 cells was
3.25×10⁷ TCID₅₀/ml. We concluded that the RIRI-PX1 cell line is established from 
the neonate larvae tissues successfully and the cells of the cell line are
sensitive to AcNPV.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tice.2011.11.007 
PMID: 22386749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

