
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Feb;97(3):1141-7. doi: 10.1007/s00253-012-3992-5.
Epub 2012 Mar 16.

Role and fate of SP100 protein in response to Rep-dependent nonviral integration 
system.

Xue YY(1), Wang R, Yue YB, Xue JL, Chen JZ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433, People's Republic of China.

Previously, we studied an AAVS1 site-specific non-viral integration system with a
Rep-donor plasmid and a plasmid containing adeno-associated virus integration
element. Our earlier study focused on the plasmid vector itself, but the cellular
response to the system was still unknown. SP100 is a member of the promyelocytic 
leukemia nuclear bodies. It is involved in many cellular processes such as
transcriptional regulation and the cellular intrinsic immune response against
viral infection. In this study, we revealed that SP100 inhibited the
Rep-dependent nonviral integration. Conversely, transient expression of Rep78
increased the degradation of SP100. This degradation was inhibited by treatment
with MG132, an inhibitor of the ubiquitin proteasome. SP100 and Rep78 are both
located in the nucleolus, which provides the spatial possibility for their
interaction. Rep78 was coimmunoprecipitated with the enhanced green fluorescent
protein (EGFP)-SP100 fusion protein but not EGFP, which verified the interaction 
between Rep78 and SP100. These results have enriched our knowledge about the
cellular protein SP100 and Rep-dependent nonviral integration. It may lead to an 
improvement in the application of Rep-related transgene integration method and in
the selection of target cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-012-3992-5 
PMID: 22419217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

