
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35888. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035888. Epub 2012 Apr 27.

CRISPR interference directs strand specific spacer acquisition.

Swarts DC(1), Mosterd C, van Passel MW, Brouns SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology, Department of Agrotechnology and Food Sciences,
Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: CRISPR/Cas is a widespread adaptive immune system in prokaryotes.
This system integrates short stretches of DNA derived from invading nucleic acids
into genomic CRISPR loci, which function as memory of previously encountered
invaders. In Escherichia coli, transcripts of these loci are cleaved into small
RNAs and utilized by the Cascade complex to bind invader DNA, which is then
likely degraded by Cas3 during CRISPR interference.
RESULTS: We describe how a CRISPR-activated E. coli K12 is cured from a high copy
number plasmid under non-selective conditions in a CRISPR-mediated way. Cured
clones integrated at least one up to five anti-plasmid spacers in genomic CRISPR 
loci. New spacers are integrated directly downstream of the leader sequence. The 
spacers are non-randomly selected to target protospacers with an AAG protospacer 
adjacent motif, which is located directly upstream of the protospacer. A
co-occurrence of PAM deviations and CRISPR repeat mutations was observed,
indicating that one nucleotide from the PAM is incorporated as the last
nucleotide of the repeat during integration of a new spacer. When multiple
spacers were integrated in a single clone, all spacer targeted the same strand of
the plasmid, implying that CRISPR interference caused by the first integrated
spacer directs subsequent spacer acquisition events in a strand specific manner.
CONCLUSIONS: The E. coli Type I-E CRISPR/Cas system provides resistance against
bacteriophage infection, but also enables removal of residing plasmids. We
established that there is a positive feedback loop between active spacers in a
cluster--in our case the first acquired spacer--and spacers acquired thereafter, 
possibly through the use of specific DNA degradation products of the CRISPR
interference machinery by the CRISPR adaptation machinery. This loop enables a
rapid expansion of the spacer repertoire against an actively present DNA element 
that is already targeted, amplifying the CRISPR interference effect.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035888 
PMCID: PMC3338789
PMID: 22558257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

