
1. AIDS Care. 2012;24(9):1145-9. doi: 10.1080/09540121.2012.687818. Epub 2012 Jun 7.

Knowledge of HIV transmission through breast milk among drug-dependent pregnant
women.

Zur J(1), Dunne E, Rose J, Latimer W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. jzur@jhsph.edu

Abstract The current study examined the correlates of knowledge about human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) transmission through breast milk among
drug-dependent pregnant women. There is a tremendous need to examine the
knowledge about HIV transmission through breastfeeding among this largely
understudied, but high-risk subset of pregnant women in order to minimize the
extent to which they pass HIV to their children after giving birth. Participants 
included 97 pregnant women from Baltimore, MD, USA. Prevalence of drug use over
the last 6 months included 37.1% reporting smoking marijuana, 36.1% injecting
heroin, and 67.0% smoking crack. When asked whether HIV could be transmitted
through breast milk, 72 women (74.2%) answered correctly. Our results indicate
that the overall knowledge about transmission through breast milk is relatively
low. Furthermore, participants who smoked crack during the past 6 months and
participants who were white were significantly less likely to have correct
knowledge about this topic. Our findings have important implications with regard 
to preventive interventions for this population. Future research is needed to
determine how to best modify these interventions to address the specific needs of
drug-dependent pregnant women, and how to specifically target white women and
women who smoke crack.

DOI: 10.1080/09540121.2012.687818 
PMCID: PMC6413874
PMID: 22670707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

