
1. Methods. 2013 Feb;59(2):249-57. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2012.05.010. Epub 2012 Jun
8.

Study of hepatitis C virus entry in genetically humanized mice.

Dorner M(1), Rice CM, Ploss A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Study of Hepatitis C, Laboratory for Virology and Infectious
Disease, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Approximately 2% of the world's population is chronically infected with hepatitis
C virus (HCV). Chronic hepatitis C can culminate in end stage liver disease and
liver cancer if the infection is untreated. Current therapy is only partially
effective and a vaccine for HCV does not exist. Since the discovery of HCV as the
etiologic agent causing hepatitis C several experimental tools have been
developed which have improved our understanding of the viral life cycle and the
interaction of HCV with human cells. However, it remains challenging to study HCV
infection in its native liver environment given its narrow species tropism,
limited to humans and chimpanzees. Mice can be rendered susceptible to HCV
infection by transplanting human hepatocytes into immunocompromized liver injury 
strains. Such human liver chimeric mice are useful as a challenge model for human
hepatotropic pathogens but their utility is hampered by their inability to mount 
functional immune responses and practical aspects including high costs, low
throughput, and donor-to-donor variability. The barriers that restrict HCV
species tropism are incompletely understood. We have previously shown that
expression of human CD81 and human OCLN is required for HCV uptake into mouse
cells. This led to the construction of a genetically humanized mouse model for
HCV infection. Here, we provide a detailed protocol for the generation of these
animals and highlight some of its applications for studying HCV biology and
preclinical testing of drug and vaccine candidates.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2012.05.010 
PMCID: PMC3652663
PMID: 22687621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

