
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2012 Oct;50(10):3216-21. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00538-12. Epub 2012
Jul 18.

Respiratory virus detection in immunocompromised patients with FilmArray
respiratory panel compared to conventional methods.

Hammond SP(1), Gagne LS, Stock SR, Marty FM, Gelman RS, Marasco WA, Poritz MA,
Baden LR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA,
USA. shammond2@partners.org

Respiratory virus infections cause significant morbidity and mortality in
immunocompromised patients. Timely diagnosis is needed to provide optimal
clinical care. Diagnostic tests routinely available at most institutions are
limited by poor sensitivity and a slow turnaround time. We collected 90
respiratory samples from 87 immunocompromised patients (56 bronchoalveolar lavage
and 34 nasopharyngeal aspirate samples) in order to compare the performance of
routine respiratory virus testing available at our institution to the FilmArray
respiratory panel assay, a novel diagnostic tool which utilizes multiplex PCR to 
test for 21 respiratory pathogens with a 1-h turnaround time. Samples with
discordant results and 13 samples with concordant results underwent further
verification testing by laboratory-developed real-time PCR. The FilmArray assay
identified viral pathogens in more samples than did clinical testing (30/90
versus 16/90; McNemar P = 0.001). Most of the additional viral pathogens
identified by the FilmArray respiratory panel assay that were confirmed by
verification testing were pathogens not assessed by routine clinical tests,
including rhinovirus/enterovirus, human metapneumovirus, and coronavirus. The
FilmArray respiratory panel assay allowed for increased identification of
respiratory viral pathogens in this cohort of immunocompromised patients.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00538-12 
PMCID: PMC3457462
PMID: 22814461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

