
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e41578. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041578. Epub 2012 Aug 1.

Dynamic modulation of DNA replication and gene transcription in deep-sea
filamentous phage SW1 in response to changes of host growth and temperature.

Jian H(1), Xu J, Xiao X, Wang F.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.

Little is known about the response of deep-sea virus and their relationship with 
their host towards environmental change. Although viruses are thought to play key
roles in the deep-sea ecological evolution and biogeochemical cycling, these
roles are yet to be defined. This study aims to delineate the relationship
between a deep-sea filamentous phage SW1 and its host Shewanella piezotolerans
(S. piezotolerans) WP3, and their response towards temperature change. The copy
number of SW1's replicative form (RF-) DNA and single-stranded (ss-) DNA along
the different growth phases of WP3 were quantified at 20°C and 4°C, respectively.
The copy number of SW1 RF-DNA was found to be temperature and growth
phase-dependent, while the ssDNA of SW1 was only produced at 4°C. This is the
first report showing low-temperature dependence of phage DNA replication. The
transcription of SW1 key genes fpsA and fpsR were also found to be induced at low
temperature during all the monitored growth periods of WP3. Additionally, the
transcription of SW1 was found to be induced by cold-shock while its DNA
replication was not changed. Our data demonstrates a dynamic change of virus DNA 
replication and transcription in accordance with host growth, and the low
temperature adapted mechanisms for SW1 activities in the deep sea. This low
temperature adapted deep-sea virus-bacterium system could serve as an ideal model
to further study the mechanism and relationship of deep-sea virus-bacteria
ecosystems.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041578 
PMCID: PMC3411601
PMID: 22870232  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

