
1. Math Biosci Eng. 2012 Jul;9(3):461-85. doi: 10.3934/mbe.2012.9.461.

Stochastic models for competing species with a shared pathogen.

Allen LJ(1), Bokil VA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX
79409-1042, United States. lallen@math.ttu.edu

The presence of a pathogen among multiple competing species has important
ecological implications. For example, a pathogen may change the competitive
outcome, resulting in replacement of a native species by a non-native species.
Alternately, if a pathogen becomes established, there may be a drastic reduction 
in species numbers. Stochastic variability in the birth, death and pathogen
transmission processes plays an important role in determining the success of
species or pathogen invasion. We investigate these phenomena while studying the
dynamics of deterministic and stochastic models for n competing species with a
shared pathogen. The deterministic model is a system of ordinary differential
equations for n competing species in which a single shared pathogen is
transmitted among the n species. There is no immunity from infection, individuals
either die or recover and become immediately susceptible, an SIS disease model.
Analytical results about pathogen persistence or extinction are summarized for
the deterministic model for two and three species and new results about stability
of the infection-free state and invasion by one species of a system of n-1
species are obtained. New stochastic models are derived in the form of
continuous-time Markov chains and stochastic differential equations. Branching
process theory is applied to the continuous-time Markov chain model to estimate
probabilities for pathogen extinction or species invasion. Finally, numerical
simulations are conducted to explore the effect of disease on two-species
competition, to illustrate some of the analytical results and to highlight some
of the differences in the stochastic and deterministic models.

DOI: 10.3934/mbe.2012.9.461 
PMID: 22881022  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

