
1. Vaccine. 2012 Oct 12;30(46):6564-72. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.08.046. Epub
2012 Aug 31.

Strain impact on equine herpesvirus type 1 (EHV-1) abortion models: viral loads
in fetal and placental tissues and foals.

Gardiner DW(1), Lunn DP, Goehring LS, Chiang YW, Cook C, Osterrieder N, McCue P, 
Del Piero F, Hussey SB, Hussey GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO
80523, USA.

Equine herpesvirus-1 (EHV-1) continues to cause both sporadic and epidemic
abortions despite extensive vaccination. Lack of progress in the development of
protective vaccines may be hindered by the lack of equine abortion models that
employ contemporary EHV-1 strains. The objective of our experiments was to
compare a contemporary EHV-1 strain with a previously described challenge strain,
and to quantify EHV-1 loads in various maternal and fetal tissues. Infection
experiments were performed in two groups of 7 pregnant pony mares at 270-290 days
of gestation with a contemporary EHV-1 strain (University of Findlay 2003 isolate
- OH03) or an EHV-1 strain isolated over 30 years ago, and previously described
in abortion models (Ab4). All mares in both groups exhibited nasal viral shedding
and viremia. Infection with OH03 resulted in 1/7 abortion and infection with Ab4 
resulted in 5/7 abortions. In the OH03 challenge, placentas of foals delivered at
term showed little detectable virus, while the aborted fetus expressed high
levels of virus infection in the spleen and liver, lower levels in the lung and
thymus, and lowest levels in the chorioallantois. After Ab4 challenge, high viral
loads were detected in fetal and placental tissues in abortions. In the two
normal deliveries, the chorioallantois contained virus levels comparable with the
chorioallantois of aborted foals and both foals shed EHV-1 starting on day 4 of
life, but were clinically healthy. Our results demonstrate the continued
importance of strain selection for abortion models, and this study is the first
report of viral load quantification using contemporary methods. Extremely high
EHV-1 loads in decidua from abortions illustrate the infection risk posed to
other horses.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.08.046 
PMID: 22944628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

