
1. Histopathology. 2012 Dec;61(6):1183-97. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2012.04339.x.
Epub 2012 Sep 10.

Plasmablastic lymphoma of the elderly: a clinicopathological comparison with
age-related Epstein-Barr virus-associated B cell lymphoproliferative disorder.

Liu F(1), Asano N, Tatematsu A, Oyama T, Kitamura K, Suzuki K, Yamamoto K,
Sakamoto N, Taniwaki M, Kinoshita T, Nakamura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Clinical Laboratories, Nagoya University Hospital,
Nagoya, Japan.

AIMS: Plasmablastic lymphoma (PBL) is an aggressive lymphoma with a terminally
differentiated B cell phenotype; half of patients with this disease have
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. The majority of PBL cases are associated with
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, while the remaining HIV-negative
cases were accompanied by other immunodeficiency conditions or immunosenescence
in the elderly.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To characterize HIV-negative PBL of the elderly (PBL-E), we 
compared the clinicopathological characteristics of 10 cases of PBL-E and 124
cases with age-related EBV-associated B cell lymphoproliferative disorder
(AR-EBVLPD). The 10 PBL-E (eight men, two women; median age: 68 years) were
associated with a more indolent clinical behaviour and a better overall survival 
than AR-EBVLPD. Extranodal involvement was higher in PBL-E (50%) than AR-EBVLPD; 
notably, the nasal cavity was affected most frequently in PBL-E (60%).
Immunoglobulin heavy chain/(IGH)/MYC translocation was detected in half of the
PBL-E cases.
CONCLUSIONS: PBL-E shares some clinical features with AR-EBVLPD, such as HIV
negativity, old age, and EBV infection, no known immunosuppressive condition but 
there are some differences such as a higher ratio of extranodal involvement and
better prognosis. PBL-E is a newly recognized condition and should be
distinguished from HIV-positive PBL, sharing features with AR-EBVLPD in
particular, immunosenescence of the elderly.

Â© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2012.04339.x 
PMID: 22958176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

