
1. Microbiol Immunol. 2012 Dec;56(12):805-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.2012.00510.x.

Anti-viral and anti-bacterial activities of an extract of blackcurrants (Ribes
nigrum L.).

Ikuta K(1), Hashimoto K, Kaneko H, Mori S, Ohashi K, Suzutani T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine,
Fukushima 960-1295, Japan.

The inhibitory effects of an extract of the blackcurrant (Ribes nigrum L.)
against pathogens associated with oral, nasopharyngeal and upper respiratory
infectious diseases; namely respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), influenza virus A 
and B (IFV-A and IFV-B), adenovirus (AdV), herpes simplex virus type 1,
Haemophilus influenzae type B, Streptococcus pneumoniae and Streptococcus mutans,
were investigated. Less than 1% concentration of extract of blackcurrant
inhibited replication of RSV, IFV-A and -B and HSV-1 by over 50% and a 10%
extract inhibited adsorption of these viruses onto the cell surface by over 95%. 
The effects on AdV were much less pronounced; the half minimal inhibitory
concentration of AdV replication was 2.54 ± 0.26, and a 10% concentration of the 
extract inhibited AdV adsorption on the cell surface by 72.9 ± 3.4%. The
antibacterial activities of the blackcurrant were evaluated based on its efficacy
as a disinfectant. A 10% extract disinfected 99.8% of H. Influenzae type B and
78.9% of S. pneumoniae in 10 min, but had no demonstrable effect against S.
mutans. The blackcurrant extract still showed antiviral and antibacterial
activities after the pH had been made neutral with sodium hydroxide, suggesting
that these activities are not the result of acidic reactions or of components
precipitated at a neutral pH. These findings demonstrate the potential of
blackcurrant extract as a functional food for oral care.

© 2012 The Societies and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.2012.00510.x 
PMID: 22985050  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

