
1. Mol Ther. 2013 Feb;21(2):433-44. doi: 10.1038/mt.2012.214. Epub 2012 Oct 23.

Hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy for the multisystemic lysosomal storage
disorder cystinosis.

Harrison F(1), Yeagy BA, Rocca CJ, Kohn DB, Salomon DR, Cherqui S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.

Cystinosis is an autosomal recessive metabolic disease that belongs to the family
of lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs). The defective gene is CTNS encoding the
lysosomal cystine transporter, cystinosin. Cystine accumulates in all tissues and
leads to organ damage including end-stage renal disease. Using the Ctns(-/-)
murine model for cystinosis, we tested the use of hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells (HSPC) genetically modified to express a functional CTNS
transgene using a self-inactivating-lentiviral vector (SIN-LV). We showed that
transduced cells were capable of decreasing cystine content in all tissues and
improved kidney function. Transduced HSPC retained their differentiative
capabilities, populating all tissue compartments examined and allowing long-term 
expression of the transgene. Direct correlation between the levels of lentiviral 
DNA present in the peripheral blood and the levels present in tissues were
demonstrated, which could be useful to follow future patients. Using a new model 
of cystinosis, the DsRed Ctns(-/-) mice, and a LV driving the expression of the
fusion protein cystinosin-enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP), we showed
that cystinosin was transferred from CTNS-expressing cells to Ctns-deficient
adjacent cells in vitro and in vivo. This transfer led to cystine decreases in
Ctns-deficient cells in vitro. These data suggest that the mechanism of
cross-correction is possible in cystinosis.

DOI: 10.1038/mt.2012.214 
PMCID: PMC3594011
PMID: 23089735  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

