
1. Cell Microbiol. 2013 Aug;15(8):1385-400. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12122. Epub 2013 Mar
14.

Influenza A virus-mediated priming enhances cytokine secretion by human dendritic
cells infected with Streptococcus pneumoniae.

Kuri T(1), Sörensen AS, Thomas S, Karlsson Hedestam GB, Normark S,
Henriques-Normark B, McInerney GM, Plant L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Secondary infections with Streptococcus pneumoniae (SP) are frequently observed
following influenza A virus (IAV) infection and have a substantial impact on
global health. Despite this, the basis for the disease progression is
incompletely understood. To investigate the effect of co-infection on human
monocyte-derived dendritic cells (MDDCs) we analysed the expression of clinically
important pro-inflammatory and immune-modulatory cytokines. IAV infection or
treatment with supernatants from IAV-infected cell cultures resulted in priming
of the DCs which subsequently influenced the production of IL-12p70, as well as
IL-6, following SP infection. Co-infection of the same cell was not required but 
this effect was dependent on the time, dose and duration of the infections, as
well as pathogen viability, bacterial uptake and endosome acidification.
Bacterially infected cells were characterized as the main producers of IL-12p70. 
Finally, we showed that type I interferons were primarily responsible for the
priming of IL-12p70 that was observed by infection with IAV. These results
provide a probable mechanism for the elevated levels of particular cytokines
observed in IAV and SP co-infected cell cultures with implications for the
pathogenic outcome observed during in vivo infection.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12122 
PMCID: PMC3798092
PMID: 23421931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

