
1. J Immunol. 2013 Apr 1;190(7):3732-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202964. Epub 2013 Mar
1.

Reversion of somatic mutations of the respiratory syncytial virus-specific human 
monoclonal antibody Fab19 reveal a direct relationship between association rate
and neutralizing potency.

Bates JT(1), Keefer CJ, Utley TJ, Correia BE, Schief WR, Crowe JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
37232, USA.

The role of affinity in determining neutralizing potency of mAbs directed against
viruses is not well understood. We investigated the kinetic, structural, and
functional advantage conferred by individual naturally occurring somatic
mutations in the Ab H chain V region of Fab19, a well-described neutralizing
human mAb directed to respiratory syncytial virus. Comparison of the
affinity-matured Ab Fab19 with recombinant Fab19 Abs that were variants
containing reverted amino acids from the inferred unmutated ancestor sequence
revealed the molecular basis for affinity maturation of this Ab. Enhanced binding
was achieved through mutations in the third H chain CDR (HCDR3) that conferred a 
markedly faster on-rate and a desirable increase in antiviral neutralizing
activity. In contrast, most somatic mutations in the HCDR1 and HCDR2 regions did 
not significantly enhance Ag binding or antiviral activity. We observed a direct 
relationship between the measured association rate (Kon) for F protein and
antiviral activity. Modeling studies of the structure of the Ag-Ab complex
suggested the HCDR3 loop interacts with the antigenic site A surface loop of the 
respiratory syncytial virus F protein, previously shown to contain the epitope
for this Ab by experimentation. These studies define a direct relationship of
affinity and neutralizing activity for a viral glycoprotein-specific human mAb.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202964 
PMCID: PMC3608519
PMID: 23455501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

