
1. Am J Public Health. 1990 Jul;80(7):829-34.

Physician breach of patient confidentiality among individuals with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection: patterns of decision.

Schwartzbaum JA(1), Wheat JR, Norton RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Tennessee, Memphis
38163.

Comment in
    Am J Public Health. 1991 Jul;81(7):931-2.
    Am J Public Health. 1991 Jul;81(7):932-3.

To determine whether the sex, race, or sexual preference of a patient infected
with immunodeficiency virus (HIV) influences a physician's decision to breach
patient confidentiality, Tennessee primary care physicians were mailed a
questionnaire containing a case study in which an HIV-infected patient presented 
a risk to a third party. Eight different descriptions of the sex, race, and
sexual preference of the hypothetical patient were distributed randomly among the
physicians, one description to each physician. The physicians were asked to
decide whether to maintain confidentiality, notify the health department, or
inform the patient's partner. Responses of 199 White male physicians were
analyzed using an unconditional saturated logistic regression model. The odds
ratios for these physicians saying they would send the patient's antibody status 
to the health department extend from 18.4 (95 percent confidence interval: 1.3,
260.1) for Black homosexual males to .5 (95 percent CI: 0, 11.5) for White
homosexual females. The odds ratios for White male physicians saying they would
inform the patient's partner range from 7.5 (95 percent CI: .8, 69.2) for Black
heterosexual males to 1.0 (reference category) for Black homosexual females. The 
results suggest that when physicians decide to protect a third party by breaching
an HIV-infected patient's confidentiality, their decision may be influenced in
some cases by the race, sex, and sexual preference of the patient.

DOI: 10.2105/ajph.80.7.829 
PMCID: PMC1404976
PMID: 2356907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

