
1. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2013 Apr;33(2):288-292. doi:
10.1007/s11596-013-1113-z. Epub 2013 Apr 17.

Chronic HBV carrier's acceptance of regular surveilling program in China.

Fang Q(1)(2), Hao YH(1), Li L(1), Zhang ZH(1), Wang JZ(1), Chen MF(1), Kang J(1),
Yang DL(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Devivision of Clinical Immunology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, China.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, the First College of Clinical Medical
Sciences, China Three Gorges University & Yichang Central People's Hospital,
Yichang, 443003, China.
(3)Devivision of Clinical Immunology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, China.
dlyang@mail.hust.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Infections Diseases, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, China.
dlyang@mail.hust.edu.cn.

Long-term compliance with regular surveillance is important for the prevention
and timely management of chronic hepatitis B (CHB). However, there are no
researches focusing on the compliance of hepatitis B virus infected patients in
regular surveillance so far. The purpose of our study was to investigate the
outpatient compliance with long-term regular surveillance in China. Data of 3257 
CHB outpatients was pooled and analyzed to assess the outpatient's compliance
with the long-term regular surveillance plan. In all outpatients, the
non-follow-up and the follow-up group accounted for 73.2% and 26.8%,
respectively. Among the follow-up outpatient's, only 48.9% received
ongoing-follow-up and 51.1% were finally lost to follow-up; the median length of 
visiting duration was 25 months; and the predictive 1-, 2-, 3-, 4- and 5-year
ongoing follow-up rate was 72.7%, 52.5%, 42.4%, 33.8%, and 26.3%, respectively.
In conclusion, our survey proved that the regular long-term surveillance on
Chinese chronic HBV carrier is difficult to be fully implemented. A large
proportion of outpatients do not receive routine follow-up and are at risk of
treatment delay due to various social reasons.

DOI: 10.1007/s11596-013-1113-z 
PMID: 23592146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

