
1. Langmuir. 2013 May 28;29(21):6420-8. doi: 10.1021/la400890f. Epub 2013 May 14.

Multifunctional dendritic sialopolymersomes as potential antiviral agents: their 
lectin binding and drug release properties.

Nazemi A(1), Haeryfar SM, Gillies ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The University of Western Ontario, 1151 Richmond
Street, London, Ontario, Canada.

Polymer vesicles, commonly referred to as polymersomes, are self-organized
materials that result from the self-assembly of amphiphilic copolymers in
solution. Recently, there has been increasing interest in biomedical applications
of polymersomes due to the different functions that can be imparted through
encapsulation of molecules within the core or membrane or through the
introduction of bioactive molecules to the polymersome surface. We describe here 
the development and study of poly(ethylene oxide)-polycaprolactone polymersomes
designed to interact with influenza viruses at two different stages in the
infection process. First, the conjugation of the sialic acid N-acetylneuraminic
acid (Neu5Ac) to the polymersome surface was designed to inhibit the binding of
viral hemagglutinin to sialic acids on host cells, thus preventing viral entry.
Second, the incorporation of the neuraminidase inhibitor zanamivir into the
polymersome core was designed to prevent the release of progeny virus from the
host cells, thus inhibiting viral replication. With the aim of maximizing
multivalent effects at the polymersome surface, polyester dendrons functionalized
with Neu5Ac were synthesized and conjugated to polymersomes. Binding of the
resulting dendritic sialopolymersomes to Limax flavus agglutinin was studied and 
compared to the sialodendron and a monovalent Neu5Ac derivative using an
enzyme-linked lectin inhibition assay. It was found that while the sialodendron
exhibited a 17-fold enhancement (per sialoside) relative to the small molecule,
the dendritic sialopolymersomes resulted in an almost 2000-fold enhancement in
binding affinity. It was also demonstrated that encapsulation of zanamivir into
the dendritic sialopolymersomes could be performed with the same efficiency as
for naked polymersomes to provide a drug loading of ~35 wt %. Drug release rates 
were similar for both systems with sustained release over a period of 4 days.
Overall, these results suggest the promise of using a multifunctional polymersome
system for interaction with and inhibition of influenza viruses.

DOI: 10.1021/la400890f 
PMID: 23621407  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

