
1. Infect Immun. 2013 Jul;81(7):2592-7. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00108-13. Epub 2013 May 6.

Bovine respiratory syncytial virus and Histophilus somni interaction at the
alveolar barrier.

Agnes JT(1), Zekarias B, Shao M, Anderson ML, Gershwin LJ, Corbeil LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, San Diego,
California, USA.

Our previous studies showed that Histophilus somni and bovine respiratory
syncytial virus (BRSV) act synergistically in vivo to cause more severe bovine
respiratory disease than either agent alone causes. Since H. somni surface and
secreted immunoglobulin binding protein A (IbpA) causes retraction of bovine
alveolar type 2 (BAT2) cells and invasion between BAT2 cells in vitro, we
investigated mechanisms of BRSV-plus-H. somni infection at the alveolar barrier. 
BRSV treatment of BAT2 cells prior to treatment with IbpA-rich H. somni
concentrated culture supernatant (CCS) resulted in increased BAT2 cell rounding
and retraction compared to those with either treatment alone. This mimicked the
increased alveolar cell thickening in calves experimentally infected with BRSV
followed by H. somni compared to that in calves infected with BRSV or H. somni
alone. BRSV-plus-H. somni CCS treatment of BAT2 cells also enhanced paracellular 
migration. The effect of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) was investigated as
well because microarray analysis revealed that treatment with BRSV plus H. somni 
synergistically upregulated BAT2 cell expression of mmp1 and mmp3 compared to
that in cells treated with either agent alone. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) confirmed that MMP1 and MMP3 protein levels were similarly upregulated.
In collagen I and collagen IV (targets for MMP1 and MMP3, respectively) substrate
zymography, digestion was increased with supernatants from dually treated BAT2
cells compared with those from singly treated cells. Enhanced breakdown of
collagen IV in the basal lamina and of fibrillar collagen I in the adjacent
interstitium in the dual infection may facilitate dissemination of H. somni
infection.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00108-13 
PMCID: PMC3697614
PMID: 23649093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

