
1. Arch Virol. 2013 Oct;158(10):2193-6. doi: 10.1007/s00705-013-1714-7. Epub 2013
May 3.

Complete coding sequences of European brown hare syndrome virus (EBHSV) strains
isolated in 1982 in Sweden.

Lopes AM(1), Gavier-Widén D, Le Gall-Reculé G, Esteves PJ, Abrantes J.

Author information: 
(1)CIBIO-UP, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos,
Universidade do Porto, InBIO, Laboratório Associado, Campus Agrário de Vairão,
Rua Padre Armando Quintas, Vairão, Portugal, analopes@cibio.up.pt.

European brown hare syndrome (EBHS) is characterised by high mortality of
European brown hares (Lepus europaeus) and mountain hares (Lepus timidus).
European brown hare syndrome virus (EBHSV) and the closely related rabbit
haemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) comprise the genus Lagovirus, family
Caliciviridae. In contrast to RHDV, which is well studied, with more than 30
complete genome sequences available, the only complete genome sequence available 
for EBHSV was obtained from a strain isolated in 1989 in France. EBHS was
originally diagnosed in Sweden in 1980. Here, we report the complete coding
sequences of two EBHSV strains isolated from European brown hares that died with 
liver lesions characteristic of EBHS in Sweden in 1982. These sequences represent
the oldest complete coding sequences of EBHSV isolated from the original area of 
virus diagnosis. The genomic organisation is similar to that of the published
French sequence. Comparison with this sequence revealed several nucleotide
substitutions, corresponding to 6 % divergence. At the amino acid level, the
Swedish strains are 2 % different from the French strain. Most amino acid
substitutions were located within the major capsid protein VP60, but when
considering the amino acid sequence length of each protein, VP10 is the protein
with the highest percentage of amino acid differences. The same result was
obtained when Swedish strains were compared. This evolutionary pattern has not
been described previously for members of the genus Lagovirus.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-013-1714-7 
PMID: 23640583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

