
1. Phytopathology. 2013 Oct;103(10):1069-76. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-10-12-0253-R.

Association of a DNA virus with grapevines affected by red blotch disease in
California.

Al Rwahnih M, Dave A, Anderson MM, Rowhani A, Uyemoto JK, Sudarshana MR.

In the Napa Valley of California, vineyards of 'Cabernet Franc' (CF) clone 214,
'Cabernet Sauvignon' clone 337, and 'Zinfandel' clone 1A (Z1A) with grapevines
exhibiting foliar symptoms of red blotches, marginal reddening, and red veins
that were accompanied by reduced sugar accumulation in fruit at harvest were
initially suspected to be infected with leafroll-associated viruses. However,
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests were negative for all
known leafroll-associated viruses, with the exception of Grapevine
leafroll-associated virus 2 in Z1A. Metagenomic analysis of cDNA libraries
obtained from double-stranded RNA enriched nucleic acid (NA) preparations from
bark scrapings of dormant canes on an Illumina platform revealed sequences having
a distant relationship with members of the family Geminiviridae. Sequencing of
products obtained by PCR assays using overlapping primers and rolling circle
amplification (RCA) confirmed the presence of a single circular genome of 3,206
nucleotides which was nearly identical to the genome of a recently reported
Grapevine cabernet franc-associated virus found in declining grapevines in New
York. We propose to call this virus "Grapevine red blotch-associated virus"
(GRBaV) to describe its association with grapevine red blotch disease. Primers
specific to GRBaV amplified a product of expected size (557 bp) from NA
preparations obtained from petioles of several diseased source vines. Chip bud
inoculations successfully transmitted GRBaV to test plants of CF, as confirmed by
PCR analysis. This is the first report of a DNA virus associated with red blotch 
disease of grapevines in California.

DOI: 10.1094/PHYTO-10-12-0253-R 
PMID: 23656312  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

