
1. J Virol Methods. 2013 Oct;193(1):77-84. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2013.05.008. Epub
2013 May 23.

Evaluation of a proximity extension assay for the detection of H1 2009 pandemic
influenza viruses.

Van Wesenbeeck L(1), Meeuws H, De Wolf H, Stuyver L.

Author information: 
(1)Janssen Diagnostics BVBA, Beerse, Belgium. lvwesenb@its.jnj.com

The rapid influenza diagnostic tests (RIDTs) are widely distributed, simple to
use, but often lack sensitivity as compared to gold standard methods (viral
culture and nucleic acid detection technologies). Applying RIDTs outside of
epidemic or pandemic infections results in large numbers of false negatives.
Hence, a sensitive RIDT that would reduce the number of false negatives would
result in an increased clinical value. We evaluated the potential of a proximity 
extension assay (PEA) for the detection of influenza A H1 viruses. This
technology makes use of antibodies to capture the pathogen, followed by molecular
detection. Forty-seven nasopharyngeal swab samples, all confirmed infections of
the H1 2009 pandemic influenza virus, were evaluated. The performance of PEA was 
compared to the RIDT Quickvue Influenza A+B assay. The success rate of the
comparative assays was modeled by means of a binary logistic response model. Both
assays performed equally well within the current range of viral particles,
expressed as log10 copies/ml. When the actual input of viral particles was taken 
into account, the 95% hitrate of PEA lies within the range of 4.60-7.02 log10
copies/reaction, which is an almost 2 log10 sensitivity improvement over the 95% 
hitrate of the Quickvue RIDT, ranging from 6.86 to 9.37 log10 copies/reaction.
The PEA method holds promise to improve sensitive detection of influenza viruses 
in clinical samples.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2013.05.008 
PMID: 23707923  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

