
1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2013 Jun 18;14:197. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-197.

HASP server: a database and structural visualization platform for comparative
models of influenza A hemagglutinin proteins.

Ambroggio XI(1), Dommer J, Gopalan V, Dunham EJ, Taubenberger JK, Hurt DE.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics and Computational Biosciences Branch, Office of Cyber
Infrastructure and Computational Biology, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Influenza A viruses possess RNA genomes that mutate frequently in
response to immune pressures. The mutations in the hemagglutinin genes are
particularly significant, as the hemagglutinin proteins mediate attachment and
fusion to host cells, thereby influencing viral pathogenicity and species
specificity. Large-scale influenza A genome sequencing efforts have been ongoing 
to understand past epidemics and pandemics and anticipate future outbreaks.
Sequencing efforts thus far have generated nearly 9,000 distinct hemagglutinin
amino acid sequences.
DESCRIPTION: Comparative models for all publicly available influenza A
hemagglutinin protein sequences (8,769 to date) were generated using the Rosetta 
modeling suite. The C-alpha root mean square deviations between a randomly chosen
test set of models and their crystallographic templates were less than 2 Ã…,
suggesting that the modeling protocols yielded high-quality results. The models
were compiled into an online resource, the Hemagglutinin Structure Prediction
(HASP) server. The HASP server was designed as a scientific tool for researchers 
to visualize hemagglutinin protein sequences of interest in a three-dimensional
context. With a built-in molecular viewer, hemagglutinin models can be compared
side-by-side and navigated by a corresponding sequence alignment. The models and 
alignments can be downloaded for offline use and further analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: The modeling protocols used in the HASP server scale well for large 
amounts of sequences and will keep pace with expanded sequencing efforts. The
conservative approach to modeling and the intuitive search and visualization
interfaces allow researchers to quickly analyze hemagglutinin sequences of
interest in the context of the most highly related experimental structures, and
allow them to directly compare hemagglutinin sequences to each other
simultaneously in their two- and three-dimensional contexts. The models and
methodology have shown utility in current research efforts and the ongoing aim of
the HASP server is to continue to accelerate influenza A research and have a
positive impact on global public health.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-197 
PMCID: PMC3693987
PMID: 23777206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

