
1. Virol J. 2013 Jul 10;10:229. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-10-229.

Active vaccination with vaccinia virus A33 protects mice against lethal vaccinia 
and ectromelia viruses but not against cowpoxvirus; elucidation of the specific
adaptive immune response.

Paran N(1), Lustig S, Zvi A, Erez N, Israely T, Melamed S, Politi B, Ben-Nathan
D, Schneider P, Lachmi B, Israeli O, Stein D, Levin R, Olshevsky U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Israel Institute for Biological Research,
P.O. box 19, Ness-Ziona 74100, Israel. nirp@iibr.gov.il

Vaccinia virus protein A33 (A33VACV) plays an important role in protection
against orthopoxviruses, and hence is included in experimental multi-subunit
smallpox vaccines. In this study we show that single-dose vaccination with
recombinant Sindbis virus expressing A33VACV, is sufficient to protect mice
against lethal challenge with vaccinia virus WR (VACV-WR) and ectromelia virus
(ECTV) but not against cowpox virus (CPXV), a closely related orthopoxvirus.
Moreover, a subunit vaccine based on the cowpox virus A33 ortholog (A33CPXV)
failed to protect against cowpox and only partially protected mice against
VACV-WR challenge. We mapped regions of sequence variation between A33VACV and
A33CPXVand analyzed the role of such variations in protection. We identified a
single protective region located between residues 104-120 that harbors a putative
H-2Kd T cell epitope as well as a B cell epitope - a target for the neutralizing 
antibody MAb-1G10 that blocks spreading of extracellular virions. Both epitopes
in A33CPXV are mutated and predicted to be non-functional. Whereas vaccination
with A33VACV did not induce in-vivo CTL activity to the predicted epitope,
inhibition of virus spread in-vitro, and protection from lethal VACV challenge
pointed to the B cell epitope highlighting the critical role of residue L118 and 
of adjacent compensatory residues in protection. This epitope's critical role in 
protection, as well as its modifications within the orthopoxvirus genus should be
taken in context with the failure of A33 to protect against CPXV as demonstrated 
here. These findings should be considered when developing new subunit vaccines
and monoclonal antibody based therapeutics against orthopoxviruses, especially
variola virus, the etiologic agent of smallpox.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-10-229 
PMCID: PMC3722049
PMID: 23842430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

