
1. J Infect Dis. 2014 Feb 15;209(4):551-6. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jit474. Epub 2013 Aug
29.

Novel avian-origin human influenza A(H7N9) can be transmitted between ferrets via
respiratory droplets.

Xu L(1), Bao L, Deng W, Dong L, Zhu H, Chen T, Lv Q, Li F, Yuan J, Xiang Z, Gao
K, Xu Y, Huang L, Li Y, Liu J, Yao Y, Yu P, Li X, Huang W, Zhao X, Lan Y, Guo J, 
Yong W, Wei Q, Chen H, Zhang L, Qin C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Laboratory Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
and Comparative Medicine Center, Peking Union Medical College, Key Laboratory of 
Human Disease Comparative Medicine, Ministry of Health.

The outbreak of human infections caused by novel avian-origin influenza A(H7N9)
in China since March 2013 underscores the need to better understand the
pathogenicity and transmissibility of these viruses in mammals. In a ferret
model, the pathogenicity of influenza A(H7N9) was found to be less than that of
an influenza A(H5N1) strain but comparable to that of 2009 pandemic influenza
A(H1N1), based on the clinical signs, mortality, virus dissemination, and results
of histopathologic analyses. Influenza A(H7N9) could replicate in the upper and
lower respiratory tract, the heart, the liver, and the olfactory bulb. It is
worth noting that influenza A(H7N9) exhibited a low level of transmission between
ferrets via respiratory droplets. There were 4 mutations in the virus isolated
from the contact ferret: D678Y in the gene encoding PB2, R157K in the gene
encoding hemagglutinin (H3 numbering), I109T in the gene encoding nucleoprotein, 
and T10I in the gene encoding neuraminidase. These data emphasized that
avian-origin influenza A(H7N9) can be transmitted between mammals, highlighting
its potential for human-to-human transmissibility.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jit474 
PMID: 23990570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

