
1. Ecohealth. 2014;11(1):120-32. doi: 10.1007/s10393-013-0878-7. Epub 2013 Oct 12.

Ecological niche modelling of potential West Nile virus vector mosquito species
and their geographical association with equine epizootics in Italy.

Mughini-Gras L(1), Mulatti P, Severini F, Boccolini D, Romi R, Bongiorno G,
Khoury C, Bianchi R, Montarsi F, Patregnani T, Bonfanti L, Rezza G, Capelli G,
Busani L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica Veterinaria e Sicurezza Alimentare, Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, lapo.mughini.gras@rivm.nl.

In Italy, West Nile virus (WNV) equine outbreaks have occurred annually since
2008. Characterizing WNV vector habitat requirements allows for the
identification of areas at risk of viral amplification and transmission.
Maxent-based ecological niche models were developed using literature records of
13 potential WNV Italian vector mosquito species to predict their habitat
suitability range and to investigate possible geographical associations with WNV 
equine outbreak occurrence in Italy from 2008 to 2010. The contribution of
different environmental variables to the niche models was also assessed. Suitable
habitats for Culex pipiens, Aedes albopictus, and Anopheles maculipennis were
widely distributed; Culex modestus, Ochlerotatus geniculatus, Ochlerotatus
caspius, Coquillettidia richiardii, Aedes vexans, and Anopheles plumbeus were
concentrated in north-central Italy; Aedes cinereus, Culex theileri, Ochlerotatus
dorsalis, and Culiseta longiareolata were restricted to coastal/southern areas.
Elevation, temperature, and precipitation variables showed the highest predictive
power. Host population and landscape variables provided minor contributions. WNV 
equine outbreaks had a significantly higher probability to occur in habitats
suitable for Cx. modestus and Cx. pipiens, providing circumstantial evidence that
the potential distribution of these two species coincides geographically with the
observed distribution of the disease in equines.

DOI: 10.1007/s10393-013-0878-7 
PMID: 24121802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

