
1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 18;8(11):e79606. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079606.
eCollection 2013.

Probability weighted ensemble transfer learning for predicting interactions
between HIV-1 and human proteins.

Mei S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Software College, Shenyang Normal University, Shenyang, China.

Reconstruction of host-pathogen protein interaction networks is of great
significance to reveal the underlying microbic pathogenesis. However, the current
experimentally-derived networks are generally small and should be augmented by
computational methods for less-biased biological inference. From the point of
view of computational modelling, data scarcity, data unavailability and negative 
data sampling are the three major problems for host-pathogen protein interaction 
networks reconstruction. In this work, we are motivated to address the three
concerns and propose a probability weighted ensemble transfer learning model for 
HIV-human protein interaction prediction (PWEN-TLM), where support vector machine
(SVM) is adopted as the individual classifier of the ensemble model. In the
model, data scarcity and data unavailability are tackled by homolog knowledge
transfer. The importance of homolog knowledge is measured by the ROC-AUC metric
of the individual classifiers, whose outputs are probability weighted to yield
the final decision. In addition, we further validate the assumption that only the
homolog knowledge is sufficient to train a satisfactory model for host-pathogen
protein interaction prediction. Thus the model is more robust against data
unavailability with less demanding data constraint. As regards with negative data
construction, experiments show that exclusiveness of subcellular co-localized
proteins is unbiased and more reliable than random sampling. Last, we conduct
analysis of overlapped predictions between our model and the existing models, and
apply the model to novel host-pathogen PPIs recognition for further biological
research.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079606 
PMCID: PMC3832534
PMID: 24260261  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

