
1. Exp Cell Res. 1987 May;170(1):116-28.

Monoclonal antibody GB3, a new probe for the study of human basement membranes
and hemidesmosomes.

Verrando P, Hsi BL, Yeh CJ, Pisani A, Serieys N, Ortonne JP.

A monoclonal antibody, GB3, has been raised against human amnion. Not only does
GB3 bind to amniotic basement membrane, but it also recognizes an antigenic
structure expressed by epidermal as well as by some other human basement
membranes. This antigen is synthesized (and excreted) by cultured normal human
epidermal keratinocytes. It is expressed to a lesser extent by the A431
epidermoid carcinoma cell line, but is not expressed by the SV40
virus-transformed SVK14 keratinocyte cell line. In ultrastructural studies, this 
antigen was located in the epidermal basement membrane, both in the lamina densa 
and in the lamina lucida, associated with hemidesmosomes. It was identified as a 
protein by in vitro proteolytic cleavage studies. The radio-immunoprecipitates
from cultured human keratinocytes, analysed by SDS-PAGE, showed that GB3
recognized five polypeptides of 93.5, 125, 130, 146 and 150 kD under reducing
conditions. They were probably linked by disulfide bonds. The tissue distribution
of the antigen and the molecular weights (MWs) of its constitutive polypeptides
suggest that it is different from other known components of basement membranes.
It may provide a biochemical marker for hemidesmosomes. Furthermore, GB3
represents an interesting and original clinical probe, since the antigenic
structure recognized by GB3 is lacking in Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa, a
lethal genodermatosis in which a dermo-epidermal splitting occurs at the level of
lamina lucida.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-4827(87)90121-2 
PMID: 2436931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

