
1. J Virol. 2014 Mar;88(6):3144-60. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02916-13. Epub 2013 Dec 26.

High-affinity Rb binding, p53 inhibition, subcellular localization, and
transformation by wild-type or tumor-derived shortened Merkel cell polyomavirus
large T antigens.

Borchert S(1), Czech-Sioli M, Neumann F, Schmidt C, Wimmer P, Dobner T, Grundhoff
A, Fischer N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Virology, University Medical Center
Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

Interference with tumor suppressor pathways by polyomavirus-encoded tumor
antigens (T-Ags) can result in transformation. Consequently, it is thought that
T-Ags encoded by Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV), a virus integrated in âˆ¼90% of 
all Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) cases, are major contributors to tumorigenesis.
The MCPyV large T-Ag (LT-Ag) has preserved the key functional domains present in 
all family members but has also acquired unique regions that flank the LxCxE
motif. As these regions may mediate unique functions, or may modulate those
shared with T-Ags of other polyomaviruses, functional studies of MCPyV T-Ags are 
required. Here, we have performed a comparative study of full-length or
MCC-derived truncated LT-Ags with regard to their biochemical characteristics,
their ability to bind to retinoblastoma (Rb) and p53 proteins, and their
transforming potential. We provide evidence that full-length MCPyV LT-Ag may not 
directly bind to p53 but nevertheless can significantly reduce p53-dependent
transcription in reporter assays. Although early region expression constructs
harboring either full-length or MCC-derived truncated LT-Ag genes can transform
primary baby rat kidney cells, truncated LT-Ags do not bind to p53 or reduce
p53-dependent transcription. Interestingly, shortened LT-Ags exhibit a very high 
binding affinity for Rb, as shown by coimmunoprecipitation and in vitro binding
studies. Additionally, we show that truncated MCPyV LT-Ag proteins are expressed 
at higher levels than those for the wild-type protein and are able to partially
relocalize Rb to the cytoplasm, indicating that truncated LT proteins may have
gained additional features that distinguish them from the full-length
protein.IMPORTANCE: MCPyV is one of the 12 known polyomaviruses that naturally
infect humans. Among these, it is of particular interest since it is the only
human polyomavirus known to be involved in tumorigenesis. MCPyV is thought to be 
causally linked to MCC, a rare skin tumor. In these tumors, viral DNA is
monoclonally integrated into the genome of the tumor cells in up to 90% of all
MCC cases, and the integrated MCV genomes, furthermore, harbor signature
mutations in the so-called early region that selectively abrogate viral
replication while preserving cell cycle deregulating functions of the virus. This
study describes comparative studies of early region T-Ag protein characteristics,
their ability to bind to Rb and p53, and their transforming potential.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02916-13 
PMCID: PMC3957953
PMID: 24371076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

