
1. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2014 Mar;25(3):371-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jvir.2013.10.027. Epub
2014 Jan 24.

Comparison of characteristics and transarterial chemoembolization outcomes in
patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma and different viral
etiologies.

Chen BB(1), Shih IL(1), Wu CH(1), Hsu C(2), Chen CH(3), Shih TT(1), Liu KL(1),
Liang PC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Imaging and Radiology, National Taiwan University
College of Medicine and Hospital, No. 7 Chung-Shan S. Road, Taipei, Taiwan 100.
(2)Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University College of Medicine and
Hospital, No. 7 Chung-Shan S. Road, Taipei, Taiwan 100.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University College of
Medicine and Hospital, No. 7 Chung-Shan S. Road, Taipei, Taiwan 100.
(4)Department of Medical Imaging and Radiology, National Taiwan University
College of Medicine and Hospital, No. 7 Chung-Shan S. Road, Taipei, Taiwan 100.
Electronic address: e510012@yahoo.com.tw.

PURPOSE: To determine any differences in patient characteristics and outcomes
after transarterial chemoembolization between different viral etiologies of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
METHODS: This retrospective study consisted of 201 patients undergoing first-time
transarterial chemoembolization for unresectable HCC from January to December
2009. The patients were divided into four groups: hepatitis B virus (HBV) only (n
= 104), hepatitis C virus (HCV) only (n = 63), HBV and HCV (n = 10), and no viral
hepatitis (n = 24). The clinical and laboratory data were obtained from
electronic medical records, and imaging findings obtained before transarterial
chemoembolization were analyzed. Kaplan-Meier analyses were used to assess the
impact of HBV or HCV status, clinical characteristics, and imaging results on
overall survival.
RESULTS: After a median follow-up of 28.3 months ± 16.2, the 1-, 2-, and 3-year
overall survival rates were 74.1%, 59.7%, and 53.2%. Patients with HBV had a
significant association with younger age (P = .001), higher male-to-female ratio 
(P = .003), lower alanine aminotransferase levels (P = .018), higher albumin
levels (P = .009), and multifocal tumors at diagnosis (P = .04) compared with
patients with HCV. Patients with both HBV and HCV had significantly higher serum 
bilirubin levels compared with the other groups (P = .002). No significant
difference was found in overall survival among the different hepatitis groups (P 
= .943). Multivariate analysis showed that statistically significant determinants
for overall survival were Child-Pugh class (P = .002), Barcelona Clinic Liver
Cancer stage (P < .001), tumor size (P < .001), and distribution (P < .001).
CONCLUSIONS: Viral etiology has no correlation with the outcome of patients with 
HCC undergoing transarterial chemoembolization.

© 2014 SIR Published by SIR All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jvir.2013.10.027 
PMID: 24468045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

