
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 31;9(1):e87527. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087527. eCollection
2014.

Social cohesion, social participation, and HIV related risk among female sex
workers in Swaziland.

Fonner VA(1), Kerrigan D(2), Mnisi Z(3), Ketende S(4), Kennedy CE(1), Baral S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Department of International
Health, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Department of Health,
Behavior, and Society, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Swaziland National AIDS Program, Mbabane, Swaziland.
(4)Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Department of Epidemiology,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Social capital is important to disadvantaged groups, such as sex workers, as a
means of facilitating internal group-related mutual aid and support as well as
access to broader social and material resources. Studies among sex workers have
linked higher social capital with protective HIV-related behaviors; however, few 
studies have examined social capital among sex workers in sub-Saharan Africa.
This cross-sectional study examined relationships between two key social capital 
constructs, social cohesion among sex workers and social participation of sex
workers in the larger community, and HIV-related risk in Swaziland using
respondent-driven sampling. Relationships between social cohesion, social
participation, and HIV-related risk factors were assessed using logistic
regression. HIV prevalence among the sample was 70.4% (223/317). Social cohesion 
was associated with consistent condom use in the past week (adjusted odds ratio
[AOR] = 2.25, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.30-3.90) and was associated with
fewer reports of social discrimination, including denial of police protection.
Social participation was associated with HIV testing (AOR = 2.39, 95% CI:
1.36-4.03) and using condoms with non-paying partners (AOR = 1.99, 95% CI:
1.13-3.51), and was inversely associated with reported verbal or physical
harassment as a result of selling sex (AOR = 0.55, 95% CI: 0.33-0.91). Both
social capital constructs were significantly associated with collective action,
which involved participating in meetings to promote sex worker rights or
attending HIV-related meetings/ talks with other sex workers. Social- and
structural-level interventions focused on building social cohesion and social
participation among sex workers could provide significant protection from HIV
infection for female sex workers in Swaziland.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087527 
PMCID: PMC3909117
PMID: 24498125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

