
1. J Virol. 2014 May;88(9):4657-67. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00137-14. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Herpes simplex virus 1 UL47 interacts with viral nuclear egress factors UL31,
UL34, and Us3 and regulates viral nuclear egress.

Liu Z(1), Kato A, Shindo K, Noda T, Sagara H, Kawaoka Y, Arii J, Kawaguchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Virology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Herpesviruses have evolved a unique mechanism for nuclear egress of nascent
progeny nucleocapsids: the nucleocapsids bud through the inner nuclear membrane
into the perinuclear space between the inner and outer nuclear membranes (primary
envelopment), and enveloped nucleocapsids then fuse with the outer nuclear
membrane to release nucleocapsids into the cytoplasm (de-envelopment). We have
shown that the herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) major virion structural protein
UL47 (or VP13/VP14) is a novel regulator for HSV-1 nuclear egress. In particular,
we demonstrated the following: (i) UL47 formed a complex(es) with HSV-1 proteins 
UL34, UL31, and/or Us3, which have all been reported to be critical for viral
nuclear egress, and these viral proteins colocalized at the nuclear membrane in
HSV-1-infected cells; (ii) the UL47-null mutation considerably reduced primary
enveloped virions in the perinuclear space although capsids accumulated in the
nucleus; and (iii) UL47 was detected in primary enveloped virions in the
perinuclear space by immunoelectron microscopy. These results suggested that UL47
promoted HSV-1 primary envelopment, probably by interacting with the critical
HSV-1 regulators for viral nuclear egress and by modulating their
functions.IMPORTANCE: Like other herpesviruses, herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1)
has evolved a vesicle-mediated nucleocytoplasmic transport mechanism for nuclear 
egress of nascent progeny nucleocapsids. Although previous reports identified and
characterized several HSV-1 and cellular proteins involved in viral nuclear
egress, complete details of HSV-1 nuclear egress remain to be elucidated. In this
study, we have presented data suggesting (i) that the major HSV-1 virion
structural protein UL47 (or VP13/VP14) formed a complex with known viral
regulatory proteins critical for viral nuclear egress and (ii) that UL47 played a
regulatory role in HSV-1 primary envelopment. Thus, we identified UL47 as a novel
regulator for HSV-1 nuclear egress.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00137-14 
PMCID: PMC3993843
PMID: 24522907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

