
1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 14;9(3):e92114. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092114. eCollection
2014.

Genomic characterization of group C Orthobunyavirus reference strains and recent 
South American clinical isolates.

Hang J(1), Forshey BM(2), Yang Y(1), Sol√≥rzano VF(3), Kuschner RA(1), Halsey
ES(2), Jarman RG(1), Kochel TJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Diseases Branch, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, 
Maryland, United States of America.
(2)U.S. Naval Medical Research Unit No. 6, Iquitos and Lima, Peru.
(3)Centro Nacional de Salud Publica, Instituto Nacional de Salud, Lima, Peru.
(4)U.S. Naval Medical Research Center, Silver Spring, Maryland, United States of 
America.

Group C orthobunyaviruses (family Bunyaviridae, genus Orthobunyavirus),
discovered in the 1950s, are vector-borne human pathogens in the Americas.
Currently there is a gap in genomic information for group C viruses. In this
study, we obtained complete coding region sequences of reference strains of
Caraparu (CARV), Oriboca (ORIV), Marituba (MTBV) and Madrid (MADV) viruses, and
five clinical isolates from Peru and Bolivia, using an unbiased de novo approach 
consisting of random reverse transcription, random anchored PCR amplification,
and high throughput pyrosequencing. The small, medium, and large segments encode 
for a 235 amino acid nucleocapsid protein, an approximately 1430 amino acid
surface glycoprotein polyprotein precursor, and a 2248 amino acid RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase, respectively. Additionally, the S segment encodes for an 83 amino
acid non-structural protein, although this protein is truncated or silenced in
some isolates. Phylogenetically, three clinical isolates clustered with CARV, one
clustered with MTBV, and one isolate appeared to be a reassortant or a genetic
drift resulted from the high variability of the medium segment which was also
seen in a few other orthobunyaviruses. These data represent the first complete
coding region sequences for this serocomplex of pathogenic orthobunyaviruses. The
genome-wide phylogeny of reference strains is consistent with the antigenic
properties of the viruses reported in the original serological studies conducted 
in the 1960s. Comparative analysis of conserved protein regions across group C
virus strains and the other orthobunyavirus groups revealed that these group C
viruses contain characteristic domains of potential structural and functional
significance. Our results provide the basis for the developments of diagnostics, 
further genetic analyses, and future epidemiologic studies of group C viruses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092114 
PMCID: PMC3954874
PMID: 24633174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

