
1. J Theor Biol. 2014 Aug 7;354:124-36. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2014.03.008. Epub 2014
Mar 21.

The virus of my virus is my friend: ecological effects of virophage with
alternative modes of coinfection.

Taylor BP(1), Cortez MH(2), Weitz JS(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Physics, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA; School
of Physics, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. Electronic
address: jsweitz@gatech.edu.

Virophages are viruses that rely on the replication machinery of other viruses to
reproduce within eukaryotic hosts. Two different modes of coinfection have been
posited based on experimental observation. In one mode, the virophage and the
virus enter the host independently. In the other mode, the virophage adheres to
the virus so both virophage and virus enter the host together. Here we ask: what 
are the ecological effects of these different modes of coinfection? In
particular, what ecological effects are common to both infection modes, and what 
are the differences particular to each mode? We develop a pair of biophysically
motivated ODE models of viral-host population dynamics, corresponding to dynamics
arising from each mode of infection. We find that both modes of coinfection allow
for the coexistence of the virophage, virus, and host either at a stable fixed
point or through cyclical dynamics. In both models, virophage tends to be the
most abundant population and their presence always reduces the viral abundance
and increases the host abundance. However, we do find qualitative differences
between models. For example, via extensive sampling of biologically relevant
parameter space, we only observe bistability when the virophage and the virus
enter the host together. We discuss how such differences may be leveraged to help
identify modes of infection in natural environments from population level data.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2014.03.008 
PMID: 24662503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

