
1. Biosci Trends. 2014 Jun;8(3):163-8.

Relationship between T-SPOT.TB responses and numbers of circulating CD4+ T-cells 
in HIV infected patients with active tuberculosis.

Cai R(1), Chen J, Guan L, Sun M, Sun Y, Shen Y, Zhang R, Liu L, Lu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center,
Fudan University.

This study sought to evaluate the performance of the T-SPOT.TB assay for the
diagnosis of active tuberculosis (TB) in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infected patients. One hundred confirmed HIV-infected patients with active TB and
known T-SPOT.TB and CD4+ T-cell counts were enrolled in this clinical
retrospective study. We found that patients with lower CD4+ T-cell counts (11-50 
cells/μL) had the lowest T-SPOT.TB positive rates (50%), and patients with higher
CD4+ T-cell counts (50-100 cells/μL) had the highest T-SPOT.TB positive rates
(75%). However, there were no significant differences between the T-SPOT.TB
positive rates of patients with different CD4+ T-cell counts (< 10, 11-50, 51-100
and > 100 cells/μL) (χ(2) = 3.7747, p = 0.287). The patients with positive TB
culture results had significantly higher T-SPOT.TB positive rates (78.9%) than
patients that were culture-negative (44.3%) (χ(2) = 12.8303, p < 0.001). Other
variables, including gender, age, TB disease classification, HIV RNA level, and
highly reactive antiretroviral therapy (HAART), had no significant effects on
T-SPOT.TB positive rates. The number of spot-forming cells (SFCs) reactive with
ESAT-6, CFP-10 and ESAT-6/CFP-10-specific T cells detected by T-SPOT.TB were
positively is strongly related to the degree of immunodeficiency, while the
T-SPOT.TB positive rates are less dependent on the level of CD4+ T-cell depletion
in HIV infection and active TB.

DOI: 10.5582/bst.2014.01032 
PMID: 25030851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

