
1. J Med Virol. 2014 Oct;86(10):1714-21. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24015. Epub 2014 Jul 11.

Protease inhibitor resistance mutations in untreated Brazilian patients infected 
with HCV: novel insights about targeted genotyping approaches.

de Carvalho IM(1), Alves R, de Souza PA, da Silva EF, Mazo D, Carrilho FJ,
Queiroz AT, Pessoa MG.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Imunology, Butantan Institute, Avenida Doutor Vital Brasil, São Paulo,
Brazil; Applied Molecular Hepatology Laboratory (LHeMA), Hepatitis Sector,
Gastroenterology Division, São Paulo Federal University, São Paulo, Brazil.

Several new direct-acting antiviral (DAA) drugs are being developed or are
already approved for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. 
HCV variants presenting drug-resistant phenotypes were observed both in vitro and
during clinical trials. The aim of this study was to characterize amino acid
changes at positions previously associated with resistance in the NS3 protease in
untreated Brazilian patients infected with HCV genotypes 1a and 1b. Plasma
samples from 171 untreated Brazilian patients infected with HCV were obtained
from the Department of Gastroenterology of Clinics Hospital (HCFMUSP) in São
Paulo, Brazil. Nested PCR and Sanger sequencing were used to obtain genetic
information on the NS3 protein. Bioinformatics was used to confirm subtype
information and analyze frequencies of resistance mutations. The results from the
genotype analysis using non-NS3 targeted methods were at variance with those
obtained from the NS3 protease phylogenetic analyses. It was found that 7.4% of
patients infected with HCV genotype 1a showed the resistance-associated mutations
V36L, T54S, Q80K, and R155K, while 5.1% of patients infected with HCV genotype 1b
had the resistance-associated mutations V36L, Q41R, T54S, and D168S. Notably,
codons at positions 80 and 155 differed between samples from Brazilian patient
used in this study and global isolates. The present study demonstrates that
genotyping methods targeting the NS3 protein showed a difference of results when 
compared to mainstream methodologies (INNO-LiPA and polymerase sequencing). The
resistance mutations present in untreated patients infected with HCV and codon
composition bias by geographical location warrant closer examination.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24015 
PMID: 25042789  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

