
1. Immune Netw. 2014 Aug;14(4):207-18. doi: 10.4110/in.2014.14.4.207. Epub 2014 Aug 
22.

Enhancing T Cell Immune Responses by B Cell-based Therapeutic Vaccine Against
Chronic Virus Infection.

Kim MK(1), Lee A(1), Hwang YK(2), Kang CY(3), Ha SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)System Immunology Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, College of Life
Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Korea.
(2)Cell Therapy Team, Mogam Biotechnology Institute, Yongin 446-799, Korea.
(3)College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-799, Korea.

Chronic virus infection leads to the functional impairment of dendritic cells
(DCs) as well as T cells, limiting the clinical usefulness of DC-based
therapeutic vaccine against chronic virus infection. Meanwhile, B cells have been
known to maintain the ability to differentiate plasma cells producing antibodies 
even during chronic virus infection. Previously, α-galactosylceramide (αGC) and
cognate peptide-loaded B cells were comparable to DCs in priming peptide-specific
CD8(+) T cells as antigen presenting cells (APCs). Here, we investigated whether 
B cells activated by αGC can improve virus-specific T cell immune responses
instead of DCs during chronic virus infection. We found that comparable to B
cells isolated from naïve mice, chronic B cells isolated from chronically
infected mice with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) clone 13 (CL13)
after αGC-loading could activate CD1d-restricted invariant natural killer T
(iNKT) cells to produce effector cytokines and upregulate co-stimulatory
molecules in both naïve and chronically infected mice. Similar to naïve B cells, 
chronic B cells efficiently primed LCMV glycoprotein (GP) 33-41-specific P14
CD8(+) T cells in vivo, thereby allowing the proliferation of functional CD8(+) T
cells. Importantly, when αGC and cognate epitope-loaded chronic B cells were
transferred into chronically infected mice, the mice showed a significant
increase in the population of epitope-specific CD8(+) T cells and the accelerated
control of viremia. Therefore, our studies demonstrate that reciprocal activation
between αGC-loaded chronic B cells and iNKT cells can strengthen virus-specific T
cell immune responses, providing an effective regimen of autologous B cell-based 
therapeutic vaccine to treat chronic virus infection.

DOI: 10.4110/in.2014.14.4.207 
PMCID: PMC4148491
PMID: 25177253 

