
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2015 Feb;179(2):265-76. doi: 10.1111/cei.12451.

Modulation of heme oxygenase-1 by metalloporphyrins increases anti-viral T cell
responses.

Bunse CE(1), Fortmeier V, Tischer S, Zilian E, Figueiredo C, Witte T, Blasczyk R,
Immenschuh S, Eiz-Vesper B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Transfusion Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany; Integrated Research and Treatment Centre Transplantation - IFB-Tx,
Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Heme oxygenase (HO)-1, the inducible isoform of HO, has immunomodulatory
functions and is considered a target for therapeutic interventions. In the
present study, we investigated whether modulation of HO-1 might have regulatory
effects on in-vitro T cell activation. The study examined whether: (i) HO-1
induction by cobalt-protoporphyrin (CoPP) or inhibition by tin-mesoporphyrin
(SnMP) can affect expansion and function of virus-specific T cells, (ii) HO-1
modulation might have a functional effect on other cell populations mediating
effects on proliferating T cells [e.g. dendritic cells (DCs), regulatory T cells 
(T(regs)) and natural killer cells] and (iii) HO-1-modulated anti-viral T cells
might be suitable for adoptive immunotherapy. Inhibition of HO-1 via SnMP in
cytomegalovirus (CMV)pp65-peptide-pulsed peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) led to increased anti-viral T cell activation and the generation of a
higher proportion of effector memory T cells (CD45RA(-) CD62L(-)) with increased 
capability to secrete interferon (IFN)-γ and granzyme B. T(reg) depletion and
SnMP exposure increased the number of anti-viral T cells 15-fold. To test the
possibility that HO-1 modulation might be clinically applicable in conformity
with good manufacturing practice (GMP), SnMP was tested in isolated anti-viral T 
cells using the cytokine secretion assay. Compared to control, SnMP treatment
resulted in higher cell counts and purity without negative impact on quality and 
effector function [CD107a, IFN-γ and tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α levels were
stable]. These results suggest an important role of HO-1 in the modulation of
adaptive immune responses. HO-1 inhibition resulted in markedly more effective
generation of functionally active T cells suitable for adoptive T cell therapy.

© 2014 British Society for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/cei.12451 
PMCID: PMC4298404
PMID: 25196646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

