
1. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 26;9(9):e108430. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108430.
eCollection 2014.

Simulation modelling of population dynamics of mosquito vectors for rift valley
Fever virus in a disease epidemic setting.

Mweya CN(1), Holst N(2), Mboera LE(3), Kimera SI(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Medical Research, Tukuyu, Tanzania; Department of
Veterinary Medicine and Public Health, Sokoine University of Agriculture,
Morogoro, Tanzania.
(2)Department of Agroecology, Aarhus University, Slagelse, Denmark.
(3)National Institute for Medical Research, Dar es salaam, Tanzania.
(4)Department of Veterinary Medicine and Public Health, Sokoine University of
Agriculture, Morogoro, Tanzania.

BACKGROUND: Rift Valley Fever (RVF) is weather dependent arboviral infection of
livestock and humans. Population dynamics of mosquito vectors is associated with 
disease epidemics. In our study, we use daily temperature and rainfall as model
inputs to simulate dynamics of mosquito vectors population in relation to disease
epidemics.
METHODS/FINDINGS: Time-varying distributed delays (TVDD) and multi-way functional
response equations were implemented to simulate mosquito vectors and hosts
developmental stages and to establish interactions between stages and phases of
mosquito vectors in relation to vertebrate hosts for infection introduction in
compartmental phases. An open-source modelling platforms, Universal Simulator and
Qt integrated development environment were used to develop models in C++
programming language. Developed models include source codes for mosquito
fecundity, host fecundity, water level, mosquito infection, host infection,
interactions, and egg time. Extensible Markup Language (XML) files were used as
recipes to integrate source codes in Qt creator with Universal Simulator plug-in.
We observed that Floodwater Aedines and Culicine population continued to
fluctuate with temperature and water level over simulation period while
controlled by availability of host for blood feeding. Infection in the system was
introduced by floodwater Aedines. Culicines pick infection from infected host
once to amplify disease epidemic. Simulated mosquito population show sudden
unusual increase between December 1997 and January 1998 a similar period when RVF
outbreak occurred in Ngorongoro district.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Findings presented here provide new opportunities for
weather-driven RVF epidemic simulation modelling. This is an ideal approach for
understanding disease transmission dynamics towards epidemics prediction,
prevention and control. This approach can be used as an alternative source for
generation of calibrated RVF epidemics data in different settings.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108430 
PMCID: PMC4178157
PMID: 25259792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

