
1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2015 Jan 30;64(3):63-6.

Public health response to commercial airline travel of a person with Ebola virus 
infection - United States, 2014.

Regan JJ, Jungerman R, Montiel SH, Newsome K, Objio T, Washburn F, Roland E,
Petersen E, Twentyman E, Olaiya O, Naughton M, Alvarado-Ramy F, Lippold SA,
Tabony L, McCarty CL, Kinsey CB, Barnes M, Black S, Azzam I, Stanek D, Sweitzer
J, Valiani A, Kohl KS, Brown C, Pesik N; Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC).

Before the current Ebola epidemic in West Africa, there were few documented cases
of symptomatic Ebola patients traveling by commercial airline, and no evidence of
transmission to passengers or crew members during airline travel. In July 2014
two persons with confirmed Ebola virus infection who were infected early in the
Nigeria outbreak traveled by commercial airline while symptomatic, involving a
total of four flights (two international flights and two Nigeria domestic
flights). It is not clear what symptoms either of these two passengers
experienced during flight; however, one collapsed in the airport shortly after
landing, and the other was documented to have fever, vomiting, and diarrhea on
the day the flight arrived. Neither infected passenger transmitted Ebola to other
passengers or crew on these flights. In October 2014, another airline passenger, 
a U.S. health care worker who had traveled domestically on two commercial
flights, was confirmed to have Ebola virus infection. Given that the time of
onset of symptoms was uncertain, an Ebola airline contact investigation in the
United States was conducted. In total, follow-up was conducted for 268 contacts
in nine states, including all 247 passengers from both flights, 12 flight crew
members, eight cleaning crew members, and one federal airport worker (81 of these
contacts were documented in a report published previously). All contacts were
accounted for by state and local jurisdictions and followed until completion of
their 21-day incubation periods. No secondary cases of Ebola were identified in
this investigation, confirming that transmission of Ebola during commercial air
travel did not occur.


PMCID: PMC4584560
PMID: 25632954  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

