
1. J S Afr Vet Assoc. 2014 Nov 14;85(1):e1-e6. doi: 10.4102/jsava.v85i1.1102.

Culicoides species abundance and potential over-wintering of African horse
sickness virus in the Onderstepoort area, Gauteng, South Africa.

Venter GJ(1), Labuschagne K, Majatladi D, Boikanyo SN, Lourens C, Ebersohn K,
Venter EH.

Author information: 
(1)Parasites, Vectors and Vector-borne Diseases Programme, Agricultural Research 
Council - Onderstepoort Veterinary Institute, South Africa; Department of
Veterinary Tropical Diseases, University of Pretoria, South Africa.
VenterG@arc.agric.za.

In South Africa, outbreaks of African horse sickness (AHS) occur in summer; no
cases are reported in winter, from July to September. The AHS virus (AHSV) is
transmitted almost exclusively by Culicoides midges (Diptera: Ceratopogonidae),
of which Culicoides imicola is considered to be the most important vector. The
over-wintering mechanism of AHSV is unknown. In this study, more than 500 000
Culicoides midges belonging to at least 26 species were collected in 88 light
traps at weekly intervals between July 2010 and September 2011 near horses in the
Onderstepoort area of South Africa. The dominant species was C. imicola. Despite 
relatively low temperatures and frost, at least 17 species, including C. imicola,
were collected throughout winter (June-August). Although the mean number of
midges per night fell from &gt; 50 000 (March) to &lt; 100 (July and August), no 
midge-free periods were found. This study, using virus isolation on cell cultures
and a reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay, confirmed
low infection prevalence in field midges and that the detection of virus
correlated to high numbers. Although no virus was detected during this winter
period, continuous adult activity indicated that transmission can potentially
occur. The absence of AHSV in the midges during winter can be ascribed to the
relatively low numbers collected coupled to low infection prevalence, low virus
replication rates and low virus titres in the potentially infected midges. Cases 
of AHS in susceptible animals are likely to start as soon as Culicoides
populations reach a critical level.

DOI: 10.4102/jsava.v85i1.1102 
PMID: 25686125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

