
1. Ter Arkh. 2014;86(11):55-9.

[Adenovirus pneumonia with a fatal outcome in adults].

[Article in Russian]

Yatsyshina SB, Samchuk VV, Vasilyev VV, Ageeva MR, Vorobyeva NS, Savochkina YA,
Bulanenko VP, Shipulin GA, Maleev VV.

AIM: To retrospectively analyze the medical records of patients who have died
from complications of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) caused by adenovirus
serotype 7.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: CAP was diagnosed in patients (6 men aged 19-24 years and 1
woman aged 49 years) on the basis of clinical, laboratory, and radiological
findings. Adenoviral pneumonia was established by real-time polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). Adenovirus DNA was detected in the patients' autopsy samples
(lungs, brain, spleen, liver, blood). The adenoviruses were referred to as B1
serotype 7 on the basis of hexone gene sequencing results. Other potential
causative agents of pneumonia were excluded by a battery of molecular genetic
tests for a wide range of viral and bacterial pathogens of acute respiratory
tract infections.
RESULTS: In all cases, the disease began acutely with fever (37.8 to 39 Â°C),
weakness, headache, a sore throat, a dry, unproductive cough or runny nose.
Clinical deterioration during symptomatic therapy led to hospital admission for
CAP on disease days 2-11. The patients continued to feel worse during massive
antibiotic therapy, by switching a drug one to six times and by simultaneously
using 2-4 antibiotics and intensive therapy. Death occurred on disease days
10-24. Postmortem examination of all the patients revealed acute respiratory
distress syndrome and multiple organ failure.
CONCLUSION: Adenovirus pneumonia causes diagnostic and therapeutic problems for
clinicians. The clinical introduction of PCR methods for the diagnosis of viral
infections allow the clinicians to elaborate and timely use effective management 
tactics in patients with adenoviral pneumonia and to prevent their death. It is
necessary to design etiotropic therapy agents and to introduce the specific
prevention of adenovirus infection in risk groups.


PMID: 25715488  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

