
1. ACS Nano. 2015 May 26;9(5):4925-38. doi: 10.1021/nn5066793. Epub 2015 Apr 24.

pH-Responsive Poly(D,L-lactic-co-glycolic acid) Nanoparticles with Rapid Antigen 
Release Behavior Promote Immune Response.

Liu Q(1), Chen X(1), Jia J(1), Zhang W(1), Yang T, Wang L, Ma G(2).

Author information: 
(1)‡University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, People's Republic
of China.
(2)§Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering
(Tianjin), Tianjin, 300072, People's Republic of China.

In the quest to treat intracellular infectious diseases and virus infection,
nanoparticles (NPs) have been considered to be efficient tools for inducing
potent immune responses, specifically cellular immunity. Antigen processing and
presenting by antigen presenting cells (APCs) could influence immune response,
especially the priming of T-cell-mediated cellular immunity. Here, we fabricated 
pH-responsive poly(D,L-lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) NPs with rapid antigen
intracellular release behavior in APCs. The NPs, which had thin shells and large 
inner space, contain ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3), which could regulate release
in endosomes and lysosomes, acting as an antigen release promoter in dendritic
cells (DCs), and were coencapsulated with antigen (ovalbumin, OVA). Hydrogen ions
(H(+)) in DC endosomes and lysosomes (pH ∼5.0 and 6.5) could react with NH4HCO3
to generate NH3 and CO2, which broke NPs and released antigens. After uptake by
DCs, antigens encapsulated in pH-responsive PLGA NPs could escape from lysosomes 
into the cytoplasm and be cross-presented. Moreover, the NPs induced
up-regulation of co-stimulatory molecules and stimulated cytokine production.
Mouse immunization with pH-responsive PLGA NPs induced greater lymphocyte
activation, more antigen-specific CD8(+) T cells, stronger cytotoxic capacity
(IFN-γ and granzyme B), enhanced antigen-specific IgG antibodies, and higher
serum IgG2a/IgG1, indicating cellular immunity. The NPs also improved generation 
of memory T cells to protect against reinfection. Thus, pH-responsive PLGA NPs,
which induced strong cellular immune responses and offered antibody protection,
could be potentially useful as effective vaccine delivery and adjuvant systems
for the therapy of intracellular infectious diseases and virus infection.

DOI: 10.1021/nn5066793 
PMID: 25898266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

