
1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2015 Jun;21(6):1419-27. doi: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000344.

Metagenomic analysis of microbiome in colon tissue from subjects with
inflammatory bowel diseases reveals interplay of viruses and bacteria.

Wang W(1), Jovel J, Halloran B, Wine E, Patterson J, Ford G, OʼKeefe S, Meng B,
Song D, Zhang Y, Tian Z, Wasilenko ST, Rahbari M, Reza S, Mitchell T, Jordan T,
Carpenter E, Madsen K, Fedorak R, Dielemann LA, Ka-Shu Wong G, Mason AL.

Author information: 
(1)*Center of Excellence in Gastrointestinal Inflammation and Immunity Research, 
Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada; and †Beijing
Genomics Institute, Shenzhen, China.

Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, are
poorly understood disorders affecting the intestinal tract. The current model for
disease suggests that genetically susceptible patients develop intolerance to gut
microflora, and chronic inflammation develops as a result of environmental
insults. Although interest has mainly focused on studying genetic variants and
gut bacterial flora, little is known about the potential of viral infection to
contribute to disease. Accordingly, we conducted a metagenomic analysis to
document the baseline virome in colonic biopsy samples from patients with IBD in 
order to assess the contribution of viral infection to IBD. Libraries were
generated from colon RNA to create approximately 2 GB sequence data per library. 
Using a bioinformatic pipeline designed to detect viral sequences, more than 1000
viral reads were derived directly from tissue without any coculture or isolation 
procedure. Herein, we describe the complexity and abundance of viruses,
bacteria/bacteriophage, and human endogenous retroviral sequences from 10
patients with IBD and 5 healthy subjects undergoing surveillance colonoscopy.
Differences in gut microflora and the abundance of mammalian viruses and human
endogenous retroviruses were readily detected in the metagenomic analyses.
Specifically, patients with herpesviridae sequences in their colon demonstrated
increased expression of human endogenous viral sequences and differences in the
diversity of their microbiome. This study provides a promising metagenomic
approach to describe the colonic microbiome that can be used to better understand
virus-host and phage-bacteria interactions in IBD.

DOI: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000344 
PMCID: PMC4450971
PMID: 25939040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

