
1. Soft Matter. 2015 Nov 28;11(44):8621-31. doi: 10.1039/c5sm01778e.

Characterization and control of surfactant-mediated Norovirus interactions.

Mertens BS(1), Velev OD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, NC 27695-7905, USA. odvelev@ncsu.edu.

Understanding of the colloidal interactions of Norovirus particles in aqueous
medium could provide insights on the origins of the notorious stability and
infectivity of these widespread viral agents. We characterized the effects of
solution pH and surfactant type and concentration on the aggregation, dispersion,
and disassembly of Norovirus virus-like particles (VLPs) using dynamic light
scattering, electrophoretic light scattering, and transmission electron
microscopy. Owing to net negative surface charge of the VLPs at neutral pH, low
concentrations of cationic surfactant tend to aggregate the VLPs, whereas low
concentrations of anionic surfactant tend to disperse the particles. Increasing
the concentration of these surfactants beyond their critical micelle
concentration leads to virus capsid disassembly and breakdown of aggregates.
Non-ionic surfactants, however, had little effect on virus interactions and
likely stabilized them additionally in suspension. The data were interpreted on
the basis of simple models for surfactant binding and re-charging of the virus
capsid. We used zeta potential data to characterize virus surface charge and
interpret the mechanisms behind these demonstrated surfactant-virus interactions.
The fundamental understanding and control of these interactions will aid in
practical formulations for virus inactivation and removal from contaminated
surfaces.

DOI: 10.1039/c5sm01778e 
PMCID: PMC4666303
PMID: 26378627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

