
1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(16):7211-7.

Diagnostic and Prognostic Roles of Serum Osteopontin and Osteopontin Promoter
Polymorphisms in Hepatitis B-related Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

Chimparlee N(1), Chuaypen N, Khlaiphuengsin A, Pinjaroen N, Payungporn S,
Poovorawan Y, Tangkijvanich P.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Hepatitis and Liver Cancer, Department of Biochemistry,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand E-mail : pisittkvn@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: The aims of this study were to evaluate the diagnostic and prognostic
roles of serum osteopontin (OPN) and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
the OPN promoter in patients with hepatitis B-related hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Four groups were studied, which included 157 patients with
HCC, 73 with liver cirrhosis (LC) and 97 with chronic hepatitis (CH), along with 
80 healthy subjects. Serum OPN and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) levels were measured. 
The SNPs -66 T/G, -156 G/Î´G and -433 C/T within the OPN promoter were determined 
by direct sequencing.
RESULTS: Serum OPN levels were significantly higher in patients with HCC than in 
the other groups. Area under receiver operating characteristics curves in
distinguishing HCC from chronic liver disease (CLD; CH and LC) were 0.782 (95%
CI; 0.729-0.834) for OPN and 0.888 (95% CI; 0.850-0.927) for AFP. Using the
optimal cut-off value (70 ng/mL), OPN had sensitivity and specificity of 72% and 
71%, respectively. Serum OPN was superior to AFP in detecting early-stage HCC
(68% vs. 46%). A combination of both markers yielded an improved sensitivity for 
detecting early HCC to 82%. A high OPN level was significantly correlated with
advanced BCLC stage and was an independent prognostic factor for HCC. The SNPs
-156 and -443 were associated with susceptibility to HCC, but were not related to
overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Serum OPN is a useful diagnostic and prognostic marker for HCC. The 
combined use of serum OPN and AFP improved the diagnosis of early HCC. Genetic
variation in the OPN promoter is associated with the risk, but not the prognosis 
of HCC.

DOI: 10.7314/apjcp.2015.16.16.7211 
PMID: 26514514  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

