
1. Epidemiol Infect. 2016 May;144(7):1528-37. doi: 10.1017/S0950268815002605. Epub
2015 Nov 13.

Estimating the critical immunity threshold for preventing hepatitis A outbreaks
in men who have sex with men.

Regan DG(1), Wood JG(2), Benevent C(3), Ali H(1), Smith LW(1), Robertson PW(4),
Ferson MJ(2), Fairley CK(5), Donovan B(1), Law MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Kirby Institute,UNSW Australia,Sydney,NSW,Australia.
(2)The School of Public Health and Community Medicine,UNSW
Australia,Sydney,NSW,Australia.
(3)École Nationale Supérieure de Techniques Avanceés,Palaiseau Cedex,France.
(4)South Eastern Area Laboratory Services,Prince of Wales
Hospital,Sydney,NSW,Australia.
(5)Central Clinical School,Monash University,Melbourne,VIC,Australia.

Several outbreaks of hepatitis A in men who have sex with men (MSM) were reported
in the 1980s and 1990s in Australia and other countries. An effective hepatitis A
virus (HAV) vaccine has been available in Australia since 1994 and is recommended
for high-risk groups including MSM. No outbreaks of hepatitis A in Australian MSM
have been reported since 1996. In this study, we aimed to estimate HAV
transmissibility in MSM populations in order to inform targets for vaccine
coverage in such populations. We used mathematical models of HAV transmission in 
a MSM population to estimate the basic reproduction number (R 0) and the
probability of an HAV epidemic occurring as a function of the immune proportion. 
We estimated a plausible range for R 0 of 1·71-3·67 for HAV in MSM and that
sustained epidemics cannot occur once the proportion immune to HAV is greater
than ~70%. To our knowledge this is the first estimate of R 0 and the critical
population immunity threshold for HAV transmission in MSM. As HAV is no longer
endemic in Australia or in most other developed countries, vaccination is the
only means of maintaining population immunity >70%. Our findings provide impetus 
to promote HAV vaccination in high-risk groups such as MSM.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268815002605 
PMID: 26566273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

