
1. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 24;6(37):39398-407. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6347.

Metformin for cancer and aging prevention: is it a time to make the long story
short?

Anisimov VN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis and Oncogerontology, N.N.Petrov Research
Institute of Oncology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.

During the last decade, the burst of interest is observed to antidiabetic
biguanide metformin as candidate drug for cancer chemoprevention. The analysis of
the available data have shown that the efficacy of cancer preventive effect of
metformin (MF) and another biguanides, buformin (BF) and phenformin (PF), has
been studied in relation to total tumor incidence and to 17 target organs, in 21 
various strains of mice, 4 strains of rats and 1 strain of hamsters (inbred,
outbred, transgenic, mutant), spontaneous (non- exposed to any carcinogenic
agent) or induced by 16 chemical carcinogens of different classes (polycycIic
aromatic hydrocarbons, nitroso compounds, estrogen, etc.), direct or indirect
(need metabolic transformation into proximal carcinogen), by total body X-rays
and Î³- irradiation, viruses, genetic modifications or special high fat diet,
using one stage and two-stage protocols of carcinogenesis, 5 routes of the
administration of antidiabetic biguanides (oral gavage, intraperitoneal or
subcutaneous injections, with drinking water or with diet) in a wide ranks of
doses and treatment regimens. In the majority of cases (86%) the treatment with
biguanides leads to inhibition of carcinogenesis. In 14% of the cases inhibitory 
effect of the drugs was not observed. Very important that there was no any case
of stimulation of carcinogenesis by antidiabetic biguanides. It was conclude that
there is sufficient experimental evidence of anti-carcinogenic effect of
antidiabetic biguanides.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.6347 
PMCID: PMC4741834
PMID: 26583576  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

