
1. J Microbiol Methods. 2016 Mar;122:1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2015.12.015. Epub
2015 Dec 29.

Development of single chain variable fragment (scFv) antibodies against surface
proteins of 'Ca. Liberibacter asiaticus'.

Yuan Q(1), Jordan R(2), Brlansky RH(3), Minenkova O(4), Hartung J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Plant Pathology Lab, USDA-ARS, Beltsville, MD 20705, United States.
(2)United States National Arboretum, USDA-ARS, Beltsville, MD 20705, United
States.
(3)Citrus Research and Education Center, University of Florida, Lake Alfred, FL
33850, United States.
(4)Sigma-tau Pharmaceuticals, Rome, Italy.

'Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus' is the causal agent of citrus huanglongbing, 
the most serious disease of citrus worldwide. We have developed and applied
immunization and affinity screening methods to develop a primary library of
recombinant single chain variable fragment (scFv) antibodies in an M13 vector,
pKM19. The antibody population is enriched for antibodies that bind antigens of
'Ca. Liberibacter asiaticus'. The primary library has more than 10(7) unique
antibodies and the genes that encode them. We have screened this library for
antibodies that bind to specifically-chosen proteins that are present on the
surface of 'Ca. Liberibacter asiaticus'. These proteins were used as targets for 
affinity-based selection of scFvs that bind to the major outer membrane protein, 
OmpA; the polysaccharide capsule protein KpsF; a protein component of the type IV
pilus (CapF); and, two flagellar proteins FlhA and FlgI. These scFvs have been
used in ELISA and dot blot assays against purified protein antigens and 'Ca.
Liberibacter asiaticus' infected plant extracts. We have also recloned many of
these scFvs into a plasmid expression vector designed for the production of
scFvs. Screening of these scFvs was more efficient when phage-bound, rather than 
soluble scFvs, were used. We have demonstrated a technology to produce antibodies
at will and against any protein target encoded by 'Ca. Liberibacter asiaticus'.
Applications could include advanced diagnostic methods for huanglongbing and the 
development of immune labeling reagents for in planta applications.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mimet.2015.12.015 
PMID: 26744234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

