
1. Nature. 2016 Mar 17;531(7594):386-9. doi: 10.1038/nature17170.

Hepatitis B virus X protein identifies the Smc5/6 complex as a host restriction
factor.

Decorsière A(1), Mueller H(1), van Breugel PC(1), Abdul F(1), Gerossier L(2),
Beran RK(3), Livingston CM(3), Niu C(3), Fletcher SP(3), Hantz O(2), Strubin
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, University Medical Centre
(C.M.U.), Rue Michel-Servet 1, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.
(2)CRCL, INSERM U1052, CNRS 5286, Université de Lyon, 151, Cours A Thomas, 69424 
Lyon Cedex, France.
(3)Gilead Sciences, Inc., 333 Lakeside Drive, Foster City, California 94404, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2016 Mar 17;531(7594):313-4.

Chronic hepatitis B virus infection is a leading cause of cirrhosis and liver
cancer. Hepatitis B virus encodes the regulatory HBx protein whose primary role
is to promote transcription of the viral genome, which persists as an
extrachromosomal DNA circle in infected cells. HBx accomplishes this task by an
unusual mechanism, enhancing transcription only from extrachromosomal DNA
templates. Here we show that HBx achieves this by hijacking the cellular
DDB1-containing E3 ubiquitin ligase to target the 'structural maintenance of
chromosomes' (Smc) complex Smc5/6 for degradation. Blocking this event inhibits
the stimulatory effect of HBx both on extrachromosomal reporter genes and on
hepatitis B virus transcription. Conversely, silencing the Smc5/6 complex
enhances extrachromosomal reporter gene transcription in the absence of HBx,
restores replication of an HBx-deficient hepatitis B virus, and rescues wild-type
hepatitis B virus in a DDB1-knockdown background. The Smc5/6 complex associates
with extrachromosomal reporters and the hepatitis B virus genome, suggesting a
direct mechanism of transcriptional inhibition. These results uncover a novel
role for the Smc5/6 complex as a restriction factor selectively blocking
extrachromosomal DNA transcription. By destroying this complex, HBx relieves the 
inhibition to allow productive hepatitis B virus gene expression.

DOI: 10.1038/nature17170 
PMID: 26983541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

