
1. J Diabetes Investig. 2016 Jul;7(4):637-640. doi: 10.1111/jdi.12393. Epub 2015 Aug
19.

Case of disseminated pyomyositis in poorly controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus
with diabetic ketoacidosis.

Tanabe A(1), Kaneto H(1), Kamei S(1), Hirata Y(1), Hisano Y(1), Sanada J(1), Irie
S(1), Kinoshita T(1), Tatsumi F(1), Shimoda M(1), Kohara K(1), Mune T(1), Kaku
K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes, Metabolism and Endocrinology, Kawasaki Medical School,
Kurashiki, Japan.

Primary pyomyositis is a pyogenic and uncommon infection of skeletal muscle,
which is mainly observed in tropical areas and/or human immunodeficiency virus
patients. In non-human immunodeficiency virus infected patients, the most common 
cause is diabetes mellitus. Because of its rarity, the accurate diagnosis is
often challenging. Staphylococcus aureus is the most common causative bacteria.
According to the severity, pyomyositis is divided into three stages, and the late
stage is occasionally lethal. The present case was compatible with the most
advanced stage. Therefore, it was very difficult to save her life without precise
and timely diagnosis. Furthermore, in the invasive stage, surgical drainage and
broad-spectrum antibiotics should be given for a long enough period. Here, we
report a case of a Japanese woman who developed disseminated abscesses under
poorly controlled diabetic conditions accompanied by ketoacidosis, but was
successfully treated without any sequelae.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Diabetes Investigation published by Asian
Association for the Study of Diabetes (AASD) and John Wiley & Sons Australia,
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jdi.12393 
PMCID: PMC4931217
PMID: 27181931 

