
1. Virus Res. 2016 Jul 2;219:11-21. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2016.05.012.

Reprint of "Novel mycoviruses discovered from metatranscriptomics survey of
soybean phyllosphere phytobiomes".

Marzano SL(1), Domier LL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Crop Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Crop Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, USA; United
States Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service, Urbana, IL, USA. 
Electronic address: leslie.domier@ars.usda.gov.

Republished from
    Virus Res. 2016 Feb 2;213:332-342.

Mycoviruses can be beneficial to plants in that they can debilitate pathogenic
fungi thereby reducing the severity of associated plant diseases. Studies to date
have focused primarily on culturable fungi that represent a fraction of natural
fungal populations. The nonculturable fungi, however, can harbor diverse
populations of mycoviruses that reduce plant disease or enhance resistance to
abiotic stress. Metatranscriptome analysis of field-grown plant samples using
high-throughput sequencing offers the possibility of unbiased detection and
quantification of mycoviruses regardless of the culturability of their fungal
hosts together with the complete associated microbial consortia. In this study,
we describe the fungal viromes of the phyllosphere of production soybean fields
in Illinois, USA by analyzing the metatranscriptomes of thousands of soybean leaf
samples collected during the 2008 and 2009 growing seasons. The analyses
identified 25 partial genome sequences that represented at least 22 mycovirus
genomes, only one of which had been described previously. The novel mycovirus
genomes showed similarity to 10 distinct lineages including the genera
Alphapartitivirus, Botybirnavirus, Endornavirus, Mitovirus, Mycoflexivirus,
Ourmiavirus, Totivirus, Victorivirus, family Tombusviridae, order
Mononegavirales, and the recently proposed genus Gemycircularvirus. The present
study adds to the wealth of mycoviruses associated with plant phytobiomes and
establishes groundwork needed for further characterization of the viruses.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2016.05.012 
PMID: 27208848 

