
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2016 Sep;43:130-4. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.05.021. Epub
2016 May 17.

Phylodynamics of DENV-1 reveals the spatiotemporal co-circulation of two distinct
lineages in 2013 and multiple introductions of dengue virus in Goiás, Brazil.

Cunha Mdos P(1), Guimarães VN(1), Souza M(1), de Paula Cardoso Dd(1), de Almeida 
TN(1), de Oliveira TS(1), Fiaccadori FS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Federal University of Goiás, Goiânia, Goiás, Brazil.
(2)Federal University of Goiás, Goiânia, Goiás, Brazil. Electronic address:
fabiolasf@gmail.com.

Dengue virus type 1 (DENV-1) was the first serotype introduced in Brazil, during 
in the 1980s. Since then, this virus has spread in the Brazilian territory,
causing several outbreaks. In 2013 the highest number of dengue cases was
notified, when compared to the previous years in Brazil, and the state of Goiás
reported over 160 thousand cases. In this study, we aimed to present the
Phylodynamics of DENV-1 isolates from the state of Goiás, Brazil, during 2013
outbreak, based on the envelope gene (E) sequences. Phylogenetic analysis
revealed that Brazilian DENV-1 isolates are grouped together with viruses from
genotype V in two distinct lineages (lineage I and lineage II) reflecting
co-circulation. Phylogeographic analyses showed that these lineages were
introduced in different moments in Goiás, Brazil, using distinct routes, likely
originated from the Caribbean. Lineage I was first introduced coming from Rio de 
Janeiro (2007-2012), followed by the introduction from Argentina (2010-2013).
Lineage II was introduced in a single moment from Rio de Janeiro and this clade
has existed since 2007-2010. The different viral introduction events demonstrate 
the viral dispersion process with neighboring regions, which is essential for the
maintenance of outbreaks and introduction of new emerging viruses. In conclusion,
obtained data reveals the importance of continuous molecular surveillance of this
virus in different regions, providing a better understanding of DENV-1
circulation, considering the evolutionary and virus spread patterns.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.05.021 
PMID: 27223633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

