
1. Sci Rep. 2016 May 26;6:26717. doi: 10.1038/srep26717.

Phage selection restores antibiotic sensitivity in MDR Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Chan BK(1), Sistrom M(2), Wertz JE(3), Kortright KE(4), Narayan D(5), Turner
PE(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.
(2)School of Natural Sciences, University of California Merced, Merced, CA,
95343, USA.
(3)E. coli Genetic Stock Center, Department of Molecular, Cellular and
Developmental Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(4)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.
(5)Department of Surgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(6)Program in Microbiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Increasing prevalence and severity of multi-drug-resistant (MDR) bacterial
infections has necessitated novel antibacterial strategies. Ideally, new
approaches would target bacterial pathogens while exerting selection for reduced 
pathogenesis when these bacteria inevitably evolve resistance to therapeutic
intervention. As an example of such a management strategy, we isolated a lytic
bacteriophage, OMKO1, (family Myoviridae) of Pseudomonas aeruginosa that utilizes
the outer membrane porin M (OprM) of the multidrug efflux systems MexAB and MexXY
as a receptor-binding site. Results show that phage selection produces an
evolutionary trade-off in MDR P. aeruginosa, whereby the evolution of bacterial
resistance to phage attack changes the efflux pump mechanism, causing increased
sensitivity to drugs from several antibiotic classes. Although modern phage
therapy is still in its infancy, we conclude that phages, such as OMKO1,
represent a new approach to phage therapy where bacteriophages exert selection
for MDR bacteria to become increasingly sensitive to traditional antibiotics.
This approach, using phages as targeted antibacterials, could extend the lifetime
of our current antibiotics and potentially reduce the incidence of antibiotic
resistant infections.

DOI: 10.1038/srep26717 
PMCID: PMC4880932
PMID: 27225966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

