
1. PLoS One. 2016 Jun 3;11(6):e0156548. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0156548.
eCollection 2016.

Epidemiological and Virological Characterizations of the 2014 Dengue Outbreak in 
Guangzhou, China.

Zhao H(1), Zhang FC(2), Zhu Q(2), Wang J(2), Hong WX(2), Zhao LZ(2), Deng YQ(1), 
Qiu S(2), Zhang Y(1), Cai WP(2), Cao WC(1), Qin CF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity,
Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing, China.
(2)Guangzhou Eighth People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou,
China.

Dengue used to be recognized as an imported and sporadic disease in China. Since 
June 2014, an unexpected large dengue outbreak has attacked Guangzhou, China,
resulting in more than 40,000 cases. Among the 1,942 laboratory-confirmed
hospitalized dengue cases, 121 were diagnosed as severe dengue according to the
2009 WHO guideline, and 2 patients finally died. Laboratory diagnosis and virus
isolation demonstrated that the majority (96%) cases were caused by dengue virus 
serotype 1 (DENV-1), and the others by serotype 2 (DENV-2). 14 DENV strains were 
isolated from the sera of acute-phase dengue patients during this outbreak, and
the complete envelope (E) gene of 12 DENV-1 strains and two DENV-2 strains were
determined using RT-PCR assay. Phylogenetic analysis based on the E gene revealed
the DENV-1 strains isolated during the outbreak belonged to genotype I and V,
respectively. These isolates formed three clades. DENV-2 isolates were assigned
to the same clade belonging to genotype cosmopolitan. These strains isolated in
2014 were closely related to the isolates obtained from the same province,
Guangdong, in 2013. No amino acid mutations known to increase virulence were
identified throughout the E protein of isolates in 2014. These results indicate
that dengue is turning into endemic in Guangdong, China, and extensive
seroepidemiological investigation and mosquito control measures are critically
needed in the future.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0156548 
PMCID: PMC4892648
PMID: 27257804  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

