
1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2016 Jun;20(11):2310-4.

Mean platelet volume in hepatitis A.

Almiş H(1), Bucak IH, Çelik V, Tekin M, Karakoç F, Konca Ç, Turgut M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Adiyaman University School of Medicine, Adiyaman,
Turkey. drhabipalmis@yahoo.com.

Comment in
    Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2016 Oct;20(19):3957-3958.

OBJECTIVE: Hepatitis A virus (HAV) still continues to be a serious public health 
problem worldwide. Mean platelet volume (MPV) is a marker of platelet function
and activation. This study aimed to evaluate the relationship between MPV in
acute hepatitis A patients as compared to the control group and to assess MPV as 
an acute phase reactant in acute hepatitis A.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Seventy-six patients were enrolled in this study. The
control group consisted of 41 healthy age- and sex-matched individuals. Alanine
aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), bilirubin, prothrombin 
time (PT), platelet count (PC), serum albumin (ALB), and mean platelet volume
(MPV) levels were recorded. The diagnosis of HAV infection was based on anti-HAV 
Ig M positivity.
RESULTS: The mean levels of MPV in the study group were significantly
statistically lower than in the control group (p < 0.001). The MPV levels
revealed no correlation with the ALT, AST, ALP, and GGT levels (p > 0.05), but
the MPV levels correlated with the platelet counts (p < 0.05). A 9.75 fL [area
under the curve (AUC: 0.756)] optimal cutoff level of MPV with a sensitivity of
69.7% and specificity of 68.3% was determined in the children with acute
hepatitis A.
CONCLUSIONS: MPV levels were significantly lower in the patients with acute
hepatitis A as compared to the healthy control group. This study demonstrated
that MPV may be a negative acute phase reactant for acute hepatitis A. Further
studies will explain the role that MPV plays in inflammation and other viral
infections.


PMID: 27338056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

