
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2016 Jun;4(3). doi: 10.1128/microbiolspec.DMIH2-0008-2015.

Parvovirus B19.

Landry ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Internal Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520.

Primary parvovirus B19 infection is an infrequent, but serious and treatable,
cause of chronic anemia in immunocompromised hosts. Many compromised hosts have
preexisting antibody to B19 and are not at risk. However, upon primary infection,
some patients may be able to mount a sufficient immune response to terminate
active parvovirus B19 infection of erythroid precursors. The most common
consequence of B19 infection in the compromised host is pure red-cell aplasia,
resulting in chronic or recurrent anemia with reticulocytopenia. Anemia persists 
until neutralizing antibody is either produced by the host or passively
administered. Parvovirus B19 should be suspected in compromised hosts with
unexplained or severe anemia and reticulocytopenia, or when bone-marrow
examination shows either giant pronormoblasts or absence of red-cell precursors. 
Diagnosis is established by detection of B19 DNA in serum in the absence of IgG
antibody to B19. In some cases, IgG antibody is detected but is not neutralizing.
Anti-B19 IgM may or may not be present. Therapy includes any or all of the
following: red-cell transfusion, adjustment in medications to restore or improve 
the patient's immune system, and administration of intravenous immunoglobulin
(IVIG). Following treatment, patients should be closely monitored, especially if 
immunosuppression is unchanged or increased. Should hematocrit trend downward and
parvovirus DNA trend upward, the therapeutic options above should be revisited.
In a few instances, monthly maintenance IVIG may be indicated. Caregivers should 
be aware that B19 variants, though rarely encountered, can be missed or
under-quantitated by some real-time polymerase-chain reaction methods.

DOI: 10.1128/microbiolspec.DMIH2-0008-2015 
PMID: 27337440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

