
1. Public Health Action. 2016 Jun 21;6(2):105-10. doi: 10.5588/pha.15.0081.

High mortality in tuberculosis patients despite HIV interventions in Swaziland.

Mchunu G(1), van Griensven J(2), Hinderaker SG(3), Kizito W(4), Sikhondze W(1),
Manzi M(5), Dlamini T(1), Harries AD(6).

Author information: 
(1)National TB Control Programme, Ministry of Health, Manzini, Swaziland.
(2)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium.
(3)University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(4)Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), Operational Centre Brussels, Kenya Mission,
Nairobi, Kenya.
(5)MSF, Medical Department, Operational Research Unit, Luxembourg.
(6)International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, Paris, France ;
London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK.

SETTING: All health facilities providing tuberculosis (TB) care in Swaziland.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the impact of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
interventions on the trend of TB treatment outcomes during 2010-2013 in
Swaziland; and to describe the evolution in TB case notification, the uptake of
HIV testing, antiretroviral therapy (ART) and cotrimoxazole preventive therapy
(CPT), and the proportion of TB-HIV co-infected patients with adverse treatment
outcomes, including mortality, loss to follow-up and treatment failure.
DESIGN: A retrospective descriptive study using aggregated national TB programme 
data.
RESULTS: Between 2010 and 2013, TB case notifications in Swaziland decreased by
40%, HIV testing increased from 86% to 96%, CPT uptake increased from 93% to 99% 
and ART uptake among TB patients increased from 35% to 75%. The TB-HIV
co-infection rate remained around 70% and the proportion of TB-HIV cases with
adverse outcomes decreased from 36% to 30%. Mortality remained high, at 14-16%,
over the study period, and anti-tuberculosis treatment failure rates were stable 
over time (<5%).
CONCLUSION: Despite high CPT and ART uptake in TB-HIV patients, mortality
remained high. Further studies are required to better define high-risk patient
groups, understand the reasons for death and design appropriate interventions.

Publisher: Contexte : Toutes les structures de santé offrant une prise en charge 
de la tuberculose (TB) au Swaziland.Objectif : Décrire l'impact des interventions
pour le virus de l'immunodéficience humaine (VIH) sur les tendances des résultats
du traitement de la TB en 2010–2013, au Swaziland. Décrire l'évolution de la
notification des cas de TB, la couverture du test VIH, de le traitement
antirétroviral (TAR) et du traitement préventif au cotrimoxazole (CPT) et la
proportion de patients coinfectées par TB-VIH avec les mauvais résultats du
traitement incluant la mortalité, les abandons et les échecs du traitement.Schéma
: Etude descriptive rétrospective basée sur les données agrégées du programme
national TB.Résultats : Entre 2010 et 2013, les notifications de cas de TB
auSwaziland ont diminué de 40%, le test VIH a augmenté de 86% à 96%, la
couverture du CPT a augmenté de 93% à 99% et la couverture du TAR parmi les
patients tuberculeux est passée de 35% à 75%. Le taux de coinfection TB-VIH est
resté autour de 70% et la proportion de cas de TB-VIH avec des résultats
médiocres a diminué de 36% à 30% entre 2010 et 2013. La mortalité est restée
élevée entre 14% et 16% pendant la période d'étude et les taux d'échec du
traitement TB ont été stables dans le temps (<5%).Conclusion : En dépit d'une
couverture élevée du CPT et du TAR parmi les patients TB-VIH, la mortalité est
restée élevée. D'autres études sont nécessaires pour mieux définir les groupes de
patients à haut risque, pour mieux comprendre les causes de décès et pour
concevoir des interventions appropriées.Publisher: Marco de referencia: Todos los
establecimientos de salud que prestan atención antituberculosa en
Swasilandia.Objetivo: Describir la repercusión de las intervenciones contra el
virus de la inmunodeficiencia humana (VIH) sobre la evolución de los desenlaces
terapéuticos de la tuberculosis (TB) del 2010 al 2013 en Swasilandia. Describir
la evolución de la notificación de casos de TB, la aceptación de la prueba
diagnóstica del VIH, el tratamiento antirretrovírico (TAR) y del tratamiento
preventivo con cotrimoxazol (CPT) y la proporción de pacientes coinfectados por
el VIH y el bacilo de la TB que presenta desenlaces terapéuticos desfavorables
como la mortalidad, la pérdida durante el seguimiento y el fracaso del
tratamiento.Método: Fue este un estudio descriptivo retrospectivo a partir de los
datos agregados del Programa Nacional contra la TB.Resultados: Del 2010 al 2013, 
la notificación de casos de TB en Swasilandia disminuyó un 40%, la aceptación de 
la prueba diagnóstica del VIH aumentó de 86% a 96%, la utilización del CPT
aumentó del 93% al 99% y en los pacientes con TB, y la aceptación del TAR aumentó
del 35% al 75%. La tasa de coinfección permaneció alrededor del 70% y la
proporción de estos pacientes que presentaba desenlaces desfavorables disminuyó
del 36% en el 2010 al 30% en el 2013. Durante el período del estudio la
mortalidad permaneció alta, entre el 14% y 16%, y las tasas de fracaso del
tratamiento antituberculoso permanecieron estables con el transcurso del tiempo
(menos del 5%).Conclusión: Pese a una alta aceptación del CPT y el TAR por parte 
de los pacientes coinfectados por el VIH y la TB, la mortalidad sigue siendo
alta. Se precisan nuevos estudios que definan con mayor precisión los grupos de
pacientes con alto riesgo de desenlaces desfavorables y que contribuyan a
comprender las causas de las defunciones y a diseñar intervenciones apropiadas.
DOI: 10.5588/pha.15.0081 
PMCID: PMC4913672
PMID: 27358803 

