
1. J Insect Physiol. 2016 Aug-Sep;91-92:48-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2016.06.009. 
Epub 2016 Jun 29.

Characterization of a venom gland-associated rhabdovirus in the parasitoid wasp
Diachasmimorpha longicaudata.

Simmonds TJ(1), Carrillo D(2), Burke GR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
(2)Tropical Research and Education Center, University of Florida-IFAS, Homestead,
FL 33031, USA.
(3)Department of Entomology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
Electronic address: grburke@uga.edu.

Parasitoid wasps reproduce by laying their eggs on or inside of a host insect,
which triggers a defense response in the host insect that kills the developing
wasp. To counteract the host's lethal response, some parasitoid wasps are
associated with symbiotic viruses that alter host metabolism and development to
promote successful development of the wasp embryo. These symbiotic viruses
display a number of characteristics that differ from those of pathogenic viruses,
but are poorly understood with the exception of one group, the polydnaviruses.
Here, we characterize the genome of a non-polydnavirus associated with parasitoid
wasps, Diachasmimorpha longicaudata rhabdovirus (DlRhV), and assess its role as a
potential mutualistic virus. Our results show that the DlRhV genome contains six 
open reading frames (ORFs). Three ORFs show sequence homology to known viral
genes and one ORF encodes a previously identified protein, called
parasitism-specific protein 24 (PSP24), that has been hypothesized to play a role
in promoting successful parasitism by D. longicaudata. We constructed a phylogeny
that shows that DlRhV is most closely related to other insect-infecting
rhabdoviruses. Finally, we report that DlRhV infection does not occur in all
populations of D. longicaudata, and is not required for successful parasitism.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2016.06.009 
PMID: 27374981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

