
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2016 Oct;57:17-24. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2016.08.021. Epub
2016 Aug 13.

PcToll3 was involved in anti-Vibrio response by regulating the expression of
antimicrobial peptides in red swamp crayfish, Procambarus clarkii.

Lan JF(1), Wei S(1), Wang YQ(1), Dai YJ(1), Tu JG(1), Zhao LJ(1), Li XC(2), Qin
QW(3), Chen N(4), Lin L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquatic Animal Medicine, Research Center for Marine Biology,
College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, 430070,
China.
(2)East China Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery
Sciences, Shanghai, 200090, China.
(3)College of Marine Sciences, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou,
510642, China.
(4)Department of Aquatic Animal Medicine, Research Center for Marine Biology,
College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, 430070,
China. Electronic address: chennan@mail.hzau.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Aquatic Animal Medicine, Research Center for Marine Biology,
College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, 430070,
China; College of Animal Sciences and Technology, Zhongkai University of
Agriculture and Engineering, Guangzhou, 510225, China. Electronic address:
linli@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

Tolls and Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play an important role in host immune
defenses by regulating the expression of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) and
cytokines, but the functional differences of crustacean Tolls from Drosophila
Tolls or Mammal TLRs are largely unknown. A novel Toll receptor, named PcToll3,
was identified from red swamp crayfish, Procambarus clarkii. It was widely
expressed in all detected tissues, and its transcript in hemocytes was
up-regulated at 12 h after Vibrio parahemolyticus (Vibrio) injection or at 24 h
post white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) challenge. After knockdown of PcToll3, the 
activity of bacterial clearance was inhibited, and the expression levels of AMPs 
including Crustin1 (Cru1), Anti-lippopolysaccharide factor 1 (ALF1), and
Lysozymes1 (Lys1), which could be up-regulated by Vibrio, were all affected.
Meanwhile, PcToll3 silencing influenced the expression of myeloid differentiation
factor 88 (PcMyd88), tumor necrosis factor-associated factor 6 (PcTRAF6), and
PcDorsal, which were the counterparts of Drosophila Toll signaling pathway.
Interestingly, PcToll3 silencing inhibited translocation of PcDorsal from
cytoplasm to nucleus. Furthermore, the knockdown of PcDorsal also impaired the
expression of AMPs after Vibrio challenge. Hence, we concluded that, besides
participating in antiviral immunity, PcToll3 might also regulate the expression
of Cru1 and Lys1 to participate in anti-Vibrio immune responses by promoting
PcDorsal translocation into nucleus.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2016.08.021 
PMID: 27531577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

