
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2016 Sep 21;138(37):12176-86. doi: 10.1021/jacs.6b05458. Epub 2016
Sep 8.

Intradomain Allosteric Network Modulates Calcium Affinity of the C-Type Lectin
Receptor Langerin.

Hanske J(1)(2), Aleksić S(2), Ballaschk M(2)(3), Jurk M(4), Shanina E(1)(2),
Beerbaum M(3), Schmieder P(3), Keller BG(2), Rademacher C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Systems, Max Planck Institute of Colloids and
Interfaces , Am Mühlenberg 1, 14424 Potsdam, Germany.
(2)Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Department of Biology, Chemistry, and
Pharmacy, Freie Universität Berlin , Takustraße 3, 14195 Berlin, Germany.
(3)Leibniz-Institut für Molekulare Pharmakologie , Robert-Rössle-Straße 10, 13125
Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Bioinformatics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics ,
Ihnestraße 63-73, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Antigen uptake and processing by innate immune cells is crucial to initiate the
immune response. Therein, the endocytic C-type lectin receptors serve as pattern 
recognition receptors, detecting pathogens by their glycan structures. Herein, we
studied the carbohydrate recognition domain of Langerin, a C-type lectin receptor
involved in the host defense against viruses such as HIV and influenza as well as
bacteria and fungi. Using a combination of nuclear magnetic resonance and
molecular dynamics simulations, we unraveled the molecular determinants
underlying cargo capture and release encoded in the receptor architecture. Our
findings revealed receptor dynamics over several time scales associated with
binding and release of the essential cofactor Ca(2+) controlled by the coupled
motions of two loops. Applying mutual information theory and site-directed
mutagenesis, we identified an allosteric intradomain network that modulates the
Ca(2+) affinity depending on the pH, thereby promoting fast ligand release.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.6b05458 
PMID: 27560542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

