
1. J Wildl Dis. 2017 Jan;53(1):37-45. doi: 10.7589/2016-02-029. Epub 2016 Aug 31.

NO EVIDENCE OF INFECTION OR EXPOSURE TO HIGHLY PATHOGENIC AVIAN INFLUENZAS IN
PERIDOMESTIC WILDLIFE ON AN AFFECTED POULTRY FACILITY.

Grear DA(1), Dusek RJ(1), Walsh DP(1), Hall JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 â€‰ US Geological Survey, National Wildlife Health Center, 6006 Schroeder Rd.,
Madison, Wisconsin 53711, USA.

We evaluated the potential transmission of avian influenza viruses (AIV) in
wildlife species in three settings in association with an outbreak at a poultry
facility: 1) small birds and small mammals on a poultry facility that was
affected with highly pathogenic AIV (HPAIV) in April 2015; 2) small birds and
small mammals on a nearby poultry facility that was unaffected by HPAIV; and 3)
small birds, small mammals, and waterfowl in a nearby natural area. We
live-captured small birds and small mammals and collected samples from
hunter-harvested waterfowl to test for active viral shedding and evidence of
exposure (serum antibody) to AIV and the H5N2 HPAIV that affected the poultry
facility. We detected no evidence of shedding or specific antibody to AIV in
small mammals and small birds 5 mo after depopulation of the poultry. We detected
viral shedding and exposure to AIV in waterfowl and estimated approximately 15%
viral shedding and 60% antibody prevalence. In waterfowl, we did not detect
shedding or exposure to the HPAIV that affected the poultry facility. We also
conducted camera trapping around poultry carcass depopulation composting barns
and found regular visitation by four species of medium-sized mammals. We provide 
preliminary data suggesting that peridomestic wildlife were not an important
factor in the transmission of AIV during the poultry outbreak, nor did small
birds and mammals in natural wetland settings show wide evidence of AIV shedding 
or exposure, despite the opportunity for exposure.

DOI: 10.7589/2016-02-029 
PMID: 27580267  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

