
1. Virus Res. 2017 Mar 2;231:83-95. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2016.11.016. Epub 2016
Nov 17.

Control of human papillomavirus gene expression by alternative splicing.

Graham SV(1), Faizo AAA(2).

Author information: 
(1)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research; Institute of Infection,
Immunity and Inflammation; College of Medical Veterinary and Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Garscube Estate, Glasgow G61 1QH, Scotland, UK. Electronic
address: Sheila.Graham@gla.ac.uk.
(2)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research; Institute of Infection,
Immunity and Inflammation; College of Medical Veterinary and Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Garscube Estate, Glasgow G61 1QH, Scotland, UK.

Human papillomaviruses possess circular double stranded DNA genomes of around 8kb
in size from which multiple mRNAs are synthesized during an infectious life
cycle. Although at least three viral promoters are used to initiate
transcription, viral mRNAs are largely the product of processing of pre-mRNAs by 
alternative splicing and polyadenylation. The HPV life cycle and viral gene
expression are tightly linked to differentiation of the epithelium the virus
infects: there is an orchestrated production of viral mRNAs and proteins. In this
review we describe viral mRNA expression and the roles of the SR and hnRNP
proteins that respectively positively and negatively regulate splicing. We
discuss HPV regulation of splicing factors and detail the evidence that the
papillomavirus E2 protein has splicing-related activities. We highlight the
possibility that HPV-mediated control of splicing in differentiating epithelial
cells may be necessary to accomplish the viral replication cycle.

Copyright Â© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2016.11.016 
PMCID: PMC5335905
PMID: 27867028  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

