
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Dec 6;6:38313. doi: 10.1038/srep38313.

Limited HIV-1 Reactivation in Resting CD4+ T cells from Aviremic Patients under
Protease Inhibitors.

Kumar A(1), Abbas W(1), Bouchat S(2), Gatot JS(2), Pasquereau S(1), Kabeya K(3), 
Clumeck N(3), De Wit S(3), Van Lint C(2), Herbein G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Pathogens &Inflammation Laboratory, University of
Franche-Comté, COMUE Bourgogne Franche-Comté University, UPRES EA4266, SFR FED
4234, CHRU Besançon, France.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, IBMM, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB),
Gosselies, Belgium.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, CHU St-Pierre, ULB, Bruxelles, Belgium.

A latent viral reservoir that resides in resting CD4+ T cells represents a major 
barrier for eradication of HIV infection. We test here the impact of HIV protease
inhibitor (PI) based combination anti-retroviral therapy (cART) over
nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI)-based cART on HIV-1
reactivation and integration in resting CD4+ T cells. This is a prospective
cohort study of patients with chronic HIV-1 infection treated with conventional
cART with an undetectable viremia. We performed a seven-year study of 47 patients
with chronic HIV-infection treated with cART regimens and with undetectable
plasma HIV-1 RNA levels for at least 1 year. Of these 47 patients treated with
cART, 24 were treated with a PI-based regimen and 23 with a NNRTI-based regimen
as their most recent treatment for more than one year. We evaluated the HIV-1
reservoir using reactivation assay and integrated HIV-1 DNA, respectively, in
resting CD4+ T cells. Resting CD4+ T cells isolated from PI-treated patients
compared to NNRTI-treated patients showed a limited HIV-1 reactivation upon
T-cell stimulation (p = 0·024) and a lower level of HIV-1 integration
(p = 0·024). Our study indicates that PI-based cART could be more efficient than 
NNRTI-based cART for limiting HIV-1 reactivation in aviremic chronically infected
patients.

DOI: 10.1038/srep38313 
PMCID: PMC5138822
PMID: 27922055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

