
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016 Dec 7;95(6):1368-1375. Epub 2016 Oct 24.

Barriers to Linkage to Care for Hepatitis B Virus Infection: A Qualitative
Analysis in Burkina Faso, West Africa.

Giles-Vernick T(1), Hejoaka F(2)(3), Sanou A(4), Shimakawa Y(5), Bamba I(6),
Traoré A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Emerging Diseases Epidemiology Unit, Pasteur Institute, Paris, France.
tamara.giles-vernick@pasteur.fr.
(2)Unité Mixte Internationale (UMI) 233/U1175 TransVIH, Institut de Recherche
pour le Développement/Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale
(INSERM), Montpellier, France.
(3)Centre de Recherche sur les Médiations, Université de Lorraine, Metz, France.
(4)Groupe de Recherche Action en Santé, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.
(5)Emerging Diseases Epidemiology Unit, Pasteur Institute, Paris, France.
(6)Sciences de l'Homme Appliquées au Développement et à l'Evaluation des
Interventions (SHADEI), Centre Muraz, Bobo-Dioulasso, Burkina Faso.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a critical global health problem. The World 
Health Organization (WHO) has recently developed a global elimination strategy
for HBV infection. Increasing access to screening, liver assessment, and
antiviral treatment are crucial steps in achieving this goal. Little is known,
however, about obstacles to linkage to care in low- and middle-income countries. 
Using a grounded theory approach, this qualitative study sought to characterize
the diagnostic itineraries of people with chronic HBV infection in Burkina Faso, 
a west African country with high HBV prevalence, to identify barriers to linkage 
from screening to specialist care with hepatic assessment (alanine transaminase
and hepatitis B e antigen or HBV DNA). We conducted 80 semistructured interviews 
with chronically infected people, their families, medical personnel, and
traditional practitioners, and participant observation of HBV diagnostic
announcements and consultations. Of 30 individuals diagnosed with chronic viral
hepatitis, 18 inadvertently discovered their status through blood screening and
12 actively sought diagnosis for their symptoms. Only a quarter (8/30) were
linked to care. Barriers included: 1) patients' ability to pay for testing and
treatment; 2) a formal health system lacking trained personnel, diagnostic
infrastructures, and other resources; 3) patients' familial and social networks
that discouraged access to testing and HBV knowledge; 4) a well-developed demand 
for and provisioning of traditional medicine for hepatitis; and 5) a weak global 
politics around HBV. More training for medical personnel would improve linkage to
care in sub-Saharan Africa. Developing effective communications between medical
workers and patients should be a major priority in this elimination strategy.

© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0398 
PMCID: PMC5154452
PMID: 27928086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

