
1. Asian Pac J Allergy Immunol. 2016 Dec;34(4):249-264. doi: 10.12932/AP0803.

The potential impact of gut microbiota on your health:Current status and future
challenges.

Sirisinha S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.

Our health and probably also our behaviors and mood depend not only on what we
eat or what we do (lifestyle behaviors), but also on what we host. It is well
established for decades that all vertebrates including humans are colonized by a 
wide array of bacteria, fungi, eukaryotic parasites and viruses, and that, at
steady state (homeostasis), this community of microbes establishes a friendly
mutual relationship with the host. The term microbiota was originally meant to
represent an ecological community of commensals and potentially pathogenic
microbes that live within our bodies, but it is now used interchangeably with the
term microbiome which was initially meant to represent a collective genome of the
microbiota. Although the number of microbes that live in or on our body was
previously estimated to outnumber that of their hosts by 10 to 1, the latest
estimate put the ratio to be closer to 1:1. On the other hand, their collective
genomes (microbiome) outnumber those of the host by 100-200 times. It is not
surprising therefore that these microbes not only provide the host with a variety
of metabolic impact, but can also modulate tissue integrity and immune defense,
all of which lead to a healthy ecosystem (symbiosis) that is unfavorable for
colonization and invasion of pathogens. Microbiota is well known for its role in 
development and education of immune system. However, its link with diseases is
less known and it is only recently that there is a surge of interest in the
potential impact of microbiota on human health and disease. The diversity and
composition of microbiota (healthy microbiota profile) are dynamics, depending
not only on the host physical status, genotype and immune phenotype, but also on 
the environmental factors like diet, antibiotic usage and lifestyle behaviors.
These environmental factors may adversely alter gut ecosystem (dysbiosis) that is
frequently associated with increased susceptibility to infections as well as to
non-communicable diseases like obesity, metabolic syndromes (e.g., diabetes and
cardiovascular diseases), allergy and other inflammatory diseases. Emerging
evidence from more recent studies also demonstrate the existence of a
bidirectional communication route linking gut and microbiota with brain, thus
suggesting that these microbes may play a role in neurological disorders as well 
as in host perception, behavior and emotional response. However, whether the
observed alteration of the microbiota profile in these diverse conditions is the 
cause or the consequence of the disease remains to be established. These
observations imply that it may be possible to design new strategies for the
management of diseases by manipulating gut microbiota. The common practice now
available is the use of probiotics to rehabilitate gut ecosystem. The
microbiota-based therapeutics like fecal transplantation for the treatment of
recurrent antibiotic-resistant Clostridium difficile infection is now under
clinical trial and reported to be highly successful. In the next decade, we will 
probably see even more exciting approaches, for example, using advanced
microbiota engineering technologies to create "intelligent" or "smart" bacteria
for use in diagnosis, prevention, prediction and treatment of inflammatory
diseases and possibly of some gastrointestinal cancers. The microbiota-based
therapeutics together with personalized medicine may be the most accurate and
optimal strategy for the future treatment of some difficult-to-manage diseases.
However, many challenges remain to be solved before the translational potential
of this new knowledge can be implemented clinically. In this review, I highlight 
some important recent developments and advances that contribute to our
understanding in the role of microbiota in human health and disease and on how to
best manipulate the microbiome to promote greater human health.

DOI: 10.12932/AP0803 
PMID: 28042926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

