
1. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 1989;152:85-94.

The effect of the scid mutation on mechanism and control of immunoglobulin heavy 
and light chain gene rearrangement.

Blackwell TK, Ferrier P, Malynn BA, Pollock RR, Covey LR, Suh HY, Heinke LB,
Fulop GM, Phillips RA, Yancopoulos GD, et al.

Most Abelson murine leukemia virus (A-MuLV)-transformed cell lines derived from
scid (severe combined immune deficient) mice actively rearrange their endogenous 
immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy (H), but not light (L) chain variable region genes.
Such cell lines express germline VH segments and other RNA transcripts that are
characteristically produced by early precursor (pre)-B lymphocytes, but do not
express high levels of transcripts from the germline kappa (k) constant region (C
kappa) locus. However, we have derived scid A-MuLV transformants that express
germline C kappa transcripts and attempt kappa gene assembly. In one case kappa
gene expression and rearrangement occurred in the absence of mu H chain
expression, and in another was not induced efficiently by introduction of a
mu-expression vector. Although the vast majority of scid H and L chain coding
sequence joins are grossly aberrant, scid A-MuLV transformants can form normal
coding joints at a very low frequency. In contrast, these cells form generally
normal signal sequence joins at an approximately normal efficiency. Thus, these
findings mechanistically distinguish coding and signal join formation. Subcloning
analyses suggest that scid A-MuLV transformants that do not attempt chromosomal
coding sequence joining may have a relative survival advantage, and therefore
that these events may often result in unrepaired chromosomal breakage and cell
death.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-74974-2_12 
PMID: 2805801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

