
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jan 9;7:38563. doi: 10.1038/srep38563.

Tubules of plant reoviruses exploit tropomodulin to regulate actin-based tubule
motility in insect vector.

Chen Q(1), Zhang L(1), Zhang Y(1), Mao Q(1), Wei T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Province Key Laboratory of Plant Virology, Institute of Plant Virology,
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350002, P.R. China.

Plant reoviruses are known to exploit virion-packaging tubules formed by
virus-encoding non-structural proteins for viral spread in insect vectors.
Tubules are propelled by actin-based tubule motility (ABTM) to overcome membrane 
or tissue barriers in insect vectors. To further understand which insect factors 
mediate ABTM, we utilized yeast two-hybrid and bimolecular fluorescence
complementation assays to test interactions between tubule protein Pns10 of rice 
dwarf virus (RDV), a plant reovirus, and proteins of its insect vector, the
leafhopper Nephotettix cincticeps. Tropomodulin (Tmod), vitellogenin, and
lipophorin precursor of N. cincticep displayed positive and strong interaction
with Pns10, and actin-associated protein Tmod interacted with Pns10 in pull-down 
assay and the co-immunoprecipitation system. Further, we determined Pns10 tubules
associated with Tmod in cultured cells and midgut of N. cincticep. The expression
dynamic of Tmod was consistent with that of Pns10 and the fluctuation of RDV
accumulation. Knockdown of Tmod inhibited the Pns10 expression and viral
accumulation, thus decreasing the viruliferous rates of leafhopper. These results
suggested that Tmod was involved in viral spread by directly interacting with
Pns10 tubules, finally promoting RDV infection. This study provided direct
evidence of plant reoviruses utilizing an actin-associated protein to manipulate 
ABTM in insect vectors, thus facilitating viral spread.

DOI: 10.1038/srep38563 
PMCID: PMC5220352
PMID: 28067229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

