
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2017;1581:133-149. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6869-5_8.

Development of Recombinant Arenavirus-Based Vaccines.

Mart√≠nez-Sobrido L(1), de la Torre JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, NY, 14642, USA.
luis_martinez@urmc.rochester.edu.
(2)Department of Immunology and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA. juanct@scripps.edu.

The development of arenavirus reverse genetics has provided investigators with a 
novel and powerful approach for the investigation of the arenavirus molecular and
cell biology. The use of cell-based minigenome systems has allowed examining the 
cis- and trans-acting factors involved in arenavirus replication and
transcription, and the identification of novel anti-arenaviral drug targets
without requiring the use of live forms of arenaviruses. Likewise, it is now
feasible to rescue infectious arenaviruses entirely from cloned cDNAs containing 
predetermined mutations in their genomes to investigate virus-host interactions
and mechanisms of pathogenesis. These advances in arenavirus genetics have also
facilitated screens to identify anti-arenaviral drugs and the pursuit of novel
strategies to generate live-attenuated arenavirus vaccine candidates. Moreover,
the generation of tri-segmented (r3) arenaviruses expressing foreign genes of
interest (GOI) has opened the possibility of implementing live-attenuated
arenaviruses-based vaccine vector approaches. In this chapter, we will summarize 
the implementation of plasmid-based reverse genetics techniques for the
development of r3 arenaviruses expressing foreign GOI for their implementation as
vaccine vectors.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6869-5_8 
PMID: 28374247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

