
1. PLoS One. 2017 Jun 20;12(6):e0179284. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179284.
eCollection 2017.

Analysis of intra-host genetic diversity of Prunus necrotic ringspot virus
(PNRSV) using amplicon next generation sequencing.

Kinoti WM(1)(2), Constable FE(1), Nancarrow N(1), Plummer KM(3), Rodoni B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Agriculture Victoria, AgriBio, La Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(2)School of Applied Systems Biology, AgriBio, La Trobe University, Melbourne,
VIC, Australia.
(3)Department of Animal, Plant and Soil Sciences, AgriBio, La Trobe University,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

PCR amplicon next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis offers a broadly
applicable and targeted approach to detect populations of both high- or
low-frequency virus variants in one or more plant samples. In this study,
amplicon NGS was used to explore the diversity of the tripartite genome virus,
Prunus necrotic ringspot virus (PNRSV) from 53 PNRSV-infected trees using
amplicons from conserved gene regions of each of PNRSV RNA1, RNA2 and RNA3.
Sequencing of the amplicons from 53 PNRSV-infected trees revealed differing
levels of polymorphism across the three different components of the PNRSV genome 
with a total number of 5040, 2083 and 5486 sequence variants observed for RNA1,
RNA2 and RNA3 respectively. The RNA2 had the lowest diversity of sequences
compared to RNA1 and RNA3, reflecting the lack of flexibility tolerated by the
replicase gene that is encoded by this RNA component. Distinct PNRSV
phylo-groups, consisting of closely related clusters of sequence variants, were
observed in each of PNRSV RNA1, RNA2 and RNA3. Most plant samples had a single
phylo-group for each RNA component. Haplotype network analysis showed that
smaller clusters of PNRSV sequence variants were genetically connected to the
largest sequence variant cluster within a phylo-group of each RNA component. Some
plant samples had sequence variants occurring in multiple PNRSV phylo-groups in
at least one of each RNA and these phylo-groups formed distinct clades that
represent PNRSV genetic strains. Variants within the same phylo-group of each
Prunus plant sample had ≥97% similarity and phylo-groups within a Prunus plant
sample and between samples had less ≤97% similarity. Based on the analysis of
diversity, a definition of a PNRSV genetic strain was proposed. The proposed
definition was applied to determine the number of PNRSV genetic strains in each
of the plant samples and the complexity in defining genetic strains in
multipartite genome viruses was explored.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179284 
PMCID: PMC5478126
PMID: 28632759  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

