
1. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2017;58(2):433-437.

HPV genotyping and p16÷Ki-67 dual staining in the detection of high-grade
cervical lesion in patients with LSIL on Pap smear.

Moleriu LC(1), Sas I, RaŢiu AC, Margan MM, Secoşan CA, Ilina RŞ, Horhat FG, Stana
LG, Grigoraş D, Pirtea LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, "Victor Babes" University of Medicine
and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania; razvanilina@yahoo.co.uk.

p16÷Ki-67 dual-stained cytology, either alone or combined with human
papillomavirus (HPV) 16÷18 genotyping, could be a useful tool for triage for
colposcopy of HPV-positive patients. Based on this background, we aimed at
comparing the diagnostic performance of the p16÷Ki-67 dual staining test, and
high-risk HPV test for the detection of high-risk cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia (CIN2÷3) in patients diagnosed with low-grade squamous intraepithelial 
lesion (LSIL) on Pap smear. We performed a retrospective study including 184
patients with LSIL cytology on Pap smear, of which 64 were referred for biopsy
after colposcopy. Prior biopsy HPV genotyping and dual staining test were
performed on all 64 patients. The mean age of the patients selected for
conization was 36 years and seven months. The pathological exam showed that
28.13% (18÷64) from the patients LSIL on cytology were actually having CIN2÷3: 12
cases with CIN2, five cases with CIN3 and one case of in situ cervical carcinoma.
HPV positive were 56.25% (36÷64) of the patients with LSIL. The p16÷Ki-67 dual
staining test was positive in 29.69% (19÷64) of the patients with LSIL. Among
women with LSIL cytology, the sensitivity and specificity of the HPV genotyping
test for predicting CIN2÷CIN3 were 94.44% (17÷18) and 58.7% (27÷46),
respectively. The sensitivity and specificity of the p16÷Ki-67 dual staining test
were 66.67% (12÷18) and 84.78% (39÷46), respectively. Our results agree with
other data available in literature and suggest that the p16÷Ki-67 dual staining
test could be included in the management protocol of patients with modified
cytology as a triage test before referring those patients for colposcopy.


PMID: 28730227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

