
1. Nat Commun. 2017 Sep 15;8(1):544. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-00589-2.

A V0 core neuronal circuit for inspiration.

Wu J(1), Capelli P(2)(3), Bouvier J(1), Goulding M(4), Arber S(2)(3), Fortin
G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Paris-Saclay Institute of Neuroscience, 1 Avenue de la Terrasse, 91190, Gif
sur Yvette, France.
(2)Biozentrum, Department of Cell Biology, University of Basel, 4056, Basel,
Switzerland.
(3)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical research, 4058, Basel,
Switzerland.
(4)Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La
Jolla, CA, 92037, USA.
(5)Paris-Saclay Institute of Neuroscience, 1 Avenue de la Terrasse, 91190, Gif
sur Yvette, France. gilles.fortin@cnrs.fr.

Breathing in mammals relies on permanent rhythmic and bilaterally synchronized
contractions of inspiratory pump muscles. These motor drives emerge from
interactions between critical sets of brainstem neurons whose origins and
synaptic ordered organization remain obscure. Here, we show, using a virus-based 
transsynaptic tracing strategy from the diaphragm muscle in the mouse, that the
principal inspiratory premotor neurons share V0 identity with, and are connected 
by, neurons of the preBÃ¶tzinger complex that paces inspiration. Deleting the
commissural projections of V0s results in left-right desynchronized inspiratory
motor commands in reduced brain preparations and breathing at birth. This work
reveals the existence of a core inspiratory circuit in which V0 to V0 synapses
enabling function of the rhythm generator also direct its output to secure
bilaterally coordinated contractions of inspiratory effector muscles required for
efficient breathing.The developmental origin and functional organization of the
brainstem breathing circuits are poorly understood. Here using virus-based
circuit-mapping approaches in mice, the authors reveal the lineage,
neurotransmitter phenotype, and connectivity patterns of phrenic premotor
neurons, which are a crucial component of the inspiratory circuit.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00589-2 
PMCID: PMC5601429
PMID: 28916788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

