
1. J Venom Anim Toxins Incl Trop Dis. 2017 Sep 15;23:41. doi:
10.1186/s40409-017-0131-x. eCollection 2017.

Zika virus congenital syndrome: experimental models and clinical aspects.

Polonio CM(1), de Freitas CL(1), Zanluqui NG(1), Peron JPS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmune Interactions Laboratory, Immunology Department - ICB IV,
University of São Paulo (USP), Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 1730, Cidade
Universitária, São Paulo, SP CEP 05508-900 Brazil.

Viral infections have long been the cause of severe diseases to humans,
increasing morbidity and mortality rates worldwide, either in rich or poor
countries. Yellow fever virus, H1N1 virus, HIV, dengue virus, hepatitis B and C
are well known threats to human health, being responsible for many million deaths
annually, associated to a huge economic and social cost. In this context, a
recently introduced flavivirus in South America, called Zika virus (ZIKV), led
the WHO to declare in February 1st 2016 a warning on Public Health Emergency of
International Concern (PHEIC). ZIKV is an arbovirus of the Flaviviridae family
firstly isolated from sentinels Rhesus sp. monkeys at the Ziika forest in Uganda,
Africa, in 1947. Lately, the virus has well adapted to the worldwide spread Aedes
aegypti mosquito, the vector for DENV, CHIKV, YFV and many others. At first, it
was not considered a threat to human health, but everything changed when a
skyrocketing number of babies born with microcephaly and adults with
Guillain-Barré syndrome were reported, mainly in northeastern Brazil. It is now
well established that the virus is responsible for the so called congenital Zika 
syndrome (CZS), whose most dramatic features are microcephaly, arthrogryposis and
ocular damage. Thus, in this review, we provide a brief discussion of these main 
clinical aspects of the CZS, correlating them with the experimental animal models
described so far.

DOI: 10.1186/s40409-017-0131-x 
PMCID: PMC5602956
PMID: 28932235 

