
1. Poult Sci. 2018 Jan 1;97(1):303-312. doi: 10.3382/ps/pex292.

Evaluation of 793/B-like and Mass-like vaccine strain kinetics in experimental
and field conditions by real-time RT-PCR quantification.

Tucciarone CM(1), Franzo G(1), Berto G(2), Drigo M(1), Ramon G(3), Koutoulis
KC(4), Catelli E(5), Cecchinato M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Medicine, Production and Health (MAPS), University of
Padua, Viale dell'Università 16, 35020 Legnaro (PD), Italy.
(2)Ceva Salute Animale, Viale Colleoni 15, 20864 Agrate Brianza (MB), Italy.
(3)Ceva Santé Animale, 10 Avenue de la Ballastiere, 33500 Libourne, France.
(4)Department of Poultry Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of
Thessaly, Trikalon 224, 43100 Karditsa, Greece.
(5)Department of Veterinary Medical Sciences, University of Bologna, Via Tolara
di Sopra, 50 - 40064 Ozzano dell'Emilia (BO), Italy.

Infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) is a great economic burden both for productive 
losses and costs of the control strategies. Many different vaccination protocols 
are applied in the same region and even in consecutive cycles on the same farm in
order to find the perfect balance between costs and benefits. In Northern Italy, 
the usual second vaccination is more and more often moved up to the chick's first
d of life. The second strain administration together with the common Mass priming
by spray at the hatchery allows saving money and time and reducing animal stress.
The present work compared the different vaccine strains (Mass-like or B48, and
1/96) kinetics both in field conditions and in a 21-day-long experimental trial
in broilers, monitoring the viral replication by upper respiratory tract swabbing
and vaccine specific real time reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) quantification.
In both field and experimental conditions, titers for all the vaccines showed an 
increasing trend in the first 2 wk and then a decrease, though still remaining
detectable during the whole monitored period. IBV field strain and avian
Metapneumovirus (aMPV) presence also was also investigated by RT-PCR and
sequencing, and by multiplex real-time RT-PCR, respectively, revealing a
consistency in the pathogen introduction timing at around 30 d, in correspondence
with the vaccine titer's main decrease. These findings suggest the need for an
accurate knowledge of live vaccine kinetics, whose replication can compete with
the other pathogen one, providing additional protection to be added to what is
conferred by the adaptive immune response.

© 2017 Poultry Science Association Inc.

DOI: 10.3382/ps/pex292 
PMCID: PMC7107209
PMID: 29077954  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

