
1. J Virol. 2017 Dec 14;92(1). pii: e01130-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01130-17. Print 2018
Jan 1.

Both Sphingomyelin and Cholesterol in the Host Cell Membrane Are Essential for
Rubella Virus Entry.

Otsuki N(1), Sakata M(1), Saito K(2), Okamoto K(1), Mori Y(1), Hanada K(3),
Takeda M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology III, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, National Institute of Infectious 
Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, National Institute of Infectious 
Diseases, Tokyo, Japan hanak@nih.go.jp mtakeda@nih.go.jp.
(4)Department of Virology III, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, 
Japan hanak@nih.go.jp mtakeda@nih.go.jp.

Rubella virus (RuV) causes a systemic infection, and transplacental fetal
infection causes congenital rubella syndrome. In this study, we showed that
treatment of cells with sphingomyelinase inhibited RuV infection. Assays using
inhibitors of serine palmitoyl transferase and ceramide transport protein
demonstrated the contribution of sphingomyelin (SM) to RuV infection. Compelling 
evidence for direct binding of RuV to lipid membranes at neutral pH was obtained 
using liposome coflotation assays. The absence of either SM or cholesterol (Chol)
abrogated the RuV-liposome interaction. SM and Chol (SM/Chol) were also critical 
for RuV binding to erythrocytes and lymphoid cells. Removal of Ca2+ from the
assay buffer or mutation of RuV envelope E1 protein Ca2+-binding sites abrogated 
RuV binding to liposomes, erythrocytes, and lymphoid cells. However, RuV bound to
various nonlymphoid adherent cell lines independently of extracellular Ca2+ or
SM/Chol. Even in these adherent cell lines, both the E1 protein Ca2+-binding
sites and cellular SM/Chol were essential for the early stage of RuV infection,
possibly affecting envelope-membrane fusion in acidic compartments. Myelin
oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) has recently been identified as a cellular
receptor for RuV. However, RuV bound to MOG-negative cells in a Ca2+-independent 
manner. Collectively, our data demonstrate that RuV has two distinct binding
mechanisms: one is Ca2+ dependent and the other is Ca2+ independent.
Ca2+-dependent binding observed in lymphoid cells occurs by the direct
interaction between E1 protein fusion loops and SM/Chol-enriched membranes.
Clarification of the mechanism of Ca2+-independent RuV binding is an important
next step in understanding the pathology of RuV infection.IMPORTANCE Rubella has 
a significant impact on public health as infection during early pregnancy can
result in babies being born with congenital rubella syndrome. Even though
effective rubella vaccines are available, rubella outbreaks still occur in many
countries. We studied the entry mechanism of rubella virus (RuV) and found that
RuV binds directly to the host plasma membrane in the presence of Ca2+ at neutral
pH. This Ca2+-dependent binding is specifically directed to membranes enriched in
sphingomyelin and cholesterol and is critical for RuV infection. Importantly, RuV
also binds to many cell lines in a Ca2+-independent manner. An unidentified RuV
receptor(s) is involved in this Ca2+-independent binding. We believe that the
data presented here may aid the development of the first anti-RuV drug.

Copyright Â© 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01130-17 
PMCID: PMC5730775
PMID: 29070689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

