
1. Glycobiology. 2018 Dec 1;28(1):42-49. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwx092.

NMR interaction studies of Neu5Ac-α-(2,6)-Gal-β-(1-4)-GlcNAc with influenza-virus
hemagglutinin expressed in transfected human cells.

Vasile F(1), Gubinelli F(2), Panigada M(2), Soprana E(2), Siccardi A(2), Potenza 
D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Milano, Via Golgi 19, 20133 Milano,
Italy.
(2)Molecular Immunology Unit, San Raffaele Research Istitute, via Olgettina 58,
20132 Milano, Italy.

The emergence of escape-mutants of influenza hemagglutinin (HA) following
vaccination compels the yearly re-formulation of flu vaccines. Since binding the 
sialic acid receptor remains in all cases essential for infection, small-molecule
inhibitors of HA binding to sialic acid could be interesting therapeutic
complements or alternatives to immuno-prophylaxis in the control of flu
epidemics. In this work, we made use of NMR spectroscopy to study the interaction
between a derivative of sialic acid (the Neu5Ac-α-(2,6)-Gal-β-(1-4)-GlcNAc
trisaccharide) and HAs (H1 and H5) from human and avian strains of influenza
virus, directly expressed on the surface of stable transfected 293 T human cells.
The HAs were shown to retain their native trimeric conformation and binding
properties. Exploiting the magnetization transfer between the proteins and the
ligand, we obtained evidence of the binding event and mapped the (non-identical) 
sugar epitopes recognized by the two HA species. The rapid and reliable method
for screening sialic acid-related HA ligands we have developed could yield useful
information for an efficient drug design.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwx092 
PMID: 29087468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

