
1. Nat Prod Res. 2019 Feb;33(4):494-499. doi: 10.1080/14786419.2017.1399382. Epub
2017 Nov 9.

Dereplication and targeted isolation of bioactive sulphur compound from bacteria 
isolated from a hydrothermal field.

Lin X(1), Li K(1)(2), Yang L(1), Peng X(1), Fang W(3), Tian X(1), Liu Y(1), Zhou 
X(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine
Bio-resources and Ecology/Guangdong Key Laboratory of Marine Materia Medica/RNAM 
Center for Marine Microbiology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, CAS ,
Guangzhou , China.
(2)b College of Earth Sciences , University of Chinese Academy of Sciences ,
Beijing , China.
(3)c Hubei Biopesticide Engineering Research Center , Hubei Academy of
Agricultural Science , Wuhan , China.

Marine micro-organisms in the deep-sea hydrothermal vent systems are considered
as potential sources of bioactive natural products. Sixteen bacterial strains
were isolated from a deep-sea hydrothermal field and screened for bioactive
metabolism studies. After the strains were subjected to bioactive testing at
different culture media, chemical dereplication by HPLC coupled to
high-resolution mass spectrometer was performed to analyse or determine the main 
secondary metabolisms in those strains. Strain 06204 was large-scale fermented
with relative optimal media, for isolating the desired sulphur compound.
Butyrolactone I 3-sulphate was isolated and structurally identified from the
extract, guided by dereplication and showed moderate antivirus activities against
H3N2 and EV71 viruses. Our study suggests that deep-sea hydrothermal bacteria are
good sources of sulphur natural products. Meanwhile, the described approach,
mainly bioactive screening, dereplication and targeted isolation, is effective
and efficient to discover interesting bioactive compounds in hydrothermal
bacteria.

DOI: 10.1080/14786419.2017.1399382 
PMID: 29117742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

