
1. J Invest Dermatol. 2018 Jun;138(6):1348-1359. doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2017.12.021.
Epub 2017 Dec 23.

HPV16E7-Induced Hyperplasia Promotes CXCL9/10 Expression and Induces CXCR3+
T-Cell Migration to Skin.

Kuo P(1), Tuong ZK(1), Teoh SM(1), Frazer IH(2), Mattarollo SR(1), Leggatt GR(1).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Translational Research
Institute, Woolloongabba, Queensland, Australia.
(2)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Translational Research
Institute, Woolloongabba, Queensland, Australia. Electronic address:
i.frazer@uq.edu.au.

Chemokines regulate tissue immunity by recruiting specific subsets of immune
cells. Mice expressing the E7 protein of human papilloma virus 16 as a transgene 
from a keratin 14 promoter (K14.E7) show increased epidermal and dermal
lymphocytic infiltrates, epidermal hyperplasia, and suppressed local immunity.
Here, we show that CXCL9 and CXCL10 are overexpressed in non-hematopoietic cells 
in skin of K14.E7 mice when compared with non-transgenic animals, and recruit
CXCR3+ lymphocytes to the hyperplastic skin. Overexpression of CXCL9 and CXCL10
is not observed in E7 transgenic mice with mutated Rb gene whose protein product 
cannot interact with E7 (K14.E7xRbΔL/ΔL) and in consequence lack hyperplastic
epithelium. CXCR3+ T cells are preferentially recruited by CXCL9 and CXCL10 in
supernatants of K14.E7 but not K14.E7xRbΔL/ΔL skin cultures in vitro. CXCR3
signalling promotes infiltration of a subset of effector T lymphocytes that
enables donor lymphocyte deficient, E7-expressing skin graft rejection. Taken
together, this suggests that recruitment of CXCR3+ T cells can be an important
factor in the rejection of precancerous skin epithelium providing they can
overcome local immunosuppressive mechanisms driven by skin-resident lymphocytes.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jid.2017.12.021 
PMID: 29277541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

