
1. Vet Microbiol. 2018 Jan;213:15-20. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2017.11.007. Epub 2017
Nov 6.

Recombinant canine adenovirus type 2 expressing rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus 
VP60 protein provided protection against RHD in rabbits.

Jiang Q(1), Yu Z(1), Liu JS(1), Kong DS(1), Guo DC(1), Quan CS(1), Li BT(1), Hu
XL(1), Qu L(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute of Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, No. 678 Haping Road,
Xiangfang District, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150069, PR China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute of Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, No. 678 Haping Road,
Xiangfang District, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150069, PR China. Electronic address:
qld@hvri.ac.cn.

Rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) is responsible for rabbit hemorrhagic
disease (RHD), which is an acute, lethal and highly contagious disease in both
wild and domestic rabbits. Although current vaccines are highly effective for
controlling RHD, they are derived from infected rabbit livers and their use is
thus associated with safety and animal-welfare concerns. In this study, we
generated a recombinant lentogenic canine adenovirus type 2 (CAV2) vector
expressing the RHDV vp60 gene, named rCAV2-VP60. rCAV2-VP60 expressed VP60
protein in Madin-Darby canine kidney cells as demonstrated by western blot and
immunofluorescence assay. Polymerase chain reaction confirmed that the vp60 gene 
was successfully inserted into rCAV2-VP60 and was still detectable after 20
passages, indicating its stable genetic character. We evaluated the feasibility
of rCAV2-VP60 as a live-virus-vectored RHD vaccine in rabbits. rCAV2-VP60
significantly induced specific antibodies to RHDV and provided effective
protection against RHDV lethal challenge. These results suggest that rCAV2
expressing RHDV VP60 could be a safe and efficient candidate vaccine against RHDV
in rabbits.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2017.11.007 
PMID: 29291998  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

