
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2018 Jan 25;14(1):e1005952. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005952. 
eCollection 2018 Jan.

The role of spatial heterogeneity in the evolution of local and global infections
of viruses.

Saeki K(1), Sasaki A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Evolutionary Studies of Biosystems, SOKENDAI (The Graduate
University for Advanced Studies), Hayama, Kanagawa, Japan.
(2)Evolution and Ecology Program, International Institute for Applied Systems
Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria.

Viruses have two modes spread in a host body, one is to release infectious
particles from infected cells (global infection) and the other is to infect
directly from an infected cell to an adjacent cell (local infection). Since the
mode of spread affects the evolution of life history traits, such as virulence,
it is important to reveal what level of global and local infection is selected.
Previous studies of the evolution of global and local infection have paid little 
attention to its dependency on the measures of spatial configuration. Here we
show the evolutionarily stable proportion of global and local infection, and how 
it depends on the distribution of target cells. Using an epidemic model on a
regular lattice, we consider the infection dynamics by pair approximation and
check the evolutionarily stable strategy. We also conduct the Monte-Carlo
simulation to observe evolutionary dynamics. We show that a higher local
infection is selected as target cells become clustered. Surprisingly, the
selected strategy depends not only on the degree of clustering but also the
abundance of target cells per se.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005952 
PMCID: PMC5800656
PMID: 29370194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

