
1. Environ Sci Technol. 2018 Jun 5;52(11):6399-6407. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.8b00241.
Epub 2018 May 16.

Smartphone-Based in-Gel Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification (gLAMP) System
Enables Rapid Coliphage MS2 Quantification in Environmental Waters.

Huang X(1), Lin X(1), Urmann K(1), Li L(1), Xie X(1)(2), Jiang S(3), Hoffmann
MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Linde + Robinson Laboratories , California Institute of Technology , Pasadena 
, California 91125 , United States.
(2)School of Civil and Environmental Engineering , Georgia Institute of
Technology , Atlanta , Georgia 30332 , United States.
(3)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Henry Samueli School of
Engineering , University of California , Irvine , California 92697 , United
States.

Model coliphages (e.g., ΦX174, MS2, and PRD1) have been widely used as surrogates
to study the fate and transport of pathogenic viruses in the environment and
during wastewater treatment. Two groups of coliphages (F-specific and somatic)
are being explored as indicators of viral fecal pollution in ambient water.
However, the detection and quantification of coliphages still largely rely on
time-consuming culture-based plaque assays. In this study, we developed an in-gel
loop-mediated isothermal amplification (gLAMP) system enabling coliphage MS2
quantification within 30 min using standard laboratory devices. Viral particles
(MS2) were immobilized with LAMP reagents in polyethylene glycol hydrogel, and
then viral RNAs were amplified through a LAMP reaction. Due to the restriction
effect of the hydrogel matrix, one viral particle would only produce one amplicon
dot. Therefore, the sample virus concentrations can be determined based on the
number of fluorescent amplicon dots using a smartphone for imaging. The method
was validated by using artificially spiked and naturally contaminated water
samples. gLAMP results were shown to correlate well with plaque assay counts ( R2
= 0.984, p < 0.05) and achieved similar sensitivity to quantitative
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR; 1 plaque-forming unit
per reaction). Moreover, gLAMP demonstrated a high level of tolerance against
inhibitors naturally present in wastewater, in which RT-qPCR was completely
inhibited. Besides MS2, gLAMP can also be used for the quantification of other
microbial targets (e.g., Escherichia coli and Salmonella). Considering its
simplicity, sensitivity, rapidity, and versatility, gLAMP holds great potential
for microbial water-quality analysis, especially in resource-limited settings.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.est.8b00241 
PMCID: PMC5990930
PMID: 29738236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

