
1. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1986 Jun;146(6):1229-34.

Cytomegalic inclusion virus encephalitis in patients with AIDS: CT, clinical, and
pathologic correlation.

Post MJ, Hensley GT, Moskowitz LB, Fischl M.

The computed tomographic (CT) scans of 10 patients with acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome who had central nervous system (CNS) involvement by cytomegalovirus
(CMV) were retrospectively reviewed and correlated with clinical data and
pathologic findings. Diagnosis was established in all 10 patients by autopsy,
which showed the pathognomonic "owl's eye" intracellular inclusions of CMV. In
six patients CMV caused an initial CNS infection that was directly responsible
for the patient's progressive encephalopathy and death. In four patients CMV
caused a superimposed nondominant CNS infection that had no clinical expression
in two. Cortical atrophy and mild hydrocephalus ex vacuo were seen on CT in all
10 patients. Positive findings on CT that could be attributed to infection with
CMV were present in only three of the 10 patients, and in these three symptomatic
cases autopsy correlation revealed that CT underestimated the degree of CNS
involvement. In the other three symptomatic patients, CT showed no parenchymal
abnormalities, while autopsy demonstrated diffuse cerebral involvement. In the
four patients whose CNS was secondarily involved by CMV, CT showed changes proven
at autopsy to be related only to the dominant infection with Toxoplasma gondii
and to postoperative hematomas. CT did not demonstrate any abnormalities at the
sites of CMV involvement, which were found at autopsy in this latter group. It
was concluded that CT is not very sensitive for the detection of CMV
encephalitis.

DOI: 10.2214/ajr.146.6.1229 
PMID: 3010685  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

