
1. Hepatology. 2019 Feb;69(2):742-759. doi: 10.1002/hep.30270. Epub 2019 Jan 4.

Hepatocyte-Specific β-Catenin Deletion During Severe Liver Injury Provokes
Cholangiocytes to Differentiate Into Hepatocytes.

Russell JO(1)(2), Lu WY(3)(4), Okabe H(5)(6), Abrams M(7), Oertel M(1)(2), Poddar
M(1)(2), Singh S(1)(2), Forbes SJ(3), Monga SP(1)(2)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
(2)Pittsburgh Liver Research Center, University of Pittsburgh and University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
(3)MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(4)Centre for Liver Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine and
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA.
(6)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto,
Japan.
(7)Dicerna Pharmaceuticals, Boston, MA.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2019 Feb;69(2):480-483.

Liver regeneration after injury is normally mediated by proliferation of
hepatocytes, although recent studies have suggested biliary epithelial cells
(BECs) can differentiate into hepatocytes during severe liver injury when
hepatocyte proliferation is impaired. We investigated the effect of
hepatocyte-specific β-catenin deletion in recovery from severe liver injury and
BEC-to-hepatocyte differentiation. To induce liver injury, we administered
choline-deficient, ethionine-supplemented (CDE) diet to three different mouse
models, the first being mice with deletion of β-catenin in both BECs and
hepatocytes (Albumin-Cre; Ctnnb1flox/flox mice). In our second model, we
performed hepatocyte lineage tracing by injecting Ctnnb1flox/flox ;
Rosa-stopflox/flox -EYFP mice with the adeno-associated virus serotype 8 encoding
Cre recombinase under the control of the thyroid binding globulin promoter, a
virus that infects only hepatocytes. Finally, we performed BEC lineage tracing
via Krt19-CreERT ; Rosa-stopflox/flox -tdTomato mice. To observe
BEC-to-hepatocyte differentiation, mice were allowed to recover on normal diet
following CDE diet-induced liver injury. Livers were collected from all mice and 
analyzed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, western blotting,
immunohistochemistry, and immunofluorescence. We show that mice with lack of
β-catenin in hepatocytes placed on the CDE diet develop severe liver injury with 
impaired hepatocyte proliferation, creating a stimulus for BECs to differentiate 
into hepatocytes. In particular, we use both hepatocyte and BEC lineage tracing
to show that BECs differentiate into hepatocytes, which go on to repopulate the
liver during long-term recovery. Conclusion: β-catenin is important for liver
regeneration after CDE diet-induced liver injury, and BEC-derived hepatocytes can
permanently incorporate into the liver parenchyma to mediate liver regeneration.

© 2018 The Authors. Hepatology published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of 
American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.30270 
PMCID: PMC6351199
PMID: 30215850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

