
1. Virology. 1986 Dec;155(2):356-64.

Expression of gangliosides as receptors at the cell surface controls infection of
NCTC 2071 cells by Sendai virus.

Markwell MA, Moss J, Hom BE, Fishman PH, Svennerholm L.

The involvement of gangliosides as receptors for Sendai virus was established
previously using experimentally produced receptor-deficient cells. In the search 
for a naturally occurring counterpart, NCTC 2071 cells emerged as a likely
candidate. These cells in their native state were not agglutinated nor infected
by Sendai virus, but were infected by the virus when the gangliosides GD1a, GT1b,
or GQ1b were supplied in the culturing medium. Preliminary analysis indicated
that NCTC 2071 cells contained an unusually high ratio of sialoglycoproteins to
gangliosides. A brief treatment of the cell surface with the protease trypsin
made greater than 99% of the native monolayer susceptible to infection by the
wild-type virus which contains the viral attachment protein HN. (Incubation of
the trypsin-treated cells with a temperature-sensitive mutant missing HN produced
no detectable infection.) The increased binding of cholera toxin, a
ganglioside-specific probe, after incubation of the cells with trypsin and
sialidase, was consistent with the hypothesis that gangliosides more complex than
GM1 are on the surface of NCTC 2071 cells and that trypsin treatment increases
their accessibility. The presence of receptor gangliosides in lipid extracts of
NCTC 2071 cells was confirmed by thin-layer chromatography of the ganglioside
fraction and by the binding of cholera toxin. These results demonstrate that
cells containing receptor gangliosides may still be resistant to infection
because these are not expressed properly at the cell surface as receptors for
interaction with the HN protein of Sendai virus.

DOI: 10.1016/0042-6822(86)90199-6 
PMID: 3024393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

