
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Oct 9;8(1):15005. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-33379-x.

Overlapping motifs on the herpes viral proteins ICP27 and ORF57 mediate
interactions with the mRNA export adaptors ALYREF and UIF.

Tunnicliffe RB(1), Tian X(2), Storer J(1), Sandri-Goldin RM(3), Golovanov AP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, School of Chemistry, Faculty of Science
and Engineering, The University of Manchester, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine,
University of California, Irvine, CA, 92697-4025, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine,
University of California, Irvine, CA, 92697-4025, USA. rmsandri@uci.edu.
(4)Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, School of Chemistry, Faculty of Science
and Engineering, The University of Manchester, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK.
a.golovanov@manchester.ac.uk.

The TREX complex mediates the passage of bulk cellular mRNA export to the nuclear
export factor TAP/NXF1 via the export adaptors ALYREF or UIF, which appear to act
in a redundant manner. TREX complex recruitment to nascent RNA is coupled with 5'
capping, splicing and polyadenylation. Therefore to facilitate expression from
their intronless genes, herpes viruses have evolved a mechanism to circumvent
these cellular controls. Central to this process is a protein from the conserved 
ICP27 family, which binds viral transcripts and cellular TREX complex components 
including ALYREF. Here we have identified a novel interaction between HSV-1 ICP27
and an N-terminal domain of UIF in vivo, and used NMR spectroscopy to locate the 
UIF binding site within an intrinsically disordered region of ICP27. We also
characterized the interaction sites of the ICP27 homolog ORF57 from KSHV with UIF
and ALYREF using NMR, revealing previously unidentified binding motifs. In both
ORF57 and ICP27 the interaction sites for ALYREF and UIF partially overlap,
suggestive of mutually exclusive binding. The data provide a map of the binding
sites responsible for promoting herpes virus mRNA export, enabling future studies
to accurately probe these interactions and reveal the functional consequences for
UIF and ALYREF redundancy.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-33379-x 
PMCID: PMC6177440
PMID: 30301920  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

