
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Oct 30;8(1):16036. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-34332-8.

Genetic and functional diversity of double-stranded DNA viruses in a tropical
monsoonal estuary, India.

Jasna V(1), Parvathi A(2), Dash A(3).

Author information: 
(1)CSIR-National Institute of Oceanography, Regional Centre, Kochi, 682 018,
India.
(2)CSIR-National Institute of Oceanography, Regional Centre, Kochi, 682 018,
India. parvathi@nio.org.
(3)Genotypic Technology, Bangalore, 560094, India.

The present study illustrates the genetic diversity of four uncultured viral
communities from the surface waters of Cochin Estuary (CE), India. Viral
diversity inferred using Illumina HiSeq paired-end sequencing using a
linker-amplified shotgun library (LASL) revealed different double-stranded DNA
(dsDNA) viral communities. The water samples were collected from four stations
PR1, PR2, PR3, and PR4, during the pre-monsoon (PRM) season. Analysis of virus
families indicated that the Myoviridae was the most common viral community in the
CE followed by Siphoviridae and Podoviridae. There were significant (p < 0.05)
spatial variations in the relative abundance of dominant families in response to 
the salinity regimes. The relative abundance of Myoviridae and Podoviridae were
high in the euryhaline region and Siphoviridae in the mesohaline region of the
estuary. The predominant phage type in CE was phages that infected Synechococcus.
The viral proteins were found to be involved in major functional activities such 
as ATP binding, DNA binding, and DNA replication. The study highlights the
genetic diversity of dsDNA viral communities and their functional protein
predictions from a highly productive estuarine system. Further, the metavirome
data generated in this study will enhance the repertoire of publicly available
dataset and advance our understanding of estuarine viral ecology.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-34332-8 
PMCID: PMC6207776
PMID: 30375431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

