
1. Virol J. 2018 Nov 27;15(1):185. doi: 10.1186/s12985-018-1098-0.

Characterization of a PCV2d-2 isolate by experimental infection of pigs.

Palya V(1), Homonnay ZG(1), Mató T(1), Kiss I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Scientific Support and Investigation Unit, Ceva-Phylaxia, Szállás u. 5,
Budapest, 1107, Hungary.
(2)Scientific Support and Investigation Unit, Ceva-Phylaxia, Szállás u. 5,
Budapest, 1107, Hungary. istvan.kiss@ceva.com.

Porcine circovirus type 2 (PCV2), a highly prevalent, economically important
swine pathogen is classified into different genotypes (PCV2a-f) based on
phylogenetic analysis. Since the introduction of extensive vaccination programs, 
at least two major shifts have been observed in the prevalence of PCV2 genotypes.
The first genotype shift from 2a towards 2b occurred around 2003, while in recent
years, we are witnessing the second change in genotype prevalence from the
predominant 2b towards 2d.In this study, a PCV2d-2 isolate was characterized as a
potential challenge virus for the evaluation of PCV2 vaccine efficacy.
Ten-week-old pigs carrying low to moderate levels of maternally derived
antibodies to PCV2 were infected with the isolate by the nasal route. Over the
next 4 weeks post-infection, the pigs were monitored for the presence of viremia,
fecal virus excretion, and humoral immune responses. At the end of the
post-infection observation period, samples were taken from the mediastinal and
mesenteric lymph nodes of the animals and tested for viral load. The gradual
depletion of maternally derived antibodies in the sera of piglets was
demonstrated by ELISA and virus neutralization tests. Following experimental
infection by PCV2d-2, specific IgM antibodies were first detected at 14 days post
challenge (dpch), while IgG class antibodies were first detected at 21 dpch. Both
viremia and virus shedding could be detected at 7 dpch, in 36 and 50% of the
pigs, respectively. The proportion of shedders reached 100% by 14 dpch and
remained at this level, while viremia was demonstrated in 86, 100, and 100% of
the pigs at 14, 21, and 28 dpch, respectively. Both the mediastinal and
mesenteric lymph nodes contained high levels of virus (7.6 and 8.5 log10
copies/mg tissue, respectively).

DOI: 10.1186/s12985-018-1098-0 
PMCID: PMC6260757
PMID: 30482219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

