
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Dec 17;8(1):17904. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-36229-y.

Complete genome analysis of a Siphoviridae phage TSK1 showing biofilm removal
potential against Klebsiella pneumoniae.

Tabassum R(1), Shafique M(1), Khawaja KA(1), Alvi IA(1), Rehman Y(1), Sheik
CS(2), Abbas Z(1), Rehman SU(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of the Punjab,
Lahore, Pakistan.
(2)Swenson College of Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota Duluth,
Duluth, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of the Punjab,
Lahore, Pakistan. shafiq.mmg@pu.edu.pk.

Multidrug-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae is a nosocomial pathogen, produces
septicemia, pneumonia and UTI. Excessive use of antibiotics contributes towards
emergence of multidrug-resistance. Bacteriophage-therapy is a potential
substitute of antibiotics with many advantages. In this investigation,
microbiological and genome characterization of TSK1 bacteriophage and its biofilm
elimination capability are presented. TSK1 showed narrow host range and highest
stability at pH 7 and 37 °C. TSK1 reduced the growth of K. pneumoniae during the 
initial 14 hours of infection. Post-treatment with TSK1 against different age K. 
pneumoniae biofilms reduced 85-100% biomass. Pre-treatment of TSK1 bacteriophage 
against the biofilm of Klebsiella pneumoniae reduced > 99% biomass in initial
24 hr of incubation. The genome of TSK1 phage comprised 49,836 base pairs with GC
composition of 50.44%. Total seventy-five open reading frames (ORFs) were
predicted, 25 showed homology with known functional proteins, while 50 were
called hypothetical, as no homologs with proved function exists in the genome
databases. Blast and phylogenetic analysis put it in the Kp36 virus genus of
family Siphoviridae. Proposed packaging strategy of TSK1 bacteriophage genome is 
headful packaging using the pac sites. The potential of TSK1 bacteriophage could 
be used to reduce the bacterial load and biofilm in clinical and non-clinical
settings.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-36229-y 
PMCID: PMC6297243
PMID: 30559386  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

