
1. Plant Dis. 2010 Nov;94(11):1373. doi: 10.1094/PDIS-10-09-0645.

First Report of Iris yellow spot virus in Onion in Mauritius.

Lobin K(1), Saison A(2), Hostachy B(2), Benimadhu SP(1), Pappu HR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Plant Pathology Division, Agricultural Research and Extension Unit (AREU),
Reduit, Mauritius.
(2)DAF Réunion, Laboratoire National de la Protection des Végétaux, Pôle de
Protection des Plantes, 7 Chemin de l'IRAT, 97410 Saint-Pierre, Ile de La
Réunion, France.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology, Washington State University, Pullman 99164.

Iris yellow spot virus (IYSV; family Bunyaviridae, genus Tospovirus) transmitted 
by thrips (Thrips tabaci Lindeman) is an economically important viral pathogen of
bulb and seed onion (Allium cepa) crops in many onion-growing areas of the world 
(2,3). In Africa, IYSV has been reported in Reunion (4) and South Africa (1). In 
June 2008, diamond-shaped lesions that are typical of IYSV were observed on onion
seed scapes in an onion plot of 0.25 ha at Reduit in the central part of
Mauritius. Disease incidence was 80% with a severity of 50 to 75% of the scape
surface area. Lodging was observed in 25% of the symptomatic plants. Twenty-two
symptomatic plants were tested and found to be positive for IYSV when tested by
double antibody sandwich (DAS)-ELISA with a commercially available kit (Agdia
Inc., Elkhart, IN). The presence of the virus was confirmed by reverse
transcription (RT)-PCR tests with primers 917L: 5'-TAAAACTTAACTAACACAAA-3' and
56U: 5'-TCCTAAGTATTCACCAT-3' as forward and reverse primers, respectively, for
specific sequences flanking the CP gene. Another set of primers specific to the
small (S) RNA of IYSV (5'-TAAAACAAACATTCAAACAA-3' and 5'-CTCTTAAACACATTT
AACAAGCAC-3') produced an amplicon of approximately 1.2 kb that includes the
772-bp nucleocapsid (N) gene. The 1.2-kb amplicon was cloned and four clones were
sequenced and consensus sequence was used for comparisons. Sequence analysis
showed that the N gene of the IYSV isolate from Mauritius (GenBank Accession No. 
HM218822) shared the highest nucleotide sequence identity (99%) with several
known IYSV N gene sequences (Accession Nos. FJ785835 and AM900393) available in
the GenBank, confirming the presence of IYSV in the onion crops in Mauritius. A
survey was subsequently carried out from July to November 2008 in major
onion-growing localities at La Marie, Henrietta, Reduit, and Plaine Sophie
(center); Bassin, La Ferme, and La Chaumiere (west); Grand Sable, Petit Sable,
and Plaisance (south, southeast); and Belle Mare, Trou d'Eau Douce, and Palmar
(east) to monitor the distribution of the disease on the island. Symptomatic
samples with diamond-to-irregularly shaped lesions were observed and 155
symptomatic and 35 nonsymptomatic samples were collected and screened by
DAS-ELISA for IYSV and Tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV), another tospovirus
reported to infect onion elsewhere. Sixty-six percent of the symptomatic samples 
screened (102 of 155) tested positive for IYSV. No IYSV was detected in the
symptomless samples. There was no serological indication of TSWV infection in the
samples. Samples that tested positive for IYSV were collected from Belle mare,
Palmar, and Trou d'eau douce in the east and La Ferme in the west. Cultivars
infected were Gandiole, Local Red, and Veronique. No IYSV was detected in the
bulbs. The vector, T. tabaci, was observed in infected onion parcels surveyed and
is known to occur in all onion-producing areas of the island. To our knowledge,
this is the first report of IYSV in onion in Mauritius. Further surveys and
monitoring of IYSV incidence, along with its impact on the yield, need to be
established. References: (1) L. J. du Toit et al. Plant Dis. 91:1203, 2007. (2)
D. H. Gent et al. Plant Dis. 88:446, 2004. (3) H. R. Pappu et al. Virus Res.
141:219, 2009. (4) I. Robène-Soustrade et al. Plant Pathol. 55:288, 2006.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS-10-09-0645 
PMID: 30743654 

