
1. Plant Dis. 2000 Feb;84(2):200. doi: 10.1094/PDIS.2000.84.2.200C.

Yellow Leaf Disease of Cantaloupe and Wax Gourd from Thailand Caused by Tomato
leaf curl virus.

Samretwanich K(1), Chiemsombat P(2), Kittipakorn K(3), Ikegami M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, Tokyo University of Agriculture, 1-1-1, Sakuragaoka,
Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 156-8502, Japan.
(2)Department of Plant Pathology, Faculty of Agriculture, Kasetsart University,
Kamphaengsaen, Nakorn Pathom 73140, Thailand.
(3)Department of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperative, Bangkok
10600, Thailand.

Cantaloupe (Cucumis melo var. reliculatus) and wax gourd (Benincasa hispida
Cogn.) plants showing a yellow leaf disease have been observed in central
Thailand since 1993. The disease has been transmitted to cantaloupe and wax gourd
plants by grafting and whiteflies (Bemisia tabaci Genn.) (K. Kittipakorn,
unpublished data). Because of the leaf yellowing symptoms and transmission by
whiteflies, a geminivirus was suspected. Three naturally infected cantaloupe and 
four naturally infected wax gourd plants showing leaf yellowing were collected
from fields at Kamphaengsaen, Nakorn Pathom, Thailand. Virus cultures were
maintained in cantaloupe and wax gourd plants. Inoculations were done with a
whitefly vector. Symptoms in cantaloupe and wax gourd plants were the same as
those observed in the field. Virus DNA associated with yellow leaf disease of
cantaloupe and wax gourd plants was amplified by polymerase chain reaction with
geminivirus-specific degenerate primers, described by Rojas et al. (2), that
anneal within the AC1 open reading frame (ORF; replication associated protein
gene) and the AV1 ORF (coat protein gene) of bipartite geminiviruses and the C1
and V2 ORFs of monopartite geminiviruses (2). Fragments (1.2 kbp) were amplified 
and cloned from affected cantaloupe and wax gourd plants. Three independent
clones were sequenced and analyzed, and identical 32-base stem loop regions were 
found in the amplified fragments from both isolates, including the conserved
nonanucleotide sequence TAATATTAC, which is present in all geminiviruses. The
iterative sequence GGCGTC also was found in the intergenic region (IR) (434 bp)
of the amplified fragments from both isolates. The B component could not be
detected. The nucleotide sequences of the IR and V1 were compared with 28
well-studied whitefly-transmitted geminiviruses and revealed â‰ˆ96% sequence
identity with DNA A of Tomato leaf curl virus of the genus Geminivirus from India
(ToLCV-In 2) (1) for both isolates. The iterative sequence GGCGTC in the IR also 
was identical to the sequence in ToLCV-In 2. These results establish the
provisional identity of the pathogen causing yellow leaf disease on cantaloupe
and wax gourds in Thailand as ToLCV or closely related strains. References: (1)
M. Padidam et al. J. Gen. Virol. 76:249, 1995. (2) M. R. Rojas et al. Plant Dis. 
77:340, 1993.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS.2000.84.2.200C 
PMID: 30841323 

