
1. Viruses. 2019 Mar 14;11(3). pii: E261. doi: 10.3390/v11030261.

Prion and Prion-Like Protein Strains: Deciphering the Molecular Basis of
Heterogeneity in Neurodegeneration.

Scialò C(1), De Cecco E(2), Manganotti P(3), Legname G(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Prion Biology, Department of Neuroscience, Scuola Internazionale
Superiore di Studi Avanzati (SISSA), 34136 Trieste, Italy. cscialo@sissa.it.
(2)Laboratory of Prion Biology, Department of Neuroscience, Scuola Internazionale
Superiore di Studi Avanzati (SISSA), 34136 Trieste, Italy. edececco@sissa.it.
(3)Clinical Unit of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health
Sciences, University Hospital and Health Services of Trieste, University of
Trieste, 34149 Trieste, Italy. pmanganotti@units.it.
(4)Laboratory of Prion Biology, Department of Neuroscience, Scuola Internazionale
Superiore di Studi Avanzati (SISSA), 34136 Trieste, Italy. legname@sissa.it.
(5)ELETTRA Sincrotrone Trieste S.C.p.A, Basovizza, 34149 Trieste, Italy.
legname@sissa.it.

Increasing evidence suggests that neurodegenerative disorders share a common
pathogenic feature: the presence of deposits of misfolded proteins with altered
physicochemical properties in the Central Nervous System. Despite a lack of
infectivity, experimental data show that the replication and propagation of
neurodegenerative disease-related proteins including amyloid-β (Aβ), tau,
α-synuclein and the transactive response DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43)
share a similar pathological mechanism with prions. These observations have led
to the terminology of "prion-like" to distinguish between conditions with
noninfectious characteristics but similarities with the prion replication and
propagation process. Prions are considered to adapt their conformation to changes
in the context of the environment of replication. This process is known as either
prion selection or adaptation, where a distinct conformer present in the initial 
prion population with higher propensity to propagate in the new environment is
able to prevail over the others during the replication process. In the last
years, many studies have shown that prion-like proteins share not only the prion 
replication paradigm but also the specific ability to aggregate in different
conformations, i.e., strains, with relevant clinical, diagnostic and therapeutic 
implications. This review focuses on the molecular basis of the strain phenomenon
in prion and prion-like proteins.

DOI: 10.3390/v11030261 
PMCID: PMC6466326
PMID: 30875755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

