
1. Cureus. 2019 Jan 14;11(1):e3880. doi: 10.7759/cureus.3880.

Epidemiology, Clinical Characteristics, and Management Status of Hepatitis B: A
Cross-sectional Study in a Tertiary Care Hospital at Karachi, Pakistan.

Butt N(1), Ali Khan M(1), Haleem F(2), Butt S(3), Reema S(4), Qureshi T(4),
Abbasi A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology, Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Centre, Karachi, PAK.
(2)Internal Medicine, Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Center, Karachi, PAK.
(3)Biomedical and Biological Sciences, Dow University of Health Sciences,
Karachi, PAK.
(4)Internal Medicine, Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Centre, Karachi, PAK.
(5)Internal Medicine, Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi, PAK.

Background Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a serious health problem in
Pakistan. In view of the serious socioeconomic consequences, identifying patient 
characteristics and the current treatment for the disease will enhance HBV
regulation and its medical management. Aims To describe the epidemiology,
clinical characteristics, and current management status of patients infected by
HBV. Methods We undertook an observational, cross-sectional, and epidemiological 
study at the Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Centre, Karachi, during the period from 
January 2014 to November 2017. Male and female patients of any age and with
documentation for an HBV infection were eligible for inclusion in the study. An
HBV infection was defined as a positive hepatitis B surface antigen test. Results
A total of 500 patients were analyzed. The mean age at presentation was
29.86±13.68 years. The majority of the patients (25.6%) were ethnically Sindhi
followed by Pathan (24.4%), indicating a high prevalence among the rural-based
population of Pakistan. The mean duration of the disease was 3.51±4.46 years. The
most common cause for the spread was positive family history (40.4%) followed by 
roadside barbers (30.0%). Most patients were Child-Pugh (CP) class A (84.6%) and 
the median Modified End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score was 7. Upper
gastrointestinal bleeding was the most frequent hepatic complication (6.2%).
Antiviral medications had been received by 18.6% of patients previously.
Peg-interferon (6.0%) was the major antiviral medication prescribed to
treatment-experienced patients. Conclusions This observational, real-life study
has identified some gaps between clinical practice and guideline recommendations 
in Pakistan. To achieve better health outcomes, several improvements, such as
disease monitoring and optimizing antiviral regimens, should be made to improve
disease management.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.3880 
PMCID: PMC6420331
PMID: 30899631 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

