
1. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2019 Jul 30;176:339-345. doi:
10.1016/j.ecoenv.2019.03.118. Epub 2019 Apr 3.

Bioactivity of an oxymatrine-based commercial formulation against Brevipalpus
yothersi Baker and its effects on predatory mites in citrus groves.

Andrade DJ(1), Ribeiro EB(2), de Morais MR(3), Zanardi OZ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Protection, College of Agricultural and Veterinary
Sciences, São Paulo State University (UNESP/FCAV), 14884-900, Jaboticabal, São
Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: daniel.andrade@unesp.br.
(2)Department of Plant Science and Animal Science, State University of the
Southwest of Bahia (UESB), 45700-000, Vitória da Conquista, Bahia, Brazil.
(3)Department of Plant Protection, College of Agricultural and Veterinary
Sciences, São Paulo State University (UNESP/FCAV), 14884-900, Jaboticabal, São
Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Department of Entomology, Fund for Citrus Protection (FUNDECITRUS), 14807-040,
Araraquara, São Paulo, Brazil.

The acaricidal bioactivity of an oxymatrine-based commercial formulation against 
Brevipalpus yothersi Baker (Acari: Tenuipalpidae), a vector mite of the Citrus
leprosis virus (CiLV), and its impact on predatory mites were assessed. For this 
purpose, laboratory and field assays using bioacaricide concentrations ranging
from 0.5 to 2.0 mg L-1 of oxymatrine were performed during the years from 2015 to
2016. Laboratory results showed that the oxymatrine-based commercial formulation 
does not cause deleterious effects on B. yothersi eggs; however, it causes high
larval mortality. For adult females, the bioacaricide caused high acute toxicity 
and residual effect for at least 5 days after application. In the field, the
bioacaricide exhibited high acaricidal activity against B. yothersi, with
efficacy levels similar to that of synthetic acaricide spirodiclofen (48 mg L-1) 
until 49 days after the application. The application of the bioacaricide did not 
negatively affect the population levels of phytoseiid predatory mites. Therefore,
our results suggest that the oxymatrine-based commercial formulation is an
important tool for management of the citrus leprosis mite in citrus groves.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2019.03.118 
PMID: 30953999  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

