
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2019 Oct;25(10):1186-1194. doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2019.04.003.
Epub 2019 Apr 12.

Is hospital-acquired pneumonia different in transplant recipients?

Gudiol C(1), Sabé N(1), Carratalà J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Department, Bellvitge University Hospital, IDIBELL,
University of Barcelona, Spain; REIPI (Spanish Network for Research in Infectious
Disease), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Infectious Diseases Department, Bellvitge University Hospital, IDIBELL,
University of Barcelona, Spain; REIPI (Spanish Network for Research in Infectious
Disease), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address:
jcarratala@bellvitgehospital.cat.

Hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) and ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) are
serious complications in transplant patients. The aim of this review is to
summarize the evidence regarding nosocomial pneumonia in transplant recipients,
including HAP in non-ventilated patients and VAP, and to identify future
directions for improvement.A comprehensive literature search in the
PubMed/MEDLINE database was performed. Articles written in English and published 
between 1990 and November 2018 were included. HAP/VAP in transplant patients
usually occurs early post-transplant, particularly during neutropenia in
haematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Bacteria are the leading cause of
nosocomial pneumonia for both immunocompetent and transplant recipients, being
Gram negative organisms, and especially Pseudomonas aeruginosa, highly prevalent.
Multidrug-resistant bacteria are of special concern. Pneumonia in the transplant 
setting may be caused by opportunistic pathogens, and the differential diagnosis 
needs to be extended to other non-infectious complications. The most relevant
opportunistic pathogens are Aspergillus fumigatus, Pneumocystis jirovecii and
cytomegalovirus. Nevertheless, they are an exceptional cause of nosocomial
pneumonia, and usually occur in severely immunosuppressed patients not receiving 
antimicrobial prophylaxis. Performing bronchoalveolar lavage may improve the rate
of aetiological diagnosis, leading to a change in therapeutic management and
improved outcomes. The optimal length of antibiotic therapy for bacterial HAP/VAP
has not been well defined, but it should perhaps be longer than in the general
population. Mortality associated with HAP/VAP is high. HAP/VAP in transplant
patients is frequent and is associated with increased mortality. There is room
for improvement in gaining knowledge about the management of HAP/VAP in this
population.

Copyright © 2019 European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious
Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmi.2019.04.003 
PMID: 30986554  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

