
1. Vaccine. 2019 Nov 8;37(47):6970-6977. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.05.064. Epub
2019 Jun 1.

Zika virus-like particles (VLPs): Stable cell lines and continuous perfusion
processes as a new potential vaccine manufacturing platform.

Alvim RGF(1), Itabaiana I Jr(2), Castilho LR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), COPPE, Cell Culture Engineering
Lab, Cx. Postal 68502, 21941-972 Rio de Janeiro/RJ, Brazil; Federal University of
Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), School of Chemistry (EQ), Department of Biochemical
Engineering, 21941-909 Rio de Janeiro/RJ, Brazil.
(2)Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), School of Chemistry (EQ),
Department of Biochemical Engineering, 21941-909 Rio de Janeiro/RJ, Brazil.
(3)Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), COPPE, Cell Culture Engineering
Lab, Cx. Postal 68502, 21941-972 Rio de Janeiro/RJ, Brazil. Electronic address:
leda@peq.coppe.ufrj.br.

Zika virus (ZIKV) was first detected in Brazil in 2015 and then rapidly spread to
more than 80 countries in Africa, Asia and the Americas. ZIKV infection was
correlated with severe congenital malformations in newborns from infected
mothers, as well as with Guillain-Barré syndrome in adults. Although the number
of infected people has declined in the affected countries lately, the development
of a vaccine for ZIKV is of great importance to avoid the future resurgence of
the virus in endemic areas or the future spread to currently non-endemic regions.
Among many different platforms currently under study, virus-like particles (VLPs)
are a promising alternative for the development of vaccines, since tridimensional
particles mimicking the virus - but lacking its genome - can be produced and
present the antigen in a repetitive way, potentially eliciting robust immune
responses. In this work, we demonstrated the generation of stably transfected
HEK293 cells constitutively expressing Zika VLPs. Small-scale shake flask studies
using a stable cell pool enriched by Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorting (FACS)
showed that daily medium exchange (intermittent perfusion) significantly enhances
viable cell density and VLP production (∼4-fold) over batch cultures. Continuous 
perfusion in a controlled bioreactor coupled to an ATF-2 cell retention device
resulted in maximum VLP titers similar to those obtained under small-scale
intermittent perfusion. Our results show that the use of cell lines
constitutively expressing Zika VLPs, cultured in stirred-tank perfusion
bioreactors, represents a promising system for the production of a VLP-based Zika
vaccine candidate.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.05.064 
PMID: 31164305 

