
1. J Pediatr Intensive Care. 2012 Sep;1(3):143-151. doi: 10.3233/PIC-2012-024.

Plasma concentration of N-terminal pro-atrial and N-terminal pro-brain
natriuretic peptides and fluid balance in children with bronchiolitis.

Daneshmand KA(1), Zaritsky AL(2), Lamb MA(3), LeVine AM(4), Theriaque DW(5),
Sanders RC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Lee Memorial Hospital, Fort Meyers, FL, USA.
(2)Executive Medical Director, Children's Hospital of The King's Daughters,
Norfolk, VA, USA.
(3)Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(4)Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(5)Clinical and Translational Science Institute, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(6)Section of Pediatric Critical Care, UAMS/Arkansas Children's Hospital, Little 
Rock, AR, USA.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the plasma levels of N-Terminal pro-brain
natriuretic peptide (N-BNP), N-Terminal pro-atrial natriuretic peptide (N-ANP)
and antidiuretic hormone (ADH) over time and their relationship to clinical
indicators in hospitalized children with bronchiolitis. Prospective crossover
clinical investigation. Hospitalized children in a university-affiliated
hospital. Twenty-seven children (birth to 24 mo) with first episode of
bronchiolitis and 34 age-matched healthy controls. Daily blood samples up to five
consecutive days were obtained for N-BNP, N-ANP and ADH in the bronchiolitis
group and on the initial blood draw in the control group. Daily total fluid
intake, net fluid balance and clinical bronchiolitis severity levels were
recorded. N-BNP and N-ANP levels were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay. ADH levels were measured by a double antibody technique. The mean age
(months ± SD) in the bronchiolitis group was 4.2 ± 5.9 mo and 12.0 ± 6.1 mo in
the control group; 51.9% of bronchiolitis patients were positive for respiratory 
syncytial virus (RSV). In patients with bronchiolitis on admission, plasma N-BNP 
measurements (mean ± SD) were elevated (996.0 ± 570.2 fmol/mL) compared to
controls (552.7 ± 264.7 fmol/mL P < 0.005). Serum N-ANP levels were also
initially elevated (3,889 ± 1,769.7 fmol/mL) compared to controls (2,173 ± 912
fmol/mL P < 0.005). The serum levels of N-BNP and N-ANP remained significantly
elevated from day 2 through day 5. Similarly, ADH levels were significantly
higher on admission in the bronchiolitis group (10 ± 7.49 pg/mL) vs. the control 
group (5.8 ± 5.5 pg/mL P < 0.05), but quickly decreased from day 2 through day 5.
N-BNP, N-ANP and ADH concentrations were elevated in hospitalized children with
bronchiolitis at admission. Based on our observation, judicious fluid management 
is indicated in children hospitalized with bronchiolitis.

DOI: 10.3233/PIC-2012-024 
PMCID: PMC6530689
PMID: 31214400 

