
1. Arch Virol. 2019 Oct;164(10):2581-2584. doi: 10.1007/s00705-019-04361-3. Epub
2019 Jul 29.

Recombinase polymerase amplification assay for rapid detection of maize chlorotic
mottle virus in maize.

Jiao Y(1), Jiang J(1), An M(1), Xia Z(2), Wu Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Plant Protection, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang,
110866, China.
(2)College of Plant Protection, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang,
110866, China. zihao8337@syau.edu.cn.
(3)College of Plant Protection, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang,
110866, China. wuyh09@syau.edu.cn.

Maize chlorotic mottle virus (MCMV), an important quarantine virus, causes lethal
necrosis in maize when coinfected with a potyvirid, which is seriously
threatening the production of maize worldwide. In this study, recombinase
polymerase amplification (RPA), a novel isothermal DNA amplification and
detection technique, was developed to detect MCMV in maize crops. A pair of
specific primers was designed based on the conserved sequences of the MCMV coat
protein region. The RT-RPA assay was carried out as an isothermal reaction at 38 
Â°C that was complete within 30 min, and no cross-reactivity was detected with
other viruses infecting maize in China. The limit of detection of the RT-RPA
assay was tenfold lower than that of ordinary RT-PCR. Moreover, this method was
successfully applied to test field-collected samples. The newly developed RT-RPA 
assay offers a reliable, sensitive and efficient method for rapid detection of
MCMV in maize in equipment-limited diagnostic laboratories and on-site
facilities.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-019-04361-3 
PMID: 31359148  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

