
1. Oncol Lett. 2019 Sep;18(3):2518-2522. doi: 10.3892/ol.2019.10585. Epub 2019 Jul
5.

Effect of lncRNA THOR on proliferation and migration of colon cancer cells.

Lv Y(1), Yang X(1), Wang L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Jinan Central Hospital Affiliated to Shandong 
University, Jinan, Shandong 250013, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Jinan Central Hospital Affiliated to
Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250013, P.R. China.

The effect of long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) THOR on proliferation and migration of
colon cancer cells was investigated. Lentiviral vector expressing lncRNA THOR
shRNA was used to establish colon cancer SW620 lncRNA THOR knockdown cell line
(experimental group), and at the same time, a control vector cell line (control
group) was established by empty vector virus. Proliferation ability of the two
groups was analyzed by CCK8 and EdU methods. Migration ability of the cells was
analyzed by Transwell method. Xenograft tumor method was used to analyze the in
vivo proliferation ability of the two groups of cells. mRNA levels of lncRNA THOR
target genes were analyzed by reverse transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR).
Compared with control cells, the cell proliferation ability of the experimental
group was significantly decreased (P<0.05). Compared with the control group, the 
cell migration ability of the experimental group was significantly decreased
(P<0.05). The tumor growth rate of the experimental group in the mice was
significantly lower than that of the control group (P<0.05). Compared with the
control group, mRNA levels of lncRNA THOR target genes IGF2BP1, SOX9 and c-myc in
the experimental group were significantly downregulated (P<0.05). The results
indicated that lncRNA THOR knockdown can significantly downregulate the
expression of genes involved in tumor proliferation and migration, promote tumor 
cell proliferation and migration, indicating that lncRNA THOR plays an important 
role in colon cancer.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2019.10585 
PMCID: PMC6676674
PMID: 31452739 

