
1. Vaccine. 2019 Oct 16;37(44):6640-6647. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.09.046. Epub
2019 Sep 18.

Commensal gut microbiota can modulate adaptive immune responses in chickens
vaccinated with whole inactivated avian influenza virus subtype H9N2.

Yitbarek A(1), Astill J(1), Hodgins DC(1), Parkinson J(2), Nagy É(1), Sharif
S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, Ontario N1G 2W1, Canada.
(2)Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S
3G4, Canada; Division of Molecular Structure and Function, Research Institute,
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada; Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8,
Canada.
(3)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, Ontario N1G 2W1, Canada. Electronic address: shayan@uoguelph.ca.

Variations in the composition of commensal gut microbiota have been reported to
be major contributors to differences in responses to vaccination among
individuals. In chickens, there is limited information on the role of gut
microbiota in responses to vaccination. The current study studied the role of gut
microbiota in cell- and antibody-mediated immune responses to vaccination with a 
whole inactivated avian influenza virus, subtype H9N2. A total of 166 one-day-old
specific pathogen free layer chickens (SPF) were randomly assigned to treatments,
where a combination of antibiotic depletion, and probiotics (a combination of
five Lactobacillus species) or fecal microbial transplant (FMT) reconstitution
were used to study the dynamics of cell- and antibody-mediated immune responses
to primary and secondary vaccinations at days 15 and 29 of age, respectively.
Overall, at days 7 and 14 post primary vaccination (p.p.v.), administration of
probiotics to non-depleted chickens resulted in significantly higher mean
hemagglutination (HI) titre compared to antibiotic treated chickens. Furthermore,
at day 21 p.p.v., chickens treated with probiotics or FMT post-antibiotic
treatment showed a significantly higher mean HI titre compared to non-depleted
chickens treated with probiotics. At day 7 p.p.v., a significantly higher virus
specific IgM and IgG titres were observed in non-depleted chickens administered
with probiotics compared to antibiotic depleted chickens, and a significantly
higher IgG titre was observed in chickens treated with FMT following antibiotic
treatment compared to only antibiotic treatment. Analysis of interferon gamma
expression in splenocytes to assess cell-mediated immune responses showed a
significantly lower expression in antibiotic-treated chickens compared to
non-depleted chickens and FMT reconstituted chickens. Taken together, the current
study suggests that shifts in the composition of gut microbiota of chickens may
result in changes in cell- and antibody-mediated immune responses to vaccination 
against influenza viruses. Further studies will be needed to highlight the
mechanisms involved in this modulation.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.09.046 
PMID: 31542262 

