
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Oct 2;9(1):14174. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-50766-0.

Comparative modulation of lncRNAs in wild-type and rag1-heterozygous mutant
zebrafish exposed to immune challenge with spring viraemia of carp virus (SVCV).

Valenzuela-Muñoz V(1), Pereiro P(1)(2), Álvarez-Rodríguez M(2), Gallardo-Escárate
C(3), Figueras A(2), Novoa B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biotechnology and Aquatic Genomics, Interdisciplinary Center for
Aquaculture Research (INCAR), University of Concepción, Concepción, Chile.
(2)Instituto de Investigaciones Marinas (IIM), CSIC, Vigo, Spain.
(3)Laboratory of Biotechnology and Aquatic Genomics, Interdisciplinary Center for
Aquaculture Research (INCAR), University of Concepción, Concepción, Chile.
crisgallardo@udec.cl.
(4)Instituto de Investigaciones Marinas (IIM), CSIC, Vigo, Spain.
beatriznovoa@iim.csic.es.

Although the modulation of immune-related genes after viral infection has been
widely described in vertebrates, the potential implications of non-coding RNAs
(ncRNAs), especially long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), in immunity are still a
nascent research field. The model species zebrafish could serve as a useful
organism for studying the functionality of lncRNAs due to the numerous advantages
of this teleost, including the existence of numerous mutant lines. In this work, 
we conducted a whole-transcriptome analysis of wild-type (WT) and heterozygous
rag1 mutant (rag1+/-) zebrafish after infection with the pathogen spring viraemia
of carp virus (SVCV). WT and rag1+/- zebrafish were infected with SVCV for 24 h. 
Kidney samples were sampled from infected and uninfected fish for transcriptome
sequencing. From a total of 198,540 contigs, 12,165 putative lncRNAs were
identified in zebrafish. Most of the putative lncRNAs were shared by the two
zebrafish lines. However, by comparing the lncRNA profiles induced after SVCV
infection in WT and rag1+/- fish, most of the lncRNAs that were significantly
induced after viral challenge were exclusive to each line, reflecting a highly
differential response to the virus. Analysis of the neighboring genes of lncRNAs 
that were exclusively modulated in WT revealed high representation of
metabolism-related terms, whereas those from rag1+/- fish showed enrichment in
terms related to the adaptive immune response, among others. On the other hand,
genes involved in numerous antiviral processes surrounded commonly modulated
lncRNAs, as expected. These results clearly indicate that after SVCV infection in
zebrafish, the expression of an array of lncRNAs with functions in different
aspects of immunity is induced.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-50766-0 
PMCID: PMC6775065
PMID: 31578442 

