
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Sep 24;10:2308. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02308. eCollection
2019.

Toward a Functional Cure for Hepatitis B: The Rationale and Challenges for
Therapeutic Targeting of the B Cell Immune Response.

Ma Z(1), Zhang E(2), Gao S(1), Xiong Y(1), Lu M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University,
Wuhan, China.
(2)Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(3)Institute of Virology, University Hospital Essen, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

The central role of the cellular immune response in the control and clearance of 
the hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection has been well-established. The contribution
of humoral immunity, including B cell and antibody responses against HBV, has
been investigated for a long time but has attracted increasing attention again in
recent years. The anti-HBs antibody was first recognized as a marker of
protective immunity after the acute resolution of the HBV infection (or
vaccination) and is now defined as a biomarker for the functional cure of chronic
hepatitis B (CHB). In this way, therapies targeting HBV-specific B cells and the 
induction of an anti-HBs antibody response are essential elements of a rational
strategy to terminate chronic HBV infection. However, a high load of HBsAg in the
blood, which has been proposed to induce antigen-specific immune tolerance,
represents a major obstacle to curing CHB. Long-term antiviral treatment by
nucleoside analogs, by targeting viral translation by siRNA, by inhibiting HBsAg 
release via nucleic acid polymers, or by neutralizing HBsAg via specific
antibodies could potentially reduce the HBsAg load in CHB patients. A combined
strategy including a reduction of the HBsAg load via the above treatments and the
therapeutic targeting of B cells by vaccination may induce the appearance of
anti-HBs antibodies and lead to a functional cure of CHB.

Copyright Â© 2019 Ma, Zhang, Gao, Xiong and Lu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02308 
PMCID: PMC6769125
PMID: 31608073 

