
1. Mol Gen Genet. 1986 Feb;202(2):257-64.

Pleiotropic mutations in appR reduce pH 2.5 acid phosphatase expression and
restore succinate utilisation in CRP-deficient strains of Escherichia coli.

Touati E, Dassa E, Boquet PL.

Several strains of Escherichia coli K12 were compared for activity of the
periplasmic "pH 2.5 acid phosphatase", an enzyme whose expression is regulated
negatively by cyclic AMP. Two distinct enzyme levels differing by about four-fold
were observed. This strain-dependent difference does not involve modifications in
the structure of the enzyme, but results from a difference in its expression. We 
show that strains with a high- or a low level of enzyme differ in the gene locus 
appR located in the 59 min region of the chromosome, a site remote from the
structural gene appA; the appR+ versus appR enzyme ratio is 3-4 in wild-type
strains, adenylate cyclase-deficient strains (cya) or cyclic AMP receptor
protein-deficient strains (crp) grown in rich medium or in glucose minimal
medium, but is close to 1 in cya strains in the presence of 0.1 mM cyclic AMP and
in wild-type strains grown with succinate as carbon source; in a crp genetic
background, appR strains, contrary to appR+ strains, are able to grow on minimal 
medium with succinate as the sole carbon source. The selection, from an appR+ crp
strain, of clones growing on succinate-minimal medium, yielded mutations in the
same region of the chromosome and showing the same phenotype as
"naturally-occurring" appR strains. All appR strains analysed so far showed other
similar deficiencies. The possibility that mutated appR gene products might
function as weak substitutes for a functional cAMP-CRP complex is discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00331647 
PMID: 3517593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

