
1. J Med Virol. 1987 Jul;22(3):257-62.

Anti-delta antibody in various HBsAg positive Argentine populations.

Fay O, Tanno H, Gatti H, Basualdo JA, Ciocca M, Fainboin H, Fainboin L, Jorge A, 
Motta A, Naval M, et al.

One thousand five hundred and seventeen HBsAg carriers from different cities of
Argentina were studied for the presence of anti-Delta antibody (anti-HDV) in
their sera. One thousand one hundred and sixty-eight were volunteer blood donors 
and 349 were patients with liver disease. Different liver diseases were diagnosed
by clinical, biochemical, and histological parameters. Among blood donors, 16
(1.4%) were positive for the antibody and none was Delta-antigen positive. In 130
patients with acute hepatitis, one (0.77%) was positive for anti-HDV, as well as 
three (2.22%) out of 135 patients with chronic active hepatitis (CAH), and three 
(5.77%) out of 52 patients with cirrhosis (C). No anti-HDV positive was found
among seven fulminant hepatitis (FH) cases. The presence of HBeAg and anti-HBe
was studied in anti-HDV positive sera; eleven (69%) volunteer blood donors were
anti-HBe positive, and five (31%) were HBeAg positive. HBeAg was positive in the 
three CAH cases, and in one out of three C Cases with anti-HDV positive.
Hepatitis Delta antigen was also positive in the hepatocytic nuclei in the three 
patients with C and two of the three CAH cases. The present results show that
Delta infection is rare among blood donors in Argentina. A small variation
without statistical significance could be found within different geographical
areas. Among patients with HBsAg related liver disease, the presence of HDV
markers was also low.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.1890220309 
PMID: 3625173  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

