
1. Am J Vet Res. 1985 May;46(5):1071-7.

Susceptibility of cats, sheep, and swine to a rabbit isolate of Encephalitozoon
cuniculi.

Pang VF, Shadduck JA.

Newborn cats, pigs, and sheep (3 to 14 days old) and postweanling cats (2.5
months old) that had been inoculated with Gardner feline sarcoma virus and feline
leukemia virus at 10 days of age were infected experimentally with a rabbit
isolate of the mammalian protozoan parasite Encephalitozoon cuniculi. Infection
occurred in all cats and in some sheep, but was questionable in pigs. Brain and
kidney were the 2 major target organs in cats. The lesions were compatible with, 
but less severe than, those of naturally infected cats and other carnivores. Of
13 cats, E cuniculi could be detected morphologically in the kidneys of 12 cats
and in the brain of 1 cat. The organisms were reisolated from 2 cats with ground 
tissue suspension of kidney or urine sediment. The indirect immunofluorescence
antibody (IFA) titers were 1:20 to 1:1,280 at the time the animals were killed,
but antibodies were not detected before inoculation. Lesions were seen in the
kidneys of 2 of 4 sheep. These lesions were mild, but were compatible with those 
in a spontaneously affected goat. Encephalitozoon cuniculi were found
morphologically in the kidney of 1 sheep with lesions. All sheep had IFA titers
of 1:10 to 1:20 before inoculation, and the titers were 1:20 to 1:320 when they
were killed. Vasculitis, similar to the subacute-to-chronic stage of
polyarteritis nodosa, was observed in 1 of 8 pigs. The lesions were primarily
present in the kidney; comparable but milder lesions were also seen in the heart 
and brain. Antibody was not detected before inoculation.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT
250 WORDS)


PMID: 3923875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

