
1. J Virol. 1972 Feb;9(2):297-308.

Intracellular forms of adenovirus deoxyribonucleic acid. I. Evidence for a
deoxyribonucleic acid-protein complex in baby hamster kidney cells infected with 
adenovirus type 12.

Doerfler W, Lundholm U, Hirsch-Kauffmann M.

The total intracellular deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) from baby hamster kidney
cells abortively infected with (3)H-adenovirus type 12 was analyzed in
dye-buoyant density gradients. Between 10 and 20% of the cell-associated
radioactivity derived from viral DNA bands in a density position which is 0.043
to 0.085 g/cm(3) higher than that of viral DNA extracted from purified virions.
The DNA in the high-density region (HP-fraction) is almost completely absent when
DNA, ribonucleic acid (RNA) or protein synthesis is chemically inhibited in
separate experiments. The HP-fraction is not found when the virus does not adsorb
to and enter the cell. The DNA in the HP-fraction appears as early as 2 hr after 
inoculation. At 2 hr after infection, the HP-fraction is present both in the
nucleus and the cytoplasm. This DNA hybridizes exclusively with viral DNA and
sediments at approximately the same rate in both neutral and alkaline sucrose
density gradients. Electron microscopy has revealed no circular DNA molecules in 
this fraction. Evidence indicates that the viral DNA in the HP-fraction exists in
a complex with protein and possibly RNA. The protein component of the complex is 
resistant to enzymatic digestion, whereas the complex is susceptible to
ribonuclease treatment. Digestion with deoxyribonuclease reduces the amount of
DNA found in the HP-fraction. The structure and biological function of this
complex are currently being investigated.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.9.2.297-308.1972 
PMCID: PMC356297
PMID: 5062681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

