
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1980 Apr;77(4):2098-102.

Introduction of a viral thymidine kinase gene and the human beta-globin gene into
developmentally multipotential mouse teratocarcinoma cells.

Pellicer A, Wagner EF, el-Kareh A, Dewey MJ, Reuser AJ, Silverstein S, Axel R,
Mintz B.

Teratocarcinoma (TCC) stem cells provide unique prospects for the introduction of
specific genes into mice, by virtue of their dual capacity for propagation in
vitro and for normal differentiation in embryos. In this study, we have
demonstrated that foreign genes amenable to selection in culture can be
transferred into the stem cells and expressed. These cells maintain expression of
the gene for long periods during differentiation in tumors in vivo in the absence
of selective pressure. The cells also integrate an unlinked nonselectable gene at
high frequency. Addition of the cloned herpes simplex virus (HSV) thymidine
kinase (tk; ATP:thymidine 5'-phosphotransferase, EC 2.7.1.21) gene to cultures of
tk(-)TCC cells yielded tk(+) colonies at a frequency of one colony per 4 mug of
plasmid DNA. This transformation efficiency, although appreciably lower than for 
mouse L tk(-) cells, permits the isolation of many transformants. The HSV
provenance of the transformed phenotype was verified by the characteristic
electrophoretic mobility of the tk protein and by neutralization of the tk
activity with specific antiserum. Moreover, blot hybridization tests revealed at 
least one intact copy of the viral tk gene integrated into the DNA of transformed
cells. When injected into syngeneic mice, the cells formed solid tumors with
various differentiating tissues. From blot hybridization comparisons with their
cell lines of origin, seven of nine tumors examined had maintained the HSV tk
gene without significant loss or rearrangement. Viral tk enzyme activity could
also be demonstrated in at least some of the tumors. Cotransfer of the cloned
human beta-globin gene along with the unlinked HSV tk gene was successful in 2 of
10 tk(+) transformants. Thus, defined genes can be stably introduced into TCC
cells in culture and maintained in vivo in a form in which they are transcribed
and translated to produce a functional protein.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.77.4.2098 
PMCID: PMC348659
PMID: 6246522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

