
1. Schweiz Med Wochenschr. 1978 Mar 11;108(10):363-73.

[Anti-HBc within the framework of hepatitis B virus infection: correlation to the
form of inflammation and to the viral expression].

[Article in German]

Endo Y, Gudat F, Bianchi L, Mihatsch M, Gasser M, Stalder GA, Schmid M.

168 HBAg seropositive and 105 HBAg seronegative liver biopsies were studied for
correlations between anti-HBc titers (indirect immunofluorescence method) and
tissue expression of HBsAg and HBcAg (immunofluorescence), Dane particles in
blood (immune electron microscopy) and inflammatory reaction. 98.8% of the HBAg
seropositive patients were positive for anti-HBc. The mean titers showed
statistically significant differences mainly between chronic aggressive hepatitis
(1:2(11.3)) versus lobular hepatitis (1:2(10.1)), chronic persistent hepatitis
(1:2(9.9)) and nonspecific reactive hepatitis (1:2(7.6)). Due to the considerable
deviation of titers within the histological groups, however, titers below 1:2(11)
are of low diagnostic relevance, whereas titers above 1:2(12) are mainly
indicative of chronic aggressive hepatitis, although acute lobular hepatitis with
signs of possible transition to chronicity or chronic persistent hepatitis with
strong inflammatory activity may occur. Among HBAg seronegative patients 20% were
positive for anti-HBc (mean titer = 1:2(7.7)). Among 78 patients also tested for 
anti-HBs, 10.2% were positive for both anti-HBc and anti-HBs. In an additional
12.8%, anti-HBc was the only marker of past hepatitis B virus infection. Anti-HBs
was the only marker in a further 33%. In none of the HBAg seronegative patients
and in only 59% of all HBAg seropositive patients, there was an association of
anti-HBc with complete virus synthesis as measured by the demonstration of HBcAg 
in tissue or Dane particles in blood. It is concluded that anti-HBc is not a
criterion of infectiosity but a specific, although non-characteristic, marker for
HBAg seropositive acute and chronic hepatitis as well as for terminated HBV
infection of all possible inflammatory and HBAg expression types.


PMID: 625636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

