
1. J Clin Microbiol. 1984 Feb;19(2):105-11.

Isolation and serotyping of porcine rotaviruses and antigenic comparison with
other rotaviruses.

Bohl EH, Theil KW, Saif LJ.

Seven rotavirus strains were isolated in cell cultures from the intestinal
contents of piglets with diarrhea. MA104 cells with pancreatin in the cell
culture medium was the host system of choice for virus isolation and replication.
A cell culture immunofluorescence test in which MA104 cells were used in
microtiter plates was very effective for detecting and assaying rotaviruses. A
plaque reduction neutralization test, cross-protection studies in gnotobiotic
pigs, and electrophoresis of rotaviral double-stranded RNA were used for
comparing viruses. Three strains produced plaques on initial isolation attempts, 
replicated well in cell cultures, and were antigenically very similar. We suggest
that these three strains be considered porcine rotavirus serotype 1, with The
Ohio State University (OSU) strain serving as the prototype. The OSU strain was
distinct from bovine, simian, canine, and human (Wa and M) rotaviruses by plaque 
reduction neutralization. Four strains did not produce plaques on initial
isolation attempts, were difficult to adapt to cell cultures, and were related to
each other but were distinct from the serotype 1 strains. We suggest that the
Gottfried (G) strain be tentatively considered as a prototype for porcine
rotavirus serotype 2. The G strain was antigenically closely related to canine
and simian rotaviruses and less so to human M rotavirus (human rotavirus serotype
3). Canine, simian, and human M rotaviruses were closely related. All seven
porcine rotavirus strains caused diarrhea in gnotobiotic pigs. Cell-cultured
vaccines of the OSU and G strains caused only mild or no diarrhea in gnotobiotic 
pigs, and protection occurred when such pigs were challenged with homologous, bur
not heterologous, virulent viruses. A survey indicated that 94% of 274 porcine
serum samples and 100% of 75 herds were serologically positive to the porcine OSU
rotavirus.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.19.2.105-111.1984 
PMCID: PMC270996
PMID: 6321541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

