
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1983 Sep;80(17):5402-6.

Transformation of human umbilical cord blood T cells by human T-cell
leukemia/lymphoma virus.

Popovic M, Lange-Wantzin G, Sarin PS, Mann D, Gallo RC.

Several isolates of human T-cell leukemia/lymphoma virus (HTLV) were transmitted 
to normal human T cells obtained from the umbilical cord blood of newborns. T
cells from seven specimens were immortalized by infection with different HTLV
isolates and their properties were compared with those of activated uninfected
normal T cells grown in the presence of T-cell growth factor (TCGF) and with
those of HTLV-positive neoplastic T-cell lines derived from patients with T-cell 
malignancies. The HTLV-infected cells generally belonged to a class of mature T
cells (OKT4+ and Leu 3A+) and differed from the normal uninfected cells in that
they could be propagated in culture indefinitely; possessed altered morphology,
including convoluted nuclei and some bi- and multinucleated giant cells; formed
large clumps in culture; demonstrated a diminished requirement for TCGF; had an
increased density of TCGF receptors; often became completely independent of
exogenous TCGF; and expressed HLA-DR determinants. These properties of the
HTLV-infected cord blood T cells contrasted to those of uncultured cord blood T
cells and of cord blood cells stimulated with mitogen and grown with TCGF but
resembled the characteristics of T-cell lines established previously from
patients with HTLV-associated T-cell malignancies. This in vitro system offers a 
unique opportunity to study the basic mechanism involved in abnormal growth and
neoplastic transformation of a specific class of human T cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.80.17.5402 
PMCID: PMC384264
PMID: 6604273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

