
1. Gene. 1995 Aug 30;162(1):5-11.

Protection from proteolysis using a T4::T7-RNAP phage
expression-packaging-processing system.

Hong YR(1), Mullaney JM, Black LW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Maryland, School of
Medicine, Baltimore 21201-1503, USA.

DNA coding for bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase (T7-RNAP) was inserted into a
positive selection-vector form of the T4 genome, placing it under the control of 
bacteriophage T4 ipIII promoters. The recombinant T4::T7-RNAP fusion phage
retained infectivity and produced T7-RNAP in infected cells. Fusion genes were
constructed by insertion into a plasmid containing an iPIII (encoding internal
protein III) target portion and a bacteriophage T7 promoter region. When
Escherichia coli cells containing the plasmid were infected with the T4::T7-RNAP 
re-phage, the bacteria produced fusion protein at high levels. The newly
synthesized T4::T7-RNAP re-phage progeny package and process the fusion protein
into the phage capsid during head morphogenesis. In this paper, we demonstrate
that truncated T4 internal protein IPIII, human IPIII::beta Glo (beta-globin)
fusion protein, E. coli IPIII::beta Glo::beta Gal (beta-galactosidase)
triple-fusion protein and IPIII::V3 fusion protein (human immunodeficiency virus 
envelope protein gp120 V3 region) are expressed at high levels by T4::T7-RNAP
induction. With IPIII::beta Glo, expression-packaging-processing (EPP) occurs
simultaneously with T4::T7-RNAP re-phage infection. We also demonstrate that
T4::T7-RNAP re-phage stabilize unstable proteins such as the X90 fragment of beta
Gal, thought to be degraded by the lon protease. An unstable 20-kDa fragment of
the large subunit of human cytochrome b558, an integral membrane protein in
phagocytes, is subject to proteolytic degradation even when produced in the
lon-deficient BL21 strain. However, upon induction with T4::T7-RNAP re-phage, the
20-kDa protein is produced intact.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(95)00327-3 
PMID: 7557416  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

