
1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 6;270(40):23641-7.

Sorting and intracellular trafficking of a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored 
protein and two hybrid transmembrane proteins with the same ectodomain in
Madin-Darby canine kidney epithelial cells.

Arreaza G(1), Brown DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, State University of New York at
Stony Brook 11794-5215, USA.

We compared the trafficking of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored
placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP) and two chimeric transmembrane proteins
containing the PLAP ectodomain in stably transfected Madin-Darby canine kidney
epithelial cells to determine whether different mechanisms might be used in
apical sorting of GPI-anchored and transmembrane proteins. PLAP-G, which
contained the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of the vesicular stomatitis
virus glycoprotein, was delivered directly to the basolateral surface. PLAP-HA
contained the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of influenza hemagglutinin.
Both PLAP and PLAP-HA were delivered directly to the apical membrane. PLAP
becomes insoluble in Triton X-100 during biosynthetic transport, as it associates
with detergent-resistant membranes. Neither hybrid protein was detergent
insoluble, though the small amount of PLAP that was missorted to the basolateral 
surface was insoluble. We examined the effects of three drugs known to interfere 
with membrane trafficking on sorting and delivery of PLAP and the hybrid
proteins. Monensin had no effect on sorting or surface expression of any of the
proteins. Nocodazole affected the sorting of both PLAP and PLAP-HA but not of
PLAP-G. Brefeldin A appeared to disrupt the sorting of PLAP and PLAP-HA but not
of PLAP-G. This conclusion was tempered by the observation that this drug
affected the distribution of proteins at the cell surface. Thus, sorting and
transport of GPI-anchored and apical transmembrane proteins are similar in a
number of respects.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.40.23641 
PMID: 7559531  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

