
1. New Horiz. 1995 May;3(2):321-9.

Gene therapy in acute critical illness.

Brigham KL(1), Stecenko AA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Lung Research, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
TN 37232-2650, USA.

The development of techniques for manipulating nucleic acids and strategies for
delivering DNA to humans has made gene therapy a reality. Although mostly focused
on genetically based diseases so far, there is every reason to expand the concept
to include acquired diseases. Critical illness may be a good target for gene
therapy because of the high mortality and need for only transient treatment.
Genes can be delivered in vivo using viral vectors (replication-deficient
adenovirus and adeno-associated virus most often). Viral vectors have some
negatives, mainly the triggering of an inflammatory and an immune response.
Nonviral DNA delivery systems include liposomes (cationic or anionic), direct DNA
injection, and polycation-DNA-glycoconjugates. Combining liposomes with viral
components to deliver plasmids with a transgene may improve efficiency of
delivery without causing toxicity. In a model of acute lung injury, in vivo
delivery of a vector hyperexpressing the prostaglandin synthase gene using
cationic liposomes resulted in increased production of prostaglandin E2 and
prostacyclin in the lungs, and protected the lungs from the effects of endotoxin.
This end-result demonstrates the feasibility of this approach. A similar
rationale for the treatment of sepsis could be used. Other promising therapeutic 
genes would include those encoding antioxidant enzymes or antiproteases. The
logistics for moving to initial studies of gene therapy in critically ill humans 
have been worked out for other diseases; such steps should expedite the
exploration of this new category of therapies.


PMID: 7583173  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

