
1. J Virol Methods. 1995 Apr;52(3):335-46.

Competitive reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction for quantitation of
feline immunodeficiency virus.

Vahlenkamp TW(1), Egberink HF, van Eijk MJ, Slotboom-Kamphorst AM, Verschoor EJ, 
Horzinek MC, de Ronde A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.

A competitive reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was
developed to quantify RNA of feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) in cats. The
assay uses in vitro synthesized RNA derived from the gag region of the FIV genome
as a competitive internal control. The synthesized RNA has a 22-base deletion
with respect to the wild-type sequence. PCR products were quantitated by
densitometric analysis of a digitalized image of the ethidium bromide stained
gel. The non-radioactive method was evaluated in reconstruction experiments. RNA 
synthesis in FIV-infected feline thymocytes correlated well with the amount of
viral p24 antigen produced. Viral RNA concentrations in the plasma of two cats
experimentally infected with FIV strain UT113 were followed for 32 weeks; peak
copy numbers (2.3 x 10(4) and 1.3 x 10(4) per ml, respectively) were reached 11
weeks after subcutaneous injection of ten 50% cat infectious doses. With rising
antibody titers against FIV-gag and FIV-env gene products, the amount of FIV RNA 
in plasma decreased. Nine asymptomatic cats that had been experimentally infected
3.5 to 4.5 years earlier had copy numbers between 5.6 x 10(3) and 4.3 x 10(4) per
ml. This quantitative competitive RT-PCR will be useful to study the pathogenesis
of the FIV infection, to evaluate the effectiveness of vaccines and to monitor
antiviral and immunomodulating drugs.

DOI: 10.1016/0166-0934(94)00169-h 
PMID: 7601907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

