
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Feb 1;90(3):1028-32.

Conformational changes induced in herpes simplex virus DNA polymerase upon DNA
binding.

Weisshart K(1), Kuo AA, Painter GR, Wright LL, Furman PA, Coen DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993 May 15;90(10):4763.

Herpesvirus DNA polymerases are prototypes for alpha-like DNA polymerases and
important targets for antiherpesvirus drugs. We have investigated changes in the 
catalytic subunit of herpes simplex virus DNA polymerase following DNA binding by
using the techniques of endogeneous fluorescence quenching and limited
proteolysis. The fluorescence studies revealed a reduction in the rate of
quenching by acrylamide in the presence of DNA without changes in the wavelength 
of the emission peak or in the lifetime of the fluorophore, consistent with the
possibility of conformational changes. Strikingly, the proteolysis studies
revealed that binding to a variety of natural and synthetic DNA and RNA molecules
induced the appearance of a new cleavage site for trypsin near residue 1060 of
the protein and increased cleavage by trypsin near the center of the protein. The
extent of these cleavages correlated with the affinity of the polymerase for
these ligands. These data provide strong evidence that binding to nucleic acid
polymers induces substantial localized conformational changes in the polymerase. 
The locations of enhanced tryptic cleavage near sites implicated in substrate
recognition and interaction with a processivity factor suggest that the
conformational changes are important for catalysis and processivity of this
prototype alpha-like DNA polymerase. Inhibition of these changes may provide a
mechanism for antiherpesvirus drugs.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.90.3.1028 
PMCID: PMC45804
PMID: 7679215  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

