
1. J Invest Dermatol. 1995 Jan;104(1):138-41.

Antibodies to the E4, E6, and E7 proteins of human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16
in patients with HPV-associated diseases and in the normal population.

MÃ¼ller M(1), Viscidi RP, Ulken V, Bavinck JN, Hill PM, Fisher SG, Reid R, Munoz
N, Schneider A, Shah KV, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Loyola University Medical Center,
Maywood, IL 60153.

In a cross-sectional study, titers of antibodies to the E4 and E7 proteins of
human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 were measured by peptide-based enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay in 1707 sera. Sera were obtained from healthy individuals
(ages 1 to 95 years), from patients with HPV-associated infection (cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia and cervical cancer), and from patients who were at
high risk for HPV infection (attending a sexually transmitted disease clinic or
referred to a colposcopist because of an abnormal Papanicolaou smear). The
prevalence of anti-E7 antibodies increased with age, although the overall
prevalence in the adult population was low (10.36%) compared to the frequent
detection of HPV 16 DNA in the population. This suggests that only a fraction of 
patients infected with HPV 16 develop an anti-E7 response. The age distribution
of anti-E4 antibodies showed a different pattern, i.e., the prevalence was low in
the adult population (1.14%) but exceeded 20% in children and teenagers. As the
specificity of the anti-E4 reaction was supported by a highly significant
association with anti-E6 positivity in children's sera (p = 0.002), it was
assumed that infection with HPV 16 can occur frequently early in life. As
compared to healthy controls, patients at high risk for HPV infection had a
significantly higher frequency (p < 0.001) of antibodies to the HPV 16 E4 protein
(but not to the E6 or the E7 protein) in their sera. Therefore, we conclude that 
in adults E4-specific antibodies may be a marker for virus replication.

DOI: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12613659 
PMID: 7798632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

