
1. Pediatrics. 1994 Feb;93(2):316-22.

Zidovudine and didanosine combination therapy in children with human
immunodeficiency virus infection.

Husson RN(1), Mueller BU, Farley M, Woods L, Kovacs A, Goldsmith JC, Ono J, Lewis
LL, Balis FM, Brouwers P, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892.

OBJECTIVE: Zidovudine and didanosine are both beneficial for the treatment of
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in children. Because disease
progression and toxicity often limit their long-term use as single agents, new
approaches to using nucleoside analogues are necessary to improve current
antiretroviral therapy.
DESIGN: We conducted a phase I-II study to evaluate the tolerance,
pharmacokinetics, and antiviral activity of the combination of zidovudine and
didanosine in children with HIV infection. Sixty-eight children who were either
previously untreated or who had manifested hematologic toxicity on full-dose
zidovudine were enrolled. Eight dose combinations were studied in the previously 
untreated children, with doses of zidovudine ranging from 90 to 180 mg/m2 every 6
hours and doses of didanosine ranging from 90 to 180 mg/m2 every 12 hours.
RESULTS: Fifty-four previously untreated HIV-infected children were enrolled in
this part of the study, of whom 49 remained in the study for a minimum of 24
weeks. For children with previous zidovudine-related hematologic toxicity, three 
dose levels with zidovudine at 60 mg/m2 every 6 hours orally and didanosine
ranging from 90 to 180 mg/m2 every 12 hours orally were used. A total of 14
children were enrolled in this part of the study, and 12 remained on therapy for 
at least 24 weeks. No evidence of new or enhanced toxicity was observed in either
group. After 24 weeks, the median CD4 cell count for all patients increased from 
331 to 556 cells/mm3 (P = .01). For the previously untreated group, the median
increase in CD4 counts was from 386 to 726 cells/mm3 (P = .003). The median p24
antigen concentration (in those with a detectable level at baseline) decreased
from 95 to < 31 pg/mL (p < .001). The geometric mean titer of HIV in plasma
decreased from 83.1 to 2.7 tissue culture infectious doses/mL (P = .001).
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of zidovudine and didanosine was well-tolerated at
doses as high as those used in single agent therapy. Potent in vivo antiviral
activity was observed. Combination therapy with nucleoside analogues may be an
important approach to optimizing the use of these agents in the treatment of HIV 
infection.


PMID: 7907174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

