
1. Tijdschr Diergeneeskd. 1994 Nov 1;119(21):629-33.

[Postmortem findings in swine: non-selected submissions from hog cholera
protection areas of 1992 versus selected submissions of 1991-1992].

[Article in Dutch]

Peperkamp NH(1), van Maanen C, Zuithoff SG, van Logtestijn GH, Elbers AR, Gruys
E.

Author information: 
(1)Gezondheidsdienst voor Dieren in West- en Midden-Nederland, Gouda.

This article presents a survey of death-causes of all spontaneously died pigs, n 
= 851, from a restricted area in the province of South Holland during a 2 1/2
months lasting hog-cholera epizo√∂tic in 1992. 23 pigs from 5 submissions showed a
positive IFT against hog-cholera virus. Those animals and pigs from sero-positive
farms were excluded from this survey. The results of the post-mortems were
compared with the post-mortem findings of the normally submitted, selected,
animals in 1991 and 1992, n = 904 + 745, from the western parts of the
Netherlands, in which the above mentioned province is situated. By means of
classification of the animals in age-classes and of the post-mortem findings to
disease or diseased organsystem, insight is gained in the prevalence of the
various causes of death per age-class. No distinct differences were found between
the findings in the groups of animals from 1991 and 1992. In the group of the
hog-cholera-period comparatively more animals belonged to the neonatal and
suckling period. In contrast to 1991-1992 the number of weaned and fattening pigs
in the hog-cholera-group was lower. In both groups 40% of the death-causes was
due to diseases of the digestive tract and 30% was a result of respiratory-tract 
infections. The third main cause of death in both groups was septicaemia and
related diseases as endocarditis, pleuritis, peritonitis, polyserositis and
polyarthritis. Comparison of the prevalence of infectious diseases per
organsystem in successive age-classes demonstrated a similar tendency in the
hog-cholera-group as in the year-groups 1991 and 1992.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)


PMID: 7974450  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

