
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Sep 13;91(19):8885-9.

Interaction between the aphid transmission factor and virus particles is a part
of the molecular mechanism of cauliflower mosaic virus aphid transmission.

Schmidt I(1), Blanc S, Esperandieu P, Kuhl G, Devauchelle G, Louis C, Cerutti M.

Author information: 
(1)Station de Recherches de Pathologie Comparée Institut National de la Recherche
Agronomique/Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Associée 1184,
Saint Christol-lez-Alès, France.

Cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) aphid transmission factor (ATF or P18) is
presumed to interact with both virus particles and vector mouthparts, thereby
mediating virus aphid transmission. We developed a protein-protein binding assay 
and our results clearly show that virus particles bind strongly and specifically 
to P18 whether P18 was obtained from plants, a baculovirus expression system, or 
the pGEX-3X Escherichia coli expression system. We overproduced, using the
pGEX-3X expression system, various fragments of P18 and thereby demonstrated that
the C-terminal 31 amino acid residues are responsible for the interaction. Using 
PCR-based mutagenesis, 2 amino acid residues essential for interaction were
identified. Point substitutions (amino acids 157 from Ile to Asn or 159 from Gly 
to Ser) were sufficient to abolish the interaction, whereas another mutation
(amino acid 158 from Ile to Ser) had no effect on P18 virus binding. We evaluated
whether there was a correlation between the ability of P18 to interact with CaMV 
particles and its biological activity. Aphid transmission assays were carried out
and we demonstrated that the loss of the virus binding capacity had a dramatic
effect on the ability of P18 to mediate aphid transmission. Thus, our results
suggest that binding between P18 and virus particles is likely to be one of the
molecular mechanisms involved in CaMV aphid transmission.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.91.19.8885 
PMCID: PMC44711
PMID: 8090739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

