
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 May 10;91(10):4554-8.

Targeted construction of temperature-sensitive mutations in vaccinia virus by
replacing clustered charged residues with alanine.

Hassett DE(1), Condit RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Medical Microbiology, University of Florida,
Gainesville 32610-0266.

The feasibility of using "clustered charge-to-alanine" mutagenesis (replacement
by alanine of two or more charged residues clustered in a five- or six-amino acid
sequence) to create temperature-sensitive, conditionally lethal mutations in
vaccinia virus was examined by creating nine mutations in the vaccinia virus gene
G2R. G2R was chosen for this analysis because mutations in this gene confer
selectable phenotypes. Specifically, vaccinia viruses that contain a wild-type
copy of G2R nare sensitive the effects of the anti-poxvirus drug
isatin-beta-thiosemicarbazone (IBT), while mutations in G2R that completely
abolish the function of the G2R protein product confer dependence upon IBT for
growth. A previously isolated mutant carrying a temperature-sensitive mutation
that maps to G2R (Cts56) is resistant to IBT at the permissive temperature and
dependent upon IBT at the restrictive temperature. Nine clustered
charge-to-alanine mutants were examined. Four of the these mutants (AS1, AS4,
AS6, and AS9) display some degree of temperature sensitivity in the function of
the G2R gene product. AS1 is temperature sensitive for growth in both a plaque
assay and in a one-step growth experiment. AS6 and AS9 form small plaques at the 
nonpermissive temperature and are temperature sensitive for growth in a one-step 
growth experiment. AS4 manifests its temperature sensitivity as
temperature-dependent IBT resistance. Five of the mutations (AS2, AS3, AS5, AS7, 
and AS8) appeared to confer phenotypes indistinguishable from that of wild-type
vaccinia. These results demonstrate that temperature-sensitive conditionally
lethal mutants can be created in vaccinia virus by altering the charge
characteristics of essential viral proteins.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.91.10.4554 
PMCID: PMC43824
PMID: 8183946  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

