
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 1993 Feb;91(2):257-65.

Identification and purification of a receptor on macrophages for the dengue
virus-induced suppressor cytokine.

Mukherjee R(1), Chaturvedi P, Chaturvedi UC.

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Department of Microbiology, K. G. Medical College, Lucknow,
India.

Dengue type 2 virus (DV)-induced suppressor cytokine (SF) binds to macrophages to
transmit the suppressor signal to recruit the second subpopulation of suppressor 
T cells. The present study was undertaken to identify and purify the receptor for
SF (SF-R) on macrophages. The binding of 125I-SF to macrophages was saturable and
reversible. Scatchard analysis showed the presence of both high (54,000/cell) and
low (1.78 x 10(6)/cell) affinity receptor sites. The binding of 125I-SF to
macrophages was inhibited by pretreatment of macrophages with anti-SF antiserum
but not by a heterologous antiserum. Normal mouse peritoneal macrophage membrane 
was solubilized with Triton-X-100 and the components separated by low pressure
liquid chromatography (LPLC) to purify SF-R. The presence of SF binding moiety
(SF-R) was screened at each step of purification. The purified SF-R resolved into
two bands of 45-50 kD mol. wt on SDS-PAGE. 125I-SF+SF-R complex run on SDS-PAGE
showed a single band at about 55-60 kD mol. wt by autoradiography. Anti-SF-R
antiserum reacted with SF-R in a Western blot test; the reaction was abolished by
pretreatment of the blots with proteinase K, but not by pretreatment with
periodic acid. SF-R was composed of two polypeptide chains (alpha and beta) which
were obtained in pure form by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) of
dithiothreitol- and iodoacetamide-treated SF-R. Only the beta chain bound SF.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.1993.tb05892.x 
PMCID: PMC1554670
PMID: 8381339  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

