
1. J Virol. 1993 Mar;67(3):1739-45.

Effect of number and position of EBNA-1 binding sites in Epstein-Barr virus oriP 
on the sites of initiation, barrier formation, and termination of replication.

Platt TH(1), Tcherepanova IY, Schildkraut CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, New
York 10461.

DNA replication intermediates of three plasmids containing all or part of a
modified Epstein-Barr virus cis-acting plasmid maintenance region (oriP) were
examined to further investigate oriP function. Replication intermediates were
analyzed in vivo and in vitro by neutral-neutral two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis. The major functional components of the wild-type oriP are a
140-bp dyad symmetry region (single dyad) and 20 tandem copies of a repeat with a
30-bp consensus sequence (family of repeats). A modified oriP was constructed by 
replacing the family of repeats with three tandem copies of the single dyad (D.
A. Wysokenski and J. L. Yates, J. Virol. 63:2657-2666, 1989). Initiation was
observed in vivo near the single dyad in the modified oriP, as seen in the
wild-type oriP (T. A. Gahn and C. L. Schildkraut, Cell 58:527-535, 1989), but was
not observed near the tandem dyads. A replication barrier and termination were
observed near the tandem dyads and were similar to those observed at the family
of repeats of the wild-type oriP (Gahn and Schildkraut, Cell 58:527-535, 1989).
In vitro experiments indicate that the viral trans-acting factor EBNA-1
contributes to efficient barrier formation at the tandem dyads as observed in the
family of repeats of the wild-type oriP (V. Dhar and C. L. Schildkraut, Mol.
Cell. Biol. 11:6268-6278, 1991). The tandem dyads thus appear to function in a
manner similar to the family of repeats. There are significant structural
differences between the family of repeats and tandem dyads. The relationship
between the number and relative positions of EBNA-1 binding sites in relation to 
the functions of the family of repeats and the dyad symmetry element is
discussed.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.67.3.1739-1745.1993 
PMCID: PMC237554
PMID: 8382320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

