
1. J Heart Lung Transplant. 1993 Jan-Feb;12(1 Pt 1):5-15; discussion 15-6.

Redo lung transplantation: a North American-European experience.

Novick RJ(1), Kaye MP, Patterson GA, Andr√©assian B, Klepetko W, Menkis AH,
McKenzie FN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular-Thoracic Surgery, University Hospital, London,
Ontario, Canada.

An international survey of redo lung transplantation was performed to identify
the morbidity and mortality rates and factors correlating with increased or
decreased survival after this procedure. Twenty institutions in North America and
Europe participated, and the study cohort included 61 patients who underwent 63
redo lung transplantation operations. Patients undergoing a redo heart-lung
transplantation were excluded. The indications for reoperation included
obliterative bronchiolitis (32 patients), graft failure (14 patients),
intractable airway problems (8 patients), severe acute lung rejection (5
patients), and miscellaneous complications (4 patients). Five types of
retransplantation procedures were performed, including redo ipsilateral single
lung transplantation (24 patients), redo contralateral single lung
transplantation (11 patients), single lung transplantation after double lung or
heart-lung transplantation (13 patients), redo double lung transplantation (8
patients), and double lung transplantation after a previous single lung
transplantation (7 patients). Actuarial survival was 65%, 49%, 42%, 35%, and 32% 
at 1, 3, 6, 12, and 24 months, respectively; survival was significantly (p <
0.05) worse than that of first-time lung transplant recipients recorded in the
International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation Registry. Actuarial
survival did not differ according to the original diagnosis of the recipients,
the indication for reoperation, or the type of retransplantation procedure
performed. Similarly, recipient cytomegalovirus status and ventilator status
before reoperation did not affect postoperative survival. Trends toward an
improved outcome were noted in patients who were ambulatory before reoperation
and in those receiving an ABO identical, as opposed to ABO compatible, graft at
reoperation. Life table and step-wise logistic regression analysis identified
donor cytomegalovirus status at reoperation to be an important determinant of
outcome, with significantly (p < 0.05) improved survival in the donor
cytomegalovirus-negative group. Polymicrobial infection was the most common cause
of death at all time intervals after reoperation. The presence of disseminated
infection and established multiorgan failure was almost uniformly associated with
a fatal outcome. We conclude that redo lung transplantation may be indicated only
in well-selected patients with obliterative bronchiolitis, severe airway
complications, or graft failure. Donor cytomegalovirus status at reoperation is
an important predictor of survival. The presence of disseminated infection and
established multiorgan failure should be contraindications to lung
retransplantation.


PMID: 8382951  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

