
1. J Virol. 1993 Apr;67(4):1905-15.

Assembly of functional Sindbis virus RNA replication complexes: requirement for
coexpression of P123 and P34.

Lemm JA(1), Rice CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110-1093.

A vaccinia virus transient expression system was used to determine which of the
Sindbis virus (SIN) proteins and/or polyproteins are necessary for the formation 
of active replication complexes and, in particular, to analyze the role of nsP4, 
the putative polymerase, versus P34 in RNA replication. We generated vaccinia
virus recombinants in which the cDNA for the entire SIN nonstructural coding
region as well as cDNA copies of the individual nonstructural proteins (nsPs) and
several intermediate polyproteins were placed downstream of the promoter for T7
RNA polymerase and the encephalomyocarditis virus 5' untranslated region. The
proteins expressed by the vaccinia virus recombinants comigrate with authentic
proteins synthesized in SIN-infected cells, and the polyproteins appear to be
processed to the individual proteins of the correct size. To examine the
replication efficiencies of different protein combinations, a vaccinia virus
recombinant was designed to express an engineered substrate RNA which could serve
as a template for replication and subgenomic mRNA transcription by the SIN nsPs. 
Expression of the entire SIN nonstructural coding region resulted in the
synthesis of high levels of both genomic and subgenomic RNAs derived from the
engineered template. No RNA replication could be detected during coexpression of 
the four individual nsPs, although the proteins were indistinguishable, in terms 
of electrophoretic mobility, from those synthesized in SIN-infected cells.
Coexpression of polyproteins P12, P23, and/or P34 with the individual nsPs also
did not result in detectable levels of RNA replication. However, when P123 and
P34 were coexpressed, efficient RNA replication and subgenomic mRNA transcription
of the substrate RNA was observed. Coexpression of nsP4 with P123 resulted in the
synthesis of only minus-strand RNAs. These studies show that expression of both
P123 and P34 is necessary for establishment of functional RNA replication and
transcription complexes and raise the possibility that the polyproteins
themselves may be functional components of these complexes. In addition, these
data indicate that an nsP4 moiety expressed independently with an additional
N-terminal methionine is capable of functioning in minus-strand but not
plus-strand RNA synthesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.67.4.1905-1915.1993 
PMCID: PMC240258
PMID: 8445716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

