
1. J Gen Virol. 1993 Jun;74 ( Pt 6):1175-9.

Encapsidation of a recombinant LuIII parvovirus genome by H1 virus and the
fibrotropic or lymphotropic strains of minute virus of mice.

Maxwell IH(1), Long CJ, Carlson JO, Rhode SL 3rd, Maxwell F.

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado Cancer Center, Denver.

We previously constructed a recombinant LuIII parvovirus genome lacking viral
coding sequences and used it to generate luciferase-transducing virions, by
cotransfection of cells with a helper plasmid expressing LuIII viral proteins.
Here, we describe similar cotransfections using alternative,
replication-defective helpers encoding the non-structural and capsid proteins of 
parvovirus H1, or of either the fibrotropic or lymphotropic parvovirus strain of 
minute virus of mice [MVM(p) or MVM(i)]. Each cotransfection generated
transducing virus which directed luciferase expression after infection of HeLa
cells. The transducing activity of virus produced using either LuIII or H1 helper
plasmids could be specifically neutralized by antiserum raised against the
corresponding infectious virus. When the recombinant LuIII parvovirus was
pseudotyped with MVM(p) or MVM(i), the resulting virions efficiently expressed
luciferase after infection in human or murine cells known to be permissive for
both MVM strains. The MVM(p) pseudotyped virus also expressed this reporter
efficiently when infected into the murine A9 fibroblast line. In contrast, the
recombinant virus generated with an MVM(i) helper gave luciferase expression that
was barely detectable after infection of A9 cells which are highly restrictive
for MVM(i) productive infection. These results support the notion that the
allotropic determinant of these MVM strains functions through their capsid
proteins. Pseudotyping of recombinant parvovirus genomes should be useful in
controlling their host range as vectors, and in studying mechanisms influencing
the permissiveness of parvovirus infections.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-74-6-1175 
PMID: 8509766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

