
1. J Med Entomol. 1993 May;30(3):524-30.

Vector competence of Aedes albopictus and Ae. aegypti (Diptera: Culicidae) to
dengue 1 virus on Taiwan: development of the virus in orally and parenterally
infected mosquitoes.

Chen WJ(1), Wei HL, Hsu EL, Chen ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Kaohsiung Medical College, Taiwan.

The vector competence in Ae. aegypti (L.) and Ae. albopictus (Skuse) from
southern Taiwan to the dengue 1 virus was studied to elucidate the distribution
of dengue infection during the 1987-1988 outbreak. The brain of Ae. aegypti was
infected as early as 3 d after intrathoracic inoculation. The esophagus and the
proboscis (tissues within the labium) were infected 5 d after inoculation. The
salivary gland was highly susceptible to the virus, but no specific infection
site was found. Gangli, muscles, and diverticula within the thorax were not
infected. In the abdominal area, the ventral diverticula, Malpighian tubules,
ganglia, and the dorsal vessel were not infected. However, the entire gut was
susceptible to dengue 1 virus, although it was not infected simultaneously. Only 
a certain type of midgut epithelial cells was infected by the virus. The
ovarioles, oviducts, and accessory glands frequently were infected. However, the 
spermathecae were not infected, perhaps because of the chitin-rich outer layer.
Infections of the testes, vas deferens, seminal vesicles, and accessory glands of
males also were detected in this study. The tissues of the proboscis were never
infected in Ae. albopictus but frequently were infected in Ae. aegypti,
indicating that the virus may escape the salivary gland barrier more efficiently 
in Ae. aegypti than in Ae. albopictus. When these mosquitoes were fed on hanging 
drops, the salivary gland infection and transmission rates of Ae. aegypti were
always higher than those of Ae. albopictus. On Taiwan, Ae. aegypti appears to be 
a more competent vector in the transmission of the dengue 1 virus than Ae.
albopictus.

DOI: 10.1093/jmedent/30.3.524 
PMID: 8510112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

