
1. Strahlenther Onkol. 1995 Oct;171(10):594-9.

[The value of conventionally fractionated radiotherapy in the local treatment of 
HIV-related Kaposi's sarcoma].

[Article in German]

Saran F(1), Adamietz IA, Mose S, Thilmann C, Böttcher HD.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Strahlentherapie und Onkologie,
Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main.

BACKGROUND: During the course of AIDS, 25 to 44% of homosexual patients infected 
with the human immunodeficiency virus develop Kaposi's sarcoma. Main
manifestation is the skin. Response rates of 80 to 100% can be achieved with
total dosage up to 50 Gy. Nevertheless, remissions can also be attained with 20
Gy of fractionated radiotherapy. As clinical data on low dose conventional
fractionated radiotherapy are insufficient we analysed the response rates of an
overall dose of 20 Gy in conventional fractionation.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: From June 1991 to June 1993, 43 patients with 111
HIV-associated Kaposi's sarcoma of the skin or oral cavity were treated. Lesions 
were irradiated with 5 to 12 MeV electrons or 60Co gamma-rays. The fractionation 
scheme was 5 times 2 Gy/week for skin and endoral lesions with a total reference 
dosage of up to 20 Gy. Side effects were assessed during therapy and the
therapeutic result 6 weeks after end of treatment.
RESULTS: Thirty-eight out of 111 lesions were judged as complete response (CR)
(34%), 61/111 as partial response (PR) (55%) and 12/111 were judged as no change 
(NC) (11%). Overall response (CR + PR) was 89%. Two patients with lesions of oral
cavity suffered from RTOG grade-IV mucositis after 10 and 14 Gy. In 71/106 skin
lesions (67%), radiation induced RTOG grade-1 reactions were observed.
CONCLUSION: In patients with HIV associated Kaposi's sarcoma effective palliation
can be achieved by means of radiotherapy with an overall dose of 20 Gy in
conventional fractionation. Yet, the fraction of patients with complete responses
is with 34 to 47% lower compared with doses above 20 Gy (66 to 100%). With
reference to the reported data our results point to a dose-response relationship 
for Kaposi's sarcoma. Therefore higher total reference doses, e.g. 30 Gy with
weekly 5 times 2 Gy or 24 Gy with 5 times 1.6 Gy for mucous lesions,
respectively, are suggested as by this mean the complete response rate can be
doubled.


PMID: 8571179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

