
1. J Med Virol. 1995 Dec;47(4):454-61.

Hepatitis B virus strains in Thailand: genomic variants in chronic carriers.

Kidd-Ljunggren K(1), Ekdahl K, Oberg M, Kurathong S, Lolekha S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, University Hospital of Lund, Sweden.

Genetic heterogeneity of the hepatitis B virus (HBV) has been shown to influence 
the serological pattern and clinical picture in HBV infection. Thailand has a
high transmission rate of HBV, but the molecular epidemiology of HBV strains
circulating in this region was hitherto unknown. In this study, the HBV strains
from 34 Thai HBsAg-positive patients were investigated. In a proportion of these 
samples, an antigenically important region of the S gene (n = 18), and the pre-S2
and precore genes (n = 15) were sequenced after PCR amplification. Four strains
had in-frame deletions of an upstream region of the pre-S2 gene, with all
deletions ending at the same nucleotide. In one of three anti-HBe positive
strains without a translational stop at codon 28 of the precore gene, there was a
one nucleotide insertion in the precore gene. This insertion would cause a frame 
shift and result in a nonsense protein being expressed, thus providing one
explanation for the lack of HBeAg in this patient. Several rare or unique amino
acid changes in the region between residues 120 and 161 of the S protein were
found. Glycine 145 was changed to alanine in one strain, and this position showed
an apparent mixture of glycine and arginine in another. In total, 10 strains
displayed unexpected changes that were not related to the normal variability
between subtypes or genetic subgroups. It is concluded that there is considerable
heterogeneity in HBV strains in Thailand and that this could have clinical and
epidemiological importance in a region with high HBV transmission rates.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.1890470427 
PMID: 8636719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

