
1. Br J Rheumatol. 1996 Oct;35(10):978-82.

Bronchoalveolar lavage in mixed cryoglobulinaemia associated with hepatitis C
virus.

Manganelli P(1), Salaffi F, Subiaco S, Carotti M, Cervini C, Consigli G, Majori
M, Pesci A.

Author information: 
(1)II Divisione Medica e Reumatologia, Azienda Ospedaliera di Parma, Italy.

In order to evaluate the presence of an inflammatory process of the lower
respiratory tract in patients with mixed cryoglobulinaemia (MC) associated with
hepatitis C virus (HCV), bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed in 16
non-smoking females free of clinical pulmonary symptoms and with normal chest
roentgenograms. Pulmonary function tests including diffusion capacity for carbon 
monoxide (DLCO) were also carried out. Thirteen healthy subjects were evaluated
as the control group. Patients with MC had a lower percentage of alveolar
macrophages (75% vs 92%, P = 0.001) and a higher percentage of lymphocytes (19.7%
vs 7%, P = 0.001) than healthy controls. The percentage of CD3+ lymphocytes was
higher in MC patients than in controls (86.5% vs 70%, P = 0.004). No significant 
differences in the percentage of CD4+, CD8+ and CD19+ lymphocytes, neutrophils
and eosinophils were found. Pulmonary function tests showed significantly lower
values of forced expiratory flow (FEF) 25-75 (P = 0.05) and DLCO (P = 0.05) in MC
patients than in healthy controls. No correlations between BAL results and
pulmonary function tests were found. The 5 yr follow-up of five patients did not 
demonstrate deterioration in lung function. Thus, BAL results indicate a
subclinical T-lymphocytic alveolitis in MC HCV+ patients that is not associated
with a risk of deterioration in lung function.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/35.10.978 
PMID: 8883436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

