
1. Biol Pharm Bull. 1996 Sep;19(9):1166-9.

Protective effect of astragali radix by oral administration against Japanese
encephalitis virus infection in mice.

Kajimura K(1), Takagi Y, Ueba N, Yamasaki K, Sakagami Y, Yokoyama H, Yoneda K.

Author information: 
(1)Osaka Prefectural Institute of Public Health, Japan.

We investigated the protective effect of Astragali Radix (AR) by oral
administration against Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) infection in mice, the
pharmacological effects of AR extracts (AE) in different origin, and the chemical
composition of the AEs. A protective effect was demonstrated in all four AEs
used, however, the effective grade for each one was different. In the control
group, an increase of hemagglutination inhibition (HI) antibody titer was
observed in all mice surviving 25 d after JEV inoculation. However, the increase 
of HI antibody titer was not observed in some animals administered an AE. In the 
control group, the rate of HI antibody positive mice was 90% 3 d after JEV
inoculation, while the four groups which received the AE had a 30-60% positive
rate. In mice which received the AE, the peritoneal exudate cell (PEC) numbers
increased significantly compared to the control group. The predominant cell
population of PECs in mice receiving the AE was macrophages, and in the PEC, the 
active oxygen (AO) production was high. From these results, we propose that the
protective effect of AE by oral administration is based on a non-specific
mechanism during the early stage of infection, before shifting to antibody
production, and that macrophages play an important role in this resistance to JEV
infection, e.g., by inducing the production of AO. In the chemical composition of
each AE, carbohydrate was the major component.

DOI: 10.1248/bpb.19.1166 
PMID: 8889035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

