
1. J Virol. 1997 Feb;71(2):1162-72.

Immunocytochemical analysis of Uukuniemi virus budding compartments: role of the 
intermediate compartment and the Golgi stack in virus maturation.

Jäntti J(1), Hildén P, Rönkä H, Mäkiranta V, Keränen S, Kuismanen E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, University of Helsinki Biocenter, Finland.

Previous studies have suggested that Uukuniemi virus, a bunyavirus, matures at
the membranes of the Golgi complex. In this study we have employed
immunocytochemical techniques to analyze in detail the budding compartment(s) of 
the virus. Electron microscopy of infected BHK-21 cells showed that virus
particles are found in the cisternae throughout the Golgi stack. Within the
cisternae, the virus particles were located preferentially in the dilated rims.
This would suggest that virus budding may begin at or before the cis Golgi
membranes. The virus budding compartment was studied further by immunoelectron
microscopy with a pre-Golgi intermediate compartment marker, p58, and a Golgi
stack marker protein, mannosidase II (ManII). Virus particles and budding virus
were detected in ManII-positive Golgi stack membranes and, interestingly, in both
juxtanuclear and peripheral p58-positive elements of the intermediate
compartment. In cells incubated at 15 degrees C the nucleocapsid and virus
envelope proteins were seen to accumulate in the intermediate compartment.
Immunoelectron microscopy demonstrated that at 15 degrees C the nucleocapsid is
associated with membranes that show a characteristic distribution and
tubulo-vesicular morphology of the pre-Golgi intermediate compartment. These
membranes contained virus particles in the lumen. The results indicate that the
first site of formation of Uukuniemi virus particles is the pre-Golgi
intermediate compartment and that virus budding continues in the Golgi stack. The
results raise questions about the intracellular transport pathway of the virus
particles, which are 100 to 120 nm in diameter and are therefore too large to be 
transported in the 60-nm-diameter vesicles postulated to function in the
intra-Golgi transport. The distribution of the virus in the Golgi stack may imply
that the cisternae themselves have a role in the vectorial transport of virus
particles.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.71.2.1162-1172.1997 
PMCID: PMC191169
PMID: 8995638  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

