
1. Immunol Invest. 1997 Jan-Feb;26(1-2):39-54.

Adsorption-induced antigenic changes and their significance in ELISA and
immunological disorders.

Butler JE(1), Navarro P, Sun J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242, USA.

The functional properties of 125I-labeled antibodies and antigens adsorbed on
polystyrene and silicone were compared to their counterparts immobilized by
non-adsorptive methods. Less than 20% of polyclonal (pAb) and 1-2% of monoclonal 
(mAb) capture antibody equivalents remained functional after adsorption as a
monolayer. Survivability circa doubled or was totally rescued, when the same
antibodies were immobilized via a streptavidin bridge or by using a first stage
polyclonal antiglobulin capture antibody, respectively. Similarly, the
antigenicity of bovine IgGs for pAb and mAb anti-IgGs was highest when the IgGs
were immobilized via a streptavidin bridge or when secondarily adsorbed to an
albumin monolayer. IgGs in these configurations were significantly more antigenic
than when directly adsorbed on polystyrene or a silicone elastomer. Similar
activity was seen after adsorption on polystyrene or silicone. Interestingly,
these IgGs were equally antigenic when denatured and subsequently adsorbed in 6M 
guanidine-HCl versus adsorption in PBS without prior denaturation. Although many 
of the above finding on antibodies and antigens could be explained by the greater
accessibility of antigenic epitopes or antibody binding sites when molecules are 
immobilized by some type of underlying molecular layer, we also show that certain
mAb and pAbs preferentially recognized allotopes on IgG2a when IgG2a was
adsorbed. Furthermore, such antigenicity was highest when IgG2a was adsorbed at
low, sub-monolayer concentrations. Finally, we show that differences in
antigenicity need not be related to the method of immobilization, but can also
result from differences in the microenvironment of the epitope. This was
demonstrated using a filamentous phage clone specific for fluorescein (FLU). This
clone recognizes the fluorescein hapten differently depending on the carrier
protein used and the method of conjugation. Data presented in this report
indicate that antibodies and antigens adsorbed on hydrophobic polymers undergo
changes in their functional properties. Data suggest that both changes in
conformation and the accessibility of antigen epitopes or antibody binding sites,
most likely occur. Especially in the case of the latter, the functional
concentration may be 1-2 orders of magnitude lower than the antibody protein
concentration. These observations have implications for immunodiagnostics and
emphasize the need to determine the specificity of an antibody in the assay in
which it is employed and to make no assumptions about the behavior of solid-phase
antigens and antibodies from their behavior in solution. Our studies are also
relevant to the use of silicone medical prostheses. The antigenicity of IgGs
adsorbed on silicone as a multilayer (secondary layer) is much higher than when
directly adsorbed. Since such surfaces would be exposed to very high protein
concentrations in vivo, multilayers not a monolayer, would be expected. Thus it
would seem from these studies that host protein adsorbed on silicone would be
expressed to the immune system at the surface of multilayers. This being the
case, it seems unlikely that the adsorption of host protein in vivo would
generate new epitopes against which the host's immune system could respond and
subsequently initiate an autoimmune syndrome.

DOI: 10.3109/08820139709048914 
PMID: 9037611  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

