
1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1997 Mar;16(3 Suppl):S65-9.

Acute otitis media in pediatrics: are there rational issues for empiric therapy?

Boccazzi A(1), Careddu P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Acute otitis media in children is a significant clinical problem that
requires a rational approach to treatment. The condition is extremely common and 
has important economic implications. At present there is considerable controversy
over the most appropriate strategy and over the use and choice of antibiotics.
OBJECTIVES: To analyze the various factors that influence therapeutic decisions
and consider how these may assist in the formulation of a rational approach to
therapy.
DISCUSSION: Otitis media has a multifactorial etiology but it is extremely
difficult to differentiate between bacterial and viral causes on clinical
grounds. Culture of the middle ear fluid is rarely practicable; however, nasal
swabs are relatively noninvasive and can provide useful microbiologic
information, especially in excluding a bacterial cause. Published information
provides little guidance on the most appropriate therapy; a rational approach to 
treatment is based on many considerations including the local epidemiology. The
minimum criteria for the empiric choice of an antibiotic for acute otitis media
are that it should be rapidly bactericidal and reach adequate concentrations in
the middle ear fluid. In areas where beta-lactamase-producing strains are
prevalent, a beta-lactamase-stable antibiotic should be chosen; good absorption
from the gastrointestinal tract and high and consistent penetration into the
middle ear are important characteristics. Compliance-enhancing factors such as
fewer doses per day and good palatability are also important.

DOI: 10.1097/00006454-199703001-00008 
PMID: 9076839  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

