
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Apr 1;94(7):3352-6.

HCAR and MCAR: the human and mouse cellular receptors for subgroup C adenoviruses
and group B coxsackieviruses.

Tomko RP(1), Xu R, Philipson L.

Author information: 
(1)Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University Medical
Center, NY 10016, USA.

The subgroup C of the adenoviruses (Ad) and the group B coxsackieviruses (CVB)
are structurally unrelated viruses that are known to compete for an unidentified 
cell surface receptor. We now describe the isolation of cDNAs from human and
mouse that encode the human CVB and Ad2 and 5 receptor (HCAR) and the mouse CVB
Ad2 and 5 receptor (MCAR). Both are 46-kDa glycoproteins whose primary amino acid
sequences are highly homologous. Structurally, HCAR and MCAR appear to be
transmembrane proteins that contain two extracellular immunoglobulin-like domains
and therefore belong to this superfamily. Transfection of either of these cDNA
molecules into receptor-negative NIH 3T3 cells conferred susceptibility to CVB
infection and permitted the expression of beta-galactosidase from a recombinant
Ad5 vector. In addition, HCAR and MCAR mRNAs could be detected on Northern blots 
of oligo(dT)-selected RNA from receptor-positive HeLa cells and TCMK-1 as well as
several tissues of human and mouse origin that are known to be targets for Ad and
CVB infections. Finally, Western blots using antibodies that inhibit virus
binding to either the human or mouse CVB receptors detected 46-kDa proteins in
HCAR- and MCAR-transfected cells, respectively. Taken together, these results
confirm that the isolated cDNAs encode the receptors for the subgroup C Ad and
CVB.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.7.3352 
PMCID: PMC20373
PMID: 9096397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

