
1. Virology. 1997 Mar 31;230(1):11-21.

Nontranslatability and dissimilar behavior in plants and protoplasts of viral RNA
and movement protein complexes formed in vitro.

Karpova OV(1), Ivanov KI, Rodionova NP, Dorokhov YuL, Atabekov JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Moscow State University, Russia.

It was found that the fusion (His)6-movement proteins (MPs) of two tobamoviruses 
(TMV UI and a crucifer-infecting tobamovirus, crTMV) were efficient nonspecific
translational repressors. The in vitro translation of viral RNAs was blocked by
incomplete 30K MP-RNA complexes formed at the MP:RNA molar ratios of 100-150:1.
Similar results were obtained with the barley stripe mosaic hordeivirus
(BSMV)-encoded 58K MP; however, the translation inhibiting activity of the 58K MP
was manifested only in the presence of magnesium. By contrast, the 25K MP of
potato virus X (PVX) was incapable of forming MP-RNA complexes under experimental
conditions used and did not inhibit in vitro translation. The translation
repressing ability correlated with the level of MP affinity to RNA. The complexes
of the 30K MP and 58K MP with TMV RNA were not infectious in isolated
protoplasts; however, they were infectious in indicator plants. Reduction of MP
affinity to RNA resulted in translatability of MP-TMV RNA complexes that
apparently was due to their destabilization. Thus, the deletion mutant DEL4 MP
formed MP-TMV RNA complexes that were translatable in vitro, infectious to
protoplasts and plants. In contrast to this, the complexes of TMV RNA with the
mammalian RNA-binding protein p50 were nontranslatable and noninfectious to
either protoplasts or intact plants. These results implied that nontranslatable
MP-RNA complexes which could not replicate in the primary infected cells were
converted into a translatable and replicatable form in the course of passage
through plasmodesmata in planta.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1997.8472 
PMID: 9126258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

