
1. Glycobiology. 1997 Mar;7(2):297-304.

Homonojirimycin and N-methyl-homonojirimycin inhibit N-linked oligosaccharide
processing.

Zeng Y(1), Pan YT, Asano N, Nash RJ, Elbein AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Little Rock 72205, USA.

Homonojirimycin (HNJ) and N-methylhomonojirimycin (MHNJ) were tested as
inhibitors of the purified glycoprotein processing enzymes, glucosidase I and
glucosidase II. MHNJ was a reasonably good inhibitor of glucosidase I (Ki = 1 x
10(-6) M) and was about three times as effective on this enzyme as was HNJ. On
the other hand, HNJ inhibited glucosidase II with a Ki of about 1 x 10(-6) M,
whereas MHNJ was three times less effective (Ki = 3 x 10(-5) M). However, the
butyl derivative of HNJ had very low activity toward these two processing
glucosidases. HNJ and its methyl derivative were also tested in vivo using
influenza virus-infected MDCK cells, and measuring the inhibition of N-linked
oligosaccharide processing of the viral envelope glycoproteins. With 100
micrograms/ml of MHNJ in the medium, essentially all of the N-linked
oligosaccharide chains of the virus were of the "high-mannose" type with the
major structure being characterized as Glc3Man9(GlcNAc)2. Similar results were
obtained with HNJ although this compound was less effective in vivo as well as in
vitro. These results are in keeping with these inhibitors being effective at the 
glucosidase I step. Both inhibitors were also tested in MDCK cell cultures to
determine whether they affected the in vivo synthesis of proteins, or of
lipid-linked saccharides. In contrast to deoxynojirimycin, which has been
reported to inhibit the formation of lipid-linked saccharides, no effects were
seen on either the incorporation of mannose into lipid-linked saccharides or the 
incorporation of leucine into protein.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/7.2.297 
PMID: 9134436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

