
1. J Virol. 1997 Sep;71(9):6671-6.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection of mature CD3hiCD8+ thymocytes.

Lee S(1), Goldstein H, Baseler M, Adelsberger J, Golding H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Retrovirus Research, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

Although CD4+ cells are the primary targets of human immunodeficiency virus type 
1 (HIV-1) infection, earlier reports have suggested that intrathymic infection of
CD8+ cells may occur. However, it was unclear whether HIV-1-infected CD8+
thymocytes were truly mature single-positive (SP) cells. In the present study,
SCID mice implanted with human fetal thymus and liver tissues (SCID-hu mice) were
infected with three primary isolates of HIV-1 and infected thymocytes were
analyzed to assess maturational status. After intra-implant or intraperitoneal
injection with HIV-1, thymocytes were sorted by three-color flow cytometric
analysis into mature populations of CD3hiCD4+ and CD3hiCD8+ SP cells of > 99%
purity (< 0.3% CD4-containing cells in the CD8+ population). The presence of
HIV-1 provirus in the sorted thymocyte populations was determined by quantitative
PCR. A fraction of mature CD3hiCD8+ thymocytes contained HIV-1 proviral DNA, and 
evidence of viral mRNA transcription in these cells was demonstrated by in situ
hybridization. In contrast, when uninfected CD3hiCD8+ thymocytes were cocultured 
with HIV-1-infected CD4+ thymocytes, no evidence of productive HIV-1 infection
was detected. Thus, HIV-1 infection of CD8+ thymocytes in the SCID-hu mouse does 
not occur by direct contact with the virus. Rather, cell surface CD4 is required;
therefore, precursor cells are the likely primary target of HIV-1 infection in
the thymus. During ontogeny, some of these infected cells continue their
differentiation into mature CD8+ SP thymocytes that contain proviral DNA and
express viral RNA.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.71.9.6671-6676.1997 
PMCID: PMC191945
PMID: 9261389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

