
1. J Protein Chem. 1997 Aug;16(6):651-60.

Inhibition of tryptase TL2 from human T4+ lymphocytes and inhibition of HIV-1
replication in H9 cells by recombinant aprotinin and bikunin homologues.

Brinkmann T(1), Sch채fers J, G체rtler L, Kido H, Niwa Y, Katunuma N, Tschesche H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut f체r Laboratoriums- und Transfusionsmedizin, Herzund Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Universit채tsklinik der Ruhr-Universitt Bochum, Bad
Oeynhausen, Germany.

The serine esterase TL2 from human T4+ lymphocytes is a binding component to
HIV-1 glycoprotein gp120 and seems to play a role in the HIV-1 infection
mechanism. Recombinant variants of the Kunitz-type serine proteinase inhibitor
aprotinin were investigated for their ability to inhibit tryptase TL2 and the
binding of gp120 to this enzyme. Furthermore, the viral replication of HIV-1 was 
investigated H9 cell cultures under the influence of recombinant aprotinin and
bikunin variants. In contrast to native aprotinin, the recombinant variant
[Arg15, Phe17, Glu52] aprotinin with a reactive-site sequence homologous to the
V3 loop of HIV-1 gp120 showed a specific inhibition of tryptase TL2 (> 80%).
However, the [Leu15, Phe17, Glu52] aprotinin variant with hydrophobic subsites
was the most potent inhibitor of the binding of gp120 to tryptase TL2 (68%). Our 
results show that the enzyme activity of purified tryptase TL2 is inhibited not
only by variants with basic amino acids, but also those with hydrophobic residues
in the reactive-site region. Therefore, tryptase TL2 is not a typical
trypsin-like or chymotrypsin-like protease. Investigations on inhibition of HIV-1
replication in H9 cell cultures showed that tryptase TL2 is involved in the
mechanism of virus internalization into human lymphocytes. The [Leu15, Phe17,
Glu52] aprotinin showed a significant retardation of syncytium formation over a
period of 5 days in a 1 micro M concentration. Similar investigations were
performed with recombinant variants of bikunin, the light chain of human
inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor. Only the single-headed variant [Arg94] delta 2
bikunin inhibited slightly the syncytium formation over a period of 2 days in a
2.2 micro M concentration. Wild-type bikunin and all full-length variants showed 
no effect, possibly due to steric hindrance by the second domain of the
double-headed inhibitor.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1026379109403 
PMID: 9263127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

