
1. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 1997 Oct;16(4):301-6.

The origin and molecular characterization of adenoid basal carcinoma of the
uterine cervix.

Jones MW(1), Kounelis S, Papadaki H, Bakker A, Swalsky PA, Finkelstein SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Magee-Womens Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Comment in
    Int J Gynecol Pathol. 1997 Oct;16(4):299-300.

Five cases of adenoid basal carcinoma (ABC) of the uterine cervix were examined
for the presence of p53 tumor suppressor gene, K-ras-2 oncogene, and human
papillomavirus (HPV). A topographic genotyping approach was used to search for
point mutations in K-ras-2 (exon 1 and 2) and p53 (exons 5 to 8) in archival
formalin-fixed tissue blocks. Minute target sites were selected from polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) amplified and directly sequenced tissue sections. Tissue
sections were additionally subjected to immunohistochemical staining for p53 and 
WAF-1 protein. Because wild type p53 induces WAF-1 gene expression,
immunohistochemical staining for WAF-1 protein using monoclonal antibodies may
serve as an indirect means to test for p53 mutational damage. Mutational genotype
was compared to histopathologic features and immunohistochemical staining. To
study the role of HPV, L1 region consensus primers were used to amplify
topographic samples, followed by HPV genotyping by direct sequencing and
comparison to known viral strains. ABC was found to contain HPV in all cases,
proven by genotyping to be HPV type 16 in each case. The virus showed no evidence
of genomic variation from prototype HPV type 16 in the L1 segment examined. No
K-ras-2 point mutations were identified. p53 immunopositivity was present in all 
tumors, being weak and focal in 4 and strong and diffuse in 1. WAF-1
immunostaining was positive in two tumors showing weak focal p53
immunopositivity. The single strong and diffuse p53 immunopositive tumor was
negative for WAF-1 and was shown to contain a missense p53 point mutation (exon
7-codon 248 tryptophan). In conclusion, ABC is characterized by the presence of
HPV type 16. K-ras-2 point mutation appears to play no role in the development of
this tumor. p53 gene alterations are common including wild type hyperexpression
(weak focal p53 immunopositivity, WAF-1 positivity, no mutational change) and p53
point mutational damage.

DOI: 10.1097/00004347-199710000-00002 
PMID: 9421067  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

