
1. Anticancer Res. 1997 Nov-Dec;17(6D):4623-32.

In vitro cytobiological effects of human herpesviruses 6 and 7:
immunohistological monitoring of apoptosis, differentiation and cell
proliferation.

Kirn E(1), Krueger E, Boehmer S, Klussmann JP, Krueger GR.

Author information: 
(1)Immunopathology Laboratory, University of Cologne, Germany.

Two human herpesviruses, HHV-6 and HHV-7, recently identified and closely
related, were studied for their influence on cellular apoptosis and
proliferation. Infection was monitored by viral DNA--and antigen expression.
Apoptosis and cell proliferation were determined by immunocytological techniques 
and the markers p53, p21WAF/Cip, Bax, Bak, Bcl-2, cyclin D1 and PCNA, and also
screened for signal transduction indicators such as c-H-ras, c-fos and raf-1.
Cell differentiation and function was monitored by determining cell membrane
receptors including Fas and CD specificities, and by ELISA tests for interleukin 
production. Both HHV-6 and HHV-7 readily infected their target cells, yet virus
antigen expression and virus replication were less active in HHV-7 infection.
Both viruses also induced GM-CFS production. Cell differentiation in terms of CD 
receptor expression was more pronounced in HHV-6 than in HHV-7 infection. No
differences were found in the activity of signal transduction factors. There were
quantitative differences in the activation of p53, Bax, p21WAF and Bcl-2 in HHV
6-infected CBC as compared to HHV-7 infection supporting the apoptosis cycle.
CyclinD1 activity remained at lower levels in HHV-7 infected CBC, yet was high in
similarly infected transformed SupT1 cells. In contrast, HHV-6 supported rather
the p53/p21WAF apoptosis pathway in both untransformed CBC and transformed HSB1
cells. Both herpesviruses, HHV-6 and HHV-7, thus possessed similar biological
activities in cultures of non-transformed susceptible cells, although with
certain quantitative differences. The data reported here may further support the 
notion that HHV-7 is less active in inducing apoptosis thus favoring continued
cell proliferation. The mechanism by which these viruses interfere with the
network control of cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis appear more 
complicated than shown here and therefore afford a more detailed study, including
a more sensitive technology than immunohistology.


PMID: 9494580  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

