
1. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 22;273(21):13089-96.

Expression and purification of the extracellular ligand binding region of
metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype 1.

Okamoto T(1), Sekiyama N, Otsu M, Shimada Y, Sato A, Nakanishi S, Jingami H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Biomolecular Engineering Research Institute, 
6-2-3 Furuedai, Suita, Osaka 565, Japan.

Each metabotropic glutamate receptor possesses a large extracellular domain that 
consists of a sequence homologous to the bacterial periplasmic binding proteins
and a cysteine-rich region. Previous experiments have proposed that the
extracellular domain is responsible for ligand binding. However, it is currently 
unknown whether the extracellular ligand binding site can bind ligands without
other domains of the receptor. We began by obtaining a sufficient amount of
receptor protein on a baculovirus expression system. In addition to the transfer 
vector that encodes the entire coding region, transfer vectors that encode
portions of the extracellular domain were designed. Here, we report a soluble
metabotropic glutamate receptor that encodes only the extracellular domain and
retains a ligand binding characteristic similar to that of the full-length
receptor. The soluble receptor secreted into culture medium showed a dimerized
form. Furthermore, we have succeeded in purifying it to homogeneity.
Dose-response curves of agonists for the purified soluble receptor were examined.
The effective concentration for half-maximal inhibition (IC50) of quisqualate for
the soluble receptor was 3.8 x 10(-8) M, which was comparable to that for the
full-length receptor. The rank order of inhibition of the agonists was
quisqualate >> ibotenate >/= L-glutamate approximately
(1S,3R)-1-aminocyclopentane-1, 3-dicarboxylic acid. These data demonstrate that a
ligand binding event in metabotropic glutamate receptors can be dissociated from 
the membrane domain.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.21.13089 
PMID: 9582347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

