
1. Immunol Rev. 1998 Jun;163:197-215.

Structural specializations of immunoglobulin superfamily members for adhesion to 
integrins and viruses.

Wang J(1), Springer TA.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachussetts, 
USA.

The circulation and migration of leukocytes are critical for immune surveillance 
and immune response to infection or injury. The key step of leukocyte recruitment
involves the adhesion between immunoglobulin superfamily (IgSF) proteins on
endothelium and integrin molecules on leukocyte surfaces. Some of the IgSF
members are subverted as virus receptors. Four crystal structures of N-terminal
two-domain fragments of these IgSF proteins have been determined: intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), ICAM-2, vascular adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), and 
mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule-1 (MAdCAM-1). An acidic residue near the
bottom of domain 1 plays a key role in integrin binding. For ICAM-1 and ICAM-2,
this glutamic acid residue is located on a flat surface, complementary to the
flat surface of the I domain of the integrin to which they bind, lymphocyte
function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1). For VCAM-1 and MAdCAM-1, the acidic
residue is aspartic acid, and it resides on a protruded CD loop which may be
complementary to a more pocket-like structure in the alpha 4 integrins to which
they bind, which lack I domains. A number of unique structural features of this
subclass of IgSF have been identified which are proposed to consolidate the
domain structure to resist force during adhesion to integrins. Different
mechanisms are proposed for the different CAMs to present the integrin-binding
surface toward the opposing cell for adhesion, and prevent cis interaction with
integrins on the same cell. Finally, CD4 and ICAM-1 are compared in the context
of ligand binding and virus binding, which shows how human immunodeficiency virus
and rhinovirus fit well with the distinct structural feature of their cognate
receptors.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-065x.1998.tb01198.x 
PMID: 9700512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

