
1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 18;273(38):24504-12.

RFX1, a single DNA-binding protein with a split dimerization domain, generates
alternative complexes.

Katan-Khaykovich Y(1), Shaul Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

The transcription of various viral and cellular genes is regulated by palindromic
and nonpalindromic DNA sites resembling the EP element of the hepatitis B virus
enhancer, which generate similar DNA-protein complexes. The upper EP complex
contains homodimers of the transcription regulator RFX1. We show that RFX1
possesses a split, extended dimerization domain composed of several
evolutionarily conserved boxes, one of which was previously shown to mediate
dimerization. Such an unusually long and complex dimerization domain could
potentially serve for generating multiple complexes. In addition to the
previously characterized complex, RFX1 generated a novel DNA-protein complex of
extremely low mobility, formed only with palindromic DNA sites. Different
deletions within the dimerization domain altered the relative abundance of the
two complexes, suggesting an interplay between them. Formation of the low
mobility complex correlated with transcriptional repression, in that both
activities were mediated by several portions of the conserved region. Our results
propose a mechanism by which the extended dimerization domain mediates the
formation of alternative homodimeric complexes, which differ in the nature of the
intersubunit interaction. By participating in different types of interactions,
this domain may regulate the relative abundance of the different complexes, thus 
affecting transcriptional activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.38.24504 
PMID: 9733744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

