
1. Pathol Oncol Res. 1998;4(3):191-9.

Combined in vitro effect of marijuana and retrovirus on the activity of mouse
natural killer cells.

Ongrádi J(1), Specter S, Horváth A, Friedman H.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Dermato-Venereology, Budapest, Hungary.
ongjos@bor.sote.hu

Both marijuana and retroviruses impair natural killer (NK) cell functions. No
data on their simulataneous effects are available. Similarities to human AIDS
induced early by Friend leukemia complex (FLC) and its replication competent
helper Rowson-Parr virus (RPV) provides a mouse model to study drug-virus action.
Leukemia susceptible BALB/c and resistant C57BL/6 mice were infected, then at
time intervals their nylon wool-separated splenocytes were exposed to
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) for 3h. Natural killer (NK) cell activity against
Yac-1 cells was assayed by 51Cr-release for 4 and 18h. Recovery of splenocytes
was found to be suppressed by FLC, but in BALB/c only by RPV. After a transient
enhancement in C57BL/6 by FLC, NK cell activity of both mice became suppressed
early (2 to 4 days), normalized subsequently and enhanced late (11 to 14 days)
postinfection. A moderate increase in BALB/c, no change in C57BL/6 were induced
by low (1-2.5 microgram/ml) THC doses. NK cell activity of BALB/c became
suppressed exponentially by higher (5-10 microgrtam/ ml) THC doses in 18h as
compared to 4h assays, while its proportional and moderate impairment was seen in
C57BL/6. The magnitude of NK cell activity of infected mice was determined by
THC: enhancement or impairment followed those of untreated, infected
counterparts, but on the level of THC-treated cells. Low doses hardly, high doses
additively influenced NK cells of infected BALB/c. THC hardly affected very early
and late enhancement in NK cell activiy of FLC infected C57BL/6, but augmented
RPV induced suppression late in 18h assays. Genetic factors similar to endotoxin 
resistance, altered cytokine profile might determine these effects. Similar
phenomena in humans might result in earlier manifestation of AIDS.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02905248 
PMID: 9761937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

