
1. Plant Cell. 1998 Oct;10(10):1623-36.

Involvement of an ABC transporter in a developmental pathway regulating hypocotyl
cell elongation in the light

Sidler M(1), Hassa P, Hasan S, Ringli C, Dudler R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Biology, University of Zurich, Zollikerstrasse 107, CH-8008
Zurich, Switzerland.

In the dark, plant seedlings follow the skotomorphogenetic developmental program,
which results in hypocotyl cell elongation. When the seedlings are exposed to
light, a switch to photomorphogenetic development occurs, and hypocotyl cell
elongation is inhibited. We have manipulated the expression of the AtPGP1 (for
Arabidopsis thaliana P glycoprotein1) gene in transgenic Arabidopsis plants by
using sense and antisense constructs. We show that within a certain light fluence
rate window, overexpression of the AtPGP1 gene under the control of the
cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter causes plants to develop longer hypocotyls,
whereas expression of the gene in antisense orientation results in hypocotyls
shorter than those occurring in the wild type. In the dark, hypocotyls of
transgenic and wild-type plants are indistinguishable. Because the AtPGP1 gene
encodes a member of the superfamily of ATP binding cassette-containing (ABC)
transporters, these results imply that a transport process is involved in a
hypocotyl cell elongation pathway active in the light. The AtPGP1 transporter is 
localized in the plasmalemma, as indicated by immunohistochemical techniques and 
biochemical membrane separation methods. Analysis of the AtPGP1 expression
pattern by using reporter gene constructs and in situ hybridization shows that in
wild-type seedlings, AtPGP1 is expressed in both the root and shoot apices.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.10.10.1623 
PMCID: PMC144355
PMID: 9761790 

