
1. Int J Mol Med. 1998 Feb;1(2):361-6.

The role of HIV-1 activated leukocyte adhesion mechanisms and matrix
metalloproteinase secretion in AIDS pathogenesis (Review).

Weeks BS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Adelphi University, Garden City, NY 11530, USA.

The following is a review of an emerging topic in the literature which has led to
new hypotheses regarding the mechanisms of pathogenesis of the various tissue
specific AIDS associated syndromes. The fundamental hypothesis in this review
proposes that HIV-1 is able to increase lymphocyte and monocyte localization in
tissues where released HIV-1 proteins cause local tissue damage leading to any
one of the various AIDS associated syndromes. It is also hypothesized here that
syndromes associated with other lymphotrophic viruses result from the ability of 
these viruses to direct leukocyte extravasation of blood vessel walls and to
initiate tissue specific pathogenesis. Further, it is suggested here that new
concepts and strategies for delivering gene therapy to specific tissues can be
derived from our understanding of the mechanisms through which lymphotrophic
viruses localize in specific tissues. HIV-1 infection of lymphocytes and
monocytes leads to increased adhesion of these cells to vascular endothelium and 
extracellular matrix molecules. In addition, HIV-1 infection of various
leukocytes leads to increased secretion of extracellular matrix degrading matrix 
metalloproteinases. Increases in leukocyte adhesion and matrix metalloproteinase 
secretion are associated with the normal mechanisms through which leukocytes
localize in tissues during inflammation. The ability of HIV-1 to activate
leukocyte adhesion and matrix metalloproteinase secretion suggests that HIV-1 has
evolved a way to take advantage of leukocyte inflammatory mechanisms in order to 
exit the blood stream and gain access to body tissues. The ability of HIV-1 to
use infected cells to localize in various tissues may lead to the establishment
of HIV-1 reservoirs in tissues. Such viral reservoirs may cause the various
tissue specific AIDS associated syndromes. AIDS patients have been found to have 
elevated adhesion molecules (integrins, and cell adhesion molecules or CAMs) on
their peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs). While there is little clinical
evidence that the tissue localization of HIV-1 infected leukocytes are the cause 
of the HIV-1 related syndromes, studies in vitro and with animal models have
shown that the HIV-1 gene products Tat, Rev and gp120 are potent neurotoxins. It 
has also been shown that Tat can contribute to the growth of cells from Kaposi's 
sarcoma lesions. Further, HIV-1 infected cells have been shown to secrete
cytotoxic levels of a variety of growth factors and small molecules. Thus, it is 
likely that the localization of HIV-1 infected cells in specific tissues could
contribute to the HIV-1 associated syndromes such as AIDS dementia, HIV-1 related
interstitial lung disease, HIV-1 associated nephropathy, the HIV-1 wasting
syndrome and perhaps AIDS associated Kaposi's sarcoma and hyperproliferative skin
disorders. This review will examine studies in the literature which demonstrate
that HIV-1 infection increases leukocyte adhesion and matrix metalloproteinase
secretion. Clinical reports of AIDS patient's leukocyte integrin levels will also
be reviewed and evidence that tissue localized HIV-1 infected cells could
contribute to a variety of HIV-1 associated syndromes will be presented.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.1.2.361 
PMID: 9852238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

