
1. J Virol. 1999 Feb;73(2):1262-70.

Limited protection from a pathogenic chimeric simian-human immunodeficiency virus
challenge following immunization with attenuated simian immunodeficiency virus.

Lewis MG(1), Yalley-Ogunro J, Greenhouse JJ, Brennan TP, Jiang JB, VanCott TC, Lu
Y, Eddy GA, Birx DL.

Author information: 
(1)Henry M. Jackson Foundation, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research,
Rockville, Maryland 20850, USA. mlevis@hiv.hjf.org

Two live attenuated single-deletion mutant simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV)
constructs, SIV239Deltanef and SIVPBj6.6Deltanef, were tested for their abilities
to stimulate protective immunity in macaques. During the immunization period the 
animals were examined for specific immune responses and virus growth. Each
construct generated high levels of specific immunity in all of the immunized
animals. The SIV239Deltanef construct was found to grow to high levels in all
immunized animals, with some animals remaining positive for virus isolation and
plasma RNA throughout the immunization period. The SIVPBj6.6Deltanef was
effectively controlled by all of the immunized animals, with virus mostly
isolated only during the first few months following immunization and plasma RNA
never detected. Following an extended period of immunization of over 80 weeks,
the animals were challenged with a pathogenic simian-human immunodeficiency virus
(SHIV) isolate, SIV89. 6PD, by intravenous injection. All of the
SIV239Deltanef-immunized animals became infected with the SHIV isolate; two of
five animals eventually controlled the challenge and three of five animals, which
failed to check the immunizing virus, progressed to disease state before the
unvaccinated controls. One of five animals immunized with SIVPBj6.6Deltanef
totally resisted infection by the challenge virus, while three others limited its
growth and the remaining animal became persistently infected and eventually died 
of a pulmonary thrombus. These data indicate that vaccination with attenuated SIV
can protect macaques from disease and in some cases from infection by a divergent
SHIV. However, if animals are unable to control the immunizing virus, potential
damage that can accelerate the disease course of a pathogenic challenge virus may
occur.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.73.2.1262-1270.1999 
PMCID: PMC103949
PMID: 9882330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

