
1. Transfusion. 1999 Jan;39(1):95-102.

Prevalence of GB virus type C/hepatitis G virus RNA and anti-E2 among blood
donors in Southeastern France.

Cantaloube JF(1), Gallian P, Biagini P, Attoui H, Escher J, Zappitelli JP, Delord
Y, de Micco P, de Lamballerie X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire Tropicale et Transfusionnelle, Faculté de 
Medecine de Marseille, France.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of the study was to analyze serologic and molecular
markers of the GB virus type C/hepatitis G virus (GBV-C/HGV) infection in
voluntary blood donors from Southeastern France.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Sera were tested for the presence of GBV-C/HGV RNA by
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and that of antibodies to the
GBV-C/HGV E2 (anti-E2) antigen by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. A first
cohort (1660 blood donors) was tested prospectively and a second cohort (238
samples with hepatitis markers) was tested retrospectively. Donors in the
prospective study were questioned for possible risk factors of virus
transmission. Amplification products were sequenced and subjected to phylogenetic
analysis.
RESULTS: Approximately 2.6 percent of individuals accepted for blood donation and
15.4 percent with positive hepatitis C virus serologic tests carried GBV-C/HGV
RNA. Anti-E2 was detected in these two populations in approximately 12 percent
and 48 percent of donors, respectively. Moderate relative risks were found only
in tattooed or pierced individuals (1.82) and health care workers (2.45). Almost 
all strains were located in the same phylogenetic branch as HGV Group 2.
CONCLUSION: Though a large proportion of the donors tested have been in contact
with GBV-C/HGV, no elevated relative risk of infection was identified. The
phylogenetic distribution of viral strains suggests that the infection is endemic
in this population.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1537-2995.1999.39199116900.x 
PMID: 9920172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

