
1. Biochem Pharmacol. 1999 Mar 15;57(6):589-95.

Chemotherapy by slowing glucosphingolipid synthesis.

Radin NS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, The University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, USA. Glyconorm@aol.com

The hypothesis offered here is that many different illnesses could be treated by 
slowing the synthesis of glucosphingolipids (GSLs) with a suitable inhibitor. In 
people with inadequate hydrolases for the GSLs (e.g. Gaucher's disease), the
lipids accumulate to a pathological degree. It should be possible to eliminate
the accumulation by slowing the synthesis of the GSLs to match the ability of the
patient to degrade them. In people with cancer, the tumors secrete excessive
amounts of GSLs, which block the ability of the immune system to attack the tumor
cells. By blocking the synthesis of tumor GSLs, it should be possible to enable
the patient to generate antibodies and activated T cells that can destroy the
tumor. Tumors exhibiting multidrug resistance may do so by synthesizing GSLs even
faster than usual. It should be possible to restore the sensitivity of the tumor 
to anti-cancer drugs by inhibiting their synthesis of GSLs. Metastasis of tumors 
also appears to require the formation of GSLs, so an inhibitor should help block 
tumor dissemination. Diabetics tend to have high levels of blood glucose, which
acts to stimulate kidney growth via more rapid synthesis of GSLs. This
pathological growth can be blocked by inhibiting the formation of kidney GSLs.
Viruses, bacteria, and bacterial toxins have been found to bind to specific GSLs 
of human and animal cells. Presumably, this binding leads to the damaging process
of infection. It should be possible to treat such infections by depleting the
host's body of its GSLs.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-2952(98)00274-3 
PMID: 10037442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

