
1. Biologicals. 1998 Sep;26(3):237-44.

Inactivation kinetics of model and relevant blood-borne viruses by treatment with
sodium hydroxide and heat.

Borovec S(1), Broumis C, Adcock W, Fang R, Uren E.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, Research and Development, CSL Limited, Bioplasma Division,
189-209 Camp Road, Broadmeadows, 3047, Australia.

To determine the efficacy of a clean-in-place system for the inactivation of
viruses present in human plasma, the effect of 0.1 M sodium hydroxide at 60
degrees C on viral infectivity was investigated. Inactivation of the following
model and relevant viruses were followed as a function of time: human hepatitis A
virus (HAV), canine parvovirus (CPV; a model for human parvovirus B-19)
pseudorabies virus (PRV, a model for hepatitis B virus), and bovine viral
diarrhoea virus (BVDV, a model for hepatitis C virus and human immunodeficiency
virus). Infectivity of CPV was determined by a novel in situ EIA method which
will prove useful for studies to validate parvovirus inactivation or removal.
Infectivity of BVDV, PRV and CPV were shown to be reproducibly inactivated below 
the limit of detection by 0.1 M NaOH at 60 degrees C within 30 s. HAV was
inactivated to below the limit of detection within 2 min. Treatment with heat
alone also resulted in some log reduction for all viruses tested except for CPV
which remained unaffected after heating at 60 degrees C for 16 min. Treatment of 
HAV with hydroxide alone (up to 1.0 m) at 15 degrees C did not lead to rapid
inactivation. Collectively, these data suggest that 0.1 M NaOH at 60 degrees C
for two min should be sufficient to inactivate viruses present in process
residues.

Copyright 1998 The International Association of Biological Standardization.

DOI: 10.1006/biol.1998.0146 
PMID: 10208725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

