
1. J Assist Reprod Genet. 1999 Jul;16(6):325-8.

Tenacity of exogenous human papillomavirus DNA in sperm washing.

Brossfield JE(1), Chan PJ, Patton WC, King A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Loma Linda University School of
Medicine, California 92350, USA.

PURPOSE: Sperm cells have been shown to take up exogenous DNA readily. The
hypothesis was that sperm washing would remove exogenous viral DNA infecting
sperm cells. The objective was to compare three types of sperm washing procedures
for their capacity to remove exogenous human papillomavirus (HPV) DNA from
infected sperm.
METHODS: Prewashed sperm were equally divided and sperm in one portion were
exposed to L1 HPV DNA fragments for 30 min at 37 degrees C. Untreated washed
sperm served as the control. After transfection, the sperm were washed by either 
centrifuge, two-layer Isolate colloid wash, or test-yolk buffer procedures. Sperm
parameters were measured on a Hamilton Thorn HTM-C analyzer. Sperm DNA were
extracted and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was carried out targeting the L1
consensus gene of HPV and the designated sentinel gene, 17q21 spanning the
D17S855 gene. Amplified products were analyzed in 2% agarose gel electrophoresis.
RESULTS: PCR analyses detected the consensus L1 HPV gene in sperm after they were
processed through either of the three procedures. Controls were negative for the 
L1 gene. Extracted DNA were verified by PCR amplification of 17q21 spanning the
D17S855 gene. Transfected sperm had higher percentages of total motility and
progression compared with the control. Centrifuged, washed, transfected sperm
exhibited a greater curvilinear velocity and hyperactivation.
CONCLUSIONS: The data showed that washing would not remove exogenous HPV DNA from
sperm cells. The viral DNA was tenaciously bound to the sperm, suggesting an
internalization into the sperm. The viral DNA also increased the motility of the 
sperm by affecting the velocity and progression of the sperm, which suggested
either an increase in metabolism, an enhancement of the calcium-regulated
motility mechanism, or an artifact of PCR reagents. More studies are needed to
elucidate the mechanism of DNA stimulated sperm motility.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1020458100382 
PMCID: PMC3455530
PMID: 10394529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

