
1. J Clin Gastroenterol. 1999 Jul;29(1):71-5.

Significance of repeatedly normal aminotransferase activities in HCV-infected
patients.

Zylberberg H(1), Pol S, Thiers V, Chaix ML, Lagorce D, Bréchot C, Nalpas B,
Berthelot P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Hépatologie, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France.

The significance of repeatedly normal serum aminotransferase activities in
antihepatitis C virus (anti-HCV)-positive patients is not clear. To address this 
issue, the authors analyzed clinical, virologic, histopathologic, and biological 
characteristics of such subjects. Among their active file of 1,200
anti-HCV-positive immunocompetent patients, they identified 36 subjects (3%) with
repeatedly normal aminotransferase activities, as defined by at least four normal
values of aminotransferase over a minimum period of 6 months without any abnormal
value (mean of this period, 31 +/- 21 months). The 36 patients included 11 men
and 25 women with a mean age of 45 +/- 15 years. Twenty-three of these 36
subjects (64%) had detectable HCV viremia by polymerase chain reaction. Their
genotype distribution was as follows: genotype 1a or 1b, 57%; genotype 2, 26%;
and genotype 3, 17%. Of the HCV ribonucleic acid (RNA)-positive and HCV
RNA-negative subjects, 17 and 5 had a liver biopsy respectively. In the former,
the mean Knodell score was 5.6 +/- 3.5 (range, 1 to 14), and was < 5 in 9
patients (53%) and > or = 5 in 8 (47%), including extensive fibrosis (n = 2) or
cirrhosis (n = 2). In the HCV RNA-negative subjects, one patient had a Knodell
score > or = 5. Comparing the 23 immunocompetent viremic subjects with repeatedly
normal serum aminotransferase activities with our group (n = 564) of
immunocompetent viremic patients with abnormal aminotransferase activities, there
was a significant predominance of women (70% versus 44%, p < 0.05) and of
genotype 2 in the former (26% versus 7%, p < 0.05), but no differences according 
to quantitative viremia, alcohol consumption, or distribution of risk factor were
observed. Most of viremic HCV-infected patients with long-term and repeatedly
normal aminotransferase values have indeed chronic active hepatitis, including
extensive fibrosis or cirrhosis in as many as 20% of patients. This emphasizes
the need for serum HCV RNA determination in anti-HCV-positive patients with
normal aminotransferase activities. In these patients liver biopsy may be
necessary and should be discussed.

DOI: 10.1097/00004836-199907000-00018 
PMID: 10405237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

