
1. Exp Cell Res. 1999 Sep 15;251(2):442-51.

Regulation and deregulation of E2F1 in postmitotic neurons differentiated from
embryonal carcinoma P19 cells.

Azuma-Hara M(1), Taniura H, Uetsuki T, Niinobe M, Yoshikawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Regulation of Macromolecular Functions, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, Yamadaoka 3-2, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

Neurons withdraw from the cell cycle immediately after differentiation from their
proliferative precursors. E2F1, a principal transcription factor that promotes
cell cycle progression, must be silenced in neurons. We investigated the E2F1
system in postmitotic neurons derived from murine embryonal carcinoma P19 cells. 
P19 cells highly expressed the E2F1 gene during neural differentiation, and
enriched neurons contained a high abundance of E2F1 mRNA. In contrast,
postmitotic neurons possessed extremely low levels of E2F1 protein as assessed by
the electrophoretic mobility shift assay and Western blotting. A recombinant E2F1
fusion protein was ubiquitinated in vitro when incubated with neuronal lysates.
In addition, treatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 increased the
endogenous level of E2F1 protein in neurons. These results suggest that the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway contributes, at least in part, to the downregulation
of E2F1 protein in postmitotic neurons. Adenovirus-mediated transfer of E2F1 cDNA
into postmitotic neurons induced both bromodeoxyuridine incorporation and
chromatin condensation, suggesting that deregulated E2F1 expression causes both
aberrant S-phase entry and apoptosis of postmitotic neurons. Thus, downregulation
of endogenous E2F1 protein in postmitotic neurons may be indispensable for the
prevention of their reentry into the cell cycle.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/excr.1999.4593 
PMID: 10471329  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

