
1. Mol Microbiol. 1999 Oct;34(2):217-26.

The genetic element pSSVx of the extremely thermophilic crenarchaeon Sulfolobus
is a hybrid between a plasmid and a virus.

Arnold HP(1), She Q, Phan H, Stedman K, Prangishvili D, Holz I, Kristjansson JK, 
Garrett R, Zillig W.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck-Institut f√ºr Biochemie, 82152 Martinsried, Germany.

A new Sulfolobus islandicus strain, REY15/4, harboured both a novel fusellovirus,
SSV2, and a small plasmid, pSSVx. The plasmid spread in S. solfataricus P1
together with the virus after infection with either the supernatant of a culture 
of REY15/4 or purified virus. Spreading of the plasmid required co-transfection
with either SSV2 or the related SSV1 as helpers. Virus purified from REY15/4
constituted a mixture of two sizes of particles, one with the dimensions of a
normal fusellovirus and the other smaller. Cloned SSV2 produced only the larger
particles and only SSV2 DNA, indicating that the smaller particles contained
pSSVx packaged into capsids made up of SSV2 components. The 5.7 kb genome of
pSSVx revealed regions of high sequence similarity to the cryptic Sulfolobales
plasmids pRN1, pRN2 and pDL10. Thus, pSSVx belongs to the family of pRN plasmids 
that share a highly conserved region, which probably constitutes the minimal
replicon. They also contain a variable region showing no sequence similarity. In 
pSSVx, this region contains three open reading frames (ORFs), two of which are
juxtapositioned and show high sequence similarity to a tandem of ORFs in
fusellovirus genomes. Neither pRN1 nor pRN2, which lack this tandem, spread in
the presence of the fuselloviruses, which implies that the sequences of these
ORFs enable pSSVx to use the packaging system of the viral helpers for spreading.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1999.01573.x 
PMID: 10564466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

