
1. Cancer Res. 1999 Dec 15;59(24):6132-6.

Detection of high-risk cervical intraepithelial neoplasia and cervical cancer by 
amplification of transcripts derived from integrated papillomavirus oncogenes.

Klaes R(1), Woerner SM, Ridder R, Wentzensen N, Duerst M, Schneider A, Lotz B,
Melsheimer P, von Knebel Doeberitz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Heidelberg, Germany.

Cervical cancer emerges from cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) induced by 
high-risk HPV (HR-HPV) infections. However, the vast majority of CIN lesions
regresses spontaneously, and only a few lesions persist or progress to invasive
carcinoma. On the basis of morphological criteria, it is not possible to
differentiate high-grade lesions that will regress or persist from those that
inevitably will progress to invasive cancers. In most cervical carcinomas, human 
papillomavirus (HPV) genomes are integrated into host cell chromosomes and
transcribed into mRNAs encompassing viral and cellular sequences. In contrast, in
early preneoplastic lesions, HPV genomes persist as episomes, and derived
transcripts contain exclusively viral sequences. Thus, detection of HPV
transcripts derived from integrated HPV genomes may specifically indicate both
CIN lesions at high risk for progression as well as invasive cervical cancers.
Here, we established a protocol for the amplification of papillomavirus oncogene 
transcripts (APOT) from cervical specimens that allows us to distinguish episome-
from integrate-derived HPV mRNAs. Cervical swab and biopsy samples from 549
patients attending outpatient clinics for cervical dysplasia were screened for
the presence of HPV DNA, and 155 samples that were positive for either HPV type
16 (n = 143) or 18 (n = 12) were subjected to the APOT assay. In samples derived 
from normal cervical epithelia (n = 19) or low-grade cervical lesions (CIN I, n =
10), no integrate-derived HPV transcripts were found. In contrast, in 1 (5%) of
22 samples derived from CIN II lesions, in 10 (16%) of 64 samples from patients
with CIN III lesions, and in 35 (88%) of 40 samples from patients with cervical
cancer, integrate-derived HPV transcripts were detected. Thus, detection of
integrate-derived HPV transcripts in cervical swabs or biopsy specimens by the
APOT assay points to advanced dysplasia or invasive cervical cancer.


PMID: 10626803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

