
1. Dev Biol. 2000 Apr 15;220(2):129-41.

Ectopic adenoviral vector-directed expression of Sema3A in organotypic spinal
cord explants inhibits growth of primary sensory afferents.

Pasterkamp RJ(1), Giger RJ, Baker RE, Hermens WT, Verhaagen J.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School Neurosciences Amsterdam, The Netherlands Institute for Brain
Research, Amsterdam, 1105 AZ, The Netherlands.

Sema3A (Sema III, SemD, collapsin-1) can induce neuronal growth cone collapse and
axon repulsion of distinct neuronal populations. To study Sema3A function in
patterning afferent projections into the developing spinal cord, we employed the 
recombinant adenoviral vector technique in embryonic rat spinal cord slices.
Virus solution was injected in the dorsal aspect of organotypic spinal cord
cultures with segmentally attached dorsal root ganglia (sc-DRG). In cultures
grown in the presence of nerve growth factor (NGF), injected either with the
control virus AdCMVLacZ or with vehicle only, afferent innervation patterns were 
similar to those of control. However, unilateral injection of
AdCMVSema3A/AdCMVLacZ in sc-DRG slices revealed a strong inhibitory effect on
NGF-dependent sensory afferent growth. Ectopic Sema3A in the dorsal spinal cord, 
the target area of NGF-responsive DRG fibers in vivo, created an exclusion zone
for these fibers and as a result they failed to reach and innervate their
appropriate target zones. Taken together, gain of Sema3A function in the dorsal
aspect of sc-DRG cultures revealed a dominant inhibitory effect on NGF-dependent,
nociceptive sensory DRG afferents, an observation in line with the model proposed
by E. K. Messersmith et al. (1995, Neuron 14, 949-959), suggesting that Sema3A
secreted by spinal cord cells can act to repel central sensory fibers during the 
formation of lamina-specific connections in the spinal cord.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/dbio.2000.9627 
PMID: 10753505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

