
1. J Virol. 1975 Sep;16(3):470-8.

Synthesis of reovirus-specific polypeptides in cells pretreated with
cycloheximide.

Lau RY, Van Alstyne D, Berckmans R, Graham AF.

When L cells are infected with reovirus in the presence of cycloheximide neither 
virus-specific polypeptides nor viral double-stranded RNA are synthesized. There 
is some synthesis of viral single-stranded RNA, transcribed mainly from segments 
L1, M3, S3, and S4 of the 10 viral genomic segments, and in previous work this
has been termed the early mRNA pattern. In an attempt to determine whether these 
early transcripts are functional mRNA's, the transcripts were allowed to
accumulate for a period of 17.5 h at 31 C in cycloheximide-treated cells. The
cycloheximide was removed and the cells were exposed for various periods to
radioactive amino acids to label any virus-specific polypeptides that might be
synthesized. An immunoprecipitation technique was used to separate the viral
polypeptides from cellular extracts and this precipitate was then analyzed on
sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels. Within 30 min of cycloheximide
removal, four major polypeptides (lambda2, mu0, sigma2a, and sigma3) and two
minor polypeptides (lambda1 and mu2) were found. In infected cells without
cycloheximide eight viral polypeptides (lambda1, lambda2, mu0, mu2, sigma1,
sigma2, sigma2a, sigma3) were found at 17.5 h after infection and the same
pattern was found between 3 to 4 h after removal of cycloheximide which had been 
present for 17.5 h after infection. The latter result shows that the
cycloheximide inhibition is reversible and that the cells readily recovered and
synthesized the normal complement of viral polypeptides. In one set of
experiments cordycepin was added to infected cells immediately after the removal 
of cycloheximide at 17.5 h to inhibit the synthesis of new viral transcripts.
During the succeeding 4 h in the presence of cordycepin, the pattern of protein
synthesis was the same as that obtained during the 30 min after cycloheximide
removal. It is concluded that the polypeptides formed right after removal of
cycloheximide are the translation products of transcripts accumulated during
cycloheximide treatment and, therefore, that these transcripts are functional
viral mRNA's.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.16.3.470-478.1975 
PMCID: PMC354693
PMID: 1080523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

