
1. Rom J Virol. 1998 Jan-Dec;49(1-4):117-39.

Observations regarding the neurocytokaryological study of the experimental
infection with herpes simplex virus type 1 and type 2 in the white mouse.

Petica M(1), Crişan I, Muţiu A.

Author information: 
(1)Stefan S. Nicolau Institute of Virology, Bucharest, Romania.

Mice distributed in groups were inoculated with the herpes virus simplex type 1
and type 2 strains in various dilutions (10(-1)-10(-7)), which had been
maintained on primary human embryo cell cultures. The animals were killed and
homogenates were prepared of their brains, which were used for testing the
infective titre in vivo and for the isolation of nuclei, by means of the
Hymer-Kuff technique. For the cytokaryological examinations, smears were prepared
from the homogenate, which were stained by May-Grünwald-Giemsa and Mann methods. 
The cell and nucleus types were evaluated morphologically, descriptively,
according to the size and structure. On the basis of three criteria the following
groups were set up: large sized cells with bulky nuclei; middle sized cells with 
nuclei of a medium size; small sized cells with small nuclei and visible
nucleoli; small sized cells with small, tachychromatic nuclei; cells exhibiting
karyolysis. In both the infection with herpes virus simplex type 1 and type 2,
the small sized cells with small tachychromatic nuclei represent the highest
rate. Between the variants of the elaborated models no significant differences
regarding the cell and nucleus types are recorded. On the whole, the
cytokaryological picture does not exhibit notable differences, but rather
resemblances with respect to the proportionality of the nucleus types in the
experimental variants studied, in the case of herpes simplex virus type 1 and 2
induced infections.


PMID: 10892432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

