
1. Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Paulo. 2000 Nov-Dec;42(6):305-11.

Outbreaks of human-herpes virus 6 (HHV-6) infection in day-care centers in Belém,
Pará, Brazil.

Freitas RB(1), Monteiro TA, Linhares AC.

Author information: 
(1)Serviço de Virologia Geral, Instituto Evandro Chagas, Fundação Nacional de
Saúde, Ministério da Saúde, Belém, Pará, Brasil. ronaldo@iec.pa.gov.br

A total of 730 children aged less than 7 years, attending 8 day-care centers
(DCCs) in Belém, Brazil were followed-up from January to December 1997 to
investigate the occurrence of human-herpes virus 6 (HHV-6) infection in these
institutional settings. Between October and December 1997 there have been
outbreaks of a febrile- and -exanthematous disease, affecting at least 15-20% of 
children in each of the DCCs. Both serum- and- plasma samples were obtained from 
401 (55%) of the 730 participating children for the detection of HHV-6 antibodies
by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and viral DNA amplification through
the nested-PCR. Recent HHV-6 infection was diagnosed in 63.8% (256/401) of them, 
as defined by the presence of both IgM and IgG-specific antibodies (IgM+/IgG+);
of these, 114 (44.5%) were symptomatic and 142 (55.5%) had no symptoms (p =
0.03). A subgroup of 123 (30.7%) children were found to be IgM-/IgG+, whereas the
remaining 22 (5.5%) children had neither IgM nor IgG HHV-6- antibodies
(IgM-/IgG-). Of the 118 children reacting strongly IgM-positive (> or = 30 PANBIO
units), 26 (22.0%) were found to harbour the HHV-6 DNA, as demonstrated by
nested-PCR. Taken the ELISA-IgM- and- nested PCR-positive results together, HHV-6
infection was shown to have occurred in 5 of the 8 DCCs under follow-up.
Serological evidence of recent infections by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and
parvovirus B19 were identified in 2.0% (8/401) and 1. 5% (6/401) of the children,
respectively. Our data provide strong evidence that HHV-6 is a common cause of
outbreaks of febrile/exanthematous diseases among children attending DCCs in the 
Belém area.

DOI: 10.1590/s0036-46652000000600002 
PMID: 11136516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

