
1. Dig Liver Dis. 2000 Oct;32(7):634-43.

Hepatitis C virus carriers with persistently normal aminotransferase levels:
healthy people or true patients?

Puoti C(1), Castellacci R, Montagnese F.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Internal Medicine and Hepato-Gastroenterology, Genzano General
Hospital, Rome, Italy. hbffe@tin.it

Comment in
    Dig Liver Dis. 2001 Mar;33(2):202-3.

Since the discovery of hepatitis C virus, the availability of serological
hepatitis C virus screening has led to the identification of many subjects with
normal aminotransferase levels who are chronically infected by the hepatitis C
virus. To date, the epidemiology and natural history of subjects with normal
aminotransferase levels are far from being clarified. Further, whether subjects
with persistently normal aminotransferase levels should routinely undergo liver
biopsy is still extremely controversial, and benefit from interferon treatment in
this group of patients is yet to be proven. On account of the consistent
normality of aminotransferases, it is not easy to calculate the rate of persons
with normal aminotransferase levels among chronic hepatitis C virus carriers, nor
their prevalence in the general population. It has been estimated that up to 25% 
of patients with chronic hepatitis C virus infection have persistently normal
aminotransferase levels (10% to 40%, according to different studies). Most
studies showed a clear prevalence of females, ranging from 58% to 90%. Liver
biopsy shows some degree of chronic liver disease in up to 80% of these subjects,
although in the majority, histological damage is mild and probably does not
progress to more severe liver disease, moreover, the progression to fibrosis is
slower than in patients with elevated aminotransferase levels. Virological
features of these subjects (hepatitis C virus genotype distribution, viral load, 
quasispecies diversity) do not differ with respect to patients with elevated
aminotransferase levels although a higher frequency of non 1 hepatitis C virus
types has been reported. To date, no biochemical or virological tools to assess
the presence and severity of liver damage exist. Antiviral treatment with
interferon may induce a long-term response in only a small proportion of
hepatitis C virus carriers with persistently normal aminotransferase levels, and 
many patients develop aminotransferase-flare-up during or shortly after
treatment. Thus, interferon or combination antiviral treatment of hepatitis C
virus carriers with normal aminotransferase values should be avoided in clinical 
practice.

DOI: 10.1016/s1590-8658(00)80850-6 
PMID: 11142566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

