
1. Development. 2001 Mar;128(5):689-702.

Spatiotemporal selectivity of response to Notch1 signals in mammalian forebrain
precursors.

Chambers CB(1), Peng Y, Nguyen H, Gaiano N, Fishell G, Nye JS.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Pharmacology & Biological Chemistry, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

The olfactory bulb, neocortex and archicortex arise from a common pool of
progenitors in the dorsal telencephalon. We studied the consequences of supplying
excess Notch1 signal in vivo on the cellular and regional destinies of
telencephalic precursors using bicistronic replication defective retroviruses.
After ventricular injections mid-neurogenesis (E14.5), activated Notch1
retrovirus markedly inhibited the generation of neurons from telencephalic
precursors, delayed the emergence of cells from the subventricular zone (SVZ),
and produced an augmentation of glial progeny in the neo- and archicortex.
However, activated Notch1 had a distinct effect on the progenitors of the
olfactory bulb, markedly reducing the numbers of cells of any type that migrated 
there. To elucidate the mechanism of the cell fate changes elicited by Notch1
signals in the cortical regions, short- and long-term cultures of E14.5
telencephalic progenitors were examined. These studies reveal that activated
Notch1 elicits a cessation of proliferation that coincides with an inhibition of 
the generation of neurons. Later, during gliogenesis, activated Notch1 triggers a
rapid cellular proliferation with a significant increase in the generation of
cells expressing GFAP. To examine the generation of cells destined for the
olfactory bulb, we used stereotaxic injections into the early postnatal anterior 
subventricular zone (SVZa). We observed that precursors of the olfactory bulb
responded to Notch signals by remaining quiescent and failing to give rise to
differentiated progeny of any type, unlike cortical precursor cells, which
generated glia instead of neurons. These data show that forebrain precursors vary
in their response to Notch signals according to spatial and temporal cues, and
that Notch signals influence the composition of forebrain regions by modulating
the rate of proliferation of neural precursor cells.


PMID: 11171394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

