
1. Clin Immunol. 2001 Apr;99(1):30-42.

Immunotherapy of HIV-infected patients with intermittent interleukin-2: effects
of cycle frequency and cycle duration on degree of CD4(+) T-lymphocyte expansion.

Miller KD(1), Spooner K, Herpin BR, Rock-Kress D, Metcalf JA, Davey RT Jr,
Falloon J, Kovacs JA, Polis MA, Walker RE, Masur H, Lane HC.

Author information: 
(1)Critical Care Medicine Department, Warren Grant Magnuson Clinical Center,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The ability of IL-2 to induce expansion of the CD4(+) T lymphocyte pool has made 
it the most studied cytokine in the treatment of HIV infection. The majority of
trials have used an empirical regimen of 5-day IL-2 cycles given every 8 weeks--a
regimen based upon early pharmacodynamic studies and patient preference. To
better define optimal duration and frequency of cycles, a randomized trial was
conducted in which patients who received this "standard" regimen were compared to
patients who received cycles of variable duration (based on individual patterns
of cell cycle progression) and to patients who received cycles of variable
frequency (based on individual CD4(+) T lymphocyte responses to previous cycles).
Twenty-two patients with HIV-1 infection and CD4(+) T lymphocyte counts > 200
cells/mm(3) were randomized to one of three treatment groups for 32 weeks of
study. Eight participants received four 5-day IL-2 cycles (controls) every 8
weeks; 7 participants received four cycles of longer duration (mean 7.7-days);
and 7 participants received an increased frequency of 5-day cycles (every 4.1
weeks on average). All three groups experienced significant increases in mean
CD4(+) T lymphocytes. However, there were no statistically significant
differences in CD4(+) T lymphocyte increases between the group that received
longer cycles (median increase 239 cells/mm(3), P = 0.78) or between the group
that received more frequent cycles (median increase 511 cells/mm(3), P = 0.54)
and the control group (median 284 cells/mm(3)). HIV-1 viral loads decreased
during the study period in all three groups. Our inability to demonstrate a
significant advantage of increased frequency or duration of IL-2 administration
provides corroborating experimental evidence for the use of an IL-2 regimen
consisting of 5-day cycles administered no more frequently than every 8 weeks in 
future clinical trials aimed at expanding the CD4(+) T lymphocyte pool.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/clim.2001.5001 
PMID: 11286539  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

