
1. J Clin Lab Anal. 2001;15(3):127-30.

Long-term benefit of genotypic-guided therapy and prevalence of multinucleoside
resistance in an Italian group of antiretroviral multiexperienced patients.

Quiros-Roldan E(1), Moretti F, Airoldi M, Fausti C, Chiodera A, Castelli F,
Carosi G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, University of Brescia, Italy.
Carosi@master.cci.unibs.it

Multiple nucleoside resistance involves specific genetic changes in the HIV-1
reverse transcriptase gene, such as Q151M mutation and an insertion of two serine
aminoacids at RT codon 69. Among 432 patients failing antiretroviral therapy,
five (1.15%) harboured viruses with Q151M mutation into the RT gene and no
viruses were identified harbouring insertion at codon 69. Also we have studied
the long-term benefit of HIV genotypic testing with the failure to reach a viral 
load below 50 copies/ml within 1 year of antiretroviral therapy using as the
primary end-point. A group of 64 HIV-positive antiretroviral multiexperienced
patients were examined, all of them failing the current ART. HIV-RNA changed -0.8
log at month 4 and +0.1 log and -0.5 log at months 8 and 12, respectively. The
proportion of patients with viral load below 50 copies/ml was 19.3, 32.8, and
28.1% at months 4, 8, and 12, respectively. In multidrug-experienced patients,
genotype-guided therapy is not in fact able to achieve complete viral suppression
in more than 30% of patients after 1 year of ART. The development of more precise
resistance tests and interpretations are needed for better control of HIV
replication. Other metabolic/pharmacokinetics factors of poor drug adherence
should also be assessed.

DOI: 10.1002/jcla.1015 
PMCID: PMC6807733
PMID: 11344527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

