
1. Mol Ther. 2001 May;3(5 Pt 1):809-15.

Development of a FLP/frt system for generating helper-dependent adenoviral
vectors.

Ng P(1), Beauchamp C, Evelegh C, Parks R, Graham FL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8S 4K1.

Helper-dependent (HD) adenoviral vectors devoid of all viral coding sequences
have a large cloning capacity and have been reported to provide long-term
transgene expression in vivo with negligible toxicity, making them attractive
vectors for gene therapy. Currently, the most efficient means of generating HD
vectors involves co-infecting 293 cells expressing Cre with the HD vector and a
helper virus bearing a packaging signal flanked by loxP sites. Cre-mediated
excision of the packaging signal renders the helper virus genome unpackageable
but still able to replicate and to provide helper functions for HD vector
propagation. HD vector titer is increased by serial co-infections. Typically,
helper virus contamination is < or =1% pre- and < or =0.1% postpurification by
CsCl banding. While these contamination levels are low, further reduction is
desirable. Alternative methods of selection against the helper virus may achieve 
this goal, especially when combined with Cre/loxP. We describe the development of
a system for generating HD vectors based on site-specific recombination between
frt sites catalyzed by FLP recombinase and show by direct comparison that the
FLP/frt and Cre/loxP systems are equivalent with respect to HD vector
amplification efficiency and helper virus contamination levels. Availability of a
second recombinase system for HD vector production will enhance the utility and
flexibility of HD vectors.

DOI: 10.1006/mthe.2001.0323 
PMID: 11356086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

