
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2001 Jul;67(7):2895-902.

Antacid increases survival of Vibrio vulnificus and Vibrio vulnificus phage in a 
gastrointestinal model.

Koo J(1), Marshall DL, DePaola A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Technology, Mississippi Agricultural and
Forestry Experiment Station, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State,
Mississippi 39762, USA.

Viable counts of three strains of Vibrio vulnificus and its phage were determined
during exposure to a mechanical gastrointestinal model with or without antacid
for 9 h at 37 degrees C. V. vulnificus was eliminated (>4-log reduction) within
30 min in the gastric compartment (pH decline from 5.0 to 3.5). Viable V.
vulnificus cells delivered from the gastric compartment during the first 30 min
of exposure reached 10(6) to 10(8) CFU/ml in the intestinal compartment after 9 h
(pH 7.0). Phages were eliminated within 45 min in the gastric compartment (pH
decline from 5.1 to 2.5). Less than a 2-log reduction of phage was observed in
the intestinal compartment after 9 h (pH 7.0). When the gastric compartment
contained antacid V. vulnificus counts decreased slightly (<2 log) during 2 h of 
exposure (pH decline from 7.7 to 6.0), while counts in the intestinal compartment
(pH 7.5) reached 10(7) to 10(9) CFU/ml. Phage numbers decreased 1 log after 2 h
in the gastric compartment (pH decline from 7.7 to 5.7) containing antacid and
decreased 1 log in the intestinal compartment (pH 7.6) after 9 h. Presence of
antacid in the gastric compartment of the model greatly increased the ability of 
both V. vulnificus and its phage to survive simulated gastrointestinal transit
and may be a factor involved with oyster-associated illness.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.67.7.2895-2902.2001 
PMCID: PMC92958
PMID: 11425699  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

