
1. J Mol Evol. 2001 May;52(5):419-25.

Poxviruses and the origin of the eukaryotic nucleus.

Takemura M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Cell Biology, Research Institute for Disease Mechanism
and Control, Nagoya University School of Medicine, Tsurumai-cho 65, Showa-ku,
Nagoya 466-8550 Japan. takemura@tsuru.med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

A number of molecular forms of DNA polymerases have been reported to be involved 
in eukaryotic nuclear DNA replication, with contributions from alpha-, delta-,
and epsilon-polymerases. It has been reported that delta-polymerase possessed a
central role in DNA replication in archaea, whose ancestry are thought to be
closely related to the ancestor of eukaryotes. Indeed, in vitro experiment shown 
here suggests that delta-polymerase has the potential ability to start DNA
synthesis immediately after RNA primer synthesis. Therefore, the question arises,
where did the alpha-polymerase come from? Phylogenetic analysis based on the
nucleotide sequence of several conserved regions reveals that two poxviruses,
vaccinia and variola viruses, have polymerases similar to eukaryotic
alpha-polymerase rather than delta-polymerase, while adenovirus, herpes family
viruses, and archaeotes have eukaryotic delta-like polymerases, suggesting that
the eukaryotic alpha-polymerase gene is derived from a poxvirus-like organism,
which had some eukaryote-like characteristics. Furthermore, the poxvirus's
proliferation independent from the host-cell nucleus suggests the possibility
that this virus could infect non-nucleated cells, such as ancestral eukaryotes. I
wish to propose here a new hypothesis for the origin of the eukaryotic nucleus,
posing symbiotic contact of an orthopoxvirus ancestor with an archaebacterium,
whose genome already had a delta-like polymerase gene.

DOI: 10.1007/s002390010171 
PMID: 11443345  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

