
1. Mol Ther. 2001 Sep;4(3):174-81.

Efficient and selective AAV2-mediated gene transfer directed to human vascular
endothelial cells.

Nicklin SA(1), Buening H, Dishart KL, de Alwis M, Girod A, Hacker U, Thrasher AJ,
Ali RR, Hallek M, Baker AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G11
6NT, UK.

Gene therapy vectors based on adeno-associated virus-2 (AAV2) offer considerable 
promise for human gene therapy. Applications for AAV vectors are limited to
tissues efficiently transduced by the vector due to its natural tropism, which is
predominantly skeletal muscle, neurons, and hepatocytes. Tropism modification to 
elevate efficiency and/or selectivity to individual cell types would enhance the 
scope of AAV for disease therapies. The vascular endothelium is implicitly
important in cardiovascular diseases and cancer, but is relatively poorly
transduced by AAV vectors. We therefore genetically incorporated the peptide
SIGYPLP, which targets endothelial cells (EC), into position I-587 of AAV
capsids. SIGYPLP-modified AAV (AAVsig) showed enhanced transduction of human EC
compared with AAV with a wild-type capsid (AAVwt), a phenotype independent of
heparan sulphate proteoglycan (HSPG) binding. In contrast, AAVsig did not enhance
transduction of primary human vascular smooth muscle cells or human hepatocytes, 
principal targets for AAV vectors in local or systemic gene delivery
applications, respectively. Furthermore, infection of EC in the presence of
bafilomycin A(2) indicated that intracellular trafficking of AAV particles was
altered by targeting AAV by means of SIGYPLP. AAV vectors with enhanced tropism
for EC will be useful for diverse gene therapeutics targeted at the vasculature.

DOI: 10.1006/mthe.2001.0424 
PMID: 11545607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

