
1. Blood. 2002 Jan 1;99(1):52-60.

CD30 triggering by agonistic antibodies regulates CXCR4 expression and CXCL12
chemotactic activity in the cell line L540.

Vinante F(1), Rigo A, Scupoli MT, Pizzolo G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Section of Hematology,
University of Verona, Italy. fabrizio.vinante@univr.it

The tumor necrosis factor receptor family molecule CD30 is expressed by activated
and memory T cells, depending on IL-4 stimulation preferentially in association
with Th0- and Th2-type responses. It mediates pleiotropic effects primarily of
the inhibitory type. Arguing that CD30(+) cells have a peculiar redistribution in
disease, it is demonstrated here, in the Hodgkin-derived L540 cell line (an
established model for studying CD30 signaling), that CD30 regulates the
prototypic lymphoid chemokine receptor CXCR4 (CD184), which plays an important
role in many organ systems and is a coreceptor for human immunodeficiency virus-1
entry. CD30 stimulation with agonistic antibodies in L540 cells led to the
accumulation of CXCR4 mRNA, which reached a plateau after 4 hours and did not
require protein synthesis. It has been reported recently that CD30 up-regulates
the transcription of CCR7 mRNA in YT lymphoma cells. After mRNA transcription,
membrane expression of CXCR4 in L540 cells increased as early as 12 hours,
reached a plateau after 24 hours (MFI +/- SD, 839 +/- 122 vs basal 168 +/- 28; P 
<.01) and was still increased after 5 days, permitting enhanced sensitivity to
the chemotactic activity of CXCR4-ligand CXCL12 (CI +/- SD, 10 +/- 1 vs basal 5
+/- 2; P <.01). CD30 cross-linking also induced the release of CCL5 and CCL3 and 
the up-regulation of membrane binding capacity for CCL3 and CCL4 and decreased
proliferative activity. This new regulatory role of CD30 may be relevant for
T-cell maturation and effector responses and for promoting cancer biology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.v99.1.52 
PMID: 11756152  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

