
1. Dis Markers. 2001;17(3):123-8.

New molecular tools for efficient screening of cervical cancer.

von Knebel Doeberitz M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Diagnostics & Therapy, Department of Surgery, University
of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer 110, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
knebel@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Cytological screening using the Pap-smear led to a remarkable reduction of the
mortality of cervical cancer. However, due to subjective test criteria it is
hampered by poor inter- and intra-observer agreement. More reproducible assays
are expected to improve the current screening and avoid unnecessary medical
intervention and psychological distress for the affected women. Cervical cancer
arises as consequence of persistent high risk papillomavirus (HR-HPV) infections.
Expression of two viral oncogenes, E6 and E7, in epithelial stem cells is
required to initiate and maintain cervical carcinogenesis and results in
significant overexpression of the cellular p16INK4a protein. Since this protein
is not expressed in normal cervical squamous epithelia, screening for p16INK4a
over-expressing cells allows to specifically identify dysplastic lesions, and
significantly reduces the inter-observer disagreement of the conventional
cytological or histological tests. Progression of preneoplastic lesions to
invasive cancers is associated with extensive recombination of viral and cellular
genomes which can be monitored by detection of papillomavirus oncogene
transcripts (APOT assay) derived from integrated viral genome copies. Detection
of integrated type oncogene transcripts points to far advanced dysplasia or
invasive cancers and thus represents a progression marker for cervical lesions.
These new assays discussed here will help to improve current limitations in
cervical cancer screening, diagnosis, and therapy control.

DOI: 10.1155/2001/249506 
PMCID: PMC3851071
PMID: 11790875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

