
1. Biochemistry. 2002 Feb 5;41(5):1545-55.

The genome factor in region-specific DNA damage: the DNA-reactive drug U-78779
prefers mixed A/T-G/C sequences at the nucleotide level but is region-specific
for long pure AT islands at the genomic level.

Herzig MC(1), Rodriguez KA, Trevino AV, Dziegielewski J, Arnett B, Hurley L,
Woynarowski JM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Therapy and Research Center, 14960 Omicron Drive, San Antonio, Texas
78245, USA.

Bizelesin is the first anticancer drug capable of damaging specific regions of
the genome with clusters of its binding sites T(A/T)(4)A. This study
characterized the sequence- and region-specificity of a bizelesin analogue,
U-78779, designed to interact with mixed A/T-G/C motifs. At the nucleotide level,
U-78779 was found to prefer runs of A/Ts interspersed with 1 or 2 G/C pairs,
although 25% of the identified sites corresponded to pure AT motifs similar to
bizelesin sites. The in silico computational analysis showed that the preferred
mixed A/T-G/C motifs distribute uniformly at the genomic level. In contrast, the 
secondary, pure AT motifs (A/T)(6)A were found densely clustered in the same long
islands of AT-rich DNA that bizelesin targets. Mapping the sites and quantitating
the frequencies of U-78779 adducts in model AT island and non-AT island naked
DNAs demonstrated that clusters of pure AT motifs outcompete isolated mixed
A/T-G/C sites in attracting drug binding. Regional preference of U-78779 for AT
island domains was verified also in DNA from drug-treated cells. Thus, while the 
primary sequence preference gives rise to non-region-specific scattered lesions, 
the clustering of the minor pure AT binding motifs seems to determine
region-specificity of U-78779 in the human genome. The closely correlated
cytotoxic activities of U-78779 and bizelesin in several cell lines further imply
that both drugs may share common cellular targets. This study underscores the
significance of the genome factor in a drug's potential for region-specific DNA
damage, by showing that it can take precedence over drug binding preferences at
the nucleotide level.

DOI: 10.1021/bi011907s 
PMID: 11814348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

