
1. Prev Vet Med. 2002 Jan 22;52(3-4):333-43.

Analysis of sampling strategies to substantiate freedom from disease in large
areas.

Ziller M(1), Selhorst T, Teuffert J, Kramer M, Schl√ºter H.

Author information: 
(1)Federal Research Center for Virus Diseases of Animals, Institute of
Epidemiology, Seestr. 55, D-16868, Wusterhausen/Dosse, Germany.
mario.ziller@wus.bfav.de

In this paper, we deal with the strategies of surveys to substantiate freedom
from disease for a certain territory. Infection might not be distributed
homogeneously. So, a relatively high within-herd prevalence might be observed
while the herd-level prevalence is lower. For this situation, we compare various 
two-stage sample strategies. The calculation of appropriate sample sizes becomes 
quite complicated. The theoretical generalization of the hypergeometric
distribution by Cameron and Baldock [Prev. Vet. Med. 24 (1998) 1] introduces a
simple way to evaluate multi-stage sample sizes while regarding real-test
properties. We demonstrate the theoretical foundations of these calculations.
These principles open up the possibility of optimizing costs or other relevant
variables, by choosing the appropriate sample strategy (each of which ensures the
same alpha-level for the first stage). In addition, we evaluate the statistical
power of the complete strategies under consideration.Furthermore, we apply our
theoretical results to a data example of Brucella melitensis. We used the
herd-size situation in Germany, characterized by many small sheep holdings and
only a few large ones. The consequences of real-test properties on sample sizes
and on the applicability of several strategies are discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-5877(01)00245-8 
PMID: 11849726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

