
1. J Med Virol. 2002 Apr;66(4):561-6.

TTV infection and its relation to serum transaminases in apparently healthy blood
donors and in patients with clotting disorders who have been investigated
previously for hepatitis C virus and GBV-C/HGV infection in Belgium.

Ali S(1), Fevery J, Peerlinck K, Verslype C, Schelstraete R, Gyselinck F, Emonds 
MP, Vermylen J, Yap SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Liver and Pancreatic Diseases, Department of Medicine, University 
Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium.

A novel DNA virus, TT virus (TTV), has been proposed as a possible etiologic
agent for non A-E hepatitis. The aim of the present study was to determine the
prevalence of TTV infection using PCR in healthy blood donors and in patients
with clotting disorders who have been investigated previously for GBV-C/HGV and
HCV infection in Belgium. In this study, PCR using primers proposed by Takahashi 
et al. [(1998) Hepatology Research 12:233-239] proved far more sensitive than
those used by Okamoto et al. [(1998) Journal of Medical Virology 56:128-132]. The
sequence of the PCR products showed 87% identity to the published sequence. TTV
was present in 29.7% of healthy blood donors, a figure intermediate between the
low rate of infection observed in Scotland and the high rates in the Far East.
TTV was detected in 46.5% of 127 patients studied with clotting disorders as
compared to 79.5% for HCV and 11.8% for GBV-C/HGV infection. However, there was
no impact on the level of serum transaminases. Treatment with interferon for HCV 
infection co-infected with TTV suppressed temporarily serum TTV DNA. Therefore,
it was concluded that TTV DNA is detected frequently in serum of healthy blood
donors in Belgium and more often in patients with clotting disorders. TTV does
not cause liver disease or contribute to the severity of liver disease.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.


PMID: 11857537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

