
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2002 Apr 1;29(4):409-17.

HIV-1 epidemic among female bar and hotel workers in northern Tanzania: risk
factors and opportunities for prevention.

Kapiga SH(1), Sam NE, Shao JF, Renjifo B, Masenga EJ, Kiwelu IE, Manongi R, Fawzi
W, Essex M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population and International Health, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. skapiga@hsph.harvard.edu

We conducted this study to determine the prevalence and risk factors for HIV-1
infection among women (N = 312) who were working in the bars and hotels in Moshi,
a town in northern Tanzania. Study subjects were interviewed to obtain
information about HIV-1 risk factors and examined to collect samples for the
diagnosis of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). The prevalence of HIV-1 was
26.3% (95% confidence interval [CI], 21.4%-31.2%). In multivariate analyses, the 
risk of HIV-1 increased with increasing age (p value, test for linear trend
<.001) and the number of sexual partners during the last 5 years (p value, test
for linear trend <.03). Other significant predictors were having a male partner
with other sexual partners (Adjusted odds ratio [AOR], 1.92; 95% CI, 1.03-3.60), 
and consuming alcohol >2 days per week (AOR, 2.56; 95% CI, 1.12-5.88). The risk
of HIV-1 was also significantly increased in women with bacterial vaginosis (AOR,
2.37; 95% CI, 1.09-5.13) and in study subjects with herpes simplex virus (HSV)-2 
antibodies (AOR, 2.48; 95% CI, 1.24-4.98). These results indicate that women
working in these settings were at increased risk of HIV-1. Programs aiming at
promoting safer sexual practices and control of other STDs are urgently needed in
this population. Such programs should address the underlying conditions that
facilitate risk behaviors and create obstacles for these women who wish to
protect themselves against HIV-1.

DOI: 10.1097/00126334-200204010-00013 
PMID: 11917247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

