
1. J Med Chem. 2002 Apr 25;45(9):1918-29.

6-[2-(Phosphonomethoxy)alkoxy]pyrimidines with antiviral activity.

Holý A(1), Votruba I, Masojídková M, Andrei G, Snoeck R, Naesens L, De Clercq E, 
Balzarini J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Academy of Sciences of the
Czech Republic, Flemingovo nám. 2, CZ-166 10 Praha 6, Czech Republic.
holy@uochb.cas.cz

6-Hydroxypyrimidines substituted at positions 2 and 4 by hydrogen, methyl, amino,
cyclopropylamino, dimethylamino, methylsulfanyl, or hydroxyl group afford by the 
reaction with diisopropyl 2-(chloroethoxy)methylphosphonate in the presence of
NaH, Cs(2)CO(3), or DBU a mixture of N(1)- and
O(6)-[2-(diisopropylphosphorylmethoxy)ethyl] isomers which were converted to the 
free phosphonic acids by treatment with bromotrimethylsilane followed by
hydrolysis. Analogously, 2,4-diamino-6-hydroxypyrimidine gave on reaction with
[(R)- and (S)-2-(diisopropylphosphorylmethoxy)propyl] tosylate, followed by
deprotection, the enantiomeric 6-[2-(phosphonomethoxy)propoxy]pyrimidines.
2,4-Diamino-6-sulfanylpyrimidine gave, on treatment with diisopropyl
2-(chloroethoxy)methylphosphonate in the presence of NaH and subsequent
deprotection, 2,4-diamino-6-[[2-(phosphonomethoxy)ethyl]sulfanyl]pyrimidine.
2-Amino-4-hydroxy-6-[2-(phosphonomethoxy)ethyl]pyrimidine was obtained from the
appropriate 2-amino-4-chloropyrimidine derivative by alkaline hydrolysis and
ester cleavage. Direct alkylation of 2-amino-4,6-dihydroxypyrimidine afforded a
mixture of 2-amino-4,6-bis[2-(phosphonomethoxy)ethyl]- and
2-amino-1,4-bis[2-(phosphonomethoxy)ethyl]pyrimidine. None of the
N(1)-[2-(phosphonomethoxy)ethyl] isomers exhibited any antiviral activity against
DNA viruses or RNA viruses tested in vitro. On the contrary, the O(6)-isomers,
namely the compounds derived from 2,4-diamino-, 2-amino-4-hydroxy-, or
2-amino-4-[2-(phosphonomethoxy)ethoxy]-6-hydroxypyrimidine, inhibited the
replication of herpes viruses [herpes simplex type 1 (HSV-1) and type 2 (HSV-2), 
varicella-zoster virus (VZV), and cytomegalovirus (CMV)] and retroviruses
[Moloney sarcoma virus (MSV) and human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) and 
type 2 (HIV-2)], their activity being most pronounced against the latter. The
antiviral activity was lower if the oxygen at the position 6 was replaced by a
sulfur atom, as in 2,4-diamino-6-[2-(phosphonomethoxy)ethylsulfanyl]pyrimidine.
In analogy to N(9)-[2-(phosphonomethoxy)propyl]-2,6-diaminopurine (PMPDAP),
solely the (R)-2,4-diamino-6-[2-(phosphonomethoxy)propoxy]pyrimidine exerted
antiviral activity, whereas its (S)-enantiomer was essentially inactive.

DOI: 10.1021/jm011095y 
PMID: 11960502  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

