
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2002 Jun;19(6):973-89.

Local structural properties of the V3 loop of Thailand HIV-1 isolate.

Andrianov AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Belarus Academy of Sciences, Kuprevich St.,
5/2, 220141 Minsk, Republic of Belarus. andrianov01@yahoo.com

The model of locally accurate conformation for the HIV-Thailand principal
neutralizing determinant (PND) located within the V3 loop of the virus envelope
protein gp120 was built in terms of NMR spectroscopy data. To this end, the
NMR-based conformational analysis of synthetic molecule representing the peptide 
copy of the fragment under study was carried out using the published sequential d
connectivity data and values of spin-spin coupling constants. As a result, (i)
the local structure for the V3 loop from Thailand isolate was determined, (ii)
the conformations of its irregular segments were analyzed, and the secondary
structure elements identified, (iii) the ensemble of conformers matching the
experimental and theoretical data was derived for the stretch forming the
neutralizing epitope of the HIV-Thailand PND, (iv) to estimate the probability of
realizing each of these conformers in solution, the results obtained were
collated with the X-ray data for corresponding segments in synthetic molecules
imitating the central region of the HIV-MN PND as well as for homologous segments
39-44 in Bence-Jonce REI protein (BJRP), 41-46 in immunoglobulin lambda (Ig
lambda), and 50-55 in beta-chain of horse hemoglobin (HH), (v) to find the
conserved structural motifs inside diverse HIV-1 isolates, the structure
determined was compared with the one derived earlier for the HIV-MN PND from NMR 
spectroscopy data, (vi) on the basis of all data obtained, the 3D structure model
describing the set of biologically relevant conformations, which may present
different antigenic determinants to the immune system in various HIV-1 isolates, 
was proposed for the immunogenic crown of the V3 loop. The results obtained are
discussed in conjunction with the data on the structure for the HIV-1 PND
reported in literature.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2002.10506801 
PMID: 12023800  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

