
1. Virology. 2002 Apr 25;296(1):52-61.

Hydrophobic residue contributions to sequence-specific DNA binding by the bovine 
papillomavirus helicase E1.

West M(1), Wilson VG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Texas A&M University System
Health Science Center, College Station, Texas 77843-1114, USA.

Previously, mutational analyses of the DNA binding domain of the bovine
papillomavirus E1 protein (E1DBD) identified several hydrophobic residues that
are critical for DNA binding activity (M. West, D. Flanery, K. Woytek, D.
Rangasamy, and V. G. Wilson, 2001, J. Virol. 75, 11948-11960). Hydrophobic
interactions of nonpolar amino acid side chains can contribute to the function of
DNA binding proteins through both conformational effects and direct interaction
with nucleotides. To further investigate the role of hydrophobic residues in
E1DBD function, a more extensive site-directed mutational analysis of hydrophobic
amino acids was conducted. Alanine substitutions were made at residues V196,
F197, F217, F, 237, V246, L249, and F276, and the mutants were tested for DNA
binding activity in vitro and in vivo. The E1 F237A and F276A mutants were
completely defective for site-specific DNA binding, while the other mutants
retained partial to full wild-type binding activity. Consistent with their DNA
binding defect, the F237A and F276A mutants were severely impaired for the
ability to support transient in vivo replication of an origin plasmid. Combined
with our previous study, five critical hydrophobic residues have been identified:
F175, V193, F237, V246, and F276. These five residues localize to two internal
clusters in the E1DBD structure designated hydrophobic clusters A (HCA; includes 
F175, V193, and F276) and B (HCB; includes F237 and V246). Amino acid side chains
from residues in HCA and HCB have little surface accessibility and it is unlikely
that they are involved in direct contact with DNA. HCA is distal to the DNA
binding surface and presumably contributes to global conformational organization 
of the E1DBD. HCB is positioned beneath the DNA contact surface and we propose
that it serves as an anchor or platform device to stabilize the DNA-binding
element. A comparable hydrophobic cluster is present in the corresponding
position in the T antigen DBD and likely serves a similar function.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.2002.1362 
PMID: 12036317  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

