
1. Rev Gastroenterol Peru. 2000 Oct-Dec;20(4):414-421.

[HEPATITIS B.VACCINATION IMPACT ON ACUTE DISEASE,CHRONIC CARRIERS AND
HEPATOCARCINOMA INCIDENCE]

[Article in Spanish]

Vild√≥sola G H.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis B virus is the cause of acute disease and several chronic
conditions, such as chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis and liver cancer.In 1982,
hepatitis B vaccine was developed. Since 1984, many immunization programs against
hepatitis B were implemented in several countries and 15 years later we can
visualize some epidemiological changes in those countries.OBJECTIVE: To review
the papers published about the results of hepatitis B immunization programs in
several countries from Asia, Africa, Europe (Italy) and Peru, since 1984.METHODS:
Pertinent literature was identified in MEDLINE (1980-2000) and references quoted 
in published papers. RESULTS: The impact of vaccination against hepatitis B over 
the incidence of acute disease, chronic carriers, hepatitis B virus prevalence
and hepatocarcinoma incidence, was anayzed.The following results were obtained:
In Afragola (Italy), a reduction of acute disease incidence from 63 cases/100,000
population before the vaccination (1983), to 3 cases/100,000 population after the
vaccination (1997), was obtained HBsAg carriers rate decreased: From 13.4% to
3.7% in the general population and from 6.8% to 0.7% in infant
population.Infection prevalence: From 66.9% to 34.2% in general population. In
Taiwan:HBsAg carriers rate decreased: From 10.0% to <1.0% in children from 1 to
10 years old.Infection prevalence: From 38.0% to 16.0% in children under 13 years
old. In Peru:Infection prevalence: From 24.4-30.4% to 2.3-5.1% in children of 3
and 4 years old. In Senegal:HBsAg carriers rate decreased: From 18.7% to 2.2% in 
children. In Gambia:HBsAg carriers rate decreased: From 10.0% to 0.6% in
children.Finally, the hepatocarcinoma incidence in children from 6 to 14 years
old, decreased from 0.70/100,000 children to 0.36/100,000 (p<0.01) in
Taiwan.CONCLUSION: The results of these studies support the hypothesis that the
vaccination against the hepatitis B virus infection reduce the incidence of acute
disease, carriers rate, prevalence of the infection and hepatocarcinoma
incidence.


PMID: 12140576 

