
1. Mol Pathol. 2002 Aug;55(4):262-72.

Alterations of the MDV oncogenic regions in an MDV transformed lymphoblastoid
cell line.

Le Rouzic E(1), Thoraval P, Afanassieff M, Cherel Y, Dambrine G, Perbal B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Virale et Moléculaire, UFR de Biochimie, Université
Paris 7-D. Diderot, Paris, France.

AIMS: Lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from Marek's disease virus (MDV) induced 
tumours have served as models of MDV latency and transformation. They are stable 
and can be cultured with no detectable MDV genomic alterations upon repeated
passaging. An MDV transformed lymphoblastoid T cell line (T9 cell line) has been 
reported to contain a disrupted MDV BamHI-H fragment and a Rous associated virus 
insertional activation of the c-myb protooncogene. In an attempt to define the
respective participation of c-myb and MDV in the transformed phenotype of T9
cells, an analysis of MDV oncogenic sequences (BamHI-H, BamHI-A, and EcoQ
fragments) was performed in these cells.
METHODS: Using two different passages of the T9 cell line (late and early
passages), the organisation of the MDV oncogenic regions and their expression in 
these cells were analysed. In vivo assessment of the oncogenicity of the virus
contained within these cells was assessed by injecting them into 1 day old
chickens.
RESULTS: In T9 cells maintained in culture for up to six months (late T9), the
MDV ICP4 gene was disrupted, whereas the meq gene was actively transcribed. The
alterations of the MDV genome in these cells correlated with the inability of the
virus to induce the classic signs of Marek's disease in 1 day old chickens.
However, early T9 cells submitted to a limited number of passages induced classic
MDV pathogenicity, as efficiently as the MDV control cell line (T5), and did not 
show gross structural changes in the oncogenic MDV sequences.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the expression pattern of the MDV oncogenes in early T9
cells was identical to the one reported for other MDV transformed cells, longterm
culture of an MDV transformed cell line containing a RAV insertional activation
of the c-myb protooncogene led to the disruption of the MDV BamHI-H and BamHI-A
oncogenic regions. In the late T9 cells MEQ was the only detected MDV
oncoprotein. These results suggest that in the late T9 cells the truncated MYB
protein compensates for the loss of MDV oncoproteins and reinforce the
possibility that MEQ and MYB cooperate in the maintenance of the transformed
state and the tumorigenic potential of these cells.

DOI: 10.1136/mp.55.4.262 
PMCID: PMC1187189
PMID: 12147717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

