
1. J Virol. 2002 Nov;76(21):11042-53.

Cooperative activation of human papillomavirus type 8 gene expression by the E2
protein and the cellular coactivator p300.

MÃ¼ller A(1), Ritzkowsky A, Steger G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, University of Cologne, 50935 Cologne. Institute of
Dermatology, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany.

The E2 proteins of papillomaviruses (PV) bind to the coactivator CBP/p300 as do
many other transcription factors, but the precise role of CBP/p300 in E2-specific
functions is not yet understood. We show that the E2 protein of human PV type 8
(HPV8) directly binds to p300. Activation of HPV8 gene expression by low amounts 
of HPV8 E2 was stimulated up to sevenfold by coexpression of p300. The
interaction between E2 and p300 may play a role in differentiation-dependent
activation of PV gene expression, since we can show that the expression level of 
p300 increases during keratinocyte differentiation. Surprisingly,
sequence-specific binding of E2 to its recognition sites within the regulatory
region of HPV8 is not necessary for this cooperation, indicating that E2 can be
recruited to the promoter via protein-protein interaction. HPV8 E2 binds via its 
N-terminal activation domain (AD), its C-terminal DNA binding domain (DBD), and
its internal hinge region to p300 in vitro. Transient-transfection assays
revealed that the AD is necessary and sufficient for cooperative activation with 
p300. However, we provide evidence that the interaction of the hinge and the DBD 
of HPV8 E2 with p300 may contribute. Our data suggest an important role of p300
in regulation of HPV8 gene expression and reveal a new mechanism by which E2 may 
be recruited to a promoter to activate transcription without sequence specific
DNA binding.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.21.11042-11053.2002 
PMCID: PMC136630
PMID: 12368347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

