
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 24;278(4):2101-5. Epub 2002 Nov 8.

Kruppel-like factor 4 mediates p53-dependent G1/S cell cycle arrest in response
to DNA damage.

Yoon HS(1), Chen X, Yang VW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Digestive Diseases, Department of Medicine and Winship Cancer
Institute, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

The tumor suppressor p53 is required for the maintenance of genomic integrity
following DNA damage. One mechanism by which p53 functions is to induce a block
in the transition between the G(1) and S phase of the cell cycle. Previous
studies indicate that the Kr√ºppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) gene is activated
following DNA damage and that such activation depends on p53. In addition,
enforced expression of KLF4 causes G(1)/S arrest. The present study examines the 
requirement of KLF4 in mediating the p53-dependent cell cycle arrest process in
response to DNA damage. We show that the G(1) population of a colon cancer cell
line, HCT116, that is null for the p53 alleles (-/-) was abolished following
gamma irradiation compared with cells with wild-type p53 (+/+). Conditional
expression of KLF4 in irradiated HCT116 p53-/- cells restored the G(1) cell
population to a level similar to that seen in irradiated HCT116 p53+/+ cells.
Conversely, treatment of HCT116 p53+/+ cells with small interfering RNA (siRNA)
specific for KLF4 significantly reduced the number of cells in the G(1) phase
following gamma irradiation compared with the untreated control or those treated 
with a nonspecific siRNA. In each case the increase or decrease in KLF4 level
because of conditional induction or siRNA inhibition, respectively, was
accompanied by an increase or decrease in the level of p21(WAF1/CIP1). Results of
our study indicate that KLF4 is an essential mediator of p53 in controlling
G(1)/S progression of the cell cycle following DNA damage.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M211027200 
PMCID: PMC2229830
PMID: 12427745  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

