
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 7;278(10):7884-90. Epub 2003 Jan 2.

Fibrates down-regulate hepatic scavenger receptor class B type I protein
expression in mice.

Mardones P(1), Pilon A, Bouly M, Duran D, Nishimoto T, Arai H, Kozarsky KF,
Altayo M, Miquel JF, Luc G, Clavey V, Staels B, Rigotti A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Gastroenterologia, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia
Universidad Cat√≥lica, Marcoleta 367, Santiago, Chile.

Fibrates are normolipidemic drugs used in atherogenic dyslipidemia because of
their ability to raise high density lipoprotein (HDL) and decrease triglyceride
levels. They exert multiple effects on lipid metabolism by activating the
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha (PPAR-alpha), which controls the
transcriptional regulation of genes involved in hepatic fatty acid, cholesterol, 
and lipoprotein metabolism. The hepatic expression of the scavenger receptor
class B type I (SR-BI) plays a critical role in lipoprotein metabolism, mainly
due to its ability to mediate selective cholesterol uptake. Because fibrates and 
PPAR-alpha agonists up-regulate SR-BI expression in human and murine macrophages,
we tested whether fibrates raised a similar regulatory response on hepatic SR-BI 
expression in mice. Surprisingly, fibrate treatment suppressed SR-BI protein
expression in the liver without changing steady state SR-BI mRNA levels.
Decreased hepatic SR-BI protein expression correlated with enlarged HDL particle 
size. This effect was concomitant with down-regulation of CLAMP, a putative
SR-BI-stabilizing protein found in the hepatic plasma membrane, which was also
not associated to changes in CLAMP mRNA levels. The post-transcriptional
regulatory effect of fibrates over hepatic SR-BI protein levels was dependent on 
PPAR-alpha expression, because it was absent in PPAR-alpha-deficient mice.
Restoring hepatic SR-BI expression in fibrate-treated mice by recombinant
adenoviral gene transfer abolished fibrate-mediated HDL particle size
enlargement. This study describes a novel effect of fibrates on hepatic SR-BI
expression providing an alternative mechanism by which this drug family modulates
HDL metabolism in vivo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M211627200 
PMID: 12511553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

