
1. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2003 Jun;228(6):730-40.

Norepinephrine enhances adhesion of HIV-1-infected leukocytes to cardiac
microvascular endothelial cells.

Sundstrom JB(1), Martinson DE, Mosunjac M, Bostik P, McMullan LK, Donahoe RM,
Gravanis MB, Ansari AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.
jsundst@emory.edu

Recent reports have indicated that norepinephrine (NE) enhances HIV replication
in infected monocytes and promotes increased expression of select matrix
metalloproteinases associated with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) in vitro in
co-cultures of HIV-infected leukocytes and human cardiac microvascular
endothelial cells (HMVEC-C). The influence of NE on HIV infection and
leukocyte-endothelial interactions suggests a pathogenic role in AIDS-related
cardiovascular disease. This study examined the effects of norepinephrine (NE)
and HIV-1 infection on leukocyte adhesion to HMVEC-C. Both flow and static
conditions were examined and the expression of selected adhesion molecules and
cytokines were monitored in parallel. NE pretreatment resulted in a detectable,
dose-dependent increase of leukocyte-endothelial adhesion (LEA) with both
HIV-1-infected and -uninfected peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
relative to media controls after 48 hr in co-culture with HMVEC-C in vitro.
However, the combination of NE plus HIV infection resulted in a significant (P < 
0.0001) 18-fold increase in LEA over uninfected media controls. Increased levels 
in both cell-associated and -soluble ICAM-1 and E-Selectin but not VCAM-1
correlated with increased LEA and with HIV-1 infection or NE pretreatment.
Blocking antibodies specific for ICAM-1 or E-Selectin inhibited HIV-NE-induced
LEA. These data suggest a model in which NE primes HIV-1-infected leukocytes for 
enhanced adhesion and localization in HMVEC-C where they can initiate and
participate in vascular injury associated with AIDS-related cardiomyopathy.

DOI: 10.1177/153537020322800613 
PMID: 12773706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

