
1. Hum Gene Ther. 2003 Aug 10;14(12):1139-53.

Size-exclusion chromatography purification of high-titer vesicular stomatitis
virus G glycoprotein-pseudotyped retrovectors for cell and gene therapy
applications.

Transfiguracion J(1), Jaalouk DE, Ghani K, Galipeau J, Kamen A.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute/National Research Council of Canada,
BioProcess Sector, Department of Animal Cell Technology, Montreal, Province of
Quebec, H4P 2R2 Canada.

Vesicular stomatitis virus G glycoprotein (VSV-G)-pseudotyped
replication-defective retroviral particles are pantropic and amenable to
concentration to high titer by ultracentrifugation. These features have allowed
development of effective retroviral transduction protocols for stem cells in
vitro as well as for tissue engineering in vivo. However, retroparticle
ultracentrifugation protocols will also copellet cellular and subcellular debris 
released from retroviral producer cell lines during vector manufacture. We have
analyzed concentrated vector preparations by chromatography and have found that a
significant amount of genomic DNA released from producer cells coconcentrates
with retroviral particles. In an effort to generate high-purity retroparticle
preparations, devoid of subcellular contaminants and contaminating genomic DNA,
we have developed a process using size-exclusion chromatography combined with
host cell nucleic acid digestion and concentration by ultrafiltration. The
procedure allowed for a final recovery of 19 +/- 0.4% infectious viral particles 
from unfractionated starting material, with an average retroparticle
concentration of 7.7 x 10(7) +/- 1.5 x 10(6)/ml. The intact virus is of high
purity, >90% as determined by anion-exchange high-performance liquid
chromatography. Retroparticle structure appeared intact as determined by negative
stain electron microscopy and purified virus was functional and allowed for
efficient transduction of primary human bone marrow stromal cells in vitro. In
conclusion, we have developed a VSV-G retrovector purification process that can
be applied to large-scale retroviral production ideal for cell and gene therapy
applications.

DOI: 10.1089/104303403322167984 
PMID: 12908966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

