
1. Vet Microbiol. 1992 Feb;30(2-3):99-112.

Relationship between the anti-FMD virus antibody reaction as measured by
different assays, and protection in vivo against challenge infection.

McCullough KC(1), Bruckner L, Schaffner R, Fraefel W, Müller HK, Kihm U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Viruskrankheiten und Immunoprophylaxe, Basel, Switzerland.

The antibody response of cattle after vaccination against foot-and-mouth disease 
(FMD) virus was monitored using the serum neutralization test (SNT), the sandwich
ELISA, liquid-phase ELISA, sandwich competition ELISA, liquid-phase competition
ELISA, and the liquid-phase sandwich competition (blocking) ELISA. The
competition ELISAs (in particular the "blocking" ELISA) were the most effective
at detecting reactivity in these cattle sera. However, 95% of negative sera also 
competed in the most sensitive ELISA (the "blocking" ELISA) to titres of 1:32 (4%
of the sera competed to a titre of 1:128). Comparisons between the different
ELISAs, and between these ELISAs and the SNT, demonstrated that the tests were
not measuring exactly the same reaction of antibody with FMD virus. With respect 
to the capacity of animals to resist FMD virus challenge, neither the SNT nor the
competition ELISAs were consistently able to identify such animals. The anti-FMD 
virus antibody titres obtained could be classified into three zones; the "white
zone" wherein antibody titres were high and donor animals likely to be protected;
the "black zone" wherein antibody titres were low and donor animals likely to be 
susceptible to infection; the "grey zone" wherein the antibody titres were
intermediary and no interpretation could be made with respect to protection.
Assays such as ELISA and SNT cannot and do not measure immunological protection; 
they are a measure of antibody responses and nothing more, and should be
interpreted in terms of the "three zone" phenomenon.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1135(92)90106-4 
PMID: 1313624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

