
1. J Gen Virol. 1992 Jun;73 ( Pt 6):1365-77.

Genetic relatedness of hepatitis A virus strains recovered from different
geographical regions.

Robertson BH(1), Jansen RW, Khanna B, Totsuka A, Nainan OV, Siegl G, Widell A,
Margolis HS, Isomura S, Ito K, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases, National Center for Infectious
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control (World Health Organization Collaborating
Centre for Research and Reference in Viral Hepatitis), Atlanta, Georgia 30333

A pairwise comparison of the nucleic acid sequence of 168 bases from 152
wild-type or unique cell culture-adapted strains of hepatitis A virus (HAV)
revealed that HAV strains can be differentiated genetically into seven unique
genotypes (I to VII). In general, the nucleotide sequence of viruses in different
genotypes differs at 15 to 25% of positions within this segment of the genome.
Viruses from four of the genotypes (I, II, III and VII) were recovered from cases
of hepatitis A in humans, whereas viruses from the other three genotypes (IV, V
and VI) were isolated only from simian species developing a hepatitis A-like
illness during captivity. Among non-epidemiologically related human HAV strains, 
81 were characterized as genotype I, and 19 as genotype III. Within each of these
major genotypes, there were two distinct groups (subgenotypes), which differed in
sequence at approximately 7.5% of base positions. Each genotype and subgenotype
has a characteristic amino acid sequence in this region of the polyprotein, with 
the most divergent genotypes differing at 10 of 56 residues. Strains recovered
from some geographical regions belonged to a common (endemic) genotype, whereas
strains from other regions belonged to several, probably imported, genotypes.
Thus, HAV strains recovered in North America were for the most part closely
related at the nucleotide sequence level, whereas in other regions, such as Japan
and Western Europe, HAV strains were derived from multiple genotypes or
sub-genotypes. These data indicate that patterns of endemic transmission can be
differentiated from situations in which infections are imported due to travel.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-73-6-1365 
PMID: 1318940  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

