
1. J Clin Invest. 1992 Dec;90(6):2197-208.

Sequence analyses of three immunoglobulin G anti-virus antibodies reveal their
utilization of autoantibody-related immunoglobulin Vh genes, but not V lambda
genes.

Huang DF(1), Olee T, Masuho Y, Matsumoto Y, Carson DA, Chen PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla
92093-0663.

Accumulated sequence analyses of the antibody repertoire have revealed that most 
autoantibodies and developmentally regulated antibodies share a small set of
germline Ig-variable region (V) genes. The findings have prompted speculation
that certain autoantibodies are of developmental importance and may be
instrumental in maintaining homeostasis of the adult antibody repertoire. In
order to evaluate this hypothesis critically, it is first necessary to determine 
the V gene usage in human antibodies against foreign substances. Unfortunately,
only a few such antibodies have had their heavy and light chains characterized.
To rectify the situation, we adapted the anchored polymerase chain reaction to
clone and analyze rapidly the expressed V genes for three anti-virus IgG
antibodies. The results show that all three heavy chain V (Vh) genes are highly
homologous to the known autoantibody-related Vh genes. In contrast, two light
chain V (VL) genes of the V lambda 1 subgroup are similar to a
non-autoantibody-related germline V lambda 1 gene. Taken together with the
reported Vh and VL sequences of several antibodies against viruses and bacteria, 
the data show that many antipathogen antibodies may use the same small set of Vh 
genes that encode autoantibodies, but diverse VL genes that are distinct from
autoantibody-related VL genes. Thus, only a small portion of the potentially
functional germline Vh genes are used recurrently to generate most antibodies in 
a normal antibody repertoire, regardless of their reactivities with either self
or non-self.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI116105 
PMCID: PMC443370
PMID: 1334971  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

