
1. Arch Anat Cytol Pathol. 1992;40(4):202-11.

[Malpighian epithelia and papillomavirus infections].

[Article in French]

Chardonnet Y(1), Béjui-Thivolet F, Viac J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.209, affilile CNRS, Hôpital E.-Herriot, Lyon, France.

Human papillomaviruses (HPV) are a large group of DNA viruses, with over 60 types
identified to date, which can cause the development of benign tumors in the skin 
and mucosal squamous epithelia. Most of these tumors regress spontaneously but
some, especially in the mucosal membranes, become malignant. HPV types with a
high risk for inducing malignancies (e.g. 16 and 18) are the subject of
increasing interest. HPVs are both host-specific and tissue-specific: some types 
preferentially infect specific epithelia, giving rise to lesions with distinct
topographic characteristics. HPVs are difficult to study because they do not
replicate in available in vitro models. In vivo, HPVs replicate well in
epithelial cells undergoing terminal differentiation, e.g. in keratinized cells. 
Some 40 different types have been reported in epidermal keratinocytes, the most
common being types 1 and 2 which produce large amounts of viral antigens and
viral particles. In contrast, HPVs replicate poorly in the weakly keratinized
squamous epithelia which line the digestive, respiratory, and genital tracts.
Junctional epithelia, e.g. on the uterine cervix, are especially prone to HPV
infection. The most prevalent HPV types in benign genital lesions are types 6 and
11, whose characteristic features include extrachromosomal DNA and production of 
only small amounts of viral antigens. The profound nuclear and cytoplasmic
changes induced by HPVs lead to the formation of koïlocytes which are found
mainly in the granular layer of epithelia and have been especially well described
in the uterine cervix and vagina. HPV epithelial tumors are squamous cell
carcinomas that often harbor HPV types 16 and 18; this is especially true of
cervical intraepithelial neoplasias. These tumors contain the viral DNA, which
may or may not be integrated into the cellular DNA, whereas viral antigens are
lacking. The high incidence and broad spectrum of HPV types found in patients
with acquired immunodeficiencies (e.g. under immunosuppressive therapy) suggest a
key role for cellular immunity in the development of HPV-induced lesions. A
number of cofactors, including UV radiations and smoking, as well as oncogene
activation and anti-oncogene inactivation, may increase the risk of progression
to malignancy.


PMID: 1338181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

