
1. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2003 Dec;32(11):1089-95.

Late hemorrhagic cystitis after reduced-intensity hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (RIST).

Yamamoto R(1), Kusumi E, Kami M, Yuji K, Hamaki T, Saito A, Murasgihe N, Hori A, 
Kim SW, Makimoto A, Ueyama J, Tanosaki R, Miyakoshi S, Mori S, Morinaga S, Heike 
Y, Taniguchi S, Masuo S, Takaue Y, Mutou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation Unit, National Cancer Center Hospital,
Tokyo, Japan.

We reviewed medical records of 256 patients to investigate the frequency and
characteristics of hemorrhagic cystitis (HC) associated with reduced-intensity
stem cell transplantation (RIST) as opposed to conventional stem cell
transplantation (CST); 137 patients underwent CST and 119 RIST. Diagnosis of HC
was made based on two or more episodes of sterile, macroscopic hematuria with
normal coagulation profiles, without any evidence of renal stones or
genitourinary malignancy. Actuarial frequency of HC development in RIST group was
7.6% (9/119), which gave a cumulative annual incidence of 11.7%. In CST group, 13
of 137 patients (9.5%) developed HC, giving an estimated annual incidence of
9.7%. The probability of developing HC was similar between the two groups
(P=0.77). The viral etiologies of HC, adenovirus (n=12) and BK virus (n=2), were 
documented in eight patients after RIST and in six after CST. HC was milder and
of a shorter duration, with less blood transfusion requirements, in RIST group
than in CST group. A multivariate analysis revealed that HC was associated with
antiadenovirus antibody positivity in the recipients, total dose of busulfan, and
chronic GVHD. Although HC following RIST is less severe than that following CST, 
it is still a significant problem.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1704261 
PMID: 14625581  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

