
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Dec 9;100(25):15095-100. Epub 2003 Nov 26.

Requirement of p53 targets in chemosensitization of colonic carcinoma to death
ligand therapy.

Wang S(1), El-Deiry WS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology and Cell Cycle Regulation, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, and Abramson Cancer Center, University
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) exhibits specific
tumoricidal activity and is under development for cancer therapy.
Mismatch-repair-deficient colonic tumors evade TRAIL-induced apoptosis through
mutational inactivation of Bax, but chemotherapeutics including Camptosar
(CPT-11) restore TRAIL sensitivity. However, the signaling pathways in restoring 
TRAIL sensitivity remain to be elucidated. Here, we imaged p53 transcriptional
activity in Bax-/- carcinomas by using bioluminescence, in vivo, and find that
p53 is required for sensitization to TRAIL by CPT-11. Small interfering RNAs
directed at proapoptotic p53 targets reveal TRAIL receptor KILLER/DR5 contributes
significantly to TRAIL sensitization, whereas Bak plays a minor role. Caspase 8
inhibition protects both CPT-11 pretreated wild-type and Bax-/- HCT116 cells from
TRAIL-induced apoptosis, whereas caspase 9 inhibition only rescued the wild-type 
HCT116 cells from death induced by TRAIL. The results suggest a conversion in the
apoptotic mechanism in HCT116 colon carcinoma from a type II pathway involving
Bax and the mitochondria to a type I pathway involving efficient extrinsic
pathway caspase activation. In contrast to Bax-/- cells, Bak-deficient human
cancers undergo apoptosis in response to TRAIL or CPT-11, implying that these
proteins have nonoverlapping functions. Our studies elucidate a mechanism for
restoration of TRAIL sensitivity in MMR-deficient Bax-/- human cancers through
p53-dependent activation of KILLER/DR5 and reconstitution of a type I death
pathway. Efforts to identify agents that up-regulate DR5 may be useful in cancer 
therapies restoring TRAIL sensitivity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2435285100 
PMCID: PMC299914
PMID: 14645705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

