
1. AIDS. 2003 Dec 5;17(18):2581-91.

Influence of HLA-B57 on clinical presentation and viral control during acute
HIV-1 infection.

Altfeld M(1), Addo MM, Rosenberg ES, Hecht FM, Lee PK, Vogel M, Yu XG, Draenert
R, Johnston MN, Strick D, Allen TM, Feeney ME, Kahn JO, Sekaly RP, Levy JA,
Rockstroh JK, Goulder PJ, Walker BD.

Author information: 
(1)Partners AIDS Research Center and Infectious Disease Division, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND: HLA-B57, as well as cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) responses restricted
by this allele, have been strongly associated with long-term non-progressive
chronic HIV-1 infection. However, their impact on viral replication during acute 
HIV-1 infection is not known.
METHODS: Clinical and immunological parameters during acute and early HIV-1
infection in individuals expressing HLA-B57 were assessed. HIV-1-specific T-cell 
responses were determined by peptide-specific interferon-gamma production
measured using Elispot assay and flow-based intracellular cytokine
quantification.
RESULTS: Individuals expressing HLA-B57 presented significantly less frequently
with symptomatic acute HIV-1 infection (4/116, 3.4%) than expected from the
frequency of chronically infected individuals expressing this allele (43/446,
9.6%; P < 0.05). During acute infection, virus-specific CD8 T-cell responses were
dominated by HLA-B57-restricted responses, with significantly broader (P < 0.02) 
and stronger (P < 0.03) responses restricted by HLA-B57 than restricted by all
other co-expressed HLA class I alleles combined. Six out of nine individuals
expressing HLA-B57 controlled HIV-1 viremia in the absence of therapy at levels <
5000 copies/ml (median, 515 copies/ml) during up to 29 months following acute
infection.
CONCLUSION: These data demonstrate that host genetic factors can influence the
clinical manifestations of acute HIV-1 infection and provide a functional link
between HLA-B57 and viral immune control.

DOI: 10.1097/00002030-200312050-00005 
PMID: 14685052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

