
1. J Trop Pediatr. 2003 Dec;49(6):327-32. doi: 10.1093/tropej/49.6.327.

Case fatality proportions and predictive factors for mortality among children
hospitalized with severe pneumonia in a rural developing country setting.

Djelantik IG(1), Gessner BD, Sutanto A, Steinhoff M, Linehan M, Moulton LH,
Arjoso S.

Author information: 
(1)Mataram Hospital, Mataram, Lombok, Indonesia.

Few large studies have evaluated risk factors for mortality among children
hospitalized for pneumonia and this may contribute to suboptimal case management 
efficiency. To identify useful screening criteria for mortality among children
hospitalized for pneumonia in a developing country setting, we conducted a
population-based hospital cohort study among children less than 2 years of age
admitted for pneumonia during 1999-2001 at one of three major hospitals on Lombok
Island, Indonesia. Of 4351 children admitted for pneumonia, 12 per cent died
before discharge. Case fatality proportions were seasonal, with peaks occurring
immediately after peaks in the proportion of cases positive for respiratory
syncytial virus. Children with an oxygen saturation < or = 85 per cent or age
younger than 4 months were 5.6 times more likely to die than children with none
of these predictive factors (95 per cent CI, 4.5-7.1); 83 per cent of children
who died had one of these two risk factors. For children < 4 months old,
mortality increased at an oxygen saturation < 88 per cent compared with < 80 per 
cent for older children. Laboratory, physical examination, and radiological
findings were not associated with or did not contribute substantially to
mortality prediction. Among children hospitalized for pneumonia, age less than 4 
months and hypoxia were identified with those at high risk of death. Age
influences cut-off levels for hypoxia.

DOI: 10.1093/tropej/49.6.327 
PMID: 14725409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

