
1. Microbes Infect. 2004 Jan;6(1):17-24.

Cytomegalovirus infection aggravates atherogenesis in apoE knockout mice by both 
local and systemic immune activation.

Vliegen I(1), Duijvestijn A, Grauls G, Herngreen S, Bruggeman C, Stassen F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Hospital Maastricht, P.
Debyelaan 25, P.O. Box 5800, 6202 AZ, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
ivl@lmib.azm.nl

Since the 1970s, cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection has been associated with
atherosclerotic disease. However, the exact contribution of the virus remains
uncertain. In this article we describe both a direct and indirect immune-mediated
effect of the virus on the disease process. Eight-week-old apolipoprotein E
(apoE) knockout mice were infected with mouse CMV (MCMV) or mock injected, and
they were sacrificed at 2 and 20 weeks post-injection (p.i.) to study
atherosclerosis, vascular wall IFNgamma and TNFalpha expression and MCMV spread. 
To study plasma IFNgamma and TNFalpha levels, blood was collected at 1, 2, 4 and 
6 days p.i. in addition to days of sacrifice. Plasma cytokine levels were
increased after MCMV infection at early time points and decreased to mock levels 
at 2 and 20 weeks p.i. At 2 weeks p.i., more aortic arch samples showed local
cytokine expression after MCMV infection. The number of early atherosclerotic
lesions and the percentage of mice containing early lesions were increased at 2
weeks p.i., while at 20 weeks p.i., the MCMV-induced effect on atherogenesis was 
seen on the late lesions. In conclusion, MCMV infection induces a systemic immune
response reflecting an indirect effect of MCMV infection on atherosclerosis in
addition to a local aortic immune response reflecting a direct effect of the
virus on the atherosclerotic process.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2003.09.024 
PMID: 14738889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

