
1. J Virol. 2004 Feb;78(4):2137-41.

Antiviral activity of distamycin A against vaccinia virus is the result of
inhibition of postreplicative mRNA synthesis.

Broyles SS(1), Kremer M, Knutson BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana
47907-1153, USA. broyles@purdue.edu

Distamycin A has been described as an inhibitor of the cellular pathogenesis of
vaccinia virus in culture. Distamycin is an antibiotic that specifically targets 
the minor groove of DNA. We show here that distamycin is a potent inhibitor of
vaccinia virus replication. Pulse-labeling experiments showed that most major
late proteins failed to accumulate in the presence of the antibiotic. We
characterized the effect of distamycin on vaccinia virus nucleic acid
biosynthesis with the goal of determining the inhibitor's target. Early gene
transcription was unaffected. DNA synthesis proceeded at normal rates, but DNA
accumulated in large masses in the cytoplasm with no evidence of virion assembly.
Transcription from the intermediate class promoter for the I1L gene was partially
reduced by distamycin; however, transcription from the intermediate promoters for
the three late transcription factor genes was severely inhibited. The
accumulation of the late transcripts for the viral F17R and A10L genes also was
severely impaired and was shown to be a direct inhibition of late promoter
activity. These results indicate that inhibition of postreplicative intermediate 
and late transcription is the basis for inhibition of vaccinia virus by
distamycin and indicate that DNA minor-groove ligands hold promise for effective 
anti-poxvirus drugs.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.78.4.2137-2141.2004 
PMCID: PMC369444
PMID: 14747579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

