
1. J Neurosci Res. 2004 Mar 15;75(6):825-34.

Nerve growth factor, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, and neurotrophin-3 are
sorted to dense-core vesicles and released via the regulated pathway in primary
rat cortical neurons.

Wu YJ(1), Krüttgen A, Möller JC, Shine D, Chan JR, Shooter EM, Cosgaya JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California 94305-5125, USA.

Neurotrophins (NTs) play an important role in the modulation of synaptic
transmission and in morphological changes in synaptic structures. Although there 
is agreement that brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is sorted to large
dense-core vesicles (LDCVs) and released via the regulated secretory pathway,
there has been some dispute regarding the mode of secretion of nerve growth
factor (NGF) and neurotrophin-3 (NT-3), two structurally related members of the
NT family. In this study, we examined the subcellular localization and release
characteristics of NGF, BDNF, and NT-3 in adenovirus-infected primary cortical
neurons. We found that all members of the NT family colocalized with markers for 
the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi within cell bodies and in a punctate manner
with a marker for LDCVs within processes. Moreover, their release was triggered
by depolarization, indicating that NGF, BDNF, and NT-3 are released via the
regulated secretory pathway. When neurons were coinfected with two separate
adenoviruses coding for NGF or BDNF, both NTs showed almost complete vesicular
colocalization within single cells, suggesting that different NTs might be
packaged into shared vesicles. We also examined whether the two splice variants
of NGF, the short and long precursors, differ in their release characteristics.
We found that neurons infected with viruses coding for either splice variant
released NGF in a regulated way. Overall, our study supports the notion that all 
members of the NT family undergo activity-dependent regulated release from
neurons, enabling them to act as "synaptotrophins" on electrically active
neurons.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.20048 
PMID: 14994343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

