
1. J Virol. 2004 Jun;78(12):6459-68.

Adenovirus protein VII condenses DNA, represses transcription, and associates
with transcriptional activator E1A.

Johnson JS(1), Osheim YN, Xue Y, Emanuel MR, Lewis PW, Bankovich A, Beyer AL,
Engel DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia Health System, P.O. Box
800734, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Adenovirus protein VII is the major protein component of the viral nucleoprotein 
core. It is highly basic, and an estimated 1070 copies associate with each viral 
genome, forming a tightly condensed DNA-protein complex. We have investigated DNA
condensation, transcriptional repression, and specific protein binding by protein
VII. Xenopus oocytes were microinjected with mRNA encoding HA-tagged protein VII 
and prepared for visualization of lampbrush chromosomes. Immunostaining revealed 
that protein VII associated in a uniform manner across entire chromosomes.
Furthermore, the chromosomes were significantly condensed and transcriptionally
silenced, as judged by the dramatic disappearance of transcription loops
characteristic of lampbrush chromosomes. During infection, the protein VII-DNA
complex may be the initial substrate for transcriptional activation by cellular
factors and the viral E1A protein. To investigate this possibility, mRNAs
encoding E1A and protein VII were comicroinjected into Xenopus oocytes.
Interestingly, whereas E1A did not associate with chromosomes in the absence of
protein VII, expression of both proteins together resulted in significant
association of E1A with lampbrush chromosomes. Binding studies with proteins
produced in bacteria or human cells or by in vitro translation showed that E1A
and protein VII can interact in vitro. Structure-function analysis revealed that 
an N-terminal region of E1A is responsible for binding to protein VII. These
studies define the in vivo functions of protein VII in DNA binding, condensation,
and transcriptional repression and indicate a role in E1A-mediated
transcriptional activation of viral genes.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.12.6459-6468.2004 
PMCID: PMC416553
PMID: 15163739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

