
1. J Histochem Cytochem. 1992 Apr;40(4):495-504.

Application and comparison of silver intensification methods for the
diaminobenzidine and diaminobenzidine-nickel endproduct of the peroxidation
reaction in immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization.

Mullink H(1), Vos W, Jiwa M, Horstman A, van der Valk P, Walboomers JM, Meijer
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Free University Hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Silver-intensification methods described in the literature for the
diaminobenzidine (DAB) and diaminobenzidine-nickel (DAB/Ni) endproduct of the
peroxidase reaction were compared in model systems after immunoperoxidase and in 
situ hybridization. First, these methods were compared in immunohistochemical
model systems, using the demonstration of glial fibrillar acidic protein (GFAP)
and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in paraffin sections of human brain and
prostate tissue, respectively. When DAB without Ni was used as substrate, tissue 
argyrophilia caused considerable background staining. Only when this tissue
reactivity was quenched with, e.g., CuSO4 with H2O2 or thioglycolic acid, were
the results acceptable. A considerable improvement in the signal-to-noise ratio
could be obtained when nickel was included in the substrate mixture. The methods 
that proved to be best for demonstration of GFAP and PSA made use of acid
developer solutions. Subsequently, these methods were compared with other
sensitive immunostaining methods for demonstration of the gamma-delta T-cell
receptor in frozen lymphoid tissue. In this model a considerable increase in the 
number of positive cells could be obtained using silver intensification. The
different methods using DAB/Ni were also compared for use in DNA in situ
hybridization (DISH). In this case two model systems were used: human papilloma
virus type 11 (HPV-11) DNA in condyloma tissue (abundant target model) and
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA in a mononucleosis lymph node (low target model).
For demonstration of HPV-11, all methods gave more or less satisfactory results, 
which were best with the acid developer solutions. Moreover, for demonstration of
EBV DNA, a signal could be obtained only with these developer solutions. Such a
method also proved suitable in double immuno-hybrido stainings for the
demonstration of EBV DNA in specific antigen-positive Reed-Sternberg cells in
paraffin sections of Hodgkin lymph nodes.

DOI: 10.1177/40.4.1532404 
PMID: 1532404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

