
1. Eur Phys J E Soft Matter. 2004 Jul;14(3):269-76.

Hemifusion and fusion of giant vesicles induced by reduction of inter-membrane
distance.

Heuvingh J(1), Pincet F, Cribier S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physico-Chimie Mol√©culaire des Membranes Biologiques, URD-CNRS 
UMR 7099, IBPC, 13 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris, France.
julien.heuvingh@univ-paris5.fr

Proteins involved in membrane fusion, such as SNARE or influenza virus
hemagglutinin, share the common function of pulling together opposing membranes
in closer contact. The reduction of inter-membrane distance can be sufficient to 
induce a lipid transition phase and thus fusion. We have used functionalized
lipids bearing DNA bases as head groups incorporated into giant unilamellar
vesicles in order to reproduce the reduction of distance between membranes and to
trigger fusion in a model system. In our experiments, two vesicles were isolated 
and brought into adhesion by the mean of micromanipulation; their evolution was
monitored by fluorescence microscopy. Actual fusion only occurred in about 5% of 
the experiments. In most cases, a state of "hemifusion" is observed and
quantified. In this state, the outer leaflets of both vesicles' bilayers merged
whereas the inner leaflets and the aqueous inner contents remained independent.
The kinetics of the lipid probes redistribution is in good agreement with a
diffusion model in which lipids freely diffuse at the circumference of the
contact zone between the two vesicles. The minimal density of bridging
structures, such as stalks, necessary to explain this redistribution kinetics can
be estimated.

DOI: 10.1140/epje/i2003-10151-2 
PMID: 15338438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

