
1. Clin Diagn Virol. 1993 Jul;1(2):129-36.

Immunogenicity and adverse reactions of influenza vaccination in elderly patients
given acetaminophen or placebo.

Chernesky M(1), O'Neill D, Pickard L, Castriciano S, Kraftcheck D, Sellors J,
McLean D, Flett N, Mahony J.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Virology and Chlamydiology Laboratory, St. Joseph's Hospital,
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ont., Canada.

The objective was to examine the antibody responses to influenza immunization in 
an elderly population and the effect of prophylactic acetaminophen on adverse
responses due to inactivated whole virus vaccine containing influenza A (H3N2 and
H1N1) and B antigens. During the autumn of 1990, 100 patients 65 years or older
were immunized and randomly allocated to receive placebo or 1,950 mg (2 x 975 mg)
of acetaminophen. They recorded any local and systemic side effects over a 3-day 
period. Serology was performed on pre- and post (4-6 weeks) -vaccination sera.
Age and gender distribution in the study were: 47% who were 75 years or older,
and 61% of the patients were female. Most of the patients (97%) had pre-existing 
antibodies to Influenza A or B. Average peak preimmunization antibody titers were
40 to B Yamagata and A Taiwan (H1N1) and 80 for A Shanghai (H3N2). Half of each
treatment group had a 4-fold or greater rise in antibody titer in response to the
vaccine. Only 30% of patients immunized the previous year but 80% of those never 
vaccinated previously demonstrated a 4-fold or greater serological response to
the vaccine. However, measurement of protection rates (HI >/= 40) before and
after vaccination indicated 81.1-100% protection for the 3 viruses not influenced
by treatment, gender or a history of previous vaccination. Both treatment groups 
had equally small numbers of patients who recorded systemic symptoms of
drowsiness, myalgia, fever and chills and about 50% had arm soreness. Although
about 80% of previously unimmunized adults mounted a 4-fold antibody rise to
influenza vaccine antigens whereas booster effects were seen in only 30% of those
immunized the previous year, protection rates were high (81-100%) after
immunization and were not affected by acetaminophen treatment. Adverse effects
(15% systemic and 50% local) were not ameliorated by 1950 mg of acetaminophen in 
these elderly patients.

DOI: 10.1016/0928-0197(93)90021-v 
PMID: 15566726 

