
1. Cancer. 2005 Jan 15;103(2):216-28.

Richter syndrome: biology, incidence, and therapeutic strategies.

Tsimberidou AM(1), Keating MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. atsimber@mdanderson.org

Richter's transformation denotes the development of high-grade non-Hodgkin
lymphoma, prolymphocytic leukemia, Hodgkin disease, or acute leukemia in patients
with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)/small lymphocytic lymphoma. A search of
published articles in Medline (PubMed) and abstracts from professional meetings
was performed. An electronic database search of patients with CLL at The
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center (Houston, TX) determined the
incidence of Richter syndrome (RS) in patients with CLL between 1992 and 2002. RS
occurs in approximately 5% of patients with CLL. The large cells of RS may arise 
through transformation of the original CLL clone or represent a new neoplasm. RS 
may be triggered by viral infections, such as Epstein-Barr virus. Trisomy 12 and 
chromosome 11 abnormalities are more frequent in patients with RS than in the
overall population of patients with CLL. Multiple genetic defects, such as
mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene, p16INK4A, and p21, loss of p27
expression, deletion of retinoblastoma, increased copy number of C-MYC, and
decreased expression of the A-MYB gene, have been described. These abnormalities 
may cause CLL cells to proliferate and-by facilitating the acquisition of new
genetic abnormalities-to transform into RS cells. Therapeutic strategies include 
intensive chemotherapy, monoclonal antibodies, and stem cell transplantation. The
response rates range from 5% to 43% (complete response, 5-38%), and the median
survival duration ranges from 5 months to 8 months. In conclusion, RS may be
triggered by viral infections or by genetic defects. Current treatments are
aggressive, but prognosis is poor. Novel curative treatment strategies are
needed.

(c) 2004 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.20773 
PMID: 15578683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

