
1. Vaccine. 2005 Jan 19;23(9):1106-13.

Protection against direct-contact challenge following emergency FMD vaccination
of cattle and the effect on virus excretion from the oropharynx.

Cox SJ(1), Voyce C, Parida S, Reid SM, Hamblin PA, Paton DJ, Barnett PV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Health, Pirbright Laboratory, Ash Road, Pirbright,
Woking, Surrey GU24 0NF, UK. sarah.cox@bbsrc.ac.uk

The ability of emergency foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) vaccine to protect cattle
from a heterologous direct-contact challenge and the effect on virus excretion
from the oropharynx were examined. An oil adjuvant O1 Manisa FMD vaccine
protected 20 cattle from clinical disease following 5 days of direct-contact
exposure to five infected cattle at 21 days post vaccination. The donor cattle
had been infected by tongue inoculation with a different FMD virus of the same
serotype (O UKG 2001). Protection from clinical disease did not prevent localised
sub-clinical infection at the oropharynx in most animals, although quantitative
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) showed that the level of
virus replication shortly after direct-contact challenge was greatly reduced in
vaccinated animals. Nevertheless, 45% of the vaccinated cattle became
persistently infected with 10(3)-10(6) RNA copies per millilitre of oropharyngeal
fluid at 28 days post challenge. However, since live virus could not be readily
isolated, the risk of these animals transmitting disease was probably very low.
The findings show that even after an extremely severe challenge, use of an
emergency vaccine will prevent or reduce local virus replication and thereby
dramatically reduce the amount of virus released into the environment in the
all-important early post-exposure period. These data should help to model the
dynamics of virus transmission in future outbreaks of disease where vaccination
is considered.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2004.08.034 
PMID: 15629353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

