
1. J Virol Methods. 2005 Mar;124(1-2):211-5. Epub 2004 Dec 16.

Assessment of human papillomavirus mRNA detection over time in cervical specimens
collected in liquid based cytology medium.

Cuschieri KS(1), Beattie G, Hassan S, Robertson K, Cubie H.

Author information: 
(1)Specialist Virology Centre, New Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, 2nd Floor
Microbiology, 51 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4SA, UK.
kate.cuschieri@luht.scot.nhs.uk

Little is known about the stability of human papillomavirus (HPV) RNA within
cervical samples collected in liquid based cytology (LBC) preservation media. We 
addressed this by analysing patient LBC specimens for the presence of HPV RNA
over a prospective time course. LBC samples in PreservCyt were obtained from
seven women referred to colposcopy due to a cytological diagnosis of moderate or 
severe dyskaryosis. Aliquots were removed and subject to RNA extraction at, 6h
(base-line), 4, 7 and 14 days, post-collection. HPV mRNA was detected using the
PreTect HPV Proofer, which detects HPV 16, 18, 31, 33 and 45 E6/E7 transcripts
and human small ribonucleoprotein U1A mRNA as a sample control. HPV DNA
genotyping was also performed at base-line to assess the range of types in our
group. In addition to assessment of viral RNA, overall integrity of the cellular 
RNA extract was analysed by the RNA 6000 pico assay. Control human RNA was
amplified successfully in all seven samples at each time point. Five of the seven
women were HPV positive for E6/E7 viral transcripts at base-line and positivity
was maintained in all five up to 14 days. Although the pattern of cellular RNA
profiles generated from the samples was variable, results indicated that this
extract could be amenable to gene expression profiling and that degradation did
not increase as a result of storage time. It is concluded that HPV RNA in
routinely collected LBC specimens in PreservCyt can be detected for at least 14
days from sample collection.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2004.11.005 
PMID: 15664071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

