
1. Zhonghua Shao Shang Za Zhi. 2004 Dec;20(6):340-2.

[The influence of the application of cytotoxic lymphocyte antigen 4-Ig adenovirus
on the burn wounds with alloskin grafting on the murine immune function].

[Article in Chinese]

Yuan J(1), Luo GX, Yi SX, Chen XW, Zheng JS, Xie ZJ, Peng SF, Wu J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Burn Research, Southwest Hospital, State Key Laboratory of
Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury, The Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing 400038, P.R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the influence of local application of cytotoxic
lymphocyte antigen 4-Ig (CTLA4-Ig) adenovirus on the burn wound with alloskin
grafting upon the murine immune function.
METHODS: Sixty BALB/c mice were randomly divided into A (operation control), B
(CTLA4-Ig transfection) and C (normal control) groups, with 20 mice in each
group. Skin wounds (full-thickness loss) sized 1.5 cm x 1.5 cm were created on
the backs of mice in A and B groups. Then the skin grafts of the same size
obtained from C57BL mice were grafted into the skin wounds. 0.1 g of
cross-linking polyacrylic resin (carbomer cream) without adenovirus was daubed
onto the wounds in A group, and the same amount of carbomer cream with adenovirus
in titers of 5 x 10(9)/L was daubed onto the wounds in B group, while no
treatment was given in C group. 1 ml of 10% SRBC (sheep red blood cell) was
injected intraperitoneally to all the mice of the three groups on the 1st post
injury day (PID). Splenocytes from BALB/c, C57BL and Kunming mice were harvested 
for mixed lymphocyte culture on 7, 14, 21 and 28 PIDs. Agglutination assay was
used in the same time to detect the SRBC antibody titers.
RESULTS: The reaction of murine splenocytes in B group to the donor (C57BL)
splenocytes was suppressed in a specific way (P < 0.05) within 14 PIDs. There was
no difference in the titers of anti-SRBC antibody among the 3 groups (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Local application of CTLA4-Ig recombinant adenovirus exhibited no
influence on the murine humoral immunity, but might induce systemic and specific 
T cell tolerance in immunity system.


PMID: 15730680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

