
1. J Med Virol. 1992 Apr;36(4):246-50.

Serologic identification of hepatitis E virus infections in epidemic and endemic 
settings.

Favorov MO(1), Fields HA, Purdy MA, Yashina TL, Aleksandrov AG, Alter MJ,
Yarasheva DM, Bradley DW, Margolis HS.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Diagnostic Department, D.I. Ivanofsky Institute (World Health
Organization Collaborating Centre for Research and Reference on Viral Hepatitis),
Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, USSR.

Recombinant chimeric protein C2 containing the N-terminal region of trpE (37
kilodaltons [kDa]) and the C-terminal half (46.8 kDa) of the polypeptide encoded 
by ORF2 of the hepatitis E virus (HEV) genome was used for the construction of a 
Western blot diagnostic test for IgG and IgM antibodies to the virus (anti-HEV). 
(The C2 protein and the trpE protein devoid of C2 activity and used as a control 
for non-specific reactions were purified by recovery from sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis [SDS-PAGE] and used for preparation of
strips). Specificity of the test was proven with sera obtained from patients with
acute hepatitis non-A, non-B, non-C (NANBNC) from outbreaks in different
geographic regions of the world. IgG antibodies reactive to the recombinant C2
protein were detected in 93% of patients with acute hepatitis NANBNC and remained
detectable in 89-100% of these patients 1-24 months after onset of jaundice. IgM 
antibodies were detected in 73% of patients within 26 days after onset of
jaundice, in 50% 1-4 months after onset, in 6% 6-7 months after onset, and in no 
patients by 8 months after onset. When this test was used to identify sporadic
hepatitis E cases in different regions of the world, such cases were found almost
exclusively in areas where outbreaks of the disease had occurred and rarely in
any other regions.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.1890360403 
PMID: 1578218  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

