
1. J Virol. 2005 May;79(9):5346-52.

St, a truncated envelope protein derived from the S protein of duck hepatitis B
virus, acts as a chaperone for the folding of the large envelope protein.

Grgacic EV(1), Anderson DA.

Author information: 
(1)Macfarlane Burnet Institute for Medical Research and Public Health, Melbourne 
3004, Australia. grgacic@burnet.edu.au

Envelope proteins of hepadnaviruses undergo a unique folding mechanism which
results in the posttranslational translocation of 50% of the large envelope
protein (L) chains across the endoplasmic reticulum. This mechanism is essential 
for the eventual positioning of the receptor-binding domain on the surface of the
virus particle and in duck hepatitis B virus (DHBV) is dependent on the small (S)
envelope protein as part of the assembly process. In this study, we report the
identification of a third envelope protein, St, derived from the S protein and
carrying functions previously attributed to S. Antibody mapping and mutagenesis
studies indicated St to be C terminally truncated, spanning the N-terminal
transmembrane domain (TM1) plus the adjacent cysteine loop. We have previously
shown that the mutation of two conserved polar residues in TM1 of S (SAA)
eliminates L translocation and assembly. A plasmid expressing a functional
equivalent of St was able to rescue assembly, demonstrating that this assembly
defect is due to mutations of the corresponding residues in St and not in S per
se. Immunofluorescence analysis showed that St directly affects L protein
cellular localization. These results indicate that St acts as a viral chaperone
for L folding, remaining associated with the DHBV envelope upon secretion. The
presence of St at a molar ratio of half that of L suggests that it is St which
regulates L translocation to 50%.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.9.5346-5352.2005 
PMCID: PMC1082741
PMID: 15827149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

