
1. Avian Dis. 2005 Mar;49(1):118-24.

Use of bacteriophages in combination with competitive exclusion to reduce
Salmonella from infected chickens.

Toro H(1), Price SB, McKee AS, Hoerr FJ, Krehling J, Perdue M, Bauermeister L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, 264 Greene Hall, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Auburn University, AL 36849, USA.

Salmonella-spedfic bacteriophages (BP) and competitive exclusion (CE) were used
to reduce Salmonella colonization in experimentally infected chickens. A
"cocktail" of distinct phage (i.e., phage showing different host ranges and
inducing different types of plaques on Salmonella Typhimurium [ST] cultures) was 
developed. The killing activity of the selected BPs on ST cultures differed
significantly, as determined in in vitro killing assays. BPs were administered
orally to the chickens several days prior and after ST challenge but not
simultaneously. BPs were readily isolated from the feces of the BP-treated
chickens approximately 48 hr after administration. A CE product consisting of a
defined culture of seven different microbial species was used either alone or in 
combination with BP treatment. CE was administered orally at hatch. Salmonella
counts in intestine, ceca, and a pool of liver/spleen were evaluated in
Salmonella-challenged chickens treated with BP or with BP and CE. In both trials 
1 and 2, a beneficial effect of the phage treatment on weight gain performance
was evident. A reduction in Salmonella counts was detected in cecum and ileum of 
BP-, CE-, and BP+CE-treated chickens as compared with nontreated birds. In trial 
1, BP treatment reduced ST counts to marginal levels in the ileum and reduced
counts sixfold in the ceca. A reduction of Salmonella counts with BP, CE, and
BP+CE treatments was evident in chickens from trial 2. Both CE and BP treatments 
showed differences in the reduction of Salmonella counts after challenge between 
spedmens obtained at days 4 and 14 postchallenge in ceca, liver/spleen, and
ileum. The preliminary data presented in this report show that isolation and
characterization of Salmonella-specific BP is uncomplicated and feasible on a
larger scale. Results indicate a protective effect of both Salmonella-specific
BPs and a defined competitive exclusion product against Salmonella colonization
of experimentally infected chickens. These results are encouraging for further
work on the use of BP as an effective alternative to antibiotics to reduce
Salmonella infections in poultry.

DOI: 10.1637/7286-100404R 
PMID: 15839424  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

