
1. Eukaryot Cell. 2005 May;4(5):948-59.

Identification in the ancient protist Giardia lamblia of two eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 4E homologues with distinctive functions.

Li L(1), Wang CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California San
Francisco, N572C, Mission Bay Genentech Hall, 600 16th St., San Francisco, CA
94122-2280, USA.

Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) binds to the m(7)GTP of
capped mRNAs and is an essential component of the translational machinery that
recruits the 40S small ribosomal subunit. We describe here the identification and
characterization of two eIF4E homologues in an ancient protist, Giardia lamblia. 
Using m(7)GTP-Sepharose affinity column chromatography, a specific binding
protein was isolated and identified as Giardia eIF4E2. The other homologue,
Giardia eIF4E1, bound only to the m(2,2,7)GpppN structure. Although neither
homologue can rescue the function of yeast eIF4E, a knockdown of eIF4E2 mRNA in
Giardia by a virus-based antisense ribozyme decreased translation, which was
shown to use m(7)GpppN-capped mRNA as a template. Thus, eIF4E2 is likely the
cap-binding protein in a translation initiation complex. The same knockdown
approach indicated that eIF4E1 is not required for translation in Giardia.
Immunofluorescence assays showed wide distribution of both homologues in the
cytoplasm. But eIF4E1 was also found concentrated and colocalized with the
m(2,2,7)GpppN cap, 16S-like rRNA, and fibrillarin in the nucleolus-like structure
in the nucleus. eIF4E1 depletion from Giardia did not affect mRNA splicing, but
the protein was bound to Giardia small nuclear RNAs D and H known to have an
m(2,2,7)GpppN cap, thus suggesting a novel function not yet observed among other 
eIF4Es in eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.4.5.948-959.2005 
PMCID: PMC1140097
PMID: 15879529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

