
1. Zhonghua Xin Xue Guan Bing Za Zhi. 2005 Feb;33(2):166-9.

[Immortalization of human umbilical vein endothelial cells by transfected with
hTERT and SV40LT].

[Article in Chinese]

Bian C(1), Zhao K, Tong GX, Zhu YL, Chen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Medical College,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310009, China. bccbs@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To immortalize human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) by
ectopic expression of the telomerase reverse transcriptase enzyme (hTERT), and by
Simian Virus 40 Large T (SV40LT) antigen without malignant transformation.
METHODS: Two different retroviruses that contained hTERT/SV40LT cDNA fragment and
drug resistance gene were constructed, and were used to transfect normal primary 
HUVECs. The transfected cells were screened with 500 microg/ml G418 and 4
microg/ml puromycin. Drug resistance cell clones were selected 3 days after
transfection and cultured for further studies. An under inverted microscope and a
scanning electron microscope were used to observe the morphology and growth of
the cells. The expression of VIII factor and transfected DNA fragments were
detected for identification of the endothelial origin and successful
transfection. And the expression of E-selectin and endothelial lipase with or
without the stimulus of TNF-alpha were also assayed to analyze the biological
activity of the transfected cells.
RESULTS: The cells were homogenous, closely apposed, large, flat, and polygonal, 
displayed a characteristic ovoid nucleus with one or two nucleoli and formed
monolayer with polygonal shape without overlapping. Immunocytochemical staining
showed the existence of VIII factor. SV40LT/hTERT antigen expressed by the
transfected cells was detected, while the contrasts had non-expression.
Telomerase activity of the cell was detected in the transfected cells, which was 
0.36 at 12 th passage and 0.38 at 50 th passage. However, the activity in the
normal HUVECs was 1.12 at the first passage and 0.06 at the third passage assayed
by PCR-ELISA. Both E-selectin and endothelial lipase were all specific in
endothelial cells. The expressions of these two were also detected. And the
expression of E-selectin can be up-regulated with the stimulus of TNF-alpha,
while the expression of endothelial lipase was not unregulated significantly.
CONCLUSION: Ectopic expression of hTERT and SV40LT can effectively immortalize
HUVECs without tumorigenesis.


PMID: 15924817  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

