
1. Atherosclerosis. 2006 Feb;184(2):264-75. Epub 2005 Jun 23.

Simultaneous expression of apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme and scavenger
receptor BI mediated by a therapeutic gene expression system.

Zhong S(1), Liu C, Haviland D, Doris PA, Teng BB.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Human Genetics, Institute of Molecular Medicine, The
University of Texas Houston Health Science Center at Houston, 2121 W. Holcombe
Blvd, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Cardiovascular diseases are often accompanied by elevated LDL particles and
endothelial dysfunction. We have examined the possibility of concurrently
reducing LDL levels and modulating endothelial function using a single
helper-dependent adenovirus vector system to simultaneously express the
apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme (Apobec1) and the scavenger receptor, class 
B, type I (SR-BI) genes under the control of separate promoters (designated
HD-C2). Apobec1 edits apoB mRNA at nucleotide C-6666 to produce truncated apoB48 
and is normally expressed in small intestine only. SR-BI is a receptor for
multiple ligands with distinct tissue-specific functions. Expression of Apobec1
in HepG2 cells resulted in apoB mRNA editing, leading to decreased apoB100
abundance (to 6% of control) and the appearance of apoB48. Editing of apoB mRNA
in HepG2 cells resulted in decline in apoB mRNA levels of 50%. This was probably 
the result of nonsense-mediated decay of edited message, since over-expression of
Apobec1 increased neither Apobec1 complementary factor (ACF) mRNA nor protein
abundance. Over-expression of SR-BI in human endothelial cells activated
endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) activity by phosphorylation of eNOS at
residue Ser-1177 in the presence of HDL, leading to increased production of the
anti-atherogenic molecule nitric oxide (NO). Taken together, this study
demonstrates that using one vector delivery system to express two genes in two
different cell types results in the cell-specific beneficial effects of
decreasing apoB100 production and increasing eNOS activities. This combined gene 
expression approach may provide an improved therapeutic strategy by targeting
multiple sites in the mechanism of cardiovascular injury.

DOI: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2005.04.017 
PMID: 15979078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

