
1. J Virol. 2005 Oct;79(19):12164-72.

Temporal and anatomic relationship between virus replication and cytokine gene
expression after vaginal simian immunodeficiency virus infection.

Abel K(1), Rocke DM, Chohan B, Fritts L, Miller CJ.

Author information: 
(1)UC Davis, CCM/CNPRC, County Rd. 98/Hutchison Dr., Davis, CA 95616, USA.
kabel@ucdavis.edu

The current knowledge about early innate immune responses at mucosal sites of
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) entry is limited but likely to be important in
the design of effective HIV vaccines against heterosexual transmission. This
study examined the temporal and anatomic relationship between virus replication, 
lymphocyte depletion, and cytokine gene expression levels in mucosal and lymphoid
tissues in a vaginal-transmission model of HIV in rhesus macaques. The results of
the study show that the kinetics of cytokine gene expression levels in the acute 
phase of infection are positively correlated with virus replication in a tissue. 
Thus, cytokine responses after vaginal simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV)
inoculation are earliest and strongest in mucosal tissues of the genital tract
and lowest in systemic lymphoid tissues. Importantly, the early cytokine response
was dominated by the induction of proinflammatory cytokines, while the induction 
of cytokines with antiviral activity, alpha/beta interferon, occurred too late to
prevent virus replication and dissemination. Thus, the early cytokine response
favors immune activation, resulting in the recruitment of potential target cells 
for SIV. Further, unique cytokine gene expression patterns were observed in
distinct anatomic locations with a rapid and persistent inflammatory response in 
the gut that is consistent with the gut being the major site of early CD4 T-cell 
depletion in SIV infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.19.12164-12172.2005 
PMCID: PMC1211549
PMID: 16160143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

