
1. J Gen Virol. 2005 Dec;86(Pt 12):3303-3310. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.81076-0.

Subcellular localization of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
nucleocapsid protein.

You J(1), Dove BK(1), Enjuanes L(2), DeDiego ML(2), Alvarez E(2), Howell G(3),
Heinen P(4), Zambon M(4), Hiscox JA(3)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences,
Garstang Building, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Centro Nacional de Biotecnolog√≠a
(CNB, CSIC), Campus Univ. Autonoma, 3 Darwin Street, Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid,
Spain.
(3)Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds
LS2 9JT, UK.
(4)Health Protection Agency, London NW9 5HT, UK.

The coronavirus nucleocapsid (N) protein is a viral RNA-binding protein with
multiple functions in terms of virus replication and modulating cell signalling
pathways. N protein is composed of three distinct regions containing RNA-binding 
motif(s), and appropriate signals for modulating cell signalling. The subcellular
localization of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) N
protein was studied. In infected cells, SARS-CoV N protein localized exclusively 
to the cytoplasm. In contrast to the avian coronavirus N protein, overexpressed
SARS-CoV N protein remained principally localized to the cytoplasm, with very few
cells exhibiting nucleolar localization. Bioinformatic analysis and deletion
mutagenesis coupled to confocal microscopy and live-cell imaging, revealed that
SARS-CoV N protein regions I and III contained nuclear localization signals and
region II contained a nucleolar retention signal. However, cytoplasmic
localization was directed by region III and was the dominant localization signal 
in the protein.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.81076-0 
PMID: 16298975  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

