
1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 3;281(9):6030-7. Epub 2005 Dec 19.

Crystal structure of a bacterial type IB DNA topoisomerase reveals a preassembled
active site in the absence of DNA.

Patel A(1), Shuman S, Mondrag√≥n A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, 2205 Tech Drive, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.

Type IB DNA topoisomerases are found in all eukarya, two families of eukaryotic
viruses (poxviruses and mimivirus), and many genera of bacteria. They alter DNA
topology by cleaving and resealing one strand of duplex DNA via a covalent
DNA-(3-phosphotyrosyl)-enzyme intermediate. Bacterial type IB enzymes were
discovered recently and are described as poxvirus-like with respect to their
small size, primary structures, and bipartite domain organization. Here we report
the 1.75-A crystal structure of Deinococcus radiodurans topoisomerase IB
(DraTopIB), a prototype of the bacterial clade. DraTopIB consists of an
amino-terminal (N) beta-sheet domain (amino acids 1-90) and a predominantly
alpha-helical carboxyl-terminal (C) domain (amino acids 91-346) that closely
resemble the corresponding domains of vaccinia virus topoisomerase IB. The five
amino acids of DraTopIB that comprise the catalytic pentad (Arg-137, Lys-174,
Arg-239, Asn-280, and Tyr-289) are preassembled into the active site in the
absence of DNA in a manner nearly identical to the pentad configuration in human 
topoisomerase I bound to DNA. This contrasts with the apoenzyme of vaccinia
topoisomerase, in which three of the active site constituents are either
displaced or disordered. The N and C domains of DraTopIB are splayed apart in an 
"open" conformation, in which the surface of the catalytic domain containing the 
active site is exposed for DNA binding. A comparison with the human topoisomerase
I-DNA cocrystal structure suggests how viral and bacterial topoisomerase IB
enzymes might bind DNA circumferentially via movement of the N domain into the
major groove and clamping of a disordered loop of the C domain around the helix.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M512332200 
PMID: 16368685  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

