
1. Virology. 2006 Mar 30;347(1):147-59. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Human papillomaviruses bind a basal extracellular matrix component secreted by
keratinocytes which is distinct from a membrane-associated receptor.

Culp TD(1), Budgeon LR, Christensen ND.

Author information: 
(1)The Jake Gittlen Cancer Research Foundation and Department of Pathology,
Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA.

Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) have previously been shown to adsorb to cultured
cells via membrane-associated heparan sulfate (HS) and alpha6 integrin. We
demonstrate that cultured keratinocytes uniquely secrete a component into the
basal extracellular matrix (ECM) which can function to adsorb HPV particles which
can then be internalized by adherent cells. This uncharacterized basal ECM
adsorption receptor was secreted by normal human epidermal keratinocytes (NHEK)
and by each of the four keratinocyte-derived cell lines we examined, but not by
non-keratinocyte cell lines. Multiple HPV types bound preferentially to this
keratinocyte-specific receptor over the membrane-associated receptor, and binding
to the basal ECM adsorption receptor was refractory to inhibition by heparin.
Like the membrane-associated receptor, this basal ECM component was functional as
an adsorption receptor in our in vitro infection model using HPV-11. Unlike
particle adsorption, however, successful infection with HPV-11 virions remained
sensitive to the pretreatment of virions with heparin. The secreted basal ECM
receptor did not colocalize with antibodies against HS, perlecan, or alpha6
integrin, but colocalized with antibody against laminin-5, a marker of
keratinocyte ECM and an abundant component of the basement membrane in mucosa and
skin. These findings suggest a model for natural infections in which HPV virions,
nonspecifically adsorbed to HS on suprabasal keratinocytes throughout an
epithelial wound, might be transferred to mitotically active migrating
keratinocytes via an intermediate association with the ECM secreted by these
cells as they reestablish the basement membrane.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2005.11.025 
PMID: 16376962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

