
1. Hepatology. 2006 Feb;43(2 Suppl 1):S207-20.

Therapy of hepatitis C: from empiricism to eradication.

Pawlotsky JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France. jean-michel.pawlotsky@hmn.aphp.fr

The complications of chronic hepatitis C virus infection can be prevented by
antiviral therapy. The initial choice of interferon alfa and, subsequently,
ribavirin as potential treatments for chronic hepatitis C was empirical.
Nevertheless, the combination of pegylated interferon alfa and ribavirin has
become the standard treatment of chronic hepatitis C. Since the advent of
interferon-based therapy, enormous progress has been made in understanding the
mechanisms of treatment efficacy and failure, and in everyday patient management.
The principal advances are: a better understanding of hepatitis C virus
steady-state kinetics and the antiviral mechanisms of interferon and ribavirin;
easier treatment decisions thanks to novel assays to assess liver disease
severity and the virological characteristics of infection; a better use of
virological tests to tailor therapy; a better management of adverse effects; a
better understanding of virological treatment failure; and a better management of
"special" populations, including patients with decompensated cirrhosis and
end-stage liver disease, liver transplant recipients, hemodialysis patients and
renal transplant recipients, human immunodeficiency virus-coinfected patients,
intravenous drug users and patients on opiate replacement therapy, or virological
non responders to previous therapies. Steady-state HCV kinetics offers several
potential targets for new drugs. These targets should ideally be hit
simultaneously in order to achieve viral eradication within a reasonable time
frame. Future drugs for HCV infection will belong to four main categories,
including new interferons, alternatives to ribavirin, specific HCV inhibitors,
and immune modulators. New treatments and vaccines might make it possible to
eradicate HCV in the future.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.21064 
PMID: 16447262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

