
1. Proteomics. 2006 Mar;6(6):1833-47.

2-DE proteome analysis of a proliferating and differentiating human neuronal stem
cell line (ReNcell VM).

Hoffrogge R(1), Mikkat S, Scharf C, Beyer S, Christoph H, Pahnke J, Mix E, Berth 
M, Uhrmacher A, Zubrzycki IZ, Miljan E, VÃ¶lker U, Rolfs A.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiological Laboratory, Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty,
University of Rostock, Germany.

The proteome of a proliferating human stem cell line was analyzed and then
utilized to detect stem cell differentiation-associated changes in the protein
profile. The analysis was conducted with a stable human fetal midbrain stem cell 
line (ReNcell VM) that displays the properties of a neural stem cell. Therefore, 
acquisition of proteomic data should be representative of cultured human neural
stem cells (hNSCs) in general. Here we present a 2-DE protein-map of this cell
line with annotations of 402 spots representing 318 unique proteins identified by
MS. The subsequent proteome profiling of differentiating cells of this stem cell 
line at days 0, 4 and 7 of differentiation revealed changes in the expression of 
49 identified spots that could be annotated to 45 distinct proteins. This
differentiation-associated expression pattern was validated by Western blot
analysis for transgelin-2, proliferating cell nuclear antigen, as well as
peroxiredoxin 1 and 4. The group of regulated proteins also included NudC,
ubiquilin-1, STRAP, stress-70 protein, creatine kinase B, glial fibrillary acidic
protein and vimentin. Our results reflect the large rearrangement of the proteome
during the differentiation process of the stem cells to terminally differentiated
neurons and offer the possibility for further characterization of specific
targets driving the stem cell differentiation.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200500556 
PMID: 16475233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

