
1. Biopolymers. 2006;84(4):383-99.

Influence of sequential oligopeptide carriers on the bioactive structure of
conjugated epitopes: comparative study of the conformation of a Herpes simplex
virus glycoprotein gD-1 epitope in the free and conjugated form, and protein
"built-in" crystal structure.

Krikorian D(1), Stavrakoudis A, Biris N, Sakarellos C, Andreu D, de Oliveira E,
Mez√∂ G, Majer Z, Hudecz F, Welling-Wester S, Cung MT, Tsikaris V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Section of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry,
University of Ioannina, 45110 Ioannina, Greece.

Synthetic carriers play an important role in immunogen presentation, due to their
ability of inducing improved and specific responses to conjugated epitopes. Their
influence on the bioactive conformation of the epitope, though admittedly crucial
for relevant in vitro and in vivo applications, is difficult to evaluate, given
the usual lack of information on the complex conformational features determined
by the nature of the carrier and the mode of ligation. Using the Herpes simplex
virus glycoprotein D-1 epitope
(Leu(9)-Lys-Nle-Ala-Asp-Pro-Asn-Arg-Phe-Arg-Gly-Lys-Asp-Leu(22)) as a model, we
have performed a detailed conformational analysis on the free epitope peptide in 
solution and on three constructs in which the epitope was conjugated to
sequential oligopeptide carriers {Ac-[Lys-Aib-Gly](4)-OH (SOC(4))} (through
either a thioether or an amide bond; Ac: acetyl) and polytuftsin oligomers
{H-[Thr-Lys-Pro-Lys-Gly](4)-NH(2) (T20)}, (through a thioether bond). The
analysis of the epitope conformation in the parent protein, in carrier-conjugated
and free form, suggests that the beta-turn structure of the
-Asp(13)-Pro-Asn-Arg(16)- segment is highly conserved and independent of the
epitope form. However, small conformational variations were observed at the
C-terminal part of the epitope, depending on the nature of the carrier.

DOI: 10.1002/bip.20486 
PMID: 16493659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

