
1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2006 May;27(5):423-30. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

Antiviral activity of cyclosaligenyl prodrugs of the nucleoside analogue
bromovinyldeoxyuridine against herpes viruses.

Meerbach A(1), Meier C, Sauerbrei A, Meckel HM, Wutzler P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology and Antiviral Therapy, Friedrich-Schiller University
Jena, Hans-Knoell-Strasse 2, D-07745 Jena, Germany.
Astrid.Meerbach@med.uni-jena.de

A series of 42 lipophilic bromovinyldeoxyuridine monophosphates (BVDUMPs) are
presented as potential prodrugs of the antiviral agent
(E)-5-(2-bromovinyl)-2'-deoxyuridine (BVDU). The 5'-cycloSal-masking group
technique has been applied to this cyclic nucleoside analogue to achieve delivery
of the monophosphate of BVDU inside the target cells. The new substances have
been tested for their antiviral activity against herpes simplex virus types 1 and
2 (HSV-1 and -2), thymidine kinase-deficient (TK(-)) HSV-1, varicella-zoster
virus (VZV), human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). The
XTT-based tetrazolium reduction assay EZ4U (for HSV), the plaque inhibition test 
(for VZV and HCMV) and a DNA hybridisation assay (for EBV) were used to assess
antiviral activity. The results indicate that cycloSal-BVDUMP triesters proved to
be potent and selective inhibitors of HSV-1 comparable with aciclovir. VZV
replication was inhibited by very low concentrations, and two substances had a
slightly better anti-VZV activity than the parent compound BVDU. No antiviral
effect could be demonstrated against TK(-)-HSV-1, HSV-2 and HCMV, most likely
owing to the lack of phosphorylation to BVDU diphosphate. Most remarkably,
several cycloSal-BVDUMP triesters yielded promising anti-EBV activity whereas the
parent compound BVDU was entirely inactive.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2005.11.021 
PMID: 16621459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

