
1. J Clin Microbiol. 1991 Sep;29(9):1991-6.

Prevention of surface-to-human transmission of rotaviruses by treatment with
disinfectant spray.

Ward RL(1), Bernstein DI, Knowlton DR, Sherwood JR, Young EC, Cusack TM, Rubino
JR, Schiff GM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Virology, James N. Gamble Institute of Medical Research, 
Cincinnati, Ohio 45219.

A model was developed to examine the effects of disinfectants on the transmission
of infectious rotavirus from a dried surface to humans. The initial experiments
were designed to find a method of preserving rotavirus infectivity during drying.
Culture-adapted human rotavirus (CJN strain) was dried at room temperature in
different organic suspensions, including fecal matter, several laboratory media, 
and nonfat dry milk (NDM). Recoveries of infectious virus were then compared.
Fecal matter provided little protection in this study relative to distilled
water, but the other suspensions were quite protective, especially NDM, which
consistently allowed recoveries of greater than 50%. When 10(3) focus-forming
units of unpassaged CJN virus were dried in NDM and administered to subjects who 
licked the dried material, 100% (8 of 8) became infected. The effect of Lysol
brand disinfectant spray (LDS) was next examined. Although NDM provided some
protection against inactivation by LDS, spraying under conditions recommended by 
the manufacturer consistently caused the CJN virus titer to decrease greater than
5 log10. Consumption of CJN virus (10(3) focus-forming units) sprayed with LDS
caused no infection in 14 subjects, whereas 13 of 14 subjects who consumed the
unsprayed virus became infected (P less than 0.00001). The methods developed in
this study could be used to test the effects of other disinfectants on the spread
of infectious rotavirus from inanimate surfaces to humans.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.29.9.1991-1996.1991 
PMCID: PMC270247
PMID: 1663519  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

