
1. J Virol. 1991 Jul;65(7):3853-63.

The inability of human immunodeficiency virus to infect chimpanzee monocytes can 
be overcome by serial viral passage in vivo.

Gendelman HE(1), Ehrlich GD, Baca LM, Conley S, Ribas J, Kalter DC, Meltzer MS,
Poiesz BJ, Nara P.

Author information: 
(1)Henry M. Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine,
Rockville, Maryland 20852.

Studies of lentivirus infection in ruminants, nonhuman primates, and humans
suggest that virus infection of macrophages plays a central role in the disease
process. To investigate whether human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) can
infect chimpanzee macrophages, we recovered monocytes from peripheral blood
mononuclear cells of HIV-1-negative animals and inoculated these and control
human monocytes with a panel of four human-passaged monocytotropic virus strains 
and one chimpanzee-passaged isolate. HIV-1 infected human monocytes synthesized
proviral DNA, viral mRNA, p24 antigen, and progeny virions. In contrast, except
for the chimpanzee-passaged HIV-1 isolate, chimpanzee monocytes failed to support
HIV-1 replication when cultured under both identical and a variety of other
conditions. Proviral DNA was demonstrated only at background levels in these cell
cultures by polymerase chain reaction for gag- and env-related sequences.
Interestingly, the chimpanzee-passaged HIV-1 isolate did not replicate in human
monocytes; viral p24 antigens and progeny virions were not detected. The same
monocytotropic panel of HIV-1 strains replicated in both human and chimpanzee
CD4+ T lymphoblasts treated with phytohemagglutinin and interleukin-2. The
failure of HIV-1 to infect chimpanzee monocytes, which can be overcome by serial 
in vivo viral passage, occurs through a block early in the viral life cycle.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.65.7.3853-3863.1991 
PMCID: PMC241416
PMID: 1674968  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

