
1. J Virol Methods. 2006 Nov;137(2):169-76. Epub 2006 Aug 2.

Evaluation of methods used to concentrate and detect hepatitis A virus in water
samples.

Villar LM(1), de Paula VS, Diniz-Mendes L, Lampe E, Gaspar AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Av.
Brazil 4365, 21045-900 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. lvillar@ioc.fiocruz.br

Two adsorption-elution concentration methods, both involving negatively charged
membranes, were evaluated in order to monitor hepatitis A virus (HAV)
contamination in tap, river, mineral and coastal water samples: elution with
urea-arginine phosphate buffer/reconcentration with magnesium chloride (method
1); and sodium hydroxide elution/reconcentration with a commercial concentrator
(method 2). Nested (qualitative) reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) and real-time
(quantitative) RT-PCR were used to detect and quantify HAV RNA in concentrated
water samples. For concentrating HAV, method 1 was found to be the most suitable 
for tap water and method 2 most suitable for mineral water. HAV inoculated
experimentally was detected in river water samples by both methods and in coastal
water samples by neither method. The detection limits were 6 x 10(9) g equiv./ml 
for qualitative PCR and 60 g equiv./ml for quantitative PCR. In a field
application study, HAV was detected in 20% of river and tap water samples but not
in coastal or mineral water samples. River water samples contained subgenotype
IA, and tap water samples contained subgenotype IB. It is concluded that,
although influencing qualitative PCR, the concentration method does not affect
quantitative PCR, which could therefore be used for all types of water samples.
Both techniques are recommended for detecting HAV in environmental water samples.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2006.06.008 
PMID: 16887200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

