
1. J Mol Recognit. 2006 Nov-Dec;19(6):542-8.

BAY 41-4109 has multiple effects on Hepatitis B virus capsid assembly.

Stray SJ(1), Zlotnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73190, USA.

Here we report the effect of a heteroaryldihydropyrimidine (HAP) antiviral
compound, BAY 41-4109, on Hepatitis B virus (HBV) capsid assembly and on
preformed HBV capsids. The HBV capsid is an icosahedral complex of 120 capsid
protein dimers. BAY41-4109 inhibits virus production in vivo by a mechanism that 
targets the viral capsid. We found that BAY 41-4109 was able to both accelerate
and misdirect capsid assembly in vitro. As little as one HAP molecule for every
five HBV dimers was sufficient to induce formation of non-capsid polymers. Unlike
the related molecule HAP-1 (Stray et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102:8138-43,
2005), no stable assembly intermediates were observed in assembly reactions with 
BAY 41-4109, indicating that accelerated assembly by BAY 41-4109 was still
kinetically regulated by the nucleation rate. Preformed capsids were stabilized
by BAY 41-4109, up to a ratio of one inhibitor molecule per two dimers. However, 
at BAY 41-4109:dimer ratios of 1:1 and greater, capsids were destabilized to
yield very large non-capsid polymers. These data suggest the existence of two
functionally distinguishable classes of drug-binding sites on HBV capsids.
Occupation of the first class of site stabilizes capsid, while binding at the
second class requires or induces structural changes that cannot be tolerated
without destabilizing the capsid. Our data suggest that HAP compounds may inhibit
virus replication by inducing assembly inappropriately and, when in excess, by
misdirecting assembly decreasing the stability of normal capsids.

Copyright (c) 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jmr.801 
PMID: 17006877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

