
1. Virology. 2007 Feb 20;358(2):291-302. Epub 2006 Oct 5.

Intracellular localization of varicella-zoster virus ORF39 protein and its
functional relationship to glycoprotein K.

Govero J(1), Hall S, Heineman TC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Saint Louis University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110-0250, USA.

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) encodes two multiply inserted membrane proteins,
open reading frame (ORF) 39 protein (ORF39p) and glycoprotein K (gK). The HSV-1
homologs of these proteins are believed to act in conjunction with each other
during viral egress and cell-cell fusion, and they directly influence each
other's intracellular trafficking. However, ORF39p and VZV gK have received very 
limited study largely due to difficulties in producing antibodies to these highly
hydrophobic proteins. To overcome this obstacle, we introduced epitope tags into 
both ORF39p and gK and examined their intracellular distributions in transfected 
and infected cells. Our data demonstrate that both ORF39p and gK accumulate
predominately in the ER of cultured cells when expressed in the absence of other 
VZV proteins or when coexpressed in isolation from other VZV proteins. Therefore,
the transport of VZV ORF39p and gK does not exhibit the functional
interdependence seen in their HSV-1 homologs. However, during infection, the
primary distributions of ORF39p and gK shift from the ER to the Golgi, and they
are also found in the plasma membrane indicating that their intracellular
trafficking during infection depends on other VZV-encoded proteins. During
infection, ORF39p and gK tightly colocalize with VZV envelope glycoproteins B, E 
and H; however, the coexpression of ORF39p or gK with other individual viral
glycoproteins is insufficient to alter the transport of either ORF39p or gK.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2006.08.055 
PMID: 17027059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

