
1. Hum Vaccin. 2005 Mar-Apr;1(2):85-90. Epub 2005 Mar 16.

A non-living nasal influenza vaccine can induce major humoral and cellular immune
responses in humans without the need for adjuvants.

Samdal HH(1), Bakke H, Oftung F, Holst J, Haugen IL, Korsvold GE, Kristoffersen
AC, Krogh G, Nord K, Rappuoli R, Berstad AK, Haneberg B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Buskerud Hospital Trust, Drammen, and Haukeland
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. sahe@sb-hf.no

Twenty-eight healthy adult volunteers were immunized intranasally with an
inactivated whole-virus influenza vaccine based on the strain A/New
Caledonia/20/99 (H1N1), either in saline or mixed with formaldehyde-inactivated
Bordetella pertussis as a mucosal adjuvant, or in a thixotropic vehicle with
mucoadhesive properties. After four doses, all groups of vaccinees developed
significant IgG- and IgA-antibody responses, measured by ELISA, in respectively
serum and nasal secretions. None of the volunteers had demonstrable
hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) antibodies in serum before being immunized,
whereas more than 80% of them reached HAI titers>or=40, considered protective,
after immunizations. In addition, cellular immune responses, measured as
significant increases in CD4+ T-cell proliferation and granzyme B-producing
cytotoxic T-cells, were detected against the vaccine strain as well as against
heterologous virus strains (H3N2). However, no additive effect on these responses
could be demonstrated with use of B. pertussis or the thixotropic substance in
the present vaccines. It appeared, actually, that the mucoadhesive vehicle
containing the thixotropic substance was less efficient than were the two other
formulations. An influenza vaccine made as a simple particulate formulation of
inactivated virus, and given repeatedly onto the nasal mucosa, may thus be an
attractive alternative to currently available vaccines.

DOI: 10.4161/hv.1.2.1718 
PMID: 17038826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

