
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Feb;11(2):945-53.

Transformation by pp60src or stimulation of cells with epidermal growth factor
induces the stable association of tyrosine-phosphorylated cellular proteins with 
GTPase-activating protein.

Bouton AH(1), Kanner SB, Vines RR, Wang HC, Gibbs JB, Parsons JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cancer Center, University of Virginia Health
Sciences Center, Charlottesville 22908.

GTPase-activating protein (GAP) is a cytosolic protein that stimulates the rate
of hydrolysis of GTP (GTP to GDP) bound to normal p21ras, but does not catalyze
the hydrolysis of GTP bound to oncogenic, activated forms of the ras protein.
Transformation of cells with v-src or activated transforming variants of c-src or
stimulation of cells with epidermal growth factor resulted in the stable
association of GAP with two tyrosine-phosphorylated cellular proteins of 64 kDa
(p64) and 190 kDa (p190). Analysis of GAP immune complexes isolated from extracts
of metabolically labeled src-transformed cells and epidermal growth
factor-stimulated cells indicated that tyrosine phosphorylation of p64 and p190
appeared to be coincident with the stable association of these proteins with GAP.
Quantitation of the amount of p64 associated with GAP in v-src-transformed cells,
however, indicated that only 15 to 25% of tyrosine-phosphorylated p64 was found
in complex with GAP. Mutations within the SH2 region of pp60src that render
activated pp60src defective for transformation inhibited the efficient formation 
of complexes between GAP and the tyrosine-phosphorylated forms of p64 and p190.
From these data, we suggest that tyrosine phosphorylation and stable association 
of p64 with GAP is an important step in mediating cellular signaling through the 
p21ras-GAP pathway.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.11.2.945 
PMCID: PMC359756
PMID: 1703633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

