
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006;34(21):6116-25. Epub 2006 Nov 3.

Role of metal ions in catalysis by HIV integrase analyzed using a quantitative
PCR disintegration assay.

Diamond TL(1), Bushman FD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
3610 Hamilton Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6076, USA.

Paired metal ions have been proposed to be central to the catalytic mechanisms of
RNase H nucleases, bacterial transposases, Holliday junction resolvases,
retroviral integrases and many other enzymes. Here we present a sensitive assay
for DNA transesterification in which catalysis by human immunodeficiency
virus-type 1 (HIV-1) integrase (IN) connects two DNA strands (disintegration
reaction), allowing detection using quantitative PCR (qPCR). We present evidence 
suggesting that the three acidic residues of the IN active site function through 
metal binding using metal rescue. In this method, the catalytic acidic residues
were each substituted with cysteines. Mn2+ binds tightly to the sulfur atoms of
the cysteine residues, but Mg2+ does not. We found that Mn2+, but not Mg2+, could
rescue catalysis of each cysteine-substituted enzyme, providing evidence for
functionally important metal binding by all three residues. We also used the
PCR-boosted assay to show that HIV-1 IN could carry out transesterification
reactions involving DNA 5' hydroxyl groups as well as 3' hydroxyls as
nucleophiles. Lastly, we show that Mn2+ by itself (i.e. without enzyme) can
catalyze formation of a low level of PCR-amplifiable product under extreme
conditions, allowing us to estimate the rate enhancement due to the IN-protein
scaffold as at least 60 million-fold.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkl862 
PMCID: PMC1693899
PMID: 17085478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

