
1. J Virol. 2007 Jan;81(2):964-76. Epub 2006 Nov 8.

GB virus B disrupts RIG-I signaling by NS3/4A-mediated cleavage of the adaptor
protein MAVS.

Chen Z(1), Benureau Y, Rijnbrand R, Yi J, Wang T, Warter L, Lanford RE, Weinman
SA, Lemon SM, Martin A, Li K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Center for Hepatitis Research,
Institute for Human Infections & Immunity, University of Texas Medical Branch,
301 University Boulevard, Galveston, TX 77555-1019, USA.

Understanding the mechanisms of hepatitis C virus (HCV) pathogenesis and
persistence has been hampered by the lack of small, convenient animal models. GB 
virus B (GBV-B) is phylogenetically the closest related virus to HCV. It causes
generally acute and occasionally chronic hepatitis in small primates and is used 
as a surrogate model for HCV. It is not known, however, whether GBV-B has evolved
strategies to circumvent host innate defenses similar to those of HCV, a property
that may contribute to HCV persistence in vivo. We show here in cultured tamarin 
hepatocytes that GBV-B NS3/4A protease, but not a related catalytically inactive 
mutant, effectively blocks innate intracellular antiviral responses signaled
through the RNA helicase, retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I), an essential
sensor molecule that initiates host defenses against many RNA viruses, including 
HCV. GBV-B NS3/4A protease specifically cleaves mitochondrial antiviral signaling
protein (MAVS; also known as IPS-1/Cardif/VISA) and dislodges it from
mitochondria, thereby disrupting its function as a RIG-I adaptor and blocking
downstream activation of both interferon regulatory factor 3 and nuclear factor
kappa B. MAVS cleavage and abrogation of virus-induced interferon responses were 
also observed in Huh7 cells supporting autonomous replication of subgenomic GBV-B
RNAs. Our data indicate that, as in the case of HCV, GBV-B has evolved to utilize
its major protease to disrupt RIG-I signaling and impede innate antiviral
defenses. These data provide further support for the use of GBV-B infection in
small primates as an accurate surrogate model for deciphering virus-host
interactions in hepacivirus pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02076-06 
PMCID: PMC1797450
PMID: 17093192  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

