
1. J Gen Virol. 2007 Jan;88(Pt 1):196-206.

The nine C-terminal amino acids of the respiratory syncytial virus protein P are 
necessary and sufficient for binding to ribonucleoprotein complexes in which six 
ribonucleotides are contacted per N protein protomer.

Tran TL(1), Castagné N, Bhella D, Varela PF, Bernard J, Chilmonczyk S, Berkenkamp
S, Benhamo V, Grznarova K, Grosclaude J, Nespoulos C, Rey FA, Eléouët JF.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Virologie et Immunologie Moléculaires, INRA, 78350 Jouy-en-Josas,
France.

The respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) phosphoprotein (P) is a major polymerase
co-factor that interacts with both the large polymerase fragment (L) and the
nucleoprotein (N). The N-binding domain of RSV P has been investigated by
co-expression of RSV P and N proteins in Escherichia coli. Pull-down assays
performed with a series of truncated forms of P fused to glutathione
S-transferase (GST) revealed that the region comprising the last nine C-terminal 
amino acid residues of P (233-DNDLSLEDF-241) is sufficient for efficient binding 
to N. Site-directed mutagenesis shows that the last four residues of this peptide
are crucial for binding and must be present at the end of a flexible C-terminal
tail. The presence of the P oligomerization domain (residues 100-160) was an
important stabilizing factor for the interaction. The tetrameric full-length P
fused to GST was able to pull down both helical and ring structures, whereas a
monomeric C-terminal fragment of P (residues 161-241) fused to GST pulled down
exclusively RNA-N rings. Electron-microscopy analysis of the purified rings
showed the presence of two types of complex: undecamers (11N) and decamers (10N).
Mass-spectrometry analysis of the RNA extracted from rings after RNase A
treatment showed two peaks of 22,900 and 24,820 Da, corresponding to a mean RNA
length of 67 and 73 bases, respectively. These results suggest strongly that each
N subunit contacts 6 nt, with an extra three or four bases further protected from
nuclease digestion by the ring structure at both the 5' and 3' ends.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.82282-0 
PMID: 17170452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

