
1. J Virol. 2007 Apr;81(7):3272-84. Epub 2007 Jan 17.

Contrasting effects of human, canine, and hybrid adenovirus vectors on the
phenotypical and functional maturation of human dendritic cells: implications for
clinical efficacy.

Perreau M(1), Mennechet F, Serratrice N, Glasgow JN, Curiel DT, Wodrich H, Kremer
EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier, CNRS 5535, 1919 Route de
Mende, 34293 Montpellier, France.

Antipathogen immune responses create a balance between immunity, tolerance, and
immune evasion. However, during gene therapy most viral vectors are delivered in 
substantial doses and are incapable of expressing gene products that reduce the
host's ability to detect transduced cells. Gene transfer efficacy is also
modified by the in vivo transduction of dendritic cells (DC), which notably
increases the immunogenicity of virions and vector-encoded genes. In this study, 
we evaluated parameters that are relevant to the use of canine adenovirus
serotype 2 (CAV-2) vectors in the clinical setting by assaying their effect on
human monocyte-derived DC (hMoDC). We compared CAV-2 to human adenovirus (HAd)
vectors containing the wild-type virion, functional deletions in the penton base 
RGD motif, and the CAV-2 fiber knob. In contrast to the HAd type 5 (HAd5)-based
vectors, CAV-2 poorly transduced hMoDC, provoked minimal upregulation of major
histocompatibility complex class I/II and costimulatory molecules (CD40, CD80,
and CD86), and induced negligible morphological changes indicative of DC
maturation. Functional maturation assay results (e.g., reduced antigen uptake;
tumor necrosis factor alpha, interleukin-1beta [IL-1beta], gamma interferon
[IFN-gamma], IL-10, IL-12, and IFN-alpha/beta secretion; and stimulation of
heterologous T-cell proliferation) were also significantly lower for CAV-2. Our
data suggested that this was due, in part, to the use of an alternative receptor 
and a block in vesicular escape. Additionally, HAd5 vector-induced hMoDC
maturation was independent of the aforementioned cytokines. Paradoxically, an
HAd5/CAV-2 hybrid vector induced the greatest phenotypical and functional
maturation of hMoDC. Our data suggest that CAV-2 and the HAd5/CAV-2 vector may be
the antithesis of Adenoviridae immunogenicity and that each may have specific
clinical advantages.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01530-06 
PMCID: PMC1866049
PMID: 17229706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

