
1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 30;282(13):9612-20. Epub 2007 Feb 2.

HIV gp41 C-terminal heptad repeat contains multifunctional domains. Relation to
mechanisms of action of anti-HIV peptides.

Liu S(1), Jing W, Cheung B, Lu H, Sun J, Yan X, Niu J, Farmar J, Wu S, Jiang S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou
510515, China. liusw269@gmail.com

T20 (Fuzeon), a novel anti-human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) drug, is a peptide 
derived from HIV-1 gp41 C-terminal heptad repeat (CHR). Its mechanism of action
has not yet been defined. We applied Pepscan strategy to determine the
relationship between functional domains and mechanisms of action of five 36-mer
overlapping peptides with a shift of five amino acids (aa): CHR-1 (aa 623-658),
C36 (aa 628-663), CHR-3 (aa 633-668), T20 (aa 638-673), and CHR-5 (aa 643-678).
C36 is a peptide with addition of two aa to the N terminus of C34. Peptides CHR-1
and C36 contain N-terminal heptad repeat (NHR)- and pocket-binding domains. They 
inhibited HIV-1 fusion by interacting with gp41 NHR, forming stable six-helix
bundles and blocking gp41 core formation. Peptide T20 containing partial NHR- and
lipid-binding domains, but lacking pocket-binding domain, blocked viral fusion by
binding its N- and C-terminal sequences with gp41 NHR and cell membrane,
respectively. Peptide CHR-3, which is located in the middle between C36 and T20, 
overlaps >86% of the sequences of these two peptides, and lacks pocket- and
lipid-binding domains, exhibited marginal anti-HIV-1 activity. These results
suggest that T20 and C36 contain different functional domains, through which they
inhibit HIV-1 entry with distinct mechanisms of action. The multiple functional
domains in gp41 CHR and their binding partners may serve as targets for rational 
design of new anti-HIV-1 drugs and vaccines.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M609148200 
PMID: 17276993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

