
1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2007 May;292(5):H2040-50. Epub 2007 Feb 9.

Oxygen sensing and redox signaling: the role of thioredoxin in embryonic
development and cardiac diseases.

Kobayashi-Miura M(1), Shioji K, Hoshino Y, Masutani H, Nakamura H, Yodoi J.

Author information: 
(1)Departmrnt of Biological Responses, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto
University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 6068507, Japan.
mmiura@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

It is important to regulate the oxygen concentration and scavenge oxygen radicals
throughout the life of animals. In mammalian embryos, proper oxygen concentration
gradually increases in utero and excessive oxygen is rather toxic during early
embryonic development. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are generated as by-products
in the respiratory system and increased under inflammatory conditions. In the
pathogenesis of a variety of adult human diseases such as cancer and
cardiovascular disorders, ROS cause an enhancement of tissue injuries. ROS
promote not only the development of atherosclerosis but also tissue injury during
the reperfusion process. The thioredoxin (TRX) system is one of the most
important mechanisms for regulating the redox balance. TRX is a small redox
active protein distributed ubiquitously in various mammalian tissues and cells.
TRX acts as not only an antioxidant but also an anti-inflammatory and an
antiapoptotic protein. TRX is induced by oxidative stress and released from cells
in response to oxidative stress. In various human diseases, the serum/plasma
level of TRX is a well-recognized biomarker of oxidative stress. Here we discuss 
the roles of TRX on oxygen stress and redox regulation from different
perspectives, in embryogenesis and in adult diseases focusing on cardiac
disorders.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.01316.2006 
PMID: 17293486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

