
1. J Viral Hepat. 2007 May;14(5):338-49.

Correlation of amino acid variations within nonstructural 4B protein with initial
viral kinetics during interferon-alpha-based therapy in HCV-1b-infected patients.

Welker MW(1), Hofmann WP, Welsch C, von Wagner M, Herrmann E, Lengauer T, Zeuzem 
S, Sarrazin C.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Innere Medizin II, Universitätsklinikum des Saarlandes,
Homburg/Saar, Germany.

Chronic hepatitis C is a major cause of liver cirrhosis leading to chronic liver 
failure and hepatocellular carcinoma. Different hepatitis C virus (HCV) proteins 
have been associated with resistance to interferon-alpha-based therapy. However, 
the exact mechanisms of virus-mediated interferon resistance are not completely
understood. The importance of amino acid (aa) variations within the HCV
nonstructural (NS)4B protein for replication efficiency and viral decline during 
the therapy is unknown. We investigated pretreatment sera from 42 patients with
known outcome to interferon-based therapy. The complete NS4B gene was amplified
and sequenced. Mutational analyses of predicted conformational, functional,
structural and phylogenetic properties of the deduced aa sequences were
performed. The complete NS4B protein was highly conserved with a median frequency
of 0.015 +/- 0.009 aa exchanges (median +/- SD, 4.00 +/- 2.31). Especially within
the predicted transmembranous domains of the NS4B protein, the mean number of aa 
variations was low (median frequency, 0.013 +/- 0.013). Neither the number of aa 
variations nor specific aa exchanges were correlated with HCV RNA serum
concentration at baseline. A rapid initial HCV RNA decline of >/=1.5 log(10)
IU/mL at week 2 of interferon-based therapy was associated with a higher
frequency of nonconservative aa exchanges within the complete NS4B protein in
comparison with patients with a nonrapid HCV RNA decline (median frequency, 0.011
+/- 0.005 vs 0.004 +/- 0.003, P = 0.006). Overall, the aa sequence of the NS4B
protein was highly conserved, indicating an important role for replication in
vivo. Amino acid variations with relevant changes of physicochemical properties
may influence replication efficiency, associated with a rapid early virological
response.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2006.00798.x 
PMID: 17439523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

