
1. J Virol. 2007 Jul;81(13):7077-85. Epub 2007 Apr 25.

Human cytomegalovirus UL84 interacts with an RNA stem-loop sequence found within 
the RNA/DNA hybrid region of oriLyt.

Colletti KS(1), Smallenburg KE, Xu Y, Pari GS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Nevada--Reno, Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine,
Howard Bldg., Reno, NV 89557, USA.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) lytic DNA replication is initiated at the complex
cis-acting oriLyt region, which spans nearly 3 kb. DNA synthesis requires six
core proteins together with UL84 and IE2. Previously, two essential regions were 
identified within oriLyt. Essential region I (nucleotides [nt] 92209 to 92573)
can be replaced with the constitutively active simian virus 40 promoter, which in
turn eliminates the requirement for IE2 in the origin-dependent
transient-replication assay. Essential region II (nt 92979 to 93513) contains two
elements of interest: an RNA/DNA hybrid domain and an inverted repeat sequence
capable of forming a stem-loop structure. Our studies now reveal for the first
time that UL84 interacts with a stem-loop RNA oligonucleotide in vitro, and
although UL84 interacted with other nucleic acid substrates, a specific
interaction occurred only with the RNA stem-loop. Increasing concentrations of
purified UL84 produced a remarkable downward-staircase pattern, which is not due 
to a nuclease activity but is dependent upon the presence of secondary
structures, suggesting that UL84 modifies the conformation of the RNA substrate. 
Cross-linking experiments show that UL84 possibly changes the conformation of the
RNA substrate. The addition of purified IE2 to the in vitro binding reaction did 
not affect binding to the stem-loop structure. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays performed using infected cells and purified virus show that UL84 is bound 
to oriLyt in a region adjacent to the RNA/DNA hybrid and the stem-loop structure.
These results solidify UL84 as the potential initiator of HCMV DNA replication
through a unique interaction with a conserved RNA stem-loop structure within
oriLyt.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00058-07 
PMCID: PMC1933308
PMID: 17459920  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

