
1. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2007 Sep;66(9):809-18.

Induction of activator protein-1 and nuclear factor-kappaB as a prerequisite for 
disease development in susceptible SJL/J mice after theiler murine
encephalomyelitis.

Gerhauser I(1), Ulrich R, Alldinger S, Baumg√§rtner W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Hannover,
Germany.

Theiler murine encephalomyelitis (TME) represents an important mouse model of
multiple sclerosis. Activator protein and nuclear factor-kappaB proteins are
interacting transcription factors controlling the expression of cytokines
involved in the demyelination process. However, specific expression patterns of
these transcription factors in susceptible and resistant mouse strains and their 
relationship to demyelination remains to be determined. The expression of
activator protein-1 (c-fos and c-jun) and nuclear factor-kappaB (p50 and p65)
genes, TME virus, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and interferon-gamma was
investigated in the spinal cord of TME virus (BeAn strain)-infected SJL/J and
C57BL/6 mice until 196 days postinfection (dpi) using reverse
transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Additionally, c-fos, c-jun,
and p50 expression was examined by applying immunohistochemistry. In susceptible 
SJL/J mice, in contrast to resistant C57BL/6 mice, all investigated mRNA
transcripts were upregulated in the early (0-7 days dpi) and late phases (28-196 
days dpi) of TME. In addition, white matter lesions of SL/J mice were
characterized by c-jun-positive astrocytes and p50-positive mononuclear immune
cells. Upregulation of activator protein-1 and nuclear factor-kappaB in resident 
glial cells in the early phase followed by strong downstream tumor necrosis
factor-alpha production might account for disease development in susceptible
SJL/J mice. In the late phase, the formation of JUN/JUN homodimers in
intralesional astrocytes might contribute to the sustained release of
proinflammatory cytokines, thereby promoting disease progression.

DOI: 10.1097/nen.0b013e3181461f31 
PMID: 17805011  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

