
1. Hepatology. 2008 Jan;47(1):17-24.

Hepatitis C virus cell-cell transmission in hepatoma cells in the presence of
neutralizing antibodies.

Timpe JM(1), Stamataki Z, Jennings A, Hu K, Farquhar MJ, Harris HJ, Schwarz A,
Desombere I, Roels GL, Balfe P, McKeating JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
United Kingdom.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection of Huh-7.5 hepatoma cells results in focal
areas of infection where transmission is potentiated by cell-cell contact. To
define route(s) of transmission, HCV was allowed to infect hepatoma cells in the 
presence or absence of antibodies that neutralize cell-free virus infectivity.
Neutralizing antibodies (nAbs) reduced cell-free virus infectivity by >95% and
had minimal effect(s) on the frequency of infected cells in the culture. To
assess whether cell-cell transfer of viral infectivity occurs, HCV-infected cells
were cocultured with fluorescently labeled na√Øve cells in the presence or absence
of nAbs. Enumeration by flow cytometry demonstrated cell-cell transfer of
infectivity in the presence or absence of nAbs and immunoglobulins from HCV(+)
patients. The host cell molecule CD81 and the tight junction protein Claudin 1
(CLDN1) are critical factors defining HCV entry. Soluble CD81 and anti-CD81
abrogated cell-free infection of Huh-7.5 and partially inhibited cell-cell
transfer of infection. CD81-negative HepG2 hepatoma cells were resistant to
cell-free virus infection but became infected after coculturing with JFH-infected
cells in the presence of nAb, confirming that CD81-independent routes of
cell-cell transmission exist. Further experiments with 293T and 293T-CLDN1
targets suggested that cell-cell transmission is dependent on CLDN1
expression.CONCLUSION: These data suggest that HCV can transmit in vitro by at
least two routes, cell-free virus infection and direct transfer between cells,
with the latter offering a novel route for evading nAbs.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.21959 
PMID: 17941058  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

