
1. Retrovirology. 2007 Oct 30;4:79.

Human immunodeficiency virus integrase inhibitors efficiently suppress feline
immunodeficiency virus replication in vitro and provide a rationale to redesign
antiretroviral treatment for feline AIDS.

Savarino A(1), Pistello M, D'Ostilio D, Zabogli E, Taglia F, Mancini F, Ferro S, 
Matteucci D, De Luca L, Barreca ML, Ciervo A, Chimirri A, Ciccozzi M, Bendinelli 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Infectious, Parasitic and Immune-mediated Diseases, Istituto
Superiore di Sanit√†, Viale Regina Elena, 299, 00161, Rome, Italy.
andrea.savarino@iss.it

BACKGROUND: Treatment of feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infection has been
hampered by the absence of a specific combination antiretroviral treatment (ART).
Integrase strand transfer inhibitors (INSTIs) are emerging as a promising new
drug class for HIV-1 treatment, and we evaluated the possibility of inhibiting
FIV replication using INSTIs.
METHODS: Phylogenetic analysis of lentiviral integrase (IN) sequences was carried
out using the PAUP* software. A theoretical three-dimensional structure of the
FIV IN catalytic core domain (CCD) was obtained by homology modeling based on a
crystal structure of HIV-1 IN CCD. The interaction of the transferred strand of
viral DNA with the catalytic cavity of FIV IN was deduced from a crystal
structure of a structurally similar transposase complexed with transposable DNA. 
Molecular docking simulations were conducted using a genetic algorithm (GOLD).
Antiviral activity was tested in feline lymphoblastoid MBM cells acutely infected
with the FIV Petaluma strain. Circular and total proviral DNA was quantified by
real-time PCR.
RESULTS: The calculated INSTI-binding sites were found to be nearly identical in 
FIV and HIV-1 IN CCDs. The close similarity of primate and feline lentivirus IN
CCDs was also supported by phylogenetic analysis. In line with these
bioinformatic analyses, FIV replication was efficiently inhibited in acutely
infected cell cultures by three investigational INSTIs, designed for HIV-1 and
belonging to different classes. Of note, the naphthyridine carboxamide INSTI,
L-870,810 displayed an EC50 in the low nanomolar range. Inhibition of FIV
integration in situ was shown by real-time PCR experiments that revealed
accumulation of circular forms of FIV DNA within cells treated with L-870,810.
CONCLUSION: We report a drug class (other than nucleosidic reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors) that is capable of inhibiting FIV replication in vitro. The present
study helped establish L-870,810, a compound successfully tested in human
clinical trials, as one of the most potent anti-FIV agents ever tested in vitro. 
This finding may provide new avenues for treating FIV infection and contribute to
the development of a small animal model mimicking the effects of ART in humans.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-4-79 
PMCID: PMC2244644
PMID: 17971219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

