
1. BioDrugs. 1998 Oct;10(4):317-28.

Rabies vaccines: a review of progress towards improved efficacy and safety.

Tsiang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Rabies Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. htsiang@pasteur.fr

Over the years, the technology for producing human rabies vaccines has undergone 
many improvements. These improvements consist in the use of tissue cultures for
the production of viral antigens, replacing the former nervous tissue substrate
vaccines. The low virus yields in tissue cultures led to the development of the
concentration and purification of virus supernatants. Another technical
improvement was obtained by using microcarriers for virus production in VERO cell
suspension cultures. This technique permits commercial-scale production of rabies
vaccine, lowering production costs and thus extending the availability of the
vaccine to a broader population in developing countries. Besides improvements in 
rabies vaccine production technology, the use of various vaccination regimens and
routes of administration in field trials has resulted in considerable gains in
our experience of postexposure treatment (PET) of this disease. The standard WHO 
recommended regimen for PET using concentrated and purified tissue culture
vaccines consists of a 5-dose course of intramuscular injections at days 0, 3, 7,
14 and 28. Reduced vaccination regimens such as the 2-1-1 have been proven to be 
efficient in raising protective antibody responses. Reduction in the total volume
of rabies vaccine is also possible by using the intradermal route of injection,
provided the vaccine is administered at several sites. The overall consequence is
a progressive shift in the worldwide use of rabies vaccines from those of nervous
tissue origin to the contemporary tissue culture vaccines.

DOI: 10.2165/00063030-199810040-00006 
PMID: 18020604 

