
1. PLoS One. 2008 Jan 16;3(1):e1433. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001433.

Protection by the NDI1 gene against neurodegeneration in a rotenone rat model of 
Parkinson's disease.

Marella M(1), Seo BB, Nakamaru-Ogiso E, Greenamyre JT, Matsuno-Yagi A, Yagi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry, Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine,
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California, United States of America.

It is widely recognized that mitochondrial dysfunction, most notably defects in
the NADH-quinone oxidoreductase (complex I), is closely related to the etiology
of sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). In fact, rotenone, a complex I inhibitor,
has been used for establishing PD models both in vitro and in vivo. A rat model
with chronic rotenone exposure seems to reproduce pathophysiological conditions
of PD more closely than acute mouse models as manifested by neuronal cell death
in the substantia nigra and Lewy body-like cytosolic aggregations. Using the
rotenone rat model, we investigated the protective effects of alternative NADH
dehydrogenase (Ndi1) which we previously demonstrated to act as a replacement for
complex I both in vitro and in vivo. A single, unilateral injection of
recombinant adeno-associated virus carrying the NDI1 gene into the vicinity of
the substantia nigra resulted in expression of the Ndi1 protein in the entire
substantia nigra of that side. It was clear that the introduction of the Ndi1
protein in the substantia nigra rendered resistance to the deleterious effects
caused by rotenone exposure as assessed by the levels of tyrosine hydroxylase and
dopamine. The presence of the Ndi1 protein also prevented cell death and
oxidative damage to DNA in dopaminergic neurons observed in rotenone-treated
rats. Unilateral protection also led to uni-directional rotation of the
rotenone-exposed rats in the behavioral test. The present study shows, for the
first time, the powerful neuroprotective effect offered by the Ndi1 enzyme in a
rotenone rat model of PD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001433 
PMCID: PMC2175531
PMID: 18197244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

