
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1976 Aug;73(8):2614-8.

Regulation of active alpha-aminoisobutyric acid transport expressed in membrane
vesicles from mouse fibroblasts.

Lever JE.

Membrane vesicles isolated from untransformed Balb/c and Swiss mouse fibroblasts 
and from those transformed by simian virus 40 catalyzed carrier-mediated uptake
of L-alpha-aminoisobutyric acid. Concentrative uptake required the presence of a 
Na+ gradient (external Na+ greater than internal Na+) and occurred independently 
of endogenous (Na+ + K+) ATPase activity. This process is electrogenic, since
uptake was stimulated by a K+ diffusion gradient (internal greater external) in
the presence of valinomycin or by the addition of the Na+ salt of a permeant ion,
conditions expected to create an interior-negative membrane potential. Both the
initial rate of concentrative uptake of L-alpha-aminoisobutyric acid and its
maximal accumulation, driven by a standard Na+ gradient, were decreased in
vesicles from density-inhibited, untransformed cells and increased in those from 
cells transformed by simian virus 40 compared with vesicles from proliferating
untransformed cells. An increased maximal velocity (Vmax) of uptake stimulated by
Na+ gradient was observed in vesicles from transformed cells compared with those 
from untransformed cells, suggesting an increase in the number of carriers or in 
their mobility. Since the relative extent of accumulation of this model amino
acid driven by a standard Na+ gradient also differed with growth or transformed
status, an additional possibility for cellular regulation of this process could
be alteration of membrane Na+ permeability or carrier response to Na+.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.73.8.2614 
PMCID: PMC430698
PMID: 183203  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

