
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2008 Mar;87(2):87-98. doi: 10.1097/MD.0b013e31816be95c.

Heat shock protein A1B 1267 polymorphism is highly associated with risk and
prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma: a case-control study.

Jeng JE(1), Tsai JF, Chuang LY, Ho MS, Lin ZY, Hsieh MY, Chen SC, Chuang WL, Wang
LY, Yu ML, Dai CY, Chang JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, College of Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

We conducted a case-control study to elucidate the role of heat shock protein A1B
(HSPA1B) 1267 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) on the risk and prognosis of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Subjects enrolled included 150 pairs of sex- and 
age-matched HCC patients and unrelated controls. Genomic DNA was typed for
HSPA1B1267 SNP using polymerase chain reaction with restriction fragment length
polymorphism. The frequencies of the HSPA1B P2/P2 genotype and the HSPA1B P2
allele in HCC patients were higher than in unrelated controls (each p = 0.0001). 
Multivariate analysis identified the following independent risk factors for HCC: 
HSPA1B P1/P2 genotype (odds ratio [OR], 2.34; 95% confidence interval [CI],
1.07-5.11), HSPA1B P2/P2 genotype (OR, 12.06; 95% CI, 4.43-32.79), hepatitis B
surface antigen (HBsAg) (OR, 25.95; 95% CI, 11.88-56.68), and antibodies to
hepatitis C virus (anti-HCV) (OR, 70.43; 95% CI, 21.89-226.64). There was an
additive interaction between HSPA1B P2 allele carriers and the presence of either
HBsAg (synergy index = 2.48) or anti-HCV (synergy index = 1.52). However, as
HSPA1B1267 SNP is a silent mutation, it is a surrogate genetic marker for
increasing risk of HCC. Our findings indicate that patients with chronic
hepatitis B/hepatitis C virus infection who harbor this SNP represent a high-risk
group for HCC. They should receive more intensive surveillance for early
detection of HCC. Moreover, patients with the HSPA1B P2 allele had significantly 
longer survival (p = 0.002).The limitations of this study include the unknown
functional significance of the HSPA1B1267 polymorphism, the relatively small
sample size, the fact that this was not a prospective study of cases and
controls, and the questionable generalizability of the findings given the
specific ethnic composition of the population studied.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0b013e31816be95c 
PMID: 18344806  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

