
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2008 Jun;25(6):1138-47. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msn059. Epub 2008 Mar 
18.

Evolutionary genomics of host adaptation in vesicular stomatitis virus.

Remold SK(1), Rambaut A, Turner PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Louisville, USA.
susanna.remold@louisville.edu

Populations experiencing similar selection pressures can sometimes diverge in the
genetic architectures underlying evolved complex traits. We used RNA virus
populations of large size and high mutation rate to study the impact of
historical environment on genome evolution, thus increasing our ability to detect
repeatable patterns in the evolution of genetic architecture. Experimental
vesicular stomatitis virus populations were evolved on HeLa cells, on MDCK cells,
or on alternating hosts. Turner and Elena (2000. Cost of host radiation in an RNA
virus. Genetics. 156:1465-1470.) previously showed that virus populations evolved
in single-host environments achieved high fitness on their selected hosts but
failed to increase in fitness relative to their ancestor on the unselected host
and that alternating-host-evolved populations had high fitness on both hosts.
Here we determined the complete consensus sequence for each evolved population
after 95 generations to gauge whether the parallel phenotypic changes were
associated with parallel genomic changes. We also analyzed the patterns of allele
substitutions to discern whether differences in fitness across hosts arose
through true pleiotropy or the presence of not only a mutation that is beneficial
in both hosts but also 1 or more mutations at other loci that are costly in the
unselected environment (mutation accumulation [MA]). We found that ecological
history may influence to what extent pleiotropy and MA contribute to fitness
asymmetries across environments. We discuss the degree to which current genetic
architecture is expected to constrain future evolution of complex traits, such as
host use by RNA viruses.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msn059 
PMID: 18353798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

