
1. J Gen Virol. 2008 May;89(Pt 5):1288-1299. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.83362-0.

Modulation of the immune responses in chickens by low-pathogenicity avian
influenza virus H9N2.

Xing Z(1), Cardona CJ(2), Li J(2), Dao N(2), Tran T(1), Andrada J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
(2)Department of Population Health and Reproduction, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Most low-pathogenicity avian influenza (LPAI) viruses cause no or mild disease in
avian species. Little is known about the mechanisms of host defence and the
immune responses of avian influenza-infected birds. This study showed that
chicken macrophages are susceptible to infection with LPAI H9N2 and H6N2 viruses 
and that infection led to apoptosis. In H9N2 virus-infected chicken macrophages, 
Toll-like receptor 7 responded to infection and mediated the cytokine responses. 
Whilst pro-inflammatory cytokines were largely upregulated, the interferon (IFN) 
response was fairly weak and IFN-inducible genes were differentially regulated.
Among the regulated genes, major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens II
were downregulated, which also occurred in the lungs of H9N2-infected chickens.
Additionally, interleukin (IL)-4, IL-4 receptor and CD74 (MHC class II invariable
chain) were also downregulated, all of which are pivotal in the activation of
CD4+ helper T cells and humoral immunity. Remarkably, in H9N2 virus-infected
chickens, the antibody response was severely suppressed. This was in contrast to 
the robust antibody response in chickens infected with H6N2 virus, in which
expression of MHC class II antigens was upregulated. These data suggest that
neutralizing antibodies and humoral immunity may not be developed efficiently in 
H9N2-infected chickens. These findings raise questions about how some LPAI
viruses differentially regulate avian immune responses and whether they have
similar effects on mammalian immune function.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.83362-0 
PMID: 18420808  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

