
1. Sex Health. 2008 Jun;5(2):155-9.

Sexually transmissible infection and HIV management among men who have sex with
men with and without HIV: survey of medical practitioners who are members of the 
Australasian Society for HIV Medicine.

Fairley CK(1), Fehler G, Lewin SR, Pitts M, Chen MY, Bradshaw CS, Hocking JS.

Author information: 
(1)Melbourne Sexual Health Centre, 580 Swanston Street, Carlton, Vic. 3053,
Australia. cfairley@unimelb.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Rates of HIV in New South Wales (NSW) have been stable, but have
increased significantly in other Australian states. The reasons for this are
unknown and may be associated with differences in the management of sexually
transmissible infections (STI) and HIV in different states in Australia. Our aim 
was to determine if the use of suppressive treatment for genital herpes, the
treatment of HIV or STI screening practices were different between states in
Australia.
METHODS: This study was a cross-sectional survey of medical practitioners who are
S100 prescribers and members of the Australian Society for HIV Medicine.
RESULTS: In general, there were no differences between the clinical practices of 
practitioners in NSW and other states except that in NSW fewer practitioners
tested HIV-positive men who have sex with men (MSM) for syphilis annually (NSW
78% v. others 87%, P = 0.04) or treated MSM with advanced HIV disease (CD4 < 150 
x 10(6) cells L(-1)) with acicylovir in the absence of herpes simplex virus (HSV)
(NSW 4% v. others 13%, P = 0.03), and more practitioners in NSW tested
HIV-negative MSM for HSV type-specific serology (NSW 21% v. others 11%, P =
0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: It is unlikely that the minor differences in HSV and HIV treatment
or STI screening practices among practitioners in NSW and other Australian states
explains the differences in HIV notifications between these two areas.

DOI: 10.1071/sh07094 
PMID: 18588780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

