
1. Mol Microbiol. 2008 Sep;69(5):1255-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06356.x.
Epub 2008 Jul 8.

Recombination of synthetic oligonucleotides with prokaryotic chromosomes:
substrate requirements of the Escherichia coli/lambdaRed and Sulfolobus
acidocaldarius recombination systems.

Grogan DW(1), Stengel KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cincinnati, 614 Rieveschl
Hall, ML 0006, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0006, USA. grogandw@email.uc.edu

In order to reveal functional properties of recombination involving short ssDNAs 
in hyperthermophilic archaea, we evaluated oligonucleotide-mediated
transformation (OMT) in Sulfolobus acidocaldarius and Escherichia coli as a
function of the molecular properties of the ssDNA substrates. Unmodified ssDNAs
as short as 20-22 nt yielded recombinants in both organisms, as did longer DNAs
forming as few as 2-5 base pairs on one side of the genomic mutation. The two OMT
systems showed similar responses to certain end modifications of the
oligonucleotides, but E. coli was found to require a 5' phosphate on 5'-limited
ssDNA whereas this requirement was not evident in S. acidocaldarius. The ability 
of both E. coli and S. acidocaldarius to incorporate short, mismatched ssDNAs
into their genomes raises questions about the biological significance of this
capability, including its phylogenetic distribution among microorganisms and its 
impact on genome stability. These questions seem particularly relevant for S.
acidocaldarius, as this archaeon has natural competence for OMT, encodes no MutSL
homologues and thrives under environmental conditions that accelerate DNA
decomposition.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06356.x 
PMID: 18631240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

