
1. AIDS. 2008 Sep 12;22(14):1809-13. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e328307f24a.

Pattern and impact of emerging resistance mutations in treatment experienced
patients failing darunavir-containing regimen.

Delaugerre C(1), Pavie J, Palmer P, Ghosn J, Blanche S, Roudiere L, Dominguez S, 
Mortier E, Molina JM, de Truchis P.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Department, Saint Louis Hospital-APHP, Paris, France.
constance.delaugerre@sls.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND: Ritonavir-boosted darunavir (DRV/r) has proven potent efficacy when
used in heavily pretreated patients, harboring protease inhibitor-associated
resistance mutations. Limited data are available on resistance pattern emerging
in patients failing DRV/r and on subsequent remaining protease inhibitor options.
METHODS: Analysis of baseline and failure resistance genotypes were performed in 
patients experiencing virologic failure (>200 copies/ml) after at least 3 months 
on a DRV/r (600/100 mg twice daily)-containing regimen.
RESULTS: Twenty-five highly protease inhibitor-experienced patients were
included. Baseline median human immunodeficiency virus type 1 RNA was 5 log10
copies/ml and number of total-protease inhibitor, major-protease inhibitor and
DRV-associated-resistance mutations was 13, 4 and 3, respectively. Median viral
replication duration on DRV/r selective pressure was 34 weeks. Emergence of
DRV-associated-resistance mutations was observed in 72% (18/25) of patients, at
codons L89I/M/V (32%), V32I (28%), V11I (20%), I47V/A (20%), I54L/M (20%), L33F/I
(16%) and I50V (16%). A high risk of DRV resistance was observed in patients with
2 and 3 baseline DRV-associated-resistance mutations and in patients with more
than 24 weeks of ongoing viral replication. According to 2007 ANRS algorithm,
isolates classified as susceptible to ritonavir-boosted tipranavir decreased from
baseline to failure from 76 to 60% and susceptible to DRV/r from 32 to 12%.
CONCLUSION: Emerging mutations observed after DRV/r failure were those already
described to impact the DRV efficacy. Our study provided recommendations to
firstly, reconsider lowering the cutoff number of DRV mutations to two; secondly,
avoid keeping patients on a DRV-failing regimen for more than 24 weeks and
thirdly, to examine the efficacy of using tipranavir after DRV failure.

DOI: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e328307f24a 
PMID: 18690163  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

