
1. Vaccine. 1991 May;9(5):364-8.

Immunogenicity achieved by the intradermal hepatitis B vaccination programme for 
US Army soldiers in Korea.

Ronish RH(1), Diniega BM, Kelley PW, Sjogren MH, Arday DR, Aronson NE, Hoke CH,
Petruccelli BP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Preventive Medicine, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research,
Washington, DC 20307-5100.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infections are a significant threat to the 30,000 US Army
soldiers stationed in South Korea. Hepatitis B surface antigen carrier rates in
some Korean populations may run as high as 15%, and HBV incidence estimates for
US soldiers in Korea have ranged from 0.6 to 6% per year. In response to this
threat, on 1 October 1986 the US Army instituted a mandatory three-dose (0,
30-60, and 60+ days), 0.1 ml per dose, intradermal (i.d.) immunization regimen
for all soldiers bound for permanent assignments in Korea. Although shown to be
immunogenic in experimental studies, the i.d. route had never been attempted on
as large a scale as in this operational setting. During September 1987, an
evaluation of programme compliance and immune response was conducted. For those
who received three doses according to schedule, antibody response was similar to 
that reported by previous controlled trials that used the i.d. approach. The
three-dose i.d. series appeared to provide protective antibody levels in at least
67% of soldiers, but, consistent with previous trials, antibody levels were
approximately one-half those obtained following intramuscular vaccination. We
conclude that, as a cost-reduction strategy, wide-scale use of intradermal
hepatitis B vaccine may be useful in situations characterized by short-term
increased HBV infection risk.

DOI: 10.1016/0264-410x(91)90065-e 
PMID: 1872022  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

