
1. Antivir Chem Chemother. 2008;19(2):75-105.

Antiviral Chemistry & Chemotherapy's current antiviral agents FactFile (2nd
edition): retroviruses and hepadnaviruses.

De Clercq E(1), Field HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Rega Institute for Medical Research, Leuven, Belgium.

There are at present exactly 25 compounds that have been formally approved for
the treatment of retrovirus (that is HIV) infections: seven nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs), one nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitor 
(NtRTI), four non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs), 10
protease inhibitors (PIs), one coreceptor inhibitor (CRI), one fusion inhibitor
(FI) and one integrase inhibitor (INI). Other compounds expected to be approved
for the treatment of HIV infections in the near future are the NNRTI rilpivirine,
the CRI vicriviroc and the INI elvitegravir. To obtain synergistic activity,
enable lower dosage levels, thus minimizing toxic side effects, and particularly 
to reduce the risk of drug resistance development, common wisdom dictates that
the HIV inhibitors should be used in drug combination regimens. Although, given
the number of compounds available, the drug combinations that could be concocted 
are uncountable, only one triple-drug combination has so far been formulated as
single pill to be taken orally once daily, namely Atripla containing the NtRTI
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, the NRTI emtricitabine and the NNRTI efavirenz.
Here, we document these approved compounds along with other HIV-active compounds 
and, for the first time, compounds whose principal activity is against hepatitis 
B virus. The logic of this new division being the enzymatic similarity between
the reverse transcriptase of HIV and hepatitis B virus; the strategies for the
development of antiviral agents to combat them have much in common.

DOI: 10.1177/095632020801900205 
PMID: 18727442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

