
1. Int J Cancer. 2008 Dec 15;123(12):2824-31. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23845.

Patients with Epstein Barr virus-positive lymphomas have decreased CD4(+) T-cell 
responses to the viral nuclear antigen 1.

Heller KN(1), Arrey F, Steinherz P, Portlock C, Chadburn A, Kelly K, MÃ¼nz C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Immunobiology, Christopher H. Browne Center for Immunology
and Immune Diseases, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.

Epstein Barr virus (EBV) causes lymphomas in immune competent and, at increased
frequencies, in immune compromised patients. In the presence of an intact immune 
system, EBV-associated lymphomas express in most cases only 3 or fewer EBV
antigens at the protein level, always including the nuclear antigen 1 of EBV
(EBNA1). EBNA1 is a prominent target for EBV-specific CD4(+) T cell and humoral
immune responses in healthy EBV carriers. Here we demonstrate that patients with 
EBV-associated lymphomas, primarily Hodgkin's lymphoma, lack detectable
EBNA1-specific CD4(+) T-cell responses and have slightly altered EBNA1-specific
antibody titers at diagnosis. In contrast, the majority of EBV-negative lymphoma 
patients had detectable IFN-gamma expression and proliferation by CD4(+) T cells 
in response to EBNA1, and carry EBNA1-specific immunoglobulins at levels similar 
to healthy virus carriers. Other EBV antigens, which were not present in the
tumors, were recognized in less EBV positive, than negative lymphoma patients,
but detectable responses reached similar CD8(+) T cell frequencies in both
cohorts. Patients with EBV-positive and -negative lymphomas did not differ in
T-cell responses in influenza-specific CD4(+) T cell proliferation and in
antibody titers against tetanus toxoid. These data suggest a selective loss of
EBNA1-specific immune control in EBV-associated lymphoma patients, which should
be targeted for immunotherapy of these malignancies.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.23845 
PMCID: PMC2605183
PMID: 18781564  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

