
1. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2008 Sep;42 Suppl 3 Pt 1:S126-9. doi:
10.1097/MCG.0b013e31816fc2f6.

Use of VSL[sharp]3 in the treatment of rotavirus diarrhea in children:
preliminary results.

Dubey AP(1), Rajeshwari K, Chakravarty A, Famularo G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi, India.
apdubey52@rediffmail.com

We conducted a double-blind randomized placebo-controlled study to evaluate
efficacy and tolerability of VSL[sharp]3 (CD Pharma India) in the treatment of
acute rotavirus diarrhea in children. The patients were randomly assigned to
receive 4 days of oral treatment with VSL[sharp]3 probiotic mixture or placebo in
addition to usual care for diarrhea.RESULTS: Out of 230 rotavirus-positive acute 
diarrhea children, 224 children completed the study, (113 in the drug group and
111 in the placebo group). At recruitment on Day 1, there were no significant
differences between the 2 groups in terms of frequency of vomiting, mean loose
stool frequency, stool consistency, and mean frequency of oral rehydration salts 
(ORS) and intravenous fluids administered. On Day 2, a lower mean stool frequency
and improved stool consistency was noted in the drug group, which achieved
statistical significance. This was also reflected in the lower volume of ORS
administration in the drug group. Even on Day 3, mean loose stool frequency and
frequency of ORS use and frequency of intravenous fluid use was significantly
lower in the drug group. The differences in the frequency of loose stools
persisted till 8 hours of Day 4. After this, as the placebo group also showed
spontaneous improvement the difference between the 2 groups in terms of the
overall stools frequency became comparable. However, the overall ORS requirement 
continued to be significantly lower in the drug group even on Day 4. The overall 
recovery rates were significantly better in the drug group compared with placebo.
No side effects were noted with the use of the probiotic mixture. Use of
probiotic mixture VSL[sharp]3 in acute rotavirus diarrhea resulted in earlier
recovery and reduced frequency of ORS administration reflecting decreased stool
volume losses during diarrhea.

DOI: 10.1097/MCG.0b013e31816fc2f6 
PMID: 18806703  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

