
1. Vaccine. 2009 Jan 7;27(2):260-9. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2008.10.042. Epub 2008
Nov 5.

Systemic DNA immunization against ovine lentivirus using particle-mediated
epidermal delivery and modified vaccinia Ankara encoding the gag and/or env
genes.

Niesalla H(1), de Andrés X, Barbezange C, Fraisier C, Reina R, Arnarson H,
Biescas E, Mazzei M, McNeilly TN, Liu C, Watkins C, Perez M, Carrozza ML,
Bandecchi P, Solano C, Crespo H, Glaria I, Huard C, Shaw DJ, de Blas I, de Andrés
D, Tolari F, Rosati S, Suzan-Monti M, Andrésdottir V, Torsteinsdottir S,
Petursson G, Badiola J, Lujan L, Pepin M, Amorena B, Blacklaws B, Harkiss GD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

To determine whether systemic immunization with plasmid DNA and virus vector
against visna/maedi virus (VMV) would induce protective immune responses, sheep
were immunized with VMV gag and/or env sequences using particle-mediated
epidermal bombardment and injection of recombinant modified vaccinia Ankara. The 
results showed that immunization induced both humoral and cell-mediated responses
prior to and after virus challenge. The vaccination protocol did not prevent
infection, but immunization with the gag gene or a combination of gag and env
genes resulted in significantly reduced provirus loads in blood and mediastinal
lymph node, respectively. Provirus loads in lung and draining lymph node were
unaffected, but p25 expression was undetectable in lungs of animals immunized
with a combination of gag and env genes. Analysis of target tissues for lesions
at post-mortem showed that immunization with the env gene caused a significant
increase in lesion score, while the gag gene or a combination of gag and env
genes had no effect. Inclusion of the ovine interferon-gamma gene in the initial 
priming mixture had minimal effect on immune responses, provirus load, or lesion 
development, although it resulted in a decreased p25 expression in the lung. The 
results thus show that systemic immunization with gag or a combination of gag and
env genes reduces provirus load in blood and lymphoid tissue, respectively
whereas env immunization has no effect on provirus load but increased lesion
development.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2008.10.042 
PMID: 18984025  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

