
1. J Microbiol Methods. 2009 Mar;76(3):241-6. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2008.11.008. Epub
2008 Dec 24.

Detection of Ralstonia solanacearum in natural substrates using phage
amplification integrated with real-time PCR assay.

Kutin RK(1), Alvarez A, Jenkins DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences and Bioengineering, University of Hawaii
at Manoa, Honolulu, Hawaii 96822, United States.

A sensitive, selective, and rapid protocol for detecting Ralstonia solanacearum
from soil and plant tissues was developed based on the integration of the rapid
self-replicating ability of bacteriophages with quantitative PCR (q-PCR). Six
bacteriophages were isolated and selected for their ability to specifically
infect and lyse R. solanacearum. Sixty-three strains of R. solanacearum and 72
isolates of other bacterial species were tested for their susceptibility to the
bacteriophages. Based on the large host range and observed replication speed and 
reproductive burst sizes in ginger infecting R. solanacearum strain GW-1, phage
M_DS1 was selected for the development of the phage-based indirect assay. With
primers based on the phage genome, the protocol was used to detect R.
solanacearum from a number of substrates. In pure R. solanacearum cultures, the
protocol consistently detected approximately 3.3 CFU/ml after an hour's
incubation with 5.3x10(2) PFU/ml M_DS1. We used the protocol to confirm the
presence of the pathogen in infected potted ginger plants, detecting levels near 
10(2) CFU/g in 0.1 g of leaf tissue and levels near 10(3) CFU/ml in drainage
water from the pots. In soils emended with the bacteria, we observed detection
limits down to approximately 10(2) CFU/g.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mimet.2008.11.008 
PMID: 19138710  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

