
1. Am J Epidemiol. 2009 May 1;169(9):1124-32. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwp002. Epub 2009 Mar
24.

Effect of highly active antiretroviral therapy on incident AIDS using calendar
period as an instrumental variable.

Cain LE(1), Cole SR, Greenland S, Brown TT, Chmiel JS, Kingsley L, Detels R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. lcain@hsph.harvard.edu

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) researchers often use calendar periods as an
imperfect proxy for highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) when estimating 
the effect of HAART on HIV disease progression. The authors report on 614
HIV-positive homosexual men followed from 1984 to 2007 in 4 US cities. During
5,321 person-years, 268 of 614 men incurred acquired immunodeficiency syndrome,
49 died, and 90 were lost to follow-up. Comparing the pre-HAART calendar period
(<1996) with the HAART calendar period (>or=1996) resulted in a naive rate ratio 
of 3.62 (95% confidence limits: 2.67, 4.92). However, this estimate is likely
biased because of misclassification of HAART use by calendar period. Simple
calendar period approaches may circumvent confounding by indication at the cost
of inducing exposure misclassification. To correct this misclassification, the
authors propose an instrumental-variable estimator analogous to ones previously
used for noncompliance corrections in randomized clinical trials. When the
pre-HAART calendar period was compared with the HAART calendar period, the
instrumental-variable rate ratio was 5.02 (95% confidence limits: 3.45, 7.31),
39% higher than the naive result. Weighting by the inverse probability of
calendar period given age at seroconversion, race/ethnicity, and time since
seroconversion did not appreciably alter the results. These methods may help
resolve discrepancies between observational and randomized evidence.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwp002 
PMCID: PMC2732979
PMID: 19318615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

