
1. J Invertebr Pathol. 2009 Jul;101(3):181-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jip.2009.03.012. Epub
2009 May 19.

Structural divergence among genomes of closely related baculoviruses and its
implications for baculovirus evolution.

Harrison RL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Invasive Insect Biocontrol and Behavior Laboratory, USDA Agricultural Research
Service, PSI, Building 011A, Room 214, BARC-W, Beltsville, MD 20705, USA.
Robert.L.Harrison@ars.usda.gov

Baculoviruses are members of a large, well-characterized family of dsDNA viruses 
that have been identified from insects of the orders Lepidoptera, Hymenoptera,
and Diptera. Baculovirus genomes from different virus species generally exhibit a
considerable degree of structural diversity. However, some sequenced baculovirus 
genomes from closely related viruses are structurally very similar and share
overall nucleotide sequence identities in excess of 95%. This review focuses on
the comparative analysis of partial and complete nucleotide sequences from two
groups of closely related baculoviruses with broad host ranges: (a) group I
multiple nucleopolyhedroviruses (MNPVs) from a cluster including Autographa
californica (Ac)MNPV, Rachiplusia ou (Ro)MNPV, and Plutella xylostella
(Plxy)MNPV; and (b) granuloviruses (GVs) from a cluster including Xestia c-nigrum
(Xecn)GV and Helicoverpa armigera (Hear)GV. Even though the individual viruses in
these clusters share high nucleotide sequence identities, a significant degree of
genomic rearrangement (in the form of insertions, deletions, and homologous
recombination resulting in allelic replacement) is evident from alignments of
their genomes. These observations suggest an important role for recombination in 
the early evolution and biological characteristics of baculoviruses of these two 
groups.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jip.2009.03.012 
PMID: 19460385  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

