
1. J Virol. 2009 Sep;83(17):8396-408. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00700-09. Epub 2009 Jun 17.

Detection of clonally expanded hepatocytes in chimpanzees with chronic hepatitis 
B virus infection.

Mason WS(1), Low HC, Xu C, Aldrich CE, Scougall CA, Grosse A, Clouston A, Chavez 
D, Litwin S, Peri S, Jilbert AR, Lanford RE.

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.
ws_mason@fccc.edu

During a hepadnavirus infection, viral DNA integrates at a low rate into random
sites in the host DNA, producing unique virus-cell junctions detectable by
inverse nested PCR (invPCR). These junctions serve as genetic markers of
individual hepatocytes, providing a means to detect their subsequent
proliferation into clones of two or more hepatocytes. A previous study suggested 
that the livers of 2.4-year-old woodchucks (Marmota monax) chronically infected
with woodchuck hepatitis virus contained at least 100,000 clones of >1,000
hepatocytes (W. S. Mason, A. R. Jilbert, and J. Summers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 102:1139-1144, 2005). However, possible correlations between sites of
viral-DNA integration and clonal expansion could not be explored because the
woodchuck genome has not yet been sequenced. In order to further investigate this
issue, we looked for similar clonal expansion of hepatocytes in the livers of
chimpanzees chronically infected with hepatitis B virus (HBV). Liver samples for 
invPCR were collected from eight chimpanzees chronically infected with HBV for at
least 20 years. Fifty clones ranging in size from approximately 35 to 10,000
hepatocytes were detected using invPCR in 32 liver biopsy fragments
(approximately 1 mg) containing, in total, approximately 3 x 10(7) liver cells.
Based on searching the analogous human genome, integration sites were found on
all chromosomes except Y, approximately 30% in known or predicted genes. However,
no obvious association between the extent of clonal expansion and the integration
site was apparent. This suggests that the integration site per se is not
responsible for the outgrowth of large clones of hepatocytes.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00700-09 
PMCID: PMC2738144
PMID: 19535448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

