
1. J Viral Hepat. 2010 Apr;17(4):236-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2009.01170.x. Epub
2009 Jul 23.

Treatment of chronic hepatitis C in polytransfused thalassaemic patients: a
meta-analysis.

Alavian SM(1), Tabatabaei SV.

Author information: 
(1)Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences, Research Center for
Gastroenterology and Liver Disease, Tehran, Iran. editor@hepmon.com

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a major cause of liver-related morbidity and
mortality among thalassaemic patients. In order to analyse the effect of the
current anti-HCV treatment in this subset of HCV-infected patients, we conducted 
a systematic review with meta-analysis of the available literature. The outcome
was sustained viral response. Both comparative [odds ratio (OR)] and
non-comparative indeces (success rate) were used to run the meta-analytical
procedure. Data encompassing 429 thalassaemic HCV-infected patients treated with 
conventional or pegylated interferon monotherapy or combination therapy with
ribavirin were collected from 13 articles (10 prospective cohort studies, 1
randomized-controlled trial and 2 controlled trials). Pooled sustained
viralogical response (SVR) was 44.7% (34.6-54.9). Pooled ORs of SVR for Genotype 
1 vs non-Genotype 1 infected thalassaemic patients were 0.46 (95% CI: 0.22-0.95) 
in IFN monotherapy and 1.7 (95% CI: 0.46-6.04) in ribavirin combination therapy. 
Our meta-analysis shows that thalassaemic patients with Genotype 1 infection
significantly benefit from the addition of ribavirin to their therapeutic
regimen. It seems that using ribavirin in thalassaemic patients increases
transfusion need by a median of 30-40%, but does not increase major adverse
events or treatment withdrawal. Current literature is lacking sufficient evidence
about the use of PEG-IFN as monotherapy or in combination with ribavirin in
thalassaemic patients.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2009.01170.x 
PMID: 19638104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

