
1. Brain Behav Immun. 2010 Feb;24(2):281-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2009.10.007. Epub
2009 Oct 29.

The olfactory nerve has a role in the body temperature and brain cytokine
responses to influenza virus.

Leyva-Grado VH(1), Churchill L, Harding J, Krueger JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Comparative Anatomy, Pharmacology and Physiology,
Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164-6520, USA.

Mouse-adapted human influenza virus is detectable in the olfactory bulbs of mice 
within hours after intranasal challenge and is associated with enhanced local
cytokine mRNA and protein levels. To determine whether signals from the olfactory
nerve influence the unfolding of the acute phase response (APR), we surgically
transected the olfactory nerve in mice prior to influenza infection. We then
compared the responses of olfactory-nerve-transected (ONT) mice to those recorded
in sham-operated control mice using measurements of body temperature, food
intake, body weight, locomotor activity and immunohistochemistry for cytokines
and the viral antigen, H1N1. ONT did not change baseline body temperature (Tb);
however, the onset of virus-induced hypothermia was delayed for about 13 h in the
ONT mice. Locomotor activity, food intake and body weights of the two groups were
similar. At 15 h post-challenge fewer viral antigen-immunoreactive (IR) cells
were observed in the olfactory bulb (OB) of ONT mice compared to sham controls.
The number of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha)- and interleukin 1beta
(IL1beta)-IR cells in ONT mice was also reduced in the OB and other
interconnected regions in the brain compared to sham controls. These results
suggest that the olfactory nerve pathway is important for the initial
pathogenesis of the influenza-induced APR.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2009.10.007 
PMCID: PMC2818451
PMID: 19836444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

