
1. Antiviral Res. 2010 Jan;85(1):201-9. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2009.10.016. Epub
2009 Oct 24.

Understanding and managing the adverse effects of antiretroviral therapy.

Hawkins T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Practice, University of New Mexico, United States.
thawkins@southwestcare.org

Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has changed the landscape of HIV
disease in a way that seemed unthinkable a decade ago; from an almost uniformly
fatal disease to a chronic manageable one. The first HAART regimens worked in
suppressing virus, but were encumbered by a variety of short term and long term
side effects. More recent regimens became simpler, easier to take, and with fewer
adverse events. As we look to people living perhaps a normal life span with HIV, 
the increasing number of antiretroviral agents available means that
individualizing treatment has become more feasible and the longer downstream
adverse events related to HAART, such as its effect on cardiovascular disease and
diabetes, renal and hepatic disease, have begun to dominate our choice of drugs. 
A knowledge of both the short and long term adverse events associated with HAART 
is essential for providers and for patients. For new drugs to be acceptable in
the current field, they will have to pass a litmus test of tolerability. Since
adverse events are often remarkably idiosyncratic, pharmacogenomics may offer a
way of predicting side effects and their severity from a particular drug or drug 
class in individual patients. This article forms part of a special issue of
Antiviral Research marking the 25th anniversary of antiretroviral drug discovery 
and development, Vol. 85, issue 1, 2010.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2009.10.016 
PMID: 19857521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

