
1. Discov Med. 2009 Dec;8(43):210-8.

Artificial antigen presenting cells that express prevalent HLA alleles: A step
towards the broad application of antigen-specific adoptive cell therapies.

Hasan AN(1), Selvakumar A, Doubrovina E, Riviere I, Sadelain MW, O'Reilly RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York 10021, USA. hasana@mskcc.org

The artificial antigen-presenting cells (AAPCs) described in this review were
generated to facilitate the production of virus-specific T-cells for the
treatment of infections in patients after bone marrow transplant. These AAPCs
consist of murine 3T3 cells genetically modified to express critical human
molecules needed for T-cell stimulation, such as the co-stimulatory molecules
B7.1, ICAM-1, and LFA-3 and one of a series of 6 common HLA class I alleles. When
T-cells were sensitized against cytomegalovirus (CMV) using AAPCs that express a 
shared HLA allele or using autologous antigen-presenting cells (APCs) loaded with
the CMVpp65 antigen, they were activated and expanded to become HLA-restricted
CMVpp65-specific T-cells. These T-cells demonstrated functional activity in vitro
against CMV by producing IFN-gamma and inducing CMVpp65-specific cytotoxicity.
T-cells sensitized with AAPCs recognized antigenic epitopes presented by each HLA
allele known to be immunogenic in Man. Sensitization with AAPCs also permitted
expansion of IFN-gamma+ cytotoxic T-cells against subdominant epitopes that were 
not effectively recognized by T-cells sensitized with autologous APCs. This panel
of AAPCs provides a source of immediately accessible, standardizable, and
replenishable "off the shelf" cellular reagents with the potential to make
adoptive immunotherapy widely available for the treatment of lethal infections,
cancer, and autoimmune diseases.


PMID: 20040272  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

