
1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Feb 19;6(2):e1000778. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000778.

Optineurin negatively regulates the induction of IFNbeta in response to RNA virus
infection.

Mankouri J(1), Fragkoudis R, Richards KH, Wetherill LF, Harris M, Kohl A, Elliott
RM, Macdonald A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences,
University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom.

The innate immune response provides a critical defense against microbial
infections, including viruses. These are recognised by pattern recognition
receptors including Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and RIG-I like helicases (RLHs).
Detection of virus triggers signalling cascades that induce transcription of type
I interferons including IFNbeta, which are pivotal for the initiation of an
anti-viral state. Despite the essential role of IFNbeta in the anti-viral
response, there is an incomplete understanding of the negative regulation of
IFNbeta induction. Here we provide evidence that expression of the Nemo-related
protein, optineurin (NRP/FIP2), has a role in the inhibition of virus-triggered
IFNbeta induction. Over-expression of optineurin inhibited Sendai-virus (SeV) and
dsRNA triggered induction of IFNbeta, whereas depletion of optineurin with siRNA 
promoted virus-induced IFNbeta production and decreased RNA virus replication.
Immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence studies identified optineurin in a
protein complex containing the antiviral protein kinase TBK1 and the ubiquitin
ligase TRAF3. Furthermore, mutagenesis studies determined that binding of
ubiquitin was essential for both the correct sub-cellular localisation and the
inhibitory function of optineurin. This work identifies optineurin as a critical 
regulator of antiviral signalling and potential target for future antiviral
therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000778 
PMCID: PMC2824764
PMID: 20174559  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

