
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1991 Jan;57(1):194-200.

Mobilization of the genetically engineered plasmid pHSV106 from Escherichia coli 
HB101(pHSV106) to Enterobacter cloacae in drinking water.

Sandt CH(1), Herson DS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life and Health Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark 19716.

We have used triparental matings to demonstrate transfer (mobilization) of the
nonconjugative genetically engineered plasmid pHSV106, which contains the
thymidine kinase gene of herpes simplex virus cloned into pBR322, from
Escherichia coli HB101 to an environmental isolate of Enterobacter cloacae in
sterile drinking water. This is the first demonstration of a two-step
mobilization of a genetically engineered plasmid in any type of fresh water,
including drinking water. Transfer was mediated by R plasmid R100-1 of E. coli
ED2149(R100-1). Matings in drinking water at 15, 25, and 35 degrees C yielded
recombinants, the number of which increased with increasing temperature. Numbers 
of recombinants obtained were 2 orders of magnitude lower than those obtained
from matings in Trypticase soy broth. High concentrations of parental organisms
(2.6 x 10(8) to 2.0 x 10(9) CFU/ml) were required. During 1 week of incubation in
drinking water, number of parental organisms and recombinants resulting from
mobilization remained constant in the absence of indigenous organisms and
declined in their presence. Using oligonucleotide probes for the cloned foreign
DNA (thymidine kinase gene) and plasmid vector DNA (ampicillin resistance gene), 
we demonstrated that both genes were transferred to E. cloacae in the
mobilization process. In one recombinant selected for detailed study, the
plasmids containing these genes differed in size from all forms of pHSV106
present in E. coli HB101(pHSV106), indicating that DNA rearrangement had
occurred. This recombinant maintained its plasmids in unchanged form for 15 days 
in drinking water. A second rearrangement occurred during serial passage of this 
recombinant on selective media.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.57.1.194-200.1991 
PMCID: PMC182684
PMID: 2036007  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

