
1. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2010 Oct;16(10):1428-35. doi:
10.1016/j.bbmt.2010.04.008. Epub 2010 Apr 24.

Prospective, comprehensive, and effective viral monitoring in children undergoing
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

Schönberger S(1), Meisel R, Adams O, Pufal Y, Laws HJ, Enczmann J, Dilloo D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology,
University Children's Hospital, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
schoenberger@med.uni-duesseldorf.de

Major advances in the monitoring and treatment of viral infections after
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) have been achieved over the last
decade. The appropriate extent of viral monitoring and antiviral therapy remains 
controversial, and reports in pediatric patients receiving allogeneic
unmanipulated hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are sparse. A total of 40 pediatric
patients who underwent HSCT with either peripheral blood stem cells (PBSCs, n =
30) or bone marrow (BM; n = 10) were prospectively monitored every week for viral
DNAemia (VDNA) by simultaneous detection of cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV), human herpesvirus 6 (HHV6), human adenovirus (ADV), and polyoma BK
virus (BKV) using real-time TaqMan polymerase chain reaction (PCR). All patients 
received prophylactic acyclovir and preemptive ganciclovir (GCV) when 500
copies/microg DNA (EBV/HHV6) or >1 copy/microg DNA (CMV) were detected on 2
consecutive measurements. VDNA occurred in 25 of 40 recipients (CMV, 11/40
patients [28%]; EBV, 19/40 [48%]; HHV6, 2/40 [5%]; ADV/BKV, 1/40) and was found
exclusively after neutrophil engraftment and in most cases up to day +100.
Recurrent VDNA (P = .028) and (readily treatable) viral disease (P = .003) were
observed predominantly in patients suffering from nonmalignant diseases, a cohort
characterized by delayed lymphocyte engraftment. VDNA occurred more frequently in
HLA-mismatched HSCT and in the 24 of 40 patients receiving antithymocyte globulin
(ATG). The incidence of EBV, but not that of CMV, was increased in the ATG group.
Yet, in these patients, viral loads of both EBV and CMV were higher, but with
prompt initiation of preemptive GCV, no posttransplantation lymphoproliferative
disorder or other life-threatening morbidities occurred. HHV6 was typically
detected at low viral loads (<10(2) copies/microg DNA), with only 5% of HSC
recipients fulfilling our HHV6 criteria for triggering GCV treatment. In
multivariate analysis, ATG treatment, HLA mismatch, recipient CMV seropositivity,
and stem cell source, but not severe acute graft-versus-host disease were
identified as independent risk factors for VDNA. This comprehensive viral
monitoring program with defined thresholds for initiation of preemptive GCV
effectively prevents the development of critical viral disease, even in high-risk
patients receiving ATG.

Copyright © 2010 American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Published
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbmt.2010.04.008 
PMID: 20399877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

