
1. Biomaterials. 2010 Aug;31(22):5886-93. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.03.075.
Epub 2010 Apr 27.

Virus-mimetic polymeric micelles for targeted siRNA delivery.

Xiong XB(1), UludaÄŸ H, Lavasanifar A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, AB T6G 2N8, Canada.

In this study, an engineered non-viral polymer based delivery systems with
structural features mimicking that of viral vectors was developed and the
potential of this carrier for siRNA delivery was assessed. The developed siRNA
carrier was based on poly(ethylene oxide)-block-poly(epsilon-caprolactone)
(PEO-b-PCL) micelles decorated with integrin alphavbeta3 targeting peptide
(RGD4C) and/or cell penetrating peptide (TAT) on the PEO shell, and modified with
a polycation (spermine) in the PCL core for siRNA binding and protection. We
observed increased cellular uptake and effective endosomal escape of siRNA
delivered with the peptide-functionalized micelles especially those with dual
functionality (RGD/TAT-micelles) compared to unmodified micelles (NON-micelles)
in MDA435/LCC6 resistant cells. Transfection of mdr1 siRNA formulated in
peptide-modified micelles led to P-gp down regulation both at the mRNA and
protein level. Subsequent to P-gp down regulation, increased cellular
accumulation of P-gp substrate, doxorubicin (DOX), in the cytoplasm and nucleus
of resistant MDA435/LCC6 cells after treatment with peptide decorated polymeric
micelle/mdr1 siRNA complexes was observed. As a result, resistance to DOX was
successfully reversed. Interestingly, RGD/TAT-micellar siRNA complexes produced
improved cellular uptake, P-gp silencing, DOX cellular accumulation, DOX nuclear 
localization and DOX induced cytotoxicity in MDA435/LCC6 cells when compared to
micelles decorated with individual peptides. Results of this study indicated a
potential for RGD/TAT-functionalized virus-like micelles as promising carriers
for efficient delivery of mdr1 siRNA to MDA435/LCC6 resistant cells as means to
reverse the P-gp mediated multidrug resistance to DOX.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.03.075 
PMID: 20427082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

