
1. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2010 Jul;36(5):558-69. doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1255450. Epub
2010 Jul 14.

Recombinant platelet factor 4: a therapeutic, anti-neoplastic chimera?

Lippi G(1), Favaloro EJ.

Author information: 
(1)U.O. Diagnostica Ematochimica, Dipartimento di Patologia e Medicina di
Laboratorio, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Parma, Parma, Italy.
giuseppe.lippi@univr.it

Angiogenesis plays a pivotal role in many serious and life-threatening disorders 
(e.g., cancer, atherosclerosis, diabetes, arthritis, psoriasis, nephropathy, and 
retinopathy) and is regulated by a delicate equilibrium between a variety of pro-
and anti-angiogenic factors. Although recombinant platelet factor 4 (PF4) was
originally developed and evaluated as a clinical alternative to protamine for
heparin neutralization, the current scientific evidence supports a role for this 
protein and derivative peptides in inhibiting tumor growth and spread, by
suppression of tumor-induced neovascularization in many different types of solid 
tumors. As a heparin-binding tetramer, recombinant PF4 interferes with several
steps of endothelial cell proliferation, migration, and angiogenesis, regulates
apoptotic death through activation of distinct signal transduction pathways,
inhibits growth factor receptor binding, amplifies the inflammatory response of
natural killer cells through regulation of cytokines production, and induces and 
maintains a nonspecific immune response to cancer cells. These biological
evidences paved the way for the development and marketing of novel PF4-based
angiostatic agents characterized by reduced toxicity and improved
bioavailability, thus raising the possibility of an alternative approach for
preventing and treating growth and metastasis of tumors. Some PF4-derived
molecules such as carboxyl-terminal fragments of recombinant human PF4 and
modified and chimeric peptides have already been developed that exhibit stronger 
anti-angiogenic properties than the parent molecule and may serve as leads for
further therapeutic developments. Newer means of delivering of this
anti-angiogenic agent are also being attempted, including PF4-bearing polymeric
microspheres, vector-mediated PF4 transduction, transgene transfection into
oncolytic viruses, and molecular targeting therapy against PF4 and rHuPF4
conjugates. These delivery systems aim to produce high concentrations of the
therapeutic agent in a local area for a sustained period, thereby avoiding the
typical problems encountered with long-term administration of recombinant
proteins.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0030-1255450 
PMID: 20632253  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

