
1. Pharmacotherapy. 2010 Oct;30(10):1021-30. doi: 10.1592/phco.30.10.1021.

Systemic preexposure prophylaxis for human immunodeficiency virus infection.

Romanelli F(1), Murphy B.

Author information: 
(1)Colleges of Pharmacy, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA. 
froma2@uky.edu

Antiretroviral therapy has significantly improved the typical course of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in industrialized nations, and life
expectancies associated with the infection have increased. However, infection
rates have generally remained unchanged, with increases noted among certain
subpopulations. The use of systemic preexposure prophylaxis for HIV infection has
been proposed as an intervention to reduce the risk of disease transmission in
at-risk individuals. The basis of this prophylaxis involves the orchestrated use 
of antiretrovirals in uninfected individuals either continuously or just before
high-risk situations, such as perinatal and occupational exposure to HIV, in
order to reduce the likelihood of successful HIV infection. Data from the use of 
antiretrovirals to prevent HIV infection in these scenarios support the concept
of preexposure prophylaxis. Preliminary animal studies have focused on the use of
antiretrovirals to prevent simian immunodeficiency virus infection in macaque
monkeys, and these data have provided support for the potential efficacy of
preexposure prophylaxis for HIV in humans. Limited human data are available,
however, but studies are ongoing. Clinical trials have focused on the use of
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate either alone or in combination with emtricitabine. 
Tenofovir-emtricitabine-based regimens may be ideal, given the drugs'
pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties. Some investigators have surveyed 
at-risk individuals to assess their knowledge of preexposure prophylaxis and
whether they used or intended to use this prevention strategy. Routine use of
preexposure prophylaxis and even knowledge of its existence appear to be very
limited. If efficacy is proved, use of preexposure prophylaxis faces several
ethical issues. Ultimately, its success will depend on proof of
cost-effectiveness. Until the many questions concerning optimal use of
preexposure prophylaxis for HIV are answered, however, its use should be limited 
to research-related clinical investigations.

DOI: 10.1592/phco.30.10.1021 
PMID: 20874040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

