
1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2011 May;30(5):e82-7. doi: 10.1097/INF.0b013e3182117289.

Drug resistance prevalence in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infected
pediatric populations in Honduras and El Salvador during 1989-2009.

Holguín A(1), Erazo K, Escobar G, de Mulder M, Yebra G, Martín L, Jovel LE,
Castaneda L, Pérez E; Proyecto Esther.

Author information: 
(1)HIV-1 Molecular Epidemiology Laboratory, Department of Microbiology and
Parasitology, FiBIO-IRYCIS (Hospital Ramón y Cajal) and CIBER-ESP, Madrid, Spain.
aholguin.hciii@salud.madrid.org

BACKGROUND: Emergence of viral resistance is a major obstacle for antiretroviral 
treatment (ART) effectiveness. Human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1)
variants and drug-resistance mutations were identified in naive and
antiretroviral drug-experienced children with virologic failure, in Honduras and 
El Salvador.
METHODS: Dried blood spots (DBS) from 80 individuals (54 from Honduras, 26 from
El Salvador) infected during their childhood between 1989 and 2009 were collected
in 2009. The HIV pol region was amplified and sequenced to identify
antiretroviral-resistant mutations according to the 2009 International AIDS
Society. The genotypic drug resistance interpretation was performed using the
Stanford algorithm. HIV-1 variants were characterized by phylogenetic analysis
and subtyping tools.
RESULTS: HIV-1 protease and reverse transcription sequences were obtained from
DBS specimens in 71 and 66 patients, respectively, of the 80 patients. All
children were native Central Americans carrying subtype B, with a mean age of 9
years, most were male (65%), perinatally infected (96%), with moderate/severe
AIDS symptoms (70%), and receiving first line ART at the time of sequencing
(65%). Diagnostic delay was frequently observed. Infected children from Honduras 
presented longer ART experience and clinical outcomes, and more frequent severe
symptoms. Resistant variants infected 1 of 11 naive children from El Salvador but
none of the perinatally infected naive children from Honduras. Resistance was
higher among ART-exposed individuals in both countries and similar for protease
inhibitors (16%), nucleoside reverse transcription inhibitors (44%-52%), and
nonnucleoside reverse-transcription inhibitors (66.7%). One in 10 pretreated
children in each country was infected with resistant viruses to the 3 drug
families.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data support the need for continued surveillance of resistance
patterns using DBS at national levels among naive and pretreated children to
optimize the ART regimens.

DOI: 10.1097/INF.0b013e3182117289 
PMID: 21326132  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

