
1. Comp Immunol Microbiol Infect Dis. 2011 May;34(3):237-45. doi:
10.1016/j.cimid.2010.11.007. Epub 2011 Mar 9.

Identification and determination of antigenic proteins of Korean ranavirus-1
(KRV-1) using MALDI-TOF/TOF MS analysis.

Kim YR(1), Hikima J, Jang HB, Nho SW, Park SB, Cha IS, Ohtani M, Eom AH, Aoki T, 
Jung TS.

Author information: 
(1)Aquatic Biotechnology Center of WCU Project, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 660-701, Republic of Korea.

Ranaviruses are serious pathogens of fish, amphibians, and reptiles, and pose a
major threat to global biodiversity. A ranavirus isolated from tissues of
diseased tadpoles and frogs in Gangwon province, Korea, in 2006 and 2007, was
designated Korean ranavirus-1 (KRV-1) and was infectious in a variety of fish
cell lines with highest titers (10(10)TCID(50)/ml) in Epithelioma papulosum
cyprini cells (EPCs) and baby hamster kidney-21 (BHK-21) cells. Bullfrog (Rana
catesbeiana) tadpoles challenged by immersion in 10(5)TCID(50)/ml of KRV-1 showed
60% mortality within 10 days. SDS-PAGE of frog virus 3 (FV3) and KRV-1 proteins
yielded several bands 35-49kDa in size, which were identified as major capsid
proteins (MCPs) by MALDI-TOF MS. Immunoblotting of FV3 proteins showed antigenic 
bands 34kDa and 93kDa in size which were identified by MALDI-TOF/TOF MS as MCP
and neurofilament triplet H1-like protein (NF-H1), respectively. In KRV-1,
antigenic bands at 32kDa, 69kDa, and 72kDa were identified as MCP, Hypothetical
protein, and NF-H1, respectively. The genes encoding these KRV-1 proteins were
sequenced. KRV-1 appeared to be closely related to the soft-shelled turtle
iridovirus (STIV), based on alignments of amino acid sequences from various
ranaviruses. Variability in ranavirus antigenic proteins was apparent in an
earlier study. It is expected that use of the methods employed here, together
with the results of the present work, will contribute to an understanding of the 
pathogenesis of ranaviruses, and will further the development of DNA- or
protein-based bait vaccines for conservation of natural habitats.

Copyright Â© 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cimid.2010.11.007 
PMID: 21388683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

