
1. J Virol. 2011 May;85(10):4792-801. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02399-10. Epub 2011 Mar 9.

A respiratory syncytial virus replicon that is noncytotoxic and capable of
long-term foreign gene expression.

Malykhina O(1), Yednak MA, Collins PL, Olivo PD, Peeples ME.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vaccines & Immunity, The Research Institute at Nationwide
Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio 43205, USA.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection of most cultured cell lines causes
cell-cell fusion and death. Cell fusion is caused by the fusion (F) glycoprotein 
and is clearly cytopathic, but other aspects of RSV infection may also contribute
to cytopathology. To investigate this possibility, we generated an RSV replicon
that lacks all three of its glycoprotein genes and so cannot cause cell-cell
fusion or virus spread. This replicon includes a green fluorescent protein gene
and an antibiotic resistance gene to enable detection and selection of
replicon-containing cells. Adaptive mutations in the RSV replicon were not
required for replicon maintenance. Cells containing the replicon could be cloned 
and passaged many times in the absence of antibiotic selection, with 99% or more 
of the cells retaining the replicon after each cell division. Transient
expression of the F and G (attachment) glycoproteins supported the production of 
virions that could transfer the replicon into most cell lines tested. Since the
RSV replicon is not toxic to these cultured cells and does not affect their rate 
of cell division, none of the 8 internal viral proteins, the viral RNA
transcripts, or the host response to these molecules or their activities is
cytopathic. However, the level of replicon genome and gene expression is
controlled in some manner well below that of complete virus and, as such, might
avoid cytotoxicity. RSV replicons could be useful for cytoplasmic gene expression
in vitro and in vivo and for screening for compounds active against the viral
polymerase.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02399-10 
PMCID: PMC3126208
PMID: 21389127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

