
1. Parasite. 2011 Feb;18(1):93-111.

Personal protection against biting insects and ticks.

PPAV Working Groups.

Collaborators: Legros F, Ancelle T, Caumes É, Dardé ML, Delmont J, Descloitres R,
Imbert P, de Gentile L, Migliani R, Ouvrard P, Robert V, Duvallet G, Boulanger N,
Chandre F, Colin de Verdière N, Consigny PH, Delaunay P, Depaquit J, Doudier B,
Franc M, Moulin F, Pagès F, Prangé A, Quatresous I, Robert V, Saviuc P, Auvin S, 
Carsuzza F, Cochet A, Darriet F, Demantké A, Elefant É, Failloux AB, de Gentile
L, Lagneau C, La Ruche G, Pecquet C, Sorge F, Tarantola A, Vauzelle C, Ajana F,
Armengaud A, Boutin JP, Chevaillier S, Gagnon S, Genty S, Girod R, Godineau N,
Guiguen C, Hatchuel Y, Hengy C, Izri A, Jean D, Jourdain F, Lamaury I, Marchou B,
Masson V, Minodier P, Pérignon A, Piccoli S, Quinet B, Yébakima A, Santi-Rocca J,
Smith S.

Recent events with the first cases of local transmission of chikungunya and
dengue fever virus in southern France by Aedes albopictus, adding to the nuisance
and potential vectors that can be encountered when traveling in tropical or
sub-tropical countries, has shown the value of a reflection on the Personal
protection against vectors (PPAV). It is seen during an outbreak of vector-borne 
disease, or simply because of nuisance arthropods, that our fellow citizens try
to protect themselves individually by using an arsenal of resources available on 
the market. Yet most of these means have been neither checked for effectiveness
or safety tests, however, essential. Travellers, staff on mission or assignment, 
are looking for specific information on how to protect themselves or their
families. Health workers had at their disposal so far indications that vary
widely from one source to another. Therefore it seemed important to the Society
of Travel Medicine (SMV) and the French Society of Parasitology (SFP) to initiate
a reflection on this theme. This reflection took the form of recommendations for 
good practice, following the outline established by the French High Health
Authority (HAS). The aim was to gather all relevant information, verified and
validated and the format to be used not only by health personnel (doctors,
pharmacists, nurses), but also by travel agents and individuals. This document
highlights the need to take into account the risk of vector-borne diseases, some 
deadly, and the benefit of various methods of personal protection. The choice of 
methods is clearly oriented towards those whose effectiveness has been proven and
potential risks assessed. The paper finally proposes two decision trees based on 
the transmission type (day or night) and kind of stay (short or roaming, long and
steady). It concerns travellers, but also expatriates, residents and nomads.

DOI: 10.1051/parasite/2011181093 
PMCID: PMC3671406
PMID: 21395212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

