
1. J Med Virol. 2011 Jul;83(7):1151-8. doi: 10.1002/jmv.22074. Epub 2011 Apr 22.

Analysis of carriers of hepatitis B virus from a tertiary referral hospital: does
the viral load change during the natural course of infection?

Aakanksha(1), Asim M, Sharma PK, Das BC, Kar P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Maulana Azad Medical College, University of Delhi, New
Delhi, India.

This study was designed to determine the prevalence, forms of transmission,
mutational profile and viral load at baseline of hepatitis B virus (HBV) carriers
in Delhi. HBV surface antigen (HBsAg)-positive patients were enrolled and
evaluated clinically for liver function, serological markers for hepatitis B and 
HBV DNA quantitation. Tests were carried out again 1 year later and the results
were compared. Liver biopsy was carried out on all carriers with active viral
replication. HBV DNA-positive samples were subjected to polymerase chain reaction
single-stranded conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) to screen mutations in the
Precore, core, and the X-gene prior to sequencing analysis. Among the 100
patients examined, HBeAg was detected in 23% and 40% were HBV DNA-positive. Of
the 40 HBV DNA-positive cases, 8 had precore/core mutations, [G1896A (10%),
T2066A (12.5%), T2050C (10%), and G1888A (7.5%)]. No X gene mutants were
detected. Reduction in viral load was higher in HBeAg-positive patients, as
compared to HBeAg-negative patients, over 1 year. At follow-up, 2/8 HBV mutants
corresponded with altered liver function and morphological changes suggestive of 
chronic hepatitis. One patient was re-designated as DNA-negative on follow-up and
had wild-type virus infection with a relatively low viral load. The predominant
route for HBV transmission was determined to be parenteral. Twenty percent of the
HBV carriers were infected with precore and core mutant HBV. Although the
clinical and biochemical profiles of these HBV carriers remained largely stable
on follow-up, there was evidence of spontaneous reduction in the mean viral load 
over the 1-year study period.

Copyright Â© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.22074 
PMID: 21520137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

