
1. J Immunol. 2011 Jun 1;186(11):6633-40. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1004181. Epub 2011
Apr 29.

Papillomavirus-specific CD4+ T cells exhibit reduced STAT-5 signaling and altered
cytokine profiles in patients with recurrent respiratory papillomatosis.

James EA(1), DeVoti JA, Rosenthal DW, Hatam LJ, Steinberg BM, Abramson AL, Kwok
WW, Bonagura VR.

Author information: 
(1)Benaroya Research Institute at Virginia Mason, Seattle, WA 98101, USA.
ejames@benaroyaresearch.org

Recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (RRP) is caused by human papillomavirus type
6 (HPV-6) or HPV-11. Specific HLA-DR haplotypes DRB1*01:02 and DRB1*03:01 are
associated with the development of RRP, disease severity, and Th2-like responses 
to HPV early proteins. Th1-like responses to HPV proteins have been shown to be
protective in animal models. Therefore, we investigated the hypothesis that RRP
patients have dysfunctional Th1-like, HPV-specific T cell responses. Using MHC
class II tetramers, we identified immunogenic peptides within HPV-11 early
proteins. Two distinct peptides (E6(113-132) and E2(1-20)) contained DRB1*01:02- 
or DRB1*03:01-restricted epitopes, respectively. An additional peptide
(E2(281-300)) contained an epitope presented by both alleles. Peptide binding,
tetramer, and proliferation assays identified minimal epitopes within these
peptides. These epitopes elicited E2/E6-specific CD4(+) T cell responses in RRP
patients and healthy control subjects, allowing the isolation of HPV-specific T
cell lines using tetramers. The cytokine profiles and STAT signaling of these
tetramer-positive T cells were measured to compare the polarization and
responsiveness of HPV-specific T cells from patients with RRP and healthy
subjects. HPV-specific IFN-γ secretion was substantially lower in T cells from
RRP patients. HPV-specific IL-13 secretion was seen at modest levels in T cells
from RRP patients and was absent in T cells from healthy control subjects.
HPV-specific T cells from RRP patients exhibited reduced STAT-5 phosphorylation
and reduced IL-2 secretion, suggesting anergy. Levels of STAT-5 phosphorylation
and IFN-γ secretion could be improved through addition of IL-2 to HPV-specific T 
cell lines from RRP patients. Therapeutic vaccination or interventions aimed at
restoring Th1-like cytokine responses to HPV proteins and reversing anergy could 
improve clinical outcomes for RRP patients.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1004181 
PMCID: PMC3124771
PMID: 21531896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

