
1. Sex Transm Dis. 1990 Jan-Mar;17(1):15-9.

Prevalence, incidence, and estimated life-time risk of cervical human
papillomavirus infections in a nonselected Finnish female population.

Syrjänen K(1), Hakama M, Saarikoski S, Väyrynen M, Yliskoski M, Syrjänen S,
Kataja V, Castrén O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Kuopio, Finland.

The authors derived prevalence and incidence figures for cervical human
papillomavirus (HPV) infections in an unselected Finnish population of women aged
22. This paper is an epidemiologic study utilizing the mass-screening program
that has been conducted in Finland for cervical cancer since the early 1960s. The
authors estimated the lifetime risk of cervical HPV infections based on the
figures in this program and on those derived from a random sample of 2,084 (out
of 28,861) routine Papanicolaou (Pap) smears examined in their laboratory. The
mass-screening program was performed between 1985-1986 focusing on a total cohort
of 22-year-old women (born in 1963) in Kuopio province. In 1985, 2,013 women were
invited of which 1,289 attended. One year later, 1,768 women of those 2,013 were 
reinvited, and the number of women screened at the second round was 1,069. The
routine cervicovaginal Pap smears were taken, including a cell sample from the
vagina, exocervix, and endocervix. All smears were screened for the HPV-induced
cytopathic changes by the same cytopathologist. The prevalence of HPV infection
among the 22-year-old women was about 3% at the beginning of the follow-up and
about 7% one year later. The crude annual incidence was 7.0%. According to the
estimates for the life-time risk, half of the sexually active women would
experience at least one HPV infection within 10 years. Up to 79% of the Finnish
females would contract at least one HPV infection between ages 20 and 79 years.
This indicates that factors, which are poorly understood at the moment, exist
that regulate the development of an invasive carcinoma from a CIS lesion.


PMID: 2154865  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

