
1. Int J Cancer. 2012 Apr 1;130(7):1682-94. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26176. Epub 2011 Aug 3.

Human dendritic cells efficiently phagocytose adenoviral oncolysate but require
additional stimulation to mature.

Schierer S(1), Hesse A, Knippertz I, Kaempgen E, Baur AS, Schuler G,
Steinkasserer A, Nettelbeck DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.

Oncolytic adenoviruses are emerging agents for treatment of cancer by
tumor-restricted virus infection and cell lysis. Clinical trials have shown that 
oncolytic adenoviruses are well tolerated in patients but also that their
antitumor activity needs improvement. A promising strategy toward this end is to 
trigger systemic and prolonged antitumor immunity by adenoviral oncolysis.
Antitumor immune activation depends in large part on antigen presentation and T
cell activation by dendritic cells (DCs). Thus, it is likely that the interaction
of lysed tumor cells with DCs is a key determinant of such "oncolytic
vaccination." Our study reveals that human DCs effectively phagocytose melanoma
cells at late stages of oncolytic adenovirus infection, when the cells die
showing preferentially features of necrotic cell death. Maturation, migration
toward CCL19 and T cell stimulatory capacity of DCs, crucial steps for immune
induction, were, however, not induced by phagocytosis of oncolysate, but could be
triggered by a cytokine maturation cocktail. Therefore, oncolytic adenoviruses
and adenoviral oncolysate did not block DC maturation, which is in contrast to
reports for other oncolytic viruses. These results represent a rationale for
inserting immunostimulatory genes into oncolytic adenovirus genomes to assure
critical DC maturation. Indeed, we report here that adenoviral transduction of
melanoma cells with CD40L during oncolysis triggers the maturation of human DCs
with T cell stimulatory capacity similar to DCs matured by cytokines. We conclude
that triggering and shaping DC-induced antitumor immunity by oncolytic
adenoviruses "armed" with immunostimulatory genes holds promise for improving the
therapeutic outcome of viral oncolysis in patients.

Copyright Â© 2011 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.26176 
PMID: 21557217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

