
1. Cancer Res. 1990 May 1;50(9):2554-61.

Characteristics of potential lymphoma-inducing cells in mice sensitive or
resistant to lymphomagenesis by radiation leukemia virus variants.

Gokhman I(1), Peled A, Haran-Ghera N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.

The relationship between the H-2-associated responsiveness of mice to radiation
leukemia virus variants (A-RadLV and D-RadLV) lymphomagenesis and the
characteristics of early occurring potential lymphoma-inducing cells (PLC) among 
thymus and bone marrow cells of these virus-infected mice was investigated.
Sensitivity to virus-induced T-cell lymphomagenesis was shown to involve early
occurrence of Thy-positive PLC, found predominantly among thymocytes, whereas
resistance was rather related with early identification of PLC-Thy-negative cells
mostly among bone marrow cells. PLC were further characterized in the sensitive
(BL/6 + A-RadLV) and resistant (BL/6 + D-RadLV) situations by testing in parallel
the tumorigenic potential (using the transplantation bioassay method) and type of
thymus and bone marrow cell populations separated by different methods such as
size fractionation by centrifugal elutriation, cytotoxic elimination of
lymphocytes, or panning. The early occurring PLC among thymocytes of BL/6 mice
10-20 days following infection with A-RadLV were shown to be cortisone-resistant,
Thy+, CD4+, and/or CD8+ medium size dividing thymocytes. PLC among thymocytes of 
BL/6 mice + D-RadLV, identified among the medium and large cell fractions, were
shown to be cortisone-resistant Thy-, CD4-CD8- lymphocytes. High tumorigenic
potential of PLC was demonstrated only among unseparated or separated (on size
basis) bone marrow cells of BL/6 + D-RadLV (72-84%), whereas unseparated or
separated fractions of bone marrow from BL/6 + A-RadLV had a low lymphomagenic
potential (15-20%). The parallelism between the bone marrow fractions that
induced optimal thymus cellularity following reconstitution of lethally
irradiated mice and optimal lymphomagenicity stress the prothymocyte
characteristics of PLC among bone marrow cells of BL/6 mice infected with
D-RadLV. It is suggested that in resistant and sensitive haplotypes RadLV
variants infect different cell populations and thereby induce PLC which differ in
their capacity to present associative MuLV antigens with self H-2.


PMID: 2158393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

