
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19193. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019193. Epub 2011 May 16.

Evolutionary time-scale of the begomoviruses: evidence from integrated sequences 
in the Nicotiana genome.

Lefeuvre P(1), Harkins GW, Lett JM, Briddon RW, Chase MW, Moury B, Martin DP.

Author information: 
(1)CIRAD, UMR 53 PVBMT CIRAD-Université de la Réunion, Pôle de Protection des
Plantes, Saint Pierre, La Réunion, France. pierre.lefeuvre@cirad.fr

Despite having single stranded DNA genomes that are replicated by host DNA
polymerases, viruses in the family Geminiviridae are apparently evolving as
rapidly as some RNA viruses. The observed substitution rates of geminiviruses in 
the genera Begomovirus and Mastrevirus are so high that the entire family could
conceivably have originated less than a million years ago (MYA). However, the
existence of geminivirus related DNA (GRD) integrated within the genomes of
various Nicotiana species suggests that the geminiviruses probably originated >10
MYA. Some have even suggested that a distinct New-World (NW) lineage of
begomoviruses may have arisen following the separation by continental drift of
African and American proto-begomoviruses ∼110 MYA. We evaluate these various
geminivirus origin hypotheses using Bayesian coalescent-based approaches to date 
firstly the Nicotiana GRD integration events, and then the divergence of the NW
and Old-World (OW) begomoviruses. Besides rejecting the possibility of a<2 MYA
OW-NW begomovirus split, we could also discount that it may have occurred
concomitantly with the breakup of Gondwanaland 110 MYA. Although we could only
confidently narrow the date of the split down to between 2 and 80 MYA, the most
plausible (and best supported) date for the split is between 20 and 30 MYA--a
time when global cooling ended the dispersal of temperate species between Asia
and North America via the Beringian land bridge.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019193 
PMCID: PMC3095596
PMID: 21603653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

