
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2011 Aug;11(6):1368-77. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.04.033.
Epub 2011 May 11.

SP-A1, SP-A2 and SP-D gene polymorphisms in severe acute respiratory syncytial
infection in Chilean infants.

Ampuero S(1), Luchsinger V, Tapia L, Palomino MA, Larrañaga CE.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Virología, Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas (ICBM), Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad de Chile, Chile.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the principal pathogen that causes acute
lower respiratory tract infection (ALRI) in infants. Severe RSV-ALRI has been
associated with the host genetic susceptibility. To assess whether severe RSV
disease in infants is associated with certain single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) into the gene of SP-A1, SP-A2 and SP-D, a prospective study was performed
among blood donors and RSV-infected infants aged <or=6 months, considering their 
severity, according to a strict scoring system. Allele and genotype frequencies
were compared using χ(2)-test. Association studies and haplotype analysis were
tested by using Armitagës trend test and Unphased 3.0 program. A total of 118
RSV-infected infants and 104 blood donors were enrolled into the study; 59
infants had a severe respiratory disease, 34 children developed a moderate
illness and 25 had a mild disease. There was no difference in the allelic and
genotypic frequencies of SP-A1, but intragenic haplotypes showed significant
differences among infected infants and blood donors (p=0.0021). 1A(0) variant of 
SP-A2 was the most frequent allele in all groups. Thr(11) allele of SP-D is
significantly higher in RSV infants (p=0.028), as given by its higher frequency
in severe disease (p=0.046). Heterozygous Thr(11)/Met(11) was significantly more 
common in infected infants (p=0.037), because it has higher frequency in
critically ill children (p=0.017). Thr(160) allele was significantly higher in
severe infants compared with blood donors (p=0.046) and infants with mild disease
(p=0.018). Thr(11)-Thr(160)-Ser(270) haplotype was significantly more common in
RSV-infants, due to severe (p=0.00000034) and moderate disease (p=0.000009).
Differences were also found among severe and mild disease (p=0.026). Differences 
found with other authors, indicate the need for local studies to identify genetic
biomarkers of severity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.04.033 
PMID: 21601013  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

