
1. J Med Entomol. 2011 May;48(3):628-33.

Wicking assay for the rapid detection of Rift Valley fever viral antigens in
mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae).

Turell M(1), Davé K, Mayda M, Parker Z, Coleman R, Davé S, Strickman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vector Assessment Virology Division, United States Army Medical 
Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, 1425 Porter Street, Fort Detrick, MD
21702-5011, USA. michael.turell@amedd.army.mil

Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) causes outbreaks of severe disease in domestic
ungulates as well as humans in Africa. There is a logical concern that RVFV could
be introduced into the Americas and cause significant health and economic damage 
based on the precedent of the introduction and spread of West Nile virus (WNV).
Unfortunately, there are currently no licensed diagnostic assays available for
RVFV in the Americas. In this work, we report on the ability of a novel dipstick 
assay, VectorTest RVFV antigen assay, modeled on the VecTest assay for WNV, to
detect a RVFV-infected female within a pool of mosquitoes. The dipsticks provided
results in <20 min, were easy to use, and did not require a laboratory with
containment facilities. Although readily able to detect a mosquito with a
disseminated RVFV infection, it only occasionally detected RVFV in a mosquito
with a nondisseminated infection, and therefore may fail to detect some pools
that actually contain one or more positive mosquitoes. The RVFV dipstick assay
was highly specific and did not react with samples to which had been added yellow
fever, West Nile, Venezuelan equine encephalitis, sandfly fever Naples, sandfly
fever Sicilian, or sandfly fever Toscana viruses. The RVFV assay can provide a
rapid, safe, easy-to-use assay to alert public health personnel to the presence
of RVFV in mosquitoes. Results from this assay will allow a rapid threat
assessment and the focusing of vector control measures in high-risk areas.

DOI: 10.1603/me10219 
PMID: 21661324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

