
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2011 May 24;95(1):19-30. doi: 10.3354/dao02343.

Penaeus monodon is protected against gill-associated virus by muscle injection
but not oral delivery of bacterially expressed dsRNAs.

Sellars MJ(1), Rao M, Arnold SJ, Wade NM, Cowley JA.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Food Futures National Research Flagship, CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric
Research, Cleveland, Queensland 4163, Australia. melony.sellars@csiro.au

Gill-associated virus (GAV) is a nidovirus that commonly infects Penaeus monodon 
(black tiger shrimp) in eastern Australia, causing morbidity and mortalities in
the acute stage of disease. Here we explored the possibility of inhibiting GAV
replication and disease using double-stranded (ds)RNAs expressed in bacteria and 
delivered either orally or by muscle injection. To enhance potential RNA
interference (RNAi) responses, 5 long dsRNAs were used that targeted open reading
frame 1a/1b (ORF1a/b) gene regions and thus only the genomic length RNA. To
examine oral delivery, P. monodon were fed pellets incorporating a pool of
formalin-fixed bacteria containing the 5 GAV-specific dsRNAs before being
injected with a minimal lethal GAV dose. Feeding with the pellets continued
post-challenge but did not reduce mortality accumulation and elevation in GAV
loads. In contrast, muscle injection of the dsRNAs purified from bacteria was
highly effective at slowing GAV replication and protecting shrimp against acute
disease and mortalities. In synergy with these data, dsRNA targeted to P. monodon
beta-actin mRNA caused 100% mortality following injection, whilst its oral
delivery caused no mortality. Findings confirm that injected dsRNA can mount
effective RNAi responses in P. monodon to endogenous shrimp mRNA and exogenous
viral RNAs, but when delivered orally in bacteria as a feed component, the same
dsRNAs are ineffective. The efficacy of the RNAi response against GAV provided by
injection of dsRNAs targeted to multiple genome sites suggests that this strategy
might have general applicability in enhancing protection against other shrimp
single-stranded (ss)RNA viruses, particularly in hatcheries or breeding programs 
where injection-based delivery systems are practical.

DOI: 10.3354/dao02343 
PMID: 21797032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

