
1. EMBO J. 2011 Aug 16;30(20):4171-84. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.294.

A thermodynamic switch modulates abscisic acid receptor sensitivity.

Dupeux F(1), Santiago J, Betz K, Twycross J, Park SY, Rodriguez L,
Gonzalez-Guzman M, Jensen MR, Krasnogor N, Blackledge M, Holdsworth M, Cutler SR,
Rodriguez PL, MÃ¡rquez JA.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Grenoble Outstation and Unit of Virus
Host-Cell Interactions, UJF-EMBL-CNRS, Grenoble Cedex 9, France.

Abscisic acid (ABA) is a key hormone regulating plant growth, development and the
response to biotic and abiotic stress. ABA binding to pyrabactin resistance
(PYR)/PYR1-like (PYL)/Regulatory Component of Abscisic acid Receptor (RCAR)
intracellular receptors promotes the formation of stable complexes with certain
protein phosphatases type 2C (PP2Cs), leading to the activation of ABA
signalling. The PYR/PYL/RCAR family contains 14 genes in Arabidopsis and is
currently the largest plant hormone receptor family known; however, it is unclear
what functional differentiation exists among receptors. Here, we identify two
distinct classes of receptors, dimeric and monomeric, with different intrinsic
affinities for ABA and whose differential properties are determined by the
oligomeric state of their apo forms. Moreover, we find a residue in PYR1, H60,
that is variable between family members and plays a key role in determining
oligomeric state. In silico modelling of the ABA activation pathway reveals that 
monomeric receptors have a competitive advantage for binding to ABA and PP2Cs.
This work illustrates how receptor oligomerization can modulate hormonal
responses and more generally, the sensitivity of a ligand-dependent signalling
system.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.294 
PMCID: PMC3199383
PMID: 21847091  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

