
1. Salud Publica Mex. 2011;53 Suppl 1:S19-25.

[Nosocomial transmission of hepatitis C associated with anesthesia procedures: a 
case-control study].

[Article in Spanish]

Contreras AM(1), Sotelo M, Celis A, Villalobos DB, Ancona-Piste O, Ochoa-Jiménez 
RJ, López-Ramírez K.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Médico Nacional de Occidente, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social,
México. acontreras53@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Nosocomial transmission of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection had been 
related with anesthesia procedures. The study aim was to measure the association 
between anesthesia procedures in cases with previous surgery and HCV infection.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In a case-control study were included subjects that
attended to the Central Blood Bank of the West Medical National Center, Mexican
Institute of the Social Security in Guadalajara, Jalisco between july 2005 and
september 2007. Cases were patients with positive hepatitis C antibody (anti-HCV)
confirmed by recombinant immunoblot assay (RIBA) and/or nucleic acid test (HCV
RNA); the control group was blood donors with negative antibody. An exhaustive
questionnaire about risk factors for hepatitis C, was applied. The risk of HCV
infection was determined with the Odds Ratio (OR) and multivariate analysis was
made by logistic regression.
RESULTS: We included 362 subjects, 211 cases and 151 controls; in 70 (33.2%)
cases were found significant association between the anesthesia procedures and
HCV infection in patients with previous surgery (OR adjusted 2.44, CI 95% 1.44 - 
4.11)
CONCLUSION: This is the first study in México that demonstrate association
between history of anesthesia procedures and HCV infection in cases with previous
surgery.


PMID: 21877068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

