
1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Sep 27;52(10):7455-63. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-7295.

The small GTPase Rap1 is a novel regulator of RPE cell barrier function.

Wittchen ES(1), Hartnett ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine whether the small GTPase Rap1 regulates the formation and
maintenance of the retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cell junctional barrier.
METHODS: An in vitro model was used to study RPE barrier properties. To dissect
the role of Rap1, two techniques were used to inhibit Rap1 function:
overexpression of RapGAP, which acts as a negative regulator of endogenous Rap1
activity, and treatment with engineered, adenovirally-transduced microRNAs to
knockdown Rap1 protein expression. Transepithelial electrical resistance (TER)
and real-time cellular analysis (RTCA) of impedance were used as readouts for
barrier properties. Immunofluorescence microscopy was used to visualize
localization of cadherins under steady state conditions and also during
junctional reassembly after calcium switch. Finally, choroidal endothelial cell
(CEC) migration across RPE monolayers was quantified under conditions of Rap1
inhibition in RPE.
RESULTS: Knockdown of Rap1 or inhibition of its activity in RPE reduces TER and
electrical impedance of the RPE monolayers. The loss of barrier function is also 
reflected by the mislocalization of cadherins and formation of gaps within the
monolayer. TER measurement and immunofluorescent staining of cadherins after a
calcium switch indicate that junctional reassembly kinetics are also impaired.
Furthermore, CEC transmigration is significantly higher in Rap1-knockdown RPE
monolayers compared with control.
CONCLUSIONS: Rap1 GTPase is an important regulator of RPE cell junctions, and is 
required for maintenance of barrier function. This observation that RPE
monolayers lacking Rap1 allow greater transmigration of CECs suggests a possible 
role for potentiating choroidal neovascularization during the pathology of
neovascular age-related macular degeneration.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.11-7295 
PMCID: PMC3183976
PMID: 21873678  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

