
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2011 Dec;17(12):1868-74. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-0691.2011.03483.x. Epub 2011 Sep 6.

Liposomal amphotericin B twice weekly as antifungal prophylaxis in paediatric
haematological malignancy patients.

Bochennek K(1), Tramsen L, Schedler N, Becker M, Klingebiel T, Groll AH,
Lehrnbecher T.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital III, Johann Wolfgang 
Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany.

Data on antifungal prophylaxis in paediatric cancer patients at high risk for
invasive fungal disease (IFD) are scant. Intermittent administration of liposomal
amphotericin B (LAMB) has been shown to be safe and effective in adult patients
with haematological malignancies. We prospectively evaluated the safety and
efficacy of prophylactic LAMB at a dosage of 2.5 mg/kg twice weekly in children
at high risk for IFD. Efficacy was compared with that in a historical control
group of patients with similar demographic characteristics not receiving LAMB
prophylaxis. A total of 46 high-risk patients (24 boys; mean age, 7.7 years) with
187 episodes of antifungal prophylaxis were analysed. The median duration of
neutropenia (<500/μL) was 10 days. LAMB was discontinued in four patients because
of acute allergic reactions. Median values for creatinine and liver enzymes at
end of treatment did not differ significantly from those at baseline.
Hypokalaemia (<3.0 mmol/L) occurred with 13.5% of the prophylactic episodes, but 
was usually mild and always reversible. No proven/probable IFD occurred in
patients receiving LAMB prophylaxis. In comparison, five proven and two probable 
IFDs were observed in 45 historical controls not receiving LAMB prophylaxis (p
0.01). LAMB prophylaxis had no impact on the use of empirical antifungal therapy.
Systemic antifungal prophylaxis with LAMB 2.5 mg/kg twice weekly is feasible and 
safe, and seems to be an effective approach for antifungal prophylaxis in
high-risk paediatric cancer patients.

© 2011 The Authors. Clinical Microbiology and Infection © 2011 European Society
of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2011.03483.x 
PMID: 21895857  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

