
1. J Virol. 2011 Dec;85(23):12594-604. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05620-11. Epub 2011 Sep 21.

Rotavirus infection induces the unfolded protein response of the cell and
controls it through the nonstructural protein NSP3.

Trujillo-Alonso V(1), Maruri-Avidal L, Arias CF, López S.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Génetica del Desarrollo y Fisiología Molecular, Instituto de
Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Avenida Universidad 2001,
Colonia Chamilpa, Cuernavaca, Morelos 62210, Mexico.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a cellular mechanism that is triggered in 
order to cope with the stress caused by the accumulation of misfolded proteins in
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). This response is initiated by the
endoribonuclease inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1), activating transcription
factor 6 (ATF6), and PKR-like ER kinase, which increase the expression of the
genes involved in the folding and degradation processes and decrease the protein 
input into the ER by inhibiting translation. It has been shown that viruses both 
induce and manipulate the UPR in order to protect the host cells from an ER
stress-mediated death, thus permitting the translation of viral proteins and the 
efficient replication of the virus. To understand the cellular events that occur 
during the rotavirus replication cycle, we examined the activation of the three
UPR arms following infection, using luciferase reporters driven by promoters of
the ER stress-responsive genes and real-time reverse transcription-PCR to
determine the levels of the stress-induced mRNAs. Our findings indicated that
during rotavirus infection two of the three arms of the UPR (IRE1 and ATF6)
become activated; however, these pathways are interrupted at the translational
level by the general inhibition of protein synthesis caused by NSP3. This
response seems to be triggered by more than one viral protein synthesized during 
the replication of the virus, but not by the viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA),
since cells transfected with psoralen-inactivated virions, or with naked viral
dsRNA, did not induce UPR.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.05620-11 
PMCID: PMC3209385
PMID: 21937647  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

