
1. Antiviral Res. 2011 Dec;92(3):424-33. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2011.09.009. Epub 
2011 Oct 4.

Exploring the molecular basis of dsRNA recognition by NS1 protein of influenza A 
virus using molecular dynamics simulation and free energy calculation.

Pan D(1), Sun H, Shen Y, Liu H, Yao X.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Lanzhou University, China.

The frequent outbreak of influenza pandemic and the limited available
anti-influenza drugs highlight the urgent need for the development of new
antiviral drugs. The dsRNA-binding surface of nonstructural protein 1 of
influenza A virus (NS1A) is a promising target. The detailed understanding of
NS1A-dsRNA interaction will be valuable for structure-based anti-influenza drug
discovery. To characterize and explore the key interaction features between dsRNA
and NS1A, molecular dynamics simulation combined with MM-GBSA calculations were
performed. Based on the MM-GBSA calculations, we find that the intermolecular van
der Waals interaction and the nonpolar solvation term provide the main driving
force for the binding process. Meanwhile, 17 key residues from NS1A were
identified to be responsible for the dsRNA binding. Compared with the wild type
NS1A, all the studied mutants S42A, T49A, R38A, R35AR46A have obvious reduced
binding free energies with dsRNA reflecting in the reduction of the polar and/or 
nonpolar interactions. In addition, the structural and energy analysis indicate
the mutations have a small effect to the backbone structures but the loss of side
chain interactions is responsible for the decrease of the binding affinity. The
uncovering of NS1A-dsRNA recognition mechanism will provide some useful insights 
and new chances for the development of anti-influenza drugs.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2011.09.009 
PMID: 22001595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

