
1. Curr Top Med Chem. 2011 Dec;11(24):2959-84.

Biochemistry and biophysics of HIV-1 gp41 - membrane interactions and
implications for HIV-1 envelope protein mediated viral-cell fusion and fusion
inhibitor design.

Cai L(1), Gochin M, Liu K.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Haidian District, Beijing
100850, China. caileefeng@gmail.com

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), the pathogen of acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), causes ~2 millions death every year and still
defies an effective vaccine. HIV-1 infects host cells through envelope protein - 
mediated virus-cell fusion. The transmembrane subunit of envelope protein, gp41, 
is the molecular machinery which facilitates fusion. Its ectodomain contains
several distinguishing functional domains, fusion peptide (FP), Nterminal heptad 
repeat (NHR), C-terminal heptad repeat (CHR) and membrane proximal extracellular 
region (MPER). During the fusion process, FP inserts into the host cell membrane,
and an extended gp41 prehairpin conformation bridges the viral and cell membranes
through MPER and FP respectively. Subsequent conformational change of the
unstable prehairpin results in a coiled-coil 6-helix bundle (6HB) structure
formed between NHR and CHR. The energetics of 6HB formation drives membrane
apposition and fusion. Drugs targeting gp41 functional domains to prevent 6HB
formation inhibit HIV-1 infection. T20 (enfuvirtide, Fuzeon) was approved by the 
US FDA in 2003 as the first fusion inhibitor. It is a 36-residue peptide from the
gp41 CHR, and it inhibits 6HB formation by targeting NHR and lipids. Development 
of new fusion inhibitors, especially small molecule drugs, is encouraged to
overcome the shortcomings of T20 as a peptide drug. Hydrophobic characteristics
and membrane association are critical for gp41 function and mechanism of action. 
Research in gp41-membrane interactions, using peptides corresponding to specific 
functional domains, or constructs including several interactive domains, are
reviewed here to get a better understanding of gp41 mediated virus-cell fusion
that can inform or guide the design of new HIV-1 fusion inhibitors.

DOI: 10.2174/156802611798808497 
PMCID: PMC3220743
PMID: 22044229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

