
1. BMC Cancer. 2012 Mar 30;12:129. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-129.

AAV-mediated human PEDF inhibits tumor growth and metastasis in murine colorectal
peritoneal carcinomatosis model.

Wu QJ(1), Gong CY, Luo ST, Zhang DM, Zhang S, Shi HS, Lu L, Yan HX, He SS, Li DD,
Yang L, Zhao X, Wei YQ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, West China Medical
School, and School of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, P.R.
China.

BACKGROUND: Angiogenesis plays an important role in tumor growth and metastasis, 
therefore antiangiogenic therapy was widely investigated as a promising approach 
for cancer therapy. Recently, pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) has been
shown to be the most potent inhibitor of angiogenesis. Adeno-associated virus
(AAV) vectors have been intensively studied due to their wide tropisms,
nonpathogenicity, and long-term transgene expression in vivo. The objective of
this work was to evaluate the ability of AAV-mediated human PEDF (hPEDF) as a
potent tumor suppressor and a potential candidate for cancer gene therapy.
METHODS: Recombinant AAV2 encoding hPEDF (rAAV2-hPEDF) was constructed and
produced, and then was assigned for in vitro and in vivo experiments. Conditioned
medium from cells infected with rAAV2-hPEDF was used for cell proliferation and
tube formation tests of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs).
Subsequently, colorectal peritoneal carcinomatosis (CRPC) mouse model was
established and treated with rAAV2-hPEDF. Therapeutic efficacy of rAAV2-hPEDF
were investigated, including tumor growth and metastasis, survival time,
microvessel density (MVD) and apoptosis index of tumor tissues, and hPEDF levels 
in serum and ascites.
RESULTS: rAAV2-hPEDF was successfully constructed, and transmission electron
microscope (TEM) showed that rAAV2-hPEDF particles were non-enveloped icosahedral
shape with a diameter of approximately 20 nm. rAAV2-hPEDF-infected cells
expressed hPEDF protein, and the conditioned medium from infected cells inhibited
proliferation and tube-formation of HUVECs in vitro. Furthermore, in CRPC mouse
model, rAAV2-hPEDF significantly suppressed tumor growth and metastasis, and
prolonged survival time of treated mice. Immunofluorescence studies indicated
that rAAV2-hPEDF could inhibit angiogenesis and induce apoptosis in tumor
tissues. Besides, hPEDF levels in serum and ascites of rAAV2-hPEDF-treated mice
were significant higher than those in rAAV2-null or normal saline (NS) groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, our results suggest that rAAV2-hPEDF may be a potential
candidate as an antiangiogenic therapy agent.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-129 
PMCID: PMC3338360
PMID: 22462776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

