
1. Microbiol Immunol. 2012 Jul;56(7):463-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.2012.00462.x.

Development of an in vitro antigen-detection test as an alternative method to the
in vivo plaque reduction neutralization test for the quality control of Japanese 
encephalitis virus vaccine.

Kim DK(1), Kim HY, Kim JY, Ye MB, Park KB, Han E, Kim J, Ja Ban S, Hong SH, Park 
YK, Nam JH.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Lot Release, Korea Food & Drug Administration,
Chungcheongbuk-do, Korea.

Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) causes diseases that attack the human central
nervous system. Traditionally, the quality control for JEV vaccines, in which the
plaque reduction neutralization (PRN) titer is measured by the national control
laboratories before the vaccine batches are marketed, has required laboratory
animal testing. However, classical animal tests have inherent problems, including
the very fact that animals are used, ethical issues, and the possibility of
error. In this study, JEV antigen was measured in an in vitro assay to assess the
feasibility of replacing in vivo assays that measure the PRN titers of JEV
vaccines. We constructed a double-sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(DS-ELISA) that could detect JEV envelope (E). Initially, monoclonal antibodies
(mAbs) directed against the JEV E protein were generated and characterized. We
isolated 18 mAbs against JEV E protein, and most were the IgG1 or IgG2a isotype. 
The mAbs (5F15 and 7D71) were selected as the most suitable mAb pair to detect
JEV E protein. DS-ELISA with this pair detected as little as approximately 3
μg/mL JEV E protein and demonstrated a relationship between the amount of JEV E
protein and the PRN titer. From these results, we surmise that this DS-ELISA may 
be useful, not only in terms of measuring the amount of JEV E protein, but also
as a substitute for the PRN test for JEV vaccine evaluation.

© 2012 The Societies and Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.2012.00462.x 
PMID: 22486472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

