
1. Vet Microbiol. 2012 Dec 28;161(1-2):66-76. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.07.020.
Epub 2012 Jul 20.

Viral tropism and pathology associated with viral hemorrhagic septicemia in
larval and juvenile Pacific herring.

Lovy J(1), Lewis NL, Hershberger PK, Bennett W, Meyers TR, Garver KA.

Author information: 
(1)Herring Conservation & Research Society, Nanaimo, BC V9T 6M4, Canada.
Jan.Lovy@dep.state.nj.us

Viral hemorrhagic septicemia virus (VHSV) genotype IVa causes mass mortality in
wild Pacific herring, a species of economic value, in the Northeast Pacific
Ocean. Young of the year herring are particularly susceptible and can be carriers
of the virus. To understand its pathogenesis, tissue and cellular tropisms of
VHSV in larval and juvenile Pacific herring were investigated with
immunohistochemistry, transmission electron microscopy, and viral tissue titer.
In larval herring, early viral tropism for epithelial tissues (6d post-exposure) 
was indicated by foci of epidermal thickening that contained heavy concentrations
of virus. This was followed by a cellular tropism for fibroblasts within the fin 
bases and the dermis, but expanded to cells of the kidney, liver, pancreas,
gastrointestinal tract and meninges in the brain. Among wild juvenile herring
that underwent a VHS epizootic in the laboratory, the disease was characterized
by acute and chronic phases of death. Fish that died during the acute phase had
systemic infections in tissues including the submucosa of the gastrointestinal
tract, spleen, kidney, liver, and meninges. The disease then transitioned into a 
chronic phase that was characterized by the appearance of neurological signs
including erratic and corkscrew swimming and darkening of the dorsal skin. During
the chronic phase viral persistence occurred in nervous tissues including
meninges and brain parenchymal cells and in one case in peripheral nerves, while 
virus was mostly cleared from the other tissues. The results demonstrate the
varying VHSV tropisms dependent on the timing of infection and the importance of 
neural tissues for the persistence and perpetuation of chronic infections in
Pacific herring.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.07.020 
PMID: 22857977  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

