
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45256. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045256. Epub 2012 Sep 18.

A spirulina-enhanced diet provides neuroprotection in an α-synuclein model of
Parkinson's disease.

Pabon MM(1), Jernberg JN, Morganti J, Contreras J, Hudson CE, Klein RL, Bickford 
PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, University of South
Florida, College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida, USA.

Inflammation in the brain plays a major role in neurodegenerative diseases. In
particular, microglial cell activation is believed to be associated with the
pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson's disease (PD).
An increase in microglia activation has been shown in the substantia nigra pars
compacta (SNpc) of PD models when there has been a decrease in tyrosine
hydroxylase (TH) positive cells. This may be a sign of neurotoxicity due to
prolonged activation of microglia in both early and late stages of disease
progression. Natural products, such as spirulina, derived from blue green algae, 
are believed to help reverse this effect due to its
anti-inflammatory/anti-oxidant properties. An adeno-associated virus vector
(AAV9) for α-synuclein was injected in the substantia nigra of rats to model
Parkinson's disease and to study the effects of spirulina on the inflammatory
response. One month prior to surgeries, rats were fed either a diet enhanced with
spirulina or a control diet. Immunohistochemistry was analyzed with unbiased
stereological methods to quantify lesion size and microglial activation. As
hypothesized, spirulina was neuroprotective in this α-synuclein model of PD as
more TH+ and NeuN+ cells were observed; spirulina concomitantly decreased the
numbers of activated microglial cells as determined by MHCII expression. This
decrease in microglia activation may have been due, in part, to the effect of
spirulina to increase expression of the fractalkine receptor (CX3CR1) on
microglia. With this study we hypothesize that α-synuclein neurotoxicity is
mediated, at least in part, via an interaction with microglia. We observed a
decrease in activated microglia in the rats that received a spirulina- enhanced
diet concomitant to neuroprotection. The increase in CX3CR1 in the groups that
received spirulina, suggests a potential mechanism of action.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045256 
PMCID: PMC3445455
PMID: 23028885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

