
1. J Wildl Dis. 2012 Oct;48(4):999-1009. doi: 10.7589/2011-11-314.

Persistence of low pathogenic avian influenza viruses in filtered surface water
from waterfowl habitats in Georgia, USA.

Keeler SP(1), Berghaus RD, Stallknecht DE.

Author information: 
(1)Southeastern Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study, Department of Population
Health, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia
30602, USA. skeeler@uga.edu

The natural reservoirs for avian influenza virus (AIV) are wild bird species of
the orders Anseriformes and Charadriiformes. The primary route of transmission
for wild birds is through fecally contaminated surface water on shared aquatic
habitats. A distilled water model has shown that AIV remains infectious in water 
for weeks to months with pH, salinity, and temperature affecting stability. To
evaluate the effect of pH, salinity, and temperature on AIV persistence in
natural surface water, we measured the duration of infectivity for two common low
pathogenic AIV subtypes in 15 filtered surface water samples collected from major
waterfowl habitats in Georgia, USA. Trials were performed at three incubation
temperatures 10, 17, and 28 C. Consistent with previous studies, pH and
temperature had a significant effect on the stability of AIV in filtered surface 
water. Both viruses were less stable at warmer temperatures and in acidic water
(pH <5.0). Due to the limited range of salinity of the field water samples, the
role of salinity in AIV stability in surface water could not adequately be
evaluated. Variations in persistence times between water samples with comparable 
pH and salinities indicated that other factors affect AIV stability in natural
surface water. These results contribute to the current understanding of AIV
persistence in aquatic habitats and may help in identifying areas with an
increased likelihood of AIV persistence and potential transmission.

DOI: 10.7589/2011-11-314 
PMID: 23060501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

