
1. Bull World Health Organ. 2012 Nov 1;90(11):831-838A. doi: 10.2471/BLT.12.102574. 
Epub 2012 Sep 14.

Understanding the modes of transmission model of new HIV infection and its use in
prevention planning.

Case KK(1), Ghys PD, Gouws E, Eaton JW, Borquez A, Stover J, Cuchi P, Abu-Raddad 
LJ, Garnett GP, Hallett TB; HIV Modelling Consortium.

Collaborators: Atun R, Auvert B, Bacaer N, Barnighausen T, Bershteyn A, Boily MC,
Delva W, Eckhoff P, Foss A, Heijne J, Klein DJ, Low N, Lowndes CM, Mishra S,
Pretorius C, Welte A, White P, Williams B, Wilson D, Wilson DP, Zaba B, Prudden
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College London, St
Mary's Campus, London, England. k.case@imperial.ac.uk

The modes of transmission model has been widely used to help decision-makers
target measures for preventing human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. The 
model estimates the number of new HIV infections that will be acquired over the
ensuing year by individuals in identified risk groups in a given population using
data on the size of the groups, the aggregate risk behaviour in each group, the
current prevalence of HIV infection among the sexual or injecting drug partners
of individuals in each group, and the probability of HIV transmission associated 
with different risk behaviours. The strength of the model is its simplicity,
which enables data from a variety of sources to be synthesized, resulting in
better characterization of HIV epidemics in some settings. However, concerns have
been raised about the assumptions underlying the model structure, about
limitations in the data available for deriving input parameters and about
interpretation and communication of the model results. The aim of this review was
to improve the use of the model by reassessing its paradigm, structure and data
requirements. We identified key questions to be asked when conducting an analysis
and when interpreting the model results and make recommendations for
strengthening the model's application in the future.

DOI: 10.2471/BLT.12.102574 
PMCID: PMC3506404
PMID: 23226895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

