
1. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2013 Sep;37(4):359-64. doi:
10.1016/j.clinre.2012.10.013. Epub 2012 Dec 27.

The effect of HLA-DQB1 alleles on virologic breakthroughs during chronic
hepatitis B treatment with genetically low barrier drugs.

Doganay L(1), Tuncer I, Katrinli S, Enc FY, Ozturk O, Colak Y, Ulasoglu C, Dinler
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Goztepe Teaching and Research Hospital,
Medeniyet University, Istanbul, Turkey. levent.doganay@ueh.gov.tr

BACKGROUND: Chronic hepatitis B treatment with oral antiviral drugs is a long
course. During this course, antiviral resistance is a serious issue,
particularly, if genetically low barrier drugs are in use. Host immunity is
accepted to have an effect on antiviral resistance development. The earliest
clinical sign of drug resistance is virologic breakthrough. In this study, we
aimed to investigate the relation between HLA-DQB1 alleles and virologic
breakthrough events.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The patient records at single institution hepatology clinic
were reviewed. Local institution ethics committee approval was taken. The
patients' demographic data, virologic parameters, treatment statues were noted.
Patients who had received lamivudine or adefovir were recruited and grouped into 
two according to virologic breakthrough occurrence. Patients who were not
compliant to the given treatment were excluded. Blood samples were taken for DNA 
extraction. HLA-DQB1 alleles were determined at high level by sequence-speciﬁc
primers-polymerase chain reaction. The distribution of DQB1 alleles among groups 
was analyzed.
RESULTS: One hundred ninety-eight patients were eligible for the study.
Ninety-six of them had virologic breakthrough where 102 did not have. DQB1 0503
allele was more frequent in patients without breakthrough (28.4% vs. 12.4%,
P=0.006). In univariate analysis, HBeAg seropositivity (P<0.001), absence of
cirrhosis (P=0.007), younger age (P=0.002) and higher pretreatment logDNA
(P<0.001) were related to breakthrough events. However, in multivariate analysis 
only logDNA (P<0.001) and DQB1*0503 (P=0.02) allele revealed statistically
significant relation with breakthrough events.
CONCLUSION: Host immunity may have an effect on outcome during treatment with
oral antiviral drugs. A patient with better immunologic profile may suppress the 
viral replication better and this may cause less resistance occurrence during
treatment with genetically low barrier drugs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinre.2012.10.013 
PMID: 23273495  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

