
1. J Proteome Res. 2013 Feb 1;12(2):559-72. doi: 10.1021/pr300869h. Epub 2013 Jan
16.

Proteomic analysis of early HIV-1 nucleoprotein complexes.

Schweitzer CJ(1), Jagadish T, Haverland N, Ciborowski P, Belshan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Creighton University,
Omaha, Nebraska 68178, USA.

After entry into the cell, the early steps of the human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) replication cycle are mediated by two functionally distinct
nucleoprotein complexes, the reverse transcription complex (RTC) and
preintegration complex (PIC). These two unique viral complexes are responsible
for the conversion of the single-stranded RNA genome into double-stranded DNA,
transport of the DNA into the nucleus, and integration of the viral DNA into the 
host cell chromosome. Prior biochemical analyses suggest that these complexes are
large and contain multiple undiscovered host cell factors. In this study,
functional HIV-1 RTCs and PICs were partially purified by velocity gradient
centrifugation and fractionation, concentrated, trypsin digested, and analyzed by
LC-MS/MS. A total of seven parallel infected and control biological replicates
were completed. Database searches were performed with Proteome Discoverer and a
comparison of the HIV-1 samples to parallel uninfected control samples was used
to identify unique cellular factors. The analysis produced a total data set of
11055 proteins. Several previously characterized HIV-1 factors were identified,
including XRCC6, TFRC, and HSP70. The presence of XRCC6 was confirmed in infected
fractions and shown to be associated with HIV-1 DNA by immunoprecipitation-PCR
experiments. Overall, the analysis identified 94 proteins unique in the infected 
fractions and 121 proteins unique to the control fractions with â‰¥ 2 protein
assignments. An additional 54 and 52 were classified as enriched in the infected 
and control samples, respectively, based on a 3-fold difference in total Proteome
Discoverer probability score. The differential expression of several candidate
proteins was validated by Western blot analysis. This study contributes
additional novel candidate proteins to the growing published bioinformatic data
sets of proteins that contribute to HIV-1 replication.

DOI: 10.1021/pr300869h 
PMCID: PMC3564510
PMID: 23282062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

