
1. Ther Adv Chronic Dis. 2013 Jan;4(1):45-51. doi: 10.1177/2040622312466279.

Recent advances in treating multiple sclerosis: efficacy, risks and place in
therapy.

Jeffery DR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Director of the MS Center, Advance Neurology at Cornerstone Health Care, 152
Kinderton Way, Suite 101, Advance, NC 27006, USA.

The development of new pharmacologic agents for the treatment of multiple
sclerosis (MS) and advances in testing for exposure to the JC virus have led to
changes in the treatment of MS. In addition several new agents are in late stage 
development for MS and their entry onto the market will provide additional
treatment options. In 2012 and in early 2013, it is likely that both terifunomide
and BG-12 will be approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) for the treatment of relapsing forms of MS. The therapeutic environment has
already changed and is likely to change rapidly over the next several years.
Fingolimod was the first oral agent approved for the treatment of MS and this
agent is now widely used in patients intolerant of injections and the side
effects associated with the older platform therapies. In many settings it is also
used a first-line agent. Owing to the risk of progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy, natalizumab had previously been reserved for patients with
active disease who were intolerant of first-line agents or patients who were
worsening despite standard therapy. With the availability of JC virus antibody
testing, natalizumab is now being used as a first-line agent in patients negative
for JC virus antibodies. Teriflunomide and BG-12 will become available in the
next year. Both agents have suitable efficacy and a favorable safety and
tolerability profile. There are advantages and disadvantages associated with all 
of the oral agents. In this article we summarize the clinical trial results
regarding the efficacy and safety of the oral agents and discuss the changes that
are already taking place in the therapeutic landscape for MS.

DOI: 10.1177/2040622312466279 
PMCID: PMC3539264
PMID: 23342246 

