
1. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 9;8(4):e60032. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060032. Print 2013.

Mutation of the fiber shaft heparan sulphate binding site of a 5/3 chimeric
adenovirus reduces liver tropism.

Koski A(1), Karli E, Kipar A, Escutenaire S, Kanerva A, Hemminki A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Gene Therapy Group, Molecular Cancer Biology Program and
Transplantation Laboratory and Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland.

Natural tropism to the liver is a major obstacle in systemic delivery of
adenoviruses in cancer gene therapy. Adenovirus binding to soluble coagulation
factors and to cellular heparan sulphate proteoglycans via the fiber shaft KKTK
domain are suggested to cause liver tropism. Serotype 5 adenovirus constructs
with mutated KKTK regions exhibit liver detargeting, but they also transduce
tumors less efficiently, possibly due to altered fiber conformation. We
constructed Ad5/3lucS*, a 5/3 chimeric adenovirus with a mutated KKTK region. The
fiber knob swap was hypothesized to facilitate tumor transduction. This construct
was studied with or without additional coagulation factor ablation. Ad5/3lucS*
exhibited significantly reduced transduction of human hepatic cells in vitro and 
mouse livers in vivo. Combination of coagulation factor ablation by
warfarinization to Ad5/3lucS* seemed to further enhance liver detargeting. Cancer
cell transduction by Ad5/3lucS* was retained in vitro. In vivo, viral particle
accumulation in M4A4-LM3 xenograft tumors was comparable to controls, but
Ad5/3lucS* transgene expression was nearly abolished. Coagulation factor ablation
did not affect tumor transduction. These studies set the stage for further
investigations into the effects of the KKTK mutation and coagulation factor
ablation in the context of 5/3 serotype chimerism. Of note, the putative
disconnect between tumor transduction and transgene expression could prove useful
in further understanding of adenovirus biology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060032 
PMCID: PMC3621953
PMID: 23585829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

