
1. J Virol Methods. 2013 Nov;193(2):320-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2013.06.004. Epub
2013 Jun 26.

Detection and quantitation of two cucurbit criniviruses in mixed infection by
real-time RT-PCR.

Abrahamian PE(1), Seblani R, Sobh H, Abou-Jawdah Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Sciences, Faculty of Agricultural and Food
Sciences, American University of Beirut, Beirut 1107 2020, Lebanon. Electronic
address: peterabrahamian@gmail.com.

Cucurbit chlorotic yellows virus (CCYV) and Cucurbit yellow stunting disorder
virus (CYSDV) are whitefly-transmitted criniviruses infecting cucurbit crops
inducing similar symptoms. Single and multiplex RT-PCR protocols were developed
and evaluated on cucurbit samples collected from commercial greenhouses. Primers 
and probes were designed from the highly conserved heat shock protein 70 homolog 
(Hsp70h) gene. Conventional RT-PCR and multiplex RT-PCR assays showed high
specificity and suitability for routine screening. TaqMan-based quantitative
real-time RT-PCR (RT-qPCR) protocols were also developed for the detection and
quantitation of both viruses occurring in single or mixed infection. The assays
proved to be highly specific with no cross amplification. RT-qPCR assays showed a
100-1000 times improved sensitivity over conventional RT-PCR. Virus titers in
mixed infections were compared to singly infected plants by RT-qPCR. CYSDV and
CCYV titers decreased in double infected plants. This paper reports highly
specific conventional RT-PCR and quantitative real-time PCR assays for detection,
quantitation and differentiation between two closely related cucurbit-infecting
criniviruses.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2013.06.004 
PMID: 23810855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

