
1. J Dairy Sci. 2013 Sep;96(9):6022-9. doi: 10.3168/jds.2013-6732. Epub 2013 Jul 5.

Genetic analysis of leukosis incidence in United States Holstein and Jersey
populations.

Abdalla EA(1), Rosa GJ, Weigel KA, Byrem T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin
53706, USA. eabdalla@wisc.edu

Bovine leukosis (BL) is a retroviral disease caused by the bovine leukosis virus 
that affects only cattle. It is associated with decreased milk production and
increased cull rates due to development of lymphosarcoma. The virus also affects 
the immune system. Infected cows display a weak response to some vaccinations. It
is important to determine if the heritability of BL susceptibility is greater
than zero, or if the environment is the only factor that can be used to reduce
the transmission and incidence of the disease. Accordingly, the aim of this study
was to estimate the heritability for BL incidence and the genetic merit of sires 
for leukosis resistance in Holstein and Jersey cattle. Continuous scores and
binary milk ELISA results for 13,217 Holstein cows from 114 dairy herds across 16
states and 642 Jersey cows from 8 dairy herds were considered. Data were obtained
from commercial testing records at Antel BioSystems (Lansing, MI). Out of the
13,859 animals tested, 38% were found to be infected with the disease. Linear and
threshold animal models were used to analyze the continuous and binary data,
respectively. Results from both models were similar in terms of estimated
breeding values and variance components in their respective scales. Estimates of 
heritability obtained with the 2 approaches were approximately 8% for both
breeds, indicating a considerable genetic component underlying BL disease
incidence. The correlation between the estimated breeding values from the 2
models was larger than 0.90, and the lists of top 10% bulls selected from each
model had about 80% overlap for both breeds. In summary, results indicate that a 
simple linear model using the continuous ELISA scores as the response variable
was a reasonable approach for the genetic analysis of BL incidence in cattle. In 
addition, the levels of heritability found indicate that genetic selection could 
also be used to decrease susceptibility to bovine leukosis virus infection in
Holstein and Jersey cattle. Further research is necessary to investigate the
genetic correlations of BL with other production and reproduction traits, and to 
search for potential genomic regions harboring major genes affecting BL
susceptibility.

Copyright Â© 2013 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2013-6732 
PMID: 23831095  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

