
1. Front Microbiol. 2013 Jul 23;4:206. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2013.00206. eCollection
2013.

Rice gall dwarf virus exploits tubules to facilitate viral spread among cultured 
insect vector cells derived from leafhopper Recilia dorsalis.

Chen H(1), Zheng L, Jia D, Zhang P, Chen Q, Liu Q, Wei T.

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Province Key Laboratory of Plant Virology, Institute of Plant Virology,
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University Fuzhou, China.

Rice gall dwarf virus (RGDV), a member of the family Reoviridae, causes repeated 
epidemics in rice fields in southern China. An RGDV isolate collected from
Guangdong Province (southern China) is mainly transmitted by leafhopper vector
Recilia dorsalis in a persistent-propagative manner. The infection by RGDV
induces the formation of virus-containing tubules in the plant host and insect
vector. In this study, we established continuous cell cultures of the leafhopper 
R. dorsalis to investigate the functional role of these tubules within the insect
vector. Cytopathologic studies revealed that the tubules, which comprised viral
non-structural protein Pns11 and contained viral particles, were able to protrude
from the surface of cultured leafhopper cells. Tubule-like structures formed in
non-host insect cells after the expression of Pns11 in a baculovirus system,
suggesting that Pns11 was the minimal viral factor required for the formation of 
the tubules induced by RGDV infection. In cultured leafhopper cells, knockdown of
Pns11 expression from RNA interference, induced by synthesized dsRNA from the
Pns11 gene, abolished the formation of such tubules, preventing the direct
cell-to-cell spread of RGDV without significant effects on viral multiplication. 
All these results show that RGDV exploits virus-containing tubules to facilitate 
viral spread among its insect vector cells.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2013.00206 
PMCID: PMC3719018
PMID: 23888157 

