
1. J Gen Virol. 2013 Oct;94(Pt 10):2309-2317. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.055228-0. Epub 2013
Jul 24.

ROS upregulation during the early phase of retroviral infection plays an
important role in viral establishment in the host cell.

Kim SJ(1), Wong PKY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas, MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Smithville, TX, USA.

Recent studies suggest that low levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) often
modulate normal intracellular signalling pathways, determine cell fates and
control cell proliferation. We found that infection of astrocytes with the
neuropathogenic retrovirus ts1, a mutant of Moloney murine leukemia retrovirus,
upregulated ROS at low levels during the early phase of infection. This
upregulation of intracellular ROS with downregulation of NADPH levels during the 
early phase of ts1 infection was a separate event from the upregulation of ROS
during the late phase while ts1-mediated cell death occurred. The treatment of
apocynin, a potential inhibitor of NADPH oxidase (NOX), inhibited establishment
of the ts1 virus in the host cell. These results suggested that ROS generated as 
a consequence of the activation of NOX may play an important role in the early
events of the virus life cycle leading to the establishment of the virus in the
host cell. The in vitro results were further supported by an in vivo experiment
which showed that the treatment of apocynin decreased viral titre in the
ts1-infected mouse brain and increased the lifespan of infected mice. This study 
provides the first in vitro and in vivo evidence on a mechanism for how ROS are
involved in ts1 retrovirus infection and ts1-mediated neurodegenerative disease. 
Our findings focusing on the early phase of the ts1 retrovirus life cycle could
provide a better understanding of retroviral life cycle, which may offer specific
therapeutic targets for suppressing viral replication and alleviating
neurodegenerative symptoms in a mouse model.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.055228-0 
PMCID: PMC3785033
PMID: 23884362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

