
1. Gynecol Oncol. 2013 Nov;131(2):480-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2013.08.025. Epub 2013
Aug 29.

Immune responses against virus and tumor in cervical carcinogenesis: treatment
strategies for avoiding the HPV-induced immune escape.

Conesa-Zamora P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology and Pharmacogenetic Group, Pathology Department, Santa
Lucía General University Hospital (HGUSL), 30202 Cartagena, Spain; Catholic
University of Murcia (UCAM), 30107 Murcia, Spain. Electronic address:
pablo.conesa@carm.es.

Despite the availability of prophylactic vaccines against human papillomavirus
(HPV), cervical cancer (CC) is still a major problem globally. It is the cancer
with the second highest incidence and the third highest mortality in women
worldwide, but, in less developed countries, it is an even greater problem being 
the second most common cause of cancer death. Although HPV infection is one of
the most common sexually transmitted diseases, and high-risk HPV16 is the most
frequent genotype involved, only a small number of HPV-infected women develop
high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions whereas, in the remainder of the
women, the virus disappears spontaneously. There is a lot of evidence to support 
the view that host-dependent immunologic status and HPV-induced immune evasion
are responsible for persistent HPV infection and subsequent development of
cervical neoplasia. Therefore, the role of the immune system, not only in viral
clearance but also in tumor antigen recognition, is particularly relevant in the 
case of cervical carcinogenesis. A better understanding of these processes would 
help in the development of therapeutic vaccines. This review aims to explain
which immune cells and molecules are involved in the process of viral and tumor
recognition, how their failure can lead to cervical carcinoma and what are the
main therapeutic strategies so far tested in preclinical models and clinical
trials to stimulate the immune system in cervical carcinoma.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2013.08.025 
PMID: 23994536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

