
1. BMC Vet Res. 2013 Oct 7;9:196. doi: 10.1186/1746-6148-9-196.

Surveillance of avian influenza virus type A in semi-scavenging ducks in
Bangladesh.

Khatun A(1), Giasuddin M, Islam KM, Khanom S, Samad MA, Islam MR, Noor M, Bhuiyan
JU, Kim WI, Eo SK, Rahman MM.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Sylhet Agricultural University,
Sylhet 3100, Bangladesh. rahmanmm.dpp@sau.ac.bd.

BACKGROUND: Ducks are the natural reservoir of influenza A virus and the central 
host for highly pathogenic avian influenza (H5N1), while domestic ducks rearing
in semi-scavenging system could serve as re-assortment vessels for re-emerging
new subtypes of influenza viruses between birds to human. Avian influenza virus
(AIV) surveillance in Bangladesh has been passive, relying on poultry farmers to 
report suspected outbreaks of highly pathogenic H5N1 influenza. Here, the results
of an active surveillance effort focusing on the semi-scavenging ducks are
presented.
RESULT: A total of 2100 cloacal swabs and 2100 sera were collected from
semi-scavenging ducks from three wintering-sites of Bangladesh during three
successive winter seasons, December through February in the years between 2009
and 2012. Virus isolation and identification were carried out from the cloacal
swabs by virus propagation in embryonated hen eggs followed by amplification of
viral RNA using Avian influenza virus (AIV) specific RT-PCR. The overall
prevalence of avian influenza type A was 22.05% for swab samples and 39.76% ducks
were sero-positive for avian influenza type A antibody. Extremely low
sero-prevalence (0.09%) of AIV H5N1 was detected.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our surveillance results, we conclude that semi-scavenging 
ducks in Bangladesh might play important role in transmitting Avian Influenza
virus (AIV) type A. However, the current risk of infection for humans from
domestic ducks in Bangladesh is negligible. We believe that this relatively large
dataset over three winters in Bangladesh might create a strong foundation for
future studies of AIV prevalence, evolution, and ecology in wintering sites
around the globe.

DOI: 10.1186/1746-6148-9-196 
PMCID: PMC3851913
PMID: 24099526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

