
1. Clin Dev Immunol. 2013;2013:874514. doi: 10.1155/2013/874514. Epub 2013 Nov 10.

Combination of human leukocyte antigen and killer cell immunoglobulin-like
receptor genetic background influences the onset age of hepatocellular carcinoma 
in male patients with hepatitis B virus infection.

Pan N(1), Qiu J, Sun H, Miao F, Shi Q, Xu J, Jiang W, Jin H, Xie W, He Y, Zhang
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology, Southeast University Medical 
School, 87 Dingjiaqiao Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210009, China ; Key Laboratory of
Developmental Genes and Human Disease, Ministry of Education, Southeast
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210009, China.

To investigate whether killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR) and human
leukocyte antigen (HLA) genetic background could influence the onset age of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in patients with hepatitis B virus (HBV)
infection, one hundred and seventy-one males with HBV-related HCC were enrolled. 
The presence of 12 loci of KIR was detected individually. HLA-A, -B, and -C loci 
were genotyped with high resolution by a routine sequence-based typing method.
The effect of each KIR locus, HLA ligand, and HLA-KIR combination was examined
individually by Kaplan-Meier (KM) analysis. Multivariate Cox hazard regression
model was also applied. We identified C1C1-KIR2DS2/2DL2 as an independent risk
factor for earlier onset age of HCC (median onset age was 44 for
C1C1-KIR2DS2/2DL2 positive patients compared to 50 for negative patients, P =
0.04 for KM analysis; HR = 1.70, P = 0.004 for multivariate Cox model). We
conclude that KIR and HLA genetic background can influence the onset age of HCC
in male patients with HBV infection. This study may be useful to improve the
current HCC surveillance program in HBV-infected patients. Our findings also
suggest an important role of natural killer cells (or other KIR-expressing cells)
in the progress of HBV-related HCC development.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/874514 
PMCID: PMC3842051
PMID: 24312130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

