
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2014 Feb 3;171:41-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.11.012. Epub 2013 Nov 19.

Inactivation of dairy bacteriophages by commercial sanitizers and disinfectants.

Campagna C(1), Villion M(1), Labrie SJ(1), Duchaine C(2), Moineau S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Département de biochimie, microbiologie et bio-informatique, Faculté des
sciences et de génie, Groupe de recherche en écologie buccale, Faculté de
médecine dentaire, Université Laval, Québec G1V 0A6, Canada.
(2)Département de biochimie, microbiologie et bio-informatique, Faculté des
sciences et de génie, Groupe de recherche en écologie buccale, Faculté de
médecine dentaire, Université Laval, Québec G1V 0A6, Canada; Centre de recherche 
de l'Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie de Québec, 2725
chemin Sainte-Foy, Québec, QC G1V 4G5, Canada.
(3)Département de biochimie, microbiologie et bio-informatique, Faculté des
sciences et de génie, Groupe de recherche en écologie buccale, Faculté de
médecine dentaire, Université Laval, Québec G1V 0A6, Canada. Electronic address: 
Sylvain.Moineau@bcm.ulaval.ca.

Many commercial sanitizers and disinfectants have been used over the years to
control microbial contamination but their efficacy on phages is often unknown.
Here, 23 commercial chemical products, including 21 food-grade sanitizers were
tested against virulent dairy phages. These food-grade chemicals included
oxidizing agents, halogenated agents, alcohols, quaternary ammonium compounds,
anionic acids, iodine-based acids, and an amphoteric chemical. Phage P008 was
first exposed to each sanitizer for 2 and 15min at room temperature and at two
different concentrations, namely the lowest and highest no-rinse sanitizing
concentrations. Organic matter (whey or milk) was also added to the testing
solutions. At the end of the exposure period, the test solution was neutralized
and the number of infectious phages was determined by plaque assays. The five
most efficient sanitizers against phage P008 (<4 log of inactivation) were then
tested against virulent lactococcal phages P008, CB13, AF6, P1532 of the 936
group, P001 (c2), Q54, and 1358 as well as Lactobacillus plantarum phage B1 and
Streptococcus thermophilus phage 2972 using the same protocol. The oxidizing
agents and the quaternary ammonium compounds were the most efficient against all 
phages although phages CB13 and P1532 were less sensitive to these chemicals than
the other phages. This study may help in the selection of appropriate chemicals
for controlling phage contamination in industrial factories and research
laboratories.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.11.012 
PMID: 24321601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

