
1. BMC Cancer. 2014 Jan 24;14:38. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-38.

Microvascular invasion (MVI) is a poorer prognostic predictor for small
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Du M, Chen L, Zhao J, Tian F, Zeng H, Tan Y, Sun H, Zhou J, Ji Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai
200032, China. ji.yuan@zs-hospital.sh.cn.

BACKGROUND: Small hepatocellular carcinoma (SHCC) is a special type of
hepatocellular carcinoma with the maximum tumor diameter ≤ 3 cm and excellent
long-term outcomes. However, the prognostic factors for SHCC remain
controversial. The purpose of this study is to clarify the predictive factors of 
SHCC.
METHODS: The study population consisted of 458 patients underwent hepatectomy for
single SHCC between January 2006 and December 2008. Clinical data (included age, 
gender, virus infection, serum alfa-fetoprotein level, cirrhosis, capsule,
border), histopathologic features (included differentiation, morphology subtype, 
microvascular invasion, tumor infiltrative lymphocytes (TIL), inflammatory injury
grade and fibrosis stage of surrounding liver), were evaluated to identify
prognostic factors influencing SHCC patients' survival and microvascular
invasion.
RESULTS: There were 384 males (83.8%) and 74 (16.2%) females with median ages of 
52 years. The median progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS)
durations were 53 and 54 months, respectively. About 91.9% (n = 421) SHCC were
infected by Hepatitis B. One hundred forty-seven of the 446 (33.0%) patients with
pre-operation serum AFP level record had serum alfa-fetoprotein (AFP) level ≥ 200
ug/ml and 178 of the 280 (63.8%) patients with post-operation serum AFP level
record had AFP level ≥ 20 ug/ml. Liver cirrhosis was present in 411 cases
(89.7%), while 434 (97.3%) tumors had clear border, and 250 (55.6%) tumors were
encapsulated.MVI was identified in 83 patients (18.1%). In univariate analysis, a
significant association between the presence of MVI and shortened PFS and OS was 
found (p = 0.012, 0.028, respectively). Histological differentiation had strong
relationship with MVI (p = 0.009), in terms of MVI was more easily presented in
patients with worse histological differentiation. In patients with MVI, worse
survival was correlated with female patients, patients with G2 or G3 histological
differentiation, pre-operation serum AFP level ≥ 200 ug/ml or post-operation
serum AFP level ≥ 20 ug/ml, and TIL ≥ 50/HPF.
CONCLUSIONS: MVI is an independent poorer prognostic factor for PFS and OS of
single SHCC patients. Tumor histological differentiation was closely related with
MVI.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-38 
PMCID: PMC3922738
PMID: 24460749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

