
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2014 Feb;52(2):438-48. doi: 10.1128/JCM.02485-13. Epub 2013 Nov
20.

Pathogens of bovine respiratory disease in North American feedlots conferring
multidrug resistance via integrative conjugative elements.

Klima CL(1), Zaheer R, Cook SR, Booker CW, Hendrick S, Alexander TW, McAllister
TA.

Author information: 
(1)Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada Research Centre, Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada.

In this study, we determined the prevalence of bovine respiratory disease
(BRD)-associated viral and bacterial pathogens in cattle and characterized the
genetic profiles, antimicrobial susceptibilities, and nature of antimicrobial
resistance determinants in collected bacteria. Nasopharyngeal swab and lung
tissue samples from 68 BRD mortalities in Alberta, Canada (n = 42), Texas (n =
6), and Nebraska (n = 20) were screened using PCR for bovine viral diarrhea virus
(BVDV), bovine respiratory syncytial virus, bovine herpesvirus 1, parainfluenza
type 3 virus, Mycoplasma bovis, Mannheimia haemolytica, Pasteurella multocida,
and Histophilus somni. Excepting bovine herpesvirus 1, all agents were detected. 
M. haemolytica (91%) and BVDV (69%) were the most prevalent, with cooccurrence in
63% of the cattle. Isolates of M. haemolytica (n = 55), P. multocida (n = 8), and
H. somni (n = 10) from lungs were also collected. Among M. haemolytica isolates, 
a clonal subpopulation (n = 8) was obtained from a Nebraskan feedlot. All three
bacterial pathogens exhibited a high rate of antimicrobial resistance, with 45%
exhibiting resistance to three or more antimicrobials. M. haemolytica (n = 18),
P. multocida (n = 3), and H. somni (n = 3) from Texas and Nebraska possessed
integrative conjugative elements (ICE) that conferred resistance for up to seven 
different antimicrobial classes. ICE were shown to be transferred via conjugation
from P. multocida to Escherichia coli and from M. haemolytica and H. somni to P. 
multocida. ICE-mediated multidrug-resistant profiles of bacterial BRD pathogens
could be a major detriment to many of the therapeutic antimicrobial strategies
currently used to control BRD.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.02485-13 
PMCID: PMC3911356
PMID: 24478472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

