
1. mBio. 2014 Feb 4;5(1):e01086-13. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01086-13.

A targeted RNA interference screen reveals novel epigenetic factors that regulate
herpesviral gene expression.

Oh HS, Bryant KF, Nieland TJ, Mazumder A, Bagul M, Bathe M, Root DE, Knipe DM.

Herpes simplex virus (HSV) utilizes and subverts host chromatin mechanisms to
express its lytic gene products in mammalian cells. The host cell attempts to
silence the incoming viral genome by epigenetic mechanisms, but the viral VP16
and ICP0 proteins promote active chromatin on the viral genome by recruiting
other host epigenetic factors. However, the dependence on VP16 and ICP0 differs
in different cell lines, implying cell type-dependent functional contributions of
epigenetic factors for HSV gene expression. In this study, we performed a
targeted RNA interference (RNAi) screen for cellular chromatin factors that are
involved in regulation of herpes simplex virus (HSV) gene expression in U2OS
osteosarcoma cells, a cell line that complements ICP0 mutant and VP16 mutant
virus replication. In this screen, we found the same general classes of chromatin
factors that regulate HSV gene expression in U2OS cells as in other cell types,
including histone demethylases (HDMs), histone deacetylases (HDACs), histone
acetyltransferases (HATs), and chromatin-remodeling factors, but the specific
factors within these classes are different from those identified previously for
other cell types. For example, KDM3A and KDM1A (LSD1) both demethylate mono- and 
dimethylated H3K9, but KDM3A emerged in our screen of U2OS cells. Further, small 
interfering RNA (siRNA) and inhibitor studies support the idea that KDM1A is more
critical in HeLa cells, as observed previously, while KDM3A is more critical in
U2OS cells. These results argue that different cellular chromatin factors are
critical in different cell lines to carry out the positive and negative
epigenetic effects exerted on the HSV genome.IMPORTANCE: Upon entry into the host
cell nucleus, the herpes simplex virus genome is subjected to host epigenetic
silencing mechanisms. Viral proteins recruit cellular epigenetic activator
proteins to reverse and counter the cellular silencing mechanisms. Some of the
host silencing and activator functions involved in HSV gene expression have been 
identified, but there have been indications that the host cell factors may vary
in different cell types. In this study, we performed a screen of chromatin
factors involved in HSV gene regulation in osteosarcoma cells, and we found that 
the chromatin factors that are critical for HSV gene expression in these cells
are different from those for previously studied cell types. These results argue
that the specific chromatin factors operative in different cell lines and cell
types may differ. This has implications for epigenetic drugs that are under
development.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01086-13 
PMCID: PMC3950524
PMID: 24496796  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

