
1. Oncotarget. 2014 Feb 15;5(3):704-15.

Immunogenicity of targeted lentivectors.

Goyvaerts C(1), Kurt de G, Van Lint S, Heirman C, Van Ginderachter JA, De
Baetselier P, Raes G, Thielemans K, Breckpot K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Therapy, Department of
Immunology-Physiology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.

To increase the safety and possibly efficacy of HIV-1 derived lentivectors (LVs) 
as an anti-cancer vaccine, we recently developed the Nanobody (Nb) display
technology to target LVs to antigen presenting cells (APCs). In this study, we
extend these data with exclusive targeting of LVs to conventional dendritic cells
(DCs), which are believed to be the main cross-presenting APCs for the induction 
of a TH1-conducted antitumor immune response. The immunogenicity of these
DC-subtype targeted LVs was compared to that of broad tropism, general
APC-targeted and non-infectious LVs. Intranodal immunization with ovalbumin
encoding LVs induced proliferation of antigen specific CD4+ T cells, irrespective
of the LVs' targeting ability. However, the cytokine secretion profile of the
restimulated CD4+ T cells demonstrated that general APC targeting induced a
similar TH1-profile as the broad tropism LVs while transduction of conventional
DCs alone induced a similar and less potent TH1 profile as the non-infectious
LVs. This observation contradicts the hypothesis that conventional DCs are the
most important APCs and suggests that the activation of other APCs is also
meaningful. Despite these differences, all targeted LVs were able to stimulate
cytotoxic T lymphocytes, be it to a lesser extent than broad tropism LVs.
Furthermore this induction was shown to be dependent on type I interferon for the
targeted and non-infectious LVs, but not for broad tropism LVs. Finally we
demonstrated that the APC-targeted LVs were as potent in therapy as broad tropism
LVs and as such deliver on their promise as safer and efficacious LV-based
vaccines.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.1680 
PMCID: PMC3996667
PMID: 24519916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

