
1. J Virol. 2014 May;88(9):4764-75. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00147-14. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Host-specific adaptation of HIV-1 subtype B in the Japanese population.

Chikata T(1), Carlson JM, Tamura Y, Borghan MA, Naruto T, Hashimoto M, Murakoshi 
H, Le AQ, Mallal S, John M, Gatanaga H, Oka S, Brumme ZL, Takiguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for AIDS Research, Kumamoto University, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto, Japan.

The extent to which HIV-1 clade B strains exhibit population-specific adaptations
to host HLA alleles remains incompletely known, in part due to incomplete
characterization of HLA-associated HIV-1 polymorphisms (HLA-APs) in different
global populations. Moreover, it remains unknown to what extent the same HLA
alleles may drive significantly different escape pathways across populations. As 
the Japanese population exhibits distinctive HLA class I allele distributions,
comparative analysis of HLA-APs between HIV-1 clade B-infected Japanese and
non-Asian cohorts could shed light on these questions. However, HLA-APs remain
incompletely mapped in Japan. In a cohort of 430 treatment-naive Japanese with
chronic HIV-1 clade B infection, we identified 284 HLA-APs in Gag, Pol, and Nef
using phylogenetically corrected methods. The number of HLA-associated
substitutions in Pol, notably those restricted by HLA-B*52:01, was weakly
inversely correlated with the plasma viral load (pVL), suggesting that the
transmission and persistence of B*52:01-driven Pol mutations could modulate the
pVL. Differential selection of HLA-APs between HLA subtype members, including
those differing only with respect to substitutions outside the peptide-binding
groove, was observed, meriting further investigation as to their mechanisms of
selection. Notably, two-thirds of HLA-APs identified in Japan had not been
reported in previous studies of predominantly Caucasian cohorts and were
attributable to HLA alleles unique to, or enriched in, Japan. We also identified 
71 cases where the same HLA allele drove significantly different escape pathways 
in Japan versus predominantly Caucasian cohorts. Our results underscore the
distinct global evolution of HIV-1 clade B as a result of host
population-specific cellular immune pressures.IMPORTANCE: Cytotoxic T lymphocyte 
(CTL) escape mutations in HIV-1 are broadly predictable based on the HLA class I 
alleles expressed by the host. Because HLA allele distributions differ among
worldwide populations, the pattern and diversity of HLA-associated escape
mutations are likely to be somewhat distinct to each race and region.
HLA-associated polymorphisms (HLA-APs) in HIV-1 have previously been identified
at the population level in European, North American, Australian, and African
cohorts; however, large-scale analyses of HIV-1 clade B-specific HLA-APs in
Asians are lacking. Differential intraclade HIV-1 adaptation to global
populations can be investigated via comparative analyses of HLA-associated
polymorphisms across ethnic groups, but such studies are rare. Here, we identify 
HLA-APs in a large Japanese HIV-1 clade B cohort using phylogenetically informed 
methods and observe that the majority of them had not been previously
characterized in predominantly Caucasian populations. The results highlight HIV's
unique adaptation to cellular immune pressures imposed by different global
populations.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00147-14 
PMCID: PMC3993807
PMID: 24522911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

