
1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 11;9(3):e91397. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091397. eCollection
2014.

Kinetic analysis of mouse brain proteome alterations following Chikungunya virus 
infection before and after appearance of clinical symptoms.

Fraisier C(1), Koraka P(2), Belghazi M(3), Bakli M(1), Granjeaud S(4), Pophillat 
M(4), Lim SM(2), Osterhaus A(2), Martina B(2), Camoin L(4), Almeras L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Aix Marseille Université, Unité de Recherche en Maladies Infectieuses et
Tropicales Emergentes, UM63, CNRS 7278, IRD 198, Inserm 1095, Marseille, France.
(2)Department of Viroscience, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, CRN2M UMR 7286, Marseille, France.
(4)CRCM, Marseille Protéomique, Inserm, U1068, Marseille, France; Aix-Marseille
Université, UM 105, Marseille, France.
(5)Aix Marseille Université, Unité de Recherche en Maladies Infectieuses et
Tropicales Emergentes, UM63, CNRS 7278, IRD 198, Inserm 1095, Marseille, France; 
Unité de recherche en biologie et épidémiologie parasitaires (URBEP), Institut de
Recherche Biomédicale des Armées (IRBA), Marseille, France.

Recent outbreaks of Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) infection have been characterized
by an increasing number of severe cases with atypical manifestations including
neurological complications. In parallel, the risk map of CHIKV outbreaks has
expanded because of improved vector competence. These features make CHIKV
infection a major public health concern that requires a better understanding of
the underlying physiopathological processes for the development of antiviral
strategies to protect individuals from severe disease. To decipher the mechanisms
of CHIKV infection in the nervous system, a kinetic analysis on the host proteome
modifications in the brain of CHIKV-infected mice sampled before and after the
onset of clinical symptoms was performed. The combination of 2D-DIGE and iTRAQ
proteomic approaches, followed by mass spectrometry protein identification
revealed 177 significantly differentially expressed proteins. This kinetic
analysis revealed a dramatic down-regulation of proteins before the appearance of
the clinical symptoms followed by the increased expression of most of these
proteins in the acute symptomatic phase. Bioinformatic analyses of the protein
datasets enabled the identification of the major biological processes that were
altered during the time course of CHIKV infection, such as integrin signaling and
cytoskeleton dynamics, endosome machinery and receptor recycling related to virus
transport and synapse function, regulation of gene expression, and the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. These results reveal the putative mechanisms
associated with severe CHIKV infection-mediated neurological disease and
highlight the potential markers or targets that can be used to develop diagnostic
and/or antiviral tools.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091397 
PMCID: PMC3949995
PMID: 24618821  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

