
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Mar 13;10(3):e1004001. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004001.
eCollection 2014 Mar.

Foodborne transmission of nipah virus in Syrian hamsters.

de Wit E(1), Prescott J(1), Falzarano D(1), Bushmaker T(1), Scott D(2), Feldmann 
H(3), Munster VJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, Montana, United States of America.
(2)Rocky Mountain Veterinary Branch, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, Montana, United States of
America.
(3)Laboratory of Virology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, Montana, United States of America;
Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.

Since 2001, outbreaks of Nipah virus have occurred almost every year in
Bangladesh with high case-fatality rates. Epidemiological data suggest that in
Bangladesh, Nipah virus is transmitted from the natural reservoir, fruit bats, to
humans via consumption of date palm sap contaminated by bats, with subsequent
human-to-human transmission. To experimentally investigate this epidemiological
association between drinking of date palm sap and human cases of Nipah virus
infection, we determined the viability of Nipah virus (strain
Bangladesh/200401066) in artificial palm sap. At 22°C virus titers remained
stable for at least 7 days, thus potentially allowing food-borne transmission.
Next, we modeled food-borne Nipah virus infection by supplying Syrian hamsters
with artificial palm sap containing Nipah virus. Drinking of 5×10⁸ TCID₅₀ of
Nipah virus resulted in neurological disease in 5 out of 8 hamsters, indicating
that food-borne transmission of Nipah virus can indeed occur. In comparison,
intranasal (i.n.) inoculation with the same dose of Nipah virus resulted in
lethal respiratory disease in all animals. In animals infected with Nipah virus
via drinking, virus was detected in respiratory tissues rather than in the
intestinal tract. Using fluorescently labeled Nipah virus particles, we showed
that during drinking, a substantial amount of virus is deposited in the lungs,
explaining the replication of Nipah virus in the respiratory tract of these
hamsters. Besides the ability of Nipah virus to infect hamsters via the drinking 
route, Syrian hamsters infected via that route transmitted the virus through
direct contact with naïve hamsters in 2 out of 24 transmission pairs. Although
these findings do not directly prove that date palm sap contaminated with Nipah
virus by bats is the origin of Nipah virus outbreaks in Bangladesh, they provide 
the first experimental support for this hypothesis. Understanding the Nipah virus
transmission cycle is essential for preventing and mitigating future outbreaks.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004001 
PMCID: PMC3953481
PMID: 24626480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

