
1. J Virol. 2014 May;88(10):5834-44. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00155-14. Epub 2014 Mar 12.

Identification of cellular proteins interacting with the retroviral restriction
factor SAMHD1.

St Gelais C(1), de Silva S, Hach JC, White TE, Diaz-Griffero F, Yount JS, Wu L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Retrovirus Research, Department of Veterinary Biosciences, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2014 Jul;88(13):7689.

Human and mouse SAMHD1 proteins block human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
infection in noncycling human monocytic cells by reducing the intracellular
deoxynucleoside triphosphate (dNTP) concentrations. Phosphorylation of human
SAMHD1 at threonine 592 (T592) by cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) and cyclin A2 
impairs its HIV-1 restriction activity, but not the dNTP hydrolase activity,
suggesting that dNTP depletion is not the sole mechanism of SAMHD1-mediated HIV-1
restriction. Using coimmunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry, we identified and
validated two additional host proteins interacting with human SAMHD1, namely,
cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2) and S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (SKP2). 
We observed that mouse SAMHD1 specifically interacted with cyclin A2, cyclin B1, 
CDK1, and CDK2. Given the role of these SAMHD1-interacting proteins in cell cycle
progression, we investigated the regulation of these host proteins by monocyte
differentiation and activation of CD4+ T cells and examined their effect on the
phosphorylation of human SAMHD1 at T592. Our results indicate that primary
monocyte differentiation and CD4+ T-cell activation regulate the expression of
these SAMHD1-interacting proteins. Furthermore, our results suggest that, in
addition to CDK1 and cyclin A2, CDK2 phosphorylates T592 of human SAMHD1 and
thereby regulates its HIV-1 restriction function.IMPORTANCE: SAMHD1 is the first 
dNTP triphosphohydrolase found in mammalian cells. Human and mouse SAMHD1
proteins block HIV-1 infection in noncycling cells. Previous studies suggested
that phosphorylation of human SAMHD1 at threonine 592 by CDK1 and cyclin A2
negatively regulates its HIV-1 restriction activity. However, it is unclear
whether human SAMHD1 interacts with other host proteins in the cyclin A2 and CDK1
complex and whether mouse SAMHD1 shares similar cellular interacting partners.
Here, we identify five cell cycle-related host proteins that interact with human 
and mouse SAMHD1, including three previously unknown cellular proteins (CDK2,
cyclin B1, and SKP2). Our results demonstrate that several SAMHD1-interacting
cellular proteins regulate phosphorylation of SAMHD1 and play an important role
in HIV-1 restriction function. Our findings help define the role of these
cellular interacting partners of SAMHD1 that regulate its HIV-1 restriction
function.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00155-14 
PMCID: PMC4019113
PMID: 24623419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

