
1. Sci Transl Med. 2014 Mar 19;6(228):228ra38. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3007736.

Polyfunctional Fc-effector profiles mediated by IgG subclass selection
distinguish RV144 and VAX003 vaccines.

Chung AW(1), Ghebremichael M, Robinson H, Brown E, Choi I, Lane S, Dugast AS,
Schoen MK, Rolland M, Suscovich TJ, Mahan AE, Liao L, Streeck H, Andrews C,
Rerks-Ngarm S, Nitayaphan S, de Souza MS, Kaewkungwal J, Pitisuttithum P, Francis
D, Michael NL, Kim JH, Bailey-Kellogg C, Ackerman ME, Alter G.

Author information: 
(1)Ragon Institute of Massachusetts General Hospital, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, and Harvard, Boston, MA 02139, USA.

The human phase 2B RV144 ALVAC-HIV vCP1521/AIDSVAX B/E vaccine trial, held in
Thailand, resulted in an estimated 31.2% efficacy against HIV infection. By
contrast, vaccination with VAX003 (consisting of only AIDSVAX B/E) was not
protective. Because protection within RV144 was observed in the absence of
neutralizing antibody activity or cytotoxic T cell responses, we speculated that 
the specificity or qualitative differences in Fc-effector profiles of
nonneutralizing antibodies may have accounted for the efficacy differences
observed between the two trials. We show that the RV144 regimen elicited
nonneutralizing antibodies with highly coordinated Fc-mediated effector responses
through the selective induction of highly functional immunoglobulin G3 (IgG3). By
contrast, VAX003 elicited monofunctional antibody responses influenced by IgG4
selection, which was promoted by repeated AIDSVAX B/E protein boosts. Moreover,
only RV144 induced IgG1 and IgG3 antibodies targeting the crown of the HIV
envelope V2 loop, albeit with limited coverage of breakthrough viral sequences.
These data suggest that subclass selection differences associated with
coordinated humoral functional responses targeting strain-specific protective V2 
loop epitopes may underlie differences in vaccine efficacy observed between these
two vaccine trials.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3007736 
PMID: 24648341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

