
1. Vaccine. 2014 May 7;32(22):2599-603. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.03.016. Epub
2014 Mar 21.

Efficacy of an inactivated FeLV vaccine compared to a recombinant FeLV vaccine in
minimum age cats following virulent FeLV challenge.

Stuke K(1), King V(2), Southwick K(2), Stoeva MI(2), Thomas A(3), Winkler MT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Zoetis, 20 Mercuriusstraat, 1930 Zaventem, Belgium. Electronic address:
kristin.stuke@zoetis.com.
(2)Zoetis, 333 Portage Street, Kalamazoo, MI 49007, USA.
(3)Zoetis, 20 Mercuriusstraat, 1930 Zaventem, Belgium.

Comment in
    Vaccine. 2015 Jun 4;33(24):2737-8.
    Vaccine. 2015 Jun 4;33(24):2739-40.

The aim of the study was to determine the efficacy of an inactivated feline
leukemia virus (FeLV) vaccine (Versifel(®) FeLV, Zoetis.) compared to a
recombinant FeLV vaccine (Purevax(®) FeLV, Merial Animal Health) in young cats,
exposed under laboratory conditions to a highly virulent challenge model. The
study was designed to be consistent with the general immunogenicity requirements 
of the European Pharmacopoeia 6.0 Monograph 01/2008:1321-Feline Leukaemia Vaccine
(Inactivated) with the exception that commercial-strength vaccines were assessed.
Fifty seronegative cats (8-9 weeks old) were vaccinated subcutaneously on two
occasions, three weeks apart, with either placebo (treatment group T01), Versifel
FeLV Vaccine (treatment group T02), or Purevax FeLV Vaccine (treatment group T03)
according to the manufacturer's directions. Cats were challenged three weeks
after the second vaccination with a virulent FeLV isolate (61E strain).
Persistent FeLV antigenemia was determined from 3 to 15 weeks postchallenge. Bone
marrow samples were tested for the presence of FeLV proviral DNA to determine
FeLV latent infection. At week 15 after challenge with the virulent FeLV 61E
strain, the Versifel FeLV Vaccine conferred 89.5% protection against FeLV
persistent antigenemia and 94.7% protection against FeLV proviral DNA integration
in bone marrow cells. In comparison, the Purevax FeLV Vaccine conferred 20%
protection against FeLV persistent antigenemia and 35% protection against FeLV
proviral DNA integration in bone marrow cells following challenge. The data from 
this study show that the Versifel FeLV Vaccine was efficacious in preventing both
FeLV persistent p27 antigenemia and FeLV proviral DNA integration in bone marrow 
cells of cats challenged with this particular challenge model under laboratory
conditions and provided better protection than Purevax FeLV in this experimental 
challenge model with highly virulent FeLV.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.03.016 
PMID: 24662705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

