
1. Indian J Med Res. 2014 Feb;139(2):260-6.

A single hospital study on portal vein thrombosis in cirrhotic patients -
clinical characteristics & risk factors.

Chen H, Trilok G, Wang F, Qi X, Xiao J, Yang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Digestive Disease Institute, Tongji
Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: Discrepancies exist in the reported prevalence of portal
vein thrombosis (PVT), and its clinical characteristics and sites of occurrence
need to be elucidated. The risk factors for PVT are also poorly understood. This 
single centre study was undertaken to determine the clinical characteristics,
sites of occurrence, and risk factors associated with PVT in patients with liver 
cirrhosis.
METHODS: Hospitalized cirrhotic patients (N = 162) were segregated into the PVT
and non-PVT groups. Indices possibly associated with PVT were measured and PVT
was detected by both Doppler ultrasonography and computed tomography portal
angiography. The portal vein diameter and flow velocity and splenic thickness
were measured by ultrasonography.
RESULTS: PVT was found in 40 patients (24.7%); in 34 PVT patients (85%), the
liver cirrhosis resulted from hepatitis B virus infections. Most (90%) patients
were Child-Pugh classes B and C, with similar distribution between the groups.
PVT was seen in 20 patients in the portal and superior mesenteric veins; ascites,
abdominal pain, gastrointestinal bleeding, and jaundice were common findings in
PVT patients. Haemoglobin levels and blood platelet counts (BPCs) were
significantly lower and splenic thickness was greater in PVT than in non-PVT
patients (P<0.01). There was a significant positive correlation between BPCs and 
platelet aggregation rates (R = 0.533, P<0.01).
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSIONS: The occurrence of PVT was 24.7 per cent, primarily 
in post-hepatitis B liver cirrhosis patients. PVT occurred mainly in the portal
vein trunk and superior mesenteric vein. Different PVT sites may account for the 
differing clinical presentations. The lower levels of haemoglobin and BPCs as
well as splenic thickening were associated with PVT. Splenic thickening may be a 
risk factor for PVT.


PMCID: PMC4001338
PMID: 24718401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

