
1. Gene Ther. 2014 Jul;21(7):662-72. doi: 10.1038/gt.2014.39. Epub 2014 May 8.

CEP290 gene transfer rescues Leber congenital amaurosis cellular phenotype.

Burnight ER(1), Wiley LA(1), Drack AV(1), Braun TA(2), Anfinson KR(1), Kaalberg
EE(1), Halder JA(1), Affatigato LM(1), Mullins RF(1), Stone EM(3), Tucker BA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Opthalmology and Visual Sciences, Stephen A Wynn Institute for
Vision Research, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA,
USA.
(2)1] Department of Opthalmology and Visual Sciences, Stephen A Wynn Institute
for Vision Research, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA, USA [2] Biomedical Engineering, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(3)1] Department of Opthalmology and Visual Sciences, Stephen A Wynn Institute
for Vision Research, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA, USA [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Iowa, Iowa City,
IA, USA.

Mutations in CEP290 are the most common cause of Leber congenital amaurosis
(LCA), a severe inherited retinal degenerative disease for which there is
currently no cure. Autosomal recessive CEP290-associated LCA is a good candidate 
for gene replacement therapy, and cells derived from affected individuals give
researchers the ability to study human disease and therapeutic gene correction in
vitro. Here we report the development of lentiviral vectors carrying full-length 
CEP290 for the purpose of correcting the CEP290 disease-specific phenotype in
human cells. A lentiviral vector containing CMV-driven human full-length CEP290
was constructed. Following transduction of patient-specific, iPSC-derived,
photoreceptor precursor cells, reverse transcriptase-PCR analysis and western
blotting revealed vector-derived expression. As CEP290 is important in
ciliogenesis, the ability of fibroblast cultures from CEP290-associated LCA
patients to form cilia was investigated. In cultures derived from these patients,
fewer cells formed cilia compared with unaffected controls. Cilia that were
formed were shorter in patient-derived cells than in cells from unaffected
individuals. Importantly, lentiviral delivery of CEP290 rescued the ciliogenesis 
defect. The successful construction and viral transfer of full-length CEP290
brings us closer to the goal of providing gene- and cell-based therapies for
patients affected with this common form of LCA.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2014.39 
PMCID: PMC4188442
PMID: 24807808  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

