
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014 Sep;80(18):5818-27. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01775-14. Epub 
2014 Jul 11.

Factors limiting the spread of the protective symbiont Hamiltonella defensa in
Aphis craccivora Aphids.

Dykstra HR(1), Weldon SR(1), Martinez AJ(1), White JA(2), Hopper KR(3), Heimpel
GE(4), Asplen MK(4), Oliver KM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA.
(2)Department of Entomology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA.
(3)USDA, ARS, Newark, Delaware, USA.
(4)Department of Entomology, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA.
(5)Department of Entomology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
kmoliver@uga.edu.

Many insects are associated with heritable symbionts that mediate ecological
interactions, including host protection against natural enemies. The cowpea
aphid, Aphis craccivora, is a polyphagous pest that harbors Hamiltonella defensa,
which defends against parasitic wasps. Despite this protective benefit, this
symbiont occurs only at intermediate frequencies in field populations. To
identify factors constraining H. defensa invasion in Ap. craccivora, we estimated
symbiont transmission rates, performed fitness assays, and measured infection
dynamics in population cages to evaluate effects of infection. Similar to results
with the pea aphid, Acyrthosiphon pisum, we found no consistent costs to
infection using component fitness assays, but we did identify clear costs to
infection in population cages when no enemies were present. Maternal transmission
rates of H. defensa in Ap. craccivora were high (ca. 99%) but not perfect.
Transmission failures and infection costs likely limit the spread of protective
H. defensa in Ap. craccivora. We also characterized several parameters of H.
defensa infection potentially relevant to the protective phenotype. We confirmed 
the presence of H. defensa in aphid hemolymph, where it potentially interacts
with endoparasites, and performed real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) to estimate
symbiont and phage abundance during aphid development. We also examined strain
variation of H. defensa and its bacteriophage at multiple loci, and despite our
lines being collected in different regions of North America, they were infected
with a nearly identical strains of H. defensa and APSE4 phage. The limited strain
diversity observed for these defensive elements may result in relatively static
protection profile for this defensive symbiosis.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01775-14 
PMCID: PMC4178609
PMID: 25015890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

