
1. J Plankton Res. 2014 Jul;36(4):943-955. Epub 2014 May 5.

Virus infection of Haptolina ericina and Phaeocystis pouchetii implicates
evolutionary conservation of programmed cell death induction in marine
haptophyte-virus interactions.

Ray JL(1), Haramaty L(2), Thyrhaug R(3), Fredricks HF(4), Van Mooy BA(4), Larsen 
A(1), Bidle KD(2), Sandaa RA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Uni Research As , Thormøhlensgt 49B, N-5006 Bergen , Norway ; Department of
Biology , University of Bergen , Thormøhlensgt 53A, N-5006 Bergen , Norway.
(2)Institute of Marine and Coastal Sciences, Rutgers University , 71 Dudley Road,
New Brunswick, NJ 08901 , USA.
(3)Department of Biology , University of Bergen , Thormøhlensgt 53A, N-5006
Bergen , Norway.
(4)Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry , Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution ,
Woods Hole, MA 02543 , USA.

The mechanisms by which phytoplankton cope with stressors in the marine
environment are neither fully characterized nor understood. As viruses are the
most abundant entities in the global ocean and represent a strong top-down
regulator of phytoplankton abundance and diversity, we sought to characterize the
cellular response of two marine haptophytes to virus infection in order to gain
more knowledge about the nature and diversity of microalgal responses to this
chronic biotic stressor. We infected laboratory cultures of the haptophytes
Haptolina ericina and Phaeocystis pouchetii with CeV-01B or PpV-01B dsDNA
viruses, respectively, and assessed the extent to which host cellular responses
resemble programmed cell death (PCD) through the activation of diagnostic
molecular and biochemical markers. Pronounced DNA fragmentation and activation of
cysteine aspartate-specific proteases (caspases) were only detected in
virus-infected cultures of these phytoplankton. Inhibition of host caspase
activity by addition of the pan-caspase inhibitor z-VAD-fmk did not impair virus 
production in either host-virus system, differentiating it from the Emiliania
huxleyi-Coccolithovirus model of haptophyte-virus interactions. Nonetheless, our 
findings point to a general conservation of PCD-like activation during virus
infection in ecologically diverse haptophytes, with the subtle heterogeneity of
cell death biochemical responses possibly exerting differential regulation on
phytoplankton abundance and diversity.

DOI: 10.1093/plankt/fbu029 
PMCID: PMC4090681
PMID: 25013242 

