
1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2014;15 Suppl 4:S1. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-15-S4-S1. Epub
2014 Mar 19.

Integrated assessment of predicted MHC binding and cross-conservation with self
reveals patterns of viral camouflage.

He L, De Groot AS, Gutierrez AH, Martin WD, Moise L, Bailey-Kellogg C.

BACKGROUND: Immune recognition of foreign proteins by T cells hinges on the
formation of a ternary complex sandwiching a constituent peptide of the protein
between a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecule and a T cell receptor
(TCR). Viruses have evolved means of "camouflaging" themselves, avoiding immune
recognition by reducing the MHC and/or TCR binding of their constituent peptides.
Computer-driven T cell epitope mapping tools have been used to evaluate the
degree to which particular viruses have used this means of avoiding immune
response, but most such analyses focus on MHC-facing 'agretopes'. Here we set out
a new means of evaluating the TCR faces of viral peptides in addition to their
agretopes, integrating evaluations of both sides of the ternary complex in a
single analysis.
METHODS: This paper develops what we call the Janus Immunogenicity Score (JIS),
bringing together a well-established method for predicting MHC binding, with a
novel assessment of the potential for TCR binding based on similarity with self. 
Intuitively, both good MHC binding and poor self-similarity are required for high
immunogenicity (i.e., a robust T effector response).
RESULTS: Focusing on the class II antigen-processing pathway, we show that the
JIS of T effector epitopes and null or regulatory epitopes deposited in a large
database of epitopes (Immune Epitope Database) are significantly different. We
then show that different types of viruses display significantly different
patterns of scores over their constituent peptides, with viruses causing chronic 
infection (Epstein-Barr and cytomegalovirus) strongly shifted to lower scores
relative to those causing acute infection (Ebola and Marburg). Similarly we find 
distinct patterns among influenza proteins in H1N1 (a strain against which human 
populations rapidly developed immunity) and H5N1 and H7N9 (highly pathogenic
avian flu strains, with significantly greater case mortality rates).
CONCLUSION: The Janus Immunogenicity Score, which integrates MHC binding and TCR 
cross-reactivity, provides a new tool for studying immunogenicity of pathogens
and may improve the selection and optimization of antigenic elements for vaccine 
design.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-15-S4-S1 
PMCID: PMC4094998
PMID: 25104221  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

