
1. J Neurovirol. 2014 Oct;20(5):526-30. doi: 10.1007/s13365-014-0274-2. Epub 2014
Aug 20.

Robust pro-inflammatory and lesser anti-inflammatory immune responses during
primary simian varicella virus infection and reactivation in rhesus macaques.

Traina-Dorge V(1), Sanford R, James S, Doyle-Meyers LA, de Haro E, Wellish M,
Gilden D, Mahalingam R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology, Tulane National Primate Research Center, Tulane
University, 18703 Three Rivers Road, Covington, LA, 70433, USA,
vtraina@tulane.edu.

Simian varicella virus (SVV) infection of non-human primates models human
varicella zoster virus (VZV) infection. Assessment of cell signaling immune
responses in monkeys after primary SVV infection, after immunosuppression and
during reactivation revealed strong pro-inflammatory responses and lesser
anti-inflammatory components during varicella and reactivation. Pro-inflammatory 
mediators elevated during varicella included interferon-gamma (IFN-γ),
interleukin (IL)-6, monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP-1), interferon
inducible T-cell α chemoattractant protein (I-TAC), interferon processing protein
(IP-10), and anti-inflammatory interleukin-1 Receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra). After 
immunosuppression and at reactivation, levels of pro-inflammatory mediators
MCP-1, eotaxin, IL-6, IL-8, MIF, RANTES (regulated-on-activation normal T-cell
expressed and secreted), and HGF (hepatocyte growth factor) were elevated, as was
the anti-inflammatory mediator IL-1Ra. Characterization of cytokine, chemokine
and growth factor responses during different stages of varicella virus infection 
will facilitate immunotherapeutic and vaccine strategies.

DOI: 10.1007/s13365-014-0274-2 
PMCID: PMC4394654
PMID: 25139181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

