
1. J Virol. 2015 Mar;89(5):2603-14. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03157-14. Epub 2014 Dec 17.

Structure of an enteric pathogen, bovine parvovirus.

Kailasan S(1), Halder S(1), Gurda B(1), Bladek H(1), Chipman PR(1), McKenna R(1),
Brown K(2), Agbandje-McKenna M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the McKnight Brain
Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
(2)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the McKnight Brain
Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA mckenna@ufl.edu.

Bovine parvovirus (BPV), the causative agent of respiratory and gastrointestinal 
disease in cows, is the type member of the Bocaparvovirus genus of the
Parvoviridae family. Toward efforts to obtain a template for the development of
vaccines and small-molecule inhibitors for this pathogen, the structure of the
BPV capsid, assembled from the major capsid viral protein 2 (VP2), was determined
using X-ray crystallography as well as cryo-electron microscopy and
three-dimensional image reconstruction (cryo-reconstruction) to 3.2- and 8.8-Å
resolutions, respectively. The VP2 region ordered in the crystal structure, from 
residues 39 to 536, conserves the parvoviral eight-stranded jellyroll motif and
an αA helix. The BPV capsid displays common parvovirus features: a channel at and
depressions surrounding the 5-fold axes and protrusions surrounding the 3-fold
axes. However, rather than a depression centered at the 2-fold axes, a raised
surface loop divides this feature in BPV. Additional observed density in the
capsid interior in the cryo-reconstructed map, compared to the crystal structure,
is interpreted as 10 additional N-terminal residues, residues 29 to 38, that
radially extend the channel under the 5-fold axis, as observed for human
bocavirus 1 (HBoV1). Surface loops of various lengths and conformations extend
from the core jellyroll motif of VP2. These loops confer the unique surface
topology of the BPV capsid, making it strikingly different from HBoV1 as well as 
the type members of other Parvovirinae genera for which structures have been
determined. For the type members, regions structurally analogous to those
decorating the BPV capsid surface serve as determinants of receptor recognition, 
tissue and host tropism, pathogenicity, and antigenicity.IMPORTANCE: Bovine
parvovirus (BPV), identified in the 1960s in diarrheic calves, is the type member
of the Bocaparvovirus genus of the nonenveloped, single-stranded DNA (ssDNA)
Parvoviridae family. The recent isolation of human bocaparvoviruses from children
with severe respiratory and gastrointestinal infections has generated interest in
understanding the life cycle and pathogenesis of these emerging viruses. We have 
determined the high-resolution structure of the BPV capsid assembled from its
predominant capsid protein VP2, known to be involved in a myriad of functions
during host cell entry, pathogenesis, and antigenicity for other members of the
Parvovirinae. Our results show the conservation of the core secondary structural 
elements and the location of the N-terminal residues for the known bocaparvovirus
capsid structures. However, surface loops with high variability in sequence and
conformation give BPV a unique capsid surface topology. Similar analogous regions
in other Parvovirinae type members are important as determinants of receptor
recognition, tissue and host tropism, pathogenicity, and antigenicity.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03157-14 
PMCID: PMC4325758
PMID: 25520501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

