
1. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Nanomed Nanobiotechnol. 2015 Sep-Oct;7(5):708-21. doi:
10.1002/wnan.1335. Epub 2015 Feb 12.

Virus-based nanomaterials as positron emission tomography and magnetic resonance 
contrast agents: from technology development to translational medicine.

Shukla S(1), Steinmetz NF(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, Schools
of Medicine and Engineering, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, Case Western Reserve University, Schools of Medicine 
and Engineering, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(3)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Case Western Reserve
University, Schools of Medicine and Engineering, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(4)Department of Macromolecular Science and Engineering, Case Western Reserve
University, Schools of Medicine and Engineering, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Viruses have recently emerged as ideal protein scaffolds for a new class of
contrast agents that can be used in medical imaging procedures such as positron
emission tomography (PET) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Whereas synthetic
nanoparticles are difficult to produce as homogeneous formulations due to the
inherently stochastic nature of the synthesis process, virus-based nanoparticles 
are genetically encoded and are therefore produced as homogeneous and
monodisperse preparations with a high degree of quality control. Because the
virus capsids have a defined chemical structure that has evolved to carry cargoes
of nucleic acids, they can be modified to carry precisely defined cargoes of
contrast agents and can be decorated with spatially defined contrast reagents on 
the internal or external surfaces. Viral nanoparticles can also be genetically
programed or conjugated with targeting ligands to deliver contrast agents to
specific cells, and the natural biocompatibility of viruses means that they are
cleared rapidly from the body. Nanoparticles based on bacteriophages and plant
viruses are safe for use in humans and can be produced inexpensively in large
quantities as self-assembling recombinant proteins. Based on these
considerations, a new generation of contrast agents has been developed using
bacteriophages and plant viruses as scaffolds to carry positron-emitting
radioisotopes such as [(18) F] fluorodeoxyglucose for PET imaging and iron oxide 
or Gd(3+) for MRI. Although challenges such as immunogenicity, loading
efficiency, and regulatory compliance remain to be address, virus-based
nanoparticles represent a promising new enabling technology for a new generation 
of highly biocompatible and biodegradable targeted imaging reagents.

Â© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/wnan.1335 
PMCID: PMC4620044
PMID: 25683790  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

