
1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2015 Jun;31(6):658-68. doi: 10.1089/AID.2014.0031.
Epub 2015 Apr 2.

Primer ID Informs Next-Generation Sequencing Platforms and Reveals Preexisting
Drug Resistance Mutations in the HIV-1 Reverse Transcriptase Coding Domain.

Keys JR(1), Zhou S(2), Anderson JA(2), Eron JJ Jr(2), Rackoff LA(2), Jabara C(3),
Swanstrom R(4).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina.
(2)2Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of North 
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(3)3Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina.
(4)4Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina.

Sequencing of a bulk polymerase chain reaction (PCR) product to identify drug
resistance mutations informs antiretroviral therapy selection but has limited
sensitivity for minority variants. Alternatively, deep sequencing is capable of
detecting minority variants but is subject to sequencing errors and PCR
resampling due to low input templates. We screened for resistance mutations among
184 HIV-1-infected, therapy-naive subjects using the 454 sequencing platform to
sequence two amplicons spanning HIV-1 reverse transcriptase codons 34-245.
Samples from 19 subjects were also analyzed using the MiSeq sequencing platform
for comparison. Errors and PCR resampling were addressed by tagging each HIV-1
RNA template copy (i.e., cDNA) with a unique sequence tag (Primer ID), allowing a
consensus sequence to be constructed for each original template from resampled
sequences. In control reactions, Primer ID reduced 454 and MiSeq errors from 71
to 2.6 and from 24 to 1.2 errors/10,000 nucleotides, respectively. MiSeq also
allowed accurate sequencing of codon 65, an important drug resistance position
embedded in a homopolymeric run that is poorly resolved by the 454 platform.
Excluding homopolymeric positions, 14% of subjects had evidence of â‰¥1 resistance 
mutation among Primer ID consensus sequences, compared to 2.7% by bulk population
sequencing. When calls were restricted to mutations that appeared twice among
consensus sequence populations, 6% of subjects had detectable resistance
mutations. The use of Primer ID revealed 5-15% template utilization on average,
limiting the depth of deep sequencing sampling and revealing sampling variation
due to low template utilization. Primer ID addresses important limitations of
deep sequencing and produces less biased estimates of low-level resistance
mutations in the viral population.

DOI: 10.1089/AID.2014.0031 
PMCID: PMC4458739
PMID: 25748056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

