
1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2015 Apr;34(4):392-7. doi: 10.1097/INF.0000000000000633.

Efficacy, safety and pharmacokinetics of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate in
virologic-suppressed HIV-infected children using weight-band dosing.

Aurpibul L(1), Cressey TR, Sricharoenchai S, Wittawatmongkol O, Sirisanthana V,
Phongsamart W, Sudjaritruk T, Chokephaibulkit K.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Research Institute for Health Sciences and † Faculty of Associated
Medical Sciences, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand; ‡Harvard School of
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts; §Institut de Recherche pour le
Développement, Marseille, France; ¶Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand; and ‖Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University,
Chiang Mai, Thailand.

Erratum in
    Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2015 Aug;34(8):847.

Comment in
    Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2015 Apr;34(4):406-8.

BACKGROUND: Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) is approved for children but
concerns remain about long-term renal and bone toxicity. We evaluated the
efficacy, safety and pharmacokinetics of TDF in treatment-experienced children
during 96 weeks.
METHODS: This was a prospective, open-label study in HIV-infected children 3-18
years of age (≥15 kg), with viral suppression on their first-line regimen without
tenofovir. Children were given TDF/lamivudine/efavirenz once daily at entry; TDF 
was prescribed according to weight bands. Age-, gender- and CD4-matched controls 
receiving TDF-sparing regimens were concomitantly enrolled. Tenofovir
pharmacokinetic assessment was performed at week 4. CD4 counts, HIV-1 RNA viral
load and safety assessments were determined at baseline, 24, 48 and 96 weeks.
RESULTS: Eighty children were enrolled (40 per group); 35 (44%) were male. Median
age was 12.2 (range 3.1-17.7) years. The median administered dose was 214 mg/m.
Tenofovir geometric mean AUC0-24 hours, Cmax and C24 hours were 2.66 [90%
confidence interval (CI) 2.49-2.84] μg hours/mL, 0.26 (0.24-0.29) μg/mL and 0.057
(0.052-0.062) μg/mL, respectively. Estimated glomerular filtration rate did not
significantly change overtime. The fractional excretion of calcium slightly
increased but fractional excretion of phosphate was unchanged among children in
TDF group. The bone mineral density Z score decreased in the first 24 weeks of
TDF treatment and was stable afterward. The TDF group had lower cholesterol
levels (P = 0.001). Thirty-nine of 40 children remained virologically suppressed.
No serious adverse event related to tenofovir.
CONCLUSION: TDF substitution in children and adolescents who were otherwise
stable while receiving a first-line nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitor-based regimen achieved adequate exposure without clinically significant
renal or bone adverse events over 96 weeks. While reassuring, these preliminary
safety findings may not exclude delayed effects on renal function and bone
density.

DOI: 10.1097/INF.0000000000000633 
PMID: 25760566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

