
1. Immunol Res. 2015 Jun;62(2):146-52. doi: 10.1007/s12026-015-8645-1.

STAT4 genetic polymorphisms association with spontaneous clearance of hepatitis B
virus infection.

Lu Y(1), Zhu Y, Peng J, Wang X, Wang F, Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, No. 1095 Jie Fang Avenue, Wuhan,
430030, China.

STAT4 signal pathway plays an important role in IFN-Î³-mediated antiviral
activity. Recent studies show an association of STAT4 polymorphisms with
hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. We therefore investigated the influence of
STAT4 polymorphisms on the susceptibility of spontaneous clearance of HBV in a
Chinese Han population. Genomic DNA from 288 cases with chronic HBV infection and
288 controls who spontaneously recovered from HBV infection was analyzed for five
SNPs in the STAT4 gene (rs7574865, rs7572482, rs7582694 rs11889341, and
rs8179673).Our analysis revealed that all the minor alleles of the four SNPs
(rs7574865, rs7582694, rs11889341, and rs8179673) had an association with overall
decreased risk to HBV infection [p = 0.040, OR 0.762 (95 % CI 0.593-0.981); p =
0.011, OR 0.686 (95 % CI 0.535-0.878); p = 0.023, OR 0.751 (95 % CI 0.586-0.962);
p = 0.002, OR 0.670 (95 % CI 0.521-0.861), respectively]. The major alleles of
the four SNPs were found to be associated with increased risk of HBV-related
cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Furthermore, the haplotype GGGCT
constructed from the five SNPs was found to have a highly significant association
with chronic HBV infection when compared to the controls who spontaneously
recovered from HBV infection [p = 0.031, OR 1.368 (95 % CI 1.028-1.818)]. These
findings indicate that STAT4 minor allele may be associated with the spontaneous 
clearance of HBV, whereas the major allele may be associated with the progress of
the HBV-related liver disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s12026-015-8645-1 
PMID: 25829184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

