
1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2015 Jul;64(7):843-51. doi: 10.1007/s00262-015-1693-5.
Epub 2015 Apr 17.

Persistent HPV16/18 infection in Indian women with the A-allele (rs6457617) of
HLA-DQB1 and T-allele (rs16944) of IL-1β -511 is associated with development of
cervical carcinoma.

Dutta S(1), Chakraborty C, Mandal RK, Basu P, Biswas J, Roychoudhury S, Panda CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncogene Regulation, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute, 37,
S.P. Mukherjee Road, Kolkata, India.

The aim of this study was to understand the association of human papillomavirus
(HPV) type 16/18 infection and polymorphisms in the HLA-DQB1 (rs6457617) and
IL-1β -511 (rs16944) loci with the development of uterine cervical cancer (CaCx).
The distribution of HLA-DQB1 G > A and IL-1β -511 C/T polymorphisms was
determined in HPV-negative cervical swabs from normal women (N = 111) and
compared with cervical swabs of HPV-cleared normal women (once HPV infected
followed by natural clearance of the infection, N = 86), HPV16/18-positive
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN, N = 41) and CaCx biopsies (N = 107). The
A-allele containing genotypes (i.e. G/A and A/A) of HLA-DQB1 was significantly
associated with CaCx compared with HPV-negative [OR = 2.56(1.42-4.62), p = 0.001]
or HPV-cleared [OR = 2.07(1.12-3.87), p = 0.01] normal women, whereas the
T-allele containing genotypes (i.e. C/T and T/T) of IL-1β showed increased risk
of CIN [OR = 3.68(0.97-16.35), p = 0.03; OR = 3.59(0.92-16.38), p = 0.03] and
CaCx development [OR = 2.03(1.03-5.2), p = 0.02; OR = 2.25(0.96-5.31), p = 0.04] 
compared with HPV-negative or HPV-cleared normal women. Considering these two
loci together, it was evident that the T- and A-alleles rendered significantly
increased susceptibility for development of CIN and CaCx compared with
HPV-negative and HPV-cleared normal women. Moreover, the T-allele of IL-1β showed
increased susceptibility for CIN [OR = 3.62(0.85-17.95), p = 0.04] and CaCx [OR =
2.39(0.91-6.37), p = 0.05] development compared with the HPV-cleared women, even 
in the presence of the HLA-DQB1 G-allele. Thus, our data suggest that persistent 
HPV16/18 infection in the cervix due to the presence of the HLA-DQB1 A-allele and
chronic inflammation due to the presence of the IL-1β -511 T-allele might
predispose women to CaCx development.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-015-1693-5 
PMID: 25893807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

