
1. J Cutan Pathol. 2015 Oct;42(10):739-45. doi: 10.1111/cup.12531. Epub 2015 Jun 15.

Herpes zoster granulomatous dermatitis: histopathologic findings in a case
series.

Ferenczi K(1), Rosenberg AS(1), McCalmont TH(2), Kwon EJ(1), Elenitsas R(3),
Somach SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Dermatology and Pathology, MetroHealth Medical Center, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Several types of cutaneous reactions have been reported to arise at the site of
herpes zoster (HZ) infection weeks to years after the acute disease. Among these,
granulomatous reactions are the most frequently reported. In this study, we
describe the spectrum of histopathologic findings of HZ granulomatous reactions
observed in 26 patients with cutaneous lesions confined to the area of previous
HZ eruption and compare them with biopsy specimens taken from 25 patients with
acute HZ. All patients with persistent reactions from whom history was available 
presented within 12 weeks of the onset of the acute eruption. The most frequent
findings were interstitial granulomatous dermatitis with lymphocytes, histiocytes
and multinucleated giant cells displaying elastophagocytosis and a perineural,
perivascular and perieccrine mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate rich in
lymphocytes and plasma cells. Less common features included intra-arrector and
peri-arrector pili granulomas, follicular dilatation and hyperkeratosis, and
vasculitis. Specimens from patients with acute HZ were found to have small
numbers of perineural plasma cells and most had subtle granulomatous
inflammation, in patterns similar to the group with late granulomatous reactions.
Our findings suggest that granulomatous reactions to varicella zoster virus
represent a persistent evolving inflammatory reaction after acute infection.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cup.12531 
PMID: 25970643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

