
1. Anim Health Res Rev. 2015 Jun;16(1):78-82. doi: 10.1017/S1466252315000043.

Perspective on BVDV control programs.

Givens MD(1), Newcomer BW(1).

Author information: 
(1)217 Veterinary Education Center,College of Veterinary Medicine,Auburn
University,Alabama 36849,USA.

Programs for control and eradication of bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV) are
often considered prudent when the expense of a control program within a specified
time frame effectively prevents loss due to disease and the expense of control
does not exceed the costs associated with infection. In some geographic areas,
concerns about animal welfare or desires to reduce antibiotic usage may motivate 
BVDV control even when control programs are associated with a lack of financial
return on investment. In other geographic areas, concerns about financial return 
on investment may be the key motivating factor in considering implementation of
BVDV control programs. Past experiences indicate that systematic,
well-coordinated control programs have a clear potential for success, while
voluntary control programs in cultures of distributed decision-making often
result in notable initial progress that ultimately ends in dissolution of
efforts. Segmentation of the cattle industry into cow-calf producers,
stocker/backgrounders, and feedlot operators amplifies the distribution of
decision-making regarding control programs and may result in control measures for
one industry segment that are associated with significant costs and limited
rewards. Though the host range of BVDV extends well beyond cattle, multiple
eradication programs that focus only on testing and removal of persistently
infected (PI) cattle have proven to be effective in various countries. While some
individuals consider education of producers to be sufficient to stimulate
eradication of BVDV, research surrounding the adoption of innovative health care 
procedures suggests that the process of adopting BVDV control programs has a
social element. Collegial interactions and discussions may be crucial in
facilitating the systematic implementation necessary to optimize the long-term
success of control programs. Compulsory control programs may be considered
efficient and effective in some regions; however, in a nation where individual
identification of cattle remains voluntary, the likelihood of effective
compulsion to control BVDV within a farm or ranch appears to be very unlikely.
While currently available diagnostic tests are sufficient to support BVDV
eradication via systematic, well-coordinated programs, the development of a
diagnostic procedure to safely and consistently detect the gestation of a PI
fetus after 5 months of gestation would be a valuable research breakthrough. This
desired testing modality would allow diagnosis of PI calves, while the dam
continues to provide biocontainment of the infected fetus. This development could
speed the progress of control programs in achieving the goal of BVDV control and 
eventual eradication.

DOI: 10.1017/S1466252315000043 
PMID: 26050576  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

