
1. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 5;10(8):e0135207. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135207.
eCollection 2015.

Stable Reference Gene Selection for RT-qPCR Analysis in Nonviruliferous and
Viruliferous Frankliniella occidentalis.

Yang C(1), Li H(2), Pan H(3), Ma Y(2), Zhang D(1), Liu Y(1), Zhang Z(4), Zheng
C(2), Chu D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hunan Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Institute of Plant Protection,
Changsha, Hunan, China.
(2)College of Agronomy and Plant Protection, Qingdao Agricultural University,
Qingdao, China.
(3)Department of Entomology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, United 
States of America.
(4)Hunan Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hunan Vegetable Institute, Changsha,
Hunan, China.

Reverse transcriptase-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) is a
reliable technique for measuring and evaluating gene expression during variable
biological processes. To facilitate gene expression studies, normalization of
genes of interest relative to stable reference genes is crucial. The western
flower thrips Frankliniella occidentalis (Pergande) (Thysanoptera: Thripidae),
the main vector of tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV), is a destructive invasive
species. In this study, the expression profiles of 11 candidate reference genes
from nonviruliferous and viruliferous F. occidentalis were investigated. Five
distinct algorithms, geNorm, NormFinder, BestKeeper, the ΔCt method, and
RefFinder, were used to determine the performance of these genes. geNorm,
NormFinder, BestKeeper, and RefFinder identified heat shock protein 70 (HSP70),
heat shock protein 60 (HSP60), elongation factor 1 α, and ribosomal protein l32
(RPL32) as the most stable reference genes, and the ΔCt method identified HSP60, 
HSP70, RPL32, and heat shock protein 90 as the most stable reference genes.
Additionally, two reference genes were sufficient for reliable normalization in
nonviruliferous and viruliferous F. occidentalis. This work provides a foundation
for investigating the molecular mechanisms of TSWV and F. occidentalis
interactions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135207 
PMCID: PMC4526564
PMID: 26244556  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

