
1. World J Virol. 2015 Aug 12;4(3):277-84. doi: 10.5501/wjv.v4.i3.277.

Perinatally infected adolescents living with human immunodeficiency virus
(perinatally human immunodeficiency virus).

Cruz ML(1), Cardoso CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Maria Leticia S Cruz, Department of Infectious Diseases, Hospital Federal dos 
Servidores do Estado, Rio de Janeiro, RJ 20221-903, Brazil.

The availability of highly potent antiretroviral treatment during the last
decades has transformed human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection into a
chronic disease. Children that were diagnosed during the first months or years of
life and received treatment, are living longer and better and are presently
reaching adolescence and adulthood. Perinatally HIV-infected adolescents (PHIV)
and young adults may present specific clinical, behavior and social
characteristics and demands. We have performed a literature review about
different aspects that have to be considered in the care and follow-up of PHIV.
The search included papers in the MEDLINE database via PubMed, located using the 
keywords "perinatally HIV-infected" AND "adolescents". Only articles published in
English or Portuguese from 2003 to 2014 were selected. The types of articles
included original research, systematic reviews, and quantitative or qualitative
studies; case reports and case series were excluded. Results are presented in the
following topics: "Puberal development and sexual maturation", "Growth in weight 
and height", "Bone metabolism during adolescence", "Metabolic complications",
"Brain development, cognition and mental health", "Reproductive health", "Viral
drug resistance" and "Transition to adult outpatient care". We hope that this
review will support the work of pediatricians, clinicians and infectious diseases
specialists that are receiving these subjects to continue treatment.

DOI: 10.5501/wjv.v4.i3.277 
PMCID: PMC4534818
PMID: 26279988 

