
1. Int J Med Microbiol. 2015 Oct;305(7):663-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2015.08.016.
Epub 2015 Aug 21.

Studies of nosocomial outbreaks of hepatitis B in nursing homes in Germany
suggest a major role of hepatitis B e antigen expression in disease severity and 
progression.

Seiz PL(1), Slanina H(1), Ziebuhr J(1), Gerlich WH(1), Glebe D(2), Schüttler
CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Virology, Justus Liebig University Giessen, National
Reference Center for Hepatitis B and D Viruses, German Center for Infection
Research, Biomedical Research Center Seltersberg, Schubertstr. 81, 35392 Giessen,
Germany.
(2)Institute of Medical Virology, Justus Liebig University Giessen, National
Reference Center for Hepatitis B and D Viruses, German Center for Infection
Research, Biomedical Research Center Seltersberg, Schubertstr. 81, 35392 Giessen,
Germany. Electronic address: dieter.glebe@viro.med.uni-giessen.de.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) causes acute or chronic hepatitis B. Local outbreaks of
HBV infections in skilled nursing facilities is a matter of growing concern in
developed countries. Here, we investigated two outbreaks of hepatitis B that
recently occurred in nursing homes in Germany. The outbreak at location A was
associated with acute fulminant hepatitis with fatal outcome in several cases,
while individuals infected at location B developed asymptomatic or mild hepatitis
B. Sequence analysis of viruses involved in these outbreaks revealed different,
but unique HBV strains for each location. Each of the strains produced high
viremia of more than 10(9) virions/mL serum. We found that the mild course of
hepatitis B at location B was caused by a circulating wild-type HBV genotype A2
strain, which is commonly found in Central Europe. Complete genome sequences of
isolates obtained from infected patients revealed nearly 100% sequence identity
at the nucleotide level as well as expression of HBV e protein (HBeAg), a known T
cell tolerogen in the incubation or chronic phases of HBV infection. By contrast,
the outbreak at location A was associated with an HBV genotype D2 variant that
lacked HBeAg expression, suggesting that immunopathology and selection of
specific HBV variants played a major role in the severe (or even fulminant) acute
hepatitis observed at location A. Importantly, all patients were diagnosed with
type 2 diabetes mellitus, a known risk factor for healthcare-associated
transmission of HBV. The study leads us to suggest that, besides strict adherence
to hygiene standards, additional efforts are required to reduce the risk of HBV
transmission and fulminant disease progression in healthcare settings and nursing
homes. In this context, a general screening for HBsAg and active hepatitis B
vaccination should be considered for people living in nursing homes, especially
for those with diagnosed diabetes or other predisposing factors for HBV
transmission.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier GmbH.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2015.08.016 
PMID: 26338147  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

