
1. Gastroenterol Nurs. 2015 Sep-Oct;38(5):369-78. doi: 10.1097/SGA.0000000000000166.

Project P.E.A.C.H. (Pathway and Education Toward Adherence and Completion in
Hepatitis C Therapy): A Nurse-Driven Evidence-Based Protocol.

Redulla RR(1), Reddy KR, Faust TW, Dudley-Brown S.

Author information: 
(1)Rhoda R. Redulla, DNP, RN, is Director of Education, Memorial Hospital of
Salem County, New Jersey; and Adjunct Faculty, Drexel University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. Dr. Redulla is also a SGNA Scholar. K. Rajender Reddy, MD, is Ruimy
Family President's Distinguished Professor, Director of Hepatology, Medical
Director of Liver Transplantation, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia. Thomas W. Faust, MD, MBE, is Transplant Hepatologist, Medstar
Georgetown Transplant Institute, Medstar Georgetown University Hospital,
Washington, DC. Sharon Dudley-Brown, PhD, FNP-BC, FAAN, is Assistant Professor of
Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland. Dr. Dudley-Brown is also
a SGNA Scholar.

Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) remains a major healthcare concern. The 24-48
week treatment of pegylated interferon and ribavirin therapy requires a
tremendous amount of commitment from patients and providers. Thus, there has been
a huge focus on health-related quality of life and various measures to support
patient adherence and completion of the recommended HCV treatment regimen. This
quality improvement project aimed to develop and test a nurse-driven
evidence-based pathway that supports the care of patients receiving hepatitis C
medication therapy in a tertiary, academic hepatology practice. All adult
patients, 18 years and older, who were started on HCV treatment from January 20
to February 15, 2011, were included in the testing of a nurse-driven HCV pathway 
for the first 12 weeks of treatment. The majority of the patients treated were
male (71.8% prepathway and 83.3% postpathway), of White ethnic background (61.5% 
prepathway and 58.3% postpathway), genotype 1 (69% prepathway and 91.7%
postpathway), and had comorbid conditions classified as "other" (38.5% prepathway
and 33.3% postpathway). As for treatment status, the majority of the patients
were "treatment naive" in prepathway or had never received prior HCV treatment
(59.0%) or "had recurrent HCV after liver transplantation" (41.7%). The 4-week
treatment completion rate was 94.9% for the prepathway group and 100.0% for the
postpathway group; 12-week completion rate was 87.2% (prepathway) and 58.3% for
the postpathway group. The mean 4-week adherence score for the prepathway group
was 2.46 and the postpathway group was 2.92. Mean lag time to treatment was
decreased with 26 days in the postpathway and 43 in the prepathway. Providers and
nurses expressed overall satisfaction with the nurse-driven pathway.

DOI: 10.1097/SGA.0000000000000166 
PMID: 26422271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

