
1. J Korean Med Sci. 2015 Nov;30(11):1618-24. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2015.30.11.1618.
Epub 2015 Oct 16.

Hepatocellular Carcinoma Risk of Compensated Cirrhosis Patients with Elevated HBV
DNA Levels according to Serum Aminotransferase Levels.

Lee J(1), Sinn DH(1), Kim JH(1), Gwak GY(1), Kim HS(2), Jung SH(2), Paik YH(1),
Choi MS(1), Lee JH(1), Koh KC(1), Yoo BC(1), Paik SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Biostatistics and Clinical Epidemiology Center, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul,
Korea.

Comment in
    J Korean Med Sci. 2016 May;31(5):824.
    J Korean Med Sci. 2016 May;31(5):825-6.

Sometimes, hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related cirrhotic patients with normal
aminotransferase levels are closely followed-up for the elevation of
aminotransferase levels instead of prompt antiviral therapy (AVT). We analyzed
the long-term hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) risk according to the
aminotransferase levels in a retrospective cohort of 1,468 treatment-naïve,
HBV-related, compensated cirrhosis patients with elevated HBV DNA levels (≥ 2,000
IU/mL). Based on aminotransferase levels, patients were categorized into normal
(< 40 U/L, n = 364) and elevated group (≥ 40 U/L, n = 1,104). During a median of 
5.3 yr of follow-up (range: 1.0-8.2 yr), HCC developed in 296 (20%) patients. The
5-yr cumulative HCC incidence rate was higher in patients with elevated
aminotransferase level, but was not low in normal aminotransferase level (17% vs.
14%, P = 0.004). During the follow-up, 270/364 (74%) patients with normal
aminotransferase levels experienced elevation of aminotransferase levels, and AVT
was initiated in 1,258 (86%) patients. Less patients with normal aminotransferase
levels received AVT (70% vs. 91%, P < 0.001) and median time to start AVT was
longer (17.9 vs. 2.4 months, P < 0.001). AVT duration was an independent factor
associated with HCC, and median duration of AVT was shorter (4.0 vs. 2.6 yr, P < 
0.001) in patients with normal aminotransferase levels. The HCC risk of
compensated cirrhosis patients with normal aminotransferase level is not low, and
AVT duration is associated with lowered HCC risk, indicating that prompt AVT
should be strongly considered even for those with normal aminotransferase levels.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2015.30.11.1618 
PMCID: PMC4630478
PMID: 26539006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

