
1. Viruses. 2015 Dec 9;7(12):6490-505. doi: 10.3390/v7122952.

Roles of HTLV-1 basic Zip Factor (HBZ) in Viral Chronicity and Leukemic
Transformation. Potential New Therapeutic Approaches to Prevent and Treat
HTLV-1-Related Diseases.

Mesnard JM(1), Barbeau B(2), Césaire R(3), Péloponèse JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)CPBS, CNRS FRE3689, Université Montpellier, 34293 Montpellier, France.
jean-michel.mesnard@cpbs.cnrs.fr.
(2)Département des Sciences Biologiques, and Centre de Recherche BioMed
Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, QC H2X 3X8, Canada.
barbeau.benoit@uqam.ca.
(3)Laboratoire de Virologie-EA4537, Centre Hospitalier et Universitaire de
Martinique, Fort de France, Martinique. Raymond.Cesaire@chu-fortdefrance.fr.
(4)CPBS, CNRS FRE3689, Université Montpellier, 34293 Montpellier, France.
jean-marie.peloponese@cpbs.cnrs.fr.

More than thirty years have passed since human T-cell leukemia virus type 1
(HTLV-1) was described as the first retrovirus to be the causative agent of a
human cancer, adult T-cell leukemia (ATL), but the precise mechanism behind
HTLV-1 pathogenesis still remains elusive. For more than two decades, the
transforming ability of HTLV-1 has been exclusively associated to the viral
transactivator Tax. Thirteen year ago, we first reported that the minus strand of
HTLV-1 encoded for a basic Zip factor factor (HBZ), and since then several teams 
have underscored the importance of this antisense viral protein for the
maintenance of a chronic infection and the proliferation of infected cells. More 
recently, we as well as others have demonstrated that HBZ has the potential to
transform cells both in vitro and in vivo. In this review, we focus on the latest
progress in our understanding of HBZ functions in chronicity and cellular
transformation. We will discuss the involvement of this paradigm shift of HTLV-1 
research on new therapeutic approaches to treat HTLV-1-related human diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/v7122952 
PMCID: PMC4690875
PMID: 26690203  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

