
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2016 Mar;100(5):2347-54. doi:
10.1007/s00253-015-7228-3. Epub 2016 Jan 4.

A novel procedure of quantitation of virus based on microflow cytometry analysis.

Vazquez D(1), López-Vázquez C(2), Cutrín JM(3), Dopazo CP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Ictiopatología, Dept. Microbiología e Instituto de Acuicultura,
Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
diego.vazquez@usc.es.
(2)Unidad de Ictiopatología, Dept. Microbiología e Instituto de Acuicultura,
Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
mdelcarmen.lopez.vazquez@usc.es.
(3)Unidad de Ictiopatología, Dept. Microbiología e Instituto de Acuicultura,
Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
juanm.cutrin@usc.es.
(4)Unidad de Ictiopatología, Dept. Microbiología e Instituto de Acuicultura,
Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
carlos.pereira@usc.es.

The accurate and fast titration of viruses is a critical step in research
laboratories and biotechnology industries. Different approaches are commonly
applied which either are time consuming (like the plaque and endpoint dilution
assays) or do not ensure quantification of only infective particles (like
quantitative real-time PCR). In the last decade, a methodology based on the
analysis of infected cells by flow cytometry and fluorescence-activated cell
sorting (FACS) has been reported as a fast and reliable test for the titration of
some viruses. However, this technology needs expensive equipment and expert
technicians to operate it. Recently, the "lab on a chip" integrated devices have 
brought about the miniaturization of this equipment, turning this technology into
an affordable and easy-to-use alternative to traditional flow cytometry. In the
present study, we have designed a microflow cytometry (μFC) procedure for the
quantitation of viruses, using the infectious pancreatic necrosis virus (IPNV) as
a model. The optimization of conditions and validation of the method are reported
here.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-015-7228-3 
PMID: 26728015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

