
1. Vet Microbiol. 2016 Feb 29;184:40-50. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2016.01.006. Epub
2016 Jan 7.

Characterization of specific antigenic epitopes and the nuclear export signal of 
the Porcine circovirus 2 ORF3 protein.

Gu J(1), Wang L(2), Jin Y(2), Lin C(2), Wang H(2), Zhou N(2), Xing G(1), Liao
M(3), Zhou J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunity and College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing 210095, PR China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Virology, Ministry of Agriculture, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, PR China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Virology, Ministry of Agriculture, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, PR China. Electronic address:
liaomin4545@zju.edu.cn.
(4)Institute of Immunity and College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing 210095, PR China; Key Laboratory of Animal Virology, Ministry
of Agriculture, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, PR China; Collaborative
Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, The First
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, PR China. Electronic
address: jyzhou@zju.edu.cn.

Porcine circovirus 2 (PCV2) is the etiological agent of postweaning multisystemic
wasting syndrome. PCV2 ORF3 protein is a nonstructural protein known to induce
apoptosis, but little is known about the biological function of ORF3 protein.
Therefore, we undertook this study to map ORF3 protein epitopes recognized by a
panel of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and to characterize putative nuclear
localization (NLS) and nuclear export (NES) sequences in ORF3. The linear
epitopes targeted by two previously published mAbs 3B1 and 1H3 and a novel mouse 
mAb 3C3 were defined using overlapping pools of peptides. Here, we find that ORF3
in PCV2 infected cells contains a conformational epitope targeted by the antibody
3C3, which is distinct from linear epitopes recognized by the antibodies 3B1 and 
1H3 in recombinant ORF3 protein. These results suggest that the linear epitope
recognized by 3B1 and 1H3 is masked in PCV2 infected cells, and that the
conformational epitope is unique to PCV2 infection. Furthermore, we find that
ORF3 protein expressed in cytoplasm in early stages of PCV2 infection and then
accumulated in nucleus over time. Moreover, we localize a NES at the N-terminus
(residues 1-35aa) of ORF3 which plays critical role in nuclear export activity.
These findings provide a novel insight that deepens our understanding of the
biological function of PCV2 ORF3.

Copyright Â© 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2016.01.006 
PMID: 26854343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

