
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Mar 22;113(12):E1720-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1523754113. Epub 2016 Mar 7.

Focal expression of mutant huntingtin in the songbird basal ganglia disrupts
cortico-basal ganglia networks and vocal sequences.

Tanaka M(1), Singh Alvarado J(1), Murugan M(2), Mooney R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710;
(2)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544.
(3)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710; 
mooney@neuro.duke.edu.

The basal ganglia (BG) promote complex sequential movements by helping to select 
elementary motor gestures appropriate to a given behavioral context. Indeed,
Huntington's disease (HD), which causes striatal atrophy in the BG, is
characterized by hyperkinesia and chorea. How striatal cell loss alters activity 
in the BG and downstream motor cortical regions to cause these disorganized
movements remains unknown. Here, we show that expressing the genetic mutation
that causes HD in a song-related region of the songbird BG destabilizes syllable 
sequences and increases overall vocal activity, but leave the structure of
individual syllables intact. These behavioral changes are paralleled by the
selective loss of striatal neurons and reduction of inhibitory synapses on
pallidal neurons that serve as the BG output. Chronic recordings in singing birds
revealed disrupted temporal patterns of activity in pallidal neurons and
downstream cortical neurons. Moreover, reversible inactivation of the cortical
neurons rescued the disorganized vocal sequences in transfected birds. These
findings shed light on a key role of temporal patterns of cortico-BG activity in 
the regulation of complex motor sequences and show how a genetic mutation alters 
cortico-BG networks to cause disorganized movements.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1523754113 
PMCID: PMC4812762
PMID: 26951661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

