
1. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2016 May;85(1):36-41. doi:
10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2016.02.003. Epub 2016 Feb 5.

Development and evaluation of a real-time method for testing human enteroviruses 
and coxsackievirus A16.

Chen Q(1), Hu Z(2), Zhang Q(2), Yu M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pediatrics, Nanjing Children's Hospital affiliated to Nanjing
Medical University, No. 72 Guangzhou Road, Gulou Area, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210008,
China. Electronic address: chenqian97@163.com.
(2)Institute of Pediatrics, Nanjing Children's Hospital affiliated to Nanjing
Medical University, No. 72 Guangzhou Road, Gulou Area, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210008,
China.
(3)Shanghai Rendu Biotechnology Co., Ltd., No. 590 Ruiqing Road, East Area
ZhangjiangHigh-Tech Park, Pudong Shanghai, 201201, China.

Hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) is a common infectious disease caused by a
group of the human enteroviruses (HEV), including coxsackievirus A16 (CA16) and
enterovirus 71 (EV71). In recent years, another HEV-A serotype, CA6 or CA10, has 
emerged to be one of the major etiologic agents that can induce HFMD worldwide.
The objective of this study is to develop specific, sensitive, and rapid methods 
to help diagnose HEV and CA16 specifically by using simultaneous amplification
testing (SAT) based on isothermal amplification of RNA and real-time detection of
fluorescence technique, which were named as SAT-HEV and SAT-CA16, respectively
(SAT-HEV/SAT-CA16). The specificity and sensitivity of SAT were tested here.
SAT-HEV/SAT-CA16 could measure viral titers that were at least 10-fold lower than
those measured by real-time PCR. Non-false cross-reactive amplification indicated
that SAT-HEV/SAT-CA16 were highly specific with the addition of internal control 
(IC) RNA (5000 copies/reaction). A total of 198 clinical specimens were assayed
by SAT comparing with real-time PCR. The statistically robust assessment of
SAT-HEV and HEV-specific real-time PCR plus sequencing reached 99.0% (196/198),
with a kappa value of 0.97, and 99.5% (197/198) and a kappa value of 0.99 for
CA16, respectively. Additionally, IC prevented false-negative readings and
assured the SAT-HEV/SAT-CA16 method's accuracy. Overall, SAT-HEV/SAT-CA16 method 
may serve as a platform for the simple and rapid detection of HEV/CA16 in time of
HFMD outbreak.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2016.02.003 
PMID: 26971632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

