
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2016 Aug 7;22(29):6716-25. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v22.i29.6716.

Hepatitis C virus G1b infection decreases the number of small low-density
lipoprotein particles.

Kinoshita C(1), Nagano T(1), Seki N(1), Tomita Y(1), Sugita T(1), Aida Y(1),
Itagaki M(1), Satoh K(1), Sutoh S(1), Abe H(1), Tsubota A(1), Aizawa Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chika Kinoshita, Tomohisa Nagano, Nobuyoshi Seki, Yoichi Tomita, Tomonori
Sugita, Yuta Aida, Munenori Itagaki, Kenichi Satoh, Satoshi Sutoh, Hiroshi Abe,
Yoshio Aizawa, Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Internal Medicine of
Jikei University Katsushika Medical Center, Tokyo 125-8506, Japan.

AIM: To investigate how hepatitis C virus (HCV) G1b infection influences the
particle number of lipoproteins.
METHODS: The numbers of lipoprotein particles in fasting sera from 173 Japanese
subjects, 82 with active HCV G1b infection (active HCV group) and 91 with cleared
HCV infection (SVR group), were examined. Serum lipoprotein was fractionated by
high-performance liquid chromatography into twenty fractions. The cholesterol and
triglyceride concentrations in each fraction were measured using LipoSEARCH. The 
number of lipoprotein particles in each fraction was calculated using a newly
developed algorithm, and the relationship between chronic HCV G1b infection and
the lipoprotein particle number was determined by multiple linear regression
analysis.
RESULTS: The median number of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles was
significantly lower in the active HCV group [1182 nmol/L, interquartile range
(IQR): 444 nmol/L] than in the SVR group (1363 nmol/L, IQR: 472 nmol/L, P <
0.001), as was that of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) particles (14168 nmol/L vs 
15054 nmol/L, IQR: 4114 nmol/L vs 3385 nmol/L, P = 0.042). The number of very
low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) particles was similar between the two groups.
Among the four LDL sub-fractions, the number of large LDL particles was similar
between the two groups. However, the numbers of medium (median: 533.0 nmol/L,
IQR: 214.7 nmol/L vs median: 633.5 nmol/L, IQR: 229.6 nmol/L, P < 0.001), small
(median: 190.9 nmol/L, IQR: 152.4 nmol/L vs median: 263.2 nmol/L, IQR: 159.9
nmol/L; P < 0.001), and very small LDL particles (median: 103.5 nmol/L, IQR: 66.8
nmol/L vs median: 139.3 nmol/L, IQR: 67.3 nmol/L, P < 0.001) were significantly
lower in the active HCV group than in the SVR group, respectively. Multiple
linear regression analysis indicated an association between HCV G1b infection and
the decreased numbers of medium, small, and very small LDL particles. However,
active HCV infection did not affect the number of large LDL particles or any
sub-fractions of VLDL and HDL particles.
CONCLUSION: HCV G1b infection decreases the numbers of medium, small, and very
small LDL particles.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v22.i29.6716 
PMCID: PMC4970482
PMID: 27547014  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

