
1. Glia. 2017 Feb;65(2):250-263. doi: 10.1002/glia.23089. Epub 2016 Oct 20.

Novel insights into role of miR-320a-VDAC1 axis in astrocyte-mediated neuronal
damage in neuroAIDS.

Fatima M(1), Prajapati B(1), Saleem K(1), Kumari R(1), Mohindar Singh Singal
C(1), Seth P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience, National Brain Research
Centre, Manesar, Gurgaon, Haryana, India.

Astroglia are indispensable component of the tripartite synapse ensheathing
innumerous soma and synapses. Its proximity to neurons aids the regulation of
neuronal functions, health and survival through dynamic neuroglia crosstalk.
Susceptibility of astrocyte to HIV-1 infection and subsequent latency culminates 
in compromised neuronal health. The viral protein HIV-1 transactivator of
transcription (Tat) is neurotoxic. HIV-1 Tat is detected in brain of AIDS
patients even in cases where viral load is non-detectable due to successful HAART
therapy. Recently, we demonstrated that HIV-1 Tat triggers excess ATP release
from astrocytes that causes neuronal death by activating purinergic receptor
system. Using well-characterized model system of human primary astrocytes and
neurons, we probed into the molecular mechanism for enhanced ATP release in HIV-1
Tat affected astrocytes. HIV-1 Tat modulated the miRNA machinery in astrocytes
and perturbed the levels of voltage dependent anion channel 1 (VDAC1), a channel 
present in the outer mitochondrial membrane and plasma membrane that regulates
extracellular ATP release. Our studies with autopsy tissue sections also showed
concordantly dysregulated VDAC1 and miR-320a levels in HIV-1 patients suffering
from mild cognitive impairment (MCI). We report a novel molecular cascade of
miRNA-mediated ATP release through regulation of VDAC1. Downregulation of VDAC1
either with miR-320a mimic or VDAC1 siRNA in HIV-1 Tat-affected astroglia could
rescue the neurons from glia-mediated indirect death. Our findings reveal a novel
upstream therapeutic target that could be employed to thwart the
astroglia-mediated neurotoxicity in HIV-1 neuropathogenesis. GLIA
2017;65:250-263.

Â© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/glia.23089 
PMID: 27761954  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

