
1. Virus Evol. 2016 Sep 6;2(2):vew024. eCollection 2016 Jul.

Mapping the genomic diversity of HCV subtypes 1a and 1b: Implications of
structural and immunological constraints for vaccine and drug development.

Cuypers L(1), Li G(2), Neumann-Haefelin C(3), Piampongsant S(4), Libin P(5), Van 
Laethem K(1), Vandamme AM(6), Theys K(1).

Author information: 
(1)KU Leuven, University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Rega Institute for Medical Research, Clinical and Epidemiological Virology,
Minderbroedersstraat 10, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(2)KU Leuven, University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Rega Institute for Medical Research, Clinical and Epidemiological Virology,
Minderbroedersstraat 10, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Metabolic Syndrome Research
Center, Key Laboratory of Diabetes Immunology, Ministry of Education, National
Clinical Research Center for Metabolic Diseases, the Second Xiangya Hospital,
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(3)Department of Medicine II, Freiburg University Medical Center, University of
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)KU Leuven, University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Rega Institute for Medical Research, Clinical and Epidemiological Virology,
Minderbroedersstraat 10, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Department of Electrical
Engineering ESAT, STADIUS Center for Dynamical Systems, Signal Processing and
Data Analytics, KU Leuven, University of Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, B-3001 
Heverlee, Belgium.
(5)Artificial Intelligence Lab, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, 1050
Brussels, Belgium; KU Leuven, University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, Rega Institute for Medical Research, Clinical and Epidemiological
Virology, Minderbroedersstraat 10, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(6)KU Leuven, University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Rega Institute for Medical Research, Clinical and Epidemiological Virology,
Minderbroedersstraat 10, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Center for Global Health and
Tropical Medicine, Microbiology Unit, Institute for Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, University Nova de Lisboa, Rua da Junqueira 100, Lisbon, 1349-008,
Portugal.

Despite significant progress in hepatitis C (HCV) treatment, global viral
eradication remains a challenge. An in-depth map of its genome diversity within
the context of structural and immunological constraints could contribute to the
design of pan-genotypic antivirals and preventive vaccines. For such analyses,
extensive information is only available for the highly prevalent HCV genotypes
(GT) 1a and 1b. Using 647 GT1a and 408 GT1b full-genome sequences obtained from
the Los Alamos database, we found that respectively 3 per cent and 82 per cent of
all codon positions are under positive and negative selective pressure,
suggesting variation mainly accumulates due to random genetic drift. An
association between conservation and both structured RNA and secondary protein
structures confirmed the important role of structural elements at nucleotide and 
at amino acid level. Remarkably, CD8+ T-cell epitopes in HCV GT1a were
significantly more conserved, while at the same time containing more sites under 
positive selection. Similarly, CD4+ T-cell epitopes were significantly more
conserved in both HCV subtypes, but under less positive selective pressure in
GT1b and more negative selective pressure in GT1a. In contrast, B-cell epitopes
in both subtypes were less conserved and under less stringent negative selection.
These findings argue against immune selective pressure as the main force of
between-host diversifying evolution. Despite its high variability, HCV is under
strict evolutionary constraints, most probably to keep its genes and proteins
functional during the replication cycle. These are encouraging findings for
vaccine and drug design, which could consider these newly established genetic
diversity profiles.

DOI: 10.1093/ve/vew024 
PMCID: PMC5072459
PMID: 27774307 

