
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jan 31;7:41645. doi: 10.1038/srep41645.

Rewiring carotenoid biosynthesis in plants using a viral vector.

Majer E(1), Llorente B(2), Rodríguez-Concepción M(2), Daròs JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Plantas, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Centíficas-Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, 46022 Valencia,
Spain.
(2)Centre for Research in Agricultural Genomics (CRAG) CSIC-IRTA-UAB-UB, Campus
UAB Bellaterra, 08193 Barcelona, Spain.

Plants can be engineered to sustainably produce compounds of nutritional,
industrial or pharmaceutical relevance. This is, however, a challenging task as
extensive regulation of biosynthetic pathways often hampers major metabolic
changes. Here we describe the use of a viral vector derived from Tobacco etch
virus to express a whole heterologous metabolic pathway that produces the
health-promoting carotenoid lycopene in tobacco tissues. The pathway consisted in
three enzymes from the soil bacteria Pantoea ananatis. Lycopene is present at
undetectable levels in chloroplasts of non-infected leaves. In tissues infected
with the viral vector, however, lycopene comprised approximately 10% of the total
carotenoid content. Our research further showed that plant viruses that express
P. ananatis phytoene synthase (crtB), one of the three enzymes of the
heterologous pathway, trigger an accumulation of endogenous carotenoids, which
together with a reduction in chlorophylls eventually result in a bright yellow
pigmentation of infected tissues in various host-virus combinations. So, besides 
illustrating the potential of viral vectors for engineering complex metabolic
pathways, we also show a yellow carotenoid-based reporter that can be used to
visually track infection dynamics of plant viruses either alone or in combination
with other visual markers.

DOI: 10.1038/srep41645 
PMCID: PMC5282570
PMID: 28139696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interests.

