
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2017 Jun;101(6):1317-1323. doi: 10.1189/jlb.2A0816-342R. Epub 2017
Mar 10.

IL-18-dependent NKG2D ligand upregulation on accessory cells is mediated by the
PI3K/GSK-3 pathway.

Brandstadter JD(1), Chen H(2), Jiang S(2), Huang X(3), Yang Y(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematologic Malignancies and Cellular Therapy, Department of
Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Hematology, First Affiliated Hospital, Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China; and.
(3)Division of Hematologic Malignancies and Cellular Therapy, Department of
Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA;
huang027@mc.duke.edu.
(4)Division of Hematologic Malignancies and Cellular Therapy, Department of
Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA;
yang0029@mc.duke.edu.
(5)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.

NK cells are critical for the control of viral infections. Studies have shown
that efficient NK cell activation in response to infection with VV in vivo
requires multiple pathways, including the NKG2D pathway. We have recently shown
that IL-18 is necessary for the activation of NK cells through upregulation of
the NKG2D ligand Rae-1 on DCs upon VV infection. However, how IL-18R signaling on
the accessory cells contributes to Rae-1 up-regulation remains to be defined. In 
this study, we found IL-18-mediated Rae-1 up-regulation in accessory cells,
including macrophages and DCs, to be dependent on the MyD88-PI3K pathway. We
further found that IL-18 signaling through PI3K led to inhibition of GSK-3, which
we found to be a negative regulator of Rae-1. Finally, we demonstrated that in
vivo inhibition of GSK-3 could restore Rae-1 up-regulation on IL18R-/- DCs and
partially rescue NK-cell activation against VV, leading to improved viral control
in IL-18R-/- mice. Our results showed that IL18-dependent Rae-1 up-regulation on 
accessory cells is mediated by the MyD88-PI3K-GSK3 pathway. These observations
may provide important insights into the design of effective NK cell-based
immunotherapies.

Â© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.2A0816-342R 
PMCID: PMC5433856
PMID: 28283665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

