
1. J Virol. 2017 May 12;91(11). pii: e02507-16. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02507-16. Print
2017 Jun 1.

CXCR5-Dependent Entry of CD8 T Cells into Rhesus Macaque B-Cell Follicles
Achieved through T-Cell Engineering.

Ayala VI(1), Deleage C(1), Trivett MT(1), Jain S(1), Coren LV(1), Breed MW(2),
Kramer JA(2), Thomas JA(1), Estes JD(1), Lifson JD(1), Ott DE(3).

Author information: 
(1)AIDS and Cancer Virus Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick
National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, Maryland, USA.
(2)Laboratory Animal Science Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick
National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, Maryland, USA.
(3)AIDS and Cancer Virus Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick
National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, Maryland, USA
ottde@mail.nih.gov.

Follicular helper CD4 T cells, TFH, residing in B-cell follicles within secondary
lymphoid tissues, are readily infected by AIDS viruses and are a major source of 
persistent virus despite relative control of viral replication. This persistence 
is due at least in part to a relative exclusion of effective antiviral CD8 T
cells from B-cell follicles. To determine whether CD8 T cells could be engineered
to enter B-cell follicles, we genetically modified unselected CD8 T cells to
express CXC chemokine receptor 5 (CXCR5), the chemokine receptor implicated in
cellular entry into B-cell follicles. Engineered CD8 T cells expressing human
CXCR5 (CD8hCXCR5) exhibited ligand-specific signaling and chemotaxis in vitro Six
infected rhesus macaques were infused with differentially fluorescent dye-labeled
autologous CD8hCXCR5 and untransduced CD8 T cells and necropsied 48 h later. Flow
cytometry of both spleen and lymph node samples revealed higher frequencies of
CD8hCXCR5 than untransduced cells, consistent with preferential trafficking to
B-cell follicle-containing tissues. Confocal fluorescence microscopy of
thin-sectioned lymphoid tissues demonstrated strong preferential localization of 
CD8hCXCR5 T cells within B-cell follicles with only rare cells in extrafollicular
locations. CD8hCXCR5 T cells were present throughout the follicles with some
observed near infected TFH In contrast, untransduced CD8 T cells were found in
the extrafollicular T-cell zone. Our ability to direct localization of unselected
CD8 T cells into B-cell follicles using CXCR5 expression provides a strategy to
place highly effective virus-specific CD8 T cells into these AIDS virus
sanctuaries and potentially suppress residual viral replication.IMPORTANCE AIDS
virus persistence in individuals under effective drug therapy or those who
spontaneously control viremia remains an obstacle to definitive treatment.
Infected follicular helper CD4 T cells, TFH, present inside B-cell follicles
represent a major source of this residual virus. While effective CD8 T-cell
responses can control viral replication in conjunction with drug therapy or in
rare cases spontaneously, most antiviral CD8 T cells do not enter B-cell
follicles, and those that do fail to robustly control viral replication in the
TFH population. Thus, these sites are a sanctuary and a reservoir for replicating
AIDS viruses. Here, we demonstrate that engineering unselected CD8 T cells to
express CXCR5, a chemokine receptor on TFH associated with B-cell follicle
localization, redirects them into B-cell follicles. These proof of principle
results open a pathway for directing engineered antiviral T cells into these
viral sanctuaries to help eliminate this source of persistent virus.

Copyright Â© 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02507-16 
PMCID: PMC5432868
PMID: 28298605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

