
1. Langmuir. 2017 Apr 25;33(16):4049-4056. doi: 10.1021/acs.langmuir.6b04582. Epub
2017 Apr 12.

Detachment of Membrane Bound Virions by Competitive Ligand Binding Induced
Receptor Depletion.

Parveen N(1), Block S(1), Zhdanov VP(1)(2), Rydell GE(3), Höök F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Chalmers University of Technology , Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Boreskov Institute of Catalysis, Russian Academy of Sciences , Novosibirsk,
Russia.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg , Gothenburg, Sweden.

Multivalent receptor-mediated interactions between virions and a lipid membrane
can be weakened using competitive nonpathogenic ligand binding. In particular,
the subsequent binding of such ligands can induce detachment of bound virions, a 
phenomenon of crucial relevance for the development of new antiviral drugs.
Focusing on the simian virus 40 (SV40) and recombinant cholera toxin B subunit
(rCTB), and using (monosialotetrahexosyl)ganglioside (GM1) as their common
receptor in a supported lipid bilayer (SLB), we present the first detailed
investigation of this phenomenon by employing the quartz crystal microbalance
with dissipation (QCM-D) and total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF)
microscopy assisted 2D single particle tracking (SPT) techniques. Analysis of the
QCM-D-measured release kinetics made it possible to determine the binding
strength of a single SV40-GM1 pair. The release dynamics of SV40, monitored by
SPT, revealed that a notable fraction of SV40 becomes mobile just before the
release, allowing to estimate the distribution of SV40-bound GM1 receptors just
prior to release.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.langmuir.6b04582 
PMID: 28350474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

