
1. Diabetes. 1988 Oct;37(10):1419-25.

Effect of coxsackievirus B4 infection in mice on expression of 64,000-Mr
autoantigen and glucose sensitivity of islets before development of
hyperglycemia.

Gerling I(1), Nejman C, Chatterjee NK.

Author information: 
(1)Wadsworth Center for Laboratories and Research, New York State Department of
Health, Albany 12201.

Diabetogenic strains of Coxsackievirus B4 (CB4) produce a diabetes syndrome in
susceptible mice that resembles insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. To assess
the possible role of autoimmunity, the expression of a 64,000-Mr islet antigen in
SJL/J and CD1 mice infected with a diabetogenic strain of CB4 was monitored in
early and late infection. Additionally, virus-induced abnormalities in glucose
metabolism were correlated with several changes in purified islets to assess
beta-cell physiology. Over 80% of the mice exhibited subnormal blood glucose at
72 h postinfection (p.i.) and were hyperglycemic at 6 and 8 wk p.i. Islet yield
in infected mice decreased by 29-47% at 72 h and 6 wk p.i. compared to
noninfected mice. Insulin release stimulated by 16.7 mM glucose increased greater
than twofold at 72 h p.i. but declined at 6 wk well below the level of
noninfected mice. Likewise, residual islet insulin content after release also
increased at 72 h and then declined. Total protein synthesis in the islets
decreased by 30% at 72 h and by 60% at 6 wk p.i. Although the synthesis of five
proteins of heterogeneous molecular weights, including tubulin, was severely
depressed in the infected islets at 72 h p.i. compared with control islets or
islets at 6 wk p.i., synthesis of the 64,000-Mr component and another protein of 
36,000 Mr increased by two- to threefold. It is possible that CB4 infection may
initiate or enhance an autoimmune reaction by increased expression of the
64,000-Mr antigen.

DOI: 10.2337/diab.37.10.1419 
PMID: 2843410  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

