
1. Oncogenesis. 2017 Jun 12;6(6):e349. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2017.46.

Limited nucleotide pools restrict Epstein-Barr virus-mediated B-cell
immortalization.

Hafez AY(1), Messinger JE(1), McFadden K(1), Fenyofalvi G(1), Shepard CN(2),
Lenzi GM(2), Kim B(2), Luftig MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Center for Virology, Duke
University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Drug Discovery, School of Medicine, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Activation of cellular oncogenes as well as infection with tumor viruses can
promote aberrant proliferation and activation of the host DNA damage response.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection of primary human B cells induces a transient
period of hyper-proliferation, but many of these infected cells succumb to an
ataxia telangiectasia mutated/checkpoint kinase 2 (ATM/Chk2)-mediated
senescence-like growth arrest. In this study, we assessed the role of DNA
replicative stress and nucleotide pool levels in limiting EBV-infected B-cell
outgrowth. We found that EBV triggered activation of the ataxia telangiectasia
and Rad3-related (ATR) signaling pathway in the early rapidly proliferating
cells, which were also significantly more sensitive to inhibition of the ATR
pathway than late attenuated proliferating cells. Through nuclear halo assays, we
determined that early EBV-infected cells displayed increased replicative stress
and DNA damage relative to late proliferating cells. Finally, we found that early
after infection, hyper-proliferating B cells exhibited limited
deoxyribonucleotide triphosphate (dNTP) pools compared with late proliferating
and EBV-immortalized lymphoblastoid cell lines with a specific loss of purine
dNTPs. Importantly, supplementation with exogenous nucleosides before the period 
of hyper-proliferation markedly enhanced B-cell immortalization by EBV and
rescued replicative stress. Together our results suggest that purine dNTP
biosynthesis has a critical role in the early stages of EBV-mediated B-cell
immortalization.

DOI: 10.1038/oncsis.2017.46 
PMCID: PMC5519195
PMID: 28604764 

