
1. Public Health Action. 2017 Jun 21;7(2):116-122. doi: 10.5588/pha.17.0013.

Unfavourable outcomes among patients with MDR-TB on the standard 24-month regimen
in Maharashtra, India.

Suryawanshi SL(1), Shewade HD(2), Nagaraja SB(3), Nair SA(1), Parmar M(1).

Author information: 
(1)World Health Organization, Country Office for India, New Delhi, India.
(2)International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, South-East Asia
Office, New Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Community Medicine, Employees' State Insurance Corporation
Medical College and Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences and Research,
Bangalore, India.

Setting: Patients with multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) registered for
treatment (2011-2012 cohort) using the standard 24-month regimen, under the
Revised National TB Control Programme's programmatic management of drug-resistant
TB (PMDT), Maharashtra, India. Objectives: To assess the treatment outcomes and
the timing and risk factors for unfavourable treatment outcomes, with a focus on 
death and loss to follow-up (LTFU). Method: This was a retrospective cohort study
involving a review of PMDT records. Treatment outcomes were reported on 31
December 2014. Results: Of 4024 patients, treatment success was recorded in 1168 
(29%). Unfavourable outcomes occurred in 2242 (56%), of whom 857 (21%) died and
768 (19%) were lost to follow-up. Treatment outcomes were missing on record
review for 375 (9%) patients, and 239 (6%) were still undergoing treatment. Half 
of LTFU occurred within 3 months, and more than four fifths of deaths occurred
after 6 months of treatment. Human immunodeficiency virus infection, being
underweight, age ⩾ 15 years, male sex and pulmonary TB were the main risk factors
for death, LTFU or other unfavourable treatment outcomes. Conclusion: The study
found poor treatment outcomes in patients with MDR-TB registered for treatment in
Maharashtra, India. Interventions are required to address the high rates of LTFU 
and death.

Publisher: Contexte: Les patients atteints d'une tuberculose multi-résistante
(TB-MDR) enregistrés en vue d'un traitement (cohorte de décembre 2011) recourant 
au protocole standard de 24 mois de la prise en charge programmatique de la TB
pharmacorésistante (PMDT) sous l'égide du Programme national révisé de lutte
contre la TB, à Maharashtra, Inde.Objectifs: Evaluer les résultats du traitement,
et le timing et les facteurs de risque de résultats défavorables du traitement en
particulier, le décès et les pertes de vue.Méthode: Etude rétrospective de
cohorte impliquant la revue des dossiers du PMDT. Les résultats du traitement ont
été rapportés au 31 décembre 2014.Résultats: Sur 4024 patients, 1168 (29%)
patients ont connu un succès, tandis que 2242 (56%) ont eu un résultat
défavorable : 857 (21%) sont décédés et 768 (19%) ont été perdus de vue. Les
résultats du traitement ont été manquants lors de la revue des dossiers pour 375 
(9%) patients et 239 (6%) patients étaient toujours sous traitement. La moitié
des pertes de vue est survenue dans les 3 mois et plus de quatre décès sur cinq
sont survenus après 6 mois de traitement. Le virus de l'immunodéficience humaine,
la maigreur, l'âge ⩾ 15 ans, le sexe masculin et la TB pulmonaire ont été des
facteurs de risque de décès ou de perte de vue ou de résultat défavorable du
traitement.Conclusion: Cette étude a découvert des résultats médiocres du
traitement chez des patients atteints de TB-MDR enregistrés pour traitement à
Maharashtra, Inde. Des interventions sont requises pour combattre ce taux élevé
de pertes de vue et de décès.Publisher: Marco de referencia: Los pacientes con
diagnóstico de tuberculosis multidrogorresistente (TB-MDR) registrados para
tratamiento (cohorte de 2011 y 2012) con el régimen normalizado de 24 meses del
tratamiento programático de la TB farmacorresistente (PMDT, por su equivalente en
inglés) en el marco del Programa Nacional Revisado contra la TB en Maharashtra,
en la India.Objetivos: Evaluar los desenlaces terapéuticos, la evolución
cronológica y los factores de riesgo de alcanzar un desenlace desfavorable, en
especial la muerte y la pérdida durante el seguimiento.Método: Un estudio
retrospectivo de cohortes con análisis de los registros del PMDT. Los desenlaces 
terapéuticos se notificaron el 31 de diciembre del 2014.Resultados: De los 4024
pacientes tratados, 1168 alcanzaron el éxito terapéutico (29%). Se observaron
desenlaces desfavorables en 2242 pacientes (56%), así: 857 fallecieron (21%) y
768 se perdieron durante el seguimiento (19%). En el examen de los registros,
faltaba el desenlace terapéutico de 375 pacientes (9%) y 239 estaban aun
recibiendo tratamiento (6%). La mitad de las pérdidas durante el seguimiento
ocurrió durante los primeros 3 meses y más de cuatro quintos de las muertes
ocurrieron después de 6 meses de tratamiento. Los factores que se asociaron con
la muerte, la pérdida durante el seguimiento u otros desenlaces desfavorables
fueron la infección por el virus de la inmunodeficiencia humana, el peso
insuficiente, la edad ⩾ 15 años, el sexo masculino y la TB de localización
pulmonar.Conclusión: En el presente estudio se observaron desenlaces terapéuticos
deficientes en los pacientes registrados en tratamiento por TB-MDR en
Maharashtra, en la India. Es necesario introducir intervenciones que aborden la
alta tasa de pérdida durante el seguimiento y de muertes.
DOI: 10.5588/pha.17.0013 
PMCID: PMC5493092
PMID: 28695084 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: none declared.

