
1. J Dermatol. 2017 Dec;44(12):1368-1373. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.13990. Epub 2017
Aug 3.

Preliminary study of analyzing mucosal human papillomaviruses in cutaneous warts 
by restriction fragment mass polymorphism.

Park SE(1), Ha JW(2), Kim CW(2), Kim SS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Chuncheon Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University 
College of Medicine, Chuncheon, Korea.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Kangdong Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Cutaneous human papillomavirus (HPV) types 1, 2, 4, 7 and 57 are reportedly found
in cutaneous warts. However, there are few reports that have investigated the
prevalence of mucosal HPV types in cutaneous warts. The aim of this study is to
investigate the prevalence of mucosal HPV types in patients with cutaneous warts 
and to determine any association between HPV types and patient characteristics.
We analyzed 62 wart samples that were taken from patients who were diagnosed with
cutaneous warts, and 30 normal skin samples were used as negative control. We
recorded the following characteristics: sex, age, type of warts, duration of
warts, number of warts and patient's immune status. A matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry (MS)-based
restriction fragment mass polymorphism (RFMP) assay was used for HPV genotyping. 
Of the total 62 wart samples, 50 samples (81.6%) were positive for HPV genotypes.
All of the negative controls (30 samples) using normal skin showed negative
reaction. Mucosal HPV types (49 samples, 84.4%) were highly detected, and high-
or probable high-risk HPV types (39 samples, 67.2%) were more common than lower
risk HPV types (10 samples, 17.2%). A statistically significant association was
observed between sex, age, duration of warts and the risk of HPV types. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first study to use the RFMP assay to analyze
cutaneous wart-associated mucosal HPV types. The high prevalence of high-risk and
probable high-risk HPV in this study is of great significance.

Â© 2017 Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.13990 
PMID: 28771770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

