
1. Glycobiology. 2017 Sep 1;27(9):806-819. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwx062.

Recent advancements in understanding mammalian O-mannosylation.

Sheikh MO(1), Halmo SM(1)(2), Wells L(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, 315 Riverbend
Road, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia, 315
Riverbend Road, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

The post-translational glycosylation of select proteins by O-linked mannose
(O-mannose or O-man) is a conserved modification from yeast to humans and has
been shown to be necessary for proper development and growth. The most well
studied O-mannosylated mammalian protein is α-dystroglycan (α-DG).
Hypoglycosylation of α-DG results in varying severities of congenital muscular
dystrophies, cancer progression and metastasis, and inhibited entry and infection
of certain arenaviruses. Defects in the gene products responsible for
post-translational modification of α-DG, primarily glycosyltransferases, are the 
basis for these diseases. The multitude of clinical phenotypes resulting from
defective O-mannosylation highlights the biomedical significance of this unique
modification. Elucidation of the various O-mannose biosynthetic pathways is
imperative to understanding a broad range of human diseases and for the
development of novel therapeutics. In this review, we will focus on recent
discoveries delineating the various enzymes, structures and functions associated 
with O-mannose-initiated glycoproteins. Additionally, we discuss current gaps in 
our knowledge of mammalian O-mannosylation, discuss the evolution of this
pathway, and illustrate the utility and limitations of model systems to study
functions of O-mannosylation.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwx062 
PMCID: PMC6082599
PMID: 28810660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

