
1. mBio. 2017 Oct 17;8(5). pii: e01579-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01579-17.

Capsids and Genomes of Jumbo-Sized Bacteriophages Reveal the Evolutionary Reach
of the HK97 Fold.

Hua J(1)(2), Huet A(1), Lopez CA(1), Toropova K(1), Pope WH(2), Duda RL(3),
Hendrix RW(2), Conway JF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA duda@pitt.edu jxc100@pitt.edu.
(4)Department of Structural Biology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA duda@pitt.edu jxc100@pitt.edu.

Large icosahedral viruses that infect bacteria represent an extreme of the
coevolution of capsids and the genomes they accommodate. One subset of these
large viruses is the jumbophages, tailed phages with double-stranded DNA genomes 
of at least 200,000 bp. We explored the mechanism leading to increased capsid and
genome sizes by characterizing structures of several jumbophage capsids and the
DNA packaged within them. Capsid structures determined for six jumbophages were
consistent with the canonical phage HK97 fold, and three had capsid geometries
with novel triangulation numbers (T=25, T=28, and T=52). Packaged DNA
(chromosome) sizes were larger than the genome sizes, indicating that all
jumbophages use a head-full DNA packaging mechanism. For two phages (PAU and G), 
the sizes appeared very much larger than their genome length. We used
two-dimensional DNA gel electrophoresis to show that these two DNAs migrated
abnormally due to base modifications and to allow us to calculate their actual
chromosome sizes. Our results support a ratchet model of capsid and genome
coevolution whereby mutations lead to increased capsid volume and allow the
acquisition of additional genes. Once the added genes and larger capsid are
established, mutations that restore the smaller size are disfavored.IMPORTANCE A 
large family of viruses share the same fold of the capsid protein as
bacteriophage HK97, a virus that infects bacteria. Members of this family use
different numbers of the capsid protein to build capsids of different sizes.
Here, we examined the structures of extremely large capsids and measured their
DNA content relative to the sequenced genome lengths, aiming to understand the
process that increases size. We concluded that mutational changes leading to
larger capsids become locked in by subsequent changes to the genome organization.

Copyright Â© 2017 Hua et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01579-17 
PMCID: PMC5646251
PMID: 29042498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

