
1. Front Plant Sci. 2017 Oct 11;8:1771. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2017.01771. eCollection
2017.

Genome-Wide Association Study Reveals Novel Loci for SC7 Resistance in a Soybean 
Mutant Panel.

Che Z(1), Liu H(2), Yi F(1), Cheng H(1), Yang Y(1), Wang L(1), Du J(1), Zhang
P(1), Wang J(1), Yu D(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, National
Center for Soybean Improvement, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources Conservation and Sustainable Utilization,
South China Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China.

Soybean mosaic virus (SMV) is a member of Potyvirus genus that causes severe
yield loss and destroys seed quality in soybean [Glycine max (L.) Merr.]. It is
important to explore new resistance sources and discover new resistance loci to
SMV, which will provide insights to improve breeding strategies for SMV
resistance. Here, a genome-wide association study was conducted to accelerate
molecular breeding for the improvement of resistance to SMV in soybean. A
population of 165 soybean mutants derived from two soybean parents was used in
this study. There were 104 SNPs identified significantly associated with
resistance to SC7, some of which were located within previous reported
quantitative trait loci. Three putative genes on chromosome 1, 9, and 12 were
homologous to WRKY72, eEF1BÎ², and RLP9, which were involved in defense response
to insect and disease in Arabidopsis. Moreover, the expression levels of these
three genes changed in resistance and susceptible soybean accessions after SMV
infection. These three putative genes may involve in the resistance to SC7 and be
worthy to further research. Collectively, markers significantly associated with
resistance to SC7 will be helpful in molecular marker-assisted selection for
breeding resistant soybean accessions to SMV, and the candidate genes identified 
would advance the functional study of resistance to SMV in soybean.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2017.01771 
PMCID: PMC5641574
PMID: 29075282 

