
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2018 Feb 5;496(2):346-351. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.01.058. Epub 2018 Jan 10.

Establishment and characterization of five immortalized human scalp dermal
papilla cell lines.

Kwack MH(1), Yang JM(1), Won GH(1), Kim MK(1), Kim JC(1), Sung YK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University,
Daegu, South Korea.
(2)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University,
Daegu, South Korea. Electronic address: ysung@knu.ac.kr.

Dermal papilla (DP) regulates the growth and cycling of hair follicles. Cultured 
DP cells are useful for the study of their role in relation to hair growth and
regeneration. However, cultivation of human DP cells is tedious and difficult. In
addition, cultured DP cells possess a relatively short replicative life span,
requiring immortalized human DP cell lines. We previously established an
immortalized human DP cell line, SV40T-hTERT-DPC, by introducing human telomerase
reverse transcriptase (hTERT) gene into the transformed cell line, SV40T-DPC. In 
this study, we co-transfected the simian virus 40 large T antigen (SV40T-Ag) and 
hTERT into DP cells from scalp hair follicles from a male with androgenetic
alopecia and established five immortalized DP cell lines and named KNU-101,
KNU-102, KNU-103, KNU-201 and KNU-202. We then evaluated tumorigenicity,
expression of DP markers, responses to androgen, Wnt3a and BMP4, and expression
of DP signature genes. These cell lines displayed early passage morphology and
maintained responses to androgen, Wnt and BMP. Furthermore, these cell lines
expressed DP markers and DP signature genes. KNU cell lines established in this
study are potentially useful sources for hair research.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.01.058 
PMID: 29331373  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

