
1. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2018 Aug;57(8):911-928. doi: 10.1007/s40262-017-0624-3.

Daclatasvir: A Review of Preclinical and Clinical Pharmacokinetics.

Gandhi Y(1), Eley T(1)(2), Fura A(1), Li W(1), Bertz RJ(1), Garimella T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Bristol-Myers Squibb, P.O. Box 4000, Princeton, NJ, 08540, USA.
(2)Arbutus Biopharma, 701 Veterans Circle, Warminster, PA, 18974, USA.
(3)Bristol-Myers Squibb, P.O. Box 4000, Princeton, NJ, 08540, USA.
tushar.garimella@bms.com.

Daclatasvir is a first-in-class, highly selective, hepatitis C virus,
non-structural protein 5a polymerase replication complex inhibitor with picomolar
potency and broad genotypic coverage in vitro. Daclatasvir undergoes rapid
absorption, with a time to reach maximum plasma concentration of 1-2 h and an
elimination half-life of ~ 10 to 14 h observed in single-ascending dose studies. 
Steady state was achieved by day 4 in multiple-ascending dose studies.
Daclatasvir can be administered without regard to food or pH modifiers.
Daclatasvir exposure is similar between healthy subjects and subjects infected
with hepatitis C virus. Intrinsic factors such as age, race, or sex do not impact
daclatasvir exposure. No dose adjustment is necessary for patients with any
degree of hepatic or renal impairment. Daclatasvir has low-to-moderate clearance 
with the predominant route of elimination via cytochrome P450 3A4-mediated
metabolism and P-glycoprotein excretion and intestinal secretion. Renal clearance
is a minor route of elimination for daclatasvir. As a result, the dose of
daclatasvir should be reduced from 60 to 30 mg once daily when co-administered
with strong inhibitors of cytochrome P450 3A4. No dose adjustment is required
when daclatasvir is co-administered with moderate inhibitors of cytochrome P450
3A4. The dose of daclatasvir should be increased from 60 to 90 mg once daily when
co-administered with moderate inducers of cytochrome P450 3A4. Co-administration 
of daclatasvir with strong inducers of cytochrome P450 3A4 is contraindicated.
Concurrent medications with inhibitory effects on P-glycoprotein without
concurrent inhibition of cytochrome P450 3A4 are unlikely to cause marked changes
in daclatasvir exposure, as the clearance of daclatasvir is through both
cytochrome P450 3A4 and P-glycoprotein. The potential for daclatasvir to affect
the pharmacokinetics of concomitantly administered drugs that are substrates of
the cytochrome P450 enzyme system is low. In vitro, daclatasvir is a
weak-to-moderate inhibitor of transporters including organic cation transporter
1, P-glycoprotein, organic transporting polypeptide 1B1, organic transporting
polypeptide 1B3, and breast cancer resistance protein, although in clinical
studies, daclatasvir has not altered the pharmacokinetics of concomitantly
administered drugs that are substrates of these transporters to an appreciable
degree, except for rosuvastatin. In summary, daclatasvir is a hepatitis C virus, 
non-structural protein 5a-selective inhibitor with a well-characterized
pharmacokinetic profile that forms part of potent and well-tolerated all-oral
treatment regimens for chronic hepatitis C virus infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s40262-017-0624-3 
PMID: 29353349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

