
1. Ann Dermatol Venereol. 2016 Dec;143 Suppl 3:S29-S36. doi:
10.1016/S0151-9638(18)30047-4.

[What's new in pediatric dermatology?]

[Article in French]

Léauté-Labrèze C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unité de dermatologie pédiatrique et centre de référence des maladies rares de
la peau, hôpital Pellegrin-Enfants, CHU de Bordeaux, 33076 Bordeaux Cedex,
France. Electronic address: christine.labreze@chu-bordeaux.fr.

The association of a birth defect and a segmental hemangioma is well established,
a consensus concerning evaluation and monitoring of infants with PHACE or LUMBAR 
syndromes has been published. The efficacy of propranolol in infantile hemangioma
is proven; however there were still unresolved issues concerning the safety in
children; after 8 years of use on thousands of children safety data collection
did not show any unexpected side effects. Topical treatment of infantile
hemangiomas with beta-blockers, such as timolol, is very popular, but recent
publications revealed a significant systemic absorption that could be responsible
for severe side effects, such as bradycardia, in low birthweight infants. As a
consequence, this therapeutic option should be considered with caution. In the
last 2 years mTOR inhibitors have been tested in low-flow vascular malformations 
with varying success, but progress remains to be done in the treatment of
vascular abnormalities. Today, genetics has led to advances in the understanding 
of the pathophysiology and in the future targeted therapies could probably be
feasible. Skin barrier deficiency is responsible for the development of allergic 
phenomena in atopic patients, since it has been shown that sensibilisation, even 
to food, could probably be induced by skin contact. Unfortunately, the topical
treatment with crisaborole, a phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor, does not look like a
revolution in children atopic dermatitis, its efficacy seems equivalent to
emollient application. In the field of infectious diseases, changes in viral
outbreaks are the most reported. Furthermore epidemic Zika virus, enteroviruses
are responsible for expanded dermatological manifestations and also severe
meningoencephalitis. Paraviral character of various eruptions, such as gloves and
socks syndrome or eruptive pseudoangiomatosis is challenged.

© 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. Tous droits réservés.

DOI: 10.1016/S0151-9638(18)30047-4 
PMID: 29429507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

