
1. Pestic Biochem Physiol. 2018 Jan;144:10-18. doi: 10.1016/j.pestbp.2017.10.009.
Epub 2017 Oct 23.

Metabolisation of thiamethoxam (a neonicotinoid pesticide) and interaction with
the Chronic bee paralysis virus in honeybees.

Coulon M(1), Schurr F(2), Martel AC(2), Cougoule N(2), Bégaud A(2), Mangoni P(2),
Dalmon A(3), Alaux C(3), Le Conte Y(3), Thiéry R(2), Ribière-Chabert M(2), Dubois
E(4).

Author information: 
(1)ANSES Sophia Antipolis, Unit of Honeybee Pathology, 105, Route des Chappes,
06902 Sophia-Antipolis, France; INRA PACA, UR 406 Abeilles et Environnement, Site
Agroparc, 84914 Avignon, France. Electronic address: marianne.coulon@anses.fr.
(2)ANSES Sophia Antipolis, Unit of Honeybee Pathology, 105, Route des Chappes,
06902 Sophia-Antipolis, France.
(3)INRA PACA, UR 406 Abeilles et Environnement, Site Agroparc, 84914 Avignon,
France.
(4)ANSES Sophia Antipolis, Unit of Honeybee Pathology, 105, Route des Chappes,
06902 Sophia-Antipolis, France. Electronic address: eric.dubois@anses.fr.

Pathogens and pesticides are likely to co-occur in honeybee hives, but much
remains to be investigated regarding their potential interactions. Here, we first
investigated the metabolisation kinetics of thiamethoxam in chronically fed
honeybees. We show that thiamethoxam, at a dose of 0.25ng/bee/day, is quickly and
effectively metabolised into clothianidin, throughout a 20day exposure period.
Using a similar chronic exposure to pesticide, we then studied, in a separate
experiment, the impact of thiamethoxam and Chronic bee paralysis virus (CBPV)
co-exposure in honeybees. The honeybees were exposed to the virus by contact,
mimicking the natural transmission route in the hive. We demonstrate that a high 
dose of thiamethoxam (5.0ng/bee/day) can cause a synergistic increase in
mortality in co-exposed honeybees after 8 to 10days of exposure, with no increase
in viral loads. At a lower dose (2.5ng/bee/day), there was no synergistic
increase of mortality, but viral loads were significantly higher in naturally
dead honeybees, compared with sacrificed honeybees exposed to the same
conditions. These results show that the interactions between pathogens and
pesticides in honeybees can be complex: increasing pesticide doses may not
necessarily be linked to a rise in viral loads, suggesting that honeybee
tolerance to the viral infection might change with pesticide exposure.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pestbp.2017.10.009 
PMID: 29463403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

