
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2018 Mar 12;15(3). pii: E495. doi:
10.3390/ijerph15030495.

Protozoan Parasites in Drinking Water: A System Approach for Improved Water,
Sanitation and Hygiene in Developing Countries.

Omarova A(1), Tussupova K(2)(3), Berndtsson R(4), Kalishev M(5), Sharapatova
K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and General Hygiene, Karaganda State Medical
University, Gogol Street 40, Karaganda 100008, Kazakhstan. alua_1912@mail.ru.
(2)Department of International Cooperation and Bologna Process, Karaganda State
Medical University, Gogol Street 40, Karaganda 100008, Kazakhstan.
kamshat.tussupova@tvrl.lth.se.
(3)Division of Water Resources Engineering & Center for Middle Eastern Studies,
Lund University, P.O. Box 118, SE-221 00 Lund, Sweden.
kamshat.tussupova@tvrl.lth.se.
(4)Division of Water Resources Engineering & Center for Middle Eastern Studies,
Lund University, P.O. Box 118, SE-221 00 Lund, Sweden.
ronny.berndtsson@tvrl.lth.se.
(5)Department of Nutrition and General Hygiene, Karaganda State Medical
University, Gogol Street 40, Karaganda 100008, Kazakhstan. marchelo99.62@mail.ru.
(6)Department of Surgery, Gynecology and Pediatry, Semey State Medical
University, Pavlodar Branch, Toraigyrov Street 72/1, Pavlodar 140000, Kazakhstan.
sharapatova_kulyash@mail.ru.

Improved water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) are significant in preventing
diarrhea morbidity and mortality caused by protozoa in low- and middle-income
countries. Due to the intimate and complex relationships between the different
WASH components, it is often necessary to improve not just one but all of these
components to have sustainable results. The objective of this paper was to review
the current state of WASH-related health problems caused by parasitic protozoa
by: giving an overview and classification of protozoa and their effect on
people's health, discussing different ways to improve accessibility to safe
drinking water, sanitation services and personal hygiene behavior; and suggesting
an institutional approach to ensure improved WASH. The findings indicate that
Giardia and Cryptosporidium are more often identified during waterborne or
water-washed outbreaks and they are less sensitive than most of the bacteria and 
viruses to conventional drinking water and wastewater treatment methods. There
are various institutions of control and prevention of water-related diseases
caused by protozoa in developed countries. Unfortunately, the developing regions 
do not have comparable systems. Consequently, the institutional and systems
approach to WASH is necessary in these countries.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph15030495 
PMCID: PMC5877040
PMID: 29534511  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

