
1. Nature. 1988 Sep 15;335(6187):256-9.

Transfer of a functional human immune system to mice with severe combined
immunodeficiency.

Mosier DE(1), Gulizia RJ, Baird SM, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biology Institute, La Jolla, California 92037.

The pressing need for a better experimental system for AIDS research has brought 
into sharp focus the shortcomings of available animal models and the practical
and ethical limitations of studies of immune responses and viral pathogenesis in 
humans. Current studies of the human immune responses are limited to relatively
restrictive in vivo experiments and several in vitro systems that, although
useful, allow only short-term studies and support responses to a few antigens.
Neither model is particularly amenable to studies of the pathogenesis of diseases
of the immune system. We report here that injection of human peripheral blood
leukocytes (PBL) can result in the stable long-term reconstitution of a
functional human immune system in mice with severe combined immunodeficiency
(SCID). Human PBL transplanted to SCID mice increase in number and survive for at
least six months; reconstituted mice show spontaneous secretion of human
immunoglobulin and a specific human antibody response is induced following
immunization with tetanus toxoid. All of the major cell populations present in
PBL are found in the lymphoid tissue and blood of SCID recipients, although the
relative proportions of B cells, T-cell subsets and monocytes/macrophages in
long-term recipients differ from those found in normal PBL and, in mice
transplanted with 50 x 10(6) or more PBL from Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-seropositive donors, EBV-positive B-cell lymphomas often develop. Our
results suggest that xenogeneic transplantation of human lymphoid cells into SCID
mice may provide a useful model for the study of normal human immune function,
the response of the immune system to pathogenic agents and early events in
lymphomagensis.

DOI: 10.1038/335256a0 
PMID: 2970594  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

