
1. J Vis Exp. 2018 Apr 16;(134). doi: 10.3791/57074.

A Simple and Efficient Method for In Vivo Cardiac-specific Gene Manipulation by
Intramyocardial Injection in Mice.

Fu Y(1), Jiang W(2), Zhao Y(2), Huang Y(3), Zhang H(4), Wang H(3), Pu J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical
College; Department of Cardiology, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University.
(3)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical
College.
(4)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical
College; 13965270077@139.com.
(5)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical
College; Department of Cardiology, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University; pujun310@hotmail.com.

Gene manipulation specifically in the heart significantly potentiate the
investigation of cardiac disease pathomechanisms and their therapeutic potential.
In vivo cardiac-specific gene delivery is commonly achieved by either systemic or
local delivery. Systemic injection via tail vein is easy and efficient in
manipulating cardiac gene expression by using recombinant adeno-associated virus 
9 (AAV9). However, this method requires a relatively high amount of vector for
efficient transduction, and may result in nontarget organ gene transduction.
Here, we describe a simple, efficient, and time-saving method of intramyocardial 
injection for in vivo cardiac-specific gene manipulation in mice. Under
anesthesia (without ventilation), the pectoral major and minor muscles were
bluntly dissected, and the mouse heart was quickly exposed by manual
externalization through a small incision at the fourth intercostal space.
Subsequently, adenovirus encoding luciferase (Luc) and vitamin D receptor (VDR), 
or short hairpin RNA (shRNA) targeting VDR, was injected with a Hamilton syringe 
into the myocardium. Subsequent in vivo imaging demonstrated that luciferase was 
successfully overexpressed specifically in the heart. Moreover, Western blot
analysis confirmed the successful overexpression or silencing of VDR in the mouse
heart. Once mastered, this technique can be used for gene manipulation, as well
as injection of cells or other materials such as nanogels in the mouse heart.

DOI: 10.3791/57074 
PMCID: PMC5933510
PMID: 29708533  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

