
1. J Chem Theory Comput. 2018 Jun 12;14(6):3218-3227. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.8b00027.
Epub 2018 May 8.

Estimating Atomic Contributions to Hydration and Binding Using Free Energy
Perturbation.

Irwin BWJ(1), Huggins DJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Theory of Condensed Matter Group, Cavendish Laboratory , University of
Cambridge , 19 J J Thomson Avenue , Cambridge CB3 0HE , United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Chemistry , University of Cambridge , Lensfield Road , Cambridge
CB2 1EW , United Kingdom.

We present a general method called atom-wise free energy perturbation (AFEP),
which extends a conventional molecular dynamics free energy perturbation (FEP)
simulation to give the contribution to a free energy change from each atom. AFEP 
is derived from an expansion of the Zwanzig equation used in the exponential
averaging method by defining that the system total energy can be partitioned into
contributions from each atom. A partitioning method is assumed and used to group 
terms in the expansion to correspond to individual atoms. AFEP is applied to six 
example free energy changes to demonstrate the method. Firstly, the hydration
free energies of methane, methanol, methylamine, methanethiol, and caffeine in
water. AFEP highlights the atoms in the molecules that interact favorably or
unfavorably with water. Finally AFEP is applied to the binding free energy of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 protease to lopinavir, and AFEP reveals the
contribution of each atom to the binding free energy, indicating candidate areas 
of the molecule to improve to produce a more strongly binding inhibitor. FEP
gives a single value for the free energy change and is already a very useful
method. AFEP gives a free energy change for each "part" of the system being
simulated, where part can mean individual atoms, chemical groups, amino acids, or
larger partitions depending on what the user is trying to measure. This method
should have various applications in molecular dynamics studies of physical,
chemical, or biochemical phenomena, specifically in the field of computational
drug discovery.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jctc.8b00027 
PMID: 29712434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

