
1. J BUON. 2018 Mar-Apr;23(2):514-521.

Simulations of centriole of polarized centrosome as a monopole antenna in immune 
and viral synapses.

Dvorak J(1), Melichar B, Filipova A, Grimova J, Grimova N, Rozsypalova A, Buka D,
Voboril R, Zapletal R, Buchler T, Richter I, Buka D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and
Thomayer Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.

The immune synapse (IS) is a temporary interface between an antigen-presenting
cell and an effector lymphocyte. Viral synapse is a molecularly organized
cellular junction that is structurally similar to the IS. Primary cilium is
considered as a functional homologue of the IS due to the morphological and
functional similarities in architecture between both micotubule structures. It
has been hypothesized that endogenous electromagnetic field in the cell is
generated by a unique cooperating system between mitochondria and microtubules.
We are extending this prior hypothesis of the endogenous electromagnetic field in
the cell postulating that polarized centriole in immune and viral synapse could
serve as a monopole antenna. This is an addition to our hypothesis that primary
cilium could serve as a monopole antenna. We simulated the distribution of
electric field of centriole of polarized centrosome as a monopole antenna in
immune and viral synapse. Very weak electromagnetic field of polarized centriole 
of CD8+ T lymphocyte in IS can contribute to the transport of cytolytic granules 
into the attacked (cancer) cell. Analogically, very weak electromagnetic field of
polarized centriole in viral synapse of infected CD4 cells can aid the transport 
of viruses (human immunodeficiency virus) to non-infected CD4 cells. We
hypothesized that healthy organisms need these monopole antennas. If, during the 
neoplastic transformation, healthy cells lose monopole antennas in form of
primary cilia, the IS aims to replace them by monopole antennas of polarized
centrioles in IS to restore homeostasis.


PMID: 29745101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

