
1. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1985 Feb;11(2):235-9.

Rous sarcoma virus SRC gene expression on the growth of quail embryo skin
fibroblasts and the establishment of permanent cell lines.

Montarras D, Poupel O, Fiszman M, Marcovich H.

Permanent cell lines of Quail embryo fibroblasts appear in cultures of cells
infected with a wild type strain of Rous sarcoma virus (SR-RSV) or with its
temperature sensitive transformation mutants (ts-T) (NYts68 and PA101) following 
a three step process. In step one, infected cells grow twice as fast as the
control. The second step consists of a crisis during which the cell population is
stationary for four to five weeks. Towards the fourth week several foci of cell
growth are observed in the flasks. Respreading of the content of these flasks
yields permanent lines. This constitutes the third step of the population
evolution. In step one the growth rate of the infected cells is the same
irrespective of the incubation temperature (36 degrees C or 41 degrees C) whereas
the level of the pp60v-src activity is considerably depressed at 41 degrees C for
NYts68 and PA101. Foci do not appear at restrictive temperature in the ts
infected population and permanent lines are not recovered under that condition.
These lines grow ony at 36 degrees C. It can be shown that the virus which they
produce is not modified with respect to the temperature sensitivity of the src
gene expression since newly infected fibroblasts grow equally well in step one at
both 36 degrees C and 41 degrees C, and stop after the same number of
generations. This finding suggests that the events which, during the crisis
period, lead to the establishment of permanent lines, take place at the cellular 
level but depend on the activity of the pp60v-src protein for their occurrence or
their expression.

DOI: 10.1016/0360-3016(85)90144-0 
PMID: 2982767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

