
1. Curr Opin HIV AIDS. 2018 Sep;13(5):416-421. doi: 10.1097/COH.0000000000000484.

Lessons learned from HIV antiretroviral treatment interruption trials.

Wen Y(1)(2), Bar KJ(3), Li JZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)The First Affiliated Hospital, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning,
China.
(3)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Clinical trials with an antiretroviral therapy (ART)
interruption remains indispensable for assessing strategies for ART-free HIV
remission. This review highlights the lessons learned from ART interruption
studies so far, including the risks to the participants and implications for HIV 
remission.
RECENT FINDINGS: Historically, analytic HIV treatment interruption (ATI) studies 
were commonly designed with a prolonged duration of ART interruption and with
viral load set point as the primary outcome. For a variety of reasons, including 
participant risk, recent treatment interruption trials have frequently used time 
to viral rebound as the primary endpoint and have restarted ART once a
predetermined viral load threshold is reached. Through treatment interruption
trials, investigators have tested the efficacy of therapeutic and curative
strategies that showed promise in preclinical trials, including therapeutic
vaccines, latency-reversing agents, and broadly neutralizing antibodies. In most 
populations, ATI trials have been well tolerated, with few adverse clinical
events and no significant changes to the reservoir. Several reservoir predictors 
of HIV-rebound timing have been reported, with a subset of trials uncovering
posttreatment controllers who can maintain HIV remission despite ART
discontinuation.
SUMMARY: Treatment interruption trials are a vital tool, but their optimal design
remain uncertain and must balance participant risks with scientific rigor. The
ability to predict the timing or extent of HIV rebound and identify mechanisms of
posttreatment control may accelerate the development of novel therapeutics for
sustained HIV remission.

DOI: 10.1097/COH.0000000000000484 
PMID: 29878912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

