
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2018 Oct;37(10):1817-1827. doi:
10.1007/s10096-018-3289-4. Epub 2018 Jun 6.

Human respiratory syncytial virus: pathogenesis, immune responses, and current
vaccine approaches.

Taleb SA(1)(2), Al Thani AA(1)(2), Al Ansari K(3), Yassine HM(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Center, Qatar University, 2713, Doha, Qatar.
(2)College of Health Sciences, Qatar University, 2713, Doha, Qatar.
(3)Pediatric Emergency Center, Hamad Medical Corporation, 3050, Doha, Qatar.
(4)Biomedical Research Center, Qatar University, 2713, Doha, Qatar.
Hyassine@qu.edu.qa.
(5)College of Health Sciences, Qatar University, 2713, Doha, Qatar.
Hyassine@qu.edu.qa.

Respiratory syncytial virus continues to pose a serious threat to the pediatric
populations worldwide. With a genomic makeup of 15,200 nucleotides, the virus
encodes for 11 proteins serving as envelope spikes, inner envelope proteins, and 
non-structural and ribonucleocapsid complexes. The fusion (F) and attachment (G) 
surface glycoproteins are the key targets for neutralizing antibodies. The highly
variable G with altered glycosylations and the conformational alternations of F
create challenges for vaccine development. The metastable F protein is
responsible for RSV-host cell fusion and thus infectivity. Novel antigenic sites 
were identified on this form following its stabilization and solving its crystal 
structure. Importantly, site Ã¸ displays neutralizing activity exceeding those of 
post-F-specific and shared antigenic sites, such as site II which is the target
for Palivizumab therapeutic antibody. Induction of high neutralizing antibody
responses by pre-F immunization in animal models promoted it as a major vaccine
candidate. Since RSV infection is more serious at age extremities and in
individuals with undermining health conditions, vaccines are being developed to
target these populations. Infants below three months of age have a suppressive
immune system, making vaccines' immunogenicity weak. Therefore, a suggested
strategy to protect newborns from RSV infection would be through passive immunity
of maternal antibodies. Hence, pregnant women at their third trimester have been 
selected as an ideal target for vaccination with RSV pre-F vaccine. This review
summarizes the different modes of RSV pathogenesis and host's immune response to 
the infection, and illustrates on the latest updates of vaccine development and
vaccination approaches.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-018-3289-4 
PMID: 29876771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

