
1. J Cell Biochem. 2018 Nov;119(10):8290-8303. doi: 10.1002/jcb.26862. Epub 2018 Jun
20.

EndophilinA2 protects against angiotensin II-induced cardiac hypertrophy by
inhibiting angiotensin II type 1 receptor trafficking in neonatal rat
cardiomyocytes.

Liu Y(1)(2), Shen HJ(1), Wang XQ(1), Liu HQ(1), Zheng LY(3), Luo JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences and the Fifth
Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, P.R. China.
(2)Guangzhou Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Guangzhou Key Laboratory of
Cardiovascular Disease, and the Second Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical
University, Guangzhou, P.R. China.
(3)School of Basic Course, Guangdong Pharmaceutical University, Guangzhou, P.R.
China.

Cardiac hypertrophy is one of the major risk factors for chronic heart failure.
The role of endophilinA2 (EndoA2) in clathrin-mediated endocytosis and
clathrin-independent endocytosis is well documented. In the present study, we
tested the hypothesis that EndoA2 protects against angiotensin II (Ang
II)-induced cardiac hypertrophy by mediating intracellular angiotensin II type 1 
receptor (AT1-R) trafficking in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes (NRCMs). Cardiac
hypertrophy was evaluated by using cell surface area and quantitative RT-PCR
(qPCR) analyses. For the first time, we found that EndoA2 attenuated cardiac
hypertrophy and fibrosis induced by Ang II. Moreover, EndoA2 inhibited apoptosis 
induced by excessive endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS), which accounted for the 
beneficial effects of EndoA2 on cardiac hypertrophy. We further revealed that
there was an interaction between EndoA2 and AT1-R.The expression levels of
EndoA2, which inhibits AT1-R transport from the cytoplasm to the membrane, and
the interaction between EndoA2 and AT1-R were obviously decreased after Ang II
treatment. Furthermore, Ang II inhibited the co-localization of AT1-R with
GRP-78, which was reversed by EndoA2 overexpression. In conclusion, our results
suggested that EndoA2 plays a role in protecting against cardiac hypertrophy
induced by Ang II, possibly by inhibiting AT1-R transport from the cytoplasm to
the membrane to suppress signal transduction.

Â© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.26862 
PMID: 29923351  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

