
1. Vaccine. 2018 Aug 6;36(32 Pt B):4919-4926. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2018.06.052.
Epub 2018 Jun 30.

Efficacy of Ontario Rabies Vaccine Baits (ONRAB) against rabies infection in
raccoons.

Gilbert A(1), Johnson S(2), Walker N(3), Wickham C(4), Beath A(5), VerCauteren
K(6).

Author information: 
(1)National Wildlife Research Center, US Department of Agriculture, Animal and
Plant Health Inspection Service, Wildlife Services, 4101 Laporte Avenue, Fort
Collins, CO 80521, USA. Electronic address: amy.t.gilbert@usda.aphis.gov.
(2)National Wildlife Research Center, US Department of Agriculture, Animal and
Plant Health Inspection Service, Wildlife Services, 4101 Laporte Avenue, Fort
Collins, CO 80521, USA. Electronic address: shylo.r.johnson@aphis.usda.gov.
(3)National Wildlife Research Center, US Department of Agriculture, Animal and
Plant Health Inspection Service, Wildlife Services, 4101 Laporte Avenue, Fort
Collins, CO 80521, USA. Electronic address: nikki.walker@siu.edu.
(4)National Wildlife Research Center, US Department of Agriculture, Animal and
Plant Health Inspection Service, Wildlife Services, 4101 Laporte Avenue, Fort
Collins, CO 80521, USA. Electronic address: chad.k.wickham@aphis.usda.gov.
(5)Artemis Technologies, Inc., 51 Watson Rd, Guelph, Ontario N1L 1E3, Canada.
Electronic address: abeath@artemiswildlifebaits.com.
(6)National Wildlife Research Center, US Department of Agriculture, Animal and
Plant Health Inspection Service, Wildlife Services, 4101 Laporte Avenue, Fort
Collins, CO 80521, USA. Electronic address: kurt.c.vercauteren@aphis.usda.gov.

In the US, rabies lyssavirus (RABV) only circulates in wildlife species and the
most significant reservoir from a public and animal health perspective is the
raccoon (Procyon lotor). Management of wildlife rabies relies principally on oral
rabies vaccination (ORV) strategies using vaccine-laden bait delivery to
free-ranging target hosts, in order to reduce the susceptible population to
prevent the spread of and eliminate RABV circulation. Our objective was to
evaluate efficacy of the Ontario Rabies Vaccine Bait (ONRAB) against a lethal
RABV challenge in captive raccoons. Sham or live vaccine baits were offered to 50
raccoons and efficacy was evaluated in 46, split into two trials of 17 and 29
raccoons. Raccoons were challenged with a lethal dose of RABV 180 days
post-vaccination and observed for 90 days post-infection. Raccoon bait
interactions were assigned increasing integer scores for approach, oral
manipulation, puncture, and consumption behaviors. Higher bait interaction scores
were observed in the fall compared to the spring trial, indicating that more
raccoons consumed baits in the fall. Although animal age did not explain
variation in bait interaction scores, the geometric mean rabies virus antibody
titers among juvenile vaccinates were higher than adults at all pre-challenge
time points. The prevented fraction associated with ONRAB delivery was 0.73
(8/11, 95% CI 0.39-0.94) in the spring trial and 0.91 (21/23, 95% CI 0.72-0.99)
in the fall trial. All sham-vaccinated raccoons (12/12) succumbed to rabies
infection, in contrast to 15% (5/34) mortality among vaccinated raccoons. Our
results indicate a high efficacy of ONRAB bait vaccination in protecting adult
and juvenile raccoons against RABV infection for a minimum of six months. These
data complement experimental field trials that have also demonstrated the
potential of ONRAB for the control and prevention of RABV circulation in
free-ranging raccoon populations in the US.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2018.06.052 
PMID: 30037482  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

