
1. J Cell Physiol. 2018 Jan;234(1):915-926. doi: 10.1002/jcp.26920. Epub 2018 Aug 1.

H19 regulates the proliferation of bovine male germline stem cells via IGF-1
signaling pathway.

Lei Q(1), Pan Q(1), Li N(1), Zhou Z(1), Zhang J(1), He X(1), Peng S(1), Li G(2), 
Sidhu K(3), Chen S(1), Hua J(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Shaanxi Centre of Stem Cells Engineering and
Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and Biotechnology of the
Ministry of Education, College of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University,
Hohhot, China.
(3)Centre for Healthy Brain Ageing, UNSW Medicine, High St Randwick, NSW,
Australia.

Self-renewal and differentiation of male germline stem cells (mGSCs) provide the 
basic function for continual spermatogenesis. Studies of in vitro culture of
germline stem cells are important and meaningful for basic biological research
and practical application. Growth factors, such as GDNF, bFGF, CSF1, and EGF,
could maintain the self-renewal of mGSCs. Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1),
an important growth factor, and its pathway have been reported to maintain the
survival of several types of stem cells and play important roles in male
reproduction. However, the mechanism through which the IGF-1 pathway acts to
regulate the self-renewal of mGSCs remains unclear. We analyzed the effect of
IGF-1 on the proliferation and apoptosis of bovine mGSCs. We evaluated the
expression profile of long noncoding RNA (LncRNA) H19 in bovine and mouse
tissues. Moreover, we investigated whether LncRNA H19 could regulate the IGF-1
pathway. Results showed that IGF-1 could activate the phosphorylation of AKT and 
ERK signaling pathways, and the IGF-1 pathway played an important role in
regulating the proliferation and apoptosis of bovine mGSCs. The proliferation
rate of mGSCs decreased, whereas the apoptosis rate of mGSCs increased when the
IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) was blocked using the IGF-1R-specific inhibitor
(picropodophyllin). LncRNA H19 could regulate the IGF-1 signaling pathway and,
consequently, the proliferation and apoptosis of mGSCs. The number of cells in
the seminiferous tubule decreased when H19 was interfered by injecting a
virus-containing supernatant. Hence, LncRNA H19 participated in the regulation of
the proliferation and apoptosis of mGSCs via the IGF-1 signaling pathway.

Â© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.26920 
PMID: 30069947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

