
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2018 Nov;65:321-328. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.07.038. Epub
2018 Jul 31.

Distribution and characterization of Shiga toxin converting temperate phages
carried by Shigella flexneri in Hispaniola.

Fogolari M(1), Mavian C(2), Angeletti S(3), Salemi M(4), Lampel KA(5), Maurelli
AT(6).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Clinical Laboratory Science, University Campus Bio-Medico of Rome,
Rome, Italy; Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL, USA.
(2)Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA;
Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(3)Unit of Clinical Laboratory Science, University Campus Bio-Medico of Rome,
Rome, Italy.
(4)Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA;
Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. Electronic address: salemi@pathology.ufl.edu.
(5)US Food and Drug Administration, Laurel, MD, USA.
(6)Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA;
Department of Environmental and Global Health, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA. Electronic address: amaurelli@phhp.ufl.edu.

Shigella infections account for a considerable burden of acute diarrheal diseases
worldwide and remain a major cause of childhood mortality in developing
countries. Although, all four species of Shigella (S. dysenteriae, S. flexneri,
S. boydii, and S. sonnei) cause bacillary dysentery, historically only S.
dysenteriae type 1 has been recognized as carrying the genes for Shiga toxin
(stx). Recent epidemiological data, however, have suggested that the emergence of
stx carrying S. flexneri strains may have originated from bacteriophage-mediated 
inter-species horizontal gene transfer in one specific geographical area,
Hispaniola. To test this hypothesis, we analyzed whole genome sequences of
stx-encoding phages carried by S. flexneri strains isolated in Haiti and S.
flexneri S. boydii and S. dysenteriae strains isolated from international
travelers who likely acquired the infection in Haiti or the Dominican Republic.
Phylogenetic analysis showed that phage sequences encoded in the Shigella strains
from Hispaniola were bacteriophage φPOC-J13 and they were all closely related to 
a phage isolated from a USA isolate, E. coli 2009C-3133 serotype O119:H4. In
addition, despite the low genetic heterogeneity of phages from different Shigella
spp. circulating in the Caribbean island between 2001 and 2014, two distinct
clusters emerged in Haiti and the Dominican Republic. Each cluster possibly
originated from phages isolated from S. flexneri 2a, and within each cluster
several instances of horizontal phage transfer from S. flexneri 2a to other
species were detected. The implications of the emergence of stx-producing non-S. 
dysenteriae type 1 Shigella species, such as S. flexneri, spans not only the
basic science behind horizontal phage spread, but also extends to medical
treatment of patients infected with this pathogen.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.07.038 
PMCID: PMC6260934
PMID: 30075254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

