
1. FEMS Yeast Res. 2018 Dec 1;18(8). doi: 10.1093/femsyr/foy086.

Efficient co-expression of multiple enzymes from a single promoter mediated by
virus 2A sequence in the oleaginous yeast Rhodosporidium toruloides.

Jiao X(1)(2), Zhang Q(1)(2), Zhang S(1), Yang X(1), Wang Q(1), Zhao ZK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, CAS, 457
Zhongshan Road, Dalian 116023, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 19 Yuquan Lu, Beijing 100049,
China.

The red yeast Rhodosporidium toruloide is a versatile host for production of
lipids and carotenoids. Genetic tools are underdeveloped for red yeasts due to
their unique genetics and physiology. Currently expression of a heterogonous gene
in red yeasts is largely based on integration of the designed cassette by
Agrobacterium mediated transformation, yet this method is somewhat restricted
when multiple genes are required to be expressed due to the lack of functional
genetic elements. Here we demonstrate that virus 2A sequence is effective to
mediate co-expression of multiple enzymes in R. toruloides. Two different 2A
sequences, Porcine teschovirus-1 2A (P2A) and foot-and-mouth disease virus 2A
(F2A), were evaluated. It was found that P2A sequence was more effective for
co-expression of two antibiotic selection markers. Co-expression of three
antibiotic resistance proteins was successful from a single promoter mediated by 
P2A sequence. When three heterogeneous enzymes responsible for β-carotene
biosynthesis were co-expressed, recombinant R. toruloides strains produced up to 
4.5-fold more β-carotene than that of the parental one. The use of 2A sequence
can facilitate cassette construction to engineer advanced cell factories for
production of lipids and related oleochemicals.

DOI: 10.1093/femsyr/foy086 
PMID: 30085062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

