
1. J Virol. 1987 Oct;61(10):2973-80.

Effects of position and orientation of the 72-base-pair-repeat transcriptional
enhancer on replication from the simian virus 40 core origin.

Chandrasekharappa SC, Subramanian KN.

A number of recent studies have reported that in papovaviruses such as simian
virus 40 (SV40) and polyomavirus, the replication of the viral DNA in vivo is
activated by the viral transcriptional enhancer or promoter sequences. Both viral
and cellular transcriptional enhancers are well known for their ability to
activate transcription in a position- and orientation-independent manner. In the 
present study, we investigated the effect of the position and orientation of the 
SV40 72-base-pair (bp) repeat enhancer on its replication activation function. We
constructed plasmids containing one copy each of the SV40 core origin and
enhancer placed in either order and orientation and at different distances from
each other. We assayed the replication efficiencies of these plasmids in the
presence of an internal control plasmid in COS-1 monkey kidney cells producing
the SV40 T antigen required for replication. We found that the 72-bp repeat was
capable of activating replication equally well in either orientation when placed 
8 or 9 bp from the core origin. The activation of replication was totally
abolished, and replication efficiencies in most instances were found to be lower 
than that obtained with the core origin alone, when the 72-bp repeat was
separated from the core origin by distances of 99 bp or more. This was in direct 
contrast to the situation with polyomavirus, in which activation of replication
by the homologous enhancer or by the SV40 72-bp repeat enhancer is known to be
position independent. We also found that when the SV40 core origin and the 72-bp 
repeat enhancer were adjacent to each other, efficient activation of replication 
was obtained only if the end of the core origin containing the 17-bp A + T block 
was linked with the enhancer. In the other orientation of the core origin,
activation of replication was either diminished or abolished. Hypotheses such as 
alteration of chromatin structure by the enhancer and interaction between
trans-acting factors binding to the enhancer and the core origin mediating the
activation effect are discussed.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.61.10.2973-2980.1987 
PMCID: PMC255869
PMID: 3041016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

