
1. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2018;51(4):1763-1777. doi: 10.1159/000495680. Epub 2018 Nov
30.

miR-10b Downregulated by DNA Methylation Acts as a Tumor Suppressor in
HPV-Positive Cervical Cancer via Targeting Tiam1.

Yu M(1), Xu Y(2), Pan L(1), Feng Y(1), Luo K(3), Mu Q(1), Luo G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Laboratory, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Changzhou, China.
(2)Gynecology Department, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Changzhou, China.
(3)Endocrine Department, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Changzhou, China.
(4)Comprehensive Laboratory, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Changzhou, Chinashineroar@163.com.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: microRNAs (miRNAs) are known to act as oncogenes or tumor
suppressors in diverse cancers. Although miR-10b is an oncogene implicated in
many tumors, its role in cervical cancer (CC) remains largely unclear. Here, we
investigated the function and underlying mechanisms of miR-10b in human CC.
METHODS: Quantitative RT-PCR was used to measure miR-10b expression in CC and
normal tissues, and its association with clinicopathologic features was analyzed.
Methylation of CpG sites in the miR-10b promoter was analyzed by methylation
sequencing. Cell proliferation, apoptosis, migration, and invasion assays were
used to elucidate the biological effects of miR-10b and expression of the target 
gene was assayed with Western blot.
RESULTS: miR-10b was downregulated in CC tissues compared with normal tissues,
and less miR-10b expression was associated with larger tumors, vascular invasion 
and HPV-type 16 positivity. miR-10b expression decreased in HeLa (HPV18-positive)
and SiHa (HPV16-positive) cells compared with C-33A (HPV-negative), but increased
after treatment with 5-Aza-CdR. Methylation ratio of site -797 in the miR-10b
promoter in C-33A was lower than that in HeLa and SiHa. Further analysis
indicates that site -797 is located within a transcription factor AP-2A (TFAP2A) 
binding element. Functionally, overexpression of miR-10b in HeLa and SiHa
suppressed cell proliferation, migration and invasion, and induced apoptosis and 
miR-10b downregulation had opposite effects. Mechanistically, T-cell lymphoma
invasion and metastasis 1 (Tiam1) was identified as a direct and functional
target of miR-10b.
CONCLUSION: miR-10b acts as a tumor suppressor in CC by suppressing oncogenic
Tiam1, and its expression may be downregulated through methylation of TFAP2A
binding element by HPV.

Â© 2018 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000495680 
PMID: 30504727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

