
1. Mol Plant Pathol. 2019 May;20(5):611-625. doi: 10.1111/mpp.12780. Epub 2019 Jan
29.

Rescue of Citrus sudden death-associated virus in Nicotiana benthamiana plants
from cloned cDNA: insights into mechanisms of expression of the three capsid
proteins.

Matsumura EE(1), Coletta-Filho HD(2), Machado MA(2), Nouri S(3), Falk BW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of California, Davis, CA, 95616,
USA.
(2)Centro de Citricultura Sylvio Moreira, Instituto Agronômico de Campinas,
Cordeirópolis, SP, 13490-970, Brazil.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, 66506, 
USA.

Citrus sudden death-associated virus (CSDaV) is a member of the genus Marafivirus
in the family Tymoviridae, and has been associated with citrus sudden death (CSD)
disease in Brazil. Difficulties in the purification of CSDaV from infected citrus
plants have prevented progress in the investigation of the role of this virus in 
CSD and an understanding of its molecular biology. In this work, we have
constructed a full-length cDNA clone of CSDaV driven by the 35S promoter
(35SRbz-CSDaV). Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated inoculation of 35SRbz-CSDaV in
Nicotiana benthamiana plants enabled a fast recovery of large amounts of virions 
from the agroinfiltrated leaves, which allowed a better molecular
characterization of CSDaV. In vivo analyses of mutant versions of 35SRbz-CSDaV
revealed the expression strategies used by CSDaV for production of the capsid
proteins (CPs). We showed that CSDaV virions contain three forms of CP, each of
which is generated from the same coding sequence, but by different mechanisms.
The major CPp21 is a product of direct translation by leaky scanning from the
second start codon in the subgenomic RNA (sgRNA), whereas the minor CPs, p25 and 
p23, are produced by direct translation from the first start codon in the sgRNA
and by trans-proteolytic cleavage processing derived from the p25 precursor,
respectively. Together, these findings contribute to advance our understanding of
CSDaV genome expression strategies. In addition, the construction and
characterization of the CSDaV infectious clone represent important steps towards 
the investigation of the role of this virus in CSD and of its use as a tool for
citrus biotechnology.

© 2018 The Authors. Molecular Plant Pathology Published by British Society for
Plant Pathology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mpp.12780 
PMCID: PMC6637869
PMID: 30575252  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

