
1. Arch Virol. 2019 Mar;164(3):917-921. doi: 10.1007/s00705-018-04135-3. Epub 2019
Jan 21.

Genome sequence of Bacillus anthracis typing phage AP631.

Liu X(1), Wang D(1), Pan C(1), Feng E(1), Fan H(2), Li M(2), Zhu L(1), Tong Y(3),
Wang H(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pathogens and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of
Biotechnology, 20 Dongdajie Street, Fengtai District, Beijing, 100071, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Pathogens and Biosecurity, Institute of Microbiology
and Epidemiology, 20 Dongdajie Street, Fengtai District, Beijing, 100071, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Pathogens and Biosecurity, Institute of Microbiology
and Epidemiology, 20 Dongdajie Street, Fengtai District, Beijing, 100071, China. 
tong.yigang@gmail.com.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Pathogens and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of
Biotechnology, 20 Dongdajie Street, Fengtai District, Beijing, 100071, China.
wanghl@nic.bmi.ac.cn.

AP631, a virulent bacteriophage of Bacillus anthracis, is widely used in China to
identify anthrax bacteria. In this study, we report the complete AP631 phage
genome sequence as well as comparative genomic analysis with other bacteriophages
of B. cereus and related species. The double-stranded circular DNA genome of
phage AP631 was 39,549 bp in length with 35.01% G + C content. The phage genome
contained 56 putative protein-coding genes but no rRNA or tRNA genes. Comparative
phylogenetic analysis of the phage major capsid proteins and terminase large
subunits showed that phage AP631 belongs to the B. cereus sensu lato phage clade 
II. Comparative genomic analysis revealed a high degree of sequence similarity
between phage AP631 and B. anthracis phages Wbeta, Gamma, Cherry, and Fah, as
well as three AP631-specific genes bearing no significant similarity to those of 
other phages.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-018-04135-3 
PMCID: PMC6394722
PMID: 30666457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

