
1. Plant Dis. 1999 Nov;83(11):1074. doi: 10.1094/PDIS.1999.83.11.1074C.

First Report of Tomato Yellow Leaf Curl Geminivirus in Morocco.

Peterschmitt M(1), Granier M(1), Aboulama S(2).

Author information: 
(1)CIRAD, BP 5035, 34032 Montpellier Cedex 1, France.
(2)SASMA, 206, All√©e des Jardins, Ain Sebaa, Casablanca 20.251, Morocco.

In July 1998, shortened internodes, reduced leaf size, leaf curling, and bushy
plants were observed in tomato crops in the coastal region near Casablanca,
Morocco. The symptoms were similar to those described for tomato yellow leaf curl
virus (TYLCV) disease. During September, the disease was present in more than 130
ha of outdoor and protected crops. Economic losses ranged between 20 and 100%.
Similar symptoms were observed in tomato crops in the northeastern region of
Morocco. During the same period, high populations of Bemisia tabaci (Gennadius)
were observed on tomato, sweet pepper, and several weeds, including Sonchus
oleraceus L., Chenopodium sp., Malva parviflora L., and Datura stramonium L.
Attempts to control whiteflies with insecticides generally were unsuccessful.
Using a pair of degenerate primers (3) that are expected to amplify a region of
the A component of begomoviruses between the intergenic conserved nonanucleotide 
sequence and the first 5' quarter of the capsid protein gene, an expected size
product of 500 bp was obtained from six tomato leaf samples collected near
Casablanca: four were obtained from symptomatic plants and two from apparently
symptomless plants. A product of the same size was obtained from a sample of
tomato infected with a TYLCV isolate from Reunion Island, France (2), but not
from a sample from symptomless tomato plants from Reunion. The polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) product obtained from one symptomatic sample from Morocco was
cloned and sequenced (2). The resulting sequence (EMBL no. AJ133491) was at least
95.2% identical to sequences of TYLCV isolates from the Dominican Republic (EMBL 
no. AF024715), Cuba (EMBL no. AJ223505), Israel (EMBL no. X15656; EMBL no. X76319
for the mild clone), Spain (EMBL no. AF071228), and Reunion (EMBL no. AJ010790). 
Based on sequence comparisons, the tomato leaf sample was infected by a
geminivirus isolate belonging to the Israeli species of TYLCV and was most
closely related to the Dominican Republic isolate (98.4% nucleotide identity). In
symptomless plants from which a 500-bp PCR product was obtained, infection may
have been in an early stage. This is consistent with the fact that in the 2-ha
field from which tomato samples were collected, only 4% of the plants exhibited
TYLCV symptoms at the time of collection, whereas at least 70% of plants showed
symptoms later, requiring the farmer to abandon the crop. The presence of the
Eastern Mediterranean TYLCV species in a Western Mediterranean country is not a
new observation; this virus has been described in Spain and Portugal (1). In
Morocco, TYLCV symptoms were observed during the 1996 to 1997 growing season,
following importation of grafted tomato plants from the Netherlands, by a farmer 
from the Casablanca region. References: (1) J. Navas-Castillo et al. Plant Dis.
83:29, 1999. (2) M. Peterschmitt et al. Plant Dis. 83:303, 1999. (3) P. Umaharan 
et al. Phytopathology 88:1262, 1998.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS.1999.83.11.1074C 
PMID: 30841294 

