
1. Gastroenterol Res Pract. 2019 Mar 7;2019:6156581. doi: 10.1155/2019/6156581.
eCollection 2019.

A Practical Review of Cytomegalovirus in Gastroenterology and Hepatology.

Fakhreddine AY(1), Frenette CT(1)(2), Konijeti GG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Scripps Clinic, La Jolla, CA,
USA.
(2)Division of Organ Transplantation, Scripps Green Hospital and Scripps Clinic, 
La Jolla, CA, USA.

Human cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a ubiquitous Herpesviridae virus with a wide
spectrum of pathology in humans. Host immunity is a major determinant of the
clinical manifestation of CMV and can vary widely in the gastroenterology and
hepatology practice setting. Immunocompetent patients generally develop a benign,
self-limited mononucleosis-like syndrome whereas gastrointestinal tissue-invasive
disease is more frequently seen in immunocompromised and inflammatory bowel
disease patients. Additionally, liver allograft dysfunction is a significant
consequence of CMV infection in liver transplant patients. While polymerase chain
reaction and immunohistochemistry techniques allow for the reliable and accurate 
detection of CMV in the human host, the diagnostic value of different serologic, 
endoscopic, and histologic tests depends on a variety of factors. Similarly,
latent CMV, CMV infection, and CMV disease carry different significance depending
on the patient population, and the decision to initiate antiviral therapy can be 
complex and patient-specific. This review will focus on the pathophysiology,
diagnosis, and management of CMV in patient populations relevant to the practice 
of gastroenterology and hepatology-liver transplant recipients, inflammatory
bowel disease patients, and otherwise immunocompetent patients.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/6156581 
PMCID: PMC6431500
PMID: 30984257 

