
1. Prep Biochem Biotechnol. 2019;49(9):900-907. doi: 10.1080/10826068.2019.1636279. 
Epub 2019 Jul 4.

Electrochemical nucleic acid hybridization biosensor based on poly(L-Aspartic
acid)-modified electrode for the detection of short oligonucleotide sequences
related to hepatitis C virus 1a.

Donmez S(1), Çağdaş L(2), Arslan H(2), Arslan F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bucak School of Health, Burdur Mehmet Akif Ersoy University , Burdur , Turkey.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Gazi University , Ankara ,
Turkey.

This work describes, for the first time, the fabrication of poly(L-aspartic acid)
(PAA) film modified pencil graphite electrode (PGE) for the detection of
hepatitis C Virus 1a (HCV1a). The presence of PAA on the electrode surface can
provide free carboxyl groups for covalent binding of biomolecules. The PGE
surface was first coated with PAA via electropolymerization of the L-aspartic
acid, and avidin was subsequently attached to the PAA modified electrode by
covalent attachment. Biotinylated HCV1a probes were immobilized on avidin/PAA/PGE
via avidin-biotin interaction. The morphology of PAA/PGE was examined using a
scanning electron microscope. The hybridization events were monitored with square
wave voltammetry using Meldola's blue (MDB). Compared to non-complementary
oligonucleotide sequences, when hybridization was carried out between the probe
and its synthetic targets or the synthetic polymerase chain reaction analog of
HCV1a, the highest MDB signal was observed. The linear range of the biosensor was
12.5 to 100 nM and limit of detection was calculated as 8.7 nM. The biosensor
exhibited favorable stability over relatively long-term storage. All these
results suggest that PAA-modified electrode can be used to nucleic acid biosensor
application and electropolymerization of L-aspartic acid can be considered as a
good candidate for the immobilization of biomolecules.

DOI: 10.1080/10826068.2019.1636279 
PMID: 31271333  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

