
1. Epidemiol Infect. 2019 Jan;147:e213. doi: 10.1017/S095026881900102X.

Prior exposure to immunogenic peptides found in human influenza A viruses may
influence the age distribution of cases with avian influenza H5N1 and H7N9 virus 
infections.

Komadina N(1), Sullivan SG(2), Kedzierska K(3), Qui√±ones-Parra SM(4), Leder K(5),
McVernon J(6).

Author information: 
(1)WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza,Royal
Melbourne Hospital at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and
Immunity,Victoria,3000,Australia; andSchool of Public Health and Preventive
Medicine,Monash University,553 St Kilda Road,Melbourne,Australia.
(2)WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza,Royal
Melbourne Hospital and the Doherty Department,University of Melbourne at the
Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity,Victoria,3000,Australia;
andMelbourne School of Population and Global Health,The University of
Melbourne,Melbourne,3000,Australia.
(3)Department of Microbiology & Immunology,University of Melbourne at the Peter
Doherty Institute for Infection & Immunity,Victoria,3000,Australia.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology,University of California,San
Diego,California,USA.
(5)School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine,Monash University,553 St Kilda
Road,Melbourne,Australia; andVictorian Infectious Disease Service,Royal Melbourne
Hospital at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and
Immunity,Victoria,3000,Australia.
(6)Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory Epidemiology Unit, Royal
Melbourne Hospital and the Doherty Department,University of Melbourne at the
Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and
Immunity,Victoria,3000,Australia;Melbourne School of Population and Global
Health,The University of Melbourne,Melbourne,3000,Australiaandthe Murdoch
Children's Research Institute,Melbourne,3000,Australia.

The epidemiology of H5N1 and H7N9 avian viruses of humans infected in China
differs despite both viruses being avian reassortants that have inherited six
internal genes from a common ancestor, H9N2. The median age of infected
populations is substantially younger for H5N1 virus (26 years) compared with H7N9
virus (63 years). Population susceptibility to infection with seasonal influenza 
is understood to be influenced by cross-reactive CD8+ T cells directed towards
immunogenic peptides derived from internal viral proteins which may provide some 
level of protection against further influenza infection. Prior exposure to
seasonal influenza peptides may influence the age-related infection patterns
observed for H5N1 and H7N9 viruses. A comparison of relatedness of immunogenic
peptides between historical human strains and the two avian emerged viruses was
undertaken for a possible explanation in the differences in age incidence
observed. There appeared to be some relationship between past exposure to related
peptides and the lower number of H5N1 virus cases in older populations, however
the relationship between prior exposure and older populations among H7N9 virus
patients was less clear.

DOI: 10.1017/S095026881900102X 
PMCID: PMC6624876
PMID: 31364549  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

