
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Aug 27;9(1):12445. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-47447-3.

Deformed wing virus type A, a major honey bee pathogen, is vectored by the mite
Varroa destructor in a non-propagative manner.

Posada-Florez F(1), Childers AK(2), Heerman MC(2), Egekwu NI(2), Cook SC(2), Chen
Y(2), Evans JD(2), Ryabov EV(3).

Author information: 
(1)USDA, Agricultural Research Service, Bee Research Lab, Beltsville, MD, USA.
Francisco.Posada@ars.usda.gov.
(2)USDA, Agricultural Research Service, Bee Research Lab, Beltsville, MD, USA.
(3)USDA, Agricultural Research Service, Bee Research Lab, Beltsville, MD, USA.
Eugene.Ryabov@gmail.com.

Honey bees, the primary managed insect pollinator, suffer considerable losses due
to Deformed wing virus (DWV), an RNA virus vectored by the mite Varroa
destructor. Mite vectoring has resulted in the emergence of virulent DWV
variants. The basis for such changes in DWV is poorly understood. Most
importantly, it remains unclear whether replication of DWV occurs in the mite. In
this study, we exposed Varroa mites to DWV type A via feeding on artificially
infected honey bees. A significant, 357-fold increase in DWV load was observed in
these mites after 2 days. However, after 8 additional days of passage on honey
bee pupae with low viral loads, the DWV load dropped by 29-fold. This decrease
significantly reduced the mites' ability to transmit DWV to honey bees. Notably, 
negative-strand DWV RNA, which could indicate viral replication, was detected
only in mites collected from pupae with high DWV levels but not in the passaged
mites. We also found that Varroa mites contain honey bee mRNAs, consistent with
the acquisition of honey bee cells which would additionally contain DWV
replication complexes with negative-strand DWV RNA. We propose that transmission 
of DWV type A by Varroa mites occurs in a non-propagative manner.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-47447-3 
PMCID: PMC6712216
PMID: 31455863 

