
1. Phytopathology. 2020 Jan;110(1):164-173. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-07-19-0229-FI. Epub
2019 Nov 29.

HCPro Suppression of Callose Deposition Contributes to Strain-Specific Resistance
Against Potato Virus Y.

Chowdhury RN(1), Lasky D(1), Karki H(2), Zhang Z(1)(3), Goyer A(4), Halterman
D(2), Rakotondrafara AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, U.S.A.
(2)U.S. Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service, Madison, WI
53706, U.S.A.
(3)Ministry of Agriculture Key Laboratory of Pest Monitoring and Green
Management, College of Plant Protection, China Agricultural University, Beijing
100193, China.
(4)Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Hermiston Agricultural Research and 
Extension Center, Oregon State University, Hermiston, OR 97838, U.S.A.

Potato virus Y (PVY; Potyviridae) is a continuing challenge for potato production
owing to the increasing popularity of strain-specific resistant cultivars.
Hypersensitive resistance (HR) is one type of plant defense responses to restrict
virus spread. In many potato cultivars, such as cultivar Premier Russet (PR),
local necrosis at the site of infection protects against the most common PVYO
strain, but the HR often fails to restrain necrotic strains, which spread
systemically. Here, we established the role of callose accumulation in the
strain-specific resistance responses to PVY infection. We first uncovered that
PVY, independent of the strain, is naturally capable of suppressing
pathogenesis-related callose formation in a susceptible host. Such activity can
be dissociated from viral replication by the transient expression of the
viral-encoded helper component proteinase (HCPro) protein, identifying it as the 
pathogen elicitor. However, unlike the necrotic strain, PVYO and its
corresponding HCPro are unable to block callose accumulation in resistant PR
potatoes, in which we observed an abundance of callose deposition and the
inability of the virus to spread. The substitution of eight amino acid residues
within the HCPro C-terminal region that differ between PVYO and PVYN strains and 
were previously shown to be responsible for eliciting the HR response, are
sufficient to restore the ability of HCProO to suppress callose accumulation,
despite the resistant host background, in line with a new viral function in
pathogenicity.

DOI: 10.1094/PHYTO-07-19-0229-FI 
PMID: 31532352  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

