
1. Am J Epidemiol. 2019 Nov 1;188(11):1994-2003. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwz190.

Inflammation and Risk of Depression in HIV: Prospective Findings From the
Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study.

Lu H, Surkan PJ, Irwin MR, Treisman GJ, Breen EC, Sacktor N, Stall R, Wolinsky
SM, Jacobson LP, Abraham AG.

Studies suggest that inflammation might be involved in the pathogenesis of
depression. Individuals with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) have a higher
risk of depression and elevated inflammatory profiles. Despite this, research on 
the link between inflammation and depression among this high-risk population is
limited. We examined a sample of men who have sex with men from the Multicenter
AIDS Cohort Study in prospective analyses of the association between inflammation
and clinically relevant depression symptoms, defined as scores >20 on Center for 
Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale. We included 1,727 participants who
contributed 9,287 person-visits from 1984 to 2010 (8,218 with HIV (HIV+) and
1,069 without (HIV-)). Exploratory factor analysis (EFA) was used to characterize
underlying inflammatory processes from 19 immune markers. Logistic regression
with generalized estimating equations was used to evaluate associations between
inflammatory processes and depressive symptoms stratified by HIV serostatus.
Three EFA-identified inflammatory processes (EIPs) were identified. EIP-1
scores-described by soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 (sTNF-R2), soluble
interleukin-2 receptor α (sIL-2Rα), sCD27, B-cell activating factor, interferon
γ-induced protein 10 (IP-10), soluble interleukin-6 receptor (sIL-6R), sCD14, and
sGP130-were significantly associated with 9% higher odds of depressive symptoms
in HIV+ participants (odds ratio = 1.09; 95% confidence interval: 1.03, 1.16) and
33% higher odds in HIV- participants (odds ratio = 1.33; 95% confidence interval:
1.09, 1.61). Findings suggest that immune activation might be involved in
depression risk among both HIV+ and HIV- men who have sex with men.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwz190 
PMCID: PMC6825834 [Available on 2020-11-01]
PMID: 31642472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

