
1. J Hered. 1988 Jul-Aug;79(4):249-56.

Characterization of two distinct disulfide-linked B-G molecules in the chicken.

Kline K(1), Briles WE, Bacon L, Sanders BG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutrition, University of Texas, Austin 78712.

Alloantisera specific for B-G antigens recognized a complex of molecules of
apparent molecular weights of 90 and 98 Kd under nonreducing conditions and
molecules of 40, 44, and 48 Kd under reducing conditions on both embryo- and
adult-derived peripheral red blood cells (RBC). The chicken B-G molecules
produced a unique two-dimensional "diagonal" pattern. Two antisera permitted the 
characterization of the complex B-G molecular profile as a homodimer composed of 
48-Kd subunits and as a heterodimer composed of 40- and 44-Kd subunits. A rabbit 
antiserum produced against B-G molecules preferentially recognized the 48-Kd
reduced molecules, suggesting that the 90-Kd molecule was a homodimer composed of
two 48-Kd molecules. One B-G reagent was capable of recognizing only the 98-Kd
nonreduced B-G molecule that gave rise to 40- and 44-Kd molecules under reducing 
conditions, suggesting that the 98-Kd molecule was a heterodimer composed of 44- 
and 40-Kd subunits. Adult chicken B-G2 molecules produced a variety of
two-dimensional isoelectric focusing/sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (IEF/SDS-PAGE) patterns depending on the characteristics of the
reagent employed in the immunoprecipitation. B-G molecules were
immunoprecipitated from primitive and definitive chicken RBCs but not from any
nonerythroid cells tested. B-G molecules were not expressed by avian
erythroblastosis virus (AEV)-transformed erythroleukemia cells, nor were they
induced to appear with butyric acid-induced erythroid differentiation.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jhered.a110505 
PMID: 3166482  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

