
1. J Virol. 1973 Dec;12(6):1540-7.

Mason-Pfizer virus characterization: a similar virus in a human amniotic cell
line.

Parks WP, Gilden RV, Bykovsky AF, Miller GG, Zhdanov VM, Soloviev VD, Scolnick
EM.

Mason-Pfizer monkey virus (MP-MV) is a RNA virus with an RNA-instructed DNA
polymerase first isolated from a rhesus monkey mammary adenocarcinoma in 1970.
Until recently, there have been no other isolates. A continuous human amnion cell
line, AO, was found to be producing a virus indistinguishable or closely related 
to the Mason-Pfizer virus as measured by morphological, immunological, and
biochemical methods. By thin-section electron microscopy, the extracellular virus
particle in AO line is 115 to 130 nm in diameter and has a preformed nucleoid (80
to 90 nm) before budding, properties which are also characteristic of MP-MV. Two 
proteins of the virus from the AO line were studied. By immunodiffusion, sera
which react specifically with MP-MV give a line of identity with virus from the
AO line. The AO viral RNA-instructed DNA polymerase purified by phosphocellulose 
chromatography was specifically inhibited by anti-MP-MV polymerase sera, and the 
AO cells contained both DNA and RNA sequences related to MP-MV (3)H-DNA. Viruses 
thus far indistinguishable from MP-MV have also recently been found by others in 
different human lines, raising again the question of the species of origin of
MP-MV. Because the virus in the AO cells cannot be differentiated from MP-MV, we 
attempted to determine the origin of MP-MV virus by measuring DNA sequences
related to MP-MV (3)H-DNA in uninfected human and rhesus monkey cells. The
quantity of MP-MV-like DNA sequences in uninfected primate tissues was found to
be much lower than the amount of DNA sequences of murine type-B or type-C viruses
in uninfected murine tissues. Thus, it was not possible to determine whether the 
virus produced by AO cells or MP-MV was of human or monkey origin, or both.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.12.6.1540-1547.1973 
PMCID: PMC356797
PMID: 4128382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

