
1. Schweiz Med Wochenschr. 1983 Apr 9;113(14):488-92.

[Hepatitis B infection: studies on endemic disease in the closed ward of a
psychiatric hospital].

[Article in German]

Graf HP, Burkhardt F, Bircher J, Preisig R.

Following the occurrence of 3 cases of icteric hepatitis in the period August
1980 to January 1981 in a closed male ward for mentally retarded patients in a
psychiatric institution, the present study was undertaken to determine the type, 
investigate the source and reconstruct the sequence of viral infection, and to
make recommendations for its containment. For this purpose, serologic markers for
HAV and HBV (including anti HBcIgM) were determined and serum transaminase (AST) 
measured in March 1981 in all 24 patients (mean age 40) and in the 39 members of 
the medical, nursing and housekeeping staff (mean age 39). Subsequently, HAV and 
HBV serologies were repeated after 6 and 9 months respectively. The propositus
(B.F.) and the two subsequent cases with overt hepatitis (F.P. and K.E.) showed
the serologic constellation of positive HBs, HBe and anti HBcIgM, together with
elevated AST levels (600, 800 and 200 I.U. respectively) at the time of clinical 
illness, consistent with an acute HBV infection. Since 7 (18%) among the staff
members were immune to HBV (positive anti HBs and anti HBc) and the remainder
sero-negative; the remaining 6, however, showed evidence of active viral
replication (S. P. and K. E.), viral infection (F. P. and J. L.) or incomplete
immune response (B.F. and G.H.). During the 9 months' follow-up their serologic
status did not change, with the exception of 2 (F.P. and B.F.), in whom HBs
disappeared. The incidence of anti HAV in patients was 42% and in the staff
44%.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 6100568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

