
1. Infect Immun. 1983 Aug;41(2):657-65.

Preferential immune response to virion surface glycoproteins by caprine
arthritis-encephalitis virus-infected goats.

Johnson GC, Barbet AF, Klevjer-Anderson P, McGuire TC.

Six months after inoculation with caprine arthritis-encephalitis virus, the serum
and synovial fluid of virus-infected goats had antibodies to
[35S]methionine-labeled viral proteins with apparent molecular weights of
125,000, 90,000, 28,000, and 15,000. The 125,000-, 90,000-, and
15,000-molecular-weight methionine-labeled proteins were identified as virion
surface glycoproteins by lactoperoxidase iodination and galactose
oxidase-boro[3H]hydride reduction labeling techniques. Radioimmunoassay antibody 
titers to purified p28, the most abundant viral structural protein, averaged
1:182 in synovial fluid and 1:67 in serum 6 months after inoculation. High
dilutions of serum and synovial fluid reacted with gp90 and gp125 electroblotted 
onto nitrocellulose paper from polyacrylamide gels. Anti-gp90 activity was
detected at dilutions with an immunoglobulin G content of 0.02 to 11 micrograms, 
whereas antibody to p28, when detectable on Western blots, was present in samples
with an immunoglobulin G content of 0.1 to 2 mg, representing 100- to
1,000-fold-greater titers of antibody to the surface glycoprotein. Synovial
fluids often contained more anti-gp90 antibody than did sera. Immunoprecipitation
of lactoperoxidase-iodinated virus confirmed the presence of high antibody titers
to the two virion surface glycoproteins. Because antiviral gp90 and gp125
antibody is abundant in the synovial fluid of infected goats, it probably
contributes to the high immunoglobulin G1 concentrations seen at this site 6
months after caprine arthritis-encephalitis virus infection.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.41.2.657-665.1983 
PMCID: PMC264693
PMID: 6307878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

