
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1983 Oct 25;11(20):7119-36.

Plasmids for the cloning and expression of full-length double-stranded cDNAs
under control of the SV40 early or late gene promoter.

Breathnach R, Harris BA.

Okayama and Berg (1) have recently described a technique for the high efficiency 
cloning of full-length dscDNAs. We have constructed eukaryotic expression vectors
compatible both with this technique (and with classical techniques) for dscDNA
cloning. The vectors are such that recombinants obtained contain dscDNAs in the
correct orientation downstream from a block of sequence comprising either the
SV40 early or late gene promoter linked to a pair of splice sites from a rabbit
beta-globin gene. A sequence encoding an SV40 polyadenylation site follows the
dscDNA. We have used our vectors to make a library from chicken oviduct polyA(+) 
RNA using the Okayama and Berg technique. Ovalbumin recombinants occur in the
library at the expected frequency and a high proportion contain full length
copies of the ovalbumin mRNA. However, a similar result was not obtained for
conalbumin recombinants. When recombinants are introduced into eukaryotic cells
by either calcium phosphate coprecipitation or protoplast fusion, expression of
chicken ovalbumin or conalbumin may be detected by indirect immunofluorescence.
Under optimal conditions (use of SV40 late promoter and cos 7 cells) ovalbumin
protein could be detected when the ovalbumin recombinant was present in only 2%
of the protoplasts used for fusion. This suggests that colony banks obtained
using our vectors could be screened in batches of 50 by protoplast fusion
followed by a search for expression of a given protein using indirect
immunofluorescence.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/11.20.7119 
PMCID: PMC326442
PMID: 6314276  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

