
1. Immunology. 1981 Sep;44(1):51-60.

Proliferation and lymphocyte stimulatory capacity of Theileria-infected
lymphoblastoid cells before and after the elimination of intracellular parasites.

Pinder M, Kar S, Withey KS, Lundin LB, Roelants GE.

A prominent pathogenic facet of Theileria infections is that the parasite infects
lymphocytes and 'transforms' them into parasitized lymphoblastoid cells which are
highly proliferative and can be cultured indefinitely in vitro. To analyse the
relationship between the intracellular parasite and lymphocyte transformation we 
have studied the effects of eliminating parasites from these lymphoblastoid cells
using the naphthoquinone derivative 993.C. Treatment of Theileria-infected
lymphoblastoid cells with 993.C gradually eliminates intracellular parasites but 
cell proliferation is not inhibited until several days after parasite
elimination. The proliferating cells no longer contain schizont particles and are
medium-sized lymphocytes and small blast cells. The surface phenotype of these
cells, as defined by lectins and monoclonal antibodies, remains unchanged after
parasite elimination. The division of non-parasitized cells, under the culture
conditions examined, was not indefinite. The compound 993.C itself does not
appear to be mitogenic and possible mechanisms for this continued division are
discussed. It has been previously reported that co-cultivation of irradiated
Theileria-infected lymphoblastoid cells with autologous lymphocytes induces
marked DNA synthesis in the latter. We examined further the relevance of this
observation for immunity to Theileria by using lymphoblastoid cells treated with 
993.C. Elimination of intracellular parasites by this compound does not impair
the ability of these cells to stimulate DNA synthesis in autologous lymphocytes. 
Furthermore, lymphocytes from Theileria-immune or non-immune cattle react
similarly. The reaction differs from a classical mixed lymphocyte reaction
induced by antigens encoded in the main histocompatibility complex since the
stimulator cells are exclusively T lymphocyte-derived cells, the magnitude of
response is greater and stimulated lymphocytes are able to act as 'stimulator
cells' to fresh autologous lymphocytes. Thus we question the immunological
relevance of the observed lymphocyte division. The possibility that
Theileria-infected lymphoblastoid cells carry viral genomes or infectious virus
particles is discussed. Preliminary electron microscopic studies have not
revealed any virus particles.


PMCID: PMC1555116
PMID: 6792058  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

