
1. Cell. 1978 Dec;15(4):1477-93.

Steps in the processing of Ad2 mRNA: poly(A)+ nuclear sequences are conserved and
poly(A) addition precedes splicing.

Nevins JR, Darnell JE Jr.

The conservation of nuclear Ad2 sequences during nucleocytoplasmic transport has 
been estimated from the accumulation of 3H-uridine in nuclear and cytoplasmic
Ad2-specific RNA from the major late transcription unit. From 10-28% is conserved
of the total Ad2 nuclear RNA synthesized from each of five regions of the genome 
that specify groups of 3' co-terminal mRNAs. The sum of the conservation of all
the regions was equivalent to 100%, signifying the conservation of at least a
part of each transcript or all of about one fifth to one sixth of the
transcripts. The conservation of poly(A)+ Ad2 nuclear RNA is about 4 times
greater than of total Ad2 nuclear RNA, approaching 100% conservation of poly(A)+ 
nuclear sequences. Since each mRNA contains three "spliced" sequences that are
probably encoded only once per transcript, these data on conservation of the Ad2 
sequences suggest that each transcriptional event from the 16-99 transcription
unit gives rise to one of a possible 13-14 mRNA molecules with destruction of the
remainder of the transcribed RNA. The portion which is conserved resides next to 
the region to which which poly(A) is added. Three models for the choice of
poly(A) sites were considered: termination at the poly(A) site, cleavage shortly 
after synthesis of one of the sites before transcription was complete, and
cleavage after completion of transcription. The first model was ruled out by the 
demonstration of equimolar synthesis over the 16-99 region. The second model is
strongly supported because 3H-uridine label appears equally rapidly in the time
range 2-10 min in each of the five 3' poly(A) addition sites, whereas chain
completion before cleavage would lead to a faster appearance of label in the most
promoter-distal site. Furthermore, briefly labeled RNA molecules extending from
16 to each of several poly(A) addition sites were the first poly(A)- terminated
3H-uridine-labeled molecules detected, demonstrating that poly(A) addition
precedes splicing. The choice of which mRNA emerges from each transcriptional
event would appear to depend upon first choosing one of five 3' mRNA ends
followed by a 5' splicing event.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(78)90071-5 
PMID: 729004  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

