
1. J Mol Evol. 1995 Nov;41(5):587-96.

Molecular evolution of the hepatitis B virus genome.

Yang Z(1), Lauder IJ, Lin HJ.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Beijing Agricultural University,
China.

The hepatitis B virus (HBV) has a circular DNA genome of about 3,200 base pairs. 
Economical use of the genome with overlapping reading frames may have led to
severe constraints on nucleotide substitutions along the genome and to highly
variable rates of substitution among nucleotide sites. Nucleotide sequences from 
13 complete HBV genomes were compared to examine such variability of substitution
rates among sites and to examine the phylogenetic relationships among the HBV
variants. The maximum likelihood method was employed to fit models of DNA
sequence evolution that can account for the complexity of the pattern of
nucleotide substitution. Comparison of the models suggests that the rates of
substitution are different in different genes and codon positions; for example,
the third codon position changes at a rate over ten times higher than the second 
position. Furthermore, substantial variation of substitution rates was detected
even after the effects of genes and codon positions were corrected; that is,
rates are different at different sites of the same gene or at the same codon
position. Such rates after the correction were also found to be positively
correlated at adjacent sites, which indicated the existence of conserved and
variable domains in the proteins encoded by the viral genome. A multiparameter
model validates the earlier finding that the variation in nucleotide conservation
is not random around the HBV genome. The test for the existence of a molecular
clock suggests that substitution rates are more or less constant among lineages. 
The phylogenetic relationships among the viral variants were examined. Although
the data do not seem to contain sufficient information to resolve the details of 
the phylogeny, it appears quite certain that the serotypes of the viral variants 
do not reflect their genetic relatedness.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00175817 
PMID: 7490773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

