
1. Immunology. 1995 Apr;84(4):645-52.

Activation of effector functions by immune complexes of mouse IgG2a with
isotype-specific autoantibodies.

Rajnavölgyi E(1), Fazekas G, Lund J, Daeron M, Teillaud JL, Jefferis R, Fridman
WH, Gergely J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, L. Eötvös University, Göd, Hungary.

Analysis of five monoclonal autoantibodies, rheumatoid factors produced by
hybridomas generated from spleen cells of BALB/c mice repeatedly infected with
A/PR/8/34 human influenza A virus, revealed that they recognized distinct but
spatially related epitopes. The differing isoallotypic specificity of the IgM and
IgA monoclonal antibodies correlated with the presence of Ile258 and Ala305,
respectively. Although these data suggest that the epitopes recognized are within
the CH2 domain, all antibodies failed to inhibit IgG antigen reactivity with
Staphylococcus aureus protein A (SpA), C1q, mouse C3, human Fc gamma RI or mouse 
Fc gamma RII, activities known to be predominantly determined by CH2 domain
structures. Reactivity of the IgA antibody, Z34, with IgG2b allowed further
specificity studies using a panel of 26 mutant IgG2b proteins, each having single
amino acid replacements over the surface of the CH2 domain. The only substitution
that affected Z34 reactivity was Asn/Ala297, which destroyed the glycosylation
sequon, resulting in secretion of an aglycosylated IgG molecule. The epitope
recognized by Z34 therefore seems to be located outside of the Fc gamma R and C1q
binding sites, but to be dependent on the presence of carbohydrate for
expression. In contrast to the binding studies, complement activation by
aggregated IgG2a, through classical or alternative pathways, was inhibited by the
presence of autoantibodies. The functional significance of isotype-specific
autoantibody in immune regulation is discussed.


PMCID: PMC1415165
PMID: 7540592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

