
1. Vet Microbiol. 1995 Jul;45(2-3):243-50.

Pathogenesis of swine vesicular disease after exposure of pigs to an infected
environment.

Dekker A(1), Moonen P, de Boer-Luijtze EA, Terpstra C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Science and Health, Department of Virology, Lelystad,
Netherlands.

The pathogenesis of swine vesicular disease (SVD) has been studied following a
natural route of infection. In two experiments groups of ten and eight pigs
respectively were introduced into a stable contaminated with SVD virus. At
various intervals after stable exposure, pigs were killed and the amount of virus
was determined in serum, vesicles (if present), spleen, kidney, and in seven
lymph glands representing various parts of the body. One day after the pigs were 
introduced into the stable, five out of eight pigs were viraemic and virus could 
be isolated from various tissues. At 2 d after introduction, three out of four
pigs killed had vesicular lesions on the feet. The tonsils of all pigs killed
between 1 to 7 d after introduction into the stable were virologically positive. 
Four days after introduction 50% of the pigs were serologically positive and at 7
d all pigs had developed an antibody response. This study shows that contact with
a SVD virus contaminated environment can be equally as infectious as injection,
or direct contact with SVD infected pigs, causing a rapid spread of the disease. 
Because the tonsil was shown to be highly efficient in trapping and growing
circulating virus, we recommend that in addition to serological examination,
virus isolation from pig tonsils should be used to study the epidemiology of SVD 
on farms where the infection is present.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1135(95)00032-6 
PMID: 7571375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

