
1. Mol Immunol. 1993 Feb;30(3):221-31.

Epitopes recognized by antibodies to denatured core protein of hepatitis B virus.

Bichko V(1), Schödel F, Nassal M, Gren E, Berzinsh I, Borisova G, Miska S,
Peterson DL, Gren E, Pushko P, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, Martinsried/Munich, Germany.

Particulate and denatured core protein as well as e-antigen (HBe) of hepatitis B 
virus (HBV) differ in part immunologically but this has not been studied in
sufficient detail. Therefore, in this study the B-cell immune response to native 
and denatured HBV core protein which both can exhibit HBe-specific epitopes was
examined using a panel of mouse MABs and rabbit polyclonal antibodies to native
and denatured core protein and polyclonal anti-HBe/anti-HBc antibodies from sera 
of infected patients. Epitope mapping was performed using a set of partially
overlapping synthetic HBc peptides, carboxy-terminally truncated HBc proteins and
various HBc fusion proteins. A major immunogenic region between amino acids
134-140 and two less immunogenic regions, one spanning amino acids 2-10 and one
with three partially overlapping epitopes between amino acid positions 138 and
154, were defined by mouse MABs. Polyclonal rabbit antibodies to denatured HBc,
woodchuck and ground squirrel hepatitis core proteins (WHc and GSHc) recognized
similar epitopes but in addition occasionally region 61-85, and the latter was
also recognized on particulate HBc. Two antigenic regions (amino acid positions
2-10 and 138-145) were found to be exposed on HBe from human serum, and were
recognized by mouse anti-HBe but not by anti-HBc antibodies from sera of infected
patients. This study demonstrates a more complex pattern of HBc and HBe epitopes 
than detected previously and provides tools to study conformational changes which
may take place during HBc/HBe processing, transport and core particle assembly.

DOI: 10.1016/0161-5890(93)90051-c 
PMID: 7679466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

