
1. Cell Immunol. 1995 Feb;160(2):185-92.

The in vivo effects of neutralizing antibodies against IFN-gamma, IL-4, or IL-10 
on the humoral immune response in young and aged mice.

Dobber R(1), Tielemans M, Nagelkerken L.

Author information: 
(1)Division Immunological and Infectious Diseases, TNO Prevention and Health,
Leiden, The Netherlands.

In the present study we investigated whether age-related changes in the
composition and functional properties of murine CD4+ T cells are reflected in
vivo by a changed humoral response to influenza vaccine in aged mice. After the
primary immunization, the titers of influenza-specific IgM, IgG1, IgG2a, and
IgG2b, but not of IgG3 and IgE, were significantly reduced in aged mice compared 
to young mice. Treatment of aged mice with anti-IFN-gamma, anti-IL-4, or
anti-IL-10 resulted in levels of IgM and IgG1 comparable to those found in young 
mice, whereas IgG2a and IgG2b were further decreased. After the booster
immunization IgE was significantly enhanced in aged mice, whereas no differences 
were observed with regard to the other isotypes. During the primary response in
young mice, anti-IFN-gamma stimulated IgG1 and IgE, whereas an inhibition of
IgG2a, IgG2b, and IgG3 was observed. Anti-IL-4 caused a decrease only in IgG3
while anti-IL-10 increased IgM and IgG1 and decreased IgG2b and IgG3. During the 
primary response in aged mice, all anti-cytokine antibodies enhanced IgM and IgG1
while IgE was only enhanced by anti-IL-10. By contrast, IgG3 was inhibited by
anti-IFN-gamma and anti-IL-10. Anti-cytokine treatment of young mice increased
all isotypes, except IgG3, in the secondary response, whereas the secondary
response in aged mice was largely insensitive to anti-cytokine treatment. These
data therefore support the idea that the in vivo effects of cytokines on isotype 
switching are dependent on the differentiation stage of B cells which may be
different in young and aged mice.

DOI: 10.1016/0008-8749(95)80026-f 
PMID: 7720078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

