
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jul;14(7):4408-18.

Cell-specific expression of the macrophage scavenger receptor gene is dependent
on PU.1 and a composite AP-1/ets motif.

Moulton KS(1), Semple K, Wu H, Glass CK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla 92093-0656.

The type I and II scavenger receptors (SRs) are highly restricted to cells of
monocyte origin and become maximally expressed during the process of
monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation. In this report, we present evidence that 
SR genomic sequences from -245 to +46 bp relative to the major transcriptional
start site were sufficient to confer preferential expression of a reporter gene
to cells of monocyte and macrophage origin. This profile of expression resulted
from the combinatorial actions of multiple positive and negative regulatory
elements. Positive transcriptional control was primarily determined by two
elements, located 181 and 46 bp upstream of the major transcriptional start site.
Transcriptional control via the -181 element was mediated by PU.1/Spi-1, a
macrophage and B-cell-specific transcription factor that is a member of the ets
domain gene family. Intriguingly, the -181 element represented a relatively
low-affinity binding site for Spi-B, a closely related member of the ets domain
family that has been shown to bind with relatively high affinity to other
PU.1/Spi-1 binding sites. These observations support the idea that PU.1/Spi-1 and
Spi-B regulate overlapping but nonidentical sets of genes. The -46 element
represented a composite binding site for a distinct set of ets domain proteins
that were preferentially expressed in monocyte and macrophage cell lines and that
formed ternary complexes with members of the AP-1 gene family. In concert, these 
observations suggest a model for how interactions between cell-specific and more 
generally expressed transcription factors function to dictate the appropriate
temporal and cell-specific patterns of SR expression during the process of
macrophage differentiation.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.14.7.4408 
PMCID: PMC358812
PMID: 8007948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

