
1. Plant Cell. 1994 Jun;6(6):863-74.

Immediate early transcription activation by salicylic acid via the cauliflower
mosaic virus as-1 element.

Qin XF(1), Holuigue L, Horvath DM, Chua NH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, New
York 10021-6399.

Transgenic tobacco plants carrying a number of regulatory sequences derived from 
the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter were tested for their response to
treatment with salicylic acid (SA), an endogenous signal involved in plant
defense responses. beta-Glucuronidase (GUS) gene fusions with the full-length
(-343 to +8) 35S promoter or the -90 truncation were found to be induced by SA.
Time course experiments revealed that, in the continuous presence of SA, the -90 
promoter construct (-90 35S-GUS) displayed rapid and transient induction
kinetics, with maximum RNA levels at 1 to 4 hr, which declined to low levels by
24 hr. Induction was still apparent in the presence of the protein synthesis
inhibitor cycloheximide (CHX). Moreover, mRNA levels continued to accumulate over
24 hr rather than to decline. By contrast, mRNA from the endogenous
pathogenesis-related protein-1a (PR-1a) gene began to accumulate at later times
during SA treatment and steadily increased through 24 hr; transcription of this
gene was almost completely blocked by the presence of CHX. Further dissection of 
the region from -90 and -46 of the 35S promoter revealed that the SA-responsive
element corresponds to the previously characterized activation sequence-1 (as-1).
These results represent a definitive analysis of immediate early responses to SA,
relative to the late induction of PR genes, and potentially elucidate the early
events of SA signal transduction during the plant defense response.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.6.6.863 
PMCID: PMC160484
PMID: 8061520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

