
1. J Infect Dis. 1994 Jun;169(6):1244-9.

Associations between HLA frequencies and pathogenic features of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in seroconverters from the Amsterdam
cohort of homosexual men.

Klein MR(1), Keet IP, D'Amaro J, Bende RJ, Hekman A, Mesman B, Koot M, de Waal
LP, Coutinho RA, Miedema F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Viro-Immunology, Central Laboratory of The Netherlands,
Red Cross Blood Transfusion Service, Amsterdam.

HLA-disease associations may be important for understanding the pathogenesis of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection. Therefore, 106 homosexual 
men from the Amsterdam Cohort Study on AIDS with a known date of HIV-1
seroconversion were serologically typed for HLA. Several significant associations
between HLA type and pathogenic features of HIV-1 infection were observed:
Subjects with fever and skin rash during primary HIV-1 infection showed an
increased frequency of HLA-B62 (relative risk [RR], 5.8; P = .005). The frequency
of HLA-B35 was increased in subjects with a rapid decline in CD4+ T lymphocytes
(RR, 3.2; P = .021). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis revealed a significant
association between HLA-B35 and a decrease in CD4+ cells to < 200/microL (P =
.01). The strongest association was found between HLA-DR1 and AIDS-related
Kaposi's sarcoma (RR, 22.5; P < .001), also confirmed in survival analysis (P =
.001). In AIDS patients with only opportunistic infections, increased frequencies
of HLA-DR3 (P = .011) and -DQ2 (P = .007) were observed. Finally, the occurrence 
of syncytium-inducing HIV-1 variants was significantly associated with HLA-DQ2 (P
= .01).

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/169.6.1244 
PMID: 8195600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

