
1. J Clin Pharmacol. 1993 Oct;33(10):912-7.

Pharmacokinetics of didanosine and ketoconazole after coadministration to
patients seropositive for the human immunodeficiency virus.

Knupp CA(1), Brater DC, Relue J, Barbhaiya RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company,
Syracuse, New York 13221-4755.

The steady-state pharmacokinetics of didanosine (DDI) and ketoconazole (KET) were
evaluated when the agents were administered alone or concurrently to patients
seropositive for the human immunodeficiency virus. Using a randomized, three-way 
crossover design, multiple oral doses of DDI (375 mg twice daily for 4 days), KET
(200 mg daily for 4 days) or the combination were administered under fasting
conditions. When DDI and KET were coadministered, KET was given 2 hours before
the morning dose of didanosine. Serial blood samples and total urine output were 
a collected after the administration of a final single dose on day 5 of each
treatment session. Samples were analyzed using high-pressure liquid
chromatography (HPLC)/ultraviolet (UV) or fluorescence methods specific for
unchanged DDI (plasma and urine) or KET (plasma only). Pharmacokinetic parameters
were calculated using noncompartmental methods. The average DDI maximum peak
plasma concentration (Cmax) value at steady state was significantly less when DDI
was administered with KET (1836 ng/mL) than when DDI was administered alone (2094
ng/mL), although the magnitude of the decrease was only 12%. Didanosine area
under the curve (AUC(0-tau)) for the combination (2872 hr.ng/mL) was 8% less than
when DDI was given alone (3107 hr.ng/mL); the difference was not significant.
There were no significant differences among the other evaluated parameters (time 
to reach peak concentration [tmax], half-life [t1/2], renal clearance [CLR], or
urinary recovery [UR]) between the two DDI treatments. There were no significant 
differences among any of the pharmacokinetic parameters between the two KET
treatments.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1002/j.1552-4604.1993.tb01921.x 
PMID: 8227460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

