
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1993 Mar;37(3):441-7.

High-capacity in vitro assessment of anti-hepatitis B virus compound selectivity 
by a virion-specific polymerase chain reaction assay.

Jansen RW(1), Johnson LC, Averett DR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Therapy, Burroughs Wellcome Co., Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina 27709.

An integrated assessment system specific for hepatitis B virus (HBV) Dane
particle DNA was developed to examine the activity of potential anti-HBV
compounds in chronic HBV-producing HepG2-derived 2.2.15 cells. Cell culture,
immunoaffinity purification, polymerase chain reaction, and hybrid-capture
detection were performed in the microtiter format to facilitate increased
throughput by automation. The high sensitivity afforded by the assay provided
quantitative detection of less than 0.5 fg of extracellular HBV DNA from 25
microliters of cell culture supernatants, and drug-induced reductions in HBV
titers greater than 100-fold were easily measured. Fluorometric determination of 
total cellular DNA from the same 96-well proliferating cell cultures allowed
simultaneous evaluation of inhibition of cell growth, thus providing the ability 
to assess the overall selectivities of candidate compounds in a single
experiment. The potent activities of three anti-HBV compounds, the (+) and (-)
enantiomers of cis-5-fluoro-1-[2-(hydroxymethyl)-1,3-oxythiolane-5-yl]cytosine
(FTC) and D-carbocyclic-2'-deoxyguanosine (CDG), were confirmed by this method.
(-)-FTC was more active than its (+) enantiomer (50% inhibitory concentrations,
0.033 +/- 0.006 and 0.723 +/- 0.160 microM [standard error of the mean; SEM],
respectively), while both enantiomers demonstrated a lack of cytotoxicity at 200 
microM. CDG was more potent (50% inhibitory concentration, 0.0063 +/- 0.0007
microM [SEM]) but was also significantly more toxic, inhibiting cell growth by
50% at 32 +/- 6 microM (SEM). These results demonstrate the usefulness of this
immunoaffinity-based, quantitative polymerase chain reaction system as a
high-capacity in vitro tool for assessment of anti-HBV compound selectivity.

DOI: 10.1128/aac.37.3.441 
PMCID: PMC187690
PMID: 8384813  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

