
1. Int J Dev Biol. 1993 Mar;37(1):213-9.

Genomic plasticity of the Lucké renal carcinoma: a review.

McKinnell RG(1), Lust JM, Sauerbier W, Rollins-Smith LA, Williams JW 3rd,
Williams CS, Carlson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Minnesota, Saint Paul
55108-1095.

The differentiation potential of the Lucké renal carcinoma of the northern
leopard frog, Rana pipiens, can be characterized by the nuclear transplantation
procedure. Transplantation of tumor nuclei into activated and enucleated ova
results, in the best of cases, in swimming larvae which fail to feed. The larvae 
die in about 10 to 14 days. Rescue of tumor nuclear transplantation tadpole
tissue, destined to die, has been accomplished by allografting fragments of that 
tissue to normal hosts. The allografts persist and differentiate a diversity of
tissues which cannot be distinguished by histological analysis from allografted
normal control tissue. Allografts are an imperfect mode of assay for histological
competence because of the immune response of the host. Lymphocytes and
eosinophils invade the grafts in about 40 days. The host immune response occurs
in both experimental and control allografts. Consequently, we believe that added 
histogenetic potential exists in the genome of the Lucké renal carcinoma. We
propose that unexpressed differentiative potential of the grafted tissue can be
extracted by abrogation of the immune response of the host. A herpesvirus is the 
etiological agent of the Lucké renal carcinoma. We currently seek to detect viral
DNA in tissue derived from tumor nuclear transplant embryos. The presence of the 
viral genetic material in normal mitotic progeny of Lucké tumor cells, if
demonstrated, raises the question of the long-term stability of differentiated
cells derived from a virus tumor. Alternatively, absence of viral DNA in the
tumor nuclear transplant tissue would suggest that normal differentiation ensues 
after elimination of the oncogenic DNA from that tissue. Loss of viral DNA may
prognosticate stable differentiation.


PMID: 8507564  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

