
1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 1996 May 1;12(7):569-76.

Doxorubicin inhibits Tat-dependent transactivation of HIV type 1 LTR.

Jeyaseelan R(1), Kurabayashi M, Kedes L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
California School of Medicine, Los Angeles 90033, USA.

Tat, the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-encoded transcription factor, is
vital for HIV replication and transcription. Any drug that inhibits Tat's
activity is a valuable candidate for chemotherapeutic applications. We show here 
that doxorubicin (Dox), a well-known anticancer drug and its derivative,
daunomycin, inhibit the ability of Tat to activate the HIV-1 LTR. We
contransfected HeLa cells with pSV40TAT and a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
gene driven by an HIV LTR promoter. CAT transcription was vigorously stimulated
many fold by Tat production but the effect of Tat was inhibited by Dox in a
dose-dependent manner. The transcriptional activation domain of Tat, located in
its 67 amino terminal residues, remains Dox sensitive. A TAR-deleted reporter
gene with a Gal binding domain is transactivated by a Gal-Tat fusion protein.
This transcription complex retains a high level of activity in the presence of
Dox, suggesting that Dox primarily affects RNA-Tat, rather than DNA-Tat, mediated
transactivation. RNA gel mobility analysis reveals that Dox does not affect the
binding of Tat to TAR-RNA in vitro but does increase the binding activity of
cellular nuclear proteins with TAR-RNA. Induction or activation of such
TAR-binding proteins in cells that might interfere with the activity of Tat could
explain the observed inhibitory effects of Dox on Tat-activated transcription.
These results suggest that Dox may have chemotherapeutic effects on HIV
expression mediated through TAR RNA.

DOI: 10.1089/aid.1996.12.569 
PMID: 8743082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

