
1. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 1996 Aug;17(8):532-8.

AIDS, emergency operations, and infection control.

Wittmann MM(1), Wittmann A, Wittmann DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Colorado Health Center, Denver, USA.

Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) caused by the human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) may turn out to be the largest lethal epidemic of infection ever. The
estimated global number of HIV-infected adults in 1993 was 13 million, with
projections of up to 40 million by the year 2000. Human immunodeficiency virus
infections and AIDS are relevant to surgeons with respect to the surgical
management of AIDS patients in general, the treatment of the increasingly long
list of surgical complications specific to AIDS patients in particular, and the
risks of patient-to-surgeon and surgeon-to-patient HIV transmission. Because of
migration of individuals and populations throughout the world, even surgeons
practicing in relatively unaffected regions should be familiar with the potential
surgical implications of AIDS. Ethical considerations arise, as well. Are
surgeons obliged to operate on HIV-positive or AIDS patients? Some surgeons
adhere strictly to the Hippocratic Oath, whereas others reserve the right to be
selective on whom they operate, except in emergencies. Other common ethical
considerations in the AIDS patient are similar to those arising in the terminal
cancer case: whether to operate or not; whether to provide advanced support such 
as total parenteral nutrition or hemodialysis. Answers are not simple and require
close collaboration between the surgeon, the AIDS specialist, and involved
members of other specialties. Emergency operations become necessary to treat AIDS
independent disease such as acute cholecystitis and appendicitis or AIDS-related 
life-threatening conditions such as gastrointestinal bleeding, obstruction,
perforation, or ischemia complicating Kaposi's sarcoma, lymphoma, and
cytomegalovirus or disseminated nontuberculous mycobacterial infections. Delays
and errors in diagnosis are frequent. Poor nutritional state with weight loss,
low serum albumin, and leukocyte count prevails in most patients requiring
emergency operations and account for a high mortality. By applying solid judgment
and selecting management appropriately, the surgeon has the ability to prolong
life and to improve the quality of life for these unfortunate patients, and to do
so with extremely minimal risk to himself and his team.

DOI: 10.1086/647364 
PMID: 8875299  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

