
1. J Virol. 1996 Dec;70(12):8944-60.

Recombinant adenoviruses with large deletions generated by Cre-mediated excision 
exhibit different biological properties compared with first-generation vectors in
vitro and in vivo.

Lieber A(1), He CY, Kirillova I, Kay MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle 98195, USA.

In vivo gene transfer of recombinant E1-deficient adenoviruses results in early
and late viral gene expression that elicits a host immune response, limiting the 
duration of transgene expression and the use of adenoviruses for gene therapy.
The prokaryotic Cre-lox P recombination system was adapted to generate
recombinant adenoviruses with extended deletions in the viral genome (referred to
here as deleted viruses) in order to minimize expression of immunogenic and/or
cytotoxic viral proteins. As an example, an adenovirus with a 25-kb deletion that
lacked E1, E2, E3, and late gene expression with viral titers similar to those
achieved with first-generation vectors and less than 0.5% contamination with
E1-deficient virus was produced. Gene transfer was similar in HeLa cells, mouse
hepatoma cells, and primary mouse hepatocytes in vitro and in vivo as determined 
by measuring reporter gene expression and DNA transfer. However, transgene
expression and deleted viral DNA concentrations were not stable and declined to
undetectable levels much more rapidly than those found for first-generation
vectors. Intravenous administration of deleted vectors in mice resulted in no
hepatocellular injury relative to that seen with first-generation vectors. The
mechanism for stability of first-generation adenovirus vectors (E1a deleted)
appeared to be linked in part to their ability to replicate in transduced cells
in vivo and in vitro. Furthermore, the deleted vectors were stabilized in the
presence of undeleted first-generation adenovirus vectors. These results have
important consequences for the development of these and other nonintegrating
vectors for gene therapy.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.70.12.8944-8960.1996 
PMCID: PMC190992
PMID: 8971024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

