
1. J Virol. 1997 Mar;71(3):1922-30.

The presence of host-derived HLA-DR1 on human immunodeficiency virus type 1
increases viral infectivity.

Cantin R(1), Fortin JF, Lamontagne G, Tremblay M.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Microbiologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, Québec,
Canada.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) incorporates several host cell
components when budding out of the infected cell. One of the most abundant
host-derived molecules acquired by HIV-1 is the HLA-DR determinant of the major
histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) molecules. The fact that CD4 is the 
natural ligand of MHC-II prompted us to determine if such virally embedded
cellular components can affect the biology of the virus. Herein, we report for
the first time that the incorporation of cellular HLA-DR1 within HIV-1 enhances
its infectivity. This observation was made possible with virions bearing or not
bearing on their surfaces host-derived HLA-DR1 glycoproteins. Such virus stocks
were prepared by a transient-expression system based on transfection of 293T
cells with a recombinant luciferase-encoding HIV-1 molecular clone along with
plasmids encoding the alpha and beta chains of HLA-DR1. Cell-free virions
recovered from transfected cells were shown to have efficiently incorporated
host-derived HLA-DR1 glycoproteins. Infectivity was increased by a factor of 1.6 
to 2.3 for virions bearing on their surfaces host-derived HLA-DR1. The observed
enhancement of HIV-1 infectivity was independent of the virus stocks used and was
seen in several T-lymphoid cell lines, in a premonocytoid cell line, and in
primary peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Finally, we determined that the
presence of virion-bound cellular HLA-DR1 is associated with faster kinetics of
virus infection. Taken together, these results suggest that HLA-DR-1-bearing
HIV-1 particles had a greater infectivity per picogram of viral p24 protein than 
HLA-DR1-free virions.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.71.3.1922-1930.1997 
PMCID: PMC191270
PMID: 9032323  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

