
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol. 1997 Feb 1;14(2):91-101.

Binding analysis of 95 HIV gp120 peptides to HLA-DR1101 and -DR0401 evidenced
many HLA-class II binding regions on gp120 and suggested several promiscuous
regions.

Gaudebout P(1), Zeliszewski D, Golvano JJ, Pignal C, Le Gac S, Borras-Cuesta F,
Sterkers G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie Biologique, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France.

To identify HLA-DR-binding peptides within the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV)-1 proteins. 95 overlapping synthetic peptides representing the entire
sequence of gp120-LAI were screened for their capacity to bind to two HLA-DR
molecules with distant sequences (DR0401 and DR1101). By using a cell surface
competitive binding assay, 56 DR-binding peptides were identified, of which 35
bound to both DR1101 and DR0401. A highly significant concordance was evidenced
by statistical analysis between binding of peptides to one and to the other DR
molecule, suggesting a high proportion of promiscuity among gp120 peptides, even 
though no clear sequence pattern accounting for such promiscuity was found.
DR-binding peptides were located along the entire gp120 sequence. Yet, the
majority of them (42 among 56) were concentrated in seven multiagretopic regions 
that were arbitrarily defined as regions containing four or more overlapping
continuous peptides binding to DR1011 and/or DR0401. A good correlation was found
between DR-binding regions or DR-binding peptides defined in this study and
promiscuous T helper gp120 epitopes previously described in seropositive
individuals. All these results suggest that the identification of multiagretopic 
DR-binding regions may be a great help for the predicition of protein
determinants that have the likelihood of being promiscuous T helper epitopes in
humans.

DOI: 10.1097/00042560-199702010-00001 
PMID: 9052717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

