
1. J Virol. 1997 May;71(5):3719-25.

Oligosaccharides in the stem region maintain the influenza virus hemagglutinin in
the metastable form required for fusion activity.

Ohuchi R(1), Ohuchi M, Garten W, Klenk HD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute für Virologie, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Germany.

The influenza A virus hemagglutinin (HA) has three conserved oligosaccharides
located in the stem region at asparagine residues 12, 28, and 478. The biological
role of these oligosaccharides has been investigated by mutational analysis of HA
of fowl plague virus that was expressed from a simian virus 40 vector in the
presence of ammonium chloride for protection from acid denaturation in the
trans-Golgi network. Resistance to endoglycosidase H and cleavage of HA into the 
subunits HA1 and HA2 have been analyzed as markers for intracellular transport.
Cell surface exposure has been determined by hemadsorption following
neuraminidase treatment, by immunofluorescence staining, and by
fluorescence-activated cell sorter analysis. When all three stem oligosaccharides
were removed, transport was almost completely blocked. When two of the three stem
oligosaccharides, particularly those at asparagine residues 12 and 28, were
missing, HA was transported to the surface but showed extremely low fusion
activity. With mutants lacking one stem oligosaccharide, fusion was reduced to a 
lesser extent. Removal of stem oligosaccharides resulted also in an increase in
the pH optimum required for fusion. On the other hand, no reduction in fusion
activity was observed when oligosaccharides in the head region of the HA spike
were removed. These results indicate that the conserved oligosaccharides in the
stem stabilize HA in the form susceptible to the conformational change necessary 
for fusion.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.71.5.3719-3725.1997 
PMCID: PMC191521
PMID: 9094646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

