
1. J Med Virol. 1997 May;52(1):77-82.

Common origin of human T-lymphotropic virus type-I from Iran, Kuwait, Israel, and
La Réunion Island.

Voevodin A(1), Gessain A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Kuwait.

We found previously that Kuwaiti HTLV-I isolates had two nucleotide substitutions
in the most frequently sequenced regions of HTLV-I genome, namely: T-->C 4783 in 
the pol and T-->C 6569 the env genes. These substitutions were observed rarely in
other HTLV-I isolates and seemed to be good markers of the HTLV-I lineage, the
"epicentre" of which was located in Mashhad, Iran. To test this hypothesis we
sequenced the fragments of HTLV-I genome including sites 4783 and 6569 from seven
isolates obtained from the Iranians either living in (five isolates) or
originating from (two isolates) Mashhad. RFLP-based tests were also designed and 
used for typing of the substitutions. All seven isolates were positive for T-->C 
4783 and six, from which env fragment was amplifiable, were also positive for
T-->C 6569. It is highly probable that all the isolates from Mashhadi Jews belong
to the same HTLV-I lineage, although they were not typed yet for the presence of 
T-->C 6569 substitution. Only 2 "non-Middle Eastern" HTLV-1, both from La Réunion
Island were positive for both of the substitutions. Another possible member of
Mashhadi lineage of HTLV-I is one isolate from southern India and two isolates
from the American Indians, British Columbia, Canada. The determination of the
T-->C 4783 and T-->C 6569 markers in HTLV-I isolates of different
geographical/ethnic origin may be useful for the reconstruction of the routes of 
HTLV-I spread from the Middle East and/or Indian subcontinent to other regions of
the world and, possibly, for gaining insights into the origin of HTLV-I in Asia.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1096-9071(199705)52:1<77::aid-jmv12>3.0.co;2-y 
PMID: 9131461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

