
1. J Hepatol. 1997 Jan;26(1):119-30.

Long-term expression of the hepatitis B virus core-e- and X-proteins does not
cause pathologic changes in transgenic mice.

Reifenberg K(1), Löhler J, Pudollek HP, Schmitteckert E, Spindler G, Köck J,
Schlicht HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Animal Research Unit, University of Ulm, Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Chronic infections with the human hepatitis B virus can result
in liver cirrhosis and primary hepatocellular carcinoma. The reasons for these
long-term effects are unclear. The aim of this study was to generate transgenic
mice expressing the HBV X- and c/e-gene under authentic and foreign promoter
control and to test whether the respective gene products can cause pathologic
effects during the lifespan of a mouse. Moreover, the temporal and the
tissue-specific regulation of the crucial HBV c/e-gene promoter was analyzed.
METHODS: Eight transgenic mouse lines were generated. Four contained the c/e- and
X-gene and two contained only the X-gene under authentic promoter control. Two
lines expressed only the X-gene under control of the rat insulin
promoter/enhancer. Gene expression was tested by protein and mRNA analyses.
During an observation period of 2 years, mice were sacrificed and organs
subjected to histologic examination. Mice expressing the X-gene in pancreatic
beta cells were tested for the development of diabetes.
RESULTS: In the liver, slight histopathologic alterations but no neoplastic
changes could be observed in mice expressing the X-gene. Activity of the c/e-gene
promoter/enhancer was age dependent and was not restricted to hepatocytes.
CONCLUSION: No evidence was obtained that long-term expression of the HBV c/e-
and X-gene products can cause neoplasia during the lifespan of a mouse.

DOI: 10.1016/s0168-8278(97)80018-9 
PMID: 9148002  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

