
1. Transplantation. 1997 May 15;63(9):1200-5.

Autologous lymphokine-activated killer cell therapy of Epstein-Barr
virus-positive and -negative lymphoproliferative disorders arising in organ
transplant recipients.

Nalesnik MA(1), Rao AS, Furukawa H, Pham S, Zeevi A, Fung JJ, Klein G, Gritsch
HA, Elder E, Whiteside TL, Starzl TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Thomas E.
Starzl Transplantation Institute, Pennsylvania, USA.

Lymphoreticular malignancies, collectively called posttransplant
lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLD), eventually develop in 2-5% of organ
transplant recipients. They frequently undergo regression when immunosuppression 
is reduced or stopped. This feature has been associated with a previous or de
novo Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. We herein describe immunotherapy with
autologous lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cells in seven patients with PTLD
(four EBV-positive patients and three EBV-negative patients). Autologous
peripheral blood mononuclear cells were obtained by leukapheresis, depleted of
monocytes, and cultured in the presence of interleukin 2 for 10 to 11 days. A
single dose of 5.2 x 10(9) to 5.6 x 10(10) LAK cells was given intravenously.
Systemic interleukin 2 was not administered. The four patients with EBV+ PTLD had
complete tumor regression; two of them developed controllable rejection. Three
patients are well 13-16 months after treatment; the fourth patient died of
pneumonia 41 days after infusion. Three patients with EBV- lymphomas had no
response despite prior evidence that their tumors also were subject to immune
surveillance. Two of these three patients died after being given other treatment,
and the third patient has persistent tumor. In conclusion, autologous LAK cell
infusion was effective for treatment of four EBV+ organ transplant recipients.
LAK cell efficacy for three patients with EBV- PTLD was not evaluable under the
management circumstances in which this treatment was utilized.

DOI: 10.1097/00007890-199705150-00002 
PMID: 9158009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

