
1. Microbiol Immunol. 1997;41(12):957-64.

Metabolic fate of [3H]1-beta-D-arabinofuranosyl-5-[(E)-2-bromovinyl]uracil in
herpes simplex virus type 1-infected cells.

Ashida N(1), Sakata S, Machida H.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Laboratory, Yamasa Corporation, Choshi, Chiba, Japan.

The metabolic fate of 1-beta-D-arabinofuranosyl-5-[(E)-2-bromovinyl]uracil
(BV-araU) in herpes simplex virus type 1-infected cells was studied using
tritium-labeled BV-araU. [3H]BV-araU was selectively taken-up by infected cells. 
Approximately 10% of the total uptake of [3H]BV-araU was recovered from the
acid-insoluble fraction at any time post-infection. Both cellular uptake of
[3H]BV-araU and its incorporation into the acid-insoluble fraction increased with
increasing incubation time through 8 hr post-infection. Uptake of [3H]BV-araU and
its incorporation into the acid-insoluble fraction also increased proportionally 
to the duration of exposure to [3H]BV-araU. An alkaline sucrose gradient
sedimentation analysis revealed that the radioactive DNA obtained from cells
pulse-labeled with [3H]BV-araU were small DNA fragments which remained at the top
following a chasing period in isotope-free medium, whereas that pulse-labeled
with [3H]thymidine was chased to a fraction of high molecular weight DNA.
Nuclease P1 digestion reduced 99% of the [3H]BV-araU-labeled DNA extracted from
infected cells to a low molecular weight. Following digestion of
[3H]BV-araU-labeled DNA with micrococcal nuclease and spleen exonuclease, all of 
the radioactivity was recovered as [3H]BV-araU 3'-monophosphate. Thus, BV-araU
strongly inhibits the elongation of viral DNA strands as demonstrated by the
alkaline sucrose gradient sedimentation analysis, whereas at least a portion of
the [3H]BV-araU is incorporated inside viral DNA strands in infected cells.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.1997.tb01955.x 
PMID: 9492181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

