
1. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 1998 Feb;9(2):157-65.

Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization/mass spectrometry mapping of human
immunodeficiency virus-gp120 epitopes recognized by a limited polyclonal
antibody.

Jeyarajah S(1), Parker CE, Summer MT, Tomer KB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Structural Biology, National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA.

In this study we have applied epitope excision and epitope extraction strategies,
combined with matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry, to
determine the fine structure of epitopes recognized by a polyclonal antibody to
human immunodeficiency virus envelope glycoprotein gp120. This is the first
application of this approach to epitope mapping on a large, heavily glycosylated 
protein. In the epitope excision method, gp120 in the native form is first bound 
to the antibody immobilized on sepharose beads and cleaved with endoproteinase
enzymes. In the epitope extraction method, the gp120 was first proteolytically
cleaved and then allowed to react with the immobilized antibody. The fragments
that remain bound to the antibody, after repeated washing to remove the unbound
peptides, contain the antigenic region that is recognized by the antibody, and
the bound peptides in both methods can be characterized by direct analysis of the
immobilized antibody by matrix assisted laser desorption ionization/mass
spectrometry. In this study we have carried out epitope excision and extraction
experiments with three different enzymes and have identified residues 472-478 as 
a major epitope. In addition, antigenic regions containing minor epitopes have
also been identified.

DOI: 10.1016/s1044-0305(97)00247-x 
PMID: 9679595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

