
1. Mol Pharmacol. 1999 Feb;55(2):223-33.

Autoantibodies against cytochromes P-4502E1 and P-4503A in alcoholics.

Lytton SD(1), Helander A, Zhang-Gouillon ZQ, Stokkeland K, Bordone R, Aric√≤ S,
Albano E, French SW, Ingelman-Sundberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Toxicology, Institute for Environmental Medicine,
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

Autoantibodies against soluble liver enzymes have been reported among alcoholics,
but the targets of self-reactivity toward membrane proteins of the liver have not
been characterized. Previously, among alcoholics, we found antibodies against
ethanol-derived radical protein adducts that are dependent on cytochrome P-4502E1
(CYP2E1) for their formation. To further investigate autoantibodies against
cytochrome P-450s during alcohol abuse, sera of rats chronically treated with
ethanol in the total enteral nutrition model and sera from alcoholics with or
without alcohol liver disease and from control subjects were analyzed by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and Western blotting for the presence of IgG
against rat and human CYP2E1, rat CYP3A1, and human CYP3A4. A time-dependent
appearance of IgG against rat CYP3A1 and CYP2E1 was evident during chronic
ethanol feeding of rats. Anti-CYP2E1 reactivity showed positive correlation with 
the levels of hepatic CYP2E1 and was inhibited by the CYP2E1 transcriptional
inhibitor chlormethiazole. Screening of the human sera by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay revealed reactivity against CYP3A4 and CYP2E1 in about 20 to 
30% and 10 to 20% of the alcoholic sera, respectively. No difference were noted
between sera from alcoholics with or without hepatitis C virus infection, and
only very little reactivity was seen in sera from control subjects. Western
blotting analysis revealed anti-human CYP2E1 reactivity in 8 of 85 alcoholic sera
and 3 of 58 control sera, whereas anti-CYP3A4 reactivity was detected in 18 of 85
alcoholic sera and 4 of 58 control sera, which were different from the sera
reactive with CYP2E1. Immunoblot reactivity of CYP3A4-positive alcoholic sera was
found against glutathione-S-transferase fusion proteins containing truncated
forms of CYP3A4, and such sera were also able to immunoprecipitate in vitro
translated CYP3A4. Seven of eight sera showed reactivity toward domains
C-terminal of position Ser281, and 1 of 8 sera recognized autoepitopes within the
region Thr207-Ser281. These findings indicate that alcoholics develop
autoantibodies against CYP2E1 and CYP3A4 that the CYP3A4 C-terminal domain is a
target for the autoantibody reactions among a subset of alcoholics. The novel
finding of CYP3A4 autoantibodies and their significant expression among
alcoholics warrants further investigation. Attention should be given to immune
toxicity associated with CYP3A4 autoantibodies and cases of alcohol abuse that
are accompanied by exposure to drugs and substances that are CYP3A substrates.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.55.2.223 
PMID: 9927612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

