
1. J Travel Med. 2011 Jan-Feb;18(1):63-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1708-8305.2010.00473.x.
Epub 2010 Dec 16.

Study of the genetic discrimination between imported and autochthonous cases of
malaria in South Korea.

Choi KM(1), Choi YK, Kang YA, Seo SY, Lee HW, Cho SH, Lee WJ, Rhie HG, Lee HS,
Kim JY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Malaria and Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Health,
Korea Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 194 Tongil-Lo, Eunpyung-Gu,
Seoul, Korea.

There has been a great increase of Plasmodium vivax incidences in the Republic of
Korea and the genetic diversity of the parasite became more complex with the
rapid dissemination of newly introduced genotypes. Surveillance of imported
malaria is very important, but there is no good way to determine imported vs.
internal cases. In this study, we characterized imported vivax cases, analyzed
the genetic sequence of three imported vivax malaria cases for the merozoite
surface protein-1 (MSP-1) and circumsporozoite protein (CSP) genes, and clearly
discriminated an imported vivax case that was misdiagnosed as indigenous by
genetic analysis. PCR reaction for the merozoite surface protein-1 (MSP-1) and
circumsporozoite protein (CSP) genes from three imported vivax cases were
amplified and sequenced. The genetic variations were compared with a previously
constructed database of South Korean isolates. The imported vivax cases showed
various patterns on incubation period before onset. Most cases were from other
parts of Asia. The MSP-1 gene sequence analysis of three imported cases showed
that the imported cases had completely different sequences from any subtypes from
Korean isolates. Case-1 and Case-2 exact match with an Indian isolate, and Case-3
had great similarity with isolates from countries neighboring Indonesia. CSP gene
analysis based on the repeat patterns showed similar results that the sequences
from the imported cases well matched with the patient's traveled countries and
completely discriminated with indigenous cases. AMA-1 gene analysis also
supported these results. We were able to clearly distinguish three imported vivax
cases from indigenous by using a genetic database of Korean isolates and were
able to suspect its origin by genotyping. This study demonstrated the usefulness 
of genetic survey on imported malaria cases.

Â© 2010 International Society of Travel Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1708-8305.2010.00473.x 
PMID: 21199147  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

