
1. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Mar 15;20(6):1173-81. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq562. Epub 2011 Jan 
10.

IL3 variant on chromosomal region 5q31-33 and protection from recurrent malaria
attacks.

Meyer CG(1), Calixto Fernandes MH, Intemann CD, Kreuels B, Kobbe R, Kreuzberg C, 
Ayim M, Ruether A, Loag W, Ehmen C, Adjei S, Adjei O, Horstmann RD, May J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, D-20359
Hamburg, Germany.

Using segregation analyses, control of malaria parasites has previously been
linked to a major gene within the chromosomal region 5q31-33, but also to complex
genetic factors in which effects are under substantial age-dependent influence.
However, the responsible gene variants have not yet been identified for this
chromosomal region. In order to perform association analyses of 5q31-33 locus
candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), 1015 children were recruited at
the age of 3 months and followed monthly until the age of 2 years in an area
holoendemic for Plasmodium falciparum malaria in Ghana. Quantitative (incidence
rates of malaria episodes) and qualitative phenotypes (i.e. 'more than one
malaria episode' or 'not more than one malaria episode') were used in population-
and family-based analyses. The strongest signal was observed for the interleukin 
3 gene (IL3) SNP rs40401 (P = 3.4 × 10(-7), P(c)= 1.4 × 10(-4)). The IL3
genotypes rs40401(CT) and rs40401(TT) were found to exert a protective effect of 
25% [incidence rate ratio (IRR) 0.75, P = 4.1 × 10(-5)] and 33% (IRR 0.67, P =
3.2 × 10(-8)), respectively, against malaria attacks. The association was
confirmed in transmission disequilibrium tests (TDT, qTDT). The results could
argue for a role of IL3 in the pathophysiology of falciparum malaria.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq562 
PMID: 21224257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

