
1. J Vis Exp. 2011 Jan 3;(47). pii: 2365. doi: 10.3791/2365.

Protocol for production of a genetic cross of the rodent malaria parasites.

Pattaradilokrat S(1), Li J, Su XZ.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, USA.

Variation in response to antimalarial drugs and in pathogenicity of malaria
parasites is of biologic and medical importance. Linkage mapping has led to
successful identification of genes or loci underlying various traits in malaria
parasites of rodents and humans. The malaria parasite Plasmodium yoelii is one of
many malaria species isolated from wild African rodents and has been adapted to
grow in laboratories. This species reproduces many of the biologic
characteristics of the human malaria parasites; genetic markers such as
microsatellite and amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) markers have
also been developed for the parasite. Thus, genetic studies in rodent malaria
parasites can be performed to complement research on Plasmodium falciparum. Here,
we demonstrate the techniques for producing a genetic cross in P. yoelii that
were first pioneered by Drs. David Walliker, Richard Carter, and colleagues at
the University of Edinburgh. Genetic crosses in P. yoelii and other rodent
malaria parasites are conducted by infecting mice Mus musculus with an inoculum
containing gametocytes of two genetically distinct clones that differ in
phenotypes of interest and by allowing mosquitoes to feed on the infected mice 4 
days after infection. The presence of male and female gametocytes in the mouse
blood is microscopically confirmed before feeding. Within 48 hrs after feeding,
in the midgut of the mosquito, the haploid gametocytes differentiate into male
and female gametes, fertilize, and form a diploid zygote (Fig. 1). During
development of a zygote into an ookinete, meiosis appears to occur. If the zygote
is derived through cross-fertilization between gametes of the two genetically
distinct parasites, genetic exchanges (chromosomal reassortment and cross-overs
between the non-sister chromatids of a pair of homologous chromosomes; Fig. 2)
may occur, resulting in recombination of genetic material at homologous loci.
Each zygote undergoes two successive nuclear divisions, leading to four haploid
nuclei. An ookinete further develops into an oocyst. Once the oocyst matures,
thousands of sporozoites (the progeny of the cross) are formed and released into 
mosquito hemoceal. Sporozoites are harvested from the salivary glands and
injected into a new murine host, where pre-erythrocytic and erythrocytic stage
development takes place. Erythrocytic forms are cloned and classified with regard
to the characters distinguishing the parental lines prior to genetic linkage
mapping. Control infections of individual parental clones are performed in the
same way as the production of a genetic cross.

DOI: 10.3791/2365 
PMCID: PMC3182633
PMID: 21248692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

