
1. J Exp Med. 2011 Feb 14;208(2):341-56. doi: 10.1084/jem.20101488. Epub 2011 Jan
24.

The malaria circumsporozoite protein has two functional domains, each with
distinct roles as sporozoites journey from mosquito to mammalian host.

Coppi A(1), Natarajan R, Pradel G, Bennett BL, James ER, Roggero MA, Corradin G, 
Persson C, Tewari R, Sinnis P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Parasitology, New York University School of Medicine,
New York, NY 10010, USA.

Plasmodium sporozoites make a remarkable journey from the mosquito midgut to the 
mammalian liver. The sporozoite's major surface protein, circumsporozoite protein
(CSP), is a multifunctional protein required for sporozoite development and
likely mediates several steps of this journey. In this study, we show that CSP
has two conformational states, an adhesive conformation in which the C-terminal
cell-adhesive domain is exposed and a nonadhesive conformation in which the N
terminus masks this domain. We demonstrate that the cell-adhesive domain
functions in sporozoite development and hepatocyte invasion. Between these two
events, the sporozoite must travel from the mosquito midgut to the mammalian
liver, and N-terminal masking of the cell-adhesive domain maintains the
sporozoite in a migratory state. In the mammalian host, proteolytic cleavage of
CSP regulates the switch to an adhesive conformation, and the highly conserved
region I plays a critical role in this process. If the CSP domain architecture is
altered such that the cell-adhesive domain is constitutively exposed, the
majority of sporozoites do not reach their target organs, and in the mammalian
host, they initiate a blood stage infection directly from the inoculation site.
These data provide structure-function information relevant to malaria vaccine
development.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20101488 
PMCID: PMC3039851
PMID: 21262960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

