
1. Cell Microbiol. 2011 Jul;13(7):967-77. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01592.x.
Epub 2011 Apr 28.

3D nuclear architecture reveals coupled cell cycle dynamics of chromatin and
nuclear pores in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Weiner A(1), Dahan-Pasternak N, Shimoni E, Shinder V, von Huth P, Elbaum M,
Dzikowski R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, The Kuvin Center for the
Study of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, IMRIC, The Hebrew University-Hadassah 
Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel.

The deadliest form of human malaria is caused by the protozoan parasite
Plasmodium falciparum. The complex life cycle of this parasite is associated with
tight transcriptional regulation of gene expression. Nuclear positioning and
chromatin dynamics may play an important role in regulating P. falciparum
virulence genes. We have applied an emerging technique of electron microscopy to 
construct a 3D model of the parasite nucleus at distinct stages of development
within the infected red blood cell. We have followed the distribution of nuclear 
pores and chromatin throughout the intra-erythrocytic cycle, and have found a
striking coupling between the distributions of nuclear pores and chromatin
organization. Pore dynamics involve clustering, biogenesis, and division among
daughter cells, while chromatin undergoes stage-dependent changes in packaging.
Dramatic changes in heterochromatin distribution coincide with a previously
identified transition in gene expression and nucleosome positioning during the
mid-to-late schizont phase. We also found a correlation between euchromatin
positioning at the nuclear envelope and the local distribution of nuclear pores, 
as well as a dynamic nuclear polarity during schizogony. These results suggest
that cyclic patterns in gene expression during parasite development correlate
with gross changes in cellular and nuclear architecture.

Â© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01592.x 
PMID: 21501361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

