
1. Vaccine. 2011 Jun 10;29(26):4308-15. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.04.028. Epub
2011 Apr 21.

Worldwide sequence conservation of transmission-blocking vaccine candidate Pvs230
in Plasmodium vivax.

Doi M(1), Tanabe K, Tachibana S, Hamai M, Tachibana M, Mita T, Yagi M, Zeyrek FY,
Ferreira MU, Ohmae H, Kaneko A, Randrianarivelojosia M, Sattabongkot J, Cao YM,
Horii T, Torii M, Tsuboi T.

Author information: 
(1)Cell-free Science and Technology Research Center, Ehime University, Matsuyama,
Ehime 790-8577, Japan.

Pfs230, surface protein of gametocyte/gamete of the human malaria parasite,
Plasmodium falciparum, is a prime candidate of malaria transmission-blocking
vaccine. Plasmodium vivax has an ortholog of Pfs230 (Pvs230), however, there has 
been no study in any aspects on Pvs230 to date. To investigate whether Pvs230 can
be a vivax malaria transmission-blocking vaccine, we performed evolutionary and
population genetic analysis of the Pvs230 gene (pvs230: PVX_003905). Our analysis
of Pvs230 and its orthologs in eight Plasmodium species revealed two distinctive 
parts: an interspecies variable part (IVP) containing species-specific
oligopeptide repeats at the N-terminus and a 7.5kb interspecies conserved part
(ICP) containing 14 cysteine-rich domains. Pvs230 was closely related to its
orthologs, Pks230 and Pcys230, in monkey malaria parasites. Analysis of 113
pvs230 sequences obtained from worldwide, showed that nucleotide diversity is
remarkably low in the non-repeat 8-kb region of pvs230 (θπ=0.00118) with 77
polymorphic nucleotide sites, 40 of which results in amino acid replacements. A
signature of purifying selection but not of balancing selection was seen on
pvs230. Functional and/or structural constraints may limit the level of
polymorphism in pvs230. The observed limited polymorphism in pvs230 should ground
for utilization of Pvs230 as an effective transmission-blocking vaccine.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.04.028 
PMCID: PMC3130600
PMID: 21514344  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

