
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2011 Jul;77(13):4669-75. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00514-11. Epub 
2011 May 20.

Secretion of anti-Plasmodium effector proteins from a natural Pantoea agglomerans
isolate by using PelB and HlyA secretion signals.

Bisi DC(1), Lampe DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Duquesne University, Department of Biological Sciences, 600 Forbes Ave.,
Pittsburgh, PA 15282, USA.

The insect-vectored disease malaria is a major world health problem. New control 
strategies are needed to supplement the current use of insecticides and
medications. A genetic approach can be used to inhibit development of malaria
parasites (Plasmodium spp.) in the mosquito host. We hypothesized that Pantoea
agglomerans, a bacterial symbiont of Anopheles mosquitoes, could be engineered to
express and secrete anti-Plasmodium effector proteins, a strategy termed
paratransgenesis. To this end, plasmids that include the pelB or hlyA secretion
signals from the genes of related species (pectate lyase from Erwinia carotovora 
and hemolysin A from Escherichia coli, respectively) were created and tested for 
their efficacy in secreting known anti-Plasmodium effector proteins (SM1,
anti-Pbs21, and PLA2) in P. agglomerans and E. coli. P. agglomerans successfully 
secreted HlyA fusions of anti-Pbs21 and PLA2, and these strains are under
evaluation for anti-Plasmodium activity in infected mosquitoes. Varied expression
and/or secretion of the effector proteins was observed, suggesting that the
individual characteristics of a particular effector may require empirical testing
of several secretion signals. Importantly, those strains that secreted
efficiently grew as well as wild-type strains under laboratory conditions and,
thus, may be expected to be competitive with the native microbiota in the
environment of the mosquito midgut.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00514-11 
PMCID: PMC3127683
PMID: 21602368  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

