
1. Malar J. 2011 May 26;10:146. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-146.

Evaluation of allelic forms of the erythrocyte binding antigen 175 (EBA-175) in
Plasmodium falciparum field isolates from Brazilian endemic area.

Perce-da-Silva DS(1), Banic DM, Lima-Junior JC, Santos F, Daniel-Ribeiro CT, de
Oliveira-Ferreira J, Pratt-Riccio LR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Pesquisas em Malária, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fiocruz,
Manguinhos, Rio de Janeiro, RJ - CEP: 21040-900 Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The Plasmodium falciparum Erythrocyte Binding Antigen-175 (EBA-175)
is an antigen considered to be one of the leading malaria vaccine candidates.
EBA-175 mediates sialic acid-dependent binding to glycophorin A on the
erythrocytes playing a crucial role during invasion of the P. falciparum in the
host cell. Dimorphic allele segments, termed C-fragment and F-fragment, have been
found in high endemicity malaria areas and associations between the dimorphism
and severe malaria have been described. In this study, the genetic dimorphism of 
EBA-175 was evaluated in P. falciparum field isolates from Brazilian malaria
endemic area.
METHODS: The study was carried out in rural villages situated near Porto Velho,
Rondonia State in the Brazilian Amazon in three time points between 1993 and
2008. The allelic dimorphism of the EBA-175 was analysed by Nested PCR.
RESULTS: The classical allelic dimorphism of the EBA-175 was identified in the
studied area. Overall, C-fragment was amplified in a higher frequency than
F-fragment. The same was observed in the three time points where C-fragment was
observed in a higher frequency than F-fragment. Single infections (one fragment
amplified) were more frequent than mixed infection (two fragments amplified).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings confirm the dimorphism of EBA175, since only the two 
types of fragments were amplified, C-fragment and F-fragment. Also, the results
show the remarkable predominance of CAMP allele in the studied area. The
comparative analysis in three time points indicates that the allelic dimorphism
of the EBA-175 is stable over time.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-146 
PMCID: PMC3138422
PMID: 21615944  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

