
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20591. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020591. Epub 2011 Jun 6.

From in vivo to in vitro: dynamic analysis of Plasmodium falciparum var gene
expression patterns of patient isolates during adaptation to culture.

Zhang Q(1), Zhang Y, Huang Y, Xue X, Yan H, Sun X, Wang J, McCutchan TF, Pan W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Disease and Vaccine Development, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1), encoded by the var
gene family, plays a crucial role in disease virulence through its involvement in
binding to various host cellular receptors during infection. Growing evidence
suggests that differential expression of the various var subgroups may be
involved in parasite virulence. To further explore this issue, we have collected 
isolates from symptomatic patients in south China-Myanmar border, and
characterized their sequence diversity and transcription profiles over time of
var gene family, and cytoadherence properties from the time of their initial
collection and extending through a two month period of adaptation to culture.
Initially, we established a highly diverse, DBLα (4 cysteines) subtype-enriched, 
but unique local repertoire of var-DBL1α sequences by cDNA cloning and
sequencing. Next we observed a rapid transcriptional decline of upsA- and
upsB-subtype var genes at ring stage through qRT-PCR assays, and a switching
event from initial ICAM-I binding to the CD36-binding activity during the first
week of adaptive cultivation in vitro. Moreover, predominant transcription of
upsA var genes was observed to be correlated with those isolates that showed a
higher parasitemia at the time of collection and the ICAM-1-binding phenotype in 
culture. Taken together, these data indicate that the initial stage of adaptive
process in vitro significantly influences the transcription of virulence-related 
var subtypes and expression of PfEMP1 variants. Further, the specific
upregulation of the upsA var genes is likely linked to the rapid propagation of
the parasite during natural infection due to the A-type PfEMP1 variant-mediated
growth advantages.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020591 
PMCID: PMC3108956
PMID: 21674009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

