
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jun 28;108(26):10568-73. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1105622108. Epub 2011 Jun 13.

Chemical genetic screen identifies Toxoplasma DJ-1 as a regulator of parasite
secretion, attachment, and invasion.

Hall CI(1), Reese ML, Weerapana E, Child MA, Bowyer PW, Albrow VE, Haraldsen JD, 
Phillips MR, Sandoval ED, Ward GE, Cravatt BF, Boothroyd JC, Bogyo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Toxoplasma gondii is a member of the phylum Apicomplexa that includes several
important human pathogens, such as Cryptosporidium and Plasmodium falciparum, the
causative agent of human malaria. It is an obligate intracellular parasite that
can cause severe disease in congenitally infected neonates and immunocompromised 
individuals. Despite the importance of attachment and invasion to the success of 
the parasite, little is known about the underlying mechanisms that drive these
processes. Here we describe a screen to identify small molecules that block the
process of host cell invasion by the T. gondii parasite. We identified a small
molecule that specifically and irreversibly blocks parasite attachment and
subsequent invasion of host cells. Using tandem orthogonal
proteolysis-activity-based protein profiling, we determined that this compound
covalently modifies a single cysteine residue in a poorly characterized protein
homologous to the human protein DJ-1. Mutation of this key cysteine residue in
the native gene sequence resulted in parasites that were resistant to inhibition 
of host cell attachment and invasion by the compound. Further analysis of the
invasion phenotype confirmed that modification of Cys127 on TgDJ-1 resulted in a 
block of microneme secretion and motility, even in the presence of direct
stimulators of calcium release. Together, our results suggest that TgDJ-1 plays
an important role that is likely downstream of the calcium flux required for
microneme secretion, parasite motility, and subsequent invasion of host cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1105622108 
PMCID: PMC3127939
PMID: 21670272  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

