
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19860. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019860. Epub 2011 May 18.

The Puf-family RNA-binding protein Puf2 controls sporozoite conversion to liver
stages in the malaria parasite.

Müller K(1), Matuschewski K, Silvie O.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Parasitology Unit, Berlin,
Germany.

Malaria is a vector-borne infectious disease caused by unicellular, obligate
intracellular parasites of the genus Plasmodium. During host switch the malaria
parasite employs specialized latent stages that colonize the new host
environment. Previous work has established that gametocytes, sexually
differentiated stages that are taken up by the mosquito vector, control
expression of genes required for mosquito colonization by translational
repression. Sexual parasite development is controlled by a DEAD-box RNA helicase 
of the DDX6 family, termed DOZI. Latency of sporozoites, the transmission stage
injected during an infectious blood meal, is controlled by the eIF2alpha kinase
IK2, a general inhibitor of protein synthesis. Whether RNA-binding proteins
participate in translational regulation in sporozoites remains to be studied.
Here, we investigated the roles of two RNA-binding proteins of the Puf-family,
Plasmodium Puf1 and Puf2, during sporozoite stage conversion. Our data reveal
that, in the rodent malaria parasite P. berghei, Puf2 participates in the
regulation of IK2 and inhibits premature sporozoite transformation. Inside
mosquito salivary glands puf2⁻ sporozoites transform over time to round forms
resembling early intra-hepatic stages. As a result, mutant parasites display
strong defects in initiating a malaria infection. In contrast, Puf1 is
dispensable in vivo throughout the entire Plasmodium life cycle. Our findings
support the notion of a central role for Puf2 in parasite latency during switch
between the insect and mammalian hosts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019860 
PMCID: PMC3097211
PMID: 21673790  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

