
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2011 Oct;55(10):4858-65. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01748-10. 
Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Genomewide scan reveals amplification of mdr1 as a common denominator of
resistance to mefloquine, lumefantrine, and artemisinin in Plasmodium chabaudi
malaria parasites.

Borges S(1), Cravo P, Creasey A, Fawcett R, Modrzynska K, Rodrigues L, Martinelli
A, Hunt P.

Author information: 
(1)UEI Malária, Centro de Malária e Outras Doenças Tropicais, Instituto de
Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua da Junqueira no.
100, 1349-008 Lisbon, Portugal. sofiaborges@hotmail.com

Multidrug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum malaria parasites pose a threat to
effective drug control, even to artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs).
Here we used linkage group selection and Solexa whole-genome resequencing to
investigate the genetic basis of resistance to component drugs of ACTs. Using the
rodent malaria parasite P. chabaudi, we analyzed the uncloned progeny of a
genetic backcross between the mefloquine-, lumefantrine-, and
artemisinin-resistant mutant AS-15MF and a genetically distinct sensitive clone, 
AJ, following drug treatment. Genomewide scans of selection showed that parasites
surviving each drug treatment bore a duplication of a segment of chromosome 12
(translocated to chromosome 04) present in AS-15MF. Whole-genome resequencing
identified the size of the duplicated segment and its position on chromosome 4.
The duplicated fragment extends for ∼393 kbp and contains over 100 genes,
including mdr1, encoding the multidrug resistance P-glycoprotein homologue 1. We 
therefore show that resistance to chemically distinct components of ACTs is
mediated by the same genetic mutation, highlighting a possible limitation of
these therapies.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01748-10 
PMCID: PMC3186966
PMID: 21709099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

