
1. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2011 Sep 1;173(2):303-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2011.06.005. 
Epub 2011 Jun 14.

Insulin-like peptides in the mosquito Anopheles stephensi: identification and
expression in response to diet and infection with Plasmodium falciparum.

Marquez AG(1), Pietri JE, Smithers HM, Nuss A, Antonova Y, Drexler AL, Riehle MA,
Brown MR, Luckhart S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, 3437 Tupper Hall, One
Shields Avenue, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA 95616,
USA.

Insulin-like peptides (ILPs) regulate a multitude of biological processes,
including metabolism and immunity to infection, and share similar structural
motifs across widely divergent taxa. Insulin/insulin-like growth factor signaling
(IIS) pathway elements are similarly conserved. We have shown that IIS regulates 
reproduction, innate immunity, and lifespan in female Anopheles stephensi, a
major mosquito vector of human malaria. To further explore IIS regulation of
these processes, we identified genes encoding five ILPs in this species and
characterized their expression in tissues. Antisera to ILP homologs in Anopheles 
gambiae were used to identify cellular sources in An. stephensi females by
immunocytochemistry. We analyzed tissue-specific ILP transcript expression in
young and older females, in response to different feeding regimens, and in
response to infection with Plasmodiumfalciparum with quantitative reverse
transcriptase-PCR assays. While some ILP transcript changes were evident in older
females and in response to blood feeding, significant changes were particularly
notable in response to hormonal concentrations of ingested human insulin and to
P. falciparum infection. These changes suggest that ILP secretion and action may 
be similarly responsive in Plasmodium-infected females and potentially alter
metabolism and innate immunity.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2011.06.005 
PMCID: PMC3153599
PMID: 21703270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

