
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jul 12;108(28):11405-10. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1104063108. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Artemisinin activity against Plasmodium falciparum requires hemoglobin uptake and
digestion.

Klonis N(1), Crespo-Ortiz MP, Bottova I, Abu-Bakar N, Kenny S, Rosenthal PJ,
Tilley L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Australian Research Council Centre of
Excellence for Coherent X-ray Science, La Trobe University, 3086 Melbourne,
Australia.

Combination regimens that include artemisinin derivatives are recommended as
first line antimalarials in most countries where malaria is endemic. However, the
mechanism of action of artemisinin is not fully understood and the usefulness of 
this drug class is threatened by reports of decreased parasite sensitivity. We
treated Plasmodium falciparum for periods of a few hours to mimic clinical
exposure to the short half-life artemisinins. We found that drug treatment
retards parasite growth and inhibits uptake of hemoglobin, even at sublethal
concentrations. We show that potent artemisinin activity is dependent on
hemoglobin digestion by the parasite. Inhibition of hemoglobinase activity with
cysteine protease inhibitors, knockout of the cysteine protease falcipain-2 by
gene deletion, or direct deprivation of host cell lysate, significantly decreases
artemisinin sensitivity. Hemoglobin digestion is also required for
artemisinin-induced exacerbation of oxidative stress in the parasite cytoplasm.
Arrest of hemoglobin digestion by early stage parasites provides a mechanism for 
surviving short-term artemisinin exposure. These insights will help in the design
of new drugs and new treatment strategies to circumvent drug resistance.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1104063108 
PMCID: PMC3136263
PMID: 21709259  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

