
1. Biochemistry. 2011 Aug 9;50(31):6701-10. doi: 10.1021/bi200922g. Epub 2011 Jul
19.

Analysis of chloroquine resistance transporter (CRT) isoforms and orthologues in 
S. cerevisiae yeast.

Baro NK(1), Pooput C, Roepe PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, and Center for Infectious Diseases, Georgetown
University, 37th and O Streets, NW Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Previous work from our laboratory optimized MeOH-inducible expression of the P.
falciparum malarial parasite transporter PfCRT in P. pastoris yeast. These
strains are useful for many experiments but do not allow for inducible protein
expression under ambient growth conditions. We have therefore optimized
galactose-inducible expression of PfCRT in S. cerevisiae yeast. We find that
expression of PfCRT confers CQ hypersensitivity to growing yeast and that this is
due to plasma membrane localization of the transporter. We use quantitative
analyses of growth rates to compare hypersensitivity for yeast expressing various
PfCRT isoforms. We also report successful high level inducible expression of the 
P. vivax orthologue, PvCRT, and compare CQ hypersensitivity for PvCRT vs PfCRT
expressing yeast. We test the hypothesis that hypersensitivity is due to
increased transport of CQ into yeast expressing the transporters via direct
(3)H-CQ transport experiments and analyze the effect that membrane potential has 
on transport. The data suggest important new tools for rapid functional screening
of PfCRT and PvCRT isoforms and provide further evidence for a model wherein
membrane potential promotes charged CQ transport by PfCRT. Data also support our 
previous conclusion that wild type PfCRT is capable of CQ transport and provide a
basis for understanding the lack of correspondence between PvCRT mutations and
resistance to CQ in the important malarial parasite P. vivax.

Â© 2011 American Chemical Society

DOI: 10.1021/bi200922g 
PMCID: PMC3155940
PMID: 21744797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

