
1. Cell Microbiol. 2011 Sep;13(9):1397-409. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01629.x.
Epub 2011 Jul 11.

Highly co-ordinated var gene expression and switching in clinical Plasmodium
falciparum isolates from non-immune malaria patients.

Bachmann A(1), Predehl S, May J, Harder S, Burchard GD, Gilberger TW, Tannich E, 
Bruchhaus I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Parasitology, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical
Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.

Antigenic variation to fool the immune system is one of the molecular tricks
Plasmodium uses to maintain infection in its human host. The exclusive expression
of the surface-exposed PfEMP1 molecules, encoded by var genes, is the best
example for this. Central questions regarding the dynamics of antigenic
variation, namely the rate of switching and the regulation of var gene expression
in Plasmodium falciparum, are yet unanswered. To elucidate the in vivo situation,
we studied var gene switching by analysing the var transcripts from parasites
isolated from 20 non-immune malaria patients as well as during subsequent in
vitro generations. Parasites were found to be highly co-ordinated as the whole
population isolated from individual patients usually expressed only one dominant 
- preferentially group A -var gene. While some isolates have very low switching
rates, others switched their var gene expression in every generation. However,
during extended cultivation the co-ordinated expression and switching is lost
resulting in random expression of all var gene groups. Switching as observed on
the RNA level was also supported on the protein level using PfEMP1-specific
antibodies. The results suggest that var genes switch in an ordered, hierarchical
manner at much higher rates than previously described.

Â© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01629.x 
PMID: 21740496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

