
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 16;286(37):32661-71. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.269399. Epub
2011 Jul 19.

Arrested oocyst maturation in Plasmodium parasites lacking type II
NADH:ubiquinone dehydrogenase.

Boysen KE(1), Matuschewski K.

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology Unit, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, 10117 Berlin,
Germany.

The Plasmodium mitochondrial electron transport chain has received considerable
attention as a potential target for new antimalarial drugs. Atovaquone, a potent 
inhibitor of Plasmodium cytochrome bc(1), in combination with proguanil is
recommended for chemoprophylaxis and treatment of malaria. The type II
NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (NDH2) is considered an attractive drug target, as
its inhibition is thought to lead to the arrest of the mitochondrial electron
transport chain and, as a consequence, pyrimidine biosynthesis, an essential
pathway for the parasite. Using the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei as
an in vivo infection model, we studied the role of NDH2 during Plasmodium life
cycle progression. NDH2 can be deleted by targeted gene disruption and, thus, is 
dispensable for the pathogenic asexual blood stages, disproving the candidacy for
an anti-malarial drug target. After transmission to the insect vector,
NDH2-deficient ookinetes display an intact mitochondrial membrane potential.
However, ndh2(-) parasites fail to develop into mature oocysts in the mosquito
midgut. We propose that Plasmodium blood stage parasites rely on glycolysis as
the main ATP generating process, whereas in the invertebrate vector, a
glucose-deprived environment, the malaria parasite is dependent on an intact
mitochondrial respiratory chain.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.269399 
PMCID: PMC3173203
PMID: 21771793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

