
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22434. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022434. Epub 2011 Jul 21.

The spleen CD4+ T cell response to blood-stage Plasmodium chabaudi malaria
develops in two phases characterized by different properties.

Muxel SM(1), Freitas do Rosário AP, Zago CA, Castillo-Méndez SI, Sardinha LR,
Rodriguez-Málaga SM, Câmara NO, Álvarez JM, Lima MR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Imunologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de 
São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. sandrammuxel@gmail.com

The pivotal role of spleen CD4(+) T cells in the development of both malaria
pathogenesis and protective immunity makes necessary a profound comprehension of 
the mechanisms involved in their activation and regulation during Plasmodium
infection. Herein, we examined in detail the behaviour of non-conventional and
conventional splenic CD4(+) T cells during P. chabaudi malaria. We took advantage
of the fact that a great proportion of CD4(+) T cells generated in CD1d(-/-) mice
are I-A(b)-restricted (conventional cells), while their counterparts in I-A(b-/-)
mice are restricted by CD1d and other class IB major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) molecules (non-conventional cells). We found that conventional CD4(+) T
cells are the main protagonists of the immune response to infection, which
develops in two consecutive phases concomitant with acute and chronic
parasitaemias. The early phase of the conventional CD4(+) T cell response is
intense and short lasting, rapidly providing large amounts of proinflammatory
cytokines and helping follicular and marginal zone B cells to secrete polyclonal 
immunoglobulin. Both TNF-α and IFN-γ production depend mostly on conventional
CD4(+) T cells. IFN-γ is produced simultaneously by non-conventional and
conventional CD4(+) T cells. The early phase of the response finishes after a
week of infection, with the elimination of a large proportion of CD4(+) T cells, 
which then gives opportunity to the development of acquired immunity.
Unexpectedly, the major contribution of CD1d-restricted CD4(+) T cells occurs at 
the beginning of the second phase of the response, but not earlier, helping both 
IFN-γ and parasite-specific antibody production. We concluded that conventional
CD4(+) T cells have a central role from the onset of P. chabaudi malaria, acting 
in parallel with non-conventional CD4(+) T cells as a link between innate and
acquired immunity. This study contributes to the understanding of malaria
immunology and opens a perspective for future studies designed to decipher the
molecular mechanisms behind immune responses to Plasmodium infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022434 
PMCID: PMC3141041
PMID: 21814579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

