
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2011 Nov;180(1):1-7. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2011.06.007. Epub 2011 Jul 23.

Molecular characterization of Plasmodium falciparum putative polynucleotide
kinase/phosphatase.

Siribal S(1), Weinfeld M, Karimi-Busheri F, Mark Glover JN, Bernstein NK,
Aceytuno D, Chavalitshewinkoon-Petmitr P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Protozoology, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Polynucleotide kinase/phosphatase (PNKP) is a bifunctional enzyme that can
phosphorylate the 5'-OH termini and dephosphorylate the 3'-phosphate termini of
DNA. It is a DNA repair enzyme involved in the processing of strand break
termini, which permits subsequent repair proteins to replace missing nucleotides 
and rejoin broken strands. Little is known about DNA repair in Plasmodium
falciparum, including the roles of PNKP in repairing parasite DNA. We identified 
a P. falciparum gene encoding a protein with 24% homology to human PNKP and thus 
suggestive of a putative PNKP. In this study, the PNKP gene of P. falciparum
strain K1 (PfPNKP) was successfully cloned and expressed in E. coli as a
GST-PfPNKP recombinant protein. MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis of the protein confirmed
the identity of PfPNKP. Assays for enzymatic activity were carried out with a
variety of single- and double-stranded substrates. Although 3'-phosphatase
activity was detected, PfPNKP was observed to dephosphorylate single-stranded
substrates or double-stranded substrates with a short 3'-single-stranded
overhang, but not double-stranded substrates that mimicked single-strand breaks. 
We hypothesize that unlike human PNKP, PfPNKP may not be involved in
single-strand break repair, since alternative terminal processing mechanisms can 
substitute for PfPNKP, and that PfPNKP DNA repair actions may be confined to
overhanging termini of double-strand breaks.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2011.06.007 
PMID: 21821066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

