
1. J Invertebr Pathol. 2011 Nov;108(3):156-66. doi: 10.1016/j.jip.2011.07.008. Epub 
2011 Aug 10.

Hepatospora eriocheir (Wang and Chen, 2007) gen. et comb. nov. infecting invasive
Chinese mitten crabs (Eriocheir sinensis) in Europe.

Stentiford GD(1), Bateman KS, Dubuffet A, Chambers E, Stone DM.

Author information: 
(1)European Union Reference Laboratory for Crustacean Diseases, Centre for
Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, Weymouth, Dorset DT4 8UB, UK.
grant.stentiford@cefas.co.uk

We describe a microsporidian parasite infecting non-native Chinese mitten crabs
(Eriochier sinensis) from Europe. Electron microscopy revealed merogonic and
sporogonic life stages bound within a plasmalemma. The crab parasite develops
polar tube precursors at the sporont stage but does not complete formation of the
intact spore extrusion apparatus at the stage of the sporogonial plasmodium like 
Enterocytozoon bienuesi and other representatives of the Enterocytozoonidae. Its 
presence within an aquatic crustacean host, and a distinct molecular phylogeny
based on partial small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA) gene sequences also place
it relatively close, though distinct to, existing genera within the
Enterocytozoonidae. Consideration of morphological and phylogenetic
characteristics of other hepatopancreas-infecting microsporidia from crustaceans 
suggests that certain ones (e.g. Enterospora canceri) are retained within the
clade corresponding to the existing family Enterocytozoonidae, while others,
including the parasite described here, may eventually be grouped in a sister
taxon potentially of family rank. Based upon morphological and host similarity,
it is likely that the parasite described here is the same as Endoreticulatus
eriocheir (Wang and Chen, 2007), previously described from Chinese mitten crabs
in Asia. However, using a combined taxonomic approach based upon morphological
and phylogenetic data, we propose the formation of a new genus (Hepatospora) to
replace the previous generic classification of the Asian parasite as
Endoreticulatus. The microsporidian from the hepatopancreas of E. sinensis is
named Hepatospora eriocheir (Wang and Chen, 2007) gen. et comb. nov. It is
assumed that the parasite was introduced during initial invasions of this crab to
Europe during the early 20th Century.

Crown Copyright Â© 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jip.2011.07.008 
PMID: 21854783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

