
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 2;286(48):41312-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.290973. Epub 2011
Oct 7.

ATP synthase complex of Plasmodium falciparum: dimeric assembly in mitochondrial 
membranes and resistance to genetic disruption.

Balabaskaran Nina P(1), Morrisey JM, Ganesan SM, Ke H, Pershing AM, Mather MW,
Vaidya AB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Parasitology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19129, USA.

The rotary nanomotor ATP synthase is a central player in the bioenergetics of
most organisms. Yet the role of ATP synthase in malaria parasites has remained
unclear, as blood stages of Plasmodium falciparum appear to derive ATP largely
through glycolysis. Also, genes for essential subunits of the F(O) sector of the 
complex could not be detected in the parasite genomes. Here, we have used
molecular genetic and immunological tools to investigate the localization,
complex formation, and functional significance of predicted ATP synthase subunits
in P. falciparum. We generated transgenic P. falciparum lines expressing seven
epitope-tagged canonical ATP synthase subunits, revealing localization of all but
one of the subunits to the mitochondrion. Blue native gel electrophoresis of P.
falciparum mitochondrial membranes suggested the molecular mass of the ATP
synthase complex to be greater than 1 million daltons. This size is consistent
with the complex being assembled as a dimer in a manner similar to the complexes 
observed in other eukaryotic organisms. This observation also suggests the
presence of previously unknown subunits in addition to the canonical subunits in 
P. falciparum ATP synthase complex. Our attempts to disrupt genes encoding β and 
γ subunits were unsuccessful, suggesting an essential role played by the ATP
synthase complex in blood stages of P. falciparum. These studies suggest that,
despite some unconventional features and its minimal contribution to ATP
synthesis, P. falciparum ATP synthase is localized to the parasite mitochondrion,
assembled as a large dimeric complex, and is likely essential for parasite
survival.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.290973 
PMCID: PMC3308843
PMID: 21984828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

