
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e24586. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024586. Epub 2011 Oct 7.

Adenovirus 5-vectored P. falciparum vaccine expressing CSP and AMA1. Part A:
safety and immunogenicity in seronegative adults.

Sedegah M(1), Tamminga C, McGrath S, House B, Ganeshan H, Lejano J, Abot E,
Banania GJ, Sayo R, Farooq F, Belmonte M, Manohar N, Richie NO, Wood C, Long CA, 
Regis D, Williams FT, Shi M, Chuang I, Spring M, Epstein JE, Mendoza-Silveiras J,
Limbach K, Patterson NB, Bruder JT, Doolan DL, King CR, Soisson L, Diggs C,
Carucci D, Dutta S, Hollingdale MR, Ockenhouse CF, Richie TL.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Military Malaria Vaccine Program, Naval Medical Research Center, Silver
Spring, Maryland, United States of America. Martha.Sedegah@med.navy.mil

BACKGROUND: Models of immunity to malaria indicate the importance of CD8+ T cell 
responses for targeting intrahepatic stages and antibodies for targeting
sporozoite and blood stages. We designed a multistage adenovirus 5 (Ad5)-vectored
Plasmodium falciparum malaria vaccine, aiming to induce both types of responses
in humans, that was tested for safety and immunogenicity in a Phase 1 dose
escalation trial in Ad5-seronegative volunteers.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The NMRC-M3V-Ad-PfCA vaccine combines two
adenovectors encoding circumsporozoite protein (CSP) and apical membrane
antigen-1 (AMA1). Group 1 (n = 6) healthy volunteers received one intramuscular
injection of 2×10∧10 particle units (1×10∧10 each construct) and Group 2 (n = 6) 
a five-fold higher dose. Transient, mild to moderate adverse events were more
pronounced with the higher dose. ELISpot responses to CSP and AMA1 peaked at 1
month, were higher in the low dose (geomean CSP = 422, AMA1 = 862 spot forming
cells/million) than in the high dose (CSP = 154, p = 0.049, AMA1 = 423,
p = 0.045) group and were still positive at 12 months in a number of volunteers. 
ELISpot depletion assays identified dependence on CD4+ or on both CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells, with few responses dependent only on CD8+ T cells. Intracellular cytokine 
staining detected stronger CD8+ than CD4+ T cell IFN-γ responses (CSP p = 0.0001,
AMA1 p = 0.003), but similar frequencies of multifunctional CD4+ and CD8+ T cells
secreting two or more of IFN-γ, TNF-α or IL-2. Median fluorescence intensities
were 7-10 fold higher in triple than single secreting cells. Antibody responses
were low but trended higher in the high dose group and did not inhibit growth of 
cultured P. falciparum blood stage parasites.
SIGNIFICANCE: As found in other trials, adenovectored vaccines appeared safe and 
well-tolerated at doses up to 1×10∧11 particle units. This is the first
demonstration in humans of a malaria vaccine eliciting strong CD8+ T cell IFN-γ
responses.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.govNCT00392015.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024586 
PMCID: PMC3189181
PMID: 22003383  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

