
1. Essays Biochem. 2011;51:97-110. doi: 10.1042/bse0510097.

Calcium storage and function in apicomplexan parasites.

Moreno SN(1), Ayong L, Pace DA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases and Department of Cellular
Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA. smoreno@cb.uga.edu

Calcium is relevant for several vital functions in apicomplexan parasites,
including host cell invasion, parasite motility and differentiation. The ER
(endoplasmic reticulum) and calcium-rich acidocalcisomes have been identified as 
major calcium stores. Other potential calcium-storage organelles include the
Golgi, the mitochondrion, the apicoplast and the recently described plant-like
vacuole in Toxoplasma gondii. Compared with most eukaryotic systems, apicomplexan
parasites contain a reduced number of calcium-related genes, a vast majority of
which remain uncharacterized. Several Ca²⁺-ATPases have been described in
apicomplexans, several of which are annotated in the different genomes. There is 
experimental evidence for an IP3 (inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate)-dependent calcium
response in Plasmodium spp. and T. gondii, although no IP3 or ryanodine receptors
have been identified. Genes encoding potential calcium channels are present in T.
gondi, but not in Plasmodium spp. and Cryptosporidium spp. Effector
calcium-binding proteins including calmodulins and CDPK (calcium-dependent
protein kinase) genes mainly found in plants have also been described. The
characterized CDPKs were found to play important roles in protein secretion, host
cell invasion and parasite differentiation. Taken together, the available
information on calcium storage and function in apicomplexans, although
fragmented, suggest the existence of unique calcium-mediated pathways in these
parasites. An in-depth functional characterization of the apicomplexan
calcium-related genes could lead to the identification of novel therapeutic
targets, and will improve our understanding of the role of calcium in parasite
development and virulence.

DOI: 10.1042/bse0510097 
PMCID: PMC3488345
PMID: 22023444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

