
1. Infect Immun. 2012 Feb;80(2):633-42. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05188-11. Epub 2011 Nov 21.

Kinetics of humoral and memory B cell response induced by the Plasmodium
falciparum 19-kilodalton merozoite surface protein 1 in mice.

Kafuye-Mlwilo MY(1), Mukherjee P, Chauhan VS.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Medical Research, Tanga Research Centre, Amani
Biomedical Research Laboratory, Tanga, Tanzania.

The 19-kDa carboxyl-terminal fragment of the merozoite surface protein-1
(MSP-1(19)) has been shown to regulate antibody (Ab)-mediated protective immunity
to blood-stage malaria infection. But the serological memory to this antigen
tends to be short-lived, and little is known of the mechanisms that regulate the 
formation of B cell memory to MSP-1(19) antigen. We studied the formation of B
cell memory response after immunization with the recombinant 19-kDa Plasmodium
falciparum merozoite surface protein 1 (PfMSP-1(19)). Immunization with
PfMSP-1(19) resulted in delayed increase in germinal center (GC) B cell numbers. 
This poor GC reaction correlated with short-lived PfMSP-1(19)-specific antibodies
in serum and the short life of PfMSP-1(19)-specific plasma cells and memory B
cells (MBCs) in spleen and bone marrow. PfMSP-1(19)-specific MBCs were capable of
producing antigen (Ag)-specific Ab-secreting cell (ASC) responses that were
short-lived following challenge immunization of the immune mice with antigen or
transgenic Plasmodium berghei parasite expressing PfMSP-1(19) in place of native 
P. berghei MSP-1(19) at 8 weeks after the last immunization or following adoptive
transfer into naive hosts. However, no protection was achieved in PfMSP-1(19)
immune mice or recipient mice with PfMSP-1(19)-specific MBCs following challenge 
with transgenic P. berghei. Our findings suggest that PfMSP-1(19)-specific IgG
production by short-lived plasma cells combined with the poor ability of the
PfMSP-1(19)-induced MBCs to maintain the anamnestic IgG responses failed to
contribute to protection against infection.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.05188-11 
PMCID: PMC3264296
PMID: 22104109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

