
1. Mol Microbiol. 2012 Jan;83(2):304-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2011.07933.x. Epub
2011 Dec 11.

Dissecting the role of glutathione biosynthesis in Plasmodium falciparum.

Patzewitz EM(1), Wong EH, Müller S.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Molecular Parasitology, Institute of Infection,
Immunity & Inflammation, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, 120 University Place, Glasgow G12 8TA, UK.
Eva-Maria.Patzewitz@nottingham.ac.uk

Glutathione (γ-glutamylcysteinyl-glycine, GSH) has vital functions as thiol redox
buffer and cofactor of antioxidant and detoxification enzymes. Plasmodium
falciparum possesses a functional GSH biosynthesis pathway and contains mM
concentrations of the tripeptide. It was impossible to delete in P. falciparum
the genes encoding γ-glutamylcysteine synthetase (γGCS) or glutathione synthetase
(GS), the two enzymes synthesizing GSH, although both gene loci were not
refractory to recombination. Our data show that the parasites cannot compensate
for the loss of GSH biosynthesis via GSH uptake. This suggests an important if
not essential function of GSH biosynthesis pathway for the parasites. Treatment
with the irreversible inhibitor of γGCS L-buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) reduced
intracellular GSH levels in P. falciparum and was lethal for their
intra-erythrocytic development, corroborating the suggestion that GSH
biosynthesis is important for parasite survival. Episomal expression of γgcs in
P. falciparum increased tolerance to BSO attributable to increased levels of
γGCS. Concomitantly expression of glutathione reductase was reduced leading to an
increased GSH efflux. Together these data indicate that GSH levels are tightly
regulated by a functional GSH biosynthesis and the reduction of GSSG.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2011.07933.x 
PMCID: PMC3321222
PMID: 22151036  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

