
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Apr;40(7):3066-77. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr1215. Epub 2011
Dec 13.

PfAlbas constitute a new eukaryotic DNA/RNA-binding protein family in malaria
parasites.

Chêne A(1), Vembar SS, Rivière L, Lopez-Rubio JJ, Claes A, Siegel TN, Sakamoto H,
Scheidig-Benatar C, Hernandez-Rivas R, Scherf A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité de Biologie des Interactions Hôte-Parasite, URA 2581, 
F-75015 Paris, France.

In Plasmodium falciparum, perinuclear subtelomeric chromatin conveys monoallelic 
expression of virulence genes. However, proteins that directly bind to chromosome
ends are poorly described. Here we identify a novel DNA/RNA-binding protein
family that bears homology to the archaeal protein Alba (Acetylation lowers
binding affinity). We isolated three of the four PfAlba paralogs as part of a
molecular complex that is associated with the P. falciparum-specific TARE6
(Telomere-Associated Repetitive Elements 6) subtelomeric region and showed in
electromobility shift assays (EMSAs) that the PfAlbas bind to TARE6 repeats. In
early blood stages, the PfAlba proteins were enriched at the nuclear periphery
and partially co-localized with PfSir2, a TARE6-associated histone deacetylase
linked to the process of antigenic variation. The nuclear location changed at the
onset of parasite proliferation (trophozoite-schizont), where the PfAlba proteins
were also detectable in the cytoplasm in a punctate pattern. Using
single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) probes in EMSAs, we found that PfAlbas bind to ssRNA,
albeit with different binding preferences. We demonstrate for the first time in
eukaryotes that Alba-like proteins bind to both DNA and RNA and that their
intracellular location is developmentally regulated. Discovery of the PfAlbas may
provide a link between the previously described subtelomeric non-coding RNA and
the regulation of antigenic variation.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkr1215 
PMCID: PMC3326326
PMID: 22167473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

