
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e29039. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029039. Epub 2011 Dec 19.

Clag9 is not essential for PfEMP1 surface expression in non-cytoadherent
Plasmodium falciparum parasites with a chromosome 9 deletion.

Nacer A(1), Roux E, Pomel S, Scheidig-Benatar C, Sakamoto H, Lafont F, Scherf A, 
Mattei D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Biology of Parasite-Host Interactions Unit, Department of
Parasitology and Mycology, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: The expression of the clonally variant virulence factor PfEMP1
mediates the sequestration of Plasmodium falciparum infected erythrocytes in the 
host vasculature and contributes to chronic infection. Non-cytoadherent parasites
with a chromosome 9 deletion lack clag9, a gene linked to cytoadhesion in
previous studies. Here we present new clag9 data that challenge this view and
show that surface the non-cytoadherence phenotype is linked to the expression of 
a non-functional PfEMP1.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Loss of adhesion in P. falciparum D10, a parasite
line with a large chromosome 9 deletion, was investigated. Surface iodination
analysis of non-cytoadherent D10 parasites and COS-7 surface expression of the
CD36-binding PfEMP1 CIDR1α domain were performed and showed that these parasites 
express an unusual trypsin-resistant, non-functional PfEMP1 at the erythrocyte
surface. However, the CIDR1α domain of this var gene expressed in COS-7 cells
showed strong binding to CD36. Atomic Force Microscopy showed a slightly modified
D10 knob morphology compared to adherent parasites. Trafficking of PfEMP1 and
KAHRP remained functional in D10. We link the non-cytoadherence phenotype to a
chromosome 9 breakage and healing event resulting in the loss of 25 subtelomeric 
genes including clag9. In contrast to previous studies, knockout of the clag9
gene from 3D7 did not interfere with parasite adhesion to CD36.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our data show the surface expression of non-functional 
PfEMP1 in D10 strongly indicating that genes other than clag9 deleted from
chromosome 9 are involved in this virulence process possibly via
post-translational modifications.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029039 
PMCID: PMC3242772
PMID: 22205992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

