
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e29465. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029465. Epub 2011 Dec 27.

Polymorphisms in the RNASE3 gene are associated with susceptibility to cerebral
malaria in Ghanaian children.

Adu B(1), Dodoo D, Adukpo S, Gyan BA, Hedley PL, Goka B, Adjei GO, Larsen SO,
Christiansen M, Theisen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Immunology, Statens Serum Institut,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Cerebral malaria (CM) is the most severe outcome of Plasmodium
falciparum infection and a major cause of death in children from 2 to 4 years of 
age. A hospital based study in Ghana showed that P. falciparum induces
eosinophilia and found a significantly higher serum level of eosinophil cationic 
protein (ECP) in CM patients than in uncomplicated malaria (UM) and severe
malaria anemia (SA) patients. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been
described in the ECP encoding-gene (RNASE3) of which the c.371G>C polymorphism
(rs2073342) results in an arginine to threonine amino acid substitution p.R124T
in the polypeptide and abolishes the cytotoxicity of ECP. The present study aimed
to investigate the potential association between polymorphisms in RNASE3 and CM.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The RNASE3 gene and flanking regions were
sequenced in 206 Ghanaian children enrolled in a hospital based malaria study. An
association study was carried out to assess the significance of five SNPs in CM
(n=45) and SA (n=56) cases, respectively. The two severe case groups (CM and SA) 
were compared with the non-severe control group comprising children suffering
from UM (n=105). The 371G allele was significantly associated with CM (p=0.00945,
OR=2.29, 95% CI=1.22-4.32) but not with SA. Linkage disequilibrium analysis
demonstrated significant linkage between three SNPs and the haplotype combination
371G/*16G/*94A was strongly associated with susceptibility to CM (p=0.000913,
OR=4.14, 95% CI=1.79-9.56), thus, defining a risk haplotype. The RNASE3 371GG
genotype was found to be under frequency-dependent selection.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The 371G allele of RNASE3 is associated with
susceptibility to CM and forms part of a risk associated haplotype GGA defined by
the markers: rs2073342 (G-allele), rs2233860 (G-allele) and rs8019343 (A-allele) 
respectively. Collectively, these results suggest a hitherto unrecognized role
for eosinophils in CM pathogenesis.

Â© 2011 Adu et al.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029465 
PMCID: PMC3246477
PMID: 22216286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

