
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2011 Dec;7(12):e1002320. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002320.
Epub 2011 Dec 22.

Genome comparison of human and non-human malaria parasites reveals species
subset-specific genes potentially linked to human disease.

Frech C(1), Chen N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada.

Genes underlying important phenotypic differences between Plasmodium species, the
causative agents of malaria, are frequently found in only a subset of species and
cluster at dynamically evolving subtelomeric regions of chromosomes. We
hypothesized that chromosome-internal regions of Plasmodium genomes harbour
additional species subset-specific genes that underlie differences in human
pathogenicity, human-to-human transmissibility, and human virulence. We combined 
sequence similarity searches with synteny block analyses to identify species
subset-specific genes in chromosome-internal regions of six published Plasmodium 
genomes, including Plasmodium falciparum, Plasmodium vivax, Plasmodium knowlesi, 
Plasmodium yoelii, Plasmodium berghei, and Plasmodium chabaudi. To improve
comparative analysis, we first revised incorrectly annotated gene models using
homology-based gene finders and examined putative subset-specific genes within
syntenic contexts. Confirmed subset-specific genes were then analyzed for their
role in biological pathways and examined for molecular functions using publicly
available databases. We identified 16 genes that are well conserved in the three 
primate parasites but not found in rodent parasites, including three key enzymes 
of the thiamine (vitamin B1) biosynthesis pathway. Thirteen genes were found to
be present in both human parasites but absent in the monkey parasite P. knowlesi,
including genes specifically upregulated in sporozoites or gametocytes that could
be linked to parasite transmission success between humans. Furthermore, we
propose 15 chromosome-internal P. falciparum-specific genes as new candidate
genes underlying increased human virulence and detected a currently
uncharacterized cluster of P. vivax-specific genes on chromosome 6 likely
involved in erythrocyte invasion. In conclusion, Plasmodium species harbour many 
chromosome-internal differences in the form of protein-coding genes, some of
which are potentially linked to human disease and thus promising leads for future
laboratory research.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002320 
PMCID: PMC3245289
PMID: 22215999  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

