
1. BMC Genomics. 2011 Dec 22;12 Suppl 4:S4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-S4-S4. Epub
2011 Dec 22.

Origin of multiple periodicities in the Fourier power spectra of the Plasmodium
falciparum genome.

Nunes MC(1), Wanner EF, Weber G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Ouro Preto, 35400-000
Ouro Preto, MG, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Fourier transforms and their associated power spectra are used for
detecting periodicities and protein-coding genes and is generally regarded as a
well established technique. Many of the periodicities which have been found with 
this method are quite well understood such as the periodicity of 3 nt which is
associated to codon usage. But what is the origin of the peculiar frequency
multiples k/21 which were reported for a tiny section of chromosome 2 in P.
falciparum? Are these present in other chromosomes and perhaps in related
organisms? And how should we interpret fractional periodicities in genomes?
RESULTS: We applied the binary indicator power spectrum to all chromosomes of P. 
falciparum, and found that the frequency overtones k/21 are present only in
non-coding sections. We did not find such frequency overtones in any other
related genomes. Furthermore, the frequency overtones were identified as
artifacts of the way the genome is encoded into a numerical sequence, that is,
they are frequency aliases. By choosing a different way to encode the sequence
the overtones do not appear. In view of these results, we revisited early
applications of this technique to proteins where frequency overtones were
reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Some authors hinted recently at the possibility of mapping artifacts
and frequency aliases in power spectra. However, in the case of P. falciparum the
frequency aliases are particularly strong and can mask the 1/3 frequency which is
used for gene detecting. This shows that albeit being a well known technique,
with a long history of application in proteins, few researchers seem to be aware 
of the problems represented by frequency aliases.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-S4-S4 
PMCID: PMC3287587
PMID: 22369134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

