
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32105. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032105. Epub 2012 Mar 5.

Genetic diversity in new members of the reticulocyte binding protein family in
Thai Plasmodium vivax isolates.

Kosaisavee V(1), Lek-Uthai U, Suwanarusk R, Grüner AC, Russell B, Nosten F, Rénia
L, Snounou G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology and Entomology, Faculty of Public Health, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(6). doi:10.1371/annotation/4e852b7d-735e-436f-bc66-3c31706b5f26.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax merozoites specifically invade reticulocytes. Until 
recently, two reticulocyte-binding proteins (Pvrbp1 and Pvrbp2) expressed at the 
apical pole of the P. vivax merozoite were considered to be involved in
reticulocyte recognition. The genome sequence recently obtained for the Salvador 
I (Sal-I) strain of P. vivax revealed additional genes in this family, and in
particular Pvrbp2a, Pvrbp2b (Pvrbp2 has been renamed as Pvrbp2c) and two
pseudogenes Pvrbp2d and Pvrbp3. It had been previously found that Pvrbp2c is
substantially more polymorphic than Pvrbp1. The primary goal of this study was to
ascertain the level of polymorphism of these new genes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The sequence of the Pvrbp2a, Pvrbp2b, Pvrbp2d and
Pvrbp3 genes were obtained by amplification/cloning using DNA purified from four 
isolates collected from patients that acquired the infection in the four cardinal
regions of Thailand (west, north, south and east). An additional seven isolates
from western Thailand were analyzed for gene copy number variation. There were
significant polymorphisms exhibited by these genes (compared to the reference
Sal-I strain) with the ratio of mutations leading to a non-synonymous or
synonymous amino acid change close to 3∶1 for Pvrbp2a and Pvrbp2b. Although the
degree of polymorphism exhibited by these two genes was higher than that of
Pvrbp1, it did not reach the exceptional diversity noted for Pvrbp2c. It was
interesting to note that variations in the copy number of Pvrbp2a and Pvrbp2b
occurred in some isolates.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The evolution of different members of the Pvrbp2 family
and their relatively high degree of polymorphism suggests that the proteins
encoded by these genes are important for parasite survival and are under immune
selection. Our data also shows that there are highly conserved regions in rbp2a
and rbp2b, which might provide suitable targets for future vaccine development
against the blood stage of P. vivax.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032105 
PMCID: PMC3293883
PMID: 22403626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

