
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2012 May;83(1):59-69. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2012.03.008. Epub
2012 Mar 17.

High-level expression of Falcipain-2 in Escherichia coli by codon optimization
and auto-induction.

Sarduy ES(1), Muñoz AC, Trejo SA, de los A Chavéz Planes M.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Estudio de Proteínas, Facultad de Biología, Universidad de la
Habana, Cuba. esalas@fbio.uh.cu

Falcipain-2, the major cysteine hemoglobinase from the human malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum, is critical for parasite development and is considered a
promising chemotherapeutic target. In order to facilitate the high-throughput
screening of Falcipain-2 inhibitors from natural sources, we developed an
economic and highly-productive overexpression system in Escherichia coli using a 
codon-optimized proFalcipain-2 construct. Very high expression levels (35-55% of 
total host proteins) were observed when proFalcaipain-2 expression was induced
with 1mM isopropyl-1-thio-β-D-galactopyranoside (IPTG) in several E. coli
strains, with the highest level observed for BL21(DE3). A lower expression (~40% 
of total host proteins) was observed when BL21(DE3) was grown in ZYM-5052
auto-induction medium, containing 0.2% lactose as inducer. However, the culture
grew to notably higher cellular density, increasing ~1.5 times the overall yield 
of the system when compared with conventional IPTG-induction. Although several
conditions were modified to achieve the expression of soluble and active
Falcipain-2, the enzyme was mainly obtained in the form of insoluble aggregates. 
After purification and refolding, ~50 mg of active enzyme were obtained per liter
of culture at low cost using a regular incubator shaker, and recombinant
Falcipain-2 exhibited structural and functional characteristics very similar to
the natural counterpart. Due to its versatility and simplicity, this strategy can
be straightforwardly adapted to other proteins from Plasmodium species or any
other organism with an AT-rich genome.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2012.03.008 
PMID: 22450163  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

