
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2012;6(4):e1592. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001592. Epub 2012
Apr 3.

Population structure and transmission dynamics of Plasmodium vivax in the
Republic of Korea based on microsatellite DNA analysis.

Iwagami M(1), Fukumoto M, Hwang SY, Kim SH, Kho WG, Kano S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine and Malaria, Research Institute, National
Center for Global Health and Medicine, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In order to control malaria, it is important to understand the
genetic structure of the parasites in each endemic area. Plasmodium vivax is
widely distributed in the tropical to temperate regions of Asia and South
America, but effective strategies for its elimination have yet to be designed. In
South Korea, for example, indigenous vivax malaria was eliminated by the late
1970s, but re-emerged from 1993. We estimated the population structure and
temporal dynamics of transmission of P. vivax in South Korea using microsatellite
DNA markers.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We analyzed 255 South Korean P. vivax isolates
collected from 1994 to 2008, based on 10 highly polymorphic microsatellite DNA
loci of the P. vivax genome. Allelic data were obtained for the 87 isolates and
their microsatellite haplotypes were determined based on a combination of allelic
data of the loci. In total, 40 haplotypes were observed. There were two
predominant haplotypes: H16 and H25. H16 was observed in 9 isolates (10%) from
1996 to 2005, and H25 in 27 (31%) from 1995 to 2003. These results suggested that
the recombination rate of P. vivax in South Korea, a temperate country, was lower
than in tropical areas where identical haplotypes were rarely seen in the
following year. Next, we estimated the relationships among the 40 haplotypes by
eBURST analysis. Two major groups were found: one composed of 36 isolates (41%)
including H25; the other of 20 isolates (23%) including H16. Despite the low
recombination rate, other new haplotypes that are genetically distinct from the 2
groups have also been observed since 1997 (H27).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggested a continual introduction of P. 
vivax from other population sources, probably North Korea. Molecular epidemiology
using microsatellite DNA of the P. vivax population is effective for assessing
the population structure and transmission dynamics of the parasites--information 
that can assist in the elimination of vivax malaria in endemic areas.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001592 
PMCID: PMC3317904
PMID: 22509416  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

