
1. Parasitol Res. 2012 Sep;111(3):1093-101. doi: 10.1007/s00436-012-2937-3. Epub
2012 May 6.

Organ-specific testosterone-insensitive response of miRNA expression of C57BL/6
mice to Plasmodium chabaudi malaria.

Al-Quraishy S(1), Dkhil MA, Delic D, Abdel-Baki AA, Wunderlich F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia. guraishi@yahoo.com

Increasing evidence critically implicates miRNAs in the pathogenesis of diseases,
but little is known in context with infectious diseases. This study investigates 
as to whether the testosterone-induced persistent susceptibility to blood-stage
malaria of Plasmodium chabaudi coincides with changes in miRNA expression of the 
anti-malaria effectors sites spleen and liver. Female C57BL/6 mice were treated
with vehicle or testosterone (T) for 3 weeks. Then, T treatment was discontinued 
for 12 weeks before challenge with 10(6) P. chabaudi-parasitized erythrocytes.
The miRNA expression was examined after 12 weeks of T withdrawal and during
infections at peak parasitemia on day 8 p.i. using miRXploreâ„¢ microarray
technology. P. chabaudi infections induce an organ-specific response of miRNA
expression. We can identify 25 miRNA species to be downregulated by more than
2-fold in the spleen and 169 miRNA species in the liver. Among these 194 miRNA
species, there are 12 common miRNA species that are downregulated by
0.48-0.14-fold in both spleen and liver, which are miR-194, miR-192, miR-193A-3P,
miR-145, miR-16, miR-99A, miR-99B, miR-15A, miR-152, let-7G, let-7B, and
miR-455-3P. Only in the liver, there is an upregulation of the miR-142-5p by
2.5-fold and miR-342-3p by 5.1-fold. After 12 weeks of T withdrawal, the spleen
exhibits only the miR-200A that is upregulated by 2.7-fold. In the liver,
miR-376B, miR-493*, and miR-188-3P are upregulated by 2.4-fold, 2.2-fold, and
2.1-fold, respectively, and miR-347, miR-200A, and miR-200B are downregulated by 
approximately 0.4-fold. Upon infection, however, these changes are not sustained,
i.e., the miRNA expressions of both spleen and liver of T-pretreated mice exhibit
the same response to P. chabaudi malaria as that of vehicle-treated control mice.
Our data suggest (1) that the P. chabaudi-induced downregulation of miRNA
expression in spleen and liver is required to allow the upregulation of their
numerous target genes in response to infection, and (2) that the T-induced
persistent susceptibility to P. chabaudi does not affect the responsiveness of
miRNA expression in spleen and liver to blood-stage malaria.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-012-2937-3 
PMID: 22562236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

