
1. Malar J. 2012 Jun 10;11:191. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-191.

Activation of nuclear factor kappa B in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from
malaria patients.

Punsawad C(1), Krudsood S, Maneerat Y, Chaisri U, Tangpukdee N, Pongponratn E,
Nantavisai K, Udomsangpetch R, Viriyavejakul P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Pathology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol
University, 420/6 Rajvithi Road, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Malaria parasites and their products can activate a specific immune
response by stimulating cytokine production in the host's immune cells.
Transcription nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) is an important regulator for the
control of many pro-inflammatory genes, such as interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor
necrosis factor (TNF). The activation and expression of NF-κB p65 in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of malaria patients were investigated and
correlated with the levels of IL-10 and TNF to study the nature of NF-κB p65 and 
its linkage to inflammatory cytokines.
METHODS: The sample group comprised 33 patients admitted with malaria caused by
Plasmodium vivax (n = 11), uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum (n = 11), and
complicated Plasmodium falciparum (n = 11). Peripheral blood was collected at
admission and on day 7 for PBMC isolation. Healthy subjects were used as a
control group. The expressions of NF-κB p65 in the PBMCs from malaria patients
and the plasma levels of IL-10 and TNF were measured by using enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The immunofluorescence technique was used to
determine NF-κB nuclear translocation.
RESULTS: At admission, patients with P. vivax and uncomplicated P. falciparum had
significantly elevated phospho-NF-κB p65 levels in the PBMCs compared with those 
of healthy controls. However, patients with complicated P. falciparum malaria had
decreased levels of phospho-NF-κB p65. On day 7 post-treatment, significantly
increased phospho-NF-κB p65 was found in the PBMCs of patients with complicated
P. falciparum, compared with healthy controls. The plasma level of IL-10 was
elevated in day 0 in patients with complicated P. falciparum malaria and was
found to be negatively correlated with phospho-NF-κB p65 level (rs = -0.630,
p = 0.038). However, there was no correlation between phospho-NF-κB p65
expression and TNF level in patients with complicated P. falciparum malaria.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report demonstrating alterations in NF-κB p65
activity in the PBMCs of malaria patients. The altered lower features of NF-κB
p65 in the PBMCs of patients with complicated P. falciparum at admission could be
due to a suppressive effect of high IL-10 associated with complicated P.
falciparum malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-191 
PMCID: PMC3422190
PMID: 22682094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

