
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2012 Sep;185(1):58-65. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.06.002. Epub 2012 Jun 13.

Novel RuvB nuclear ATPase is specific to intraerythrocytic mitosis during
schizogony of Plasmodium falciparum.

Ahmad M(1), Singh S, Afrin F, Tuteja R.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali
Marg, New Delhi, India.

RuvB protein belongs to AAA+ family of enzymes involved in diverse cellular
activities. In addition to the annotated two RuvB proteins in Plasmodium
falciparum database, we report that a third RuvB protein is also present. The
amino acid sequence analysis has revealed that P. falciparum RuvB3 (PfRuvB3)
possesses Walker motif A, Walker motif B, sensor I and sensor II conserved motifs
similar to yeast and human RuvB like proteins. The phylogenetic analysis revealed
that PfRuvB3 is closely related to yeast RuvB like proteins which are essential
for the survival of yeast. The biochemical characterization of recombinant
PfRuvB3 confirms its ssDNA dependent ATPase activity. Using the truncated
derivatives we show that Walker motif A is essential for the enzymatic activity
of PfRuvB3. Using the immunodepletion assays we further show that the ATPase
activity is attributable to PfRuvB3 protein. The endogenous P. falciparum RuvB3
contains the characteristic ATPase and some DNA helicase activities. The confocal
microscopy analysis showed that this protein is mainly expressed during
intraerythrocytic schizont stages of the parasite and is localized to the nuclear
region. Once merozoite comes out from schizont, PfRuvB3 protein distinctly
relocalized to the subnuclear region. The co-localization studies with a
nucleolar marker PfNop1 further suggest that in P. falciparum RuvB3 localizes
into a discrete nuclear compartment. On the basis of these studies it can be
speculated that P. falciparum RuvB3 is most likely required for intraerythrocytic
schizogony.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.06.002 
PMID: 22705314  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

