
1. Malar J. 2012 Jul 6;11:228. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-228.

Two functional reticulocyte binding-like (RBL) invasion ligands of zoonotic
Plasmodium knowlesi exhibit differential adhesion to monkey and human
erythrocytes.

Semenya AA(1), Tran TM, Meyer EV, Barnwell JW, Galinski MR.

Author information: 
(1)Emory Vaccine Center and Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium knowlesi is a monkey malaria species that is becoming a
serious public health concern infecting hundreds and perhaps thousands of humans 
in Southeast Asia. Invasion of erythrocytes by merozoites entails a cascade of
molecular interactions. One step involves the adhesion of Plasmodium reticulocyte
binding-like (RBL) proteins. Plasmodium knowlesi merozoites express only two RBL 
invasion ligands, known as Normocyte Binding Proteins (PkNBPXa and PkNBPXb).
METHODS: Overlapping N-terminal regions of PkNBPXa and PkNBPXb were expressed in 
COS7 cells and tested for surface expression and adhesion to rhesus monkey
erythrocytes. Subsequent tests to study specific receptor ligand interactions
included adhesion to a panel of human and non-human primate erythrocytes,
enzymatic treatment, and site directed mutagenesis.
RESULTS: An N-terminal cysteine-rich region of PkNBPXb (PkNBPXb-II) exhibited
specific adhesion to rhesus monkey erythrocytes. Mutation of four of five
cysteines in PkNBPXb-II interfered with its surface expression on COS7 cells,
suggesting disulphide bond conformation is critical for intracellular
trafficking. Binding of PkNBPXb-II was abolished when rhesus erythrocytes were
pre-treated with chymotrypsin, but not trypsin or neuraminidase. PkNBPXb-II also 
bound other Old World monkey species and gibbon erythrocytes. However,
erythrocytes from other primate species including humans did not bind to
PkNBPXb-II or native PkNBPXb. Importantly, unlike PkNBPXb, PkNBPXa bound human
erythrocytes, and this binding was independent of the Duffy blood group
determinant.
CONCLUSIONS: The data reported here begins to clarify the functional domains of
the P. knowlesi RBLs. A binding domain has been identified and characterized in
PkNBPXb. Notably, this study demonstrates that unlike PkNBPXb, PkNBPXa can bind
to human erythrocytes, suggesting that PkNBPXa may function as a ligand to enable
the invasion of P. knowlesi merozoites into human cells.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-228 
PMCID: PMC3464698
PMID: 22770469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

