
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2012 Nov;186(1):29-37. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.09.004. Epub 2012 Sep 20.

Characterization of a glycerophosphodiesterase with an unusual tripartite
distribution and an important role in the asexual blood stages of Plasmodium
falciparum.

Denloye T(1), Dalal S, Klemba M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.

Catabolism of glycerophospholipids during the rapid growth of the asexual
intraerythrocytic malaria parasite may contribute to membrane recycling and the
acquisition of lipid biosynthetic precursors from the host. To better understand 
the scope of lipid catabolism in Plasmodium falciparum, we have characterized a
malarial homolog of bacterial glycerophosphodiesterases. These enzymes catalyze
the hydrolysis of glycerophosphodiesterases that are generated by
phospholipase-catalyzed removal of the two acyl groups from glycerophospholipids.
The P. falciparum glycerophosphodiesterase (PfGDPD) exhibits an unusual
tripartite distribution during the asexual blood stage with pools of enzyme in
the parasitophorous vacuole, food vacuole and cytosol. Efforts to disrupt the
chromosomal PfGDPD coding sequence were unsuccessful, which implies that the
enzyme is important for efficient parasite growth. Tagging of the endogenous pool
of PfGDPD with a conditional aggregation domain partially perturbed the
distribution of the enzyme in the parasitophorous vacuole but had no discernable 
effect on growth in culture. Kinetic characterization of the hydrolysis of
glycerophosphocholine by recombinant PfGDPD, an Mg(2+)-dependent enzyme, yielded 
steady-state parameters that were comparable to those of a homologous bacterial
glycerophosphodiesterase. Together, these results suggest a physiological role
for PfGDPD in glycerophospholipid catabolism in multiple subcellular
compartments. Possibilities for what this role might be are discussed.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.09.004 
PMID: 23000576  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

