
1. Trop Biomed. 2012 Sep;29(3):405-21.

Modulation of interleukin-18 release produced positive outcomes on parasitaemia
development and cytokines production during malaria in mice.

Basir R(1), Hasballah K, Jabbarzare M, Gam LH, Abdul Majid AM, Yam MF, Moklas MA,
Othman F, Che Norma MT, Zalinah A, Mahmud R, Abdullah WO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, Universiti
Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia. rusliza@medic.upm.edu.my

The involvement of interleukin-18 (IL-18) and the effects of modulating its
release on the course of malaria infection were investigated using Plasmodium
berghei ANKA infection in ICR mice as a model. Results demonstrated that plasma
IL-18 concentrations in malarial mice were significantly elevated and positively 
correlated with the percentage parasitaemia development. Significant expressions 
of IL-18 were also observed in the brain, spleen and liver tissues. Slower
development of parasitaemia was observed significantly upon inhibition and
neutralization of IL-18, whereas faster development of parasitaemia was recorded 
when the circulating levels of IL-18 were further augmented during the infection.
Inhibition and neutralization of IL-18 production also resulted in a significant 
decrease of plasma concentrations of pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNFα, IFNγ,
IL-1α and IL-6), whereas the anti-inflammatory cytokine, IL-10, was significantly
increased. Augmenting the release of IL- 18 during the infection on the other
hand resulted in the opposite. Early mortality in malarial mice was also observed
when the circulating levels of IL-18 were further augmented. Results proved the
important role of IL-18 in immune response against malaria and suggest that IL-8 
is pro-inflammatory in nature and may involve in mediating the severity of the
infection through a pathway of elevating the pro-inflammatory cytokine and
limiting the release of anti-inflammatory cytokine.


PMID: 23018504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

