
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012 Sep;8(9):e1002948. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002948. Epub 2012
Sep 20.

A unique protein phosphatase with kelch-like domains (PPKL) in Plasmodium
modulates ookinete differentiation, motility and invasion.

Guttery DS(1), Poulin B, Ferguson DJ, Szöőr B, Wickstead B, Carroll PL,
Ramakrishnan C, Brady D, Patzewitz EM, Straschil U, Solyakov L, Green JL, Sinden 
RE, Tobin AB, Holder AA, Tewari R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genetics and Genomics, School of Biology, Queens Medical Centre,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation (catalysed by kinases and
phosphatases, respectively) are post-translational modifications that play key
roles in many eukaryotic signalling pathways, and are often deregulated in a
number of pathological conditions in humans. In the malaria parasite Plasmodium, 
functional insights into its kinome have only recently been achieved, with over
half being essential for blood stage development and another 14 kinases being
essential for sexual development and mosquito transmission. However, functions
for any of the plasmodial protein phosphatases are unknown. Here, we use reverse 
genetics in the rodent malaria model, Plasmodium berghei, to examine the role of 
a unique protein phosphatase containing kelch-like domains (termed PPKL) from a
family related to Arabidopsis BSU1. Phylogenetic analysis confirmed that the
family of BSU1-like proteins including PPKL is encoded in the genomes of land
plants, green algae and alveolates, but not in other eukaryotic lineages.
Furthermore, PPKL was observed in a distinct family, separate to the most
closely-related phosphatase family, PP1. In our genetic approach, C-terminal GFP 
fusion with PPKL showed an active protein phosphatase preferentially expressed in
female gametocytes and ookinetes. Deletion of the endogenous ppkl gene caused
abnormal ookinete development and differentiation, and dissociated apical
microtubules from the inner-membrane complex, generating an immotile phenotype
and failure to invade the mosquito mid-gut epithelium. These observations were
substantiated by changes in localisation of cytoskeletal tubulin and actin, and
the micronemal protein CTRP in the knockout mutant as assessed by indirect
immunofluorescence. Finally, increased mRNA expression of dozi, a RNA helicase
vital to zygote development was observed in ppkl(-) mutants, with global
phosphorylation studies of ookinete differentiation from 1.5-24 h
post-fertilisation indicating major changes in the first hours of zygote
development. Our work demonstrates a stage-specific essentiality of the unique
PPKL enzyme, which modulates parasite differentiation, motility and transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002948 
PMCID: PMC3447748
PMID: 23028336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

