
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46160. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046160. Epub 2012 Sep 25.

Subcompartmentalisation of proteins in the rhoptries correlates with ordered
events of erythrocyte invasion by the blood stage malaria parasite.

Zuccala ES(1), Gout AM, Dekiwadia C, Marapana DS, Angrisano F, Turnbull L, Riglar
DT, Rogers KL, Whitchurch CB, Ralph SA, Speed TP, Baum J.

Author information: 
(1)Infection and Immunity, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Host cell infection by apicomplexan parasites plays an essential role in
lifecycle progression for these obligate intracellular pathogens. For most
species, including the etiological agents of malaria and toxoplasmosis, infection
requires active host-cell invasion dependent on formation of a tight junction -
the organising interface between parasite and host cell during entry. Formation
of this structure is not, however, shared across all Apicomplexa or indeed all
parasite lifecycle stages. Here, using an in silico integrative genomic search
and endogenous gene-tagging strategy, we sought to characterise proteins that
function specifically during junction-dependent invasion, a class of proteins we 
term invasins to distinguish them from adhesins that function in species specific
host-cell recognition. High-definition imaging of tagged Plasmodium falciparum
invasins localised proteins to multiple cellular compartments of the blood stage 
merozoite. This includes several that localise to distinct subcompartments within
the rhoptries. While originating from the same organelle, however, each has very 
different dynamics during invasion. Apical Sushi Protein and Rhoptry Neck protein
2 release early, following the junction, whilst a novel rhoptry protein PFF0645c 
releases only after invasion is complete. This supports the idea that
organisation of proteins within a secretory organelle determines the order and
destination of protein secretion and provides a localisation-based classification
strategy for predicting invasin function during apicomplexan parasite invasion.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046160 
PMCID: PMC3458004
PMID: 23049965  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

