
1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 30;287(49):41499-513. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.384388. Epub
2012 Oct 11.

Erythrocytic stage-dependent regulation of oligomerization of Plasmodium
ribosomal protein P2.

Das S(1), Sudarsan R, Sivakami S, Sharma S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
400005 Mumbai, India.

The eukaryotic 60 S-ribosomal stalk consists of P0, P1, and P2 proteins, which
associate in a pentameric structure (P1(2)-P0-P2(2)). The Plasmodium falciparum
protein P2 (PfP2) appears to play nonribosomal roles. It gets exported to the
infected erythrocyte (IE) surface at 30 h post-merozoite invasion (PMI),
concomitant with extensive oligomerization. Here we present certain biophysical
properties of PfP2. Recombinant P2 (rPfP2) protein showed SDS-resistant
oligomerization, which could be significantly abolished under reducing
conditions. However, the protein continued to oligomerize even when both cysteine
residues were mutated, and with up to 40 amino acids (aa) deleted from the
C-terminal end. CD analysis of P2 showed largely α-helical and random coil
domains. The SDS- and DTT-resistant oligomerization was studied further as it
occurred in a development-specific manner in Plasmodium. In a synchronized
erythrocytic culture of P. falciparum, the PfP2 protein was detected as part of
the ribosomal complex (∼96 kDa) at 18 and 30 h PMI, and was SDS sensitive.
However, at 30 h, large amounts of SDS-sensitive aggregates of >600 kDa were also
seen. At 30 h PMI, each of the parasites, IE cytosol and IE ghost contained
60-80-kDa PfP2 complexes, which resolved to a single 65-kDa species on SDS-PAGE. 
Tetramethylrhodamine-labeled rPfP2 protein exhibited DTT- and SDS-resistant
oligomerization when treated with P. falciparum parasite extracts only from 24 to
36 h PMI, and multiple proteins appeared to be required for this oligomerization.
Understanding the regulation of oligomerization of PfP2 may help in the
elucidation of the novel structure-function relationship in the export of PfP2 to
the red cell surface.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.384388 
PMCID: PMC3510846
PMID: 23060439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

