
1. BMC Microbiol. 2012 Oct 24;12:243. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-12-243.

Molecular analysis of reticulocyte binding protein-2 gene in Plasmodium vivax
isolates from India.

Prajapati SK(1), Kumari P, Singh OP.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Division, National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector 8, 
Dwarka, Delhi, India. surendramrc@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax reticulocyte binding protein-2 (PvRBP-2) is a
promising candidate for development of vaccine against parasite. DNA sequence
polymorphism in pvrbp-2 which may hamper the vaccine development program has been
identified in laboratory strains. Therefore, unraveling genetic polymorphism in
pvrbp-2 from field isolates is a prerequisite for success in vaccine development.
This study was designed with a primary aim to uncover genetic polymorphism in
pvrbp-2 among P. vivax field isolates.
RESULTS: Using virtual restriction mapping of pvrbp-2 sequences, two restriction 
enzymes (AluI and ApoI) were selected for the development of pvrbp-2 as a
PCR-RFLP marker. Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis
revealed a high degree of genetic polymorphism in the pvrbp-2 gene among field
isolates of P. vivax. ApoI-RFLP was found to be more efficient in identifying the
extent of genetic polymorphism in pvrbp-2 compared to AluI-RFLP. Combined
genotyping/haplotyping of RFLP pattern revealed a total of 36 distinct RFLP
patterns among 83 P. vivax isolates analyzed. DNA sequence analysis also supports
high degree of genetic polymorphism among field isolates of P. vivax. Pvrbp-2
PCR-RFLP method is able to distinguish multiple infection up to 16.86% and it
revealed a low level of shared genetic pool between more than two populations.
CONCLUSION: The study suggests that pvrbp-2 is highly polymorphic genetic marker 
which can be used for population genetic analyses. RFLP analysis suggests
presence of nearly similar proportion of Sal-1 and Belem alleles in Indian P.
vivax populations. The larger extent of genetic polymorphism identified from
limited samples advocates to screen genetic polymorphism in pvrbp-2 from malaria 
endemic geographical regions and countries for designing pvrbp-2 based
anti-malarial control measures.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-12-243 
PMCID: PMC3539960
PMID: 23096021  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

