
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(10):e1002964. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002964. Epub 2012
Oct 18.

Plasmodium falciparum gametocyte development 1 (Pfgdv1) and gametocytogenesis
early gene identification and commitment to sexual development.

Eksi S(1), Morahan BJ, Haile Y, Furuya T, Jiang H, Ali O, Xu H, Kiattibutr K,
Suri A, Czesny B, Adeyemo A, Myers TG, Sattabongkot J, Su XZ, Williamson KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Malaria transmission requires the production of male and female gametocytes in
the human host followed by fertilization and sporogonic development in the
mosquito midgut. Although essential for the spread of malaria through the
population, little is known about the initiation of gametocytogenesis in vitro or
in vivo. Using a gametocyte-defective parasite line and genetic complementation, 
we show that Plasmodium falciparumgametocyte development 1 gene (Pfgdv1),
encoding a peri-nuclear protein, is critical for early sexual differentiation.
Transcriptional analysis of Pfgdv1 negative and positive parasite lines
identified a set of gametocytogenesis early genes (Pfge) that were significantly 
down-regulated (>10 fold) in the absence of Pfgdv1 and expression was restored
after Pfgdv1 complementation. Progressive accumulation of Pfge transcripts during
successive rounds of asexual replication in synchronized cultures suggests that
gametocytes are induced continuously during asexual growth. Comparison of Pfge
gene transcriptional profiles in patient samples divided the genes into two
groups differing in their expression in mature circulating gametocytes and
providing candidates to evaluate gametocyte induction and maturation separately
in vivo. The expression profile of one of the early gametocyte specific genes,
Pfge1, correlated significantly with asexual parasitemia, which is consistent
with the ongoing induction of gametocytogenesis during asexual growth observed in
vitro and reinforces the need for sustained transmission-blocking strategies to
eliminate malaria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002964 
PMCID: PMC3475683
PMID: 23093935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

