
1. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces. 2013 Feb 1;102:492-503. doi:
10.1016/j.colsurfb.2012.09.026. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

On designing stable magnetic vectors as carriers for malaria DNA vaccine.

Al-Deen FN(1), Selomulya C, Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800,
Australia.

Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) can be used as therapeutic
and diagnostic agents due to their unique magnetic characteristics, provided that
they are stable in physiological conditions. Here, the assembly of different
magnetic vector configurations comprising SPIONs, polyethylenimine (PEI), and
hyaluronic acid (HA), acting as carriers for malaria DNA vaccine encoding
Plasmodium yoelii merozoite surface protein MSP1-19 (VR1020-PyMSP1-19), and their
stability in different cell media were investigated. The order of assembly
affected vector size, surface charge, stability, and ability to bind and release 
DNA. Generally, all vectors showed relatively small size of less than 200 nm in
water, whereas higher degree of aggregation was observed immediately after
transferring to high-ionic strength media such as 150 mM NaCl buffer and RPMI
1640 culture media (Roswell Park Memorial Institute medium). However, the
pre-addition of HA to DNA effectively reduced the extent of aggregation in
serum-free RPMI 1640 with sizes of almost all complexes remaining below 90 nm,
particularly at HA:PEI charge ratio of 100%. The presence of fetal bovine serum
(FBS) in RPMI 1640 culture media further converted the surface charge of vectors 
from positive to negative, decreasing the size to smaller than 50 nm. Partial
disassembly of some vectors was observed in water, in RPMI, and in RPMI
supplemented with 10% FBS after incubation for 1h, but not in NaCl buffer,
indicating that incubation of complexes in NaCl buffer prior to transfection may 
limit the intracellular release of plasmid DNA. DNase sensitivity assay showed
that plasmid DNA vaccine encoding the PyMSP1-19 in all configurations preserved
their structural integrity without damage, even after DNase I treatment for 30
min. This study demonstrated that structurally well-defined magnetic gene
carriers could be designed to improve malaria DNA vaccine delivery systems,
particularly for in vivo applications.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2012.09.026 
PMID: 23104020  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

