
1. Exp Parasitol. 2013 Jan;133(1):44-50. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2012.10.011. Epub
2012 Oct 29.

Optimized protocols for improving the likelihood of cloning recombinant progeny
from Plasmodium yoelii genetic crosses.

Qi Y(1), Zhu F, Li J, Fu Y, Pattaradilokrat S, Hong L, Liu S, Huang F, Xu W, Su
XZ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 361005, PR China.

Genetic cross is a powerful tool for studying malaria genes contributing to drug 
resistance, parasite development, and pathogenesis. Cloning and identification of
recombinant progeny (RP) is laborious and expensive, especially when a large
proportion of progeny derived from self-fertilization are present in the uncloned
progeny of a genetic cross. Since the frequency of cross-fertilization affects
the number of recombinant progeny in a genetic cross, it is important to optimize
the procedure of a genetic cross to maximize the cross-fertilization. Here we
investigated the factors that might influence the chances of obtaining RP from a 
genetic cross and showed that different Plasmodium yoelii
strains/subspecies/clones had unique abilities in producing oocysts in a mosquito
midgut. When a genetic cross is performed between two parents producing different
numbers of functional gametocytes, the ratio of parental parasites must be
adjusted to improve the chance of obtaining RP. An optimized parental ratio could
be established based on oocyst counts from single infection of each parent before
crossing experiments, which may reflect the efficiency of gametocyte production
and/or fertilization. The timing of progeny cloning is also important; cloning of
genetic cross progeny from mice directly infected with sporozoites (vs. frozen
blood after needle passage) at a time when parasitemia is low (usually <1%) could
improve the chance of obtaining RP. This study provides an optimized protocol for
efficiently cloning RPs from a genetic cross of malaria parasites.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2012.10.011 
PMCID: PMC3530016
PMID: 23116600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

