
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 20;109(47):E3278-87. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1209823109. Epub 2012 Oct 29.

Plasmodium falciparum responds to amino acid starvation by entering into a
hibernatory state.

Babbitt SE(1), Altenhofen L, Cobbold SA, Istvan ES, Fennell C, Doerig C, Llinás
M, Goldberg DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO 63110, USA.

The human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum is auxotrophic for most amino
acids. Its amino acid needs are met largely through the degradation of host
erythrocyte hemoglobin; however the parasite must acquire isoleucine exogenously,
because this amino acid is not present in adult human hemoglobin. We report that 
when isoleucine is withdrawn from the culture medium of intraerythrocytic P.
falciparum, the parasite slows its metabolism and progresses through its
developmental cycle at a reduced rate. Isoleucine-starved parasites remain viable
for 72 h and resume rapid growth upon resupplementation. Protein degradation
during starvation is important for maintenance of this hibernatory state.
Microarray analysis of starved parasites revealed a 60% decrease in the rate of
progression through the normal transcriptional program but no other apparent
stress response. Plasmodium parasites do not possess a TOR nutrient-sensing
pathway and have only a rudimentary amino acid starvation-sensing eukaryotic
initiation factor 2α (eIF2α) stress response. Isoleucine deprivation results in
GCN2-mediated phosphorylation of eIF2α, but kinase-knockout clones still are able
to hibernate and recover, indicating that this pathway does not directly promote 
survival during isoleucine starvation. We conclude that P. falciparum, in the
absence of canonical eukaryotic nutrient stress-response pathways, can cope with 
an inconsistent bloodstream amino acid supply by hibernating and waiting for more
nutrient to be provided.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1209823109 
PMCID: PMC3511138
PMID: 23112171  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

