
1. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2012;4(1):e2012065. doi: 10.4084/MJHID.2012.065.
Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Sickle cell anaemia and malaria.

Luzzatto L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Honorary Professor of Haematology, University of Florence, Scientific
Director, Istituto Toscano Tumori. Firenze. Italy.

Sickle cell anaemia is a major chapter within haemolytic anaemias; at the same
time, its epidemiology is a remarkable signature of the past and present world
distribution of Plasmodium falciparum malaria. In this brief review, in keeping
with the theme of this journal, we focus on the close and complex relationship
betweeen this blood disease and this infectious disease. On one hand,
heterozygotes for the sickle gene (AS) are relatively protected against the
danger of dying of malaria, as now firmly established through a number of
clinical field studies from different parts of Africa. In addition, experimental 
work is consistent with a plausibile mechanism: namely, that in AS heterozygotes 
P falciparum-infected red cells sickle preferentially and are then removed by
macrophages. On the other hand, patients who are homozygous for the sickle gene
and therefore suffer from sickle cell anaemia (SCA) are highly susceptible to the
lethal effects of malaria. The simplest explanation of this fact is that malaria 
makes the anaemia of SCA more severe; in addition, in SCA there is often
hyposplenism, which reduces clearance of parasites. From the point of view of
public health it is important that in malaria-endemic countries patients with
SCA, and particularly children, be protected from malaria by appropriate
prophylaxis.

DOI: 10.4084/MJHID.2012.065 
PMCID: PMC3499995
PMID: 23170194 

