
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51023. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051023. Epub 2012 Dec 5.

Defining the antigenic diversity of Plasmodium falciparum apical membrane antigen
1 and the requirements for a multi-allele vaccine against malaria.

Drew DR(1), Hodder AN, Wilson DW, Foley M, Mueller I, Siba PM, Dent AE, Cowman
AF, Beeson JG.

Author information: 
(1)The Burnet Institute for Medical Research and Public Health, Melbourne,
Australia.

Apical Membrane Antigen 1 (AMA1) is a leading malaria vaccine candidate and a
target of naturally-acquired human immunity. Plasmodium falciparum AMA1 is
polymorphic and in vaccine trials it induces strain-specific protection. This
antigenic diversity is a major roadblock to development of AMA1 as a malaria
vaccine and understanding how to overcome it is essential. To assess how AMA1
antigenic diversity limits cross-strain growth inhibition, we assembled a panel
of 18 different P. falciparum isolates which are broadly representative of global
AMA1 sequence diversity. Antibodies raised against four well studied AMA1 alleles
(W2Mef, 3D7, HB3 and FVO) were tested for growth inhibition of the 18 different
P. falciparum isolates in growth inhibition assays (GIA). All antibodies
demonstrated substantial cross-inhibitory activity against different isolates and
a mixture of the four different AMA1 antibodies inhibited all 18 isolates tested,
suggesting significant antigenic overlap between AMA1 alleles and limited
antigenic diversity of AMA1. Cross-strain inhibition by antibodies was only
moderately and inconsistently correlated with the level of sequence diversity
between AMA1 alleles, suggesting that sequence differences are not a strong
predictor of antigenic differences or the cross-inhibitory activity of
anti-allele antibodies. The importance of the highly polymorphic C1-L region for 
inhibitory antibodies and potential vaccine escape was assessed by generating
novel transgenic P. falciparum lines for testing in GIA. While the polymorphic
C1-L epitope was identified as a significant target of some growth-inhibitory
antibodies, these antibodies only constituted a minor proportion of the total
inhibitory antibody repertoire, suggesting that the antigenic diversity of
inhibitory epitopes is limited. Our findings support the concept that a
multi-allele AMA1 vaccine would give broad coverage against the diversity of AMA1
alleles and establish new tools to define polymorphisms important for vaccine
escape.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051023 
PMCID: PMC3515520
PMID: 23227229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

