
1. Mol Microbiol. 2013 Mar;87(5):1061-73. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12151. Epub 2013 Jan 28.

H2A.Z/H2B.Z double-variant nucleosomes inhabit the AT-rich promoter regions of
the Plasmodium falciparum genome.

Hoeijmakers WA(1), Salcedo-Amaya AM, Smits AH, Françoijs KJ, Treeck M, Gilberger 
TW, Stunnenberg HG, Bártfai R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Radboud University, Nijmegen Centre for
Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen 6525GA, the Netherlands.

Histone variants are key components of the epigenetic code and evolved to perform
specific functions in transcriptional regulation, DNA repair, chromosome
segregation and other fundamental processes. Although variants for histone H2A
and H3 are found throughout the eukaryotic kingdom, variants of histone H2B and
H4 are rarely encountered. H2B.Z is one of those rare H2B variants and is
apicomplexan-specific. Here we show that in Plasmodium falciparum H2B.Z localizes
to euchromatic intergenic regions throughout intraerythrocytic development and
together with H2A.Z forms a double-variant nucleosome subtype. These nucleosomes 
are enriched in promoters over 3' intergenic regions and their occupancy
generally correlates with the strength of the promoter, but not with its temporal
activity. Remarkably, H2B.Z occupancy levels exhibit a clear correlation with the
base-composition of the underlying DNA, raising the intriguing possibility that
the extreme AT content of the intergenic regions within the Plasmodium genome
might be instructive for histone variant deposition. In summary, our data show
that the H2A.Z/H2B.Z double-variant nucleosome demarcates putative regulatory
regions of the P. falciparum epigenome and likely provides a scaffold for dynamic
regulation of gene expression in this deadly human pathogen.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12151 
PMCID: PMC3594968
PMID: 23320541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

