
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2013 May;19(5):408-15. doi: 10.1111/1469-0691.12152. Epub 
2013 Feb 1.

Malaria rapid diagnostic tests in travel medicine.

Maltha J(1), Gillet P, Jacobs J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp,
Belgium. jmaltha@itg.be

Malaria is a serious condition in the non-immune traveller, and prognosis depends
on timely diagnosis. Although microscopy remains the cornerstone of diagnosis,
malaria rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) are increasingly used in non-endemic
settings. They are easy to use, provide results rapidly and require no specific
training and equipment. Reported sensitivities vary between different RDT
products but are generally good for Plasmodium falciparum, with RDTs detecting
the P. falciparum antigen histidine-rich protein-2 (PfHRP2) scoring slightly
better than P. falciparum-lactate dehydrogenase (Pf-pLDH)-detecting RDTs.
Sensitivity is lower for Plasmodium vivax (66.0 - 88.0%) and poor for Plasmodium 
ovale (5.5 - 86.7%) and Plasmodium malariae (21.4 - 45.2%). Rapid diagnostic
tests have several other limitations, including persistence of the PfHRP2
antigen, cross-reactions of P. falciparum with the non-falciparum test line and
vice versa and (rare) false-positive reactions due to other infectious agents or 
immunological factors. False-negative results occur in the case of low parasite
densities, prozone effect or pfhrp2 gene deletions. In addition, errors in
interpretation occur, partly due to inadequacies in the instructions for use.
Finally, RDTs do not give information about parasite density. In the diagnostic
laboratory, RDTs are a valuable adjunct to (but not a replacement for) microscopy
for the diagnosis of malaria in the returned traveller.In malaria endemic
settings, special groups of travellers (those travelling for long periods,
expatriates and short-stay frequent travellers) who are remote from qualified
medical services may benefit from self-diagnosis by RDTs, provided they use
correctly stored RDT products of proven accuracy, with comprehensive instructions
for use and appropriate hands-on training.

© 2013 The Authors Clinical Microbiology and Infection © 2013 European Society of
Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/1469-0691.12152 
PMID: 23373854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

