
1. Parasitol Res. 2013 Apr;112(4):1691-700. doi: 10.1007/s00436-013-3325-3. Epub
2013 Feb 14.

Genetic diversity of Plasmodium falciparum infections in mild and severe malaria 
of children from Kampala, Uganda.

Kiwuwa MS(1), Ribacke U, Moll K, Byarugaba J, Lundblom K, FÃ¤rnert A, Fred K,
Wahlgren M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, School of Medicine, Makerere University College of 
Health Sciences, Kampala, Uganda. mkiwuwa@yahoo.com

Diversity in parasite virulence is one of the factors that contribute to the
clinical outcome of malaria infections. The association between the severity of
Plasmodium falciparum malaria and the number of distinct parasite populations
infecting the host (multiplicity of infection) or polymorphism within any of the 
specific antigen genes was investigated. The study included 164 children
presenting with mild and severe malaria from central Uganda where malaria is
meso-endemic. The polymorphic regions of the circumsporozoite protein (csp),
merozoite surface proteins 1 and 2 (msp1 and msp2), and glutamate-rich protein
(glurp) were genotyped by polymerase chain reaction methods and fragment analysis
by gel electrophoresis. In a subset of samples fragment analysis was also
performed by fluorescent PCR genotyping followed by capillary electrophoresis.
The multiplicity of infection (MOI), determined as the highest number of alleles 
detected within any of the four genetic loci, was significantly higher in severe 
than in mild malaria cases (mean 3.7 and 3.0, respectively, P=0.002). No
particular genotype or allelic family of msp1 or msp2 was associated with
severity of malaria, and nor did the genotyping method reveal any significant
difference in MOI when only assessed by msp2 genotyping. Severity of malaria was 
not linked to the predominance of any particular msp1 or msp2 allelic types,
independent of methods used for genotyping. Monitoring the dynamics of multiple
clone infections in relation to disease outcome, host immune status and genetic
factors will provide more insight into parasite virulence mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-013-3325-3 
PMCID: PMC3597336
PMID: 23408340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

