
1. Malar J. 2013 Feb 22;12:74. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-74.

Improved assay to detect Plasmodium falciparum using an uninterrupted,
semi-nested PCR and quantitative lateral flow analysis.

Ongagna-Yhombi SY(1), Corstjens P, Geva E, Abrams WR, Barber CA, Malamud D,
Mharakurwa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Science, NYU College of Dentistry, New York, NY 10010,
USA.

BACKGROUND: A rapid, non-invasive, and inexpensive point-of-care (POC) diagnostic
for malaria followed by therapeutic intervention would improve the ability to
control infection in endemic areas.
METHODS: A semi-nested PCR amplification protocol is described for quantitative
detection of Plasmodium falciparum and is compared to a traditional nested PCR.
The approach uses primers that target the P. falciparum dihydrofolate reductase
gene.
RESULTS: This study demonstrates that it is possible to perform an uninterrupted,
asymmetric, semi-nested PCR assay with reduced assay time to detect P. falciparum
without compromising the sensitivity and specificity of the assay using saliva as
a testing matrix.
CONCLUSIONS: The development of this PCR allows nucleic acid amplification
without the need to transfer amplicon from the first PCR step to a second
reaction tube with nested primers, thus reducing both the chance of contamination
and the time for analysis to < two hours. Analysis of the PCR amplicon yield was 
adapted to lateral flow detection using the quantitative up-converting phosphor
(UCP) reporter technology. This approach provides a basis for migration of the
assay to a POC microfluidic format. In addition the assay was successfully
evaluated with oral samples. Oral fluid collection provides a simple non-invasive
method to collect clinical samples.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-74 
PMCID: PMC3605351
PMID: 23433252  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

