
1. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2013 Feb;108(1):98-105.

Cross-reactive anti-PfCLAG9 antibodies in the sera of asymptomatic parasite
carriers of Plasmodium vivax.

Costa JD(1), Zanchi FB, Rodrigues FL, Honda ER, Katsuragawa TH, Pereira DB,
Taborda RL, Tada MS, Ferreira Rde G, Pereira-da-Silva LH.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Pesquisa em Medicina Tropical, Porto Velho, RO, Brasil.
joanadarcneves@hotmail.com

The PfCLAG9 has been extensively studied because their immunogenicity. Thereby,
the gene product is important for therapeutics interventions and a potential
vaccine candidate. Antibodies against synthetic peptides corresponding to
selected sequences of the Plasmodium falciparum antigen PfCLAG9 were found in
sera of falciparum malaria patients from Rond√¥nia, in the Brazilian Amazon. Much 
higher antibody titres were found in semi-immune and immune asymptomatic parasite
carriers than in subjects suffering clinical infections, corroborating original
findings in Papua Guinea. However, sera of Plasmodium vivax patients from the
same Amazon area, in particular from asymptomatic vivax parasite carriers,
reacted strongly with the same peptides. Bioinformatic analyses revealed regions 
of similarity between P. falciparum Pfclag9 and the P. vivax ortholog Pvclag7.
Indirect fluorescent microscopy analysis showed that antibodies against PfCLAG9
peptides elicited in BALB/c mice react with human red blood cells (RBCs) infected
with both P. falciparum and P. vivax parasites. The patterns of reactivity on the
surface of the parasitised RBCs are very similar. The present observations
support previous findings that PfCLAG9 may be a target of protective immune
responses and raises the possibility that the cross reactive antibodies to
PvCLAG7 in mixed infections play a role in regulate the fate of Plasmodium mixed 
infections.

DOI: 10.1590/s0074-02762013000100016 
PMCID: PMC3974312
PMID: 23440122  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

