
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Feb;9(2):e1003191. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003191. Epub 2013
Feb 28.

The Plasmodium berghei Ca(2+)/H(+) exchanger, PbCAX, is essential for tolerance
to environmental Ca(2+) during sexual development.

Guttery DS(1), Pittman JK, Fr√©nal K, Poulin B, McFarlane LR, Slavic K, Wheatley
SP, Soldati-Favre D, Krishna S, Tewari R, Staines HM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genetics and Genomics, School of Biology, Queen's Medical Centre,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Ca(2+) contributes to a myriad of important cellular processes in all organisms, 
including the apicomplexans, Plasmodium and Toxoplasma. Due to its varied and
essential roles, free Ca(2+) is tightly regulated by complex mechanisms. These
mechanisms are therefore of interest as putative drug targets. One pathway in
Ca(2+) homeostatic control in apicomplexans uses a Ca(2+)/H(+) exchanger (a
member of the cation exchanger family, CAX). The P. falciparum CAX (PfCAX) has
recently been characterised in asexual blood stage parasites. To determine the
physiological importance of apicomplexan CAXs, tagging and knock-out strategies
were undertaken in the genetically tractable T. gondii and P. berghei parasites. 
In addition, a yeast heterologous expression system was used to study the
function of apicomplexan CAXs. Tagging of T. gondii and P. berghei CAXs (TgCAX
and PbCAX) under control of their endogenous promoters could not demonstrate
measureable expression of either CAX in tachyzoites and asexual blood stages,
respectively. These results were consistent with the ability of parasites to
tolerate knock-outs of the genes for TgCAX and PbCAX at these developmental
stages. In contrast, PbCAX expression was detectable during sexual stages of
development in female gametocytes/gametes, zygotes and ookinetes, where it was
dispersed in membranous networks within the cytosol (with minimal mitochondrial
localisation). Furthermore, genetically disrupted parasites failed to develop
further from "round" form zygotes, suggesting that PbCAX is essential for
ookinete development and differentiation. This impeded phenotype could be rescued
by removal of extracellular Ca(2+). Therefore, PbCAX provides a mechanism for
free living parasites to multiply within the ionic microenvironment of the
mosquito midgut. Ca(2+) homeostasis mediated by PbCAX is critical and suggests
plasmodial CAXs may be targeted in approaches designed to block parasite
transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003191 
PMCID: PMC3585132
PMID: 23468629  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

