
1. Mol Microbiol. 2013 Apr;88(2):318-38. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12187. Epub 2013 Mar 12.

Loss-of-function analyses defines vital and redundant functions of the Plasmodium
rhomboid protease family.

Lin JW(1), Meireles P, Prudêncio M, Engelmann S, Annoura T, Sajid M,
Chevalley-Maurel S, Ramesar J, Nahar C, Avramut CM, Koster AJ, Matuschewski K,
Waters AP, Janse CJ, Mair GR, Khan SM.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden Malaria Research Group (Parasitology), Leiden University Medical
Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Rhomboid-like proteases cleave membrane-anchored proteins within their
transmembrane domains. In apicomplexan parasites substrates include molecules
that function in parasite motility and host cell invasion. While two Plasmodium
rhomboids, ROM1 and ROM4, have been examined, the roles of the remaining six
rhomboids during the malaria parasite's life cycle are unknown. We present
systematic gene deletion analyses of all eight Plasmodium rhomboid-like proteins 
as a means to discover stage-specific phenotypes and potential functions in the
rodent malaria model, P. berghei. Four rhomboids (ROM4, 6, 7 and 8) are
refractory to gene deletion, suggesting an essential role during asexual blood
stage development. In contrast ROM1, 3, 9 and 10 were dispensable for blood stage
development and exhibited no, subtle or severe defects in mosquito or liver
development. Parasites lacking ROM9 and ROM10 showed no major phenotypic defects.
Parasites lacking ROM1 presented a delay in blood stage patency following liver
infection, but in contrast to a previous study blood stage parasites had similar 
growth and virulence characteristics as wild type parasites. Parasites lacking
ROM3 in mosquitoes readily established oocysts but failed to produce sporozoites.
ROM3 is the first apicomplexan rhomboid identified to play a vital role in
sporogony.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12187 
PMID: 23490234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

