
1. Malar J. 2013 Mar 21;12:110. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-110.

Anti-malarial IgG subclasses pattern and FcγRIIa (CD32) polymorphism among
pregnancy-associated malaria in semi-immune Saudi women.

Nasr A(1), Hamid O, Al-Ghamdi A, Allam G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Taif University, PO Box 888, 
Taif, Saudi Arabia. gm_allam@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Pregnant women remain are at an increased risk of malaria with
primigravidae being at the highest risk. Genetic polymorphism of the Fc receptor 
IIa for immunologlobulin (Ig) G (FcγRIIa) determines IgG subclass binding.
Protection against pregnancy-associated malaria (PAM) is associated with the
production of IgG specific for apical membrane antigen-1 (AMA-1). The present
study was undertaken to examine the relationship between specific IgG/IgG
subclasses and malaria infection. The second aim of the study is to examine the
association between FcγRIIa R/H131 polymorphism in correlation with specific
anti-malarial IgG antibodies of AMA-1 distribution and asymptomatic malaria
infection among Saudi women living in the southern part of Saudi Arabia.
METHODS: One hundred and twenty pregnant women living in an area of meso-endemic 
Plasmodium falciparum malaria infection were consecutively enrolled onto the
study. These pregnant women were asymptomatic and attending routine antenatal
clinics. The levels of plasma antibodies (IgG and subclasses AMA-1) were measured
using indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA). Genotyping of
FcγRIIa-R/H131 dimorphism was performed using gene-specific polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) amplification with allele-specific restriction enzyme digestion
(BstU1) of the PCR product.
RESULTS: A total of sixty-two (52%) pregnant women was diagnosed with
asymptomatic malarial infection (ASM) compared with 58 (48%) malaria free
controls (MFC). In the ASM group, there were high levels of anti-malarial IgG1
and IgG3, when compared to MFC (P value <0.001, respectively). The FcγRIIa-R/R131
genotype and R131 were found to be statistically significantly more prevalent in 
the ASM group when compared to the MFC group [55% for ASM versus 12% for MFC,
odds ratio (OR) 5.62, 95% confidence interval (CI)= (2.03- 15.58), P value=
0.001]. However, the H/H131 genotype showed statistically significant association
with MFC [14% for ASM versus 50% for MFC, OR(0.36), 95% CI= (0.14- 0.95), P
value= 0.03].
CONCLUSIONS: The study revealed that the ASM patients had higher anti-malarial
IgG and IgG subclasses antibody levels when compared to the MFC. The
FcγRIIa-R/R131 genotype and R131 allele were found to be statistically prevalent 
in the ASM when compared to the MFC group. The individuals carrying H/H131 were
consistently associated with higher levels of anti-malarial IgG subclasses.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-110 
PMCID: PMC3608938
PMID: 23517907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

