
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59755. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059755. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

Plasmodium berghei MAPK1 displays differential and dynamic subcellular
localizations during liver stage development.

Wierk JK(1), Langbehn A, Kamper M, Richter S, Burda PC, Heussler VT, Deschermeier
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Parasitology, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical
Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) regulate key signaling events in
eukaryotic cells. In the genomes of protozoan Plasmodium parasites, the causative
agents of malaria, two genes encoding kinases with significant homology to other 
eukaryotic MAPKs have been identified (mapk1, mapk2). In this work, we show that 
both genes are transcribed during Plasmodium berghei liver stage development, and
analyze expression and subcellular localization of the PbMAPK1 protein in liver
stage parasites. Live cell imaging of transgenic parasites expressing GFP-tagged 
PbMAPK1 revealed a nuclear localization of PbMAPK1 in the early schizont stage
mediated by nuclear localization signals in the C-terminal domain. In contrast, a
distinct localization of PbMAPK1 in comma/ring-shaped structures in proximity to 
the parasite's nuclei and the invaginating parasite membrane was observed during 
the cytomere stage of parasite development as well as in immature blood stage
schizonts. The PbMAPK1 localization was found to be independent of integrity of a
motif putatively involved in ATP binding, integrity of the putative activation
motif and the presence of a predicted coiled-coil domain in the C-terminal
domain. Although PbMAPK1 knock out parasites showed normal liver stage
development, the kinase may still fulfill a dual function in both schizogony and 
merogony of liver stage parasites regulated by its dynamic and stage-dependent
subcellular localization.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059755 
PMCID: PMC3609774
PMID: 23544094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

