
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e60307. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060307. Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Molecular identification of falciparum malaria and human tuberculosis
co-infections in mummies from the Fayum depression (Lower Egypt).

Lalremruata A(1), Ball M, Bianucci R, Welte B, Nerlich AG, Kun JF, Pusch CM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Due to the presence of the lake Quarun and to the particular nature of its
irrigation system, it has been speculated that the Fayum, a large depression 80
kilometers south-west of modern Cairo, was exposed to the hazards of malaria in
historic times. Similarly, it has been speculated that, in the same area, also
human tuberculosis might have been far more widespread in the antiquity than in
its recent past. If these hypotheses were confirmed, it would imply that frequent
cases of co-infection between the two pathogens might have occurred in ancient
populations. To substantiate those speculations, molecular analyses were carried 
out on sixteen mummified heads recovered from the necropolis of Abusir el Meleq
(Fayum) dating from the 3(rd) Intermediate Period (1064-656 BC) to the Roman
Period (30 BC-300 AD). Soft tissue biopsies were used for DNA extractions and PCR
amplifications using well-suited protocols. A partial 196-bp fragment of
Plasmodium falciparum apical membrane antigen 1 gene and a 123-bp fragment of the
Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex insertion sequence IS6110 were amplified and
sequenced in six and five of the sixteen specimens, respectively. A 100%
concordance rates between our sequences and those of P. falciparum and M.
tuberculosis complex ones were obtained. Lastly, concomitant PCR amplification of
P. falciparum and M. tuberculosis complex DNA specific fragments was obtained in 
four mummies, three of which are (14)C dated to the Late and Graeco-Roman
Periods. Our data confirm that the hydrography of Fayum was extremely conducive
to the spread of malaria. They also support the notion that the agricultural boom
and dense crowding occurred in this region, especially under the Ptolemies,
highly increased the probability for the manifestation and spread of
tuberculosis. Here we extend back-wards to ca. 800 BC new evidence for malaria
tropica and human tuberculosis co-occurrence in ancient Lower Egypt.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060307 
PMCID: PMC3614933
PMID: 23565222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

