
1. FEBS J. 2013 Jul;280(13):3132-48. doi: 10.1111/febs.12282. Epub 2013 May 24.

Evolutionary and mechanistic insights into substrate and product accommodation of
CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase from Plasmodium falciparum.

Nagy GN(1), Marton L, Krámos B, Oláh J, Révész Á, Vékey K, Delsuc F,
Hunyadi-Gulyás É, Medzihradszky KF, Lavigne M, Vial H, Cerdan R, Vértessy BG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Enzymology, Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Hungarian
Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary. gnagy@enzim.hu

The enzyme CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase (CCT) is essential in the
lipid biosynthesis of Plasmodia (Haemosporida), presenting a promising
antimalarial target. Here, we identified two independent gene duplication events 
of CCT within Apicomplexa and characterized a truncated construct of Plasmodium
falciparum CCT that forms a dimer resembling the molecular architecture of CCT
enzymes from other sources. Based on biophysical and enzyme kinetics methods, our
data show that the CDP-choline product of the CCT enzymatic reaction binds to the
enzyme considerably stronger than either substrate (CTP or choline phosphate).
Interestingly, in the presence of Mg²⁺ , considered to be a cofactor of the
enzyme, the binding of the CTP substrate is attenuated by a factor of 5. The
weaker binding of CTP:Mg²⁺ , similarly to the related enzyme family of aminoacyl 
tRNA synthetases, suggests that, with lack of Mg²⁺ , positively charged side
chain(s) of CCT may contribute to CTP accommodation. Thermodynamic investigations
by isothermal titration calorimetry and fluorescent spectroscopy studies indicate
that accommodation of the choline phosphate moiety in the CCT active site is
different when it appears on its own as one of the substrates or when it is
linked to the CDP-choline product. A tryptophan residue within the active site is
identified as a useful internal fluorescence sensor of enzyme-ligand binding.
Results indicate that the catalytic mechanism of Plasmodium falciparum CCT may
involve conformational changes affecting the choline subsite of the enzyme.

© 2013 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.12282 
PMID: 23578277  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

