
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013 May;9(5):e1003303. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003303. Epub 2013
May 9.

Identification of targets of CD8⁺ T cell responses to malaria liver stages by
genome-wide epitope profiling.

Hafalla JC(1), Bauza K, Friesen J, Gonzalez-Aseguinolaza G, Hill AV, Matuschewski
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infection, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
Julius.Hafalla@lshtm.ac.uk

CD8⁺ T cells mediate immunity against Plasmodium liver stages. However, the
paucity of parasite-specific epitopes of CD8⁺ T cells has limited our current
understanding of the mechanisms influencing the generation, maintenance and
efficiency of these responses. To identify antigenic epitopes in a stringent
murine malaria immunisation model, we performed a systematic profiling of
H(2b)-restricted peptides predicted from genome-wide analysis. We describe the
identification of Plasmodium berghei (Pb) sporozoite-specific gene 20 (S20)- and 
thrombospondin-related adhesive protein (TRAP)-derived peptides, termed PbS20₃₁₈ 
and PbTRAP₁₃₀ respectively, as targets of CD8⁺ T cells from C57BL/6 mice
vaccinated by whole parasite strategies known to protect against sporozoite
challenge. While both PbS20₃₁₈ and PbTRAP₁₃₀ elicit effector and effector memory 
phenotypes in both the spleens and livers of immunised mice, only
PbTRAP₁₃₀-specific CD8⁺ T cells exhibit in vivo cytotoxicity. Moreover,
PbTRAP₁₃₀-specific, but not PbS20₃₁₈-specific, CD8⁺ T cells significantly
contribute to inhibition of parasite development. Prime/boost vaccination with
PbTRAP demonstrates CD8⁺ T cell-dependent efficacy against sporozoite challenge. 
We conclude that PbTRAP is an immunodominant antigen during liver-stage
infection. Together, our results underscore the presence of CD8⁺ T cells with
divergent potencies against distinct Plasmodium liver-stage epitopes. Our
identification of antigen-specific CD8⁺ T cells will allow interrogation of the
development of immune responses against malaria liver stages.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003303 
PMCID: PMC3649980
PMID: 23675294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

