
1. Nature. 2013 Jun 27;498(7455):487-91. doi: 10.1038/nature12206. Epub 2013 May 29.

orco mutant mosquitoes lose strong preference for humans and are not repelled by 
volatile DEET.

DeGennaro M(1), McBride CS, Seeholzer L, Nakagawa T, Dennis EJ, Goldman C,
Jasinskiene N, James AA, Vosshall LB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Behavior, and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
The Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10065, USA.

Female mosquitoes of some species are generalists and will blood-feed on a
variety of vertebrate hosts, whereas others display marked host preference.
Anopheles gambiae and Aedes aegypti have evolved a strong preference for humans, 
making them dangerously efficient vectors of malaria and Dengue haemorrhagic
fever. Specific host odours probably drive this strong preference because other
attractive cues, including body heat and exhaled carbon dioxide (CO2), are common
to all warm-blooded hosts. Insects sense odours via several chemosensory receptor
families, including the odorant receptors (ORs), membrane proteins that form
heteromeric odour-gated ion channels comprising a variable ligand-selective
subunit and an obligate co-receptor called Orco (ref. 6). Here we use zinc-finger
nucleases to generate targeted mutations in the orco gene of A. aegypti to
examine the contribution of Orco and the odorant receptor pathway to mosquito
host selection and sensitivity to the insect repellent DEET
(N,N-diethyl-meta-toluamide). orco mutant olfactory sensory neurons have greatly 
reduced spontaneous activity and lack odour-evoked responses. Behaviourally, orco
mutant mosquitoes have severely reduced attraction to honey, an odour cue related
to floral nectar, and do not respond to human scent in the absence of CO2.
However, in the presence of CO2, female orco mutant mosquitoes retain strong
attraction to both human and animal hosts, but no longer strongly prefer humans. 
orco mutant females are attracted to human hosts even in the presence of DEET,
but are repelled upon contact, indicating that olfactory- and contact-mediated
effects of DEET are mechanistically distinct. We conclude that the odorant
receptor pathway is crucial for an anthropophilic vector mosquito to discriminate
human from non-human hosts and to be effectively repelled by volatile DEET.

DOI: 10.1038/nature12206 
PMCID: PMC3696029
PMID: 23719379  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

