
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(6):e1003430. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003430. Epub 2013 Jun
27.

DC8 and DC13 var genes associated with severe malaria bind avidly to diverse
endothelial cells.

Avril M(1), Brazier AJ, Melcher M, Sampath S, Smith JD.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, United States of
America.

During blood stage infection, Plasmodium falciparum infected erythrocytes (IE)
bind to host blood vessels. This virulence determinant enables parasites to evade
spleen-dependent killing mechanisms, but paradoxically in some cases may reduce
parasite fitness by killing the host. Adhesion of infected erythrocytes is
mediated by P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1), a family of
polymorphic adhesion proteins encoded by var genes. Whereas cerebral binding and 
severe malaria are associated with parasites expressing DC8 and DC13 var genes,
relatively little is known about the non-brain endothelial selection on severe
malaria adhesive types. In this study, we selected P. falciparum-IEs on diverse
endothelial cell types and demonstrate that DC8 and DC13 var genes were
consistently among the major var transcripts selected on non-brain endothelial
cells (lung, heart, bone marrow). To investigate the molecular basis for this
avid endothelial binding activity, recombinant proteins were expressed from the
predominant upregulated DC8 transcript, IT4var19. In-depth binding comparisons
revealed that multiple extracellular domains from this protein bound brain and
non-brain endothelial cells, and individual domains largely did not discriminate 
between different endothelial cell types. Additionally, we found that recombinant
DC8 and DC13 CIDR1 domains exhibited a widespread endothelial binding activity
and could compete for DC8-IE binding to brain endothelial cells, suggesting they 
may bind the same host receptor. Our findings provide new insights into the
interaction of severe malaria adhesive types and host blood vessels and support
the hypothesis that parasites causing severe malaria express PfEMP1 variants with
a superior ability to adhere to diverse endothelial cell types, and may therefore
endow these parasites with a growth and transmission advantage.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003430 
PMCID: PMC3694856
PMID: 23825944  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

