
1. Med Vet Entomol. 2014 Jun;28(2):169-78. doi: 10.1111/mve.12023. Epub 2013 Jul 15.

Occurrence and host preferences of Anopheles maculipennis group mosquitoes in
England and Wales.

Danabalan R(1), Monaghan MT, Ponsonby DJ, Linton YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Museum für Naturkunde, Berlin, Germany; Department of 
Geographical and Life Sciences, Canterbury Christ Church University, Kent, U.K.; 
Department of Entomology, Natural History Museum, London, U.K.

Mosquitoes of the Anopheles maculipennis Meigen (Diptera: Culicidae) group are of
public health concern: five of the 11 morphologically indistinct species have
been historically considered as vectors of malaria in Europe. Three members of
the An. maculipennis group have been reported in the U.K.: Anopheles atroparvus
van Thiel; Anopheles messeae Falleroni, and Anopheles daciae Linton, Nicolescu & 
Harbach. To study the distribution of the three U.K. species, particularly that
of An. daciae, we developed a polymerase chain reaction-Restriction fragment
length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) assay using the nuclear ribosomal internal
transcribed spacer 2 (ITS-2) gene. Anopheles daciae was found to be widespread,
occurring in four of the five counties surveyed in southern England and on the
Welsh island of Anglesey, often in sympatry with the closely related species
An. messeae. The host preferences of 237 blood-fed females were determined using 
either direct sequencing or PCR-based fragment analysis of the mitochondrial
cytochrome oxidase b gene with DNA from females' abdomens. All three species were
found to be opportunistic, having fed on at least three different hosts.
Seventeen individuals contained multiple bloodmeals, including two An. daciae
that had fed on humans and birds. Our results show that An. daciae is widespread 
in England and Wales, occurs in sympatry with other members of the
An. maculipennis group, and feeds on humans, which suggests it is a potential
vector of disease in the U.K.

© 2013 The Royal Entomological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/mve.12023 
PMID: 23848304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

