
1. Curr Drug Targets. 2014 Apr;15(4):374-409.

Antimalarial drug targets and drugs targeting dolichol metabolic pathway of
Plasmodium falciparum.

Qidwai T, Priya A, Khan NA, Tripathi H, Khan F, Darokar MP, Pal A, Bawankule DU, 
Shukla RK, Bhakuni RS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic & Structural Biology, CSIR-Central Institute of
Medicinal & Aromatic Plants, P.O.-CIMAP, Kukrail Picnic Spot Road, Lucknow-226015
(U.P.), India. f.khan@cimap.res.in.

Because of mutation and natural selection, development of drug resistance to the 
existing antimalarial is the major problem in malaria treatment. This problem has
created an urgent need of novel antimalarial drug targets as well as lead
compounds. The important characteristic of malaria is that it shows the
phenomenon of balanced polymorphisms. Several traits have been selected in
response to disease pressure. Therefore such factors must be explored to
understand the pathogenesis of malaria infection in human host. Apicoplast, hub
of metabolism is present in Plasmodium falciparum (causative agent of falciparum 
malaria) having similarities with plant plastid. Among several pathways in
apicoplast, Dolichol metabolic pathway is one of the most important pathway and
has been known to play role in parasite survival in the human host. In
P.falciparum, a phosphorylated derivative of Dolichol participates in
biosynthesis of glycoproteins. Several proteins of this pathway play role in post
translational modifications of proteins involved in the signal transduction
pathways, regulation of DNA replication and cell cycle. This pathway can be used 
as antimalarial drug target. This report has explored progress towards the study 
of proteins and inhibitors of Dolichol metabolic pathway. For more comprehensive 
analysis, the host genetic factors and drug-protein interaction have been
covered.

DOI: 10.2174/13894501113149990169 
PMID: 23848395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

