
1. Parasitol Res. 2013 Oct;112(10):3509-15. doi: 10.1007/s00436-013-3533-x. Epub
2013 Jul 14.

First data on the genetic diversity of avian haemosporidians in China: cytochrome
b lineages of the genera Plasmodium and Haemoproteus (Haemosporida) from Gansu
Province.

Zehtindjiev P(1), Ivanova K, Mariaux J, Georgiev BB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Research, Bulgarian Academy of
Sciences, 2 Gagarin Street, 1113, Sofia, Bulgaria, pavel.zehtindjiev@gmail.com.

A total of 76 birds belonging to 23 species and 14 families was examined for the 
presence of Plasmodium spp. and Haemoproteus spp. Birds were trapped at four
localities in Gansu Province, China, in June-July 2011. DNA was isolated from
blood samples and parasite detection, and identification was based on PCR assays 
and sequences of 479 bp of cyt b gene. The total prevalence of haemosporidians
was 21.0%. Haemoproteus spp. were detected in 14 birds (prevalence 18.4%). The
lineage CYAPIC1 from Cyanopica cyanus, Parus major, Passer montanus and
Pyrrhocorax pyrrhocorax was new; it is genetically distinct and probably
represents a new species of the genus Haemoproteus. Three lineages represented
known species: RBS4 (from Lanius tephronotus), a lineage of Haemoproteus lanii;
COLL2 (from Turdus mupinensis), a lineage of Haemoproteus pallidus and TURDUS2
(from Turdus rubrocanus), a lineage of Haemoproteus minutus. The lineage RBS5
(from Lanius cristatus and L. tephronotus) differs by 1.4% from RBS4 and probably
represents an intraspecific entity of H. lanii. The lineages TUCHR1 (recorded
from T. mupinensis), WW1 (recorded from Upupa epops) and YWT2 (recorded from
Motacilla flava) have not been linked to any known species for the moment. Only
one bird was positive for Plasmodium (prevalence 1.4%), i.e. P. major infected
with the lineage GRW4 of Plasmodium relictum. The latter lineage has been
considered by previous studies as typical for migratory birds and having
transmission in tropical areas only; its record in a sedentary bird in China
suggests its transmission in temperate latitudes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-013-3533-x 
PMID: 23851731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

