
1. Afr J Infect Dis. 2011;5(1):1-6.

Sensitivity of microscopy compared to molecular diagnosis of p. Falciparum:
implications on malaria treatment in epidemic areas in kenya.

Wangai LN(1), Karau MG, Njiruh PN, Sabah O, Kimani FT, Magoma G, Kiambo N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine and Infectious Diseases (ITROMID), P.O. Box
54840-00200 Nairobi, Kenya ; Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and
Technology (JKUAT), Biochemistry Department, P.O. Box 62000-00200, Nairobi,
Kenya.

Detection of Plasmodium species by microscopy has been the gold standard for
diagnosis of malaria for more than a century. Despite the fact that there is a
significant decline in the number of positive cases reported from microscopy,
antimalarial drugs prescriptions are on continuous increase as patients present
with symptoms of malaria. This makes it difficult to establish accuracy,
sensitivity and specificity of light microscopy in diagnosis of malaria in
epidemic areas. This study was designed to compare microscopy with polymerase
chain reaction as diagnostic methods for malaria in three epidemic areas in
Kenya. A total of 356 patients presenting with malaria symptoms were diagnosed by
microscopy and dried blood filter paper spots were collected from patient in
Kisii, West Pokot and Narok districts. Plasmodium falciparum DNA was extracted
from the dried blood filter samples. Primers specific for the Plasmodium Species 
were designed and used in a two step amplification of the Pfmdr gene. The PCR
products were analyzed in ethidium bromide stained 1.5% agarose gel. It was found
that 72 out of 350 specimens diagnosed as negative were positive for P.
falciparum by nested PCR, while 6 which were microscopy positive were confirmed
so by nested PCR. This study demonstrates that there is a high level of
misdiagnosis which may either lead to denial for deserved treatment or undeserved
treatment. Nested PCR detection of malaria parasites is a very useful complement 
to microscopy although it is expensive and takes long time. Additionally, smear
negative patients suspected to have malaria should be subjected to PCR diagnosis 
to improve rational drug use. The economic burden of misdiagnosis and
mistreatment of malaria outweighs that of PCR diagnosis, hence this diagnostic
mode could be tenable in the long run even in rural areas.

DOI: 10.4314/ajid.v5i1.66504 
PMCID: PMC3497842
PMID: 23878701 

