
1. Infect Immun. 2013 Oct;81(10):3709-20. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00180-13. Epub 2013 Jul
29.

Inducing humoral and cellular responses to multiple sporozoite and liver-stage
malaria antigens using exogenous plasmid DNA.

Ferraro B(1), Talbott KT, Balakrishnan A, Cisper N, Morrow MP, Hutnick NA, Myles 
DJ, Shedlock DJ, Obeng-Adjei N, Yan J, Kayatani AK, Richie N, Cabrera W, Shiver
R, Khan AS, Brown AS, Yang M, Wille-Reece U, Birkett AJ, Sardesai NY, Weiner DB.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

A vaccine candidate that elicits humoral and cellular responses to multiple
sporozoite and liver-stage antigens may be able to confer protection against
Plasmodium falciparum malaria; however, a technology for formulating and
delivering such a vaccine has remained elusive. Here, we report the preclinical
assessment of an optimized DNA vaccine approach that targets four P. falciparum
antigens: circumsporozoite protein (CSP), liver stage antigen 1 (LSA1),
thrombospondin-related anonymous protein (TRAP), and cell-traversal protein for
ookinetes and sporozoites (CelTOS). Synthetic DNA sequences were designed for
each antigen with modifications to improve expression and were delivered using in
vivo electroporation (EP). Immunogenicity was evaluated in mice and nonhuman
primates (NHPs) and assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), gamma 
interferon (IFN-γ) enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot (ELISpot) assay, and flow
cytometry. In mice, DNA with EP delivery induced antigen-specific IFN-γ
production, as measured by ELISpot assay and IgG seroconversion against all
antigens. Sustained production of IFN-γ, interleukin-2, and tumor necrosis factor
alpha was elicited in both the CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cell compartments.
Furthermore, hepatic CD8(+) lymphocytes produced LSA1-specific IFN-γ. The immune 
responses conferred to mice by this approach translated to the NHP model, which
showed cellular responses by ELISpot assay and intracellular cytokine staining.
Notably, antigen-specific CD8(+) granzyme B(+) T cells were observed in NHPs.
Collectively, the data demonstrate that delivery of gene sequences by DNA/EP
encoding malaria parasite antigens is immunogenic in animal models and can
harness both the humoral and cellular arms of the immune system.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00180-13 
PMCID: PMC3811783
PMID: 23897618  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

