
1. Cell Microbiol. 2014 May;16(5):657-72. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12181. Epub 2013 Aug 28.

RON12, a novel Plasmodium-specific rhoptry neck protein important for parasite
proliferation.

Knuepfer E(1), Suleyman O, Dluzewski AR, Straschil U, O'Keeffe AH, Ogun SA, Green
JL, Grainger M, Tewari R, Holder AA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, Mill
Hill, London, NW7 1AA, UK.

Apicomplexan parasites invade host cells by a conserved mechanism: parasite
proteins are secreted from apical organelles, anchored in the host cell plasma
membrane, and then interact with integral membrane proteins on the zoite surface 
to form the moving junction (MJ). The junction moves from the anterior to the
posterior of the parasite resulting in parasite internalization into the host
cell within a parasitophorous vacuole (PV). Conserved as well as coccidia-unique 
rhoptry neck proteins (RONs) have been described, some of which associate with
the MJ. Here we report a novel RON, which we call RON12. RON12 is found only in
Plasmodium and is highly conserved across the genus. RON12 lacks a membrane
anchor and is a major soluble component of the nascent PV. The bulk of RON12
secretion happens late during invasion (after parasite internalization) allowing 
accumulation in the fully formed PV with a small proportion of RON12 also
apparent occasionally in structures resembling the MJ. RON12, unlike most other
RONs is not essential, but deletion of the gene does affect parasite
proliferation. The data suggest that although the overall mechanism of invasion
by Apicomplexan parasites is conserved, additional components depending on the
parasite-host cell combination are required.

Â© 2013 The Authors. Cellular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12181 
PMCID: PMC3922828
PMID: 23937520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

