
1. Parasitology. 2013 Dec;140(14):1701-17. doi: 10.1017/S0031182013000838. Epub 2013
Aug 19.

Sex and Eimeria: a molecular perspective.

Walker RA(1), Ferguson DJ, Miller CM, Smith NC.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Tropical Health Alliance Research Laboratory, James Cook
University, Cairns Campus, McGregor Road, Smithfield QLD 4878, Australia.

Eimeria is a common genus of apicomplexan parasites that infect diverse
vertebrates, most notably poultry, causing serious disease and economic loss.
Like all apicomplexans, eimerians have a complex life cycle characterized by
asexual divisions that amplify the parasite population in preparation for sexual 
reproduction. This can be divided into three events: gametocytogenesis, producing
gametocytes from merozoites; gametogenesis, producing microgametes and
macrogametes from gametocytes; and fertilization of macrogametes by microgametes,
producing diploid zygotes with ensuing meiosis completing the sexual phase.
Sexual development in Eimeria depends on the differential expression of
stage-specific genes, rather than presence or absence of sex chromosomes. Thus,
it involves the generation of specific structures and, implicitly, storage of
proteins and regulation of protein expression in macrogametes, in preparation for
fertilization. In Eimeria, the formation of a unique, resilient structure, the
oocyst wall, is essential for completion of the sexual phase and parasite
transmission. In this review, we piece together the molecular events that
underpin sexual reproduction in Eimeria and use additional details from analogous
events in Plasmodium to fill current knowledge gaps. The mechanisms governing
sexual stage formation and subsequent fertilization may represent targets for
counteracting parasite transmission.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182013000838 
PMID: 23953058  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

