
1. Cell Death Differ. 2013 Nov;20(11):1569-79. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.113. Epub 2013 
Aug 30.

Mechanisms of haptoglobin protection against hemoglobin peroxidation triggered
endothelial damage.

Schaer CA(1), Deuel JW, Bittermann AG, Rubio IG, Schoedon G, Spahn DR, Wepf RA,
Vallelian F, Schaer DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anesthesiology, University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.

Extracellular hemoglobin (Hb) has been recognized as a disease trigger in
hemolytic conditions such as sickle cell disease, malaria, and blood transfusion.
In vivo, many of the adverse effects of free Hb can be attenuated by the Hb
scavenger acute-phase protein haptoglobin (Hp). The primary physiologic
disturbances that can be caused by free Hb are found within the cardiovascular
system and Hb-triggered oxidative toxicity toward the endothelium has been
promoted as a potential mechanism. The molecular mechanisms of this toxicity as
well as of the protective activities of Hp are not yet clear. Within this study, 
we systematically investigated the structural, biochemical, and cell biologic
nature of Hb toxicity in an endothelial cell system under peroxidative stress. We
identified two principal mechanisms of oxidative Hb toxicity that are mediated by
globin degradation products and by modified lipoprotein species, respectively.
The two damage pathways trigger diverse and discriminative inflammatory and
cytotoxic responses. Hp provides structural stabilization of Hb and shields Hb's 
oxidative reactions with lipoproteins, providing dramatic protection against both
pathways of toxicity. By these mechanisms, Hp shifts Hb's destructive
pseudo-peroxidative reaction to a potential anti-oxidative function during
peroxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1038/cdd.2013.113 
PMCID: PMC3792434
PMID: 23995229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

