
1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 3;8(9):e72130. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072130. eCollection 
2013.

Bacteria- and IMD pathway-independent immune defenses against Plasmodium
falciparum in Anopheles gambiae.

Blumberg BJ(1), Trop S, Das S, Dimopoulos G.

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
United States of America.

The mosquito Anopheles gambiae uses its innate immune system to control bacterial
and Plasmodium infection of its midgut tissue. The activation of potent IMD
pathway-mediated anti-Plasmodium falciparum defenses is dependent on the presence
of the midgut microbiota, which activate this defense system upon parasite
infection through a peptidoglycan recognition protein, PGRPLC. We employed
transcriptomic and reverse genetic analyses to compare the P. falciparum
infection-responsive transcriptomes of septic and aseptic mosquitoes and to
determine whether bacteria-independent anti-Plasmodium defenses exist. Antibiotic
treated aseptic mosquitoes mounted molecular immune responses representing a
variety of immune functions upon P. falciparum infection. Among other immune
factors, our analysis uncovered a serine protease inhibitor (SRPN7) and
Clip-domain serine protease (CLIPC2) that were transcriptionally induced in the
midgut upon P. falciparum infection, independent of bacteria. We also showed that
SRPN7 negatively and CLIPC2 positively regulate the anti-Plasmodium defense,
independently of the midgut-associated bacteria. Co-silencing assays suggested
that these two genes may function together in a signaling cascade. Neither gene
was regulated, nor modulated, by infection with the rodent malaria parasite
Plasmodium berghei, suggesting that SRPN7 and CLIPC2 are components of a defense 
system with preferential activity towards P. falciparum. Further analysis using
RNA interference determined that these genes do not regulate the anti-Plasmodium 
defense mediated by the IMD pathway, and both factors act as agonists of the
endogenous midgut microbiota, further demonstrating the lack of functional
relatedness between these genes and the bacteria-dependent activation of the IMD 
pathway. This is the first study confirming the existence of a
bacteria-independent, anti-P. falciparum defense. Further exploration of this
anti-Plasmodium defense will help clarify determinants of immune specificity in
the mosquito, and expose potential gene and/or protein targets for malaria
intervention strategies based on targeting the parasite in the mosquito vector.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072130 
PMCID: PMC3760850
PMID: 24019865  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

