
1. Malar J. 2013 Sep 17;12:328. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-328.

Malarial parasite diversity in chimpanzees: the value of comparative approaches
to ascertain the evolution of Plasmodium falciparum antigens.

Pacheco MA(1), Cranfield M, Cameron K, Escalante AA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Evolutionary Medicine and Informatics, The Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA. Ananias.Escalante@asu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum shares its most recent common ancestor with
parasites found in African apes; these species constitute the so-called Laverania
clade. In this investigation, the evolutionary history of Plasmodium lineages
found in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) was explored.
METHODS: Here, the remainders of 74 blood samples collected as part of the
chimpanzees' routine health examinations were studied. For all positive samples
with parasite lineages belonging to the Laverania clade, the complete
mitochondrial genome (mtDNA), the gene encoding dihydrofolate
reductase-thymidylate synthase (dhfr-ts), the chloroquine resistance transporter 
(Pfcrt), the circumsporozoite protein (csp), merozoite surface protein 2 (msp2), 
and the DBL-1 domain from var2CSA were amplified, cloned, and sequenced. Other
Plasmodium species were included in the mtDNA, dhfr-ts, and csp analyses.
Phylogenetic and evolutionary genetic analyses were performed, including
molecular clock analyses on the mtDNA.
RESULTS/CONCLUSIONS: Nine chimpanzees were malaria positive (12.2%); four of
those infections were identified as P. falciparum, two as a Plasmodium
reichenowi-like parasite or Plasmodium sp., one as Plasmodium gaboni, and two as 
Plasmodium malariae. All P. falciparum isolates were resistant to chloroquine
indicating that the chimpanzees acquired such infections from humans in recent
times. Such findings, however, are not sufficient for implicating chimpanzees as 
an animal reservoir for P. falciparum.Timing estimates support that the Laverania
clade has co-existed with hominids for a long-period of time. The proposed
species P. gaboni, Plasmodium billbrayi, and Plasmodium billcollinsi are
monophyletic groups supporting that they are indeed different species.An expanded
CSP phylogeny is presented, including all the Laverania species and other
malarial parasites. Contrasting with other Plasmodium, the Laverania csp exhibits
great conservation at the central tandem repeat region. Msp2 and var2CSA,
however, show extended recent polymorphism in P. falciparum that likely
originated after the P. reichenowi-P. falciparum split. The accumulation of such 
diversity may indicate adaptation to the human host. These examples support the
notion that comparative approaches among P. falciparum and its related species
will be of great value in understanding the evolution of proteins that are
important in parasite invasion of the human red blood cell, as well as those
involved in malaria pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-328 
PMCID: PMC3848613
PMID: 24044371  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

