
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Dec;57(12):6050-62. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00870-13. 
Epub 2013 Sep 23.

Identification of MMV malaria box inhibitors of plasmodium falciparum early-stage
gametocytes using a luciferase-based high-throughput assay.

Lucantoni L(1), Duffy S, Adjalley SH, Fidock DA, Avery VM.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Biology, Eskitis Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, 
Nathan, Queensland, Australia.

The design of new antimalarial combinations to treat Plasmodium falciparum
infections requires drugs that, in addition to resolving disease symptoms caused 
by asexual blood stage parasites, can also interrupt transmission to the mosquito
vector. Gametocytes, which are essential for transmission, develop as sexual
blood stage parasites in the human host over 8 to 12 days and are the most
accessible developmental stage for transmission-blocking drugs. Considerable
effort is currently being devoted to identifying compounds active against mature 
gametocytes. However, investigations on the drug sensitivity of developing
gametocytes, as well as screening methods for identifying inhibitors of early
gametocytogenesis, remain scarce. We have developed a luciferase-based
high-throughput screening (HTS) assay using tightly synchronous stage I to III
gametocytes from a recombinant P. falciparum line expressing green fluorescent
protein (GFP)-luciferase. The assay has been used to evaluate the early-stage
gametocytocidal activity of the MMV Malaria Box, a collection of 400 compounds
with known antimalarial (asexual blood stage) activity. Screening this collection
against early-stage (I to III) gametocytes yielded 64 gametocytocidal compounds
with 50% inhibitory concentrations (IC50s) below 2.5 μM. This assay is
reproducible and suitable for the screening of large compound libraries, with an 
average percent coefficient of variance (%CV) of ≤5%, an average signal-to-noise 
ratio (S:N) of >30, and a Z' of ∼0.8. Our findings highlight the need for
screening efforts directed specifically against early gametocytogenesis and
indicate the importance of experimental verification of early-stage
gametocytocidal activity in the development of new antimalarial candidates for
combination therapy.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00870-13 
PMCID: PMC3837862
PMID: 24060871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

