
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2013 Sep;191(1):44-52. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2013.09.003. Epub 2013 Sep 25.

Two putative protein export regulators promote Plasmodium blood stage development
in vivo.

Matz JM(1), Matuschewski K, Kooij TW.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Parasitology Unit, Charitéplatz 1,
10117 Berlin, Germany; Institute of Biology, Humboldt University, 10117 Berlin,
Germany.

Protein export is considered an essential feature of malaria parasite blood stage
development. Here, we examined five components of the candidate Plasmodium
translocon of exported proteins (PTEX), a complex thought to mediate protein
export across the parasitophorous vacuole membrane into the host cell. Using the 
murine malaria model parasite Plasmodium berghei, we succeeded in generating
parasite lines lacking PTEX88 and thioredoxin 2 (TRX2). Repeated attempts to
delete the remaining three translocon components failed, suggesting essential
functions for EXP2, PTEX150, and heat shock protein 101 (HSP101) during blood
stage development. To analyze blood infections of the null-mutants, we
established a flow cytometry-assisted intravital competition assay using three
novel high fluorescent lines (Bergreen, Beryellow, and Berred). Although blood
stage development of parasites lacking TRX2 was affected, the deficit was much
more striking in PTEX88 null-mutants. The multiplication rate of PTEX88-deficient
parasites was strongly reduced resulting in out-competition by wild-type
parasites. Endogenous tagging revealed that TRX2::tag resides in distinct
punctate organelles of unknown identity. PTEX88::tag shows a diffuse
intraparasitic pattern in blood stage parasites. In trophozoites, PTEX88::tag
also localized to previously unrecognized extensions reaching from the parasite
surface into the erythrocyte cytoplasm. Together, our results indicate auxiliary 
roles for TRX2 and PTEX88 and central roles for EXP2, PTEX150, and HSP101 during 
P. berghei blood infection.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2013.09.003 
PMID: 24076174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

