
1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 1;8(10):e76097. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076097. eCollection
2013.

Transgenic mosquitoes expressing a phospholipase A(2) gene have a fitness
advantage when fed Plasmodium falciparum-infected blood.

Smith RC(1), Kizito C, Rasgon JL, Jacobs-Lorena M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Malaria Research
Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, 
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Genetically modified mosquitoes have been proposed as an alternative 
strategy to reduce the heavy burden of malaria. In recent years, several
proof-of-principle experiments have been performed that validate the idea that
mosquitoes can be genetically modified to become refractory to malaria parasite
development.
RESULTS: We have created two transgenic lines of Anophelesstephensi, a natural
vector of Plasmodium falciparum, which constitutively secrete a catalytically
inactive phospholipase A2 (mPLA2) into the midgut lumen to interfere with
Plasmodium ookinete invasion. Our experiments show that both transgenic lines
expressing mPLA2 significantly impair the development of rodent malaria
parasites, but only one line impairs the development of human malaria parasites. 
In addition, when fed on malaria-infected blood, mosquitoes from both transgenic 
lines are more fecund than non-transgenic mosquitoes. Consistent with these
observations, cage experiments with mixed populations of transgenic and
non-transgenic mosquitoes show that the percentage of transgenic mosquitoes
increases when maintained on Plasmodium-infected blood.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the expression of an anti-Plasmodium
effector gene gives transgenic mosquitoes a fitness advantage when fed
malaria-infected blood. These findings have important implications for future
applications of transgenic mosquito technology in malaria control.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076097 
PMCID: PMC3788000
PMID: 24098427  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

