
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Oct 22;110(43):17415-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1311016110. Epub 2013 Oct 7.

High diversity of West African bat malaria parasites and a tight link with rodent
Plasmodium taxa.

Schaer J(1), Perkins SL, Decher J, Leendertz FH, Fahr J, Weber N, Matuschewski K.

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology Unit, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, 10117 Berlin,
Germany.

As the only volant mammals, bats are captivating for their high taxonomic
diversity, for their vital roles in ecosystems--particularly as pollinators and
insectivores--and, more recently, for their important roles in the maintenance
and transmission of zoonotic viral diseases. Genome sequences have identified
evidence for a striking expansion of and positive selection in gene families
associated with immunity. Bats have also been known to be hosts of malaria
parasites for over a century, and as hosts, they possess perhaps the most
phylogenetically diverse set of hemosporidian genera and species. To provide a
molecular framework for the study of these parasites, we surveyed bats in three
remote areas of the Upper Guinean forest ecosystem. We detected four distinct
genera of hemosporidian parasites: Plasmodium, Polychromophilus, Nycteria, and
Hepatocystis. Intriguingly, the two species of Plasmodium in bats fall within the
clade of rodent malaria parasites, indicative of multiple host switches across
mammalian orders. We show that Nycteria species form a very distinct phylogenetic
group and that Hepatocystis parasites display an unusually high diversity and
prevalence in epauletted fruit bats. The diversity and high prevalence of novel
lineages of chiropteran hemosporidians underscore the exceptional position of
bats among all other mammalian hosts of hemosporidian parasites and support
hypotheses of pathogen tolerance consistent with the exceptional immunology of
bats.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1311016110 
PMCID: PMC3808598
PMID: 24101466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

