
1. Malar J. 2013 Oct 30;12:377. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-377.

Increased pfmdr1 gene copy number and the decline in pfcrt and pfmdr1 resistance 
alleles in Ghanaian Plasmodium falciparum isolates after the change of
anti-malarial drug treatment policy.

Duah NO(1), Matrevi SA, de Souza DK, Binnah DD, Tamakloe MM, Opoku VS, Onwona CO,
Narh CA, Quashie NB, Abuaku B, Duplessis C, Kronmann KC, Koram KA.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology Department, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research,
College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, PO Box LG581, Legon, Ghana.
nduah@noguchi.ug.edu.gh.

BACKGROUND: With the introduction of artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) 
in 2005, monitoring of anti-malarial drug efficacy, which includes the use of
molecular tools to detect known genetic markers of parasite resistance, is
important for first-hand information on the changes in parasite susceptibility to
drugs in Ghana. This study investigated the Plasmodium falciparum multidrug
resistance gene (pfmdr1) copy number, mutations and the chloroquine resistance
transporter gene (pfcrt) mutations in Ghanaian isolates collected in seven years 
to detect the trends in prevalence of mutations.
METHODS: Archived filter paper blood blots collected from children aged below
five years with uncomplicated malaria in 2003-2010 at sentinel sites were used.
Using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), 756 samples
were assessed for pfmdr1 gene copy number. PCR and restriction fragment length
polymorphism (RFLP) were used to detect alleles of pfmdr1 86 in 1,102 samples,
pfmdr1 184, 1034, 1042 and 1246 in 832 samples and pfcrt 76 in 1,063 samples.
Merozoite surface protein 2 (msp2) genotyping was done to select monoclonal
infections for copy number analysis.
RESULTS: The percentage of isolates with increased pfmdr1 copy number were 4, 27,
9, and 18% for 2003-04, 2005-06, 2007-08 and 2010, respectively. Significant
increasing trends for prevalence of pfmdr1 N86 (×(2) = 96.31, p <0.001) and pfcrt
K76 (×(2) = 64.50, p <0.001) and decreasing trends in pfmdr1 Y86 (x(2) = 38.52, p
<0.001) and pfcrt T76 (x(2) = 43.49, p <0.001) were observed from 2003-2010. The 
pfmdr1 F184 and Y184 prevalence showed an increasing and decreasing trends
respectively but were not significant (×(2) = 7.39,p=0.060; ×(2) = 7.49, p =
0.057 respectively). The pfmdr1 N86-F184-D1246 haplotype, which is alleged to be 
selected by artemether-lumefantrine showed a significant increasing trend (×(2) =
20.75, p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Increased pfmdr1 gene copy number was observed in the isolates
analysed and this finding has implications for the use of ACT in the country
although no resistance has been reported. The decreasing trend in the prevalence 
of chloroquine resistance markers after change of treatment policy presents the
possibility for future introduction of chloroquine as prophylaxis for malaria
risk groups such as children and pregnant women in Ghana.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-377 
PMCID: PMC3819684
PMID: 24172030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

