
1. Pathog Glob Health. 2013 Sep;107(6):299-304. doi:
10.1179/204777213X13777615588180.

Malaria in a tertiary health care facility of Central India with special
reference to severe vivax: implications for malaria control.

Jain V(1), Agrawal A, Singh N.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Medical Research Centre for Tribals, ICMR, Nagpur Road Garha,
Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India.

Plasmodium vivax is now recognized as a cause of severe and fatal infection in
many parts of the world. This prospective observational study was undertaken in a
tertiary health setting to understand the spectrum of the disease burden and
associated complications due to P. vivax malaria in central India. A malaria
clinic under Regional Medical Research Centre for Tribals is operational at
Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose Medical College and Hospital, Jabalpur in central
India, where all fever cases and cases with history of fever were referred for
screening of malaria parasite by microscopy and rapid diagnostic test kits.
Confirmation of all the cases was done by PCR targeting 18s ribosomal RNA gene of
the parasite to exclude mixed infection with P. falciparum. Severe vivax malaria 
was found in 22 (11Â·1%) out of 198 vivax patients. Cerebral malaria, seizures,
severe malaria anaemia, and respiratory distress each were observed in 32%
subjects. Multi-organ dysfunction syndrome was common (36%). Mortality was
recorded in two patients and neurological sequelae were also observed in two
patients at the time of discharge. This is the first report from Central India
where P. vivax has been shown to be associated with severe signs of malaria.
Severe vivax malaria is a relatively new clinical entity and further studies from
different parts of the world are needed to understand clinical spectrum and
burden of P. vivax not only for successful treatment, but also for designing and 
developing effective malaria control measures.

DOI: 10.1179/204777213X13777615588180 
PMCID: PMC4001609
PMID: 24188240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

