
1. J Proteomics. 2014 Jan 16;96:117-32. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2013.10.028. Epub 2013 
Nov 1.

Expression of the mevalonate pathway enzymes in the Lutzomyia longipalpis
(Diptera: Psychodidae) sex pheromone gland demonstrated by an integrated
proteomic approach.

González-Caballero N(1), Rodríguez-Vega A(2), Dias-Lopes G(3), Valenzuela JG(4), 
Ribeiro JM(5), Carvalho PC(6), Valente RH(7), Brazil RP(1), Cuervo P(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Bioquímica e Fisiologia de Insetos, IOC, FIOCRUZ, Rio de
Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Pesquisa em Leishmaniose, IOC, FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, RJ,
Brazil.
(3)Pós-graduação Biologia Parasitaria, IOC, FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(4)Vector Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research,
National Institutes of Health Rockville, MD, USA.
(5)Vector Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National
Institutes of Health Rockville, MD, USA.
(6)Laboratório de Proteômica e Engenharia de Proteínas, Instituto Carlos Chagas, 
FIOCRUZ, Curitiba, Brazil.
(7)Laboratório de Toxinologia, IOC, FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(8)Laboratório de Pesquisa em Leishmaniose, IOC, FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, RJ,
Brazil. Electronic address: pcuervo@fiocruz.br.

In Latin America, Lutzomyia longipalpis is the main vector of the protozoan
parasite Leishmania infantum, which is the causal agent of American Visceral
Leishmaniasis. This insect uses male-produced pheromones for mate recognition.
Elucidation of pheromone biogenesis or its regulation may enable molecular
strategies for mating disruption and, consequently, the vector's population
management. Motivated by our recent results of the transcriptomic
characterization of the L. longipalpis pheromone gland, we performed a proteomic 
analysis of this tissue combining SDS-PAGE, and mass spectrometry followed by an 
integrative data analysis. Considering that annotated genome sequences of this
sand fly are not available, we designed an alternative workflow searching MS/MS
data against two customized databases using three search engines: Mascot, OMSSA
and ProLuCID. A total of 542 proteins were confidently characterized, 445 of them
using a Uniref100-insect protein database, and 97 using a transcript translated
database. In addition, use of PEAKS for de novo peptide sequencing of MS/MS data 
confirmed ~90% identifications made with the combination of the three search
engines. Our results include the identification of six of the seven enzymes of
the mevalonate-pathway, plus the enzymes involved in sesquiterpenoid
biosynthesis, all of which are proposed to be involved in pheromone production in
L. longipalpis.BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: L. longipalpis is the main vector of the 
protozoan parasite L. infantum, which is the causal agent of American Visceral
Leishmaniasis. One of the control measures of such disease is focused on vector
population control. As this insect uses male-produced pheromones for mate
recognition, the elucidation of pheromone biogenesis or its regulating process
may enable molecular strategies for mating disruption and, consequently, this
vector's population management. On this regard, in this manuscript we report
expression evidence, at the protein level, of several molecules potentially
involved in the pheromone production of L. longipalpis. Our results include the
identification of the mevalonate-pathway enzymes, plus the enzymes involved in
sesquiterpenoid biosynthesis, all of which are proposed to be involved in
pheromone production in L. longipalpis. In addition, considering that the
annotated genome sequences of this sand fly are not yet available, we designed an
alternative workflow searching MS/MS data against proteomic and transcript
translated customized databases, using three search engines: Mascot, OMSSA, and
ProLuCID. In addition, a de novo peptide sequencing software (PEAKS) was used to 
further analyze the MS/MS data. This approach made it possible to identify and
annotate 542 proteins for the pheromone gland of L. longipalpis. Importantly, all
annotated protein sequences and raw data are available for the research community
in protein repositories that provide free access to the data.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2013.10.028 
PMCID: PMC3917562
PMID: 24185139  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

