
1. BMC Syst Biol. 2013 Nov 9;7:123. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-123.

Kinetic modelling of phospholipid synthesis in Plasmodium knowlesi unravels
crucial steps and relative importance of multiple pathways.

Sen P(1), Vial HJ, Radulescu O.

Author information: 
(1)Dynamique des Interactions Membranaires Normales et Pathologiques, UMR 5235
CNRS, UM1, UM2, CP 107, Place Eug√®ne Bataillon, 34095 Montpellier Cedex 5,
France. partho.phd@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium is the causal parasite of malaria, infectious disease
responsible for the death of up to one million people each year.
Glycerophospholipid and consequently membrane biosynthesis are essential for the 
survival of the parasite and are targeted by a new class of antimalarial drugs
developed in our lab. In order to understand the highly redundant phospholipid
synthethic pathways and eventual mechanism of resistance to various drugs, an
organism specific kinetic model of these metabolic pathways need to be developed 
in Plasmodium species.
RESULTS: Fluxomic data were used to build a quantitative kinetic model of
glycerophospholipid pathways in Plasmodium knowlesi. In vitro incorporation
dynamics of phospholipids unravels multiple synthetic pathways. A detailed
metabolic network with values of the kinetic parameters (maximum rates and
Michaelis constants) has been built. In order to obtain a global search in the
parameter space, we have designed a hybrid, discrete and continuous, optimization
method. Discrete parameters were used to sample the cone of admissible fluxes,
whereas the continuous Michaelis and maximum rates constants were obtained by
local minimization of an objective function.The model was used to predict the
distribution of fluxes within the network of various metabolic precursors.The
quantitative analysis was used to understand eventual links between different
pathways. The major source of phosphatidylcholine (PC) is the CDP-choline Kennedy
pathway.In silico knock-out experiments showed comparable importance of
phosphoethanolamine-N-methyltransferase (PMT) and
phosphatidylethanolamine-N-methyltransferase (PEMT) for PC synthesis.The flux
values indicate that, major part of serine derived phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) 
is formed via serine decarboxylation, whereas major part of phosphatidylserine
(PS) is formed by base-exchange reactions.Sensitivity analysis of CDP-choline
pathway shows that the carrier-mediated choline entry into the parasite and the
phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase reaction have the largest sensitivity
coefficients in this pathway, but does not distinguish a reaction as an unique
rate-limiting step.
CONCLUSION: We provide a fully parametrized kinetic model for the multiple
phospholipid synthetic pathways in P. knowlesi. This model has been used to
clarify the relative importance of the various reactions in these metabolic
pathways. Future work extensions of this modelling strategy will serve to
elucidate the regulatory mechanisms governing the development of Plasmodium
during its blood stages, as well as the mechanisms of action of drugs on membrane
biosynthetic pathways and eventual mechanisms of resistance.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-123 
PMCID: PMC3829661
PMID: 24209716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

