
1. Malar J. 2013 Nov 7;12:400. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-400.

Human genetic polymorphisms in the Knops blood group are not associated with a
protective advantage against Plasmodium falciparum malaria in Southern Ghana.

Hansson HH(1), Kurtzhals JA, Goka BQ, Rodriques OP, Nkrumah FN, Theander TG,
Bygbjerg IC, Alifrangis M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of International Health,
Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. hellehan@sund.ku.dk.

BACKGROUND: The complex interactions between the human host and the Plasmodium
falciparum parasite and the factors influencing severity of disease are still not
fully understood. Human single nucleotide polymorphisms SNPs associated with
Knops blood group system; carried by complement receptor 1 may be associated with
the pathology of P. falciparum malaria, and susceptibility to disease.
METHODS: The objective of this study was to determine the genotype and haplotype 
frequencies of the SNPs defining the Knops blood group antigens; Kna/b, McCoya/b,
Swain-Langley1/2 and KCAM+/- in Ghanaian patients with malaria and determine
possible associations between these polymorphisms and the severity of the
disease. Study participants were patients (n = 267) admitted to the emergency
room at the Department of Child Health, Korle-Bu Teaching Hospital, Accra, Ghana 
during the malaria season from June to August in 1995, 1996 and 1997, classified 
as uncomplicated malaria (n = 89), severe anaemia (n = 57) and cerebral malaria
(n = 121) and controls who did not have a detectable Plasmodium infection or were
symptomless carriers of the parasite (n = 275). The frequencies were determined
using a post-PCR ligation detection reaction-fluorescent microsphere assay,
developed to detect the SNPs defining the antigens. Chi-square/Fisher's exact
test and logistic regression models were used to analyse the data.
RESULTS: As expected, high frequencies of the alleles Kna, McCb, Sl2 and KCAM-
were found in the Ghanaian population. Apart from small significant differences
between the groups at the Sl locus, no significant allelic or genotypic
differences were found between the controls and the disease groups or between the
disease groups. The polymorphisms define eight different haplotypes H1(2.4%),
H2(9.4%), H3(59.8%), H4(0%), H5(25.2%), H6(0.33%), H7(2.8%) and H8(0%).
Investigating these haplotypes, no significant differences between any of the
groups were found.
CONCLUSION: The results confirm earlier findings of high frequencies of certain
CR1 alleles in Africa; and shed more light on earlier conflicting findings; the
alleles McCb, Sl2, Knb and KCAM- or combined haplotypes do not seem to confer any
protective advantage against malaria infection or resulting disease severity.
Based on these findings, in a very well-characterized population, malaria does
not seem to be the selective force on these alleles.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-400 
PMCID: PMC4226212
PMID: 24200236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

