
1. Malar J. 2013 Nov 22;12:429. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-429.

Population genetics of Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax and
asymptomatic malaria in Temotu Province, Solomon Islands.

Gray KA(1), Dowd S, Bain L, Bobogare A, Wini L, Shanks GD, Cheng Q.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Resistance and Diagnostics, Australian Army Malaria Institute, Weary
Dunlop Drive, Gallipoli Barracks, Enoggera, QLD, 4051, Australia.
qin.cheng@defence.gov.au.

BACKGROUND: Temotu Province, Solomon Islands is progressing toward malaria
elimination. A baseline survey conducted in 2008 showed that most Plasmodium
infections in the province were of low parasite density and asymptomatic
infections. To better understand mechanisms underlying these malaria transmission
characteristics genetic diversity and relationships among Plasmodium falciparum
and Plasmodium vivax populations in the province were examined.
METHODS: Forty-five P. falciparum and 67 P. vivax samples collected in the 2008
baseline survey were successfully genotyped using eight P. falciparum and seven
P. vivax microsatellite markers. Genetic diversity, relationships and
distribution of both P. falciparum and P. vivax populations were analysed.
RESULTS: Plasmodium falciparum population exhibited low diversity with 19
haplotypes identified and had closely related clusters indicating clonal
expansion. Interestingly, a dominant haplotype was significantly associated with 
fever and high parasite density. In contrast, the P. vivax population was highly 
diverse with 58 haplotypes identified that were not closely related. Parasite
populations between different islands in the province showed low genetic
differentiation.
CONCLUSION: The low diversity and clonal population of P. falciparum population
may partially account for clinical immunity developed against illness. However,
it is possible that importation of a new P. falciparum strain was the major cause
of illness. High diversity in P. vivax population and low relatedness between
strains suggested clinical immunity to P. vivax may be maintained by different
mechanisms. The genetic diversity, population structure and distribution of
strains indicate that transmission of P. falciparum was low, but that of P. vivax
was still high in 2008. These data will be useful for assessing changes in
malaria transmission resulting from interventions.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-429 
PMCID: PMC4222835
PMID: 24261646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

