
1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 2;8(12):e82246. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082246. eCollection
2013.

Protein microarray analysis of antibody responses to Plasmodium falciparum in
western Kenyan highland sites with differing transmission levels.

Baum E(1), Badu K, Molina DM, Liang X, Felgner PL, Yan G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of
California Irvine, Irvine, California, United States of America.

Malaria represents a major public health problem in Africa. In the East African
highlands, the high-altitude areas were previously considered too cold to support
vector population and parasite transmission, rendering the region particularly
prone to epidemic malaria due to the lack of protective immunity of the
population. Since the 1980's, frequent malaria epidemics have been reported and
these successive outbreaks may have generated some immunity against Plasmodium
falciparum amongst the highland residents. Serological studies reveal indirect
evidence of human exposure to the parasite, and can reliably assess prevalence of
exposure and transmission intensity in an endemic area. However, the vast
majority of serological studies of malaria have been, hereto, limited to a small 
number of the parasite's antigens. We surveyed and compared the antibody response
profiles of age-stratified sera from residents of two endemic areas in the
western Kenyan highlands with differing malaria transmission intensities, during 
two distinct seasons, against 854 polypeptides of P. falciparum using
high-throughput proteomic microarray technology. We identified 107 proteins as
serum antibody targets, which were then characterized for their gene ontology
biological process and cellular component of the parasite, and showed significant
enrichment for categories related to immune evasion, pathogenesis and expression 
on the host's cell and parasite's surface. Additionally, we calculated age-fitted
annual seroconversion rates for the immunogenic proteins, and contrasted the
age-dependent antibody acquisition for those antigens between the two sampling
sites. We observed highly immunogenic antigens that produce stable antibody
responses from early age in both sites, as well as less immunogenic proteins that
require repeated exposure for stable responses to develop and produce different
seroconversion rates between sites. We propose that a combination of highly and
less immunogenic proteins could be used in serological surveys to detect
differences in malaria transmission levels, distinguishing sites of unstable and 
stable transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082246 
PMCID: PMC3846730
PMID: 24312649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

