
1. Brief Funct Genomics. 2014 May;13(3):203-16. doi: 10.1093/bfgp/elt047. Epub 2013 
Dec 10.

Epigenetic regulation of the Plasmodium falciparum genome.

Duffy MF, Selvarajah SA, Josling GA, Petter M.

Recent research has highlighted some unique aspects of chromatin biology in the
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. During its erythrocytic lifecycle P.
falciparum maintains its genome primarily as unstructured euchromatin. Indeed
there is no clear role for chromatin-mediated silencing of the majority of the
developmentally expressed genes in P. falciparum. However discontinuous stretches
of heterochromatin are critical for variegated expression of contingency genes
that mediate key pathogenic processes in malaria. These range from invasion of
erythrocytes and antigenic variation to solute transport and growth adaptation in
response to environmental changes. Despite lack of structure within euchromatin
the nucleus maintains functional compartments that regulate expression of many
genes at the nuclear periphery, particularly genes with clonally variant
expression. The typical components of the chromatin regulatory machinery are
present in P. falciparum; however, some of these appear to have evolved novel
species-specific functions, e.g. the dynamic regulation of histone variants at
virulence gene promoters. The parasite also appears to have repeatedly acquired
chromatin regulatory proteins through lateral transfer from endosymbionts and
from the host. P. falciparum chromatin regulators have been successfully targeted
with multiple drugs in laboratory studies; hopefully their functional divergence 
from human counterparts will allow the development of parasite-specific
inhibitors.

Â© The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bfgp/elt047 
PMID: 24326119  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

