
1. Mol Microbiol. 2014 Feb;91(4):679-93. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12485. Epub 2014 Jan 7.

Enzymes involved in plastid-targeted phosphatidic acid synthesis are essential
for Plasmodium yoelii liver-stage development.

Lindner SE(1), Sartain MJ, Hayes K, Harupa A, Moritz RL, Kappe SH, Vaughan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA.

Malaria parasites scavenge nutrients from their host but also harbour enzymatic
pathways for de novo macromolecule synthesis. One such pathway is
apicoplast-targeted type II fatty acid synthesis, which is essential for late
liver-stage development in rodent malaria. It is likely that fatty acids
synthesized in the apicoplast are ultimately incorporated into membrane
phospholipids necessary for exoerythrocytic merozoite formation. We hypothesized 
that these synthesized fatty acids are being utilized for apicoplast-targeted
phosphatidic acid synthesis, the phospholipid precursor. Phosphatidic acid is
typically synthesized in a three-step reaction utilizing three enzymes: glycerol 
3-phosphate dehydrogenase, glycerol 3-phosphate acyltransferase and
lysophosphatidic acid acyltransferase. The Plasmodium genome is predicted to
harbour genes for both apicoplast- and cytosol/endoplasmic reticulum-targeted
phosphatidic acid synthesis. Our research shows that apicoplast-targeted
Plasmodium yoelii glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase and glycerol 3-phosphate
acyltransferase are expressed only during liver-stage development and deletion of
the encoding genes resulted in late liver-stage growth arrest and lack of
merozoite differentiation. However, the predicted apicoplast-targeted
lysophosphatidic acid acyltransferase gene was refractory to deletion and was
expressed solely in the endoplasmic reticulum throughout the parasite life cycle.
Our results suggest that P. yoelii has an incomplete apicoplast-targeted
phosphatidic acid synthesis pathway that is essential for liver-stage maturation.

Â© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12485 
PMCID: PMC3925071
PMID: 24330260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

