
1. Blood. 2014 Feb 13;123(7):959-66. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-08-520767. Epub 2013
Dec 13.

Molecular evidence for the localization of Plasmodium falciparum immature
gametocytes in bone marrow.

Aguilar R(1), Magallon-Tejada A, Achtman AH, Moraleda C, Joice R, Cisteró P, Li
Wai Suen CS, Nhabomba A, Macete E, Mueller I, Marti M, Alonso PL, Menéndez C,
Schofield L, Mayor A.

Author information: 
(1)Barcelona Centre for International Health Research (CRESIB), Hospital Clínic
de Barcelona, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain;

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Feb 13;123(7):954-5.

Plasmodium falciparum immature gametocytes are not observed in peripheral blood. 
However, gametocyte stages in organs such as bone marrow have never been assessed
by molecular techniques, which are more sensitive than optical microscopy. We
quantified P falciparum sexual stages in bone marrow (n = 174) and peripheral
blood (n = 70) of Mozambican anemic children by quantitative polymerase chain
reaction targeting transcripts specific for early (PF14_0748; PHISTa),
intermediate (PF13_0247; Pfs48/45), and mature (PF10_0303; Pfs25) gametocytes.
Among children positive for the P falciparum housekeeping gene (PF08_0085;
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme gene) in bone marrow (n = 136) and peripheral blood 
(n = 25), prevalence of immature gametocytes was higher in bone marrow than
peripheral blood (early: 95% vs 20%, P < .001; intermediate: 80% vs 16%; P <
.001), as were transcript levels (P < .001 for both stages). In contrast, mature 
gametocytes were more prevalent (100% vs 51%, P < .001) and abundant (P < .001)
in peripheral blood than in the bone marrow. Severe anemia (3.57, 95% confidence 
interval 1.49-8.53) and dyserythropoiesis (6.21, 95% confidence interval
2.24-17.25) were independently associated with a higher prevalence of mature
gametocytes in bone marrow. Our results highlight the high prevalence and
abundance of early sexual stages in bone marrow, as well as the relationship
between hematological disturbances and gametocyte development in this tissue.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2013-08-520767 
PMCID: PMC4067503
PMID: 24335496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

