
1. Autophagy. 2014 Feb;10(2):269-84. doi: 10.4161/auto.27166. Epub 2013 Dec 12.

Characterization of the ATG8-conjugation system in 2 Plasmodium species with
special focus on the liver stage: possible linkage between the apicoplastic and
autophagic systems?

Jayabalasingham B(1), Voss C(2), Ehrenman K(2), Romano JD(2), Smith ME(2), Fidock
DA(3), Bosch J(4), Coppens I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology; Malaria Research
Institute; Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health; Baltimore,
MD USA; Department of Microbiology & Immunology; Division of Infectious Diseases,
Medical Sciences; Columbia University Medical Center; New York, NY USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology; Malaria Research
Institute; Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health; Baltimore,
MD USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology & Immunology; Division of Infectious Diseases,
Medical Sciences; Columbia University Medical Center; New York, NY USA;
Department of Medicine Division of Infectious Diseases, Medical Sciences;
Columbia University Medical Center; New York, NY USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology; Malaria Research
Institute; Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health; Baltimore,
MD USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology; Johns Hopkins
University Bloomberg School of Public Health; Baltimore, MD USA.

Plasmodium parasites successfully colonize different habitats within mammals and 
mosquitoes, and adaptation to various environments is accompanied by changes in
their organelle composition and size. Previously, we observed that during
hepatocyte infection, Plasmodium discards organelles involved in invasion and
expands those implicated in biosynthetic pathways. We hypothesized that this
process is regulated by autophagy. Plasmodium spp. possess a rudimentary set of
known autophagy-related proteins that includes the ortholog of yeast Atg8. In
this study, we analyzed the activity of the ATG8-conjugation pathway over the
course of the lifecycle of Plasmodium falciparum and during the liver stage of
Plasmodium berghei. We engineered a transgenic P. falciparum strain expressing
mCherry-PfATG8. These transgenic parasites expressed mCherry-PfATG8 in human
hepatocytes and erythrocytes, and in the midgut and salivary glands of Anopheles 
mosquitoes. In all observed stages, mCherry-PfATG8 was localized to tubular
structures. Our EM and colocalization studies done in P. berghei showed the
association of PbATG8 on the limiting membranes of the endosymbiont-derived
plastid-like organelle known as the apicoplast. Interestingly, during parasite
replication in hepatocytes, the association of PbATG8 with the apicoplast
increases as this organelle expands in size. PbATG3, PbATG7 and PbATG8 are
cotranscribed in all parasitic stages. Molecular analysis of PbATG8 and PbATG3
revealed a novel mechanism of interaction compared with that observed for other
orthologs. This is further supported by the inability of Plasmodium ATG8 to
functionally complement atg8Î” yeast or localize to autophagosomes in starved
mammalian cells. Altogether, these data suggests a unique role for the
ATG8-conjugation system in Plasmodium parasites.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.27166 
PMCID: PMC5396099
PMID: 24342964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

