
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2014 Jan;21:424-35. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.12.012. Epub
2013 Dec 30.

Population genetics and natural selection in the gene encoding the Duffy binding 
protein II in Iranian Plasmodium vivax wild isolates.

Valizadeh V(1), Zakeri S(2), Mehrizi AA(1), Djadid ND(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Pasteur Avenue, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Pasteur Avenue, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran.
Electronic address: zakeris@yahoo.com.

Region II of Duffy binding protein (PvDBP-II) is one of the most promising
blood-stage vaccine candidate antigens against Plasmodium vivax and having
knowledge of the nature and genetic polymorphism of PvDBP-II among global P.
vivax isolates is important for developing a DBP-based vaccine. By using PCR and 
sequencing, the present molecular population genetic approach was carried out to 
investigate sequence diversity and natural selection of dbp-II gene in 63 P.
vivax isolates collected from unstable and low transmission malaria-endemic areas
of Iran during 2008-2012. Also, phylogenetic analysis, the diversifying natural
selection, and recombination across the pvdbp-II gene, including regions
containing B-cell epitopes were analyzed using the DnaSP and MEGA4 programs.
Twenty two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs, including 20 non-synonymous and
2 synonymous) were identified in PvDBP-II, resulting in 16 different PvDBP-II
haplotypes among the Iranian P. vivax isolates. High binding inhibitory B-cell
epitope (H3) overlapping with intrinsically unstructured/disordered region (aa:
384-392) appeared to be highly polymorphic (D384G/E385K/ K386N/Q/R390H), and
positive selective pressure acted on this region. Most of the polymorphic amino
acids, which are located on the surface of the protein, are under selective
pressure that implies increased recombination events and exposure to the human
immune system. In summary, PvDBP-II gene displays genetic polymorphism among
Iranian P. vivax isolates and it is under selective pressure. Mutations,
recombination, and positive selection seem to play a role in the resulting
genetic diversity, and phylogenetic analysis of DNA sequences demonstrates that
Iranian isolates represent a sample of the global population. These results are
useful for understanding the nature of the P. vivax population in Iran and also
for development of PvDBP-II-based malaria vaccine.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.12.012 
PMID: 24384095  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

