
1. Malar J. 2014 Jan 25;13:28. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-28.

Insecticide resistance mechanisms associated with different environments in the
malaria vector Anopheles gambiae: a case study in Tanzania.

Nkya TE, Akhouayri I, Poupardin R, Batengana B, Mosha F, Magesa S, Kisinza W,
David JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Ecologie Alpine, UMR CNRS-Universit√© de Grenoble 5553, BP 53,
38041, Grenoble cedex 09, France. jean-philippe.david@ujf-grenoble.fr.

BACKGROUND: Resistance of mosquitoes to insecticides is a growing concern in
Africa. Since only a few insecticides are used for public health and limited
development of new molecules is expected in the next decade, maintaining the
efficacy of control programmes mostly relies on resistance management strategies.
Developing such strategies requires a deep understanding of factors influencing
resistance together with characterizing the mechanisms involved. Among factors
likely to influence insecticide resistance in mosquitoes, agriculture and
urbanization have been implicated but rarely studied in detail. The present study
aimed at comparing insecticide resistance levels and associated mechanisms across
multiple Anopheles gambiae sensu lato populations from different environments.
METHODS: Nine populations were sampled in three areas of Tanzania showing
contrasting agriculture activity, urbanization and usage of insecticides for
vector control. Insecticide resistance levels were measured in larvae and adults 
through bioassays with deltamethrin, DDT and bendiocarb. The distribution of An. 
gambiae sub-species and pyrethroid target-site mutations (kdr) were investigated 
using molecular assays. A microarray approach was used for identifying
transcription level variations associated to different environments and
insecticide resistance.
RESULTS: Elevated resistance levels to deltamethrin and DDT were identified in
agriculture and urban areas as compared to the susceptible strain Kisumu. A
significant correlation was found between adult deltamethrin resistance and
agriculture activity. The subspecies Anopheles arabiensis was predominant with
only few An. gambiae sensu stricto identified in the urban area of Dar es Salaam.
The L1014S kdr mutation was detected at elevated frequency in An gambiae s.s. in 
the urban area but remains sporadic in An. arabiensis specimens. Microarrays
identified 416 transcripts differentially expressed in any area versus the
susceptible reference strain and supported the impact of agriculture on
resistance mechanisms with multiple genes encoding pesticide targets,
detoxification enzymes and proteins linked to neurotransmitter activity affected.
In contrast, resistance mechanisms found in the urban area appeared more specific
and more related to the use of insecticides for vector control.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, this study confirmed the role of the environment in shaping
insecticide resistance in mosquitoes with a major impact of agriculture
activities. Results are discussed in relation to resistance mechanisms and the
optimization of resistance management strategies.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-28 
PMCID: PMC3913622
PMID: 24460952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

