
1. Malar J. 2014 Feb 12;13:54. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-54.

Diversity and population structure of Plasmodium falciparum in Thailand based on 
the spatial and temporal haplotype patterns of the C-terminal 19-kDa domain of
merozoite surface protein-1.

Simpalipan P, Pattaradilokrat S, Siripoon N, Seugorn A, Kaewthamasorn M, Butcher 
RD, Harnyuttanakorn P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok
10330, Thailand. hpongcha@chula.ac.th.

BACKGROUND: The 19-kDa C-terminal region of the merozoite surface protein-1 of
the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum (PfMSP-119) constitutes the
major component on the surface of merozoites and is considered as one of the
leading candidates for asexual blood stage vaccines. Because the protein exhibits
a level of sequence variation that may compromise the effectiveness of a vaccine,
the global sequence diversity of PfMSP-119 has been subjected to extensive
research, especially in malaria endemic areas. In Thailand, PfMSP-119 sequences
have been derived from a single parasite population in Tak province, located
along the Thailand-Myanmar border, since 1995. However, the extent of sequence
variation and the spatiotemporal patterns of the MSP-119 haplotypes along the
Thai borders with Laos and Cambodia are unknown.
METHODS: Sixty-three isolates of P. falciparum from five geographically isolated 
populations along the Thai borders with Myanmar, Laos and Cambodia in three
transmission seasons between 2002 and 2008 were collected and culture-adapted.
The msp-1 gene block 17 was sequenced and analysed for the allelic diversity,
frequency and distribution patterns of PfMSP-119 haplotypes in individual
populations. The PfMSP-119 haplotype patterns were then compared between parasite
populations to infer the population structure and genetic differentiation of the 
malaria parasite.
RESULTS: Five conserved polymorphic positions, which accounted for five distinct 
haplotypes, of PfMSP-119 were identified. Differences in the prevalence of
PfMSP-119 haplotypes were detected in different geographical regions, with the
highest levels of genetic diversity being found in the Kanchanaburi and Ranong
provinces along the Thailand-Myanmar border and Trat province located at the
Thailand-Cambodia border. Despite this variability, the distribution patterns of 
individual PfMSP-119 haplotypes seemed to be very similar across the country and 
over the three malarial transmission seasons, suggesting that gene flow may
operate between parasite populations circulating in Thailand and the three
neighboring countries.
CONCLUSION: The major MSP-119 haplotypes of P. falciparum populations in all
endemic populations during three transmission seasons in Thailand were
identified, providing basic information on the common haplotypes of MSP-119 that 
is of use for malaria vaccine development and inferring the population structure 
of P. falciparum populations in Thailand.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-54 
PMCID: PMC3931489
PMID: 24521474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

