
1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 15;9(4):e94994. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094994. eCollection
2014.

Outbreak of avian malaria associated to multiple species of Plasmodium in
magellanic penguins undergoing rehabilitation in southern Brazil.

Vanstreels RE(1), Kolesnikovas CK(2), Sandri S(2), Silveira P(3), Belo NO(3),
Ferreira Junior FC(3), Epiphanio S(4), Steindel M(5), Braga ÉM(3), Catão-Dias
JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Patologia Comparada de Animais Selvagens, Departamento de
Patologia, Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária e Zootecnia, Universidade de São
Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Associação R3 Animal, Florianópolis, Santa Catarina, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade 
Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Análises Clínicas e Toxicológicas, Faculdade de Ciências
Farmacêuticas, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Laboratório de Protozoologia, Departamento de Microbiologia e Parasitologia,
Centro de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina,
Florianópolis, Santa Catarina, Brazil.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(12):e116554.
    PLoS One. 2014;9(7):e103670.

Avian malaria is a mosquito-borne disease caused by Plasmodium spp. Avian
plasmodia are recognized conservation-threatening pathogens due to their
potential to cause severe epizootics when introduced to bird populations with
which they did not co-evolve. Penguins are considered particularly susceptible,
as outbreaks in captive populations will often lead to high morbidity and rapid
mortality. We used a multidisciplinary approach to investigate an outbreak of
avian malaria in 28 Magellanic penguins (Spheniscus magellanicus) at a
rehabilitation center during summer 2009 in Florianópolis, Brazil. Hemosporidian 
infections were identified by microscopic and molecular characterization in 64%
(18/28) of the penguins, including Plasmodium (Haemamoeba) tejerai, Plasmodium
(Huffia) elongatum, a Plasmodium (Haemamoeba) sp. lineage closely related to
Plasmodium cathemerium, and a Haemoproteus (Parahaemoproteus) sp. lineage closely
related to Haemoproteus syrnii. P. tejerai played a predominant role in the
studied outbreak and was identified in 72% (13/18) of the hemosporidian-infected 
penguins, and in 89% (8/9) of the penguins that died, suggesting that this is a
highly pathogenic parasite for penguins; a detailed description of tissue meronts
and lesions is provided. Mixed infections were identified in three penguins, and 
involved P. elongatum and either P. tejerai or P. (Haemamoeba) sp. that were
compatible with P. tejerai but could not be confirmed. In total, 32% (9/28)
penguins died over the course of 16 days despite oral treatment with chloroquine 
followed by sulfadiazine-trimethoprim. Hemosporidian infections were considered
likely to have occurred during rehabilitation, probably from mosquitoes infected 
while feeding on local native birds, whereas penguin-mosquito-penguin
transmission may have played a role in later stages of the outbreak. Considering 
the seasonality of the infection, rehabilitation centers would benefit from
narrowing their efforts to prevent avian malaria outbreaks to the penguins that
are maintained throughout summer.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094994 
PMCID: PMC3988135
PMID: 24736326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

