
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2014 Jul;25:81-92. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.04.010. Epub
2014 Apr 21.

Genetic diversity of VAR2CSA ID1-DBL2Xb in worldwide Plasmodium falciparum
populations: impact on vaccine design for placental malaria.

Bordbar B(1), Tuikue Ndam N(2), Renard E(1), Jafari-Guemouri S(1), Tavul L(3),
Jennison C(4), Gnidehou S(1), Tahar R(1), Gamboa D(5), Bendezu J(5), Menard D(6),
Barry AE(4), Deloron P(1), Sabbagh A(7).

Author information: 
(1)PRES Sorbonne Paris Cité, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France; Institut 
de Recherche Pour le Développement (IRD), UMR216 Mère et enfant face aux
infections tropicales, Paris, France.
(2)PRES Sorbonne Paris Cité, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France; Institut 
de Recherche Pour le Développement (IRD), UMR216 Mère et enfant face aux
infections tropicales, Paris, France; Centre d'Étude et de Recherche sur le
Paludisme Associé à la Grossesse et à l'Enfance (CERPAGE), Cotonou, Benin.
(3)Papua New Guinea Institute of Medical Research, Madang, Papua New Guinea.
(4)Division of Infection and Immunity, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia.
(5)Instituto de Medicina Tropical "Alexander Von Humboldt", Universidad Peruana
Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru.
(6)Unité d'Epidémiologie Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur du Cambodge, Phnom Penh,
Cambodia.
(7)PRES Sorbonne Paris Cité, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France; Institut 
de Recherche Pour le Développement (IRD), UMR216 Mère et enfant face aux
infections tropicales, Paris, France. Electronic address: audrey.sabbagh@ird.fr.

In placental malaria (PM), sequestration of infected erythrocytes in the placenta
is mediated by an interaction between VAR2CSA, a Plasmodium falciparum protein
expressed on erythrocytes, and chondroitin sulfate A (CSA) on
syncytiotrophoblasts. Recent works have identified ID1-DBL2Xb as the minimal
CSA-binding region within VAR2CSA able to induce strong protective immunity,
making it the leading candidate for the development of a vaccine against PM.
Assessing the existence of population differences in the distribution of
ID1-DBL2Xb polymorphisms is of paramount importance to determine whether
geographic diversity must be considered when designing a candidate vaccine based 
on this fragment. In this study, we examined patterns of sequence variation of
ID1-DBL2Xb in a large collection of P. falciparum field isolates (n=247) from
different malaria-endemic areas, including Africa (Benin, Senegal, Cameroon and
Madagascar), Asia (Cambodia), Oceania (Papua New Guinea), and Latin America
(Peru). Detection of variants and estimation of their allele frequencies were
performed using next-generation sequencing of DNA pools. A considerable amount of
variation was detected along the whole gene segment, suggesting that several
allelic variants may need to be included in a candidate vaccine to achieve broad 
population coverage. However, most sequence variants were common and extensively 
shared among worldwide parasite populations, demonstrating long term persistence 
of those polymorphisms, probably maintained through balancing selection.
Therefore, a vaccine mixture including such stable antigen variants will be
putatively applicable and efficacious in all world regions where malaria occurs. 
Despite similarity in ID1-DBL2Xb allele repertoire across geographic areas,
several peaks of strong population differentiation were observed at specific
polymorphic loci, pointing out putative targets of humoral immunity subject to
positive immune selection.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.04.010 
PMID: 24768682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

