
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 May 22;8(5):e2889. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002889.
eCollection 2014 May.

Multiple resistances and complex mechanisms of Anopheles sinensis mosquito: a
major obstacle to mosquito-borne diseases control and elimination in China.

Chang X(1), Zhong D(2), Fang Q(3), Hartsel J(2), Zhou G(2), Shi L(4), Fang F(4), 
Zhu C(4), Yan G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China;
Department of Pathogen Biology, Bengbu Medical College, Anhui, China; Program in 
Public Health, College of Health Sciences, University of California at Irvine,
Irvine, California, United States of America.
(2)Program in Public Health, College of Health Sciences, University of California
at Irvine, Irvine, California, United States of America.
(3)Department of Pathogen Biology, Bengbu Medical College, Anhui, China.
(4)Department of Pathogen Biology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Malaria, dengue fever, and filariasis are three of the most common mosquito-borne
diseases worldwide. Malaria and lymphatic filariasis can occur as concomitant
human infections while also sharing common mosquito vectors. The overall
prevalence and health significance of malaria and filariasis have made them top
priorities for global elimination and control programmes. Pyrethroid resistance
in anopheline mosquito vectors represents a highly significant problem to malaria
control worldwide. Several methods have been proposed to mitigate insecticide
resistance, including rotational use of insecticides with different modes of
action. Anopheles sinensis, an important malaria and filariasis vector in
Southeast Asia, represents an interesting mosquito species for examining the
consequences of long-term insecticide rotation use on resistance. We examined
insecticide resistance in two An. Sinensis populations from central and southern 
China against pyrethroids, organochlorines, organophosphates, and carbamates,
which are the major classes of insecticides recommended for indoor residual
spray. We found that the mosquito populations were highly resistant to the four
classes of insecticides. High frequency of kdr mutation was revealed in the
central population, whereas no kdr mutation was detected in the southern
population. The frequency of G119S mutation in the ace-1 gene was moderate in
both populations. The classification and regression trees (CART) statistical
analysis found that metabolic detoxification was the most important resistance
mechanism, whereas target site insensitivity of L1014 kdr mutation played a less 
important role. Our results indicate that metabolic detoxification was the
dominant mechanism of resistance compared to target site insensitivity, and
suggests that long-term rotational use of various insecticides has led An.
sinensis to evolve a high insecticide resistance. This study highlights the
complex network of mechanisms conferring multiple resistances to chemical
insecticides in mosquito vectors and it has important implication for designing
and implementing vector resistance management strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002889 
PMCID: PMC4031067
PMID: 24852174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

