
1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014 Sep 5;738:273-84. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2014.04.050. Epub
2014 Jun 2.

Artemisinin protects against dextran sulfate-sodium-induced inflammatory bowel
disease, which is associated with activation of the pregnane X receptor.

Hu D(1), Wang Y(2), Chen Z(1), Ma Z(2), You Q(2), Zhang X(2), Zhou T(2), Xiao
Y(2), Liang Q(2), Tan H(2), Xiao C(2), Tang X(2), Zhang B(3), Gao Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Beijing Institute of Radiation
Medicine, Taiping Road 27, Haidian, Beijing 100850, China.
(3)Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin 300193, China.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Beijing Institute of Radiation
Medicine, Taiping Road 27, Haidian, Beijing 100850, China. Electronic address:
gaoyue@nic.bmi.ac.cn.

Artemisinin has been used to treat malaria for centuries in the context of
traditional Chinese medicine. In the present study, the effects of artemisinin on
pregnane X receptor (PXR)-mediated CYP3A expression and its therapeutic role in
inflammatory bowel disease were investigated. LS174T cells exposed to artemisinin
at various concentrations and for different periods of time were examined with
respect to the specific induction of CYP3A4 and PXR mRNA expression. Transient
transfection experiments showed transcriptional activation of the CYP3A4 gene
through artemisinin to be PXR-dependent. An electrophoretic-mobility shift assay 
(EMSA) showed that artemisinin activates the DNA-binding capacity of the PXR for 
the CYP3A4 element. These results indicate that the induction of CYP3A4 by
artemisinin is mediated through the activation of PXR. Using animal models, it
was demonstrated that artemisinin abrogates dextran sulfate sodium (DDS)-induced 
intestinal inflammation. Preadministration of artemisinin ameliorated the
clinical hallmarks of colitis in DSS-treated mice as determined by body weight
loss and assessment of diarrhea, rectal bleeding, colon length, and histology.
Artemisinin was found to prevent or reduce the severity of colonic inflammation
by inducing CYP3A expression by activation of PXR.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2014.04.050 
PMID: 24886881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

