
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2014 Aug;91(2):412-4. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.14-0053. Epub 2014
Jun 2.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency A- variant in febrile patients in
Haiti.

Carter TE(1), Maloy H(2), von Fricken M(2), St Victor Y(2), Romain JR(2), Okech
BA(2), Mulligan CJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Genomics Program, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida;
Department of Anthropology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Genetics
Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Department of Medicinal
Chemistry, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Emerging Pathogens
Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Department of
Environmental and Global Health, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida;
Hospital Saint Croix, Leogane, Haiti; Blanchard Clinic, Terre Noire, Haiti
tamarec@ufl.edu.
(2)Genetics and Genomics Program, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida;
Department of Anthropology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Genetics
Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Department of Medicinal
Chemistry, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Emerging Pathogens
Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida; Department of
Environmental and Global Health, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida;
Hospital Saint Croix, Leogane, Haiti; Blanchard Clinic, Terre Noire, Haiti.

Haiti is one of two remaining malaria-endemic countries in the Caribbean. To
decrease malaria transmission in Haiti, primaquine was recently added to the
malaria treatment public health policy. One limitation of primaquine is that, at 
certain doses, primaquine can cause hemolytic anemia in individuals with
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency (G6PDd). In this study, we
genotyped two mutations (A376G and G202A), which confer the most common G6PDd
variant in West African populations, G6PDd A-. We estimated the frequency of
G6PDd A- in a sample of febrile patients enrolled in an on-going malaria study
who represent a potential target population for a primaquine mass drug
administration. We found that 33 of 168 individuals carried the G6PDd A- allele
(includes A- hemizygous males, A- homozygous or heterozygous females) and could
experience toxicity if treated with primaquine. These data inform discussions on 
safe and effective primaquine dosing and future malaria elimination strategies
for Haiti.

Â© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.14-0053 
PMCID: PMC4125271
PMID: 24891465  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

