
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014 Aug;80(16):5021-7. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01172-14. Epub
2014 Jun 6.

Biosynthesis of the β-methylarginine residue of peptidyl nucleoside arginomycin
in Streptomyces arginensis NRRL 15941.

Feng J(1), Wu J(2), Gao J(2), Xia Z(3), Deng Z(2), He X(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism and School of Life Science and
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China National Institute 
of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Key
Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of Health, and WHO
Collaborating Centre for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and Filariasis, Shanghai,
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism and School of Life Science and
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(3)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of
Health, and WHO Collaborating Centre for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and Filariasis,
Shanghai, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism and School of Life Science and
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China xyhe@sjtu.edu.cn.

The peptidyl nucleoside arginomycin is active against Gram-positive bacteria and 
fungi but displays much lower toxicity to mice than its analog blasticidin S. It 
features a rare amino acid, β-methylarginine, which is attached to the
deoxyhexose moiety via a 4'-aminoacyl bond. We here report cloning of the
complete biosynthetic gene cluster for arginomycin from Streptomyces arginensis
NRRL 15941. Among the 14 putative essential open reading frames, argM, encoding
an aspartate aminotransferase (AAT), and adjacent argN, encoding an S-adenosyl
methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase, are coupled to catalyze arginine
and yield β-methylarginine in Escherichia coli. Purified ArgM can transfer the
α-amino group of l-arginine to α-ketoglutaric acid to give glutamate and thereby 
converts l-arginine to 5-guanidino-2-oxopentanoic acid, which is methylated at
the C-3 position by ArgN to form 5-guanidino-3-methyl-2-oxopentanoic acid.
Iteratively, ArgM specifically catalyzes transamination from the donor
l-aspartate to the resulting 5-guanidino-3-methyl-2-oxopentanoic acid, generating
β-methylarginine. The complete and concise biosynthetic pathway for the rare and 
bioactive amino acid revealed by this study may pave the way for the production
of β-methylarginine either by enzymatic conversion or by engineered living cells.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01172-14 
PMCID: PMC4135772
PMID: 24907335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

