
1. J Vector Borne Dis. 2014 Jun;51(2):97-105.

Differential expression of glutathione s-transferase enzyme in different life
stages of various insecticide-resistant strains of Anopheles stephensi: a malaria
vector.

Sanil D, Shetty V, Shetty NJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Genetics, Bangalore University, Bengaluru, India.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: Interest in insect glutathione s-transferases (GSTs) has
primarily focused on their role in insecticide resistance. These play an
important role in biotransformation and detoxification of many different
xenobiotic and endogenous substances including insecticides. The GST activity
among 10 laboratory selected insecticide resistant and susceptible/control
strains of Anopheles stephensi was compared using the substrates
1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (CDNB). The difference in the GST activities of
different life stages of diverse insecticide resistant strains was compared and
presented.
METHODS: About 100 larvae, pupae, adult males, adult females and eggs (100 Î¼g in 
total weight) were collected and used for the experiment. The extracts were
prepared from each of the insecticide-resistant strains and control. Protein
contents of the enzyme homogenate and GST activities were determined.
RESULTS: Deltamethrin and cyfluthrin-resistant strains of An. stephensi showed
significantly higher GST activity. Larvae and pupae of DDT-resistant strain
showed peak GST activity followed by the propoxur-resistant strain. On contrary, 
the GST activity was found in reduced quantity in alphamethrin, bifenthrin,
carbofuran and chloropyrifos resistant strains. Adults of either sexes showed
higher GST activity in mosquito strain resistant to organophosphate group of
insecticides namely, temephos and chloropyrifos.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSION: The GST activity was closely associated with almost 
all of the insecticides used in the study, strengthening the fact that one of the
mechanisms associated with resistance includes an increase of GST activity. This 
comparative data on GST activity in An. stephensi can be useful database to
identify possible underlying mechanisms governing insecticide-resistance by GSTs.


PMID: 24947216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

