
1. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jul 4;15:557. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-557.

Transcriptome-wide analysis of microRNA expression in the malaria mosquito
Anopheles gambiae.

Biryukova I(1), Ye T, Levashina E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vector Biology, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology,
Berlin 10117, Germany. biryukova@mpiib-berlin.mpg.de.

BACKGROUND: microRNAs (miRNAs) are a highly abundant class of small noncoding
regulatory RNAs that post-transcriptionally regulate gene expression in
multicellular organisms. miRNAs are involved in a wide range of biological and
physiological processes, including the regulation of host immune responses to
microbial infections. Small-scale studies of miRNA expression in the malaria
mosquito Anopheles gambiae have been reported, however no comprehensive analysis 
of miRNAs has been performed so far.
RESULTS: Using small RNA sequencing, we characterized de novo A. gambiae miRNA
repertoire expressed in adult sugar- and blood-fed females. We provided
transcriptional evidences for 123 miRNAs, including 58 newly identified miRNAs.
Out of the newly described miRNAs, 19 miRNAs are homologs to known miRNAs in
other insect species and 17 miRNAs share sequence similarity restricted to the
seed sequence. The remaining 21 novel miRNAs displayed no obvious sequence
homology with known miRNAs. Detailed bioinformatics analysis of the mature miRNAs
revealed a sequence variation occurring at their 5'-end and leading to functional
seed shifting in more than 5% of miRNAs. We also detected significant sequence
heterogeneity at the 3'-ends of the mature miRNAs, mostly due to imprecise
processing and post-transcriptional modifications. Comparative analysis of
arm-switching events revealed the existence of species-specific production of
dominant mature miRNAs induced by blood feeding in mosquitoes. We also identified
new conserved and fragmented miRNA clusters and A. gambiae-specific miRNA gene
duplication. Using miRNA expression profiling, we identified the differentially
expressed miRNAs at an early time point after regular blood feeding and after
infection with the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei. Significant
changes were detected in the expression levels of 4 miRNAs in blood-fed
mosquitoes, whereas 6 miRNAs were significantly upregulated after P. berghei
infection.
CONCLUSIONS: In the current study, we performed the first systematic analysis of 
miRNAs in A. gambiae. We provided new insights on mature miRNA sequence diversity
and functional shifts in the mosquito miRNA evolution. We identified a set of the
differentially expressed miRNAs that respond to normal and infectious blood
meals. The extended set of Anopheles miRNAs and their isoforms provides a basis
for further experimental studies of miRNA expression patterns and biological
functions in A. gambiae.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-557 
PMCID: PMC4112208
PMID: 24997592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

