
1. BMC Syst Biol. 2014;8 Suppl 2:S4. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-8-S2-S4. Epub 2014 Mar
13.

Integrative omics analysis. A study based on Plasmodium falciparum mRNA and
protein data.

Tomescu OA, Mattanovich D, Thallinger GG.

BACKGROUND: Technological improvements have shifted the focus from data
generation to data analysis. The availability of large amounts of data from
transcriptomics, protemics and metabolomics experiments raise new questions
concerning suitable integrative analysis methods. We compare three integrative
analysis techniques (co-inertia analysis, generalized singular value
decomposition and integrative biclustering) by applying them to gene and protein 
abundance data from the six life cycle stages of Plasmodium falciparum.
Co-inertia analysis is an analysis method used to visualize and explore gene and 
protein data. The generalized singular value decomposition has shown its
potential in the analysis of two transcriptome data sets. Integrative
Biclustering applies biclustering to gene and protein data.
RESULTS: Using CIA, we visualize the six life cycle stages of Plasmodium
falciparum, as well as GO terms in a 2D plane and interpret the spatial
configuration. With GSVD, we decompose the transcriptomic and proteomic data sets
into matrices with biologically meaningful interpretations and explore the
processes captured by the data sets. IBC identifies groups of genes, proteins, GO
Terms and life cycle stages of Plasmodium falciparum. We show method-specific
results as well as a network view of the life cycle stages based on the results
common to all three methods. Additionally, by combining the results of the three 
methods, we create a three-fold validated network of life cycle stage specific GO
terms: Sporozoites are associated with transcription and transport; merozoites
with entry into host cell as well as biosynthetic and metabolic processes; rings 
with oxidation-reduction processes; trophozoites with glycolysis and energy
production; schizonts with antigenic variation and immune response; gametocyctes 
with DNA packaging and mitochondrial transport. Furthermore, the network
connectivity underlines the separation of the intraerythrocytic cycle from the
gametocyte and sporozoite stages.
CONCLUSION: Using integrative analysis techniques, we can integrate knowledge
from different levels and obtain a wider view of the system under study. The
overlap between method-specific and common results is considerable, even if the
basic mathematical assumptions are very different. The three-fold validated
network of life cycle stage characteristics of Plasmodium falciparum could
identify a large amount of the known associations from literature in only one
study.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-8-S2-S4 
PMCID: PMC4101701
PMID: 25033389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

