
1. Parasit Vectors. 2014 Jul 24;7:345. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-345.

Contemporary gene flow between wild An. gambiae s.s. and An. arabiensis.

Weetman D, Steen K, Rippon EJ, Mawejje HD, Donnelly MJ, Wilding CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke 
Place, Liverpool L3 5QA, UK. c.s.wilding@ljmu.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: In areas where the morphologically indistinguishable malaria
mosquitoes Anopheles gambiae Giles and An. arabiensis Patton are sympatric,
hybrids are detected occasionally via species-diagnostic molecular assays. An.
gambiae and An. arabiensis exhibit both pre- and post-reproductive mating
barriers, with swarms largely species-specific and male F1 (first-generation)
hybrids sterile. Consequently advanced-stage hybrids (back-crosses to parental
species), which would represent a route for potentially-adaptive introgression,
are expected to be very rare in natural populations. Yet the use of one or two
physically linked single-locus diagnostic assays renders them indistinguishable
from F1 hybrids and levels of interspecific gene flow are unknown.
METHODS: We used data from over 350 polymorphic autosomal SNPs to investigate
post F1 gene flow via patterns of genomic admixture between An. gambiae and An.
arabiensis from eastern Uganda. Simulations were used to investigate the
statistical power to detect hybrids with different levels of crossing and to
identify the hybrid category significantly admixed genotypes could represent.
RESULTS: A range of admixture proportions were detected for 11 field-collected
hybrids identified via single-locus species-diagnostic PCRs. Comparison of
admixture data with simulations indicated that at least seven of these hybrids
were advanced generation crosses, with backcrosses to each species identified. In
addition, of 36 individuals typing as An. gambiae or An. arabiensis that
exhibited outlying admixture proportions, ten were identified as significantly
mixed backcrosses, and at least four of these were second or third generation
crosses.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that hybrids detected using standard diagnostics
will often be hybrid generations beyond F1, and that in our study area around 5% 
(95% confidence intervals 3%-9%) of apparently 'pure' species samples may also be
backcrosses. This is likely an underestimate because of rapidly-declining
detection power beyond the first two backcross generations. Post-F1 gene flow
occurs at a far from inconsequential rate between An. gambiae and An. arabiensis,
and, especially for traits under strong selection, could readily lead to adaptive
introgression of genetic variants relevant for vector control.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-345 
PMCID: PMC4124135
PMID: 25060488  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

