
1. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 4;9(9):e105732. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105732. eCollection
2014.

Inhibition of the SR protein-phosphorylating CLK kinases of Plasmodium falciparum
impairs blood stage replication and malaria transmission.

Kern S(1), Agarwal S(2), Huber K(3), Gehring AP(3), Strödke B(3), Wirth CC(4),
Brügl T(2), Abodo LO(4), Dandekar T(5), Doerig C(6), Fischer R(4), Tobin AB(7),
Alam MM(7), Bracher F(3), Pradel G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany; Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen,
Germany.
(2)Research Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany.
(3)Department of Pharmacy - Center for Drug Research, Ludwig-Maximillians
University, Munich, Germany.
(4)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(5)Bioinformatics, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(6)INSERM U609, Global Health Institute, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
(EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland; Department of Microbiology, Monash University,
Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
(7)Department of Cell Physiology and Pharmacology, MRC Toxicology Unit,
University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom.

Cyclin-dependent kinase-like kinases (CLKs) are dual specificity protein kinases 
that phosphorylate Serine/Arginine-rich (SR) proteins involved in pre-mRNA
processing. Four CLKs, termed PfCLK-1-4, can be identified in the human malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum, which show homology with the yeast SR protein
kinase Sky1p. The four PfCLKs are present in the nucleus and cytoplasm of the
asexual blood stages and of gametocytes, sexual precursor cells crucial for
malaria parasite transmission from humans to mosquitoes. We identified three
plasmodial SR proteins, PfSRSF12, PfSFRS4 and PfSF-1, which are predominantly
present in the nucleus of blood stage trophozoites, PfSRSF12 and PfSF-1 are
further detectable in the nucleus of gametocytes. We found that recombinantly
expressed SR proteins comprising the Arginine/Serine (RS)-rich domains were
phosphorylated by the four PfCLKs in in vitro kinase assays, while a recombinant 
PfSF-1 peptide lacking the RS-rich domain was not phosphorylated. Since it was
hitherto not possible to knock-out the pfclk genes by conventional gene
disruption, we aimed at chemical knock-outs for phenotype analysis. We identified
five human CLK inhibitors, belonging to the oxo-β-carbolines and
aminopyrimidines, as well as the antiseptic chlorhexidine as PfCLK-targeting
compounds. The six inhibitors block P. falciparum blood stage replication in the 
low micromolar to nanomolar range by preventing the trophozoite-to-schizont
transformation. In addition, the inhibitors impair gametocyte maturation and
gametogenesis in in vitro assays. The combined data show that the four PfCLKs are
involved in phosphorylation of SR proteins with essential functions for the blood
and sexual stages of the malaria parasite, thus pointing to the kinases as
promising targets for antimalarial and transmission blocking drugs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105732 
PMCID: PMC4154858
PMID: 25188378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

