
1. Genome Biol. 2014 Sep 23;15(9):459. doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0459-2.

Genome analysis of a major urban malaria vector mosquito, Anopheles stephensi.

Jiang X, Peery A, Hall AB, Sharma A, Chen XG, Waterhouse RM, Komissarov A, Riehle
MM, Shouche Y, Sharakhova MV, Lawson D, Pakpour N, Arensburger P, Davidson VL,
Eiglmeier K, Emrich S, George P, Kennedy RC, Mane SP, Maslen G, Oringanje C, Qi
Y, Settlage R, Tojo M, Tubio JM, Unger MF, Wang B, Vernick KD, Ribeiro JM, James 
AA, Michel K, Riehle MA, Luckhart S, Sharakhov IV, Tu Z.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles stephensi is the key vector of malaria throughout the
Indian subcontinent and Middle East and an emerging model for molecular and
genetic studies of mosquito-parasite interactions. The type form of the species
is responsible for the majority of urban malaria transmission across its range.
RESULTS: Here, we report the genome sequence and annotation of the Indian strain 
of the type form of An. stephensi. The 221Â Mb genome assembly represents more
than 92% of the entire genome and was produced using a combination of 454,
Illumina, and PacBio sequencing. Physical mapping assigned 62% of the genome onto
chromosomes, enabling chromosome-based analysis. Comparisons between An.
stephensi and An. gambiae reveal that the rate of gene order reshuffling on the X
chromosome was three times higher than that on the autosomes. An. stephensi has
more heterochromatin in pericentric regions but less repetitive DNA in chromosome
arms than An. gambiae. We also identify a number of Y-chromosome contigs and
BACs. Interspersed repeats constitute 7.1% of the assembled genome while LTR
retrotransposons alone comprise more than 49% of the Y contigs. RNA-seq analyses 
provide new insights into mosquito innate immunity, development, and sexual
dimorphism.
CONCLUSIONS: The genome analysis described in this manuscript provides a resource
and platform for fundamental and translational research into a major urban
malaria vector. Chromosome-based investigations provide unique perspectives on
Anopheles chromosome evolution. RNA-seq analysis and studies of immunity genes
offer new insights into mosquito biology and mosquito-parasite interactions.

DOI: 10.1186/s13059-014-0459-2 
PMCID: PMC4195908
PMID: 25244985  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

