
1. Malar J. 2014 Sep 30;13:387. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-387.

Spatial clustering and risk factors of malaria infections in Ratanakiri Province,
Cambodia.

Sluydts V(1), Heng S, Coosemans M, Van Roey K, Gryseels C, Canier L, Kim S, Khim 
N, Siv S, Mean V, Uk S, Grietens KP, Tho S, Menard D, Durnez L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium. vsluydts@itg.be.

BACKGROUND: Malaria incidence worldwide has steadily declined over the past
decades. Consequently, increasingly more countries will proceed from control to
elimination. The malaria distribution in low incidence settings appears patchy,
and local transmission hotspots are a continuous source of infection. In this
study, species-specific clusters and associated risk factors were identified
based on malaria prevalence data collected in the north-east of Cambodia. In
addition, Plasmodium falciparum genetic diversity, population structure and gene 
flows were studied.
METHOD: In 2012, blood samples from 5793 randomly selected individuals living in 
117 villages were collected from Ratanakiri province, Cambodia. Malariometric
data of each participant were simultaneously accumulated using a standard
questionnaire. A two-step PCR allowed for species-specific detection of malaria
parasites, and SNP-genotyping of P. falciparum was performed. SaTScan was used to
determine species-specific areas of elevated risk to infection, and univariate
and multivariate risk analyses were carried out.
RESULT: PCR diagnosis found 368 positive individuals (6.4%) for malaria
parasites, of which 22% contained mixed species infections. The occurrence of
these co-infections was more frequent than expected. Specific areas with elevated
risk of infection were detected for all Plasmodium species. The clusters for
Falciparum, Vivax and Ovale malaria appeared in the north of the province along
the main river, while the cluster for Malariae malaria was situated elsewhere.
The relative risk to be a malaria parasite carrier within clusters along the
river was twice that outside the area. The main risk factor associated with three
out of four malaria species was overnight stay in the plot hut, a human behaviour
associated with indigenous farming. Haplotypes did not show clear geographical
population structure, but pairwise Fst value comparison indicated higher parasite
flow along the river.
DISCUSSION: Spatial aggregation of malaria parasite carriers, and the
identification of malaria species-specific risk factors provide key insights in
malaria epidemiology in low transmission settings, which can guide targeted
supplementary interventions. Consequently, future malaria programmes in the
province should implement additional specific policies targeting households
staying overnight at their farms outside the village, in addition to migrants and
forest workers.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-387 
PMCID: PMC4190307
PMID: 25269827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

