
1. Parasitol Int. 2015 Jun;64(3):295-300. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2014.09.011. Epub
2014 Sep 28.

Direct evidence for the atovaquone action on the Plasmodium cytochrome bc1
complex.

Siregar JE(1), Kurisu G(2), Kobayashi T(3), Matsuzaki M(3), Sakamoto K(3),
Mi-ichi F(3), Watanabe Y(3), Hirai M(4), Matsuoka H(4), Syafruddin D(1), Marzuki 
S(1), Kita K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Eijkman Institute for Molecular Biology, Jl. Diponegoro 69, Jakarta 10430,
Indonesia.
(2)Institute for Protein Research, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871,
Japan.
(3)Department of Biomedical Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
(4)Department of Medical Zoology, Jichi Medical School, Minami-kawachi, Tochigi
329-0498, Japan.
(5)Department of Biomedical Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. Electronic address:
kitak@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Atovaquone, a coenzyme Q analogue has been indicated to specifically target the
cytochrome bc1 complex of the mitochondrial respiratory chain in the malarial
parasite and other protozoan. Various mutations in the quinone binding site of
the cytochrome b gene of Plasmodium spp. such as M133I, L144S, L271V, K272R,
Y268C, Y268S, Y268N, and V284F are suggesting to associate with resistance to
atovaquone. There is no direct evidence of relation between the mutations and
resistance to atovaquone in Plasmodium parasite that has been available.
Technical difficulties in isolating active assayable mitochondria in the malarial
parasite hinder us to obtain direct biochemical evidence to support the relation 
between the mutations and drug resistance. The establishment of a mitochondrial
isolation method for the malaria parasite has allowed us to test the degree of
resistance of Plasmodium berghei isolates to atovaquone directly. We have tested 
the activity of dihydroorotate (DHO)-cytochrome c reductase in various P. berghei
atovaquone resistant clones in the presence of a wide concentration range of
atovaquone. Our results show the IC(50) of P. berghei atovaquone resistant clones
is much higher (1.5 up to 40 nM) in comparison to the atovaquone sensitive clones
(0.132-0.465 nM). The highest IC(50) was revealed in clones carrying Y268C and
Y268N mutations (which play an important role in atovaquone resistance in
Plasmodium falciparum), with an approximately 100-fold increase. The findings
indicate the importance of the mutation in the quinone binding site of the
cytochrome b gene and that provide a direct evidence for the atovaquone
inhibitory mechanism in the cytochrome bc1 complex of the parasite.

Copyright Â© 2014. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2014.09.011 
PMID: 25264100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

