
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 12;289(50):34827-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.615831. Epub
2014 Oct 28.

The heme biosynthesis pathway is essential for Plasmodium falciparum development 
in mosquito stage but not in blood stages.

Ke H(1), Sigala PA(2), Miura K(3), Morrisey JM(1), Mather MW(1), Crowley JR(4),
Henderson JP(5), Goldberg DE(6), Long CA(3), Vaidya AB(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Molecular Parasitology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19129.
(2)the Department of Molecular Microbiology and the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110.
(3)the Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, NIAID, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, Maryland 20852, and.
(4)the Center for Women's Infectious Disease Research and.
(5)the Center for Women's Infectious Disease Research and Department of Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110.
(6)the Department of Molecular Microbiology and the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110,
Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110.
(7)From the Center for Molecular Parasitology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19129, avaidya@drexelmed.edu.

Heme is an essential cofactor for aerobic organisms. Its redox chemistry is
central to a variety of biological functions mediated by hemoproteins. In blood
stages, malaria parasites consume most of the hemoglobin inside the infected
erythrocytes, forming nontoxic hemozoin crystals from large quantities of heme
released during digestion. At the same time, the parasites possess a heme de novo
biosynthetic pathway. This pathway in the human malaria parasite Plasmodium
falciparum has been considered essential and is proposed as a potential drug
target. However, we successfully disrupted the first and last genes of the
pathway, individually and in combination. These knock-out parasite lines, lacking
5-aminolevulinic acid synthase and/or ferrochelatase (FC), grew normally in
blood-stage culture and exhibited no changes in sensitivity to heme-related
antimalarial drugs. We developed a sensitive LC-MS/MS assay to monitor stable
isotope incorporation into heme from its precursor 5-[(13)C4]aminolevulinic acid,
and this assay confirmed that de novo heme synthesis was ablated in FC knock-out 
parasites. Disrupting the FC gene also caused no defects in gametocyte generation
or maturation but resulted in a greater than 70% reduction in male gamete
formation and completely prevented oocyst formation in female Anopheles stephensi
mosquitoes. Our data demonstrate that the heme biosynthesis pathway is not
essential for asexual blood-stage growth of P. falciparum parasites but is
required for mosquito transmission. Drug inhibition of pathway activity is
therefore unlikely to provide successful antimalarial therapy. These data also
suggest the existence of a parasite mechanism for scavenging host heme to meet
metabolic needs.

Â© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.615831 
PMCID: PMC4263882
PMID: 25352601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

