
1. J Insect Sci. 2014 Jan 1;14:165. doi: 10.1093/jisesa/ieu027. Print 2014.

Genomic and bioinformatic analysis of NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase in
Anopheles stephensi (Diptera: Culicidae).

Suwanchaichinda C(1), Brattsten LB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08901
csuwanch@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Entomology, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08901.

The cytochrome P450 monooxygenase (P450) enzyme system is a major mechanism of
xenobiotic biotransformation. The nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
(NADPH)-cytochrome P450 reductase (CPR) is required for transfer of electrons
from NADPH to P450. One CPR gene was identified in the genome of the
malaria-transmitting mosquito Anopheles stephensi Liston (Diptera: Culicidae).
The gene encodes a polypeptide containing highly conserved flavin
mononucleotide-, flavin adenine dinucleotide-, and NADPH-binding domains, a
unique characteristic of the reductase. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the
A. stephensi and other known mosquito CPRs belong to a monophyletic group
distinctly separated from other insects in the same order, Diptera. Amino acid
residues of CPRs involved in binding of P450 and cytochrome c are conserved
between A. stephensi and the Norway rat Rattus norvegicus Berkenhout (Rodentia:
Muridae). However, gene structure particularly within the coding region is
evidently different between the two organisms. Such difference might arise during
the evolution process as also seen in the difference of P450 families and
isoforms found in these organisms. CPR in the mosquito A. stephensi is expected
to be active and serve as an essential component of the P450 system.

Â© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Entomological Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/jisesa/ieu027 
PMCID: PMC5443604
PMID: 25368081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

