
1. BMC Genomics. 2014 Nov 25;15:1024. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-1024.

Genome wide in silico analysis of Plasmodium falciparum phosphatome.

Pandey R, Mohmmed A, Pierrot C, Khalife J(1), Malhotra P, Gupta D.

Author information: 
(1)Structural and Computational Biology group, International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India.
jamal.khalife@pasteur-lille.fr.

BACKGROUND: Eukaryotic cellular machineries are intricately regulated by several 
molecular mechanisms involving transcriptional control, post-translational
control and post-translational modifications of proteins (PTMs). Reversible
protein phosphorylation/dephosphorylation process, which involves kinases as well
as phosphatases, represents an important regulatory mechanism for diverse
pathways and systems in all organisms including human malaria parasite,
Plasmodium falciparum. Earlier analysis on P. falciparum protein-phosphatome
revealed presence of 34 phosphatases in Plasmodium genome. Recently, we
re-analysed P. falciparum phosphatome aimed at identifying parasite specific
phosphatases.
RESULTS: Plasmodium database (PlasmoDB 9.2) search, combined with PFAM and CDD
searches, revealed 67 candidate phosphatases in P. falciparum. While this number 
is far less than the number of phosphatases present in Homo sapiens, it is almost
the same as in other Plasmodium species. These Plasmodium phosphatase proteins
were classified into 13 super families based on NCBI CDD search. Analysis of
proteins expression profiles of the 67 phosphatases revealed that 44 phosphatases
are expressed in both schizont as well as gametocytes stages. Fourteen
phosphatases are common in schizont, ring and trophozoite stages, four
phosphatases are restricted to gametocytes, whereas another three restricted to
schizont stage. The phylogenetic trees for each of the known phosphatase super
families reveal a considerable phylogenetic closeness amongst apicomplexan
organisms and a considerable phylogenetic distance with other eukaryotic model
organisms included in the study. The GO assignments and predicted interaction
partners of the parasite phosphatases indicate its important role in diverse
cellular processes.
CONCLUSION: In the study presented here, we reviewed the P. falciparum
phosphatome to show presence of 67 candidate phosphatases in P. falciparum
genomes/proteomes. Intriguingly, amongst these phosphatases, we could identify
six Plasmodium specific phosphatases and 33 putative phosphatases that do not
have human orthologs, thereby suggesting that these phosphatases have the
potential to be explored as novel antimalarial drug targets.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-1024 
PMCID: PMC4256932
PMID: 25425018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

