
1. Public Health Genomics. 2015;18(1):40-51. Epub 2014 Nov 26.

Genome-wide association studies in Africans and African Americans: expanding the 
framework of the genomics of human traits and disease.

Peprah E, Xu H, Tekola-Ayele F, Royal CD.

Genomic research is one of the tools for elucidating the pathogenesis of diseases
of global health relevance and paving the research dimension to clinical and
public health translation. Recent advances in genomic research and technologies
have increased our understanding of human diseases, genes associated with these
disorders, and the relevant mechanisms. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS)
have proliferated since the first studies were published several years ago and
have become an important tool in helping researchers comprehend human variation
and the role genetic variants play in disease. However, the need to expand the
diversity of populations in GWAS has become increasingly apparent as new
knowledge is gained about genetic variation. Inclusion of diverse populations in 
genomic studies is critical to a more complete understanding of human variation
and elucidation of the underpinnings of complex diseases. In this review, we
summarize the available data on GWAS in recent African ancestry populations
within the western hemisphere (i.e. African Americans and peoples of the
Caribbean) and continental African populations. Furthermore, we highlight ways in
which genomic studies in populations of recent African ancestry have led to
advances in the areas of malaria, HIV, prostate cancer, and other diseases.
Finally, we discuss the advantages of conducting GWAS in recent African ancestry 
populations in the context of addressing existing and emerging global health
conditions.

DOI: 10.1159/000367962 
PMCID: PMC4418477
PMID: 25427668  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

