
1. Yao Xue Xue Bao. 2014 Sep;49(9):1346-52.

[Enhancement of artemisinin biosynthesis in transgenic Artemisia annua L. by
overexpressed HDR and ADS genes].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang YX, Long SP, Zeng LX, Xiang LE, Lin Z, Chen M, Liao ZH.

Artemisnin is a novel sesquiterpene lactone with an internal peroxide bridge
structure, which is extracted from traditional Chinese herb Artemisia annua L.
(Qinghao). Recommended by World Health Organization, artemisinin is the
first-line drug in the treatment of encephalic and chloroquine-resistant malaria.
In the present study, transgenic A. annua plants were developed by overexpressing
the key enzymes involved in the biosynthetic pathway of artemisinin. Based on
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation methods, transgenic plants of A. annua with
overexpression of both HDR and ADS were obtained through hygromycin screening.
The genomic PCR analysis confirmed six transgenic lines in which both HDR and ADS
were integrated into genome. The gene expression analysis given by real-time
quantitative PCR showed that all the transgenic lines had higher expression
levels of HDR and ADS than the non-transgenic control (except ah3 in which the
expression level of ADS showed no significant difference compared with control); 
and the HPLC analysis of artemisinin demonstrated that transgenic A. annua plants
produced artemisinin at significantly higher level than non-transgenic plants.
Especially, the highest content of artemisinin was found in transgenic line ah70,
in which the artemisinin content was 3.48 times compared with that in
non-transgenic lines. In summary, overexpression of HDR and ADS facilitated
artemisinin biosynthesis and this method could be applied to develop transgenic
plants of A. annua with higher yield of artemisinin.


PMID: 25518337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

