
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Feb;59(2):1230-5. doi: 10.1128/AAC.04270-14.
Epub 2014 Dec 15.

Therapeutic responses of Plasmodium vivax malaria to chloroquine and primaquine
treatment in northeastern Myanmar.

Yuan L(1), Wang Y(2), Parker DM(3), Gupta B(3), Yang Z(4), Liu H(4), Fan Q(5),
Cao Y(6), Xiao Y(6), Lee MC(7), Zhou G(7), Yan G(7), Baird JK(8), Cui L(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology and Immunology, Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, China Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, 
China.
(3)Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Pathogen Biology and Immunology, Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, China.
(5)Dalian Institute of Biotechnology, Dalian, Liaoning, China.
(6)Department of Immunology, China Medical University, Shenyang, China.
(7)Program in Public Health, University of California at Irvine, Irvine,
California, USA.
(8)Eijkman-Oxford Clinical Research Unit, Jakarta, Indonesia Centre for Tropical 
Medicine, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.
(9)Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania, USA luc2@psu.edu.

Chloroquine-primaquine (CQ-PQ) continues to be the frontline therapy for radical 
cure of Plasmodium vivax malaria. Emergence of CQ-resistant (CQR) P. vivax
parasites requires a shift to artemisinin combination therapies (ACTs), which
imposes a significant financial, logistical, and safety burden. Monitoring the
therapeutic efficacy of CQ is thus important. Here, we evaluated the therapeutic 
efficacy of CQ-PQ for P. vivax malaria in northeast Myanmar. We recruited 587
patients with P. vivax monoinfection attending local malaria clinics during 2012 
to 2013. These patients received three daily doses of CQ at a total dose of 24 mg
of base/kg of body weight and an 8-day PQ treatment (0.375 mg/kg/day) commencing 
at the same time as the first CQ dose. Of the 401 patients who finished the
28-day follow-up, the cumulative incidence of recurrent parasitemia was 5.20%
(95% confidence interval [CI], 3.04% to 7.36%). Among 361 (61%) patients
finishing a 42-day follow-up, the cumulative incidence of recurrent blood-stage
infection reached 7.98% (95% CI, 5.20% to 10.76%). The cumulative risk of
gametocyte carriage at days 28 and 42 was 2.21% (95% CI, 0.78% to 3.64%) and
3.93% (95% CI, 1.94% to 5.92%), respectively. Interestingly, for all 15 patients 
with recurrent gametocytemia, this was associated with concurrent asexual stages.
Genotyping of recurrent parasites at the merozoite surface protein 3α gene locus 
from 12 patients with recurrent parasitemia within 28 days revealed that 10 of
these were the same genotype as at day 0, suggesting recrudescence or relapse.
Similar studies in 70 patients in the same area in 2007 showed no recurrent
parasitemias within 28 days. The sensitivity to chloroquine of P. vivax in
northeastern Myanmar may be deteriorating.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.04270-14 
PMCID: PMC4335844
PMID: 25512415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

