
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Feb 3;112(5):1273-80. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1423586112. Epub 2014 Dec 31.

Plasmodium falciparum evades mosquito immunity by disrupting JNK-mediated
apoptosis of invaded midgut cells.

Ramphul UN(1), Garver LS(1), Molina-Cruz A(1), Canepa GE(1), Barillas-Mury C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20852.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20852
cbarillas@niaid.nih.gov.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Feb 3;112(5):1250-1.

The malaria parasite, Plasmodium, must survive and develop in the mosquito vector
to be successfully transmitted to a new host. The Plasmodium falciparum Pfs47
gene is critical for malaria transmission. Parasites that express Pfs47 (NF54 WT)
evade mosquito immunity and survive, whereas Pfs47 knockouts (KO) are efficiently
eliminated by the complement-like system. Two alternative approaches were used to
investigate the mechanism of action of Pfs47 on immune evasion. First, we
examined whether Pfs47 affected signal transduction pathways mediating mosquito
immune responses, and show that the Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway is a key 
mediator of Anopheles gambiae antiplasmodial responses to P. falciparum infection
and that Pfs47 disrupts JNK signaling. Second, we used microarrays to compare the
global transcriptional responses of A. gambiae midguts to infection with WT and
KO parasites. The presence of Pfs47 results in broad and profound changes in gene
expression in response to infection that are already evident 12 h postfeeding,
but become most prominent at 26 h postfeeding, the time when ookinetes invade the
mosquito midgut. Silencing of 15 differentially expressed candidate genes
identified caspase-S2 as a key effector of Plasmodium elimination in parasites
lacking Pfs47. We provide experimental evidence that JNK pathway regulates
activation of caspases in Plasmodium-invaded midgut cells, and that caspase
activation is required to trigger midgut epithelial nitration. Pfs47 alters the
cell death pathway of invaded midgut cells by disrupting JNK signaling and
prevents the activation of several caspases, resulting in an ineffective
nitration response that makes the parasite undetectable by the mosquito
complement-like system.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1423586112 
PMCID: PMC4321252
PMID: 25552553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

