
1. Mol Plant. 2015 Jan;8(1):163-75. doi: 10.1016/j.molp.2014.12.004. Epub 2014 Dec
15.

A basic leucine zipper transcription factor, AabZIP1, connects abscisic acid
signaling with artemisinin biosynthesis in Artemisia annua.

Zhang F(1), Fu X(1), Lv Z(1), Lu X(1), Shen Q(1), Zhang L(1), Zhu M(1), Wang
G(1), Sun X(1), Liao Z(2), Tang K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South) Ministry of Agriculture, Plant
Biotechnology Research Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China.
(2)SWU-TAAHC Medicinal Plant Joint R&D Centre, School of Life Sciences, Southwest
University, Chongqing 400715, China. Electronic address: zhliao@swu.edu.cn.
(3)Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South) Ministry of Agriculture, Plant
Biotechnology Research Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China. Electronic address: kxtang@sjtu.edu.cn.

Artemisinin is a sesquiterpenoid especially synthesized in the Chinese herbal
plant, Artemisia annua, which is widely used in the treatment of malaria.
Artemisinin accumulation can be enhanced by exogenous abscisic acid (ABA)
treatment. However, it is not known how ABA signaling regulates artemisinin
biosynthesis. A global expression profile and phylogenetic analysis as well as
the dual-LUC screening revealed that a basic leucine zipper family transcription 
factor from A. annua (namely AabZIP1) was involved in ABA signaling to regulate
artemisinin biosynthesis. AabZIP1 had a higher expression level in the
inflorescences than in other tissues; ABA treatment, drought, and salt stress
strongly induced the expression of AabZIP1. Yeast one-hybrid assay and
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) showed that AabZIP1 bound to the
ABA-responsive elements (ABRE) in the promoter regions of the amorpha-4,11-diene 
synthase (ADS) gene and CYP71AV1, which are two key structural genes of the
artemisinin biosynthetic pathway. A mutagenesis assay showed that the C1 domain
in the N-terminus of AabZIP1 was important for its transactivation activity.
Furthermore, the activation of ADS and CYP71AV1 promoters by AabZIP1 was enhanced
by ABA treatment in transient dual-LUC analysis. The AabZIP1 variant with C1
domain deletion lost the ability to activate ADS and CYP71AV1 promoters
regardless of ABA treatment. Notably, overexpression of AabZIP1 in A. annua
resulted in significantly increased accumulation of artemisinin. Our results
indicate that ABA promotes artemisinin biosynthesis, likely through 1 activation 
of ADS and CYP71AV1 expression by AabZIP in A. annua. Meanwhile, our findings
reveal the potential value of AabZIP1 in genetic engineering of artemisinin
production.

Copyright Â© 2015 The Author. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molp.2014.12.004 
PMID: 25578280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

