
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2015 Apr;31:312-20. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.02.007. Epub
2015 Feb 17.

Genetic diversity and population structure in the Leishmania guyanensis vector
Lutzomyia anduzei (Diptera, Psychodidae) from the Brazilian Amazon.

Scarpassa VM(1), Figueiredo Ada S(2), Alencar RB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Genética de Populações e Evolução de Mosquitos Vetores de
Malária e Dengue, Coordenação de Biodiversidade, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas 
da Amazônia (INPA), Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil. Electronic address:
vera@inpa.gov.br.
(2)Laboratório de Genética de Populações e Evolução de Mosquitos Vetores de
Malária e Dengue, Coordenação de Biodiversidade, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas 
da Amazônia (INPA), Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil.
(3)Universidade do Estado do Amazonas (UEA), Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil.

Lutzomyia (Nyssomyia) anduzei has been recognized as a secondary vector of
Leishmania guyanensis in the Brazilian Amazon region. Since L. anduzei is
anthropophilic, co-exists in areas of high leishmaniasis transmission and has
been found infected with L. guyanensis, the understanding of the vector
population structure and of the process responsible for it is paramount to the
vector management and control efforts. In this study we analyzed 74 and 67
sequences of the COI and Cytb loci, respectively, from mitochondrial DNA, aiming 
to estimate the intra-population genetic variability and population structure in 
six L. anduzei samples from the Brazilian Amazon region. For COI, we found 58
haplotypes, low to high (FST=0.0310-0.4128) and significant (P=0.0033) genetic
structure, and reduced gene flow among populations. The haplotype network yielded
many reticulations that likely resulted from hypervariability in the locus. For
Cytb, we observed 27 haplotypes, low to moderate (FST=0.0077-0.1954) and
nonsignificant (P>0.05) genetic structure for the majority of comparisons and
extensive gene flow among populations, in line with the haplotypes network data. 
AMOVA analysis indicated that most of the variation occurred within populations
(83.41%, 90.94%); nevertheless, there were significant differences
(ΦST=0.0906-0.1659; P=0.00098; P=0.00000) among them for both loci. The Mantel
test showed that the genetic structure is not associated to an
isolation-by-distance (IBD) model in either of both loci. These data suggest that
L. anduzei is genetically very diverse. The genetic structure lacking IBD may be 
due to adaptation to local habitats and the low dispersal capacity of the
sandflies, and both could lead to population fragmentation and geographic
isolation. These findings have important implications for epidemiology,
surveillance and vector control and may be a first step in understanding the
evolutionary history of this species.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.02.007 
PMID: 25701124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

