
1. Gene. 2015 Jul 15;566(1):109-19. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.04.037. Epub 2015 Apr
16.

Cloning, expression and functional characterization of heme detoxification
protein (HDP) from the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium vinckei.

Soni A(1), Goyal M(2), Prakash K(2), Bhardwaj J(1), Siddiqui AJ(1), Puri SK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, Uttar
Pradesh 226031, India; Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR),
Anusandhan Bhawan, New Delhi, India.
(2)Division of Parasitology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, Uttar
Pradesh 226031, India.
(3)Division of Parasitology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, Uttar
Pradesh 226031, India; Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR),
Anusandhan Bhawan, New Delhi, India. Electronic address: sk_puri@cdri.res.in.

Malaria parasite resides within the host red blood cells, where it degrades vast 
amount of haemoglobin. During haemoglobin degradation, toxic free heme is
liberated which subsequently gets converted into hemozoin. This process is
facilitated by action of various proteins viz. heme detoxification protein (HDP),
and histidine rich proteins II and III (HRP II & III). Out of these, HDP is the
most potent in hemozoin formation and plays indispensible role for parasite
survival. Despite this, the detailed study of HDP from rodent and simian parasite
has not been performed till date. Here, we have cloned and sequenced hdp gene
from different malaria parasites Plasmodium vinckei, Plasmodium yoelii,
Plasmodium knowlesi, and Plasmodium cynomolgi. Furthermore, HDP from P. vinckei
(PvHDP) was over-expressed and purified for detailed characterization. The PvHDP 
is cytosolic, expressed throughout the intra erythrocytic stages and its
expression is higher in late trophozoite and schizont stages of parasite. The
PvHDP interacts with free heme (KD=89 nM) and efficiently converts heme into
hemozoin in a time and concentration dependent manner. Moreover, PvHDP showed
activity in acidic pH and over a broad range of temperature. Histidine
modification of PvHDP using DEPC showed reduction in heme binding and hemozoin
formation, thus emphasizing the importance of histidine residues in heme binding 
and subsequent hemozoin production. Furthermore, applicability of PvHDP to screen
anti-plasmodial agents (targeting heme to hemozoin conversion) was also
determined using chloroquine, and mefloquine as reference antimalarials. Results 
showed that these drugs inhibit heme polymerization effectively in a
concentration dependent manner. In conclusion, our study identified and
biochemically characterized HDP from rodent malaria parasite P. vinckei and this 
will help to develop a high throughput assay to evaluate new antimalarials
targeting hemozoin pathway.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.04.037 
PMID: 25891072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

