
1. Planta. 2015 Oct;242(4):869-79. doi: 10.1007/s00425-015-2323-3. Epub 2015 May 22.

Deciphering UV-B-induced variation in DNA methylation pattern and its influence
on regulation of DBR2 expression in Artemisia annua L.

Pandey N(1), Pandey-Rai S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Morphogenesis, Department of Botany, Faculty of Science, Banaras
Hindu University, Varanasi, 221005, Uttar Pradesh, India.

MAIN CONCLUSION: UV-B-caused DNA hypomethylation and UV-B-mediated epigenetic
activation of additional WRKY-binding site(s) in the DBR2 promoter may contribute
to the overexpression of the DBR2 gene in Artemisia annua. DNA methylation is one
of the key mechanisms behind stress-induced transcriptional switch off/on. Here, 
we evaluate the DNA methylation level in response to UV-B radiation in Artemisia 
annua which produces artemisinin, a sesquiterpene that has been recommended by
WHO for the frontline treatment of malaria. However, the drug is facing serious
shortage due to its low concentration in plants. UV-B treatment (3 h) enhanced
artemisinin concentration up to 1.91-fold as compared to control. A key
regulatory gene of artemisinin biosynthesis, DBR2 was upregulated under UV-B.
This study presents observations regarding contributions of DNA methylation to
the gene regulation using DBR2 as an example. Restriction digestion of genomic
DNA by isoschizomers (MspI and HpaII) suggested UV-B involvement in DNA
hypomethylation in A. annua. The global level of DNA methylation (R) was 3.4 and 
5.9% for UV-B treated and control plants, respectively, attesting hypomethylation
of DNA in response to UV-B. Further bisulfite sequencing PCR showed demethylation
at two CHG sites in 18S rRNA gene. Similarly, bisulfite sequencing of promoter
region of DBR2 has demonstrated demethylation at 4 CG-, 4 CHH- and 2 CHG-sites.
In silico analysis revealed UV-B-mediated demethylation at seven putative
transcription factor binding sites including WRKY, which are positive regulators 
of artemisinin biosynthesis. UV-B treatment has resulted in activation of
additional WRKY-binding site in UV-B-treated plants compared with single active
WRKY-binding site in control and this could be the probable reason for
overexpression of DBR2. It is suggested that DNA demethylation is an important
epigenetic response to UV-B radiation in A. annua that surely will provide new
horizons to further elucidate the mechanistic evidence of plant's responses to
UV-B radiation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00425-015-2323-3 
PMID: 25998525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

