
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2015 Dec;67:47-58. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2015.05.007. Epub
2015 May 21.

A comprehensive transcriptomic view of renal function in the malaria vector,
Anopheles gambiae.

Overend G(1), Cabrero P(1), Halberg KA(2), Ranford-Cartwright LC(1), Woods DJ(3),
Davies SA(1), Dow JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Medical, Veterinary & Life Sciences, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, UK.
(2)College of Medical, Veterinary & Life Sciences, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, UK; August Krogh Centre, Department of Biology, University of
Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 13, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)College of Medical, Veterinary & Life Sciences, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, UK; Zoetis Inc., Kalamazoo, USA.
(4)College of Medical, Veterinary & Life Sciences, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, UK. Electronic address: julian.dow@glasgow.ac.uk.

Renal function is essential to maintain homeostasis. This is particularly
significant for insects that undergo complete metamorphosis; larval mosquitoes
must survive a freshwater habitat whereas adults are terrestrial, and mature
females must maintain ion and fluid homeostasis after blood feeding. To
investigate the physiological adaptations required for successful development to 
adulthood, we studied the Malpighian tubule transcriptome of Anopheles gambiae
using Affymetrix arrays. We assessed transcription under several conditions; as
third instar larvae, as adult males fed on sugar, as adult females fed on sugar, 
and adult females after a blood meal. In addition to providing the most detailed 
transcriptomic data to date on the Anopheles Malpighian tubules, the data provide
unique information on the renal adaptations required for the switch from
freshwater to terrestrial habitats, on gender differences, and on the contrast
between nectar-feeding and haematophagy. We found clear differences associated
with ontogenetic change in lifestyle, gender and diet, particularly in the
neuropeptide receptors that control fluid secretion, and the water and ion
transporters that impact volume and composition. These data were also combined
with transcriptomics from the Drosophila melanogaster tubule, allowing
meta-analysis of the genes which underpin tubule function across Diptera. To
further investigate renal conservation across species we selected four D.
melanogaster genes with orthologues highly enriched in the Anopheles tubules, and
generated RNAi knockdown flies. Three of these genes proved essential, showing
conservation of critical functions across 150 million years of phylogenetic
separation. This extensive data-set is available as an online resource,
MozTubules.org, and could potentially be mined for novel insecticide targets that
can impact this critical organ in this pest species.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2015.05.007 
PMID: 26003916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

