
1. Mol Microbiol. 2015 Oct;98(1):17-33. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13099. Epub 2015 Jul 17.

Regulation of Plasmodium falciparum Origin Recognition Complex subunit 1 (PfORC1)
function through phosphorylation mediated by CDK-like kinase PK5.

Deshmukh AS(1)(2), Agarwal M(1), Mehra P(1), Gupta A(1), Gupta N(1), Doerig
CD(3), Dhar SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,
India.
(2)National Institute of Animal Biotechnology, Hyderabad, India.
(3)Department of Microbiology, School of Biomedical sciences, Monash University, 
Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

Plasmodium falciparum Origin Recognition Complex subunit 1 (PfORC1) has been
implicated in DNA replication and var gene regulation. While the C-terminus is
involved in DNA replication, the specific role of N-terminus has been suggested
in var gene regulation in a Sir2-dependent manner. PfORC1 is localized at the
nuclear periphery, where the clustering of chromosomal ends at the early stage of
parasite development may be crucial for the regulation of subtelomeric var gene
expression. Upon disassembly of telomeric clusters at later stages of parasite
development, ORC1 is distributed in the nucleus and parasite cytoplasm where it
may be required for its other cellular functions including DNA replication. The
level of ORC1 decreases dramatically at the late schizont stage. The mechanisms
that mediate regulation of PfORC1 function are largely unknown. Here we show, by 
the use of recombinant proteins and of transgenic parasites expressing wild type 
or mutant forms of ORC1, that phosphorylation of the PfORC1-N terminal domain by 
the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) PfPK5 abolishes DNA-binding activity and leads 
to changes in subcellular localization and proteasome-mediated degradation of the
protein in schizonts. These results reveal that PfORC1 phosphorylation by a CDK
is central to the regulation of important biological functions like DNA
replication and var gene silencing.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13099 
PMID: 26094711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

