
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 1;10(7):e0131292. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131292.
eCollection 2015.

An Insight into the Sialome of the Lone Star Tick, Amblyomma americanum, with a
Glimpse on Its Time Dependent Gene Expression.

Karim S(1), Ribeiro JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Southern Mississippi,
Hattiesburg, Mississippi, United States of America.
(2)Vector Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Rockville, Maryland, United States of America.

Hard ticks feed for several days or weeks on their hosts. Blood feeding is
assisted by tick saliva, which is injected in the host skin regularly,
alternating with blood ingestion. Tick saliva contains hundreds or thousands of
different peptides and other bioactive compounds that assist feeding by
inhibiting their hosts' blood clotting, platelet aggregation, vasoconstriction,
as well as pain and itching. Immunomodulatory and antimicrobial peptides are also
found in tick saliva. Molecular characterization of tick salivary compounds, or
its sialome (from the Greek sialos = saliva), helps identification of possible
antigens that might confer anti-tick immunity, as well as identifying novel
pharmacologically active compounds. Amblyomma americanum is a major nuisance tick
in Eastern and Southern US, being a vector of Theileria and Ehrlichia bacteria to
animals and humans. Presently we report an RNAseq study concerning the salivary
glands of adult female A. americanum ticks, which involved sequencing of four
libraries collected at different times of feeding. A total of 5,792 coding
sequences were deduced from the transcriptome assembly, 3,139 of which were
publicly deposited, expanding from the previously available 146 salivary
sequences found in GenBank. A remarkable time-dependent transcript expression was
found, mostly related to secretory products, supporting the idea that ticks may
have several "sialomes" that are expressed at different times during feeding. The
molecular nature of this sialome switching remains unknown. The hyperlinked
spreadsheet containing the deduced coding sequences can be found at
http://exon.niaid.nih.gov/transcriptome/Amb_americanum/Ambame-web.xlsx.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131292 
PMCID: PMC4489193
PMID: 26131772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

