
1. Mol Biol Cell. 2015 Sep 1;26(17):3001-12. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E14-10-1427. Epub 2015
Jul 8.

Disassembly activity of actin-depolymerizing factor (ADF) is associated with
distinct cellular processes in apicomplexan parasites.

Haase S(1), Zimmermann D(2), Olshina MA(1), Wilkinson M(3), Fisher F(3), Tan
YH(4), Stewart RJ(1), Tonkin CJ(1), Wong W(1), Kovar DR(2), Baum J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC 3052,
Australia Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 
3052, Australia.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom.
(4)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC 3052,
Australia.
(5)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC 3052,
Australia Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 
3052, Australia Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College, London SW7 2AZ,
United Kingdom jake.baum@imperial.ac.uk.

Proteins of the actin-depolymerizing factor (ADF)/cofilin family have been shown 
to be crucial for the motility and survival of apicomplexan parasites. However,
the mechanisms by which ADF proteins fulfill their function remain poorly
understood. In this study, we investigate the comparative activities of ADF
proteins from Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium falciparum, the human malaria
parasite, using a conditional T. gondii ADF-knockout line complemented with ADF
variants from either species. We show that P. falciparum ADF1 can fully restore
native TgADF activity, demonstrating functional conservation between parasites.
Strikingly, mutation of a key basic residue (Lys-72), previously implicated in
disassembly in PfADF1, had no detectable phenotypic effect on parasite growth,
motility, or development. In contrast, organelle segregation was severely
impaired when complementing with a TgADF mutant lacking the corresponding residue
(Lys-68). Biochemical analyses of each ADF protein confirmed the reduced ability 
of lysine mutants to mediate actin depolymerization via filament disassembly
although not severing, in contrast to previous reports. These data suggest that
actin filament disassembly is essential for apicomplexan parasite development but
not for motility, as well as pointing to genus-specific coevolution between ADF
proteins and their native actin.

© 2015 Haase, Zimmermann, et al. This article is distributed by The American
Society for Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after
publication it is available to the public under an
Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E14-10-1427 
PMCID: PMC4551315
PMID: 26157165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

