
1. BMC Plant Biol. 2015 Jul 9;15:175. doi: 10.1186/s12870-015-0565-7.

Proteomic analysis of Artemisia annua--towards elucidating the biosynthetic
pathways of the antimalarial pro-drug artemisinin.

Bryant L(1), Flatley B(2), Patole C(3), Brown GD(4), Cramer R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Whiteknights, Reading, RG6 6AD, United Kingdom.
gk002242@reading.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Whiteknights, Reading, RG6 6AD, United Kingdom.
flatley3@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Whiteknights, Reading, RG6 6AD, United Kingdom.
chhayapatole@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Whiteknights, Reading, RG6 6AD, United Kingdom.
g.d.brown@reading.ac.uk.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Whiteknights, Reading, RG6 6AD, United Kingdom.
r.k.cramer@reading.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: MS-based proteomics was applied to the analysis of the medicinal
plant Artemisia annua, exploiting a recently published contig sequence database
(Graham et al. (2010) Science 327, 328-331) and other genomic and proteomic
sequence databases for comparison. A. annua is the predominant natural source of 
artemisinin, the precursor for artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs),
which are the WHO-recommended treatment for P. falciparum malaria.
RESULTS: The comparison of various databases containing A. annua sequences
(NCBInr/viridiplantae, UniProt/viridiplantae, UniProt/A. annua, an A. annua
trichome Trinity contig database, the above contig database and another A. annua 
EST database) revealed significant differences in respect of their suitability
for proteomic analysis, showing that an organism-specific database that has
undergone extensive curation, leading to longer contig sequences, can greatly
increase the number of true positive protein identifications, while reducing the 
number of false positives. Compared to previously published data an
order-of-magnitude more proteins have been identified from trichome-enriched A.
annua samples, including proteins which are known to be involved in the
biosynthesis of artemisinin, as well as other highly abundant proteins, which
suggest additional enzymatic processes occurring within the trichomes that are
important for the biosynthesis of artemisinin.
CONCLUSIONS: The newly gained information allows for the possibility of an
enzymatic pathway, utilizing peroxidases, for the less well understood final
stages of artemisinin's biosynthesis, as an alternative to the known
non-enzymatic in vitro conversion of dihydroartemisinic acid to artemisinin. Data
are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000703.

DOI: 10.1186/s12870-015-0565-7 
PMCID: PMC4496932
PMID: 26156581  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

