
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2015 Dec;36:72-81. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.09.002. Epub
2015 Sep 6.

In silico identification of genetically attenuated vaccine candidate genes for
Plasmodium liver stage.

Kumar H(1), Frischknecht F(2), Mair GR(2), Gomes J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Kusuma School of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi,
New Delhi 110016, India.; Integrative Parasitology, Department of Infectious
Diseases, University of Heidelberg Medical School, Im Neuenheimer Feld 324, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Integrative Parasitology, Department of Infectious Diseases, University of
Heidelberg Medical School, Im Neuenheimer Feld 324, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Kusuma School of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi,
New Delhi 110016, India.. Electronic address: jgomes@bioschool.iitd.ac.in.

Genetically attenuated parasites (GAPs) that lack genes essential for the liver
stage of the malaria parasite, and therefore cause developmental arrest, have
been developed as live vaccines in rodent malaria models and recently been tested
in humans. The genes targeted for deletion were often identified by trial and
error. Here we present a systematic gene - protein and transcript - expression
analyses of several Plasmodium species with the aim to identify candidate genes
for the generation of novel GAPs. With a lack of liver stage expression data for 
human malaria parasites, we used data available for liver stage development of
Plasmodium yoelii, a rodent malaria model, to identify proteins expressed in the 
liver stage but absent from blood stage parasites. An orthology-based search was 
then employed to identify orthologous proteins in the human malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum resulting in a total of 310 genes expressed in the liver
stage but lacking evidence of protein expression in blood stage parasites. Among 
these 310 possible GAP candidates, we further studied Plasmodium liver stage
proteins by phyletic distribution and functional domain analyses and shortlisted 
twenty GAP-candidates; these are: fabB/F, fabI, arp, 3 genes encoding subunits of
the PDH complex, dnaJ, urm1, rS5, ancp, mcp, arh, gk, lisp2, valS, palm, and four
conserved Plasmodium proteins of unknown function. Parasites lacking one or
several of these genes might yield new attenuated malaria parasites for
experimental vaccination studies.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.09.002 
PMID: 26348884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

