
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Dec;59(12):7540-7. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01894-15.
Epub 2015 Sep 21.

In Vitro and Molecular Surveillance for Antimalarial Drug Resistance in
Plasmodium falciparum Parasites in Western Kenya Reveals Sustained Artemisinin
Sensitivity and Increased Chloroquine Sensitivity.

Lucchi NW(1), Komino F(2), Okoth SA(3), Goldman I(4), Onyona P(2), Wiegand RE(4),
Juma E(5), Shi YP(4), Barnwell JW(4), Udhayakumar V(3), Kariuki S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global Health, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA NLucchi@cdc.gov.
(2)Kenya Medical Research Institute/Centre for Global Health Research, Kisumu,
Kenya.
(3)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global Health, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA Atlanta Research and
Education Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global Health, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(5)Centre for Clinical Research, Kenya Medical Research Institute/Division of
Malaria Control, Ministry of Health, Nairobi, Kenya.

Malaria control is hindered by the evolution and spread of resistance to
antimalarials, necessitating multiple changes to drug policies over time. A
comprehensive antimalarial drug resistance surveillance program is vital for
detecting the potential emergence of resistance to antimalarials, including
current artemisinin-based combination therapies. An antimalarial drug resistance 
surveillance study involving 203 Plasmodium falciparum malaria-positive children 
was conducted in western Kenya between 2010 and 2013. Specimens from enrolled
children were analyzed in vitro for sensitivity to chloroquine (CQ), amodiaquine 
(AQ), mefloquine (MQ), lumefantrine, and artemisinin derivatives (artesunate and 
dihydroartemisinin) and for drug resistance allele polymorphisms in P. falciparum
crt (Pfcrt), Pfmdr-1, and the K13 propeller domain (K13). We observed a
significant increase in the proportion of samples with the Pfcrt wild-type
(CVMNK) genotype, from 61.2% in 2010 to 93.0% in 2013 (P < 0.0001), and higher
proportions of parasites with elevated sensitivity to CQ in vitro. The majority
of isolates harbored the wild-type N allele in Pfmdr-1 codon 86 (93.5%), with
only 7 (3.50%) samples with the N86Y mutant allele (the mutant nucleotide is
underlined). Likewise, most isolates harbored the wild-type Pfmdr-1 D1246 allele 
(79.8%), with only 12 (6.38%) specimens with the D1246Y mutant allele and 26
(13.8%) with mixed alleles. All the samples had a single copy of the Pfmdr-1 gene
(mean of 0.907 ± 0.141 copies). None of the sequenced parasites had mutations in 
K13. Our results suggest that artemisinin is likely to remain highly efficacious 
and that CQ sensitivity appears to be on the rise in western Kenya.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01894-15 
PMCID: PMC4649220
PMID: 26392510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

