
1. Pathog Glob Health. 2015 Sep;109(6):255-65. doi: 10.1179/2047773215Y.0000000018. 
Epub 2015 Sep 21.

VEGF and LPS synergistically silence inflammatory response to Plasmodium berghei 
infection and protect against cerebral malaria.

Canavese M, Dottorini T, Crisanti A.

Comment in
    Pathog Glob Health. 2015 Sep;109(6):253-4.

Malaria infection induces, alongside endothelial damage and obstruction hypoxia, 
a potent inflammatory response similar to that observed in other systemic
diseases caused by bacteria and viruses. Accordingly, it is increasingly
recognised that cerebral malaria (CM), the most severe and life threatening
complication of Plasmodium falciparum infection, bears a number of similarities
with sepsis, an often fatal condition associated with a misregulated inflammatory
response triggered by systemic microbial infections. Using a Plasmodium berghei
ANKA mouse model, histology, immunohistochemistry and gene expression analysis,
we showed that lipopolysaccharide S (LPS), at doses that normally induce
inflammation tolerance, protects P. berghei infected mice against experimental CM
(ECM). Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) preserved blood vessel
integrity, and the combination with LPS resulted in a strong synergistic effect. 
Treated mice did not develop ECM, showed a prolonged survival and failed to
develop a significant inflammatory response and splenomegaly in spite of normal
parasite loads. The protective role of VEGF was further confirmed by the
observation that the treatment of P. berghei infected C57BL/6 and Balb/c mice
with the VEGF receptor inhibitor axitinib exacerbates cerebral pathology and
aggravates the course of infection. Infected mice treated with VEGF and LPS
showed an induction of the anti-inflammatory genes Nrf2 and HO-1 and a
suppression to basal levels of the genes IFN-γ and TNF-α. These results provide
the rationale for developing new therapeutic approaches against CM and shed new
light on how the inflammatory process can be modulated in the presence of
systemic infectious diseases.

DOI: 10.1179/2047773215Y.0000000018 
PMCID: PMC4727580
PMID: 26392042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

