
1. Ticks Tick Borne Dis. 2016 Feb;7(1):85-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2015.09.002.
Epub 2015 Sep 16.

Characterization of a papain-like cysteine protease essential for the survival of
Babesia ovis merozoites.

Carletti T(1), Barreto C(2), Mesplet M(3), Mira A(4), Weir W(5), Shiels B(5),
Oliva AG(2), Schnittger L(4), Florin-Christensen M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Patobiología, Centro de Investigaciones en Ciencias Veterinarias 
y Agronómicas (CICVyA), INTA-Castelar, Los Reseros y Nicolas Repetto s/n, 1686,
Hurlingham, Argentina.
(2)Laboratório de Diagnóstico Biomolecular, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e
Biológica, Universidade Nova de Lisboa and Instituto de Biologia Experimental e
Tecnologica, Av. da República, Oeiras, 2780-157, Portugal.
(3)Cátedra de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias,
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Chorroarín 280, Buenos Aires, C1427CWO, Argentina.
(4)Instituto de Patobiología, Centro de Investigaciones en Ciencias Veterinarias 
y Agronómicas (CICVyA), INTA-Castelar, Los Reseros y Nicolas Repetto s/n, 1686,
Hurlingham, Argentina; CONICET, C1033AAJ, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires,
Argentina.
(5)University of Glasgow, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences,
Garscube Campus, Bearsden Road, Glasgow, G61 1QH, UK.
(6)Instituto de Patobiología, Centro de Investigaciones en Ciencias Veterinarias 
y Agronómicas (CICVyA), INTA-Castelar, Los Reseros y Nicolas Repetto s/n, 1686,
Hurlingham, Argentina; CONICET, C1033AAJ, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires,
Argentina. Electronic address: jacobsen.monica@inta.gob.ar.

Babesia ovis, a tick-transmitted intraerythrocytic protozoan parasite, causes
severe infections in small ruminants from Southern Europe, Middle East, and
Northern Africa. With the aim of finding potential targets for the development of
control methods against this parasite, sequence analysis of its genome led to the
identification of four putative cysteine proteases of the C1A family. Orthology
between B. ovis, B. bovis, T. annulata, and T. parva sequences showed that each
B. ovis C1A peptidase sequence clustered within one of the four ortholog groups
previously reported for these piroplasmids. The ortholog of bovipain-2 of B.
bovis and falcipain-2 of Plasmodium falciparum, respectively, was designated
"ovipain-2" and further characterized. In silico analysis showed that ovipain-2
has the typical topology of papain-like cysteine peptidases and a highly similar 
predicted three dimensional structure to bovipain-2 and falcipain-2, suggesting
susceptibility to similar inhibitors. Immunoblotting using antibodies raised
against a recombinant form of ovipain-2 (r-ovipain-2) demonstrated expression of 
ovipain-2 in in vitro cultured B. ovis merozoites. By immunofluorescence, these
antibodies reacted with merozoites and stained the cytoplasm of infected
erythrocytes. This suggests that ovipain-2 is secreted by the parasite and could 
be involved in intra- and extracellular digestion of hemoglobin and/or cleavage
of erythrocyte proteins facilitating parasite egress. A significant reduction in 
the percentage of parasitized erythrocytes was obtained upon incubation of B.
ovis in vitro cultures with anti-r-ovipain-2 antibodies, indicating an important 
functional role for ovipain-2 in the intra erythrocytic development cycle of this
parasite. Finally, studies of the reactivity of sera from B. ovis-positive and
negative sheep against r-ovipain-2 showed that this protease is expressed in
vivo, and can be recognized by host antibodies. The results of this study suggest
that ovipain-2 constitutes a potential target for immunotherapies and drug
development against ovine babesiosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2015.09.002 
PMID: 26456355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

