
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2016 Mar;22(3):285.e1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2015.10.027.
Epub 2015 Nov 5.

Natural selection of K13 mutants of Plasmodium falciparum in response to
artemisinin combination therapies in Thailand.

Putaporntip C(1), Kuamsab N(2), Kosuwin R(2), Tantiwattanasub W(3), Vejakama
P(4), Sueblinvong T(5), Seethamchai S(6), Jongwutiwes S(2), Hughes AL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology of Malaria and Opportunistic Parasites Research Unit,
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand. Electronic address: p.chaturong@gmail.com.
(2)Molecular Biology of Malaria and Opportunistic Parasites Research Unit,
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Umphang Hospital, Tak Province, Thailand.
(4)Department of Medicine, Bundarik Hospital, Ubon Ratchathani Province,
Thailand.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(6)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Naresuan University, Phitsanulok
Province, Thailand.
(7)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC,
USA.

Resistance of Plasmodium falciparum to artemisinin combination therapy (ACT) in
Southeast Asia can have a devastating impact on chemotherapy and control
measures. In this study, the evolution of artemisinin-resistant P. falciparum in 
Thailand was assessed by exploring mutations in the K13 locus believed to confer 
drug resistance phenotype. P. falciparum-infected blood samples were obtained
from patients in eight provinces of Thailand over two decades (1991-2014; n =
904). Analysis of the K13 gene was performed by either sequencing the complete
coding region (n = 259) or mutation-specific PCR-restriction fragment length
polymorphism method (n = 645). K13 mutations related to artesunate resistance
were detected in isolates from Trat province bordering Cambodia in 1991, about 4 
years preceding widespread deployment of ACT in Thailand and increased in
frequency over time. Nonsynonymous nucleotide diversity exceeded synonymous
nucleotide diversity in the propeller region of the K13 gene, supporting the
hypothesis that this diversity was driven by natural selection. No single mutant 
appeared to be favoured in every population, and propeller-region mutants were
rarely observed in linkage with each other in the same haplotype. On the other
hand, there was a highly significant association between the occurrence of a
propeller mutant and the insertion of two or three asparagines after residue 139 
of K13. Whether this insertion plays a compensatory role for deleterious effects 
of propeller mutants on the function of the K13 protein requires further
investigation. However, modification of duration of ACT from 2-day to 3-day
regimens in 2008 throughout the country does not halt the increase in frequency
of mutants conferring artemisinin resistance phenotype.

Copyright Â© 2015 European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious
Diseases. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmi.2015.10.027 
PMID: 26548510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

