
1. J Vis Exp. 2015 Nov 10;(105):e52839. doi: 10.3791/52839.

Methods to Increase the Sensitivity of High Resolution Melting Single Nucleotide 
Polymorphism Genotyping in Malaria.

Daniels R(1), Hamilton EJ(2), Durfee K(2), Ndiaye D(3), Wirth DF(4), Hartl DL(5),
Volkman SK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University;
Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of
Public Health; rdaniels@broadinstitute.org.
(2)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cheikh Anta Diop University.
(4)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health; Institute of Infectious Diseases, Broad Institute.
(5)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University.
(6)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health; School of Nursing and Health Sciences, Simmons College.

Despite decades of eradication efforts, malaria remains a global burden. Recent
renewed interest in regional elimination and global eradication has been
accompanied by increased genomic information about Plasmodium parasite species
responsible for malaria, including characteristics of geographical populations as
well as variations associated with reduced susceptibility to anti-malarial drugs.
One common genetic variation, single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), offers
attractive targets for parasite genotyping. These markers are useful not only for
tracking drug resistance markers but also for tracking parasite populations using
markers not under drug or other selective pressures. SNP genotyping methods offer
the ability to track drug resistance as well as to fingerprint individual
parasites for population surveillance, particularly in response to malaria
control efforts in regions nearing elimination status. While informative SNPs
have been identified that are agnostic to specific genotyping technologies,
high-resolution melting (HRM) analysis is particularly suited to field-based
studies. Compared to standard fluorescent-probe based methods that require
individual SNPs in a single labeled probe and offer at best 10% sensitivity to
detect SNPs in samples that contain multiple genomes (polygenomic), HRM offers
2-5% sensitivity. Modifications to HRM, such as blocked probes and asymmetric
primer concentrations as well as optimization of amplification annealing
temperatures to bias PCR towards amplification of the minor allele, further
increase the sensitivity of HRM. While the sensitivity improvement depends on the
specific assay, we have increased detection sensitivities to less than 1% of the 
minor allele. In regions approaching malaria eradication, early detection of
emerging or imported drug resistance is essential for prompt response. Similarly,
the ability to detect polygenomic infections and differentiate imported parasite 
types from cryptic local reservoirs can inform control programs. This manuscript 
describes modifications to high resolution melting technology that further
increase its sensitivity to identify polygenomic infections in patient samples.

DOI: 10.3791/52839 
PMCID: PMC4692701
PMID: 26575471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

