
1. Metab Brain Dis. 2016 Feb;31(1):197-204. doi: 10.1007/s11011-015-9788-4. Epub
2016 Jan 8.

Multiple sclerosis-like diagnosis as a complication of previously treated malaria
in an iron and vitamin D deficient Nigerian patient.

van Rensburg SJ(1), van Toorn R(2), Moremi KE(3), Peeters AV(4), Oguniyi A(5),
Kotze MJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Pathology, National Health Laboratory Service (NHLS) and Stellenbosch
University, Cape Town, South Africa. sjvr@sun.ac.za.
(2)Paediatric Medicine and Child Health, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town,
South Africa.
(3)Chemical Pathology, National Health Laboratory Service (NHLS) and Stellenbosch
University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(4)Anatomical Pathology, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(5)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, University of Ibadan, Ibadan,
Nigeria.

In contrast to malaria, multiple sclerosis (MS) is infrequently found in Black
Africans. We describe a 29Â year old Nigerian female who developed an MS-like
condition with symptoms similar to relapsing-remitting MS following malaria
infection, leading to a diagnosis of MS. However, absence of hyperintense lesions
in the brain and spinal cord presented a conundrum since not all the diagnostic
criteria for MS were met. Pathology supported genetic testing (PSGT) was applied 
to combine family and personal medical history, lifestyle factors, and
biochemical test results for interpretation of genetic findings. This approach
provides a means of identifying risk factors for different subtypes of
demyelinating disease. The patient was subsequently treated according to an
individualised intervention program including nutritional supplementation as well
as a change in diet and lifestyle. Deficiencies of vitamin B12, iron and vitamin 
D were addressed. Genetic analysis revealed absence of the HLA DRB1*1501 allele, 
considered to be the most prominent genetic risk factor for MS. Extended mutation
analysis identified variations in three genes in the folate-vitamin B12 metabolic
pathway, which could have increased the patient's sensitivity to the antifolate
drugs used to treat the malaria. A glutathione-S-transferase GSTM1 null allele,
previously associated with neurological complications of malaria, was also
detected. Furthermore, a heterozygous variation in the iron-related transmembrane
protease serine 6 (TMPRSS6) gene, rs855791 was found, which could have impacted
the patient's iron status following two successive blood donations and exposure
to malaria preceding the MS diagnosis. PSGT identifies relevant risk factors for 
demyelinating disorders resembling MS and uses the data for individualised
treatment programs, and to systematically build a database that can provide
evidence in large patient cohorts. Follow-up investigations may be suggested,
such as whole exome sequencing in selected cases, to ensure that remyelination
and restoration of function are achieved.

DOI: 10.1007/s11011-015-9788-4 
PMID: 26746433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

