
1. Parasitol Res. 2016 Apr;115(4):1363-73. doi: 10.1007/s00436-015-4898-9. Epub 2016
Jan 13.

Insecticide resistance and its molecular basis in urban insect pests.

Naqqash MN(1), Gökçe A(2), Bakhsh A(3), Salim M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Production & Technologies, Ayhan Şahenk Faculty of
Agricultural Sciences and Technologies, Niğde University, Niğde, Turkey.
muhammadnadir.naqqash@mail.nigde.edu.tr.
(2)Department of Plant Production & Technologies, Ayhan Şahenk Faculty of
Agricultural Sciences and Technologies, Niğde University, Niğde, Turkey.
(3)Department of Agricultural Genetic Engineering, Ayhan Şahenk Faculty of
Agricultural Sciences and Technologies, Niğde University, Niğde, Turkey.

Insecticide resistance is one of the most important evolutionary phenomena for
researchers. Overuse of chemicals has induced resistance in insect pests that
ultimately has led to the collapse of disease control programs in many countries.
The erroneous and inappropriate management of insect vectors has resulted in
dissemination of many vector-borne diseases like dengue, malaria, diarrhea,
leishmaniasis, and many others. In most cases, the emergence of new diseases and 
the revival of old ones can be related with ecological changes that have favored 
rapid growth of vector densities. Understanding molecular mechanisms in resistant
strains can assist in the development of management programs to control the
development and spread of resistant insect populations. The dominant, recessive, 
and co-dominant forms of genes encoding resistance can be investigated, and
furthermore, resistance development can be addressed either by the release of
susceptible strains or timely insecticide rotation. The present review discusses 
the resistance level in all important insect vectors of human diseases; the
molecular basis of evolvement of resistance has also been discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-015-4898-9 
PMID: 26758450  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

