
1. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Dec 23;6:1169. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.01169. eCollection
2015.

Application of a Scalable Plant Transient Gene Expression Platform for Malaria
Vaccine Development.

Spiegel H(1), Boes A(1), Voepel N(1), Beiss V(1), Edgue G(1), Rademacher T(1),
Sack M(2), Schillberg S(1), Reimann A(1), Fischer R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME Aachen,
Germany.
(2)Institute for Molecular Biotechnology, RWTH Aachen University Aachen, Germany.
(3)Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IMEAachen,
Germany; Institute for Molecular Biotechnology, RWTH Aachen UniversityAachen,
Germany.

Despite decades of intensive research efforts there is currently no vaccine that 
provides sustained sterile immunity against malaria. In this context, a large
number of targets from the different stages of the Plasmodium falciparum life
cycle have been evaluated as vaccine candidates. None of these candidates has
fulfilled expectations, and as long as we lack a single target that induces
strain-transcending protective immune responses, combining key antigens from
different life cycle stages seems to be the most promising route toward the
development of efficacious malaria vaccines. After the identification of
potential targets using approaches such as omics-based technology and reverse
immunology, the rapid expression, purification, and characterization of these
proteins, as well as the generation and analysis of fusion constructs combining
different promising antigens or antigen domains before committing to expensive
and time consuming clinical development, represents one of the bottlenecks in the
vaccine development pipeline. The production of recombinant proteins by transient
gene expression in plants is a robust and versatile alternative to cell-based
microbial and eukaryotic production platforms. The transfection of plant tissues 
and/or whole plants using Agrobacterium tumefaciens offers a low technical entry 
barrier, low costs, and a high degree of flexibility embedded within a rapid and 
scalable workflow. Recombinant proteins can easily be targeted to different
subcellular compartments according to their physicochemical requirements,
including post-translational modifications, to ensure optimal yields of high
quality product, and to support simple and economical downstream processing.
Here, we demonstrate the use of a plant transient expression platform based on
transfection with A. tumefaciens as essential component of a malaria vaccine
development workflow involving screens for expression, solubility, and stability 
using fluorescent fusion proteins. Our results have been implemented for the
evidence-based iterative design and expression of vaccine candidates combining
suitable P. falciparum antigen domains. The antigens were also produced,
purified, and characterized in further studies by taking advantage of the
scalability of this platform.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2015.01169 
PMCID: PMC4688378
PMID: 26779197 

