
1. Cell Microbiol. 2016 Aug;18(8):1106-1120. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12571. Epub 2016 Feb
22.

The conserved apicomplexan Aurora kinase TgArk3 is involved in endodyogeny,
duplication rate and parasite virulence.

Berry L(#)(1), Chen CT(#)(2), Reininger L(#)(3), Carvalho TG(#)(4), El Hajj
H(#)(5), Morlon-Guyot J(1), Bordat Y(1), Lebrun M(1), Gubbels MJ(2), Doerig C(4),
Daher W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dynamique des Interactions Membranaires Normales et Pathologiques, UMR5235
CNRS, Université Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(2)Department of Biology, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA 02467, USA.
(3)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire Comparative des Apicomplexes, INSERM U1016,
Institut Cochin, Paris, France.
(4)Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and
Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Victoria, Australia, 3800.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine and Experimental Pathology, Immunology and
Microbiology, American University of Beirut, Beirut 1107 2020, Lebanon.
(#)Contributed equally

Aurora kinases are eukaryotic serine/threonine protein kinases that regulate key 
events associated with chromatin condensation, centrosome and spindle function
and cytokinesis. Elucidating the roles of Aurora kinases in apicomplexan
parasites is crucial to understand the cell cycle control during Plasmodium
schizogony or Toxoplasma endodyogeny. Here, we report on the localization of two 
previously uncharacterized Toxoplasma Aurora-related kinases (Ark2 and Ark3) in
tachyzoites and of the uncharacterized Ark3 orthologue in Plasmodium falciparum
erythrocytic stages. In Toxoplasma gondii, we show that TgArk2 and TgArk3
concentrate at specific sub-cellular structures linked to parasite division: the 
mitotic spindle and intranuclear mitotic structures (TgArk2), and the outer core 
of the centrosome and the budding daughter cells cytoskeleton (TgArk3). By
tagging the endogenous PfArk3 gene with the green fluorescent protein in live
parasites, we show that PfArk3 protein expression peaks late in schizogony and
localizes at the periphery of budding schizonts. Disruption of the TgArk2 gene
reveals no essential function for tachyzoite propagation in vitro, which is
surprising giving that the P. falciparum and P. berghei orthologues are essential
for erythrocyte schizogony. In contrast, knock-down of TgArk3 protein results in 
pronounced defects in parasite division and a major growth deficiency.
TgArk3-depleted parasites display several defects, such as reduced parasite
growth rate, delayed egress and parasite duplication, defect in rosette
formation, reduced parasite size and invasion efficiency and lack of virulence in
mice. Our study provides new insights into cell cycle control in Toxoplasma and
malaria parasites and highlights Aurora kinase 3 as potential drug target.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12571 
PMCID: PMC4961599
PMID: 26833682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

