
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 11;6:20613. doi: 10.1038/srep20613.

Strain-transcending immune response generated by chimeras of the malaria vaccine 
candidate merozoite surface protein 2.

Krishnarjuna B(1), Andrew D(2), MacRaild CA(1), Morales RA(1), Beeson
JG(2)(3)(4), Anders RF(5), Richards JS(2)(3)(4), Norton RS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Chemistry, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash
University, Parkville 3052, Australia.
(2)Centre for Biomedical Research, Burnet Institute, Melbourne, Victoria 3004,
Australia.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Australia.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Parkville 3052, Australia.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular
Science, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Victoria 3086, Australia.

MSP2 is an intrinsically disordered protein that is abundant on the merozoite
surface and essential to the parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Naturally-acquired
antibody responses to MSP2 are biased towards dimorphic sequences within the
central variable region of MSP2 and have been linked to naturally-acquired
protection from malaria. In a phase IIb study, an MSP2-containing vaccine induced
an immune response that reduced parasitemias in a strain-specific manner. A
subsequent phase I study of a vaccine that contained both dimorphic forms of MSP2
induced antibodies that exhibited functional activity in vitro. We have assessed 
the contribution of the conserved and variable regions of MSP2 to the generation 
of a strain-transcending antibody response by generating MSP2 chimeras that
included conserved and variable regions of the 3D7 and FC27 alleles. Robust
anti-MSP2 antibody responses targeting both conserved and variable regions were
generated in mice, although the fine specificity and the balance of responses to 
these regions differed amongst the constructs tested. We observed significant
differences in antibody subclass distribution in the responses to these chimeras.
Our results suggest that chimeric MSP2 antigens can elicit a broad immune
response suitable for protection against different strains of P. falciparum.

DOI: 10.1038/srep20613 
PMCID: PMC4749986
PMID: 26865062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

