
1. Cell Rep. 2016 Mar 15;14(10):2463-75. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.02.025. Epub
2016 Mar 3.

Landscape and Dynamics of Transcription Initiation in the Malaria Parasite
Plasmodium falciparum.

Adjalley SH(1), Chabbert CD(1), Klaus B(1), Pelechano V(1), Steinmetz LM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Genome Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(2)Genome Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, 
Germany; Stanford Genome Technology Center, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA; Department 
of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
Electronic address: larsms@embl.de.

A comprehensive map of transcription start sites (TSSs) across the highly AT-rich
genome of P. falciparum would aid progress toward deciphering the molecular
mechanisms that underlie the timely regulation of gene expression in this malaria
parasite. Using high-throughput sequencing technologies, we generated a
comprehensive atlas of transcription initiation events at single-nucleotide
resolution during the parasite intra-erythrocytic developmental cycle. This
detailed analysis of TSS usage enabled us to define architectural features of
plasmodial promoters. We demonstrate that TSS selection and strength are
constrained by local nucleotide composition. Furthermore, we provide evidence for
coordinate and stage-specific TSS usage from distinct sites within the same
transcription unit, thereby producing transcript isoforms, a subset of which are 
developmentally regulated. This work offers a framework for further
investigations into the interactions between genomic sequences and regulatory
factors governing the complex transcriptional program of this major human
pathogen.

Copyright Â© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.02.025 
PMCID: PMC4806524
PMID: 26947071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

