
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2016 Apr 22;60(5):3057-64. doi:
10.1128/AAC.01836-15. Print 2016 May.

Inhibition of Glutathione Biosynthesis Sensitizes Plasmodium berghei to
Antifolates.

Songsungthong W(1), Koonyosying P(2), Uthaipibull C(2), Kamchonwongpaisan S(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), Pathum Thani, Thailand
warangkhana.son@biotec.or.th.
(2)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), Pathum Thani, Thailand.

Glutathione plays a central role in maintaining cellular redox homeostasis, and
modulations to this status may affect malaria parasite sensitivity to certain
types of antimalarials. In this study, we demonstrate that inhibition of
glutathione biosynthesis in the Plasmodium berghei ANKA strain through disruption
of the γ-glutamylcysteine synthetase (γ-GCS) gene, which encodes the first and
rate-limiting enzyme in the glutathione biosynthetic pathway, significantly
sensitizes parasites in vivo to pyrimethamine and sulfadoxine, but not to
chloroquine, artesunate, or primaquine, compared with control parasites
containing the same pyrimethamine-resistant marker cassette. Treatment of mice
infected with an antifolate-resistant P. berghei control line with a γ-GCS
inhibitor, buthionine sulfoximine, could partially abrogate pyrimethamine and
sulfadoxine resistance. The role of glutathione in modulating the malaria
parasite's response to antifolates suggests that development of specific
inhibitors against Plasmodium γ-GCS may offer a new approach to counter
Plasmodium antifolate resistance.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01836-15 
PMCID: PMC4862499
PMID: 26953195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

