
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2016 Mar-Apr;206(1-2):2-12. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2016.03.005. Epub 2016 Mar 18.

Typical 2-Cys peroxiredoxins in human parasites: Several physiological roles for 
a potential chemotherapy target.

Angelucci F(1), Miele AE(2), Ardini M(1), Boumis G(2), Saccoccia F(2), Bellelli
A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health, Life and Environmental Sciences, University of L'Aquila,
L'Aquila, Italy.
(2)Department of Biochemical Sciences "A. Rossi Fanelli", Sapienza University of 
Rome, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Biochemical Sciences "A. Rossi Fanelli", Sapienza University of 
Rome, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: andrea.bellelli@uniroma1.it.

Peroxiredoxins (Prxs) are ubiquitary proteins able to play multiple physiological
roles, that include thiol-dependent peroxidase, chaperone holdase, sensor of
H2O2, regulator of H2O2-dependent signal cascades, and modulator of the immune
response. Prxs have been found in a great number of human pathogens, both
eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Gene knock-out studies demonstrated that Prxs are
essential for the survival and virulence of at least some of the pathogens
tested, making these proteins potential drug targets. However, the multiplicity
of roles played by Prxs constitutes an unexpected obstacle to drug development.
Indeed, selective inhibitors of some of the functions of Prxs are known (namely
of the peroxidase and holdase functions) and are here reported. However, it is
often unclear which function is the most relevant in each pathogen, hence which
one is most desirable to inhibit. Indeed there are evidences that the main
physiological role of Prxs may not be the same in different parasites. We here
review which functions of Prxs have been demonstrated to be relevant in different
human parasites, finding that the peroxidase and chaperone activities figure
prominently, whereas other known functions of Prxs have rarely, if ever, been
observed in parasites, or have largely escaped detection thus far.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2016.03.005 
PMID: 27002228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

