
1. Med Vet Entomol. 2016 Sep;30(3):253-63. doi: 10.1111/mve.12172. Epub 2016 Apr 13.

Differential protein expression in the midgut of Culex quinquefasciatus
mosquitoes induced by the insecticide temephos.

Games PD(1), Alves SN(2), Katz BB(3), Tomich JM(3), Serrão JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Biology, State University of Viçosa, Viçosa, Brazil.
(2)Department of Biology, State University of São João del-Rey, Divinópolis,
Brazil.
(3)Biotechnology Core Facility and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, U.S.A.

Mosquitoes are vectors for pathogens of malaria, lymphatic filariasis, dengue,
chikungunya, yellow fever and Japanese encephalitis. Culex quinquefasciatus Say, 
1823 (Diptera: Culicidae) is a known vector of lymphatic filariasis. Its control 
in Brazil has been managed using the organophosphate temephos. Studies examining 
the proteins of Cx. quinquefasciatus that are differentially expressed in
response to temephos further understanding of the modes of action of the
insecticide and may potentially identify resistance factors in the mosquito. In
the present study, a comparative proteomic analysis, using 2-dimensional
electrophoresis coupled with matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) 
time of flight (TOF)/TOF mass spectrometry, and bioinformatics analyses were
performed to identify midgut proteins in Cx. quinquefasciatus larvae that were
differentially expressed in response to exposure to temephos relative to those in
untreated controls. A total of 91 protein spots were differentially expressed; 40
were upregulated and 51 were downregulated by temephos. A total of 22 proteins,
predominantly upregulated, were identified as known to play a role in the immune 
response, whereas the downregulated proteins were involved in energy and protein 
catabolism. This is the first proteome study of the midgut of Cx.
quinquefasciatus and it provides insights into the molecular mechanisms of
insecticide-induced responses in the mosquito.

© 2016 The Royal Entomological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/mve.12172 
PMID: 27072633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

