
1. Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Paulo. 2016;58:30. doi: 10.1590/S1678-9946201658030. Epub
2016 Apr 8.

PRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE PUTATIVE ASSOCIATION OF IL10 -3575 T/A GENETIC
POLYMORPHISM WITH MALARIA SYMPTOMS.

Domingues W(1), Kanunfre KA(1), Rodrigues JC(1), Teixeira LE(1), Yamamoto L(1),
Okay TS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Seroepidemiology and Immunobiology, Institute of Tropical
Medicine, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

Only a small percentage of individuals living in endemic areas develop severe
malaria suggesting that host genetic factors may play a key role. This study has 
determined the frequency of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in some pro
and anti-inflammatory cytokine gene sequences: IL6 (-174; rs1800795), IL12p40
(+1188; rs3212227), IL4 (+33; rs2070874), IL10 (-3575; rs1800890) and TGFb1
(+869; rs1800470), by means of PCR-RFLP. Blood samples were collected from 104
symptomatic and 37 asymptomatic subjects. Laboratory diagnosis was assessed by
the thick blood smear test and nested-PCR. No association was found between IL6
(-174), IL12p40 (+1188), IL4 (+33), IL10 (- 3575), TGFb1 (+869) SNPs and malaria 
symptoms. However, regarding the IL10 -3575 T/A SNP, there were significantly
more AA and AT subjects, carrying the polymorphic allele A, in the symptomatic
group (c2 = 4.54, p = 0.01, OR = 0.40 [95% CI - 0.17- 0.94]). When the analysis
was performed by allele, the frequency of the polymorphic allele A was also
significantly higher in the symptomatic group (c2 = 4.50, p = 0.01, OR = 0.45
[95% CI - 0.21-0.95]). In conclusion, this study has suggested the possibility
that the IL10 - 3575 T/A SNP might be associated with the presence and
maintenance of malaria symptoms in individuals living in endemic areas. Taking
into account that this polymorphism is related to decreased IL10 production, a
possible role of this SNP in the pathophysiology of malaria is also suggested,
but replication studies with a higher number of patients and evaluation of IL10
levels are needed for confirmation.

DOI: 10.1590/S1678-9946201658030 
PMCID: PMC4826083
PMID: 27074324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

