
1. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2018 Mar-Apr;15(2):469-481. doi:
10.1109/TCBB.2016.2550444. Epub 2016 Apr 7.

Algorithmic Mapping and Characterization of the Drug-Induced Phenotypic-Response 
Space of Parasites Causing Schistosomiasis.

Singh R, Beasley R, Long T, Caffrey CR.

Neglected tropical diseases, especially those caused by helminths, constitute
some of the most common infections of the world's poorest people. Amongst these, 
schistosomiasis (bilharzia or 'snail fever'), caused by blood flukes of the genus
Schistosoma, ranks second only to malaria in terms of human impact: two hundred
million people are infected and close to 800 million are at risk of infection.
Drug screening against helminths poses unique challenges: the parasite cannot be 
cloned and is difficult to target using gene knockouts or RNAi. Consequently,
both lead identification and validation involve phenotypic screening, where
parasites are exposed to compounds whose effects are determined through the
analysis of the ensuing phenotypic responses. The efficacy of leads thus
identified derives from one or more or even unknown molecular mechanisms of
action. The two most immediate and significant challenges that confront the
state-of-the-art in this area are: the development of automated and quantitative 
phenotypic screening techniques and the mapping and quantitative characterization
of the totality of phenotypic responses of the parasite. In this paper, we
investigate and propose solutions for the latter problem in terms of the
following: (1) mathematical formulation and algorithms that allow rigorous
representation of the phenotypic response space of the parasite, (2) application 
of graph-theoretic and network analysis techniques for quantitative modeling and 
characterization of the phenotypic space, and (3) application of the
aforementioned methodology to analyze the phenotypic space of S. mansoni - one of
the etiological agents of schistosomiasis, induced by compounds that target its
polo-like kinase 1 (PLK 1) gene - a recently validated drug target. In our
approach, first, bio-image analysis algorithms are used to quantify the
phenotypic responses of different drugs. Next, these responses are linearly
mapped into a low- dimensional space using Principle Component Analysis (PCA).
The phenotype space is modeled using neighborhood graphs which are used to
represent the similarity amongst the phenotypes. These graphs are characterized
and explored using network analysis algorithms. We present a number of results
related to both the nature of the phenotypic space of the S. mansoni parasite as 
well as algorithmic issues encountered in constructing and analyzing the
phenotypic-response space. In particular, the phenotype distribution of the
parasite was found to have a distinct shape and topology. We have also
quantitatively characterized the phenotypic space by varying critical model
parameters. Finally, these maps of the phenotype space allows visualization and
reasoning about complex relationships between putative drugs and their
system-wide effects and can serve as a highly efficient paradigm for assimilating
and unifying information from phenotypic screens both during lead identification 
and lead optimization.

DOI: 10.1109/TCBB.2016.2550444 
PMCID: PMC5915339
PMID: 27071187  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

