
1. Parasit Vectors. 2016 Apr 25;9:230. doi: 10.1186/s13071-016-1510-9.

Insecticide resistance status of the Anopheles funestus population in Central
African Republic: a challenge in the war.

Sangba ML(1)(2), Deketramete T(1)(3), Wango SP(3), Kazanji M(4), Akogbeto
M(2)(5), Ndiath MO(6).

Author information: 
(1)G4 Malaria Group Institut Pasteur in Bangui, Bangui, Central African Republic.
(2)Faculté des Sciences et Techniques, Université d'Abomey Calavi, Cotonou,
Bénin.
(3)Faculté des Sciences et Techniques, Laboratoire de Biologie Animale Appliquée 
et de Biodiversité, Université de Bangui, Bangui, Central African Republic.
(4)Virology Department, Institut Pasteur in Bangui, Bangui, Central African
Republic.
(5)Centre de Recherche Entomologique de Cotonou (CREC), Cotonou, 06 BP 2604,
Bénin.
(6)G4 Malaria Group Institut Pasteur in Bangui, Bangui, Central African Republic.
ousmane.ndiath@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: In the Central African Republic, malaria is a major public health
problem and the leading cause of death among children. This disease appears to be
hyperendemic but no substantial entomological data, including data on Anopheles
spp. susceptibility to insecticides, is available. This study evaluates, for the 
first time in the CAR, the status of insecticide resistance in the Anopheles
funestus population, the second major vector of malaria in Africa.
METHODS: WHO standard bioassay susceptibility tests were performed on the An.
funestus population using F1 generation from gravid females mosquitoes (F0)
collected by manual aspirator sampling of households in Gbanikola, Bangui in
October 2014 to assess: (i) An. funestus susceptibility to bendiocarb, malathion,
permethrin, lamda-cyhalothrin, deltamethrin and DDT, and (ii) the effect of
pre-exposure to the piperonyl butoxide (PBO) synergist on insecticide
susceptibility. Additional tests were conducted to investigate metabolic
resistance status (cytochrome P450 monooxygenases, glutathione S-transferases,
and esterases).
RESULTS: A high phenotypic resistance of An. funestus population to malathion,
DDT and pyrethroids was observed with a mortality rate ranging from 23 to 74%.
For the pyrethroid groups, the mortality rate was 35, 31 and 23% for
lambda-cyhalothrin, deltamethrin, and permethrin, respectively. In contrast a
100% mortality rate to bendiocarb was recorded. Knockdown time (KDT) was long for
all pyrethroids, DDT and malathion with KDT50 higher than 50 min. Pre-exposure of
An. funestus to PBO synergist significantly restored susceptibility to all
pyrethroids (Fisher's exact test P <0.0001) but not in DDT (Fisher's exact test
P = 0.724). Data from biochemical tests suggest the involvement of cytochrome
P450 monooxygenases, esterases and glutatione S-transferases in the resistance of
An. funestus population from Gbanikola (Wilcoxon test P <0.05).
CONCLUSION: Evidence of biochemical resistance to insecticide was detected in An.
funestus population from the district of Gbanikola, Bangui. This study suggests
that detoxifying enzymes are involved in insecticide resistance of An. funestus. 
However, despite disruptive violence, further research is urgently needed to
assess the insecticide susceptibility status of An. funestus population in all
CAR regions; insecticide resistance could rapidly compromise the success of
malaria control programs.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-016-1510-9 
PMCID: PMC4845364
PMID: 27113956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

