
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016 Jun 1;94(6):1245-50. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0446. Epub
2016 May 2.

Plasmodium falciparum Genetic Diversity in Bangladesh Does Not Suggest a
Hypoendemic Population Structure.

Alam MS(1), Elahi R(2), Mohon AN(2), Al-Amin HM(2), Kibria MG(2), Khan WA(2),
Khanum H(2), Haque R(2).

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (icddr,b),
Dhaka, Bangladesh; Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg,
Virginia; Department of Microbiology and Infectious Disease, Cumming School of
Medicine, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Parasitology Branch, Department
of Zoology, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh shafiul@icddrb.org.
(2)International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (icddr,b),
Dhaka, Bangladesh; Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg,
Virginia; Department of Microbiology and Infectious Disease, Cumming School of
Medicine, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Parasitology Branch, Department
of Zoology, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Despite the recommendation for the use of merozoite surface protein 1 (msp1),
merozoite surface protein 2 (msp2), and glutamate-rich protein (glurp) genes as
markers in drug efficacy studies by World Health Organization and their limited
use in Bangladesh, the circulating Plasmodium falciparum population genetic
structure has not yet been assessed in Bangladesh. This study presents a
comprehensive report on the circulating P. falciparum population structure based 
on msp1, msp2, and glurp polymorphic gene markers in Bangladesh. Among the 130
pretreatment (day 0) P. falciparum samples from seven malaria-endemic districts, 
14 distinct genotypes were observed for msp1, 20 for msp2, and 13 for glurp
Polyclonal infection was reported in 94.6% (N = 123) of the samples. Multiplicity
of infection (MOI) for msp1 was the highest (1.5) among the MOIs of the markers. 
The heterozygosity for msp1, msp2, and glurp was 0.89, 0.93, and 0.83,
respectively. Data according to different malaria-endemic areas are also
presented and discussed. Bangladesh is considered as a malaria-hypoendemic
country. However, the prevalence of polyclonal infection and the genetic
diversity of P. falciparum do not represent hypoendemicity.

Â© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0446 
PMCID: PMC4889740
PMID: 27139455  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

