
1. Parasitol Res. 2016 Aug;115(8):3175-84. doi: 10.1007/s00436-016-5077-3. Epub 2016
May 5.

Morphological re-description and molecular characterization of Kudoa pagrusi
(Myxosporea: Multivalvulida) infecting the heart muscles of the common sea bream 
fish Pagrus pagrus (Perciformes: Sparidae) from the Red Sea, Egypt.

Abdel-Ghaffar F(1), Abdel-Gaber R(2), Maher S(3), Al Quraishy S(4), Mehlhorn
H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Zoology Department, Faculty of Science, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
fathyghaffar@yahoo.com.
(2)Zoology Department, Faculty of Science, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Zoology Department, Faculty of Women for Arts, Science and Education, Ain
Shams University, Heliopolis, Egypt.
(4)Zoology Department, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia.
(5)Parasitology Institute, Düsseldorf University, Düsseldorf, Germany.

In the present study, 100 samples of different sizes of the common sea bream fish
Pagrus pagrus were collected from the Egyptian water along the Gulf of Suez, Red 
Sea and examined for the prevalence of myxosporidian parasites in general and
Kudoa spp. in particular. Fish samples were thoroughly externally examined. After
dissection, all the internal organs were removed and examined. A total of 60 out 
of 100 fish specimens were found to be infected with Kudoa stages. Parasitic
infection was restricted to the heart muscles of the examined fish. None of the
other organs was found to be infected. Macroscopic cysts (plasmodia) heavily
infested the different parts of the heart muscles. Each plasmodium measured
1.2-2.5 (1.53 ± 0.2) mm × 0.63-0.80 (0.65 ± 0.2) mm. Mature spores are quadratic 
in shape in the apical view showing four equal valves and four symmetrical polar 
capsules. Fresh spores were 5.0-7.1 (5.7 ± 0.2) μm long × 5.4-8.5 (6.1 ± 0.3) μm 
wide. On the basis of spore morphology, the present species was identified as
Kudoa pagrusi. Morphometric characterization revealed that the relatively small
size of this Kudoa species was the distinctive feature that separates it from all
previously described species. Molecular analysis based on small subunit ribosomal
DNA (SSU rDNA) sequences revealed that the highest percentage of identity was
observed with K. scomberomori and followed by K. shiomitsui, K.
hypoepicarclialis, K. amamiensis, and K. kenti. The kudoid spores showed
morphometric variations to some extents but had essentially identical nucleotide 
sequences of the SSU rDNA gene sequences closest to those of K. scomberomori and 
K. shiomitsui recorded from elasmobranchs in the Indo-Pacific Ocean. The present 
findings support the identification of an ancestral marine origin of the present 
Kudoa species.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-016-5077-3 
PMID: 27146899  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

