
1. PLoS One. 2016 May 10;11(5):e0155308. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0155308.
eCollection 2016.

Frequency of Epstein - Barr Virus in Patients Presenting with Acute Febrile
Illness in Kenya.

Masakhwe C(1)(2), Ochanda H(1), Nyakoe N(2), Ochiel D(2), Waitumbi J(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya.
(2)Walter Reed Project/Kenya Medical Research Institute, Kisumu, Kenya.

BACKGROUND: Most acute febrile illnesses (AFI) are usually not associated with a 
specific diagnosis because of limitations of available diagnostics. This study
reports on the frequency of EBV viremia and viral load in children and adults
presenting with febrile illness in hospitals in Kenya.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A pathogen surveillance study was conducted on
patients presenting with AFI (N = 796) at outpatient departments in 8 hospitals
located in diverse regions of Kenya. Enrollment criterion to the study was fever 
without a readily diagnosable infection. All the patients had AFI not
attributable to the common causes of fever in Kenyan hospitals, such as malaria
or rickettsiae, leptospira, brucella and salmonella and they were hence
categorized as having AFI of unknown etiology. EBV was detected in blood using
quantitative TaqMan-based qPCR targeting a highly conserved BALF5 gene. The
overall frequency of EBV viremia in this population was 29.2%, with significantly
higher proportion in younger children of <5years (33.8%, p = 0.039) compared to
patients aged â‰¥5 years (26.3% for 5-15 years or 18.8% for >15 years). With
respect to geographical localities, the frequency of EBV viremia was higher in
the Lake Victoria region (36.4%), compared to Kisii highland (24.6%), Coastal
region (22.2%) and Semi-Arid region (25%). Furthermore, patients from the malaria
endemic coastal region and the Lake Victoria region presented with significantly 
higher viremia than individuals from other regions of Kenya.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study provides profiles of EBV in patients with
AFI from diverse eco-regions of Kenya. Of significant interest is the high
frequency of EBV viremia in younger children. The observed high frequencies of
EBV viremia and elevated viral loads in residents of high malaria transmission
areas are probably related to malaria induced immune activation and resultant
expansion of EBV infected B-cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0155308 
PMCID: PMC4862666
PMID: 27163791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

