
1. Brief Bioinform. 2017 May 1;18(3):394-402. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbw039.

Detecting multi-way epistasis in family-based association studies.

Loucoubar C, Grant AV, Bureau JF, Casademont I, Bar NA, Bar-Hen A, Diop M, Faye
J, Sarr FD, Badiane A, Tall A, Trape JF, Cliquet F, Schwikowski B, Lathrop M,
Paul RE, Sakuntabhai A.

The era of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) has led to the discovery of
numerous genetic variants associated with disease. Better understanding of
whether these or other variants interact leading to differential risk compared
with individual marker effects will increase our understanding of the genetic
architecture of disease, which may be investigated using the family-based study
design. We present M-TDT (the multi-locus transmission disequilibrium test), a
tool for detecting family-based multi-locus multi-allelic effects for qualitative
or quantitative traits, extended from the original transmission disequilibrium
test (TDT). Tests to handle the comparison between additive and epistatic models,
lack of independence between markers and multiple offspring are described.
Performance of M-TDT is compared with a multifactor dimensionality reduction
(MDR) approach designed for investigating families in the hypothesis-free
genome-wide setting (the multifactor dimensionality reduction pedigree
disequilibrium test, MDR-PDT). Other methods derived from the TDT or MDR to
investigate genetic interaction in the family-based design are also discussed.
The case of three independent biallelic loci is illustrated using simulations for
one- to three-locus alternative hypotheses. M-TDT identified joint-locus effects 
and distinguished effectively between additive and epistatic models. We showed a 
practical example of M-TDT based on three genes already known to be implicated in
malaria susceptibility. Our findings demonstrate the value of M-TDT in a
hypothesis-driven context to test for multi-way epistasis underlying common
disease etiology, whereas MDR-PDT-based methods are more appropriate in a
hypothesis-free genome-wide setting.

Â© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbw039 
PMID: 27178992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

