
1. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2016 Aug;32:96-102. doi: 10.1016/j.mib.2016.04.006. Epub
2016 Jun 2.

Malaria vaccines and human immune responses.

Long CA(1), Zavala F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, 12735 Twinbrook Parkway, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Health,
Rockville, MD 20852, United States. Electronic address: clong@niaid.nih.gov.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Malaria Research
Institute, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, 615 N.
Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, United States.

Despite reductions in malaria episodes and deaths over the past decade, there is 
still significant need for more effective tools to combat this serious global
disease. The positive results with the Phase III trial of RTS,S directed to the
circumsporozoite protein of Plasmodium falciparum have established that a vaccine
against malaria can provide partial protection to children in endemic areas, but 
its limited efficacy and relatively short window of protection mandate that new
generations of more efficacious vaccines must be sought. Evidence shows that
anti-parasite immune responses can control infection against other stages as
well, but translating these experimental findings into vaccines for blood stages 
has been disappointing and clinical efforts to test a transmission blocking
vaccine are just beginning. Difficulties include the biological complexity of the
organism with a large array of stage-specific genes many of which in the
erythrocytic stages are antigenically diverse. In addition, it appears necessary 
to elicit high and long-lasting antibody titers, address the redundant pathways
of merozoite invasion, and still seek surrogate markers of protective immunity.
Most vaccine studies have focused on a single or a few antigens with an apparent 
functional role, but this is likely to be too restrictive, and broad,
multi-antigen, multi-stage vaccines need further investigation. Finally, novel
tools and biological insights involving parasite sexual stages and the mosquito
vector will provide new avenues for reducing or blocking malaria transmission.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mib.2016.04.006 
PMCID: PMC4983510
PMID: 27262417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

