
1. Malar J. 2016 Jun 7;15:310. doi: 10.1186/s12936-016-1365-8.

Sub-Saharan red cell antigen phenotypes and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency variants in French Guiana.

Petit F(1)(2), Bailly P(2)(3), Chiaroni J(2)(3), Mazières S(4).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, IRD, Avignon Université, IMBE UMR 7263, Aix Marseille Université, 13397,
Marseille, France.
(2)CNRS, EFS, ADES UMR 7268, Aix Marseille Université, 13916, Marseille, France.
(3)Etablissement Français du Sang Alpes Méditerranée, 13392, Marseille, France.
(4)CNRS, EFS, ADES UMR 7268, Aix Marseille Université, 13916, Marseille, France. 
stephane.mazieres@univ-amu.fr.

BACKGROUND: The treatment of Plasmodium vivax infections requires the use of
primaquine, which can lead to severe haemolysis in glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase (G6PD)-deficient individuals. However, most of the Latin American
countries, which are still endemic for vivax malaria, lack information on the
distribution of G6PD deficiency (G6PDd). No survey has been performed so far in
French Guiana. Herein, 80 individuals of the French Guianan Noir Marron
population were scrutinized for red cell surface antigens of six blood group
systems (ABO, Rh, Kell, Kidd, Duffy and MNS) and G6PD genetic polymorphisms.
First, the sub-Saharan origin of the red cell phenotypes was assessed in relation
with the literature. Then, given that the main sub-Saharan G6PDd variants are
expected to be encountered, only the G6PD sequences of exons 4, 5, 6 and 9 were
screened. This work aims at appraising the G6PD gene variation in this
population, and thus, contributing to the G6PD piecemeal information in Latin
America.
RESULTS: Ninety-seven percent (97 %) of the red cells are Fy(a- b-), either D+ C-
E- c+ e+ or D+ C+ E- c+ e+ and 44 % exhibited the Fya-/Jkb-/S- combined
phenotype. Noteworthy is the detection of the G6PD(Val68Met) variant
characterized by c.202G > A transition, G6PD(Asn126Asp) variant characterized by 
c.376A>G transition and G6PD(Asp181Val) variant characterized by c.542A>T
transversion of the G6PD gene in 22.5 % of the sample, characteristic of the
A(-(202)), A and Santamaria G6PDd variants, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: French Guianan Noir Marron population represents a pool of Rh-D
antigen positive, Duffy-negative and G6PD-deficient erythrocytes, the latter
accounting for one in every eight persons. The present study provides the first
community-based estimation of the frequency of G6PDd polymorphisms in French
Guiana. These results contribute to the G6PD genetic background information
puzzle in Latin America.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1365-8 
PMCID: PMC4897928
PMID: 27267757  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

