
1. J Eukaryot Microbiol. 2016 Sep;63(5):679-90. doi: 10.1111/jeu.12338. Epub 2016
Jul 15.

Genome Editing by CRISPR/Cas9: A Game Change in the Genetic Manipulation of
Protists.

Lander N(1), Chiurillo MA(1), Docampo R(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Patologia Clínica, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Universidade
Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, 13083, Brazil.
(2)Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases and Department of Cellular
Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, 30602, USA.

Genome editing by CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeats)/Cas9 (CRISPR-associated gene 9) system has been transformative in
biology. Originally discovered as an adaptive prokaryotic immune system,
CRISPR/Cas9 has been repurposed for genome editing in a broad range of model
organisms, from yeast to mammalian cells. Protist parasites are unicellular
organisms producing important human diseases that affect millions of people
around the world. For many of these diseases, such as malaria, Chagas disease,
leishmaniasis and cryptosporidiosis, there are no effective treatments or
vaccines available. The recent adaptation of the CRISPR/Cas9 technology to
several protist models will be playing a key role in the functional study of
their proteins, in the characterization of their metabolic pathways, and in the
understanding of their biology, and will facilitate the search for new
chemotherapeutic targets. In this work we review recent studies where the
CRISPR/Cas9 system was adapted to protist parasites, particularly to
Apicomplexans and trypanosomatids, emphasizing the different molecular strategies
used for genome editing of each organism, as well as their advantages. We also
discuss the potential usefulness of this technology in the green alga
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.

© 2016 The Author(s) Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology © 2016 International
Society of Protistologists.

DOI: 10.1111/jeu.12338 
PMCID: PMC5012946
PMID: 27315329  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

