
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2016 Jun;4(3). doi: 10.1128/microbiolspec.EI10-0013-2016.

Artemisinin-Resistant Plasmodium falciparum Malaria.

Fairhurst RM(1), Dondorp AM(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20852.
(2)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.
(3)Centre for Tropical Medicine, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, United Kingdom.

For more than five decades, Southeast Asia (SEA) has been fertile ground for the 
emergence of drug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum malaria. After generating
parasites resistant to chloroquine, sulfadoxine, pyrimethamine, quinine, and
mefloquine, this region has now spawned parasites resistant to artemisinins, the 
world's most potent antimalarial drugs. In areas where artemisinin resistance is 
prevalent, artemisinin combination therapies (ACTs)-the first-line treatments for
malaria-are failing fast. This worrisome development threatens to make malaria
practically untreatable in SEA, and threatens to compromise global endeavors to
eliminate this disease. A recent series of clinical, in vitro, genomics, and
transcriptomics studies in SEA have defined in vivo and in vitro phenotypes of
artemisinin resistance, identified its causal genetic determinant, explored its
molecular mechanism, and assessed its clinical impact. Specifically, these
studies have established that artemisinin resistance manifests as slow parasite
clearance in patients and increased survival of early-ring-stage parasites in
vitro; is caused by single nucleotide polymorphisms in the parasite's K13 gene,
is associated with an upregulated "unfolded protein response" pathway that may
antagonize the pro-oxidant activity of artemisinins, and selects for partner drug
resistance that rapidly leads to ACT failures. In SEA, clinical studies are
urgently needed to monitor ACT efficacy where K13 mutations are prevalent, test
whether new combinations of currently available drugs cure ACT failures, and
advance new antimalarial compounds through preclinical pipelines and into
clinical trials. Intensifying these efforts should help to forestall the spread
of artemisinin and partner drug resistance from SEA to sub-Saharan Africa, where 
the world's malaria transmission, morbidity, and mortality rates are highest.

DOI: 10.1128/microbiolspec.EI10-0013-2016 
PMCID: PMC4992992
PMID: 27337450  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

