
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016 Sep;15(9):2852-62. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M116.058263. Epub
2016 Jul 1.

Proteomic Analysis of the Plasmodium berghei Gametocyte Egressome and Vesicular
bioID of Osmiophilic Body Proteins Identifies Merozoite TRAP-like Protein (MTRAP)
as an Essential Factor for Parasite Transmission.

Kehrer J(1), Frischknecht F(1), Mair GR(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the ‡Integrative Parasitology, Center for Infectious Diseases, University
of Heidelberg Medical School, Im Neuenheimer Feld 324, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)From the ‡Integrative Parasitology, Center for Infectious Diseases, University
of Heidelberg Medical School, Im Neuenheimer Feld 324, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany 
freddy.frischknecht@med.uni-heidelberg.de gunnarmair@yahoo.com.

Malaria transmission from an infected host to the mosquito vector requires the
uptake of intraerythrocytic sexual precursor cells into the mosquito midgut. For 
the release of mature extracellular gametes two membrane barriers-the parasite
parasitophorous vacuole membrane and the host red blood cell membrane-need to be 
dissolved. Membrane lysis occurs after the release of proteins from specialized
secretory vesicles including osmiophilic bodies. In this study we conducted
proteomic analyses of the P. berghei gametocyte egressome and developed a
vesicular bioID approach to identify hitherto unknown proteins with a potential
function in gametocyte egress. This first Plasmodium gametocyte egressome
includes the proteins released by the parasite during the lysis of the
parasitophorous vacuole membrane and red blood cell membrane. BioID of the
osmiophilic body protein MDV1/PEG3 revealed a vesicular proteome of these
gametocyte-specific secretory vesicles. Fluorescent protein tagging and gene
deletion approaches were employed to validate and identify a set of novel factors
essential for this lysis and egress process. Our study provides the first in vivo
bioID for a rodent malaria parasite and together with the first Plasmodium
gametocyte egressome identifies MTRAP as a novel factor essential for mosquito
transmission. Our data provide an important resource for proteins potentially
involved in a key step of gametogenesis.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M116.058263 
PMCID: PMC5013303
PMID: 27371728  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

