
1. Parasitology. 2016 Oct;143(12):1557-68. doi: 10.1017/S0031182016001207. Epub 2016
Jul 21.

Potential cerebral malaria therapy: intramuscular arteether and vitamin D
co-administration.

Dwivedi H(1), Singh SK(1), Chauhan BS(1), Gunjan S(1), Tripathi R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology,CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute,Lucknow,Uttar
Pradesh 226031,India.

Cerebral malaria (CM) shows lethality rate of 15-25% despite effective
antimalarial chemotherapy. The effective adjunct treatment to counteract the CM
pathogenesis is urgently required. In murine CM model, most interventions studied
till date are administered before the onset of CM symptoms, which belittle its
translational value to human. We studied intramuscular arteether-vitamin D
(ART-VD) combination treatment for CM outcome improvement after the onset of
neurological symptoms. The intramuscular dose of 50 µg kg-1 VD for 3 days
combined with a loading dose of 25 mg kg-1 α/β arteether followed by 12·5 mg kg-1
dose for two consecutive days led to significant improvement in survival (73% in 
combination group vs 29 and 0% in arteether and VD monotherapy, respectively) and
clinical recovery. The treatment in all the groups partially restored the
blood-brain barrier integrity and reduced the level of serum proinflammatory
cytokines tumour necrosis factor-α and interferon-γ. The brain transcripts of
inflammatory chemokines viz. CXCL10, CXCL9, CCL4 and CCL5 and T cell migration in
the brain microvasculature were significantly diminished in all the treatment
groups. ART-VD treatment significantly reduced intercellular cell adhesion
molecule-1 expression. Taken together, our findings show that coordinated actions
of ART-VD improve the outcome of experimental CM.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182016001207 
PMID: 27440106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

