
1. BMC Syst Biol. 2016 Aug 8;10(1):58. doi: 10.1186/s12918-016-0291-2.

Metabolic host responses to malarial infection during the intraerythrocytic
developmental cycle.

Wallqvist A(1), Fang X(1), Tewari SG(1), Ye P(1), Reifman J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Defense Biotechnology High Performance Computing Software
Applications Institute, Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center,
U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command, Ft. Detrick, MD, 21702, USA.
(2)Department of Defense Biotechnology High Performance Computing Software
Applications Institute, Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center,
U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command, Ft. Detrick, MD, 21702, USA.
jaques.reifman.civ@mail.mil.

BACKGROUND: The malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum undergoes a complex life 
cycle, including an intraerythrocytic developmental cycle, during which it is
metabolically dependent on the infected human red blood cell (RBC). To describe
whole cell metabolic activity within both P. falciparum and RBCs during the
asexual reproduction phase of the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle, we
developed an integrated host-parasite metabolic modeling framework driven by
time-dependent gene expression data.
RESULTS: We validated the model by reproducing the experimentally determined 1)
stage-specific production of biomass components and their precursors in the
parasite and 2) metabolite concentration changes in the medium of P.
falciparum-infected RBC cultures. The model allowed us to explore time- and
strain-dependent P. falciparum metabolism and hypothesize how host cell
metabolism alters in response to malarial infection. Specifically, the metabolic 
analysis showed that uninfected RBCs that coexist with infected cells in the same
culture decrease their production of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate, an oxygen-carrying 
regulator, reducing the ability of hemoglobin in these cells to release oxygen.
Furthermore, in response to parasite-induced oxidative stress, infected RBCs
downgraded their glycolytic flux by using the pentose phosphate pathway and
secreting ribulose-5-phosphate. This mechanism links individually observed
experimental phenomena, such as glycolytic inhibition and ribulose-5-phosphate
secretion, to the oxidative stress response.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the metabolic model does not incorporate regulatory
mechanisms per se, alterations in gene expression levels caused by regulatory
mechanisms are manifested in the model as altered metabolic states. This provides
the model the capability to capture complex multicellular host-pathogen metabolic
interactions of the infected RBC culture. The system-level analysis revealed
complex relationships such as how the parasite can reduce oxygen release in
uninfected cells in the presence of infected RBCs as well as the role of
different metabolic pathways involved in the oxidative stress response of
infected RBCs.

DOI: 10.1186/s12918-016-0291-2 
PMCID: PMC4977726
PMID: 27502771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

