
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Sep 20;6:33615. doi: 10.1038/srep33615.

Absence of apolipoprotein E protects mice from cerebral malaria.

Kassa FA(1)(2), Van Den Ham K(1)(2), Rainone A(1), Fournier S(1), Boilard E(3),
Olivier M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(2)The Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre and Infectious
Diseases and Immunity in Global Health Program, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(3)Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, Université 
Laval, Québec, Québec, Canada.

Cerebral malaria claims the life of millions of people each year, particularly
those of children, and is a major global public health problem. Thus, the
identification of novel malaria biomarkers that could be utilized as diagnostic
or therapeutic targets is becoming increasingly important. Using a proteomic
approach, we previously identified unique biomarkers in the sera of
malaria-infected individuals, including apolipoprotein E (ApoE). ApoE is the
dominant apolipoprotein in the brain and has been implicated in several
neurological disorders; therefore, we were interested in the potential role of
ApoE in cerebral malaria. Here we report the first demonstration that cerebral
malaria is markedly attenuated in ApoE(-/-) mice. The protection provided by the 
absence of ApoE was associated with decreased sequestration of parasites and T
cells within the brain, and was determined to be independent from the involvement
of ApoE receptors and from the altered lipid metabolism associated with the
knock-out mice. Importantly, we demonstrated that treatment of mice with the ApoE
antagonist heparin octasaccharide significantly decreased the incidence of
cerebral malaria. Overall, our study indicates that the reduction of ApoE could
be utilized in the development of therapeutic treatments aimed at mitigating the 
neuropathology of cerebral malaria.

DOI: 10.1038/srep33615 
PMCID: PMC5028887
PMID: 27647324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

