
1. Mol Ecol. 2016 Nov;25(22):5719-5731. doi: 10.1111/mec.13840. Epub 2016 Nov 3.

The last bastion? X chromosome genotyping of Anopheles gambiae species pair males
from a hybrid zone reveals complex recombination within the major candidate
'genomic island of speciation'.

Caputo B(1), Pichler V(1), Mancini E(1), Pombi M(1), Vicente JL(2), Dinis J(3),
Steen K(4), Petrarca V(5), Rodrigues A(3), Pinto J(2), Della Torre A(1), Weetman 
D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur Italia - Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Dipartimento di Sanità 
Pubblica e Malattie Infettive, Università 'Sapienza', Piazzale Aldo Moro 5,
00185, Rome, Italy.
(2)Global Health and Tropical Medicine, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua daJunqueira, 100, 1349-008, Lisboa, Portugal.
(3)Instituto Nacional de Saúde Pública, Ministério da Saúde Pública, Avenida
Combatentes da Liberdade da Pátria, Apartado 861, 1004, Bissau Codex, Guinea
Bissau.
(4)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke Pl,
Liverpool, Merseyside, L3 5QA, UK.
(5)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci-Bolognetti, Dipartimento di Biologia e
Biotecnologie Charles Darwin, Università 'Sapienza', Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185,
Rome, Italy.

Speciation with gene flow may be aided by reduced recombination helping to build 
linkage between genes involved in the early stages of reproductive isolation.
Reduced recombination on chromosome X has been implicated in speciation within
the Anopheles gambiae complex, species of which represent the major Afrotropical 
malaria vectors. The most recently diverged, morphologically indistinguishable,
species pair, A. gambiae and Anopheles coluzzii, ubiquitously displays a 'genomic
island of divergence' spanning over 4 Mb from chromosome X centromere, which
represents a particularly promising candidate region for reproductive isolation
genes, in addition to containing the diagnostic markers used to distinguish the
species. Very low recombination makes the island intractable for experimental
recombination studies, but an extreme hybrid zone in Guinea Bissau offers the
opportunity for natural investigation of X-island recombination. SNP analysis of 
chromosome X hemizygous males revealed: (i) strong divergence in the X-island
despite a lack of autosomal divergence; (ii) individuals with
multiple-recombinant genotypes, including likely double crossovers and localized 
gene conversion; (iii) recombination-driven discontinuity both within and between
the molecular species markers, suggesting that the utility of the diagnostics is 
undermined under high hybridization. The largely, but incompletely protected
nature of the X centromeric genomic island is consistent with a primary candidate
area for accumulation of adaptive variants driving speciation with gene flow,
while permitting some selective shuffling and removal of genetic variation.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.13840 
PMID: 27661465  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

