
1. J Insect Physiol. 2017 Jan;96:35-44. doi: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2016.10.011. Epub
2016 Oct 20.

Molecular expression of aquaporin mRNAs in the northern house mosquito, Culex
pipiens.

Yang L(1), Piermarini PM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center,
The Ohio State University, Wooster, OH, United States.
(2)Department of Entomology, Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center,
The Ohio State University, Wooster, OH, United States. Electronic address:
piermarini.1@osu.edu.

Aquaporins (AQPs) are a family of membrane-bound proteins, originally described
as water-channels, that broadly exist in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.
However, some AQPs can transport small molecules (e.g. urea, glycerol) along with
or preferentially to water. Previous work in the mosquitoes Aedes aegypti and
Anopheles gambiae have characterized the molecular expression of one or more AQP 
genes and shown that they are involved in water homeostasis after blood feeding, 
tolerance to dehydration and heat stresses, and development of Plasmodium
falciparum in the mosquito. However, the molecular expression of AQPs in the
northern house mosquito Culex pipiens, the primary vector of West Nile virus, is 
presently unknown. Here we characterize the relative mRNA expression of six AQP
genes in C. pipiens. We used quantitative RT-PCR (qPCR) to compare AQP mRNA
levels 1) among different life stages and sexes, 2) between blood fed and
non-blood fed adult females, 3) between adult females injected with
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and non-injected females, and 4) between adult
females exposed to a low vs. high relative humidity. We found that: 1) four AQP
mRNAs (Drip, Bib, Eglp1, Aqp12L) were differentially expressed between larval and
adult life stages, but not between sexes; 2) after a blood meal, the expression
of two AQP mRNAs (Drip and Aqp12L) were down-regulated and one AQP mRNA (Eglp2)
was up-regulated; 3) the expression of two AQP mRNAs (Drip and Prip) were
down-regulated and one AQP mRNA (Eglp1) was up regulated after injecting the
hemolymph of mosquitoes with PBS; and 4) the expression of Prip and Eglp2 mRNAs
were both down-regulated in response to a low relative humidity. Our study is the
first to characterize the molecular expression patterns of AQPs in C. pipiens,
thus providing a foundation for future research elucidating the physiological and
functional roles of AQPs in this important disease vector.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2016.10.011 
PMID: 27773635  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

