
1. FEBS J. 2017 Jan;284(2):237-257. doi: 10.1111/febs.13967. Epub 2016 Dec 9.

Activation and clustering of a Plasmodium falciparum var gene are affected by
subtelomeric sequences.

Duffy MF(1)(2), Tang J(1)(2), Sumardy F(1)(3), Nguyen HH(1)(2), Selvarajah
SA(1)(2), Josling GA(1)(4), Day KP(2), Petter M(1)(2), Brown GV(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital, The University of Melbourne 
at The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Victoria, Australia.
(2)The School of BioSciences, Bio21, The University of Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.
(3)The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, State College, PA, USA.
(5)The Nossal Institute for Global Health, The University of Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.

The Plasmodium falciparum var multigene family encodes the cytoadhesive, variant 
antigen PfEMP1. P. falciparum antigenic variation and cytoadhesion specificity
are controlled by epigenetic switching between the single, or few, simultaneously
expressed var genes. Most var genes are maintained in perinuclear clusters of
heterochromatic telomeres. The active var gene(s) occupy a single, perinuclear
var expression site. It is unresolved whether the var expression site forms in
situ at a telomeric cluster or whether it is an extant compartment to which
single chromosomes travel, thus controlling var switching. Here we show that
transcription of a var gene did not require decreased colocalisation with
clusters of telomeres, supporting var expression site formation in situ. However 
following recombination within adjacent subtelomeric sequences, the same var gene
was persistently activated and did colocalise less with telomeric clusters. Thus,
participation in stable, heterochromatic, telomere clusters and var switching are
independent but are both affected by subtelomeric sequences. The var expression
site colocalised with the euchromatic mark H3K27ac to a greater extent than it
did with heterochromatic H3K9me3. H3K27ac was enriched within the active var gene
promoter even when the var gene was transiently repressed in mature parasites and
thus H3K27ac may contribute to var gene epigenetic memory.

Â© 2016 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.13967 
PMID: 27860263  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

