
1. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2016 Dec;9(12):1165-1171. doi: 10.1016/j.apjtm.2016.09.013.
Epub 2016 Nov 9.

Glycoproteomics analysis of plasma proteins associated with Opisthorchis
viverrini infection-induced cholangiocarcinoma in hamster model.

Sriwanitchrak P(1), Paemanee A(2), Roytrakul S(2), Viyanant V(3), Na-Bangchang
K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Allied Health Sciences,
Thammasat University, Pathumtani, Thailand.
(2)Proteomics Research Laboratory, National Center for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, 113 Thailand Science Park, Pahonyothin Road, Klongluang,
Pathumthani, Thailand.
(3)Graduate Program in Bioclinical Sciences, Center of Excellence in Pharmacology
and Molecular Biology of Malaria and Cholangiocarcinoma, Chulabhorn International
College of Medicine, Thailand; Center of Excellence in Pharmacology and Molecular
Biology of Malaria and Cholangiocarcinoma, Chulabhorn International College of
Medicine, Thailand.
(4)Graduate Program in Bioclinical Sciences, Center of Excellence in Pharmacology
and Molecular Biology of Malaria and Cholangiocarcinoma, Chulabhorn International
College of Medicine, Thailand; Center of Excellence in Pharmacology and Molecular
Biology of Malaria and Cholangiocarcinoma, Chulabhorn International College of
Medicine, Thailand; Excellence Center in Pharmacology and Molecular Biology of
Malaria and Cholangiocarcinoma, Thammasat University, Thailand. Electronic
address: kesaratmu@yahoo.com.

OBJECTIVE: To apply lectin affinity chromatography and glycoproteomics-based
LC-MS/MS to preliminarily investigate the possible potential plasma biomarkers of
Opisthorchis viverrini (OV)-associated CCA in OV/dimethylnitrosamine
(DMN)-induced CCA hamster model.
METHODS: Nine Syrian hamsters were divided into 3 groups as follows (n = 3 each):
normal (healthy control group); OV group; and OV/DMN group (CCA group). Pooled
plasma samples collected from animals in each group at the 6th month
post-infection with OV metacercarae were subjected to glycoproteomics analysis.
Glycoproteins in the pooled sample from each group were initially isolated by
concanavalin A (ConA)-based affinity chromatography. The expression of
glycoproteins isolated by both enrichment methods were determined using LC-MS/MS.
RESULTS: Among the 24 ConA-binding glycoproteins isolated, two proteins, N-myc
downstream regulated gene 1 (NDRG1) and fetuin-B (FETUB) were found up-regulated 
only in the samples from the OV and control groups, but not in the OV/DMN (CCA)
groups. On the other hand, one protein, i.e., NSFL1 cofactor p47 isoform ×3
(NSFL1C) was found only in the samples from OV/DMN (CCA) and control groups, but 
not in the OV group. The remaining 21 proteins were upregulated in the samples
from all groups.
CONCLUSIONS: NDRG1, FETUB and NSFL1C glycoproteins isolated by ConA-based
affinity chromatography could be potential biomarkers for CCA. Plasma samples
with negative for NDRG1 and FETUB proteins but positive for NSFL1C are likely to 
be OV-associated CCA. Nevertheless, this conclusion remains to be confirmed
whether this battery test can discriminate OV-associated CCA from other risk
factors.

Copyright © 2016 Hainan Medical University. Production and hosting by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apjtm.2016.09.013 
PMID: 27955744 

