
1. J Invertebr Pathol. 2017 Feb;143:124-134. doi: 10.1016/j.jip.2016.12.006. Epub
2016 Dec 18.

Parahepatospora carcini n. gen., n. sp., a parasite of invasive Carcinus maenas
with intermediate features of sporogony between the Enterocytozoon clade and
other microsporidia.

Bojko J(1), Clark F(2), Bass D(3), Dunn AM(4), Stewart-Clark S(5), Stebbing
PD(6), Stentiford GD(7).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK;
Pathology and Molecular Systematics Team, Centre for Environment, Fisheries and
Aquaculture Science (Cefas), Weymouth Laboratory, Weymouth, Dorset DT4 8UB, UK.
Electronic address: bs09jb@leeds.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Prince Edward Island,
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island C1A 4P3, Canada. Electronic address:
fclark@mta.ca.
(3)Pathology and Molecular Systematics Team, Centre for Environment, Fisheries
and Aquaculture Science (Cefas), Weymouth Laboratory, Weymouth, Dorset DT4 8UB,
UK; European Union Reference Laboratory for Crustacean Diseases, Centre for
Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (Cefas), Weymouth Laboratory,
Weymouth, Dorset DT4 8UB, UK; Department of Life Sciences, Natural History Museum
London, Cromwell Road, London SW7 5BD, UK. Electronic address:
david.bass@cefas.co.uk.
(4)Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK.
Electronic address: A.Dunn@Leeds.ac.uk.
(5)Department of Animal Science and Aquaculture, Dalhousie University Faculty of 
Agriculture, 58 River Road, Truro, Nova Scotia B2N 5E3, Canada. Electronic
address: Sarah.Stewart-Clark@Dal.Ca.
(6)Epidemiology and Risk Team, Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture 
Science (Cefas), Weymouth Laboratory, Weymouth, Dorset DT4 8UB, UK. Electronic
address: paul.stebbing@cefas.co.uk.
(7)Pathology and Molecular Systematics Team, Centre for Environment, Fisheries
and Aquaculture Science (Cefas), Weymouth Laboratory, Weymouth, Dorset DT4 8UB,
UK; European Union Reference Laboratory for Crustacean Diseases, Centre for
Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (Cefas), Weymouth Laboratory,
Weymouth, Dorset DT4 8UB, UK. Electronic address: grant.stentiford@cefas.co.uk.

Parahepatospora carcini n. gen. n. sp., is a novel microsporidian parasite
discovered infecting the cytoplasm of epithelial cells of the hepatopancreas of a
single Carcinus maenas specimen. The crab was sampled from within its invasive
range in Atlantic Canada (Nova Scotia). Histopathology and transmission electron 
microscopy were used to show the development of the parasite within a simple
interfacial membrane, culminating in the formation of unikaryotic spores with 5-6
turns of an isofilar polar filament. Formation of a multinucleate meront (>12
nuclei observed) preceded thickening and invagination of the plasmodial membrane,
and in many cases, formation of spore extrusion precursors (polar filaments,
anchoring disk) prior to complete separation of pre-sporoblasts from the
sporogonial plasmodium. This developmental feature is intermediate between the
Enterocytozoonidae (formation of spore extrusion precursors within the sporont
plasmodium) and all other Microsporidia (formation of spore extrusion precursors 
after separation of sporont from the sporont plasmodium). SSU rRNA-based gene
phylogenies place P. carcini within microsporidian Clade IV, between the
Enterocytozoonidae and the so-called Enterocytospora-clade, which includes
Enterocytospora artemiae and Globulispora mitoportans. Both of these groups
contain gut-infecting microsporidians of aquatic invertebrates, fish and humans. 
According to morphological and phylogenetic characters, we propose that P.
carcini occupies a basal position to the Enterocytozoonidae. We discuss the
discovery of this parasite from a taxonomic perspective and consider its origins 
and presence within a high profile invasive host on the Atlantic Canadian
coastline.

Crown Copyright Â© 2017. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jip.2016.12.006 
PMID: 27993617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

