
1. Biosci Trends. 2017 Jan 16;10(6):424-432. doi: 10.5582/bst.2016.01180. Epub 2016 
Dec 18.

Current status of genome editing in vector mosquitoes: A review.

Reegan AD(1), Ceasar SA, Paulraj MG, Ignacimuthu S, Al-Dhabi NA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vector Control, Entomology Research Institute, Loyola College.

Mosquitoes pose a major threat to human health as they spread many deadly
diseases like malaria, dengue, chikungunya, filariasis, Japanese encephalitis and
Zika. Identification and use of novel molecular tools are essential to combat the
spread of vector borne diseases. Genome editing tools have been used for the
precise alterations of the gene of interest for producing the desirable trait in 
mosquitoes. Deletion of functional genes or insertion of toxic genes in vector
mosquitoes will produce either knock-out or knock-in mutants that will check the 
spread of vector-borne diseases. Presently, three types of genome editing tools
viz., zinc finger nuclease (ZFN), transcription activator-like effector nucleases
(TALEN) and clustered regulatory interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)
and CRISPR associated protein 9 (Cas9) are widely used for the editing of the
genomes of diverse organisms. These tools are also applied in vector mosquitoes
to control the spread of vector-borne diseases. A few studies have been carried
out on genome editing to control the diseases spread by vector mosquitoes and
more studies need to be performed with the utilization of more recently invented 
tools like CRISPR/Cas9 to combat the spread of deadly diseases by vector
mosquitoes. The high specificity and flexibility of CRISPR/Cas9 system may offer 
possibilities for novel genome editing for the control of important diseases
spread by vector mosquitoes. In this review, we present the current status of
genome editing research on vector mosquitoes and also discuss the future
applications of vector mosquito genome editing to control the spread of
vectorborne diseases.

DOI: 10.5582/bst.2016.01180 
PMID: 27990003  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

