
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Dec 19;6:39258. doi: 10.1038/srep39258.

Transcriptomic profiling of microglia reveals signatures of cell activation and
immune response, during experimental cerebral malaria.

Capuccini B(1), Lin J(1), Talavera-López C(1), Khan SM(2), Sodenkamp J(1),
Spaccapelo R(3), Langhorne J(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Francis Crick Institute, London NW1 1AT, UK.
(2)Leiden University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA, Leiden,
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Perugia, 06132 Perugia,
Italy.

Cerebral malaria is a pathology involving inflammation in the brain. There are
many immune cell types activated during this process, but there is little
information on the response of microglia, in this severe complication. We
examined microglia by genome wide transcriptomic analysis in a model of
experimental cerebral malaria (ECM), in which C57BL/6 mice are infected with
Plasmodium berghei ANKA. Thousands of transcripts were differentially expressed
in microglia at two different time points during infection. Proliferation of
microglia was a dominant feature before the onset of ECM, and supporting this, we
observed an increase in numbers of these cells in the brain. When cerebral
malaria symptoms were manifest, genes involved in immune responses and chemokine 
production were upregulated, which were possibly driven by Type I Interferon.
Consistent with this hypothesis, in vitro culture of a microglial cell line with 
Interferon-β, but not infected red blood cells, resulted in production of several
of the chemokines shown to be upregulated in the gene expression analysis. It
appears that these responses are associated with ECM, as microglia from mice
infected with a mutant P. berghei parasite (ΔDPAP3), which does not cause ECM,
did not show the same level of activation or proliferation.

DOI: 10.1038/srep39258 
PMCID: PMC5171943
PMID: 27991544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

