
1. Parasit Vectors. 2017 Jan 3;10(1):2. doi: 10.1186/s13071-016-1935-1.

Genetic clustering and polymorphism of the merozoite surface protein-3 of
Plasmodium knowlesi clinical isolates from Peninsular Malaysia.

De Silva JR(1), Lau YL(1), Fong MY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603, 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603, 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. fongmy@um.edu.my.

BACKGROUND: The simian malaria parasite Plasmodium knowlesi has been reported to 
cause significant numbers of human infection in South East Asia. Its merozoite
surface protein-3 (MSP3) is a protein that belongs to a multi-gene family of
proteins first found in Plasmodium falciparum. Several studies have evaluated the
potential of P. falciparum MSP3 as a potential vaccine candidate. However, to
date no detailed studies have been carried out on P. knowlesi MSP3 gene (pkmsp3).
The present study investigates the genetic diversity, and haplotypes groups of
pkmsp3 in P. knowlesi clinical samples from Peninsular Malaysia.
METHODS: Blood samples were collected from P. knowlesi malaria patients within a 
period of 4 years (2008-2012). The pkmsp3 gene of the isolates was amplified via 
PCR, and subsequently cloned and sequenced. The full length pkmsp3 sequence was
divided into Domain A and Domain B. Natural selection, genetic diversity, and
haplotypes of pkmsp3 were analysed using MEGA6 and DnaSP ver. 5.10.00 programmes.
RESULTS: From 23 samples, 48 pkmsp3 sequences were successfully obtained. At the 
nucleotide level, 101 synonymous and 238 non-synonymous mutations were observed. 
Tests of neutrality were not significant for the full length, Domain A or Domain 
B sequences. However, the dN/dS ratio of Domain B indicates purifying selection
for this domain. Analysis of the deduced amino acid sequences revealed 42
different haplotypes. Neighbour Joining phylogenetic tree and haplotype network
analyses revealed that the haplotypes clustered into two distinct groups.
CONCLUSIONS: A moderate level of genetic diversity was observed in the pkmsp3 and
only the C-terminal region (Domain B) appeared to be under purifying selection.
The separation of the pkmsp3 into two haplotype groups provides further evidence 
of the existence of two distinct P. knowlesi types or lineages. Future studies
should investigate the diversity of pkmsp3 among P. knowlesi isolates in North
Borneo, where large numbers of human knowlesi malaria infection still occur.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-016-1935-1 
PMCID: PMC5209848
PMID: 28049516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

