
1. Int J Parasitol. 2017 Jun;47(7):385-398. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2016.11.006. Epub 
2017 Jan 30.

Tools for attenuation of gene expression in malaria parasites.

Shaw PJ(1), Aroonsri A(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), 113 Thailand Science Park,
Thanon Phahonyothin, Tambon Khlong Neung, Amphoe Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani
12120, Thailand. Electronic address: philip@biotec.or.th.
(2)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), 113 Thailand Science Park,
Thanon Phahonyothin, Tambon Khlong Neung, Amphoe Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani
12120, Thailand.

An understanding of the biology of Plasmodium parasites, which are the causative 
agents of the disease malaria, requires study of gene function. Various reverse
genetic tools have been described for determining gene function. These tools can 
be broadly grouped as trans- and cis-acting. Trans-acting tools control gene
functions through synthetic nucleic acid probe molecules matching the sequence of
the gene of interest. Once delivered to the parasite, the probe engages with the 
mRNA of the target gene and attenuates its function. Cis-acting tools control
gene function through elements introduced into the gene of interest by DNA
transfection. The expression of the modified gene can be controlled using
external agents, typically small molecule ligands. In this review, we discuss the
strengths and weaknesses of these tools to guide researchers in selecting the
appropriate tool for studies of gene function, and for guiding future refinements
of these tools.

Copyright Â© 2017 Australian Society for Parasitology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2016.11.006 
PMID: 28153780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

