
1. Mol Ecol. 2017 Jun;26(11):2939-2958. doi: 10.1111/mec.14085. Epub 2017 Apr 8.

The transcriptome of the avian malaria parasite Plasmodium ashfordi displays
host-specific gene expression.

Videvall E(1), Cornwallis CK(1), Ahrén D(1)(2), Palinauskas V(3), Valkiūnas G(3),
Hellgren O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Lund University, Sölvegatan 37, SE-22362, Lund, Sweden.
(2)National Bioinformatics Infrastructure Sweden (NBIS), Lund University,
Sölvegatan 37, SE-22362, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Institute of Ecology, Nature Research Centre, Akademijos 2, LT-08412, Vilnius,
Lithuania.

Malaria parasites (Plasmodium spp.) include some of the world's most widespread
and virulent pathogens. Our knowledge of the molecular mechanisms these parasites
use to invade and exploit their hosts other than in mice and primates is,
however, extremely limited. It is therefore imperative to characterize
transcriptome-wide gene expression from nonmodel malaria parasites and how this
varies across individual hosts. Here, we used high-throughput Illumina RNA
sequencing on blood from wild-caught Eurasian siskins experimentally infected
with a clonal strain of the avian malaria parasite Plasmodium ashfordi (lineage
GRW2). Using a bioinformatic multistep approach to filter out host transcripts,
we successfully assembled the blood-stage transcriptome of P. ashfordi. A total
of 11 954 expressed transcripts were identified, and 7860 were annotated with
protein information. We quantified gene expression levels of all parasite
transcripts across three hosts during two infection stages - peak and decreasing 
parasitemia. Interestingly, parasites from the same host displayed remarkably
similar expression profiles during different infection stages, but showed large
differences across hosts, indicating that P. ashfordi may adjust its gene
expression to specific host individuals. We further show that the majority of
transcripts are most similar to the human parasite Plasmodium falciparum, and a
large number of red blood cell invasion genes were discovered, suggesting
evolutionary conserved invasion strategies between mammalian and avian
Plasmodium. The transcriptome of P. ashfordi and its host-specific gene
expression advances our understanding of Plasmodium plasticity and is a valuable 
resource as it allows for further studies analysing gene evolution and
comparisons of parasite gene expression.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.14085 
PMID: 28267239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

