
1. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol. 2017 Jun;52(3):254-273. doi:
10.1080/10409238.2017.1290043. Epub 2017 Feb 22.

Genomics of apicomplexan parasites.

Swapna LS(1), Parkinson J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Program in Molecular Structure and Function , Hospital for Sick Children ,
Toronto , Ontario , Canada.
(2)b Departments of Biochemistry, Molecular Genetics and Computer Science ,
University of Toronto , Toronto , Ontario , Canada.

The increasing prevalence of infections involving intracellular apicomplexan
parasites such as Plasmodium, Toxoplasma, and Cryptosporidium (the causative
agents of malaria, toxoplasmosis, and cryptosporidiosis, respectively) represent 
a significant global healthcare burden. Despite their significance, few
treatments are available; a situation that is likely to deteriorate with the
emergence of new resistant strains of parasites. To lay the foundation for
programs of drug discovery and vaccine development, genome sequences for many of 
these organisms have been generated, together with large-scale expression and
proteomic datasets. Comparative analyses of these datasets are beginning to
identify the molecular innovations supporting both conserved processes mediating 
fundamental roles in parasite survival and persistence, as well as
lineage-specific adaptations associated with divergent life-cycle strategies. The
challenge is how best to exploit these data to derive insights into parasite
virulence and identify those genes representing the most amenable targets. In
this review, we outline genomic datasets currently available for apicomplexans
and discuss biological insights that have emerged as a consequence of their
analysis. Of particular interest are systems-based resources, focusing on areas
of metabolism and host invasion that are opening up opportunities for discovering
new therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1080/10409238.2017.1290043 
PMCID: PMC6813780
PMID: 28276701  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

