
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Apr 4;7(1):607. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-00687-7.

Quantitative chromatin proteomics reveals a dynamic histone post-translational
modification landscape that defines asexual and sexual Plasmodium falciparum
parasites.

Coetzee N(1), Sidoli S(2), van Biljon R(1), Painter H(3), Llinás M(3), Garcia
BA(2), Birkholtz LM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute for Sustainable Malaria Control,
University of Pretoria, Private bag x20, Hatfield, Pretoria, South Africa.
(2)Epigenetics Program, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology and Centre for Malaria
Research, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Institute for Sustainable Malaria Control,
University of Pretoria, Private bag x20, Hatfield, Pretoria, South Africa.
lbirkholtz@up.ac.za.

Gene expression in Plasmodia integrates post-transcriptional regulation with
epigenetic marking of active genomic regions through histone post-translational
modifications (PTMs). To generate insights into the importance of histone PTMs to
the entire asexual and sexual developmental cycles of the parasite, we used
complementary and comparative quantitative chromatin proteomics to identify and
functionally characterise histone PTMs in 8 distinct life cycle stages of P.
falciparum parasites. ~500 individual histone PTMs were identified of which 106
could be stringently validated. 46 individual histone PTMs and 30 co-existing
PTMs were fully quantified with high confidence. Importantly, 15 of these histone
PTMs are novel for Plasmodia (e.g. H3K122ac, H3K27me3, H3K56me3). The comparative
nature of the data revealed a highly dynamic histone PTM landscape during life
cycle development, with a set of histone PTMs (H3K4ac, H3K9me1 and H3K36me2)
displaying a unique and conserved abundance profile exclusively during
gametocytogenesis (P < 0.001). Euchromatic histone PTMs are abundant during
schizogony and late gametocytes; heterochromatic PTMs mark early gametocytes.
Collectively, this data provides the most accurate, complete and comparative
chromatin proteomic analyses of the entire life cycle development of malaria
parasites. A substantial association between histone PTMs and stage-specific
transition provides insights into the intricacies characterising Plasmodial
developmental biology.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-00687-7 
PMCID: PMC5428830
PMID: 28377601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

