
1. Biochem Soc Trans. 2017 Apr 15;45(2):531-535. doi: 10.1042/BST20160478.

CD81 as a tumor target.

Vences-Catalán F(1), Duault C(1), Kuo CC(1), Rajapaksa R(1), Levy R(1), Levy
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, U.S.A.
(2)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, U.S.A. slevy@stanford.edu.

CD81 participates in a variety of important cellular processes such as membrane
organization, protein trafficking, cellular fusion and cell-cell interactions. In
the immune system, CD81 regulates immune synapse, receptor clustering and
signaling; it also mediates adaptive and innate immune suppression. CD81 is a
gateway in hepatocytes for pathogens such as hepatitis C virus and Plasmodium; it
also confers susceptibility to Listeria infection. These diverse biological roles
are due to the tendency of CD81 to associate with other tetraspanins and with
cell-specific partner proteins, which provide the cells with a signaling
platform. CD81 has also been shown to regulate cell migration and invasion, and
has therefore been implicated in cancer progression. Indeed, we have recently
shown that CD81 contributes to tumor growth and metastasis. CD81 is expressed in 
most types of cancer, including breast, lung, prostate, melanoma, brain cancer
and lymphoma, and the overexpression or down-regulation of this molecule has been
correlated with either good or bad prognosis. Here, we discuss the role of CD81
in cancer and its potential therapeutic use as a tumor target.

© 2017 The Author(s); published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the
Biochemical Society.

DOI: 10.1042/BST20160478 
PMID: 28408492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

