
1. Genome Res. 2017 Jun;27(6):1074-1086. doi: 10.1101/gr.217356.116. Epub 2017 Apr
17.

Capturing in vivo RNA transcriptional dynamics from the malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum.

Painter HJ(1), Carrasquilla M(1), Llinás M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Huck Center for Malaria
Research, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802,
USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

To capture the transcriptional dynamics within proliferating cells, methods to
differentiate nascent transcription from preexisting mRNAs are desired. One
approach is to label newly synthesized mRNA transcripts in vivo through the
incorporation of modified pyrimidines. However, the human malaria parasite,
Plasmodium falciparum, is incapable of pyrimidine salvage for mRNA biogenesis. To
capture cellular mRNA dynamics during Plasmodium development, we engineered
parasites that can salvage pyrimidines through the expression of a single
bifunctional yeast fusion gene, cytosine deaminase/uracil
phosphoribosyltransferase (FCU). We show that expression of FCU allows for the
direct incorporation of thiol-modified pyrimidines into nascent mRNAs. Using
developmental stage-specific promoters to express FCU-GFP enables the
biosynthetic capture and in-depth analysis of mRNA dynamics from subpopulations
of cells undergoing differentiation. We demonstrate the utility of this method by
examining the transcriptional dynamics of the sexual gametocyte stage transition,
a process that is essential to malaria transmission between hosts. Using the
pfs16 gametocyte-specific promoter to express FCU-GFP in 3D7 parasites, we found 
that sexual stage commitment is governed by transcriptional reprogramming and
stabilization of a subset of essential gametocyte transcripts. We also measured
mRNA dynamics in F12 gametocyte-deficient parasites and demonstrate that the
transcriptional program required for sexual commitment and maturation is
initiated but likely aborted due to the absence of the PfAP2-G transcriptional
regulator and a lack of gametocyte-specific mRNA stabilization. Biosynthetic
labeling of Plasmodium mRNAs is incredibly versatile, can be used to measure
transcriptional dynamics at any stage of parasite development, and will allow for
future applications to comprehensively measure RNA-protein interactions in the
malaria parasite.

© 2017 Painter et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.217356.116 
PMCID: PMC5453321
PMID: 28416533  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

