
1. G3 (Bethesda). 2017 Jun 7;7(6):1819-1832. doi: 10.1534/g3.117.040147.

Genome-Wide Transcription and Functional Analyses Reveal Heterogeneous Molecular 
Mechanisms Driving Pyrethroids Resistance in the Major Malaria Vector Anopheles
funestus Across Africa.

Riveron JM(1)(2), Ibrahim SS(1)(3), Mulamba C(1)(4), Djouaka R(5), Irving H(1),
Wondji MJ(1)(2), Ishak IH(1)(6), Wondji CS(7)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, L3 5QA, United Kingdom.
(2)Organisation de Coordination pour la lutte contre les Endémies en Afrique
Centrale (OCEAC), P.O. Box 288 Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Bayero University, PMB 3011 Kano, Nigeria.
(4)Uganda Virus Research Institute, P.O. Box 49 Entebbe, Uganda.
(5)International Institute of Tropical Agriculture, Cotonou 08 BP 0932, Benin.
(6)School of Biological Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Gelugor, 11800
Penang, Malaysia.
(7)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, L3 5QA, United Kingdom
Charles.Wondji@lstmed.ac.uk.

Pyrethroid resistance in malaria vector, An. funestus is increasingly reported
across Africa, threatening the sustainability of pyrethroid-based control
interventions, including long lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs). Managing this
problem requires understanding of the molecular basis of the resistance from
different regions of the continent, to establish whether it is being driven by a 
single or independent selective events. Here, using a genome-wide transcription
profiling of pyrethroid resistant populations from southern (Malawi), East
(Uganda), and West Africa (Benin), we investigated the molecular basis of
resistance, revealing strong differences between the different African regions.
The duplicated cytochrome P450 genes (CYP6P9a and CYP6P9b) which were highly
overexpressed in southern Africa are not the most upregulated in other regions,
where other genes are more overexpressed, including GSTe2 in West (Benin) and
CYP9K1 in East (Uganda). The lack of directional selection on both CYP6P9a and
CYP6P9b in Uganda in contrast to southern Africa further supports the limited
role of these genes outside southern Africa. However, other genes such as the
P450 CYP9J11 are commonly overexpressed in all countries across Africa. Here,
CYP9J11 is functionally characterized and shown to confer resistance to
pyrethroids and moderate cross-resistance to carbamates (bendiocarb). The
consistent overexpression of GSTe2 in Benin is coupled with a role of allelic
variation at this gene as GAL4-UAS transgenic expression in Drosophila flies
showed that the resistant 119F allele is highly efficient in conferring both DDT 
and permethrin resistance than the L119. The heterogeneity in the molecular basis
of resistance and cross-resistance to insecticides in An. funestus populations
throughout sub-Saharan African should be taken into account in designing
resistance management strategies.

Copyright © 2017 Riveron et al.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.117.040147 
PMCID: PMC5473761
PMID: 28428243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

