
1. PLoS One. 2017 Apr 19;12(4):e0175771. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175771.
eCollection 2017.

Four human Plasmodium species quantification using droplet digital PCR.

Srisutham S(1), Saralamba N(1)(2), Malleret B(3)(4), RÃ©nia L(3), Dondorp
AM(2)(5), Imwong M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Tropical Medicine and Genetics, Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Laboratory of Pathogen Immunobiology, Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN),
Agency for Science Technology and Research (A*STAR), Biopolis, Singapore,
Singapore.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, National University Health System, Singapore,
Singapore.
(5)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Churchill Hospital, University
of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Droplet digital polymerase chain reaction (ddPCR) is a partial PCR based on
water-oil emulsion droplet technology. It is a highly sensitive method for
detecting and delineating minor alleles from complex backgrounds and provides
absolute quantification of DNA targets. The ddPCR technology has been applied for
detection of many pathogens. Here the sensitive assay utilizing ddPCR for
detection and quantification of Plasmodium species was investigated. The assay
was developed for two levels of detection, genus specific for all Plasmodium
species and for specific Plasmodium species detection. The ddPCR assay was
developed based on primers and probes specific to the Plasmodium genus 18S rRNA
gene. Using ddPCR for ultra-sensitive P. falciparum assessment, the lower level
of detection from concentrated DNA obtained from a high volume (1 mL) blood
sample was 11 parasites/mL. For species identification, in particular for samples
with mixed infections, a duplex reaction was developed for detection and
quantification P. falciparum/ P. vivax and P. malariae/ P. ovale. Amplification
of each Plasmodium species in the duplex reaction showed equal sensitivity to
singleplex single species detection. The duplex ddPCR assay had higher
sensitivity to identify minor species in 32 subpatent parasitaemia samples from
Cambodia, and performed better than real-time PCR. The ddPCR assay shows high
sensitivity to assess very low parasitaemia of all human Plasmodium species. This
provides a useful research tool for studying the role of the asymptomatic
parasite reservoir for transmission in regions aiming for malaria elimination.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175771 
PMCID: PMC5396971
PMID: 28423028  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

