
1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Apr 11;8:622. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00622. eCollection
2017.

Complete Molecular and Immunoprotective Characterization of Babesia microti
Enolase.

Liu X(1), Zheng C(1), Gao X(2), Chen J(3), Zheng K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Province Key Laboratory of Immunity and Metabolism, Department of
Pathogenic Biology and Immunology, Xuzhou Medical UniversityXuzhou, China.
(2)Jiangsu Center for the Collaboration and Innovation of Cancer Biotherapy,
Cancer Institute, Xuzhou Medical UniversityXuzhou, China.
(3)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of Health
of China, WHO Collaborating Centre for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and
FilariasisShanghai, China.

The apicomplexan Babesia microti is the primary causative agent of human
babesiosis, one of the most broadly distributed tick-borne diseases worldwide. B.
microti undergoes a complex lifecycle within both the mammalian host and the tick
vector, and employs several different specific molecular mechanisms to enter host
cells. Enolase, the key glycolytic enzyme in intracellular glucose metabolism,
can also be expressed on the parasite's outer surface, binds to human
plasminogen, and coordinates apicomplexan parasite invasion of host cells,
however, it lacks sorting sequences or lipoprotein anchor sites. In the present
study, we isolated the coding gene of B. microti enolase (BmEno), expressed it
within E. coli and purified the recombinant BmEno protein (rBmEno). Consequently,
we confirmed cytoplasmic and surface localization of BmEno via
immunofluorescence, and demonstrated that rBmEno catalyzes the dehydration of
2-phospho-D-glycerate to phosphoenolpyruvate. Moreover, our results showed that
rBmEno binds to human plasminogen, and that the lysine analog Îµ-aminocaproic acid
significantly inhibited this binding. Furthermore plasminogen bound to rBmEno
converts to active plasmin. Additionally, actively immunizing mice with rBmEno
could evoke a partial protective immunity against B. microti infection following 
challenge. In conclusion, B. microti enolase is a multifunctional cytoplasmic
protein which is also expressed at the parasitic outer surface, facilitates
binding to host plasminogen, and could partially protect hosts against parasite
infection.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00622 
PMCID: PMC5387042
PMID: 28443086 

