
1. Parasitol Res. 2017 Jul;116(7):1879-1885. doi: 10.1007/s00436-017-5463-5. Epub
2017 May 22.

Detection and prevalence of Haemoproteus archilochus (Haemosporida,
Haemoproteidae) in two species of California hummingbirds.

Bradshaw AC(1), Tell LA(2), Ernest HB(3)(4), Bahan S(3), Carlson J(5), Sehgal
RNM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine and Epidemiology, School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of California at Davis, 1 Shields Avenue, Davis, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Population Health and Reproduction, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of California at Davis, 1 Shields Avenue, Davis, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Veterinary Sciences, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY, USA.
(5)Department of Entomology, University of California at Davis, 1 Shields Avenue,
Davis, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA, USA.
sehgal@sfsu.edu.

Haemosporidian blood parasites are transmitted to a wide range of avian hosts via
blood-sucking dipteran vectors. Microscopy has revealed an impressive diversity
of avian haemosporidia with more than 250 species described. Moreover, PCR and
subsequent sequence analyses have suggested a much greater diversity of
haemosporidia than morphological analyses alone. Given the importance of these
parasites, very few studies have focused on the charismatic hummingbirds. To
date, three Haemoproteus species (Haemoproteus archilochus, Haemoproteus
trochili, and Haemoproteus witti) and one Leucocytozoon species (Leucocytozoon
quynzae) have been described in blood samples taken from hummingbirds
(Trochilidae). Unconfirmed Plasmodium lineages have also been detected in
hummingbirds. Here, we report the detection of H. archilochus in two hummingbird 
species (Calypte anna and Archilochus alexandri) sampled in Northern California
and perform a phylogenetic analysis of mitochondrial cytochrome b (cyt b) gene
lineages. A total of 261 hummingbirds (157 C. anna, 104 A. alexandri) were
sampled and screened for blood parasites using PCR and microscopy techniques.
Combining both methods, 4 (2.55%) haemosporidian infections were detected in C.
anna and 18 (17.31%) haemosporidian infections were detected in A. alexandri.
Molecular analyses revealed four distinct H. archilocus cyt b lineages, which
clustered as a monophyletic clade. No species of Plasmodium or Leucocytozoon were
detected in this study, raising the possibility of specific vector associations
with hummingbirds. These results provide resources for future studies of
haemosporidian prevalence, diversity, and pathogenicity in California hummingbird
populations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-017-5463-5 
PMID: 28534106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

