
1. Pathog Glob Health. 2017 Jun;111(4):186-194. doi: 10.1080/20477724.2017.1331875. 
Epub 2017 May 26.

Clinical and molecular monitoring of Plasmodium falciparum resistance to
antimalarial drug (artesunate+sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine) in two highly malarious
district of Madhya Pradesh, Central India from 2012-2014.

Mishra S(1), Bharti PK(1), Shukla MM(1), Ali NA(1), Kashyotia SS(2), Kumar A(2), 
Dhariwal AC(2), Singh N(1).

Author information: 
(1)a National Institute for Research in Tribal Health , ICMR , Jabalpur , India.
(2)b National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme , Delhi , India.

The spread of P. falciparum resistant strain has led to a significant resurgence 
of malaria morbidity and mortality. The current cornerstone in malaria treatment 
in India is Artemisinin based Combination
(Artesunate + Sulphadoxine-Pyrimethamine) Therapy (ACT) for treatment of
uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria since 2010. In the present study we assessed 
the therapeutic efficacy of ACT and molecular monitoring of antimalarial
resistance. Therapeutic efficacy was determined by in vivo method using 28 days
follow-up. Molecular genotyping of dihydrofolate reductase (dhfr),
dihydropteroate synthase (dhps) and kelch13 genes were analyzed. msp-1 and msp-2 
genotyping were used to differentiate recrudescence. Therapeutic efficacy of ACT 
was determined in 237 patients over the three year period. Most of the patients
showed adequate clinical and parasitological response (99.6%). Molecular study
revealed that 72% parasites were of mutant genotype (27.2% single mutants, 43.5% 
double mutants and 1.3% triple mutants) for pfdhfr while pfdhps showed 78.2% wild
type alleles and 21.8% mutants (18.1% single mutants and 3.7% double mutants).
Analysis of total 135 samples revealed mutation in k13 gene along with
non-synonymous single mutation at codon M579T (1.5%) and double mutations at
codon M579T & N657H in 37%. ACT remains effective for the treatment of
uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria in Madhya Pradesh, Central India. However,
increasing mutation in pfdhfr (particularly triple mutations) and pfdhps may
reduce susceptibility to partner drug SP and mutation in k13 propeller gene,
highlighting the need for continuous monitoring of the efficacy of ACT.

DOI: 10.1080/20477724.2017.1331875 
PMCID: PMC5498763
PMID: 28549390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

