
1. J Immunol Methods. 2017 Sep;448:66-73. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2017.05.010. Epub 2017 
May 26.

A method for the isolation and characterization of functional murine monoclonal
antibodies by single B cell cloning.

Carbonetti S(1), Oliver BG(1), Vigdorovich V(1), Dambrauskas N(1), Sack B(1),
Bergl E(1), Kappe SHI(1), Sather DN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Research (formerly Seattle BioMed), Seattle, WA,
USA.
(2)Center for Infectious Disease Research (formerly Seattle BioMed), Seattle, WA,
USA. Electronic address: noah.sather@cidresearch.org.

Monoclonal antibody technologies have enabled dramatic advances in immunology,
the study of infectious disease, and modern medicine over the past 40years.
However, many monoclonal antibody discovery procedures are labor- and
time-intensive, low efficiency, and expensive. Here we describe an optimized mAb 
discovery platform for the rapid and efficient isolation, cloning and
characterization of monoclonal antibodies in murine systems. In this platform,
antigen-binding splenic B cells from immunized mice are isolated by FACS and
cocultured with CD40L positive cells to induce proliferation and mAb production. 
After 12days of coculture, cell culture supernatants are screened for antigen,
and IgG positivity and RNA is isolated for reverse-transcription. Positive-well
cDNA is then amplified by PCR and the resulting amplicons can be cloned into
ligation-independent expression vectors, which are then used directly to
transfect HEK293 cells for recombinant antibody production. After 4days of
growth, conditioned medium can be screened using biolayer interferometry for
antigen binding and affinity measurements. Using this method, we were able to
isolate six unique, functional monoclonal antibodies against an antigen of the
human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Importantly, this method
incorporates several important advances that circumvent the need for single-cell 
PCR, restriction cloning, and large scale protein production, and can be applied 
to a wide array of protein antigens.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2017.05.010 
PMCID: PMC5546949
PMID: 28554543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

