
1. Nihon Eiseigaku Zasshi. 2017;72(2):106-111. doi: 10.1265/jjh.72.106.

Collaborative Research on Puerperal Infections in Bangladesh.

[Article in Japanese]

Kobayashi N(1), Ahmed S(1), Sumi A(1), Urushibara N(1), Kawaguchiya M(1), Aung
MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine.

Bangladesh is considered as a high-risk country for emerging infectious diseases 
because of its high population density, poverty, and unhygienic conditions.
Although control efforts have primarily been focused on major infectious diseases
such as diarrheal diseases, tuberculosis, malaria, and HIV infection, the
prevalence and impact of many local or minor infectious diseases are still
unclarified in this country. In this review, we present our recent experience and
outcomes of collaborative research on puerperal infection (PI), which is a poorly
defined infectious disease in Bangladesh. PI is the most common complication
during the perinatal period in developing countries. We investigated the
incidence of individual species of aerobic bacteria causing PIs and their drug
resistance, and the genetic traits of isolates during the two-year period
(2010-2012). The common species of isolates from patients with PIs were
Escherichia coli, Enterococcus faecalis, Staphylococcus haemolyticus, Proteus
mirabilis, Staphylococcus aureus, and Klebsiella pneumoniae. A remarkable finding
was the high rates of resistance to cephalosporins among Gram-negative bacteria
harboring extended-spectrum beta-lactamase genes, which were associated with
carbapenem resistance in a few isolates. This study defined the importance of
control of antimicrobial resistance in Bangladesh, and provided suggestions for
the future direction of collaborative research on infectious diseases in
Bangladesh.

DOI: 10.1265/jjh.72.106 
PMID: 28552890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

