
1. Parasitology. 2018 Jan;145(1):85-100. doi: 10.1017/S0031182017001135. Epub 2017
Jul 17.

Plasmodium knowlesi: a superb in vivo nonhuman primate model of antigenic
variation in malaria.

Galinski MR(1), Lapp SA(1), Peterson MS(1), Ay F(2), Joyner CJ(1), LE Roch KG(3),
Fonseca LL(4), Voit EO(4); MAHPIC CONSORTIUM.

Author information: 
(1)Emory Vaccine Center,Yerkes National Primate Research Center,Emory
University,Atlanta,GA,USA.
(2)La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology,La Jolla,CA 92037,USA.
(3)Department of Cell Biology & Neuroscience,Center for Disease and Vector
Research,Institute for Integrative Genome Biology,University of California
Riverside,CA 92521,USA.
(4)The Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering,Georgia Institute 
of Technology and Emory University,Atlanta,Georgia,30332-2000,USA.

Antigenic variation in malaria was discovered in Plasmodium knowlesi studies
involving longitudinal infections of rhesus macaques (M. mulatta). The variant
proteins, known as the P. knowlesi Schizont Infected Cell Agglutination (SICA)
antigens and the P. falciparum Erythrocyte Membrane Protein 1 (PfEMP1) antigens, 
expressed by the SICAvar and var multigene families, respectively, have been
studied for over 30 years. Expression of the SICA antigens in P. knowlesi
requires a splenic component, and specific antibodies are necessary for variant
antigen switch events in vivo. Outstanding questions revolve around the role of
the spleen and the mechanisms by which the expression of these variant antigen
families are regulated. Importantly, the longitudinal dynamics and molecular
mechanisms that govern variant antigen expression can be studied with P. knowlesi
infection of its mammalian and vector hosts. Synchronous infections can be
initiated with established clones and studied at multi-omic levels, with the
benefit of computational tools from systems biology that permit the integration
of datasets and the design of explanatory, predictive mathematical models. Here
we provide an historical account of this topic, while highlighting the potential 
for maximizing the use of P. knowlesi - macaque model systems and summarizing
exciting new progress in this area of research.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182017001135 
PMCID: PMC5798396
PMID: 28712361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

