
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2017 Sep;88:48-62. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2017.07.008. Epub
2017 Aug 2.

Serine protease-related proteins in the malaria mosquito, Anopheles gambiae.

Cao X(1), Gulati M(1), Jiang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, Oklahoma State University,
Stillwater, OK 74078, USA.
(2)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, Oklahoma State University,
Stillwater, OK 74078, USA. Electronic address: haobo.jiang@okstate.edu.

Insect serine proteases (SPs) and serine protease homologs (SPHs) participate in 
digestion, defense, development, and other physiological processes. In
mosquitoes, some clip-domain SPs and SPHs (i.e. CLIPs) have been investigated for
possible roles in antiparasitic responses. In a recent test aimed at improving
quality of gene models in the Anopheles gambiae genome using RNA-seq data, we
observed various discrepancies between gene models in AgamP4.5 and corresponding 
sequences selected from those modeled by Cufflinks, Trinity and Bridger. Here we 
report a comparative analysis of the 337 SP-related proteins in A. gambiae by
examining their domain structures, sequence diversity, chromosomal locations, and
expression patterns. One hundred and ten CLIPs contain 1 to 5 clip domains in
addition to their protease domains (PDs) or non-catalytic, protease-like domains 
(PLDs). They are divided into five subgroups: CLIPAs (22) are clip1-5-PLD; CLIPBs
(29), CLIPCs (12) and CLIPDs (14) are mainly clip-PD; most CLIPEs (33) have a
domain structure of PD/PLD-PLD-clip-PLD0-1. While expression of the CLIP genes in
group-1 is generally low and detected in various tissue- and stage-specific
RNA-seq libraries, some putative GPs/GPHs (i.e. single domain gut SPs/SPHs) in
group-2 are highly expressed in midgut, whole larva or whole adult libraries. In 
comparison, 46 SPs, 26 SPHs, and 37 multi-domain SPs/SPHs (i.e. PD/PLD-PLD≥1) in 
group-3 do not seem to be specifically expressed in digestive tract. There are 16
SPs and 2 SPH containing other types of putative regulatory domains (e.g. LDLa,
CUB, Gd). Of the 337 SP and SPH genes, 159 were sorted into 46 groups (2-8
members/group) based on similar phylogenetic tree position, chromosomal location,
and expression profile. This information and analysis, including improved gene
models and protein sequences, constitute a solid foundation for functional
analysis of the SP-related proteins in A. gambiae.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2017.07.008 
PMCID: PMC5586530
PMID: 28780069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

