
1. Parasitol Res. 2017 Oct;116(10):2671-2681. doi: 10.1007/s00436-017-5576-x. Epub
2017 Aug 10.

High-resolution melting PCR assay, applicable for diagnostics and screening
studies, allowing detection and differentiation of several Babesia spp. infecting
humans and animals.

Rozej-Bielicka W(1), Masny A(2), Golab E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, National Institute of Public Health - National
Institute of Hygiene, Warszawa, Poland.
(2)Department of Parasitology, National Institute of Public Health - National
Institute of Hygiene, Warszawa, Poland. amasny@gmx.com.

The goal of the study was to design a single tube PCR test for detection and
differentiation of Babesia species in DNA samples obtained from diverse
biological materials. A multiplex, single tube PCR test was designed for
amplification of approximately 400Â bp region of the Babesia 18S rRNA gene.
Universal primers were designed to match DNA of multiple Babesia spp. and to have
low levels of similarity to DNA sequences of other intracellular protozoa and
Babesia hosts. The PCR products amplified from Babesia DNA isolated from human,
dog, rodent, deer, and tick samples were subjected to high-resolution melting
analysis for Babesia species identification. The designed test allowed detection 
and differentiation of four Babesia species, three zoonotic (B. microti, B.
divergens, B. venatorum) and one that is generally not considered
zoonotic-Babesia canis. Both detection and identification of all four species
were possible based on the HRM curves of the PCR products in samples obtained
from the following: humans, dogs, rodents, and ticks. No cross-reactivity with
DNA of Babesia hosts or Plasmodium falciparum and Toxoplasma gondii was observed.
The lack of cross-reactivity with P. falciparum DNA might allow using the assay
in endemic malaria areas. The designed assay is the first PCR-based test for
detection and differentiation of several Babesia spp. of medical and veterinary
importance, in a single tube reaction. The results of the study show that the
designed assay for Babesia detection and identification could be a practical and 
inexpensive tool for diagnostics and screening studies of diverse biological
materials.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-017-5576-x 
PMCID: PMC5599466
PMID: 28795223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

