
1. PLoS One. 2017 Aug 11;12(8):e0183129. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0183129.
eCollection 2017.

Knockdown of the Plasmodium falciparum SURFIN4.1 antigen leads to an increase of 
its cognate transcript.

Macedo-Silva T(1), Araujo RBD(1), Meissner KA(1), Fotoran WL(1), Medeiros MM(1), 
de Azevedo MF(1), Wunderlich G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Institute for Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, Avenida Professor Lineu Prestes, 1374, São Paulo, Brazil.

The genome of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum contains the surf gene
family which encodes large transmembrane proteins of unknown function. While some
surf alleles appear to be expressed in sexual stages, others occur in asexual
blood stage forms and may be associated to virulence-associated processes and
undergo transcriptional switching. We accessed the transcription of surf genes
along multiple invasions by real time PCR. Based on the observation of persistent
expression of gene surf4.1, we created a parasite line which expresses a
conditionally destabilized SURFIN4.1 protein. Upon destabilization of the
protein, no interference of parasite growth or morphological changes were
detected. However, we observed a strong increase in the transcript quantities of 
surf4.1 and sometimes of other surf genes in knocked-down parasites. While this
effect was reversible when SURFIN4.1 was stabilized again after a few days of
destabilization, longer destabilization periods resulted in a transcriptional
switch away from surf4.1. When we tested if a longer transcript half-life was
responsible for increased transcript detection in SURFIN4.1 knocked-down
parasites, no alteration was found compared to control parasite lines. This
suggests a specific feedback of the expressed SURFIN protein to its transcript
pointing to a novel type of regulation, inedited in Plasmodium.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0183129 
PMCID: PMC5553854
PMID: 28800640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

