
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Aug 29;7(1):9740. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-09569-4.

A Plasmodium plasma membrane reporter reveals membrane dynamics by live-cell
microscopy.

Burda PC(1)(2), Schaffner M(3), Kaiser G(3), Roques M(3), Zuber B(4), Heussler
VT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, 3012, Bern, Switzerland.
burda@bnitm.de.
(2)Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, 20359, Hamburg, Germany.
burda@bnitm.de.
(3)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, 3012, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Institute of Anatomy, University of Bern, 3012, Bern, Switzerland.

During asexual replication within the Anopheles mosquito and their vertebrate
host, Plasmodium parasites depend on the generation of a massive amount of new
plasma membrane to produce thousands of daughter parasites. How the parasite
plasma membrane (PPM) is formed has mostly been studied by electron microscopy,
which does not allow an insight into the dynamics of this process. We generated a
Plasmodium berghei reporter parasite line by GFP-tagging of a non-essential
PPM-localized protein, and followed plasma membrane development in living
parasites through the entire Plasmodium life cycle. By generating
double-fluorescent parasites in which the PPM is visualized in combination with
the parasite endoplasmic reticulum, we show that membrane contact sites are
formed between both membrane systems during oocyst and liver stage development
that might be used to deliver lipids to the dramatically expanding PPM. In
conclusion, we have established a powerful tool to follow PPM development in
living parasites, which promises to greatly expand our knowledge of membrane
biology in the Plasmodium parasite.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-09569-4 
PMCID: PMC5575152
PMID: 28851956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

