
1. Parasit Vectors. 2017 Sep 7;10(1):417. doi: 10.1186/s13071-017-2351-x.

Molecular phylogeny of Anopheles hyrcanus group members based on ITS2 rDNA.

Fang Y(1), Shi WQ(1), Zhang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention; WHO Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases; National Center
for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Ministry of Science and
Technology; Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of Health,
Shanghai, 20025, People's Republic of China.
(2)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention; WHO Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases; National Center
for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Ministry of Science and
Technology; Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of Health,
Shanghai, 20025, People's Republic of China. zhang1972003@163.com.

BACKGROUND: The Anopheles hyrcanus group includes 25 species, and is widely
distributed in the Oriental and Palaearctic regions. Several species within this 
group are vectors of malaria, lymphatic filariasis and Japanese encephalitis. It 
is difficult or impossible to identify cryptic species based on their
morphological characteristics, with some closely related species of the Hyrcanus 
Group have similar adult morphological characteristics. Thus, their molecular
identification has been an important complementary method to traditional
morphological taxonomy.
METHODS: We used 461 ribosomal DNA (rDNA) internal transcribed spacer 2 (ITS2)
sequences relating to 19 species to reconstruct the molecular phylogeny of
theÂ Hyrcanus Group across its range. In addition, we compared the performance of 
rDNA ITS2 to that of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1
gene (cox1) to assess the genetic divergence of Hyrcanus Group sibling species.
RESULTS: Based on Kimura's 2-parameter (K2P) distance model, the average
conspecific ITS2 divergence was 0.003, whereas sequence divergence between
species averaged 0.480. Average ITS2 sequence divergences were almost 160 times
higher among the Hyrcanus Group members than within each species. Two sets of
sibling species, An. lesteri Baisas & Hu, 1936 and An. paraliae Sandosham, 1959; 
and An. sinensis Wiedemann, 1828, An. belenrae Rueda, 2005, and An. kleini Rueda,
2005, were resolved by ITS2. Each of these species was represented as an
independent lineage in the phylogenetic tree. Results suggest that An.
pseudopictus Grassi, 1899 and An. hyrcanus (Pallas, 1771) are most likely a
single species. We uncovered two new ITS2 lineages that require further study
before resolving their true taxonomic status, and designed a diagnostic
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay to distinguish five morphologically similar
species.
CONCLUSIONS: Nuclear and mitochondrial genes generally provided consistent
results for subgroup division. Compared to cox1, ITS2 is a more reliable tool for
studying phylogenetic relationships among closely related mosquito taxa. Based on
species-specific differences in ITS2 sequences, the multiplex PCR assay developed
here can be used to improve the efficiency of vector identification. Thus, this
research will promote the progress of malaria vector surveillance in both
epidemic and non-epidemic areas of South and East Asia.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-017-2351-x 
PMCID: PMC5590201
PMID: 28882174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

