
1. BMC Genomics. 2017 Sep 22;18(1):751. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-4122-7.

Chemosensory gene expression in olfactory organs of the anthropophilic Anopheles 
coluzzii and zoophilic Anopheles quadriannulatus.

Athrey G(1), Cosme LV(2), Popkin-Hall Z(3), Pathikonda S(3), Takken W(4), Slotman
MA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven,
CT, USA.
(3)Department of Entomology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 77845,
USA.
(4)Laboratory of Entomology, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Entomology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 77845,
USA. maslotman@tamu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles (An.) coluzzii, one of Africa's primary malaria vectors, is
highly anthropophilic. This human host preference contributes greatly to its
ability to transmit malaria. In contrast, the closely related An. quadriannulatus
prefers to feed on bovids and is not thought to contribute to malaria
transmission. The diverged preference for host odor profiles between these
sibling species is likely reflected in chemosensory gene expression levels in the
olfactory organs. Therefore, we compared the transcriptomes of the antennae and
maxillary palps between An. coluzzii and An. quadriannulatus, focusing on the
major chemosensory gene families.
RESULTS: While chemosensory gene expression is strongly correlated between the
two species, various chemosensory genes show significantly enhanced expression in
one of the species. In the antennae of An. coluzzii the expression of six
olfactory receptors (Ors) and seven ionotropic receptors (Irs) is considerably
enhanced, whereas 11 Ors and 3 Irs are upregulated in An. quadriannulatus. In the
maxillary palps, leaving aside Irs with very low level of expression, one Ir is
strongly enhanced in each species. In addition, we find divergence in odorant
binding protein (Obp) gene expression, with several highly expressed Obps being
enhanced in the antennae and palps of An. coluzzii. Finally, the expression of
several gustatory receptors (Grs) in the palps appears to be species-specific,
including a homolog of a sugar-sensing Drosophila Gr.
CONCLUSIONS: A considerable number of Ors and Irs are differentially expressed
between these two closely related species with diverging host preference. These
chemosensory genes could play a role in the human host preference of the malaria 
vector An. coluzzii. Additionally, divergence in Obp expression between the two
species suggests a possible role of these odor carrier proteins in determining
host preference. Finally, divergence in chemosensory expression in the palps may 
point towards a possible role for the maxillary palps in host differentiation.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-017-4122-7 
PMCID: PMC5610455
PMID: 28938869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

