
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017 Oct 2;11(10):e0005975. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0005975. eCollection 2017 Oct.

A longitudinal study of the infant nasopharyngeal microbiota: The effects of age,
illness and antibiotic use in a cohort of South East Asian children.

Salter SJ(1), Turner C(2)(3), Watthanaworawit W(2), de Goffau MC(1), Wagner J(1),
Parkhill J(1), Bentley SD(1), Goldblatt D(4), Nosten F(2)(3), Turner P(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pathogen Genomics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom.
(2)Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, 
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Mae Sot, Thailand.
(3)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London,
London, United Kingdom.

A longitudinal study was undertaken in infants living in the Maela refugee camp
on the Thailand-Myanmar border between 2007 and 2010. Nasopharyngeal swabs were
collected monthly, from birth to 24 months of age, with additional swabs taken if
the infant was diagnosed with pneumonia according to WHO clinical criteria. At
the time of collection, swabs were cultured for Streptococcus pneumoniae and
multiple serotype carriage was assessed. The bacterial 16S rRNA gene profiles of 
544 swabs from 21 infants were analysed to see how the microbiota changes with
age, respiratory infection, antibiotic consumption and pneumococcal acquisition. 
The nasopharyngeal microbiota is a somewhat homogenous community compared to that
of other body sites. In this cohort it is dominated by five taxa: Moraxella,
Streptococcus, Haemophilus, Corynebacterium and an uncharacterized
Flavobacteriaceae taxon of 93% nucleotide similarity to Ornithobacterium. Infant 
age correlates with certain changes in the microbiota across the cohort:
Staphylococcus and Corynebacterium are associated with the first few months of
life while Moraxella and the uncharacterised Flavobacteriaceae increase in
proportional abundance with age. Respiratory illness and antibiotic use often
coincide with an unpredictable perturbation of the microbiota that differs from
infant to infant and in different illness episodes. The previously described
interaction between Dolosigranulum and Streptococcus was observed in these data. 
Monthly sampling demonstrates that the nasopharyngeal microbiota is in flux
throughout the first two years of life, and that in this refugee camp population 
the pool of potential bacterial colonisers may be limited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005975 
PMCID: PMC5638608
PMID: 28968382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

