
1. PeerJ. 2017 Oct 5;5:e3766. doi: 10.7717/peerj.3766. eCollection 2017.

The Plasmodium berghei RC strain is highly diverged and harbors putatively novel 
drug resistance variants.

Songsungthong W(1)(2), Kulawonganunchai S(3), Wilantho A(3), Tongsima S(3),
Koonyosying P(1), Uthaipibull C(1), Kamchonwongpaisan S(1), Shaw PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Protein-Ligand Engineering and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Medical Molecular
Biology Research Unit, National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology 
(BIOTEC), National Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), Pathum
Thani, Thailand.
(2)Biomolecular Analysis and Application Laboratory, Biosensing Technology
Research Unit, National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology
(BIOTEC), National Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), Pathum
Thani, Thailand.
(3)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Laboratory, Genome Technology Research Unit, 
National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), Pathum Thani, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: The current first line drugs for treating uncomplicated malaria are
artemisinin (ART) combination therapies. However, Plasmodium falciparum parasites
resistant to ART and partner drugs are spreading, which threatens malaria control
efforts. Rodent malaria species are useful models for understanding antimalarial 
resistance, in particular genetic variants responsible for cross resistance to
different compounds.
METHODS: The Plasmodium berghei RC strain (PbRC) is described as resistant to
different antimalarials, including chloroquine (CQ) and ART. In an attempt to
identify the genetic basis for the antimalarial resistance trait in PbRC, its
genome was sequenced and compared with five other previously sequenced P. berghei
strains.
RESULTS: We found that PbRC is eight-fold less sensitive to the ART derivative
artesunate than the reference strain PbANKA. The genome of PbRC is markedly
different from other strains, and 6,974 single nucleotide variants private to
PbRC were identified. Among these PbRC private variants, non-synonymous changes
were identified in genes known to modulate antimalarial sensitivity in rodent
malaria species, including notably the ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase 1
gene. However, no variants were found in some genes with strong evidence of
association with ART resistance in P. falciparum such as K13 propeller protein.
DISCUSSION: The variants identified in PbRC provide insight into P. berghei
genome diversity and genetic factors that could modulate CQ and ART resistance in
Plasmodium spp.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.3766 
PMCID: PMC5632537
PMID: 29018598 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

