
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2017 Nov;97(5):1576-1580. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0351. Epub
2017 Oct 10.

Comparative Prevalence of Plasmodium falciparum Resistance-Associated Genetic
Polymorphisms in Parasites Infecting Humans and Mosquitoes in Uganda.

Conrad MD(1), Mota D(1), Musiime A(2), Kilama M(2), Rek J(2), Kamya M(3)(2),
Dorsey G(1), Rosenthal PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, California.
(2)Infectious Disease Research Collaboration, Kampala, Uganda.
(3)Makerere University College of Health Sciences, Kampala, Uganda.

Controlling malaria in high transmission areas, such as much of sub-Saharan
Africa, will require concerted efforts to slow the spread of drug resistance and 
to impede malaria transmission. Understanding the fitness costs associated with
the development of drug resistance, particularly within the context of
transmission, can help guide policy decisions to accomplish these goals, as
fitness constraints might lead to decreased transmission of drug-resistant
strains. To determine if Plasmodium falciparum resistance-mediating polymorphisms
impact on development at different parasite stages, we compared the genotypes of 
parasites infecting humans and mosquitoes from households in Uganda. Genotypes at
14 polymorphic loci in genes encoding putative transporters (pfcrt and pfmdr1)
and folate pathway enzymes (pfdhfr and pfdhps) were characterized using ligase
detection reaction-fluorescent microsphere assays. In paired analysis using the
Wilcoxon signed-rank test, prevalences of mutations at 12 loci did not differ
significantly between parasites infecting humans and mosquitoes. However,
compared with parasites infecting humans, those infecting mosquitoes were
enriched for the pfmdr1 86Y mutant allele (P = 0.0001) and those infecting
Anopheles gambiae s.s. were enriched for the pfmdr1 86Y (P = 0.0001) and pfcrt
76T (P = 0.0412) mutant alleles. Our results suggest modest directional selection
resulting from varied fitness costs during the P. falciparum life cycle. Better
appreciation of the fitness implications of drug resistance mediating mutations
can inform optimal malaria treatment and prevention strategies.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0351 
PMCID: PMC5817777
PMID: 29016309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

