
1. Infect Immun. 2017 Dec 19;86(1). pii: e00447-17. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00447-17. Print
2018 Jan.

Plasmodium falciparum PfEMP1 Modulates Monocyte/Macrophage Transcription Factor
Activation and Cytokine and Chemokine Responses.

Sampaio NG(1)(2), Eriksson EM(3)(2), Schofield L(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Population Health and Immunity Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia.
(3)Population Health and Immunity Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia eriksson@wehi.edu.au.
(4)Australian Institute of Tropical Health and Medicine, James Cook University,
Townsville, Queensland, Australia.

Immunity to Plasmodium falciparum malaria is slow to develop, and it is often
asserted that malaria suppresses host immunity, although this is poorly
understood and the molecular basis for such activity remains unknown. P.
falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) is a virulence factor that
plays a key role in parasite-host interactions. We investigated the
immunosuppressive effect of PfEMP1 on monocytes/macrophages, which are central to
the antiparasitic innate response. RAW macrophages and human primary monocytes
were stimulated with wild-type 3D7 or CS2 parasites or transgenic PfEMP1-null
parasites. To study the immunomodulatory effect of PfEMP1, transcription factor
activation and cytokine and chemokine responses were measured. The level of
activation of NF-κB was significantly lower in macrophages stimulated with
parasites that express PfEMP1 at the red blood cell surface membrane than in
macrophages stimulated with PfEMP1-null parasites. Modulation of additional
transcription factors, including CREB, also occurred, resulting in reduced immune
gene expression and decreased tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin-10
(IL-10) release. Similarly, human monocytes released less IL-1β, IL-6, IL-10,
monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP-1), macrophage inflammatory protein 1α
(MIP-1α), MIP-1β, and TNF specifically in response to VAR2CSA PfEMP1-containing
parasites than in response to PfEMP1-null parasites, suggesting that this immune 
regulation by PfEMP1 is important in naturally occurring infections. These
results indicate that PfEMP1 is an immunomodulatory molecule that affects the
activation of a range of transcription factors, dampening cytokine and chemokine 
responses. Therefore, these findings describe a potential molecular basis for
immune suppression by P. falciparum.

Copyright © 2017 Sampaio et al.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00447-17 
PMCID: PMC5736827
PMID: 29038124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

