
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Oct 31;114(44):E9356-E9365. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1711310114. Epub 2017 Oct 19.

CRISPR/Cas9 knockouts reveal genetic interaction between strain-transcendent
erythrocyte determinants of Plasmodium falciparum invasion.

Kanjee U(1), Gr√ºring C(1), Chaand M(1), Lin KM(2), Egan E(1), Manzo J(1), Jones
PL(3), Yu T(1), Barker R Jr(3), Weekes MP(2), Duraisingh MT(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T. H. Chan School of
Public Health, Boston, MA 02115.
(2)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge, CB2 OXY, United Kingdom.
(3)Sanofi-Genzyme, Waltham, MA 02451.
(4)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T. H. Chan School of
Public Health, Boston, MA 02115; mduraisi@hsph.harvard.edu.

During malaria blood-stage infections, Plasmodium parasites interact with the RBC
surface to enable invasion followed by intracellular proliferation. Critical
factors involved in invasion have been identified using biochemical and genetic
approaches including specific knockdowns of genes of interest from primary CD34+ 
hematopoietic stem cells (cRBCs). Here we report the development of a robust in
vitro culture system to produce RBCs that allow the generation of gene knockouts 
via CRISPR/Cas9 using the immortal JK-1 erythroleukemia line. JK-1 cells
spontaneously differentiate, generating cells at different stages of
erythropoiesis, including terminally differentiated nucleated RBCs that we term
"jkRBCs." A screen of small-molecule epigenetic regulators identified several
bromodomain-specific inhibitors that promote differentiation and enable
production of synchronous populations of jkRBCs. Global surface proteomic
profiling revealed that jkRBCs express all known Pfalciparum host receptors in a 
similar fashion to cRBCs and that multiple Pfalciparum strains invade jkRBCs at
comparable levels to cRBCs and RBCs. Using CRISPR/Cas9, we deleted two host
factors, basigin (BSG) and CD44, for which no natural nulls exist. BSG interacts 
with the parasite ligand Rh5, a prominent vaccine candidate. A BSG knockout was
completely refractory to parasite invasion in a strain-transcendent manner,
confirming the essential role for BSG during invasion. CD44 was recently
identified in an RNAi screen of blood group genes as a host factor for invasion, 
and we show that CD44 knockout results in strain-transcendent reduction in
invasion. Furthermore, we demonstrate a functional interaction between these two 
determinants in mediating Pfalciparum erythrocyte invasion.

Published under the PNAS license.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1711310114 
PMCID: PMC5676921
PMID: 29078358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

