
1. PLoS One. 2017 Oct 31;12(10):e0186614. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186614.
eCollection 2017.

IRAK4 is essential for TLR9-induced suppression of Epstein-Barr virus BZLF1
transcription in Akata Burkitt's lymphoma cells.

Jordi M(1)(2), Marty J(1)(2), Mordasini V(1)(2), LÃ¼nemann A(1)(2), McComb
S(1)(2), Bernasconi M(1)(2), Nadal D(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Experimental Infectious Diseases and Cancer Research of the
Division of Infectious Diseases and Hospital Epidemiology and the Division of
Oncology, University Children's Hospital of Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(2)Children's Research Center, University Children's Hospital of Zurich,
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) is the most common childhood cancer in equatorial Africa,
and is endemic to areas where people are chronically co-infected with
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and the malaria pathogen Plasmodium falciparum. The
contribution of these pathogens in the oncogenic process remains poorly
understood. We showed earlier that the activation of Toll-like receptor (TLR) 9
by hemozoin, a disposal product formed from the digestion of blood by P.
falciparum, suppresses the lytic reactivation of EBV in BL cells. EBV lytic
reactivation is regulated by the expression of transcription factor Zta (ZEBRA), 
encoded by the EBV gene BZLF1. Here, we explore in the BL cell line Akata, the
mechanism involved in repression by TLR9 of expression of BZLF1. We show that
BZLF1 repression is mediated upon TLR9 engagement by a mechanism that is largely 
independent of de novo protein synthesis. By CRISPR/Cas9-induced inactivation of 
TLR9, MyD88, IRAK4 and IRAK1 we confirm that BZLF1 repression is dependent on
functional TLR9 and MyD88 signaling, and identify IRAK4 as an essential element
for TLR9-induced repression of BZLF1 expression upon BCR cross-linking. Our
results unprecedentedly show that TLR9-mediated inhibition of lytic EBV is
largely independent of new protein synthesis and demonstrate the central roles of
MyD88 and IRAK4 in this process contributing to EBV's persistence in the host's
B-cell pool.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186614 
PMCID: PMC5663394
PMID: 29088270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

