
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Jan 4;46(D1):D413-D418. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx1015.

Target-Pathogen: a structural bioinformatic approach to prioritize drug targets
in pathogens.

Sosa EJ(1)(2), Burguener G(1)(2), Lanzarotti E(1)(2), Defelipe L(1)(2), Radusky
L(1)(2), Pardo AM(3), Marti M(1)(2)(3), Turjanski AG(1)(2)(3), Fernández Do Porto
D(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)IQUIBICEN-CONICET, Ciudad Universitaria, Pabellón 2, C1428EHA Ciudad de Buenos
Aires, Argentina.
(2)Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Universitaria, Pabellón 2, C1428EHA Ciudad de
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Plataforma de Bioinformática Argentina (BIA), Instituto de Cálculo, Facultad
de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad
Universitaria, Pabellón 2, C1428EHA Ciudad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Available genomic data for pathogens has created new opportunities for drug
discovery and development to fight them, including new resistant and
multiresistant strains. In particular structural data must be integrated with
both, gene information and experimental results. In this sense, there is a lack
of an online resource that allows genome wide-based data consolidation from
diverse sources together with thorough bioinformatic analysis that allows easy
filtering and scoring for fast target selection for drug discovery. Here, we
present Target-Pathogen database (http://target.sbg.qb.fcen.uba.ar/patho),
designed and developed as an online resource that allows the integration and
weighting of protein information such as: function, metabolic role,
off-targeting, structural properties including druggability, essentiality and
omic experiments, to facilitate the identification and prioritization of
candidate drug targets in pathogens. We include in the database 10 genomes of
some of the most relevant microorganisms for human health (Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, Mycobacterium leprae, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Plasmodium vivax,
Toxoplasma gondii, Leishmania major, Wolbachia bancrofti, Trypanosoma brucei,
Shigella dysenteriae and Schistosoma Smanosoni) and show its applicability. New
genomes can be uploaded upon request.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx1015 
PMCID: PMC5753371
PMID: 29106651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

