
1. Bull Soc Pathol Exot. 2017 Dec;110(5):286-290. doi: 10.1007/s13149-017-0578-6.
Epub 2017 Nov 10.

[Plasmodium ovale wallikeri and Plasmodium ovale curtisi Malaria in Senegal in
2016].

[Article in French]

Diallo MA(1), Diongue K(2), Diagne G(3), Seck MC(2), Ndiaye M(2), Dièye B(2),
Ndiaye YD(2), Badiane AS(2), Ndiaye D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de parasitologie-mycologie, hôpital Aristide-Le-Dantec, université
Cheikh-Anta-Diop de Dakar, av. Cheikh-Anta-Diop, BP 5005 Fann, Dakar, Sénégal.
mamadoualpha.diallo@ucad.edu.sn.
(2)Laboratoire de parasitologie-mycologie, hôpital Aristide-Le-Dantec, université
Cheikh-Anta-Diop de Dakar, av. Cheikh-Anta-Diop, BP 5005 Fann, Dakar, Sénégal.
(3)Unité de pédiatrie, hôpital Aristide-Le-Dantec, université Cheikh-Anta-Diop de
Dakar, av. Cheikh-Anta-Diop, BP 5005 Fann, Dakar, Sénégal.

Recently in Senegal, a case of Plasmodium ovale malaria had led to a diagnostic
difficulty due to the ignorance of this parasite and the neglect of it. The
objective of this study was to actively investigate cases of P. ovale malaria
that would be misdiagnosed in the health centre structures of Senegal. The study 
was conducted in three areas that reflect different epidemiological strata of
malaria. Microscopy was performed by microscopy experts on suspected malaria
patients. The results were validated by Rougemont real-time PCR. Positive P.
ovale cases were genotyped by nested PCR targeting the potra gene. A total of 406
samples were taken. Microscopy of Giemsa stained thick and thin smears recorded
228 cases of Plasmodium falciparum (97%), 3 cases of Plasmodium malariae (1.3%), 
and 4 cases of P. ovale (1.7%). The cases of P. ovale observed at microscopy were
confirmed by real-time PCR. Genotyping of P. ovale revealed 3 cases of P. ovale
wallikeri and 1 case of P. ovale curtisi. The prevalence of P. ovale malaria
remains low in Senegal. However, malaria microscopists should be trained to
recognize non-falciparum species in order to avoid the diagnostic delays and
unnecessary investigations. National malaria control program should consider
those species for the better management of malaria control in the country.
Simplified molecular methods like, loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) 
may be useful to better characterize the epidemiology of non-falciparum malaria.

DOI: 10.1007/s13149-017-0578-6 
PMID: 29127650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

