
1. Cell Rep. 2017 Nov 14;21(7):1746-1756. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.10.081.

PfClpC Is an Essential Clp Chaperone Required for Plastid Integrity and Clp
Protease Stability in Plasmodium falciparum.

Florentin A(1), Cobb DW(2), Fishburn JD(2), Cipriano MJ(3), Kim PS(3), Fierro
MA(2), Striepen B(1), Muralidharan V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA; 
Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia, Athens, 
GA 30602, USA.
(2)Department of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
(3)Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia,
Athens, GA 30602, USA.
(4)Department of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA; 
Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia, Athens, 
GA 30602, USA. Electronic address: vasant@uga.edu.

The deadly malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum contains a nonphotosynthetic
plastid, known as the apicoplast, that functions to produce essential
metabolites, and drugs that target the apicoplast are clinically effective.
Several prokaryotic caseinolytic protease (Clp) genes have been identified in the
Plasmodium genome. Using phylogenetic analysis, we focused on the Clp members
that may form a regulated proteolytic complex in the apicoplast. We genetically
targeted members of this complex and generated conditional mutants of the
apicoplast-localized PfClpC chaperone and PfClpP protease. Conditional inhibition
of the PfClpC chaperone resulted in growth arrest and apicoplast loss and was
rescued by addition of the essential apicoplast-derived metabolite IPP. Using a
double-conditional mutant parasite line, we discovered that the chaperone
activity is required to stabilize the mature protease, revealing functional
interactions. These data demonstrate the essential function of PfClpC in
maintaining apicoplast integrity and its role in regulating the proteolytic
activity of the Clp complex.

Copyright Â© 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.10.081 
PMCID: PMC5726808
PMID: 29141210  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

