
1. Wellcome Open Res. 2017 Nov 2;2:72. doi: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.12338.2.
eCollection 2017.

Prevalences of inherited red blood cell disorders in pregnant women of different 
ethnicities living along the Thailand-Myanmar border.

Bancone G(1)(2), Gilder ME(2), Chowwiwat N(2), Gornsawun G(2), Win E(2), Cho
WW(2), Moo E(2), Min AM(2), Charunwatthana P(3)(4), Carrara VI(2), White
NJ(1)(4), Nosten F(1)(2), McGready R(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7BN, UK.
(2)Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, 
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, , Mahidol University, Mae Sot, Thailand.
(3)Department of Clinical Tropical Medicine, Faculty of Tropical Medicine,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Background: Inherited red blood cell disorders are prevalent in populations
living in malaria endemic areas; G6PD deficiency is associated with
oxidant-induced haemolysis and abnormal haemoglobin variants may cause chronic
anaemia. In pregnant women, microcytic anaemia caused by haemoglobinopathies
mimics iron deficiency, complicating diagnosis and treatment. Anaemia during
pregnancy is associated with morbidity and mortality. The aim of this study was
to characterise the prevalence of G6PD deficiency and haemoglobinopathies Â among 
the pregnant population living along the Thailand-Myanmar border. Pregnant women 
attending antenatal clinics in this area belong to several distinct ethnic
groups. Methods: Data were available for 13,520 women attending antenatal care
between July 2012 and September 2016. Screening for G6PD deficiency was done by
fluorescent spot test routinely. G6PD genotyping and quantitative phenotyping by 
spectrophotometry were analysed in a subsample of women. Haemoglobin variants
were diagnosed by HPLC or capillary electrophoresis and molecular methods. The
prevalence and distribution of inherited red blood cell disorders was analysed
with respect to ethnicity. Results: G6PD deficiency was common, especially in the
Sgaw Karen ethnic group, in whom the G6PD Mahidol variant allele frequency was
20.7%. Quantitative G6PD phenotyping showed that 60.5% of heterozygous women had 
an intermediate enzymatic activity between 30% and 70% of the population median. 
HbE, beta-thalassaemia trait and Hb Constant Spring were found overall in 15.6%
of women. Only 45.2% of women with low percentage of HbA 2 were carriers of
mutations on the alpha globin genes. Conclusions: Distribution of G6PD and
haemoglobin variants varied among the different ethnic groups, but the prevalence
was generally high throughout the cohort. These findings encourage the
implementation of an extended program of information and genetic counselling to
women of reproductive age and will help inform future studies and current
clinical management of anaemia in the pregnant population in this region.

DOI: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.12338.2 
PMCID: PMC5686509
PMID: 29181452 

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.

