
1. ACS Infect Dis. 2018 Mar 9;4(3):415-423. doi: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.7b00222. Epub
2017 Dec 26.

cGMP Binding Domain D Mediates a Unique Activation Mechanism in Plasmodium
falciparum PKG.

Franz E(1), Knape MJ(1), Herberg FW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry , University of Kassel , Heinrich-Plett-Strasse 40 
, 34132 Kassel , Germany.

cGMP-dependent protein kinase from Plasmodium falciparum ( PfPKG) plays a crucial
role in the sexual as well as the asexual proliferation of this human malaria
causing parasite. However, function and regulation of PfPKG are largely unknown. 
Previous studies showed that the domain organization of PfPKG significantly
differs from human PKG ( hPKG) and indicated a critical role of the cyclic
nucleotide binding domain D (CNB-D). We identified a novel mechanism, where the
CNB-D controls activation and regulation of the parasite specific protein kinase.
Here, kinase activity is not dependent on a pseudosubstrate autoinhibitory
sequence (IS), as reported for human PKG. A construct lacking the putative IS and
containing only the CNB-D and the catalytic domain is inactive in the absence of 
cGMP and can efficiently be activated with cGMP. On the basis of structural
evidence, we describe a regulatory mechanism, whereby cGMP binding to CNB-D
induces a conformational change involving the αC-helix of the CNB-D. The inactive
state is defined by a unique interaction between Asp597 of the catalytic domain
and Arg528 of the αC-helix. The same arginine (R528), however, stabilizes cGMP
binding by interacting with Tyr480 of the phosphate binding cassette (PBC). This 
represents the active state of PfPKG. Our results unveil fundamental differences 
in the activation mechanism between PfPKG and hPKG, building the basis for the
development of strategies for targeted drug design in fighting malaria.

DOI: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.7b00222 
PMID: 29251493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

