
1. mBio. 2018 Jan 2;9(1). pii: e02021-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02021-17.

ATG8 Is Essential Specifically for an Autophagy-Independent Function in
Apicoplast Biogenesis in Blood-Stage Malaria Parasites.

Walczak M(1), Ganesan SM(2), Niles JC(2), Yeh E(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Stanford Medical School, San Francisco,
California, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Stanford Medical School, San Francisco,
California, USA ellenyeh@stanford.edu.
(4)Department of Pathology, Stanford Medical School, San Francisco, California,
USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford Medical School, San
Francisco, California, USA.
(6)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, California, USA.

Plasmodium parasites and related pathogens contain an essential nonphotosynthetic
plastid organelle, the apicoplast, derived from secondary endosymbiosis.
Intriguingly, a highly conserved eukaryotic protein, autophagy-related protein 8 
(ATG8), has an autophagy-independent function in the apicoplast. Little is known 
about the novel apicoplast function of ATG8 and its importance in blood-stage
Plasmodium falciparum Using a P. falciparum strain in which ATG8 expression was
conditionally regulated, we showed that P. falciparum ATG8 (PfATG8) is essential 
for parasite replication. Significantly, growth inhibition caused by the loss of 
PfATG8 was reversed by addition of isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP), which was
previously shown to rescue apicoplast defects in P. falciparum Parasites
deficient in PfATG8, but whose growth was rescued by IPP, had lost their
apicoplast. We designed a suite of functional assays, including a new
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) method for detection of the
low-copy-number apicoplast genome, to interrogate specific steps in apicoplast
biogenesis and detect apicoplast defects which preceded the block in parasite
replication. Though protein import and membrane expansion of the apicoplast were 
unaffected, the apicoplast was not inherited by daughter parasites. Our findings 
demonstrate that, though multiple autophagy-dependent and independent functions
have been proposed for PfATG8, only its role in apicoplast biogenesis is
essential in blood-stage parasites. We propose that PfATG8 is required for
fission or segregation of the apicoplast during parasite
replication.IMPORTANCEPlasmodium parasites, which cause malaria, and related
apicomplexan parasites are important human and veterinary pathogens. They are
evolutionarily distant from traditional model organisms and possess a unique
plastid organelle, the apicoplast, acquired by an unusual eukaryote-eukaryote
endosymbiosis which established novel protein/lipid import and organelle
inheritance pathways in the parasite cell. Though the apicoplast is essential for
parasite survival in all stages of its life cycle, little is known about these
novel biogenesis pathways. We show that malaria parasites have adapted a highly
conserved protein required for macroautophagy in yeast and mammals to function
specifically in apicoplast inheritance. Our finding elucidates a novel mechanism 
of organelle biogenesis, essential for pathogenesis, in this divergent branch of 
pathogenic eukaryotes.

Copyright © 2018 Walczak et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02021-17 
PMCID: PMC5750400
PMID: 29295911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

