
1. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2018 Mar;243(5):395-407. doi: 10.1177/1535370218757458.
Epub 2018 Feb 5.

Featured Article: Immunomodulatory effect of hemozoin on pneumocyte apoptosis via
CARD9 pathway, a possibly retarding pulmonary resolution.

Maknitikul S(1), Luplertlop N(2), Chaisri U(1), Maneerat Y(1), Ampawong S(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Tropical Pathology, 115374 Faculty of Tropical Medicine,
Mahidol University , Ratchathewi, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.
(2)2 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 115374 Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University , Ratchathewi, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.

Plasmodium falciparum, the most virulent malaria parasite species, causes severe 
symptoms especially acute lung injury (ALI), of which characterized by alveolar
epithelium and endothelium destruction and accelerated to blood-gas-barrier
breakdown. Parasitized erythrocytes, endothelial cells, monocytes, and cytokines 
are all involved in this mechanism, but hemozoin (HZ), the parasitic waste from
heme detoxification, also mainly contributes. In addition, it is not clear why
type II pneumocyte proliferation, alveolar restorative stage, is rare in
malaria-associated ALI. To address this, in vitro culture of A549 cells with
Plasmodium HZ or with interleukin (IL)-1β triggered by HZ and monocytes
(HZ-IL-1β) was conducted to determine their alveolar apoptotic effect using
ethidium bromide/acridine orange staining, annexin-V-FITC/propidium iodide
staining, and electron mircroscopic study. Caspase recruitment domain-containing 
protein 9 ( CARD9), the apoptotic regulator gene, and IL-1β were quantified by
reverse-transcriptase PCR. Junctional cellular defects were characterized by
immunohistochemical staining of E-cadherin. The results revealed that cellular
apoptosis and CARD9 expression levels were extremely high 24 h after induction by
HZ-IL-1β when compared to the HZ- and non-treated groups. E-cadherin was markedly
down-regulated by HZ-IL-1β and HZ treatments. CARD9 expression was positively
correlated with IL-1β expression and the number of apoptotic cells.
Interestingly, the localization of HZ in the vesicular surfactant of apoptotic
pneumocyte was also identified and submitted to be a cause of alveolar resolution
abnormality. Thus, HZ triggers monocytes to produce IL-1β and induces pneumocyte 
type II apoptosis through CARD9 pathway in association with down-regulated
E-cadherin, which probably impairs alveolar resolution in malaria-associated ALI.
Impact statement The present work shows the physical and immunomodulatory
properties of hemozoin on the induction of pneumocyte apoptosis in relation to
IL-1β production through the CARD9 pathway. This occurrence may be a possible
pathway for the retardation of lung resolution leading to blood-gas-barrier
breakdown. Our findings lead to the understanding of the host-parasite
relationship focusing on the dysfunction in ALI induced by HZ, a possible pathway
of the recovering lung epithelial retardation in malaria-associated ARDS.

DOI: 10.1177/1535370218757458 
PMCID: PMC5882027
PMID: 29402133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

