
1. PLoS One. 2018 Feb 15;13(2):e0192850. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0192850.
eCollection 2018.

Malaria severity: Possible influence of the E670G PCSK9 polymorphism: A
preliminary case-control study in Malian children.

Arama C(1), Diarra I(1), Kouriba B(1), Sirois F(2), Fedoryak O(2), Thera MA(1),
Coulibaly D(1), Lyke KE(3), Plowe CV(3), Chrétien M(2)(4)(5), Doumbo OK(1),
Mbikay M(2)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research and Training Center, International Centers for Excellence in 
Research, Université des Sciences, des Techniques et des Technologies de Bamako, 
Bamako, Mali.
(2)Laboratoire de protéolyse fonctionnelle, Institut de recherches cliniques de
Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(3)Center for Vaccine Development and Division of Malaria Research, Institute for
Global Health, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland,
United States of America.
(4)Chronic Disease Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Hospital, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

AIM: Proprotein Convertase Subtilisin/Kexin Type 9 (PCSK9) is a hepatic secretory
protein which promotes the degradation of low-density lipoprotein receptors
leading to reduced hepatic uptake of plasma cholesterol. Non-synonymous
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in its gene have been linked to hypo- or hyper-
cholesterolemia, depending on whether they decrease or increase PCSK9 activity,
respectively. Since the proliferation and the infectivity of Plasmodium spp.
partially depend on cholesterol from the host, we hypothesize that these PCSK9
genetic polymorphisms could influence the course of malaria infection in
individuals who carry them. Here we examined the frequency distribution of one
dominant (C679X) and two recessive (A443T, I474V) hypocholesterolemic
polymorphisms as well as that of one recessive hypercholesterolemic polymorphism 
(E670G) among healthy and malaria-infected Malian children.
METHODS: Dried blood spots were collected in Bandiagara, Mali, from 752 age,
residence and ethnicity-matched children: 253 healthy controls, 246 uncomplicated
malaria patients and 253 severe malaria patients. Their genomic DNA was extracted
and genotyped for the above PCSK9 polymorphisms using Taqman assays. Associations
of genotype distributions and allele frequencies with malaria were evaluated.
RESULTS: The minor allele frequency of the A443T, I474V, E670G, and C679X
polymorphisms in the study population sample was 0.12, 0.20, 0.26, and 0.02,
respectively. For each polymorphism, the genotype distribution among the three
health conditions was statistically insignificant, but for the
hypercholesterolemic E670G polymorphism, a trend towards association of the minor
allele with malaria severity was observed (P = 0.035). The association proved to 
be stronger when allele frequencies between healthy controls and severe malaria
cases were compared (Odd Ratio: 1.34; 95% Confidence Intervals: 1.04-1.83); P =
0.031).
CONCLUSIONS: Carriers of the minor allele of the E670G PCSK9 polymorphism might
be more susceptible to severe malaria. Further investigation of the cholesterol
regulating function of PCSK9 in the pathophysiology of malaria is needed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0192850 
PMCID: PMC5813955
PMID: 29447211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

