
1. Front Plant Sci. 2018 Jan 31;9:87. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2018.00087. eCollection
2018.

Approaches and Recent Developments for the Commercial Production of
Semi-synthetic Artemisinin.

Kung SH(1), Lund S(1), Murarka A(1), McPhee D(1), Paddon CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Amyris Inc., Emeryville, CA, United States.

The antimalarial drug artemisinin is a natural product produced by the plant
Artemisia annua. Extracts of A. annua have been used in Chinese herbal medicine
for over two millennia. Following the re-discovery of A. annua extract as an
effective antimalarial, and the isolation and structural elucidation of
artemisinin as the active agent, it was recommended as the first-line treatment
for uncomplicated malaria in combination with another effective antimalarial drug
(Artemisinin Combination Therapy) by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2002.
Following the WHO recommendation, the availability and price of artemisinin
fluctuated greatly, ranging from supply shortfalls in some years to oversupply in
others. To alleviate these supply and price issues, a second source of
artemisinin was sought, resulting in an effort to produce artemisinic acid, a
late-stage chemical precursor of artemisinin, by yeast fermentation, followed by 
chemical conversion to artemisinin (i.e., semi-synthesis). Engineering to enable 
production of artemisinic acid in yeast relied on the discovery of A. annua genes
encoding artemisinic acid biosynthetic enzymes, and synthetic biology to engineer
yeast metabolism. The progress of this effort, which resulted in semi-synthetic
artemisinin entering commercial production in 2013, is reviewed with an emphasis 
on recent publications and opportunities for further development. Aspects of both
the biology of artemisinin production in A. annua, and yeast strain engineering
are discussed, as are recent developments in the chemical conversion of
artemisinic acid to artemisinin.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2018.00087 
PMCID: PMC5797932
PMID: 29445390 

