
1. mSphere. 2018 Feb 28;3(1). pii: e00073-18. doi: 10.1128/mSphereDirect.00073-18.
eCollection 2018 Jan-Feb.

Toxoplasma gondii LCAT Primarily Contributes to Tachyzoite Egress.

Schultz AJ(1), Carruthers VB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan School of
Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

Egress is a crucial phase of the Toxoplasma gondii intracellular lytic cycle.
This is a process that drives inflammation and is strongly associated with the
pathogenesis observed during toxoplasmosis. Despite the link between this process
and virulence, little is known about egress on a mechanistic or descriptive
level. Previously published work has suggested that a phospholipase,
lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), secreted from the parasite's dense
granules contributes to parasite growth, virulence, and egress. Here we present
evidence from several independent mutant parasite lines confirming a role for
LCAT in efficient egress, although no defects in growth or virulence were
apparent. We also show via genetic complementation that the catalytic activity of
LCAT is required for its role in parasite egress. This work solidifies the
contribution of LCAT to egress of T.Â gondii tachyzoites. IMPORTANCEToxoplasma
gondii is one of the most successful human pathogens, infecting an estimated 2.5 
billion people across the globe. Pathogenesis seen during acute or reactivated
toxoplasmosis has been closely tied to the parasite's intracellular lytic life
cycle, which culminates in an event called egress that results in the release of 
freshly replicated parasites from the infected host cell. Despite the highly
destructive, cytolytic nature of this event and its downstream consequences, very
little is known about how the parasite accomplishes this step. Previous work has 
suggested a role for a secreted phospholipase, LCAT, in Toxoplasma egress and
roles in cell traversal and egress in the Plasmodium species orthologue. We
confirm here that LCAT-deficient tachyzoites are unable to efficiently egress
from infected monolayers, and we provide evidence that LCAT catalytic activity is
required for its role in egress.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphereDirect.00073-18 
PMCID: PMC5830472
PMID: 29507893 

