
1. Parasit Vectors. 2018 Mar 12;11(1):175. doi: 10.1186/s13071-018-2762-3.

Prevalence of Plasmodium falciparum delayed clearance associated polymorphisms in
adaptor protein complex 2 mu subunit (pfap2mu) and ubiquitin specific protease 1 
(pfubp1) genes in Ghanaian isolates.

Adams T(1), Ennuson NAA(1), Quashie NB(2)(3), Futagbi G(1), Matrevi S(2), Hagan
OCK(4), Abuaku B(2), Koram KA(2), Duah NO(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology and Conservation Science, School of Biological
Sciences, College of Basic and Allied Sciences, University of Ghana, Accra,
Ghana.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research,
College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.
(3)Centre for Tropical Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, School of Medicine
and Dentistry, College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology, School of Biological
Sciences, College of Basic and Allied Sciences, University of Ghana, Accra,
Ghana.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research,
College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.
nduah@noguchi.ug.edu.gh.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum delayed clearance with the use of
artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACTs) has been reported in some African
countries. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in two genes, P. falciparum
adaptor protein complex 2 mu subunit (pfap2mu) and ubiquitin specific protease 1 
(pfubp1), have been linked to delayed clearance with ACT use in Kenya and
recurrent imported malaria in Britain. With over 12 years of ACT use in Ghana,
this study investigated the prevalence of SNPs in the pfap2mu and pfubp1 in
Ghanaian clinical P. falciparum isolates to provide baseline data for
antimalarial drug resistance surveillance in the country.
METHODS: Filter paper blood blots collected in 2015-2016 from children aged below
9 years presenting with uncomplicated malaria at hospitals in three sentinel
sites Begoro, Cape Coast and Navrongo were used. Parasite DNA was extracted from 
120 samples followed by nested polymerase chain reaction (nPCR). Sanger
sequencing was performed to detect and identify SNPs in pfap2mu and pfubp1 genes.
RESULTS: In all, 11.1% (9/81) of the isolates carried the wildtype genotypes for 
both genes. A total of 164 pfap2mu mutations were detected in 67 isolates whilst 
271 pfubp1 mutations were observed in 72 isolates. The majority of the mutations 
were non-synonymous (NS): 78% (128/164) for pfap2mu and 92.3% (250/271) for
pfubp1. Five unique samples had a total of 215 pfap2mu SNPs, ranging between 15
and 63 SNPs per sample. Genotypes reportedly associated with ART resistance
detected in this study included pfap2mu S160N (7.4%, 6/81) and pfubp1 E1528D
(7.4%, 6/81) as well as D1525E (4.9%, 4/81). There was no significant difference 
in the prevalence of the SNPs between the three ecologically distinct study sites
(pfap2mu: χ2 = 6.905, df = 2, P = 0.546; pfubp1: χ2 = 4.883, df = 2, P = 0.769).
CONCLUSIONS: The detection of pfap2mu and pfubp1 genotypes associated with ACT
delayed parasite clearance is evidence of gradual nascent emergence of resistance
in Ghana. The results will serve as baseline data for surveillance and the
selection of the genotypes with drug pressure over time. The pfap2mu S160N,
pfubp1 E1528D and D1525E must be monitored in Ghanaian isolates in ACT
susceptibility studies, especially when cure rates of ACTs, particularly AL, is
less than 100%.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-018-2762-3 
PMCID: PMC5848568
PMID: 29530100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

