
1. Curr Top Med Chem. 2018;18(5):315-320. doi: 10.2174/1568026618666180427145308.

Ubiquitin Proteasome System as a Potential Drug Target for Malaria.

Pereira PHS(1)(2), Curra C(1)(3), Garcia CRS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Toxicological Analyses, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo 05508-090, Brazil.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Biomedical Sciences Institute, University of Sao
Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology - Hellas, Crete, Greece.

Parasites of Plasmodium genus are responsible for causing malaria in humans.
Resistant strains to all available antimalarials can be found in several
locations around the globe, including parasites resistant to the latest
generation of combination drugs, such as piperaquine + artemisinin. Plasmodium
develops between two completely different hosts such as a vertebrate one and the 
mosquito vector, thus it has the ability to adapt to very extreme and different
environments. Through the complex life cycle in the hosts, Plasmodium invades and
replicates in totally different cells thus making the study of the biology of the
parasite and the identification of targets for drug development affecting all
stages very difficult. It was shown that host molecules, such as melatonin and
derivatives, have a role in the progression and regulation of the parasite cell
cycle; In fact, when the parasite is exposed to melatonin there is an increase in
transcription levels of genes encoding for proteins related to the Ubiquitin
Proteasome (UPS) System. This system is essential for the survival of the
parasite, and drugs such as bortezomib, MLN-273, ZL3B, epoxomicins and
salinosporamides are capable of eliminating the parasite by inhibiting the
degradation of proteins via the proteasome system. In addition, the Plasmodium
UPS shows low similarity to the ubiquitin proteasome system in Humans; the
identification of unique targets to be used for therapeutic molecules development
increases the importance of UPS studies in malaria challenging. Drugs that cause 
oxidative stress, such as artemisinin, show a strong synergistic effect with
proteasome inhibitors, increasing the possibilities of combined therapies, which 
are more effective with lower concentration of drugs. Thus, the study of the
mechanism of action of the UPS and the identification of potential targets for
new drugs development are promising alternative strategies to fight the
drug-resistance problem in malaria parasites.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1568026618666180427145308 
PMID: 29701143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

