
1. Can J Infect Dis Med Microbiol. 2018 Mar 20;2018:1875217. doi:
10.1155/2018/1875217. eCollection 2018.

Human Genomic Loci Important in Common Infectious Diseases: Role of
High-Throughput Sequencing and Genome-Wide Association Studies.

Mboowa G(1)(2), Sserwadda I(1), Amujal M(2), Namatovu N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Molecular Biology, College of Health Sciences,
Makerere University, P.O. Box 7072, Kampala, Uganda.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, College of Health Sciences, Makerere
University, P.O. Box 7072, Kampala, Uganda.

HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis (TB), and malaria are 3 major global public health threats
that undermine development in many resource-poor settings. Recently, the notion
that positive selection during epidemics or longer periods of exposure to common 
infectious diseases may have had a major effect in modifying the constitution of 
the human genome is being interrogated at a large scale in many populations
around the world. This positive selection from infectious diseases increases
power to detect associations in genome-wide association studies (GWASs).
High-throughput sequencing (HTS) has transformed both the management of
infectious diseases and continues to enable large-scale functional
characterization of host resistance/susceptibility alleles and loci; a paradigm
shift from single candidate gene studies. Application of genome sequencing
technologies and genomics has enabled us to interrogate the host-pathogen
interface for improving human health. Human populations are constantly locked in 
evolutionary arms races with pathogens; therefore, identification of common
infectious disease-associated genomic variants/markers is important in
therapeutic, vaccine development, and screening susceptible individuals in a
population. This review describes a range of host-pathogen genomic loci that have
been associated with disease susceptibility and resistant patterns in the era of 
HTS. We further highlight potential opportunities for these genetic markers.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/1875217 
PMCID: PMC5884297
PMID: 29755620 

