
1. PLoS Genet. 2018 May 23;14(5):e1007279. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007279.
eCollection 2018 May.

Identity-by-descent analyses for measuring population dynamics and selection in
recombining pathogens.

Henden L(1)(2), Lee S(3)(4), Mueller I(1)(2), Barry A(1)(2), Bahlo M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Population Health and Immunity Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute
of Medical Research, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Department of Econometrics and Business Statistics, Monash University,
Clayton, Australia.
(4)Molecular Medicine Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Victoria, Australia.

Identification of genomic regions that are identical by descent (IBD) has proven 
useful for human genetic studies where analyses have led to the discovery of
familial relatedness and fine-mapping of disease critical regions. Unfortunately 
however, IBD analyses have been underutilized in analysis of other organisms,
including human pathogens. This is in part due to the lack of statistical
methodologies for non-diploid genomes in addition to the added complexity of
multiclonal infections. As such, we have developed an IBD methodology, called
isoRelate, for analysis of haploid recombining microorganisms in the presence of 
multiclonal infections. Using the inferred IBD status at genomic locations, we
have also developed a novel statistic for identifying loci under positive
selection and propose relatedness networks as a means of exploring shared
haplotypes within populations. We evaluate the performance of our methodologies
for detecting IBD and selection, including comparisons with existing tools, then 
perform an exploratory analysis of whole genome sequencing data from a global
Plasmodium falciparum dataset of more than 2500 genomes. This analysis identifies
Southeast Asia as having many highly related isolates, possibly as a result of
both reduced transmission from intensified control efforts and population
bottlenecks following the emergence of antimalarial drug resistance. Many signals
of selection are also identified, most of which overlap genes that are known to
be associated with drug resistance, in addition to two novel signals observed in 
multiple countries that have yet to be explored in detail. Additionally, we
investigate relatedness networks over the selected loci and determine that one of
these sweeps has spread between continents while the other has arisen
independently in different countries. IBD analysis of microorganisms using
isoRelate can be used for exploring population structure, positive selection and 
haplotype distributions, and will be a valuable tool for monitoring disease
control and elimination efforts of many diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007279 
PMCID: PMC5988311
PMID: 29791438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

