
1. Data Brief. 2018 Feb 21;17:1295-1303. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2018.02.028. eCollection
2018 Apr.

Mapping Anopheles stephensi midgut proteome using high-resolution mass
spectrometry.

Mohanty AK(1), Dey G(2)(3)(4), Kumar M(2)(4), Sreenivasamurthy SK(2)(4), Garg
S(5), Prasad TSK(2)(3), Kumar A(1).

Author information: 
(1)ICMR-National Institute of Malaria Research, Field Unit, Campal, Panaji, Goa
403001, India.
(2)Institute of Bioinformatics, International Tech Park, Bangalore 560066, India.
(3)Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya Research Center,
Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Mangalore 575018, India.
(4)Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Madhav Nagar, Manipal, 576104, India.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Goa University, Taleigao Plateau, Goa 403206,
India.

Anopheles stephensi Liston is one of the major vectors of malaria in urban areas 
of India. Midgut plays a central role in the vector life cycle and transmission
of malaria. Because gene expression of An. stephensi midgut has not been
investigated at protein level, an unbiased mass spectrometry-based proteomic
analysis of midgut tissue was carried out. Midgut tissue proteins from female An.
stephensi mosquitoes were extracted using 0.5% SDS and digested with trypsin
using two complementary approaches, in-gel and in-solution digestion. Fractions
were analysed on high-resolution mass spectrometer, which resulted in acquisition
of 494,960 MS/MS spectra. The MS/MS spectra were searched against protein
database comprising of known and predicted proteins reported in An. stephensi
using Sequest and Mascot software. In all, 47,438 peptides were identified
corresponding to 5,709 An. stephensi proteins. The identified proteins were
functionally categorized based on their cellular localization, biological
processes and molecular functions using Gene Ontology (GO) annotation. Several
proteins identified in this data are known to mediate the interaction of the
Plasmodium with vector midgut and also regulate parasite maturation inside the
vector host. This study provides information about the protein composition in
midgut tissue of female An. stephensi, which would be useful in understanding
vector parasite interaction at molecular level and besides being useful in
devising malaria transmission blocking strategies. The data of this study is
related to the research article "Integrating transcriptomics and proteomics data 
for accurate assembly and annotation of genomes".

DOI: 10.1016/j.dib.2018.02.028 
PMCID: PMC5966514
PMID: 29845101 

