
1. Trop Med Health. 2018 Jun 22;46:22. doi: 10.1186/s41182-018-0100-2. eCollection
2018.

PCR-based detection of Plasmodium falciparum in saliva using mitochondrial cox3
and varATS primers.

Lloyd YM(1), Esemu LF(2), Antallan J(1), Thomas B(1), Tassi Yunga S(1)(3), Obase 
B(4), Christine N(2), Leke RGF(2), Culleton R(5)(6), Mfuh KO(1), Nerurkar VR(1), 
Taylor DW(1).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Tropical Medicine, Medical Microbiology and Pharmacology, John 
A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96813
USA.
(2)2The Biotechnology Center, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(3)6Present Address: Cancer Early Detection Advanced Research Center, Knight
Cancer Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, USA.
(4)3The Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Buea, Buea, Cameroon.
(5)4Leading Program, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University,
Nagasaki, Japan.
(6)5Malaria Unit, Department of Pathology, Institute of Tropical Medicine
(NEKKEN), Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.

Background: Sampling of saliva for diagnosing Plasmodium falciparum infections is
a safe, non-invasive alternative to sampling of blood. However, the use of saliva
presents a challenge because lower concentrations of parasite DNA are present in 
saliva compared to peripheral blood. Therefore, a sensitive method is needed for 
detection of parasite DNA in saliva. This study utilized two recently reported
"ultra-sensitive" PCR assays based on detection of the P. falciparum
mitochondrial cox3 gene and the multi-copy nuclear varATS gene. The
ultra-sensitive assays have an advantage over standard 18S rRNA gene-based PCR
assay as they target genes with higher copy numbers per parasite genome. Stored
saliva DNA samples from 60 Cameroonian individuals with infections previously
confirmed by 18S rRNA gene PCR in peripheral blood were tested with assays
targeting the cox3 and varATS genes.
Results: Overall, the standard 18S rRNA gene-based PCR assay detected P.
falciparum DNA in 62% of the stored saliva DNA samples, whereas 77 and 68% of the
samples were positive with assays that target the cox3 and varATS genes,
respectively. Interestingly, the ultra-sensitive assays detected more P.
falciparum infections in stored saliva samples than were originally detected by
thick-film microscopy (41/60 = 68%). When stratified by number of parasites in
the blood, the cox3 assay successfully detected more than 90% of infections using
saliva when individuals had > 1000 parasites/μl of peripheral blood, but
sensitivity was reduced at submicroscopic parasitemia levels. Bands on
electrophoresis gels were distinct for the cox3 assay, whereas faint or
non-specific bands were sometimes observed for varATS and 18S rRNA that made
interpretation of results difficult. Assays could be completed in 3.5 and 3 h for
the cox3 and varATS assays, respectively, whereas the 18S rRNA gene assays
required at least 7 h.
Conclusions: This study demonstrates that a PCR assay targeting the cox3 gene
detected P. falciparum DNA in more saliva samples than primers for the 18S rRNA
gene. Non-invasive collection of saliva in combination with the proposed cox3
primer-based PCR assay could potentially enhance routine testing of P. falciparum
during disease surveillance, monitoring, and evaluation of interventions for
malaria elimination.

DOI: 10.1186/s41182-018-0100-2 
PMCID: PMC6013985
PMID: 29977122 

Conflict of interest statement: Blood and saliva samples used were deidentified, 
archival samples collected in 2015. The current study was exempt from human
subject research by the Committee on Human Studies, University of Hawaii at Manoa
(Protocol Number: 2017-00395).The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

