
1. J Mol Model. 2018 Aug 14;24(9):232. doi: 10.1007/s00894-018-3761-1.

In silico identification of inhibitors against Plasmodium falciparum histone
deacetylase 1 (PfHDAC-1).

Kumar A(1), Dhar SK(2), Subbarao N(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Computational and Integrative Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University,
New Delhi, 110067, India.
(2)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,
India.
(3)School of Computational and Integrative Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University,
New Delhi, 110067, India. nsrao@mail.jnu.ac.in.

In erythrocytes, actively multiplying Plasmodium falciparum parasites exhibit a
unique signature of virulence associated histone modifications, thereby
epigenetically regulating the expression of the majority of genes. Histone
acetylation is one such modification, effectuated and maintained by the dynamic
interplay of two functionally antagonist enzymes, histone acetyltransferases
(HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs). Their inhibition leads to
hypo/hyperacetylation and is known to be deleterious for P. falciparum, and hence
they have become attractive molecular targets to design novel antimalarials. Many
compounds, including four Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved drugs, have
been developed so far to inhibit HDAC activity but are not suitable to treat
malaria as they lack selectivity and cause cytotoxicity in mammalian cells. In
this study, we used comparative modeling and molecular docking to establish
different binding modes of nonselective and selective compounds in the PfHDAC-1
(a class I HDAC protein in P. falciparum) active site and identified the
involvement of active site nonidentical residues in binding of selective
compounds. Further, we have applied virtual screening with precise selection
criteria and molecular dynamics simulation to identify novel potential inhibitors
against PfHDAC-1. We report 20 compounds (10 from ChEMBL and 10 from analogues
compound library) bearing seven scaffolds having better affinity toward PfHDAC-1.
Sixteen of these compounds are known antimalarials with 14 having activity in the
nanomolar range against various drug resistant and sensitive strains of P.
falciparum. The cytotoxicity of these compounds against various human cell lines 
are reported at relatively higher concentration and hence can be used as
potential PfHDAC-1 inhibitors in P. falciparum. These findings indeed show great 
potential for using the above molecules as prospective antimalarials.

DOI: 10.1007/s00894-018-3761-1 
PMID: 30109440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

