
1. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2017 Feb;35(1):1-7.

[Polymorphism analysis of the block 5 region in merozoite surface protein-1 gene 
of imported and local Plasmodium vivax in Yunnan Province].

[Article in Chinese]

Dong Y, Sun AM, Chen MN, Xu YC, Mao XH, Deng Y.

Objective: To analyze the sequence of Plasmodium vivax merozoite surface
protein-1(PvMSP-1) and allele polymorphism in imported and local vivax malaria
parasites in Yunnan Province.
Methods: Blood samples on filter paper were collected from imported and local
vivax malaria cases in Yunnan Province during August 2012 and September 2015 and 
information of epidemiological history was recorded. Plasmodium DNA was extracted
by a DNA extraction kit, and the block 5 region in PvMSP-1 gene was amplified by 
PCR. The PCR products were sequenced and blasted with reference sequences M75674,
AAN86237, M60807, ABJ53045, AAN86238 and BAA18977. The sequence polymorphism in
block 5 region of PvMSP-1 was analyzed with MEGA 5.04 and Arlequin3.5.1
softwares. The conserved sites, genetic distances among sequences and
Shannon-wiener index among alleles were calculated. The clustering tree was drawn
according to the genetic distances between the amino-acid sequences.
Results: A total of 847 blood samples were collected from the malaria cases,
comprising of 61 samples from local cases, 66 from imported cases from Africa,
and 720 from Myanmar. The block 5 region in PvMSP-1 was successfully amplified in
278 samples, and sequencing was successfully made in 206 of them. The peptide
coded by the block 5 region had a length of 193 to 222 aa. The amino acid
sequence alignment showed that in 206 samples the proportion of genotypes of
Sal-1, Belem and Recombine was 59.2%(122/206),23.3%(48/206) and 17.5%(36/206),
respectively. The proportion of Sal-1 genotype in imported cases from Myanmar and
Africa and in local cases was 58.8%(104/177),73.3%(11/15) and 50%(7/14),
respectively. The genotypes Sal-1, Belem and Recombine had 51, 9 and 6 different 
alleles. The 66 alleles had a Shannon Wiener index (Hâ€™) of 0.955 and an expected 
heterozygosis (He) of 0.567. The 206 DNA sequences had a 665-bp homologous locus,
comprising of 75 conserved sites (11.3%,75/665) and 590 variable sites (88.7%,
590/665). The genetic distances between sequences were all less than 0.4. The
clustering analysis showed that the 206 sequences were clustered into two
categories with three branches. The homology of Recombine with Belem genotype was
91%-92%, higher than with Sal-1 genotype (82%-83%).
Conclusion: The block 5 region in PvMSP-1 gene from local and imported Plasmodium
vivax in Yunnan Province has varied forms of alleles, and the Sal-1 genotype is
predominant among the three genotypes.


PMID: 30133220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

