
1. Front Genet. 2018 Sep 10;9:372. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2018.00372. eCollection 2018.

On the Evolution and Function of Plasmodium vivax Reticulocyte Binding Surface
Antigen (pvrbsa).

Camargo-Ayala PA(1)(2), Garzón-Ospina D(1)(3), Moreno-Pérez DA(1)(4),
Ricaurte-Contreras LA(1), Noya O(5), Patarroyo MA(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Immunology, Fundación Instituto de
Inmunología de Colombia (FIDIC), Bogotá, Colombia.
(2)Microbiology Postgraduate Programme, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá,
Colombia.
(3)PhD Programme in Biomedical and Biological Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, 
Bogotá, Colombia.
(4)Livestock Sciences Faculty, Universidad de Ciencias Aplicadas y Ambientales,
Bogotá, Colombia.
(5)Instituto de Medicina Tropical, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Central de
Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela.
(6)School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá,
Colombia.

The RBSA protein is encoded by a gene described in Plasmodium species having
tropism for reticulocytes. Since this protein is antigenic in natural infections 
and can bind to target cells, it has been proposed as a potential candidate for
an anti-Plasmodium vivax vaccine. However, genetic diversity (a challenge which
must be overcome for ensuring fully effective vaccine design) has not been
described at this locus. Likewise, the minimum regions mediating specific
parasite-host interaction have not been determined. This is why the rbsa gene's
evolutionary history is being here described, as well as the P. vivax rbsa
(pvrbsa) genetic diversity and the specific regions mediating parasite adhesion
to reticulocytes. Unlike what has previously been reported, rbsa was also present
in several parasite species belonging to the monkey-malaria clade; paralogs were 
also found in Plasmodium parasites invading reticulocytes. The pvrbsa locus had
less diversity than other merozoite surface proteins where natural selection and 
recombination were the main evolutionary forces involved in causing the observed 
polymorphism. The N-terminal end (PvRBSA-A) was conserved and under functional
constraint; consequently, it was expressed as recombinant protein for binding
assays. This protein fragment bound to reticulocytes whilst the C-terminus,
included in recombinant PvRBSA-B (which was not under functional constraint), did
not. Interestingly, two PvRBSA-A-derived peptides were able to inhibit protein
binding to reticulocytes. Specific conserved and functionally important peptides 
within PvRBSA-A could thus be considered when designing a fully-effective vaccine
against P. vivax.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2018.00372 
PMCID: PMC6139305
PMID: 30250483 

