
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2018 Oct 8;8:343. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00343.
eCollection 2018.

Back to the Future: Lessons Learned From the 1918 Influenza Pandemic.

Short KR(1)(2), Kedzierska K(3), van de Sandt CE(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(2)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, The University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Peter Doherty Institute for
Infection and Immunity, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(4)Department of Hematopoiesis, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory,
Amsterdam, Netherlands.

2018 marks the 100-year anniversary of the 1918 influenza pandemic, which killed 
~50 million people worldwide. The severity of this pandemic resulted from a
complex interplay between viral, host, and societal factors. Here, we review the 
viral, genetic and immune factors that contributed to the severity of the 1918
pandemic and discuss the implications for modern pandemic preparedness. We
address unresolved questions of why the 1918 influenza H1N1 virus was more
virulent than other influenza pandemics and why some people survived the 1918
pandemic and others succumbed to the infection. While current studies suggest
that viral factors such as haemagglutinin and polymerase gene segments most
likely contributed to a potent, dysregulated pro-inflammatory cytokine storm in
victims of the pandemic, a shift in case-fatality for the 1918 pandemic toward
young adults was most likely associated with the host's immune status. Lack of
pre-existing virus-specific and/or cross-reactive antibodies and cellular
immunity in children and young adults likely contributed to the high attack rate 
and rapid spread of the 1918 H1N1 virus. In contrast, lower mortality rate in in 
the older (>30 years) adult population points toward the beneficial effects of
pre-existing cross-reactive immunity. In addition to the role of humoral and
cellular immunity, there is a growing body of evidence to suggest that individual
genetic differences, especially involving single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs),
contribute to differences in the severity of influenza virus infections.
Co-infections with bacterial pathogens, and possibly measles and malaria,
co-morbidities, malnutrition or obesity are also known to affect the severity of 
influenza disease, and likely influenced 1918 H1N1 disease severity and outcomes.
Additionally, we also discuss the new challenges, such as changing population
demographics, antibiotic resistance and climate change, which we will face in the
context of any future influenza virus pandemic. In the last decade there has been
a dramatic increase in the number of severe influenza virus strains entering the 
human population from animal reservoirs (including highly pathogenic H7N9 and
H5N1 viruses). An understanding of past influenza virus pandemics and the lessons
that we have learnt from them has therefore never been more pertinent.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00343 
PMCID: PMC6187080
PMID: 30349811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

