
1. PLoS One. 2018 Oct 31;13(10):e0205256. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0205256.
eCollection 2018.

Pre-exposure to non-pathogenic bacteria does not protect Drosophila against the
entomopathogenic bacterium Photorhabdus.

Patrnogic J(1), Castillo JC(1)(2), Shokal U(1), Yadav S(1), Kenney E(1), Heryanto
C(1), Ozakman Y(1), Eleftherianos I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Infection and Innate Immunity Lab, Department of Biological Sciences, George
Washington University, Washington, District of Columbia, United States of
America.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, United
States of America.

Immune priming in insects involves an initial challenge with a non-pathogenic
microbe or exposure to a low dose of pathogenic microorganisms, which provides a 
certain degree of protection against a subsequent pathogenic infection. The
protective effect of insect immune priming has been linked to the activation of
humoral or cellular features of the innate immune response during the preliminary
challenge, and these effects might last long enough to promote the survival of
the infected animal. The fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster is a superb model to
dissect immune priming processes in insects due to the availability of molecular 
and genetic tools, and the comprehensive understanding of the innate immune
response in this organism. Previous investigations have indicated that the D.
melanogaster immune system can be primed efficiently. Here we have extended these
studies by examining the result of immune priming against two potent
entomopathogenic bacteria, Photorhabdus luminescens and P. asymbiotica. We have
found that rearing D. melanogaster on diet containing a non-pathogenic strain of 
Escherichia coli alone or in combination with Micrococcus luteus upregulates the 
antibacterial peptide immune response in young adult flies, but it does not
prolong fly life span. Also, subsequent intrathoracic injection with P.
luminescens or P. asymbiotica triggers the Immune deficiency and Toll signaling
pathways in flies previously exposed to a live or heat-killed mix of the
non-pathogenic bacteria, but the immune activation fails to promote fly survival 
against the pathogens. These findings suggest that immune priming in D.
melanogaster, and probably in other insects, is determined by the type of
microbes involved as well as the mode of microbial exposure, and possibly
requires a comprehensive and precise alteration of immune signaling and function 
to provide efficient protection against pathogenic infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0205256 
PMCID: PMC6209181
PMID: 30379824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

