
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Dec 11;115(50):12799-12804. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1812317115. Epub 2018 Nov 12.

Mutations in Plasmodium falciparum actin-binding protein coronin confer reduced
artemisinin susceptibility.

Demas AR(1), Sharma AI(1), Wong W(1), Early AM(2), Redmond S(2), Bopp S(1),
Neafsey DE(1)(2), Volkman SK(1)(2)(3), Hartl DL(4)(5), Wirth DF(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health, Boston, MA 02115.
(2)Infectious Disease and Microbiome Program, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA
02142.
(3)School of Nursing and Health Sciences, Simmons College, Boston, MA 02115.
(4)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health, Boston, MA 02115; dhartl@oeb.harvard.edu dfwirth@hsph.harvard.edu.
(5)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Dec 11;115(50):12556-12558.
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Jun 25;116(26):12611-12612.
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Jun 25;116(26):12613-12614.

Drug resistance is an obstacle to global malaria control, as evidenced by the
recent emergence and rapid spread of delayed artemisinin (ART) clearance by
mutant forms of the PfKelch13 protein in Southeast Asia. Identifying genetic
determinants of ART resistance in African-derived parasites is important for
surveillance and for understanding the mechanism of resistance. In this study, we
carried out long-term in vitro selection of two recently isolated West African
parasites (from Pikine and Thiès, Senegal) with increasing concentrations of
dihydroartemisinin (DHA), the biologically active form of ART, over a 4-y period.
We isolated two parasite clones, one from each original isolate, that exhibited
enhanced survival to DHA in the ring-stage survival assay. Whole-genome sequence 
analysis identified 10 mutations in seven different genes. We chose to focus on
the gene encoding PfCoronin, a member of the WD40-propeller domain protein
family, because mutations in this gene occurred in both independent selections,
and the protein shares the β-propeller motif with PfKelch13 protein. For
functional validation, when pfcoronin mutations were introduced into the parental
parasites by CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing, these mutations were sufficient
to reduce ART susceptibility in the parental lines. The discovery of a second
gene for ART resistance may yield insights into the molecular mechanisms of
resistance. It also suggests that pfcoronin mutants could emerge as a nonkelch13 
type of resistance to ART in natural settings.

Copyright © 2018 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1812317115 
PMCID: PMC6294886
PMID: 30420498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

