
1. Parasitol Res. 2019 Feb;118(2):599-606. doi: 10.1007/s00436-018-6155-5. Epub 2018
Nov 19.

Pathological and molecular characterization of avian malaria in captive
Magellanic penguins (Spheniscus magellanicus) in South America.

Taunde PA(1), Bianchi MV(2), Perles L(3), da Silva FS(1), Guim TN(1), Stadler
RA(4), André MR(3), Driemeier D(1), Pavarini SP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Patologia Clínica Veterinária, Setor de Patologia Veterinária,
Faculdade de Veterinária, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Av. 
Bento Gonçalves 9090, Prédio 42505, Porto Alegre, RS, 91540-000, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Patologia Clínica Veterinária, Setor de Patologia Veterinária,
Faculdade de Veterinária, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Av. 
Bento Gonçalves 9090, Prédio 42505, Porto Alegre, RS, 91540-000, Brazil.
matheusviezzerb@hotmail.com.
(3)Departamento de Patologia Veterinária, Laboratório de Imunoparasitologia,
Faculdade de Ciências Agrárias e Veterinárias (FCAV), Universidade do Estado de
São Paulo (UNESP), Via de Acesso Prof. Paulo Donato Castellani, Jaboticabal, SP, 
14884-900, Brazil.
(4)GramadoZoo, Gramado, RS, Brazil.

Avian malaria is a mosquito-borne disease that affects multiple avian species and
is caused by protozoans of the genus Plasmodium. An avian malaria infection
caused by Plasmodium sp. in Magellanic penguins (Spheniscus magellanicus) with
high mortality is described in a zoo in Southern Brazil. Clinically, three birds 
presented signs of inappetence, anorexia, pale mucosa, dyspnea, and opisthotonus,
with death in a clinical course of 5-8 h. At the necropsy, all birds exhibited
pale mucosa, marked splenomegaly and hepatomegaly, in addition to moderate
leptomeningeal blood vessels ingurgitation in the brain. Microscopically,
multiple exoerythrocytic meronts were observed in the cytoplasm of endothelial
cells in the spleen, liver, heart, lungs, brain, kidneys, and pancreas. The
spleen had a multifocal perivascular inflammatory infiltrate of lymphocytes,
plasma cells, and macrophages, which also exhibited hemosiderosis and
erythrophagocytosis. The liver had a multifocal periportal inflammatory
infiltrate of lymphocytes, macrophages, and plasma cells, in addition to marked
hemosiderosis in the hepatic sinusoids. Fragments of spleen, liver, brain,
skeletal muscle, and lung were tested by the polymerase chain reaction technique 
for the detection of a fragment of the cytochrome B gene from haemosporidians,
which resulted positive for Plasmodium spp. After sequencing, the samples were
phylogenetically associated to Plasmodium sp. detected in Turdus albicollis
(KU562808) in Brazil and matched to the lineage TURALB01 previously detected in
T. albicollis. Avian malaria infections caused by Plasmodium sp. of lineage
TURALB01 may occur in S. magellanicus with high mortality, and, thus, it is
essential to detect and characterize the agent involved to obtain the
differential diagnosis of the condition.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-018-6155-5 
PMID: 30456492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

