
1. Malar J. 2018 Dec 14;17(1):470. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2614-9.

Challenging diagnosis of congenital malaria in non-endemic areas.

Romani L(1), Pane S(2), Severini C(3), Menegon M(3), Foglietta G(2), Bernardi
S(1), Tchidjou HK(1), Onetti Muda A(4), Palma P(5), Putignani L(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Research Unit in Congenital
and Perinatal Infections, University-Hospital, Pediatric Department (DPUO),
Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Piazza Sant'Onofrio 4, 00165, Rome, Italy.
(2)Unit of Parasitology, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Piazza Sant'Onofrio 4,
00165, Rome, Italy.
(3)Istituto Superiore di Sanità (ISS), Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161, Rome,
Italy.
(4)Department of Laboratories, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Piazza
Sant'Onofrio 4, 00165, Rome, Italy.
(5)Division of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Research Unit in Congenital
and Perinatal Infections, University-Hospital, Pediatric Department (DPUO),
Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Piazza Sant'Onofrio 4, 00165, Rome, Italy.
paolo.palma@opbg.net.
(6)Unit of Parasitology, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Piazza Sant'Onofrio 4,
00165, Rome, Italy. lorenza.putignani@opbg.net.
(7)Unit of Human Microbiome, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Viale San Paolo
15, 00146, Rome, Italy. lorenza.putignani@opbg.net.

BACKGROUND: Congenital malaria is usually defined as the detection of asexual
forms of Plasmodium spp. in a blood sample of a neonate during perinatal age if
there is no possibility of postpartum infection by a mosquito bite. The incidence
of congenital malaria is highly variable and seems related to several factors,
such as different diagnostic methods for Plasmodium spp. detection, and area in
which the epidemiologic analyses are performed. In non-endemic countries, cases
of congenital malaria are rare. Hereby, a case of a congenital malaria in an HIV 
exposed child is reported.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 2-month-old male child was admitted to Bambino Gesù
Children's Hospital due to anaemia and exposure to HIV. He was born prematurely
in Italy by cesarean section at 34 weeks' gestation after a bicorial, biamniotic 
pregnancy by a migrant woman from Nigeria. He was the first of non-identical
twins. Combined with anaemia, spleen and liver enlargement was noted, malaria was
hypothesized. Malaria laboratory panel was performed on the newborn, mother and
other twin blood samples, as follows: (i) malaria rapid diagnostic test (RDT);
(ii) Giemsa-stained thick and thin blood smears for Plasmodium spp.
identification and parasitaemia titration; (iii) molecular screening and typing
of Plasmodium spp. by multiplex qualitative PCR assay based on 18S rRNA gene.
Genotyping of Plasmodium falciparum isolates from mother and child was performed 
by neutral microsatellite and highly polymorphic marker amplification.
CONCLUSIONS: The maternal RDT sample was negative, while the infant RDT was
positive; in both cases microscopy of blood smears and PCR showed infection with 
P. falciparum. Two of the genotypic molecular markers displayed different allelic
variants between the two samples. This difference could imply infection
multiplicity of the mother during the pregnancy, possibly harbouring more than
one isolate, only one of them being transmitted to the newborn while the other
persisting in the mother's blood. Because of the increasing number of pregnant
women coming from endemic areas for malaria, an accurate anamnesis of infant's
mother, and the inclusion of Plasmodium spp. research into TORCH screenings for
mother-infant pair at birth, aiming at reducing morbidity and mortality
associated to the disease might be suitable.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2614-9 
PMCID: PMC6295090
PMID: 30551740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

