
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2019 Jun;95:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2018.12.010. Epub 2018 Dec 
22.

The Aedes aegypti IMD pathway is a critical component of the mosquito antifungal 
immune response.

Ramirez JL(1), Muturi EJ(2), Barletta ABF(3), Rooney AP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Crop Bioprotection Research Unit, National Center for Agricultural Utilization
Research, Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture,
Peoria, IL, USA. Electronic address: jose.ramirez@ars.usda.gov.
(2)Crop Bioprotection Research Unit, National Center for Agricultural Utilization
Research, Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture,
Peoria, IL, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institutes of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA.

Successful infection of the insect body by entomopathogenic fungi is the result
of complex molecular interactions between the host and the invading pathogenic
fungi. The mosquito antifungal response is multifaceted and is regulated in part 
by the Toll and Jak-STAT pathways. Here, we assessed the role of the IMD pathway 
in the mosquito Ae. aegypti antifungal immune response when challenged with one
of two entomopathogenic fungi, Beauveria bassiana and Isaria javanica. IMD
pathway components of the mosquito immune system were elicited in response to
infection with both entomopathogenic fungi, primarily in the fat body of
mosquitoes. Furthermore, we observed induction of antimicrobial peptides that in 
turn appear to be tissue and fungal strain-specific. IMD pathway impairment by
RNAi gene silencing resulted in higher fungal proliferation and reduction in
survival of fungi-infected mosquitoes. Collectively, these data indicates that
the IMD pathway plays a more significant role in the antifungal immune response
than previously recognized.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2018.12.010 
PMID: 30582948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

