
1. J Trop Med. 2018 Dec 6;2018:9486905. doi: 10.1155/2018/9486905. eCollection 2018.

Antimalarial Activity of Piperine.

Thiengsusuk A(1), Muhamad P(1), Chaijaroenkul W(2), Na-Bangchang K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery and Development Center, Thammasat University (Rangsit Campus), 
Pathumtani 12121, Thailand.
(2)Center of Excellence in Pharmacology and Molecular Biology of Malaria and
Cholangiocarcinoma, Chulabhorn International College of Medicine, Thammasat
University, Pathumthani 12121, Thailand.

Malaria remains a public health problem in tropical and subtropical regions.
Resistance of Plasmodium falciparum to artemisinins in Southeast Asia is a great 
concern for disease control and research on discovery and development of new
alternative antimalarial drugs is urgently required. In a previous study, the
fruit of Piper chaba Hunt. was demonstrated to exhibit promising antimalarial
activity against the asexual stage of 3D7 (chloroquine-sensitive) and K1
(chloroquine-resistant) P. falciparum clones. The aim of the present study was to
further investigate the antimalarial activity of piperine, the major isolated
constituent of Piper chaba Hunt. fruits against both P. falciparum clones. The
antimalarial activity was determined using SYBR green-I-based assay and
morphological change was observed under the light microscope with Giemsa
staining. The median IC50 (concentration that inhibits parasite growth by 50%)
values of piperine against 3D7 and K1 P. falciparum were 111.5 and 59 Î¼M,
respectively. A marked change in parasite morphology was observed within 48 hours
of piperine exposure. Results of real-time PCR showed no effect of piperine on
modulating the expression of the three genes associated with antimalarial drug
resistance in P. falciparum, i.e., pfcrt, pfmdr1, and pfmrp1. Piperine could be a
promising candidate for further development as an antimalarial drug based on its 
antimalarial potency and low risk of resistance development.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/9486905 
PMCID: PMC6304611
PMID: 30631371 

