
1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Jan 31;15(1):e1007164. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007164.
eCollection 2019 Jan.

Plasmodium male gametocyte development and transmission are critically regulated 
by the two putative deadenylases of the CAF1/CCR4/NOT complex.

Hart KJ(1), Oberstaller J(2), Walker MP(1), Minns AM(1), Kennedy MF(1), Padykula 
I(2), Adams JH(2), Lindner SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Malaria Research,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, State College, Pennsylvania,
United States of America.
(2)Center for Global Health and Infectious Diseases Research, Department of
Global Health, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States of
America.

With relatively few known specific transcription factors to control the abundance
of specific mRNAs, Plasmodium parasites may rely more on the regulation of
transcript stability and turnover to provide sufficient gene regulation.
Plasmodium transmission stages impose translational repression on specific
transcripts in part to accomplish this. However, few proteins are known to
participate in this process, and those that are characterized primarily affect
female gametocytes. We have identified and characterized Plasmodium yoelii (Py)
CCR4-1, a putative deadenylase, which plays a role in the development and
activation of male gametocytes, regulates the abundance of specific mRNAs in
gametocytes, and ultimately increases the efficiency of host-to-vector
transmission. We find that when pyccr4-1 is deleted or its protein made
catalytically inactive, there is a loss in the initial coordination of male
gametocyte maturation and a reduction of parasite infectivity of the mosquito.
Expression of only the N-terminal CAF1 domain of the essential CAF1 deadenylase
leads to a similar phenotype. Comparative RNA-seq revealed that PyCCR4-1 affects 
transcripts important for transmission-related functions that are associated with
male or female gametocytes, some of which directly associate with the
immunoprecipitated complex. Finally, circular RT-PCR of one of the bound,
dysregulated transcripts showed that deletion of the pyccr4-1 gene does not
result in gross changes to its UTR or poly(A) tail length. We conclude that the
two putative deadenylases of the CAF1/CCR4/NOT complex play critical and
intertwined roles in gametocyte maturation and transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007164 
PMCID: PMC6355032
PMID: 30703164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

