
1. Insect Mol Biol. 2019 Oct;28(5):591-604. doi: 10.1111/imb.12575. Epub 2019 Mar
13.

Exome-wide association of deltamethrin resistance in Aedes aegypti from Mexico.

Saavedra-Rodriguez K(1), Campbell CL(1), Lenhart A(2), Penilla P(1)(2),
Lozano-Fuentes S(1), Black WC 4th(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, CO, USA.
(2)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global Health, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Erratum in
    Insect Mol Biol. 2020 Oct;29(5):498.

Aedes aegypti is the major vector of a number of arboviruses that cause disease
in humans. Without vaccines or pharmaceuticals, pyrethroid insecticides remain
the major tool for public health protection. Pyrethroid resistance is now
widespread. Replacement substitutions in the voltage-gated sodium channel (vgsc) 
that reduce the stability of pyrethroid binding account for most of the
resistance, but metabolic mechanisms also inactivate pyrethroids. High-throughput
sequencing and the A. aegypti L5 annotated physical map has allowed interrogation
of the exome for genes and single-nucleotide polymorphisms associated with
pyrethroid resistance. We exposed females of A. aegypti from Mexico to a
deltamethrin discriminating dose to designate them as resistant (active after
1 h) or susceptible (knocked down with no recovery after 4 h). The vgsc on
chromosome 3 had the highest association, followed by genes proximal to vgsc. We 
identified potential detoxification genes located singly (eg HPX8C) or within
clusters in chromosome 2 [three esterase clusters, two of cytochrome P450
monooxygenases (CYP)] and chromosome 3 (one cluster of 16 CYP325 and seven CYP9
genes). Deltamethrin resistance in A. aegypti is associated with mutations in the
vgsc gene and a large assortment of genes.

© 2019 The Authors. Insect Molecular Biology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
on behalf of Royal Entomological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/imb.12575 
PMCID: PMC6766855
PMID: 30758862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

