
1. Cell Metab. 2019 Mar 5;29(3):727-735.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2019.02.003.

Improving Drug Discovery by Nucleic Acid Delivery in Engineered Human
Microlivers.

Mancio-Silva L(1), Fleming HE(1), Miller AB(2), Milstein S(3), Liebow A(3),
Haslett P(3), Sepp-Lorenzino L(3), Bhatia SN(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(2)Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(3)Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, 300 3rd Street, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(4)Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA; Koch Institute for
Integrative Cancer Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
sbhatia@mit.edu.

The liver plays a central role in metabolism; however, xenobiotic metabolism
variations between human hepatocytes and those in model organisms create
challenges in establishing functional test beds to detect the potential drug
toxicity and efficacy of candidate small molecules. In the emerging areas of RNA 
interference, viral gene therapy, and genome editing, more robust, long-lasting, 
and predictive human liver models may accelerate progress. Here, we apply a new
modality to a previously established, functionally stable, multi-well
bioengineered microliver-fabricated from primary human hepatocytes and supportive
stromal cells-in order to advance both small molecule and nucleic acid
therapeutic pipelines. Specifically, we achieve robust and durable gene silencing
in vitro to tune the human metabolism of small molecules, and demonstrate its
capacity to query the potential efficacy and/or toxicity of candidate
therapeutics. Additionally, we apply this engineered platform to test siRNAs
designed to target hepatocytes and impact human liver genetic and infectious
diseases.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmet.2019.02.003 
PMCID: PMC6408324
PMID: 30840913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

