
1. Malar J. 2019 Mar 7;18(1):60. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2701-6.

K13-propeller gene polymorphisms in Plasmodium falciparum parasite population in 
malaria affected countries: a systematic review of prevalence and risk factors.

Ocan M(1)(2), Akena D(3), Nsobya S(4), Kamya MR(5), Senono R(6), Kinengyere
AA(7), Obuku E(8)(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, Makerere University, P.O. Box 7072,
Kampala, Uganda. ocanmoses@gmail.com.
(2)Africa Centre for Systematic Reviews and Knowledge Translation, Makerere
University College of Health Sciences, P.O. Box 7072, Kampala, Uganda.
ocanmoses@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Makerere University, P.O. Box 7072, Kampala, Uganda.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, Makerere University, P.O. Box 7072,
Kampala, Uganda.
(5)Department of Medicine, Makerere University, P.O. Box 7072, Kampala, Uganda.
(6)Infectious Disease Institute, Makerere University, P. O. Box 22418, Kampala,
Uganda.
(7)Albert Cook Library, Makerere University, P.O. Box 7072, Kampala, Uganda.
(8)Clinical Epidemiology Unit, Department of Medicine, Makerere University, P.O. 
Box 7072, Kampala, Uganda.
(9)Africa Centre for Systematic Reviews and Knowledge Translation, Makerere
University College of Health Sciences, P.O. Box 7072, Kampala, Uganda.
(10)Faculty of Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Efficacy of artemisinin (ART) agents, a critical element of current
malaria control efforts is threatened by emergence and spread of resistance.
Mutations in pfkelch13 gene associated with ART-resistance evolved in Southeast
Asia (SEA). k13 mutations whose role in ART-resistance remains unknown, have
subsequently emerged independently across all malaria-affected regions. The aim
of this systematic review was to determine the prevalence and identify risk
factors of Plasmodium falciparum k13 mutations in malaria-endemic countries.
METHODS: An electronic search of studies from 2014 to date was done in MEDLINE
via PubMED, SCOPUS, EMBASE and LILACS/VHL databases. Mesh terms and Boolean
operators (AND, OR) were used. Two librarians independently conducted this search
(RS and AK). The articles were screened for inclusion using a priori criteria set
following PRISMA-P and STREGA guidelines. Three independent reviewers (NL, BB,
and OM) extracted the data. Data analysis was performed in Open Meta Analyst
software. Random effects analysis (DL) was used and heterogeneity established
using I2-statistic.
RESULTS: A total of 482 articles were retrieved from Pubmed = 302,
Lilacs/Vhl = 50, Embase = 80, and Scopus = 37; Bibliography/other searches = 13, 
of which 374 did not meet the inclusion criteria. The aggregate prevalence of
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in pfkelch13 gene was 27.6% (3694/14,827) 
(95% CI 22.9%, 32.3%). Sub-group analysis showed that aggregate prevalence of
non-synonymous SNPs in pfkelch13 gene was higher, 45.4% (95% CI 35.4%, 55.3%) in 
Southeast Asia as opposed to 7.6% (95% CI 5.6%, 9.5%) in the African region. A
total of 165 independent k13 mutations were identified across malaria-affected
regions globally. A total of 16 non-validated k13 mutations were associated with 
increased ART parasite clearance half-life (t1/2 > 5 h). The majority, 45.5%
(75/165), of the mutations were reported in single P. falciparum parasite
infections. Of the 165 k13-mutations, over half were reported as new alleles.
Twenty (20) non-propeller mutations in the pfkelch13 gene were identified.
CONCLUSION: This review identified emergence of potential ART-resistance
mediating k13 mutations in the African region. Diversity of mutations in
pfkelch13 gene is highest in African region compared to SEA. Mutations outside
the pfkelch13 propeller region associated with increased ART parasite clearance
half-life occur in malaria-affected regions.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-2701-6 
PMCID: PMC6407282
PMID: 30846002  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

