
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Mar 26;116(13):6244-6249. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1810239116. Epub 2019 Mar 13.

Fractional coalescent.

Mashayekhi S(1), Beerli P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Scientific Computing, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 
32306 smashayekhi@fsu.edu.
(2)Department of Scientific Computing, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 
32306.

An approach to the coalescent, the fractional coalescent (f-coalescent), is
introduced. The derivation is based on the discrete-time Cannings population
model in which the variance of the number of offspring depends on the parameter
α. This additional parameter α affects the variability of the patterns of the
waiting times; values of [Formula: see text] lead to an increase of short time
intervals, but occasionally allow for very long time intervals. When [Formula:
see text], the f-coalescent and the Kingman's n-coalescent are equivalent. The
distribution of the time to the most recent common ancestor and the probability
that n genes descend from m ancestral genes in a time interval of length T for
the f-coalescent are derived. The f-coalescent has been implemented in the
population genetic model inference software Migrate Simulation studies suggest
that it is possible to accurately estimate α values from data that were generated
with known α values and that the f-coalescent can detect potential environmental 
heterogeneity within a population. Bayes factor comparisons of simulated data
with [Formula: see text] and real data (H1N1 influenza and malaria parasites)
showed an improved model fit of the f-coalescent over the n-coalescent. The
development of the f-coalescent and its inclusion into the inference program
Migrate facilitates testing for deviations from the n-coalescent.

Copyright © 2019 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1810239116 
PMCID: PMC6442577
PMID: 30867282  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

