
1. Malar J. 2019 Apr 11;18(1):129. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2699-9.

Genetic variation of avian malaria in the tropical Andes: a relationship with the
spatial distribution of hosts.

Gil-Vargas DL(1), Sedano-Cruz RE(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Investigación en Ecología Animal, Departamento de Biología,
Universidad del Valle, Calle 13 No 100-00, Edif. E20, Room 3120, Cali, Colombia.
(2)Grupo de Investigación en Ecología Animal, Departamento de Biología,
Universidad del Valle, Calle 13 No 100-00, Edif. E20, Room 3120, Cali, Colombia. 
raul.sedano@correounivall.edu.co.
(3)Grupo de Investigación en Ecofisiología, Evolución y Biogeografía,
Departamento de Biología, Universidad del Valle, Cali, Colombia.
raul.sedano@correounivall.edu.co.

BACKGROUND: Avian haemosporidia are obligate blood parasites with an ample range 
of hosts worldwide. To understand how host communities may influence the
diversity of parasites of the neotropics, the spatial genetic variation of avian 
Plasmodium, Haemoproteus, and Leucocytozoon was examined between areas of host
endemism and along the elevational gradient in the tropical Andes.
METHODS: A total of 1686 accessions of the cytochrome b gene of avian
haemosporidia were selected from 43 publications, that further provides
additional information on 14.2% of bird species in the Neotropics. Haplotype
groups were identified using a similarity-based clustering of sequences using a
cut-off level ≥ 99.3% of sequence identity. Phylogenetic-based analyses were
implemented to examine the spatial genetic structure of avian haemosporidia among
areas of host endemism and the elevation gradient in the tropical Andes.
RESULTS: The areas of avian endemism, including the tropical Andes, can explain
the differential distribution of the haemosporidia cytochrome b gene variation.
In the tropical Andes region, the total number of avian haemosporidia haplotypes 
follows a unimodal pattern that peaks at mid-elevation between 2000 and 2500 m
above sea level. Furthermore, the haplotype assemblages of obligate blood
parasites tend to overlap towards mid-elevation, where avian host diversity tends
to be maximized.
CONCLUSIONS: Spatial analyses revealed that richness and turnover in
haemosporidia suggest an association with montane host diversity, according to
elevation in the tropical Andes. In addition, the spatial distribution of
haemosporidia diversity is closely associated with patterns of host assemblages
over large geographical scale in the tropical Andes and areas of avian endemism
nearby.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-2699-9 
PMCID: PMC6458820
PMID: 30971233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

