
1. Malar J. 2019 Apr 11;18(1):127. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2759-1.

Introgression between Anopheles gambiae and Anopheles coluzzii in Burkina Faso
and its associations with kdr resistance and Plasmodium infection.

Hanemaaijer MJ(1), Higgins H(1), Eralp I(1), Yamasaki Y(1), Becker N(2)(3),
Kirstein OD(1), Lanzaro GC(4), Lee Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Genetics Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Microbiology and
Immunology, School of Veterinary Medicine, UC Davis, Davis, CA, 95616, USA.
(2)German Mosquito Control Association (KABS), Speyer, Germany.
(3)Centre for Organismal Studies, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Vector Genetics Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Microbiology and
Immunology, School of Veterinary Medicine, UC Davis, Davis, CA, 95616, USA.
gclanzaro@ucdavis.edu.

BACKGROUND: Insecticide resistance in Anopheles coluzzii mosquitoes has become
widespread throughout West Africa including in Burkina Faso. The insecticide
resistance allele (kdr or L1014F) is a prime indicator that is highly correlated 
with phenotypic resistance in West Africa. Studies from Benin, Ghana and Mali
have suggested that the source of the L1014F is introgression of the 2L
divergence island via interspecific hybridization with Anopheles gambiae. The
goal of this study was to characterize local mosquito populations in the Nouna
Department, Burkina Faso with respect to: (i) the extent of introgression between
An. coluzzii and An. gambiae, (ii) the frequency of the L1014F mutation and (iii)
Plasmodium infection rates.
METHODS: A total of 95 mosquitoes were collected from ten sites surrounding Nouna
town in Kossi Province, Burkina Faso in 2012. The species composition, the extent
of introgression in An. coluzzii mosquitoes and their Plasmodium infection rates 
were identified with a modified version of the "Divergence Island SNP" (DIS)
genotyping assay.
RESULTS: The mosquito collection contained 70.5% An. coluzzii, 89.3% of which
carried a 3Â Mb genomic region on the 2L chromosome with L1014F insecticide
resistance mutation that was introgressed from An. gambiae. In addition, 22.4% in
the introgressed An. coluzzii specimens were infected with Plasmodium falciparum,
whereas none of the non-introgressed ("pure") An. coluzzii were infected.
CONCLUSION: This paper is the first report providing divergence island SNP
genotypes for natural population of Burkina Faso and corresponding Plasmodium
infection rates. These observations warrant further study and could have a major 
impact on future malaria control strategies in Burkina Faso.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-2759-1 
PMCID: PMC6458625
PMID: 30971230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

