
1. mBio. 2019 Apr 30;10(2). pii: e02731-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02731-18.

Global Spread of Mutant PfCRT and Its Pleiotropic Impact on Plasmodium falciparum
Multidrug Resistance and Fitness.

Dhingra SK(1), Gabryszewski SJ(1), Small-Saunders JL(1)(2), Yeo T(1), Henrich
PP(1), Mok S(1), Fidock DA(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Irving Medical 
Center, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Irving Medical 
Center, New York, New York, USA df2260@columbia.edu.

The global spread of Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter
(PfCRT) variant haplotypes earlier caused the widespread loss of chloroquine (CQ)
efficacy. In Asia, novel PfCRT mutations that emerged on the Dd2 allelic
background have recently been implicated in high-level resistance to piperaquine,
and N326S and I356T have been associated with genetic backgrounds in which
resistance emerged to artemisinin derivatives. By analyzing large-scale genome
sequencing data, we report that the predominant Asian CQ-resistant Dd2 haplotype 
is undetectable in Africa. Instead, the GB4 and previously unexplored Cam783
haplotypes predominate, along with wild-type, drug-sensitive PfCRT that has
reemerged as the major haplotype. To interrogate how these alleles impact drug
susceptibility, we generated pfcrt-modified isogenic parasite lines spanning the 
mutational interval between GB4 and Dd2, which includes Cam783 and involves amino
acid substitutions at residues 326 and 356. Relative to Dd2, the GB4 and Cam783
alleles were observed to mediate lower degrees of resistance to CQ and the
first-line drug amodiaquine, while resulting in higher growth rates. These
findings suggest that differences in growth rates, a surrogate of parasite
fitness, influence selection in the context of African infections that are
frequently characterized by high transmission rates, mixed infections, increased 
immunity, and less recourse to treatment. We also observe that the Asian Dd2
allele affords partial protection against piperaquine yet does not directly
impact artemisinin efficacy. Our results can help inform the regional
recommendations of antimalarials, whose activity is influenced by and, in certain
cases, enhanced against select PfCRT variant haplotypes.IMPORTANCE Our study
defines the allelic distribution of pfcrt, an important mediator of multidrug
resistance in Plasmodium falciparum, in Africa and Asia. We leveraged
whole-genome sequence analysis and gene editing to demonstrate how current drug
combinations can select different allelic variants of this gene and shape
region-specific parasite population structures. We document the ability of PfCRT 
mutations to modulate parasite susceptibility to current antimalarials in
dissimilar, pfcrt allele-specific ways. This study underscores the importance of 
actively monitoring pfcrt genotypes to identify emerging patterns of multidrug
resistance and help guide region-specific treatment options.

Copyright Â© 2019 Dhingra et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02731-18 
PMCID: PMC6495381
PMID: 31040246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

