
1. Scand J Immunol. 2019 Jul;90(1):e12771. doi: 10.1111/sji.12771. Epub 2019 May 20.

Toll-like receptor polymorphism in host immune response to infectious diseases: A
review.

Mukherjee S(1), Huda S(2), Sinha Babu SP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Kazi Nazrul University, Asansol, India.
(2)Department of Zoology (Centre for Advanced Studies), Visva-Bharati University,
Santiniketan, India.

Immunopolymorphism is considered as an important aspect behind the resistance or 
susceptibility of the host to an infectious disease. Over the years, researchers 
have explored many genetic factors for their role in immune surveillance against 
infectious diseases. Polymorphic characters in the gene encoding Toll-like
receptors (TLRs) play profound roles in inducing differential immune responses by
the host against parasitic infections. Protein(s) encoded by TLR gene(s) are
immensely important due to their ability of recognizing different types of
pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). This study reviews the
polymorphic residues present in the nucleotide or in the amino acid sequence of
TLRs and their influence on alteration of inflammatory signalling pathways
promoting either susceptibility or resistance to major infectious diseases,
including tuberculosis, leishmaniasis, malaria and filariasis. Population-based
studies exploring TLR polymorphisms in humans are primarily emphasized to discuss
the association of the polymorphic residues with the occurrence and epidemiology 
of the mentioned infectious diseases. Principal polymorphic residues in TLRs
influencing immunity to infection are mostly single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs). I602S (TLR1), R677W (TLR2), P554S (TLR3), D299G (TLR4), F616L (TLR5),
S249P (TLR6), Q11L (TLR7), M1V (TLR8), G1174A (TLR9) and G1031T (TLR10) are
presented as the major influential SNPs in shaping immunity to pathogenic
infections. The contribution of these SNPs in the structure-function relationship
of TLRs is yet not clear. Therefore, molecular studies on such polymorphisms can 
improve our understanding on the genetic basis of the immune response and pave
the way for therapeutic intervention in a more feasible way.

Â© 2019 The Foundation for the Scandinavian Journal of Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/sji.12771 
PMID: 31054156  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

