
1. Genes (Basel). 2019 Jun 28;10(7). pii: E490. doi: 10.3390/genes10070490.

Novel Molecular Synapomorphies Demarcate Different Main Groups/Subgroups of
Plasmodium and Piroplasmida Species Clarifying Their Evolutionary Relationships.

Sharma R(1), Gupta RS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario L8N 3Z5, Canada. sharmr33@mcmaster.ca.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario L8N 3Z5, Canada. gupta@mcmaster.ca.

The class Hematozoa encompasses several clinically important genera, including
Plasmodium, whose members cause the major life-threating disease malaria. Hence, 
a good understanding of the interrelationships of organisms from this class and
reliable means for distinguishing them are of much importance. This study reports
comprehensive phylogenetic and comparative analyses on protein sequences on the
genomes of 28 hematozoa species to understand their interrelationships. In
addition to phylogenetic trees based on two large datasets of protein sequences, 
detailed comparative analyses were carried out on the genomes of hematozoa
species to identify novel molecular synapomorphies consisting of conserved
signature indels (CSIs) in protein sequences. These studies have identified 79
CSIs that are exclusively present in specific groups of Hematozoa/Plasmodium
species, also supported by phylogenetic analysis, providing reliable means for
the identification of these species groups and understanding their
interrelationships. Of these CSIs, six CSIs are specifically shared by all
hematozoa species, two CSIs serve to distinguish members of the order
Piroplasmida, five CSIs are uniquely found in all Piroplasmida species except B. 
microti and two CSIs are specific for the genus Theileria. Additionally, we also 
describe 23 CSIs that are exclusively present in all genome-sequenced Plasmodium 
species and two, nine, ten and eight CSIs which are specific for members of the
Plasmodium subgenera Haemamoeba, Laverania, Vinckeia and Plasmodium (excluding P.
ovale and P. malariae), respectively. Additionally, our work has identified
several CSIs that support species relationships which are not evident from
phylogenetic analysis. Of these CSIs, one CSI supports the ancestral nature of
the avian-Plasmodium species in comparison to the mammalian-infecting groups of
Plasmodium species, four CSIs strongly support a specific relationship of species
between the subgenera Plasmodium and Vinckeia and three CSIs each that reliably
group P. malariae with members of the subgenus Plasmodium and P. ovale within the
subgenus Vinckeia, respectively. These results provide a reliable framework for
understanding the evolutionary relationships among the Plasmodium/Piroplasmida
species. Further, in view of the exclusivity of the described molecular markers
for the indicated groups of hematozoa species, particularly large numbers of
unique characteristics that are specific for all Plasmodium species, they provide
important molecular tools for biochemical/genetic studies and for developing
novel diagnostics and therapeutics for these organisms.

DOI: 10.3390/genes10070490 
PMCID: PMC6678196
PMID: 31261747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

