
1. ACS Infect Dis. 2019 Oct 11;5(10):1738-1753. doi: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.9b00168.
Epub 2019 Aug 14.

Identification via a Parallel Hit Progression Strategy of Improved Small Molecule
Inhibitors of the Malaria Purine Uptake Transporter that Inhibit Plasmodium
falciparum Parasite Proliferation.

Sosa Y, Deniskin R, Frame IJ, Steiginga MS(1), Bandyopadhyay D(1), Graybill
TL(1), Kallal LA(1), Ouellette MT(1), Pope AJ(1), Widdowson KL(1), Young RJ(1),
Akabas MH.

Author information: 
(1)Platform Technology & Science and Discovery Partners in Academia ,
GlaxoSmithKline , 1250 South Collegeville Road , Collegeville , Pennsylvania
19426 , United States.

Emerging resistance to current antimalarial medicines underscores the importance 
of identifying new drug targets and novel compounds. Malaria parasites are purine
auxotrophic and import purines via the Plasmodium falciparum equilibrative
nucleoside transporter type 1 (PfENT1). We previously showed that PfENT1
inhibitors block parasite proliferation in culture. Our goal was to identify
additional, possibly more optimal chemical starting points for a drug discovery
campaign. We performed a high throughput screen (HTS) of GlaxoSmithKline's 1.8
million compound library with a yeast-based assay to identify PfENT1 inhibitors. 
We used a parallel progression strategy for hit validation and expansion, with an
emphasis on chemical properties in addition to potency. In one arm, the most
active hits were tested for human cell toxicity; 201 had minimal toxicity. The
second arm, hit expansion, used a scaffold-based substructure search with the HTS
hits as templates to identify over 2000 compounds; 123 compounds had activity. Of
these 324 compounds, 175 compounds inhibited proliferation of P. falciparum
parasite strain 3D7 with IC50 values between 0.8 and ∼180 μM. One hundred
forty-two compounds inhibited PfENT1 knockout (pfent1Δ) parasite growth,
indicating they also hit secondary targets. Thirty-two hits inhibited growth of
3D7 but not pfent1Δ parasites. Thus, PfENT1 inhibition was sufficient to block
parasite proliferation. Therefore, PfENT1 may be a viable target for antimalarial
drug development. Six compounds with novel chemical scaffolds were extensively
characterized in yeast-, parasite-, and human-erythrocyte-based assays. The
inhibitors showed similar potencies against drug sensitive and resistant P.
falciparum strains. They represent attractive starting points for development of 
novel antimalarial drugs.

DOI: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.9b00168 
PMCID: PMC7171677
PMID: 31373203  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

