
1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Jul 18;10:1580. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.01580. eCollection 
2019.

A Gut Symbiotic Bacterium Serratia marcescens Renders Mosquito Resistance to
Plasmodium Infection Through Activation of Mosquito Immune Responses.

Bai L(1)(2), Wang L(2)(3), Vega-Rodr√≠guez J(4), Wang G(2)(3), Wang S(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Insect Developmental and Evolutionary Biology, CAS
Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Institute of Plant Physiology 
and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, United States.

The malaria development in the mosquito midgut is a complex process that results 
in considerable parasite losses. The mosquito gut microbiota influences the
outcome of pathogen infection in mosquitoes, but the underlying mechanisms
through which gut symbiotic bacteria affect vector competence remain elusive.
Here, we identified two Serratia strains (Y1 and J1) isolated from field-caught
female Anopheles sinensis from China and assessed their effect on Plasmodium
development in An. stephensi. Colonization of An. stephensi midgut by Serratia Y1
significantly renders the mosquito resistant to Plasmodium berghei infection,
while Serratia J1 has no impact on parasite development. Parasite inhibition by
Serratia Y1 is induced by the activation of the mosquito immune system.
Genome-wide transcriptomic analysis by RNA-seq shows a similar pattern of midgut 
gene expression in response to Serratia Y1 and J1 in sugar-fed mosquitoes.
However, 24 h after blood ingestion, Serratia Y1 modulates more midgut genes than
Serratia J1 including the c-type lectins (CTLs), CLIP serine proteases and other 
immune effectors. Furthermore, silencing of several Serratia Y1-induced
anti-Plasmodium factors like the thioester-containing protein 1 (TEP1),
fibrinogen immunolectin 9 (FBN9) or leucine-rich repeat protein LRRD7 can rescue 
parasite oocyst development in the presence of Serratia Y1, suggesting that these
factors modulate the Serratia Y1-mediated anti-Plasmodium effect. This study
enhances our understanding of how gut bacteria influence mosquito-Plasmodium
interactions.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.01580 
PMCID: PMC6657657
PMID: 31379768 

