
1. Int J Hematol Oncol Stem Cell Res. 2019 Apr 1;13(2):61-67.

Investigation of RFLP Haplotypes β-Globin Gene Cluster in Beta-Thalassemia
Patients in Central Iran.

Sajadpour Z(1), Amini-Farsani Z(2), Motovali-Bashi M(1), Yadollahi M(3),
Yadollahi F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University
of Isfahan, Isfahan, Iran.
(2)Young Researchers and Elites Club, Shahrekord Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Shahrekord, Iran.
(3)Department of Operative Dentistry, School of Dentistry, Shahrekord University 
of Medical Sciences, Shahrekord, Iran.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, Clinical Research Development Unit, Kashani
Hospital, Shahrekord University of Medical Sciences, Shahrekord, Iran.

Introduction: Beta-thalassemia is one of the most prevalent inherited blood
diseases among Iranians. The aim of this study was to elucidate the chromosomal
background of beta-thalassemia mutations in Esfahan province, Iran. Materials and
Methods: In this study, we investigated three frequent mutations (c.315+1G>A,
c.93-21G>A and c.92+5G>C in β-globin gene, the frequency of RFLP haplotypes, and 
LD between markers at β-globin gene cluster) in 150 beta-thalassemia patients and
50 healthy individuals. The molecular and population genetic investigations were 
performed on RFLP markers HindIII in the c.315+1G>A of Gγ (HindIIIG) and Aγ
(HindIIIA) genes, AvaII in the c.315+1G>A of β-globin gene and BamHI 3' to the
β-globin gene. All statistical analyses were performed using Power Marker
software and SISA server. Results: Fifty percent of beta-thalasemia patients were
associated with these mutations. Haplotype I was the most prevalent haplotype
among beta-thalassemia patients (39.33%) and normal individuals (46%). The
commonest c.315+1G>A mutation in our population was tightly linked with haplotype
III (43.75%) and haplotype I (31.25%). The second prevalent mutation, c.92+5G>C, 
was 90%, 6.66%, and 3.33% in linkage disequilibrium with haplotypes I, VII, and
III, respectively. The c.93-21G>A mutation indicated a strong association with
haplotype I (80%). Conclusion: Our study participants like beta-thalassemia
patients from Kermanshah province was found to possess a similar haplotype
background for common mutations. The emergence of most prevalent mutations on
chromosomes with different haplotypes can be explained by gene conversion and
recombination. High linkage of a mutation with specific haplotype is consistent
with the hypothesis that chromosomes carrying beta-thalassemia mutations
experienced positive selection pressure, probably because of the protection
against malaria experienced by beta-thalassemia carriers.


PMCID: PMC6660478
PMID: 31372199 

