
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2019 Oct 8;518(1):38-43. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.08.005. Epub 2019 Aug 9.

Development of mCherry tagged UdgX as a highly sensitive molecular probe for
specific detection of uracils in DNA.

Datta M(1), Aroli S(1), Karmakar K(1), Dutta S(2), Chakravortty D(1), Varshney
U(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, 560012, India.
(2)Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 560012,
India.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, 560012, India; Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific
Research, Bangalore, 560064, India. Electronic address: varshney@iisc.ac.in.

Uracil is not always a mistakenly occurring base in DNA. Uracils in DNA genomes
are known to be important in the life cycles of Bacillus subtilis phages (PBS1/2)
and the malarial parasite, Plasmodium falciparum; and have been implicated in the
development of fruit fly and antibody maturation in B-lymphocytes. Availability
of a sensitive, specific and robust technique for the detection uracils in
genes/genomes is essential to understand its varied biological roles.
Mycobacterium smegmatis UdgX (MsmUdgX), identified and characterised in our
laboratory, forms covalent complexes with the uracil sites in DNA in a specific
manner. MsmUdgX cleaves the glycosidic bond between uracil and the deoxyribose
sugar in DNA to produce uracilate and oxocarbenium ions. The oxocarbenium ion is 
then captured into a covalent complex by the nucleophilic attack of a histidine
side chain of MsmUdgX. Here, we describe the use of a fusion protein, mCherry
tagged MsmUdgX (mChUdgX), which combines the property of MsmUdgX to covalently
and specifically bind the uracil sites in the genome, with the sensitivity of
fluorescent detection of mCherry as a reporter. We show that both the purified
mChUdgX and the Escherichia coli cell-extracts overexpressing mChUdgX provide
high sensitivity and specificity of detecting uracils in DNA.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.08.005 
PMID: 31402116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

