
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2019 Nov;75:103994. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.103994. Epub
2019 Aug 14.

Indel-informed Bayesian analysis suggests cryptic population structure between
Plasmodium knowlesi of humans and long-tailed macaques (Macaca fascicularis) in
Malaysian Borneo.

Wilcox JS(1), Kerschner A(2), Hollocher H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN
46556-5688, USA. Electronic address: jw5478@nyu.edu.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN
46556-5688, USA.

Plasmodium knowlesi is an important causative agent of malaria in humans of
Southeast Asia. Macaques are natural hosts for this parasite, but little is
conclusively known about its patterns of transmission within and between these
hosts. Here, we apply a comprehensive phylogenetic approach to test for patterns 
of cryptic population genetic structure between P. knowlesi isolated from humans 
and long-tailed macaques from the state of Sarawak in Malaysian Borneo. Our
approach differs from previous investigations through our exhaustive use of
archival 18S Small Subunit rRNA (18S) gene sequences from Plasmodium and
Hepatocystis species, our inclusion of insertion and deletion information during 
phylogenetic inference, and our application of Bayesian phylogenetic inference to
this problem. We report distinct clades of P. knowlesi that predominantly
contained sequences from either human or macaque hosts for paralogous A-type and 
S-type 18S gene loci. We report significant partitioning of sequence distances
between host species across both types of loci, and confirmed that sequences of
the same locus type showed significantly biased assortment into different clades 
depending on their host species. Our results support the zoonotic potential of
Plasmodium knowlesi, but also suggest that humans may be preferentially infected 
with certain strains of this parasite. Broadly, such patterns could arise through
preferential zoonotic transmission of some parasite lineages or a disposition of 
parasites to transmit within, rather than between, human and macaque hosts.
Available data are insufficient to address these hypotheses. Our results suggest 
that the epidemiology of P. knowlesi may be more complicated than previously
assumed, and highlight the need for renewed and more vigorous explorations of
transmission patterns in the fifth human malarial parasite.

Copyright Â© 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.103994 
PMID: 31421245  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

