
1. Am J Chin Med. 2019;47(6):1325-1343. doi: 10.1142/S0192415X1950068X. Epub 2019
Sep 5.

Effect of Dihydroartemisinin on Plasmodium NADH-Dependent Glutamate Synthase: The
Implication in Malaria Management.

Xu W(1)(2), Wang H(1)(2), Tang T(1)(2), Ma J(1)(2), Cui Z(2), Li L(2), Guo S(2), 
Zhou Y(2), Jiang T(2), Li C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Artemisinin, Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, China
Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 100700, P. R. China.
(2)Tang Center for Herbal Medicine Research, Institute of Chinese Materia Medica,
China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 100700, P. R. China.

Artemisinin and its analogues (ARTs) are currently the most effective
anti-malarial drugs, but the precise mechanism of action is still highly
controversial. Effects of ARTs on Plasmodium genes expression are studied in our 
Lab. The overexpression of an interesting amidotransferase, NADH-dependent
glutamate synthase (NADH-GltS) was found in treated by dihydroartemisinin (DHA). 
The increased expression occurred not only from global transcriptomics analysis
on the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum (P. falciparum) 3D7 and gene 
expression screening on all of iron-sulphur cluster proteins from P.f. 3D7
in vitro but also from Plasmodium berghei (P. berghei) ANKA in mice. Influence of
DHA on NADH-GltS was specifically at trophozoite stage of P. falciparum and in a 
dose-dependent manner below the effective doses. L-glutamine (Gln) and
L-glutamate (Glu) are the substrate and product of NADH-GltS respectively.
Azaserine (Aza) is specific inhibitor for NADH-GltS. Experimental data showed
that Glu levels were significantly decreasing with DHA dose increasing but
NADH-GltS enzyme activities were still remained at higher levels in parasites,
and appropriate amount of exogenous Glu could significantly reduce anti-malarial 
action of DHA but excessive amount lost the above effect. Aza alone could inhibit
proliferation of P. falciparum and had an additive effect in combination with
DHA. Those results could suggest that: Glutamate depletion is one of the
anti-malarial actions of DHA; overexpression of NADH-GltS would be a feedback
pattern of parasite itself due to glutamate depletion, but not a direct action of
DHA; the "feedback pattern" is one of protective strategies of Plasmodium to
interfere with the anti-malarial actions of DHA; and specific inhibitor for
NADH-GltS as a new type of anti-malarial agents or new partner in ACT might
provide a potential.

DOI: 10.1142/S0192415X1950068X 
PMID: 31488031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

