
1. Mol Ecol Resour. 2020 Jan;20(1):14-28. doi: 10.1111/1755-0998.13091. Epub 2019
Dec 13.

Metatranscriptomics yields new genomic resources and sensitive detection of
infections for diverse blood parasites.

Galen SC(1)(2), Borner J(1)(3), Williamson JL(4), Witt CC(4), Perkins SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sackler Institute for Comparative Genomics, American Museum of Natural
History, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Richard Gilder Graduate School, American Museum of Natural History, New York, 
NY, USA.
(3)Institute of Evolutionary Ecology and Conservation Genomics, University of
Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(4)Department of Biology, Museum of Southwestern Biology, University of New
Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA.

Metatranscriptomics is a powerful method for studying the composition and
function of complex microbial communities. The application of metatranscriptomics
to multispecies parasite infections is of particular interest, as research on
parasite evolution and diversification has been hampered by technical challenges 
to genome-scale DNA sequencing. In particular, blood parasites of vertebrates are
abundant and diverse although they often occur at low infection intensities and
exist as multispecies infections, rendering the isolation of genomic sequence
data challenging. Here, we use birds and their diverse haemosporidian parasites
to illustrate the potential for metatranscriptome sequencing to generate large
quantities of genome-wide sequence data from multiple blood parasite species
simultaneously. We used RNA-sequencing of 24 blood samples from songbirds in
North America to show that metatranscriptomes can yield large proportions of
haemosporidian protein-coding gene repertoires even when infections are of low
intensity (<0.1% red blood cells infected) and consist of multiple parasite taxa.
By bioinformatically separating host and parasite transcripts and assigning them 
to the haemosporidian genus of origin, we found that transcriptomes detected ~23%
more total parasite infections across all samples than were identified using
microscopy and DNA barcoding. For single-species infections, we obtained data for
>1,300 loci from samples with as low as 0.03% parasitaemia, with the number of
loci increasing with infection intensity. In total, we provide data for 1,502
single-copy orthologous loci from a phylogenetically diverse set of 33
haemosporidian mitochondrial lineages. The metatranscriptomic approach described 
here has the potential to accelerate ecological and evolutionary research on
haemosporidians and other diverse parasites.

Â© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1755-0998.13091 
PMCID: PMC6942209 [Available on 2021-01-01]
PMID: 31507097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

