
1. Korean J Parasitol. 2019 Aug;57(4):445-450. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2019.57.4.445. Epub 
2019 Aug 31.

Low Levels of Polymorphisms and Negative Selection in Plasmodum knowlesi
Merozoite Surface Protein 8 in Malaysian Isolates.

Atique Ahmed M(1), Kang HJ(2), Quan FS(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Zoology, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul
02447, Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Science, Graduate School, Kyung Hee University, Seoul
02447, Korea.
(3)Medical Research Center for Bioreaction to Reactive Oxygen Species and
Biomedical Science Institute, School of Medicine, Graduate School, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul 02447, Korea.

Human infections due to the monkey malaria parasite Plasmodium knowlesi is
increasingly being reported from most Southeast Asian countries specifically
Malaysia. The parasite causes severe and fatal malaria thus there is a need for
urgent measures for its control. In this study, the level of polymorphisms,
haplotypes and natural selection of full-length pkmsp8 in 37 clinical samples
from Malaysian Borneo along with 6 lab-adapted strains were investigated. Low
levels of polymorphism were observed across the full-length gene, the double
epidermal growth factor (EGF) domains were mostly conserved, and non-synonymous
substitutions were absent. Evidence of strong negative selection pressure in the 
non-EGF regions were found indicating functional constrains acting at different
domains. Phylogenetic haplotype network analysis identified shared haplotypes and
indicated geographical clustering of samples originating from Peninsular Malaysia
and Malaysian Borneo. This is the first study to genetically characterize the
full-length msp8 gene from clinical isolates of P. knowlesi from Malaysia;
however, further functional characterization would be useful for future rational 
vaccine design.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2019.57.4.445 
PMCID: PMC6753297
PMID: 31533414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

