
1. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist. 2019 Dec;11:49-58. doi:
10.1016/j.ijpddr.2019.10.001. Epub 2019 Oct 4.

Profiles of Kelch mutations in Plasmodium falciparum across South Asia and their 
implications for tracking drug resistance.

Chhibber-Goel J(1), Sharma A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, New Delhi, 110067, India. Electronic address:
jyoti.chhibber@gmail.com.
(2)Molecular Medicine Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, New Delhi, 110067, India. Electronic address:
amitpsharma68@gmail.com.

Artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) offers highly successful treatment of
malaria. Emergence and spread of Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) parasites with
decreased susceptibility to ACT in South-East Asia has caused concern worldwide. 
The current accepted criteria to assess artemisinin (ART) resistance relies upon 
data on treatment failure, delayed parasite clearance at day 3 (DPC3), parasite
clearance half-life (PCHL) and in-vitro/ex-vivo ring stage survival assays
(RSAs). Interestingly, some studies suggest that DPC3 does not provide a distinct
separation between ART sensitive/resistant strains, and RSA differences may also 
be inconclusive. More recently, recrudescence of ART treated Pf, independent of
the presence of Kelch 13 (K13) mutation (C580Y), has been reported in the monkey 
malaria model suggesting that genes other than K13 like coronin, dhps, dhfr, crt,
mdr1 and plasmepsin1 may contribute towards ACT failure. Here we have collated
the distribution of K13 mutants from Pf strains in South Asia. A total of fifty
Pf-K13 mutations have been studied for ART resistance in South Asia of which nine
have been validated while eleven are potentials for ART resistance. The remaining
thirty K13 mutations have been reported from various locations in South Asia but 
lack corroborative clinical data on ART resistance/ACT failure. Of the fifty,
fourteen K13 mutations have been identified in India including four novel
mutations (S549Y, G625R, N657H, D702N). Structural mapping of these K13 mutations
does not offer any coherent explanation for their contribution towards ART
resistance as they are scattered in the K13 structure. Thus, K13 mutations likely
provide only a partial synopsis, and we propose that all suspect cases of ACT
failure be assessed by: 1) DPC3, 2) PCHL, 3) in-vitro/ex-vivo RSAs and 4) GWAS
data in an effort to annotate the resistance status of the parasites. These
efforts may help in surveillance and containment of ART resistance/ACT failure in
South Asia.

Copyright Â© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpddr.2019.10.001 
PMCID: PMC6796718
PMID: 31606696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

