
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Oct 14;20(20). pii: E5087. doi: 10.3390/ijms20205087.

The G9a Histone Methyltransferase Inhibitor BIX-01294 Modulates Gene Expression
during Plasmodium falciparum Gametocyte Development and Transmission.

Ngwa CJ(1), Kiesow MJ(2), Orchard LM(3), Farrukh A(4), Llin√°s M(5), Pradel G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Applied Infection Biology, Institute of Zoology, RWTH
Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany. ngwa.che@bio2.rwth-aachen.de.
(2)Division of Cellular and Applied Infection Biology, Institute of Zoology, RWTH
Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany. kiesow@bio2.rwth-aachen.de.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology & Center for Malaria
Research, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.
lma20@psu.edu.
(4)Division of Cellular and Applied Infection Biology, Institute of Zoology, RWTH
Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany. afiafarrukh10@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology & Center for Malaria
Research, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.
manuel@psu.edu.
(6)Division of Cellular and Applied Infection Biology, Institute of Zoology, RWTH
Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany. pradel@bio2.rwth-aachen.de.

Transmission of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum from the human to the 
mosquito is initiated by specialized sexual cells, the gametocytes. In the human,
gametocytes are formed in response to stress signals and following uptake by a
blood-feeding Anopheles mosquito initiate sexual reproduction. Gametocytes need
to fine-tune their gene expression in order to develop inside the mosquito to
continue life-cycle progression. Previously, we showed that post-translational
histone acetylation controls gene expression during gametocyte development and
transmission. However, the role of histone methylation remains poorly understood.
We here use the histone G9a methyltransferase inhibitor BIX-01294 to investigate 
the role of histone methylation in regulating gene expression in gametocytes. In 
vitro assays demonstrated that BIX-01294 inhibits intraerythrocytic replication
with a half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of 13.0 nM. Furthermore,
BIX-01294 significantly impairs gametocyte maturation and reduces the formation
of gametes and zygotes. Comparative transcriptomics between BIX-01294-treated and
untreated immature, mature and activated gametocytes demonstrated greater than
1.5-fold deregulation of approximately 359 genes. The majority of these genes are
transcriptionally downregulated in the activated gametocytes and could be
assigned to transcription, translation, and signaling, indicating a contribution 
of histone methylations in mediating gametogenesis. Our combined data show that
inhibitors of histone methylation may serve as a multi-stage antimalarial.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20205087 
PMCID: PMC6829282
PMID: 31615031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

