
1. Korean J Parasitol. 2019 Oct;57(5):469-479. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2019.57.5.469. Epub 
2019 Oct 31.

Genetic Diversity of Plasmodium vivax in Clinical Isolates from Southern Thailand
using PvMSP1, PvMSP3 (PvMSP3α, PvMSP3β) Genes and Eight Microsatellite Markers.

Thanapongpichat S(1), Khammanee T(2), Sawangjaroen N(2), Buncherd H(1), Tun
AW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medical Technology, Prince of Songkla University, Hat Yai,
Songkhla, Thailand.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Prince of Songkla University, 
Hat Yai, Songkhla, Thailand.
(3)Faculty of Graduate Studies, Mahidol University, Salaya, Nakhon Pathom,
Thailand.

Plasmodium vivax is usually considered morbidity in endemic areas of Asia,
Central and South America, and some part of Africa. In Thailand, previous studies
indicated the genetic diversity of P. vivax in malaria-endemic regions such as
the western part of Thailand bordering with Myanmar. The objective of the study
is to investigate the genetic diversity of P. vivax circulating in Southern
Thailand by using 3 antigenic markers and 8 microsatellite markers. Dried blood
spots were collected from Chumphon, Phang Nga, Ranong and, Surat Thani provinces 
of Thailand. By PCR, 3 distinct sizes of PvMSP3α, 2 sizes of PvMSP3β and 2 sizes 
of PvMSP1 F2 were detected based on the length of PCR products, respectively.
PCR/RFLP analyses of these antigen genes revealed high levels of genetic
diversity. The genotyping of 8 microsatellite loci showed high genetic diversity 
as indicated by high alleles per locus and high expected heterozygosity (HE). The
genotyping markers also showed multiple-clones of infection. Mixed genotypes were
detected in 4.8% of PvMSP3α, 29.1% in PvMSP3β and 55.3% of microsatellite
markers. These results showed that there was high genetic diversity of P. vivax
isolated from Southern Thailand, indicating that the genetic diversity of P.
vivax in this region was comparable to those observed other areas of Thailand.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2019.57.5.469 
PMCID: PMC6851248
PMID: 31715687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

