
1. Parasitol Res. 2019 Dec;118(12):3497-3508. doi: 10.1007/s00436-019-06459-8. Epub 
2019 Nov 13.

Epidemiology, hematology, and unusual morphological characteristics of Plasmodium
during an avian malaria outbreak in penguins in Brazil.

Vanstreels RET(1)(2), Dutra DA(3), Ferreira-Junior FC(3)(4), Hurtado R(5), Egert 
L(5), Mayorga LFSP(5), Bhering RCC(5), Braga ÉM(3), Catão-Dias JL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Wildlife Comparative Pathology (LAPCOM), School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
ralph_vanstreels@yahoo.com.br.
(2)Institute of Research and Rehabilitation of Marine Animals (IPRAM), Cariacica,
Brazil. ralph_vanstreels@yahoo.com.br.
(3)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal
University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(4)Center for Conservation Genomics, Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute, 
Washington, USA.
(5)Institute of Research and Rehabilitation of Marine Animals (IPRAM), Cariacica,
Brazil.
(6)Laboratory of Wildlife Comparative Pathology (LAPCOM), School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Avian malaria is a mosquito-borne disease caused by Plasmodium spp. protozoa, and
penguins are considered particularly susceptible to this disease, developing
rapid outbreaks with potentially high mortality. We report on an outbreak of
avian malaria in Magellanic penguins (Spheniscus magellanicus) at a
rehabilitation center in Espírito Santo, southeast Brazil. In August and
September 2015, a total of 89 Magellanic penguins (87 juveniles and 2 adults)
received care at Institute of Research and Rehabilitation of Marine Animals. Over
a period of 2 weeks, Plasmodium infections were identified in eight individuals
(9.0%), four of which died (mortality = 4.5%, lethality = 50%). Blood smears and 
sequencing of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene revealed the presence of
Plasmodium lutzi SPMAG06, Plasmodium elongatum GRW06, Plasmodium sp. PHPAT01,
Plasmodium sp. SPMAG10, and Plasmodium cathemerium (sequencing not successful).
Two unusual morphological features were observed in individuals infected with
lineage SPMAG06: (a) lack of clumping of pigment granules and (b) presence of
circulating exoerythrocytic meronts. Hematological results (packed cell volume,
plasma total solids, complete blood cell counts) of positive individuals showed
differences from those of negative individuals depending on the lineages, but
there was no overarching pattern consistently observed for all Plasmodium spp.
The epidemiology of the outbreak and the phylogeography of the parasite lineages 
detected in this study support the notion that malarial infections in penguins
undergoing rehabilitation in Brazil are the result of the spillover inoculation
by plasmodia that circulate in the local avifauna, especially Passeriformes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-019-06459-8 
PMID: 31720833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

