
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2020;2071:125-141. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9857-9_7.

CRISPR/Cas9-Mediated Generation of Tetracycline Repressor-Based Inducible
Knockdown in Toxoplasma gondii.

Jacot D(1), Soldati-Favre D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, CMU, University of Geneva, 
Geneva, Switzerland. Damien.Jacot@unige.ch.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, CMU, University of Geneva, 
Geneva, Switzerland.

The phylum Apicomplexa groups numerous pathogenic protozoan parasites including
Plasmodium, the causative agent of malaria, Cryptosporidium which can cause
severe gastrointestinal infections, as well as Babesia, Eimeria, and Theileria
that account for considerable economic burdens to poultry and cattle industry.
Toxoplasma gondii is the most ubiquitous and opportunistic member of this phylum 
able to infect all warm-blooded animals and responsible for severe disease in
immunocompromised individuals and unborn fetuses.Due to its ease of cultivation
and genetic tractability T. gondii has served as recipient for the transfer and
adaptation of multiple genetic tools developed to control gene expression. In
these parasites, a collection of tight conditional systems exists to control gene
expression at the levels of transcription, RNA degradation or protein stability. 
The recent implementation of the CRISPR/Cas9 technology considerably reduces time
and effort to generate transgenic parasites and at the same time increases to an 
ultimate level of precision the editing of the parasite genome. Here, we provide 
a step-by-step protocol for CRISPR/Cas9-mediated generation of tetracycline
repressor-based inducible knockdown in T. gondii.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9857-9_7 
PMID: 31758450 

