
1. PLoS One. 2019 Nov 21;14(11):e0225637. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0225637.
eCollection 2019.

An odorant receptor from Anopheles gambiae that demonstrates enantioselectivity
to the plant volatile, linalool.

Huff RM(1), Pitts RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Baylor University, Waco, Texas, United States of
America.

Insects express chemical receptors within sensory neurons that are activated by
specific cues in the environment, thereby influencing the acquisition of critical
resources. A significant gap in our current understanding of insect chemical
ecology is defining the molecular mechanisms that underlie sensitivity to
plant-emitted volatiles. Linalool is a commonly-occurring monoterpene that has
various effects on insect behavior, either acting as an attractant or a
repellent, and existing in nature as one of two possible stereoisomers,
(R)-(-)-linalool and (S)-(+)-linalool. In this study, we have used a cell-based
functional assay to identify linalool and structurally-related compounds as
ligands of Odorant receptor 29, a labellum-expressed receptor in the malaria
vector mosquito, Anopheles gambiae (AgamOr29). While (R)-(-)-linalool activates
AgamOr29, a mixture of the (R) and (S) stereoisomers activates the receptor with 
higher potency, implying enantiomeric selectivity. Orthologs of Or29 are present 
in the genomes of Anophelines within the Cellia subgenus. The conservation of
this receptor across Anopheline lineages suggests that this ecologically
important compound might serve as an attraction cue for nectar-seeking
mosquitoes. Moreover, the characterization of a mosquito terpene receptor could
serve as a foundation for future ligand-receptor studies of plant volatiles and
for the discovery of compounds that can be integrated into push-pull vector
control strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0225637 
PMCID: PMC6872167
PMID: 31751420  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

