
1. mBio. 2020 Feb 4;11(1). pii: e03234-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.03234-19.

RNA-Seq Analysis Illuminates the Early Stages of Plasmodium Liver Infection.

Toro-Moreno M(#)(1), Sylvester K(#)(2), Srivastava T(1), Posfai D(2), Derbyshire 
ER(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University, Durham,
North Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA
emily.derbyshire@duke.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

The apicomplexan parasites Plasmodium spp. are the causative agents of malaria, a
disease that poses a significant global health burden. Plasmodium spp. initiate
infection of the human host by transforming and replicating within hepatocytes.
This liver stage (LS) is poorly understood compared to other Plasmodium life
stages, which has hindered our ability to target these parasites for disease
prevention. We conducted an extensive transcriptome sequencing (RNA-Seq) analysis
throughout the Plasmodium berghei LS, covering as early as 2 h postinfection
(hpi) and extending to 48 hpi. Our data revealed that hundreds of genes are
differentially expressed at 2 hpi and that multiple genes shown to be important
for later infection are upregulated as early as 12 hpi. Using hierarchical
clustering along with coexpression analysis, we identified clusters functionally 
enriched for important liver-stage processes such as interactions with the host
cell and redox homeostasis. Furthermore, some of these clusters were highly
correlated to the expression of ApiAP2 transcription factors, while showing
enrichment of mostly uncharacterized DNA binding motifs. This finding indicates
potential LS targets for these transcription factors, while also hinting at
alternative uncharacterized DNA binding motifs and transcription factors during
this stage. Our work presents a window into the previously undescribed
transcriptome of Plasmodium upon host hepatocyte infection to enable a
comprehensive view of the parasite's LS. These findings also provide a blueprint 
for future studies that extend hypotheses concerning LS gene function in P.
berghei to human-infective Plasmodium parasites.IMPORTANCE The LS of Plasmodium
infection is an asymptomatic yet necessary stage for producing blood-infective
parasites, the causative agents of malaria. Blocking the liver stage of the life 
cycle can prevent clinical malaria, but relatively less is known about the
parasite's biology at this stage. Using the rodent model P. berghei, we
investigated whole-transcriptome changes occurring as early as 2 hpi of
hepatocytes. The transcriptional profiles of early time points (2, 4, 12, and 18 
hpi) have not been accessible before due to the technical challenges associated
with liver-stage infections. Our data now provide insights into these early
parasite fluxes that may facilitate establishment of infection, transformation,
and replication in the liver.

Copyright © 2020 Toro-Moreno et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.03234-19 
PMCID: PMC7002348
PMID: 32019802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

