
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2020 Mar 2;20(1):188. doi: 10.1186/s12879-020-4885-3.

Comprehensive proteomics investigation of P. vivax-infected human plasma and
parasite isolates.

Venkatesh A(1), Aggarwal S(1), Kumar S(1), Rajyaguru S(1), Kumar V(1), Bankar
S(2), Shastri J(2), Patankar S(1), Srivastava S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay, Powai, Mumbai, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, T. N. Medical College and BYL Nair Hospital,
Mumbai, India.
(3)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay, Powai, Mumbai, India. sanjeeva@iitb.ac.in.

BACKGROUND: In recent times, Plasmodium vivax (P. vivax) has become a serious
threat to public health due to its ability to cause severe infection with fatal
outcomes. Its unique biology makes it resilient to control measures that are
otherwise effective against P. falciparum. A deeper understanding of P. vivax
biology and pathogenesis is, therefore, essential for developing the right
control strategies. Proteomics of P. falciparum has been helpful in studying
disease biology and elucidating molecular mechanisms involved in the development 
of disease. However, unlike P. falciparum, proteomics data for P. vivax infection
is minimal due to the absence of a continuous culture system. The dependence on
clinical samples and animal models has drastically limited P. vivax research,
creating critical knowledge gaps in our understanding of the disease. This study 
describes an in-depth proteomics analysis of P. vivax-infected human plasma and
parasite isolates, to understand parasite biology, pathogenesis, and to identify 
new diagnostic targets for P. vivax malaria.
METHODS: A mass-spectrometry- (MS) based proteomics approach (Q Exactive) was
applied to analyze human plasma and parasite isolates from vivax malaria patients
visiting a primary health centre in India. Additionally, a targeted proteomics
assay was standardized for validating unique peptides of most recurring parasite 
proteins.
RESULTS: Thirty-eight P. vivax proteins were detected in human plasma with high
confidence. Several glycolytic enzymes were found along with hypothetical,
cytoskeletal, ribosomal, and nuclear proteins. Additionally, 103 highly abundant 
P. vivax proteins were detected in parasite isolates. This represents the highest
number of parasite proteins to be reported from clinical samples so far.
Interestingly, five of these; three Plasmodium exported proteins (PVX_003545,
PVX_003555 and PVX_121935), a hypothetical protein (PVX_083555) and Pvstp1
(subtelomeric transmembrane protein 1, PVX_094303) were found in both plasma and 
parasite isolates.
CONCLUSIONS: A parasite proteomics investigation is essential to understand
disease pathobiology and design novel interventions. Control strategies against
P. vivax also depend on early diagnosis. This work provides deeper insights into 
the biology of P. vivax by identifying proteins expressed by the parasite during 
its complex life-cycle within the human host. The study also reports antigens
that may be explored as diagnostic candidates.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-020-4885-3 
PMCID: PMC7053139
PMID: 32122317  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

