
1. mBio. 2020 Mar 17;11(2). pii: e03272-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.03272-19.

Evolution of Host Specificity by Malaria Parasites through Altered Mechanisms
Controlling Genome Maintenance.

Siao MC(1), Borner J(2)(3), Perkins SL(2), Deitsch KW(4), Kirkman LA(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Tri-Institutional MD-PhD Program, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New
York, USA.
(2)Sackler Institute for Comparative Genomics & Division of Invertebrate Zoology,
American Museum of Natural History, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Institute of Evolutionary Ecology and Conservation Genomics, University of
Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, New York, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, New York, USA lak9015@med.cornell.edu.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA.

The protozoan parasites that cause malaria infect a wide variety of vertebrate
hosts, including birds, reptiles, and mammals, and the evolutionary pressures
inherent to the host-parasite relationship have profoundly shaped the genomes of 
both host and parasite. Here, we report that these selective pressures have
resulted in unexpected alterations to one of the most basic aspects of eukaryotic
biology, the maintenance of genome integrity through DNA repair. Malaria
parasites that infect humans continuously generate genetic diversity within their
antigen-encoding gene families through frequent ectopic recombination between
gene family members, a process that is a crucial feature of the persistence of
malaria globally. The continuous generation of antigen diversity ensures that
different parasite isolates are antigenically distinct, thus preventing extensive
cross-reactive immunity and enabling parasites to maintain stable transmission
within human populations. However, the molecular basis of the recombination
between gene family members is not well understood. Through computational
analyses of the antigen-encoding, multicopy gene families of different Plasmodium
species, we report the unexpected observation that malaria parasites that infect 
rodents do not display the same degree of antigen diversity as observed in
Plasmodium falciparum and appear to undergo significantly less ectopic
recombination. Using comparative genomics, we also identify key molecular
components of the diversification process, thus shedding new light on how malaria
parasites balance the maintenance of genome integrity with the requirement for
continuous genetic diversification.IMPORTANCE Malaria remains one of the most
prevalent and deadly infectious diseases of the developing world, causing
approximately 228 million clinical cases and nearly half a million deaths
annually. The disease is caused by protozoan parasites of the genus Plasmodium,
and of the five species capable of infecting humans, infections with P.
falciparum are the most severe. In addition to the parasites that infect people, 
there are hundreds of additional species that infect birds, reptiles, and other
mammals, each exquisitely evolved to meet the specific challenges inherent to
survival within their respective hosts. By comparing the unique strategies that
each species has evolved, key insights into host-parasite interactions can be
gained, including discoveries regarding the pathogenesis of human disease. Here, 
we describe the surprising observation that closely related parasites with
different hosts have evolved remarkably different methods for repairing their
genomes. This observation has important implications for the ability of parasites
to maintain chronic infections and for the development of host immunity.

Copyright Â© 2020 Siao et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.03272-19 
PMCID: PMC7078485
PMID: 32184256 

