
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Apr 14;10(1):6354. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-63121-5.

An epigenetic map of malaria parasite development from host to vector.

Witmer K(1), Fraschka SA(2)(3), Vlachou D(4), Bártfai R(2), Christophides GK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ, London, UK.
kathrin.witmer@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Radboud University, 6525, GA, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.
(3)Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen,
72076, Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ, London, UK.
(5)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ, London, UK.
g.christophides@imperial.ac.uk.

The malaria parasite replicates asexually in the red blood cells of its
vertebrate host employing epigenetic mechanisms to regulate gene expression in
response to changes in its environment. We used chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by sequencing in conjunction with RNA sequencing to create an epigenomic
and transcriptomic map of the developmental transition from asexual blood stages 
to male and female gametocytes and to ookinetes in the rodent malaria parasite
Plasmodium berghei. Across the developmental stages examined, heterochromatin
protein 1 associates with variantly expressed gene families localised at
subtelomeric regions and variant gene expression based on heterochromatic
silencing is observed only in some genes. Conversely, the euchromatin mark
histone 3 lysine 9 acetylation (H3K9ac) is abundant in non-heterochromatic
regions across all developmental stages. H3K9ac presents a distinct pattern of
enrichment around the start codon of ribosomal protein genes in all stages but
male gametocytes. Additionally, H3K9ac occupancy positively correlates with
transcript abundance in all stages but female gametocytes suggesting that
transcription in this stage is independent of H3K9ac levels. This finding
together with known mRNA repression in female gametocytes suggests a multilayered
mechanism operating in female gametocytes in preparation for fertilization and
zygote development, coinciding with parasite transition from host to vector.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-63121-5 
PMCID: PMC7156373
PMID: 32286373 

