
1. Korean J Parasitol. 2020 Apr;58(2):201-204. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2020.58.2.201. Epub 
2020 Apr 30.

Molecular Diagnosis of Taenia saginata Tapeworms from Two Residents of Northern
Cambodia.

Chang T(1), Jung BK(1), Sohn WM(2), Hong S(1), Shin H(1), Ryoo S(1), Lee J(1),
Lee KH(1), Khieu V(3), Huy R(3), Chai JY(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Korea Association of Health Promotion, Seoul 
07649, Korea.
(2)Department of Parasitology and Tropical Medicine, and Institute of Health
Sciences, Gyeongsang National University College of Medicine, Jinju 52727, Korea.
(3)National Center for Parasitology, Entomology and Malaria Control, Phnom Penh, 
Cambodia.
(4)Department of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul 03080, Korea.

Taenia saginata infection has seldom been reported in Cambodia. In this study, we
performed a survey of intestinal parasites in 1,156 residents of Preah Vihear and
Stung Treng Provinces in 2018. The results revealed that 26 (2.4%) cases were
positive for Taenia spp. eggs. In order to obtain the strobilae of the tapeworms,
2 patients in Preah Vihear were treated with praziquantel and purged with
magnesium salts. The proglottids expelled after the medication were
morphologically and molecularly analyzed to determine the species. The main
uterine lateral braches in gravid proglottids were &gt;15 in number suggesting
that they are either T. saginata or Taenia asiatica. The sequences of the
mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 (cox1) gene and 2 nuclear loci,
elongation factor-1 alpha (ef1) and ezrin-radixin-moesin-like protein (elp), were
identical to the sequences of T. saginata available in GenBank but distant from
Taenia solium, T. asiatica, and T. saginata-T. asiatica hybrid. This is the first
report of the presence of T. saginata in the northern part of Cambodia bordering 
Lao PDR based on a molecular confirmation.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2020.58.2.201 
PMCID: PMC7231828
PMID: 32418391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

