
1. Acta Trop. 2020 Nov;211:105596. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2020.105596. Epub 2020
Jun 23.

Natural Plasmodium infection in wild macaques of three states in peninsular
Malaysia.

Amir A(1), Shahari S(1), Liew JWK(1), de Silva JR(1), Khan MB(1), Lai MY(1),
Snounou G(2), Abdullah ML(3), Gani M(3), Rovie-Ryan JJ(3), Lau YL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology Faculty of Medicine, University Malaya, 50603,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)CEA-Université Paris Sud 11-INSERM U1184, Immunology of Viral Infections and
Autoimmune Diseases (IMVA) IDMIT Department IBFJ DRF, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.
(3)National Wildlife Forensic Laboratory, Ex-situ Conservation Division
Department of Wildlife and National Parks Peninsular Malaysia, 56100, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Parasitology Faculty of Medicine, University Malaya, 50603,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Electronic address: lauyeeling@um.edu.my.

Zoonotic cases of Plasmodium knowlesi account for most malaria cases in Malaysia,
and humans infected with P. cynomolgi, another parasite of macaques have recently
been reported in Sarawak. To date the epidemiology of malaria in its natural
Macaca reservoir hosts remains little investigated. In this study we surveyed the
prevalence of simian malaria in wild macaques of three states in Peninsular
Malaysia, namely Pahang, Perak and Johor using blood samples from 103 wild
macaques (collected by the Department of Wildlife and National Parks Peninsular
Malaysia) subjected to microscopic examination and nested PCR targeting the
Plasmodium small subunit ribosomal RNA gene. As expected, PCR analysis yielded
significantly higher prevalence (64/103) as compared to microscopic examination
(27/103). No relationship between the age and/or sex of the macaques with the
parasitaemia and the Plasmodium species infecting the macaques could be
identified. Wild macaques in Pahang had the highest prevalence of Plasmodium
parasites (89.7%), followed by those of Perak (69.2%) and Johor (28.9%).
Plasmodium inui and P. cynomolgi were the two most prevalent species infecting
the macaques from all three states. Half of the macaques (33/64) harboured two or
more Plasmodium species. These data provide a baseline survey, which should be
extended by further longitudinal investigations that should be associated with
studies on the bionomics of the anopheline vectors. This information will allow
an accurate evaluation of the risk of zoonotic transmission to humans, and to
elaborate effective strategies to control simian malaria.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2020.105596 
PMID: 32589995 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare no conflict of interest.

