
1. Malar J. 2020 Jul 25;19(1):269. doi: 10.1186/s12936-020-03339-w.

Piperaquine resistant Cambodian Plasmodium falciparum clinical isolates: in vitro
genotypic and phenotypic characterization.

Boonyalai N(1), Vesely BA(2), Thamnurak C(2), Praditpol C(2), Fagnark W(2),
Kirativanich K(2), Saingam P(2), Chaisatit C(2), Lertsethtakarn P(2), Gosi P(2), 
Kuntawunginn W(2), Vanachayangkul P(2), Spring MD(2), Fukuda MM(2), Lon C(2),
Smith PL(3), Waters NC(2), Saunders DL(4), Wojnarski M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacterial and Parasitic Diseases, Armed Forces Research
Institute of Medical Sciences, 315/6 Rajvithi Road, Bangkok, 10400, Thailand.
nonlwatb.fsn@afrims.org.
(2)Department of Bacterial and Parasitic Diseases, Armed Forces Research
Institute of Medical Sciences, 315/6 Rajvithi Road, Bangkok, 10400, Thailand.
(3)Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, Maryland, 20910, USA.
(4)U.S. Army Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, Frederick, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: High rates of dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (DHA-PPQ) treatment
failures have been documented for uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum in
Cambodia. The genetic markers plasmepsin 2 (pfpm2), exonuclease (pfexo) and
chloroquine resistance transporter (pfcrt) genes are associated with PPQ
resistance and are used for monitoring the prevalence of drug resistance and
guiding malaria drug treatment policy.
METHODS: To examine the relative contribution of each marker to PPQ resistance,
in vitro culture and the PPQ survival assay were performed on seventeen P.
falciparum isolates from northern Cambodia, and the presence of E415G-Exo and
pfcrt mutations (T93S, H97Y, F145I, I218F, M343L, C350R, and G353V) as well as
pfpm2 copy number polymorphisms were determined. Parasites were then cloned by
limiting dilution and the cloned parasites were tested for drug susceptibility.
Isobolographic analysis of several drug combinations for standard clones and
newly cloned P. falciparum Cambodian isolates was also determined.
RESULTS: The characterization of culture-adapted isolates revealed that the
presence of novel pfcrt mutations (T93S, H97Y, F145I, and I218F) with E415G-Exo
mutation can confer PPQ-resistance, in the absence of pfpm2 amplification. In
vitro testing of PPQ resistant parasites demonstrated a bimodal dose-response,
the existence of a swollen digestive vacuole phenotype, and an increased
susceptibility to quinine, chloroquine, mefloquine and lumefantrine. To further
characterize drug sensitivity, parental parasites were cloned in which a clonal
line, 14-B5, was identified as sensitive to artemisinin and piperaquine, but
resistant to chloroquine. Assessment of the clone against a panel of drug
combinations revealed antagonistic activity for six different drug combinations. 
However, mefloquine-proguanil and atovaquone-proguanil combinations revealed
synergistic antimalarial activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Surveillance for PPQ resistance in regions relying on DHA-PPQ as the
first-line treatment is dependent on the monitoring of molecular markers of drug 
resistance. P. falciparum harbouring novel pfcrt mutations with E415G-exo
mutations displayed PPQ resistant phenotype. The presence of pfpm2 amplification 
was not required to render parasites PPQ resistant suggesting that the increase
in pfpm2 copy number alone is not the sole modulator of PPQ resistance. Genetic
background of circulating field isolates appear to play a role in drug
susceptibility and biological responses induced by drug combinations. The use of 
latest field isolates may be necessary for assessment of relevant drug
combinations against P. falciparum strains and when down-selecting novel drug
candidates.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-020-03339-w 
PMCID: PMC7382038
PMID: 32711538 

