
1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 Aug 3;16(8):e1008717. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008717.
eCollection 2020 Aug.

Genomic and transcriptomic evidence for descent from Plasmodium and loss of blood
schizogony in Hepatocystis parasites from naturally infected red colobus monkeys.

Aunin E(1), BÃ¶hme U(1), Sanderson T(2), Simons ND(3), Goldberg TL(4), Ting N(3), 
Chapman CA(5)(6)(7), Newbold CI(1)(8), Berriman M(1), Reid AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Parasite Genomics, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.
(2)Malaria Biochemistry Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United
Kingdom.
(3)Department of Anthropology and Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University 
of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon, United States of America.
(4)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(5)Department of Anthropology, Center for the Advanced Study of Human
Paleobiology, The George Washington University, Washington DC, United States of
America.
(6)Shaanxi Key Laboratory for Animal Conservation, Northwest University, Xi'an,
China.
(7)School of Life Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Scottsville,
Pietermaritzburg, South Africa.
(8)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Hepatocystis is a genus of single-celled parasites infecting, amongst other
hosts, monkeys, bats and squirrels. Although thought to have descended from
malaria parasites (Plasmodium spp.), Hepatocystis spp. are thought not to undergo
replication in the blood-the part of the Plasmodium life cycle which causes the
symptoms of malaria. Furthermore, Hepatocystis is transmitted by biting midges,
not mosquitoes. Comparative genomics of Hepatocystis and Plasmodium species
therefore presents an opportunity to better understand some of the most important
aspects of malaria parasite biology. We were able to generate a draft genome for 
Hepatocystis sp. using DNA sequencing reads from the blood of a naturally
infected red colobus monkey. We provide robust phylogenetic support for
Hepatocystis sp. as a sister group to Plasmodium parasites infecting rodents. We 
show transcriptomic support for a lack of replication in the blood and genomic
support for a complete loss of a family of genes involved in red blood cell
invasion. Our analyses highlight the rapid evolution of genes involved in
parasite vector stages, revealing genes that may be critical for interactions
between malaria parasites and mosquitoes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008717 
PMCID: PMC7425995
PMID: 32745123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

