
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Aug 12;10(1):13614. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-69707-3.

Identification and the potential involvement of miRNAs in the regulation of
artemisinin biosynthesis in A. annua.

Khan S(1), Ali A(1), Saifi M(1), Saxena P(1), Ahlawat S(1), Abdin MZ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Chemical and Life Sciences, Centre for 
Transgenic Plant Development, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi, 110062, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, School of Chemical and Life Sciences, Centre for 
Transgenic Plant Development, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi, 110062, India.
mzabdin@jamiahamdard.ac.in.

Micro RNAs (miRNAs) play crucial regulatory roles in multiple biological
processes. Recently they have garnered the attention for their strong influence
on the secondary metabolite production in plants. Their role in the regulation of
artemisinin (ART) biosynthesis is, however, not fully elucidated. ART is a potent
anti-malarial compound recommended by WHO for the treatment of drug-resistant
malaria. It is produced by Artemisia annua (A. annua). The lower in
planta content of ART necessitates a deep understanding of regulatory mechanisms 
involved in the biosynthesis of this metabolite. In this study, using modern high
throughput small RNA-sequencing by Illumina Nextseq 500 platform for
identification and stem-loop RT PCR for validation, miRNAs were identified in the
leaf sample of A. annua plant. Here, we report a total of 121 miRNAs from A.
annua that target several important genes and transcription factors involved in
the biosynthesis of ART. This study revealed the presence of some important
conserved miRNA families, miR396, miR319, miR399, miR858, miR5083 and miR6111 not
identified so far in A. annua. The expression patterns and correlation between
miRNAs and their corresponding targets at different developmental stages of the
plant using real-time PCR indicate that they may influence ART accumulation.
These findings thus, open new possibilities for the rational engineering of the
secondary metabolite pathways in general and ART biosynthesis in particular.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-69707-3 
PMCID: PMC7423619
PMID: 32788629 

