
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2020 Aug 18;14(8):e0008542. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0008542. eCollection 2020 Aug.

Self-limiting paratransgenesis.

Huang W(1), Wang S(2), Jacobs-Lorena M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Malaria Research
Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, 
United States of America.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Insect Developmental and Evolutionary Biology, Institute
of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Presently, the principal tools to combat malaria are restricted to killing the
parasite in infected people and killing the mosquito vector to thwart
transmission. While successful, these approaches are losing effectiveness in view
of parasite resistance to drugs and mosquito resistance to insecticides. Clearly,
new approaches to fight this deadly disease need to be developed. Recently, one
such approach-engineering mosquito resident bacteria to secrete anti-parasite
compounds-has proven in the laboratory to be highly effective. However,
implementation of this strategy requires approval from regulators as it involves 
introduction of recombinant bacteria into the field. A frequent argument by
regulators is that if something unexpectedly goes wrong after release, there must
be a recall mechanism. This report addresses this concern. Previously we have
shown that a Serratia bacterium isolated from a mosquito ovary is able to spread 
through mosquito populations and is amenable to be engineered to secrete
anti-plasmodial compounds. We have introduced a plasmid into this bacterium that 
carries a fluorescent protein gene and show that when cultured in the laboratory,
the plasmid is completely lost in about 130 bacterial generations. Importantly,
when these bacteria were introduced into mosquitoes, the bacteria were
transmitted from one generation to the next, but the plasmid was lost after three
mosquito generations, rendering the bacteria non-recombinant (wild type).
Furthermore, no evidence was obtained for horizontal transfer of the plasmid to
other bacteria either in culture or in the mosquito. Prior to release, it is
imperative to demonstrate that the genes that thwart parasite development in the 
mosquito are safe to the environment. This report describes a methodology to
safely achieve this goal, utilizing transient expression from a plasmid that is
gradually lost, returning the bacterium to wild type status.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008542 
PMCID: PMC7454989
PMID: 32810151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

