
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2020 Jul 24;10:374. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00374.
eCollection 2020.

TickSialoFam (TSFam): A Database That Helps to Classify Tick Salivary Proteins, a
Review on Tick Salivary Protein Function and Evolution, With Considerations on
the Tick Sialome Switching Phenomenon.

Ribeiro JMC(1), Mans BJ(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Vector Biology, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Rockville, MD, United States.
(2)Epidemiology, Parasites and Vectors, Agricultural Research Council -
Onderstepoort Veterinary Research, Pretoria, South Africa.
(3)The Department of Veterinary Tropical Diseases, University of Pretoria,
Pretoria, South Africa.
(4)Department of Life and Consumer Sciences, University of South Africa,
Pretoria, South Africa.

Tick saliva contains a complex mixture of peptides and non-peptides that
counteract their hosts' hemostasis, immunity, and tissue-repair reactions. Recent
transcriptomic studies have revealed over one thousand different transcripts
coding for secreted polypeptides in a single tick species. Not only do these gene
products belong to many expanded families, such as the lipocalins,
metalloproteases, Antigen-5, cystatins, and apyrases, but also families that are 
found exclusively in ticks, such as the evasins, Isac, DAP36, and many others.
Phylogenetic analysis of the deduced protein sequences indicate that the salivary
genes exhibit an increased rate of evolution due to a lower evolutionary
constraint and/or positive selection, allowing for a large diversity of tick
salivary proteins. Thus, for each new tick species that has its salivary
transcriptome sequenced and assembled, a formidable task of annotation of these
transcripts awaits. Currently, as of November 2019, there are over 287 thousand
coding sequences deposited at the National Center for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI) that are derived from tick salivary gland mRNA. Here, from these 287
thousand sequences we identified 45,264 potential secretory proteins which
possess a signal peptide and no transmembrane domains on the mature peptide. By
using the psiblast tools, position-specific matrices were constructed and
assembled into the TickSialoFam (TSF) database. The TSF is a rpsblastable
database that can help with the annotation of tick sialotranscriptomes. The TSA
database identified 136 tick salivary secreted protein families, as well as 80
families of endosomal-related products, mostly having a protein modification
function. As the number of sequences increases, and new annotation details become
available, new releases of the TSF database may become available.

Copyright Â© 2020 Ribeiro and Mans.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00374 
PMCID: PMC7396615
PMID: 32850476 

