
1. Int J Parasitol. 2020 Sep 5. pii: S0020-7519(20)30252-6. doi:
10.1016/j.ijpara.2020.07.010. [Epub ahead of print]

PfKsgA1 functions as a transcription initiation factor and interacts with the
N-terminal region of the mitochondrial RNA polymerase of Plasmodium falciparum.

Gupta A(1), Shrivastava D(2), Shakya AK(1), Gupta K(1), Pratap JV(1), Habib S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Structural Biology, CSIR-Central Drug Research
Institute, Lucknow 226031, India.
(2)Division of Molecular and Structural Biology, CSIR-Central Drug Research
Institute, Lucknow 226031, India; Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research
(AcSIR), Ghaziabad 201002, India.
(3)Division of Molecular and Structural Biology, CSIR-Central Drug Research
Institute, Lucknow 226031, India; Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research
(AcSIR), Ghaziabad 201002, India. Electronic address: saman_habib@cdri.res.in.

The small mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) of the malaria parasite is known to
transcribe its genes polycistonically, although promoter element(s) have not yet 
been identified. An unusually large Plasmodium falciparum candidate mitochondrial
phage-like RNA polymerase (PfmtRNAP) with an extended N-terminal region is
encoded by the parasite nuclear genome. Using specific antibodies against the
enzyme, we established that PfmtRNAP was targeted exclusively to the
mitochondrion and interacted with mtDNA. Phylogenetic analysis showed that it is 
part of a separate apicomplexan clade. A search for PfmtRNAP-associated
transcription initiation factors using sequence homology and in silico
protein-protein interaction network analysis identified PfKsgA1. PfKsgA1 is a
dual cytosol- and mitochondrion-targeted protein that functions as a small
subunit rRNA dimethyltransferase in ribosome biogenesis. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation showed that PfKsgA1 interacts with mtDNA, and in vivo
crosslinking and pull-down experiments confirmed PfmtRNAP-PfKsgA1 interaction.
The ability of PfKsgA1 to serve as a transcription initiation factor was
demonstrated by complementation of yeast mitochondrial transcription factor Mtf1 
function in Rpo41-driven in vitro transcription. Pull-down experiments using
PfKsgA1 and PfmtRNAP domains indicated that the N-terminal region of PfmtRNAP
interacts primarily with the PfKsgA1 C-terminal domain with some contacts being
made with the linker and N-terminal domain of PfKsgA1. In the absence of
full-length recombinant PfmtRNAP, solution structures of yeast mitochondrial RNA 
polymerase Rpo41 complexes with Mtf1 or PfKsgA1 were determined by small-angle
X-ray scattering. Protein interaction interfaces thus identified matched with
those reported earlier for Rpo41-Mtf1 interaction and overlaid with the
PfmtRNAP-interfacing region identified experimentally for PfKsgA1. Our results
indicate that in addition to a role in mitochondrial ribosome biogenesis, PfKsgA1
has an independent function as a transcription initiation factor for PfmtRNAP.

Copyright Â© 2020 Australian Society for Parasitology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2020.07.010 
PMID: 32896572 

