
1. mBio. 2020 Oct 6;11(5). pii: e00166-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00166-20.

Phosphorylation of Rhoptry Protein RhopH3 Is Critical for Host Cell Invasion by
the Malaria Parasite.

Ekka R(#)(1), Gupta A(#)(1), Bhatnagar S(1), Malhotra P(2), Sharma P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Gene Expression Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology, New
Delhi, India.
(2)International Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi,
India.
(3)Eukaryotic Gene Expression Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology, New
Delhi, India pushkar@nii.ac.in.
(#)Contributed equally

Merozoites formed after asexual division of the malaria parasite invade the host 
red blood cells (RBCs), which is critical for initiating malaria infection. The
process of invasion involves specialized organelles like micronemes and rhoptries
that discharge key proteins involved in interaction with host RBC receptors.
RhopH complex comprises at least three proteins, which include RhopH3. RhopH3 is 
critical for the process of red blood cell (RBC) invasion as well as
intraerythrocytic development of human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum It 
is phosphorylated at serine 804 (S804) in the parasite; however, it is unclear if
phosphorylation regulates its function. To address this, a CRISPR-CAS9-based
approach was used to mutate S804 to alanine (A) in P. falciparum Using this
phosphomutant (R3_S804A) of RhopH3, we demonstrate that the phosphorylation of
S804 is critical for host RBC invasion by the parasite but not for its
intraerythrocytic development. Importantly, the phosphorylation of RhopH3
regulates its localization to the rhoptries and discharge from the parasite,
which is critical for RBC invasion. We also identified P. falciparum CDPK1
(PfCDPK1) as a possible candidate kinase for RhopH3-S804 phosphorylation and
found that it regulates RhopH3 secretion from the parasite. These findings
provide novel insights into the role of phosphorylation in rhoptry release and
invasion, which is poorly understood.IMPORTANCE Host cell invasion by the malaria
parasite is critical for establishing infection in human host and is dependent on
discharge of key ligands from organelles like rhoptry and microneme, and these
ligands interact with host RBC receptors. In the present study, we demonstrate
that phosphorylation of a key rhoptry protein, RhopH3, is critical for host
invasion. Phosphorylation regulates its localization to rhoptries and discharge
from the parasite.

Copyright Â© 2020 Ekka et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00166-20 
PMCID: PMC7542355
PMID: 33024030 

