
1. Infect Immun. 2001 May;69(5):3181-9.

Apoptotic signaling pathway activated by Helicobacter pylori infection and
increase of apoptosis-inducing activity under serum-starved conditions.

Shibayama K(1), Doi Y, Shibata N, Yagi T, Nada T, Iinuma Y, Arakawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacterial and Blood Products, National Institute of Infectious
Diseases, Tokyo 208-0011, Japan. keigo@nih.go.jp

The enhanced gastric epithelial cell apoptosis observed during infection with
Helicobacter pylori has been suggested to be of significance in the etiology of
gastritis, peptic ulcers, and neoplasia. To investigate the cell death signaling 
induced by H. pylori infection, human gastric epithelial cells were incubated
with H. pylori for up to 72 h. H. pylori infection induced the activation of
caspase -8, -9, and -3 and the expression of the proapoptotic Bcl-2 family
proteins Bad and Bid. The peak of the activity of the caspases occurred at 24 h. 
At this time, the inhibition of caspase-8 or -9 almost completely suppressed H.
pylori-induced apoptosis. Inhibition of caspase-8 suppressed the expression of
Bad and Bid and the subsequent activation of caspase-9 and -3. These observations
indicate that H. pylori induces apoptosis through a pathway involving the
sequential induction of apical caspase-8 activity, the proapoptotic proteins Bad 
and Bid, caspase-9 activity, and effector caspase-3 activity. Activation of the
pathway was independent of CagA or vacuolating toxin. A membrane fraction of H.
pylori was sufficient to activate this pathway, and treatment with proteinase K
eliminated the activity. Apoptotic activity of the membrane fraction was
significantly increased by incubating the bacteria under serum-starved conditions
for 24 h. These observations suggest that environmental conditions in the human
stomach could induce H. pylori-mediated pathogenesis, leading to a variety of
clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.69.5.3181-3189.2001 
PMCID: PMC98275
PMID: 11292739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

