
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2001 Sep;125(3):414-22.

Down-regulation of CXCR1 and CXCR2 expression on human neutrophils upon
activation of whole blood by S. aureus is mediated by TNF-alpha.

Tikhonov I(1), Doroshenko T, Chaly Y, Smolnikova V, Pauza CD, Voitenok N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Institute of Hematology and
Blood Transfusion, Minsk, Belarus. tikhonov@umbi.umd.edu

It was suggested that bacterial products can inhibit the expression of leucocyte 
chemokine receptors during sepsis and affect leucocyte functions in septic
syndrome. Superantigens and toxins produced by Staphylococcus aureus are capable 
of activating leucocytes via binding to MHC-II antigens on monocytes and T-cell
receptor molecules on T lymphocytes. It was recently shown that staphylococcal
enterotoxins directly down-regulate the expression of CC chemokine receptors on
monocytes through binding to MHC class II molecules. We studied the effects of
killed S. aureus on the expression of interleukin-8 receptors, CXCR1 and CXCR2,
on polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PMN), which are known to lack the expression of 
MHC-II antigens. It was shown that S. aureus down-regulated the cell-surface
expression of CXCR1 and CXCR2 on PMN in the whole blood and total blood leucocyte
fraction containing PMN and monocytes, but did not modulate IL-8 receptor
expression in purified PMN suspension. Antibody to TNF-alpha abrogated
down-regulation of IL-8 receptors induced by S. aureus. In contrast, LPS reduced 
CXCR1 and CXCR2 expression in purified PMN and whole blood in a
TNF-alpha-independent manner. We further showed that TNF-alpha-induced decrease
of CXCR1 and CXCR2 expression was associated with lower IL-8 binding and lower
CXCR1 and CXCR2 mRNA levels, and was abrogated by protease inhibitors. We suggest
that during septicemia, S. aureus may inhibit neutrophil responsiveness to IL-8
and other CXC chemokines via TNF-alpha- mediated down-regulation of CXCR1 and
CXCR2.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.2001.01626.x 
PMCID: PMC1906137
PMID: 11531949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

