
1. Cell Microbiol. 2005 Jan;7(1):29-38.

Anaplasma phagocytophilum inhibits human neutrophil apoptosis via upregulation of
bfl-1, maintenance of mitochondrial membrane potential and prevention of caspase 
3 activation.

Ge Y(1), Yoshiie K, Kuribayashi F, Lin M, Rikihisa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA.

The inhibition of neutrophil apoptosis plays a central role in human granulocytic
anaplasmosis. Intracellular signalling pathways through which the obligatory
intracellular bacterium Anaplasma phagocytophilum inhibits the spontaneous
apoptosis of human peripheral blood neutrophils were investigated. bfl-1 mRNA
levels in uninfected neutrophils after 12 h in culture were reduced to
approximately 5-25% of 0 h levels, but remained high in infected neutrophils. The
eukaryotic RNA synthesis inhibitor, actinomycin D, prevented the maintenance of
bfl-1 mRNA levels by A. phagocytophilum. Differences in mcl-1, bax, bcl-w, bad or
bak mRNA levels in infected versus uninfected neutrophils were not remarkable. By
using mitochondrial fluorescent dyes, Mitotracker Red and JC-1, it was found that
most uninfected neutrophils lost mitochondrial membrane potential after 10-12 h
incubation, whereas A. phagocytophilum-infected neutrophils maintained high
membrane potential. Caspase 3 activity and the degree of apoptosis were lower in 
dose-dependent manner in A. phagocytophilum-infected neutrophils at 16 h post
infection, as compared to uninfected neutrophils. Anti-active caspase 3 antibody 
labelling showed less positively stained population in infected neutrophils
compared to those in uninfected neutrophils after 12 h incubation. These results 
suggest that A. phagocytophilum inhibits human neutrophil apoptosis via
transcriptional upregulation of bfl-1 and inhibition of mitochondria-mediated
activation of caspase 3.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2004.00427.x 
PMID: 15617521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

