
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1992 Apr;58(4):1292-300.

Isolation and screening of plasmids from the epilithon which mobilize recombinant
plasmid pD10.

Hill KE(1), Weightman AJ, Fry JC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pure and Applied Biology, University of Wales College of Cardiff,
United Kingdom.

This study examined the potential of bacteria from river epilithon to mobilize a 
recombinant catabolic plasmid, pD10, encoding 3-chlorobenzoate degradation and
kanamycin resistance. Fifty-four mobilizing plasmids were exogenously isolated by
triparental matings between strains of Pseudomonas putida and epilithic bacteria 
from the River Taff (South Wales, United Kingdom). Frequencies for mobilization
ranged from 1.7 x 10(-8) to 4.5 x 10(-3) per recipient at 20 degrees C. The sizes
of the mobilizing plasmids isolated ranged from 40 kb to over 200 kb, and 19 of
54 were found to encode mercury resistance. Plasmid-encoded resistance to
tetracycline and streptomycin was also found but not resistance to UV light or
various heavy metals. Eight plasmids of epilithic bacteria, analyzed by comparing
restriction fragmentation patterns, showed significant differences between those 
isolated from different independent matings. Optimal temperatures for
mobilization of pD10 were between 15 and 25 degrees C. Four mercury resistance
plasmids were found to be broad host range, transferring mercury resistance and
mobilizing pD10 readily to representative species of beta- and gamma-purple
bacteria. In general, frequencies of pD10 mobilization by plasmids of epilithic
bacteria were 2 to 3 orders of magnitude lower than conjugal transfer
frequencies. Thus, there is a high potential for exchange of recombinant genes
introduced into the epilithon by mobilization between a variety of bacterial
species.

DOI: 10.1128/aem.58.4.1292-1300.1992 
PMCID: PMC195589
PMID: 1599248  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

