
1. J Pathol. 2005 Nov;207(3):277-84.

Vascular endothelial growth factor and neo-angiogenesis in H. pylori gastritis in
humans.

Tuccillo C(1), Cuomo A, Rocco A, Martinelli E, Staibano S, Mascolo M, Gravina AG,
Nardone G, Ricci V, Ciardiello F, Del Vecchio Blanco C, Romano M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Internistica Clinica e Sperimentale-Cattedra di
Gastroenterologia, Seconda Universit√† di Napoli, Napoli, Italy.

Host response plays a major role in the pathogenesis of Helicobacter
pylori-induced gastroduodenal disease including adenocarcinoma of the distal
stomach. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an important modulator of
gastric mucosal repair and is overexpressed in gastric cancer. The present study 
sought to evaluate the expression of VEGF in the gastric mucosa of H.
pylori-infected and H. pylori-non-infected dyspeptic patients. Fifteen H.
pylori-infected and 15 H. pylori-non-infected dyspeptic patients were studied.
Diagnosis of H. pylori infection was based on rapid urease test and histology.
VEGF protein expression was assessed by western blotting. VEGF mRNA expression
was assessed by RT-PCR. VEGF localization in the gastric mucosa and
neo-angiogenesis were determined by immunohistochemistry. VEGF protein and mRNA
expression was significantly greater in H. pylori-infected than in non-infected
patients. Immunohistochemistry showed that VEGF expression was more intense in
the gastric gland compartment of H. pylori-infected mucosa than in the
non-infected mucosa. The increase in VEGF expression was associated with a
significant increase in neo-angiogenesis as assessed by determination of
CD34-positive micro-vessels. H. pylori gastritis is therefore associated with
up-regulation of VEGF expression, which parallels the increased formation of
blood vessels in the gastric mucosa. It is postulated that increased VEGF
expression and neo-angiogenesis may contribute to H. pylori-related gastric
carcinogenesis.

Copyright (c) 2005 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published
by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/path.1844 
PMID: 16184519  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

