
1. Cell Microbiol. 2007 Jan;9(1):84-96. Epub 2006 Aug 2.

Leishmania promastigotes activate PI3K/Akt signalling to confer host cell
resistance to apoptosis.

Ruhland A(1), Leal N, Kima PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 326111, USA.

Previous reports have shown that cells infected with promastigotes of some
Leishmania species are resistant to the induction of apoptosis. This would
suggest that either parasites elaborate factors that block signalling from
apoptosis inducers or that parasites engage endogenous host signalling pathways
that block apoptosis. To investigate the latter scenario, we determined whether
Leishmania infection results in the activation of signalling pathways that have
been shown to mediate resistance to apoptosis in other infection models. First,
we showed that infection with the promastigote form of Leishmania major,
Leishmania pifanoi and Leishmania amazonensis activates signalling through p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), NFkappaB and PI3K/Akt. Then we found
that inhibition of signalling through the PI3K/Akt pathway with LY294002 and Akt 
IV inhibitor reversed resistance of infected bone marrow-derived macrophages and 
RAW 264.7 macrophages to potent inducers of apoptosis. Moreover, reduction of Akt
levels with small interfering RNAs to Akt resulted in the inability of infected
macrophages to resist apoptosis. Further evidence of the role of PI3K/Akt
signalling in the promotion of cell survival by infected cells was obtained with 
the finding that Bad, which is a substrate of Akt, becomes phosphorylated during 
the course of infection. In contrast to the observations with PI3K/Akt
signalling, inhibition of p38 MAPK signalling with SB202190 or NFkappaB
signalling with wedelolactone had limited effect on parasite-induced resistance
to apoptosis. We conclude that Leishmania promastigotes engage PI3K/Akt
signalling, which confers to the infected cell, the capacity to resist death from
activators of apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00769.x 
PMID: 16889626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

