
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Jun;1831(6):1177-84. doi:
10.1016/j.bbalip.2013.03.008. Epub 2013 Mar 29.

Bacterial sphingophospholipids containing non-hydroxy fatty acid activate murine 
macrophages via Toll-like receptor 4 and stimulate bacterial clearance.

Fujiwara N(1), Porcelli SA, Naka T, Yano I, Maeda S, Kuwata H, Akira S, Uematsu
S, Takii T, Ogura H, Kobayashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Osaka City University Graduate School of Medicine,
Osaka, Japan. fujiwara@med.osaka-cu.ac.jp

Sphingobacterium spiritivorum has five unusual sphingophospholipids (SPLs). Our
previous study determined the complete chemical structures of these SPLs. The
compositions of the long-chain bases/fatty acids in the ceramide portion,
isoheptadecasphingosine/isopentadecanoate or isoheptadecasphingosine/2-hydroxy
isopentadecanoate, are characteristic. The immune response against bacterial
lipid components is considered to play important roles in microbial infections.
It is reported that several bacterial sphingolipids composed of ceramide are
recognized by CD1-restricted T and NKT cells and that a non-peptide antigen is
recognized by γδ T cells. In this study, we demonstrated that these bacterial
SPLs activated murine bone marrow macrophages (BMMs) via Toll-like receptor (TLR)
4 but not TLR2, although they slightly activated CD1d-restricted NKT and γδT
cells. Interestingly, this TLR 4-recognition pathway of bacterial SPLs involves
the fatty acid composition of ceramide in addition to the sugar moiety. A
non-hydroxy fatty acid composed of ceramide was necessary to activate murine
BMMs. The bacterial survival was significantly higher in TLR4-KO mice than in
TLR2-KO and wild-type mice. The results indicate that activation of the
TLR4-dependent pathway of BMMs by SPLs induced an innate immune response and
contributed to bacterial clearance.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2013.03.008 
PMID: 23545566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

