
1. J Biol Chem. 1988 Dec 25;263(36):19633-9.

Directed mutagenesis of the strongly conserved aspartate 242 in the beta-subunit 
of Escherichia coli proton-ATPase.

Al-Shawi MK(1), Parsonage D, Senior AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Rochester Medical Center, New York
14642.

Oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis was used to substitute Asn or Val for
residue Asp-242 in the beta-subunit of Escherichia coli F1-ATPase. Asp-242 is
strongly conserved in beta-subunits of F1-ATPase enzymes, in a region of sequence
which shows homology with numerous nucleotide-binding proteins. By analogy with
adenylate kinase (Fry, D.C., Kuby, S.A., and Mildvan, A.S. (1986) Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 83, 907-911), beta-Asp-242 of F1-ATPase might participate in
catalysis through electrostatic effects on the substrate Mg2+ or through hydrogen
bonding to the substrate(s); an acid-base catalytic role is also plausible. The
substitutions Asn and Val were chosen to affect the charge, hydrogen-bonding
ability, and hydrophobicity of residue beta-Asp-242. Both mutations significantly
impaired oxidative phosphorylation rates in vivo and membrane ATPase and
ATP-driven proton-pumping activities in vitro. Asn-242 was more detrimental than 
Val-242. Purified soluble mutant F1-ATPases had normal molecular size and subunit
composition, and displayed 7% (beta-Asn-242) and 17% (beta-Val-242) of normal
specific Mg-ATPase activity. The relative MgATPase activities of both mutant
enzymes showed similar pH dependence to normal. Relative MgATPase and CaATPase
activities of normal and mutant enzymes were compared at widely varied pMg and
pCa. The mutations had little effect on KM MgATP, but KM CaATP was reduced. The
data showed that the carboxyl side-chain of beta-Asp-242 is not involved in
catalysis either as a general acid-base catalyst or through direct involvement in
any protonation/deprotonation-linked mechanism, nor is it likely to be directly
involved in liganding to substrate Mg2+ during the reaction. Specificity
constants (kcat/KM) for MgATP and CaATP were reduced in both mutant enzymes,
showing that the mutations destabilized interactions between the catalytic
nucleotide-binding domain and the transition state.


PMID: 2904440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

