
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2019 Mar 5;13(3):e0006704. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006704.
eCollection 2019 Mar.

The unique tropism of Mycobacterium leprae to the nasal epithelial cells can be
explained by the mammalian cell entry protein 1A.

Fadlitha VB(1), Yamamoto F(1), Idris I(2), Dahlan H(2), Sato N(3)(4), Aftitah
VB(5), Febriyanda A(2), Fujimura T(1)(4), Takimoto H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Kitasato University Graduate School of Medical
Science, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan.
(2)Hasanuddin University Medical Research Centre, Makassar, South Sulawesi,
Indonesia.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Toshiba Rinkan Hospital, Sagamihara, Kanagawa,
Japan.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa, Japan.
(5)Department of Cellular Immunology, Kitasato University Graduate School of
Medical Science, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan.
(6)Department of Bioscience, Kitasato University School of Science, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa, Japan.

Leprosy is a chronic infection where the skin and peripheral nervous system is
invaded by Mycobacterium leprae. The infection mechanism remains unknown in part 
because culture methods have not been established yet for M. leprae. Mce1A
protein (442 aa) is coded by mce1A (1326 bp) of M. leprae. The Mce1A homolog in
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is known to be associated with M. tuberculosis
epithelial cell entry, and survival and multiplication within macrophages.
Studies using recombinant proteins have indicated that Mce1A of M. leprae is also
associated with epithelial cell entry. This study is aimed at identifying
particular sequences within Mce1A associated with M. leprae epithelial cell
entry. Recombinant proteins having N-terminus and C-terminus truncations of the
Mce1A region of M. leprae were created in Escherichia coli. Entry activity of
latex beads, coated with these truncated proteins (r-lep37 kDa and r-lep27 kDa), 
into HeLa cells was observed by electron microscopy. The entry activity was
preserved even when 315 bp (105 aa) and 922 bp (308 aa) was truncated from the
N-terminus and C-terminus, respectively. This 316-921 bp region was divided into 
three sub-regions: 316-531 bp (InvX), 532-753 bp (InvY), and 754-921 bp (InvZ).
Each sub-region was cloned into an AIDA vector and expressed on the surface of E.
coli. Entry of these E. coli into monolayer-cultured HeLa and RPMI2650 cells was 
observed by electron microscopy. Only E. coli harboring the InvX sub-region
exhibited cell entry. InvX was further divided into 4 domains, InvXa-InvXd,
containing sequences 1-24 aa, 25-46 aa, 47-57 aa, and 58-72 aa, respectively.
Recombinant E. coli, expressing each of InvXa-InvXd on the surface, were treated 
with antibodies against these domains, then added to monolayer cultured RPMI
cells. The effectiveness of these antibodies in preventing cell entry was studied
by colony counting. Entry activity was suppressed by antibodies against InvXa,
InvXb, and InvXd. This suggests that these three InvX domains of Mce1A are
important for M. leprae invasion into nasal epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006704 
PMCID: PMC6420055
PMID: 30835734  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

