
1. Ann Transl Med. 2020 May;8(10):651. doi: 10.21037/atm-20-3462.

Molecular biology of BPIFB1 and its advances in disease.

Li J(1), Xu P(1), Wang L(1), Feng M(1), Chen D(1), Yu X(1), Lu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Shenzhen Respiratory Disease, Shenzhen Institute of
Respiratory Disease, Shenzhen People's Hospital (The First Affiliated Hospital of
Southern University of Science and Technology, The Second Clinical Medical
College of Jinan University), Shenzhen, China.

Bactericidal/permeability-increasing (BPI)-fold-containing family B member 1
(BPIFB1), also known as long-palate lung and nasal epithelium clone 1 (LPLUNC1), 
belongs to the BPI-fold-containing family, is a newly discovered natural immune
protection molecule, which, having the function of bactericidal and osmotic
enhancement protein domain, can respond to the external physical and chemical
stimuli. The gene of BPIFB1 is located at chromosome 20q11.21-20q11.22, and
contains 16 exons and 15 introns, encoding 484 amino acids. The 5' terminal of
the BPIFB1 protein has a signal peptide sequence composed of 19 amino acids.
BPIFB1 is abnormally expressed in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), gastric cancer,
and other cancer tissues, regulate chronic infections and inflammation,
indicating that it may play an important role in the development of tumors.
Meanwhile, BPIFB1 has well-recognized roles in sensing and responding to
Gram-negative bacteria due to its structural similarity with BPI protein and
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-binding protein, both of which are innate immune
molecules with recognized roles in sensing and responding to Gram-negative
bacteria, so it can regulate cystic fibrosis (CF), chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD), asthma, and other respiratory diseases. In this article, we will 
discuss the progress of BPIFB1 in a variety of diseases and fully understand its 
function.

2020 Annals of Translational Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/atm-20-3462 
PMCID: PMC7290611
PMID: 32566588 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have completed
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/atm-20-3462). The authors have no conflicts of
interest to declare.

