
1. J Biol Chem. 1993 May 15;268(14):10066-75.

A biosensor approach to probe the structure and function of the p85 alpha subunit
of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complex.

End P(1), Gout I, Fry MJ, Panayotou G, Dhand R, Yonezawa K, Kasuga M, Waterfield 
MD.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom.

Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, which generates putative novel second messenger
phospholipids, is a heterodimer composed of regulatory adaptor 85-kDa and
catalytic 110-kDa subunits. The p85 alpha subunit contains a NH2-terminal src
homology (SH) 3 domain, a region with homology to the product of the breakpoint
cluster region (bcr) gene, and a COOH-terminal portion of the molecule which
contains two SH2 domains, separated by a spacer region. In this study a panel of 
monoclonal antibodies (mAb) was raised against recombinant bovine p85 alpha to
probe its multidomain structure in relation to function. These mAbs were
characterized using a BIAcore biosensor instrument. Epitopes for nine mAbs were
mapped in relation to the domain structure of p85 alpha using recombinant protein
fragments expressed in bacteria. These mAbs were then used to map the sites on
p85 alpha which are involved in growth factor receptor binding. Two interesting
classes of functional mAbs were identified. First, mAb U14, whose epitope lies
within the NH2-terminal SH2 domain of p85 alpha, blocked the interaction of p85
alpha with activated protein-tyrosine kinase receptors. Second, real-time binding
experiments using phospholipid-containing vesicles showed that p85 alpha by
itself could specifically bind certain phospholipids. Two mAbs (U9 and U15) with 
epitopes located in the inter-SH2 spacer region blocked the binding of lipids to 
this site. The relevance of these observations to understanding the relationship 
of structure to function of p85 and the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase are
discussed.


PMID: 7683666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

