
1. Blood. 1999 Sep 15;94(6):2121-7.

CD36 peptides that block cytoadherence define the CD36 binding region for
Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes.

Baruch DI(1), Ma XC, Pasloske B, Howard RJ, Miller LH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. dbaruch@niaid.nih.gov

Mature Plasmodium falciparum parasitized erythrocytes (PE) sequester from the
circulation by adhering to microvascular endothelial cells. PE sequestration
contributes directly to the virulence and severe pathology of falciparum malaria.
The scavenger receptor, CD36, is a major host receptor for PE adherence. PE
adhesion to CD36 is mediated by the malarial variant antigen, P. falciparum
erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1), and particularly by its cysteine-rich
interdomain region 1 (CIDR-1). Several peptides from the extended immunodominant 
domain of CD36 (residues 139-184), including CD36 139-155, CD36 145-171, CD36
146-164, and CD36 156-184 interfered with the CD36-PfEMP1 interaction. Each of
these peptides affected binding at the low micromolar range in 2 independent
assays. Two peptides, CD36 145-171 and CD36 156-184, specifically blocked PE
adhesion to CD36 without affecting binding to the host receptor intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1). Moreover, an adhesion blocking peptide from the
ICAM-1 sequence inhibits the PfEMP1-ICAM-1 interaction without affecting adhesion
to CD36. These results confirm earlier observations that PfEMP1 is also a
receptor for ICAM-1. Thus, the region 139-184 and particularly the 146-164 or the
145-171 regions of CD36 form the adhesion region for P. falciparum PE. Adherence 
blocking peptides from this region may be useful for modeling the PE/PfEMP1
interaction with CD36 and for development of potential anti-adhesion
therapeutics.


PMID: 10477742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

