
1. Parasite Immunol. 2000 Sep;22(9):425-35.

Differential interleukin-10 expression in interferon regulatory factor-1
deficient mice during Plasmodium berghei blood-stage infection.

Tan RS(1), Kara AU, Feng C, Asano Y, Sinniah R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Parasitology Laboratory, Department of Biological Sciences, National
University of Singapore, 10 Kent Ridge Crescent, Singapore 119260, Singapore.

Mice deficient of functional interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1-/-) by
targeted gene disruption infected with a lethal murine malaria strain, Plasmodium
berghei ANKA survived longer than its wild-type littermates despite the inability
to induce appreciable amounts of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) and nitric oxide.
In addition, infected IRF-1-/- mice displayed less organ injury with reduced
necrosis and inflammation. Both wild-type and IRF-1-/- mice treated with
exogenous interleukin-12 (IL-12) suffered extensive organ damage with
corresponding up regulation of IFN-gamma, suggesting the pathogenic potential of 
IL-12 and IFN-gamma. IL-10 is a cytokine produced by CD4+ T lymphocytes belonging
to the Th2 subset. Expression of IL-10 in the wild-type mice correlated with the 
severity of the infection, with higher mRNA expression towards the later stage of
infection. In contrast to the wild-type mice, IL-10 levels in the IRF-1-/- mice
were induced early in the infection and decreased gradually as the infection
progressed. Both untreated and IL-12 treated wild-type mice appeared to follow a 
Th1-like immune response early in the infection and a Th2-like immune response
later in the infection. However, the IRF-1-/- mice were able to launch an altered
immune response with a Th2-like immune response early in the infection. These
findings suggest that IL-10 expression in the IRF-1-/- mice during the early
stage of P. berghei ANKA infection could play an important role in suppressing
pathogenic effects of a cell mediated immune response and promoting protective
immunity against the parasite.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3024.2000.00312.x 
PMID: 10972849  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

