
1. Vet Res Commun. 2001 May;25(4):289-300.

Studies on some blood parameters of crossbred calves with experimental Theileria 
annulata infections.

Singh A(1), Singh J, Grewal AS, Brar RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, College of Veterinary Science, Punjab
Agricultural University, Ludhiana, India.

Subcutaneous inoculation of 1 ml of ground Theileria annulata tick tissue
stabilate (0.75 tick equivalent) into crossbred calves (n = 6, average age 53
days) resulted in the development of acute theileriosis. The percentage
parasitaemia was 71.7% +/- 3.3% on day 20 after inoculation. Macroschizonts were 
observed in lymphocytes and monocytes. Phagocytosed schizonts were observed in
neutrophils, along with cytoplasmic vacuolation in monocytes and neutrophils.
There was progressive decrease (p < 0.05) in the haemoglobin and packed cell
volume, along with a marked reticulocytosis. Serum analysis revealed a decrease
(p <0.05) in the concentrations of calcium, cholesterol and triglycerides, while 
there was an increase (p < 0.05) in the concentrations of blood urea nitrogen as 
compared to day 0 values. The total serum proteins, albumin and serum
immunoglobulin concentrations and the albumin-to-immunoglobulin ratio showed
marked decreases (p<0.05). Coagulopathies included thrombocytopenia and an
increased prothrombin time, along with a non-significant increase in the bleeding
time and activated partial thromboplastin time during the terminal stages of the 
disease. There was an increase in the osmotic fragility of erythrocytes during
the disease. Morphological alterations in the erythrocytes were observed with the
developing parasitaemia.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1010678625336 
PMID: 11432430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

