
1. Am J Pathol. 2004 Mar;164(3):781-6.

Pathogenic role of P-selectin in experimental cerebral malaria: importance of the
endothelial compartment.

Combes V(1), Rosenkranz AR, Redard M, Pizzolato G, Lepidi H, Vestweber D, Mayadas
TN, Grau GE.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Parasitology Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Institut Fédératif de
Recherche 48, Université de la Méditerranée, Marseille Cedex, France.

P-selectin is a leukocyte adhesion receptor expressed on the surface of activated
platelets and endothelial cells. Its role in the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria
was explored in a murine model of cerebral malaria. Infection of mice with
Plasmodium berghei ANKA led to P-selectin up-regulation in brain vessels of
cerebral malaria-susceptible mice but not of cerebral malaria-resistant mice.
Treatment of susceptible mice with anti-mouse P-selectin mAb failed to prevent
the development of the neurological syndrome. However, P-selectin-deficient mice 
infected with Plasmodium berghei ANKA had a cumulative incidence of cerebral
malaria which was significantly reduced compared to wild-type animals (4.5%
versus 80%, respectively), despite identical levels of parasitemia, platelet and 
leukocyte accumulation. To determine whether P-selectin on platelets and/or
endothelium was responsible for the microvascular pathology, cerebral malaria was
assessed in chimeric mice deficient in platelet or endothelial P-selectin, which 
were generated by bone marrow transplantation. Mice deficient only in endothelial
P-selectin did not show any sign of cerebral malaria (vascular plugging,
hemorrhages, or edema), while mice lacking only platelet P-selectin showed signs 
of cerebral malaria similar to that seen in wild-type mice. These results
indicate that endothelial P-selectin plays an important role in the pathogenesis 
of cerebral malaria.

DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)63166-5 
PMCID: PMC1613268
PMID: 14982832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

