
1. Blood. 2005 Mar 1;105(5):1956-63. Epub 2004 Oct 19.

Platelet depletion by anti-CD41 (alphaIIb) mAb injection early but not late in
the course of disease protects against Plasmodium berghei pathogenesis by
altering the levels of pathogenic cytokines.

van der Heyde HC(1), Gramaglia I, Sun G, Woods C.

Author information: 
(1)La Jolla Bioengineering Institute and Targeted Molecules Corporation, 505
Coast Blvd, Suite 405, San Diego, CA 92037, USA. hvande@ljbi.org

Accumulating evidence indicates that platelets play a critical role in the
pathogenesis of experimental severe malaria (ESM) elicited by infection with
Plasmodium berghei. Mice injected on day 1 of P berghei infection (early) with
either anti-CD41 or anti-CD61 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) exhibited
significantly (P<.001) increased survival from ESM compared with infection
controls, indicating that platelets function early in the disease. In contrast,
groups of mice treated on days 4, 5, and 6 (late) with anti-CD41 mAb exhibited
similar mortality as controls. Because platelet depletion by anti-CD41 mAb on day
4 of infection did not protect mice, and platelet adherence occurs on day 6,
platelet adherence to endothelium is not required to mediate malarial
pathogenesis. Few platelet microparticles were detected in the blood during the
course of malaria, but large numbers of erythrocyte vesicles, microparticles, and
debris were detected. The protective effect of early anti-CD41 mAb treatment was 
independent of the number of platelets, platelet microparticles,
erythrocyte-platelet conjugates, and erythrocyte vesicles. Mice treated early
with anti-CD41 mAb exhibited markedly altered cytokine production on day 4 of P
berghei infection (increased interleukin 10 [IL-10], IL-1alpha, IL-6,
interferon-gamma [IFN-gamma], and tumor necrosis factor alpha [TNF-alpha];
decreased IL-2) but no decline in coagulation factors compared with rat
immunoglobulin G (IgG)-treated controls, indicating that platelets regulate the
levels of pathogenic cytokines.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2004-06-2206 
PMID: 15494426  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

