
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 4;280(9):8617-27. Epub 2004 Dec 15.

Induction of proinflammatory responses in macrophages by the
glycosylphosphatidylinositols of Plasmodium falciparum: the requirement of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase, p38, c-Jun N-terminal kinase and NF-kappaB
pathways for the expression of proinflammatory cytokines and nitric oxide.

Zhu J(1), Krishnegowda G, Gowda DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033-0850, USA.

The glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors of Plasmodium falciparum have been
proposed to be the major factors that contribute to malaria pathogenesis by
eliciting the production of proinflammatory cytokines and nitric oxide by the
host innate immune system. In this study we demonstrate that the parasite GPIs
can effectively induce the production of TNF-alpha at 5-20 nm concentrations in
interferon-gamma-primed monocytes and macrophages. The potency of the parasite
GPIs activity is physiologically relevant to their ability to contribute to
severe malaria pathogenesis. More importantly, we investigated the requirement of
the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)-,
p38-, and NF-kappaB-signaling pathways that are activated in response to P.
falciparum GPIs through toll-like receptor-mediated recognition (Krishnegowda,
G., Hajjar, A. M., Zhu J. Z., Douglass, E. J., Uematsu, S., Akira, S., Wood, A.
S., and Gowda, D. C. (2005) J. Biol. Chem. 280, 8606-8616) for the
proinflammatory responses by macrophages. The data conclusively show that the
production of TNF-alpha, interleukin (IL)-12, IL-6, and nitric oxide by
macrophages stimulated with parasite GPIs is critically dependent on the
NF-kappaB and JNK pathways. NF-kappaB1 is essential for IL-6 and IL-12 production
but not for TNF-alpha and nitric oxide, whereas NF-kappaB/c-Rel appears to be
important for all four proinflammatory mediators. JNK1 and JNK2 are functionally 
redundant for the expression of TNF-alpha, IL-6, and nitric oxide, whereas JNK2
but not JNK1 is essential for IL-12 production. The ERK signaling pathway is not 
involved in TNF-alpha and nitric oxide production, but, interestingly, negatively
regulates the expression of IL-6 and IL-12. Furthermore, p38 is critical for the 
production of IL-6 and IL-12 but is only marginally required for the production
of TNF-alpha and nitric oxide. Thus, our data define the differential requirement
of the downstream signaling molecules for the production of key proinflammatory
cytokines and nitric oxide by macrophages in response to P. falciparum GPI
stimuli. The data have important implications for the development of therapeutics
for malaria treatment.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M413539200 
PMCID: PMC4980998
PMID: 15611045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

