
1. J Immunol. 2005 Jan 15;174(2):790-9.

Role of CD28 in polyclonal and specific T and B cell responses required for
protection against blood stage malaria.

Elias RM(1), Sardinha LR, Bastos KR, Zago CA, da Silva AP, Alvarez JM, Lima MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sao 
Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil. stellato@usp.br

The role of B7/CD28 costimulatory pathway in the polyclonal and specific
lymphocyte activation induced by blood stages of Plasmodium chabaudi AS was
investigated in CD28 gene knockout (CD28(-/-)) and C57BL/6 (CD28(+/+)) mice.
Analysis of the spleen during the acute infection revealed a similar increase in 
T and B cell populations in both groups of mice. Moreover, CD28(-/-) mice were
able to develop a polyclonal IgM response to P. chabaudi. On the contrary, the
polyclonal IgG2a response was markedly reduced in the absence of CD28. Production
of IFN-gamma; up-regulation of CD69, CD40L, CD95 (Fas), and CD95L (Fas ligand);
and induction of apoptosis were also affected by the lack of CD28. Interestingly,
the ability to control the first parasitemia peak was not compromised in acutely 
infected CD28(-/-) mice, but CD28(-/-) mice failed to eradicate the parasites
that persisted in the blood for >3 mo after infection. In addition, drug-cured
CD28(-/-) mice were unable to generate memory T cells, develop an anamnesic IgG
response, or eliminate the parasites from a secondary challenge. The incapacity
of CD28(-/-) mice to acquire a full protective immunity to P. chabaudi correlated
with an impaired production of specific IgG2a. Moreover, reinfected CD28(-/-)
mice were protected by the adoptive transfer of serum from reinfected CD28(+/+)
mice containing specific IgG2a. Our results demonstrate that the polyclonal
lymphocyte response is only partially affected by the absence of CD28, but this
coreceptor is essential to generate specific T and B cell responses required for 
complete protection against P. chabaudi malaria.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.174.2.790 
PMID: 15634900  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

