
1. Am J Pathol. 2005 Jan;166(1):295-302.

ABCA1 gene deletion protects against cerebral malaria: potential pathogenic role 
of microparticles in neuropathology.

Combes V(1), Coltel N, Alibert M, van Eck M, Raymond C, Juhan-Vague I, Grau GE,
Chimini G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, Faculty of Medicine, IFR48, Université de la
Méditerranée, 27, Bd Jean Moulin, F-13385 Marseille Cedex 05, France.

The ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) modulates the transbilayer
distribution of phosphatidylserine at the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane.
This external exposure of phosphatidylserine is a hallmark of microparticle
production and is impaired in ABCA1(-/-) mice. In this study, we report about the
complete resistance to cerebral malaria of these mice. On analysis of
histological and systemic parameters we evidenced an impairment of cellular
responses to Plasmodium berghei ANKA infection in ABCA1(-/-) mice, as shown by
lower plasma tumor necrosis factor levels, a weaker up-regulation of endothelial 
adhesion molecules in brain microvessels, a reduced leukocyte sequestration, as
well as an ablated platelet accumulation. Besides, the number and the
procoagulant activity of microparticles were dramatically reduced in the plasma
of ABCA1(-/-) compared to ABCA1(+/+) mice. Moreover, microparticles derived from 
Plasmodium berghei ANKA-infected ABCA1(+/+) mice induced a significant increase
of tumor necrosis factor release by noninfected macrophages. In ABCA1(-/-) mice
platelet and macrophage responses to vesiculation agonists were ablated and
reduced, respectively. Altogether, by pointing out the ABCA1 transporter as a
major element controlling cerebral malaria susceptibility, these data provide a
novel insight into its pathophysiological mechanisms and are consistent with a
pathogenic role of microparticles in this neurological syndrome.

DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)62253-5 
PMCID: PMC1602289
PMID: 15632021  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

