
1. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2005 Aug;106(2):107-15.

Essential trace elements selenium, zinc, copper, and iron concentrations and
their related acute-phase proteins in patients with vivax malaria.

Seyrek A(1), Kocyigit A, Erel O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Medical Faculty, Firat University, Elazig, Turkey.

The aim of the present study is to evaluate the status of plasma essential trace 
elements selenium (Se), zinc (Zn), copper (Cu), and iron (Fe) concentrations and 
their related acute-phase proteins, ceruloplasmin (Cp), ferritin, transferrin
(Tf), and albumin levels in patients with vivax malaria. Plasma Cu and Zn
concentrations were determined by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS). Se
concentrations were determined by graphite furnace AAS. Fe, Cp, Tf, and albumin
levels were determined by colorimetric methods. Plasma Se, Fe, and albumin levels
were found to be significantly lower (p < 0.01, p < 0.001, and p < 0.05,
respectively) and Cu, Cp, and ferritin levels and Cu/Zn ratios were significantly
higher (p < 0.001, p < 0.001, p < 0.001, and p < 0.05, respectively) in patients 
when compared with those of healthy subjects. Plasma, Tf, and Zn levels were not 
found to be significantly different (p > 0.05) in patients and controls. There
were positive important correlations between Cu and Cp (r = 0.908, p < 0.001), Zn
and albumin (r = 0.633, p < 0.001), and negative correlations between Fe and
ferritin content (r = -0.521, p < 0.05) and Fe and Tf (r = -0.616, p < 0.01) in
the patients group. Our findings demonstrated that plasma essential trace
elements Se, Cu, and Fe change, but these changes might be dependent on
acute-phase proteins, which were regulated as a part of defense strategies of the
organism, induced by hormonelike substances.

DOI: 10.1385/BTER:106:2:107 
PMID: 16116242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

