
1. Blood. 2005 Dec 15;106(13):4359-66. Epub 2005 Aug 23.

The N-terminal 11 amino acids of human erythrocyte band 3 are critical for
aldolase binding and protein phosphorylation: implications for band 3 function.

Perrotta S(1), Borriello A, Scaloni A, De Franceschi L, Brunati AM, Turrini F,
Nigro V, del Giudice EM, Nobili B, Conte ML, Rossi F, Iolascon A, Donella-Deana
A, Zappia V, Poggi V, Anong W, Low P, Mohandas N, Della Ragione F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Second University of Naples, Italy.
silverio.perrotta@unina2.it

The 911 amino acid band 3 (SLC4A1) is the major intrinsic membrane protein of red
cells and is the principal Cl-/HCO3- exchanger. The N-terminal cytoplasmic domain
of band 3 anchors the spectrin-based membrane skeleton to the lipid bilayer
through its interaction with ankyrin and also binds glycolytic enzymes and
hemoglobin. We identified a son of a consanguineous marriage with severe anemia
in association with marked deficiency of band 3 (12% +/- 4% of normal). Direct
nucleotide sequencing of SLC4A1 gene demonstrated a single base substitution (T
--> C) at position + 2 in the donor splice site of intron 2, resulting in the
generation of a novel mutant protein. Biochemical characterization of the mutant 
protein showed that it lacked the first 11 N-terminal amino acids (band 3
Neapolis). The expression of the mutant protein resulted in the complete absence 
of membrane-bound aldolase, and the mutant band 3 could not be tyrosine
phosphorylated. The ability of the malarial parasite P falciparum to invade these
red cells was significantly decreased. The identification of a novel band 3
mutant and its structural and functional characterization enabled us to identify 
pivotal roles for the 11 N-terminal amino acids in several protein functions and,
in turn, in red-cell physiology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2005-07-2806 
PMID: 16118313  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

