
1. Neurochem Int. 2006 Jan;48(2):108-13. Epub 2005 Oct 19.

Activation of calpains, calpastatin and spectrin cleavage in the brain during the
pathology of fatal murine cerebral malaria.

Shukla M(1), Rajgopal Y, Babu PP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurochemistry, School of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad, 
Department of Animal Sciences, Hyderabad 500046, India.

Neuronal calpains appear to be activated uncontrollably by sustained elevation of
cytosolic calcium levels under pathological conditions as well as
neurodegenerative diseases. In the present study, we have characterized calpain
activation in cytosolic extract of mice cerebral cortex and cerebellum using an
experimental model of fatal murine cerebral malaria (FMCM). Pathology of FMCM
resulted in the increase in activity of calpains in both cerebral cortex and
cerebellum. Western blot analysis revealed an increase in the levels of
mu-calpain (calpain-1) in the cytosolic fraction of infected cerebral cortex and 
cerebellum although a decrease in the level of m-calpain was observed in the
cytosolic fraction of infected cerebellum and cerebral cortex. Calpain activation
was further confirmed by monitoring the formation of calpain-specific spectrin
breakdown products (SBDP). Protease-specific SBDP revealed the formation of
calpain-generated 150kDa product in the infected cerebral cortex and cerebellum. 
The specific signature fragment of calpain activation and spectrin breakdown
after Plasmodium berghei ANKA infection provide a strong evidence of the role of 
calpains during the cell death in cerebral cortex and cerebellum. Given the role 
of calpains in neurodegeneration and cell death, our results strongly suggest
that calpains are important mediators of cell injury and neurological sequelae
associated with FMCM.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuint.2005.09.001 
PMID: 16236382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

