
1. Parasitol Res. 2006 Jul;99(2):153-9. Epub 2006 Mar 7.

Caveolins and flotillin-2 are present in the blood stages of Plasmodium vivax.

Bracho C(1), Dunia I, Romano M, Raposo G, De La Rosa M, Benedetti EL, Pérez HA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas (IVIC), Centro de
Microbiología y Biología Celular, Apdo. 21827, Caracas 1020A, Venezuela.
cbracho@ivic.ve

Blood stages of Plasmodium vivax induce the development of caveolae and
caveola-vesicle complexes (CVC) in the membrane of their host erythrocyte.
Caveolae are found in almost all types of cells and are involved in endogenous
processes as calcium and cholesterol homeostasis, cell signalling, transporting, 
ligand internalization and transcytosis of serum components. Major structural
components of caveolae are the proteins caveolins and flotillins. The functional 
role of caveolae in the P. vivax-infected erythrocyte is not properly understood.
As these organelles have been shown to contain malaria antigens, it has been
suggested that they are involved in the transport and release of specific
parasite antigens from the infected erythrocyte and in the uptake of plasma
proteins. Using specific antibodies to classical caveolae proteins and an
immunolocalization approach, we found caveolin-2, caveolin-3, and flotillin-2 in 
the vesicle profiles and some CVC of P. vivax-infected erythrocytes. Caveolin-1-3
were not found in uninfected erythrocytes. This is the first report of
identification and localization of caveolins in the CVC present in erythrocytes
infected with P. vivax, thereby providing evidence of the role of this particular
organelle in the protein-trafficking pathway that connect parasite-encoded
proteins with the erythrocyte cytoplasm and the cell surface throughout the
asexual blood cycle of vivax malaria parasite.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-006-0139-6 
PMID: 16521037  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

