
1. Vet Parasitol. 2006 Nov 30;142(1-2):179-86. Epub 2006 Aug 9.

Evaluation of antioxidant status and oxidative stress in cattle naturally
infected with Theileria annulata.

Asri Rezaei S(1), Dalir-Naghadeh B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, Urmia
University, Urmia, P.O. Box 1177, Iran. s.asri@mail.urmia.ac.ir

To assess the antioxidant status and oxidative stress in bovine theileriosis due 
to Theileria annulata blood samples were collected from 35 clinically affected
cattle referred to Veterinary Teaching Hospital, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Urmia University, Urmia, Iran. Complete blood count, piroplasm parasitemia
percentage, erythrocyte glutathione peroxidase, superoxide dismutase, catalase
and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase activities, malondialdehyde concentration, 
osmotic fragility test and median corpuscular fragility were determined and the
results were compared with those of 50 healthy controls. Of 35 affected cattle,
12 (34.28%) had severe anemia and 23 had mild to moderate anemia and parasitemia 
varied from 5 to 40%. The activities of erythrocyte glutathione peroxidase,
superoxide dismutase and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase were significantly
lower (P<0.0001) and the activity of catalase was significantly higher in the
affected cattle than in healthy ones (P<0.001). Malondialdehyde concentration in 
erythrocytes of affected cattle was significantly more than those of healthy
cattle (P<0.001). The affected cattle showed increased fragility of erythrocytes,
so that median corpuscular fragility (MCF) in affected group was significantly
lower than those of healthy group (P<0.0001). Median corpuscular fragility showed
a positive correlation with the severity of parasitemia (r=0.81, P<0.0005) and a 
negative correlation with the activities of GSH-Px (r=-0.78, P<0.0001), SOD
(r=-0.71, P<0.0005), catalase (r=-0.53, P<0.018) and G6PD (r=-0.58, P<0.0005).
The results of this study suggest that oxidative damage to RBCs may contribute to
the pathogenesis of anemia in bovine theileriosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2006.05.033 
PMID: 16901649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

