
1. Infect Immun. 2007 May;75(5):2511-22. Epub 2007 Feb 16.

Primary infection of C57BL/6 mice with Plasmodium yoelii induces a heterogeneous 
response of NKT cells.

Soulard V(1), Roland J, Sellier C, Gruner AC, Leite-de-Moraes M, Franetich JF,
Rénia L, Cazenave PA, Pied S.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Immunophysiopathologie Infectieuse, Institut Pasteur, 25-28 rue du
Docteur Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

NKT cells are a population of innate-like lymphocytes that display effector
functions and immunoregulatory properties. We characterized the NKT cell response
induced in C57BL/6 mice during a primary infection with Plasmodium yoelii
sporozoites. We observed a heterogeneous NKT cell response that differed between 
liver and spleen. Hepatic NKT cells found in infected livers consisted mainly of 
CD1d-dependent CD4+ and double-negative (DN) NKT cells, whereas CD1d-independent 
NKT cells exhibiting a TCR(high) CD4(high) phenotype were prominent among splenic
NKT cells during the infection. Hepatic and splenic NKT cells isolated from
infected mice were activated and secreted mainly gamma interferon and tumor
necrosis factor alpha in response to stimulation. Finally, P. yoelii-activated
hepatic DN NKT cells inhibited the parasite's liver stage in a CD1d-dependent
manner in vitro. However, experiments using B6.CD1d-deficient mice showed that
CD1d and CD1d-restricted NKT cells are not necessary to control the parasite's
development in vivo during neither the preerythrocytic stage nor the erythrocytic
stage. Thus, our results show that a primary P. yoelii infection induces a
heterogeneous and organ-specific response of NKT cells and that CD1d-dependent
NKT cells play a minor role in the control of the development of Plasmodium in
vivo in our model.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01818-06 
PMCID: PMC1865793
PMID: 17307938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

