
1. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2007 Apr;33(2):179-92.

Cerebral calpain in fatal falciparum malaria.

Medana IM(1), Day NP, Hien TT, Mai NT, Bethell D, Phu NH, Turner GD, Farrar J,
White NJ, Esiri MM.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK. isabelle.medana@ndcls.ox.ac.uk

Disruption of axonal transport may represent a final common pathway leading to
neurological dysfunction in cerebral malaria (CM). Calpains are calcium
(Ca2+)-activated cysteine proteases which have been implicated in axonal injury
in neurological diseases of various aetiologies. In this study we examined the
association between mu- and m-calpain, the specific inhibitor calpastatin, and
axonal injury in post mortem brain tissue from patients who died from severe
malaria. Calpains were associated with axons labelled for the beta-amyloid
precursor protein that detects impaired axonal transport. Elevated levels of
calpastatin were rarely observed in injured axons. There were increased numbers
of neurones with mu-calpain in the nuclear compartment in severe malaria cases
compared with non-neurological controls, and increased numbers of glia with
nuclear mu-calpain in CM patients compared with non-CM malaria cases and
non-neurological controls. There was marked redistribution of calpastatin in the 
sequestered Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes. Responses specific to
malaria infection were ascertained following analysis of brain samples from fatal
cases with acute axonal injury, HIV encephalitis, and progressive multifocal
leucoencephalopathy. Our findings implicate a role for calpains in the modulation
of disease progression in CM.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2990.2006.00777.x 
PMID: 17359359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

