
1. Microbes Infect. 2007 Oct;9(12-13):1463-70. Epub 2007 Aug 7.

CD44, a signal receptor for the inhibition of the cytoadhesion of CD36-binding
Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes by CSA-binding infected erythrocytes.

Jurzynski C(1), Gysin J, Pouvelle B.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Parasitologie Expérimentale, EA3282 Institut Pasteur/Univ. Med.,
IFR48, Faculté de Médecine de la Timone, 27 Boulevard Jean Moulin, 13385
Marseille, France.

The cytoadhesion of Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes (IEs) in organ
microvessels is a key event in the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria and pulmonary
edema. Identification of the molecules involved in the interaction between IEs
and endothelial cells has been a major goal of research into severe forms of
malaria. In contrast, the consequences of cytoadhesion for endothelial cells have
been largely ignored. By combining phenotypic selection, cytoadhesion assays and 
flow cytometry, we demonstrated that the cytoadhesion of CSA-binding IEs
inhibited the cytoadhesion of CD36-binding IEs. We identified CD44 as a signal
receptor for CSA-binding IEs cytoadhesion, and demonstrated that the signal was
transduced to CD36 through a pathway involving the Src-kinase family and MEK.
CD36-mediated cytoadhesion was modulated independently of changes in CD36
expression. These results provide the first evidence that some IEs can
downregulate the cytoadhesion of IEs of another phenotype, by modifying
endothelial cells via a signaling pathway relating CD44 to CD36. Mimicking this
phenomenon may constitute an interesting therapeutic strategy for inhibiting the 
adhesion of CD36-binding IEs -- the most abundant phenotype among field isolates 
-- and promoting their degradation in the spleen.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2007.07.011 
PMID: 17913542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

