
1. J Exp Med. 2008 Feb 18;205(2):395-408. doi: 10.1084/jem.20071548. Epub 2008 Jan
28.

Inhibition of histamine-mediated signaling confers significant protection against
severe malaria in mouse models of disease.

Beghdadi W(1), Porcherie A, Schneider BS, Dubayle D, Peronet R, Huerre M,
Watanabe T, Ohtsu H, Louis J, Mécheri S.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Réponses Précoces aux Parasites et Immunopathologie, Institut
Pasteur, Paris 75015, France.

From the inoculation of Plasmodium sporozoites via Anopheles mosquito bites to
the development of blood-stage parasites, a hallmark of the host response is an
inflammatory reaction characterized by elevated histamine levels in the serum and
tissues. Given the proinflammatory and immunosuppressive activities associated
with histamine, we postulated that this vasoactive amine participates in malaria 
pathogenesis. Combined genetic and pharmacologic approaches demonstrated that
histamine binding to H1R and H2R but not H3R and H4R increases the susceptibility
of mice to infection with Plasmodium. To further understand the role of histamine
in malaria pathogenesis, we used histidine decarboxylase-deficient (HDC(-/-))
mice, which are free of histamine. HDC(-/-) mice were highly resistant to severe 
malaria whether infected by mosquito bites or via injection of infected
erythrocytes. HDC(-/-) mice displayed resistance to two lethal strains:
Plasmodium berghei (Pb) ANKA, which triggers cerebral malaria (CM), and Pb NK65, 
which causes death without neurological symptoms. The resistance of HDC(-/-) mice
to CM was associated with preserved blood-brain barrier integrity, the absence of
infected erythrocyte aggregation in the brain vessels, and a lack of
sequestration of CD4 and CD8 T cells. We demonstrate that histamine-mediated
signaling contributes to malaria pathogenesis. Understanding the basis for these 
biological effects of histamine during infection may lead to novel therapeutic
strategies to alleviate the severity of malaria.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20071548 
PMCID: PMC2271011
PMID: 18227221  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

