
1. Int J Parasitol. 2008 Dec;38(14):1693-704. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2008.05.014.
Epub 2008 Jun 12.

Infection of cattle with Theileria parva induces an early CD8 T cell response
lacking appropriate effector function.

Houston EF(1), Taracha EL, Brackenbury L, MacHugh ND, McKeever DJ, Charleston B, 
Morrison WI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Health, Compton, Berkshire, RG20 7BH, UK.

Theileria parva causes an acute lympho-proliferative disease in cattle, which can
result in death of susceptible animals within 2-3 weeks of infection. Analyses of
the cellular response in the lymph node draining the site of infection
demonstrated an early T cell response, with the appearance of large numbers of
uninfected lymphoblasts between 6 and 9 days p.i., coinciding with initial
detection of parasitised cells. There was a marked increase in the representation
of CD8(+) T cells and the emergence of a sizable sub-population of CD2(-) CD8(+) 
alpha/beta T cells during this period. Analysis of T cell receptor beta chain
variable (TCR BV) gene expression did not reveal any evidence for the involvement
of a superantigen in stimulating the response. Responding lymph node cells were
found to produce increased quantities of IFNgamma and IL-10, and both the CD2(+) 
CD8(+) and CD2(-) CD8(+) populations expressed IFNgamma transcripts. Purified
CD2(+) CD8(+) cells proliferated when stimulated in vitro with autologous
parasitised cells or non-specific mitogens, whereas CD2(-) CD8(+) cells were
refractory to these stimuli. In contrast to the parasite-specific cytotoxic
activity associated with T cell responses in immune cattle, the responses to
primary infection exhibited variable levels of non-specific cytotoxic activity.
Stimulation of purified CD2(+) CD8(+) T cells in vitro with autologous
parasitised cells also failed to reveal evidence of specific cytotoxic activity. 
These findings indicate that primary infection with T. parva induces an aberrant 
T cell response that lacks appropriate effector activity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2008.05.014 
PMID: 18590735  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

