
1. Infect Immun. 2008 Oct;76(10):4518-29. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00525-08. Epub 2008 Jul
21.

Host biomarkers and biological pathways that are associated with the expression
of experimental cerebral malaria in mice.

Oakley MS(1), McCutchan TF, Anantharaman V, Ward JM, Faucette L, Erexson C,
Mahajan B, Zheng H, Majam V, Aravind L, Kumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Cerebral malaria (CM) is a primary cause of malaria-associated deaths among young
African children. Yet no diagnostic tools are available that could be used to
predict which of the children infected with Plasmodium falciparum malaria will
progress to CM. We used the Plasmodium berghei ANKA murine model of experimental 
cerebral malaria (ECM) and high-density oligonucleotide microarray analyses to
identify host molecules that are strongly associated with the clinical symptoms
of ECM. Comparative expression analyses were performed with C57BL/6 mice, which
have an ECM-susceptible phenotype, and with mice that have ECM-resistant
phenotypes: CD8 knockout and perforin knockout mice on the C57BL/6 background and
BALB/c mice. These analyses allowed the identification of more than 200 host
molecules (a majority of which had not been identified previously) with altered
expression patterns in the brain that are strongly associated with the
manifestation of ECM. Among these host molecules, brain samples from mice with
ECM expressed significantly higher levels of p21, metallothionein, and hemoglobin
alpha1 proteins by Western blot analysis than mice unaffected by ECM, suggesting 
the possible utility of these molecules as prognostic biomarkers of CM in humans.
We suggest that the higher expression of hemoglobin alpha1 in the brain may be
associated with ECM and could be a source of excess heme, a molecule that is
considered to trigger the pathogenesis of CM. Our studies greatly enhance the
repertoire of host molecules for use as diagnostics and novel therapeutics in CM.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00525-08 
PMCID: PMC2546852
PMID: 18644885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

