
1. Malar J. 2008 Oct 20;7:211. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-7-211.

Interaction of an atypical Plasmodium falciparum ETRAMP with human
apolipoproteins.

Vignali M(1), McKinlay A, LaCount DJ, Chettier R, Bell R, Sahasrabudhe S, Hughes 
RE, Fields S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Box 355065, Seattle, 
WA 98195, USA. marissa.vignali@sbri.org

BACKGROUND: In order to establish a successful infection in the human host, the
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum must establish interactions with a variety
of human proteins on the surface of different cell types, as well as with
proteins inside the host cells. To better understand this aspect of malaria
pathogenesis, a study was conducted with the goal of identifying interactions
between proteins of the parasite and those of its human host.
METHODS: A modified yeast two-hybrid methodology that preferentially selects
protein fragments that can be expressed in yeast was used to conduct
high-throughput screens with P. falciparum protein fragments against human liver 
and cerebellum libraries. The resulting dataset was analyzed to exclude
interactions that are not likely to occur in the human host during infection.
RESULTS: An initial set of 2,200 interactions was curated to remove proteins that
are unlikely to play a role in pathogenesis based on their annotation or
localization, and proteins that behave promiscuously in the two-hybrid assay,
resulting in a final dataset of 456 interactions. A cluster that implicates
binding between P. falciparum PFE1590w/ETRAMP5, a putative parasitophorous
vacuole membrane protein, and human apolipoproteins ApoA, ApoB and ApoE was
selected for further analysis. Different isoforms of ApoE, which are associated
with different outcomes of malaria infection, were shown to display differential 
interactions with PFE1590w.
CONCLUSION: A dataset of interactions between proteins of P. falciparum and those
of its human host was generated. The preferential interaction of the P.
falciparum PFE1590w protein with the human ApoE epsilon3 and ApoE epsilon4
isoforms, but not the ApoE epsilon2 isoform, supports the hypothesis that ApoE
genotype affects risk of malaria infection. The dataset contains other
interactions of potential relevance to disease that may identify possible vaccine
candidates and drug targets.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-7-211 
PMCID: PMC2577112
PMID: 18937849  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

