
1. Parasitol Res. 2009 Feb;104(3):575-82. doi: 10.1007/s00436-008-1232-9. Epub 2008 
Oct 31.

Reduced CD3/TCR complex expression leads to immunosuppression during Plasmodium
falciparum malaria.

Kalmbach Y(1), Boldt AB, Mordmüller B, Kombila M, Grobusch MP, Kremsner PG, Kun
JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Institute for Tropical Medicine, University of
Tübingen, Wilhelmstr. 27, 72074, Tübingen, Germany.

Inhibition of T cell function is an important pathological feature in malaria. We
investigated which T cell population is reduced contributing to
immunosuppression. We examined protein and RNA level of various cell receptors,
specific for T cells in children having Plasmodium falciparum infection and
compared those to healthy children of the same age. We observe reduced levels of 
cluster of differentiation (CD)3 and T cell receptor (TCR)alphabeta in both RNA
and protein expression level. This reduced expression was associated with a
collapsed membrane asymmetry as determined by enhanced annexinV binding. Also
human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A,B,C- and HLA-DR-positive cells increasingly bound
annexinV. The enhanced binding of annexinV was paralleled by a reduced expression
of transcription factors such as T cell transcription factor 7 and GATA binding
protein 3, which are involved in the expression of T cell specific genes. Also
the expression of the transcription factors major histocompatibility complex
class II transactivator and regulatory factor X 5, which are part of the HLA
transcription machinery, is reduced during infection. We show that two mechanisms
may lead to a suppression of the immune system during malaria: cell damage and
reduction of gene expression of the CD3/TCR complex.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-008-1232-9 
PMID: 18975003  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

