
1. Eur J Immunol. 1991 Jan;21(1):89-95.

Lymphocytes infected with Theileria parva require both cell-cell contact and
growth factor to proliferate.

Dobbelaere DA(1), Roditi IJ, Coquerelle TM, Kelke C, Eichhorn M, Williams RO.

Author information: 
(1)Kernforschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institut f√ºr Genetik und Toxikologie,
Karlsruhe.

Lymphocytes infected with the intracellular parasite Theileria parva proliferate 
continuously as lymphoblastoid cell lines. We have previously shown that the
continuous proliferation of the T. parva-infected (Tpi) cell line TpM(803) is
mediated in part by an autocrine mechanism (Dobbelaere, D. A. E. et al., Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1988. 85:4730). We now report that continuous proliferation 
also requires surface stimulation through cell-cell contact. Under standard
culture conditions this surface stimulus is provided by the infected cells
themselves, but it can also be provided by uninfected lymphocytes or macrophages.
The ability to respond to surface stimulation is critically dependent on the
presence of the parasite in the host cell and is lost within 48 h after the
elimination of the parasite from the host cell cytoplasm by treatment with the
theilericidal drug BW720c. Tpi cells also secrete a growth factor which is able
to support the proliferation of diluted Tpi cells. Growth factor secretion is
rapidly lost upon elimination of the parasite. Moreover, inhibition experiments
using anti-interleukin 2 (IL 2) antibodies show that IL 2 is involved in the
proliferation of the Tpi cell lines TpM(803) and IN10. T cell proliferation is
dependent on a number of costimulatory signals which are normally provided by
accessory cells. The finding that Tpi cells can mutually stimulate each other to 
grow in the absence of conventional accessory cells helps to explain how they can
escape the normal constraints on T cell growth, allowing them to invade and
multiply in non-lymphoid as well as lymphoid tissues.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830210114 
PMID: 1899385  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

