
1. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 2008 Jul;39(4):581-8.

Defective erythropoietin production and reticulocyte response in acute Plasmodium
falciparum malaria-associated anemia.

Leowattana W(1), Krudsood S, Tangpukdee N, Brittenham G, Looareesuwan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, 420/6
Ratchawithi Road, Bangkok 10400, Thailand. dirctm@mahidol.ac.th

To elucidate the relationship between falciparum malaria-associated anemia and
serum erythropoietin (Epo) levels and reticulocyte response during acute malaria 
infection, 87 adults aged 18-65 years presenting with acute, uncomplicated
malaria were examined on enrollment and for 28 days of follow-up. The 87 patients
were divided into 2 groups: those with anemia (n = 45) and those without (n =
42). Serum samples were taken on admission (Day 0), then on Days 7, 21, and 28,
to measure the reticulocyte count, absolute reticulocyte count, reticulocyte
hemoglobin content, and erythropoietin level (Epo). The absolute reticulocyte
counts for the anemic patients were significantly higher than for those without
anemia on Days 0, 7, 21, and 28. The serum Epo levels for the anemic patients
were significantly higher than the non-anemic group only on Day 0 (44.39 +/- 4.06
vs 25.91 +/- 4.86 mlU/ml, p < 0.001). Inadequate Epo production was found in
31.03% (27/87) of patients on Day 0, 37.93% (33/87) on Day 7, 43.67% (38/87) on
Day 21, and 39.08% (34/87) on Day 28. These results indicate defective Epo
production and reticulocyte response in adult patients suffering from acute P.
falciparum malaria, which differs from pediatric patients. Our findings may
provide the basis for further study into the choice of therapeutic strategies to 
treat acute P. falciparum malaria-associated anemia with recombinant human Epo to
correct refractory anemia due to malaria.


PMCID: PMC3114418
PMID: 19058593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

