
1. Vet Parasitol. 2009 Oct 14;164(2-4):301-5. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2009.06.002.
Epub 2009 Jun 11.

Clinical and biochemical studies on Theileria annulata in Egyptian buffaloes
(Bubalus bubalis) with particular orientation to oxidative stress and ketosis
relationship.

El-Deeb WM(1), Younis EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Mansoura University, EL-Gomhorya St, Mansoura, Dakahlia 35516, Egypt.
drwaeleldeeb@yahoo.com

This study was carried out on 68 Theileria annulata naturally infected buffaloes 
in addition to 25 parasitologically free buffaloes distributed in small herds at 
Dakahlia and Gharbya governorates, Egypt, to demonstrate the clinical picture
associated with theileriosis in this buffaloes with particular emphasis to the
oxidative stress and ketosis relationship. Clinical signs recorded in infected
buffaloes were in the form of fever, enlargement of one or more lymph node,
ocular discharge, corneal opacity, skin lesions, decreased milk yield, pale
mucous membrane and anorexia. Blood and serum analysis revealed significant
(p<or=0.05) decrease in RBCS and or Hb concentration in infected animals compared
to control ones. Moreover, significant increase (p<or=0.05) in the levels of beta
hydroxy butyric acid (BHBA) and non-esterified free fatty acid (NEFA) with a
significant decrease (p<or=0.05) in the levels of reduced glutathione (R.GSH),
superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), total antioxidant capacity (TAC),
nitric oxide (NO), glucose and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) in
infected animals compared to control ones. It can be concluded that T. annulata
plays an important role in the occurrence of anemia, oxidative and ketotic
stressor in Egyptian water buffaloes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2009.06.002 
PMID: 19559534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

