
1. Acta Vet Hung. 2009 Jun;57(2):295-304. doi: 10.1556/AVet.57.2009.2.10.

Alterations in some blood coagulation parameters in naturally occurring cases of 
canine babesiosis.

Rafaj RB(1), Matijatko V, Kis I, Kucer N, Zivicnjak T, Lemo N, Zvorc Z, BrkljaciÄ‡
M, Mrljak V.

Author information: 
(1)University of Zagreb, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry Heinzelova, 55 
10000 Zagreb, Croatia. rrafaj@vef.hr

Changes in coagulation parameters were studied in dogs naturally infected with
Babesia canis canis (n = 30), and haemostasis was evaluated and compared to
values obtained from healthy dogs (n = 29). To date, there have not been any
studies examining the dynamics of thrombin-antithrombin complex formation in
cases of canine babesiosis. Coagulation parameters evaluated before (day 0) and
on days 1, 2, and 3 after treatment with imidocarb (6 mg/kg inj. s.c.) included
the determination of platelet counts, the formation of thrombin-antithrombin
complexes (TAT), prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time
(APTT) and antithrombin III (AT III) activity. TAT complexes were significantly
elevated in animals with babesiosis on days 0 and 2 (mean 49.7 and 87.7 microg/L 
vs. control, 7.2 microg/L). AT III activity was significantly decreased at all
time-points examined. There were no differences in PT. On days 2 and 3 the APTT
was significantly shortened in the infected dogs when compared to control animals
(means of 21.3 and 19.2 s vs. control, 30.0 s). Our analysis demonstrated that
infected dogs had significant thrombocytopenia during the course of the study
(mean day 0 - 29 x 10(9) /L, day 1 - 48 x 10(9) /L, day 2 - 47 x 10(9) /L and day
3 - 87 x 10(9) /L, vs. control -259 x 10(9) /L). These data suggest that
babesiosis in dogs compromise primary and secondary haemostasis and that
induction of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) occurs in canine
babesiosis.

DOI: 10.1556/AVet.57.2009.2.10 
PMID: 19584042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

