
1. New Microbiol. 2009 Jul;32(3):285-91.

Determination of the expression of lymphocyte surface markers and cytokine levels
in a mouse model of Plasmodium berghei.

Dogruman-Al F(1), Fidan I, Kustimur S, Ceber K, Imir T.

Author information: 
(1)Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Microbiology,
Besevler, Ankara, Turkey. alfunda@gazi.edu.tr

This study aimed to determine the changes in lymphocyte surface markers and
cytokine profiles during a malarial infection in a mouse model of malaria.
Mononuclear cells obtained from the spleens of the mice infected with Plasmodium 
berghei (P. berghei) were stained with anti-mouse CD3, anti-mouse CD4, anti-mouse
CD8, anti-mouse CD19, anti-mouse CD152, anti-mouse pan natural killer (NK),
anti-mouse CD80 monoclonal antibodies and expression of surface markers was
evaluated by flow cytometry. In the serum samples of the mice, the levels of
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), interferon gamma (IFN-gamma),
transforming growth factor-1beta (TGF-1beta), and interleukin (IL)-4, IL-10, and 
IL-12 cytokines were determined by ELISA method. The expressions of all the
surface markers of lymphocyte evaluated were statistically significantly lower in
the infected mice than in the healthy control mice (p < 0.05). However, except
for the level of TGF-1beta, the levels of all the other cytokines evaluated were 
statistically significantly higher in the infected group than in the control
group (p < 0.001). No significant differences were determined between the
TGF-1beta levels of the study and control groups (p > 0.05). In this study, T, B,
and NK lymphocyte responses were inhibited and cytokine profiles changed in the
course of malarial infection. Thus, interventions to increase the Th1 lymphocyte 
response may be beneficial in the prevention of malarial infection.


PMID: 19845111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

