
1. J Infect Dis. 2009 Dec 15;200(12):1842-8. doi: 10.1086/648476.

Endoglin in African children with Plasmodium falciparum malaria: a novel player
in severe malaria pathogenesis?

Dietmann A(1), Helbok R, Lackner P, Fischer M, Reindl M, Lell B, Issifou S,
Kremsner PG, Schmutzhard E.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Department of Neurology, Innsbruck Medical University, 6020
Innsbruck, Austria. Anelia.Dietmann@i-med.ac.at

BACKGROUND: Molecular mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of severe
Plasmodium falciparum malaria-specifically, cerebral malaria-are still unclear.
Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) family members are important
regulators of inflammation that influence malaria pathogenesis. The soluble form 
of the auxiliary receptor endoglin (sEng) may play a role in malaria
pathogenesis.
METHODS: Serum levels of sEng were measured using enzyme-linked
immunosorbent-assay in Gabonese children with cerebral malaria (n = 7) severe
malaria (n = 43), or uncomplicated malaria (n = 43) and were compared with levels
in healthy control subjects (n = 25) and in another infectious disease group (n =
8).
RESULTS: Serum sEng levels were higher in patients with cerebral malaria and all 
patients with severe malaria when compared with levels in patients in the other
infection group and the healthy control group. Furthermore, sEng correlated
significantly with disease severity. Only 7% of patients with uncomplicated
malaria and none of the control patients (patients in the other infection group
or the healthy control group) had serum levels higher than 12 ng/mL, whereas this
was found in 85.7% of patients with cerebral malaria and 46.5% of patients with
severe malaria.
CONCLUSIONS: High sEng levels may attenuate anti-inflammatory response resulting 
in clinical deterioration of patients with P. falciparum malaria. Our results
further corroborate the role of the vascular compartment, especially the
endothelium, in severe malaria pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1086/648476 
PMID: 19919302  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

