
1. Parasite Immunol. 2010 Feb;32(2):143-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3024.2009.01169.x.

Course of infection by Babesia sp. BQ1 (Lintan) and B. divergens in sheep depends
on the production of IFNgamma and IL10.

Guan G(1), Chauvin A, Yin H, Luo J, Moreau E.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Key Laboratory of
Grazing Animal Diseases MOA, State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological
Biology, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Science, Lanzhou, Gansu, China.

Ovine babesiosis is an important disease in China and responsible for economic
losses. Several Babesia strains are involved, but Babesia sp. BQ1 (Lintan) and
Babesia sp. BQ1 (Ningxian) are particularly prevalent in the Guansu region.
Babesia divergens, in contrast, can experimentally infect spleen-intact sheep,
but does not induce clinical signs. The immune response of spleen-intact sheep to
Babesia sp. BQ1 (Lintan) and to B. divergens was therefore compared to identify
the immune mechanisms involved in pathogenicity. The greater pathogenicity of
Babesia sp. BQ1 (Lintan) than that of B. divergens was confirmed: sheep infected 
with Babesia sp. BQ1 (Lintan), but not with B. divergens, developed hyperthermia 
and showed patent parasitaemia in Giemsa-stained blood smears from the ear vein. 
Furthermore, more parasites were also detected in the blood from the jugular vein
of Babesia sp. BQ1 (Lintan)-infected sheep. Pathogenicity of Babesia spp.
involved cellular responses, but not humoral responses. Interferon-gamma was
produced only by specifically activated PBMC from B. divergens-infected sheep and
interleukin-10 only by specifically activated PBMC from Babesia sp. BQ1
(Lintan)-infected sheep. The role of these cytokines in the course of infection
by Babesia spp. is discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3024.2009.01169.x 
PMID: 20070828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

