
1. Int Immunol. 1991 Jan;3(1):29-37.

Induction of high levels of IgG autoantibodies in mice infected with Plasmodium
chabaudi.

Ternynck T(1), Falanga PB, Unterkirscher C, Gregoire J, da Silva LP, Avrameas S.

Author information: 
(1)Unit√© d'Immunocytochimie, CNRS URA 359, Paris, France.

This study analyzed the effect of infection of mice with a virulent strain of
Plasmodium chabaudi on natural autoantibodies. Mice received appropriate
treatments in order to survive and the serum autoantibodies were characterized
either by enzyme immunoassays against a panel of self and non-self antigens or by
Western immunoblots using fibroblast or red blood cell (RBC) extracts. IgM and
mainly IgG antibodies directed against actin, myoglobin, myosin, spectrin,
tubulin, and trinitrophenylated-ovalbumin were found a few days after the
parasitemia peak, persisted for several weeks after parasite clearance, and
returned to almost normal levels after 2 months. Following a challenge with
parasitized RBCs, a similar increase in all antibodies was observed, their levels
remaining high 20 days post-injection and still remaining at twice the normal
level 1 month later. Western blotting detected autoantibodies to many membrane
RBC proteins, e.g. spectrin, and band 3 and its related polypeptides, as well as 
against fibroblast constituents, such as tubulin, actin, and the 70 kd heat shock
protein. Autoantibodies seemed to be polyspecific, since those eluted from
infected mouse RBCs and the IgG antibodies from infected mouse sera
affinity-purified on a mouse tubulin immunoadsorbent reacted with all antigens of
the panel, including parasite extracts. Surprisingly, in mice which had recovered
from infection, autoantibody levels, particularly anti-spectrin and anti-band 3, 
rose after the injection of a high dose of normal instead of parasitized
RBCs.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/3.1.29 
PMID: 2049335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

