
1. Pflugers Arch. 2010 Nov;460(6):1029-44. doi: 10.1007/s00424-010-0878-1. Epub 2010
Sep 21.

Functional significance of the intermediate conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channel
for the short-term survival of injured erythrocytes.

Föller M(1), Bobbala D, Koka S, Boini KM, Mahmud H, Kasinathan RS, Shumilina E,
Amann K, Beranek G, Sausbier U, Ruth P, Sausbier M, Lang F, Huber SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Increased cytosolic Ca(2+) concentrations activate Gardos K(+) channels in human 
erythrocytes with membrane hyperpolarization, efflux of K(+), Cl⁻, and
osmotically obliged H₂O resulting in cell shrinkage, a phenomenon referred to as 
Gardos effect. We tested whether the Gardos effect delays colloid osmotic
hemolysis of injured erythrocytes from mice lacking the Ca(2+)-activated K(+)
channel K(Ca)3.1. To this end, we applied patch clamp and flow cytometry and
determined in vitro as well as in vivo hemolysis. As a result, erythrocytes from 
K(Ca)3.1-deficient (K(Ca)3.1(-/-)) mice lacked Gardos channel activity and the
Gardos effect. Blood parameters, reticulocyte count, or osmotic erythrocyte
resistance, however, did not differ between K(Ca)3.1(-/-) mice and their
wild-type littermates, suggesting low or absent Gardos channel activity in
unstressed erythrocytes. Oxidative stress-induced Ca(2+) entry and phospholipid
scrambling were significantly less pronounced in K(Ca)3.1(-/-) than in wild-type 
erythrocytes. Moreover, in vitro treatment with α-toxin from Staphylococcus
aureus, which forms pores in the cellular membrane, resulted in significantly
stronger hemolysis of K(Ca)3.1(-/-) than of wild-type erythrocytes. Intravenous
injection of α-toxin induced more profound hemolysis in K(Ca)3.1(-/-) than in
wild-type mice. Similarly, intra-peritoneal application of the redox-active
substance phenylhydrazine, an agent for the induction of hemolytic anemia, was
followed by a significantly stronger decrease of hematocrit in K(Ca)3.1(-/-) than
in wild-type mice. Finally, malaria infection triggered the activation of
K(Ca)3.1 and transient shrinkage of the infected erythrocytes. In conclusion,
K(Ca)3.1 channel activity and Gardos effect counteract hemolysis of injured
erythrocytes, thus decreasing hemoglobin release into circulating blood.

DOI: 10.1007/s00424-010-0878-1 
PMID: 20857305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

