
1. PLoS Biol. 2010 Sep 28;8(9). pii: e1000499. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000499.

The transforming parasite Theileria co-opts host cell mitotic and central
spindles to persist in continuously dividing cells.

von Schubert C(1), Xue G, Schmuckli-Maurer J, Woods KL, Nigg EA, Dobbelaere DA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathobiology, DCR-VPH, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2010;8(9). pii: e1000498. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000498.

The protozoan parasite Theileria inhabits the host cell cytoplasm and possesses
the unique capacity to transform the cells it infects, inducing continuous
proliferation and protection against apoptosis. The transforming schizont is a
multinucleated syncytium that resides free in the host cell cytoplasm and is
strictly intracellular. To maintain transformation, it is crucial that this
syncytium is divided over the two daughter cells at each host cell cytokinesis.
This process was dissected using different cell cycle synchronization methods in 
combination with the targeted application of specific inhibitors. We found that
Theileria schizonts associate with newly formed host cell microtubules that
emanate from the spindle poles, positioning the parasite at the equatorial region
of the mitotic cell where host cell chromosomes assemble during metaphase. During
anaphase, the schizont interacts closely with host cell central spindle. As part 
of this process, the schizont recruits a host cell mitotic kinase, Polo-like
kinase 1, and we established that parasite association with host cell central
spindles requires Polo-like kinase 1 catalytic activity. Blocking the interaction
between the schizont and astral as well as central spindle microtubules prevented
parasite segregation between the daughter cells during cytokinesis. Our findings 
provide a striking example of how an intracellular eukaryotic pathogen that
evolved ways to induce the uncontrolled proliferation of the cells it infects
usurps the host cell mitotic machinery, including Polo-like kinase 1, one of the 
pivotal mitotic kinases, to ensure its own persistence and survival.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000499 
PMCID: PMC2946958
PMID: 20927361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

