
1. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 15;186(2):1218-27. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000808. Epub 2010
Dec 13.

Antibody-targeted NY-ESO-1 to mannose receptor or DEC-205 in vitro elicits dual
human CD8+ and CD4+ T cell responses with broad antigen specificity.

Tsuji T(1), Matsuzaki J, Kelly MP, Ramakrishna V, Vitale L, He LZ, Keler T,
Odunsi K, Old LJ, Ritter G, Gnjatic S.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Ltd., New York Branch, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Immunization of cancer patients with vaccines containing full-length tumor Ags
aims to elicit specific Abs and both CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells. Vaccination with 
protein Ags, however, often elicits only CD4(+) T cell responses without inducing
Ag-specific CD8(+) T cells, as exogenous protein is primarily presented to CD4(+)
T cells. Recent data revealed that Ab-mediated targeting of protein Ags to cell
surface receptors on dendritic cells could enhance the induction of both CD4(+)
and CD8(+) T cells. We investigated in this study if these observations were
applicable to NY-ESO-1, a cancer-testis Ag widely used in clinical cancer vaccine
trials. We generated two novel targeting proteins consisting of the full-length
NY-ESO-1 fused to the C terminus of two human mAbs against the human mannose
receptor and DEC-205, both internalizing molecules expressed on APC. These
targeting proteins were evaluated for their ability to activate NY-ESO-1-specific
human CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells in vitro. Both targeted NY-ESO-1 proteins rapidly
bound to their respective targets on APC. Whereas nontargeted and Ab-targeted
NY-ESO-1 proteins similarly activated CD4(+) T cells, cross-presentation to
CD8(+) T cells was only efficiently induced by targeted NY-ESO-1. In addition,
both mannose receptor and DEC-205 targeting elicited specific CD4(+) and CD8(+) T
cells from PBLs of cancer patients. Receptor-specific delivery of NY-ESO-1 to APC
appears to be a promising vaccination strategy to efficiently generate integrated
and broad Ag-specific immune responses against NY-ESO-1 in cancer patients.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000808 
PMID: 21149605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

