
1. J Infect Dis. 2011 Jan 15;203(2):211-9. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiq041.

Distinct clinical and immunologic profiles in severe malarial anemia and cerebral
malaria in Zambia.

Thuma PE(1), van Dijk J, Bucala R, Debebe Z, Nekhai S, Kuddo T, Nouraie M, Weiss 
G, Gordeuk VR.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Institute at Macha, Choma, Zambia.

BACKGROUND: The mechanisms of severe malarial anemia and cerebral malaria, which 
are extreme manifestations of Plasmodium falciparum malaria, are not fully
understood.
METHODS: Children aged <6 years from southern Zambia presenting to the hospital
with severe malarial anemia (n = 72), cerebral malaria (n = 28), or uncomplicated
malaria (n = 66) were studied prospectively. Children with overlapping severe
anemia and cerebral malaria were excluded.
RESULTS: Low interleukin 10 concentrations had the strongest association with
severe anemia (standard β = .61; P < .001) followed by high tumor necrosis factor
α and sFas concentrations, low weight-for-age z scores, presence of stool
parasites, and splenomegaly (standard β = .15-.25; P ≤ .031); most of these
factors were also associated with lower reticulocytes. Greater parasitemia was
associated with higher interleukin 10 and tumor necrosis factor α concentrations,
whereas sulfadoxizole/pyrimethamine therapy and lower weight-for-age z scores
were associated with lower interleukin 10 levels. Thrombocytopenia and elevated
tissue plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 levels had the strongest associations
with cerebral malaria (standard β = .37 or .36; P < .0001), followed by exposure 
to traditional herbal medicine and hemoglobinuria (standard β = .21-.31; P ≤
.006).
CONCLUSIONS: Predictors of severe malarial anemia (altered immune responses, poor
nutrition, intestinal parasites, and impaired erythropoiesis) differed from those
of cerebral malaria (thrombocytopenia, herbal medicine, and intravascular
hemolysis). Improved preventive and therapeutic measures may need to consider
these differences.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiq041 
PMCID: PMC3071068
PMID: 21288821  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

