
1. Blood. 2011 May 26;117(21):5674-82. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-312413. Epub 2011 
Apr 1.

Host fibrinogen stably bound to hemozoin rapidly activates monocytes via TLR-4
and CD11b/CD18-integrin: a new paradigm of hemozoin action.

Barrera V(1), Skorokhod OA, Baci D, Gremo G, Arese P, Schwarzer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Biology, and Biochemistry, University of Torino
Medical School, Torino, Italy.

Natural hemozoin (nHZ), prepared after schizogony, consists of crystalline
ferriprotoporphyrin-IX dimers from undigested heme bound to host and parasite
proteins and lipids. Phagocytosed nHZ alters important functions of host
phagocytes. Most alterations are long-term effects. We show that host fibrinogen 
(FG) was constantly present (at ~ 1 FG per 25 000 HZ-heme molecules) and stably
bound to nHZ from plasma-cultured parasites. FG was responsible for the rapid
100-fold stimulation of reactive oxygen species production and 50-fold increase
of TNF and monocyte chemotactic protein 1 by human monocytes. Those effects,
starting within minutes after nHZ cell contact, were because of interaction of FG
with FG-receptors TLR4 and integrin CD11b/CD18. Receptor blockage by specific
mAbs or removal of FG from nHZ abrogated the effects. nHZ-opsonizing IgGs
contribute to the stimulatory response but are not essential for FG effects.
Immediate increase in reactive oxygen species and TNF may switch on previously
described long-term effects of nHZ, largely because of HZ-generated
lipo-peroxidation products 15(S,R)-hydroxy-6,8,11,13-eicosatetraenoic acid and
4-hydroxynonenal. The FG/HZ effects mediated by TLR4/integrins represent a novel 
paradigm of nHZ activity and allow expansion of nHZ effects to nonphagocytic
cells, such as endothelia and airway epithelia, and lead to a better
understanding of organ pathology in malaria.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-312413 
PMID: 21460246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

