
1. Dis Markers. 2011;30(1):39-49. doi: 10.3233/DMA-2011-0763.

CXCL4 and CXCL10 predict risk of fatal cerebral malaria.

Wilson NO(1), Jain V, Roberts CE, Lucchi N, Joel PK, Singh MP, Nagpal AC, Dash
AP, Udhayakumar V, Singh N, Stiles JK.

Author information: 
(1)Morehouse School of Medicine, Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and
Immunology, Atlanta, Georgia 30310, USA.

Plasmodium falciparum in a subset of patients can lead to a diffuse
encephalopathy known as cerebral malaria (CM). Despite treatment, mortality
caused by CM can be as high as 30% while 10% of survivors of the disease may
experience short- and long-term neurological complications. The pathogenesis of
CM involves alterations in cytokine and chemokine expression, local inflammation,
vascular injury and repair processes. These diverse factors have limited the rate
of discovery of prognostic predictors of fatal CM. Identification of reliable
early predictors of CM severity will enable clinicians to adjust this risk with
appropriate management of CM. Recent studies revealed that elevated levels of
CXCL10 expression in cerebrospinal fluid and peripheral blood plasma
independently predicted severe and fatal CM. CXCR3, a promiscuous receptor of
CXCL10, plays an important role in pathogenesis of mouse model of CM. In this
study the role of corresponding CXCR3 ligands (CXCL11, CXCL10, CXCL9 & CXCL4) in 
fatal or severe CM was evaluated by comparing their levels in 16 healthy control 
(HC), 26 mild malaria (MM), 26 cerebral malaria survivors (CMS) and 12
non-survivors (CMNS) using enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Levels of
CXCL4 and CXCL10 were significantly elevated in CMNS patients (p < 0.05) when
compared with HC, MM and CMS. Elevated plasma levels of CXCL10 and CXCL4 were
tightly associated with CM mortality. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC)
curve analysis revealed that CXCL4 and CXCL10 can discriminate CMNS from MM (p < 
0.0001) and CMS (p <0.0001) with an area under the curve (AUC)=1. These results
suggest that CXCL4 and CXCL10 play a prominent role in pathogenesis of CM
associated death and may be used as functional or surrogate biomarkers for
predicting CM severity.

DOI: 10.3233/DMA-2011-0763 
PMCID: PMC3260027
PMID: 21508508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

