
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Sep;7(9):e1002254. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002254. Epub 2011
Sep 15.

Nrf2, a PPARγ alternative pathway to promote CD36 expression on inflammatory
macrophages: implication for malaria.

Olagnier D(1), Lavergne RA, Meunier E, Lefèvre L, Dardenne C, Aubouy A,
Benoit-Vical F, Ryffel B, Coste A, Berry A, Pipy B.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Toulouse, UPS, UMR-MD3, Relations Hôte-Parasites Polarisation
des Macrophages et Récepteurs Nucléaires dans les Pathologies Inflammatoires et
Infectieuses, Toulouse, France.

CD36 is the major receptor mediating nonopsonic phagocytosis of Plasmodium
falciparum-parasitized erythrocytes by macrophages. Its expression on macrophages
is mainly controlled by the nuclear receptor PPARγ. Here, we demonstrate that
inflammatory processes negatively regulate CD36 expression on human and murine
macrophages, and hence decrease Plasmodium clearance directly favoring the
worsening of malaria infection. This CD36 downregulation in inflammatory
conditions is associated with a failure in the expression and activation of
PPARγ. Interestingly, using siRNA mediating knock down of Nrf2 in macrophages or 
Nrf2- and PPARγ-deficient macrophages, we establish that in inflammatory
conditions, the Nrf2 transcription factor controls CD36 expression independently 
of PPARγ. In these conditions, Nrf2 activators, but not PPARγ ligands, enhance
CD36 expression and CD36-mediated Plasmodium phagocytosis. These results were
confirmed in human macrophages and in vivo where only Nrf2 activators improve the
outcome of severe malaria. Collectively, this report highlights that the Nrf2
transcription factor could be an alternative target to PPARγ in the control of
severe malaria through parasite clearance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002254 
PMCID: PMC3174257
PMID: 21949655  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

