
1. Am J Pathol. 2012 Jan;180(1):246-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.09.038. Epub 2011
Nov 8.

Platelet-activating factor receptor is essential for the development of
experimental cerebral malaria.

Lacerda-Queiroz N(1), Rodrigues DH, Vilela MC, Rachid MA, Soriani FM, Sousa LP,
Campos RD, Quesniaux VF, Teixeira MM, Teixeira AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
norinneq@yahoo.com.br

Cerebral malaria is a severe form of the disease that may result, in part, from
an overt inflammatory response during infection by Plasmodium falciparum. The
understanding of the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria may aid in the development 
of better therapeutic strategies for patients. The immune response in cerebral
malaria involves elevation of circulating levels of cytokines and chemokines
associated with leukocyte accumulation and breakdown of the blood-brain barrier
in the central nervous system. Platelet-activating factor (PAF) is a mediator of 
inflammation shown to orchestrate inflammatory processes, including recruitment
of leukocytes and increase of vascular permeability. Using mice lacking the PAF
receptor (PAFR(-/-)), we investigated the relevance of this molecule for the
outcome and the neuroinflammatory process triggered by P. berghei ANKA, an
experimental model of cerebral malaria. In PAFR(-/-) mice, lethality was markedly
delayed and brain inflammation was significantly reduced, as demonstrated by
histology, accumulation, and activation of CD8(+) T cells, changes in vascular
permeability and activation of caspase-3 on endothelial cells and leukocytes.
Similarly, treatment with the PAFR antagonist UK-74,505 delayed lethality. Taken 
together, the results suggest that PAFR signaling is crucial for the development 
of experimental cerebral malaria. Mechanistically, PAFR activation is crucial for
the cascade of events leading to changes in vascular permeability, accumulation, 
and activation of CD8(+) T cells and apoptosis of leukocytes and endothelial
cells.

Copyright Â© 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.09.038 
PMID: 22079430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

