
1. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2012 May;107(3):410-5.

Expression of non-TLR pattern recognition receptors in the spleen of BALB/c mice 
infected with Plasmodium yoelii and Plasmodium chabaudi chabaudi AS.

Rosanas-Urgell A(1), Martin-Jaular L, Ricarte-Filho J, Ferrer M, Kalko S, Kimura 
E, Del Portillo HA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade 
de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil. anna.rosanas@gmail.com

The spleen plays a crucial role in the development of immunity to malaria, but
the role of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) in splenic effector cells during
malaria infection is poorly understood. In the present study, we analysed the
expression of selected PRRs in splenic effector cells from BALB/c mice infected
with the lethal and non-lethal Plasmodium yoelii strains 17XL and 17X,
respectively, and the non-lethal Plasmodium chabaudi chabaudi AS strain. The
results of these experiments showed fewer significant changes in the expression
of PRRs in AS-infected mice than in 17X and 17XL-infected mice. Mannose receptor 
C type 2 (MRC2) expression increased with parasitemia, whereas Toll-like
receptors and sialoadhesin (Sn) decreased in mice infected with P. chabaudi AS.
In contrast, MRC type 1 (MRC1), MRC2 and EGF-like module containing mucin-like
hormone receptor-like sequence 1 (F4/80) expression decreased with parasitemia in
mice infected with 17X, whereas MRC1 an MRC2 increased and F4/80 decreased in
mice infected with 17XL. Furthermore, macrophage receptor with collagenous
structure and CD68 declined rapidly after initial parasitemia. SIGNR1 and Sn
expression demonstrated minor variations in the spleens of mice infected with
either strain. Notably, macrophage scavenger receptor (Msr1) and dendritic
cell-associated C-type lectin 2 expression increased at both the transcript and
protein levels in 17XL-infected mice with 50% parasitemia. Furthermore, the
increased lethality of 17X infection in Msr1 -/- mice demonstrated a protective
role for Msr1. Our results suggest a dual role for these receptors in parasite
clearance and protection in 17X infection and lethality in 17XL infection.

DOI: 10.1590/s0074-02762012000300017 
PMID: 22510838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

