
1. Malar J. 2012 May 3;11:148.

Host immune response in returning travellers infected with malaria.

MacMullin G(1), Mackenzie R, Lau R, Khang J, Zhang H, Rajwans N, Liles WC, Pillai
DR.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Ontario, Toronto, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Clinical observations suggest that Canadian-born (CB) travellers are 
prone to more severe malaria, characterized by higher parasite density in the
blood, and severe symptoms, such as cerebral malaria and renal failure, than
foreign-born travellers (FB) from areas of malaria endemicity. It was
hypothesized that host cytokine and chemokine responses differ significantly in
CB versus FB patients returning with malaria, contributing to the courses of
severity. A more detailed understanding of the profiles of cytokines, chemokines,
and endothelial activation may be useful in developing biomarkers and novel
therapeutic approaches for malaria.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The patient population for the study (n = 186) was
comprised of travellers returning to Toronto, Canada between 2007 and 2011. The
patient blood samples' cytokine, chemokine and angiopoietin concentrations were
determined using cytokine multiplex assays, and ELISA assays.
RESULTS: Significantly higher plasma cytokine levels of IL-12 (p40) were observed
in CB compared to FB travellers, while epidermal growth factor (EGF) was observed
to be higher in FB than CB travellers. Older travellers (55 years old or greater)
with Plasmodium vivax infections had significantly higher mean cytokine levels
for IL-6 and macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) than other adults with 
P. vivax (ages 18-55). Patients with P. vivax infections had significantly higher
mean cytokine levels for monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), and M-CSF than
patients with Plasmodium falciparum. Angiopoietin 2 (Ang-2) was higher for
patients infected with P. falciparum than P. vivax, especially when comparing
just the FB groups. IL-12 (p40) was higher in FB patients with P. vivax compared 
to P. falciparum. Il-12 (p40) was also higher in patients infected with P. vivax 
than those infected with Plasmodium ovale. For patients travelling to West
Africa, IFN-Î³ and IL-6 was lower than for patients who were in other regions of
Africa.
CONCLUSION: Significantly higher levels of IL-12 (p40) and lower levels of EGF in
CB travellers may serve as useful prognostic markers of disease severity and help
guide clinical management upon return. IL-6 and M-CSF in older adults and MCP-1, 
IL-12 (p40) and M-CSF for P. vivax infected patients may also prove useful in
understanding age-associated and species-specific host immune responses, as could
the species-specific differences in Ang-2. Regional differences in host immune
response to malaria infection within the same species may speak to unique strains
circulating in parts of West Africa.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-148 
PMCID: PMC3586951
PMID: 22554058  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

