
1. Front Immunol. 2012 Apr 25;3:85. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00085. eCollection 2012.

IL-22 Protects Against Liver Pathology and Lethality of an Experimental
Blood-Stage Malaria Infection.

Mastelic B(1), do Rosario AP, Veldhoen M, Renauld JC, Jarra W, Sponaas AM,
Roetynck S, Stockinger B, Langhorne J.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Parasitology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research London,
UK.

The host response following malaria infection depends on a fine balance between
levels of pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory mediators resulting in the
resolution of the infection or immune-mediated pathology. Whilst other components
of the innate immune system contribute to the pro-inflammatory milieu, T cells
play a major role. For blood-stage malaria, CD4(+) and γδ T cells are major
producers of the IFN-γ that controls parasitemia, however, a role for TH17 cells 
secreting IL-17A and other cytokines, including IL-17F and IL-22 has not yet been
investigated in malaria. TH17 cells have been shown to play a role in some
protozoan infections, but they also are a source of pro-inflammatory cytokines
known to be involved in protection or pathogenicity of infections. In the present
study, we have investigated whether IL-17A and IL-22 are induced during a
Plasmodium chabaudi infection in mice, and whether these cytokines contribute to 
either protection or to pathology induced during the infection. Although small
numbers of IL-17- and IL-22-producing CD4 T cells are induced in the spleens of
infected mice, a more pronounced induction is observed in the liver, where
increases in mRNA for IL-17A and, to a lesser extent, IL-22 were observed and
CD8(+) T cells, rather than CD4 T cells, are a major source of these cytokines in
this organ. Although the lack of IL-17 did not affect the outcome of infection or
pathology, lack of IL-22 resulted in 50% mortality within 12 days after infection
with significantly greater weight loss at the peak of infection and significant
increase in alanine transaminase in the plasma in the acute infection. As
parasitemias and temperature were similar in IL-22 KO and wild-type control mice,
our observations support the idea that IL-22 but not IL-17 provides protection
from the potentially lethal effects of liver damage during a primary P. chabaudi 
infection.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00085 
PMCID: PMC3342387
PMID: 22566965 

