
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36692. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036692. Epub 2012 May 16.

Investigation of host candidate malaria-associated risk/protective SNPs in a
Brazilian Amazonian population.

da Silva Santos S(1), Clark TG, Campino S, Suarez-Mutis MC, Rockett KA,
Kwiatkowski DP, Fernandes O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório Interdisciplinar de Pesquisas Médicas, IOC, Fiocruz, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. simone@ioc.fiocruz.br

The Brazilian Amazon is a hypo-endemic malaria region with nearly 300,000 cases
each year. A variety of genetic polymorphisms, particularly in erythrocyte
receptors and immune response related genes, have been described to be associated
with susceptibility and resistance to malaria. In order to identify polymorphisms
that might be associated with malaria clinical outcomes in a Brazilian Amazonian 
population, sixty-four human single nucleotide polymorphisms in 37 genes were
analyzed using a Sequenom massARRAY iPLEX platform. A total of 648 individuals
from two malaria endemic areas were studied, including 535 malaria cases (113
individuals with clinical mild malaria, 122 individuals with asymptomatic
infection and 300 individuals with history of previous mild malaria) and 113
health controls with no history of malaria. The data revealed significant
associations (p<0.003) between one SNP in the IL10 gene (rs1800896) and one SNP
in the TLR4 gene (rs4986790) with reduced risk for clinical malaria, one SNP in
the IRF1 gene (rs2706384) with increased risk for clinical malaria, one SNP in
the LTA gene (rs909253) with protection from clinical malaria and one SNP in the 
TNF gene (RS1800750) associated with susceptibility to clinical malaria. Also, a 
new association was found between a SNP in the CTL4 gene (rs2242665), located at 
the major histocompatibility complex III region, and reduced risk for clinical
malaria. This study represents the first association study from an Amazonian
population involving a large number of host genetic polymorphisms with
susceptibility or resistance to Plasmodium infection and malaria outcomes.
Further studies should include a larger number of individuals, refined parameters
and a fine-scale map obtained through DNA sequencing to increase the knowledge of
the Amazonian population genetic diversity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036692 
PMCID: PMC3353949
PMID: 22615793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

