
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38999. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038999. Epub 2012 Jun 19.

A novel ENU-mutation in ankyrin-1 disrupts malaria parasite maturation in red
blood cells of mice.

Greth A(1), Lampkin S, Mayura-Guru P, Rodda F, Drysdale K, Roberts-Thomson M,
McMorran BJ, Foote SJ, Burgio G.

Author information: 
(1)The Menzies Research Institute of Tasmania, University of Tasmania, Hobart,
Australia.

The blood stage of the plasmodium parasite life cycle is responsible for the
clinical symptoms of malaria. Epidemiological studies have identified
coincidental malarial endemicity and multiple red blood cell (RBC) disorders.
Many RBC disorders result from mutations in genes encoding cytoskeletal proteins 
and these are associated with increased protection against malarial infections.
However the mechanisms underpinning these genetic, host responses remain obscure.
We have performed an N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU) mutagenesis screen and have
identified a novel dominant (haploinsufficient) mutation in the Ank-1 gene
(Ank1(MRI23420)) of mice displaying hereditary spherocytosis (HS). Female mice,
heterozygous for the Ank-1 mutation showed increased survival to infection by
Plasmodium chabaudi adami DS with a concomitant 30% decrease in parasitemia
compared to wild-type, isogenic mice (wt). A comparative in vivo red cell
invasion and parasite growth assay showed a RBC-autonomous effect characterised
by decreased proportion of infected heterozygous RBCs. Within approximately 6-8
hours post-invasion, TUNEL staining of intraerythrocytic parasites, showed a
significant increase in dead parasites in heterozygotes. This was especially
notable at the ring and trophozoite stages in the blood of infected heterozygous 
mutant mice compared to wt (p<0.05). We conclude that increased malaria
resistance due to ankyrin-1 deficiency is caused by the intraerythrocytic death
of P. chabaudi parasites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038999 
PMCID: PMC3378575
PMID: 22723917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

