
1. Traffic. 2012 Oct;13(10):1351-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2012.01398.x. Epub
2012 Aug 3.

The host endocytic pathway is essential for Plasmodium berghei late liver stage
development.

Lopes da Silva M(1), Thieleke-Matos C, Cabrita-Santos L, Ramalho JS,
Wavre-Shapton ST, Futter CE, Barral DC, Seabra MC.

Author information: 
(1)CEDOC, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, FCM, Universidade Nova de Lisboa,
Lisboa, 1169-056, Portugal; Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, 2780-156,
Portugal.

The obligate intracellular liver stage of the Plasmodium parasite represents a
bottleneck in the parasite life cycle and remains a promising target for
therapeutic intervention. During this stage, parasites undergo dramatic
morphological changes and achieve one of the fastest replication rates among
eukaryotic species. Nevertheless, relatively little is known about the parasite
interactions with the host hepatocyte. Using immunofluorescence, live cell
imaging and electron microscopy, we show that Plasmodium berghei parasites are
surrounded by vesicles from the host late endocytic pathway. We found that these 
vesicles are acidic and contain the membrane markers Rab7a, CD63 and LAMP1. When 
host cell vesicle acidification was disrupted using ammonium chloride or
Concanamycin A during the late liver stage of infection, parasite survival was
not affected, but schizont size was significantly decreased. Furthermore, when
the host cell endocytic pathway was loaded with BSA-gold, gold particles were
found within the parasite cytoplasm, showing the transport of material from the
host endocytic pathway toward the parasite interior. These observations reveal a 
novel Plasmodium-host interaction and suggest that vesicles from the host
endolysosomal pathway could represent an important source of nutrients exploited 
by the fast-growing late liver stage parasites.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2012.01398.x 
PMID: 22780869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

