
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54481. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054481. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

A potential role for plasma uric acid in the endothelial pathology of Plasmodium 
falciparum malaria.

Mita-Mendoza NK(1), van de Hoef DL, Lopera-Mesa TM, Doumbia S, Konate D,
Doumbouya M, Gu W, Anderson JM, Santos-Argumedo L, Rodriguez A, Fay MP, Diakite
M, Long CA, Fairhurst RM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, USA.

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory cytokinemia and systemic activation of the microvascular
endothelium are central to the pathogenesis of Plasmodium falciparum malaria.
Recently, 'parasite-derived' uric acid (UA) was shown to activate human immune
cells in vitro, and plasma UA levels were associated with inflammatory cytokine
levels and disease severity in Malian children with malaria. Since UA is
associated with endothelial inflammation in non-malaria diseases, we hypothesized
that elevated UA levels contribute to the endothelial pathology of P. falciparum 
malaria.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We measured levels of UA and soluble forms of
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1), vascular cell adhesion molecule-1
(sVCAM-1), E-selectin (sE-Selectin), thrombomodulin (sTM), tissue factor (sTF)
and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in the plasma of Malian children
aged 0.5-17 years with uncomplicated malaria (UM, n = 487) and non-cerebral
severe malaria (NCSM, n = 68). In 69 of these children, we measured these same
factors once when they experienced a malaria episode and twice when they were
healthy (i.e., before and after the malaria transmission season). We found that
levels of UA, sICAM-1, sVCAM-1, sE-Selectin and sTM increase during a malaria
episode and return to basal levels at the end of the transmission season
(p<0.0001). Plasma levels of UA and these four endothelial biomarkers correlate
with parasite density and disease severity. In children with UM, UA levels
correlate with parasite density (r = 0.092, p = 0.043), sICAM-1 (r = 0.255,
p<0.0001) and sTM (r = 0.175, p = 0.0001) levels. After adjusting for parasite
density, UA levels predict sTM levels.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Elevated UA levels may contribute to malaria
pathogenesis by damaging endothelium and promoting a procoagulant state. The
correlation between UA levels and parasite densities suggests that parasitized
erythrocytes are one possible source of excess UA. UA-induced shedding of
endothelial TM may represent a novel mechanism of malaria pathogenesis, in which 
activated thrombin induces fibrin deposition and platelet aggregation in
microvessels. This protocol is registered at clinicaltrials.gov (NCT00669084).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054481 
PMCID: PMC3551755
PMID: 23349902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

