
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Feb;9(2):e1003153. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003153. Epub 2013
Feb 7.

Plasmodium falciparum malaria elicits inflammatory responses that dysregulate
placental amino acid transport.

Boeuf P(1), Aitken EH, Chandrasiri U, Chua CL, McInerney B, McQuade L, Duffy M,
Molyneux M, Brown G, Glazier J, Rogerson SJ.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Melbourne, Department of Medicine-RMH, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia. pboeuf@unimelb.edu.au

Placental malaria (PM) can lead to poor neonatal outcomes, including low
birthweight due to fetal growth restriction (FGR), especially when associated
with local inflammation (intervillositis or IV). The pathogenesis of
PM-associated FGR is largely unknown, but in idiopathic FGR, impaired
transplacental amino acid transport, especially through the system A group of
amino acid transporters, has been implicated. We hypothesized that PM-associated 
FGR could result from impairment of transplacental amino acid transport triggered
by IV. In a cohort of Malawian women and their infants, the expression and
activity of system A (measured by Na⁺-dependent ¹⁴C-MeAIB uptake) were reduced in
PM, especially when associated with IV, compared to uninfected placentas. In an
in vitro model of PM with IV, placental cells exposed to monocyte/infected
erythrocytes conditioned medium showed decreased system A activity. Amino acid
concentrations analyzed by reversed phase ultra performance liquid chromatography
in paired maternal and cord plasmas revealed specific alterations of amino acid
transport by PM, especially with IV. Overall, our data suggest that the
fetoplacental unit responds to PM by altering its placental amino acid transport 
to maintain adequate fetal growth. However, IV more profoundly compromises
placental amino acid transport function, leading to FGR. Our study offers the
first pathogenetic explanation for FGR in PM.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003153 
PMCID: PMC3567154
PMID: 23408887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

