
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(4):e1003222. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003222. Epub 2013 Apr
18.

OncomiR addiction is generated by a miR-155 feedback loop in
Theileria-transformed leukocytes.

Marsolier J(1), Pineau S, Medjkane S, Perichon M, Yin Q, Flemington E, Weitzman
MD, Weitzman JB.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Epigenetics and Cell Fate, UMR 
7216 CNRS, Paris, France.

The intracellular parasite Theileria is the only eukaryote known to transform its
mammalian host cells. We investigated the host mechanisms involved in
parasite-induced transformation phenotypes. Tumour progression is a multistep
process, yet 'oncogene addiction' implies that cancer cell growth and survival
can be impaired by inactivating a single gene, offering a rationale for targeted 
molecular therapies. Furthermore, feedback loops often act as key regulatory hubs
in tumorigenesis. We searched for microRNAs involved in addiction to regulatory
loops in leukocytes infected with Theileria parasites. We show that Theileria
transformation involves induction of the host bovine oncomiR miR-155, via the
c-Jun transcription factor and AP-1 activity. We identified a novel miR-155
target, DET1, an evolutionarily-conserved factor involved in c-Jun
ubiquitination. We show that miR-155 expression led to repression of DET1
protein, causing stabilization of c-Jun and driving the promoter activity of the 
BIC transcript containing miR-155. This positive feedback loop is critical to
maintain the growth and survival of Theileria-infected leukocytes; transformation
is reversed by inhibiting AP-1 activity or miR-155 expression. This is the first 
demonstration that Theileria parasites induce the expression of host non-coding
RNAs and highlights the importance of a novel feedback loop in maintaining the
proliferative phenotypes induced upon parasite infection. Hence, parasite
infection drives epigenetic rewiring of the regulatory circuitry of host
leukocytes, placing miR-155 at the crossroads between infection, regulatory
circuits and transformation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003222 
PMCID: PMC3630095
PMID: 23637592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

