
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013 May;9(5):e1003346. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003346. Epub 2013
May 9.

Recruitment of EB1, a master regulator of microtubule dynamics, to the surface of
the Theileria annulata schizont.

Woods KL(1), Theiler R, MÃ¼hlemann M, Segiser A, Huber S, Ansari HR, Pain A,
Dobbelaere DA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathobiology, Department of Clinical Research and Veterinary Public 
Health, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

The apicomplexan parasite Theileria annulata transforms infected host cells,
inducing uncontrolled proliferation and clonal expansion of the parasitized cell 
population. Shortly after sporozoite entry into the target cell, the surrounding 
host cell membrane is dissolved and an array of host cell microtubules (MTs)
surrounds the parasite, which develops into the transforming schizont. The latter
does not egress to invade and transform other cells. Instead, it remains tethered
to host cell MTs and, during mitosis and cytokinesis, engages the cell's astral
and central spindle MTs to secure its distribution between the two daughter
cells. The molecular mechanism by which the schizont recruits and stabilizes host
cell MTs is not known. MT minus ends are mostly anchored in the MT organizing
center, while the plus ends explore the cellular space, switching constantly
between phases of growth and shrinkage (called dynamic instability). Assuming the
plus ends of growing MTs provide the first point of contact with the parasite, we
focused on the complex protein machinery associated with these structures. We now
report how the schizont recruits end-binding protein 1 (EB1), a central component
of the MT plus end protein interaction network and key regulator of host cell MT 
dynamics. Using a range of in vitro experiments, we demonstrate that T. annulata 
p104, a polymorphic antigen expressed on the schizont surface, functions as a
genuine EB1-binding protein and can recruit EB1 in the absence of any other
parasite proteins. Binding strictly depends on a consensus SxIP motif located in 
a highly disordered C-terminal region of p104. We further show that parasite
interaction with host cell EB1 is cell cycle regulated. This is the first
description of a pathogen-encoded protein to interact with EB1 via a bona-fide
SxIP motif. Our findings provide important new insight into the mode of
interaction between Theileria and the host cell cytoskeleton.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003346 
PMCID: PMC3649978
PMID: 23675298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

