
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(6):e1003444. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003444. Epub 2013 Jun
20.

Nitric oxide synthase dysfunction contributes to impaired cerebroarteriolar
reactivity in experimental cerebral malaria.

Ong PK(1), Melchior B, Martins YC, Hofer A, Orjuela-SÃ¡nchez P, Cabrales P, Zanini
GM, Frangos JA, Carvalho LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Malaria Research, La Jolla Bioengineering Institute, San Diego,
California, United States of America. pkong@ljbi.org

Cerebrovascular dysfunction plays a key role in the pathogenesis of cerebral
malaria. In experimental cerebral malaria (ECM) induced by Plasmodium berghei
ANKA, cerebrovascular dysfunction characterized by vascular constriction,
occlusion and damage results in impaired perfusion and reduced cerebral blood
flow and oxygenation, and has been linked to low nitric oxide (NO)
bioavailability. Here, we directly assessed cerebrovascular function in ECM using
a novel cranial window method for intravital microscopy of the pial
microcirculation and probed the role of NOS isoforms and phosphorylation patterns
in the impaired vascular responses. We show that pial arteriolar responses to
endothelial NOS (eNOS) and neuronal NOS (nNOS) agonists (Acetylcholine (ACh) and 
N-Methyl-D-Aspartate (NMDA)) were blunted in mice with ECM, and could be
partially recovered by exogenous supplementation of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4).
Pial arterioles in non-ECM mice infected by Plasmodium berghei NK65 remained
relatively responsive to the agonists and were not significantly affected by BH4 
treatment. These findings, together with the observed blunting of NO production
upon stimulation by the agonists, decrease in total NOS activity, augmentation of
lipid peroxidation levels, upregulation of eNOS protein expression, and increase 
in eNOS and nNOS monomerization in the brain during ECM development strongly
indicate a state of eNOS/nNOS uncoupling likely mediated by oxidative stress.
Furthermore, the downregulation of Serine 1176 (S1176) phosphorylation of eNOS,
which correlated with a decrease in cerebrovascular wall shear stress, implicates
hemorheological disturbances in eNOS dysfunction in ECM. Finally, pial arterioles
responded to superfusion with the NO donor, S-Nitroso-L-glutathione (GSNO), but
with decreased intensity, indicating that not only NO production but also
signaling is perturbed during ECM. Therefore, the pathological impairment of eNOS
and nNOS functions contribute importantly to cerebrovascular dysfunction in ECM
and the recovery of intrinsic functionality of NOS to increase NO bioavailability
and restore vascular health represents a target for ECM treatment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003444 
PMCID: PMC3688552
PMID: 23818850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

