
1. Malar J. 2013 Jul 16;12:246. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-246.

Clinical relevance of different biomarkers in imported plasmodium falciparum
malaria in adults: a case control study.

Stauga S(1), Hahn A, Brattig NW, Fischer-Herr J, Baldus S, Burchard GD, Cramer
JP.

Author information: 
(1)Section Tropical Medicine, I, Department of Internal Medicine, University
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. s.stauga@uke.de

BACKGROUND: For rapid initiation of anti-malarial treatment and prevention of
complications, early diagnosis and risk stratification is important in patients
with Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Routine laboratory values do not correlate
well with disease severity. The aim of this study was to determine the diagnostic
and prognostic value of several biomarkers related to inflammation; endothelial
and cardiac dysfunction; coagulation, and haemolysis in imported P. falciparum
malaria.
METHODS: In a prospective case-control study, 79 adult travellers with both
uncomplicated and complicated P. falciparum malaria were included between 2007
and 2011. Forty-one healthy subjects were included as controls. Blood samples
were obtained within 24 hours after first consultation to assess routine
laboratory values as well as markers related to inflammation (PAPP-A, copeptin,
CRP), endothelial activation (MPO, elastase-2, endothelin-1, sICAM-1, sVCAM-1),
cardiac function (NT-proBNP, MR-proANP), coagulation (fibrinogen, D-dimers,
platelet count), and haemolysis (LDH). Prognostic performance was assessed using 
the receiver operating characteristic curve (area under the curve = AUROC).
RESULTS: Twelve (15.2%) patients had severe P. falciparum malaria. In the patient
group, significant thrombocytopaenia was found, all other markers but PAPP-A were
significantly elevated. Diagnostic performance was best for CRP with an AUROC of 
1.00, followed by MPO (0.99), D-dimers (0.98), elastase-2 (0.98), and sICAM-1
(0.98). Biomarker levels did not correlate well with disease severity.
CONCLUSION: The combination of travel history, fever prior to blood sampling, and
CRP serum levels above or below 10.8 mg/l upon hospital admission, best
discriminated between malaria patients and control persons. None of the
biomarkers studied predicted the presence or the development of malaria
complications, neither at the time of admission, nor during hospitalization.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-246 
PMCID: PMC3724717
PMID: 23866258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

