
1. Acta Trop. 2013 Dec;128(3):571-7. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2013.08.005. Epub
2013 Aug 17.

Evidence for genetic linkage between a polymorphism in the GNAS gene and malaria 
in South Indian population.

Gupta H(1), Sakharwade SC, Angural A, Kotambail A, Bhat GK, Hande MH, D'Souza SC,
Rao P, Kumari V, Saadi AV, Satyamoorthy K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Manipal Life Sciences Centre, Manipal University,
Manipal, Karnataka, India.

The complex imprinted GNAS locus which encodes G-alpha subunit (Gαs) is involved 
in a number of G-protein coupled signaling pathways in eukaryotic cells.
Erythrocyte invasion by Plasmodium falciparum parasites is significantly
regulated by protein of GNAS gene. This study was designed to evaluate the
association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) present in GNAS locus 
and susceptibility to malaria. In this case control study, individuals affected
by P. falciparum malaria (n=230), Plasmodium vivax malaria (n=230) and normal
controls (n=230) were tested for the association of eighteen (18) known SNPs to
evaluate their role in the onset of the disease. There was no significant
difference in genotype frequencies of all the SNPs tested between P. falciparum
and P. vivax affected individuals. However, when Bonferroni correction for
multiple comparisons were performed as a control, our results demonstrated
alleles and genotypes of rs7121: C>T (NC_000020.10:g.57478807C>T), a silent
polymorphism situated in the exon 5, were significantly (p<0.05) associated with 
susceptibility to malaria in the South Indians participants. Our results
demonstrate that population specific polymorphisms that exist in GNAS gene may
alter the risk of occurrence of malaria.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2013.08.005 
PMID: 23962387  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

