
1. Thromb Res. 2014 Jan;133(1):5-9. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2013.09.030. Epub 2013
Sep 26.

Coagulopathy in malaria.

Angchaisuksiri P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand. Electronic address: pantep.ang@mahidol.ac.th.

Blood coagulation activation is frequently found in patients with malaria.
Clinically apparent bleeding or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is
associated with very severe disease and a high mortality. Protein C, protein S,
and antithrombin levels were found to be low in P. falciparum, but were normal in
P. vivax infection. Plasma levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 were high 
in cases of P. falciparum infection whereas tissue plasminogen activator levels
were low. Elevated plasma levels of von Willebrand factor (vWF) and vWF
propeptide, thrombomodulin, endothelial microparticles have been reported in P.
falciparum-infected patients. It has been demonstrated that severe P. falciparum 
infection is associated with acute endothelial cell (EC) activation, abnormal
circulating ultralarge vWF multimers, and a significant reduction in plasma
ADAMTS13 function. These changes may result in intravascular platelet
aggregation, thrombocytopenia, and microvascular disease. It has also been shown 
that P. falciparum-parasitized red blood cells (pRBCs) induce tissue factor (TF) 
expression in microvascular ECs in vitro. Recently, loss of endothelial protein C
receptor (EPCR) localized to sites of cytoadherent pRBCs in cerebral malaria has 
been demonstrated. Severe malaria is associated with parasite binding to EPCR.
The cornerstone of the treatment of coagulopathy in malaria is the use of
effective anti-malarial agents. DIC with spontaneous systemic bleeding should be 
treated with screened blood products. Study in Thailand has shown that for
patients who presented with parasitemia >30% and severe systemic complications
such as acute renal failure and ARDS, survival was superior in the group who
received exchange transfusion. The use of heparin is generally restricted to
patients with DIC and extensive deposition of fibrin, as occurs with purpura
fulminans or acral ischemia. Antiplatelet agents interfere with the protective
effect of platelets against malaria and should be avoided.

Â© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.thromres.2013.09.030 
PMID: 24099998  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

