
1. Cytokine. 2014 Jan;65(1):42-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2013.09.014. Epub 2013 Oct 17.

Role of IL6, IL12B and VDR gene polymorphisms in Plasmodium vivax malaria
severity, parasitemia and gametocytemia levels in an Amazonian Brazilian
population.

Sortica VA(1), Cunha MG, Ohnishi MD, Souza JM, Ribeiro-dos-Santos ÂK, Santos SE, 
Hutz MH.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto
Alegre, RS, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the influence of IL6, IL12B and VDR single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in uncomplicated Plasmodium vivax infection symptoms
intensity, parasitemia and gametocytemia levels in a Brazilian Amazonian
population.
METHODS: A total of 167 malaria patients infected by P. vivax have parasitemia
and gametocytemia levels estimated before treatment. Fourteen clinical symptoms
were evaluated and included in a principal component analysis to derive a
clinical symptom index. Patients were genotyped for IL6-174C>G, IL12B 735T>C,
458A>G, 159A>C, and VDR FokI, TaqI, BsmI SNPs by Taqman 5' nuclease assays. A
General Linear Model analysis of covariance with age, gender, exposure period and
infection history and genetic ancestry was performed to investigate the
association of genotypes with parasitemia and gametocytemia levels and with a
clinical symptom index.
RESULTS: Higher parasitemia levels were observed in IL6-174C carriers (p=0.02)
whereas IL12B CGT haplotype carriers presented lower parasitemia levels
(p=0.008). VDR TaqIC/BsmIA haplotype carriers showed higher gametocyte levels
than non-carriers (p=0.013). Based on the clinical index values the IL6-174C>G
polymorphism was associated with malaria severity. The IL6-174C carriers
presented a more severe clinical index when compared to GG homozygotes (p=0.001).
CONCLUSION: The present study suggests that IL6, IL12 and VDR influence severity,
parasitemia and gametocytemia clearance in P. vivax infections, and highlights
their potential role in malaria immune response in an Amazonian population.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2013.09.014 
PMID: 24139871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

