
1. Malar J. 2013 Nov 5;12:392. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-392.

Human immune responses to Plasmodium falciparum infection: molecular evidence for
a suboptimal THαβ and TH17 bias over ideal and effective traditional TH1 immune
response.

Hu WC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins University School of Public 
Health, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. lukluk73_2006@yahoo.com.tw.

BACKGROUND: Using microarray analysis, this study showed up-regulation of
toll-like receptors 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, NF-κB, TNF, p38-MAPK, and MHC molecules in
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells following infection with Plasmodium
falciparum.
METHODS: This analysis reports herein further studies based on time-course
microarray analysis with focus on malaria-induced host immune response.
RESULTS: The results show that in early malaria, selected immune response-related
genes were up-regulated including α β and γ interferon-related genes, as well as 
genes of IL-15, CD36, chemokines (CXCL10, CCL2, S100A8/9, CXCL9, and CXCL11),
TRAIL and IgG Fc receptors. During acute febrile malaria, up-regulated genes
included α β and γ interferon-related genes, IL-8, IL-1b IL-10 downstream genes, 
TGFB1, oncostatin-M, chemokines, IgG Fc receptors, ADCC signalling,
complement-related genes, granzymes, NK cell killer/inhibitory receptors and Fas 
antigen. During recovery, genes for NK receptors and granzymes/perforin were
up-regulated. When viewed in terms of immune response type, malaria infection
appeared to induce a mixed TH1 response, in which α and β interferon-driven
responses appear to predominate over the more classic IL-12 driven pathway. In
addition, TH17 pathway also appears to play a significant role in the immune
response to P. falciparum. Gene markers of TH17 (neutrophil-related genes, TGFB1 
and IL-6 family (oncostatin-M)) and THαβ (IFN-γ and NK cytotoxicity and ADCC
gene) immune response were up-regulated. Initiation of THαβ immune response was
associated with an IFN-αβ response, which ultimately resulted in moderate-mild
IFN-γ achieved via a pathway different from the more classic IL-12 TH1 pattern.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on these observations, this study speculates that in P.
falciparum infection, THαβ/TH17 immune response may predominate over ideal TH1
response.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-392 
PMCID: PMC3928643
PMID: 24188121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

