
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Nov 26;110(48):19531-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1306873110. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

TREM2 governs Kupffer cell activation and explains belr1 genetic resistance to
malaria liver stage infection.

Gonçalves LA(1), Rodrigues-Duarte L, Rodo J, Vieira de Moraes L, Marques I,
Penha-Gonçalves C.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, 2780-156 Oeiras, Portugal.

Plasmodium liver stage infection is a target of interest for the treatment of and
vaccination against malaria. Here we used forward genetics to search for
mechanisms underlying natural host resistance to infection and identified
triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) and MHC class II
molecules as determinants of Plasmodium berghei liver stage infection in mice.
Locus belr1 confers resistance to malaria liver stage infection. The use of newly
derived subcongenic mouse lines allowed to map belr1 to a 4-Mb interval on mouse 
chromosome 17 that contains the Trem2 gene. We show that Trem2 expression in the 
nonparenchymal liver cells closely correlates with resistance to liver stage
infection, implicating TREM2 as a mediator of the belr1 genetic effect.
Trem2-deficient mice are more susceptible to liver stage infection than their WT 
counterparts. We found that Kupffer cells are the principle cells expressing
TREM2 in the liver, and that Trem2(-/-) Kupffer cells display altered functional 
activation on exposure to P. berghei sporozoites. TREM2 expression in Kupffer
cells contributes to the limitation of parasite expansion in isolated hepatocytes
in vitro, potentially explaining the increased susceptibility of Trem2(-/-) mice 
to liver stage infection. The MHC locus was also found to control liver parasite 
burden, possibly owing to the expression of MHC class II molecules in
hepatocytes. Our findings implicate unexpected Kupffer-hepatocyte cross-talk in
the control Plasmodium liver stage infection and demonstrate that TREM2 is
involved in host responses against the malaria parasite.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1306873110 
PMCID: PMC3845107
PMID: 24218563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

