
1. Drug Metab Dispos. 2014 Apr;42(4):603-10. doi: 10.1124/dmd.113.053983. Epub 2013 
Nov 26.

Malaria infection alters the expression of hepatobiliary and placental drug
transporters in pregnant mice.

Cressman AM(1), McDonald CR, Silver K, Kain KC, Piquette-Miller M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada (A.M.C., M.P.-M.); and Sandra
Rotman Centre for Global Health, University Health Network-Toronto General
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada (C.R.M., K.S., K.C.K.).

Preventing and treating malaria in pregnancy is a global health priority. However
little is known regarding the impact of malaria infection on the maternal and
fetal disposition of pharmaceuticals and other xenobiotics. Our objective was to 
characterize expression of key determinants of drug-disposition in maternal and
fetal tissues in a validated murine model of experimental placental malaria.
Balb/c mice were infected with Plasmodium berghei at mid gestation [gestational
day (GD) 13] and maternal, placental, and fetal tissues were collected at GD19.
Expression of key ABC drug transporters and Cyp3a11 was examined by quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction. Western blotting was used to examine the protein
expression of multidrug resistance protein 1 (MDR1, ABCB1). Compared with
controls, placental mRNA expression of Abcb1a, Abcb1b, Abcc1, Abcc2, Abcc3, and
Abcg2 were significantly downregulated in the malaria-infected group (P < 0.05), 
as was placental MDR1 protein (P < 0.05). Significantly decreased hepatic
expression of Abcc2, Abcg2, and Abcb11 and significantly increased expression of 
Abcb1b, Abcc1, and Abcc3 were seen in malaria-infected dams (P < 0.05) in
comparison with uninfected controls. The expression of Abcb1a and Abcg2 was
significantly decreased in fetal liver of infected dams, whereas levels of Abcb1b
were increased (P < 0.05). Maternal and fetal hepatic expression of Cyp3a11 was
significantly downregulated in the malaria group (P < 0.05). Together,
malaria-induced alterations in the expression of transporters and
drug-metabolizing enzymes in maternal and fetal tissues may alter the disposition
of endogenous and therapeutic substrates, potentially impacting maternal and
fetal outcomes.

DOI: 10.1124/dmd.113.053983 
PMID: 24281836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

