
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2014 Jan;193(1):45-54. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2014.01.004. Epub 2014 Feb 3.

Plasmodium falciparum proteases hydrolyze plasminogen, generating
angiostatin-like fragments.

Melo PM(1), Bagnaresi P(1), Paschoalin T(2), Hirata IY(1), Gazarini ML(3),
Carmona AK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biofísica, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua Pedro de
Toledo, 699, 7° andar, 04039-032 São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Microbiologia, Imunologia e Parasitologia, Universidade
Federal de São Paulo, Rua Botucatu, 862, 8° andar, 04023-062 São Paulo, SP,
Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Biociências, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Avenida Ana
Costa, 95, 11060-001 Santos, SP, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Biofísica, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua Pedro de
Toledo, 699, 7° andar, 04039-032 São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address:
ak.carmona@unifesp.br.

Malaria is a disease caused by Plasmodium parasites and remains one of the most
prevalent and persistent maladies, affecting hundreds of millions of people. In
the present work, we evaluated the capability of Plasmodium falciparum proteases 
to hydrolyze the multifunctional protein plasminogen, which is implicated in
angiogenesis and coagulation processes by the generation of angiostatin and
plasmin, respectively. Using fluorescence microscopy, we visualized the
internalization of FITC-labeled plasminogen in erythrocytes infected by P.
falciparum and showed that the parasites are able to hydrolyze the protein. The
cleavage of plasminogen by the P. falciparum proteases was also observed by
SDS-PAGE, followed by immunoblotting with anti-angiostatin antibody. N-terminal
sequencing of the main generated fragments indicated that they are comprised in
the five plasminogen kringle domains, suggesting as being angiostatin-like
peptides. This assumption was reinforced by the demonstration that the products
of plasminogen processing mimic angiostatin functions, including the capability
to inhibit angiogenesis and to stimulate calcium response in endothelial cells in
vitro. However, no plasmin activity was detected after plasminogen hydrolysis by 
P. falciparum. Nonetheless, exogenous tissue plasminogen activator (tPA)
activated plasmin in infected erythrocytes, suggesting that the uptake of
plasminogen by P. falciparum may be modulated by the vertebrate host. Taken
together, the data presented here provide evidence for the processing of host
plasminogen by malaria parasites to generate active fragments that may modulate
host physiology events during malaria infection.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2014.01.004 
PMID: 24503144  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

