
1. Med Microbiol Immunol. 2014 Dec;203(6):383-93. doi: 10.1007/s00430-014-0347-0.
Epub 2014 Jul 2.

Malarial anemia: digestive vacuole of Plasmodium falciparum mediates complement
deposition on bystander cells to provoke hemophagocytosis.

Dasari P(1), Fries A, Heber SD, Salama A, Blau IW, Lingelbach K, Bhakdi SC,
Udomsangpetch R, Torzewski M, Reiss K, Bhakdi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Medical Center,
Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Hochhaus Augustusplatz, 55202, Mainz,
Germany.

The digestive vacuole (DV) of Plasmodium falciparum, which is released into the
bloodstream upon rupture of each parasitized red blood cell (RBC), was recently
discovered to activate the alternative complement pathway. In the present work,
we show that C3- and C5-convertases assembling on the parasitic organelle are
able to provoke deposition of activated C3 and C5b-9 on non-infected bystander
erythrocytes. Direct contact of DVs with cells is mandatory for the effect, and
bystander complement deposition occurs focally, possibly at the sites of contact.
Complement opsonization promotes protracted erythrophagocytosis by human
macrophages, an effect that is magnified when ring-stage infected RBCs with
reduced CD55 and CD59, or paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH)-RBCs lacking 
these complement inhibitors are employed as targets. Bystander attack can also
directly induce lysis of PNH-RBCs. Direct evidence for complement activation and 
bystander attack mediated by DVs was obtained through immunohistochemical
analyses of brain paraffin sections from autopsies of patients who had died of
cerebral malaria. C3d and the assembled C5b-9 complex could be detected in all
sections, colocalizing with and often extending locally beyond massive
accumulations of DVs that were identified under polarized light. This is the
first demonstration that a complement-activating particle can mediate
opsonization of bystander cells to promote their antibody-independent
phagocytosis. The phenomenon may act in concert with other pathomechanisms to
promote the development of anemia in patients with severe malaria.

DOI: 10.1007/s00430-014-0347-0 
PMID: 24985035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

