
1. Malar J. 2014 Jul 21;13:279. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-279.

Chitinase 3-like 1 is induced by Plasmodium falciparum malaria and predicts
outcome of cerebral malaria and severe malarial anaemia in a case-control study
of African children.

Erdman LK, Petes C, Lu Z, Dhabangi A, Musoke C, Cserti-Gazdewich CM, Lee CG,
Liles WC, Elias JA, Kain KC(1).

Author information: 
(1)S,A, Rotman Laboratories, Sandra Rotman Centre for Global Health, Toronto
General Hospital-University Health Network, MaRS building Room 10-401, 101
College St, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, Canada. Kevin.Kain@uhn.ca.

BACKGROUND: Severe and fatal malaria are associated with dysregulated host
inflammatory responses to infection. Chitinase 3-like 1 (CHI3L1) is a secreted
glycoprotein implicated in regulating immune responses. Expression and function
of CHI3L1 in malaria infection were investigated.
METHODS: Plasma levels of CHI3L1 were quantified in a case-control study of
Ugandan children presenting with Plasmodium falciparum malaria. CHI3L1 levels
were compared in children with uncomplicated malaria (UM; n = 53), severe
malarial anaemia (SMA; n = 59) and cerebral malaria (CM; n = 44) using the
Kruskall Wallis-test, and evaluated for utility in predicting fatal (n = 23)
versus non-fatal (n = 80) outcomes in severe disease using the Mann Whitney U
test, receiver operating characteristic curves, and combinatorial analysis.
Co-culture of P. falciparum with human peripheral blood mononuclear cells and the
Plasmodium berghei ANKA experimental model of cerebral malaria were used to
examine the role of CHI3L1 in severe malaria.
RESULTS: In children presenting with falciparum malaria, CHI3L1 levels were
increased in SMA and CM versus UM (p < 0.001). Among severe malaria cases, CHI3L1
levels at presentation predicted subsequent death (area under receiver operating 
characteristic curve 0.84 [95% CI 0.76-0.92]) and in combination with other host 
biomarkers, predicted mortality with high sensitivity (100% [85.7-100]) and
specificity (81.3% [71.3-88.3]). Plasmodium falciparum stimulated CHI3L1
production by human peripheral blood mononuclear cells in vitro. CHI3L1 was
increased in plasma and brain tissue in experimental cerebral malaria, but
targeted Chi3l1 deletion did not alter cytokine production or survival in this
model.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that plasma CHI3L1 measured at presentation
correlates with malaria severity and predicts outcome in paediatric SMA and CM,
but do not support a causal role for CHI3L1 in cerebral malaria pathobiology in
the model tested.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-279 
PMCID: PMC4114103
PMID: 25047113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

