
1. Blood. 2014 Sep 4;124(10):1553-62. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-05-578328. Epub 2014
Jul 21.

Endothelial cell protein C receptor: a multiliganded and multifunctional
receptor.

Mohan Rao LV(1), Esmon CT(2), Pendurthi UR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Health
Science Center, Tyler, TX; and.
(2)Coagulation Biology Laboratory, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma
City, OK.

Endothelial cell protein C receptor (EPCR) was first identified and isolated as a
cellular receptor for protein C on endothelial cells. EPCR plays a crucial role
in the protein C anticoagulant pathway by promoting protein C activation. In the 
last decade, EPCR has received wide attention after it was discovered to play a
key role in mediating activated protein C (APC)-induced cytoprotective effects,
including antiapoptotic, anti-inflammatory, and barrier stabilization. APC
elicits cytoprotective signaling through activation of protease activated
receptor-1 (PAR1). Understanding how EPCR-APC induces cytoprotective effects
through activation of PAR1, whose activation by thrombin is known to induce a
proinflammatory response, has become a major research focus in the field. Recent 
studies also discovered additional ligands for EPCR, which include factor VIIa,
Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein, and a specific variant of the
T-cell receptor. These observations open unsuspected new roles for EPCR in
hemostasis, malaria pathogenesis, innate immunity, and cancer. Future research on
these new discoveries will undoubtedly expand our understanding of the role of
EPCR in normal physiology and disease, as well as provide novel insights into
mechanisms for EPCR multifunctionality. Comprehensive understanding of EPCR may
lead to development of novel therapeutic modalities in treating hemophilia,
inflammation, cerebral malaria, and cancer.

Â© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2014-05-578328 
PMCID: PMC4155268
PMID: 25049281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

