
1. Int J Cancer. 2015 Mar 15;136(6):1371-80. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29127. Epub 2014 Aug
19.

AID expression in peripheral blood of children living in a malaria holoendemic
region is associated with changes in B cell subsets and Epstein-Barr virus.

Wilmore JR(1), Asito AS, Wei C, Piriou E, Sumba PO, Sanz I, Rochford R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Health and Translational Science, Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, State University of New York Upstate Medical University,
Syracuse, NY.

The development of endemic Burkitt's lymphoma (eBL) is closely associated with
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection and holoendemic malaria infections. The role
of EBV in the development of malignancy has been studied in depth, but there is
still little known about the mechanisms by which malaria affects Burkitt's
lymphomagenesis. Activation induced cytidine deaminase (AID) expression is
necessary for the introduction of c-myc translocations that are characteristic of
BL, but a link between AID and EBV or malaria is unclear. To determine whether
frequency of malaria exposure leads to increased AID expression in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) we examined two cohorts of children in western
Kenya with endemic and sporadic malaria transmission dynamics. High frequency of 
malaria exposure led to increased expression of AID, which coincided with
decreases in the IgM(+) memory B cells. In the children from the malaria endemic 
region, the presence of a detectible EBV viral load was associated with higher
AID expression compared to children with undetectable EBV, but this effect was
not seen in children with sporadic exposure to malaria. This study demonstrates
that intensity of malaria transmission correlates with AID expression levels in
the presence of EBV suggesting that malaria and EBV infection have a synergistic 
effect on the development of c-myc translocations and BL.

Â© 2014 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.29127 
PMCID: PMC4697832
PMID: 25099163  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

