
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2015 Jan 15;163(1-2):1-7. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2014.10.012. Epub 2014 Nov 6.

Local pulmonary immune responses in domestic cats naturally infected with
Cytauxzoon felis.

Frontera-Acevedo K(1), Sakamoto K(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of the 
West Indies, Building 47, Eric Williams Medical Sciences Complex, Uriah Butler
Highway, Champ Fleurs, Trinidad and Tobago.
(2)Department of Pathology, The University of Georgia, College of Veterinary
Medicine, 501 D.W. Brooks Dr., Athens, GA 30602, United States. Electronic
address: kaoris@uga.edu.

Cytauxzoonosis is a hemoprotozoal disease of cats and wild felids in the South
and Southeastern United States caused by Cytauxzoon felis. Although the causative
agent has been recognized since the seventies, no study has examined the local
immune response in affected organs, such as the lung, and compared them to the
lungs of uninfected domestic cats. Previous studies have suggested that the
histopathologic findings in the lungs of C. felis-infected cats are caused by the
release of pro-inflammatory mediators, such as cytokines and increased production
of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), by the infected macrophages. Our
laboratory had previously found an upregulation of the adhesion molecule CD18,
which can stimulate the release of these pro-inflammatory mediators. The
objective of this study was to characterize local pulmonary immune responses in
cats naturally infected with C. felis. Immunohistochemistry was performed to
detect tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, iNOS, and
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) II in 19 lungs from affected cats that
died between 2005 and 2013. Results showed increased expression of all of these
molecules when compared to lungs from uninfected, healthy cats. Furthermore, MHC 
II is expressed in the endothelium of C. felis naturally infected cats. These
results support that there is a marked, local, pro-inflammatory immune response
that can contribute to the pathogenesis of cytauxzoonosis in the lungs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2014.10.012 
PMID: 25467887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

