
1. Mol Ther. 2015 May;23(5):857-865. doi: 10.1038/mt.2015.18. Epub 2015 Feb 4.

Host-based Prophylaxis Successfully Targets Liver Stage Malaria Parasites.

Douglass AN(1), Kain HS(1), Abdullahi M(1), Arang N(1), Austin LS(2), Mikolajczak
SA(1), Billman ZP(3), Hume JCC(1), Murphy SC(3), Kappe SHI(2), Kaushansky A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, United States.
(2)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, United States;
Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
United States.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and the Center for Emerging and Re-emerging 
Infectious Diseases, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United
States.
(4)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, United States.
Electronic address: alexis.kaushansky@seattlebiomed.org.

Eliminating malaria parasites during the asymptomatic but obligate liver stages
(LSs) of infection would stop disease and subsequent transmission. Unfortunately,
only a single licensed drug that targets all LSs, Primaquine, is available.
Targeting host proteins might significantly expand the repertoire of prophylactic
drugs against malaria. Here, we demonstrate that both Bcl-2 inhibitors and P53
agonists dramatically reduce LS burden in a mouse malaria model in vitro and in
vivo by altering the activity of key hepatocyte factors on which the parasite
relies. Bcl-2 inhibitors act primarily by inducing apoptosis in infected
hepatocytes, whereas P53 agonists eliminate parasites in an apoptosis-independent
fashion. In combination, Bcl-2 inhibitors and P53 agonists act synergistically to
delay, and in some cases completely prevent, the onset of blood stage disease.
Both families of drugs are highly effective at doses that do not cause
substantial hepatocyte cell death in vitro or liver damage in vivo. P53 agonists 
and Bcl-2 inhibitors were also effective when administered to humanized mice
infected with Plasmodium falciparum. Our data demonstrate that host-based
prophylaxis could be developed into an effective intervention strategy that
eliminates LS parasites before the onset of clinical disease and thus opens a new
avenue to prevent malaria.

DOI: 10.1038/mt.2015.18 
PMCID: PMC4427874
PMID: 25648263  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

