
1. Infect Immun. 2015 May;83(5):1869-80. doi: 10.1128/IAI.02975-14. Epub 2015 Feb
17.

Transforming growth factor β2 promotes transcription of COX2 and EP4, leading to 
a prostaglandin E2-driven autostimulatory loop that enhances virulence of
Theileria annulata-transformed macrophages.

Haidar M(1), Echebli N(1), Ding Y(1), Kamau E(1), Langsley G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire Comparative des Apicomplexes, Faculté de
Médicine, Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, and
Inserm U1016, Cnrs UMR8104, Cochin Institute, Paris, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire Comparative des Apicomplexes, Faculté de
Médicine, Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, and
Inserm U1016, Cnrs UMR8104, Cochin Institute, Paris, France
gordon.langsley@inserm.fr.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) is a pleiotropic cytokine known to
regulate cell growth, differentiation, and motility and is a potent modulator of 
immune function. TGF-β consequently plays a central role in carcinogenesis, and a
dampened TGF-β2 response by Theileria annulata-infected monocytes/macrophages
underpins disease resistance to tropical theileriosis. Here, we show that
concomitant with the loss of TGF-β2 production, there is ablated expression of
COX2 and EP4, which leads to a drop in cyclic AMP (cAMP) levels and,
consequently, reduced activation of protein kinase A (PKA) and EPAC. This ablated
phenotype can be rescued in attenuated macrophages by the addition of exogenous
TGF-β2, which reactivates the expression of COX2 and EP4 while repressing that of
protein kinase inhibitor gamma (PKIG) to the levels in virulent macrophages.
TGF-β2 therefore promotes the adhesion and invasiveness of virulent macrophages
by modulating COX2, EP4, and PKIG transcription to initiate a prostaglandin E2
(PGE2)-driven autostimulatory loop that augments PKA and EPAC activities. A
virulence phenotype stemming from the double activation of PKA and EPAC is the
induction of a CREB-mediated transcriptional program and the upregulation of
JAM-L- and integrin 4αβ1-mediated adhesion of Theileria-infected macrophages.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.02975-14 
PMCID: PMC4399038
PMID: 25690101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

