
1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Mar 12;11(3):e1004715. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004715.
eCollection 2015 Mar.

Disruption of IL-21 signaling affects T cell-B cell interactions and abrogates
protective humoral immunity to malaria.

Pérez-Mazliah D(1), Ng DH(1), Freitas do Rosário AP(1), McLaughlin S(1),
Mastelic-Gavillet B(1), Sodenkamp J(1), Kushinga G(1), Langhorne J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR), 
London, United Kingdom.

Interleukin-21 signaling is important for germinal center B-cell responses,
isotype switching and generation of memory B cells. However, a role for IL-21 in 
antibody-mediated protection against pathogens has not been demonstrated. Here we
show that IL-21 is produced by T follicular helper cells and co-expressed with
IFN-γ during an erythrocytic-stage malaria infection of Plasmodium chabaudi in
mice. Mice deficient either in IL-21 or the IL-21 receptor fail to resolve the
chronic phase of P. chabaudi infection and P. yoelii infection resulting in
sustained high parasitemias, and are not immune to re-infection. This is
associated with abrogated P. chabaudi-specific IgG responses, including memory B 
cells. Mixed bone marrow chimeric mice, with T cells carrying a targeted
disruption of the Il21 gene, or B cells with a targeted disruption of the Il21r
gene, demonstrate that IL-21 from T cells signaling through the IL-21 receptor on
B cells is necessary to control chronic P. chabaudi infection. Our data uncover a
mechanism by which CD4+ T cells and B cells control parasitemia during chronic
erythrocytic-stage malaria through a single gene, Il21, and demonstrate the
importance of this cytokine in the control of pathogens by humoral immune
responses. These data are highly pertinent for designing malaria vaccines
requiring long-lasting protective B-cell responses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004715 
PMCID: PMC4370355
PMID: 25763578  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

