
1. Infect Immun. 2015 Nov;83(11):4322-34. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00926-15. Epub 2015 Aug
24.

Erythrocytic Iron Deficiency Enhances Susceptibility to Plasmodium chabaudi
Infection in Mice Carrying a Missense Mutation in Transferrin Receptor 1.

Lelliott PM(1), McMorran BJ(1), Foote SJ(1), Burgio G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Australian National University, John Curtin School of Medical Research,
Canberra, ACT, Australia, and Macquarie University, Australian School of Advanced
Medicine, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(2)Australian National University, John Curtin School of Medical Research,
Canberra, ACT, Australia, and Macquarie University, Australian School of Advanced
Medicine, Sydney, NSW, Australia Gaetan.Burgio@anu.edu.au.

The treatment of iron deficiency in areas of high malaria transmission is
complicated by evidence which suggests that iron deficiency anemia protects
against malaria, while iron supplementation increases malaria risk. Iron
deficiency anemia results in an array of pathologies, including reduced systemic 
iron bioavailability and abnormal erythrocyte physiology; however, the mechanisms
by which these pathologies influence malaria infection are not well defined. In
the present study, the response to malaria infection was examined in a mutant
mouse line, Tfrc(MRI24910), identified during an N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU)
screen. This line carries a missense mutation in the gene for transferrin
receptor 1 (TFR1). Heterozygous mice exhibited reduced erythrocyte volume and
density, a phenotype consistent with dietary iron deficiency anemia. However,
unlike the case in dietary deficiency, the erythrocyte half-life, mean
corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, and intraerythrocytic ferritin content were
unchanged. Systemic iron bioavailability was also unchanged, indicating that this
mutation results in erythrocytic iron deficiency without significantly altering
overall iron homeostasis. When infected with the rodent malaria parasite
Plasmodium chabaudi adami, mice displayed increased parasitemia and succumbed to 
infection more quickly than their wild-type littermates. Transfusion of
fluorescently labeled erythrocytes into malaria parasite-infected mice
demonstrated an erythrocyte-autonomous enhanced survival of parasites within
mutant erythrocytes. Together, these results indicate that TFR1 deficiency alters
erythrocyte physiology in a way that is similar to dietary iron deficiency
anemia, albeit to a lesser degree, and that this promotes intraerythrocytic
parasite survival and an increased susceptibility to malaria in mice. These
findings may have implications for the management of iron deficiency in the
context of malaria.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00926-15 
PMCID: PMC4598400
PMID: 26303393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

