
1. Nature. 2015 Oct 15;526(7573):448-52. doi: 10.1038/nature14957. Epub 2015 Sep 30.

Inhibition of Gli1 mobilizes endogenous neural stem cells for remyelination.

Samanta J(1), Grund EM(1), Silva HM(2), Lafaille JJ(2), Fishell G(1), Salzer
JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)New York University Neuroscience Institute, Department of Neuroscience and
Physiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016,
USA.
(2)The Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine of the Skirball Institute, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2015 Nov;16(11):646.

Enhancing repair of myelin is an important but still elusive therapeutic goal in 
many neurological disorders. In multiple sclerosis, an inflammatory demyelinating
disease, endogenous remyelination does occur but is frequently insufficient to
restore function. Both parenchymal oligodendrocyte progenitor cells and
endogenous adult neural stem cells resident within the subventricular zone are
known sources of remyelinating cells. Here we characterize the contribution to
remyelination of a subset of adult neural stem cells, identified by their
expression of Gli1, a transcriptional effector of the sonic hedgehog pathway. We 
show that these cells are recruited from the subventricular zone to populate
demyelinated lesions in the forebrain but never enter healthy, white matter
tracts. Unexpectedly, recruitment of this pool of neural stem cells, and their
differentiation into oligodendrocytes, is significantly enhanced by genetic or
pharmacological inhibition of Gli1. Importantly, complete inhibition of canonical
hedgehog signalling was ineffective, indicating that the role of Gli1 both in
augmenting hedgehog signalling and in retarding myelination is specialized.
Indeed, inhibition of Gli1 improves the functional outcome in a
relapsing/remitting model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and is
neuroprotective. Thus, endogenous neural stem cells can be mobilized for the
repair of demyelinated lesions by inhibiting Gli1, identifying a new therapeutic 
avenue for the treatment of demyelinating disorders.

DOI: 10.1038/nature14957 
PMCID: PMC4970518
PMID: 26416758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

