
1. Malar J. 2015 Oct 14;14:407. doi: 10.1186/s12936-015-0930-x.

Associations between hepcidin and immune response in individuals with
hyperbilirubinaemia and severe malaria due to Plasmodium vivax infection.

Mendonça VR(1)(2), Souza LC(3)(4), Garcia GC(5)(6), Magalhães BM(7)(8), Gonçalves
MS(9), Lacerda MV(10)(11), Barral-Netto M(12)(13)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório Integrado de Microbiogia e Imunoregulação (LIMI), Centro de
Pesquisas Gonçalo Moniz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Salvador, Brazil.
vitorrosaramos@hotmail.com.
(2)Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil.
vitorrosaramos@hotmail.com.
(3)Laboratório Integrado de Microbiogia e Imunoregulação (LIMI), Centro de
Pesquisas Gonçalo Moniz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Salvador, Brazil.
ligiacorreialima@gmail.com.
(4)Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil.
ligiacorreialima@gmail.com.
(5)Laboratório Integrado de Microbiogia e Imunoregulação (LIMI), Centro de
Pesquisas Gonçalo Moniz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Salvador, Brazil.
gabibarreto92@hotmail.com.
(6)Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil.
gabibarreto92@hotmail.com.
(7)Fundação de Medicina Tropical Dr Heitor Vieira Dourado, Manaus, Brazil.
magalhaesbelisa@gmail.com.
(8)Universidade do Estado do Amazonas, Manaus, Brazil. magalhaesbelisa@gmail.com.
(9)Laboratório Integrado de Microbiogia e Imunoregulação (LIMI), Centro de
Pesquisas Gonçalo Moniz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Salvador, Brazil.
mari@bahia.fiocruz.br.
(10)Fundação de Medicina Tropical Dr Heitor Vieira Dourado, Manaus, Brazil.
marcuslacerda.br@gmail.com.
(11)Universidade do Estado do Amazonas, Manaus, Brazil.
marcuslacerda.br@gmail.com.
(12)Laboratório Integrado de Microbiogia e Imunoregulação (LIMI), Centro de
Pesquisas Gonçalo Moniz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Salvador, Brazil.
mbarral@bahia.fiocruz.br.
(13)Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil.
mbarral@bahia.fiocruz.br.
(14)Instituto de Investigação em Imunologia, Instituto Nacional de Ciência e
Tecnologia, São Paulo, Brazil. mbarral@bahia.fiocruz.br.

BACKGROUND: Hyperbilirubinaemia (bilirubin >51.3 μmol/L) alone is not indicative 
of severe malaria, and the immune response underlying hyperbilirubinaemia remains
largely unexplored. Liver damage associated with hyperbilirubinaemia may alter
the expression of hepcidin, which regulates systemic iron by degrading
ferroportin. For this study, the association between hepcidin and the levels of
cytokines and chemokines in the serum of individuals with mild and severe vivax
malaria and subjects with malaria with isolated hyperbilirubinaemia was
evaluated.
METHODS: Cytokines/chemokines and hepcidin were measured in individuals with mild
(n = 72) and severe (n = 17) vivax malaria, as well as in the serum of subjects
with vivax malaria with isolated hyperbilirubinaemia (n = 14) from the Brazilian 
Amazon between 2009 and 2013 by multiplex assay and ELISA, respectively. The
polymorphism 744 G > T in the ferroportin gene was identified by restriction
fragment-length polymorphism analysis and the restriction enzyme PvuII.
RESULTS: The polymorphism at position 744 G > T in the ferroportin gene was typed
and no differences in the distributions of genotypes or alleles were observed
between the study groups. Subjects with severe malaria had higher levels of
interleukin (IL)-2 and IL-13 than subjects with hyperbilirubinaemia. No
differences in the expression of immune markers were observed between subjects
with mild malaria and those with hyperbilirubinaemia. However, hepcidin levels
were higher in individuals with severe malaria and hyperbilirubinaemia than those
with mild malaria (p = 0.0002 and p = 0.0004, respectively) and cut-off values of
hepcidin differentiated these groups from subjects with mild malaria. Hepcidin
was positively associated with IL-6 and IL-10 levels and with parasitaemia in
subjects with mild malaria and with IFN-γ in subjects with severe malaria.
CONCLUSIONS: Malaria in the presence of hyperbilirubinaemia produces a less
robust inflammatory response compared to severe cases of malaria. Hepcidin levels
are positively associated with immune markers in vivax malaria outcomes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-015-0930-x 
PMCID: PMC4607001
PMID: 26466783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

