
1. Nanomedicine (Lond). 2016 Jan;11(1):47-62. doi: 10.2217/nnm.15.181. Epub 2015 Dec
11.

Antiparasitic and immunomodulatory potential of oral nanocapsules encapsulated
lactoferrin protein against Plasmodium berghei.

Anand N(1), Kanwar RK(2), Sehgal R(1), Kanwar JR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Parasitology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Education and Research, Madhya Marg, Sector-12, Chandigarh, 160014, India.
(2)Nanomedicine-Laboratory of Immunology and Molecular Biomedical Research
(NLIMBR), School of Medicine (SoM), Centre for Molecular and Medical Research
(C-MMR), Faculty of Health, Deakin University, Geelong, 75 Pigdons Road, Waurn
Ponds, Victoria 3217, Australia.

AIM: To analyze the effect of native buffalo lactoferrin (buLf) protein along
with its nanoformulation using alginate-enclosed, chitosan-conjugated, calcium
phosphate buffalo Lf nanocapsules (AEC-CCo-CP-buLf NCs) against rodent parasite
Plasmodium berghei.
MATERIALS & METHODS: BALB/c mice were infected with malaria parasite and efficacy
of the proteins (buLf and NCs) was evaluated by measuring parasitemia,
initialization, role of miRNA in absorption of NCs, parasite load by
histopathology and quantitative determination, cytokine levels, bioavailability
and immunohistochemistry to localize Lf protein.
RESULTS: NCs significantly reduced the parasite load in mice compared with buLf
and untreated group. NCs were found to be modulating the disease profile of mice 
as shown by immunohistochemistry, free radical ion production and higher survival
tendency.
CONCLUSION: Our study confirms that NCs internalized and changed the expression
of miRNAs that further enhanced their uptake in various organs leading to
inhibitory effect against the parasite as well as maintenance of the Fe
metabolism.

DOI: 10.2217/nnm.15.181 
PMID: 26654428  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

