
1. Lancet Haematol. 2015 Apr;2(4):e140-9. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3026(15)00043-5. Epub
2015 Mar 24.

Effect of red blood cell variants on childhood malaria in Mali: a prospective
cohort study.

Lopera-Mesa TM(1), Doumbia S(2), Konaté D(2), Anderson JM(1), Doumbouya M(2),
Keita AS(2), Diakité SA(2), Traoré K(2), Krause MA(1), Diouf A(3), Moretz SE(3), 
Tullo GS(3), Miura K(3), Gu W(4), Fay MP(5), Taylor SM(6), Long CA(1), Diakité
M(2), Fairhurst RM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA.
(2)Malaria Research and Training Center, University of Bamako, Bamako, Mali.
(3)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA; Kelly
Scientific Resources, Rockville, MD, USA.
(4)Clinical Research Directorate/Clinical Monitoring Research Program, Leidos
Biomedical Research Inc, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research,
Frederick, MD, USA.
(5)Biostatistics Research Branch, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health and Duke Global
Health Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA; Department of 
Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(7)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA.
Electronic address: rfairhurst@niaid.nih.gov.

Comment in
    Lancet Haematol. 2015 Apr;2(4):e130-1.

BACKGROUND: Red blood cell variants protect African children from severe
falciparum malaria. However, their individual and interactive effects on mild
disease and parasite density, and their modification by age-dependent immunity,
are poorly understood. In this study, we address these knowledge gaps in a
prospective cohort study of malaria risk and Plasmodium falciparum densities in
Malian children.
METHODS: The Kenieroba Innate Defense Study for Malaria (KIDS-Malaria) was a
4-year prospective cohort study of children aged 6 months to 17 years undertaken 
in Mali between 2008 and 2011. Red blood cell variants were haemoglobin S (HbS), 
haemoglobin C (HbC), α thalassaemia, ABO blood groups, and glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency encoded by the X-linked A- allele. The primary
outcome was malaria incidence, measured as the number of uncomplicated or severe 
malaria episodes over time. The secondary outcome was parasite density at the
time of a malaria episode. We modelled incidence rate ratios with quasi-Poisson
regression and we analysed parasite densities using generalised estimating
equations. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00669084.
FINDINGS: Between May 1, 2008, and Dec 29, 2011, we enrolled 1586 children into
the study. We successfully typed all five red blood cell variants for 1543 of
these children, who therefore constituted the evaluable population and in whom we
diagnosed 4091 malaria episodes over 2656 child-years of follow-up. In these 1543
children, red blood cell variants were common, and occurred at the following
frequencies: sickle cell trait (HbAS) 220 (14%), HbC heterozygosity (HbAC) 103
(7%), α thalassaemia 438 (28%), type O blood group 621 (40%), and G6PD deficiency
72 (9%) in 767 boys and 158 (20%) in 776 girls. The overall incidence of malaria 
was 1.54 episodes per child-year of follow-up, ranging from 2.78 episodes per
child-year at age 3 years to 0.40 episodes per child-year at age 17 years. The
malaria incidence was lower in HbAS children than in HbAA children with normal
haemoglobin (adjusted incidence rate ratio [aIRR] 0.66 [95% CI 0.59-0.75],
p<0.0001) and lower in G6PD A-/A- homozygous girls than in G6PD A+/A+ girls (0.51
[0.29-0.90], p=0.020), but was higher in HbAC children than in HbAA children
(1.15 [1.01-1.32], p=0.039). Parasite density was lower in HbAS children (median 
10,550 parasites per μL [IQR 1350-26,250]) than in HbAA children (15,150
parasites per μL [4250-31,050]; p=0.0004). The HbAS-associated reductions in
malaria risk and parasite density were greatest in early childhood.
INTERPRETATION: The individual and interactive effects of HbAS, HbAC, and G6PD
A-/A- genotypes on malaria risk and parasite density define clinical and cellular
correlates of protection. Further identification of the molecular mechanisms of
these protective effects might uncover new targets for intervention.
FUNDING: Intramural Research Program, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2352-3026(15)00043-5 
PMCID: PMC4418020
PMID: 26687956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

