
1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Nov 1;8(11):13996-4004. eCollection 2015.

Increased synapsin I expression in cerebral malaria.

Thonsranoi K(1), Glaharn S(1), Punsawad C(2), Chaisri U(1), Krudsood S(3),
Viriyavejakul P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Pathology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol
University Bangkok 10400, Thailand.
(2)School of Medicine, Walailak University Nakhon Si Thammarat 80161, Thailand.
(3)Department of Tropical Hygiene, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol
University Bangkok 10400, Thailand.
(4)Department of Tropical Pathology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol
UniversityBangkok 10400, Thailand; Center for Emerging and Neglected Infectious
Diseases, Mahidol UniversitySalaya, Nakhon Pathom 73170, Thailand.

Synapsin I is a neuronal phosphoprotein contained in the synaptic vesicles of
mammalian central and peripheral nervous systems. It regulates both
neurotransmitter release and synaptic formation. Variations in synapsin I
expression in the brain have been reported to cause brain malfunction. In severe 
malaria, neurological complications, such as convulsion, delirium and coma,
suggest abnormalities in the release of neurotransmitters. This study evaluated
synapsin I expression in cerebral malaria (CM). An immunohistochemical method was
used to study the semi-quantitative and qualitative expression of synapsin I in
the brain of CM patients (10 cases) who died with Plasmodium falciparum, compared
with non-cerebral malaria (NCM) (4 cases), and control brain tissues (5).
Synapsin I was expressed in the gray matter of the cerebral cortex and the
molecular layer of the cerebellum, as a diffusely dense precipitate pattern in
the neuropil, with no immunoreactivity in the neurons, neuronal dendrites, glial 
cells, endothelial cells, and Purkinje cells. The findings were similarly
demonstrated in CM, NCM, and control brain tissues. However, in the granular
layer of the cerebellum, a significant increase in synapsin I expression was
observed in the granule cells, and the glomerular synaptic complex, from the CM
group, compared with the NCM, and control brain tissues (all P < 0.05).
Parasitemia showed a positive correlation with synapsin I expression in the
granule cells (on admission: Spearman's ρ = 0.600, P = 0.023) (before death:
Spearman's ρ = 0.678, P = 0.008), and glomerular synaptic complex (before death: 
Spearman's ρ = 0.571, P = 0.033). It was hypothesized that CM causes pre-synaptic
excitation and eventually activation of synapsin I, leading to increased
neurotransmitter release. Synapsin I inhibitor should be investigated further as 
a target for a therapeutic intervention to alleviate neurological symptoms in
severe malaria.


PMCID: PMC4713497
PMID: 26823711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

