
1. Parasitol Res. 2016 Sep;115(9):3669-76. doi: 10.1007/s00436-016-5172-5. Epub 2016
Jun 15.

Recombinant methionine aminopeptidase protein of Babesia microti:
immunobiochemical characterization as a vaccine candidate against human
babesiosis.

Munkhjargal T(1)(2), Yokoyama N(1), Igarashi I(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases, Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Inada-cho, Obihiro, Hokkaido, 080-8555,
Japan.
(2)Institute of Veterinary Medicine, Zaisan-17042, Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
(3)National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases, Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Inada-cho, Obihiro, Hokkaido, 080-8555,
Japan. igarcpmi@obihiro.ac.jp.

Human babesiosis is the most important zoonotic protozoan infection in the world.
This is the first report of the cloning, expression, purification, and
immunobiochemical characterization of a methionine aminopeptidase 1 (MetAP1)
protein from Babesia microti (B. microti). The gene encodes a MetAP1 protein of
B. microti (BmMetAP1) of approximately 66.8 kDa that includes glutathione
S-transferase (GST) tag and shows MetAP activity. BmMetAP1 was detected in a
lysate of B. microti and further localized in cytoplasm of the B. microti
merozoite. rBmMetAP1 was found to be immunogenic, eliciting a high antibody titer
in mice. Moreover, rBmMetAP1 stimulated the production of IFN-γ and IL-12 but not
IL-4. Finally, rBmMetAP1 was able to provide considerable protection to mice
against a B. microti challenge infection based on a reduction in peak parasitemia
levels and earlier clearance of the parasite as compared with control mice. Taken
together, these results suggest that rBmMetAP1 confers significant protection
against experimental B. microti infection and might be considered a potential
vaccine target against human babesiosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-016-5172-5 
PMID: 27306898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

