
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jun 17;6:28058. doi: 10.1038/srep28058.

IL-22 dampens the T cell response in experimental malaria.

Sellau J(1), Alvarado CF(1), Hoenow S(1), Mackroth MS(1)(2), Kleinschmidt D(2),
Huber S(2), Jacobs T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bernhard-Nocht-Institute for Tropical Medicine, Bernhard-Nocht-Straße 74,
20359 Hamburg, Germany.
(2)University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, I. Department of Medicine,
Martinistraße 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.

A tight regulation between the pro- and anti-inflammatory immune responses during
plasmodial infection is of crucial importance, since a disruption leads to severe
malaria pathology. IL-22 is a member of the IL-10 cytokine family, which is known
to be highly important in immune regulation. We could detect high plasma levels
of IL-22 in Plasmodium falciparum malaria as well as in Plasmodium berghei ANKA
(PbA)-infected C57BL/6J mice. The deficiency of IL-22 in mice during PbA
infection led to an earlier occurrence of cerebral malaria but is associated with
a lower parasitemia compared to wt mice. Furthermore, at an early time point of
infection T cells from PbA-infected Il22(-/-) mice showed an enhanced IFNγ but a 
diminished IL-17 production. Moreover, dendritic cells from Il22(-/-) mice
expressed a higher amount of the costimulatory ligand CD86 upon infection. This
finding can be corroborated in vitro since bone marrow-derived dendritic cells
from Il22(-/-) mice are better inducers of an antigen-specific IFNγ response by
CD8(+) T cells. Even though there is no IL-22 receptor complex known on
hematopoietic cells, our data suggest a link between IL-22 and the adaptive
immune system which is currently not identified.

DOI: 10.1038/srep28058 
PMCID: PMC4911577
PMID: 27311945  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

