
1. EBioMedicine. 2016 Jul;9:207-216. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.05.015. Epub 2016 May
14.

Complement and Antibody-mediated Enhancement of Red Blood Cell Invasion and
Growth of Malaria Parasites.

Biryukov S(1), Angov E(2), Landmesser ME(3), Spring MD(2), Ockenhouse CF(4),
Stoute JA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Pennsylvania State University,
College of Medicine, 500 University Drive, Hershey, PA 17033, United States.
(2)Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Division of Malaria Vaccine
Development, Silver Spring, MD 20910, United States.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Pennsylvania State University,
College of Medicine, 500 University Drive, Hershey, PA 17033, United States;
Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and Epidemiology,
Pennsylvania State University, College of Medicine, 500 University Drive,
Hershey, PA 17033, United States.
(4)PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative, Washington, DC 20001, United States.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Pennsylvania State University,
College of Medicine, 500 University Drive, Hershey, PA 17033, United States;
Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and Epidemiology,
Pennsylvania State University, College of Medicine, 500 University Drive,
Hershey, PA 17033, United States. Electronic address: jstoute@psu.edu.

Plasmodium falciparum malaria is a deadly pathogen. The invasion of red blood
cells (RBCs) by merozoites is a target for vaccine development. Although
anti-merozoite antibodies can block invasion in vitro, there is no efficacy in
vivo. To explain this discrepancy we hypothesized that complement activation
could enhance RBC invasion by binding to the complement receptor 1 (CR1). Here we
show that a monoclonal antibody directed against the merozoite and human
polyclonal IgG from merozoite vaccine recipients enhanced RBC invasion in a
complement-dependent manner and that soluble CR1 inhibited this enhancement.
Sialic acid-independent strains, that presumably are able to bind to CR1 via a
native ligand, showed less complement-dependent enhancement of RBC invasion than 
sialic acid-dependent strains that do not utilize native CR1 ligands. Confocal
fluorescent microscopy revealed that complement-dependent invasion resulted in
aggregation of CR1 at the RBC surface in contact with the merozoite. Finally,
total anti-P. berghei IgG enhanced parasite growth and C3 deficiency decreased
parasite growth in mice. These results demonstrate, contrary to current views,
that complement activation in conjunction with antibodies can paradoxically aid
parasites invade RBCs and should be considered in future design and testing of
merozoite vaccines.

Copyright Â© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.05.015 
PMCID: PMC4972486
PMID: 27333049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

