
1. Cytokine. 2016 Dec;88:154-166. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2016.08.034. Epub 2016 Sep 12.

Role of TGF-β and IL-6 in dendritic cells, Treg and Th17 mediated immune response
during experimental cerebral malaria.

Keswani T(1), Sarkar S(1), Sengupta A(1), Bhattacharyya A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Laboratory, Department of Zoology, University of Calcutta, 35,
Ballygunge Circular Road, Kolkata 700019, West Bengal, India.
(2)Immunology Laboratory, Department of Zoology, University of Calcutta, 35,
Ballygunge Circular Road, Kolkata 700019, West Bengal, India. Electronic address:
arindam19@yahoo.com.

The role of cytokines in Plasmodium infection have been extensively investigated,
but pro and anti inflammatory cytokines mediated imbalance during malaria
immune-pathogenesis is still unrevealed. Malaria is associated with the
circulating levels of Interleukin-6 (IL-6) and transforming growth factor β
(TGF-β), but association between these two cytokines in immune response remains
largely obscured. Using mouse model, we proposed that IL-6 and TGF-β are involved
in immune regulation of dendritic cells (DC), regulatory T cells (Treg), T-helper
cells (Th17) during P. berghei ANKA (PbA) infection. Association between the
cytokines and the severity of malaria was established with anti-TGF-β treatment
resulting in increased parasitemia and increased immunopathology, whereas;
anti-IL-6 treatment delays immunopathology during PbA infection. Further,
splenocytes revealed differential alteration of myeloid DC (mDC), plasmocytoid DC
(pDC), Treg, Th17 cells following TGF-β and IL-6 neutralization. Interestingly
anti-TGF-β reduces CD11c+CD8+ DC expression, whereas anti-IL-6 administration
causes a profound increase during PbA infection in Swiss mice. We observed down
regulation of TGF-β, IL-10, NFAT, Foxp3, STAT-5 SMAD-3 and upregulation of IL-6, 
IL-23, IL-17 and STAT-3 in splenocytes during PbA infection. The STAT activity
probably plays differential role in induction of Th17 and Treg cells.
Interestingly we found increase in STAT-3 and decrease in STAT-5 expression
during PbA infection. This pattern of STAT indicates that possibly TGF-β and IL-6
play a crucial role in differentiation of DCs subsets and Treg/Th17 imbalance
during experimental cerebral malaria (ECM).

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2016.08.034 
PMID: 27632786  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

