
1. Vet J. 2016 Nov;217:112-118. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2016.10.003. Epub 2016 Oct 11.

Oxidative stress and DNA damage in horses naturally infected with Theileria equi.

Radakovic M(1), Davitkov D(2), Borozan S(3), Stojanovic S(4), Stevanovic J(5),
Krstic V(2), Stanimirovic Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Belgrade,
Bul. oslobodjenja 18, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia. Electronic address:
mj.radakovic@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Equine, Small Аnimal, Poultry and Wild Animal Diseases, Faculty 
of Veterinary Medicine, Bul. oslobodjenja 18, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Belgrade, Bul. oslobodjenja 18, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(4)ICTM-Department of Chemistry, University of Belgrade, Njegoseva 12, 11000
Belgrade, Serbia.
(5)Department of Biology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Belgrade,
Bul. oslobodjenja 18, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.

The aim of this study was to determine the concentrations of oxidative stress
parameters and DNA damage in horses infected by Theileria equi. Initial screening
of 110 horses with duplex PCR enabled the selection of 30 infected horses with T.
equi and 30 free of infection (control). Specimens from the 60 horses were
further analysed by determining the following oxidative stress parameters: extent
of haemolysis (EH), plasma free haemoglobin (PHb), catalase (CAT), Cu,Zn
superoxide dismutase (SOD1), paraoxonase (PON1), nitrite (NO2-), total nitrate
and nitrite (NOx), malondialdehyde (MDA) and free thiol groups (-SH). In
addition, relative distribution of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH1-LDH5) activity and
the DNA-damaging effects of T. equi infection were evaluated. Compared to control
horses, horses infected with T. equi had significantly higher SOD1 activities
(P <0.05) and PHb (P <0.01), NO2- (P <0.001), NOx (P <0.05) and MDA
concentrations (P <0.001), and significantly lower EH (P <0.001), CAT (P <0.01)
and PON1 (P <0.001) activities, and thiol group concentrations (P <0.05). The
comet assay demonstrated significantly increased DNA damage in T. equi infected
cells compared to non-infected cells (P <0.001). Infected horses had
significantly increased LDH5 isoenzyme activities (P <0.05). There was higher
production of ROS/RNS in T. equi-infected horses, which resulted in changes in
osmotic fragility, damage to lipids, proteins and DNA, haemolysis and
hepatocellular damage. Oxidative stress in horses naturally infected with T. equi
could contribute to the pathogenesis of the infection.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2016.10.003 
PMID: 27810201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

