
1. Immunobiology. 2017 Apr;222(4):604-619. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2016.11.010. Epub
2016 Nov 17.

Differences in the modulation of reactive species, lipid bodies,
cyclooxygenase-2, 5-lipoxygenase and PPAR-γ in cerebral malaria-susceptible and
resistant mice.

Borges TK(1), Alves ÉA(2), Vasconcelos HA(3), Carneiro FP(4), Nicola AM(1),
Magalhães KG(5), Muniz-Junqueira MI(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Immunology, Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Brasilia, Campus Darcy Ribeiro, Brasilia, Distrito Federal 70.910.900, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Cellular Immunology, Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Brasilia, Campus Darcy Ribeiro, Brasilia, Distrito Federal 70.910.900, Brazil;
Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, René Rachou Research Center,
Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais 30.190.002 Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Cellular Immunology, Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Brasilia, Campus Darcy Ribeiro, Brasilia, Distrito Federal 70.910.900, Brazil;
National Direction of Public Health, Ministry of Health of the Republic of
Angola, Luanda, Angola.
(4)Laboratory of Pathology, Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Brasilia, Campus Darcy Ribeiro, Brasilia, Distrito Federal 70.910.900, Brazil.
(5)Laboratory of Immunology and Inflammation, Department of Cellular Biology,
Biology Institute, University of Brasilia, Campus Darcy Ribeiro, Brasilia,
Distrito Federal 70.910.900, Brazil.
(6)Laboratory of Cellular Immunology, Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Brasilia, Campus Darcy Ribeiro, Brasilia, Distrito Federal 70.910.900, Brazil.
Electronic address: mimjunqueira@unb.br.

Proinflammatory responses are associated with the severity of cerebral malaria.
NO, H2O2, eicosanoid and PPAR-γ are involved in proinflammatory responses, but
regulation of these factors is unclear in malaria. This work aimed to compare the
expression of eicosanoid-forming-enzymes in cerebral malaria-susceptible CBA and 
C57BL/6 and -resistant BALB/c mice. Mice were infected with Plasmodium berghei
ANKA, and the survival rates and parasitemia curves were assessed. On the sixth
day post-infection, cyclooxygenase-2 and 5-lipoxygenase in brain sections were
assessed by immunohistochemistry, and, NO, H2O2, lipid bodies, and PPAR-γ
expression were assessed in peritoneal macrophages. The C57BL/6 had more severe
disease with a lower survival time, higher parasitemia and lower production of
plasmodicidal NO and H2O2 molecules than BALB/c. Enhanced COX-2 and 5-LOX
expression were observed in brain tissue cells and vessels from C57BL/6 mice, and
these mice expressed higher constitutive PPAR-γ levels. There was no
translocation of PPAR-γ from cytoplasm to nucleus in macrophages from these mice.
CBA mice had enhanced COX-2 expression in brain tissue cells and vessels and also
lacked PPAR-γ cytoplasm-to-nucleus translocation. The resistant BALB/c mice
presented higher survival time, lower parasitemia and higher NO and H2O2
production on the sixth day post-infection. These mice did not express either
COX-2 or 5-LOX in brain tissue cells and vessels. Our data showed that besides
the high parasite burden and lack of microbicidal molecules, an imbalance with
high COX-2 and 5-LOX eicosanoid expression and a lack of regulatory PPAR-γ
cytoplasm-to-nucleus translocation in macrophages were observed in mice that
develop cerebral malaria.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2016.11.010 
PMID: 27887739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

