
1. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Dec 6;12(12):e1006046. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006046.
eCollection 2016 Dec.

Macrophage Colony Stimulating Factor Derived from CD4+ T Cells Contributes to
Control of a Blood-Borne Infection.

Fontana MF(1), de Melo GL(1), Anidi C(1), Hamburger R(1), Kim CY(1), Lee SY(1),
Pham J(1), Kim CC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2017 Feb 1;13(2):e1006192.

Dynamic regulation of leukocyte population size and activation state is crucial
for an effective immune response. In malaria, Plasmodium parasites elicit robust 
host expansion of macrophages and monocytes, but the underlying mechanisms remain
unclear. Here we show that myeloid expansion during P. chabaudi infection is
dependent upon both CD4+ T cells and the cytokine Macrophage Colony Stimulating
Factor (MCSF). Single-cell RNA-Seq analysis on antigen-experienced T cells
revealed robust expression of Csf1, the gene encoding MCSF, in a sub-population
of CD4+ T cells with distinct transcriptional and surface phenotypes. Selective
deletion of Csf1 in CD4+ cells during P. chabaudi infection diminished
proliferation and activation of certain myeloid subsets, most notably lymph
node-resident CD169+ macrophages, and resulted in increased parasite burden and
impaired recovery of infected mice. Depletion of CD169+ macrophages during
infection also led to increased parasitemia and significant host mortality,
confirming a previously unappreciated role for these cells in control of P.
chabaudi. This work establishes the CD4+ T cell as a physiologically relevant
source of MCSF in vivo; probes the complexity of the CD4+ T cell response during 
type 1 infection; and delineates a novel mechanism by which T helper cells
regulate myeloid cells to limit growth of a blood-borne intracellular pathogen.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006046 
PMCID: PMC5140069
PMID: 27923070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

