
1. Infect Immun. 1994 Oct;62(10):4374-9.

Increased concentrations of interleukin-6 and interleukin-1 receptor antagonist
and decreased concentrations of beta-2-glycoprotein I in Gambian children with
cerebral malaria.

Jakobsen PH(1), McKay V, Morris-Jones SD, McGuire W, van Hensbroek MB, Meisner S,
Bendtzen K, Schousboe I, Bygbjerg IC, Greenwood BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, University Hospital (Rigshospitalet),
Copenhagen, Denmark.

To investigate the pathogenic versus the protective role of cytokines and
toxin-binding factors in Plasmodium falciparum infections, we measured the
concentrations of tumor necrosis factor alpha, interleukin-1 alpha (IL-1 alpha), 
IL-1 beta, IL-1 receptor antagonist, and IL-6, as well as soluble receptors of
tumor necrosis factor and IL-6 (sIL-6R) in serum of Gambian children with
cerebral malaria, mild or asymptomatic malaria, or other illnesses unrelated to
malaria. Because cytokine secretion may be triggered by toxic structures
containing phosphatidylinositol (PI), we also measured concentrations of anti-PI 
antibodies and the PI-binding serum protein beta-2-glycoprotein I. We found
increased concentrations of IL-6, sIL-6R, IL-1ra, and some immunoglobulin M
antibodies against PI in children with cerebral malaria, but those who died had
decreased concentrations of beta-2-glycoprotein I. We conclude that increased
concentrations of cytokines and soluble cytokine receptors represent a normal
host response to P. falciparum infections but that excessive secretion of
cytokines like IL-6 may predispose to cerebral malaria and a fatal outcome while 
beta-2-glycoprotein I may protect against a fatal outcome of cerebral malaria.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.62.10.4374-4379.1994 
PMCID: PMC303119
PMID: 7927698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

