
1. J Vet Med Sci. 1998 Oct;60(10):1127-32.

Pathogenesis of Babesia caballi infection in experimental horses.

Hanafusa Y(1), Cho KO, Kanemaru T, Wada R, Sugimoto C, Onuma M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Disease Control, Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

The present study was designed to investigate the role of cytokines in the
pathogenesis of Babesia caballi in experimentally infected horses. The expression
of cytokine mRNA was determined by using reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction in two B. caballi-infected horses for 2 weeks after the infection. In
one horse, there was up-regulation of interferon-gamma, tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and interleukin-2 mRNAs, while in the second horse,
expression of only TNF-alpha mRNA was up-regulated. No change was observed in
interleukin-4 mRNA in both of the horses. To know the relation between nitric
oxide (NO) production and pathogenesis, NO production was assayed in three
dexamethasone treated-B. caballi-infected horses. Production of NO in all 3
horses increased significantly before death, although the parasitemia level
remained very low. Treatment with NO inhibitor resulted in the suppression of NO 
production and increased parasitemia level in a horse, which died of the
infection. The pathological examination showed that the main cause of the death
was dyspnoea and pulmonary edema. Histopathologically, diffuse global mesangial
proliferative glomerulonephritis was also observed. These results suggested that 
NO may be a critical effector molecule of immune defense against parasite.
TNF-alpha and NO might be contributing to the pathogenesis in B. caballi
infection.

DOI: 10.1292/jvms.60.1127 
PMID: 9819767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

