
1. J Parasitol. 2010 Dec;96(6):1145-51. doi: 10.1645/GE-2485.1. Epub 2010 Jul 23.

Molecular cloning and characterization of the circumsporozoite protein gene of
Plasmodium inui isolated from Formosan macaques (Macaca cyclopis) in Taiwan.

Huang CC(1), Chiang YC, Ji DD, Teng HJ, Liao MH, Chang CD, Wu YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, National Pingtung University of Science &
Technology, 1, Shuefu Road, Neipu, Pingtung County, Pingtung 91201, Taiwan.

We characterized the complete nucleic and amino acid sequences of the Plasmodium 
inui circumsporozoite protein (Pincsp) gene and analyzed nucleotide diversity
across the entire Pincsp gene by using 7 field isolates and strains Taiwan I and 
II obtained from Formosan macaques (Macaca cyclopis) in Taiwan. The length of the
circumsporozoite protein ( CSP ) gene ranged from 1077 to 1125 bp. Size
polymorphisms were due to variations in the number of tandem repeat units. The
non-repetitive (NR) region exhibited high homology (99.1 ∼ 100 and 98.7 ∼ 100% at
the nucleotide and amino acid levels, respectively) and was conserved among the
variants (nucleotide diversities, π, of the 5'NR and 3'NR regions were 0.00364
and 0.00392, respectively). In the central repetitive (CR) region, we decomposed 
the sequences into 2 kinds of repeating amino acid motifs, i.e., a repeat unit
R1, PA(P/A)(P/A)A(E)GG (n  =  11-13), and a following repeat unit R2:
P(A/G)(A/P/G)(P/Q)AQ(N/K) (n  =  9-10). Analyzing these repeat sequences showed
evidence of 3 genetic mechanisms for generating variations in the repeats of the 
Pincsp gene, i.e., point mutation, insertion, and recombination. These findings
suggest that polymorphisms in the Pincsp gene are essentially limited to the CR
region, which showed much greater variability in terms of length, number of
repeats, and sequence.

DOI: 10.1645/GE-2485.1 
PMID: 21158626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

