
1. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2011 Jul;16(4):389-401. doi: 10.1007/s12192-010-0250-6.
Epub 2010 Dec 30.

Plasmodium falciparum encodes a single cytosolic type I Hsp40 that functionally
interacts with Hsp70 and is upregulated by heat shock.

Botha M(1), Chiang AN, Needham PG, Stephens LL, Hoppe HC, KÃ¼lzer S, Przyborski
JM, Lingelbach K, Wipf P, Brodsky JL, Shonhai A, Blatch GL.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Biotechnology Research Unit, Department of Biochemistry,
Microbiology and Biotechnology, Rhodes University, Grahamstown, South Africa.

Heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) and heat shock protein 40 (Hsp40) function as
molecular chaperones during the folding and trafficking of proteins within most
cell types. However, the Hsp70-Hsp40 chaperone partnerships within the malaria
parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, have not been elucidated. Only one of the 43 P. 
falciparum Hsp40s is predicted to be a cytosolic, canonical Hsp40 (termed
PfHsp40) capable of interacting with the major cytosolic P. falciparum-encoded
Hsp70, PfHsp70. Consistent with this hypothesis, we found that PfHsp40 is
upregulated under heat shock conditions in a similar pattern to PfHsp70. In
addition, PfHsp70 and PfHsp40 reside mainly in the parasite cytosol, as assessed 
using indirect immunofluorescence microscopy. Recombinant PfHsp40 stimulated the 
ATP hydrolytic rates of both PfHsp70 and human Hsp70 similar to other canonical
Hsp40s of yeast (Ydj1) and human (Hdj2) origin. In contrast, the Hsp40-stimulated
plasmodial and human Hsp70 ATPase activities were differentially inhibited in the
presence of pyrimidinone-based small molecule modulators. To further probe the
chaperone properties of PfHsp40, protein aggregation suppression assays were
conducted. PfHsp40 alone suppressed protein aggregation, and cooperated with
PfHsp70 to suppress aggregation. Together, these data represent the first
cellular and biochemical evidence for a PfHsp70-PfHsp40 partnership in the
malaria parasite, and furthermore that the plasmodial and human Hsp70-Hsp40
chaperones possess unique attributes that are differentially modulated by small
molecules.

DOI: 10.1007/s12192-010-0250-6 
PMCID: PMC3118825
PMID: 21191678  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

