
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 4;286(9):7116-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C110.208389. Epub 2011
Jan 5.

Post-transcriptional repair of a split heat shock protein 90 gene by mRNA
trans-splicing.

Nageshan RK(1), Roy N, Hehl AB, Tatu U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012,
India.

Heat shock protein 90 participates in diverse biological processes ranging from
protein folding, cell cycle, signal transduction and development to evolution in 
all eukaryotes. It is also critically involved in regulating growth of protozoa
such as Dictyostelium discoideum, Leishmania donovani, Plasmodium falciparum,
Trypanosoma cruzi, and Trypanosoma evansi. Selective inhibition of Hsp90 has also
been explored as an intervention strategy against important human diseases such
as cancer, malaria, or trypanosomiasis. Giardia lamblia, a simple protozoan
parasite of humans and animals, is an important cause of diarrheal disease with
significant morbidity and some mortality in tropical countries. Here we show that
the G. lamblia cytosolic hsp90 (glhsp90) is split in two similar sized fragments 
located 777 kb apart on the same scaffold. Intrigued by this unique arrangement, 
which appears to be specific for the Giardiinae, we have investigated the
biosynthesis of GlHsp90. We used genome sequencing to confirm the split nature of
the giardial hsp90. However, a specific antibody raised against the peptide
detected a product with a mass of about 80 kDa, suggesting a post-transcriptional
rescue of the genomic defect. We show evidence for the joining of the two
independent Hsp90 transcripts in-trans to one long mature mRNA presumably by RNA 
splicing. The splicing junction carries hallmarks of classical cis-spliced
introns, suggesting that the regular cis-splicing machinery may be sufficient for
repair of the open reading frame. A complementary 26-nt sequence in the "intron" 
regions adjacent to the splice sites may assist in positioning the two pre-mRNAs 
for processing. This is the first example of post-transcriptional rescue of a
split gene by trans-splicing.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C110.208389 
PMCID: PMC3044968
PMID: 21209094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

