
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 May;39(9):3820-35. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq1223. Epub 2011
Jan 17.

RNA-Seq analysis of splicing in Plasmodium falciparum uncovers new splice
junctions, alternative splicing and splicing of antisense transcripts.

Sorber K(1), Dimon MT, DeRisi JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Over 50% of genes in Plasmodium falciparum, the deadliest human malaria parasite,
contain predicted introns, yet experimental characterization of splicing in this 
organism remains incomplete. We present here a transcriptome-wide
characterization of intraerythrocytic splicing events, as captured by RNA-Seq
data from four timepoints of a single highly synchronous culture. Gene
model-independent analysis of these data in conjunction with publically available
RNA-Seq data with HMMSplicer, an in-house developed splice site detection
algorithm, revealed a total of 977 new 5' GU-AG 3' and 5 new 5' GC-AG 3'
junctions absent from gene models and ESTs (11% increase to the current
annotation). In addition, 310 alternative splicing events were detected in 254
(4.5%) genes, most of which truncate open reading frames. Splicing events
antisense to gene models were also detected, revealing complex transcriptional
arrangements within the parasite's transcriptome. Interestingly, antisense
introns overlap sense introns more than would be expected by chance, perhaps
indicating a functional relationship between overlapping transcripts or an
inherent organizational property of the transcriptome. Independent experimental
validation confirmed over 30 new antisense and alternative junctions. Thus, this 
largest assemblage of new and alternative splicing events to date in Plasmodium
falciparum provides a more precise, dynamic view of the parasite's transcriptome.

Â© The Author(s) 2011. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq1223 
PMCID: PMC3089446
PMID: 21245033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

