
1. Neurotoxicology. 2011 Oct;32(5):578-85. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2011.01.001. Epub
2011 Jan 15.

Mefloquine neurotoxicity is mediated by non-receptor tyrosine kinase.

Milatovic D(1), Jenkins JW, Hood JE, Yu Y, Rongzhu L, Aschner M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
dejan.milatovic@vanderbilt.edu

Comment in
    Neurotoxicology. 2011 Dec;32(6):986-7; author reply 987.

Among several available antimalarial drugs, mefloquine has proven to be effective
against drug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum and remains the drug of choice for
both therapy and chemoprophylaxis. However, mefloquine is known to cause adverse 
neurological and/or psychiatric symptoms, which offset its therapeutic advantage.
The exact mechanisms leading to the adverse neurological effects of mefloquine
are poorly defined. Alterations in neurotransmitter release and calcium
homeostasis, the inhibition of cholinesterases and the interaction with adenosine
A(2A) receptors have been hypothesized to play prominent roles in mediating the
deleterious effects of this drug. Our recent data have established that
mefloquine can also trigger oxidative damage and subsequent neurodegeneration in 
rat cortical primary neurons. Furthermore, we have utilized a system
biology-centered approach and have constructed a pathway model of cellular
responses to mefloquine, identifying non-receptor tyrosine kinase 2 (Pyk2) as a
critical target in mediating mefloquine neurotoxicity. In this study, we sought
to establish an experimental validation of Pyk2 using gene-silencing techniques
(siRNA). We have examined whether the downregulation of Pyk2 in primary rat
cortical neurons alters mefloquine neurotoxicity by evaluating cell viability,
apoptosis and oxidative stress. Results from our study have confirmed that
mefloquine neurotoxicity is associated with apoptotic response and oxidative
injury, and we have demonstrated that mefloquine affects primary rat cortical
neurons, at least in part, via Pyk2. The implication of these findings may prove 
beneficial in suppressing the neurological side effects of mefloquine and
developing effective therapeutic modalities to offset its adverse effects.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuro.2011.01.001 
PMCID: PMC6457117
PMID: 21241737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

