
1. J Infect Dis. 2011 Jan 15;203(2):220-7. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiq038.

Selective sweeps and genetic lineages of Plasmodium falciparum drug -resistant
alleles in Ghana.

Alam MT(1), de Souza DK, Vinayak S, Griffing SM, Poe AC, Duah NO, Ghansah A,
Asamoa K, Slutsker L, Wilson MD, Barnwell JW, Udhayakumar V, Koram KA.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30329, USA.
hsf1@cdc.gov

BACKGROUND: In 2005, Ghana adopted artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT)
for primary treatment of falciparum malaria. A comprehensive study of the
drug-resistance-associated mutations and their genetic lineages will lead to a
better understanding of the evolution of antimalarial drug resistance in this
region.
METHODS: The pfcrt, pfmdr1, dhps, and dhfr mutations associated with chloroquine 
(CQ) and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) resistance and the microsatellite loci
flanking these genes were genotyped in Plasmodium falciparum isolates from Ghana.
RESULTS: The prevalence of mutations associated with both CQ and SP resistance
was high in Ghana. However, we observed a decrease in prevalence of the pfcrt
K76T mutation in northern Ghana after the change in drug policy from CQ to ACT.
Analysis of genetic diversity and differentiation at microsatellite loci flanking
all 4 genes indicated that they have been under strong selection, because of CQ
and SP use. The triple-mutant pfcrt and dhfr alleles in Ghana were derived from
Southeast Asia, whereas the double-mutant dhfr, dhps, and pfmdr1 alleles were of 
African lineage.
CONCLUSION: Because of the possible role of pfmdr1 in amodiaquine and mefloquine 
resistance, demonstrating selection on pfmdr1 and defining lineages of resistant 
alleles in an African population holds great importance.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiq038 
PMCID: PMC3071065
PMID: 21288822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

