
1. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 20;6(1):e16294. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016294.

Plasmodium vivax tryptophan-rich antigen PvTRAg33.5 contains alpha helical
structure and multidomain architecture.

Bora H(1), Garg S, Sen P, Kumar D, Kaur P, Khan RH, Sharma YD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.

Tryptophan-rich proteins from several malarial parasites have been identified
where they play an important role in host-parasite interaction. Structural
characterization of these proteins is needed to develop them as therapeutic
targets. Here, we describe a novel Plasmodium vivax tryptophan-rich protein named
PvTRAg33.5. It is expressed by blood stage(s) of the parasite and its gene
contains two exons. The exon 1 encodes for a 23 amino acids long putative signal 
peptide which is likely to be cleaved off whereas the exon 2 encodes for the
mature protein of 252 amino acids. The mature protein contains B-cell epitopes
which were recognized by the human immune system during P.vivax infection. The
PvTRAg33.5 contains 24 (9.5%) tryptophan residues and six motifs whose patterns
were similar among tryptophan-rich proteins. The modeled structure of the
PvTRAg33.5 consists of a multidomain architecture which is stabilized by the
presence of large number of tryptophan residues. The recombinant PvTRAg33.5
showed predominantly α helical structure and alpha helix to beta sheet transition
at pH below 4.5. Protein acquires an irreversible non-native state at temperature
more than 50°C at neutral pH. Its secondary and tertiary structures remain stable
in the presence of 35% alcohol but these structures are destabilized at higher
alcohol concentrations due to the disturbance of hydrophobic interactions between
tryptophanyl residues. These structural changes in the protein might occur during
its translocation to interact with other proteins at its final destination for
biological function such as erythrocyte invasion.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016294 
PMCID: PMC3024423
PMID: 21283717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

