
1. Mol Microbiol. 2011 Feb;79(4):929-39. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07497.x. Epub
2010 Dec 22.

SAP1 is a critical post-transcriptional regulator of infectivity in malaria
parasite sporozoite stages.

Aly AS(1), Lindner SE, MacKellar DC, Peng X, Kappe SH.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Plasmodium salivary gland sporozoites upregulate expression of a unique subset of
genes, collectively called the UIS (upregulated in infectious sporozoites). Many 
UIS were shown to be essential for early liver stage development, although little
is known about their regulation. We previously identified a conserved
sporozoite-specific protein, SAP1, which has an essential role in Plasmodium
liver infection. Targeted deletion of SAP1 in Plasmodium yoelii caused the
depletion of a number of selectively tested UIS transcripts in sporozoites,
resulting in a complete early liver stage arrest. Here, we use a global gene
expression survey to more comprehensively identify transcripts that are affected 
by SAP1 deletion. We find an effect upon both the transcript abundance of UIS
genes, as well as of select genes previously not grouped as UIS. Importantly, we 
show that the lack of SAP1 causes the specific degradation of these transcripts. 
Collectively, our data suggest that SAP1 is involved in a selective
post-transcriptional mechanism to regulate the abundance of transcripts critical 
to the infectivity of sporozoites. Although Pysap1(-) sporozoites are depleted of
many of these important transcripts, they confer long-lasting sterile protection 
against wild-type sporozoite challenge in mice. SAP1 is therefore an appealing
candidate locus for attenuation of Plasmodium falciparum.

Â© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07497.x 
PMID: 21299648  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

