
1. Mol Microbiol. 2011 Apr;80(2):391-406. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2011.07574.x.
Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Heterochromatin formation in bistable chromatin domains controls the epigenetic
repression of clonally variant Plasmodium falciparum genes linked to erythrocyte 
invasion.

Crowley VM(1), Rovira-Graells N, Ribas de Pouplana L, Cortés A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB), 08028 Barcelona, Catalonia,
Spain.

Clonally variant gene expression is a common survival strategy used by many
pathogens, including the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Among the genes 
that show variant expression in this parasite are several members of small gene
families linked to erythrocyte invasion, including the clag and eba families. The
active or repressed state of these genes is clonally transmitted by epigenetic
mechanisms. Here we characterized the promoters of clag3.1, clag3.2 and eba-140, 
and compared nuclease accessibility and post-translational histone modifications 
between their active and repressed states. Activity of these promoters in an
episomal context is similar between parasite subclones characterized by different
patterns of expression of the endogenous genes. Variant expression is controlled 
by the euchromatic or heterochromatic state of bistable chromatin domains.
Repression is mediated by H3K9me3-based heterochromatin, whereas the active state
is characterized by H3K9ac. These marks are maintained throughout the asexual
blood cycle to transmit the epigenetic memory. Furthermore, eba-140 is organized 
in two distinct chromatin domains, probably separated by a barrier insulator
located within its ORF. The 5' chromatin domain controls expression of the gene, 
whereas the 3' domain shares the chromatin conformation with the upstream region 
of the neighbouring phista family gene, which also shows variant expression.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2011.07574.x 
PMID: 21306446  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

