
1. Exp Parasitol. 2011 Jun;128(2):127-32. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2011.02.015. Epub
2011 Feb 18.

Plasmodium vivax: collaborative roles for plasmepsin 4 and vivapains in
hemoglobin hydrolysis.

Moon SU(1), Kang JM, Kim TS, Kong Y, Sohn WM, Na BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Brain Korea 21 Biomedical Center, and Institute of
Health Sciences, Gyeongsang National University School of Medicine, Jinju
660-751, Republic of Korea.

Plasmepsins, a family of aspartic proteases of Plasmodium species, are known to
participate in a wide variety of cellular processes essential for parasite
survival. Therefore, the plasmepsins of malaria parasites have been recognized as
attractive antimalarial drug targets. Although the plasmepsins of P. falciparum
have been extensively characterized, the plasmepsins of P. vivax are currently
not well known. To expand our understanding of the plasmepsins of P. vivax, we
characterized plasmepsin 4 of P. vivax (PvPM4). The bacterially expressed
recombinant PvPM4 was insoluble, but it was easily refolded into a soluble
protein. The processing of PvPM4 into a mature enzyme occurred through
autocatalytic activity under acidic conditions in a pepstatin A-sensitive manner,
in which process a portion of prodomain was essential for correct folding. PvPM4 
could hydrolyze native human hemoglobin at acidic pHs, but preferred denatured
hemoglobin as a substrate. PvPM4 acted synergistically with vivapain-2 and
vivapain-3, cysteine proteases of P. vivax, in the hydrolysis of hemoglobin. The 
vivapains also mediated processing of PvPM4 into a mature enzyme. These results
collectively suggest that PvPM4 is an active hemoglobinase of P. vivax that works
collaboratively with vivapains to enhance the parasite's ability to hydrolyze
hemoglobin.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2011.02.015 
PMID: 21334328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

