
1. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 9;6(2):e16629. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016629.

A molecular epidemiological study of var gene diversity to characterize the
reservoir of Plasmodium falciparum in humans in Africa.

Chen DS(1), Barry AE, Leliwa-Sytek A, Smith TA, Peterson I, Brown SM,
Migot-Nabias F, Deloron P, Kortok MM, Marsh K, Daily JP, Ndiaye D, Sarr O, Mboup 
S, Day KP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Parasitology, New York University School of Medicine,
New York, New York, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The reservoir of Plasmodium infection in humans has traditionally
been defined by blood slide positivity. This study was designed to characterize
the local reservoir of infection in relation to the diverse var genes that encode
the major surface antigen of Plasmodium falciparum blood stages and underlie the 
parasite's ability to establish chronic infection and transmit from human to
mosquito.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We investigated the molecular epidemiology of the
var multigene family at local sites in Gabon, Senegal and Kenya which differ in
parasite prevalence and transmission intensity. 1839 distinct var gene types were
defined by sequencing DBLÎ± domains in the three sites. Only 76 (4.1%) var types
were found in more than one population indicating spatial heterogeneity in var
types across the African continent. The majority of var types appeared only once 
in the population sample. Non-parametric statistical estimators predict in each
population at minimum five to seven thousand distinct var types. Similar
diversity of var types was seen in sites with different parasite prevalences.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Var population genomics provides new insights into the 
epidemiology of P. falciparum in Africa where malaria has never been conquered.
In particular, we have described the extensive reservoir of infection in local
African sites and discovered a unique var population structure that can
facilitate superinfection through minimal overlap in var repertoires among
parasite genomes. Our findings show that var typing as a molecular surveillance
system defines the extent of genetic complexity in the reservoir of infection to 
complement measures of malaria prevalence. The observed small scale spatial
diversity of var genes suggests that var genetics could greatly inform current
malaria mapping approaches and predict complex malaria population dynamics due to
the import of var types to areas where no widespread pre-existing immunity in the
population exists.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016629 
PMCID: PMC3036650
PMID: 21347415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

