
1. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 28;6(2):e17102. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017102.

Plasmodium falciparum reticulocyte binding-like homologue protein 2 (PfRH2) is a 
key adhesive molecule involved in erythrocyte invasion.

Sahar T(1), Reddy KS, Bharadwaj M, Pandey AK, Singh S, Chitnis CE, Gaur D.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology 
(ICGEB), New Delhi, India.

Erythrocyte invasion by Plasmodium merozoites is a complex, multistep process
that is mediated by a number of parasite ligand-erythrocyte receptor
interactions. One such family of parasite ligands includes the P. falciparum
reticulocyte binding homologue (PfRH) proteins that are homologous with the P.
vivax reticulocyte binding proteins and have been shown to play a role in
erythrocyte invasion. There are five functional PfRH proteins of which only
PfRH2a/2b have not yet been demonstrated to bind erythrocytes. In this study, we 
demonstrated that native PfRH2a/2b is processed near the N-terminus yielding
fragments of 220 kDa and 80 kDa that exhibit differential erythrocyte binding
specificities. The erythrocyte binding specificity of the 220 kDa processed
fragment of native PfRH2a/2b was sialic acid-independent, trypsin resistant and
chymotrypsin sensitive. This specific binding phenotype is consistent with
previous studies that disrupted the PfRH2a/2b genes and demonstrated that PfRH2b 
is involved in a sialic acid independent, trypsin resistant, chymotrypsin
sensitive invasion pathway. Interestingly, we found that the smaller 80 kDa
PfRH2a/2b fragment is processed from the larger 220 kDa fragment and binds
erythrocytes in a sialic acid dependent, trypsin resistant and chymotrypsin
sensitive manner. Thus, the two processed fragments of PfRH2a/2b differed with
respect to their dependence on sialic acids for erythrocyte binding. Further, we 
mapped the erythrocyte binding domain of PfRH2a/2b to a conserved 40 kDa
N-terminal region (rPfRH2(40)) in the ectodomain that is common to both PfRH2a
and PfRH2b. We demonstrated that recombinant rPfRH2(40) bound human erythrocytes 
with the same specificity as the native 220 kDa processed protein. Moreover,
antibodies generated against rPfRH2(40) blocked erythrocyte invasion by P.
falciparum through a sialic acid independent pathway. PfRH2a/2b thus plays a key 
role in erythrocyte invasion and its conserved receptor-binding domain deserves
attention as a promising candidate for inclusion in a blood-stage malaria
vaccine.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017102 
PMCID: PMC3046117
PMID: 21386888  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

