
1. Malar J. 2011 Mar 14;10:60. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-60.

PvRON2, a new Plasmodium vivax rhoptry neck antigen.

Arévalo-Pinzón G(1), Curtidor H, Patiño LC, Patarroyo MA.

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Instituto de Inmunología de Colombia FIDIC, Carrera 50 # 26-20,
Bogotá, Colombia.

BACKGROUND: Rhoptries are specialized organelles from parasites belonging to the 
phylum Apicomplexa; they secrete their protein content during invasion of host
target cells and are sorted into discrete subcompartments within rhoptry neck or 
bulb. This distribution is associated with these proteins' role in tight junction
(TJ) and parasitophorous vacuole (PV) formation, respectively.
METHODS: Plasmodium falciparum RON2 amino acid sequence was used as bait for
screening the codifying gene for the homologous protein in the Plasmodium vivax
genome. Gene synteny, as well as identity and similarity values, were determined 
for ron2 and its flanking genes among P. falciparum, P. vivax and other malarial 
parasite genomes available at PlasmoDB and Sanger Institute databases. Pvron2
gene transcription was determined by RT-PCR of cDNA obtained from the P. vivax
VCG-1 strain. Protein expression and localization were assessed by Western blot
and immunofluorescence using polyclonal anti-PvRON2 antibodies. Co-localization
was confirmed using antibodies directed towards specific microneme and rhoptry
neck proteins.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: The first P. vivax rhoptry neck protein (named here
PvRON2) has been identified in this study. PvRON2 is a 2,204 residue-long protein
encoded by a single 6,615 bp exon containing a hydrophobic signal sequence
towards the amino-terminus, a transmembrane domain towards the carboxy-terminus
and two coiled coil α-helical motifs; these are characteristic features of
several previously described vaccine candidates against malaria. This protein
also contains two tandem repeats within the interspecies variable sequence
possibly involved in evading a host's immune system. PvRON2 is expressed in late 
schizonts and localized in rhoptry necks similar to what has been reported for
PfRON2, which suggests its participation during target cell invasion.
CONCLUSIONS: The identification and partial characterization of the first P.
vivax rhoptry neck protein are described in the present study. This protein is
homologous to PfRON2 which has previously been shown to be associated with
PfAMA-1, suggesting a similar role for PvRON2.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-60 
PMCID: PMC3068128
PMID: 21401956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

