
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Mar;7(3):e1002007. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002007. Epub 2011
Mar 10.

The moving junction protein RON8 facilitates firm attachment and host cell
invasion in Toxoplasma gondii.

Straub KW(1), Peng ED, Hajagos BE, Tyler JS, Bradley PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.

The apicomplexan moving junction (MJ) is a highly conserved structure formed
during host cell entry that anchors the invading parasite to the host cell and
serves as a molecular sieve of host membrane proteins that protects the
parasitophorous vacuole from host lysosomal destruction. While recent work in
Toxoplasma and Plasmodium has reinforced the composition of the MJ as an
important association of rhoptry neck proteins (RONs) with micronemal AMA1,
little is known of the precise role of RONs in the junction or how they are
targeted to the neck subcompartment. We report the first functional analysis of a
MJ/RON protein by disrupting RON8 in T. gondii. Parasites lacking RON8 are
severely impaired in both attachment and invasion, indicating that RON8 enables
the parasite to establish a firm clasp on the host cell and commit to invasion.
The remaining junction components frequently drag in trails behind invading
knockout parasites and illustrate a malformed complex without RON8.
Complementation of Δron8 parasites restores invasion and reveals a processing
event at the RON8 C-terminus. Replacement of an N-terminal region of RON8 with a 
mCherry reporter separates regions within RON8 that are necessary for rhoptry
targeting and complex formation from those required for function during invasion.
Finally, the invasion defects in Δron8 parasites seen in vitro translate to
radically impaired virulence in infected mice, promoting a model in which RON8
has a crucial and unprecedented task in committing Toxoplasma to host cell entry.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002007 
PMCID: PMC3053350
PMID: 21423671  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

