
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Jun;79(6):2379-84. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01136-10. Epub 2011 Mar
21.

Differential microRNA expression in experimental cerebral and noncerebral
malaria.

El-Assaad F(1), Hempel C, Combes V, Mitchell AJ, Ball HJ, Kurtzhals JA, Hunt NH, 
Mathys JM, Grau GE.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Immunology Unit, Discipline of Pathology, Sydney Medical School,
University of Sydney, Camperdown, New South Wales, Australia.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are posttranscriptional regulatory molecules that have been
implicated in the regulation of immune responses, but their role in the immune
response to Plasmodium infection is unknown. We studied the expression of
selected miRNAs following infection of CBA mice with Plasmodium berghei ANKA
(PbA), which causes cerebral malaria (CM), or Plasmodium berghei K173 (PbK),
which causes severe malaria but without cerebral complications, termed non-CM.
The differential expression profiles of selected miRNAs (let-7i, miR-27a,
miR-150, miR-126, miR-210, and miR-155) were analyzed in mouse brain and heart
tissue by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR). We identified three
miRNAs that were differentially expressed in the brain of PbA-infected CBA mice: 
let7i, miR-27a, and miR-150. In contrast, no miRNA changes were detected in the
heart, an organ with no known pathology during acute malaria. To investigate the 
involvement of let-7i, miR-27a, and miR-150 in CM-resistant mice, we assessed the
expression levels in gamma interferon knockout (IFN-γ(-/-)) mice on a C57BL/6
genetic background. The expression of let-7i, miR-27a, and miR-150 was unchanged 
in both wild-type (WT) and IFN-γ(-/-) mice following infection. Overexpression of
these three miRNAs during PbA, but not PbK, infection in WT mice may be critical 
for the triggering of the neurological syndrome via regulation of their potential
downstream targets. Our data suggest that in the CBA mouse at least, miRNA may
have a regulatory role in the pathogenesis of severe malaria.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01136-10 
PMCID: PMC3125837
PMID: 21422175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

