
1. Malar J. 2011 Mar 28;10:69. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-69.

Plasmodium berghei ANKA infection increases Foxp3, IL-10 and IL-2 in CXCL-10
deficient C57BL/6 mice.

Sarfo BY(1), Wilson NO, Bond VC, Stiles JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Immunology, Morehouse School of
Medicine, 720 Westview Drive, South West, Atlanta Georgia, GA 30310, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cerebral malaria (CM) is a major cause of malaria mortality.
Sequestration of infected red blood cells and leukocytes in brain vessels coupled
with the production of pro-inflammatory factors contribute to CM. CXCL-10 a
chemokine that is chemotactic to T cells has been linked to fatal CM. Mice
deficient for CXCL-10 gene are resistant to murine CM, while antibody ablation of
CXCL-10 enhanced the production of regulatory T cells (CD4+Cd25+Foxp3+) and IL-10
which regulate the immune system. Interleukin-2 (IL-2), a pro-inflammatory
cytokine implicated in malaria pathogenesis has also been shown to be a key
regulator of Foxp3. However the role of Foxp3 in resistant murine CM is not well 
understood.
METHODS: The hypothesis that resistance of CXCL-10-/- mice to murine CM may be
due to enhanced expression of Foxp3 in concert with IL-10 and IL-2 was tested.
CXCL-10-/- and WT C57BL/6 mice were infected with Plasmodium berghei ANKA and
evaluated for CM symptoms. Brain, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and 
plasma were harvested from infected and uninfected mice at days 2, 4 and 8.
Regulatory T cells (CD4+CD25+) and non-T regs (CD4+CD25-) were isolated from
PBMCs and cultured with P. berghei antigens in vitro with dendritic cells as
antigen presenting cells. Regulatory T cell transcription and specific factor
Foxp3, was evaluated in mouse brain and PBMCs by realtime-PCR and Western blots
while IL-10, and IL-2 were evaluated in plasma and cultured supernatants by
ELISA.
RESULTS: Wild type mice exhibited severe murine CM symptoms compared with
CXCL-10-/- mice. Foxp3 mRNA and protein in brain and PBMC's of CXCL-10-/- mice
was significantly up-regulated (p < 0.05) by day 4 post-infection (p.i) compared 
with WT. Plasma levels of IL-10 and IL-2 in infected CXCL-10-/- were higher than 
in WT mice (p < 0.05) at days 2 and 4 p.i. Ex-vivo CD4+CD25+ T cells from
CXCL-10-/- re-stimulated with P. berghei antigens produced more IL-10 than WT
CD4+CD25+ T cells.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that in the absence of CXCL-10, the resulting
up-regulation of Foxp3, IL-10 and IL-2 may be involved in attenuating fatal
murine CM.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-69 
PMCID: PMC3078901
PMID: 21439091  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

