
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Mar;7(3):e1001320. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001320. Epub 2011
Mar 17.

Blood meal-derived heme decreases ROS levels in the midgut of Aedes aegypti and
allows proliferation of intestinal microbiota.

Oliveira JH(1), Gonçalves RL, Lara FA, Dias FA, Gandara AC, Menna-Barreto RF,
Edwards MC, Laurindo FR, Silva-Neto MA, Sorgine MH, Oliveira PL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Bioquímica de Artrópodes Hematófagos, Instituto de Bioquímica
Médica, Programa de Biologia Molecular e Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2013 Feb;9(2).
doi:10.1371/annotation/34fed6f4-4096-4980-bf2f-b918e14f5ff5.

The presence of bacteria in the midgut of mosquitoes antagonizes infectious
agents, such as Dengue and Plasmodium, acting as a negative factor in the
vectorial competence of the mosquito. Therefore, knowledge of the molecular
mechanisms involved in the control of midgut microbiota could help in the
development of new tools to reduce transmission. We hypothesized that toxic
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated by epithelial cells control bacterial
growth in the midgut of Aedes aegypti, the vector of Yellow fever and Dengue
viruses. We show that ROS are continuously present in the midgut of sugar-fed
(SF) mosquitoes and a blood-meal immediately decreased ROS through a mechanism
involving heme-mediated activation of PKC. This event occurred in parallel with
an expansion of gut bacteria. Treatment of sugar-fed mosquitoes with increased
concentrations of heme led to a dose dependent decrease in ROS levels and a
consequent increase in midgut endogenous bacteria. In addition, gene silencing of
dual oxidase (Duox) reduced ROS levels and also increased gut flora. Using a
model of bacterial oral infection in the gut, we show that the absence of ROS
resulted in decreased mosquito resistance to infection, increased midgut
epithelial damage, transcriptional modulation of immune-related genes and
mortality. As heme is a pro-oxidant molecule released in large amounts upon
hemoglobin degradation, oxidative killing of bacteria in the gut would represent 
a burden to the insect, thereby creating an extra oxidative challenge to the
mosquito. We propose that a controlled decrease in ROS levels in the midgut of
Aedes aegypti is an adaptation to compensate for the ingestion of heme.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001320 
PMCID: PMC3060171
PMID: 21445237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

