
1. Adv Appl Microbiol. 2011;74:77-96. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-387022-3.00007-0.

Antigenic Variation and the Genetics and Epigenetics of the PfEMP1 Erythrocyte
Surface Antigens in Plasmodium falciparum Malaria.

Arnot DE(1), Jensen AT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of International Health,
Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, CSS Oester Farimagsgade 5, Copenhagen K, Denmark; Department of
Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital (Rigshospitalet), CSS Oester 
Farimagsgade 5, Copenhagen K, Denmark; Institute of Immunology and Infection
Research, School of Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, United
Kingdom.

How immunity to malaria develops remains one of the great unresolved issues in
bio-medicine and resolution of its various paradoxes is likely to be the key to
developing effective malaria vaccines. The basic epidemiological observations
are; under conditions of intense natural transmission, humans do become immune to
P. falciparum malaria, but this is a slow process requiring multiple disease
episodes which many, particularly young children, do not survive. Adult survivors
are immune to the symptoms of malaria, and unless pregnant, can control the
growth of most or all new inoculations. Sterile immunity is not achieved and
chronic parasitization of apparently healthy adults is the norm. In this article,
we analyse the best understood malaria "antigenic variation" system, that based
on Plasmodium falciparum's PfEMP1-type cytoadhesion antigens, and critically
review recent literature on the function and control of this multi-gene family of
parasite variable surface antigens.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-387022-3.00007-0 
PMID: 21459194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

