
1. Malar J. 2011 Apr 6;10:79. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-79.

Plasmodium falciparum msp1, msp2 and glurp allele frequency and diversity in
sub-Saharan Africa.

Mwingira F(1), Nkwengulila G, Schoepflin S, Sumari D, Beck HP, Snounou G, Felger 
I, Olliaro P, Mugittu K.

Author information: 
(1)Dares Salaam University College of Education P.O.BOX 2329, Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania.

BACKGROUND: The efficacy of anti-malarial drugs is assessed over a period of
28-63 days (depending on the drugs' residence time) following initiation of
treatment in order to capture late failures. However, prolonged follow-up
increases the likelihood of new infections depending on transmission intensity.
Therefore, molecular genotyping of highly polymorphic regions of Plasmodium
falciparum msp1, msp2 and glurp loci is usually carried out to distinguish
recrudescence (true failures) from new infections. This tool has now been adopted
as an integral part of anti-malarial efficacy studies and clinical trials.
However, there are concerns over its utility and reliability because conclusions 
drawn from molecular typing depend on the genetic profile of the respective
parasite populations, but this profile is not systematically documented in most
endemic areas. This study presents the genetic diversity of P. falciparum msp1,
msp2 and glurp markers in selected sub-Saharan Africa countries with varying
levels of endemicity namely Malawi, Tanzania, Uganda, Burkina Faso and São Tomé.
METHODS: A total 780 baseline (Day 0) blood samples from children less than seven
years, recruited in a randomized controlled clinical trials done between 1996 and
2000 were genotyped. DNA was extracted; allelic frequency and diversity were
investigated by PCR followed by capillary electrophoresis for msp2 and fragment
sizing by a digitalized gel imager for msp1 and glurp.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Plasmodium falciparum msp1, msp2 and glurp markers were
highly polymorphic with low allele frequencies. A total of 17 msp1 genotypes
[eight MAD20-, one RO33- and eight K1-types]; 116 msp2 genotypes [83 3D7 and 33
FC27- types] and 14 glurp genotypes were recorded. All five sites recorded very
high expected heterozygosity (HE) values (0.68 - 0.99). HE was highest in msp2
locus (HE=0.99), and lowest for msp1 (HE=0.68) (P<0.0001). The genetic diversity 
and allelic frequency recorded were independent of transmission intensity
(P=0.84, P=0.25 respectively. A few genotypes had particularly high frequencies; 
however the most abundant showed only a 4% probability that a new infection would
share the same genotype as the baseline infection. This is unlikely to confound
the distinction of recrudescence from new infection, particularly if more than
one marker is used for genotyping. Hence, this study supports the use of msp1,
msp2 and glurp in malaria clinical trials in sub-Saharan Africa to discriminate
new from recrudescent infections.

© 2011 Mwingira et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-79 
PMCID: PMC3090371
PMID: 21470428  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

