
1. Eukaryot Cell. 2011 Jun;10(6):744-52. doi: 10.1128/EC.00008-11. Epub 2011 Apr 15.

Protein targeting to the parasitophorous vacuole membrane of Plasmodium
falciparum.

Eksi S(1), Williamson KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Loyola University-Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Red blood cell (RBC) invasion and parasitophorous vacuole (PV) formation by
Plasmodium falciparum are critical for the development and pathogenesis of
malaria, a continuing global health problem. Expansion of the PV membrane (PVM)
during growth is orchestrated by the parasite. This is particularly important in 
mature RBCs, which lack internal organelles and no longer actively synthesize
membranes. Pfs16, a 16-kDa integral PVM protein expressed by gametocytes, was
chosen as a model for studying the trafficking of material from the parasite
across the PV space to the PVM. The locations of Pfs16-green fluorescent protein 
(GFP) reporter proteins containing distinct regions of Pfs16 were tracked from
RBC invasion to emergence. Inclusion of the 53 C-terminal amino acids (aa) of
Pfs16 to a GFP reporter construct already containing the N-terminal secretory
signal sequence was sufficient for targeting to and retention on the PVM. An
amino acid motif identified in this region was also found in seven other known
PVM proteins. Removal of the 11 C-terminal aa did not affect PVM targeting, but
membrane retention was decreased. Additionally, during emergence from the PVM and
RBC, native Pfs16 and the full-length Pfs16-GFP reporter protein were found to
concentrate on the ends of the gametocyte. Capping was not observed in constructs
lacking the amino acids between the N-terminal secretory signal sequence and the 
transmembrane domain, suggesting that this region, which is not required for PVM 
targeting, is involved in capping. This is the first report to define the amino
acid domains required for targeting to the P. falciparum PVM.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.00008-11 
PMCID: PMC3127666
PMID: 21498641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

