
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2011 Jun;11(4):708-15. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.04.013. Epub
2011 Apr 14.

Comparing metabolic network models based on genomic and automatically inferred
enzyme information from Plasmodium and its human host to define drug targets in
silico.

Fatumo S(1), Plaimas K, Adebiyi E, König R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Covenant University, Ota,
Nigeria. segunfatumo@gmail.com

Plasmodium falciparum causes the most severe malaria pathogen and has developed
resistance to existing drugs making it indispensable to discover new drugs. In
order to predict drug targets in silico, a useful model for the metabolism is
needed. However, automatically reconstructed network models typically cover more 
non-confirmed enzymes than confirmed enzymes of known gene products. Furthermore,
it needs to be considered that the parasite takes advantage of the metabolism of 
the host. We compared several reconstructed network models and aimed to find the 
best suitable reconstruction for detecting drug targets in silico. We
computationally reconstructed the metabolism based on automatically inferred
enzymes and compared this with a reconstructed model that was based only on
enzymes whose coding genes are known. Additionally, we tested if integrating
enzymes of the host cell is beneficial for such an analysis. We employed several 
well established criteria for defining essential enzymes including chokepoints,
betweenness centrality (or load-points), connectivity and the diameter of the
networks. Comparing the modeling results with a comprehensive list of known drug 
targets for P. falciparum, showed that we had the best discovery success with a
network model consisting only of enzymes from the parasite alone which coding
genes were known.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.04.013 
PMID: 21515412  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

