
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2011 Jul;49(7):2411-8. doi: 10.1128/JCM.02603-10. Epub 2011 Apr
27.

Applied genomics: data mining reveals species-specific malaria diagnostic targets
more sensitive than 18S rRNA.

Demas A(1), Oberstaller J, DeBarry J, Lucchi NW, Srinivasamoorthy G, Sumari D,
Kabanywanyi AM, Villegas L, Escalante AA, Kachur SP, Barnwell JW, Peterson DS,
Udhayakumar V, Kissinger JC.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,Atlanta, Georgia 30602, USA.

Accurate and rapid diagnosis of malaria infections is crucial for implementing
species-appropriate treatment and saving lives. Molecular diagnostic tools are
the most accurate and sensitive method of detecting Plasmodium, differentiating
between Plasmodium species, and detecting subclinical infections. Despite
available whole-genome sequence data for Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax, the 
majority of PCR-based methods still rely on the 18S rRNA gene targets.
Historically, this gene has served as the best target for diagnostic assays.
However, it is limited in its ability to detect mixed infections in multiplex
assay platforms without the use of nested PCR. New diagnostic targets are needed.
Ideal targets will be species specific, highly sensitive, and amenable to both
single-step and multiplex PCRs. We have mined the genomes of P. falciparum and P.
vivax to identify species-specific, repetitive sequences that serve as new PCR
targets for the detection of malaria. We show that these targets (Pvr47 and
Pfr364) exist in 14 to 41 copies and are more sensitive than 18S rRNA when
utilized in a single-step PCR. Parasites are routinely detected at levels of 1 to
10 parasites/μl. The reaction can be multiplexed to detect both species in a
single reaction. We have examined 7 P. falciparum strains and 91 P. falciparum
clinical isolates from Tanzania and 10 P. vivax strains and 96 P. vivax clinical 
isolates from Venezuela, and we have verified a sensitivity and specificity of
∼100% for both targets compared with a nested 18S rRNA approach. We show that
bioinformatics approaches can be successfully applied to identify novel
diagnostic targets and improve molecular methods for pathogen detection. These
novel targets provide a powerful alternative molecular diagnostic method for the 
detection of P. falciparum and P. vivax in conventional or multiplex PCR
platforms.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.02603-10 
PMCID: PMC3147814
PMID: 21525225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

