
1. PLoS Genet. 2011 Apr;7(4):e1001383. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001383. Epub 2011 
Apr 21.

Identification and functional validation of the novel antimalarial resistance
locus PF10_0355 in Plasmodium falciparum.

Van Tyne D(1), Park DJ, Schaffner SF, Neafsey DE, Angelino E, Cortese JF, Barnes 
KG, Rosen DM, Lukens AK, Daniels RF, Milner DA Jr, Johnson CA, Shlyakhter I,
Grossman SR, Becker JS, Yamins D, Karlsson EK, Ndiaye D, Sarr O, Mboup S, Happi
C, Furlotte NA, Eskin E, Kang HM, Hartl DL, Birren BW, Wiegand RC, Lander ES,
Wirth DF, Volkman SK, Sabeti PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

The Plasmodium falciparum parasite's ability to adapt to environmental pressures,
such as the human immune system and antimalarial drugs, makes malaria an enduring
burden to public health. Understanding the genetic basis of these adaptations is 
critical to intervening successfully against malaria. To that end, we created a
high-density genotyping array that assays over 17,000 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (âˆ¼ 1 SNP/kb), and applied it to 57 culture-adapted parasites from
three continents. We characterized genome-wide genetic diversity within and
between populations and identified numerous loci with signals of natural
selection, suggesting their role in recent adaptation. In addition, we performed 
a genome-wide association study (GWAS), searching for loci correlated with
resistance to thirteen antimalarials; we detected both known and novel resistance
loci, including a new halofantrine resistance locus, PF10_0355. Through
functional testing we demonstrated that PF10_0355 overexpression decreases
sensitivity to halofantrine, mefloquine, and lumefantrine, but not to
structurally unrelated antimalarials, and that increased gene copy number
mediates resistance. Our GWAS and follow-on functional validation demonstrate the
potential of genome-wide studies to elucidate functionally important loci in the 
malaria parasite genome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001383 
PMCID: PMC3080868
PMID: 21533027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

