
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2011 Oct;17(10):1484-91. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-0691.2011.03507.x. Epub 2011 May 20.

Improved performance with saliva and urine as alternative DNA sources for malaria
diagnosis by mitochondrial DNA-based PCR assays.

Putaporntip C(1), Buppan P, Jongwutiwes S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Molecular Biology of Malaria 
and Opportunistic Parasites Research Unit, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,
Thailand. p.chaturong@gmail.com

Erratum in
    Clin Microbiol Infect. 2012 Jul;18(7):720.

Saliva and urine from malaria-infected individuals contain trace amounts of
Plasmodium DNA, and therefore, could be used as alternative specimens for
diagnosis. A nested PCR targeting the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene (Cytb-PCR) 
of four human malaria species and Plasmodium knowlesi was developed and tested
with 693 blood samples from febrile patients living in diverse malaria-endemic
areas of Thailand, and compared with microscopy and nested PCR targeting
small-subunit rRNA (18S-PCR). Cytb-PCR was 16% and 39.8% more sensitive than
18S-PCR and microscopy, respectively, in detecting all of these malarial species 
in blood samples. Importantly, 34% and 17% of Plasmodium falciparum and
Plasmodium vivax mono-infections, respectively, detected by microscopy were, in
fact, mixed P. falciparum and P. non-falciparum infections. Analysis of matched
blood, saliva and urine from 157 individuals showed that microscopy and Cytb-PCR 
of saliva yielded no significant difference in detecting P. falciparum and P.
vivax. However, Cytb-PCR of saliva was more sensitive than microscopy for
diagnosis of mixed-species infections. A combination of Cytb-PCR of saliva and of
urine significantly outperformed microscopy (p 0.0098 for P. falciparum, p 0.006 
for P. vivax, and p 0.0002 for mixed infections). Furthermore, Plasmodium
malariae and P. knowlesi could also be identified in saliva and urine with this
method. Therefore, the Cytb-PCR developed herein offers a high potential for the 
use of both saliva and urine for malaria diagnosis, with a sensitivity comparable
with or superior to that of microscopy.

© 2011 The Authors. Clinical Microbiology and Infection © 2011 European Society
of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2011.03507.x 
PMID: 21595789  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

