
1. Med Vet Entomol. 2012 Mar;26(1):112-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2915.2011.00965.x.
Epub 2011 May 25.

RNAi knock-downs support roles for the mucin-like (AeIMUC1) gene and short-chain 
dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR) gene in Aedes aegypti susceptibility to Plasmodium 
gallinaceum.

Berois M(1), Romero-Severson J, Severson DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Eck Institute for Global Health, University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, U.S.A.

The mosquito midgut represents the first barrier encountered by the Plasmodium
parasite (Haemosporida: Plasmodiidae) when it is ingested in blood from an
infected vertebrate. Previous studies identified the Aedes aegypti (L.) (Diptera:
Culicidae) mucin-like (AeIMUC1) and short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR)
genes as midgut-expressed candidate genes influencing susceptibility to infection
by Plasmodium gallinaceum (Brumpt). We used RNA inference (RNAi) by
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) injections to examine ookinete survival to the oocyst
stage following individual gene knock-downs. Double-stranded RNA gene knock-downs
were performed 3 days prior to P. gallinaceum infection and oocyst development
was evaluated at 7 days post-infection. Mean numbers of parasites developing to
the oocyst stage were significantly reduced by 52.3% in dsAeIMUC1-injected
females and by 36.5% in dsSDR-injected females compared with females injected
with a dsβ-gal control. The prevalence of infection was significantly reduced in 
dsAeIMUC1- and dsSDR-injected females compared with females injected with
dsβ-gal; these reductions resulted in a two- and three-fold increase in the
number of uninfected individuals, respectively. Overall, these results suggest
that both AeIMUC1 and SDR play a role in Ae. aegypti vector competence to P.
gallinaceum.

© 2011 The Authors. Medical and Veterinary Entomology © 2011 The Royal
Entomological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2915.2011.00965.x 
PMCID: PMC3165091
PMID: 21615441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

