
1. Mol Ecol. 2011 Aug;20(15):3275-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2011.05136.x. Epub
2011 Jun 1.

On the specificity of avian blood parasites: revealing specific and generalist
relationships between haemosporidians and biting midges.

Martínez-de la Puente J(1), Martínez J, Rivero-de Aguilar J, Herrero J, Merino S.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ecología Evolutiva, Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales
(CSIC), Madrid, Spain. jmp@ebd.csic.es

Comment in
    Mol Ecol. 2011 Aug;20(15):3084-6.

The study of host-parasite relationships involving vector-borne parasites
requires understanding interactions between parasites and vectors. The capacity
of haemosporidians to infect insects has clear evolutionary consequences for the 
transmission of diseases. Here, we investigated (i) the associations between
blood parasites, biting midges and birds and (ii) the potential specificity
between biting midge and haemosporidian haplotypes. A total of 629 parous biting 
midges Culicoides and 224 wild birds (belonging to seven species) from a locality
of central Spain were individually examined for the presence of Haemoproteus and 
Plasmodium parasites by sequencing a fragment of cytochrome B. Biting midges were
identified morphologically and characterized on the basis of a fragment of the
cytochrome c oxidase (COI) gene. Overall, 12 Haemoproteus and three Plasmodium
haplotypes were isolated and sequenced. Among them, 10 haplotypes were
exclusively isolated from biting midges, three haplotypes only from birds and two
haplotypes from both biting midges and birds. Biting midge haplotypes showed both
specific and generalist relationships with Haemoproteus haplotypes but only
generalist relationships with Plasmodium haplotypes. Several C. festivipennis and
C. kibunesis haplotypes established significant coevolutionary links with
Haemoproteus haplotypes. These results shed light on the specificity of
interactions between vectors and blood parasites.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2011.05136.x 
PMID: 21627703  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

