
1. J Infect Dis. 2011 Jul 1;204(1):27-35. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir217.

Transcription of var genes other than var2csa in Plasmodium falciparum parasites 
infecting Mozambican pregnant women.

Rovira-Vallbona E(1), Dobaño C, Bardají A, Cisteró P, Romagosa C, Serra-Casas E, 
Quintó L, Bassat Q, Sigaúque B, Alonso PL, Ordi J, Menéndez C, Mayor A.

Author information: 
(1)Barcelona Centre for International Health Research, Hospital
Clínic-Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Increased susceptibility to Plasmodium falciparum infection during
pregnancy has been attributed to the accumulation of infected erythrocytes in the
placenta. This phenomenon is mediated by a var gene coding for VAR2CSA, which
adheres to chondroitin sulphate A. However, the contribution of parasites
transcribing other var genes to maternal infections has not been well
characterized.
METHODS: Transcription of var2csa and var groups A, B, and C was measured by
real-time polymerase chain reaction in 30 placental and 21 peripheral P.
falciparum isolates from pregnant women and in 42 isolates from nonpregnant
adults and children. Associations of infections with non-var2csa isolates with
maternal parasitemia and immune responses were assessed.
RESULTS: Placental parasites showed the highest levels of var2csa. ABC var genes 
were transcribed by 20 (67%) of 30 placental isolates and were associated with
higher parasitemia compared with infections by parasites only transcribing
var2csa (P = .004). Peripheral isolates from pregnant women transcribed ABC var
genes at levels similar to those of parasites infecting nonpregnant adults with
clinical malaria (P[varA] = .420, P[varB] = .808, and P[varC] = .619).
CONCLUSIONS: Transcripts of var2csa are abundant in pregnancy-associated P.
falciparum infections; however, ABC var types are also common, especially in
peripheral blood, with transcription levels similar to those of infections out of
pregnancy. These findings are of interest for the design of malaria vaccines for 
pregnant women.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jir217 
PMCID: PMC3307158
PMID: 21628655  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

