
1. J Vector Ecol. 2011 Jun;36(1):213-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1948-7134.2011.00159.x.

Implications of Plasmodium parasite infected mosquitoes on an insular avifauna:
the case of Socorro Island, México.

Carlson JS(1), Martínez-Gómez JE, Cornel A, Loiseau C, Sehgal RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA
94132, USA.

Avian malaria (Plasmodium spp.) has been implicated in the decline of avian
populations in the Hawaiian Islands and it is generally agreed that
geographically isolated and immunologically naïve bird populations are
particularly vulnerable to the pathogenic effects of invasive malaria parasites. 
In order to assess the potential disease risk of malaria to the avifauna of
Socorro Island, México, we surveyed for Plasmodium isolates from 1,300 resident
field-caught mosquitoes. Most of them were identified as Aedes (Ochlerotatus)
taeniorhynchus (Wiedemann, 1821), which were abundant in the salt marshes. We
also collected Culex quinquefasciatus Say, 1823 close to human dwellings.
Mitochondrial ND5 and COII gene sequences of Ae. taeniorhynchus were analyzed and
compared to corresponding sequences of mosquitoes of the Galápagos Islands, Latin
America, and the North American mainland. Aedes lineages from Socorro Island
clustered most closely with a lineage from the continental U.S. Plasmodium spp.
DNA was isolated from both species of mosquitoes. From 38 positive pools, we
isolated 11 distinct mitochondrial Cytb lineages of Plasmodium spp. Seven of the 
Plasmodium lineages represent previously documented avian infective strains while
four were new lineages. Our results confirm a potential risk for the spread of
avian malaria and underscore the need to monitor both the mosquito and avian
populations as a necessary conservation measure to protect endangered bird
species on Socorro Island.

© 2011 The Society for Vector Ecology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1948-7134.2011.00159.x 
PMID: 21635660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

