
1. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Sep;41(9):2688-98. doi: 10.1002/eji.201141539. Epub 2011 Aug 
8.

Type I interferons suppress CD4⁺ T-cell-dependent parasite control during
blood-stage Plasmodium infection.

Haque A(1), Best SE, Ammerdorffer A, Desbarrieres L, de Oca MM, Amante FH, de
Labastida Rivera F, Hertzog P, Boyle GM, Hill GR, Engwerda CR.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Infection Laboratory, Queensland Institute of Medical Research 
and The Australian Centre for Vaccine Development, Herston, QLD, Australia.
ashraful.haque@qimr.edu.au

During blood-stage Plasmodium infection, large-scale invasion of RBCs often
occurs before the generation of cellular immune responses. In Plasmodium berghei 
ANKA (PbA)-infected C57BL/6 mice, CD4(+) T cells controlled parasite numbers
poorly, instead providing early help to pathogenic CD8(+) T cells. Expression
analysis revealed that the transcriptional signature of CD4(+) T cells from
PbA-infected mice was dominated by type I IFN (IFN-I) and IFN-γ-signalling
pathway-related genes. A role for IFN-I during blood-stage Plasmodium infection
had yet to be established. Here, we observed IFN-α protein production in the
spleen of PbA-infected C57BL/6 mice over the first 2 days of infection. Mice
deficient in IFN-I signalling had reduced parasite burdens, and displayed none of
the fatal neurological symptoms associated with PbA infection. IFN-I
substantially inhibited CD4(+) T-bet(+) T-cell-derived IFN-γ production, and
prevented this emerging Th1 response from controlling parasites. Experiments
using BM chimeric mice revealed that IFN-I signalled predominantly via
radio-sensitive, haematopoietic cells, but did not suppress CD4(+) T cells via
direct signalling to this cell type. Finally, we found that IFN-I suppressed
IFN-γ production, and hampered efficient control of parasitaemia in mice infected
with non-lethal Plasmodium chabaudi. Thus, we have elucidated a novel regulatory 
pathway in primary blood-stage Plasmodium infection that suppresses CD4(+)
T-cell-mediated parasite control.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201141539 
PMID: 21674481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

