
1. Genome Biol. 2011 Jun 20;12(6):R56. doi: 10.1186/gb-2011-12-6-r56.

A global transcriptional analysis of Plasmodium falciparum malaria reveals a
novel family of telomere-associated lncRNAs.

Broadbent KM(1), Park D, Wolf AR, Van Tyne D, Sims JS, Ribacke U, Volkman S,
Duraisingh M, Wirth D, Sabeti PC, Rinn JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood Avenue,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mounting evidence suggests a major role for epigenetic feedback in
Plasmodium falciparum transcriptional regulation. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) 
have recently emerged as a new paradigm in epigenetic remodeling. We therefore
set out to investigate putative roles for lncRNAs in P. falciparum
transcriptional regulation.
RESULTS: We used a high-resolution DNA tiling microarray to survey
transcriptional activity across 22.6% of the P. falciparum strain 3D7 genome. We 
identified 872 protein-coding genes and 60 putative P. falciparum lncRNAs under
developmental regulation during the parasite's pathogenic human blood stage.
Further characterization of lncRNA candidates led to the discovery of an
intriguing family of lncRNA telomere-associated repetitive element transcripts,
termed lncRNA-TARE. We have quantified lncRNA-TARE expression at 15 distinct
chromosome ends and mapped putative transcriptional start and termination sites
of lncRNA-TARE loci. Remarkably, we observed coordinated and stage-specific
expression of lncRNA-TARE on all chromosome ends tested, and two dominant
transcripts of approximately 1.5 kb and 3.1 kb transcribed towards the telomere.
CONCLUSIONS: We have characterized a family of 22 telomere-associated lncRNAs in 
P. falciparum. Homologous lncRNA-TARE loci are coordinately expressed after
parasite DNA replication, and are poised to play an important role in P.
falciparum telomere maintenance, virulence gene regulation, and potentially other
processes of parasite chromosome end biology. Further study of lncRNA-TARE and
other promising lncRNA candidates may provide mechanistic insight into P.
falciparum transcriptional regulation.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2011-12-6-r56 
PMCID: PMC3218844
PMID: 21689454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

