
1. Int J Parasitol. 2011 Aug 1;41(9):967-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2011.05.004. Epub
2011 Jun 15.

Tree-based delimitation of morphologically ambiguous taxa: a study of the lizard 
malaria parasites on the Caribbean island of Hispaniola.

Falk BG(1), Mahler DL, Perkins SL.

Author information: 
(1)Richard Gilder Graduate School, Division of Invertebrate Zoology and Sackler
Institute for Comparative Genomics, American Museum of Natural History, Central
Park West at 79th Street, New York, NY 10024, USA. bfalk@amnh.org

Malaria parasites in the genus Plasmodium have been classified primarily on the
basis of differences in morphology. These single-celled organisms often lack
distinguishing morphological features, and this can encumber both species
delimitation and identification. Six saurian malaria parasites have been
described from the Caribbean island of Hispaniola. All six infect lizards in the 
genus Anolis, but only two of these parasites can be distinguished using
morphology. The remaining four species overlap in morphology and geography, and
cannot be consistently identified using traditional methods. We compared a
morphological approach with a molecular phylogenetic approach for assessing the
taxonomy of these parasites. We surveyed for blood parasites from 677 Anolis
lizards, representing 26 Anolis spp. from a total of 52 sites across Hispaniola. 
Fifty-five of these lizards were infected with Plasmodium spp., representing
several new host records, but only 24 of these infections could be matched to
previously described species using traditional morphological criteria. We then
estimated the phylogeny of these parasites using both mitochondrial (cytb and
coxI) and nuclear (EF2) genes, and included carefully selected GenBank sequences 
to confirm identities for certain species. Our molecular results unambiguously
corroborated our morphology-based species identifications for only the two
species previously judged to be morphologically distinctive. The remaining
infections fell into two well-supported and reciprocally monophyletic clades,
which contained the morphological variation previously reported for all four of
the morphologically ambiguous species. One of these clades was identified as
Plasmodium floridense and the other as Plasmodium fairchildi hispaniolae. We
elevate the latter to Plasmodium hispaniolae comb. nov. because it is
polyphyletic with the mainland species Plasmodium fairchildifairchildi and we
contribute additional morphological and molecular characters for future species
delimitation. Our phylogenetic hypotheses indicate that two currently recognised 
taxa, Plasmodium minasense anolisi and Plasmodium tropiduri caribbense, are not
valid on Hispaniola. These results illustrate that molecular data can improve
taxonomic hypotheses in Plasmodium when reliable morphological characters are
lacking.

Copyright Â© 2011 Australian Society for Parasitology Inc. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2011.05.004 
PMID: 21718698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

