
1. J Immunol. 2011 Aug 1;187(3):1347-57. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100302. Epub 2011
Jun 29.

CD8+ T effector memory cells protect against liver-stage malaria.

Reyes-Sandoval A(1), Wyllie DH, Bauza K, Milicic A, Forbes EK, Rollier CS, Hill
AV.

Author information: 
(1)The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom.
arturo.reyes@ndm.ox.ac.uk

Identification of correlates of protection for infectious diseases including
malaria is a major challenge and has become one of the main obstacles in
developing effective vaccines. We investigated protection against liver-stage
malaria conferred by vaccination with adenoviral (Ad) and modified vaccinia
Ankara (MVA) vectors expressing pre-erythrocytic malaria Ags. By classifying
CD8(+) T cells into effector, effector memory (T(EM)), and central memory subsets
using CD62L and CD127 markers, we found striking differences in T cell memory
generation. Although MVA induced accelerated central memory T cell generation,
which could be efficiently boosted by subsequent Ad administration, it failed to 
protect against malaria. In contrast, Ad vectors, which permit persistent Ag
delivery, elicit a prolonged effector T cell and T(EM) response that requires
long intervals for an efficient boost. A preferential T(EM) phenotype was
maintained in liver, blood, and spleen after Ad/MVA prime-boost regimens, and
animals were protected against malaria sporozoite challenge. Blood CD8(+) T(EM)
cells correlated with protection against malaria liver-stage infection, assessed 
by estimation of number of parasites emerging from the liver into the blood. The 
protective ability of Ag-specific T(EM) cells was confirmed by transfer
experiments into naive recipient mice. Thus, we identify persistent CD8 T(EM)
populations as essential for vaccine-induced pre-erythrocytic protection against 
malaria, a finding that has important implications for vaccine design.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100302 
PMCID: PMC4568294
PMID: 21715686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

