
1. Vaccine. 2011 Aug 11;29(35):5940-9. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.06.053. Epub 2011
Jun 29.

Cellular and humoral immune effector mechanisms required for sterile protection
against sporozoite challenge induced with the novel malaria vaccine candidate
CelTOS.

Bergmann-Leitner ES(1), Legler PM, Savranskaya T, Ockenhouse CF, Angov E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Malaria Vaccine Development, US Military Malaria Vaccine Program, 
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, 503 Robert Grant Ave, Silver Spring, MD
20910, USA. Elke.BergmannLeitner@us.army.mil

The malarial protein CelTOS, for cell-traversal protein for ookinetes and
sporozoites, from Plasmodium berghei has been shown to mediate malarial invasion 
of both vertebrate and insect host cells and is required for establishing their
successful infections. In the vertebrate host, Plasmodium sporozoites traverse
via a complex passage through cellular barriers in the skin and the liver
sinusoid to infect hepatocytes. Induction of immunity targeted to molecules
involved in sporozoite motility and migration into hepatocytes may lead to
abrogation of hepatocyte infection. We have previously demonstrated the potential
of CelTOS as a target antigen for a pre-erythrocytic vaccine. The objective of
the current study was to determine the potency of different vaccine platforms to 
induce protective immunity and determine the mode of action in protective immune 
responses. To this end, inbred Balb/c and outbred ICR mice were immunized with
either the recombinant protein adjuvanted with Montanide ISA-720 or with a
pCI-TPA plasmid encoding the P. berghei CelTOS (epidermal delivery by gene-gun)
and assessed for the induction of protective responses against a homologous P.
berghei challenge. Humoral and cellular immune responses induced by the various
immunization regimens were evaluated in an effort to establish immune correlates.
The results confirm that the CelTOS antigen is a potentially interesting
pre-erythrocytic vaccine candidate and demonstrate that both arms of the adaptive
immune system are required to mediate complete sterile protection against
sporozoite challenge.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.06.053 
PMID: 21722682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

