
1. Proc Biol Sci. 2012 Feb 7;279(1728):577-84. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2011.0917. Epub
2011 Jul 6.

Quantitative disease resistance: to better understand parasite-mediated selection
on major histocompatibility complex.

Westerdahl H(1), Asghar M, Hasselquist D, Bensch S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Molecular Ecology and Evolution Lab, Lund University,
Ecology Building, 223 62 Lund, Sweden. helena.westerdahl@biol.lu.se

We outline a descriptive framework of how candidate alleles of the immune system 
associate with infectious diseases in natural populations of animals. Three kinds
of alleles can be separated when both prevalence of infection and infection
intensity are measured--qualitative disease resistance, quantitative disease
resistance and susceptibility alleles. Our descriptive framework demonstrates why
alleles for quantitative resistance and susceptibility cannot be separated based 
on prevalence data alone, but are distinguishable on infection intensity. We then
present a case study to evaluate a previous finding of a positive association
between prevalence of a severe avian malaria infection (GRW2, Plasmodium
ashfordi) and a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I allele (B4b) in
great reed warblers Acrocephalus arundinaceus. Using the same dataset, we find
that individuals with allele B4b have lower GRW2 infection intensities than
individuals without this allele. Therefore, allele B4b provides quantitative
resistance rather than increasing susceptibility to infection. This implies that 
birds carrying B4b can mount an immune response that suppresses the acute-phase
GRW2 infection, while birds without this allele cannot and may die. We argue that
it is important to determine whether MHC alleles related to infections are
advantageous (quantitative and qualitative resistance) or disadvantageous
(susceptibility) to obtain a more complete picture of pathogen-mediated balancing
selection.

DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2011.0917 
PMCID: PMC3234550
PMID: 21733902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

