
1. Hum Immunol. 2011 Oct;72(10):881-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2011.06.007. Epub 2011 
Jul 1.

Human leukocyte antigen class I polymorphisms influence the mild clinical
manifestation of Plasmodium falciparum infection in Ghanaian children.

Yamazaki A(1), Yasunami M, Ofori M, Horie H, Kikuchi M, Helegbe G, Takaki A,
Ishii K, Omar AH, Akanmori BD, Hirayama K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunogenetics, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN),
Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.

A prospective study that included 429 children for active detection of mild
malaria was conducted in a coastal region of Ghana to reveal whether the
incidence of malaria is affected by human leukocyte antigen (HLA) polymorphism.
During 12 months of follow-up, 85 episodes of mild clinical malaria in 74
individuals were observed, and 34 episodes among them were accompanied with
significant parasitemia at >5000 infected red blood cells per cubic millimeter.
Attributable and relative risks conferred by genetic factors in the HLA region
were evaluated by comparison of the incidence in children, stratified by carrier 
status, of a given allele of HLA-A, -B, -DRB1 and TNFA promoter polymorphism.
HLA-B*35:01 reduced the incidence by 0.178 events per person per year (0.060
versus 0.239 for B*35:01-positive and -negative subpopulations, respectively),
and a relative risk of 0.25, which remained statistically significant after
Bonferroni's correction for multiple testing (p(c) = 8.2 × 10(-5)). Further,
HLA-B*35:01 and -B*53:01 exhibited opposite effects on the incidence of malaria
with significant parasitemia. When parasite densities in different HLA carriers
status were compared, HLA-A*01 conferred an increase in parasite load (p = 6.0 × 
10(-7)). In addition, we found a novel DRB1 allele that appears to have emerged
from DRB1*03:02 by single nucleotide substitution.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humimm.2011.06.007 
PMID: 21756958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

