
1. Cell Microbiol. 2011 Nov;13(11):1768-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01657.x.
Epub 2011 Aug 31.

Organelle segregation into Plasmodium liver stage merozoites.

Stanway RR(1), Mueller N, Zobiak B, Graewe S, Froehlke U, Zessin PJ, Aepfelbacher
M, Heussler VT.

Author information: 
(1)Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Bernhard-Nocht-Str. 74, 20359 
Hamburg, Germany. stanway@izb.unibe.ch

The liver stage of the Plasmodium parasite remains one of the most promising
targets for intervention against malaria as it is clinically silent, precedes the
symptomatic blood stage and represents a bottleneck in the parasite life cycle.
However, many aspects of the development of the parasite during this stage are
far from understood. During the liver stage, the parasite undergoes extensive
replication, forming tens of thousands of infectious merozoites from each
invading sporozoite. This implies a very efficient and accurate process of
cytokinesis and thus also of organelle development and segregation. We have
generated for the first time Plasmodium berghei double-fluorescent parasite
lines, allowing visualization of the apicoplast, mitochondria and nuclei in live 
liver stage parasites. Using these we have seen that in parallel with nuclear
division, the apicoplast and mitochondrion become two extensively branched and
intertwining structures. The organelles then undergo impressive morphological and
positional changes prior to cell division. To form merozoites, the parasite
undergoes cytokinesis and the complex process of organelle development and
segregation into the forming daughter merozoites could be analysed in detail
using the newly generated transgenic parasites.

Â© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01657.x 
PMID: 21801293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

