
1. Cell Microbiol. 2011 Nov;13(11):1755-67. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01656.x.
Epub 2011 Aug 31.

A systematic analysis of the early transcribed membrane protein family throughout
the life cycle of Plasmodium yoelii.

MacKellar DC(1), Vaughan AM, Aly AS, DeLeon S, Kappe SH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Washington, Seattle, WA,
USA.

The early transcribed membrane proteins (ETRAMPs) are a family of small, highly
charged transmembrane proteins unique to malaria parasites. Some members of the
ETRAMP family have been localized to the parasitophorous vacuole membrane that
separates the intracellular parasite from the host cell and thus presumably have 
a role in host-parasite interactions. Although it was previously shown that two
ETRAMPs are critical for rodent malaria parasite liver-stage development, the
importance of most ETRAMPs during the parasite life cycle remains unknown. Here, 
we comprehensively identify nine new etramps in the genome of the rodent malaria 
parasite Plasmodium yoelii, and elucidate their conservation in other malaria
parasites. etramp expression profiles are diverse throughout the parasite life
cycle as measured by RT-PCR. Epitope tagging of two ETRAMPs demonstrates protein 
expression in blood and liver stages, and reveals differences in both their
timing of expression and their subcellular localization. Gene targeting studies
of each of the nine uncharacterized etramps show that two are refractory to
deletion and thus likely essential for blood-stage replication. Seven etramps are
not essential for any life cycle stage. Systematic characterization of the
members of the ETRAMP family reveals the diversity in importance of each family
member at the interface between host and parasite throughout the developmental
cycle of the malaria parasite.

Â© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01656.x 
PMCID: PMC3328200
PMID: 21819513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

