
1. Exp Parasitol. 2011 Nov;129(3):312-7. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2011.08.001. Epub
2011 Aug 10.

Plasmodium falciparum: effect of antimalarial drugs, malaria pigment (β-haematin)
and Plasmodium falciparum lysate on monocyte GTP-cyclohydrolase 1 gene
expression.

Cumming BM(1), Watson GM, Goldring JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Biochemistry, Genetics and Microbiology,
University of KwaZulu-Natal, Pietermaritzburg Campus, Private Bag X01,
Scottsville 3209, South Africa.

In interferon-γ activated human macrophages, GTP-cyclohydrolase 1 catalyses the
conversion of guanosine triphosphate to 7,8-dihydroneopterin triphosphate, which 
is dephosphorylated and oxidized to form neopterin. Elevated levels of neopterin 
have been detected in the urine and serum of malaria-infected patients. In this
study, U937 cells were treated with interferon-γ and one of the following
antimalarial drugs: amodiaquine, artemisinin, chloroquine, doxycycline,
primaquine, pyrimethamine or quinine. The effects of treating the U937 cells with
malaria pigment (β-haematin), latex beads, or Plasmodium falciparum-infected-red 
blood cell lysates were also investigated. U937 GTP-cyclohydrolase 1 mRNA
expression was monitored using reverse-transcriptase-quantitative PCR.
Artemisinin, primaquine, and quinine down-regulated GTP-cyclohydrolase 1 gene
expression 1.26-, 1.29-, and 1.63-fold, respectively. The remaining drugs had
insignificant effects. β-haematin up-regulated GTP-cyclohydrolase 1 mRNA
expression 1.18-fold, whereas P. falciparum-infected red blood cell lysate
down-regulated expression 1.56-fold. These results show the differing
immunomodulatory actions of antimalarial drugs and malaria pigment taking place
in monocytes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2011.08.001 
PMID: 21854775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

