
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2011 Nov 18;6(11):1214-22. doi: 10.1021/cb200105d. Epub 2011 Sep
8.

A chemical genomic analysis of decoquinate, a Plasmodium falciparum cytochrome b 
inhibitor.

Nam TG(1), McNamara CW, Bopp S, Dharia NV, Meister S, Bonamy GM, Plouffe DM, Kato
N, McCormack S, Bursulaya B, Ke H, Vaidya AB, Schultz PG, Winzeler EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, United States.

Decoquinate has single-digit nanomolar activity against in vitro blood stage
Plasmodium falciparum parasites, the causative agent of human malaria. In vitro
evolution of decoquinate-resistant parasites and subsequent comparative genomic
analysis to the drug-sensitive parental strain revealed resistance was conferred 
by two nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms in the gene encoding
cytochrome b. The resultant amino acid mutations, A122T and Y126C, reside within 
helix C in the ubiquinol-binding pocket of cytochrome b, an essential subunit of 
the cytochrome bc(1) complex. As with other cytochrome bc(1) inhibitors, such as 
atovaquone, decoquinate has low nanomolar activity against in vitro liver stage
P. yoelii and provides partial prophylaxis protection when administered to
infected mice at 50 mg kg(-1). In addition, transgenic parasites expressing yeast
dihydroorotate dehydrogenase are >200-fold less sensitive to decoquinate, which
provides additional evidence that this drug inhibits the parasite's mitochondrial
electron transport chain. Importantly, decoquinate exhibits limited
cross-resistance to a panel of atovaquone-resistant parasites evolved to harbor
various mutations in cytochrome b. The basis for this difference was revealed by 
molecular docking studies, in which both of these inhibitors were shown to have
distinctly different modes of binding within the ubiquinol-binding site of
cytochrome b.

DOI: 10.1021/cb200105d 
PMCID: PMC3220786
PMID: 21866942  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

