
1. Nat Protoc. 2011 Aug 25;6(9):1412-28. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2011.363.

FLP/FRT-mediated conditional mutagenesis in pre-erythrocytic stages of Plasmodium
berghei.

Lacroix C(1), Giovannini D, Combe A, Bargieri DY, Späth S, Panchal D, Tawk L,
Thiberge S, Carvalho TG, Barale JC, Bhanot P, Ménard R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité de Biologie et Génétique du Paludisme, Paris, France. 
celine.lacroix@pasteur.fr

We describe here a highly efficient procedure for conditional mutagenesis in
Plasmodium. The procedure uses the site-specific recombination FLP-FRT system of 
yeast and targets the pre-erythrocytic stages of the rodent Plasmodium parasite
P. berghei, including the sporozoite stage and the subsequent liver stage. The
technique consists of replacing the gene under study by an FRTed copy (i.e.,
flanked by FRT sites) in the erythrocytic stages of a parasite clone that
expresses the flip (FLP) recombinase stage-specifically--called the 'deleter'
clone. We present the available deleter clones, which express FLP at different
times of the parasite life cycle, as well as the schemes and tools for
constructing new deleter parasites. We also outline and discuss the various
strategies for exchanging a wild-type gene with an FRTed copy and for generating 
conditional gene knockout or knockdown parasite clones. Finally, we detail the
protocol for obtaining sporozoites that lack a protein of interest and for
monitoring sporozoite-specific DNA excision and depletion of the target protein. 
The protocol should allow the functional analysis of any essential protein in the
sporozoite, liver stage or hepatic merozoite stages of rodent Plasmodium
parasites.

DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2011.363 
PMID: 21886105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

