
1. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2011 Aug;106 Suppl 1:130-3.

Change in mutation patterns of Plasmodium vivax dihydrofolate reductase (Pvdhfr) 
and dihydropteroate synthase (Pvdhps) in P. vivax isolates from malaria endemic
areas of Thailand.

Kuesap J(1), Rungsrihirunrat K, Thongdee P, Ruangweerayut R, Na-Bangchang K.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology and Toxicology Unit, Graduate Program in Biomedical Sciences,
Thammasat University, Pathumthani, Thailand.

Malaria is the most important public health problem in several countries. In
Thailand, co-infections of Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium falciparum are common.
We examined the prevalence and patterns of mutations in P. vivax dihydrofolate
reductase (Pvdhfr) and P. vivax dihydropteroate synthase (Pvdhps) in 103 blood
samples collected from patients with P. vivax infection who had attended the
malaria clinic in Mae Sot, Tak Province during 2009 and 2010. Using nested
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorfism, we examined
single nucleotide polymorphisms-haplotypes at amino acid positions 13, 33, 57,
58, 61, 117 and 173 of Pvdhfr and 383 and 553 of Pvdhps. All parasite isolates
carried mutant Pvdhfr alleles, of which the most common alleles were triple
mutants (99%). Eight different types of Pvdhfr and combination alleles were
found, as follows: 57I/58R/117T, 57I/58R/117T, 57I/58R/117T/N, 57L/58R/117T,
57L/58R/117T, 58R/61M/117N, 58R/61M/117N and 13L/57L/58R/117T. The most common
Pvdhfr alleles were 57I/58R/117T (77.7%), 57I/58R/117T/N (1%), 57L/58R/117T
(5.8%) and 58R/61M/117N (14.5%). The most common Pvdhfr alleles were 57I/58R/117T
(77.7%), 57I/58R/117T/N (1%), 57L/58R/117T (5.8%) and 58R/61M/117N (14.5%).
Additionally, we recovered one isolate of a carrying a quadruple mutant allele,
13L/57L/58R/117T. The most prevalent Pvdhps allele was a single mutation in amino
acid 383 (82.5%), followed by the wild-type A383/A553 (17.5%) allele. Results
suggest that all P. vivax isolates in Thailand carry some combination of
mutations in Pvdhfr and Pvdhps. Our findings demonstrate that development of new 
antifolate drugs effective against sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine-resistant P. vivax
is required.

DOI: 10.1590/s0074-02762011000900017 
PMID: 21881767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

