
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2011 Sep;85(3):568-72. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.2011.11-0194.

Polymorphisms of molecular markers of antimalarial drug resistance and
relationship with artesunate-mefloquine combination therapy in patients with
uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria in Thailand.

Muhamad P(1), Phompradit P, Sornjai W, Maensathian T, Chaijaroenkul W,
Rueangweerayut R, Na-Bangchang K.

Author information: 
(1)Thailand Center of Excellence on Drug Discovery and Development, Thammasat
University, Rangsit Campus, Klong Luang District, Pathumtani, Thailand; Mae-Sot
General Hospital, Mae-Sot, Tak Province, Thailand.

The aim of this study was to investigate the association between genetic
polymorphisms of Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter
(pfcrt), P. falciparum multidrug resistance 1 (pfmdr1), and P. falciparum ATPase 
(pfatp6) and clinical outcome after a three-day mefloquine-artesunate combination
therapy in 134 patients with uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria in an
area with multidrug resistance along the Thailand-Myanmar border. Analysis of
gene mutation and amplification were performed by nested real-time polymerase
chain reaction and SYBR Green I real-time polymerase chain reaction,
respectively. The mutation for pfcrt (codons 76, 220, 271, 326, 356, and 371) was
found in all isolates (100%), whereas no mutation of pfmdr1 (codon 86) and pfatp6
(codons 37, 693, 769, 898) was found. The Pfmdr1 copy number was significantly
higher in isolates with recrudescence (median number = 2.44) compared with a
sensitive response (median number = 1.44). The gene copy number was also found to
be significantly higher in paired isolates collected before treatment and at the 
time of recrudescence. All isolates carried one pfatp6 gene copy.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.2011.11-0194 
PMCID: PMC3163886
PMID: 21896824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

