
1. Parasitology. 2011 Dec;138(14):1843-51. doi: 10.1017/S0031182011001491. Epub 2011
Sep 9.

Diversity, distribution and biogeographical origins of Plasmodium parasites from 
the New Zealand bellbird (Anthornis melanura).

Baillie SM(1), Brunton DH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Natural Sciences, Massey University, Private Bag 102-904, North
Shore Mail Centre, Auckland, New Zealand.

Understanding the origin of invasive parasites and ecological transmission
barriers on the distribution of mosquito-borne pathogens is enriched by molecular
phylogenetic approaches now that large databases are becoming available. Here we 
assess the biogeographical relationships among haemosporidian blood parasites and
an avian host, the New Zealand bellbird (Meliphagidae, Anthornis melanura). Four 
Plasmodium haplotypes were identified among 93 infected bellbirds (693 screened) 
using nested PCR of a mitochondrial DNA cytochrome b gene fragment. The most
common lineage, LIN1 (11%), is confined to northern New Zealand and falls within 
a known clade of Plasmodium (subgenus Novyella) sp. infecting Australian
meliphagids. LIN1 differs within that clade by 4 9% sequence divergence
suggestive of an endemic lineage to New Zealand. The most widespread lineage,
LIN2 (2%), is an exact match with a global cosmopolitan (P. elongatum GRW06). Two
rare lineages, LIN3 and LIN4 are less abundant, geographically restricted within 
New Zealand and have <1% sequence divergence with P. (Novyella) sp. (AFTRU08) and
P. relictum (LINOLI01) documented from Africa. For the first time, we provide
invaluable information on possible rates of entry of invading parasites in New
Zealand and their distribution from temperate to cold environments.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182011001491 
PMID: 21902870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

