
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e24181. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024181. Epub 2011 Aug 30.

The interplay between tubulins and P450 cytochromes during Plasmodium berghei
invasion of Anopheles gambiae midgut.

Félix RC(1), Silveira H.

Author information: 
(1)UEI Parasitologia Médica, Centro de Malária e Outras Doenças Tropicais,
Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisboa,
Portugal. rfelix@ihmt.unl.pt

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium infection increases the oxidative stress inside the
mosquito, leading to a significant alteration on transcription of Anopheles
gambiae detoxification genes. Among these detoxification genes several P450
cytochromes and tubulins were differently expressed, suggesting their involvement
in the mosquito's response to parasite invasion. P450 cytochromes are usually
involved in the metabolism and detoxification of several compounds, but are also 
regulated by several pathogens, including malaria parasite. Tubulins are
extremely important as components of the cytoskeleton, which rearrangement
functions as a response to malaria parasite invasion.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Gene silencing methods were used to uncover the
effects of cytochrome P450 reductase, tubulinA and tubulinB silencing on the A.
gambiae response to Plasmodium berghei invasion. The role of tubulins in counter 
infection processes was also investigated by inhibiting their effect. Colchicine,
vinblastine and paclitaxel, three different tubulin inhibitors were injected into
A. gambiae mosquitoes. Twenty-four hours post injection these mosquitoes were
infected with P. berghei through a blood meal from infected CD1 mice. Cytochrome 
P450 gene expression was measured using RT-qPCR to detect differences in
cytochrome expression between silenced, inhibited and control mosquitoes. Results
showed that cytochrome P450 reductase silencing, as well as tubulin (A and B)
silencing and inhibition affected the efficiency of Plasmodium infection.
Silencing and inhibition also affected the expression levels of cytochromes P450.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest the existence of a relationship between tubulins
and P450 cytochromes during A. gambiae immune response to P. berghei invasion.
One of the P450 cytochromes in this study, CYP6Z2, stands out as the potential
link in this association. Further work is needed to fully understand the role of 
tubulin genes in the response to Plasmodium infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024181 
PMCID: PMC3166158
PMID: 21912622  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

