
1. J Infect Dis. 2011 Nov 15;204(10):1620-31. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir594. Epub 2011 
Sep 16.

Var Gene promoter activation in clonal Plasmodium falciparum isolates follows a
hierarchy and suggests a conserved switching program that is independent of
genetic background.

Enderes C(1), Kombila D, Dal-Bianco M, Dzikowski R, Kremsner P, Frank M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.

Antigenic variation of Plasmodium falciparum is mediated by a mutually exclusive 
expression mechanism that limits expression to an individual member of the
multicopy var gene family. This process determines the antigenic and adhesive
phenotype of the infected red blood cell. Previously, we showed that var gene
switching is influenced by chromosomal position. Here, we address whether var
gene transcription follows a general conserved pattern in long-term laboratory
parasites and in recently culture-adapted field parasites. Activation of the var 
gene family was monitored in biological replicates in each parasite isolate every
3-5 generations for up to 3 months. We used transgenic parasites carrying a
drug-selectable marker at a defined var locus to characterize var gene activation
after the exclusive expression of the transgene. Transgenic parasites exhibited a
repeatable hierarchy of var gene activation and a fluctuating transcriptional
activity of the transgenic var locus. Transcriptional profiling of wild-type
laboratory and field parasites showed a universal bias toward transcription of
UpsC var genes and a fluctuating transcriptional activity of the dominant var
promoter. The data suggest the existence of an intrinsic var gene transcription
program that is independent of genetic background.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jir594 
PMID: 21926380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

