
1. Malar J. 2011 Sep 22;10:276. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-276.

Genetic polymorphism of merozoite surface protein-1 and merozoite surface
protein-2 in Plasmodium falciparum isolates from Brazzaville, Republic of Congo.

Mayengue PI(1), Ndounga M, Malonga FV, Bitemo M, Ntoumi F.

Author information: 
(1)Fondation Congolaise pour la Recherche MÃ©dicale, Brazzaville, Republic of
Congo.

BACKGROUND: The characterization of malaria parasite populations circulating in
an area is part of site characterization, as a basis for evaluating the impact of
malaria interventions on genetic diversity, parasite species, and multiplicity of
infection. The present study was aimed at analysing genetic diversity of
Plasmodium falciparum merozoite surface proteins 1 and 2 (MSP-1 and MSP-2) and to
determine the multiplicity of infection in clinical isolates collected from
children living in the Southern district of Brazzaville in the Republic of Congo.
METHODS: A total of 125 isolates from patients with uncomplicated malaria
attending Terinkyo and Madibou health centres were collected between January and 
June 2005 while evaluating the therapeutic efficacy of amodiaquine-artesunate
combination. DNA was extracted and msp-1 and msp-2 genes were genotyped using
allele-specific nested-PCR.
RESULTS: Out of 468 distinct fragments detected, 15 msp-1 and 20 msp-2 genotypes 
were identified. For the msp-1 gene, K1 family was the predominant allelic type
carried alone or in association with RO33 and Mad20 types, whereas the 3D7 family
was the most prevalent in the msp-2 gene. Overall, the mean multiplicity of
infection was 2.2. Out of 125 samples, 104 (83%) harboured more than one parasite
genotype. There was no statistical significant difference in the multiplicity of 
infection by either sex or age of patients. However, a statistically significant 
correlation was found between parasite densities and the number of genotypes.
CONCLUSION: Polymorphism in P. falciparum clinical isolates from Brazzaville was 
high and mainly of multiple clones. The basis for the positive association
between parasite densities and multiplicity of infection is discussed.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-276 
PMCID: PMC3195763
PMID: 21936949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

