
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e23486. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023486. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

South American Plasmodium falciparum after the malaria eradication era: clonal
population expansion and survival of the fittest hybrids.

Griffing SM(1), Mixson-Hayden T, Sridaran S, Alam MT, McCollum AM, Cabezas C,
Marqui√±o Quezada W, Barnwell JW, De Oliveira AM, Lucas C, Arrospide N, Escalante 
AA, Bacon DJ, Udhayakumar V.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, United
States of America.

Malaria has reemerged in many regions where once it was nearly eliminated. Yet
the source of these parasites, the process of repopulation, their population
structure, and dynamics are ill defined. Peru was one of malaria eradication's
successes, where Plasmodium falciparum was nearly eliminated for two decades. It 
reemerged in the 1990s. In the new era of malaria elimination, Peruvian P.
falciparum is a model of malaria reinvasion. We investigated its population
structure and drug resistance profiles. We hypothesized that only populations
adapted to local ecological niches could expand and repopulate and originated as 
vestigial populations or recent introductions. We investigated the genetic
structure (using microsatellites) and drug resistant genotypes of 220 parasites
collected from patients immediately after peak epidemic expansion (1999-2000)
from seven sites across the country. The majority of parasites could be grouped
into five clonal lineages by networks and AMOVA. The distribution of clonal
lineages and their drug sensitivity profiles suggested geographic structure. In
2001, artesunate combination therapy was introduced in Peru. We tested 62
parasites collected in 2006-2007 for changes in genetic structure. Clonal
lineages had recombined under selection for the fittest parasites. Our findings
illustrate that local adaptations in the post-eradication era have contributed to
clonal lineage expansion. Within the shifting confluence of drug policy and
malaria incidence, populations continue to evolve through genetic outcrossing
influenced by antimalarial selection pressure. Understanding the population
substructure of P. falciparum has implications for vaccine, drug, and
epidemiologic studies, including monitoring malaria during and after the
elimination phase.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023486 
PMCID: PMC3174945
PMID: 21949680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

