
1. Transfus Med Rev. 2012 Apr;26(2):103-18. doi: 10.1016/j.tmrv.2011.08.002. Epub
2011 Sep 23.

ABO research in the modern era of genomics.

Yamamoto F(1), Cid E, Yamamoto M, Blancher A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Medicina Predictiva i Personalitzada delCàncer (IMPPC), Badalona, 
Spain. fyamamoto@imppc.org

Research on ABO has advanced significantly in recent years. A database was
established to manage the sequence information of an increasing number of novel
alleles. Genome sequencings have identified ABO orthologues and paralogues in
various organisms and enhanced the knowledge on the evolution of the ABO and
related genes. The most prominent advancements include clarification of the
association between ABO and different disease processes. For instance, ABO status
affects the infectivity of certain strains of Helicobacter pylori and Noroviruses
as well as the sequestration and rosetting of red blood cells infected with
Plasmodium falciparum. Genome-wide association studies have conclusively linked
the ABO locus to pancreatic cancer, venous thromboembolism, and myocardial
infarction in the presence of coronary atherosclerosis. These findings suggest
ABO's important role in determining an individual's susceptibility to such
diseases. Furthermore, our understanding of the structures of A and B
transferases and their enzymology has been dramatically improved. ABO has also
become a research subject in neurobiology and the preparation of
artificial/universal blood and became a topic in the pseudoscience of "blood type
diets." With such new progress, it has become evident that ABO is a critical
player in the modern era of genomic medicine. This article provides the most
up-to-date information regarding ABO genomics.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tmrv.2011.08.002 
PMID: 21945157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

