
1. Eukaryot Cell. 2011 Nov;10(11):1492-503. doi: 10.1128/EC.05155-11. Epub 2011 Sep 
30.

Functional analysis of the exported type IV HSP40 protein PfGECO in Plasmodium
falciparum gametocytes.

Morahan BJ(1), Strobel C, Hasan U, Czesny B, Mantel PY, Marti M, Eksi S,
Williamson KC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland 20892,
USA. belinda.morahan@nih.gov

During Plasmodium falciparum infection, host red blood cell (RBC) remodeling is
required for the parasite's survival. Such modifications are mediated by the
export of parasite proteins into the RBC that alter the architecture of the RBC
membrane and enable cytoadherence. It is probable that some exported proteins
also play a protective role against the host defense response. This may be of
particular importance for the gametocyte stage of the life cycle that is
responsible for malaria transmission, since the gametocyte remains in contact
with blood as it proceeds through five morphological stages (I to V) during its
12-day maturation. Using microarray analysis, we identified several genes with
encoded secretory or export sequences that were differentially expressed during
early gametocytogenesis. One of these, PfGECO, encodes a predicted type IV heat
shock protein 40 (HSP40) that we show is expressed in gametocyte stages I to IV
and is exported to the RBC cytoplasm. HSPs are traditionally induced under
stressful conditions to maintain homeostasis, but PfGECO expression was not
increased upon heat shock, suggesting an alternate function. Targeted disruption 
of PfGECO indicated that the gene is not essential for gametocytogenesis in
vitro, and quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) showed that there was 
no compensatory expression of the other type IV HSP40 genes. Although P.
falciparum HSP40 members are implicated in the trafficking of proteins to the RBC
surface, removal of PfGECO did not affect the targeting of other exported
gametocyte proteins. This work has expanded the repertoire of known
gametocyte-exported proteins to include a type IV HSP40, PfGECO.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.05155-11 
PMCID: PMC3209067
PMID: 21965515  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

