
1. Parasitol Int. 2011 Dec;60(4):335-40. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2011.09.007. Epub
2011 Oct 1.

Helicases involved in splicing from malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Tuteja R(1).

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi,
India. renu@icgeb.res.in

An interesting element of eukaryotic genomes is the large quantity of non-coding 
intervening sequences commonly known as introns, which regularly interrupt
functional genes and therefore must be removed prior to the use of genetic
information by the cell. After splicing, the mature RNA is exported from the
nucleus to the cytoplasm. Any error in the process of recognition and removal of 
introns, or splicing, would lead to change in genetic message and thus has
potentially catastrophic consequences. Thus splicing is a highly complex
essential step in eukaryotic gene expression. It takes place in spliceosome,
which is a dynamic RNA-protein complex made of snRNPs and non-snRNP proteins. The
splicing process consists of following sequential steps: spliceosome formation,
the first transesterification and second transesterification reactions, release
of the mature mRNA and recycling of the snRNPs. The spliceosomal components
produce a complex network of RNA-RNA, RNA-protein and protein-protein
interactions and spliceosome experience remodeling during each splicing cycle.
Helicases are essentially required at almost each step for resolution of RNA-RNA 
and/or RNA-protein interactions. RNA helicases share a highly conserved helicase 
domain which includes the motif DExD/H in the single letter amino acid code. This
article will focus on members of the DExD/H-box proteins involved specially in
splicing in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2011.09.007 
PMID: 21996352  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

