
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Nov 15;108(46):18796-801. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1116162108. Epub 2011 Nov 7.

Malaria antifolate resistance with contrasting Plasmodium falciparum
dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) polymorphisms in humans and Anopheles mosquitoes.

Mharakurwa S(1), Kumwenda T, Mkulama MA, Musapa M, Chishimba S, Shiff CJ,
Sullivan DJ, Thuma PE, Liu K, Agre P.

Author information: 
(1)The Malaria Institute at Macha, Choma, Zambia.

Surveillance for drug-resistant parasites in human blood is a major effort in
malaria control. Here we report contrasting antifolate resistance polymorphisms
in Plasmodium falciparum when parasites in human blood were compared with
parasites in Anopheles vector mosquitoes from sleeping huts in rural Zambia. DNA 
encoding P. falciparum dihydrofolate reductase (EC 1.5.1.3) was amplified by PCR 
with allele-specific restriction enzyme digestions. Markedly prevalent
pyrimethamine-resistant mutants were evident in human P. falciparum
infections--S108N (>90%), with N51I, C59R, and 108N+51I+59R triple mutants
(30-80%). This resistance level may be from selection pressure due to decades of 
sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine use in the region. In contrast, cycloguanil-resistant
mutants were detected in very low frequency in parasites from human blood
samples-S108T (13%), with A16V and 108T+16V double mutants (âˆ¼4%). Surprisingly,
pyrimethamine-resistant mutants were of very low prevalence (2-12%) in the
midguts of Anopheles arabiensis vector mosquitoes, but cycloguanil-resistant
mutants were highly prevalent-S108T (90%), with A16V and the 108T+16V double
mutant (49-57%). Structural analysis of the dihydrofolate reductase by in silico 
modeling revealed a key difference in the enzyme within the NADPH binding pocket,
predicting the S108N enzyme to have reduced stability but the S108T enzyme to
have increased stability. We conclude that P. falciparum can bear highly
host-specific drug-resistant polymorphisms, most likely reflecting different
selective pressures found in humans and mosquitoes. Thus, it may be useful to
sample both human and mosquito vector infections to accurately ascertain the
epidemiological status of drug-resistant alleles.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1116162108 
PMCID: PMC3219121
PMID: 22065788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

