
1. Biotechnol J. 2012 Jan;7(1):133-47. doi: 10.1002/biot.201100331. Epub 2011 Dec
28.

Histidine affinity tags affect MSP1(42) structural stability and immunodominance 
in mice.

Khan F(1), Legler PM, Mease RM, Duncan EH, Bergmann-Leitner ES, Angov E.

Author information: 
(1)Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Military Malaria Research Program,
Malaria Vaccine Branch, Silver Spring, MD, USA.

Inclusion of affinity tags has greatly facilitated process development for
protein antigens, primarily for their recovery from complex mixtures. Although
generally viewed as supportive of product development, affinity tags may have
unintended consequences on protein solubility, susceptibility to aggregation, and
immunogenicity. Merozoite surface protein 1 (MSP1), an erythrocytic stage protein
of Plasmodium falciparum and a candidate malaria vaccine, was used to evaluate
the impact of a metal ion affinity-tag on both protein structure and the
induction of immunity. To this end, codon harmonized gene sequences from the P.
falciparum MSP1(42) of FVO and 3D7 parasites were cloned and purified with and
without a histidine (His) tag. We report on the influence of His-affinity tags on
protein expression levels, solubility, secondary structure, thermal denaturation,
aggregation and the impact on humoral and cellular immune responses in mice.
While the overall immunogenicity induced by His-tagged MSP1(42) proteins is
greater, the fine specificity of the humoral and cellular immune responses is
altered relative to anti-parasitic antibody activity and the breadth of T-cell
responses. Thus, the usefulness of protein tags may be outweighed by their
potential impact on structure and function, stressing the need for caution in
their use. See accompanying commentary by Randolph DOI: 10.1002/biot.201100459.

Â© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/biot.201100331 
PMID: 22076863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

