
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2012 Jan;12(1):142-8. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.11.001. Epub 
2011 Nov 12.

Deletion of the APOBEC3B gene strongly impacts susceptibility to falciparum
malaria.

Jha P(1), Sinha S, Kanchan K, Qidwai T, Narang A, Singh PK, Pati SS, Mohanty S,
Mishra SK, Sharma SK, Awasthi S, Venkatesh V, Jain S, Basu A, Xu S; Indian Genome
Variation Consortium, Mukerji M, Habib S.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics and Molecular Medicine, Institute of Genomics and Integrative
Biology, CSIR, Delhi, India.

APOBEC3B, a gene involved in innate response, exhibits insertion-deletion
polymorphism across world populations. We observed the insertion allele to be
nearly fixed in malaria endemic regions of sub-Saharan Africa as well as
populations with high malaria incidence in the past. This prompted us to
investigate the possible association of the polymorphism with falciparum malaria.
We studied the distribution of APOBEC3B, in 25 diverse Indian populations
comprising of 500 samples and 176 severe or non-severe Plasmodium falciparum
patients and 174 ethnically-matched uninfected individuals from a P. falciparum
endemic and a non-endemic region of India. The deletion frequencies ranged from
0% to 43% in the Indian populations. The frequency of the insertion allele
strikingly correlated with the endemicity map of P. falciparum malaria in India. 
A strong association of the deletion allele with susceptibility to falciparum
malaria in the endemic region (non-severe vs. control, Odds ratio=4.96, P
value=9.5E(-06); severe vs. control, OR=4.36, P value=5.76E(-05)) was observed.
Although the frequency of deletion allele was higher in the non-endemic region,
there was a significant association of the homozygous deletion genotype with
malaria (OR=3.17, 95% CI=1.10-10.32, P value=0.0177). Our study also presents a
case for malaria as a positive selection force for the APOBEC3B insertion and
suggests a major role for this gene in innate immunity against malaria.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.11.001 
PMID: 22108670  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

