
1. Cell Microbiol. 2012 Mar;14(3):386-400. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01726.x.
Epub 2011 Dec 28.

Functional analysis of Plasmodium vivax VIR proteins reveals different
subcellular localizations and cytoadherence to the ICAM-1 endothelial receptor.

Bernabeu M(1), Lopez FJ, Ferrer M, Martin-Jaular L, Razaname A, Corradin G, Maier
AG, Del Portillo HA, Fernandez-Becerra C.

Author information: 
(1)Barcelona Centre for International Health Research (CRESIB, Hospital
Clínic-Universitat de Barcelona), Barcelona, Spain.

The subcellular localization and function of variant subtelomeric multigene
families in Plasmodium vivax remain vastly unknown. Among them, the vir
superfamily is putatively involved in antigenic variation and in mediating
adherence to endothelial receptors. In the absence of a continuous in vitro
culture system for P. vivax, we have generated P. falciparum transgenic lines
expressing VIR proteins to infer location and function. We chose three proteins
pertaining to subfamilies A (VIR17), C (VIR14) and D (VIR10), with domains and
secondary structures that predictably traffic these proteins to different
subcellular compartments. Here, we showed that VIR17 remained inside the parasite
and around merozoites, whereas VIR14 and VIR10 were exported to the membrane of
infected red blood cells (iRBCs) in an apparent independent pathway of Maurer's
clefts. Remarkably, VIR14 was exposed at the surface of iRBCs and mediated
adherence to different endothelial receptors expressed in CHO cells under static 
conditions. Under physiological flow conditions, however, cytoadherence was only 
observed to ICAM-1, which was the only receptor whose adherence was specifically 
and significantly inhibited by antibodies against conserved motifs of VIR
proteins. Immunofluorescence studies using these antibodies also showed different
subcellular localizations of VIR proteins in P. vivax-infected reticulocytes from
natural infections. These data suggest that VIR proteins are trafficked to
different cellular compartments and functionally demonstrates that VIR proteins
can specifically mediate cytoadherence to the ICAM-1 endothelial receptor.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01726.x 
PMID: 22103402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

