
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Nov;7(11):e1002394. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002394. Epub
2011 Nov 17.

Transcriptome analysis of Aedes aegypti transgenic mosquitoes with altered
immunity.

Zou Z(1), Souza-Neto J, Xi Z, Kokoza V, Shin SW, Dimopoulos G, Raikhel A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology and the Institute for Integrative Genome Biology,
University of California, Riverside, California, United States of America.

The mosquito immune system is involved in pathogen-elicited defense responses.
The NF-κB factors REL1 and REL2 are downstream transcription activators of Toll
and IMD immune pathways, respectively. We have used genome-wide microarray
analyses to characterize fat-body-specific gene transcript repertoires activated 
by either REL1 or REL2 in two transgenic strains of the mosquito Aedes aegypti.
Vitellogenin gene promoter was used in each transgenic strain to ectopically
express either REL1 (REL1+) or REL2 (REL2+) in a sex, tissue, and stage specific 
manner. There was a significant change in the transcript abundance of 297 (79 up-
and 218 down-regulated) and 299 (123 up- and 176 down-regulated) genes in fat
bodies of REL1+ and REL2+, respectively. Over half of the induced genes had
predicted functions in immunity, and a large group of these was co-regulated by
REL1 and REL2. By generating a hybrid transgenic strain, which ectopically
expresses both REL1 and REL2, we have shown a synergistic action of these NF-κB
factors in activating immune genes. The REL1+ immune transcriptome showed a
significant overlap with that of cactus (RNAi)-depleted mosquitoes (50%). In
contrast, the REL2+ -regulated transcriptome differed from the relatively small
group of gene transcripts regulated by RNAi depletion of a putative inhibitor of 
the IMD pathway, caspar (35 up- and 140 down-regulated), suggesting that caspar
contributes to regulation of a subset of IMD-pathway controlled genes. Infections
of the wild type Ae. aegypti with Plasmodium gallinaceum elicited the
transcription of a distinct subset of immune genes (76 up- and 25 down-regulated)
relative to that observed in REL1+ and REL2+ mosquitoes. Considerable overlap was
observed between the fat body transcriptome of Plasmodium-infected mosquitoes and
that of mosquitoes with transiently depleted PIAS, an inhibitor of the JAK-STAT
pathway. PIAS gene silencing reduced Plasmodium proliferation in Ae. aegypti,
indicating the involvement of the JAK-STAT pathway in anti-Plasmodium defense in 
this infection model.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002394 
PMCID: PMC3219725
PMID: 22114564  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

