
1. Acta Trop. 2012 Feb;121(2):148-51. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2011.11.004. Epub
2011 Nov 16.

Large differences in prevalence of Pfcrt and Pfmdr1 mutations between Mwanza,
Tanzania and Iganga, Uganda-a reflection of differences in policies regarding
withdrawal of chloroquine?

Kamugisha E(1), Bujila I, Lahdo M, Pello-Esso S, Minde M, Kongola G, Naiwumbwe H,
Kiwuwa S, Kaddumukasa M, Kironde F, Swedberg G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Bugando University College of Health Sciences,
Mwanza, Tanzania.

BACKGROUND: Malaria is still a major public health problem in the world and
sub-Saharan Africa is one of the most affected areas. Efforts to control malaria 
are highly affected by drug resistance to commonly used antimalarials. The
introduction of artemisinin based combination therapy (ACT) as a first line drug 
seems to be a major step in treatment of uncomplicated malaria, though search for
drugs to combine with artemisinins still continues. There have been reports on
increased prevalence of the wild type markers Pfcrt 76K and Pfmdr1 86N in some
African countries and ideas of using chloroquine (CQ) in intermittent presumptive
treatment for adults (IPTa) is coming up. The common combination of artemether
and lumefantrine even selects for parasites that are wild type at these
positions. This study is comparing prevalence of mutation at these two positions 
in two East African countries with ACT as their first line drug but following
somewhat different drug policies regarding CQ. In Tanzania CQ was stopped in 2001
but in Uganda CQ was retained in combination with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) 
and used in home based management of fever for some time. SP is still used in IPT
for pregnant women.
METHODS: Blood smears and dried blood spots on Whatman filter papers were
collected from 100 patients with uncomplicated malaria in Mwanza, Tanzania and
100 patients from Iganga, Uganda. DNA was extracted from all samples using Tris
EDTA method. PCR and RFLP were performed and sequencing done on Pfcrt
amplification products.
RESULTS: The prevalence of K76T mutations at Pfcrt in samples from Mwanza,
Tanzania was 40.5% (34/84) and 100% (100/100) in samples from Iganga, Uganda.
Prevalence of N86Y mutations in Pfmdr1 was 16.9% (13/77) and 77.7% (63/81) in
samples from Mwanza and Iganga, respectively. The re-emergence of CQ sensitive
isolates in Mwanza, Tanzania showed the haplotype CVMNK typical for wild type
isolates.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of CQ resistant parasites in Mwanza, Tanzania is low 
compared to the existing high level of resistant parasites in Iganga, Uganda.
This could be an indication that CQ may become useful in the future in Tanzania. 
This study shows clearly that there is a difference in mutations at these
positions in these two countries implementing similar but somewhat different drug
policies. In Uganda the drug resistance has reached fixation while in Tanzania
the prevalence is going down.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2011.11.004 
PMID: 22118982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

