
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27714. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027714. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Inhaled nitric oxide reduces endothelial activation and parasite accumulation in 
the brain, and enhances survival in experimental cerebral malaria.

Serghides L(1), Kim H, Lu Z, Kain DC, Miller C, Francis RC, Liles WC, Zapol WM,
Kain KC.

Author information: 
(1)SA Rotman Laboratories, McLaughlin-Rotman Centre for Global Health, Tropical
Disease Unit, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University
Health Network-Toronto General Hospital, and University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada.

The host immune response contributes to the onset and progression of severe
malaria syndromes, such as cerebral malaria. Adjunctive immunomodulatory
strategies for severe malaria may improve clinical outcome beyond that achievable
with artemisinin-based therapy alone. Here, we report that prophylaxis with
inhaled nitric oxide significantly reduced systemic inflammation (lower TNF, IFNγ
and MCP-1 in peripheral blood) and endothelial activation (decreased sICAM-1 and 
vWF, and increased angiopoeitin-1 levels in peripheral blood) in an experimental 
cerebral malaria model. Mice that received inhaled nitric oxide starting prior to
infection had reduced parasitized erythrocyte accumulation in the brain,
decreased brain expression of ICAM-1, and preserved vascular integrity compared
to control mice.Inhaled nitric oxide administered in combination with artesunate,
starting as late as 5.5 days post-infection, improved survival over treatment
with artesunate alone (70% survival in the artesunate only vs. 100% survival in
the artesunate plus iNO group, p = 0.03). These data support the clinical
investigation of inhaled nitric oxide as a novel adjunctive therapy in patients
with severe malaria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027714 
PMCID: PMC3218025
PMID: 22110737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

