
1. J Vector Ecol. 2011 Dec;36(2):343-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1948-7134.2011.00174.x.

Bionomics of sympatric chromosomal forms of Anopheles funestus (Diptera:
Culicidae).

Dia I(1), Sagnon N, Guelbeogo MW, Diallo M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Entomologie Médicale, Institut Pasteur de Dakar, 36 Avenue Pasteur, BP
220 Dakar, Sénégal. dia@pasteur.sn

Anopheles funestus is one of the major vectors of malaria in Africa. Cytogenetic 
studies conducted on populations from West Africa have shown variable degrees of 
polymorphism with a genetic structure leading to the description of two
chromosomal forms called "Folonzo" and "Kiribina" that exhibit limited gene flow.
Because studies on allopatric populations showed bionomical heterogeneities, the 
present study was undertaken during three consecutive years (2006, 2007, and
2008) in an area of sympatry in Senegal, in order to assess their bionomical
characteristics and compare their epidemiologic role in malaria transmission.
Overall, the two forms coexisted in the study area; the Kiribina form being more 
abundant and exhibiting higher biting rates. Based on an enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay, the anthropophilic rates were statistically comparable and
were, respectively, 30.7% and 28.6% for Kiribina and Folonzo. Plasmodium
falciparum circumsporozoite rates were also comparable and were 2.7% for Kiribina
and 3.1% for Folonzo. Both forms were involved in malaria transmission; Kiribina 
being responsible for 68% of transmission. Thus, due to the limited gene flow
between the two forms, the introduction of transgene for Plasmodium resistance in
one of the two forms could be a disadvantage for the implementation of control
strategies based on the use of Plasmodium-refractory genetically modified
individuals. Nevertheless, it could represent an advantage limiting the
insurgence of insecticide resistance gene spread between forms and should be
taken into account for the implementation of control strategies.

© 2011 The Society for Vector Ecology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1948-7134.2011.00174.x 
PMID: 22129405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

