
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2012 Mar;12(2):278-81. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.11.008. Epub
2011 Nov 26.

Genetic backgrounds of the Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine resistant
transporter (pfcrt) alleles in Pakistan.

Rawasia WF(1), Sridaran S, Patel JC, Abdallah J, Ghanchi NK, Barnwell JW,
Escalante AA, Udhayakumar V, Beg MA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College, Aga Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan.

Chloroquine (CQ) resistance in Plasmodium falciparum has been associated with
point mutations in the P. falciparum CQ resistance transporter gene (pfcrt).
Previous studies have shown 4-5 independent origins for CQ resistant pfcrt
alleles globally, two in South America, one each in Southeast Asia, Papua New
Guinea (PNG) and Philippines. In Asia, at least two different alleles
corresponding to amino acids 72-76 (CVIET and SVMNT) have been found. The CVIET
allele originated in Southeast Asia and then spread to Asia and Africa as well.
The SVMNT allele, originating from PNG, has been found in India. This study was
undertaken to investigate the genetic background of the CQ resistant pfcrt
haplotypes in Pakistan. We genotyped microsatellite markers surrounding the pfcrt
gene (six different markers at -12.3, -4.8, -1, 1.5, 3.9, 18.8 kb) in 114
clinical isolates of P. falciparum collected from different regions in Pakistan. 
Microsatellite analysis showed a significant reduction in genetic variation among
the mutant SVMNT pfcrt alleles when compared to wild type alleles. The
predominant SVMNT haplotype found in this study shared the same microsatellite
haplotype found in both PNG and India. Two isolates with CVIET haplotypes showed 
similar microsatellite background to those found in Africa and Asia. In
conclusion, this study suggests that CQ resistant SVMNT haplotypes in India and
Pakistan have a common ancestral origin similar to that of Papua New Guinean
isolates.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.11.008 
PMID: 22138496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

