
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2012 Mar;50(3):903-8. doi: 10.1128/JCM.05848-11. Epub 2011 Dec 
14.

A new real-time PCR assay for improved detection of the parasite Babesia microti.

Teal AE(1), Habura A, Ennis J, Keithly JS, Madison-Antenucci S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department
of Health, Albany New York, USA.

Babesiosis is an emerging zoonosis with important public health implications, as 
the incidence of the disease has risen dramatically over the past decade. Because
the current gold standard for detection of Babesia is microscopic examination of 
blood smears, accurate identification requires trained personnel. Species in the 
genus cannot be distinguished microscopically, and Babesia can also be confused
with the early trophozoite stage (ring forms) of Plasmodium parasites. To allow
more accurate diagnosis in a format that is accessible to a wider variety of
laboratories, we developed a real-time PCR assay targeting the 18S rRNA gene of
Babesia microti, the dominant babesiosis pathogen in the United States. The
real-time PCR is performed on DNA extracted from whole-blood specimens and
detects Babesia microti with a limit of detection of ∼100 gene copies in 5 μl of 
blood. The real-time PCR assay was shown to be 100% specific when tested against 
a panel of 24 organisms consisting of Babesia microti, other Babesia species,
Plasmodium species, tick-borne and other pathogenic bacteria, and other
blood-borne parasites. The results using clinical specimens show that the assay
can detect infections of lower parasitemia than can be detected by microscopic
examination. This method is therefore a rapid, sensitive, and accurate method for
detection of Babesia microti in patient specimens.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.05848-11 
PMCID: PMC3295123
PMID: 22170915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

