
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2012 Apr;94(1):151-61. doi: 10.1007/s00253-011-3772-7.
Epub 2011 Dec 15.

Production, characterisation and immunogenicity of a plant-made Plasmodium
antigen--the 19 kDa C-terminal fragment of Plasmodium yoelii merozoite surface
protein 1.

Ma C(1), Wang L, Webster DE, Campbell AE, Coppel RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800,
Australia. charles.ma@monash.edu

Development of a safe, effective and affordable malaria vaccine is central to
global disease control efforts. One of the most highly regarded proteins for
inclusion in an asexual blood stage subunit vaccine is the 19-kDa C-terminal
fragment of merozoite surface protein 1 (MSP1(19)). As production of vaccine
antigens in plants can potentially overcome cost and delivery hurdles, we set out
to produce MSP1(19) in plants, characterise the protein and test its
immunogenicity using a mouse model. Plasmodium yoelii MSP1(19) (PyMSP1(19)) was
produced in Nicotiana benthamiana using the MagnICONÂ® deconstructed TMV-based
viral vector. PyMSP1(19) yield of at least 23% total soluble protein (TSP;3-4
mg/g Fwt) were achieved using a codon-optimised construct that was targeted to
the apoplast. Freeze-dried leaf powder contained at least 20 mg PyMSP1(19) per
gram dry weight and the protein retained immunogenicity in this form for more
than 2 years. Characterisation studies, including SDS-PAGE, mass spectrometry and
circular dichroism, indicated that the plant-expressed PyMSP1(19) was similar to 
its Escherichia coli- and Saccharomyces cerevisiae-expressed counterparts.
Purified plant-made PyMSP1(19) induced strong immune responses following
intraperitoneal immunisation, although titres were lower than those induced by an
equivalent dose of purified E. coli-expressed PyMSP1(19). The reason for this is 
uncertain but may be due to differences in the oligomerisation profile of the
vaccines. The plant-made PyMSP1(19) vaccine was also found to be orally
immunogenic when delivered alone or following immunisation with a PyMSP1(19) DNA 
vaccine. This study adds to an increasing body of research supporting the
feasibility of plants as both a factory for the production of malaria antigens,
and as a safe and affordable platform for oral delivery of a temperature-stable
malaria vaccine.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-011-3772-7 
PMID: 22170105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

