
1. J Mol Evol. 2011 Dec;73(5-6):297-304. doi: 10.1007/s00239-011-9476-x. Epub 2011
Dec 20.

A revised timeline for the origin of Plasmodium falciparum as a human pathogen.

Baron JM(1), Higgins JM, Dzik WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. jmbaron@partners.org

While Plasmodium falciparum is known to have had a strong effect on human
evolution, the time period when P. falciparum first infected ancestors of modern 
humans has remained uncertain. Recent advances demonstrated that P. falciparum
evolved from ancestors of gorilla parasites via host switching. Here, we estimate
the range of dates during which this host switch may have occurred. DNA sequences
of portions of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene obtained from gorilla
parasites closely related to human P. falciparum were aligned and compared
against similar sequences from human P. falciparum. Time estimates were
calculated by applying a previously established parasite cytochrome b gene
mutation rate (0.012 mutations per site per million years) and by modeling
uncertainty in a Monte-Carlo simulation. We estimate a 95% confidence interval
for when P. falciparum first infected ancestors of modern humans to be 112,000
and 1,036,000 years ago (median estimate, 365,000 years ago). This confidence
interval suggests that P. falciparum first infected human ancestors much more
recently than the previous recognized estimate of 2.5 million years ago. The
revised estimate may inform our understanding of certain aspects of human-malaria
co-evolution. For example, this revised date suggests a closer relationship
between the entry of P. falciparum in humans and the appearance of many red blood
cell polymorphisms considered to be genetic adaptations to malaria. In addition, 
the confidence interval lies within the timeframe dating the dawn of Homo
sapiens, suggesting that P. falciparum may have undergone host switching as a
Plasmodia adaptation specific for our species.

DOI: 10.1007/s00239-011-9476-x 
PMID: 22183792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

