
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e29289. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029289. Epub 2011 Dec 27.

A novel 'gene insertion/marker out' (GIMO) method for transgene expression and
gene complementation in rodent malaria parasites.

Lin JW(1), Annoura T, Sajid M, Chevalley-Maurel S, Ramesar J, Klop O,
Franke-Fayard BM, Janse CJ, Khan SM.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden Malaria Research Group, Department of Parasitology, Leiden University
Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Research on the biology of malaria parasites has greatly benefited from the
application of reverse genetic technologies, in particular through the analysis
of gene deletion mutants and studies on transgenic parasites that express
heterologous or mutated proteins. However, transfection in Plasmodium is limited 
by the paucity of drug-selectable markers that hampers subsequent genetic
modification of the same mutant. We report the development of a novel 'gene
insertion/marker out' (GIMO) method for two rodent malaria parasites, which uses 
negative selection to rapidly generate transgenic mutants ready for subsequent
modifications. We have created reference mother lines for both P. berghei ANKA
and P. yoelii 17XNL that serve as recipient parasites for GIMO-transfection.
Compared to existing protocols GIMO-transfection greatly simplifies and speeds up
the generation of mutants expressing heterologous proteins, free of
drug-resistance genes, and requires far fewer laboratory animals. In addition we 
demonstrate that GIMO-transfection is also a simple and fast method for genetic
complementation of mutants with a gene deletion or mutation. The implementation
of GIMO-transfection procedures should greatly enhance Plasmodium reverse-genetic
research.

Â© 2011 Lin et al.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029289 
PMCID: PMC3246482
PMID: 22216235  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

