
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 17;109(3):E111-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1110740109. Epub 2012 Jan 12.

Production of amorphadiene in yeast, and its conversion to dihydroartemisinic
acid, precursor to the antimalarial agent artemisinin.

Westfall PJ(1), Pitera DJ, Lenihan JR, Eng D, Woolard FX, Regentin R, Horning T, 
Tsuruta H, Melis DJ, Owens A, Fickes S, Diola D, Benjamin KR, Keasling JD,
Leavell MD, McPhee DJ, Renninger NS, Newman JD, Paddon CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Amyris, Inc., 5885 Hollis Street, Suite 100, Emeryville, CA 94608, USA.

Malaria, caused by Plasmodium sp, results in almost one million deaths and over
200 million new infections annually. The World Health Organization has
recommended that artemisinin-based combination therapies be used for treatment of
malaria. Artemisinin is a sesquiterpene lactone isolated from the plant Artemisia
annua. However, the supply and price of artemisinin fluctuate greatly, and an
alternative production method would be valuable to increase availability. We
describe progress toward the goal of developing a supply of semisynthetic
artemisinin based on production of the artemisinin precursor amorpha-4,11-diene
by fermentation from engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and its chemical
conversion to dihydroartemisinic acid, which can be subsequently converted to
artemisinin. Previous efforts to produce artemisinin precursors used S.
cerevisiae S288C overexpressing selected genes of the mevalonate pathway [Ro et
al. (2006) Nature 440:940-943]. We have now overexpressed every enzyme of the
mevalonate pathway to ERG20 in S. cerevisiae CEN.PK2, and compared production to 
CEN.PK2 engineered identically to the previously engineered S288C strain.
Overexpressing every enzyme of the mevalonate pathway doubled artemisinic acid
production, however, amorpha-4,11-diene production was 10-fold higher than
artemisinic acid. We therefore focused on amorpha-4,11-diene production.
Development of fermentation processes for the reengineered CEN.PK2
amorpha-4,11-diene strain led to production of > 40 g/L product. A chemical
process was developed to convert amorpha-4,11-diene to dihydroartemisinic acid,
which could subsequently be converted to artemisinin. The strains and procedures 
described represent a complete process for production of semisynthetic
artemisinin.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1110740109 
PMCID: PMC3271868
PMID: 22247290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

