
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2012 Apr;50(4):1397-405. doi: 10.1128/JCM.06533-11. Epub 2012
Jan 18.

Identification of optimal epitopes for Plasmodium falciparum rapid diagnostic
tests that target histidine-rich proteins 2 and 3.

Lee N(1), Gatton ML, Pelecanos A, Bubb M, Gonzalez I, Bell D, Cheng Q, McCarthy
JS.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Tropical Medicine Laboratory, Queensland Institute of Medical
Research, University of Queensland, Herston, Queensland, Australia.

Rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) represent important tools to diagnose malaria
infection. To improve understanding of the variable performance of RDTs that
detect the major target in Plasmodium falciparum, namely, histidine-rich protein 
2 (HRP2), and to inform the design of better tests, we undertook detailed mapping
of the epitopes recognized by eight HRP-specific monoclonal antibodies (MAbs). To
investigate the geographic skewing of this polymorphic protein, we analyzed the
distribution of these epitopes in parasites from geographically diverse areas. To
identify an ideal amino acid motif for a MAb to target in HRP2 and in the related
protein HRP3, we used a purpose-designed script to perform bioinformatic analysis
of 448 distinct gene sequences from pfhrp2 and from 99 sequences from the closely
related gene pfhrp3. The frequency and distribution of these motifs were also
compared to the MAb epitopes. Heat stability testing of MAbs immobilized on
nitrocellulose membranes was also performed. Results of these experiments enabled
the identification of MAbs with the most desirable characteristics for inclusion 
in RDTs, including copy number and coverage of target epitopes, geographic
skewing, heat stability, and match with the most abundant amino acid motifs
identified. This study therefore informs the selection of MAbs to include in
malaria RDTs as well as in the generation of improved MAbs that should improve
the performance of HRP-detecting malaria RDTs.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.06533-11 
PMCID: PMC3318543
PMID: 22259210  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

