
1. Cardiovasc Hematol Agents Med Chem. 2012 Mar 1;10(1):3-13.

Community expansion and gene geography of sickle cell trait and G6PD deficiency, 
and natural selection against malaria: experience from tribal land of India.

Balgir RS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Regional Medical Research Centre for Tribals
(Indian Council of Medical Research), Near NSCB Medical College, Garha Nagpur
Road, Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, Central India. balgirrs@yahoo.co.in

Malaria is globally endemic in tropical and subtropical regions and so is the
hemoglobinopathies, thalassemias and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)
deficiency. This biological dogma of hyper-endemic all over the tribal land in
India leads to high morbidity and mortality. The directed genetic abnormalities
of human erythrocytes have found to decrease the susceptibility towards malaria
parasites and the heterozygotes of abnormalities probably confer protection
against the Plasmodium falciparum infection. A fascinating trend for an inverse
relationship between sickle cell disorders and G6PD deficiency in scheduled caste
and tribal communities of Central-Eastern India has been observed. When the
frequency of sickle cell allele decreases in malaria endemic cross-section of the
tribal population, the frequency of G6PD deficiency allele increases and vice
versa. This medical aspect is important from an evolutionary biological
background and could be an excellent point for molecular analyses to determine
the signature of selection in the genomic regions of Î²- globin and G6PD genes.
Since the selection favors the mutation with least cost to the population [as the
clinical manifestations of G6PD deficiency are mild and do not result in a
complete loss of enzyme activity against the sickle cell disease with high
morbidity and mortality in the region] and the predominant frequency of G6PD
deficiency over the sickle cell disorders in some tribal communities, it seems
that the replacement of sickle cell allele for G6PD deficiency is occurring in
the scheduled castes/tribes of Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and
Odisha states in Central India. These findings are consistent with our previous
studies carried out in Central-Eastern India.

DOI: 10.2174/187152512799201190 
PMID: 22264009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

