
1. Acta Trop. 2012 Apr;122(1):138-49. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2012.01.007. Epub
2012 Jan 10.

Plasmodium vivax apicoplast genome: a comparative analysis of major genes from
Indian field isolates.

Saxena V(1), Garg S, Tripathi J, Sharma S, Pakalapati D, Subudhi AK, Boopathi PA,
Saggu GS, Kochar SK, Kochar DK, Das A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, 
Pilani, Rajasthan, India. vishalsaxena@bits-pilani.ac.in

The apicomplexan parasite Plasmodium vivax is responsible for causing more than
70% of human malaria cases in Central and South America, Southeastern Asia and
the Indian subcontinent. The rising severity of the disease and the increasing
incidences of resistance shown by this parasite towards usual therapeutic
regimens have necessitated investigation of putative novel drug targets to combat
this disease. The apicoplast, an organelle of procaryotic origin, and its
circular genome carrying genes of possible functional importance, are being
looked upon as potential drug targets. The genes on this circular genome are
believed to be highly conserved among all Plasmodium species. Till date, the
plastid genome of P. falciparum, P. berghei and P. chabaudi have been detailed
while partial sequences of some genes from other parasites including P. vivax
have been studied for identifying evolutionary positions of these parasites. The 
functional aspects and significance of most of these genes are still
hypothetical. In one of our previous reports, we have detailed the complete
sequence, as well as structural and functional characteristics of the Elongation 
factor encoding tufA gene from the plastid genome of P. vivax. We present here
the sequences of large and small subunit rRNA (lsu and ssu rRNA) genes, sufB
(ORF470) gene, RNA polymerase (rpo B, C) subunit genes and clpC (casienolytic
protease) gene from the plastid genome of P. vivax. A comparative analysis of
these genes between P. vivax and P. falciparum reveals approximately 5-16%
differences. A codon usage analysis of major plastid genes has shown a high
frequency of codons rich in A/T at any or all of the three positions in all the
species. TTA, AAT, AAA, TAT, and ATA are the major preferred codons. The
sequences, functional domains and structural analysis of respective proteins do
not show any variations in the active sites. A comparative analysis of these
Indian P. vivax plastid genome encoded genes has also been done to understand the
evolutionary position of the Indian parasite in comparison to other Plasmodium
species.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2012.01.007 
PMID: 22266119  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

