
1. Immunogenetics. 2012 Jul;64(7):497-505. doi: 10.1007/s00251-012-0608-2. Epub 2012
Mar 7.

Molecular evolution of a malaria resistance gene (DARC) in primates.

Oliveira TY(1), Harris EE, Meyer D, Jue CK, Silva WA Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10065, USA. stratus@lgmb.fmrp.usp.br

Genes involved in host-pathogen interactions are often strongly affected by
positive natural selection. The Duffy antigen, coded by the Duffy antigen
receptor for chemokines (DARC) gene, serves as a receptor for Plasmodium vivax in
humans and for Plasmodium knowlesi in some nonhuman primates. In the majority of 
sub-Saharan Africans, a nucleic acid variant in GATA-1 of the gene promoter is
responsible for the nonexpression of the Duffy antigen on red blood cells and
consequently resistance to invasion by P. vivax. The Duffy antigen also acts as a
receptor for chemokines and is expressed in red blood cells and many other
tissues of the body. Because of this dual role, we sequenced a ~3,000-bp region
encompassing the entire DARC gene as well as part of its 5' and 3' flanking
regions in a phylogenetic sample of primates and used statistical methods to
evaluate the nature of selection pressures acting on the gene during its
evolution. We analyzed both coding and regulatory regions of the DARC gene. The
regulatory analysis showed accelerated rates of substitution at several sites
near known motifs. Our tests of positive selection in the coding region using
maximum likelihood by branch sites and maximum likelihood by codon sites did not 
yield statistically significant evidence for the action of positive selection.
However, the maximum likelihood test in which the gene was subdivided into
different structural regions showed that the known binding region for P. vivax/P.
knowlesi is under very different selective pressures than the remainder of the
gene. In fact, most of the gene appears to be under strong purifying selection,
but this is not evident in the binding region. We suggest that the binding region
is under the influence of two opposing selective pressures, positive selection
possibly exerted by the parasite and purifying selection exerted by chemokines.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-012-0608-2 
PMID: 22395823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

