
1. Genome Res. 2012 May;22(5):925-38. doi: 10.1101/gr.129692.111. Epub 2012 Mar 13.

Transcriptional variation in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Rovira-Graells N(1), Gupta AP, Planet E, Crowley VM, Mok S, Ribas de Pouplana L, 
Preiser PR, Bozdech Z, Cort√©s A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2012 May;13(5):298-9.

Malaria genetic variation has been extensively characterized, but the level of
epigenetic plasticity remains largely unexplored. Here we provide a comprehensive
characterization of transcriptional variation in the most lethal malaria
parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, based on highly accurate transcriptional
analysis of isogenic parasite lines grown under homogeneous conditions. This
analysis revealed extensive transcriptional heterogeneity within genetically
homogeneous clonal parasite populations. We show that clonally variant expression
controlled at the epigenetic level is an intrinsic property of specific genes and
gene families, the majority of which participate in host-parasite interactions.
Intrinsic transcriptional variability is not restricted to genes involved in
immune evasion, but also affects genes linked to lipid metabolism, protein
folding, erythrocyte remodeling, or transcriptional regulation, among others,
indicating that epigenetic variation results in both antigenic and functional
variation. We observed a general association between heterochromatin marks and
clonally variant expression, extending previous observations for specific genes
to essentially all variantly expressed gene families. These results suggest that 
phenotypic variation of functionally unrelated P. falciparum gene families is
mediated by a common mechanism based on reversible formation of H3K9me3-based
heterochromatin. In changing environments, diversity confers fitness to a
population. Our results support the idea that P. falciparum uses a bet-hedging
strategy, as an alternative to directed transcriptional responses, to adapt to
common fluctuations in its environment. Consistent with this idea, we found that 
transcriptionally different isogenic parasite lines markedly differed in their
survival to heat-shock mimicking febrile episodes and adapted to periodic
heat-shock with a pattern consistent with natural selection of pre-existing
parasites.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.129692.111 
PMCID: PMC3337437
PMID: 22415456  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

