
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(3):e1002565. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002565. Epub 2012 Mar
8.

Significant association of KIR2DL3-HLA-C1 combination with cerebral malaria and
implications for co-evolution of KIR and HLA.

Hirayasu K(1), Ohashi J, Kashiwase K, Hananantachai H, Naka I, Ogawa A, Takanashi
M, Satake M, Nakajima K, Parham P, Arase H, Tokunaga K, Patarapotikul J, Yabe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. hirayasu@ifrec.osaka-u.ac.jp

Cerebral malaria is a major, life-threatening complication of Plasmodium
falciparum malaria, and has very high mortality rate. In murine malaria models,
natural killer (NK) cell responses have been shown to play a crucial role in the 
pathogenesis of cerebral malaria. To investigate the role of NK cells in the
developmental process of human cerebral malaria, we conducted a case-control
study examining genotypes for killer immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR) and
their human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I ligands in 477 malaria patients. We
found that the combination of KIR2DL3 and its cognate HLA-C1 ligand was
significantly associated with the development of cerebral malaria when compared
with non-cerebral malaria (odds ratio 3.14, 95% confidence interval 1.52-6.48,
P = 0.00079, corrected P = 0.02). In contrast, no other KIR-HLA pairs showed a
significant association with cerebral malaria, suggesting that the NK cell
repertoire shaped by the KIR2DL3-HLA-C1 interaction shows certain functional
responses that facilitate development of cerebral malaria. Furthermore, the
frequency of the KIR2DL3-HLA-C1 combination was found to be significantly lower
in malaria high-endemic populations. These results suggest that natural selection
has reduced the frequency of the KIR2DL3-HLA-C1 combination in malaria
high-endemic populations because of the propensity of interaction between KIR2DL3
and C1 to favor development of cerebral malaria. Our findings provide one
possible explanation for KIR-HLA co-evolution driven by a microbial pathogen, and
its effect on the global distribution of malaria, KIR and HLA.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002565 
PMCID: PMC3297587
PMID: 22412373  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

