
1. Exp Parasitol. 2012 May;131(1):40-4. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2012.02.024. Epub
2012 Mar 6.

Direct loop-mediated isothermal amplification from Plasmodium chabaudi infected
blood samples: inability to discriminate genomic and cDNA sequences.

Ebbinghaus P(1), von Samson-Himmelstjerna G, Krücken J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Parasitology and Veterinary Medicine, Freie Universität Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.

Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) has been increasingly used for
diagnosis and quantification of pathogens. Since the Bst DNA polymerase used in
this assay is highly resistant to PCR inhibitors present in blood, direct
analysis of blood samples without DNA or RNA extraction is possible. Indeed, the 
presence of Plasmodium chabaudi specific nucleic acids was easily detectable
using primer sets for P. chabaudi 18S rRNA and the cir 1 mRNA. Despite the fact
that primers for cir 1, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and
actin II mRNAs were used that spanned an intron, selective amplification of mRNA 
in the presence of contaminating genomic DNA was not possible. Optimization of
the reaction temperature could only improve discrimination when low complexity
templates (target sequences cloned in a plasmid vector) were used. Placing
different LAMP primers across intron exon boundaries did not prevent
amplification in the absence of reverse transcriptase. Probably due to the high
A+T content and low number of introns only a very limited number of possible
primer sets spanning introns could be identified in the target genes and no
reaction conditions could be established that would allow quantification of RNA
levels in the presence of DNA directly from blood samples.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2012.02.024 
PMID: 22417971  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

