
1. Malar J. 2012 Mar 23;11:80. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-80.

Transcript and protein expression profile of PF11_0394, a Plasmodium falciparum
protein expressed in salivary gland sporozoites.

Schlarman MS(1), Roberts RN, Kariuki MM, LaCrue AN, Ou R, Beerntsen BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum malaria is a significant problem around the
world today, thus there is still a need for new control methods to be developed. 
Because the sporozoite displays dual infectivity for both the mosquito salivary
glands and vertebrate host tissue, it is a good target for vaccine development.
METHODS: The P. falciparum gene, PF11_0394, was chosen as a candidate for study
due to its potential role in the invasion of host tissues. This gene, which was
selected using a data mining approach from PlasmoDB, is expressed both at the
transcriptional and protein levels in sporozoites and likely encodes a putative
surface protein. Using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
and green fluorescent protein (GFP)-trafficking studies, a transcript and protein
expression profile of PF11_0394 was determined.
RESULTS: The PF11_0394 protein has orthologs in other Plasmodium species and
Apicomplexans, but none outside of the group Apicomplexa. PF11_0394 transcript
was found to be present during both the sporozoite and erythrocytic stages of the
parasite life cycle, but no transcript was detected during axenic exoerythrocytic
stages. Despite the presence of transcript throughout several life cycle stages, 
the PF11_0394 protein was only detected in salivary gland sporozoites.
CONCLUSIONS: PF11_0394 appears to be a protein uniquely detected in salivary
gland sporozoites. Even though a specific function of PF11_0394 has not been
determined in P. falciparum biology, it could be another candidate for a new
vaccine.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-80 
PMCID: PMC3355004
PMID: 22443220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

