
1. Malar J. 2012 Mar 27;11:88. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-88.

Specific tagging of the egress-related osmiophilic bodies in the gametocytes of
Plasmodium falciparum.

Sannella AR(1), Olivieri A, Bertuccini L, Ferrè F, Severini C, Pace T, Alano P.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Department, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, v.le Regina
Elena 299, Rome 00161, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Gametocytes, the blood stages responsible for Plasmodium falciparum
transmission, contain electron dense organelles, traditionally named osmiophilic 
bodies, that are believed to be involved in gamete egress from the host cell. In 
order to provide novel tools in the cellular and molecular studies of osmiophilic
body biology, a P. falciparum transgenic line in which these organelles are
specifically marked by a reporter protein was produced and characterized.
METHODOLOGY: A P. falciparum transgenic line expressing an 80-residue N-terminal 
fragment of the osmiophilic body protein Pfg377 fused to the reporter protein
DsRed, under the control of pfg377 upstream and downstream regulatory regions,
was produced.
RESULTS: The transgenic fusion protein is expressed at the appropriate time and
stage of sexual differentiation and is trafficked to osmiophilic bodies as the
endogenous Pfg377 protein. These results indicate that a relatively small
N-terminal portion of Pfg377 is sufficient to target the DsRed reporter to the
gametocyte osmiophilic bodies.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first identification of a P. falciparum aminoacid
sequence able to mediate trafficking to such organelles. To fluorescently tag
such poorly characterized organelles opens novel avenues in cellular and imaging 
studies on their biogenesis and on their role in gamete egress.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-88 
PMCID: PMC3342164
PMID: 22452991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

