
1. Sci Transl Med. 2012 Apr 11;4(129):129ra45. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3003247.

Prognostic indicators of life-threatening malaria are associated with distinct
parasite variant antigen profiles.

Warimwe GM(1), Fegan G, Musyoki JN, Newton CR, Opiyo M, Githinji G, Andisi C,
Menza F, Kitsao B, Marsh K, Bull PC.

Author information: 
(1)Kenya Medical Research Institute-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, P. O. Box 
230-80108 Kilifi, Kenya.

PfEMP1 is a family of cytoadhesive surface antigens expressed on erythrocytes
infected with Plasmodium falciparum, the parasite that causes the most severe
form of malaria. These surface antigens play a role in immune evasion and are
thought to contribute to the pathogenesis of the malaria parasite. Previous
studies have suggested a role for a specific subset of PfEMP1 called "group A" in
severe malaria. To explore the role of group A PfEMP1 in disease, we measured the
expression of the var genes that encode them in parasites from clinical isolates 
collected from children suffering from malaria. We also looked at the ability of 
these clinical isolates to induce rosetting of erythrocytes, which indicates a
cytoadhesion phenotype that is thought to be important in pathogenesis. These two
sets of data were correlated with the presence of two life-threatening
manifestations of severe malaria in the children: impaired consciousness and
respiratory distress. Using regression analysis, we show that marked rosetting
was associated with respiratory distress, whereas elevated expression of group
A-like var genes without elevated rosetting was associated with impaired
consciousness. The results suggest that manifestations of malarial disease may
reflect the distribution of cytoadhesion phenotypes expressed by the infecting
parasite population.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3003247 
PMCID: PMC3491874
PMID: 22496547  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

