
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34820. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034820. Epub 2012 Apr 10.

Lack of evidence from studies of soluble protein fragments that Knops blood group
polymorphisms in complement receptor-type 1 are driven by malaria.

Tetteh-Quarcoo PB(1), Schmidt CQ, Tham WH, Hauhart R, Mertens HD, Rowe A,
Atkinson JP, Cowman AF, Rowe JA, Barlow PN.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Complement receptor-type 1 (CR1, CD35) is the immune-adherence receptor, a
complement regulator, and an erythroid receptor for Plasmodium falciparum during 
merozoite invasion and subsequent rosette formation involving parasitized and
non-infected erythrocytes. The non-uniform geographical distribution of Knops
blood group CR1 alleles Sl1/2 and McC(a/b) may result from selective pressures
exerted by differential exposure to infectious hazards. Here, four variant short 
recombinant versions of CR1 were produced and analyzed, focusing on complement
control protein modules (CCPs) 15-25 of its ectodomain. These eleven modules
encompass a region (CCPs 15-17) key to rosetting, opsonin recognition and
complement regulation, as well as the Knops blood group polymorphisms in CCPs
24-25. All four CR1 15-25 variants were monomeric and had similar axial ratios.
Modules 21 and 22, despite their double-length inter-modular linker, did not lie 
side-by-side so as to stabilize a bent-back architecture that would facilitate
cooperation between key functional modules and Knops blood group antigens.
Indeed, the four CR1 15-25 variants had virtually indistinguishable affinities
for immobilized complement fragments C3b (K(D) = 0.8-1.1 µM) and C4b
(K(D) = 5.0-5.3 µM). They were all equally good co-factors for factor I-catalysed
cleavage of C3b and C4b, and they bound equally within a narrow affinity range,
to immobilized C1q. No differences between the variants were observed in assays
for inhibition of erythrocyte invasion by P. falciparum or for rosette
disruption. Neither differences in complement-regulatory functionality, nor
interactions with P. falciparum proteins tested here, appear to have driven the
non-uniform geographic distribution of these alleles.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034820 
PMCID: PMC3323580
PMID: 22506052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

