
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012 Jul;56(7):3615-9. doi: 10.1128/AAC.06350-11.
Epub 2012 Apr 16.

pfmdr1 amplification is related to increased Plasmodium falciparum in vitro
sensitivity to the bisquinoline piperaquine.

Veiga MI(1), Ferreira PE, Malmberg M, Jörnhagen L, Björkman A, Nosten F, Gil JP.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research Lab, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. maria.isabel.veiga@gmail.com

The 4-aminoquinoline bisquinoline piperaquine is an important partner drug in one
of the presently recommended artemisinin combination therapies. Recent clinical
trials have confirmed its high efficacy in combination with dihydroartemisinin.
Resistance to piperaquine alone has, however, been documented. Amplification in
copy number of the Plasmodium falciparum multidrug resistance locus on chromosome
5, containing the pfmdr1 gene, has been shown to confer resistance to
structurally unrelated antimalarials. Through the determination of the 50%
inhibitory concentrations (IC(50)s) and IC(90)s for piperaquine and chloroquine
in a set of 46 adapted P. falciparum cultures originating from the Thai-Burmese
border, we have characterized the regions around the pfmdr1 gene and identified a
significant association between the presence of pfmdr1 duplications and enhanced 
sensitivity to piperaquine (P = 0.005 for IC(50) and P = 0.002 for IC(90)) and
chloroquine, reaching statistical significance at IC(90)s (P = 0.026). These
results substantiate the potential importance of pfmdr1 copy number
amplifications in the efficacy of the combination therapy
piperaquine-dihydroartemisinin. It supports the rational use of 4-aminoquinolines
and artemisinin-based compounds, as they independently select for mutually
incompatible combinations of mutations.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.06350-11 
PMCID: PMC3393437
PMID: 22508315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

