
1. Malar J. 2012 Apr 18;11:119. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-119.

Comparison of molecular tests for the diagnosis of malaria in Honduras.

Fontecha GA(1), Mendoza M, Banegas E, Poorak M, De Oliveira AM, Mancero T,
Udhayakumar V, Lucchi NW, Mejia RE.

Author information: 
(1)MEIZ-Microbiology School, National Autonomous University of Honduras (UNAH),
Tegucigalpa, Honduras.

BACKGROUND: Honduras is a tropical country with more than 70% of its population
living at risk of being infected with either Plasmodium vivax or Plasmodium
falciparum. Laboratory diagnosis is a very important factor for adequate
treatment and management of malaria. In Honduras, malaria is diagnosed by both,
microscopy and rapid diagnostic tests and to date, no molecular methods have been
implemented for routine diagnosis. However, since mixed infections, and
asymptomatic and low-parasitaemic cases are difficult to detect by light
microscopy alone, identifying appropriate molecular tools for diagnostic
applications in Honduras deserves further study. The present study investigated
the utility of different molecular tests for the diagnosis of malaria in
Honduras.
METHODS: A total of 138 blood samples collected as part of a clinical trial to
assess the efficacy of chloroquine were used: 69 microscopically confirmed P.
falciparum positive samples obtained on the day of enrollment and 69 follow-up
samples obtained 28 days after chloroquine treatment and shown to be malaria
negative by microscopy. Sensitivity and specificity of microscopy was compared to
an 18 s ribosomal RNA gene-based nested PCR, two single-PCR reactions designed to
detect Plasmodium falciparum infections, one single-PCR to detect Plasmodium
vivax infections, and one multiplex one-step PCR reaction to detect both parasite
species.
RESULTS: Of the 69 microscopically positive P. falciparum samples, 68 were
confirmed to be P. falciparum-positive by two of the molecular tests used. The
one sample not detected as P. falciparum by any of the molecular tests was shown 
to be P. vivax-positive by a reference molecular test indicating a misdiagnosis
by microscopy. The reference molecular test detected five cases of P. vivax/P.
falciparum mixed infections, which were not recognized by microscopy as mixed
infections. Only two of these mixed infections were recognized by a multiplex
test while a P. vivax-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) detected three of 
them. In addition, one of the day 28 samples, previously determined to be malaria
negative by microscopy, was shown to be P. vivax-positive by three of the
molecular tests specific for this parasite.
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular tests are valuable tools for the confirmation of
Plasmodium species and in detecting mixed infections in malaria endemic regions.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-119 
PMCID: PMC3407797
PMID: 22513192  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

