
1. J Infect Dis. 2012 Jul 15;206(2):238-48. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jis339. Epub 2012
May 7.

Metabolomic analysis of patient plasma yields evidence of plant-like α-linolenic 
acid metabolism in Plasmodium falciparum.

Lakshmanan V(1), Rhee KY, Wang W, Yu Y, Khafizov K, Fiser A, Wu P, Ndir O, Mboup 
S, Ndiaye D, Daily JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Yeshiva University, Bronx, New York, USA.
viswanathan.lakshmanan@seattlebiomed.org

Metabolomics offers a powerful means to investigate human malaria parasite
biology and host-parasite interactions at the biochemical level, and to discover 
novel therapeutic targets and biomarkers of infection. Here, we used an approach 
based on liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry to perform an untargeted
metabolomic analysis of metabolite extracts from Plasmodium falciparum-infected
and uninfected patient plasma samples, and from an enriched population of in
vitro cultured P. falciparum-infected and uninfected erythrocytes. Statistical
modeling robustly segregated infected and uninfected samples based on metabolite 
species with significantly different abundances. Metabolites of the α-linolenic
acid (ALA) pathway, known to exist in plants but not known to exist in P.
falciparum until now, were enriched in infected plasma and erythrocyte samples.
In vitro labeling with (13)C-ALA showed evidence of plant-like ALA pathway
intermediates in P. falciparum. Ortholog searches using ALA pathway enzyme
sequences from 8 available plant genomes identified several genes in the P.
falciparum genome that were predicted to potentially encode the corresponding
enzymes in the hitherto unannotated P. falciparum pathway. These data suggest
that our approach can be used to discover novel facets of host/malaria parasite
biology in a high-throughput manner.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jis339 
PMCID: PMC3490690
PMID: 22566569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

