
1. Parasitol Res. 2012 Sep;111(3):1239-49. doi: 10.1007/s00436-012-2958-y. Epub 2012
May 15.

Proteomic analysis of salivary glands of female Anopheles barbirostris species A2
(Diptera: Culicidae) by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass
spectrometry.

Jariyapan N(1), Roytrakul S, Paemanee A, Junkum A, Saeung A, Thongsahuan S,
Sor-suwan S, Phattanawiboon B, Poovorawan Y, Choochote W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Chiang
Mai, 50200, Thailand. narsuwan@mail.med.cmu.ac.th

Salivary gland proteins of adult female Anopheles barbirostris species A2, a
potential vector of Plasmodium vivax in Thailand, were analyzed using a proteomic
approach (two-dimensional gel electrophoresis followed by nanoLC-MS).
Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis revealed approximately 75 well-resolved spots
on the reference gel. Most of the protein spots displayed relative molecular
masses from 14 to 85 kDa and isoelectric points ranging from 3.9 to 10. The
proteome profiles of A. barbirostris species A2 female salivary glands were
affected by aging. The typical electrophoretic pattern of the female salivary
glands was reached in 48 h post emergence, suggesting the maturation of salivary 
glands and saliva contents for blood feeding. Proteins involved in blood feeding,
i.e., putative 5' nucleotidase/apyrase, anti-platelet protein, long form D7
salivary protein, D7-related 1 protein, and gSG6 salivary protein, start to
accumulate from emergence and gradually increase becoming predominant within 48
h. There are different salivary components expressed within each region of the
female glands. The blood-feeding proteins were detected in the distal-lateral
lobes and/or medial lobes. Proteins detected and/or identified by this approach
could be tested in strategies developed to control pathogen and disease
transmission. Moreover, the information of a 2D map of the female salivary gland 
could be used for comparison with other related species in the A. barbirostris
complex to distinguish species members in the complex.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-012-2958-y 
PMID: 22584379  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

