
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 26;109(26):E1791-800. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1120455109. Epub 2012 May 22.

Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 domain cassettes 8 and 13
are associated with severe malaria in children.

Lavstsen T(1), Turner L, Saguti F, Magistrado P, Rask TS, Jespersen JS, Wang CW, 
Berger SS, Baraka V, Marquard AM, Seguin-Orlando A, Willerslev E, Gilbert MT,
Lusingu J, Theander TG.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of International Health,
Immunology, and Microbiology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, Rigshospitalet, 1014 Copenhagen K, Denmark. thomasl@sund.ku.dk.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 26;109(26):10130-1.

The clinical outcome of Plasmodium falciparum infections ranges from asymptomatic
parasitemia to severe malaria syndromes associated with high mortality. The
virulence of P. falciparum infections is associated with the type of P.
falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) expressed on the surface of
infected erythrocytes to anchor these to the vascular lining. Although var2csa,
the var gene encoding the PfEMP1 associated with placental malaria, was
discovered in 2003, the identification of the var/PfEMP1 variants associated with
severe malaria in children has remained elusive. To identify var/PfEMP1 variants 
associated with severe disease outcome, we compared var transcript levels in
parasites from 88 children with severe malaria and 40 children admitted to the
hospital with uncomplicated malaria. Transcript analysis was performed by
RT-quantitative PCR using a set of 42 primer pairs amplifying var
subtype-specific loci covering most var/PfEMP1 subtypes. In addition, we
characterized the near-full-length sequence of the most prominently expressed var
genes in three patients diagnosed with severe anemia and/or cerebral malaria. The
combined analysis showed that severe malaria syndromes, including severe anemia
and cerebral malaria, are associated with high transcript levels of PfEMP1 domain
cassette 8-encoding var genes. Transcript levels of group A var genes, including 
genes encoding domain cassette 13, were also significantly higher in patients
with severe syndromes compared with those with uncomplicated malaria. This study 
specifies the var/PfEMP1 types expressed in severe malaria in children, and
thereby provides unique targets for future efforts to prevent and treat severe
malaria infections.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1120455109 
PMCID: PMC3387094
PMID: 22619319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

