
1. J Biomed Semantics. 2012 May 23;3(1):5. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-3-5.

The Ontology for Parasite Lifecycle (OPL): towards a consistent vocabulary of
lifecycle stages in parasitic organisms.

Parikh PP(1), Zheng J, Logan-Klumpler F, Stoeckert CJ Jr, Louis C, Topalis P,
Protasio AV, Sheth AP, Carrington M, Berriman M, Sahoo SS.

Author information: 
(1)The Kno,e,sis Center, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Wright
State University, Dayton, OH, USA. priti@knoesis.org.

BACKGROUND: Genome sequencing of many eukaryotic pathogens and the volume of data
available on public resources have created a clear requirement for a consistent
vocabulary to describe the range of developmental forms of parasites. Consistent 
labeling of experimental data and external data, in databases and the literature,
is essential for integration, cross database comparison, and knowledge discovery.
The primary objective of this work was to develop a dynamic and controlled
vocabulary that can be used for various parasites. The paper describes the
Ontology for Parasite Lifecycle (OPL) and discusses its application in parasite
research.
RESULTS: The OPL is based on the Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) and follows the
rules set by the OBO Foundry consortium. The first version of the OPL models
complex life cycle stage details of a range of parasites, such as Trypanosoma
sp., Leishmaniasp., Plasmodium sp., and Shicstosoma sp. In addition, the ontology
also models necessary contextual details, such as host information, vector
information, and anatomical locations. OPL is primarily designed to serve as a
reference ontology for parasite life cycle stages that can be used for database
annotation purposes and in the lab for data integration or information retrieval 
as exemplified in the application section below.
CONCLUSION: OPL is freely available at http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/opl.owl and
has been submitted to the BioPortal site of NCBO and to the OBO Foundry. We
believe that database and phenotype annotations using OPL will help run
fundamental queries on databases to know more about gene functions and to find
intervention targets for various parasites. The OPL is under continuous
development and new parasites and/or terms are being added.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-3-5 
PMCID: PMC3488002
PMID: 22621763 

