
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2012 Aug;13(4):392-7. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2012.05.012.
Epub 2012 Jun 1.

Targeting Toll-like receptors by chloroquine protects mice from experimental
cerebral malaria.

Zhu X(1), Pan Y, Li Y, Jiang Y, Shang H, Gowda DC, Cui L, Cao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, China Medical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China.

Excessive production of proinflammatory cytokines, elicited mostly by Th1 cells, 
is an important cause of cerebral malaria (CM). Dendritic cells (DCs), a critical
link between innate and adaptive immune responses, rely heavily on Toll-like
receptor (TLR) signaling. Using C57BL/6 mice infected with Plasmodium berghei
ANKA (PbA) as an experimental CM model, we first confirmed that inhibition of
TLR9 by suppressive oligodeoxynucleotides protected mice from CM. In addition to 
being a well-known antimalarial, chloroquine (CQ) has been used as an
immunomodulator of endocytic TLRs because it inhibits endosomal acidification. We
found that immediately before and shortly after infection by PbA, treatment with 
a single dose of 50 mg/kg of CQ protected mice from experimental CM. Both CQ
treatments significantly inhibited expression of TLR9 and MHC-II on DCs, and
reduced the number of myeloid and plasmatocytoid DCs at 3 and 5 days after
infection. Consequently, activation of CD4+ T cells, especially the expansion of 
the Th1 subsets, was dramatically inhibited in CQ treated groups, which was
accompanied by a remarkable decline in the production of Th1 type proinflammatory
mediators IFN-γ, TNF-α, and nitric oxide. Taken together, these results
corroborated the involvement of TLR9 in CM pathogenesis and suggest that
interference with the activation of this receptor is a promising strategy to
prevent deleterious inflammatory response mediating pathogenesis and severity of 
malaria.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2012.05.012 
PMID: 22659438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

