
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(5):e1002678. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002678. Epub 2012 May
24.

Comparative genomics reveals two novel RNAi factors in Trypanosoma brucei and
provides insight into the core machinery.

Barnes RL(1), Shi H, Kolev NG, Tschudi C, Ullu E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

The introduction ten years ago of RNA interference (RNAi) as a tool for molecular
exploration in Trypanosoma brucei has led to a surge in our understanding of the 
pathogenesis and biology of this human parasite. In particular, a genome-wide
RNAi screen has recently been combined with next-generation Illumina sequencing
to expose catalogues of genes associated with loss of fitness in distinct
developmental stages. At present, this technology is restricted to RNAi-positive 
protozoan parasites, which excludes T. cruzi, Leishmania major, and Plasmodium
falciparum. Therefore, elucidating the mechanism of RNAi and identifying the
essential components of the pathway is fundamental for improving RNAi efficiency 
in T. brucei and for transferring the RNAi tool to RNAi-deficient pathogens. Here
we used comparative genomics of RNAi-positive and -negative trypanosomatid
protozoans to identify the repertoire of factors in T. brucei. In addition to the
previously characterized Argonaute 1 (AGO1) protein and the cytoplasmic and
nuclear Dicers, TbDCL1 and TbDCL2, respectively, we identified the RNA
Interference Factors 4 and 5 (TbRIF4 and TbRIF5). TbRIF4 is a 3'-5' exonuclease
of the DnaQ superfamily and plays a critical role in the conversion of duplex
siRNAs to the single-stranded form, thus generating a TbAGO1-siRNA complex
required for target-specific cleavage. TbRIF5 is essential for cytoplasmic RNAi
and appears to act as a TbDCL1 cofactor. The availability of the core RNAi
machinery in T. brucei provides a platform to gain mechanistic insights in this
ancient eukaryote and to identify the minimal set of components required to
reconstitute RNAi in RNAi-deficient parasites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002678 
PMCID: PMC3359990
PMID: 22654659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

