
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 10;109(28):E1922-30. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1207738109. Epub 2012 Jun 11.

Transgenic Anopheles stephensi coexpressing single-chain antibodies resist
Plasmodium falciparum development.

Isaacs AT(1), Jasinskiene N, Tretiakov M, Thiery I, Zettor A, Bourgouin C, James 
AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-4500, USA.

Anopheles stephensi mosquitoes expressing m1C3, m4B7, or m2A10 single-chain
antibodies (scFvs) have significantly lower levels of infection compared to
controls when challenged with Plasmodium falciparum, a human malaria pathogen.
These scFvs are derived from antibodies specific to a parasite chitinase, the
25Â kDa protein and the circumsporozoite protein, respectively. Transgenes
comprising m2A10 in combination with either m1C3 or m4B7 were inserted into
previously-characterized mosquito chromosomal "docking" sites using site-specific
recombination. Transgene expression was evaluated at four different genomic
locations and a docking site that permitted tissue- and sex-specific expression
was researched further. Fitness studies of docking site and dual scFv transgene
strains detected only one significant fitness cost: adult docking-site males
displayed a late-onset reduction in survival. The m4B7/m2A10 mosquitoes
challenged with P. falciparum had few or no sporozoites, the parasite stage
infective to humans, in three of four experiments. No sporozoites were detected
in m1C3/m2A10 mosquitoes in challenge experiments when both genes were induced at
developmentally relevant times. These studies support the conclusion that
expression of a single copy of a dual scFv transgene can completely inhibit
parasite development without imposing a fitness cost on the mosquito.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1207738109 
PMCID: PMC3396534
PMID: 22689959  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

