
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2012 Aug;84(2):195-203. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2012.05.008. Epub 
2012 Jun 7.

Cloning, overexpression, purification and characterization of Plasmodium knowlesi
lactate dehydrogenase.

Singh V(1), Kaushal DC, Rathaur S, Kumar N, Kaushal NA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow
226001, India.

Plasmodial lactate dehydrogenase, key enzyme of anaerobic glycolysis, has been
shown to be a potential immunodiagnostic marker as well as a novel target for
chemotherapy. We have cloned, overexpressed and immunochemically characterized
the recombinant lactate dehydrogenase of Plasmodium knowlesi, the fifth human
malaria parasite. The P. knowlesi lactate dehydrogenase (PkLDH) gene was PCR
amplified and 0.9 kb PCR product was cloned into pGEM-T Easy vector. Sequencing
and BLAST analysis revealed open reading frame of 316 amino acids of PkLDH
showing 96.8% homology with Plasmodium vivax LDH and around 90% with Plasmodium
falciparum, Plasmodium malariae and Plasmodium ovale LDHs. The PkLDH gene was
subcloned into pGEX-6P1 expression vector and the SDS-PAGE analysis revealed that
about 70% of fusion protein was present in the soluble fraction. The fusion
protein was cleaved with PreScission protease and recombinant PkLDH (34 kDa) was 
affinity purified to homogeneity. The purified PkLDH exhibited high reactivity
with polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies against plasmodial LDH. The polyclonal 
antibody produced against purified recombinant PkLDH in rabbits showed high ELISA
reactivity with both native and recombinant PkLDH and could detect parasite LDH
in malaria infected blood samples by sandwich ELISA. The purified recombinant
PkLDH can be used to produce P. knowlesi specific monoclonal antibodies for
specific diagnosis of P. knowlesi infection in humans.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2012.05.008 
PMID: 22683723  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

