
1. Malar J. 2012 Jun 12;11:196. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-196.

Role of polymorphisms of toll-like receptor (TLR) 4, TLR9, toll-interleukin 1
receptor domain containing adaptor protein (TIRAP) and FCGR2A genes in malaria
susceptibility and severity in Burundian children.

Esposito S(1), Molteni CG, Zampiero A, Baggi E, Lavizzari A, Semino M, Daleno C, 
Groppo M, Scala A, Terranova L, Miozzo M, Pelucchi C, Principi N.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Clinic 1, Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca'
Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Via Commenda 9, 20122, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Malaria caused by Plasmodium falciparum is one of the leading causes 
of human morbidity and mortality from infectious diseases, predominantly in
tropical and sub-tropical countries. As genetic variations in the toll-like
receptors (TLRs)-signalling pathway have been associated with either
susceptibility or resistance to several infectious and inflammatory diseases, the
supposition is that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of TLR2, TLR4, TLR9,
Toll-interleukin 1 receptor domain containing adaptor protein (TIRAP) and FCGR2A 
could modulate malaria susceptibility and severity.
METHODS: This study was planned to make a further contribution to solving the
problem of the real role of the most common polymorphisms of TLR4, TLR9, TIRAP
and FCGR2A genes in modulating the risk of malaria and disease severity in
children from Burundi, Central Africa. All the paediatric patients aged six
months to 10 years admitted to the hospital of Kiremba, Burundi, between February
2011 and September 2011, for fever and suspicion of acute malaria were screened
for malaria parasitaemia by light microscopy of thick and thin blood smears. In
children with malaria and in uninfected controls enrolled during the study period
in the same hospital, blood samples were obtained on filter paper and TLR4
Asp299Gly rs4986790, TLR9 G1174A rs352139, T-1486 C rs187084 TLR9 T-1237 C
rs5743836, TIRAP Ser180Leu rs8177374 and the FCGR2A His131Arg rs1801274
polymorphisms were studied using an ABI PRISM 7900 HT Fast Real-time instrument.
RESULTS: A total of 602 patients and 337 controls were enrolled. Among the
malaria cases, 553 (91.9%) were considered as suffering from uncomplicated and 49
(8.1%) from severe malaria. TLR9 T1237C rs5743836CC was associated with an
increased risk of developing malaria (p=0.03), although it was found with the
same frequency in uncomplicated and severe malaria cases. No other differences
were found in all alleles studied and in genotype frequencies between malaria
cases and uninfected controls as well as between uncomplicated and severe malaria
cases.
CONCLUSIONS: TLR9 T1237C seems to condition susceptibility to malaria in
Burundian children but not its severity, whereas none of the assessed SNPs of
TLR4, TIRAP and FCGR2A seem to influence susceptibility to malaria and disease
severity in this population.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-196 
PMCID: PMC3411399
PMID: 22691414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

