
1. Nature. 2012 Jul 19;487(7407):375-9. doi: 10.1038/nature11174.

Analysis of Plasmodium falciparum diversity in natural infections by deep
sequencing.

Manske M(1), Miotto O, Campino S, Auburn S, Almagro-Garcia J, Maslen G, O'Brien
J, Djimde A, Doumbo O, Zongo I, Ouedraogo JB, Michon P, Mueller I, Siba P, Nzila 
A, Borrmann S, Kiara SM, Marsh K, Jiang H, Su XZ, Amaratunga C, Fairhurst R,
Socheat D, Nosten F, Imwong M, White NJ, Sanders M, Anastasi E, Alcock D, Drury
E, Oyola S, Quail MA, Turner DJ, Ruano-Rubio V, Jyothi D, Amenga-Etego L, Hubbart
C, Jeffreys A, Rowlands K, Sutherland C, Roper C, Mangano V, Modiano D, Tan JC,
Ferdig MT, Amambua-Ngwa A, Conway DJ, Takala-Harrison S, Plowe CV, Rayner JC,
Rockett KA, Clark TG, Newbold CI, Berriman M, MacInnis B, Kwiatkowski DP.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK.

Malaria elimination strategies require surveillance of the parasite population
for genetic changes that demand a public health response, such as new forms of
drug resistance. Here we describe methods for the large-scale analysis of genetic
variation in Plasmodium falciparum by deep sequencing of parasite DNA obtained
from the blood of patients with malaria, either directly or after short-term
culture. Analysis of 86,158 exonic single nucleotide polymorphisms that passed
genotyping quality control in 227 samples from Africa, Asia and Oceania provides 
genome-wide estimates of allele frequency distribution, population structure and 
linkage disequilibrium. By comparing the genetic diversity of individual
infections with that of the local parasite population, we derive a metric of
within-host diversity that is related to the level of inbreeding in the
population. An open-access web application has been established for the
exploration of regional differences in allele frequency and of highly
differentiated loci in the P.â€‰falciparum genome.

DOI: 10.1038/nature11174 
PMCID: PMC3738909
PMID: 22722859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

