
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2012 Nov;29(11):3427-39. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mss161. Epub 2012 Jun
24.

Genomic sequencing of Plasmodium falciparum malaria parasites from Senegal
reveals the demographic history of the population.

Chang HH(1), Park DJ, Galinsky KJ, Schaffner SF, Ndiaye D, Ndir O, Mboup S,
Wiegand RC, Volkman SK, Sabeti PC, Wirth DF, Neafsey DE, Hartl DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University.
hhchang@oeb.harvard.edu

Malaria is a deadly disease that causes nearly one million deaths each year. To
develop methods to control and eradicate malaria, it is important to understand
the genetic basis of Plasmodium falciparum adaptations to antimalarial treatments
and the human immune system while taking into account its demographic history. To
study the demographic history and identify genes under selection more
efficiently, we sequenced the complete genomes of 25 culture-adapted P.
falciparum isolates from three sites in Senegal. We show that there is no
significant population structure among these Senegal sampling sites. By fitting
demographic models to the synonymous allele-frequency spectrum, we also estimated
a major 60-fold population expansion of this parasite population âˆ¼20,000-40,000
years ago. Using inferred demographic history as a null model for coalescent
simulation, we identified candidate genes under selection, including genes
identified before, such as pfcrt and PfAMA1, as well as new candidate genes.
Interestingly, we also found selection against G/C to A/T changes that offsets
the large mutational bias toward A/T, and two unusual patterns: similar
synonymous and nonsynonymous allele-frequency spectra, and 18% of genes having a 
nonsynonymous-to-synonymous polymorphism ratio >1.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/mss161 
PMCID: PMC3472501
PMID: 22734050  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

