
1. Parasit Vectors. 2012 Jul 27;5:150. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-5-150.

Diversity of anopheline species and their Plasmodium infection status in rural
Bandarban, Bangladesh.

Alam MS(1), Chakma S, Khan WA, Glass GE, Mohon AN, Elahi R, Norris LC, Podder MP,
Ahmed S, Haque R, Sack DA, Sullivan DJ Jr, Norris DE.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research Bangladesh (icddr,b),
Dhaka, Bangladesh. shafiul@icddrb.org

BACKGROUND: Historically, the Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT) of Bangladesh was
considered hyperendemic for malaria. To better understand the contemporary
malaria epidemiology and to develop new and innovative control strategies,
comprehensive epidemiologic studies are ongoing in two endemic unions of
Bandarban district of CHT. Within these studies entomological surveillance has
been undertaken to study the role of the existing anopheline species involved in 
the malaria transmission cycle throughout the year.
METHODS: CDC miniature light traps were deployed to collect anopheline mosquitoes
from the sleeping room of the selected houses each month in a single union
(Kuhalong). Molecular identification was carried out for available Anopheles
species complexes. Circumsporozoite proteins (CSP) for Plasmodium falciparum,
Plasmodium vivax-210 (Pv-210) and Plasmodium vivax-247(Pv-247) were detected by
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) from the female anopheline mosquitoes. 
To confirm CSP-ELISA results, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was also performed.
RESULTS: A total of 2,837 anopheline mosquitoes, of which 2,576 were female,
belonging to 20 species were collected from July 2009-June 2010. Anopheles
jeyporiensis was the most abundant species (18.9%), followed by An. vagus (16.8%)
and An. kochi (14.4%). ELISA was performed on 2,467 female mosquitoes of 19
species. 15 (0.6%) female anophelines belonging to eight species were found to be
positive for Plasmodium infection by CSP-ELISA. Of those, 11 (0.4%) mosquitoes
were positive for P. falciparum and four (0.2%) for Pv-210. No mosquito was found
positive for Pv-247. An. maculatus (2.1%, 2/97) had the highest infection rate
followed by An. umbrosus (1.7%, 2/115) and An. barbirostris (1.1%, 2/186). Other 
infected species were An. nigerrimus, An. nivipes, An. jeyporiensis, An. kochi,
and An. vagus. Out of 11 P. falciparum CSP positive samples, seven turned out to 
be positive by PCR. None of the samples positive for Pv-210 was positive by PCR. 
In terms of abundance and incrimination, the results suggest that An. maculatus, 
An. jeyporiensis and An. nivipes play important roles in malaria transmission in 
Kuhalong.
CONCLUSION: The findings of this study suggest that even in the presence of an
insecticide impregnated bed-net intervention, a number of Anopheles species still
play a role in the transmission of malaria. Further investigations are required
to reveal the detailed biology and insecticide resistance patterns of the vector 
mosquito species in endemic areas in Bangladesh in order to assist with the
planning and implementation of improved malaria control strategies.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-5-150 
PMCID: PMC3419674
PMID: 22839212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

