
1. Malar J. 2012 Jul 28;11:243.

Molecular epidemiology of drug resistance markers of Plasmodium falciparum in
Yunnan Province, China.

Huang F(1), Tang L, Yang H, Zhou S, Liu H, Li J, Guo S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, WHO Collaborating Centre for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and
Filariasis, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of Health,
Shanghai, 200025, PR China.

BACKGROUND: The mutations in Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine resistance
transporter (pfcrt), multidrug resistance 1 (pfmdr1), dihydrofolate reductase
(pfdhfr), dihydropteroate synthase (pfdhps) and ATPase (pfatp6) genes were
associated with anti-malaria drug resistance. The aim of this study was to
investigate the prevalence of polymorphisms in pfcrt, pfmdr1, pfdhfr, pfdhps and 
pfatp6 in Yunnan Province. Finger-prick blood samples were collected from
malaria-positive patients from Yunnan Province in 2009-2010. Single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the resistance-related genes were analysed by various
PCR-based methods.
RESULTS: A total of 108 blood samples were collected. Although chloroquine has
not been used to treat falciparum malaria for nearly 30 years, 95.3% of the
parasites still carried the pfcrt K76T mutation, whereas the majority of isolates
displayed the wild-type pfmdr1 N86 and D1246 sequences. The molecular level of
sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine resistance in P. falciparum was high. The most
prevalent mutation was pfdhfr C59R (95.9%), whereas the frequencies of the
quadruple, triple and double mutants were 22.7% (N51I/C59R/S108N/I164L), 51.5%
(N51I/C59R/S108N, N51I/C59R/I164L and C59R/S108N/ I164L) and 21.6% (N51I/ C59R,
C59R/S108N and C59R/I164L), respectively. A437G (n = 77) and K540E (n = 71) were 
the most prevalent mutations in pfdhps, and 52.7% of the samples were double
mutants, among which A437G/K540E was the most common double mutation (37/49).
Quadruple mutants were found in 28.0% (26/93) of samples. A total of 8.6% of
isolates (8/93) carried the S436A/A437G/A581G triple mutation. No mutations were 
found in pfatp6 codons 623 or 769, but another two mutations (N683K and R756K)
were found in 4.6% (3/97) and 9.2% (6/97) of parasite isolates, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified a high frequency of mutations in pfcrt, pfdhfr
and pfdhps associated with CQ and SP resistance in P. falciparum and no mutations
linked to artemisinin resistance (pfatp6). Molecular epidemiology should be
included in routine surveillance protocols and used to provide complementary
information to assess the appropriateness of the current national anti-malarial
drug policy.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-243 
PMCID: PMC3459721
PMID: 22839209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

