
1. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2012 Sep;19(9):1539-48. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00313-12. Epub
2012 Aug 1.

Multiplex assay detection of immunoglobulin G antibodies that recognize Babesia
microti antigens.

Priest JW(1), Moss DM, Won K, Todd CW, Henderson L, Jones CC, Wilson M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA. jpriest@cdc.gov

Human babesiosis, a blood-borne infection caused by several species of Babesia,
including B. microti, is an emerging disease that is endemic in the Northeast,
upper Midwest, and Pacific Northwest regions of the United States. Risk factors
for babesiosis include exposure to the infected tick vector and blood
transfusions from infected donors. In this work, we cloned and expressed two of
the immunodominant antigens from B. microti and used them in a multiplex bead
format assay (MBA) to detect parasite-specific IgG responses in human sera. The
MBA using recombinant B. microti secreted antigen 1 (BmSA1) protein was more
specific (100%) and slightly more sensitive (98.7%) than the assay using a
truncated recombinant BMN1-17 construct (97.6% and 97.4%, respectively). Although
some antibody reactivity was observed among sera from confirmed-malaria patients,
only one Plasmodium falciparum sample was simultaneously positive for IgG
antibodies to both antigens. Neither antigen reacted with sera from babesiosis
patients who were infected with Babesia species other than B. microti. Both
positive and negative MBA results were reproducible between assays and between
instruments. Additional studies of these recombinant antigens and of the
multiplex bead assay using blood samples from clinically defined babesiosis
patients and from blood donors are needed to more clearly define their usefulness
as a blood screening assay.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00313-12 
PMCID: PMC3428400
PMID: 22855390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

