
1. Parasitol Res. 2012 Nov;111(5):2137-42. doi: 10.1007/s00436-012-3062-z. Epub 2012
Aug 2.

Molecular characterization of avian malaria parasites in three Mediterranean blue
tit (Cyanistes caeruleus) populations.

Ferrer ES(1), García-Navas V, Sanz JJ, Ortego J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciencias Ambientales, Facultad de Ciencias Ambientales y
Bioquímicas, Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, Avenida Carlos III s/n, 45071
Toledo, Spain. esperanza.sferrer@uclm.es

We genetically analysed malaria parasites (Protozoa) in three Mediterranean blue 
tit (Cyanistes caeruleus) populations from central Spain. A total of 853 breeding
individuals were screened for parasites of the genera Plasmodium and Haemoproteus
using a very efficient polymerase chain reaction approach that amplifies a
partial segment of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene of these parasites. We
have found six lineages of Plasmodium (SGS1, GRW11, COLL1, DELURB4, GRW04 and
BLUTI10) parasitizing the studied populations but we did not detect any infection
by Haemoproteus. One of the detected lineages (BLUTI10) has not been previously
described in any bird species and this is the first study recording lineages
DELURB4 and GRW04 in blue tits. SGS1 (belonging to the morphospecies Plasmodium
relictum) was the most frequent lineage (overall prevalence, 24 %), whereas the
other lineages showed a much lower prevalence (<4 %). Only a small proportion
(12.2 %) of positive amplifications of the most common lineage (SGS1) was
detected in blood smears using light microscopy and infection intensities were
very low (mean ± SE, 2.0 ± 1.4 parasites/2,000 erythrocytes). We have also found 
strong inter-population variability in prevalence patterns (12-41 % for lineage
SGS1), suggesting important differences in parasite transmission rates among the 
geographically close studied localities.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-012-3062-z 
PMID: 22855242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

