
1. BMC Genomics. 2012 Aug 13;13:389. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-389.

Insights into the genome structure and copy-number variation of Eimeria tenella.

Lim LS(1), Tay YL, Alias H, Wan KL, Dear PH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences and Biotechnology, Faculty of Science and Technology,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 43600 UKM Bangi, Selangor DE, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Eimeria is a genus of parasites in the same phylum (Apicomplexa) as
human parasites such as Toxoplasma, Cryptosporidium and the malaria parasite
Plasmodium. As an apicomplexan whose life-cycle involves a single host, Eimeria
is a convenient model for understanding this group of organisms. Although the
genomes of the Apicomplexa are diverse, that of Eimeria is unique in being
composed of large alternating blocks of sequence with very different
characteristics - an arrangement seen in no other organism. This arrangement has 
impeded efforts to fully sequence the genome of Eimeria, which remains the last
of the major apicomplexans to be fully analyzed. In order to increase the value
of the genome sequence data and aid in the effort to gain a better understanding 
of the Eimeria tenella genome, we constructed a whole genome map for the
parasite.
RESULTS: A total of 1245 contigs representing 70.0% of the whole genome assembly 
sequences (Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute) were selected and subjected to marker
selection. Subsequently, 2482 HAPPY markers were developed and typed. Of these,
795 were considered as usable markers, and utilized in the construction of a
HAPPY map. Markers developed from chromosomally-assigned genes were then
integrated into the HAPPY map and this aided the assignment of a number of
linkage groups to their respective chromosomes. BAC-end sequences and contigs
from whole genome sequencing were also integrated to improve and validate the
HAPPY map. This resulted in an integrated HAPPY map consisting of 60 linkage
groups that covers approximately half of the estimated 60â€‰Mb genome. Further
analysis suggests that the segmental organization first seen in Chromosome 1 is
present throughout the genome, with repeat-poor (P) regions alternating with
repeat-rich (R) regions. Evidence of copy-number variation between strains was
also uncovered.
CONCLUSIONS: This paper describes the application of a whole genome mapping
method to improve the assembly of the genome of E. tenella from shotgun data, and
to help reveal its overall structure. A preliminary assessment of copy-number
variation (extra or missing copies of genomic segments) between strains of E.
tenella was also carried out. The emerging picture is of a very unusual genome
architecture displaying inter-strain copy-number variation. We suggest that these
features may be related to the known ability of this parasite to rapidly develop 
drug resistance.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-389 
PMCID: PMC3505466
PMID: 22889016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

