
1. FEBS J. 2012 Oct;279(20):3872-88. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2012.08746.x. Epub
2012 Sep 13.

A novel trafficking pathway in Plasmodium falciparum for the organellar
localization of glutathione peroxidase-like thioredoxin peroxidase.

Chaudhari R(1), Narayan A, Patankar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, IIT Bombay, Mumbai, India.

Although common in plants, very few proteins are currently known to be localized 
to both the plastid and the mitochondrion in Plasmodium falciparum. One such
protein is P. falciparum glutathione peroxidase-like thioredoxin peroxidase
(PfTPx(Gl)) which we show, by immunofluorescence imaging and bioinformatics
predictions, is localized to the apicoplast, the mitochondrion and the cytosol.
The distribution of PfTPx(Gl) was random in the population, with the protein
localizing to any one organelle in some parasites and to both in others. It has
been proposed that targeting to each organelle occurs via independent pathways
that do not proceed via the Golgi. However, for PfTPx(Gl), both incubation at low
temperature (15 °C) and Brefeldin A treatment reversibly blocked targeting to
these organelles, suggesting the involvement of a novel trafficking route, most
probably via the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi. This idea is further supported 
by the lack of cleavage of the putative N-terminal signal sequence of PfTPx(Gl), 
and this N-terminal extension did not compromise PfTPx(Gl) enzyme activity. In
the context of evolution, a common pathway for the dual localization of a single 
gene product, such as the primitive endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi route, may have
been retained as opposed to optimization for individual organellar import
pathways.

© 2012 The Authors Journal compilation © 2012 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2012.08746.x 
PMID: 22889167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

