
1. Cell Microbiol. 2012 Dec;14(12):1836-48. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12004. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Identification of a cis-acting DNA-protein interaction implicated in singular var
gene choice in Plasmodium falciparum.

Brancucci NM(1), Witmer K, Schmid CD, Flueck C, Voss TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Parasitology and Infection Biology, Swiss Tropical and
Public Health Institute, 4051 Basel, Switzerland.

Plasmodium falciparum is responsible for the most severe form of malaria in
humans. Antigenic variation of P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 leads
to immune evasion and occurs through switches in mutually exclusive var gene
transcription. The recent progress in Plasmodium epigenetics notwithstanding, the
mechanisms by which singularity of var activation is achieved are unknown. Here, 
we employed a functional approach to dissect the role of var gene upstream
regions in mutually exclusive activation. Besides identifying sequence elements
involved in activation and initiation of transcription, we mapped a region
downstream of the transcriptional start site that is required to maintain
singular var gene choice. Activation of promoters lacking this sequence occurs no
longer in competition with endogenous var genes. Within this region we pinpointed
a sequence-specific DNA-protein interaction involving a cis-acting sequence motif
that is conserved in the majority of var loci. These results suggest an important
role for this interaction in mutually exclusive locus recognition. Our findings
are furthermore consistent with a novel mechanism for the control of singular
gene choice in eukaryotes. In addition to their importance in P. falciparum
antigenic variation, our results may also help to explain similar processes in
other systems.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12004 
PMCID: PMC3549481
PMID: 22891919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

