
1. Trop Med Int Health. 2012 Nov;17(11):1329-34. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-3156.2012.03071.x. Epub 2012 Aug 22.

Novel quadruple mutations in dihydropteroate synthase genes of Plasmodium
falciparum in West Bengal, India.

Das S(1), Chakraborty SP, Tripathy S, Hati A, Roy S.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Microbiology Laboratory, Vidyasagar University, Midnapore,
India  Division of Parasitology, Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, Kolkata,
India.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the anti-folate (sulphadoxine)-resistant pattern in
Kolkata, one of the malaria endemic zones of Eastern India.
METHODS: At first, 107 P. falciparum suspected cases were enrolled in this study.
Ninety isolates (84.11%) of 107 suspected cases were analysed, as they had
mono-infection with P. falciparum. In vitro susceptibility assays were performed 
in all 90 isolates. Parasitic DNA was isolated by phenol-chloroform extraction
method and polymerase chain reaction was followed by restriction fragment length 
polymorphism analysis of different codons of the pfdhps gene (436, 437, 540, 581 
and 613).
RESULTS: Among 90 isolates from Kolkata, dhps mutant isolates at codons 436, 437,
540, 581 and 613 were found in 53.33%, 67.78%, 46.66%, 15.56% and 45.55%,
respectively. In vitro sulphadoxine resistance was found in 49 isolates (54.44%).
Interestingly we found 33 isolates (36.67%) with quadruple AGEAT mutant allele,
of which 32 isolates (96.97%) were highly sulphadoxine resistant (P < 0.01) in
vitro.
CONCLUSION: Our present findings implicate that because of enormous drug
(sulphfadoxine) pressure, novel AGEAT mutation was highly correlated (P < 0.01)
with sulphadoxine resistance.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3156.2012.03071.x 
PMID: 22909027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

