
1. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Dec;42(12):3291-301. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242689. Epub 2012
Oct 16.

Malaria infection alters the expression of B-cell activating factor resulting in 
diminished memory antibody responses and survival.

Liu XQ(1), Stacey KJ, Horne-Debets JM, Cridland JA, Fischer K, Narum D, Mackay F,
Pierce SK, Wykes MN.

Author information: 
(1)The Queensland Institute of Medical Research, The Bancroft Centre, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.

Malaria is a major cause of morbidity worldwide with reports of over 200-500
million infected individuals and nearly 1 million deaths each year. Antibodies
have been shown to play a critical role in controlling the blood stage of this
disease; however, in malaria-endemic areas antibody immunity is slow to develop
despite years of exposure to Plasmodium spp. the causative parasite. Using rodent
Plasmodium yoelii YM, we provide evidence that malarial infections result in a
decrease in the proportion of DCs that express the B-cell survival factor, BAFF, 
resulting in a decreased ability of these DCs to support memory B-cell
differentiation into antibody secreting cells (ASCs) and/or the survival of ASCs.
Further, compared with infected WT mice, ASC numbers were significantly increased
in malaria-infected transgenic mice that either overexpressed BAFF or mice with
BAFF-independent B-cell survival (B-cell-restricted TRAF3 deletion). Remarkably, 
BAFF-overexpressing mice were protected from lethal malaria infections,
indicating the significance of the role BAFF plays in determining the outcome of 
malaria infections. These findings describe a previously unappreciated mechanism 
by which Plasmodium spp. can depress the generation of protective antibody
responses.

Â© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201242689 
PMCID: PMC4075050
PMID: 22936176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

