
1. Parasitology. 2013 Jan;140(1):21-8. doi: 10.1017/S0031182012001217. Epub 2012 Sep
5.

Microsatellite loci over a thirty-three year period for a malaria parasite
(Plasmodium mexicanum): bottleneck in effective population size and effect on
allele frequencies.

Schall JJ(1), St Denis KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405, USA.
jschall@uvm.edu

Changes in population allele frequencies may be driven by several forces,
including selection and drift, and are revealed only by sampling over many
generations. Such studies, however, are rare for protist parasites.
Microsatellite allele frequencies for 4 loci were followed in a population of
Plasmodium mexicanum, a malaria parasite of lizards in California USA at 1 site
from 1978 to 2010. Rapid turnover of the lizards indicates the parasite was
studied for a minimum of 33 transmission cycles and possibly twice that number.
Sample sizes ranged from 841 to 956 scored parasite clones per locus. DNA was
extracted from frozen dried blood and blood removed from stained blood smears
from the earliest years, and a verification study demonstrated DNA from the blood
smears provided valid genetic data. Parasite prevalence and effective population 
size (Ne) dropped after 2000, remaining lower for the next decade. For 2 loci,
allele frequencies appeared stable for the first 2 decades of the study, but
changed more rapidly after the decline in prevalence. Allele frequencies changed 
more gradually for the other 2 loci. Genetic drift could account for changes in
allele frequencies, especially after the drop in prevalence and Ne, but the force
of selection could also have driven the observed patterns.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182012001217 
PMID: 22948096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

