
1. Malar J. 2012 Sep 5;11:312. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-312.

Optimization of flow cytometric detection and cell sorting of transgenic
Plasmodium parasites using interchangeable optical filters.

Vorobjev IA(1), Buchholz K, Prabhat P, Ketman K, Egan ES, Marti M, Duraisingh MT,
Barteneva NS.

Author information: 
(1)Immune Disease Institute and Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
Children's Hospital, D-239, 200 Longwood Avenue, 02115, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Malaria remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide.
Flow cytometry-based assays that take advantage of fluorescent protein
(FP)-expressing malaria parasites have proven to be valuable tools for
quantification and sorting of specific subpopulations of parasite-infected red
blood cells. However, identification of rare subpopulations of parasites using
green fluorescent protein (GFP) labelling is complicated by autofluorescence (AF)
of red blood cells and low signal from transgenic parasites. It has been
suggested that cell sorting yield could be improved by using filters that
precisely match the emission spectrum of GFP.
METHODS: Detection of transgenic Plasmodium falciparum parasites expressing
either tdTomato or GFP was performed using a flow cytometer with interchangeable 
optical filters. Parasitaemia was evaluated using different optical filters and, 
after optimization of optics, the GFP-expressing parasites were sorted and
analysed by microscopy after cytospin preparation and by imaging cytometry.
RESULTS: A new approach to evaluate filter performance in flow cytometry using
two-dimensional dot blot was developed. By selecting optical filters with narrow 
bandpass (BP) and maximum position of filter emission close to GFP maximum
emission in the FL1 channel (510/20, 512/20 and 517/20; dichroics 502LP and
466LP), AF was markedly decreased and signal-background improve dramatically.
Sorting of GFP-expressing parasite populations in infected red blood cells at 90 
or 95% purity with these filters resulted in 50-150% increased yield when
compared to the standard filter set-up. The purity of the sorted population was
confirmed using imaging cytometry and microscopy of cytospin preparations of
sorted red blood cells infected with transgenic malaria parasites.
DISCUSSION: Filter optimization is particularly important for applications where 
the FP signal and percentage of positive events are relatively low, such as
analysis of parasite-infected samples with in the intention of gene-expression
profiling and analysis. The approach outlined here results in substantially
improved yield of GFP-expressing parasites, and requires decreased sorting time
in comparison to standard methods. It is anticipated that this protocol will be
useful for a wide range of applications involving rare events.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-312 
PMCID: PMC3544587
PMID: 22950515  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

