
1. PLoS Med. 2012;9(9):e1001305. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001305. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Reduced risk of Plasmodium vivax malaria in Papua New Guinean children with
Southeast Asian ovalocytosis in two cohorts and a case-control study.

Rosanas-Urgell A(1), Lin E, Manning L, Rarau P, Laman M, Senn N, Grimberg BT,
Tavul L, Stanisic DI, Robinson LJ, Aponte JJ, Dabod E, Reeder JC, Siba P,
Zimmerman PA, Davis TM, King CL, Michon P, Mueller I.

Author information: 
(1)PNG Institute of Medical Research, Madang, Papua New Guinea.

BACKGROUND: The erythrocyte polymorphism, Southeast Asian ovalocytosis (SAO)
(which results from a 27-base pair deletion in the erythrocyte band 3 gene,
SLC4A1Δ27) protects against cerebral malaria caused by Plasmodium falciparum;
however, it is unknown whether this polymorphism also protects against P. vivax
infection and disease.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: The association between SAO and P. vivax infection was
examined through genotyping of 1,975 children enrolled in three independent
epidemiological studies conducted in the Madang area of Papua New Guinea. SAO was
associated with a statistically significant 46% reduction in the incidence of
clinical P. vivax episodes (adjusted incidence rate ratio [IRR] = 0.54, 95% CI
0.40-0.72, p<0.0001) in a cohort of infants aged 3-21 months and a significant
52% reduction in P. vivax (blood-stage) reinfection diagnosed by PCR (95% CI
22-71, p = 0.003) and 55% by light microscopy (95% CI 13-77, p = 0.014),
respectively, in a cohort of children aged 5-14 years. SAO was also associated
with a reduction in risk of P. vivax parasitaemia in children 3-21 months
(1,111/µl versus 636/µl, p = 0.011) and prevalence of P. vivax infections in
children 15-21 months (odds ratio [OR] = 0.39, 95% CI 0.23-0.67, p = 0.001). In a
case-control study of children aged 0.5-10 years, no child with SAO was found
among 27 cases with severe P. vivax or mixed P. falciparum/P. vivax malaria (OR =
0, 95% CI 0-1.56, p = 0.11). SAO was associated with protection against severe P.
falciparum malaria (OR = 0.38, 95% CI 0.15-0.87, p = 0.014) but no effect was
seen on either the risk of acquiring blood-stage infections or uncomplicated
episodes with P. falciparum. Although Duffy antigen receptor expression and
function were not affected on SAO erythrocytes compared to non-SAO children, high
level (>90% binding inhibition) P. vivax Duffy binding protein-specific binding
inhibitory antibodies were observed significantly more often in sera from SAO
than non-SAO children (SAO, 22.2%; non-SAO, 6.7%; p = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: In three independent studies, we observed strong associations
between SAO and protection against P. vivax malaria by a mechanism that is
independent of the Duffy antigen. P. vivax malaria may have contributed to
shaping the unique host genetic adaptations to malaria in Asian and Oceanic
populations. Please see later in the article for the Editors' Summary.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001305 
PMCID: PMC3433408
PMID: 22973182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

