
1. BMC Genomics. 2012 Sep 23;13:503. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-503.

High-resolution genotyping and mapping of recombination and gene conversion in
the protozoan Theileria parva using whole genome sequencing.

Henson S(1), Bishop RP, Morzaria S, Spooner PR, Pelle R, Poveda L, Ebeling M,
KÃ¼ng E, Certa U, Daubenberger CA, Qi W.

Author information: 
(1)International Livestock Research Institute, Nairobi 00100, Kenya.

BACKGROUND: Theileria parva is a tick-borne protozoan parasite, which causes East
Coast Fever, a disease of cattle in sub-Saharan Africa. Like Plasmodium
falciparum, the parasite undergoes a transient diploid life-cycle stage in the
gut of the arthropod vector, which involves an obligate sexual cycle. As assessed
using low-resolution VNTR markers, the crossover (CO) rate in T. parva is
relatively high and has been reported to vary across different regions of the
genome; non-crossovers (NCOs) and CO-associated gene conversions have not yet
been characterised due to the lack of informative markers. To examine all
recombination events at high marker resolution, we sequenced the haploid genomes 
of two parental strains, and two recombinant clones derived from ticks fed on
cattle that had been simultaneously co-infected with two different parasite
isolates.
RESULTS: By comparing the genome sequences, we were able to genotype over 64
thousand SNP markers with an average spacing of 127 bp in the two progeny clones.
Previously unrecognized COs in sub-telomeric regions were detected. About 50% of 
CO breakpoints were accompanied by gene conversion events. Such a high fraction
of COs accompanied by gene conversions demonstrated the contributions of meiotic 
recombination to the diversity and evolutionary success of T. parva, as the
process not only redistributed existing genetic variations, but also altered
allelic frequencies. Compared to COs, NCOs were more frequently observed and more
uniformly distributed across the genome. In both progeny clones, genomic regions 
with more SNP markers had a reduced frequency of COs or NCOs, suggesting that the
sequence divergence between the parental strains was high enough to adversely
affect recombination frequencies. Intra-species polymorphism analysis identified 
81 loci as likely to be under selection in the sequenced genomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Using whole genome sequencing of two recombinant clones and their
parents, we generated maps of COs, NCOs, and CO-associated gene conversion events
for T. parva. The data comprises one of the highest-resolution genome-wide
analyses of the multiple outcomes of meiotic recombination for this pathogen. The
study also demonstrates the usefulness of high throughput sequencing typing for
detailed analysis of recombination in organisms in which conventional genetic
analysis is technically difficult.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-503 
PMCID: PMC3575351
PMID: 22998600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

