
1. Steroids. 2013 Feb;78(2):220-7. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2012.10.004. Epub 2012
Nov 2.

Testosterone-induced persistent susceptibility to Plasmodium chabaudi malaria:
long-term changes of lincRNA and mRNA expression in the spleen.

Dkhil MA(1), Al-Quraishy S, Delic D, Abdel-Baki AA, Wunderlich F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia. mohameddkhil@yahoo.com

Testosterone (T) is known to induce persistent susceptibility to blood-stage
malaria of Plasmodium chabaudi in otherwise resistant female C57BL/6 mice, which 
is associated with permanent changes in mRNA expression of the liver. Here, we
investigate the spleen as the major effector against blood-stage malaria for any 
possible T-induced long-term effects on lincRNA and mRNA expression. Female
C57BL/6 mice were treated with T for 3 weeks, then T was withdrawn for 12 weeks
before challenging with P. chabaudi. LincRNA and mRNA expression was examined
after 12 weeks of T-withdrawal and after subsequent infections using Agilent
whole mouse genome oligo microarrays. Our data show for the first time long-term 
effects of T on lincRNA expression evidenced directly as persistent changes after
T-withdrawal for 12 weeks and indirectly as altered responsiveness of expression 
to P. chabaudi infections. There are 3 lincRNA-species upregulated and 10
lincRNAs downregulated by more than 2-fold (p<0.01). In addition, 11 and 10 mRNAs
are persistently up- and downregulated by T, respectively. These changes remain
not sustained during infections at peak parasitemia, when 15 other lincRNAs and 9
other mRNAs exhibit an altered expression. The only exception is the Tnk1-mRNA
encoding the non-receptor tyrosine kinase 1 that is persistently downregulated by
0.34-fold after T-withdrawal and that becomes upregulated by 5.9-fold upon
infection at peak parasitemia, suggesting an involvement of tyrosine
phosphorylation by Tnk1 in mediating long-term effects of T in the spleen. The
T-induced changes in splenic mRNA expression are totally different to those
previously observed in the liver. Collectively, our data support the view that T 
induces long-term organ-specific changes in both lincRNA and mRNA expression,
that presumably contribute to organ-specific dysfunctions upon infection with
blood-stage malaria of P. chabaudi.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.steroids.2012.10.004 
PMID: 23123741  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

