
1. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2012;22(3):243-8.

Edible vaccine: a new platform for the development of malaria vaccine.

Kumar CS(1), Deepesh G, Mahavir Y, Archana T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Rajiv Gandhi Proudyogiki Vishwavidhyalaya (State
Technological University of Madhya Pradesh), Airport Bypass Road, Bhopal (M.P.)
462033, India. sonu.veer2050@gmail.com

The plasmodium vivax is the most prevalent malaria parasite. The world
essentially needs a malaria vaccine to alleviate the human suffering associated
with the parasitic disease that kills more than one million people annually. The 
use of plants for the expression of the proteins of disease-causing vehicle in
transgenic plants has been increasingly used in the development of experimental
vaccines, largely oriented to the improvement of edible vaccines. Currently,
through modern biotechnology, there has been a revival in obtaining a new edible 
vaccine against the malaria parasite from plant sources. Through genetic
alteration, it is now recognized that plants are potentially a new source of
recombinant proteins including vaccines, antibodies, blood substitutes, and other
therapeutic entities. Plant-derived antibodies and other proteins are mostly
valuable since they are free of mammalian viral vectors and human pathogens.
Although significant progress has been achieved in the research for edible
vaccine in Plasmodium falciparum, limited progress has been made in the
Plasmodium vivax component that might be eligible for edible vaccine development.
We describe the overall strategy recommended by plants, which include high
biomass production and low cost of cultivation, relatively fast "gene to protein"
time, low capital and operating costs, outstanding scalability, eukaryotic
posttranslational modifications, and a relatively high protein yield.

DOI: 10.1615/critreveukargeneexpr.v22.i3.70 
PMID: 23140165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

