
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49871. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049871. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

Multiple-clone activation of hypnozoites is the leading cause of relapse in
Plasmodium vivax infection.

de Araujo FC(1), de Rezende AM, Fontes CJ, Carvalho LH, Alves de Brito CF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria, Centro de Pesquisas Ren√© Rachou - Fiocruz Minas, Belo
Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax infection is characterized by a dormant hepatic
stage, the hypnozoite that is activated at varying periods of time after
clearance of the primary acute blood-stage, resulting in relapse. Differentiation
between treatment failure and new infections requires characterization of initial
infections, relapses, and clone multiplicity in vivax malaria infections.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Parasite DNA obtained from primary/relapse paired
blood samples of 30 patients with P. vivax infection in Brazil was analyzed using
10 molecular markers (8 microsatellites and MSP-1 blocks 2 and 10). Cloning of
PCR products and genotyping was used to identify low-frequency clones of
parasites. We demonstrated a high frequency of multiple-clone infections in both 
primary and relapse infections. Few alleles were identified per locus, but the
combination of these alleles produced many haplotypes. Consequently, the majority
of parasites involved in relapse showed haplotypes that were distinct from those 
of primary infections. Plasmodium vivax relapse was characterized by temporal
variations in the predominant parasite clones.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The high rate of low frequency alleles observed in both
primary and relapse infections, along with temporal variation in the predominant 
alleles, might be the source of reported heterologous hypnozoite activation. Our 
findings complicate the concept of heterologous activation, suggesting the
involvement of undetermined mechanisms based on host or environmental factors in 
the simultaneous activation of multiple clones of hypnozoites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049871 
PMCID: PMC3503861
PMID: 23185469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

