
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 26;109(52):E3678-86. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1214572109. Epub 2012 Nov 29.

Insulator-like pairing elements regulate silencing and mutually exclusive
expression in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Avraham I(1), Schreier J, Dzikowski R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Institute for Medical
Research Israel-Canada, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Plasmodium falciparum causes the deadliest form of human malaria. Its virulence
is attributed to its ability to modify the infected RBC and to evade human immune
attack through antigenic variation. Antigenic variation is achieved through tight
regulation of antigenic switches between variable surface antigens named "P.
falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein-1" encoded by the var multicopy gene
family. Individual parasites express only a single var gene at a time,
maintaining the remaining var genes in a transcriptionally silent state. Strict
pairing between var gene promoters and a second promoter within an intron found
in each var gene is required for silencing and counting of var genes by the
mechanism that controls mutually exclusive expression. We have identified and
characterized insulator-like DNA elements that are required for pairing var
promoters and introns and thus are essential for regulating silencing and
mutually exclusive expression. These elements, found in the regulatory regions of
each var gene, are bound by distinct nuclear protein complexes. Any alteration in
the specific, paired structure of these elements by either deletion or insertion 
of additional elements results in an unregulated var gene. We propose a model by 
which silencing and mutually exclusive expression of var genes is regulated by
the precise arrangement of insulator-like DNA pairing elements.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1214572109 
PMCID: PMC3535642
PMID: 23197831  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

