
1. J Infect Dis. 2013 Feb 1;207(3):511-9. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jis709. Epub 2012 Nov 
29.

Molecular basis of allele-specific efficacy of a blood-stage malaria vaccine:
vaccine development implications.

Ouattara A(1), Takala-Harrison S, Thera MA, Coulibaly D, Niangaly A, Saye R, Tolo
Y, Dutta S, Heppner DG, Soisson L, Diggs CL, Vekemans J, Cohen J, Blackwelder WC,
Dube T, Laurens MB, Doumbo OK, Plowe CV.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research and Training Center, University of Sciences, Techniques and
Technology, Bamako, Mali.

The disappointing efficacy of blood-stage malaria vaccines may be explained in
part by allele-specific immune responses that are directed against polymorphic
epitopes on blood-stage antigens. FMP2.1/AS02(A), a blood-stage candidate vaccine
based on apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1) from the 3D7 strain of Plasmodium
falciparum, had allele-specific efficacy against clinical malaria in a phase II
trial in Malian children. We assessed the cross-protective efficacy of the
malaria vaccine and inferred which polymorphic amino acid positions in AMA1 were 
the targets of protective allele-specific immune responses. FMP2.1/AS02(A) had
the highest efficacy against AMA1 alleles that were identical to the 3D7
vaccine-type allele at 8 highly polymorphic amino acid positions in the cluster 1
loop (c1L) but differed from 3D7 elsewhere in the molecule. Comparison of the
incidence of vaccine-type alleles before and after vaccination in the malaria
vaccine and control groups and examination of the patterns of allele change at
polymorphic positions in consecutive malaria episodes suggest that the highly
polymorphic amino acid position 197 in c1L was the most critical determinant of
allele-specific efficacy. These results indicate that a multivalent AMA1 vaccine 
with broad efficacy could include only a limited set of key alleles of this
extremely polymorphic antigen.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jis709 
PMCID: PMC3537449
PMID: 23204168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

