
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Feb;57(2):833-9. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01006-12.
Epub 2012 Dec 3.

Mefloquine exposure induces cell cycle delay and reveals stage-specific
expression of the pfmdr1 gene.

Boh√≥rquez EB(1), Juliano JJ, Kim HS, Meshnick SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Drug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum malaria is a major public health problem. An
elevated pfmdr1 gene copy number (CN) is known to decrease parasite sensitivity
to the commonly used antimalarial mefloquine (MFQ). To understand the
relationship between pfmdr1 CN and mefloquine resistance, we evaluated pfmdr1
transcript levels in three P. falciparum strains with different CNs in the
presence and absence of MFQ. Parasite strains with multiple pfmdr1 gene copies
exhibited higher relative transcript levels than single-copy parasites, and MFQ
induced pfmdr1 expression above the levels without treatment in all three strains
evaluated. Concomitant morphology analyses of the sampled cultures revealed that 
MFQ treatment of synchronized ring-stage parasites induced a delay in parasite
maturation through the intraerythrocytic cycle. pfmdr1 expression peaks in the
ring stage, and MFQ could be causing increased transcription by delaying parasite
maturation. However, pretreatment with mefloquine did not affect the artemisinin 
in vitro half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC(50)). These results suggest
that MFQ-induced increases in pfmdr1 expression are the direct result of the
maturation delay at the ring stage but that this change in expression does not
affect the antimalarial activity of artemisinin.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01006-12 
PMCID: PMC3553685
PMID: 23208721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

