
1. Gene. 2013 Feb 15;515(1):99-109. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.11.020. Epub 2012 Dec
2.

Plasmodium falciparum RuvB1 is an active DNA helicase and translocates in the
5'-3' direction.

Ahmad M(1), Tuteja R.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
P.O. Box 10504, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi-110067, India.

RuvB family of protein contains two similar kinds of proteins i.e. RuvB1 and
RuvB2 from yeast to human. These proteins belong to the AAA+ class of proteins
and are critical components of several multiprotein complexes involved in diverse
cellular activities. There are two RuvB proteins annotated in the Plasmodium
database but the identification of the third protein recently by our lab has
raised the question why Plasmodium falciparum contains three RuvB proteins
instead of two. Hence the biochemical characterizations of these proteins have
become essential to understand the role of these proteins in the malaria
parasite. Recently we have reported the characterization of the recombinant
PfRuvB3, which contains ATPase activity but lacks DNA helicase activity. In the
present study we report the phylogenetic analysis and detailed biochemical
characterization of one of the other RuvB homologue RuvB1 from P. falciparum.
PfRuvB1 shows considerable homology with human as well as yeast RuvB1 and
contains Walker motif A and Walker motif B. The activity analysis of this protein
revealed that PfRuvB1 is an ATPase and this activity increased significantly in
the presence of ss-DNA. PfRuvB1 also contains DNA helicase activity and
translocates preferentially in 5' to 3' direction. In vivo investigation of
PfRuvB1 revealed that it is constitutively expressed during all the stages of
intraerythrocytic cycle of P. falciparum and localizes mainly to the nucleus.
These studies will make important contribution in understanding the role of RuvB 
protein in P. falciparum.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.11.020 
PMID: 23219504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

