
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2013 Jan;187(1):43-51. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.11.007. Epub 2012 Dec 16.

Sphingolipid synthesis and scavenging in the intracellular apicomplexan parasite,
Toxoplasma gondii.

Pratt S(1), Wansadhipathi-Kannangara NK, Bruce CR, Mina JG, Shams-Eldin H, Casas 
J, Hanada K, Schwarz RT, Sonda S, Denny PW.

Author information: 
(1)Biophysical Sciences Institute, Department of Chemistry and School of
Biological Sciences, University Science Laboratories, Durham DH1 3LE, UK.

Sphingolipids are essential components of eukaryotic cell membranes, particularly
the plasma membrane, and are involved in a diverse array of signal transduction
pathways. Mammals produce sphingomyelin (SM) as the primary complex sphingolipid 
via the well characterised SM synthase. In contrast yeast, plants and some
protozoa utilise an evolutionarily related inositol phosphorylceramide (IPC)
synthase to synthesise IPC. This activity has no mammalian equivalent and IPC
synthase has been proposed as a target for anti-fungals and anti-protozoals.
However, detailed knowledge of the sphingolipid biosynthetic pathway of the
apicomplexan protozoan parasites was lacking. In this study bioinformatic
analyses indicated a single copy orthologue of the putative SM synthase from the 
apicomplexan Plasmodium falciparum (the causative agent of malaria) was a bona
fide sphingolipid synthase in the related model parasite, Toxoplasma gondii
(TgSLS). Subsequently, TgSLS was indicated, by complementation of a mutant cell
line, to be a functional orthologue of the yeast IPC synthase (AUR1p),
demonstrating resistance to the well characterised AUR1p inhibitor aureobasidin
A. In vitro, recombinant TgSLS exhibited IPC synthase activity and, for the first
time, the presence of IPC was demonstrated in T. gondii lipid extracts by mass
spectrometry. Furthermore, host sphingolipid biosynthesis was indicated to
influence, but be non-essential for, T. gondii proliferation, suggesting that
whilst scavenging does take place de novo sphingolipid synthesis may be important
for parasitism.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.11.007 
PMCID: PMC3629565
PMID: 23246819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

