
1. Malar J. 2012 Dec 22;11:430. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-430.

Plasmodium vivax infection in Anajás, State of Pará: no differential resistance
profile among Duffy-negative and Duffy-positive individuals.

Carvalho TA(1), Queiroz MG, Cardoso GL, Diniz IG, Silva AN, Pinto AY, Guerreiro
JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Genética Humana e Médica, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal do Pará, Cidade Universitária Prof, José da Silva Neto, Rua 
Augusto Corrêa, N º 1, Guamá, CEP 66075-110, Belém, PA, Brasil.

BACKGROUND: There is large body of evidence that states that invasion of
Plasmodium vivax requires the Duffy antigen, but the universality of this
specificity is certainly now under question with recent reports showing that in
some parts of the world P. vivax infects and causes disease in Duffy-negative
people. These findings reinforce the idea that this parasite is rapidly evolving,
being able to use other receptors than Duffy to invade the erythrocytes, which
may have an enormous impact in P. vivax current distribution. The presence of P. 
vivax infection in Duffy-negative individuals was investigated in a
cross-sectional study conducted in Anajás, Archipelago of Marajó, State of Pará, 
which is an area of malaria transmission in the Brazilian Amazonia.
METHODS: Duffy genotyping and Plasmodium species diagnostic assays were performed
successfully in 678 individuals. An allele-specific primer polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) technique was used for Duffy blood group genotyping.
Identification of Plasmodium species was achieved by conventional blood smear
light microscopy and a TaqMan-based real-time PCR method to detect mitochondrial 
genome of Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax.
RESULTS: Plasmodium spp. infection was detected in 137 samples (20.2%).
Prevalence of each Plasmodium species was 13.9% P. vivax, 5.8% P. falciparum, and
0.6% P. vivax plus P. falciparum. Overall, 4.3% (29/678) were genotyped as
Duffy-negative (FY*BES/*BES). Among Duffy-negative individuals 6.9% were P. vivax
PCR positive and among Duffy-positive 14.2% were P. vivax PCR positive. Although 
lower, the risk of Duffy-negatives to experience a P. vivax blood stage infection
was not significantly different to that of Duffy-positives. Furthermore, the
genotypic and allelic frequencies of the Duffy blood group among P.
vivax-infected patients and in the control group did not differ significantly,
also suggesting no reduction in infection rates among the carriers of FY*BES
allele.
CONCLUSIONS: The data obtained in Anajás showed no differential resistance vivax 
malaria among Duffy-negative and Duffy-positive individuals. This result needs
additional confirmation through a deeper evaluation in a larger sample of
patients with P. vivax malaria and molecular parasite characterization.
Nonetheless, this genetic profile of the parasite may be contributing to the high
incidence of malaria in the municipality.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-430 
PMCID: PMC3544589
PMID: 23259672  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

