
1. J Parasitol. 2013 Jun;99(3):522-7. doi: 10.1645/12-73.1. Epub 2012 Dec 21.

Blood parasites in nestlings of wood stork populations from three regions of the 
American continent.

Villar CM(1), Bryan AL Jr, Lance SL, Braga EM, Congrains C, Del Lama SN.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética e Evolução, Universidade Federal de São Carlos,
Rodovia Washington Luís, km 235, 13565-905 São Carlos, São Paulo, Brazil.

This study documents the prevalences and lineages of hemoparasites in wood stork 
nestlings from 3 regions of the American continent: southeastern United States (n
= 90), northern Brazil (n = 74), and central-western Brazil (n = 125).
Identification was based on PCR amplification of a mitochondrial small subunit
ribosomal RNA gene. A fragment of the hemoparasite cytochrome B gene in infected 
individuals was utilized for Bayesian phylogenetic analysis. Four wood stork
nestlings were infected by Haemoproteus, 1 from northern Brazil and 3 from the
United States, and all shared the same haplotype. Morphological analysis
confirmed the infection of the U.S. birds by Haemoproteus. Infection by
Plasmodium was found in wood stork nestlings from northern (6) and
central-western Brazil (14). Five Plasmodium lineages (MYCAMP1-2, and MYCAMP4-6) 
were found in the Brazilian central-western region and 3 Plasmodium lineages
(MYCAMP2-3, and MYCAMP7) were found in the northern region. The most prevalent
haplotype (MYCAMP2) differs from the others by 1 mutation, and the less prevalent
haplotypes are derived from MYCAMP2. We did not find Plasmodium or Haemoproteus
in nestlings younger than 15 and 30 days old, respectively. This is the first
documentation of Plasmodium and Haemoproteus infection in wood storks in
Brazilian breeding populations. Potential connectivity among wood stork
populations was indirectly supported by the presence of identical Haemoproteus
lineages in U.S. and northern Brazilian populations, and by the presence of
identical Plasmodium haplotypes in the northern and central-western Brazilian
populations.

DOI: 10.1645/12-73.1 
PMID: 23259406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

