
1. Trop Med Health. 2012 Sep;40(3):71-7. doi: 10.2149/tmh.2012-13. Epub 2012 Aug 11.

Stable Allele Frequency Distribution of the Plasmodium falciparum clag Genes
Encoding Components of the High Molecular Weight Rhoptry Protein Complex.

Alexandre JS(1), Xangsayarath P, Kaewthamasorn M, Yahata K, Sattabongkot J,
Udomsangpetch R, Kaneko O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Protozoology, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN) and the
Global COE Program, Nagasaki University, Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan ;
Centro Nacional de Control de Enfermedades Tropicales, Santo Domingo, Rep√∫blica
Dominicana.

Plasmodium falciparum Clag protein is a candidate component of the plasmodial
surface anion channel located on the parasite-infected erythrocyte. This protein 
is encoded by 5 separated clag genes and forms a RhopH complex with the other
components. Previously, a signature of positive diversifying selection was
detected on the hypervariable region of clag2 and clag8 by population-based
analyses using P. falciparum originating from Thailand in 1988-1989. In this
study, we obtained the sequence of this region of 3 clag genes (clag2, clag8, and
clag9) in 2005 and evaluated the changes over time in the frequency distribution 
of the polymorphism of these gene products by comparison with the sequences
obtained in 1988-1989. We found no difference in the frequency distribution of 18
putatively neutral loci between the 2 groups, evidence that the background of the
parasite population structure has remained stable over 14 years. Although the
frequency distribution of most of the polymorphic sites in the hypervariable
region of Clag2, Clag8, and Clag9 was stable over 14 years, we found that a
proportion of the major Clag2 group and one amino acid position of Clag8 changed 
significantly. This may be a response to a certain type of pressure.

DOI: 10.2149/tmh.2012-13 
PMCID: PMC3521051
PMID: 23264726 

