
1. G3 (Bethesda). 2012 Dec;2(12):1505-19. doi: 10.1534/g3.112.004473. Epub 2012 Dec 
1.

Evidence for population-specific positive selection on immune genes of Anopheles 
gambiae.

Crawford JE(1), Bischoff E, Garnier T, Gneme A, Eiglmeier K, Holm I, Riehle MM,
Guelbeogo WM, Sagnon N, Lazzaro BP, Vernick KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

Host-pathogen interactions can be powerful drivers of adaptive evolution, shaping
the patterns of molecular variation at the genes involved. In this study, we
sequenced alleles from 28 immune-related loci in wild samples of multiple genetic
subpopulations of the African malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae, obtaining
unprecedented sample sizes and providing the first opportunity to contrast
patterns of molecular evolution at immune-related loci in the recently discovered
GOUNDRY population to those of the indoor-resting M and S molecular forms. In
contrast to previous studies that focused on immune genes identified in
laboratory studies, we centered our analysis on genes that fall within a
quantitative trait locus associated with resistance to Plasmodium falciparum in
natural populations of A. gambiae. Analyses of haplotypic and genetic diversity
at these 28 loci revealed striking differences among populations in levels of
genetic diversity and allele frequencies in coding sequence. Putative signals of 
positive selection were identified at 11 loci, but only one was shared by two
subgroups of A. gambiae. Striking patterns of linkage disequilibrium were
observed at several loci. We discuss these results with respect to ecological
differences among these strata as well as potential implications for disease
transmission.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.112.004473 
PMCID: PMC3516473
PMID: 23275874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

