
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53179. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053179. Epub 2013 Jan 7.

Comprehensive histone phosphorylation analysis and identification of Pf14-3-3
protein as a histone H3 phosphorylation reader in malaria parasites.

Dastidar EG(1), Dzeyk K, Krijgsveld J, Malmquist NA, Doerig C, Scherf A,
Lopez-Rubio JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biology of Host-Parasite Interactions Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The important role of histone posttranslational modifications, particularly
methylation and acetylation, in Plasmodium falciparum gene regulation has been
established. However, the role of histone phosphorylation remains understudied.
Here, we investigate histone phosphorylation utilizing liquid chromatography and 
tandem mass spectrometry to analyze histones extracted from asexual blood stages 
using two improved protocols to enhance preservation of PTMs. Enrichment for
phosphopeptides lead to the detection of 14 histone phospho-modifications in P.
falciparum. The majority of phosphorylation sites were observed at the N-terminal
regions of various histones and were frequently observed adjacent to acetylated
lysines. We also report the identification of one novel member of the P.
falciparum histone phosphosite binding protein repertoire, Pf14-3-3I. Recombinant
Pf14-3-3I protein bound to purified parasite histones. In silico structural
analysis of Pf14-3-3 proteins revealed that residues responsible for binding to
histone H3 S10ph and/or S28ph are conserved at the primary and the tertiary
structure levels. Using a battery of H3 specific phosphopeptides, we demonstrate 
that Pf14-3-3I preferentially binds to H3S28ph over H3S10ph, independent of
modification of neighbouring residues like H3S10phK14ac and H3S28phS32ph. Our
data provide key insight into histone phosphorylation sites. The identification
of a second member of the histone modification reading machinery suggests a
widespread use of histone phosphorylation in the control of various nuclear
processes in malaria parasites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053179 
PMCID: PMC3538786
PMID: 23308157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

