
1. Gene. 2013 Apr 15;518(2):381-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.01.003. Epub 2013 Jan
17.

Population genetic structure of the Plasmodium vivax circumsporozoite protein
(Pvcsp) in Sri Lanka.

Dias S(1), Wickramarachchi T, Sahabandu I, Escalante AA, Udagama PV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, University of Colombo, Colombo 03, 
Sri Lanka.

Molecular methods elucidate evolutionary and ecological processes in parasites,
where interaction between hosts and parasites enlighten the evolution of parasite
lifestyles and host defenses. Population genetics of Plasmodium vivax parasites
accurately describe transmission dynamics of the parasites and evaluation of
malaria control measures. As a first generation vaccine candidate against
malaria, the Circumsporozoite Protein (CSP) has demonstrated significant
potential in P. falciparum. Extensive polymorphism hinders the development of a
potent malaria vaccine. Hence, the genetic diversity of Pvcsp was investigated
for the first time in 60 Sri Lankan clinical isolates by obtaining the nucleotide
sequence of the central repeat (CR) domain and examining the polymorphism of the 
peptide repeat motifs (PRMs), the genetic diversity indices and phylogenetic
relationships. PCR amplicons determined size polymorphism of 610, 700 and 710 bp 
in Pvcsp of Sri Lanka where all amino acid sequences obtained were of the VK210
variant, consisting variable repeats of 4 different PRMs. The two most abundant
PRMs of the CR domain, GDRADGQPA and GDRAAGQPA consisted ~2-4 repeats, while
GNRAAGQPA was unique to the island. Though, different nucleotide sequences termed
repeat allotypes (RATs) were observed for each PRM, these were synonymous
contributing to a less polymorphic CR domain. The genetic diversity of Pvcsp in
Sri Lanka was due to the number of repetitive peptide repeat motifs, point
mutations, and intragenic recombination. The 19 amino acid haplotypes defined
were exclusive to Sri Lanka, whereas the 194 Pvcsp sequences of global isolates
generated 57 more distinct a.a. haplotypes of the VK210 variant. Strikingly, the 
CR domain of both VK210 and VK247 variants was under purifying selection
interpreting the scarcity of CSP non-synonymous polymorphisms. Insights to the
distribution of RATs in the CR region with geographic clustering of the P. vivax 
VK210 variant were revealed. The cladogram reiterated this unique geographic
clustering of local (VK210) and global isolates (VK210 and VK247), which was
further validated by the elevated fixation index values of the VK210 variant.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.01.003 
PMID: 23333606  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

