
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2013 May;9(5):1104-11. doi: 10.4161/hv.23688. Epub 2013
Jan 28.

Immunogenicity, protective efficacy and safety of a recombinant DNA vaccine
encoding truncated Plasmodium yoelii sporozoite asparagine-rich protein 1
(PySAP1).

Zhao J(1), Deng S, Liang J, Cao Y, Liu J, Du F, Shang H, Cui L, Luo E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology; College of Basic Medical Sciences; China
Medical University; Shenyang, Liaoning P.R. China.

Although great efforts have been undertaken for the development of malaria
vaccines, no completely effective malaria vaccines are available yet. Despite
being clinically silent, the pre-erythrocytic stage is considered an ideal target
for the development of malaria vaccines. Sporozoite asparagine-rich protein 1
(SAP1) is a sporozoite-localized protein that regulates the expression of UIS
(upregulated in infectious sporozoites) genes, which are essential for the
infectivity of sporozoites. In this study, a recombinant DNA vaccine encoding a
predicted antigenic determinant region of Plasmodium yoelii SAP1 (PySAP1) was
constructed. Immunization of mice with this DNA vaccine construct resulted in
significant elevation of cytokines such as IFN-Î³, IL-2, IL-4 and IL-10, and total
IgG as compared with control groups immunized with either the empty DNA vector or
saline. After challenge with sporozoites, the group receiving the DNA vaccine
showed delayed development of parasitemia and prolonged survival time compared
with the control group. The DNA vaccine provided partial protection against P.
yoelii 17XL infection, with an overall protection rate of 20%. In addition, the
DNA vaccine did not show integration into the host genome. Further studies of
SAP1 are needed to test whether it can be used as subunit vaccine candidate.

DOI: 10.4161/hv.23688 
PMCID: PMC3899146
PMID: 23357857  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

