
1. Cell Microbiol. 2013 Jul;15(7):1266-83. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12116. Epub 2013 Feb 27.

Perturbations of Plasmodium Puf2 expression and RNA-seq of Puf2-deficient
sporozoites reveal a critical role in maintaining RNA homeostasis and parasite
transmissibility.

Lindner SE(1), Mikolajczak SA, Vaughan AM, Moon W, Joyce BR, Sullivan WJ Jr,
Kappe SH.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Malaria's cycle of infection requires parasite transmission between a mosquito
vector and a mammalian host. We here demonstrate that the Plasmodium yoelii
Pumilio-FBF family member Puf2 allows the sporozoite to remain infectious in the 
mosquito salivary glands while awaiting transmission. Puf2 mediates this solely
through its RNA-binding domain (RBD) likely by stabilizing or hastening the
degradation of specific mRNAs. Puf2 traffics to sporozoite cytosolic granules,
which are negative for several markers of stress granules and P-bodies, and
disappear rapidly after infection of hepatocytes. In contrast to previously
described Plasmodium berghei pbpuf2(-) parasites, pypuf2(-) sporozoites have no
apparent defect in host infection when tested early in salivary gland residence, 
but become progressively non-infectious and prematurely transform into EEFs
during prolonged salivary gland residence. The premature overexpression of Puf2
in oocysts causes striking deregulation of sporozoite maturation and infectivity 
while extension of Puf2 expression in liverstages causes no defect, suggesting
that the presence of Puf2 alone is not sufficient for its functions. Finally, by 
conducting the first comparative RNA-seq analysis of Plasmodium sporozoites, we
find that Puf2 may play a role in directly or indirectly maintaining the
homeostasis of specific transcripts. These findings uncover requirements for
maintaining a window of opportunity for the malaria parasite to accommodate the
unpredictable moment of transmission from mosquito to mammalian host.

Â© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12116 
PMCID: PMC3815636
PMID: 23356439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

