
1. Cell Microbiol. 2013 May;15(5):718-26. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12115. Epub 2013 Feb 21.

Silence, activate, poise and switch! Mechanisms of antigenic variation in
Plasmodium falciparum.

Guizetti J(1), Scherf A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Biologie des Interactions Hôte-Parasite, Département de Parasitologie
et Mycologie, Institut Pasteur, 25 Rue du Dr. Roux, Cedex 15, F-75724 Paris,
France.

Phenotypic variation in genetically identical malaria parasites is an emerging
topic. Although antigenic variation is only part of a more global parasite
strategy to create adaptation through epigenetically controlled transcriptional
variability, it is the central mechanism enabling immune evasion and promoting
pathogenesis. The var gene family is the best-studied example in a wide range of 
clonally variant gene families in Plasmodium falciparum. It is unique in its
strict selection of a single member for activation, a process termed monoallelic 
expression. The conceptual advances that have emerged from studying var genes
show striking common epigenetic features with many other clonally variant gene
families or even single-copy genes that show a variegated expression in parasite 
populations. However, major mechanistic questions, such as the existence of a
potential expression site and the identity of transcription factors or genetic
elements driving singular gene choice, are still unanswered. In this review we
discuss the recent findings in the molecular processes essential for clonal
variation, namely silencing, activation, poising and switching. Integrating
findings about all clonally variant gene families and other mutually exclusive
expression systems will hopefully drive mechanistic understanding of antigenic
variation.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12115 
PMCID: PMC3654561
PMID: 23351305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

