
1. Adv Parasitol. 2013;81:27-76. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-407826-0.00002-3.

Red blood cell polymorphism and susceptibility to Plasmodium vivax.

Zimmerman PA(1), Ferreira MU, Howes RE, Mercereau-Puijalon O.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Health & Diseases, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, Ohio, USA. paz@case.edu

Resistance to Plasmodium vivax blood-stage infection has been widely recognised
to result from absence of the Duffy (Fy) blood group from the surface of red
blood cells (RBCs) in individuals of African descent. Interestingly, recent
studies from different malaria-endemic regions have begun to reveal new
perspectives on the association between Duffy gene polymorphism and P. vivax
malaria. In Papua New Guinea and the Americas, heterozygous carriers of a
Duffy-negative allele are less susceptible to P. vivax infection than
Duffy-positive homozygotes. In Brazil, studies show that the Fy(a) antigen,
compared to Fy(b), is associated with lower binding to the P. vivax Duffy-binding
protein and reduced susceptibility to vivax malaria. Additionally, it is
interesting that numerous studies have now shown that P. vivax can infect RBCs
and cause clinical disease in Duffy-negative people. This suggests that the
relationship between P. vivax and the Duffy antigen is more complex than
customarily described. Evidence of P. vivax Duffy-independent red cell invasion
indicates that the parasite must be evolving alternative red cell invasion
pathways. In this chapter, we review the evidence for P. vivax Duffy-dependent
and Duffy-independent red cell invasion. We also consider the influence of
further host gene polymorphism associated with malaria endemicity on
susceptibility to vivax malaria. The interaction between the parasite and the RBC
has significant potential to influence the effectiveness of P. vivax-specific
vaccines and drug treatments. Ultimately, the relationships between red cell
polymorphisms and P. vivax blood-stage infection will influence our estimates on 
the population at risk and efforts to eliminate vivax malaria.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-407826-0.00002-3 
PMCID: PMC3728992
PMID: 23384621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

