
1. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2013 Feb;33(2):65-71. doi: 10.1089/jir.2012.0094.

Expression of interleukin-6 family receptors in NK92 cells is regulated by
cytokines and not through direct interaction with Plasmodium falciparum-infected 
erythrocytes.

Böttger E(1), Grangeiro de Carvalho E, Meese S, Kun JF, Esen M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Tropical Medicine, Tübingen University, Tübingen, Germany.
evelyn-boettger@hotmail.de

A balanced proinflammatory cytokine response to Plasmodium ssp. infection is
crucial to control the disease outcome. To elucidate the effect of cytokines and 
Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes on the regulation of interleukin
(IL)-6 receptor (IL-6R), ciliary neurotrophic factor alpha (CNTFR-α) and
glycoprotein (gp)130 in natural killer (NK) cells in the context of malaria, we
assessed their gene expression and surface expression in NK92 cells. P.
falciparum alone did not alter gene expression of the investigated receptors in
NK92 cells. Analysis revealed a low effect of IL-6 on IL-6R surface expression in
NK92 cells. However, at transcriptional level, a downregulation of IL-6R was
observed following IL-6 stimulation. Thus, IL-6 might act within a negative
feedback loop to terminate signal transduction by downregulating IL-6R
expression. Additionally, we observed that IL-6R and CNTFR-α surface expression
were regulated by a combination of IL-2, 12, and 18, and gp130 was influenced by 
interferon-α. Our results show that the IL-6 family receptors in NK92 cells are
not directly influenced by P. falciparum. However, cytokines usually derived from
accessory cells during malaria episodes may regulate IL-6 receptor signaling
pathways. This finding encourages future studies in a more physiological context 
and with primary cells isolated from humans with and without malaria.

DOI: 10.1089/jir.2012.0094 
PMID: 23398366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

