
1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2013 May;41(5):447-51. doi:
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2013.01.005. Epub 2013 Feb 18.

Malaria treatment failure with novel mutation in the Plasmodium falciparum
dihydrofolate reductase (pfdhfr) gene in Kolkata, West Bengal, India.

Das S(1), Chakraborty SP, Hati A, Roy S.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Microbiology Laboratory, Department of Human Physiology with
Community Health, Vidyasagar University, Midnapore 721 102, West Bengal, India.

The aim of this work was to define the cause of sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine (SP)
treatment failure in Plasmodium falciparum infections in a malaria-endemic zone
of India. Samples were collected from 176 patients in Kolkata from November 2008 
to July 2009. In vitro susceptibility testing was performed on all isolates.
Parasite DNA was extracted, and PCR and restriction fragment length polymorphism 
(RFLP) analysis of different codons of the dhfr gene (16, 51, 59, 108 and 164)
and dhps gene (436, 437, 540, 581 and 613) were performed. Finally, sequencing of
the products was performed to confirm the mutations. The in vivo treatment
response to SP among the 176 patients was determined. A novel mutation of
isoleucine was observed at codon 108 of the dhfr gene, which was highly
correlated with in vitro SP resistance as well as early treatment failure. A
double dhfr mutation (108I+51I) was observed in 77.3% of isolates, and triple
mutation of the dhps gene was observed in 18.2% of isolates. In this endemic
zone, SP treatment failure is due to a novel dhfr mutation (108I+51I) and any one
of the dhps mutations (S436A, A437G, A581G or A613T/S). An increase in these
mutations was highly correlated with SP resistance (P < 0.0001).

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. and the International Society of Chemotherapy. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2013.01.005 
PMID: 23428313  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

