
1. Pathog Glob Health. 2013 Jan;107(1):21-9. doi: 10.1179/2047773212Y.0000000069.

Association of high plasma TNF-alpha levels and TNF-alpha/IL-10 ratios with TNF2 
allele in severe P. falciparum malaria patients in Sri Lanka.

Perera MK(1), Herath NP, Pathirana SL, Phone-Kyaw M, Alles HK, Mendis KN,
Premawansa S, Handunnetti SM.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research Unit, Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Colombo, Sri Lanka.

Plasma levels of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines of Plasmodium
falciparum-infected patients with severe malaria (SM; n = 62) and uncomplicated
malaria (UM; n = 69) from Sri Lanka were assessed. SM patients had significantly 
higher levels of TNF-alpha (P < 0·01), IL-6 (P < 0·01), and IL-10 (P < 0·05)
compared to the UM patients. Plasma IL-2 levels of these patients were
undetectable. TNF-alpha levels of a third group of patients with uncomplicated P.
falciparum malaria, who were recruited during their fever episodes (UMF; n = 14) 
were significantly higher than those of the UM patients (P < 0·001) and
comparable to SM patients. Plasma IFN-gamma levels of SM patients were higher
compared to UM patients, but was not statistically significant. Body temperature 
in both SM and UMF groups were significantly higher compared to UM group, whereas
percentages of parasitemia in all three groups were comparable. Analysis of
plasma TNF-alpha levels and the ratio of TNF-alpha/IL-10 in UM (n = 34) and SM (n
= 34) patients carrying TNF1 and TNF2 allelic types showed that SM patients
carrying TNF2 had significantly higher TNF-alpha levels as well as
TNF-alpha/IL-10 ratio compared to UM patients carrying TNF1, UM patients carrying
TNF2 and SM patients carrying TNF1 (P < 0·05). These results suggest that the
high circulating TNF-alpha levels and the inadequate IL-10 response in the SM
patients carrying TNF2 allele could have contributed to the development of severe
falciparum malarial disease.

DOI: 10.1179/2047773212Y.0000000069 
PMCID: PMC4001599
PMID: 23432860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

