
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2013 May;19(5):399-407. doi: 10.1111/1469-0691.12151. Epub
2013 Feb 25.

Malaria rapid diagnostic tests in endemic settings.

Maltha J(1), Gillet P, Jacobs J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp,
Belgium. jmaltha@itg.be

Malaria rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) are instrument-free tests that provide
results within 20 min and can be used by community health workers. RDTs detect
antigens produced by the Plasmodium parasite such as Plasmodium falciparum
histidine-rich protein-2 (PfHPR2) and Plasmodium lactate dehydrogenase (pLDH).
The accuracy of RDTs for the diagnosis of uncomplicated P. falciparum infection
is equal or superior to routine microscopy (but inferior to expert microscopy).
Sensitivity for Plasmodium vivax is 75-100%; for Plasmodium ovale and Plasmodium 
malariae, diagnostic performance is poor. Design limitations of RDTs include poor
sensitivity at low parasite densities, susceptibility to the prozone effect
(PfHRP2-detecting RDTs), false-negative results due to PfHRP2 deficiency in the
case of pfhrp2 gene deletions (PfHRP2-detecting RDTs), cross-reactions between
Plasmodium antigens and detection antibodies, false-positive results by other
infections and susceptibility to heat and humidity. End-user's errors relate to
safety, procedure (delayed reading, incorrect sample and buffer volumes) and
interpretation (not recognizing invalid test results, disregarding faint test
lines). Withholding antimalarial treatment in the case of negative RDT results
tends to be infrequent and tendencies towards over-prescription of antibiotics
have been noted. Numerous shortcomings in RDT kits' labelling, instructions for
use (correctness and readability) and contents have been observed. The World
Health Organization and partners actively address quality assurance of RDTs by
comparative testing of RDTs, inspections of manufacturing sites, lot testing and 
training tools but no formal external quality assessment programme of end-user
performance exists. Elimination of malaria requires RDTs with lower detection
limits, for which nucleic acid amplification tests are under development.

© 2013 The Authors Clinical Microbiology and Infection © 2013 European Society of
Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/1469-0691.12151 
PMID: 23438048  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

