
1. Mol Microbiol. 2013 May;88(4):687-701. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12206. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

Robust inducible Cre recombinase activity in the human malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum enables efficient gene deletion within a single asexual
erythrocytic growth cycle.

Collins CR(1), Das S, Wong EH, Andenmatten N, Stallmach R, Hackett F, Herman JP, 
Müller S, Meissner M, Blackman MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, Mill
Hill, London, NW7 1AA, UK.

Comment in
    Mol Microbiol. 2013 May;88(4):650-4.

Asexual blood stages of the malaria parasite, which cause all the pathology
associated with malaria, can readily be genetically modified by homologous
recombination, enabling the functional study of parasite genes that are not
essential in this part of the life cycle. However, no widely applicable method
for conditional mutagenesis of essential asexual blood-stage malarial genes is
available, hindering their functional analysis. We report the application of the 
DiCre conditional recombinase system to Plasmodium falciparum, the causative
agent of the most dangerous form of malaria. We show that DiCre can be used to
obtain rapid, highly regulated site-specific recombination in P. falciparum,
capable of excising loxP-flanked sequences from a genomic locus with close to
100% efficiency within the time-span of a single erythrocytic growth cycle.
DiCre-mediated deletion of the SERA5 3' UTR failed to reduce expression of the
gene due to the existence of alternative cryptic polyadenylation sites within the
modified locus. However, we successfully used the system to recycle the most
widely used drug resistance marker for P. falciparum, human dihydrofolate
reductase, in the process producing constitutively DiCre-expressing P. falciparum
clones that have broad utility for the functional analysis of essential asexual
blood-stage parasite genes.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12206 
PMCID: PMC3708112
PMID: 23489321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

