
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Jun;16:263-9. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.02.021. Epub
2013 Mar 14.

Association of HLA-G 3'UTR polymorphisms with response to malaria infection: a
first insight.

Garcia A(1), Milet J, Courtin D, Sabbagh A, Massaro JD, Castelli EC, Migot-Nabias
F, Favier B, Rouas-Freiss N, Donadi EA, Moreau P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement, UMR 216, Mère et enfant face aux 
infections tropicales, Université Paris Descartes, 4, avenue de l'Observatoire,
75006 Paris, France. Andre.Garcia@ird.fr

Malaria represents one of the most important causes of mortality and morbidity in
Africa. Variability in clinical presentation is partly due to host genetic
polymorphisms. Among them, human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I and class II
alleles may be responsible for malaria susceptibility; however less is known
about the possible role of non classical HLA molecules. Among them, HLA-G is a
tolerogenic molecule with immunomodulatory properties, which differs from
classical HLA class I molecules by its lower genetic diversity, tissue expression
and function. Although primarily associated with maternal-fetal tolerance, HLA-G 
is now known to be involved in a wide range of physiopathological conditions,
such as tumor, autoimmunity, transplantation, inflammation and viral infection by
suppressing the function of various immune cells. In this work, we present the
first evidence of an association between HLA-G 3'UTR polymorphisms and malaria
infection. More precisely, we showed that HLA-G polymorphisms are associated with
asymptomatic infection through two parasitological phenotypes, the intensity of
Plasmodium falciparum infection and the mean level of parasite density. The
allele+3187G and its haplotype (UTR-1,
14bp-Del/3001C/3003T/3010G/3035C/3052C/3142C/3187G/3196C) was associated with
lower level of infection under a dominant model, and the haplotype UTR-3
(Del/3001C/3003T/3010C/3035C/3152C/3142G/3187A/3196C) was associated with high
levels of infection under a recessive model. In conclusion, although further
investigations are on the way to better address the possible involvement of the
HLA-G molecule in the control of P. falciparum infection, this work presents the 
first evidence of an association between HLA-G polymorphisms and malaria
infection. Further investigations are on the way to take into account the
particularities of African populations.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.02.021 
PMID: 23499774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

