
1. Parasit Vectors. 2013 Mar 7;6:58. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-58.

Natural infection in anopheline species and its implications for autochthonous
malaria in the Atlantic Forest in Brazil.

Duarte AM(1), Pereira DM, de Paula MB, Fernandes A, Urbinatti PR, Ribeiro AF,
Mello MH, Matos MO Jr, Mucci LF, Fernandes LN, Natal D, Malafronte RS.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Superintendency for the Control
of Endemic Diseases, Rua Paula Souza 166, São Paulo 01027-000, Brazil.
amrcd2@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: A descriptive study was carried out in an area of the Atlantic Forest
with autochthonous malaria in the Parelheiros subdistrict on the periphery of the
municipality of São Paulo to identify anopheline fauna and anophelines naturally 
infected with Plasmodium as well as to discuss their role in this peculiar
epidemiological context.
METHODS: Entomological captures were made from May 2009 to April 2011 using
Shannon traps and automatic CDC traps in four areas chosen for their different
patterns of human presence and incidences of malaria (anthropic zone 1, anthropic
zone 2, transition zone and sylvatic zone). Natural Plasmodium infection was
detected by nested PCR based on amplification of the 18S rRNA gene.
RESULTS: In total, 6,073 anophelines were collected from May 2009 to April 2011, 
and six species were identified in the four zones. Anopheles cruzii was the
predominant species in the three environments but was more abundant in the
sylvatic zone. Anopheles (Kerteszia) cruzii specimens from the anthropic and
sylvatic zones were positive for P. vivax and P. malariae. An. (Ker.) bellator,
An. (Nys.) triannulatus, An. (Nys.) strodei, An. (Nys.) lutzi and An. (Ano)
maculipes were found in small numbers. Of these, An. (Nys.) triannulatus and An. 
(Nys.) lutzi, which were collected in the anthropic zone, were naturally infected
with P. vivax while An. (Nys.) triannulatus from the anthropic zones and An.
(Nys.) strodei from the transition zone were positive for P. malariae.
CONCLUSION: These results confirm that Anopheles (Kerteszia) cruzii plays an
important role as a major Plasmodium vector. However, the finding of other
naturally infected species may indicate that secondary vectors are also involved 
in the transmission of malaria in the study areas. These findings can be expected
to help in the implementation of new measures to control autochthonous malaria in
areas of the Atlantic Forest.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-58 
PMCID: PMC3605261
PMID: 23497493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

