
1. Vaccine. 2013 Sep 6;31(39):4231-4. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.03.017. Epub 2013 
Mar 21.

Modified Vaccinia virus Ankara: innate immune activation and induction of
cellular signalling.

Price PJ(1), Torres-Domínguez LE, Brandmüller C, Sutter G, Lehmann MH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Ludwig-Maximilians-University 
München, Veterinärstr. 13, 80539 Munich, Germany.

Attenuated poxviruses are currently under development as vaccine vectors against 
a number of diseases including, influenza, HIV, malaria and tuberculosis.
Modified Vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA) is an attenuated, replication deficient
vaccinia virus (VACV) strain which, similar to replication competent VACV, is
highly immunogenic. The lack of productive viral replication further improves the
safety profile of MVA as a vector, minimizing the potential for reversion to
virulent forms particularly if used in immunocompromised individuals. Despite its
inability to replicate in most mammalian cells, MVA still efficiently expresses
viral and recombinant genes making it a potent antigen delivery platform.
Moreover, due to the loss of various immunomodulatory factors MVA infection leads
to rapid local immune responses, fulfilling a requirement of an adjuvant. In this
review we take a look at the immunostimulatory properties of MVA, paying
particular attention to the signalling of the innate immune system in response to
MVA and VACV infection. Understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms
modulated by VACV will help in the future design and engineering of new vaccines 
and may provide insight into previously unknown mechanisms of dominant virus-host
interactions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.03.017 
PMID: 23523404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

