
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Jul;17:51-61. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.03.042. Epub
2013 Apr 2.

Population genetics, sequence diversity and selection in the gene encoding the
Plasmodium falciparum apical membrane antigen 1 in clinical isolates from the
south-east of Iran.

Mehrizi AA(1), Sepehri M, Karimi F, Djadid ND, Zakeri S.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur
Institute of Iran, Tehran 1316943551, Iran.

The Plasmodium falciparum apical membrane antigen1 (AMA1) is a leading malaria
vaccine candidate antigen. In the present investigation, for the first time, the 
almost full length of the ama1 gene covering domain I (DI), DII and DIII was PCR 
amplified and sequenced in 21 P. falciparum isolates collected from the
southeastern parts of Iran. The result showed the low genetic diversity of
Iranian PfAMA1 with 11 PfAMA1 haplotypes in which nine out of 11 haplotypes are
novel and have been reported for the first time. The Iranian P. falciparum
population indicated a moderate level of genetic differentiation. The difference 
among the rates of non-synonymous and synonymous mutations, Tajima's D and
McDonald-Kreitman tests suggested that the diversity at DI is due to positive
natural selection. In addition, recombination contributes to the diversity of
Iranian PfAMA1 and this is supported by the decline of the linkage disequilibrium
index R(2) with increasing the nucleotide distance. The highly polymorphic
residues (positions: 187, 197, 200, 230 and 243) were polymorphic; however, most 
of the SNPs in non-polymorphic residues were conserved except the residue at
position 395. Nevertheless, no mutation was found in the DII loop of the Iranian 
PfAMA1, indicating that it is subjected to purifying selection. In conclusion,
the low genetic diversity in PfAMA1 among Iranian isolates supports and provides 
valuable information for the development of a PfAMA1-based malaria vaccine.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.03.042 
PMID: 23557839  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

