
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2013 Apr;188(2):99-108. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2013.03.003. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Evidence of tRNA cleavage in apicomplexan parasites: Half-tRNAs as new potential 
regulatory molecules of Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium berghei.

Galizi R(1), Spano F, Giubilei MA, Capuccini B, Magini A, Urbanelli L, Ogawa T,
Dubey JP, Spaccapelo R, Emiliani C, Di Cristina M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical Sciences, University of
Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

Several lines of evidence demonstrated that organisms ranging from bacteria to
higher animals possess a regulated endonucleolytic cleavage pathway producing
half-tRNA fragments. In the present study, we investigated the occurrence of this
phenomenon in two distantly related apicomplexan parasites, Toxoplasma gondii,
the agent of toxoplasmosis, and the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei. A
low-scale molecular characterization of the small RNA fraction of T. gondii
revealed the endonucleolytic processing of 10 distinct tRNA species, with
cleavage in the anticodon loop and upstream of the 3'-terminal CCA sequence
yielding 5'- or 3'-end half-tRNAs. T. gondii and P. berghei exhibited variable
rates of tRNA cleavage upon egress from host cells and in response to stage
differentiation, amino acid starvation and heat-shock. Moreover, avirulent
isolates of T. gondii and attenuated P. berghei parasites showed a higher rate of
tRNA cleavage than virulent strains. Interestingly, half-tRNA production was
significantly higher in the metabolically quiescent bradyzoite and sporozoite
stages of T. gondii, compared to the fast-growing tachyzoite. Collectively, our
findings shed light for the first time on the occurrence of tRNA cleavage in
apicomplexan parasites and suggest a relationship between half-tRNA production
and growth rate in this important group of organisms.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2013.03.003 
PMID: 23557708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

