
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e60077. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060077. Epub 2013 Mar 29.

Imperfect duplicate insertions type of mutations in plasmepsin V modulates
binding properties of PEXEL motifs of export proteins in Indian Plasmodium vivax.

Rawat M(1), Vijay S, Gupta Y, Tiwari PK, Sharma A.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Biochemistry and Structural Biology Division, National Institute of
Malaria Research (ICMR), Dwarka, New Delhi, India.

INTRODUCTION: Plasmepsin V (PM-V) have functionally conserved orthologues across 
the Plasmodium genus who's binding and antigenic processing at the PEXEL motifs
for export about 200-300 essential proteins is important for the virulence and
viability of the causative Plasmodium species. This study was undertaken to
determine P. vivax plasmepsin V Ind (PvPM-V-Ind) PEXEL motif export pathway for
pathogenicity-related proteins/antigens export thereby altering plasmodium
exportome during erythrocytic stages.
METHOD: We identify and characterize Plasmodium vivax plasmepsin-V-Ind (mutant)
gene by cloning, sequence analysis, in silico bioinformatic protocols and
structural modeling predictions based on docking studies on binding capacity with
PEXEL motifs processing in terms of binding and accessibility of export proteins.
RESULTS: Cloning and sequence analysis for genetic diversity demonstrates
PvPM-V-Ind (mutant) gene is highly conserved among all isolates from different
geographical regions of India. Imperfect duplicate insertion types of mutations
(SVSE from 246-249 AA and SLSE from 266-269 AA) were identified among all Indian 
isolates in comparison to P.vivax Sal-1 (PvPM-V-Sal 1) isolate. In silico
bioinformatics interaction studies of PEXEL peptide and active enzyme reveal that
PvPM-V-Ind (mutant) is only active in endoplasmic reticulum lumen and membrane
embedding is essential for activation of plasmepsin V. Structural modeling
predictions based on docking studies with PEXEL motif show significant variation 
in substrate protein binding of these imperfect mutations with data mined PEXEL
sequences. The predicted variation in the docking score and interacting amino
acids of PvPM-V-Ind (mutant) proteins with PEXEL and lopinavir suggests a
modulation in the activity of PvPM-V in terms of binding and accessibility at
these sites.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Our functional modeled validation of PvPM-V-Ind (mutant)
imperfect duplicate insertions with data mined PEXEL sequences leading to altered
binding and substrate accessibility of the enzyme makes it a plausible target to 
investigate export mechanisms for in silico virtual screening and novel
pharmacophore designing.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060077 
PMCID: PMC3612065
PMID: 23555891  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

