
1. Asian Pac J Trop Biomed. 2011 Jun;1(3):233-42. doi:
10.1016/S2221-1691(11)60034-8.

Malaria parasite carbonic anhydrase: inhibition of aromatic/heterocyclic
sulfonamides and its therapeutic potential.

Krungkrai SR(1), Krungkrai J.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Biochemistry, Department of Medical Science, Faculty of Science,
Rangsit University, Paholyothin Rd., Patumthani 12000, Thailand.

Plasmodium falciparum (P. falciparum) is responsible for the majority of
life-threatening cases of human malaria, causing 1.5-2.7 million annual deaths.
The global emergence of drug-resistant malaria parasites necessitates
identification and characterization of novel drug targets and their potential
inhibitors. We identified the carbonic anhydrase (CA) genes in P. falciparum. The
pfCA gene encodes anÎ±-carbonic anhydrase, a Zn(2+)-metalloenzme, possessing
catalytic properties distinct from that of the human host CA enzyme. The amino
acid sequence of the pfCA enzyme is different from the analogous protozoan and
human enzymes. A library of aromatic/heterocyclic sulfonamides possessing a large
diversity of scaffolds were found to be very good inhibitors for the malarial
enzyme at moderate-low micromolar and submicromolar inhibitions. The structure of
the groups substituting the aromatic-ureido- or aromatic-azomethine fragment of
the molecule and the length of the parent sulfonamide were critical parameters
for the inhibitory properties of the sulfonamides. One derivative, that is, 4-
(3, 4-dichlorophenylureido)thioureido-benzenesulfonamide (compound 10) was the
most effective in vitro Plasmodium falciparum CA inhibitor, and was also the most
effective antimalarial compound on the in vitro P. falciparum growth inhibition. 
The compound 10 was also effective in vivo antimalarial agent in mice infected
with Plasmodium berghei, an animal model of drug testing for human malaria
infection. It is therefore concluded that the sulphonamide inhibitors targeting
the parasite CA may have potential for the development of novel therapies against
human malaria.

DOI: 10.1016/S2221-1691(11)60034-8 
PMCID: PMC3609187
PMID: 23569766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

