
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Jul;57(7):2937-41. doi: 10.1128/AAC.02574-12.
Epub 2013 Apr 15.

Modulation of PF10_0355 (MSPDBL2) alters Plasmodium falciparum response to
antimalarial drugs.

Van Tyne D(1), Uboldi AD, Healer J, Cowman AF, Wirth DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Malaria's ability to rapidly adapt to new drugs has allowed it to remain one of
the most devastating infectious diseases of humans. Understanding and tracking
the genetic basis of these adaptations are critical to the success of treatment
and intervention strategies. The novel antimalarial resistance locus PF10_0355
(Pfmspdbl2) was previously associated with the parasite response to halofantrine,
and functional validation confirmed that overexpression of this gene lowered
parasite sensitivity to both halofantrine and the structurally related
antimalarials mefloquine and lumefantrine, predominantly through copy number
variation. Here we further characterize the role of Pfmspdbl2 in mediating the
antimalarial drug response of Plasmodium falciparum. Knockout of Pfmspdbl2
increased parasite sensitivity to halofantrine, mefloquine, and lumefantrine but 
not to unrelated antimalarials, further suggesting that this gene mediates the
parasite response to a specific class of antimalarial drugs. A single nucleotide 
polymorphism encoding a C591S mutation within Pfmspdbl2 had the strongest
association with halofantrine sensitivity and showed a high derived allele
frequency among Senegalese parasites. Transgenic parasites expressing the
ancestral Pfmspdbl2 allele were more sensitive to halofantrine and structurally
related antimalarials than were parasites expressing the derived allele,
revealing an allele-specific effect on drug sensitivity in the absence of copy
number effects. Finally, growth competition experiments showed that under drug
pressure, parasites expressing the derived allele of Pfmspdbl2 outcompeted
parasites expressing the ancestral allele within a few generations. Together,
these experiments demonstrate that modulation of Pfmspdbl2 affects malaria
parasite responses to antimalarial drugs.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02574-12 
PMCID: PMC3697352
PMID: 23587962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

