
1. Int J Parasitol. 2013 Jul;43(8):613-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2013.03.002. Epub
2013 Apr 19.

Co-infection and cross-species transmission of divergent Hepatocystis lineages in
a wild African primate community.

Thurber MI(1), Ghai RR, Hyeroba D, Weny G, Tumukunde A, Chapman CA, Wiseman RW,
Dinis J, Steeil J, Greiner EC, Friedrich TC, O'Connor DH, Goldberg TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Hemoparasites of the apicomplexan family Plasmodiidae include the etiological
agents of malaria, as well as a suite of non-human primate parasites from which
the human malaria agents evolved. Despite the significance of these parasites for
global health, little information is available about their ecology in multi-host 
communities. Primates were investigated in Kibale National Park, Uganda, where
ecological relationships among host species are well characterized. Blood samples
were examined for parasites of the genera Plasmodium and Hepatocystis using
microscopy and PCR targeting the parasite mitochondrial cytochrome b gene,
followed by Sanger sequencing. To assess co-infection, "deep sequencing" of a
variable region within cytochrome b was performed. Out of nine black-and-white
colobus (Colobus guereza), one blue guenon (Cercopithecus mitis), five
grey-cheeked mangabeys (Lophocebus albigena), 23 olive baboons (Papio anubis), 52
red colobus (Procolobus rufomitratus) and 12 red-tailed guenons (Cercopithecus
ascanius), 79 infections (77.5%) were found, all of which were Hepatocystis spp. 
Sanger sequencing revealed 25 different parasite haplotypes that sorted
phylogenetically into six species-specific but morphologically similar lineages. 
"Deep sequencing" revealed mixed-lineage co-infections in baboons and red colobus
(41.7% and 64.7% of individuals, respectively) but not in other host species. One
lineage infecting red colobus also infected baboons, but always as the minor
variant, suggesting directional cross-species transmission. Hepatocystis
parasites in this primate community are a diverse assemblage of cryptic lineages,
some of which co-infect hosts and at least one of which can cross primate species
barriers.

Copyright Â© 2013 Australian Society for Parasitology Inc. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2013.03.002 
PMCID: PMC3676718
PMID: 23603520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

