
1. J Theor Biol. 2013 Aug 21;331:78-90. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2013.04.014. Epub 2013
Apr 19.

Modelling Aedes aegypti mosquito control via transgenic and sterile insect
techniques: endemics and emerging outbreaks.

Seirin Lee S(1), Baker RE, Gaffney EA, White SM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.
seirin.lee@gmail.com

The invasion of pest insects often changes or destroys a native ecosystem, and
can result in food shortages and disease endemics. Issues such as the
environmental effects of chemical control methods, the economic burden of
maintaining control strategies and the risk of pest resistance still remain, and 
mosquito-borne diseases such as malaria and dengue fever prevail in many
countries, infecting over 100 million worldwide in 2010. One environmentally
friendly method for mosquito control is the Sterile Insect Technique (SIT). This 
species-specific method of insect control relies on the mass rearing,
sterilization and release of large numbers of sterile insects. An alternative
transgenic method is the Release of Insects carrying a Dominant Lethal (RIDL).
Our objective is to consider contrasting control strategies for two invasive
scenarios via SIT and RIDL: an endemic case and an emerging outbreak. We
investigate how the release rate and size of release region influence both the
potential for control success and the resources needed to achieve it, under a
range of conditions and control strategies, and we discuss advantageous
strategies with respect to reducing the release resources and strategy costs (in 
terms of control mosquito numbers) required to achieve complete eradication of
wild-type mosquitoes.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2013.04.014 
PMID: 23608633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

