
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 14;110(20):8260-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1302562110. Epub 2013 Apr 29.

Blood meal-induced changes to antennal transcriptome profiles reveal shifts in
odor sensitivities in Anopheles gambiae.

Rinker DC(1), Pitts RJ, Zhou X, Suh E, Rokas A, Zwiebel LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics Research, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN 37235, USA.

Olfactory-driven behaviors are central to the lifecycle of the malaria vector
mosquito Anopheles gambiae and are initiated by peripheral signaling in the
antenna and other olfactory tissues. To continue gaining insight into the
relationship between gene expression and olfaction, we have performed cohort
comparisons of antennal transcript abundances at five time points after a blood
meal, a key event in both reproduction and disease transmission cycles. We found 
that more than 5,000 transcripts displayed significant abundance differences,
many of which were correlated by cluster analysis. Within the chemosensory gene
families, we observed a general reduction in the level of chemosensory gene
transcripts, although a subset of odorant receptors (AgOrs) was modestly enhanced
in post-blood-fed samples. Integration of AgOr transcript abundance data with
previously characterized AgOr excitatory odorant response profiles revealed
potential changes in antennal odorant receptivity that coincided with the shift
from host-seeking to oviposition behaviors in blood-fed female mosquitoes.
Behavioral testing of ovipositing females to odorants highlighted by this
synthetic analysis identified two unique, unitary oviposition cues for An.
gambiae, 2-propylphenol and 4-methylcyclohexanol. We posit that modest, yet
cumulative, alterations of AgOr transcript levels modulate peripheral odor coding
resulting in biologically relevant behavioral effects. Moreover, these results
demonstrate that highly quantitative, RNAseq transcript abundance data can be
successfully integrated with functional data to generate testable hypotheses.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1302562110 
PMCID: PMC3657813
PMID: 23630291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

