
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2013 May 13;13:215. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-13-215.

Association of IL-4 and IL-10 maternal haplotypes with immune responses to P.
falciparum in mothers and newborns.

Lokossou AG(1), Dechavanne C, Bouraïma A, Courtin D, Le Port A, Ladékpo R, Noukpo
J, Bonou D, Ahouangninou C, Sabbagh A, Fayomi B, Massougbodji A, Garcia A,
Migot-Nabias F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement, UMR 216 Mère et enfant face aux
infections tropicales, Paris, France. gbenalog@yahoo.fr

BACKGROUND: Particular cytokine gene polymorphisms are involved in the regulation
of the antibody production. The consequences of already described IL-4, IL-10 and
IL-13 gene polymorphisms on biological parameters and antibody levels were
investigated among 576 mothers at delivery and their newborns in the context of
P. falciparum placental malaria infection.
METHODS: The study took place in the semi-rural area of Tori-Bossito, in
south-west Benin, where malaria is meso-endemic. Six biallelic polymorphisms were
determined by quantitative PCR using TaqMan® Pre-Designed SNP Genotyping Assays, 
in IL-4 (rs2243250, rs2070874), IL-10 (rs1800896, rs1800871, rs1800872) and IL-13
(rs1800925) genes. Antibody responses directed to P. falciparum MSP-1, MSP-2,
MSP-3, GLURP-R0, GLURP-R2 and AMA-1 recombinant proteins were determined by
ELISA.
RESULTS: The maternal IL-4(-590)*T/IL-4(+33)*T haplotype (one or two copies) was 
associated with favorable maternal condition at delivery (high haemoglobin
levels, absence of placental parasites) and one of its component, the
IL-4(-590)TT genotype, was related to low IgG levels to MSP-1, MSP-2/3D7 and
MSP-2/FC27. Inversely, the maternal IL-10(-1082)AA was positively associated with
P. falciparum placenta infection at delivery. As a consequence, the IL-10(-819)*T
allele (in CT and TT genotypes) as well as the
IL-10(-1082)*A/IL-10(-819)*T/IL-10(-592)*A haplotype (one or two copies) in which
it is included, were related to an increased risk for anaemia in newborns. The
maternal IL-10(-1082)AA genotype was related to high IgG levels to MSP-2/3D7 and 
AMA-1 in mothers and newborns, respectively. The IL-13 gene polymorphism was only
involved in the newborn's antibody response to AMA-1.
CONCLUSION: These data revealed that IL-4 and IL-10 maternal gene polymorphisms
are likely to play a role in the regulation of biological parameters in pregnant 
women at delivery (anaemia, P. falciparum placenta infection) and in newborns
(anaemia). Moreover, IL-4, IL-10 and IL-13 maternal gene polymorphisms were
related to IgG responses to MSP-1, MSP-2/3D7 and MSP-2/FC27 in mothers as well as
to AMA-1 in newborns.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2334-13-215 
PMCID: PMC3679728
PMID: 23668806  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

