
1. Parasitol Int. 2013 Oct;62(5):423-30. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2013.05.003. Epub
2013 May 18.

Characterization of Plasmodium falciparum cdc2-related kinase and the effects of 
a CDK inhibitor on the parasites in erythrocytic schizogony.

Iwanaga T(1), Sugi T, Kobayashi K, Takemae H, Gong H, Ishiwa A, Murakoshi F,
Recuenco FC, Horimoto T, Akashi H, Kato K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Faculty of Agriculture, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The cell cycle of Plasmodium is unique among major eukaryotic cell cycle models. 
Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are thought to be the key molecular switches that
regulate cell cycle progression in the parasite. However, little information is
available about Plasmodium CDKs. The present study was performed to investigate
the effects of a CDK inhibitor, olomoucine, on the erythrocytic growth of
Plasmodium falciparum. This agent inhibited the growth of the parasite at the
trophozoite/schizont stage. Furthermore, we characterized the Plasmodium CDK
homolog, P. falciparum cdc2-related kinase-1 (Pfcrk-1), which is a potential
target of olomoucine. We synthesized a functional kinase domain of Pfcrk-1 as a
GST fusion protein using a wheat germ protein expression system, and examined its
phosphorylation activity. The activity of this catalytic domain was higher than
that of GST-GFP control, but the same as that of a kinase-negative mutant of
Pfcrk-1. After the phosphatase treatment, the labeling of [γ-(32)P]ATP was
abolished. Recombinant human cyclin proteins were added to these kinase
reactions, but there were no differences in activity. This report provides
important information for the future investigation of Plasmodium CDKs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2013.05.003 
PMID: 23688804  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

