
1. Malar J. 2013 May 20;12:165. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-165.

Characterizing PvARP, a novel Plasmodium vivax antigen.

Moreno-Pérez DA(1), Saldarriaga A, Patarroyo MA.

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Instituto de Inmunología de Colombia (FIDIC), Carrera 50 No, 26-20, 
Bogotá, Colombia. mapatarr.fidic@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax continues to be the most widely distributed malarial
parasite species in tropical and sub-tropical areas, causing high morbidity
indices around the world. Better understanding of the proteins used by the
parasite during the invasion of red blood cells is required to obtain an
effective vaccine against this disease. This study describes characterizing the
P. vivax asparagine-rich protein (PvARP) and examines its antigenicity in natural
infection.
METHODS: The target gene in the study was selected according to a previous in
silico analysis using profile hidden Markov models which identified P. vivax
proteins that play a possible role in invasion. Transcription of the arp gene in 
the P. vivax VCG-1 strain was here evaluated by RT-PCR. Specific human antibodies
against PvARP were used to confirm protein expression by Western blot as well as 
its subcellular localization by immunofluorescence. Recognition of recombinant
PvARP by sera from P. vivax-infected individuals was evaluated by ELISA.
RESULTS: VCG-1 strain PvARP is a 281-residue-long molecule, which is encoded by a
single exon and has an N-terminal secretion signal, as well as a tandem repeat
region. This protein is expressed in mature schizonts and is located on the
surface of merozoites, having an apparent accumulation towards their apical pole.
Sera from P. vivax-infected patients recognized the recombinant, thereby
suggesting that this protein is targeted by the immune response during infection.
CONCLUSIONS: This study showed the characterization of PvARP and its
antigenicity. Further assays orientated towards evaluating this antigen's
functional importance during parasite invasion are being carried out.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-165 
PMCID: PMC3662610
PMID: 23688042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

