
1. Genes Dev. 2013 May 15;27(10):1198-215. doi: 10.1101/gad.212746.112.

Comparative genomics in Chlamydomonas and Plasmodium identifies an ancient
nuclear envelope protein family essential for sexual reproduction in protists,
fungi, plants, and vertebrates.

Ning J(1), Otto TD, Pfander C, Schwach F, Brochet M, Bushell E, Goulding D,
Sanders M, Lefebvre PA, Pei J, Grishin NV, Vanderlaan G, Billker O, Snell WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Fertilization is a crucial yet poorly characterized event in eukaryotes. Our
previous discovery that the broadly conserved protein HAP2 (GCS1) functioned in
gamete membrane fusion in the unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas and the
malaria pathogen Plasmodium led us to exploit the rare biological phenomenon of
isogamy in Chlamydomonas in a comparative transcriptomics strategy to uncover
additional conserved sexual reproduction genes. All previously identified
Chlamydomonas fertilization-essential genes fell into related clusters based on
their expression patterns. Out of several conserved genes in a minus gamete
cluster, we focused on Cre06.g280600, an ortholog of the fertilization-related
Arabidopsis GEX1. Gene disruption, cell biological, and immunolocalization
studies show that CrGEX1 functions in nuclear fusion in Chlamydomonas. Moreover, 
CrGEX1 and its Plasmodium ortholog, PBANKA_113980, are essential for production
of viable meiotic progeny in both organisms and thus for mosquito transmission of
malaria. Remarkably, we discovered that the genes are members of a large,
previously unrecognized family whose first-characterized member, KAR5, is
essential for nuclear fusion during yeast sexual reproduction. Our comparative
transcriptomics approach provides a new resource for studying sexual development 
and demonstrates that exploiting the data can lead to the discovery of novel
biology that is conserved across distant taxa.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.212746.112 
PMCID: PMC3672651
PMID: 23699412  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

