
1. Evol Appl. 2013 Jun;6(4):706-20. doi: 10.1111/eva.12056. Epub 2013 Feb 22.

An analysis of two island groups as potential sites for trials of transgenic
mosquitoes for malaria control.

Marsden CD(1), Cornel A, Lee Y, Sanford MR, Norris LC, Goodell PB, Nieman CC, Han
S, Rodrigues A, Denis J, Ouledi A, Lanzaro GC.

Author information: 
(1)Vector Genetics Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and
Immunology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California Davis, CA,
USA.

Considerable technological advances have been made towards the generation of
genetically modified mosquitoes for vector control. In contrast, less progress
has been made towards field evaluations of transformed mosquitoes which are
critical for evaluating the success of, and hazards associated with, genetic
modification. Oceanic islands have been highlighted as potentially the best
locations for such trials. However, population genetic studies are necessary to
verify isolation. Here, we used a panel of genetic markers to assess for evidence
of genetic isolation of two oceanic island populations of the African malaria
vector, Anopheles gambiae s.s. We found no evidence of isolation between the
Bijag√≥s archipelago and mainland Guinea-Bissau, despite separation by distances
beyond the known dispersal capabilities of this taxon. Conversely, the Comoros
Islands appear to be genetically isolated from the East African mainland, and
thus represent a location worthy of further investigation for field trials. Based
on assessments of gene flow within and between the Comoros islands, the island of
Grande Comore was found to be genetically isolated from adjacent islands and also
exhibited local population structure, indicating that it may be the most suitable
site for trials with existing genetic modification technologies.

DOI: 10.1111/eva.12056 
PMCID: PMC3684749
PMID: 23789035 

