
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Sep;57(9):4245-4251. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00161-13.
Epub 2013 Jun 24.

Fitness Consequences of Plasmodium falciparum pfmdr1 Polymorphisms Inferred from 
Ex Vivo Culture of Ugandan Parasites.

Ochong E(1), Tumwebaze PK(2), Byaruhanga O(2), Greenhouse B(1), Rosenthal PJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, California,
USA.
(2)Infectious Diseases Research Collaboration, Kampala, Uganda.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, California,
USA prosenthal@medsfgh.ucsf.edu.

Polymorphisms in the Plasmodium falciparum multidrug resistance 1 (pfmdr1) gene
impact sensitivity to multiple antimalarials. In Africa, polymorphisms at N86Y
and D1246Y are common and have various impacts on sensitivity to different drugs.
To gain insight into the fitness consequences of these polymorphisms, we cultured
parasites isolated from children with malaria in Tororo, Uganda, where the
multiplicity of infection is high, and used pyrosequencing to follow polymorphism
prevalences in culture over time. Of 71 cultures, parasites in 69 were
successfully analyzed at N86Y and parasites in 68 were successfully analyzed at
D1246Y over 3 to 36 days of culture. For position 86, the sequences of 39/69
(56.5%) parasites remained stable (>90% prevalence over 2 to 17 time points),
with 82.1% of these being stable for the 86Y mutation. For position 1246, the
sequences of 31/68 (45.6%) parasites remained stable, with 64.5% of these being
stable for the wild-type D1246 sequence (P = 0.0002 for comparison of stable
mutant genotypes for the two alleles). Defining allele selection as a ≥15% change
in prevalence between the first and last samples assessed, for position 86, 11
samples showed selection, with selection toward 86Y occurring in 72.7% of
alleles; for position 1246, 14 samples showed selection, with selection toward
D1246 occurring in 64.3% of alleles (P = 0.11 for comparison of selection of
mutations at the two alleles). Among the 7 samples with selection at both
alleles, 5 showed selection for both 86Y and D1246. Overall, consistent trends in
the direction of selection were seen, although differences were not statistically
significant. Our results suggest fitness advantages for parasites with the pfmdr1
86Y mutation and wild-type D1246, highlighting the complex interplay between drug
resistance and fitness in malaria parasites. (This study has been registered at
ClinicalTrials.gov under registration no. NCT00948896 and NCT00993031.).

Copyright © 2013, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00161-13 
PMCID: PMC3754360
PMID: 23796921 

