
1. J Mol Diagn. 2013 Sep;15(5):634-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2013.05.005. Epub 2013 
Jun 22.

Detection and species identification of malaria parasites by isothermal tHDA
amplification directly from human blood without sample preparation.

Li Y(1), Kumar N, Gopalakrishnan A, Ginocchio C, Manji R, Bythrow M, Lemieux B,
Kong H.

Author information: 
(1)BioHelix Corporation, Beverly, Massachusetts, USA. li@biohelix.com

We report the clinical and analytical performance of an isothermal thermophilic
helicase-dependent amplification assay for blood Plasmodium parasite detection
and species-level identification. The assay amplifies the 18S rRNA gene fragment 
of all Plasmodium species and uses a species-specific probe and a pan-malarial
probe to definitively identify Plasmodium falciparum from other infectious
Plasmodium species. Amplicon-probe hybridization products are detected with a
disposable dipstick enclosed in a cassette. With a pan-malarial-positive and P.
falciparum-negative result, an additional test is performed to detect if the
pan-malarial-positive band was the result of the presence of Plasmodium vivax.
The assay uses only 2 μL of human whole blood directly for a 50-μL amplification 
reaction, without any pre-amplification processing. The clinical performance of
the assay was validated using 88 samples from New York patients suspected of
malaria or babesiosis. The overall sensitivity of the assay was 96.6% (95% CI,
87.3% to 99.4%), and the specificity was 100% (95% CI, 85.4% to 100%), compared
with gold standard microscopy and a laboratory-developed molecular assay,
respectively. The analytical sensitivity was 50 copies of DNA per assay or 200
parasites per microliter of blood, and the assay can detect samples with
parasitemia levels <1%. This novel molecular diagnostic assay requires minimal
laboratory instrumentation and uses un-processed blood as input; it can be
readily performed in the field.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the Association
for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2013.05.005 
PMCID: PMC5803547
PMID: 23800575  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

