
1. Eukaryot Cell. 2013 Sep;12(9):1171-8. doi: 10.1128/EC.00028-13. Epub 2013 Jun 28.

Atypical mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase implicated in regulating
transition from pre-S-Phase asexual intraerythrocytic development of Plasmodium
falciparum.

Balu B(1), Campbell C, Sedillo J, Maher S, Singh N, Thomas P, Zhang M, Pance A,
Otto TD, Rayner JC, Adams JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Health, College of Public Health, University of South
Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA.

Intraerythrocytic development of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum
appears as a continuous flow through growth and proliferation. To develop a
greater understanding of the critical regulatory events, we utilized piggyBac
insertional mutagenesis to randomly disrupt genes. Screening a collection of
piggyBac mutants for slow growth, we isolated the attenuated parasite C9, which
carried a single insertion disrupting the open reading frame (ORF) of
PF3D7_1305500. This gene encodes a protein structurally similar to a
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) phosphatase, except for two notable
characteristics that alter the signature motif of the dual-specificity
phosphatase domain, suggesting that it may be a low-activity phosphatase or
pseudophosphatase. C9 parasites demonstrated a significantly lower growth rate
with delayed entry into the S/M phase of the cell cycle, which follows the stage 
of maximum PF3D7_1305500 expression in intact parasites. Genetic complementation 
with the full-length PF3D7_1305500 rescued the wild-type phenotype of C9,
validating the importance of the putative protein phosphatase PF3D7_1305500 as a 
regulator of pre-S-phase cell cycle progression in P. falciparum.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.00028-13 
PMCID: PMC3811562
PMID: 23813392  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

