
1. Eukaryot Cell. 2013 Sep;12(9):1179-91. doi: 10.1128/EC.00027-13. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

A bacterial phosphatase-like enzyme of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum
possesses tyrosine phosphatase activity and is implicated in the regulation of
band 3 dynamics during parasite invasion.

Fernandez-Pol S(1), Slouka Z, Bhattacharjee S, Fedotova Y, Freed S, An X, Holder 
AA, Campanella E, Low PS, Mohandas N, Haldar K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Rare and Neglected Diseases, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, 
Indiana, USA.

Eukaryotic parasites of the genus Plasmodium cause malaria by invading and
developing within host erythrocytes. Here, we demonstrate that PfShelph2, a gene 
product of Plasmodium falciparum that belongs to the Shewanella-like phosphatase 
(Shelph) subfamily, selectively hydrolyzes phosphotyrosine, as shown for other
previously studied Shelph family members. In the extracellular merozoite stage,
PfShelph2 localizes to vesicles that appear to be distinct from those of rhoptry,
dense granule, or microneme organelles. During invasion, PfShelph2 is released
from these vesicles and exported to the host erythrocyte. In vitro, PfShelph2
shows tyrosine phosphatase activity against the host erythrocyte protein Band 3, 
which is the most abundant tyrosine-phosphorylated species of the erythrocyte.
During P. falciparum invasion, Band 3 undergoes dynamic and rapid clearance from 
the invasion junction within 1 to 2 s of parasite attachment to the erythrocyte. 
Release of Pfshelph2 occurs after clearance of Band 3 from the parasite-host cell
interface and when the parasite is nearly or completely enclosed in the nascent
vacuole. We propose a model in which the phosphatase modifies Band 3 in time to
restore its interaction with the cytoskeleton and thus reestablishes the
erythrocyte cytoskeletal network at the end of the invasion process.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.00027-13 
PMCID: PMC3811575
PMID: 23825180  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

