
1. Int J Lab Hematol. 2014 Feb;36(1):62-70. doi: 10.1111/ijlh.12122. Epub 2013 Jul
10.

An investigation of the protective effect of alpha+-thalassaemia against severe
Plasmodium falciparum amongst children in Kumasi, Ghana.

Opoku-Okrah C(1)(2), Gordge M(2), Kweku Nakua E(1), Abgenyega T(1), Parry M(2),
Robertson C(2), Smith CL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana.
(2)University of Westminster, School of Life Sciences, London, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Several factors influence the severity of Plasmodium falciparum;
here, we investigate the impact of alpha+-thalassaemia genotype on P. falciparum 
parasitemia and prevalence of severe anaemia amongst microcytic children from
Kumasi, Ghana.
METHODS: Seven hundred and thirty-two children (≤10 years) with P. falciparum
were categorised into normocytic and microcytic (mean cell volume ≤76 fL).
Microcytic individuals were genotyped for the -α(3.7) deletional thalassaemia
mutation and parasite densities determined.
RESULTS: Amongst microcytic patients both parasite densities and prevalence of
severe malaria parasitemia (≥100 000/μL) were significantly lower (P < 0.001) in 
the presence of an alpha+-thalassaemia genotype compared with
non-alpha+-thalassaemia genotype. There was no evidence that alpha+-thalassaemia 
protected against severe anaemia. The protection conferred by alpha-thalassaemia 
genotype against severe P. falciparum parasitemia did not change with increasing 
age.
CONCLUSION: The severity of P. falciparum parasitemia was significantly lower in 
both the homozygous and heterozygous alpha+-thalassaemia groups compared with
microcytic individuals with non-alpha+-thalassaemia genotype. The protective
effect, from severe malaria, of the alpha+-thalassaemia allele does not alter
with age.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ijlh.12122 
PMID: 23837700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

