
1. Adv Parasitol. 2013;83:1-92. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-407705-8.00001-X.

Iron-sulphur clusters, their biosynthesis, and biological functions in protozoan 
parasites.

Ali V(1), Nozaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical
Sciences, Indian Council of Medical Research, Agam-kuan, Patna, India.

Fe-S clusters are ensembles of sulphide-linked di-, tri-, and tetra-iron centres 
of a variety of metalloproteins that play important roles in reduction and
oxidation of mitochondrial electron transport, energy metabolism, regulation of
gene expression, cell survival, nitrogen fixation, and numerous other metabolic
pathways. The Fe-S clusters are assembled by one of four distinct systems: NIF,
SUF, ISC, and CIA machineries. The ISC machinery is a house-keeping system
conserved widely from prokaryotes to higher eukaryotes, while the other systems
are present in a limited range of organisms and play supplementary roles under
certain conditions such as stress. Fe-S cluster-containing proteins and the
components required for Fe-S cluster biosynthesis are modulated under stress
conditions, drug resistance, and developmental stages. It is also known that a
defect in Fe-S proteins and Fe-S cluster biogenesis leads to many genetic
disorders in humans, which indicates the importance of the systems. In this
review, we describe the biological and physiological significance of Fe-S
cluster-containing proteins and their biosynthesis in parasitic protozoa
including Plasmodium, Trypanosoma, Leishmania, Giardia, Trichomonas, Entamoeba,
Cryptosporidium, Blastocystis, and microsporidia. We also discuss the roles of
Fe-S cluster biosynthesis in proliferation, differentiation, and stress response 
in protozoan parasites. The heterogeneity of the systems and the
compartmentalization of Fe-S cluster biogenesis in the protozoan parasites likely
reflect divergent evolution under highly diverse environmental niches, and
influence their parasitic lifestyle and pathogenesis. Finally, both Fe-S
cluster-containing proteins and their biosynthetic machinery in protozoan
parasites are remarkably different from those in their mammalian hosts. Thus,
they represent a rational target for the development of novel chemotherapeutic
and prophylactic agents against protozoan infections.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-407705-8.00001-X 
PMID: 23876871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

