
1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 9;8(7):e67888. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067888. Print 2013.

Dry-coated live viral vector vaccines delivered by nanopatch microprojections
retain long-term thermostability and induce transgene-specific T cell responses
in mice.

Pearson FE(1), McNeilly CL, Crichton ML, Primiero CA, Yukiko SR, Fernando GJ,
Chen X, Gilbert SC, Hill AV, Kendall MA.

Author information: 
(1)Delivery of Drugs and Genes Group (D2G2), Australian Institute for
Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.

The disadvantages of needle-based immunisation motivate the development of
simple, low cost, needle-free alternatives. Vaccine delivery to cutaneous
environments rich in specialised antigen-presenting cells using microprojection
patches has practical and immunological advantages over conventional needle
delivery. Additionally, stable coating of vaccine onto microprojections removes
logistical obstacles presented by the strict requirement for cold-chain storage
and distribution of liquid vaccine, or lyophilised vaccine plus diluent. These
attributes make these technologies particularly suitable for delivery of vaccines
against diseases such as malaria, which exerts its worst effects in countries
with poorly-resourced healthcare systems. Live viral vectors including
adenoviruses and poxviruses encoding exogenous antigens have shown significant
clinical promise as vaccines, due to their ability to generate high numbers of
antigen-specific T cells. Here, the simian adenovirus serotype 63 and the
poxvirus modified vaccinia Ankara--two vectors under evaluation for the delivery 
of malaria antigens to humans--were formulated for coating onto Nanopatch
microprojections and applied to murine skin. Co-formulation with the stabilising 
disaccharides trehalose and sucrose protected virions during the dry-coating
process. Transgene-specific CD8(+) T cell responses following Nanopatch delivery 
of both vectors were similar to intradermal injection controls after a single
immunisation (despite a much lower delivered dose), though MVA boosting of
pre-primed responses with Nanopatch was found to be less effective than the ID
route. Importantly, disaccharide-stabilised ChAd63 could be stored for 10 weeks
at 37Â°C with less than 1 log10 loss of viability, and retained single-dose
immunogenicity after storage. These data support the further development of
microprojection patches for the deployment of live vaccines in hot climates.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067888 
PMCID: PMC3706440
PMID: 23874462  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

