
1. Infect Immun. 2013 Oct;81(10):3835-42. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00301-13. Epub 2013 Jul
29.

Analysis of antibodies to newly described Plasmodium falciparum merozoite
antigens supports MSPDBL2 as a predicted target of naturally acquired immunity.

Tetteh KK(1), Osier FH, Salanti A, Kamuyu G, Drought L, Failly M, Martin C, Marsh
K, Conway DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen Molecular Biology, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

Prospective studies continue to identify malaria parasite genes with particular
patterns of polymorphism which indicate they may be under immune selection, and
the encoded proteins require investigation. Sixteen new recombinant protein
reagents were designed to characterize three such polymorphic proteins expressed 
in Plasmodium falciparum schizonts and merozoites: MSPDBL1 (also termed MSP3.4)
and MSPDBL2 (MSP3.8), which possess Duffy binding-like (DBL) domains, and
SURFIN4.2, encoded by a member of the surface-associated interspersed (surf)
multigene family. After testing the antigenicities of these reagents by murine
immunization and parasite immunofluorescence, we analyzed naturally acquired
antibody responses to the antigens in two cohorts in coastal Kenya in which the
parasite was endemic (Chonyi [n = 497] and Ngerenya [n = 461]). As expected, the 
prevalence and levels of serum antibodies increased with age. We then
investigated correlations with subsequent risk of clinical malaria among children
<11 years of age during 6 months follow-up surveillance. Antibodies to the
polymorphic central region of MSPDBL2 were associated with reduced risk of
malaria in both cohorts, with statistical significance remaining for the 3D7
allelic type after adjustment for individuals' ages in years and antibody
reactivity to whole-schizont extract (Chonyi, risk ratio, 0.51, and 95%
confidence interval [CI], 0.28 to 0.93; Ngerenya, risk ratio, 0.38, and 95% CI,
0.18 to 0.82). For the MSPDBL1 Palo Alto allelic-type antigen, there was a
protective association in one cohort (Ngerenya, risk ratio, 0.53, and 95% CI,
0.32 to 0.89), whereas the other antigens showed no protective associations after
adjustment. These findings support the prediction that antibodies to the
polymorphic region of MSPDBL2 contribute to protective immunity.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00301-13 
PMCID: PMC3811751
PMID: 23897617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

