
1. Acta Trop. 2013 Dec;128(3):473-8. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2013.07.010. Epub
2013 Jul 29.

Mutant Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter in Hodeidah,
Yemen: association with parasitologic indices and treatment-seeking behaviors.

Abdul-Ghani R(1), Farag HF, Allam AF, Shawky SM, Al-Mekhlafi AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Medical Research Institute, Alexandria University,
Alexandria, Egypt; Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Sana'a University, Sana'a, Yemen. Electronic address:
rashadqb@yahoo.com.

Malaria still represents a major health problem in Yemen, particularly in
Hodeidah, despite continuing efforts to eliminate it. With the absence of
clinically proven vaccines, chemotherapy with antimalarials is still greatly
needed. Chloroquine (CQ) has been popular as the drug of choice for malaria
control. However, Plasmodium falciparum resistance to CQ has been one of the main
obstacles in malaria control and elimination. Although CQ is no longer the
recommended antimalarial chemotherapy, it has remained the number one
over-the-counter antimalarial drug in many endemic areas, including Yemen, and is
still used for self-medication. In addition, promising reports on CQ efficacy
reversal in many African countries brought it again into the scene. This has led 
to a growing interest in the possibility of its re-introduction, particularly
with the concerns raised about the parasite resistance to artemisinin-based
combination therapies. Therefore, the present study aimed at analyzing the
CQ-associated pfcrt 76T mutation in P. falciparum isolates from patients with
uncomplicated falciparum malaria in Hodeidah, west of Yemen. The association of
treatment-seeking behaviors and antimalarial drug use with the pfcrt 76T mutant
allele was also studied. It was revealed that there is still a sustained high
frequency of this molecular marker among parasite isolates associated with
younger age, decreased parasite density and the presence of gametocytes in blood.
Delay in seeking treatment and frequent use of antimalarials were the behaviors
significantly associated with the presence of the pfcrt 76T mutant allele among
patients reporting a history of malaria treatment.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2013.07.010 
PMID: 23906615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

