
1. Aquat Toxicol. 2013 Sep 15;140-141:389-97. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2013.07.004.
Epub 2013 Jul 16.

Contrasting patterns of tolerance between chemical and biological insecticides in
mosquitoes exposed to UV-A.

Tetreau G(1), Chandor-Proust A, Faucon F, Stalinski R, Akhouayri I, Prud'homme
SM, Raveton M, Reynaud S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Ecologie Alpine, LECA-UMR 5553, Université de Grenoble 1, BP 53,
38041 Grenoble cedex 09, France. guillaume.tetreau@gmail.com

Mosquitoes are vectors of major human diseases, such as malaria, dengue or yellow
fever. Because no efficient treatments or vaccines are available for most of
these diseases, control measures rely mainly on reducing mosquito populations by 
the use of insecticides. Numerous biotic and abiotic factors are known to
modulate the efficacy of insecticides used in mosquito control. Mosquito breeding
sites vary from opened to high vegetation covered areas leading to a large
ultraviolet gradient exposure. This ecological feature may affect the general
physiology of the insect, including the resistance status against insecticides.
In the context of their contrasted breeding sites, we assessed the impact of
low-energetic ultraviolet exposure on mosquito sensitivity to biological and
chemical insecticides. We show that several mosquito detoxification enzyme
activities (cytochrome P450, glutathione S-transferases, esterases) were
increased upon low-energy UV-A exposure. Additionally, five specific genes
encoding detoxification enzymes (CYP6BB2, CYP6Z7, CYP6Z8, GSTD4, and GSTE2)
previously shown to be involved in resistance to chemical insecticides were found
over-transcribed in UV-A exposed mosquitoes, revealed by RT-qPCR experiments.
More importantly, toxicological bioassays revealed that UV-exposed mosquitoes
were more tolerant to four main chemical insecticide classes (DDT, imidacloprid, 
permethrin, temephos), whereas the bioinsecticide Bacillus thuringiensis subsp.
israelensis (Bti) appeared more toxic. The present article provides the first
experimental evidence of the capacity of low-energy UV-A to increase mosquito
tolerance to major chemical insecticides. This is also the first time that a
metabolic resistance to chemical insecticides is linked to a higher
susceptibility to a bioinsecticide. These results support the use of Bti as an
efficient alternative to chemical insecticides when a metabolic resistance to
chemicals has been developed by mosquitoes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2013.07.004 
PMID: 23911355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

