
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Sep 20;288(38):27002-18. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.460709. Epub
2013 Aug 2.

Characterization of a serine hydrolase targeted by acyl-protein thioesterase
inhibitors in Toxoplasma gondii.

Kemp LE(1), Rusch M, Adibekian A, Bullen HE, Graindorge A, Freymond C, Rottmann
M, Braun-Breton C, Baumeister S, Porfetye AT, Vetter IR, Hedberg C, Soldati-Favre
D.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, University Medical
Center (CMU), University of Geneva, Rue Michel-Servet 1, CH-1211 Geneva,
Switzerland.

In eukaryotic organisms, cysteine palmitoylation is an important reversible
modification that impacts protein targeting, folding, stability, and interactions
with partners. Evidence suggests that protein palmitoylation contributes to key
biological processes in Apicomplexa with the recent palmitome of the malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum reporting over 400 substrates that are modified
with palmitate by a broad range of protein S-acyl transferases. Dynamic
palmitoylation cycles require the action of an acyl-protein thioesterase (APT)
that cleaves palmitate from substrates and conveys reversibility to this
posttranslational modification. In this work, we identified candidates for APT
activity in Toxoplasma gondii. Treatment of parasites with low micromolar
concentrations of β-lactone- or triazole urea-based inhibitors that target human 
APT1 showed varied detrimental effects at multiple steps of the parasite lytic
cycle. The use of an activity-based probe in combination with these inhibitors
revealed the existence of several serine hydrolases that are targeted by APT1
inhibitors. The active serine hydrolase, TgASH1, identified as the homologue
closest to human APT1 and APT2, was characterized further. Biochemical analysis
of TgASH1 indicated that this enzyme cleaves substrates with a specificity
similar to APTs, and homology modeling points toward an APT-like enzyme. TgASH1
is dispensable for parasite survival, which indicates that the severe effects
observed with the β-lactone inhibitors are caused by the inhibition of non-TgASH1
targets. Other ASH candidates for APT activity were functionally characterized,
and one of them was found to be resistant to gene disruption due to the potential
essential nature of the protein.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.460709 
PMCID: PMC3779702
PMID: 23913689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

