
1. J Infect Dis. 2014 Jan 1;209(1):130-9. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jit415. Epub 2013 Aug 
6.

Ordered accumulation of mutations conferring resistance to
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine in the Plasmodium falciparum parasite.

Mita T(1), Ohashi J, Venkatesan M, Marma AS, Nakamura M, Plowe CV, Tanabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Parasitology, Juntendo University School 
of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Monitoring the prevalence of drug resistant Plasmodium falciparum is 
essential for effective malaria control. Resistance to pyrimethamine and
sulfadoxine increases as mutations accumulate in the parasite genes encoding
dihydrofolate reductase (dhfr) and dihydropteroate synthase (dhps), respectively.
Although parasites are exposed to these antifolate drugs simultaneously, it
remains virtually unknown whether dhfr and dhps mutations accumulate along
interrelated paths.
METHODS: We investigated the order of step-wise accumulation in dhfr and dhps by 
cumulative analyses using binomial tests in 575 P. falciparum isolates obtained
from 7 countries in Asia and Melanesia.
RESULTS: An initial step in the accumulation of mutations preferentially occurred
in dhfr (2 mutations), followed by 1 mutation in dhps. In a subsequent step,
mutations were estimated separately for 5 dhfr/dhps-resistant lineages identified
using 12 microsatellites flanking dhfr and dhps. Among these lineages, we found 3
major mutational paths, each of which follows a unique stepwise trajectory to
produce the most highly resistant form with 4 mutations in dhfr and 3 in dhps.
CONCLUSIONS: The ordered accumulation of mutations in dhfr and dhps elucidated
here will assist in predicting the status and progression of antifolate
resistance in malaria-endemic regions where antifolate drugs are used for
intermittent preventive treatment.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jit415 
PMID: 23922363  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

