
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2013 Jul 25;7(7):e2332. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002332.
Print 2013.

Polyethyleneimine mediated DNA transfection in schistosome parasites and
regulation of the WNT signaling pathway by a dominant-negative SmMef2.

Liang S(1), Knight M, Jolly ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio,
United States of America.

Schistosomiasis is a serious global problem and the second most devastating
parasitic disease following malaria. Parasitic worms of the genus Schistosoma are
the causative agents of schistosomiasis and infect more than 240 million people
worldwide. The paucity of molecular tools to manipulate schistosome gene
expression has made an understanding of genetic pathways in these parasites
difficult, increasing the challenge of identifying new potential drugs for
treatment. Here, we describe the use of a formulation of polyethyleneimine (PEI) 
as an alternative to electroporation for the efficacious transfection of genetic 
material into schistosome parasites. We show efficient expression of genes from a
heterologous CMV promoter and from the schistosome Sm23 promoter. Using the
schistosome myocyte enhancer factor 2 (SmMef2), a transcriptional activator
critical for myogenesis and other developmental pathways, we describe the
development of a dominant-negative form of the schistosome Mef2. Using this
mutant, we provide evidence that SmMef2 may regulate genes in the WNT pathway. We
also show that SmMef2 regulates its own expression levels. These data demonstrate
the use of PEI to facilitate effective transfection of nucleic acids into
schistosomes, aiding in the study of schistosome gene expression and regulation, 
and development of genetic tools for the characterization of molecular pathways
in these parasites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002332 
PMCID: PMC3723562
PMID: 23936566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

