
1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 14;8(8):e71468. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071468. eCollection
2013.

Natural haemozoin induces expression and release of human monocyte tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1.

Polimeni M(1), Valente E, Ulliers D, Opdenakker G, Van den Steen PE, Giribaldi G,
Prato M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Oncologia, Università di Torino, Torino, Italy.

Recently matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) and its endogenous inhibitor (tissue 
inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1, TIMP-1) have been implicated in complicated
malaria. In vivo, mice with cerebral malaria (CM) display high levels of both
MMP-9 and TIMP-1, and in human patients TIMP-1 serum levels directly correlate
with disease severity. In vitro, natural haemozoin (nHZ, malarial pigment)
enhances monocyte MMP-9 expression and release. The present study analyses the
effects of nHZ on TIMP-1 regulation in human adherent monocytes. nHZ induced
TIMP-1 mRNA expression and protein release, and promoted TNF-α, IL-1β, and
MIP-1α/CCL3 production. Blocking antibodies or recombinant cytokines abrogated or
mimicked nHZ effects on TIMP-1, respectively. p38 MAPK and NF-κB inhibitors
blocked all nHZ effects on TIMP-1 and pro-inflammatory molecules. Still, total
gelatinolytic activity was enhanced by nHZ despite TIMP-1 induction.
Collectively, these data indicate that nHZ induces inflammation-mediated
expression and release of human monocyte TIMP-1 through p38 MAPK- and
NF-κB-dependent mechanisms. However, TIMP-1 induction is not sufficient to
counterbalance nHZ-dependent MMP-9 enhancement. Future investigation on
proteinase-independent functions of TIMP-1 (i.e. cell survival promotion and
growth/differentiation inhibition) is needed to clarify the role of TIMP-1 in
malaria pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071468 
PMCID: PMC3743797
PMID: 23967215  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

