
1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2013;19(9). doi: 10.3201/eid1909.130133.

Plasmodium falciparum mutant haplotype infection during pregnancy associated with
reduced birthweight, Tanzania.

Minja DT(1), Schmiegelow C, Mmbando B, Bostr√∂m S, Oesterholt M, Magistrado P,
Pehrson C, John D, Salanti A, Luty AJ, Lemnge M, Theander T, Lusingu J,
Alifrangis M.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Medical Research, Tanga Centre, Tanga, United Republic 
of Tanzania. minjartd@gmail.com

Intermittent preventive treatment during pregnancy with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine
(IPTp-SP) is a key strategy in the control of pregnancy-associated malaria.
However, this strategy is compromised by widespread drug resistance from
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the Plasmodium falciparum dihydrofolate
reductase and dihydropteroate synthetase genes. During September 2008-October
2010, we monitored a cohort of 924 pregnant women in an area of Tanzania with
declining malaria transmission. P. falciparum parasites were genotyped, and the
effect of infecting haplotypes on birthweight was assessed. Of the genotyped
parasites, 9.3%, 46.3%, and 44.4% had quadruple or less, quintuple, and sextuple 
mutated haplotypes, respectively. Mutant haplotypes were unrelated to SP doses.
Compared with infections with the less-mutated haplotypes, infections with the
sextuple haplotype mutation were associated with lower (359 g) birthweights.
Continued use of the suboptimal IPTp-SP regimen should be reevaluated, and
alternative strategies (e.g., intermittent screening and treatment or
intermittent treatment with safe and effective alternative drugs) should be
evaluated.

DOI: 10.3201/eid1909.130133 
PMCID: PMC3810920
PMID: 23969132  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

