
1. Malar J. 2013 Aug 21;12:287. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-287.

Identification of piggyBac-mediated insertions in Plasmodium berghei by next
generation sequencing.

Cao Y(1), Rui B, Wellems DL, Li M, Chen B, Zhang D, Pan W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Infectious Diseases, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: The piggyBac transposon system provides a powerful forward genetics
tool to study gene function in Plasmodium parasites via random insertion
mutagenesis and phenotypic screening. The identification of genotype of piggyBac 
mutants in the Plasmodium genome is thus an indispensable step in forward genetic
analysis. Several PCR-based approaches have been used to identify the piggyBac
insertion sites in Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium berghei, but all are
tedious and inefficient. Next generation sequencing can produce large amounts of 
sequence data and is particularly suitable for genome-wide association studies.
In this study, the Next generation sequencing technology was employed to
efficiently identify piggyBac insertion sites in the genome of P. berghei.
METHODS: Plasmodium berghei parasites were co-transfected with piggyBac donor and
helper plasmids. Initially, the classical inverse PCR method was used to identify
the existence of piggyBac insertions in the P. berghei genome. The whole genome
of post-transfection parasites was subsequently sequenced with a PCR-free
paired-end module using the Illumina HiSeq sequencing system. The two distinct
methods ('BLAST method' and 'SOAP method') were employed to identify piggyBac
insertion sites in the P. berghei genome with Illumina sequencing data. All the
identified piggyBac insertions were further tested by half-nested PCR.
RESULTS: The inverse PCR method resulted in a very low yield of ten individual
insertions identified. Conversely, 47 piggyBac insertions were identified from
about 1 Gb of Illumina sequencing data via the two distinct analysis methods. The
majority of identified piggyBac insertions were confirmed by half-nested PCR. In 
addition, 1,850 single nucleotide polymorphisms were identified through alignment
of the Illumina sequencing data of the P. berghei ANKA strain used in this study 
with the reference genome sequences.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that a high-throughput genome sequencing
approach is an efficient tool for the identification of piggyBac-mediated
insertions in Plasmodium parasites.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-287 
PMCID: PMC3765144
PMID: 23961915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

