
1. Mol Microbiol. 2013 Nov;90(3):519-37. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12381. Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Genome-wide profiling of chromosome interactions in Plasmodium falciparum
characterizes nuclear architecture and reconfigurations associated with antigenic
variation.

Lemieux JE(1), Kyes SA, Otto TD, Feller AI, Eastman RT, Pinches RA, Berriman M,
Su XZ, Newbold CI.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Headington, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK;
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, NIH, Rockville, MD, 20892, 
USA.

Spatial relationships within the eukaryotic nucleus are essential for proper
nuclear function. In Plasmodium falciparum, the repositioning of chromosomes has 
been implicated in the regulation of the expression of genes responsible for
antigenic variation, and the formation of a single, peri-nuclear nucleolus
results in the clustering of rDNA. Nevertheless, the precise spatial
relationships between chromosomes remain poorly understood, because, until
recently, techniques with sufficient resolution have been lacking. Here we have
used chromosome conformation capture and second-generation sequencing to study
changes in chromosome folding and spatial positioning that occur during switches 
in var gene expression. We have generated maps of chromosomal spatial affinities 
within the P. falciparum nucleus at 25 Kb resolution, revealing a structured
nucleolus, an absence of chromosome territories, and confirming previously
identified clustering of heterochromatin foci. We show that switches in var gene 
expression do not appear to involve interaction with a distant enhancer, but do
result in local changes at the active locus. These maps reveal the folding
properties of malaria chromosomes, validate known physical associations, and
characterize the global landscape of spatial interactions. Collectively, our data
provide critical information for a better understanding of gene expression
regulation and antigenic variation in malaria parasites.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12381 
PMCID: PMC3894959
PMID: 23980881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

