
1. Cell Microbiol. 2014 May;16(5):687-700. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12212. Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Sequestration and histopathology in Plasmodium chabaudi malaria are influenced by
the immune response in an organ-specific manner.

Brugat T(1), Cunningham D, Sodenkamp J, Coomes S, Wilson M, Spence PJ, Jarra W,
Thompson J, Scudamore C, Langhorne J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, London,
NW7 1AA, UK.

Infection with the malaria parasite, Plasmodium, is associated with a strong
inflammatory response and parasite cytoadhesion (sequestration) in several
organs. Here, we have carried out a systematic study of sequestration and
histopathology during infection of C57Bl/6 mice with Plasmodium chabaudi AS and
determined the influence of the immune response. This parasite sequesters
predominantly in liver and lung, but not in the brain, kidney or gut.
Histopathological changes occur in multiple organs during the acute infection,
but are not restricted to the organs where sequestration takes place. Adaptive
immunity, and signalling through the IFNγ receptor increased sequestration and
histopathology in the liver, but not in the lung, suggesting that there are
differences in the adhesion molecules and/or parasite ligands utilized and
mechanisms of pathogenesis in these two organs. Exacerbation of pro-inflammatory 
responses during infection by deletion of the il10 gene resultsin the aggravation
of damage to lung and kidney irrespective of the degree of sequestration. The
immune response therefore affected both sequestration and histopathology in an
organ-specific manner. P.  chabaudi AS provides a good model to investigate the
influence of the host response on the sequestration and specific organ pathology,
which is applicable to human malaria.

© 2013 Crown copyright. Cellular Microbiology © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. This 
article is published with the permission of the Controller of HMSO and the
Queen's Printer for Scotland.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12212 
PMCID: PMC4234010
PMID: 24003897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

