
1. Infect Immun. 2013 Dec;81(12):4431-42. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00923-13. Epub 2013 Sep
16.

Toll-like receptor 7 mediates early innate immune responses to malaria.

Baccarella A(1), Fontana MF, Chen EC, Kim CC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, California, USA.

Innate immune recognition of malaria parasites is the critical first step in the 
development of the host response. At present, Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) is
thought to play a central role in sensing malaria infection. However, we and
others have observed that Tlr9(-/-) mice, in contrast to mice deficient in the
downstream adaptor, Myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 (MYD88),
exhibit few deficiencies in immune function during early infection with the
malaria parasite Plasmodium chabaudi, implying that another MYD88-dependent
receptor also contributes to the antimalarial response. Here we use
candidate-based screening to identify TLR7 as a key sensor of early P. chabaudi
infection. We show that TLR7 mediates a rapid systemic response to infection
through induction of cytokines such as type I interferons (IFN-I), interleukin
12, and gamma interferon. TLR7 is also required for induction of IFN-I by other
species and strains of Plasmodium, including an etiological agent of human
disease, P. falciparum, suggesting that malaria parasites harbor a common
pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP) recognized by TLR7. In contrast to
the nonredundant requirement for TLR7 in early immune activation, sensing through
both TLR7 and TLR9 was required for proinflammatory cytokine production and
immune cell activation during the peak of parasitemia. Our findings indicate that
TLR7 plays a central role in early immune activation during malaria infection,
whereas TLR7 and TLR9 contribute combinatorially to immune responses as infection
progresses.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00923-13 
PMCID: PMC3837989
PMID: 24042114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

