
1. Parasitol Res. 2013 Dec;112(12):4193-204. doi: 10.1007/s00436-013-3611-0. Epub
2013 Sep 19.

Description and molecular characterization of Plasmodium (Novyella) unalis sp.
nov. from the Great Thrush (Turdus fuscater) in highland of Colombia.

Mantilla JS(1), González AD, Valkiūnas G, Moncada LI, Matta NE.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogota, Colombia.

Plasmodium (Novyella) unalis sp. nov. was found in the Great Thrush, Turdus
fuscater (Passeriformes, Turdidae) in Bogotá, Colombia, at 2,560 m above sea
level where the active transmission occurs. This parasite is described based on
the morphology of its blood stages and a fragment of the mitochondrial cytochrome
b gene (lineage UN227). Illustrations of blood stages of new species are given,
and the phylogenetic analysis identifies closely related species and lineages of 
avian malaria parasites. The new species is most similar to Plasmodium (Novyella)
vaughani (lineage SYAT05), a cosmopolitan avian malaria parasite; these parasites
are also closely related genetically, with a genetic difference of 3.2% between
them. P. unalis can be readily distinguished from the latter species
morphologically, primarily due to the (1) presence of a single large, circular
shaped pigment granule in the erythrocytic trophozoites and meronts; (2) presence
of prominent vacuoles in trophozoites and growing meronts; and (3) presence of
predominantly fan-like shaped erythrocytic meronts. Cytochrome b lineages with
high similarity to the new species have been reported in Costa Rica, Brazil,
Chile, and USA. It is probable that the new species of malaria parasite is widely
distributed in the New World. This parasite has been reported only in the Great
Thrush at the study site and might have a narrow range of avian hosts. Records of
P. unalis are of particular theoretical interest due to its active transmission
at highlands in Andes. Possible influence of urbanization on transmission of this
malaria parasite in Bogotá is discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-013-3611-0 
PMID: 24048707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

