
1. Parasitol Int. 2015 Jun;64(3):260-6. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2013.09.011. Epub 2013
Sep 20.

Plasmodium falciparum: genetic diversity and complexity of infections in an
isolated village in western Thailand.

Tanabe K(1), Zollner G(2), Vaughan JA(3), Sattabongkot J(2), Khuntirat B(2),
Honma H(4), Mita T(5), Tsuboi T(6), Coleman R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malariology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka
University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; Department of Molecular Protozoology, Research
Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
Electronic address: kztanabe@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Entomology, U.S. Army Medical Component, Armed Forces Research
Institute of Medical Sciences (AFRIMS), Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Department of Biology, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND 58202-9019,
USA.
(4)Department of International Affairs and Tropical Medicine, Tokyo Women's
Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of International Affairs and Tropical Medicine, Tokyo Women's
Medical University, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Molecular and Cellular
Parasitology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.
(6)Division of Malaria Research, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University,
Matsuyama, Ehime 790-8577, Japan. Electronic address: tsuboi@ccr.ehime-u.ac.jp.
(7)Department of Entomology, U.S. Army Medical Component, Armed Forces Research
Institute of Medical Sciences (AFRIMS), Bangkok, Thailand. Electronic address:
russell.coleman@us.army.mil.

Genetic diversity of Plasmodium falciparum is intimately associated with
morbidity, mortality and malaria control strategies. It is therefore imperative
to study genetic makeup and population structure of this parasite in endemic
areas. In Kong Mong Tha, an isolated village in western Thailand, the majority of
P. falciparum infections are asymptomatic. In this study we investigated
complexity of infections and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the P.
falciparum population of Kong Mong Tha, and compared results with those
previously obtained from Mae Sod, in northwestern Thailand, where the majority of
infections were symptomatic. Using PCR-based determination of the 5' merozoite
surface protein 1 gene (msp1) recombinant types, we found that 39% of 59 P.
falciparum isolates from Kong Mong Tha had multiple 5' recombinant types with a
mean number of 1.54. These values were much lower than those obtained from Mae
Sod: 96% for multiple infections and with a mean number of 3.61. Analysis of
full-length sequences of two housekeeping genes, the P-type Ca(2+)-transporting
ATPase gene (n=33) plus adenylosuccinate lyase gene (n=33), and three vaccine
candidate antigen genes, msp1 (n=26), the circumsporozoite protein gene, csp
(n=30) and the apical membrane antigen 1 gene, ama 1 (n=32), revealed that in all
of these genes within-population SNP diversity was at similar levels between Kong
Mong Tha and Mae Sod, suggesting that the extent of MOI and clinical
manifestations of malaria are not strongly associated with genetic diversity.
Additionally, we did not detect significant genetic differentiation between the
two parasite populations, as estimated by the Wright's fixation index of
inter-population variance in allele frequencies, suggesting that gene flow
prevented the formation of population structuring. Thus, this study highlights
unique features of P. falciparum populations in Thailand. The implications of
these finding are discussed.

Â© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2013.09.011 
PMID: 24060540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

