
1. BMC Evol Biol. 2013 Sep 24;13:207. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-13-207.

Evidence for the occurrence of two sympatric sibling species within the Anopheles
(Kerteszia) cruzii complex in southeast Brazil and the detection of asymmetric
introgression between them using a multilocus analysis.

Rona LD(1), Carvalho-Pinto CJ, Peixoto AA.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Polo de Xerém, Estrada de Xerém 27,
Duque de Caxias 25245-390, RJ, Brazil. luisadrp@yahoo.com.br.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles (Kerteszia) cruzii (Diptera: Culicidae) is a primary vector
of human and simian malaria parasites in southern and southeastern Brazil.
Earlier studies using chromosome inversions, isoenzymes and a number of molecular
markers have suggested that An. cruzii is a species complex.
RESULTS: In this study, a multilocus approach using six loci, three circadian
clock genes and three encoding ribosomal proteins, was carried out to investigate
in more detail the genetic differentiation between the An. cruzii populations
from Florianópolis-Santa Catarina (southern Brazil) and Itatiaia-Rio de Janeiro
States (southeastern Brazil). The analyses were performed first comparing
Florianópolis and Itatiaia, and then comparing the two putative sympatric
incipient species from Itatiaia (Itatiaia A and Itatiaia B). The analysis
revealed high FST values between Florianópolis and Itatiaia (considering Itatiaia
A and B together) and also between the sympatric Itatiaia A and Itatiaia B,
irrespective of their function. Also, using the IM program, no strong indication 
of migration was found between Florianópolis and Itatiaia (considering Itatiaia A
and B together) using all loci together, but between Itatiaia A and Itatiaia B,
the results show evidence of migration only in the direction of Itatiaia B.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the multilocus analysis indicate that Florianópolis
and Itatiaia represent different species of the An. cruzii complex that diverged 
around 0.6 Mya, and also that the Itatiaia sample is composed of two sympatric
incipient species A and B, which diverged around 0.2 Mya. Asymmetric
introgression was found between the latter two species despite strong divergence 
in some loci.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-13-207 
PMCID: PMC3850420
PMID: 24063651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

