
1. Malar J. 2013 Oct 5;12:356. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-356.

Annotation and characterization of the Plasmodium vivax rhoptry neck protein 4
(PvRON4).

Arévalo-Pinzón G(1), Curtidor H, Abril J, Patarroyo MA.

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Instituto de Inmunología de Colombia FIDIC, Carrera 50 # 26-20,
Bogotá, Colombia. mapatarr.fidic@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The tight junction (TJ) is one of the most important structures
established during merozoite invasion of host cells and a large amount of
proteins stored in Toxoplasma and Plasmodium parasites' apical organelles are
involved in forming the TJ. Plasmodium falciparum and Toxoplasma gondii apical
membrane antigen 1 (AMA-1) and rhoptry neck proteins (RONs) are the two main TJ
components. It has been shown that RON4 plays an essential role during merozoite 
and sporozoite invasion to target cells. This study has focused on characterizing
a novel Plasmodium vivax rhoptry protein, RON4, which is homologous to PfRON4 and
PkRON4.
METHODS: The ron4 gene was re-annotated in the P. vivax genome using various
bioinformatics tools and taking PfRON4 and PkRON4 amino acid sequences as
templates. Gene synteny, as well as identity and similarity values between open
reading frames (ORFs) belonging to the three species were assessed. The gene
transcription of pvron4, and the expression and localization of the encoded
protein were also determined in the VCG-1 strain by molecular and immunological
studies. Nucleotide and amino acid sequences obtained for pvron4 in VCG-1 were
compared to those from strains coming from different geographical areas.
RESULTS: PvRON4 is a 733 amino acid long protein, which is encoded by three
exons, having similar transcription and translation patterns to those reported
for its homologue, PfRON4. Sequencing PvRON4 from the VCG-1 strain and comparing 
it to P. vivax strains from different geographical locations has shown two
conserved regions separated by a low complexity variable region, possibly acting 
as a "smokescreen". PvRON4 contains a predicted signal sequence, a coiled-coil
α-helical motif, two tandem repeats and six conserved cysteines towards the
carboxy-terminus and is a soluble protein lacking predicted transmembranal
domains or a GPI anchor. Indirect immunofluorescence assays have shown that
PvRON4 is expressed at the apical end of schizonts and co-localizes at the
rhoptry neck with PvRON2.
CONCLUSIONS: Genomic, transcriptional and expression data reported for PvRON4, as
well as its primary structure characteristics suggest that this protein
participates in reticulocyte invasion, as has been shown for its homologue
PfRON4.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-356 
PMCID: PMC3851475
PMID: 24093777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

