
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2014 Feb;69(2):400-3. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkt388. Epub 2013 
Oct 3.

Occurrence of multiple chloroquine-resistant Pfcrt haplotypes and emergence of
the S(agt)VMNT type in Cameroonian Plasmodium falciparum.

Ngassa Mbenda HG(1), Das A.

Author information: 
(1)Evolutionary Genomics and Bioinformatics Laboratory, Division of Genomics and 
Bioinformatics, National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector 8, Dwarka, New
Delhi 110077, India.

OBJECTIVES: The main objective of this study was to unravel the distribution of
different Pfcrt genotypes in the central, littoral, eastern and southern regions 
of Cameroon and also in locations bordering Gabon and Equatorial Guinea. This is 
because (i) the chloroquine-resistant malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum
shows a wide occurrence in Cameroon, (ii) mutations in the 72nd to 76th amino
acid positions of the Pfcrt gene are known to confer resistance to chloroquine,
and (iii) only a single chloroquine-resistant haplotype (C72V73I74E75T76) has so 
far been reported in Cameroon.
METHODS: We followed a molecular approach with DNA sequencing of the second exon 
of the Pfcrt gene to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms in 180 P.
falciparum field isolates sampled in five different locations in Cameroon.
RESULTS: The chloroquine-resistant Pfcrt CVIET haplotype was most abundant,
followed by the wild-type CVMNK haplotype. Five hitherto unreported
chloroquine-resistant Pfcrt haplotypes were detected for the first time in
Cameroonian P. falciparum, including the surprise appearance of the S(agt)VMNT
haplotype.
CONCLUSIONS: The high observed haplotype diversity of the chloroquine-resistant
Pfcrt gene and the appearance of the S(agt)VMNT haplotype are daunting and can be
attributed to drug pressure and/or the misuse of chloroquine and/or amodiaquine
in Cameroon.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkt388 
PMID: 24092656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

