
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Dec;20:428-43. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.09.026. Epub
2013 Oct 11.

Revealing natural antisense transcripts from Plasmodium vivax isolates: evidence 
of genome regulation in complicated malaria.

Boopathi PA(1), Subudhi AK, Garg S, Middha S, Acharya J, Pakalapati D, Saxena V, 
Aiyaz M, Chand B, Mugasimangalam RC, Kochar SK, Sirohi P, Kochar DK, Das A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science
(BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan, India. Electronic address:
boopathiarunachalam@gmail.com.

Plasmodium vivax is the most geographically widespread human malaria parasite
causing approximately 130-435 million infections annually. It is an economic
burden in many parts of the world and poses a public health challenge along with 
the other Plasmodium sp. The biology of this parasite is less studied and poorly 
understood, in spite of these facts. Emerging evidence of severe complications
due to infections by this parasite provides an impetus to focus research on the
same. Investigating the parasite directly from infected patients is the best way 
to study its biology and pathogenic mechanisms. Gene expression studies of this
parasite directly obtained from the patients has provided evidence of gene
regulation resulting in varying amount of transcript levels in the different
blood stages. The mechanisms regulating gene expression in malaria parasites are 
not well understood. Discovery of Natural Antisense Transcripts (NATs) in
Plasmodium falciparum has suggested that these might play an important role in
regulating gene expression. We report here the genome-wide occurrence of NATs in 
P. vivax parasites from patients with differing clinical symptoms. A total of
1348 NATs against annotated gene loci have been detected using a custom designed 
microarray with strand specific probes. Majority of NATs identified from this
study shows positive correlation with the expression pattern of the sense (S)
transcript. Our data also shows condition specific expression patterns of varying
S and antisense (AS) transcript levels. Genes with AS transcripts enrich to
various biological processes. To our knowledge this is the first report on the
presence of NATs from P. vivax obtained from infected patients with different
disease complications. The data suggests differential regulation of gene
expression in diverse clinical conditions, as shown by differing sense/antisense 
ratios and would lead to future detailed investigations of gene regulation.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.09.026 
PMID: 24121022  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

