
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2013;9(10):e1003268. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003268. Epub
2013 Oct 10.

A network approach to analyzing highly recombinant malaria parasite genes.

Larremore DB(1), Clauset A, Buckee CO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America ; Center for Communicable Disease
Dynamics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States
of America.

The var genes of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum present a
challenge to population geneticists due to their extreme diversity, which is
generated by high rates of recombination. These genes encode a primary antigen
protein called PfEMP1, which is expressed on the surface of infected red blood
cells and elicits protective immune responses. Var gene sequences are
characterized by pronounced mosaicism, precluding the use of traditional
phylogenetic tools that require bifurcating tree-like evolutionary relationships.
We present a new method that identifies highly variable regions (HVRs), and then 
maps each HVR to a complex network in which each sequence is a node and two nodes
are linked if they share an exact match of significant length. Here, networks of 
var genes that recombine freely are expected to have a uniformly random
structure, but constraints on recombination will produce network communities that
we identify using a stochastic block model. We validate this method on synthetic 
data, showing that it correctly recovers populations of constrained
recombination, before applying it to the Duffy Binding Like-α (DBLα) domain of
var genes. We find nine HVRs whose network communities map in distinctive ways to
known DBLα classifications and clinical phenotypes. We show that the
recombinational constraints of some HVRs are correlated, while others are
independent. These findings suggest that this micromodular structuring
facilitates independent evolutionary trajectories of neighboring mosaic regions, 
allowing the parasite to retain protein function while generating enormous
sequence diversity. Our approach therefore offers a rigorous method for analyzing
evolutionary constraints in var genes, and is also flexible enough to be easily
applied more generally to any highly recombinant sequences.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003268 
PMCID: PMC3794903
PMID: 24130474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

