
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014;58(1):237-46. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00972-13. Epub
2013 Oct 21.

Distinctive origin and spread route of pyrimethamine-resistant Plasmodium
falciparum in southern China.

Zhang Y(1), Yan H, Wei G, Han S, Huang Y, Zhang Q, Pan W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Disease and Vaccine Development, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Southeast Asia (the Thailand-Cambodia border) has been considered the primal
epicenter for most antimalarial drug resistance; however, numerous molecular
epidemiological studies have successively reported multiple independent origins
of sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) resistance-associated Plasmodium falciparum
dhfr (pfdhfr) and pfdhps alleles in other areas. To better understand the origin 
and evolutionary pathway of the SP resistance in Southeast Asia, a total of 374
P. falciparum field isolates from the Yunnan-Burma border and Hainan Island in
southern China have been collected for comprehensive investigations on the
mutation patterns of the pfdhfr/pfdhps genes as well as their microsatellite
haplotypes. By comparative analysis of single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
genotyping and flanking microsatellite haplotypes, we reveal a unique origin of
pyrimethamine-resistant mutations in Pfdhfr gene in Hainan Island and an oriented
spread route of the pyrimethamine resistance from the Thailand-Cambodia border
into the Hainan area, which reflects the geographical traits and SP
administration histories in the two geographically independent areas. Moreover,
genetic linkages between the high-level SP resistance-conferring pfdhfr/pfdhps
alleles have been established in the isolates from the Yunnan-Burma border,
raising the concern of a genetic basis in adopting combination chemotherapies
against falciparum malaria.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00972-13 
PMCID: PMC3910728
PMID: 24145550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

