
1. Vaccine. 2013 Dec 16;31(52):6216-24. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.10.041. Epub
2013 Oct 19.

Comparison of the immune responses induced by soluble and particulate Plasmodium 
vivax circumsporozoite vaccine candidates formulated in AS01 in rhesus macaques.

Vanloubbeeck Y(1), Pichyangkul S, Bayat B, Yongvanitchit K, Bennett JW,
Sattabongkot J, Schaecher K, Ockenhouse CF, Cohen J, Yadava A; P. vivax vaccine
study group.

Collaborators: Donner MN, Garzé V, Ska M, Ajhir N, Marchand M, Ware LA, Hall C.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, Rixensart, Belgium. Electronic address:
yannick.f.vanloubbeeck@gsk.com.

We have designed a pre-erythrocytic vaccine candidate based on the Plasmodium
vivax circumsporozoite (CSV) protein, which includes its N- and C-terminal parts 
and a truncated region containing repeat sequences from both the VK210 and the
VK247 P. vivax subtypes. Two versions of this vaccine candidate were made: a
soluble recombinant protein expressed in Escherichia coli, designated VMP001 and 
a particulate antigen expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, designated CSV-S,S. 
The latter is composed of CSV-S, a fusion protein between VMP001 and hepatitis B 
surface antigen (HBsAg), and free HBsAg co-expressed in yeast and self-assembling
into mixed particles. Both antigen versions, adjuvanted with AS01, were shown to 
be immunogenic in rhesus monkeys. CSV-S,S/AS01 induced higher levels of
VMP001-specific antibodies than did VMP001/AS01. Antibody responses against the
N- and C-terminal regions of CSV and the VK210 repeat motif were of a similar
magnitude following immunization with either the soluble or the particulate
antigen. However, antibodies against the AGDR region, a potentially protective B 
cell epitope, were only detected after immunization with CSV-S,S. Analysis of the
induced CD4(+) T cells highlighted different cytokine profiles depending on the
antigen form. These results warrant further clinical evaluation of these two
vaccine candidates to assess the added value of a particulate versus soluble form
of CSV, in terms of both immunogenicity and protective efficacy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.10.041 
PMID: 24144477  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

