
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Dec;20:476-87. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.10.010. Epub
2013 Oct 21.

Analyses of genetic variations at microsatellite loci present in-and-around the
Pfcrt gene in Indian Plasmodium falciparum.

Chauhan K(1), Pande V, Das A.

Author information: 
(1)Evolutionary Genomics and Bioinformatics Laboratory, Division of Genomics and 
Bioinformatics, National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector 8, Dwarka, New
Delhi 110077, India.

Evolution and spread of chloroquine resistant (CQR) malaria parasite Plasmodium
falciparum have posed great threat in malaria intervention across the globe. The 
occurrence of K76T mutation in the P. falciparum chloroquine resistance
transporter (pfcrt) gene has been widely attributed to CQR with four neighboring 
mutations providing compensatory fitness benefit to the parasite survival.
Understanding evolutionary patterns of the pfcrt gene is of great relevance not
only for devising new malaria control measures but also could serve as a model to
understand evolution and spread of other human drug-resistant pathogens. Several 
studies, mainly based on differential patterns of diversities of the
microsatellite loci placed in-and-around the pfcrt gene have indicated the role
of positive natural selection under the 'hitchhiking' model of molecular
evolution. However, the studies were restricted to limited number of
microsatellite loci present inside the pfcrt gene. Moreover, comparatively higher
level of diversities in microsatellite loci present inside the pfcrt gene than
the loci flanking the pfcrt gene are hallmarks of Indian P. falciparum,
presenting contrasting evolutionary models to global isolates. With a view to
infer evolutionary patterns of the pfcrt gene in Indian P. falciparum, we have
adopted a unique sampling scheme of two types of populations (cultured and field 
collected) and utilized 20 polymorphic microsatellite loci (16 located inside the
pfcrt gene and four in the two flanking regions) to disentangle between genetic
drift (inbred cultured isolates) and natural selection (field isolates). Data
analyses employing different population genetic tests could not straightforwardly
explain either the model invoking 'genetic hitchhiking' or 'genetic drift'.
However, complex evolutionary models influenced by both demography and natural
selection or an alternative model of natural selection (e.g.
diversifying/balancing selection) might better explain the observed
microsatellite variation in-and-around the pfcrt gene in Indian P. falciparum.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.10.010 
PMID: 24157593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

