
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Dec 20;288(51):36361-71. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.522896. Epub
2013 Nov 6.

Aminoacylation of Plasmodium falciparum tRNA(Asn) and insights in the synthesis
of asparagine repeats.

Filisetti D(1), Théobald-Dietrich A, Mahmoudi N, Rudinger-Thirion J, Candolfi E, 
Frugier M.

Author information: 
(1)From the Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, 
Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 15 rue René Descartes, 67084
Strasbourg cedex, France and.

Genome sequencing revealed an extreme AT-rich genome and a profusion of
asparagine repeats associated with low complexity regions (LCRs) in proteins of
the malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Despite their abundance, the
function of these LCRs remains unclear. Because they occur in almost all families
of plasmodial proteins, the occurrence of LCRs cannot be associated with any
specific metabolic pathway; yet their accumulation must have given selective
advantages to the parasite. Translation of these asparagine-rich LCRs demands
extraordinarily high amounts of asparaginylated tRNA(Asn). However, unlike other 
organisms, Plasmodium codon bias is not correlated to tRNA gene copy number.
Here, we studied tRNA(Asn) accumulation as well as the catalytic capacities of
the asparaginyl-tRNA synthetase of the parasite in vitro. We observed that
asparaginylation in this parasite can be considered standard, which is expected
to limit the availability of asparaginylated tRNA(Asn) in the cell and, in turn, 
slow down the ribosomal translation rate when decoding asparagine repeats. This
observation strengthens our earlier hypothesis considering that asparagine rich
sequences act as "tRNA sponges" and help cotranslational folding of parasite
proteins. However, it also raises many questions about the mechanistic aspects of
the synthesis of asparagine repeats and about their implications in the global
control of protein expression throughout Plasmodium life cycle.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.522896 
PMCID: PMC3868750
PMID: 24196969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

