
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 Feb;13(2):503-19. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M112.026575. Epub
2013 Nov 7.

Phosphoproteomic analysis of protein phosphorylation networks in Tetrahymena
thermophila, a model single-celled organism.

Tian M(1), Chen X, Xiong Q, Xiong J, Xiao C, Ge F, Yang F, Miao W.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Aquatic Biodiversity and Conservation, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei 430072, China;

Tetrahymena thermophila is a widely used unicellular eukaryotic model organism in
biological research and contains more than 1000 protein kinases and phosphatases 
with specificity for Ser/Thr/Tyr residues. However, only a few dozen
phosphorylation sites in T. thermophila are known, presenting a major obstacle to
further understanding of the regulatory roles of reversible phosphorylation in
this organism. In this study, we used high-accuracy mass-spectrometry-based
proteomics to conduct global and site-specific phosphoproteome profiling of T.
thermophila. In total, 1384 phosphopeptides and 2238 phosphorylation sites from
1008 T. thermophila proteins were identified through the combined use of peptide 
prefractionation, TiO2 enrichment, and two-dimensional LC-MS/MS analysis. The
identified phosphoproteins are implicated in the regulation of various biological
processes such as transport, gene expression, and mRNA metabolic process.
Moreover, integrated analysis of the T. thermophila phosphoproteome and gene
network revealed the potential biological functions of many previously
unannotated proteins and predicted some putative kinase-substrate pairs. Our data
provide the first global survey of phosphorylation in T. thermophila using a
phosphoproteomic approach and suggest a wide-ranging regulatory scope of this
modification. The provided dataset is a valuable resource for the future
understanding of signaling pathways in this important model organism.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M112.026575 
PMCID: PMC3916650
PMID: 24200585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

