
1. PLoS Genet. 2013 Oct;9(10):e1003938. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003938. Epub 2013
Oct 31.

Co-evolution of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I ligands with killer-cell
immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR) in a genetically diverse population of
sub-Saharan Africans.

Norman PJ(1), Hollenbach JA, Nemat-Gorgani N, Guethlein LA, Hilton HG, Pando MJ, 
Koram KA, Riley EM, Abi-Rached L, Parham P.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Structural Biology and Microbiology & Immunology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America.

Interactions between HLA class I molecules and killer-cell immunoglobulin-like
receptors (KIR) control natural killer cell (NK) functions in immunity and
reproduction. Encoded by genes on different chromosomes, these polymorphic
ligands and receptors correlate highly with disease resistance and
susceptibility. Although studied at low-resolution in many populations,
high-resolution analysis of combinatorial diversity of HLA class I and KIR is
limited to Asian and Amerindian populations with low genetic diversity. At the
other end of the spectrum is the West African population investigated here: we
studied 235 individuals, including 104 mother-child pairs, from the Ga-Adangbe of
Ghana. This population has a rich diversity of 175 KIR variants forming 208 KIR
haplotypes, and 81 HLA-A, -B and -C variants forming 190 HLA class I haplotypes. 
Each individual we studied has a unique compound genotype of HLA class I and KIR,
forming 1-14 functional ligand-receptor interactions. Maintaining this
exceptionally high polymorphism is balancing selection. The centromeric region of
the KIR locus, encoding HLA-C receptors, is highly diverse whereas the telomeric 
region encoding Bw4-specific KIR3DL1, lacks diversity in Africans. Present in the
Ga-Adangbe are high frequencies of Bw4-bearing HLA-B*53:01 and Bw4-lacking
HLA-B*35:01, which otherwise are identical. Balancing selection at key residues
maintains numerous HLA-B allotypes having and lacking Bw4, and also those of
stronger and weaker interaction with LILRB1, a KIR-related receptor.
Correspondingly, there is a balance at key residues of KIR3DL1 that modulate its 
level of cell-surface expression. Thus, capacity to interact with NK cells
synergizes with peptide binding diversity to drive HLA-B allele frequency
distribution. These features of KIR and HLA are consistent with ongoing
co-evolution and selection imposed by a pathogen endemic to West Africa. Because 
of the prevalence of malaria in the Ga-Adangbe and previous associations of
cerebral malaria with HLA-B*53:01 and KIR, Plasmodium falciparum is a candidate
pathogen.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003938 
PMCID: PMC3814319
PMID: 24204327  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

