
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Dec 3;110(49):19854-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1316851110. Epub 2013 Nov 18.

Spatiotemporal dynamics of gene flow and hybrid fitness between the M and S forms
of the malaria mosquito, Anopheles gambiae.

Lee Y(1), Marsden CD, Norris LC, Collier TC, Main BJ, Fofana A, Cornel AJ,
Lanzaro GC.

Author information: 
(1)Vector Genetics Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Microbiology and
Immunology, and Department of Entomology and Nematology, University of
California, Davis, CA 95616.

The M and S forms of Anopheles gambiae have been the focus of intense study by
malaria researchers and evolutionary biologists interested in ecological
speciation. Divergence occurs at three discrete islands in genomes that are
otherwise nearly identical. An "islands of speciation" model proposes that
diverged regions contain genes that are maintained by selection in the face of
gene flow. An alternative "incidental island" model maintains that gene flow
between M and S is effectively zero and that divergence islands are unrelated to 
speciation. A "divergence island SNP" assay was used to explore the spatial and
temporal distributions of hybrid genotypes. Results revealed that hybrid
individuals occur at frequencies ranging between 5% and 97% in every population
examined. A temporal analysis revealed that assortative mating is unstable and
periodically breaks down, resulting in extensive hybridization. Results suggest
that hybrids suffer a fitness disadvantage, but at least some hybrid genotypes
are viable. Stable introgression of the 2L speciation island occurred at one site
following a hybridization event.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1316851110 
PMCID: PMC3856788
PMID: 24248386  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

