
1. Proc Biol Sci. 2013 Nov 20;281(1774):20132690. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2013.2690. Print
2014 Jan 7.

Surveillance for microbes and range expansion in house sparrows.

Martin LB(1), Coon CA, Liebl AL, Schrey AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of South Florida, , SCA 110,
Tampa, FL 33620, USA, Department of Biology, Armstrong Atlantic State University,
, Savannah, GA 31419, USA.

Interactions between hosts and parasites influence the success of host
introductions and range expansions post-introduction. However, the physiological 
mechanisms mediating these outcomes are little known. In some vertebrates,
variation in the regulation of inflammation has been implicated, perhaps because 
inflammation imparts excessive costs, including high resource demands and
collateral damage upon encounter with novel parasites. Here, we tested the
hypothesis that variation in the regulation of inflammation contributed to the
spread of house sparrows (Passer domesticus) across Kenya, one of the world's
most recent invasions of this species. Specifically, we asked whether
inflammatory gene expression declines with population age (i.e. distance from
Mombasa (dfM), the site of introduction around 1950). We compared expression of
two microbe surveillance molecules (Toll-like receptors, TLRs-2 and 4) and a
proinflammatory cytokine (interleukin-6, IL-6) before and after an injection of
an immunogenic component of Gram-negative bacteria (lipopolysaccharide, LPS)
among six sparrow populations. We then used a best-subset model selection
approach to determine whether population age (dfM) or other factors (e.g. malaria
or coccidian infection, sparrow density or genetic group membership)
best-explained gene expression. For baseline expression of TLR-2 and TLR-4,
population age tended to be the best predictor with expression decreasing with
population age, although other factors were also important. Induced expression of
TLRs was affected by LPS treatment alone. For induced IL-6, only LPS treatment
reliably predicted expression; baseline expression was not explained by any
factor. These data suggest that changes in microbe surveillance, more so than
downstream control of inflammation via cytokines, might have been important to
the house sparrow invasion of Kenya.

DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2013.2690 
PMCID: PMC3843847
PMID: 24258722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

