
1. Parasitol Res. 2014 Mar;113(3):823-8. doi: 10.1007/s00436-013-3712-9. Epub 2013
Dec 4.

The apicoplast genome of Leucocytozoon caulleryi, a pathogenic apicomplexan
parasite of the chicken.

Imura T(1), Sato S, Sato Y, Sakamoto D, Isobe T, Murata K, Holder AA, Yukawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Bioresource Sciences, Nihon
University, Fujisawa, Kanagawa, 252-0880, Japan.

Leucocytozoon caulleryi, a haemosporidian parasite of the chicken (Gallus gallus 
domesticus), can be highly pathogenic and often fatal. Although this parasite is 
extremely relevant to veterinary science, knowledge of its genomic features is
limited. To gain information applicable to developing novel control methods for
the parasite, we analyzed the apicoplast genome of L. caulleryi. This
extranuclear organellar DNA of 85.1% A + T and a unit of 34,779 bp was found to
encode almost the same set of genes as the plastid genome of Plasmodium
falciparum, including 16 tRNA and 30 protein coding genes, and except for one
open reading frame, ORF91 absent in L. caulleryi. As in P. falciparum, the L.
caulleryi apicoplast DNA contains two sets of a unique inverted repeat (IR), each
one 5,253 bp and encoding genes specifying one large and one small rRNA subunit
and nine tRNAs but no protein, and separated by a unique 13 bp sequence. Studies 
of several haemosporidian apicoplast DNA sequences have identified a
corresponding IR region; however, none of these studies has looked at the
complete sequence, even for well-studied species such as P. falciparum.
Phylogenetic studies using a concatenated amino acid sequence based on the open
reading frames confirmed the close relationship between L. caulleryi and
Plasmodium spp. In this study, we determined the nucleotide sequence of the
entire L. caulleryi apicoplast genome, including the region connecting the two IR
units. This is the first report of the complete nucleotide sequence of a
haemosporidian apicoplast DNA with a canonical IR.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-013-3712-9 
PMCID: PMC3932168
PMID: 24301182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

