
1. Parasit Vectors. 2013 Dec 6;6:343. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-343.

The dynamics of pyrethroid resistance in Anopheles arabiensis from Zanzibar and
an assessment of the underlying genetic basis.

Jones CM, Haji KA, Khatib BO, Bagi J, Mcha J, Devine GJ, Daley M, Kabula B, Ali
AS, Majambere S, Ranson H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke 
Place, Liverpool L3 5QA, UK. hranson@liverpool.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The emergence of pyrethroid resistance in the malaria vector,
Anopheles arabiensis, threatens to undermine the considerable gains made towards 
eliminating malaria on Zanzibar. Previously, resistance was restricted to the
island of Pemba while mosquitoes from Unguja, the larger of the two islands of
Zanzibar, were susceptible. Here, we characterised the mechanism(s) responsible
for resistance on Zanzibar using a combination of gene expression and target-site
mutation assays.
METHODS: WHO resistance bioassays were conducted using 1-5d old adult Anopheles
gambiae s.l. collected between 2011 and 2013 across the archipelago. Synergist
assays with the P450 inhibitor piperonyl-butoxide were performed in 2013. Members
of the An. gambiae complex were PCR-identified and screened for target-site
mutations (kdr and Ace-1). Gene expression in pyrethroid resistant An. arabiensis
from Pemba was analysed using whole-genome microarrays.
RESULTS: Pyrethroid resistance is now present across the entire Zanzibar
archipelago. Survival to the pyrethroid lambda-cyhalothrin in bioassays conducted
in 2013 was 23.5-54.3% on Unguja and 32.9-81.7% on Pemba. We present evidence
that resistance is mediated, in part at least, by elevated P450 monoxygenases.
Whole-genome microarray scans showed that the most enriched gene terms in
resistant An. arabiensis from Pemba were associated with P450 activity and
synergist assays with PBO completely restored susceptibility to pyrethroids in
both islands. CYP4G16 was the most consistently over-expressed gene in resistant 
mosquitoes compared with two susceptible strains from Unguja and Dar es Salaam.
Expression of this P450 is enriched in the abdomen and it is thought to play a
role in hydrocarbon synthesis. Microarray and qPCR detected several additional
genes putatively involved in this pathway enriched in the Pemba pyrethroid
resistant population and we hypothesise that resistance may be, in part, related 
to alterations in the structure of the mosquito cuticle. None of the kdr
target-site mutations, associated with pyrethroid/DDT resistance in An. gambiae
elsewhere in Africa, were found on the islands.
CONCLUSION: The consequences of this resistance phenotype are discussed in
relation to future vector control strategies on Zanzibar to support the ongoing
malaria elimination efforts on the islands.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-343 
PMCID: PMC3895773
PMID: 24314005  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

