
1. Malar J. 2013 Dec 20;12:459. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-459.

Assessment of pfcrt 72-76 haplotypes eight years after chloroquine withdrawal in 
Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of Congo.

Mvumbi DM(1), Boreux R, Sacheli R, Lelo M, Lengu B, Nani-Tuma S, Melin P, Ntumba 
K, Lunganza K, DeMol P, Hayette MP.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Unit, Department of Basic Sciences, School 
of Medicine, University of Kinshasa, BP 190 KIN XI, Kinshasa, DR Congo.
didimvumbi@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: In 2001, the World Health Organization (WHO) has recommended the use 
of artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) as the first-line treatment of
uncomplicated malaria cases, as monotherapies had become ineffective in many
parts of the world. As a result, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) withdrew 
chloroquine (CQ) from its malaria treatment policy in 2002 and an artesunate
(AS)-amodiaquine (AQ) combination became the ACT of choice in DRC in 2005.
AQ-resistance (AQR) has been reported in several parts of the world and mutations
in codons 72-76 of the Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine-resistance transporter
(pfcrt) gene have been strongly correlated with resistance, especially mutations 
encoding the SVMNT haplotype. This haplotype was first identified in Southeast
Asia and South America but was recently reported in two African countries
neighbouring DRC. These facts raised two questions: the first about the evolution
of CQ resistance (CQR) in DRC and the second about the presence of the SVMNT
haplotype, which would compromise the use of AQ as a partner drug for ACT.
METHODS: A total of 213 thick blood films were randomly collected in 2010 from a 
paediatric clinic in Kinshasa, DRC. Microscopy controls and real-time polymerase 
chain reaction (RT-PCR) were performed for Plasmodium species identification.
Haplotypes of the pfcrt gene were determined by sequencing.
RESULTS: The K76T mutation was detected in 145 out of 198 P. falciparum-positive 
samples (73.2%). In these 145 resistant strains, only the CVIET haplotype was
detected.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to assess the molecular markers of
resistance to CQ and AQ after the introduction of ACT in DRC. The results suggest
first that CQR is decreasing, as wild-type pfcrt haplotypes were found in only
26.8% of the samples and secondly that the SVMNT haplotype is not yet present in 
Kinshasa, suggesting that AQ remains valid as a partner drug for ACT in this
region.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-459 
PMCID: PMC3878180
PMID: 24359280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

