
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Mar;82(3):1287-95. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01070-13. Epub 2013 Dec
30.

NOS2 variants reveal a dual genetic control of nitric oxide levels,
susceptibility to Plasmodium infection, and cerebral malaria.

Trovoada Mde J(1), Martins M, Ben Mansour R, Sambo Mdo R, Fernandes AB, Antunes
Gonçalves L, Borja A, Moya R, Almeida P, Costa J, Marques I, Macedo MP, Coutinho 
A, Narum DL, Penha-Gonçalves C.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.

Nitric oxide (NO) is a proposed component of malaria pathogenesis, and the
inducible nitric oxide synthase gene (NOS2) has been associated to malaria
susceptibility. We analyzed the role of NOS2 polymorphisms on NO bioavailability 
and on susceptibility to infection, Plasmodium carrier status and clinical
malaria. Two distinct West African sample collections were studied: a
population-based collection of 1,168 apparently healthy individuals from the
Príncipe Island and a hospital-based cohort of 269 Angolan children. We found
that two NOS2 promoter single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) alleles associated to
low NO plasma levels in noninfected individuals were also associated to reduced
risk of pre-erythrocytic infection as measured anti-CSP antibody levels (6.25E-04
< P < 7.57E-04). In contrast, three SNP alleles within the NOS2 cistronic region 
conferring increased NO plasma levels in asymptomatic carriers were strongly
associated to risk of parasite carriage (8.00E-05 < P < 7.90E-04).
Notwithstanding, three SNP alleles in this region protected from cerebral malaria
(7.90E-4 < P < 4.33E-02). Cohesively, the results revealed a dual regimen in the 
genetic control of NO bioavailability afforded by NOS2 depending on the infection
status. NOS2 promoter variants operate in noninfected individuals to decrease
both NO bioavailability and susceptibility to pre-erythrocytic infection.
Conversely, NOS2 cistronic variants (namely, rs6505469) operate in infected
individuals to increase NO bioavailability and confer increased susceptibility to
unapparent infection but protect from cerebral malaria. These findings
corroborate the hypothesis that NO anti-inflammatory properties impact on
different steps of malaria pathogenesis, explicitly by favoring infection
susceptibility and deterring severe malaria syndromes.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01070-13 
PMCID: PMC3958015
PMID: 24379293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

