
1. Parasite Immunol. 2014 Feb;36(2):87-99. doi: 10.1111/pim.12085.

Flt3 ligand treatment modulates parasitemia during infection with rodent malaria 
parasites via MyD88- and IFN-γ-dependent mechanisms.

Tamura T(1), Akbari M, Kimura K, Kimura D, Yui K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, Sakamoto, Nagasaki, 
Japan; Global COE Program, Nagasaki University, Sakamoto, Nagasaki, Japan.

We previously showed that treatment of mice with the Flt3 ligand (Flt3L) prevents
development of lethal experimental cerebral malaria and inhibits parasitemia
during Plasmodium berghei ANKA (PbA) infection. In this study, we investigated
the mechanisms underlying the reduction of parasitemia in Flt3L-treated mice.
Studies using gene knockout mice and antibody treatment indicated that the
anti-parasitemia effect of Flt3L was mediated by innate immune system and was
dependent on MyD88, IFN-γ, IL-12 and natural killer (NK) cells. The number of NK 
cells and their ability to produce IFN-γ was enhanced in Flt3L-treated mice.
Phagocytic activity of splenocytes was increased in Flt3L-treated mice after PbA 
infection when compared with that in untreated mice, and this activity was mainly
mediated by the accumulation of F4/80(mid) CD11b(+) cells in the spleen. In both 
MyD88(-/-) and IFN-γ(-/-) mice, the proportion of F4/80(mid) CD11b(+) cells was
not increased in the spleen of Flt3L-treated mice after infection. These
correlations suggest that NK cells produce IFN-γ in Flt3L-treated mice, and
accumulation of F4/80(mid) CD11b(+) cells in the spleen is promoted by an IFN-γ
-dependent manner, culminating in the inhibition of parasitemia. These findings
imply that Flt3L promotes effective innate immunity against malaria infection
mediated by interplay among varieties of innate immune cells.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pim.12085 
PMID: 24400637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

