
1. Pediatrics. 2014 Feb;133(2):e363-70. doi: 10.1542/peds.2013-2112. Epub 2014 Jan
20.

Diagnostic and prognostic value of procalcitonin and C-reactive protein in
malnourished children.

Page AL(1), de Rekeneire N, Sayadi S, Aberrane S, Janssens AC, Dehoux M, Baron E.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology and Population Health, Epicentre, Paris, France;

BACKGROUND: Early recognition of bacterial infections is crucial for their proper
management, but is particularly difficult in children with severe acute
malnutrition (SAM). The objectives of this study were to evaluate the accuracy of
C-reactive protein (CRP) and procalcitonin (PCT) for diagnosing bacterial
infections and assessing the prognosis of hospitalized children with SAM, and to 
determine the reliability of CRP and PCT rapid tests suitable for remote
settings.
METHODS: From November 2007 to July 2008, we prospectively recruited 311 children
aged 6 to 59 months hospitalized with SAM plus a medical complication in Maradi, 
Niger. Blood, urine, and stool cultures and chest radiography were performed
systematically on admission. CRP and PCT were measured by rapid tests and by
reference quantitative methods using frozen serum sent to a reference laboratory.
RESULTS: Median CRP and PCT levels were higher in children with bacteremia or
pneumonia than in those with no proven bacterial infection (P < .002). However,
both markers performed poorly in identifying invasive bacterial infection, with
areas under the curve of 0.64 and 0.67 before and after excluding children with
malaria, respectively. At a threshold of 40 mg/L, CRP was the best predictor of
death (81% sensitivity, 58% specificity). Rapid test results were consistent with
those from reference methods.
CONCLUSIONS: CRP and PCT are not sufficiently accurate for diagnosing invasive
bacterial infections in this population of hospitalized children with complicated
SAM. However, a rapid CRP test could be useful in these settings to identify
children most at risk for dying.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2013-2112 
PMID: 24446443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

