
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2014 Mar;22:150-6. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.01.016. Epub
2014 Jan 24.

Limited genetic diversity and purifying selection in Iranian Plasmodium
falciparum Generative Cell Specific 1 (PfGCS1), a potential target for
transmission-blocking vaccine.

Mehrizi AA(1), Zakeri S(2), Djadid ND(2).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
abouei@gmail.com.
(2)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran.

Among vaccines, those that have an impact on transmission are in priority for
malaria elimination and eradication. One of the new identified
transmission-blocking vaccine (TBV) candidate antigens is Generative Cell
Specific 1 (GCS1) located on the male gametocytes of Plasmodium species. Since
the antigenic diversity could hamper vaccine development, it is essential to
determine the gene diversity of gcs1 in global malaria-endemic areas in order to 
develop efficient TBVs. Therefore, in this study, nucleotide diversity and
selection in the Plasmodium falciparum GCS1 (PfGCS1) antigen were analyzed in 36 
Iranian clinical isolates by using PCR sequencing in order to provide useful
information on this TBV candidate antigen. For this purpose, successful sequence 
analysis was carried out in 36 isolates. The results showed three
single-nucleotide polymorphisms including one synonymous (G1475A) and two
non-synonymous (A697G and G1479A) mutations leading to 3 distinct haplotypes with
different frequencies: GCS1-A (N184/D445, 16.7%), GCS1-B (S184/D445, 63.9%), and 
GCS1-C (N184/N445, 19.4%). The overall nucleotide diversity (π) for all 36
sequences of Iranian pfgcs1 was 0.00066±0.00012, and the dN-dS value (-0.00028)
was negative, suggesting the possible action of purifying selection in this gene.
Epitope mapping prediction of PfGCS1 antigen showed that most of the potential
linear and conformational B-cell epitopes are located in conserved regions.
However, N184S and D445N mutations were also involved in linear and
conformational B-cell epitopes, respectively that should be considered in vaccine
design. In conclusion, the present study showed a very low genetic diversity of
pfgcs1 gene among Iranian isolates. Considering PfGCS1 as a conserved TBV
candidate, our data provides valuable information to develop a PfGCS1-based TBV.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.01.016 
PMID: 24462906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

