
1. Infect Dis Rep. 2011 Dec 16;3(2):e16. doi: 10.4081/idr.2011.e16. eCollection 2011
Sep 7.

Prevalence of Dihydrofolate reductase gene mutations in Plasmodium falciparum
isolate from pregnant women in Nigeria.

Ojurongbe O(1), Tijani BD(2), Fawole AA(3), Adeyeba OA(4), Kun JF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Ladoke Akintola
University of Technology, Nigeria; ; Institute of Tropical Medicine, University
of Tuebingen, Germany;
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, University of Ilorin
Teaching Hospital;
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Ilorin Teaching
Hospital, Nigeria.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Ladoke Akintola
University of Technology, Nigeria;
(5)Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tuebingen, Germany;

We assessed the prevalence of Plasmodium falciparum and the frequency of the dhfr
triple mutation that is associated with antifolate drug resistance among P.
falciparum isolates obtained from pregnant women in Ilorin, Nigeria. The study
included 179 women in the second and third trimester of pregnancy who have been
exposed to intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy (IPTp) with
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine. Thick and thin blood films and PCR were used for
malaria parasite detection. Blood group and hemoglobin concentration were also
determined. Mutations in P. falciparum dhfr were analyzed by sequencing DNA
obtained from blood spots on filter paper. Prevalence of P. falciparum in the
population (PCR corrected) was 44.1% (79/179) with 66.7% and 33.3% in the second 
and third trimester, respectively. Primigravide (51.3%) were more infected than
multigravide (48.7%) but the difference was not statistically significant. Women 
in blood group A had the highest P. falciparum malaria infection (30.8%). The
mean hemoglobin concentration was lower among those infected with malaria
parasite. Also, more women with the malaria parasite (38.4%) had anemia compare
to those without (21.4%). The prevalence of the P. falciparum dhfr mutant alleles
was 64.1%, 61.5%, 38.5%, and 12.8% for I51, R59, N108 and T108, respectively.
None of the samples had the L164 mutation. The combined triple dhfr mutation (51 
+ 59 + 108) in the population was 17.9% (7 of 39). Also, the prevalence of the
triple mutant alleles was not significantly associated to the number of doses of 
SP taken by the women. These findings highlight the need for a regular assessment
of IPTp/SP efficacy, and evaluation of possible alternative drugs.

DOI: 10.4081/idr.2011.e16 
PMCID: PMC3892595
PMID: 24470913 

