
1. FEBS J. 2014 Mar;281(6):1679-99. doi: 10.1111/febs.12732. Epub 2014 Feb 24.

A secretory multifunctional serine protease, DegP of Plasmodium falciparum, plays
an important role in thermo-oxidative stress, parasite growth and development.

Sharma S(1), Jadli M, Singh A, Arora K, Malhotra P.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
New Delhi, India.

Plasmodium falciparum heat shock proteins and proteases are known for their
indispensable roles in parasite virulence and survival in the host cell. They
neutralize various host-derived stress responses that are deleterious for
parasite growth and invasion. We report identification and functional
characterization of the first DegP from an apicomplexan (P. falciparum). To
determine the molecular identity and functions of the parasite-encoded DegP, we
complemented the Escherichia coli degP null mutant with a putative PfdegP gene,
and the results showed that PfDegP complements the growth defect of the
temperature sensitive DegP-deficient mutant and imparts resistance to
non-permissive temperatures and oxidative stress. Molecular interaction studies
showed that PfDegP exists as a complex with parasite-encoded heat shock protein
70, iron superoxide dismutase and enolase. DegP expression is significantly
induced in parasite culture upon heat shock/oxidative stress. Our data suggest
that the PfDegP protein may play a role in the growth and development of P.
falciparum through its ability to confer protection against thermal/oxidative
stress. Antibody against DegP showed anti-plasmodial activity against blood-stage
parasites in vitro, suggesting that PfDegP and its associated complex may be a
potential focus for new anti-malarial therapies.STRUCTURED DIGITAL ABSTRACT:
●PfDegP physically interacts with PfHsp70 and PfEno by anti-bait
co-immunoprecipitation (View interaction) ●PfDegP physically interacts with
PfEno, PfSod, PfOat, PfHsp70, PfLDH and PfGpi by anti-bait co-immunoprecipitation
(View interaction) ●PfHsp-70 and PfDegP co-localize by fluorescence microscopy
(View interaction) ●PfDegP physically interacts with PfOat, PfHsp70, PfEno,
PfSod, PfGpi and PfLDH by surface plasmon resonance (View interaction) ●PfEno and
PfDegP co-localize by fluorescence microscopy (View interaction) ●PfDegP and
PfHsp70 co-localize by co-sedimentation through density gradient (View
interaction).

© 2014 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.12732 
PMID: 24494818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

