
1. Parasitol Res. 2014 Apr;113(4):1269-81. doi: 10.1007/s00436-014-3765-4. Epub 2014
Feb 13.

Genome-wide identification and functional annotation of Plasmodium falciparum
long noncoding RNAs from RNA-seq data.

Liao Q(1), Shen J, Liu J, Sun X, Zhao G, Chang Y, Xu L, Li X, Zhao Y, Zheng H,
Zhao Y, Wu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, School of Medicine, Ningbo University,
Ningbo, People's Republic of China.

The life cycle of Plasmodium falciparum is very complex, with an erythrocytic
stage that involves the invasion of red blood cells and the survival and growth
of the parasite within the host. Over the past several decades, numbers of
studies have shown that proteins exported by P. falciparum to the surface of
infected red blood cells play a critical role in recognition and interaction with
host receptors and are thus essential for the completion of the life cycle of P. 
falciparum. However, little is known about long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs). In this
study, we designed a computational pipeline to identify new lncRNAs of P.
falciparum from published RNA-seq data and analyzed their sequences and
expression features. As a result, 164 novel lncRNAs were found. The sequences and
expression features of P. falciparum lncRNAs were similar to those of humans and 
mice: there was a lack of sequence conservation, low expression levels, and high 
expression coefficient of variance and co-expression with nearby coding sequences
in the genome. Next, a coding/noncoding gene co-expression network for P.
falciparum was constructed to further annotate the functions of novel and known
lncRNAs. In total, the functions of 69 lncRNAs, including 44 novel lncRNAs, were 
annotated. The main functions of the lncRNAs included metabolic processes,
biosynthetic processes, regulation of biological processes, establishment of
localization, catabolic processes, cellular component organization, and
interspecies interactions between organisms. Our results will provide clues to
further the investigation of interactions between human hosts and parasites and
the mechanisms of P. falciparum infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-014-3765-4 
PMID: 24522451  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

