
1. Parasitol Res. 2014 May;113(5):1703-11. doi: 10.1007/s00436-014-3815-y. Epub 2014
Feb 18.

The morphological and molecular characterization of Henneguya rotunda n. sp., a
parasite of the gill arch and fins of Salminus brasiliensis from the Mogi Guaçu
River, Brazil.

Moreira GS(1), Adriano EA, Silva MR, Ceccarelli PS, Maia AA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina Veterinária, Faculdade de Zootecnia e Engenharia de
Alimentos, Universidade de São Paulo (USP), Rua Duque de Caxias Norte, 225,
Pirassununga, SP, CEP 13635-900, Brazil, gabrielmoreira@usp.br.

A new species of myxosporea (Henneguya rotunda n. sp.) was found in the membrane 
of the gill arch and the fins of Salminus brasiliensis in the Mogi Guaçu River,
municipality of Pirassununga, São Paulo state, Brazil. Morphological and
morphometric analyses using light microscopy revealed parasites with similar
characteristics at both infection sites. The mature spores found infecting the
fins had oval spore body with 7.1 ± 0.2 μm in length, 5.6 ± 0.2 μm in width,
3.7 ± 0.1 μm in thickness, 16.4 ± 1.2 μm in length of the caudal process, and
23.6 ± 1.1 μm in total length of the spore. In a frontal view, the polar capsule 
was observed to be symmetrical with 3.4 ± 0.2 μm in length and 1.8 ± 0.1 μm in
width. Mature spores contain six to seven turns of the polar filaments. The
morphometric data concerning the spores obtained from plasmodia from the membrane
of the gill arch were similar to those from the fins. Ultrastructure analysis
revealed that the plasmodial wall was formed by a single membrane and had
numerous pinocytotic canals connecting the outside of the plasmodia to the
ectoplasm zone. Beyond that, various electron-translucent vesicles also were
observed at the periphery of the plasmodium. The molecular analyses of the 18S
rDNA gene from the spores obtained from the gill arch membrane and fin membrane
showed that these sequences shared 100% similarity. Phylogenetic studies using
maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood methods demonstrated the polyphyletic
clustering of the myxosporean parasites of characiform fishes. H. rotunda n. sp. 
clustered as a sister species of Myxobolus pantanalis, also a parasite of S.
brasiliensis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-014-3815-y 
PMID: 24535737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

