
1. Malar J. 2014 Mar 17;13:104. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-104.

Polymorphic patterns of the merozoite surface protein-3β in Korean isolates of
Plasmodium vivax.

Kang JM, Ju HL, Cho PY, Moon SU, Ahn SK, Sohn WM, Lee HW, Kim TS(1), Na BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology and Tropical Medicine, and Institute of Health
Sciences, Gyeongsang National University School of Medicine, Jinju 660-751,
Republic of Korea. tongsookim@inha.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: The merozoite surface protein-3β of Plasmodium vivax (PvMSP-3β) is
one of the candidate antigens for blood stage malaria vaccine development. The
polymorphisms in PvMSP-3β have been reported in certain P. vivax isolates.
However, the diversity of PvMSP-3β throughout its global distribution has not
been well understood. In this study, the genetic diversity and the effects of
natural selection in PvMSP-3β among P. vivax Korean isolates were analysed.
METHODS: Blood samples were collected from 95 patients with vivax malaria in
Korea. The region flanking full-length PvMSP-3β was amplified by polymerase chain
reaction and cloned into a TA cloning vector. The PvMSP-3β sequence of each
isolate was determined and the polymorphic characteristics and effects of natural
selection were analysed using the DNASTAR, MEGA4, and DnaSP programs.
RESULTS: Five different subtypes of PvMSP-3β were identified based on single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), insertions, and deletions. Although a high level
of sequence diversity was observed in the PvMSP-3β gene, the coiled-coil tertiary
structure of the PvMSP-3β protein was well conserved in all of the sequences. The
PvMSP-3β of Korean isolates is under natural selection. DNA polymerase slippage
and intragenic recombination likely contributed to PvMSP-3β diversity in Korean
P. vivax isolates.
CONCLUSIONS: The PvMSP-3β of Korean P. vivax isolates displayed polymorphisms,
with SNPs, insertions and deletions scattered throughout of the gene. These
results of parasite heterogeneity are relevant to the development of a PvMSP-3β
based vaccine against P. vivax and the implementation of malaria control
programmes in Korea.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-104 
PMCID: PMC3995521
PMID: 24635878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

