
1. Biochem Soc Trans. 2014 Apr;42(2):419-24. doi: 10.1042/BST20140008.

Activity, regulation, copy number and function in the glyoxalase system.

Rabbani N(1), Xue M(1), Thornalley PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Clinical Sciences Research Laboratories, Warwick Medical School, University
of Warwick, University Hospital, Coventry CV2 2DX, U.K.

Molecular, catalytic and structural properties of glyoxalase pathway enzymes of
many species are now known. Current research has focused on the regulation of
activity and expression of Glo1 (glyoxalase I) and Glo2 (glyoxalase II) and their
role in health and disease. Human GLO1 has MRE (metal-response element), IRE
(insulin-response element), E2F4 (early gene 2 factor isoform 4), AP-2α
(activating enhancer-binding protein 2α) and ARE (antioxidant response-element)
regulatory elements and is a hotspot for copy number variation. The human Glo2
gene, HAGH (hydroxyacylglutathione hydrolase), has a regulatory p53-response
element. Glo1 is linked to healthy aging, obesity, diabetes and diabetic
complications, chronic renal disease, cardiovascular disease, other disorders and
multidrug resistance in cancer chemotherapy. Mathematical modelling of the
glyoxalase pathway predicts that pharmacological levels of increased Glo1
activity markedly decrease cellular methylglyoxal and related glycation, and
pharmacological Glo1 inhibition markedly increases cellular methylglyoxal and
related glycation. Glo1 inducers are in development to sustain healthy aging and 
for treatment of vascular complications of diabetes and other disorders, and
cell-permeant Glo1 inhibitors are in development for treatment of
multidrug-resistant tumours, malaria and potentially pathogenic bacteria and
fungi.

DOI: 10.1042/BST20140008 
PMID: 24646254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

