
1. Blood. 2014 May 1;123(18):e100-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-12-541698. Epub 2014
Mar 20.

Glycophorin C (CD236R) mediates vivax malaria parasite rosetting to normocytes.

Lee WC(1), Malleret B, Lau YL, Mauduit M, Fong MY, Cho JS, Suwanarusk R, Zhang R,
Albrecht L, Costa FT, Preiser P, McGready R, Renia L, Nosten F, Russell B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia;

Erratum in
    Blood. 2015 Dec 17;126(25):2765.

Rosetting phenomenon has been linked to malaria pathogenesis. Although rosetting 
occurs in all causes of human malaria, most data on this subject has been derived
from Plasmodium falciparum. Here, we investigate the function and factors
affecting rosette formation in Plasmodium vivax. To achieve this, we used a range
of novel ex vivo protocols to study fresh and cryopreserved P vivax (n = 135) and
P falciparum (n = 77) isolates from Thailand. Rosetting is more common in vivax
than falciparum malaria, both in terms of incidence in patient samples and
percentage of infected erythrocytes forming rosettes. Rosetting to P vivax
asexual and sexual stages was evident 20 hours postreticulocyte invasion,
reaching a plateau after 30 hours. Host ABO blood group, reticulocyte count, and 
parasitemia were not correlated with P vivax rosetting. Importantly, mature
erythrocytes (normocytes), rather than reticulocytes, preferentially form
rosetting complexes, indicating that this process is unlikely to directly
facilitate merozoite invasion. Although antibodies against host erythrocyte
receptors CD235a and CD35 had no effect, Ag-binding fragment against the BRIC 4
region of CD236R significantly inhibited rosette formation. Rosetting assays
using CD236R knockdown normocytes derived from hematopoietic stem cells further
supports the role of glycophorin C as a receptor in P vivax rosette formation.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2013-12-541698 
PMCID: PMC4007619
PMID: 24652986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

