
1. Malar J. 2014 Mar 27;13:120. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-120.

High prevalence of pfcrt-CVIET haplotype in isolates from asymptomatic and
symptomatic patients in south-central Oromia, Ethiopia.

Golassa L(1), Enweji N, Erko B, Aseffa A, Swedberg G.

Author information: 
(1)Aklilu Lemma Institute of Pathobiology, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia. lgolassa@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: As a result of extensive chloroquine resistance (CQR) in Plasmodium
falciparum in late 1990s, Ethiopia replaced CQ with sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine
(SP) as first-line drug, which in turn was replaced by artemisinin combination
therapy in 2004. Plasmodium falciparum resistance to CQ is determined by the
mutation at K76T of the P. falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter (pfcrt) 
gene. Understanding diversity in the P. falciparum genome is crucial since it has
the potential to influence important phenotypes of the parasite such as drug
resistance. Limited data is available regarding the type of pfcrt mutant allelic 
type, the effect of CQ withdrawal and diversity of the parasite population in
south-central Oromia, Ethiopia.
METHODS: Finger-pricked blood spotted on Whatman 3MM filter papers were collected
from falciparum malaria patients. Parasite DNA was extracted from individual
blood spots on the filter papers. The presence of K76T mutations was determined
using nested PCR for all isolates. Complete sequencing of mutations in pfcrt
72-76 was done for a set of randomly selected resistant isolates. Four
microsatellite (MS) markers were analysed to determine the heterozygosity.
RESULTS: Although CQ was withdrawn for more than a decade, 100% of the parasites 
still carried the pfcrt K76T mutation. All isolates were mutant at the K76T
polymorphism. Based on combinations of MS markers, seven different Ethiopian CQR 
variants (E1-E7) were identified. Heterozygosity (H(e)) for MS flanking the pfcrt
chloroquine resistance allele ranged from 0.00 (mscrt -29, -29.268 kb) to 0.21
(mscrt -2, -2.814 kb). H(e) ranged from 0.00 (msint 3, 0 kb) to 0.19 (msint 2, 0 
kb) for MS within the pfcrt gene. Both intronic and MS flanking the pfcrt gene
showed low levels of diversity.
CONCLUSION: pfcrt CQR allele seems to be fixed in the study area. Of the
different haplotypes associated with CQR, only the CVIET genotype was identified.
No reversal to the wild-type has occurred in Ethiopia unlike in many Africa
countries where CQR parasites declined after cessation of CQ use. Decreased
diversity in CQR isolates surrounding pfcrt suggests CQ selection and
homogenization among CQR parasite population. While mutation in msint 3 and mscrt
-29 of the mutant pfcrt allele is being fixed, it seems that mutations in msint 2
and mscrt -2 are still evolving and may indicate the start of re-diversification 
of the population from a fixed 76 T population.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-120 
PMCID: PMC3986696
PMID: 24674605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

