
1. Genome Res. 2014 Jun;24(6):974-88. doi: 10.1101/gr.169417.113. Epub 2014 Mar 26.

Three-dimensional modeling of the P. falciparum genome during the erythrocytic
cycle reveals a strong connection between genome architecture and gene
expression.

Ay F(1), Bunnik EM(2), Varoquaux N(3), Bol SM(2), Prudhomme J(2), Vert JP(3),
Noble WS(4), Le Roch KG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195, USA;
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of California,
Riverside, California 92521, USA;
(3)Centre for Computational Biology, Mines ParisTech, Fontainebleau F-77300,
France; Institut Curie, Paris F-75248, France; U900, INSERM, Paris F-75248,
France;
(4)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195, USA; Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

The development of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum is controlled
by coordinated changes in gene expression throughout its complex life cycle, but 
the corresponding regulatory mechanisms are incompletely understood. To study the
relationship between genome architecture and gene regulation in Plasmodium, we
assayed the genome architecture of P. falciparum at three time points during its 
erythrocytic (asexual) cycle. Using chromosome conformation capture coupled with 
next-generation sequencing technology (Hi-C), we obtained high-resolution
chromosomal contact maps, which we then used to construct a consensus
three-dimensional genome structure for each time point. We observed strong
clustering of centromeres, telomeres, ribosomal DNA, and virulence genes,
resulting in a complex architecture that cannot be explained by a simple volume
exclusion model. Internal virulence gene clusters exhibit domain-like structures 
in contact maps, suggesting that they play an important role in the genome
architecture. Midway during the erythrocytic cycle, at the highly
transcriptionally active trophozoite stage, the genome adopts a more open
chromatin structure with increased chromosomal intermingling. In addition, we
observed reduced expression of genes located in spatial proximity to the
repressive subtelomeric center, and colocalization of distinct groups of
parasite-specific genes with coordinated expression profiles. Overall, our
results are indicative of a strong association between the P. falciparum spatial 
genome organization and gene expression. Understanding the molecular processes
involved in genome conformation dynamics could contribute to the discovery of
novel antimalarial strategies.

Â© 2014 Ay et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.169417.113 
PMCID: PMC4032861
PMID: 24671853  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

