
1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 3;9(4):e93759. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093759. eCollection 
2014.

Proteolysis at a specific extracellular residue implicates integral membrane
CLAG3 in malaria parasite nutrient channels.

Nguitragool W(1), Rayavara K(2), Desai SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Tropical Medicine and Genetics, Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)The Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland,
United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(7):e102283.

The plasmodial surface anion channel mediates uptake of nutrients and other
solutes into erythrocytes infected with malaria parasites. The clag3 genes of P. 
falciparum determine this channel's activity in human malaria, but how the
encoded proteins contribute to transport is unknown. Here, we used proteases to
examine the channel's composition and function. While proteases with distinct
specificities all cleaved within an extracellular domain of CLAG3, they produced 
differing degrees of transport inhibition. Chymotrypsin-induced inhibition
depended on parasite genotype, with channels induced by the HB3 parasite affected
to a greater extent than those of the Dd2 clone. Inheritance of functional
proteolysis in the HB3Ã—Dd2 genetic cross, DNA transfection, and gene silencing
experiments all pointed to the clag3 genes, providing independent evidence for a 
role of these genes. Protease protection assays with a Dd2-specific inhibitor and
site-directed mutagenesis revealed that a variant L1115F residue on a CLAG3
extracellular loop contributes to inhibitor binding and accounts for differences 
in functional proteolysis. These findings indicate that surface-exposed CLAG3 is 
the relevant pool of this protein for channel function. They also suggest
structural models for how exposed CLAG3 domains contribute to pore formation and 
parasite nutrient uptake.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093759 
PMCID: PMC3974804
PMID: 24699906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

