
1. Acta Trop. 2014 Aug;136:89-100. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2014.03.019. Epub 2014
Apr 2.

Non-allele specific antibody responses to genetically distinct variant forms of
Plasmodium vivax Duffy binding protein (PvDBP-II) in Iranians exposed to seasonal
malaria transmission.

Valizadeh V(1), Zakeri S(2), Mehrizi AA(1), Djadid ND(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center,
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Pasteur Avenue, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center,
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Pasteur Avenue, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran.
Electronic address: zakeris@yahoo.com.

Duffy binding protein (DBP) is a leading vaccine candidate of Plasmodium vivax.
The binding domain of DBP (DBP-II) is polymorphic, that may be a major challenge 
for development of a broadly effective vaccine against vivax malaria. The present
investigation was undertaken to explore whether the sequence diversity of DBP-II 
causes variation in naturally acquired anti-DBP-II antibodies. In this study, the
five genetically distinct variants were expressed, and anti-DBP-II responses were
measured in P. vivax-infected individuals (n=202). Finally, by performing
immune-depletion ELISA experiments, antibody responses to the conserved sites of 
all allelic forms were evaluated using the corresponding and non-corresponding
patients' sera (n=20). In this study, natural P. vivax infection produces IgG
against all five examined variant forms of PvDBP-II with no statistically
difference. Sequence analysis in the 20 selected samples (for antibody depletion 
experiment) showed eight distinct haplotypes, DBPI (n=1), DBPIII (n=3), DBPIV
(n=1), DBPV (n=1), DBPVI (n=5), DBPIX (n=6), DBPX (n=1), and DBP XI (n=2). The
results showed the presence of the cross-reactive antibody responses to
heterologous variants of PvDBP-II in Iranian individuals who were infected with
distinct allelic forms of the PvDBP-II. Therefore, it is proposed that the
majority of antibodies recognized sharing B-cell epitopes and this could overcome
the PvDBP-II variation as a one of the biggest challenges of PvDBP-II-based
vaccine development.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2014.03.019 
PMID: 24704284  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

