
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Apr 22;111(16):5854-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1401715111. Epub 2014 Apr 7.

Mating activates the heme peroxidase HPX15 in the sperm storage organ to ensure
fertility in Anopheles gambiae.

Shaw WR(1), Teodori E, Mitchell SN, Baldini F, Gabrieli P, Rogers DW, Catteruccia
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United
Kingdom.

Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes are major African vectors of malaria, a disease that
kills more than 600,000 people every year. Given the spread of insecticide
resistance in natural mosquito populations, alternative vector control strategies
aimed at reducing the reproductive success of mosquitoes are being promoted.
Unlike many other insects, An. gambiae females mate a single time in their lives 
and must use sperm stored in the sperm storage organ, the spermatheca, to
fertilize a lifetime's supply of eggs. Maintenance of sperm viability during
storage is therefore crucial to the reproductive capacity of these mosquitoes.
However, to date, no information is available on the factors and mechanisms
ensuring sperm functionality in the spermatheca. Here we identify cellular
components and molecular mechanisms used by An. gambiae females to maximize their
fertility. Pathways of energy metabolism, cellular transport, and oxidative
stress are strongly regulated by mating in the spermatheca. We identify the
mating-induced heme peroxidase (HPX) 15 as an important factor in long-term
fertility, and demonstrate that its function is required during multiple
gonotrophic cycles. We find that HPX15 induction is regulated by sexually
transferred 20-hydroxy-ecdysone (20E), a steroid hormone that is produced by the 
male accessory glands and transferred during copulation, and that expression of
this peroxidase is mediated via the 20E nuclear receptor. To our knowledge, our
findings provide the first evidence of the mechanisms regulating fertility in
Anopheles, and identify HPX15 as a target for vector control.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1401715111 
PMCID: PMC4000814
PMID: 24711401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

