
1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 11;9(4):e94611. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094611. eCollection
2014.

Ribosomal protein S29 regulates metabolic insecticide resistance through binding 
and degradation of CYP6N3.

Yu J(1), Hu S(1), Ma K(1), Sun L(2), Hu H(1), Zou F(1), Guo Q(1), Lei Z(1), Zhou 
D(1), Sun Y(1), Zhang D(1), Ma L(1), Shen B(1), Zhu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Pediatric Research Center, Nanjing Children's Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Many diseases are transmitted by mosquitoes, including malaria,
dengue fever, yellow fever, filariasis, and West Nile fever. Chemical control
plays a major role in managing mosquito-borne diseases. However, excessive and
continuous application of insecticides has caused the development of insecticide 
resistance in many species including mosquito, and this has become the major
obstacle to controlling mosquito-borne diseases. Insecticide resistance is the
result of complex polygenic inheritance, and the mechanisms are not well
understood. Ribosomal protein RPS29 was found to be associated with DM resistance
in our previous study. In this study, we aim to further investigate the
involvement of RPS29 in deltamethrin resistance.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, tandem affinity purification
was used to identify proteins that can interact with RPS29. Among the candidate
proteins, CYP6N3, a member of the CYP450 superfamily, was identified, and binding
to RPS29 was confirmed in vitro and in vivo by GST pull-down and
immunofluorescence. CCK-8 assay was used to investigate the RPS29-CTP6N3
interaction in relation to DM resistance. CYP6N3 overexpression significantly
enhanced DM resistance and insect cell viability, but this was reversed by RPS29 
overexpression. Western blot was used to study the mechanism of interaction
between RPS29 and CYP6N3. RPS29 increases CYP6N3 protein degradation through the 
proteasome.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: These observations indicate that CYP6N3, a novel
RPS29-interacting partner, could stimulate deltamethrin resistance in mosquito
cells and RPS29 overexpression targeted CYP6N3 for proteosomal degradation,
abrogating the CYP6N3-associated resistence to deltamethrin. Our findings provide
a novel mechanism associated with CYP450s mediated DM resistance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094611 
PMCID: PMC3984272
PMID: 24728095  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

