
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014 Jul;58(7):3666-78. doi: 10.1128/AAC.02721-13.
Epub 2014 Apr 14.

Lysine acetylation in sexual stage malaria parasites is a target for antimalarial
small molecules.

Trenholme K(1), Marek L(2), Duffy S(3), Pradel G(4), Fisher G(3), Hansen FK(2),
Skinner-Adams TS(3), Butterworth A(1), Ngwa CJ(4), Moecking J(4), Goodman CD(5), 
McFadden GI(5), Sumanadasa SD(3), Fairlie DP(6), Avery VM(3), Kurz T(7), Andrews 
KT(8).

Author information: 
(1)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Queensland, Australia
School of Medicine, University of Queensland, Herston, Queensland, Australia.
(2)Institute for Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Heinrich Heine
University, Duesseldorf, Germany.
(3)Eskitis Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, Nathan, Queensland,
Australia.
(4)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(5)School of Botany, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(6)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St. Lucia,
Queensland, Australia.
(7)Institute for Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Heinrich Heine
University, Duesseldorf, Germany thomas.kurz@uni-duesseldorf.de
k.andrews@griffith.edu.au.
(8)Eskitis Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, Nathan, Queensland,
Australia thomas.kurz@uni-duesseldorf.de k.andrews@griffith.edu.au.

Therapies to prevent transmission of malaria parasites to the mosquito vector are
a vital part of the global malaria elimination agenda. Primaquine is currently
the only drug with such activity; however, its use is limited by side effects.
The development of transmission-blocking strategies requires an understanding of 
sexual stage malaria parasite (gametocyte) biology and the identification of new 
drug leads. Lysine acetylation is an important posttranslational modification
involved in regulating eukaryotic gene expression and other essential processes. 
Interfering with this process with histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors is a
validated strategy for cancer and other diseases, including asexual stage malaria
parasites. Here we confirm the expression of at least one HDAC protein in
Plasmodium falciparum gametocytes and show that histone and nonhistone protein
acetylation occurs in this life cycle stage. The activity of the canonical HDAC
inhibitors trichostatin A (TSA) and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA;
Vorinostat) and a panel of novel HDAC inhibitors on early/late-stage gametocytes 
and on gamete formation was examined. Several compounds displayed
early/late-stage gametocytocidal activity, with TSA being the most potent (50%
inhibitory concentration, 70 to 90 nM). In contrast, no inhibitory activity was
observed in P. falciparum gametocyte exflagellation experiments. Gametocytocidal 
HDAC inhibitors caused hyperacetylation of gametocyte histones, consistent with a
mode of action targeting HDAC activity. Our data identify HDAC inhibitors as
being among a limited number of compounds that target both asexual and sexual
stage malaria parasites, making them a potential new starting point for
gametocytocidal drug leads and valuable tools for dissecting gametocyte biology.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02721-13 
PMCID: PMC4068603
PMID: 24733477  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

