
1. ISRN Hematol. 2014 Mar 11;2014:745245. doi: 10.1155/2014/745245. eCollection
2014.

Prevalence of deletional alpha thalassemia and sickle gene in a tribal dominated 
malaria endemic area of eastern India.

Purohit P(1), Dehury S(1), Patel S(2), Patel DK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Sickle Cell Clinic & Molecular Biology Laboratory, Veer Surendra Sai Medical
College, Burla, Sambalpur, Odisha 768017, India.
(2)Department Medicine, Sickle Cell Clinic & Molecular Biology Laboratory, Veer
Surendra Sai Medical College, Burla, Sambalpur, Odisha 768017, India.
(3)Department of Medicine, Sickle Cell Clinic & Molecular Biology Laboratory,
Veer Surendra Sai Medical College, Qr. 3R/27, Doctors Colony, Burla, Sambalpur,
Odisha 768017, India.

Inherited hemoglobin disorders like alpha thalassemia and sickle gene are common 
in the Indian subcontinent. These disorders in the heterozygous state act as
malaria resistance genes and influence the susceptibility to Plasmodium
falciparum malaria. There is inadequate knowledge about the epidemiology of these
malaria resistance genes in the tribal dominated malaria endemic region of the
state of Odisha in eastern India. A cross sectional prevalence study was
undertaken in 594 subjects in five tribal populations in this region, namely,
Sahara (42.4%), Kutia Kandha (30.0%), Kuda (15.8%), Gond (9.8%), and Oraon
(2.0%). Sickling test, Hb electrophoresis, HPLC, and molecular studies were
undertaken to diagnose the prevalence of sickle allele, β -thalassemia allele,
and deletional alpha thalassemia. Sickle and β thalassemia alleles were found in 
13.1% and 3.4% of subjects, respectively. Sickle allele was found both in
heterozygous (10.1%) and homozygous state (3.03%). The prevalence of alpha
thalassemia was 50.84% with an allelic frequency of 0.37. Both α (-3.7) and α
(-4.2) alpha thalassemia were detected with an allele frequency of 0.33 and 0.04,
respectively. The high prevalence of alpha thalassemia and sickle gene in this
population is probably due to selection pressure of endemic malaria in this part 
of India.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/745245 
PMCID: PMC3967634
PMID: 24808962 

