
1. Transfusion. 2014 Oct;54(10):2419-24. doi: 10.1111/trf.12650. Epub 2014 May 7.

Plasmodium genome in blood donors at risk for malaria after several years of
residence in Italy.

Assennato SM(1), Berzuini A, Foglieni B, Spreafico M, Allain JP, Prati D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: At present, the main risk of transfusion-transmitted malaria (TTM) in
nonendemic countries is chronic, asymptomatic immigrants from malaria-endemic
areas. Semi-immune donors may carry undetected parasitemia. This study examines
Plasmodium infection in at-risk blood donors in Northern Italy.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Plasma samples from 97 candidate donors and 80 controls
were tested for malarial antibodies using a commercial enzyme immunoassay. The
conserved 18S rRNA and the mitochondrial genes of Plasmodium were amplified to
detect and quantify parasite genomes (copies/mL). Plasmodium species were
identified with a species-specific nested polymerase chain reaction. Parasitemic 
samples were further tested by amplification of polymorphic repetitive regions in
MSP-1 Block 2, MSP-2 Block 3, and glutamate-rich protein (GLURP) confirmed by
sequencing.
RESULTS: Three of 83 seropositive (3.6%) and one of 14 seronegative at-risk
candidate donors carried Plasmodium genome (4 × 10(3) -8.5 × 10(4) copies/mL):
two P. falciparum, one P. malariae (seronegative sample), and one coinfection
with P. malariae and P. ovale. Alleles of MSP-1 (MAD20 and K1), MSP-2 (3D7 and
FC27), and GLURP were amplified from Sample 261. In Sample 282 only one allele in
MSP-2 (FC27) and GLURP was amplified. No alleles were detected in Samples 283 and
331.
CONCLUSIONS: Immigrants from endemic countries might carry infectious Plasmodium 
after 2 to 5 years of continuous residence in Italy. Serologic screening may miss
donors carrying P. malariae. Permanent exclusion or screening for both antibodies
and genome are needed to prevent TTM.

© 2014 AABB.

DOI: 10.1111/trf.12650 
PMID: 24801273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

