
1. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2013 Feb;31(1):33-8.

[The binding property of different regions in Duffy-binding-like domain alpha of 
Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 to heparin].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Y, Sun XD, Yang C, Zhang YN, Song M, Lu HJ, Jiang N, Yin JG, Chen QJ.

OBJECTIVE: To clone and express Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane
protein 1 DBLalpha (PfEMP1-DBLalpha) and three fragments genes, and screen the
strongest affinity sequence with the red blood cell surface receptors-heparin or 
heparin sulfate in the structure of PfEMP1-DBLalpha.
METHODS: The sequence of PfEMP1-DBLalpha1245 was optimized according to the
characteristics of E. coli codon, synthesized, and divided into three fragments
(DBLaA, DBLalphaB, and DBLalphaC) by PCR. Full-length gene and three gene
fragments were subcloned into PGEX-4T-1 vector, and transformed into E. coli BL21
and then induced with IPTG for expression. The recombinant protein was purified
from bacterial lysates using glutathione-Sepharose 4B. Heparin affinity test and 
glycosaminoglycan (GAG) inhibition test were used to analyze the affinity between
recombinant protein and heparin.
RESULTS: Four recombinant proteins(DBLalpha1245, DBLalphaA, DBLalphaB, and
DBLalphaC) were expressed as solubility and the relative molecular weight (M(r)
73 600, M(r) 41 600, M(r) 42 500, and M(r) 41 500) were conformed to the
prediction size. Heparin affinity test and GAG inhibition test showed that the
four recombinant proteins were binded to the heparin-Sepharose, but not for the
GST control. DBLalphaC (Q285-Y415) had the strongest affinity to heparin.
CONCLUSION: The strongest affinity sequence with heparin or heparin sulfate in
the structure of PfEMP1-DBLalpha is Q285-Y415, which plays a role in binding of
Plasmodium falciparum infected red blood cells to the peripheral red blood cells.


PMID: 24812834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

