
1. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2014 Feb;32(1):1-5.

[In vivo identification of the interaction between var intron and an ApiAP2
transcription factor in Plasmodium falciparum].

[Article in Chinese]

Han ST, Zhang QF, Pan WQ.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the potential interaction between the ApiAP2 protein
family member, PF3D7_1107800, and var intron of Plasmodium falciparum in vivo.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from Plasmodium falciparum (3D7 strain), 5'
end gene fragment of PF3D7_1107800 was amplified by PCR, and cloned into
pGEX-4T-1 vector. The constructed pGEX-4T-1-PF3D7_1107800N was transformed into
E. Coli BL21 (DE3) and followed by expression of the protein induced by IPTG. The
recombinant protein was purified through glutathione sepharose. Twenty female
BALB/c mice were divided into 2 group. Ten mice in experiment group were
immunized with a mixture of the purified protein and Freund's adjuvant by
subcutaneous injection. Other 10 mice received PBS injection as control. Sera
from mice of 2 group were purified with protein G. The effect of the antibody was
testified with Western blotting. DNA products of ChIP assay was analyzed for
enrichment of anti-PF3D7_1107800 group in ups C var intron by qPCR.
RESULTS: PCR result of the PF3D7_1107800 gene 5' end segment showed that there
was a specific band (about 345 bp), which was consistent with the theoretical
value. The constructed vector pGEX-4T-1-PF3D7_1107800N was confirmed by gene
sequencing. SDS-PAGE and Western blotting analysis demonstrated that the
recombinant protein was about Mr 37,000. The anti-PF3D7_1107800 serum was
obtained after the immunization of mice with the purified protein, and reacted
with the recombinant protein, the specific band was about Mr 200,000. qPCR result
showed that the fold enrichment of anti-PF3D7_1107800 group in var intron was two
times higher than that of the reference gene region.
CONCLUSION: The Plasmodium falciparum ApiAP2 family member PF3D7_1107800 binds to
ups C var intron region in vivo.


PMID: 24822355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

