
1. Acta Trop. 2014 Sep;137:130-9. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2014.05.002. Epub 2014 
May 10.

Vectorial capacity and genetic diversity of Anopheles annularis (Diptera:
Culicidae) mosquitoes in Odisha, India from 2009 to 2011.

Das B(1), Patra AP(1), Das M(1), Mahapatra N(1), Tripathy H(1), Kar SK(1), Hazra 
RK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Regional Medical Research Centre, Chandrasekharpur, Bhubaneswar 751023,
Odisha, India.
(2)Regional Medical Research Centre, Chandrasekharpur, Bhubaneswar 751023,
Odisha, India. Electronic address: rupenkh@yahoo.co.in.

Anopheles annularis is one of the major vectors of malaria in Odisha, India. The 
present study was undertaken to determine the vectorial capacity and assess the
genetic diversity of An. annularis collected from different endemic regions of
Odisha. Mosquitoes were collected from thirteen endemic districts using standard 
entomological collection methods from 2009 to 2011. Sibling species of An.
annularis were identified by PCR-RFLP and sequencing of D3 region of 28S
ribosomal DNA (rDNA) region. Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) sporozoite rate and human
blood fed percentage (HBF) were estimated by multiplex PCR using Pf and human
specific primers. Genetic diversity of An. annularis was estimated by ISSR
markers. Out of 1647 An. annularis collected, 1353 (82.15%) were collected by
mechanical aspirators and 294 (17.85%) by light trap. 49 (2.97%) were positive
for human blood and 18 (1.09%) were positive for Pf sporozoite. PCR-RFLP and
sequencing analyses detected only An annularis A in the study areas. Overall
genetic differentiation among An. annularis populations was moderate (FST=0.048) 
and showed significant correlation between genetic distance and geographic
distance (r=0.882; P<0.05). Angul population proved to be genetically unique and 
was highly divergent FST>0.110) from other populations, suggesting low gene flow 
between them. The study indicated that only An. annularis A was found in Odisha
with potential vectorial capacity that can play a major role in malaria
transmission. ISSR markers proved to be useful molecular tools to evaluate
genetic variability in An. annularis populations.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2014.05.002 
PMID: 24820180  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

