
1. Genes Immun. 2014 Jul-Aug;15(5):313-9. doi: 10.1038/gene.2014.21. Epub 2014 May
22.

Urban-rural differences in the gene expression profiles of Ghanaian children.

Amoah AS(1), Obeng BB(1), May L(2), Kruize YC(2), Larbi IA(3), Kabesch M(4),
Wilson MD(3), Hartgers FC(2), Boakye DA(3), Yazdanbakhsh M(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Parasitology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical
Research, Accra, Ghana [2] Department of Parasitology, Leiden University Medical 
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Parasitology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research,
Accra, Ghana.
(4)Department of Pediatric Pneumology and Allergy, KUNO University Children's
Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

Recent studies indicate that urbanization is having a pronounced effect on
disease patterns in developing countries. To understand the immunological basis
of this, we examined mRNA expression in whole blood of genes involved in immune
activation and regulation in 151 children aged 5-13 years attending rural, urban 
low socioeconomic status (SES) and urban high-SES schools in Ghana. Samples were 
also collected to detect helminth and malaria infections. Marked differences in
gene expression were observed between the rural and urban areas as well as within
the urban area. The expression of both interleukin (IL)-10 and programmed cell
death protein 1 increased significantly across the schools from urban high SES to
urban low SES to rural (P-trend <0.001). Although IL-10 gene expression was
significantly elevated in the rural compared with the urban schools (P<0.001),
this was not associated with parasitic infection. Significant differences in the 
expression of toll-like receptors (TLRs) and their signaling genes were seen
between the two urban schools. Genetic differences could not fully account for
the gene expression profiles in the different groups as shown by analysis of
IL-10, TLR-2 and TLR-4 gene polymorphisms. Immune gene expression patterns are
strongly influenced by environmental determinants and may underlie the effects of
urbanization seen on health outcomes.

DOI: 10.1038/gene.2014.21 
PMID: 24848931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

