
1. PLoS One. 2014 May 19;9(5):e97715. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097715. eCollection
2014.

Insights from the genome annotation of Elizabethkingia anophelis from the malaria
vector Anopheles gambiae.

Kukutla P(1), Lindberg BG(2), Pei D(1), Rayl M(2), Yu W(1), Steritz M(1), Faye
I(2), Xu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, New Mexico,
United States of America.
(2)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm
University, Stockholm, Sweden.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(3):e0122154.

Elizabethkingia anophelis is a dominant bacterial species in the gut ecosystem of
the malaria vector mosquito Anopheles gambiae. We recently sequenced the genomes 
of two strains of E. anophelis, R26T and Ag1, isolated from different strains of 
A. gambiae. The two bacterial strains are identical with a few exceptions.
Phylogenetically, Elizabethkingia is closer to Chryseobacterium and Riemerella
than to Flavobacterium. In line with other Bacteroidetes known to utilize various
polymers in their ecological niches, the E. anophelis genome contains numerous
TonB dependent transporters with various substrate specificities. In addition,
several genes belonging to the polysaccharide utilization system and the
glycoside hydrolase family were identified that could potentially be of benefit
for the mosquito carbohydrate metabolism. In agreement with previous reports of
broad antibiotic resistance in E. anophelis, a large number of genes encoding
efflux pumps and Î²-lactamases are present in the genome. The component genes of
resistance-nodulation-division type efflux pumps were found to be syntenic and
conserved in different taxa of Bacteroidetes. The bacterium also displays
hemolytic activity and encodes several hemolysins that may participate in the
digestion of erythrocytes in the mosquito gut. At the same time, the OxyR regulon
and antioxidant genes could provide defense against the oxidative stress that is 
associated with blood digestion. The genome annotation and comparative genomic
analysis revealed functional characteristics associated with the symbiotic
relationship with the mosquito host.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097715 
PMCID: PMC4026382
PMID: 24842809  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

