
1. Front Immunol. 2014 May 14;5:213. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00213. eCollection
2014.

Genetically modified organisms and visceral leishmaniasis.

Chhajer R(1), Ali N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases and Immunology Division, Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology , Kolkata , India.

Vaccination is the most effective method of preventing infectious diseases. Since
the eradication of small pox in 1976, many other potentially life compromising if
not threatening diseases have been dealt with subsequently. This event was a
major leap not only in the scientific world already burdened with many diseases
but also in the mindset of the common man who became more receptive to novel
treatment options. Among the many protozoan diseases, the leishmaniases have
emerged as one of the largest parasite killers of the world, second only to
malaria. There are three types of leishmaniasis namely cutaneous (CL),
mucocutaneous (ML), and visceral (VL), caused by a group of more than 20 species 
of Leishmania parasites. Visceral leishmaniasis, also known as kala-azar is the
most severe form and almost fatal if untreated. Since the first attempts at
leishmanization, we have killed parasite vaccines, subunit protein, or DNA
vaccines, and now we have live recombinant carrier vaccines and live attenuated
parasite vaccines under various stages of development. Although some research has
shown promising results, many more potential genes need to be evaluated as live
attenuated vaccine candidates. This mini-review attempts to summarize the success
and failures of genetically modified organisms used in vaccination against some
of major parasitic diseases for their application in leishmaniasis.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00213 
PMCID: PMC4030198
PMID: 24860575 

