
1. Mol Phylogenet Evol. 2014 Sep;78:172-84. doi: 10.1016/j.ympev.2014.05.013. Epub
2014 May 23.

The origin and diversification of the merozoite surface protein 3 (msp3)
multi-gene family in Plasmodium vivax and related parasites.

Rice BL(1), Acosta MM(2), Pacheco MA(3), Carlton JM(4), Barnwell JW(5), Escalante
AA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Evolutionary Medicine and Informatics, The Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. Electronic address:
Benjamin.Rice@asu.edu.
(2)Center for Evolutionary Medicine and Informatics, The Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. Electronic address: mmacost1@asu.edu.
(3)Center for Evolutionary Medicine and Informatics, The Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. Electronic address:
Maria.Pacheco@asu.edu.
(4)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, Department of Biology, New York
University, New York, NY, USA. Electronic address: Jane.Carlton@nyu.edu.
(5)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA. Electronic 
address: wzb3@cdc.gov.
(6)Center for Evolutionary Medicine and Informatics, The Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA; School of Life Sciences, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ, USA. Electronic address: Ananias.Escalante@asu.edu.

The genus Plasmodium is a diversified group of parasites with more than 200 known
species that includes those causing malaria in humans. These parasites use
numerous proteins in a complex process that allows them to invade the red blood
cells of their vertebrate hosts. Many of those proteins are part of multi-gene
families; one of which is the merozoite surface protein-3 (msp3) family. The msp3
multi-gene family is considered important in the two main human parasites,
Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium falciparum, as its paralogs are simultaneously
expressed in the blood stage (merozoite) and are immunogenic. There are large
differences among Plasmodium species in the number of paralogs in this family.
Such differences have been previously explained, in part, as adaptations that
allow the different Plasmodium species to invade their hosts. To investigate
this, we characterized the array containing msp3 genes among several Plasmodium
species, including P. falciparum and P. vivax. We first found no evidence
indicating that the msp3 family of P. falciparum was homologous to that of P.
vivax. Subsequently, by focusing on the diverse clade of nonhuman primate
parasites to which P. vivax is closely related, where homology was evident, we
found no evidence indicating that the interspecies variation in the number of
paralogs was an adaptation related to changes in host range or host switches.
Overall, we hypothesize that the evolution of the msp3 family in P. vivax is
consistent with a model of multi-allelic diversifying selection where the
paralogs may have functionally redundant roles in terms of increasing antigenic
diversity. Thus, we suggest that the expressed MSP3 proteins could serve as
"decoys", via antigenic diversity, during the critical process of invading the
host red blood cells.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ympev.2014.05.013 
PMCID: PMC4406276
PMID: 24862221  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

