
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2014 Aug;91(2):361-6. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.13-0531. Epub 2014
Jun 2.

Preliminary investigation of the contribution of CYP2A6, CYP2B6, and UGT1A9
polymorphisms on artesunate-mefloquine treatment response in Burmese patients
with Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Phompradit P(1), Muhamad P(1), Cheoymang A(1), Na-Bangchang K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chulabhorn International College of Medicine, and Thailand Center of
Excellence on Drug Discovery and Development Thammasat University (Rangsit
Campus), Patumthani, Thailand; Mae Sot General Hospital, Mae Sot District, Tak
Province, Thailand.
(2)Chulabhorn International College of Medicine, and Thailand Center of
Excellence on Drug Discovery and Development Thammasat University (Rangsit
Campus), Patumthani, Thailand; Mae Sot General Hospital, Mae Sot District, Tak
Province, Thailand kesaratmu@yahoo.com.

CYP2A6, CYP2B6, and UGT1A9 genetic polymorphisms and treatment response after a
three-day course of artesunate-mefloquine was investigated in 71 Burmese patients
with uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Results provide evidence for
the possible link between CYP2A6 and CYP2B6 polymorphisms and plasma
concentrations of artesunate/dihydroartemisinin and treatment response. In one
patient who had the CYP2A6*1A/*4C genotype (decreased enzyme activity), plasma
concentration of artesunate at one hour appeared to be higher, and the
concentration of dihydroartemisinin was lower than for those carrying other
genotypes (415 versus 320 ng/mL). The proportion of patients with adequate
clinical and parasitologic response who had the CYP2B6*9/*9 genotype (mutant
genotype) was significantly lower compared with those with late parasitologic
failure (14.0% versus 19.0%). Confirmation through a larger study in various
malaria-endemic areas is required before a definite conclusion on the role of
genetic polymorphisms of these drug-metabolizing enzymes on treatment response
after artesunate-based combination therapy can be made.

Â© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.13-0531 
PMCID: PMC4125263
PMID: 24891466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

