
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 18;289(29):20386-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.561670. Epub
2014 Jun 3.

Regulation of Plasmodium falciparum development by calcium-dependent protein
kinase 7 (PfCDPK7).

Kumar P(1), Tripathi A(1), Ranjan R(1), Halbert J(2), Gilberger T(3), Doerig
C(4), Sharma P(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Eukaryotic Gene Expression Laboratory, National Institute of
Immunology, New Delhi 110067, India.
(2)the Inserm-EPFL Joint Laboratory, Global Health Institute, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)the Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, M.G. DeGroote Institute
for Infectious Disease Research, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario L8S 4L8, 
Canada, the Bernhard-Nocht-Institute for Tropical Medicine, 20359 Hamburg,
Germany, and.
(4)the Inserm-EPFL Joint Laboratory, Global Health Institute, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland, the Department of
Microbiology, Monash University, Wellington Road, Clayton, Victoria 3800,
Australia.
(5)From the Eukaryotic Gene Expression Laboratory, National Institute of
Immunology, New Delhi 110067, India, pushkar@nii.ac.in.

Second messengers such as phosphoinositides and calcium are known to control
diverse processes involved in the development of malaria parasites. However, the 
underlying molecular mechanisms and pathways need to be unraveled, which may be
achieved by understanding the regulation of effectors of these second messengers.
Calcium-dependent protein kinase (CDPK) family members regulate diverse parasitic
processes. Because CDPKs are absent from the host, these kinases are considered
as potential drug targets. We have dissected the function of an atypical CDPK
from Plasmodium falciparum, PfCDPK7. The domain architecture of PfCDPK7 is very
different from that of other CDPKs; it has a pleckstrin homology domain adjacent 
to the kinase domain and two calcium-binding EF-hands at its N terminus. We
demonstrate that PfCDPK7 interacts with PI(4,5)P2 via its pleckstrin homology
domain, which may guide its subcellular localization. Disruption of PfCDPK7
caused a marked reduction in the growth of the blood stage parasites, as
maturation of rings to trophozoites was markedly stalled. In addition, parasite
proliferation was significantly attenuated. These findings shed light on an
important role for PfCDPK7 in the erythrocytic asexual cycle of malaria
parasites.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.561670 
PMCID: PMC4106351
PMID: 24895132  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

