
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2014 Aug;26:213-22. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.05.033. Epub
2014 Jun 6.

DNA sequence polymorphisms of the pfmdr1 gene and association of mutations with
the pfcrt gene in Indian Plasmodium falciparum isolates.

Chauhan K(1), Pande V(2), Das A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Evolutionary Genomics and Bioinformatics Laboratory, Division of Genomics and 
Bioinformatics, National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector 8, Dwarka, New
Delhi 110077, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Kumaun University, Nainital 263001, Uttarakhand, 
India.
(3)Evolutionary Genomics and Bioinformatics Laboratory, Division of Genomics and 
Bioinformatics, National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector 8, Dwarka, New
Delhi 110077, India. Electronic address: aparup@mrcindia.org.

Mutations in the Plasmodium falciparum multidrug resistance (pfmdr1) gene are
known to provide compensatory fitness benefits to the chloroquine (CQ)-resistant 
malaria parasites and are often associated with specific mutations in the P.
falciparum CQ resistant transporter (pfcrt) gene. Prevalence of the specific
mutations in these two genes across different malaria endemic regions was mostly 
studies. However, reports on mutations in the pfmdr1 gene and their genetic
associations with mutations in the pfcrt gene in Indian P. falciparum field
isolates are scarce. We have sequenced a 560 bp region of pfmdr1 coding sequence 
in 64 P. falciparum isolates collected from different malaria endemic populations
in India. Twenty out of these 64 isolates were laboratory cultured with known in 
vitro CQ sensitiveness (10 sensitive and 10 resistant). Three low frequency
mutations (two non-synonymous and one synonymous) in the pfmdr1 gene were
segregating in Indian isolates in addition to the predominant Y₈₆ and Y₁₈₄ ones, 
with high haplotype and nucleotide diversity in the field isolates in comparison 
to the cultured ones. No statistically significant genetic association between
the mutations in the pfmdr1 and pfcrt gene could be detected; almost all observed
associations were intragenic in nature. The results on the genetic diversity of
the pfmdr1 gene were discussed in term of evolutionary perspectives in Indian P. 
falciparum, with possible future potential of gaining further insights on this
gene in view of evolving malaria parasites resistant to artemisinin partner
drugs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.05.033 
PMID: 24911283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

