
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 16;9(6):e99822. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099822. eCollection
2014.

Underpinning sustainable vector control through informed insecticide resistance
management.

Thomsen EK(1), Strode C(1), Hemmings K(1), Hughes AJ(1), Chanda E(2), Musapa
M(3), Kamuliwo M(2), Phiri FN(2), Muzia L(3), Chanda J(2), Kandyata A(2), Chirwa 
B(3), Poer K(3), Hemingway J(1), Wondji CS(1), Ranson H(1), Coleman M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool,
United Kingdom.
(2)National Malaria Control Centre, Lusaka, Zambia.
(3)Zambia Integrated Systems Strengthening Program, Abt Associates, Lusaka,
Zambia.

BACKGROUND: There has been rapid scale-up of malaria vector control in the last
ten years. Both of the primary control strategies, long-lasting pyrethroid
treated nets and indoor residual spraying, rely on the use of a limited number of
insecticides. Insecticide resistance, as measured by bioassay, has rapidly
increased in prevalence and has come to the forefront as an issue that needs to
be addressed to maintain the sustainability of malaria control and the drive to
elimination. Zambia's programme reported high levels of resistance to the
insecticides it used in 2010, and, as a result, increased its investment in
resistance monitoring to support informed resistance management decisions.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A country-wide survey on insecticide resistance
in Zambian malaria vectors was performed using WHO bioassays to detect resistant 
phenotypes. Molecular techniques were used to detect target-site mutations and
microarray to detect metabolic resistance mechanisms. Anopheles gambiae s.s. was 
resistant to pyrethroids, DDT and carbamates, with potential organophosphate
resistance in one population. The resistant phenotypes were conferred by both
target-site and metabolic mechanisms. Anopheles funestus s.s. was largely
resistant to pyrethroids and carbamates, with potential resistance to DDT in two 
locations. The resistant phenotypes were conferred by elevated levels of
cytochrome p450s.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Currently, the Zambia National Malaria Control Centre
is using these results to inform their vector control strategy. The methods
employed here can serve as a template to all malaria-endemic countries striving
to create a sustainable insecticide resistance management plan.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099822 
PMCID: PMC4059741
PMID: 24932861  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

