
1. Malar J. 2014 Jun 14;13:233. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-233.

Distinct patterns of diversity, population structure and evolution in the AMA1
genes of sympatric Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax populations of
Papua New Guinea from an area of similarly high transmission.

Arnott A, Wapling J, Mueller I, Ramsland PA, Siba PM, Reeder JC, Barry AE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Melbourne, Australia. barry@wehi.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: As Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax co-exist in most
malaria-endemic regions outside sub-Saharan Africa, malaria control strategies in
these areas must target both species in order to succeed. Population genetic
analyses can predict the effectiveness of interventions including vaccines, by
providing insight into patterns of diversity and evolution. The aim of this study
was to investigate the population genetics of leading malaria vaccine candidate
AMA1 in sympatric P. falciparum and P. vivax populations of Papua New Guinea
(PNG), an area of similarly high prevalence (Pf = 22.3 to 38.8%, Pv = 15.3 to
31.8%).
METHODS: A total of 72 Pfama1 and 102 Pvama1 sequences were collected from two
distinct areas, Madang and Wosera, on the highly endemic PNG north coast.
RESULTS: Despite a greater number of polymorphic sites in the AMA1 genes of P.
falciparum (Madang = 52; Wosera = 56) compared to P. vivax (Madang = 36,
Wosera = 34), the number of AMA1 haplotypes, haplotype diversity (Hd) and
recombination (R) was far lower for P. falciparum (Madang = 12, Wosera = 20; Hd
≤0.92, R ≤45.8) than for P. vivax (Madang = 50, Wosera = 38; Hd = 0.99,
R = ≤70.9). Balancing selection was detected only within domain I of AMA1 for P. 
vivax, and in both domains I and III for P. falciparum.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher diversity in the genes encoding P. vivax AMA1 than in P.
falciparum AMA1 in this highly endemic area has important implications for
development of AMA1-based vaccines in PNG and beyond. These results also suggest 
a smaller effective population size of P. falciparum compared to P. vivax, a
finding that warrants further investigation. Differing patterns of selection on
the AMA1 genes indicate that critical antigenic sites may differ between the
species, highlighting the need for independent investigations of these two
leading vaccine candidates.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-233 
PMCID: PMC4085730
PMID: 24930015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

