
1. Parasit Vectors. 2014 Jun 19;7:274. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-274.

Genetic basis of pyrethroid resistance in a population of Anopheles arabiensis,
the primary malaria vector in Lower Moshi, north-eastern Tanzania.

Matowo J(1), Jones CM, Kabula B, Ranson H, Steen K, Mosha F, Rowland M, Weetman
D.

Author information: 
(1)Kilimanjaro Christian Medical University College (KCMUCo), Moshi, Tanzania.
johntowo@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Pyrethroid resistance has been slower to emerge in Anopheles
arabiensis than in An. gambiae s.s and An. funestus and, consequently, studies
are only just beginning to unravel the genes involved. Permethrin resistance in
An. arabiensis in Lower Moshi, Tanzania has been linked to elevated levels of
both P450 monooxygenases and Î²-esterases. We have conducted a gene expression
study to identify specific genes linked with metabolic resistance in the Lower
Moshi An. arabiensis population.
METHODS: Microarray experiments employing an An. gambiae whole genome expression 
chip were performed on An. arabiensis, using interwoven loop designs.
Permethrin-exposed survivors were compared to three separate unexposed mosquitoes
from the same or a nearby population. A subsection of detoxification genes were
chosen for subsequent quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR).
RESULTS: Microarray analysis revealed significant over expression of 87 probes
and under expression of 85 probes (in pairwise comparisons between permethrin
survivors and unexposed sympatric and allopatric samples from Dar es Salaam
(controls). For qRT-PCR we targeted over expressed ABC transporter genes (ABC
'2060'), a glutathione-S-transferase, P450s and esterases. Design of efficient,
specific primers was successful for ABC '2060'and two P450s (CYP6P3, CYP6M2). For
the CYP4G16 gene, we used the primers that were previously used in a microarray
study of An. arabiensis from Zanzibar islands. Over expression of CYP4G16 and ABC
'2060' was detected though with contrasting patterns in pairwise comparisons
between survivors and controls. CYP4G16 was only up regulated in survivors,
whereas ABC '2060' was similar in survivors and controls but over expressed in
Lower Moshi samples compared to the Dar es Salaam samples. Increased
transcription of CYP4G16 and ABC '2060' are linked directly and indirectly
respectively, with permethrin resistance in Lower Moshi An. arabiensis.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased transcription of a P450 (CYP4G16) and an ABC transporter
(ABC 2060) are linked directly and indirectly respectively, with permethrin
resistance in Lower Moshi An. arabiensis. Our study provides replication of
CYP4G16 as a candidate gene for pyrethroid resistance in An. arabiensis, although
its role may not be in detoxification, and requires further investigation.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-274 
PMCID: PMC4082164
PMID: 24946780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

