
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jul;42(13):8271-84. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku500. Epub 2014
Jun 23.

The Cryptosporidium parvum ApiAP2 gene family: insights into the evolution of
apicomplexan AP2 regulatory systems.

Oberstaller J(1), Pumpalova Y(2), Schieler A(2), Llinás M(2), Kissinger JC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA Center
for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia, Athens, GA
30602, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative
Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA Center
for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia, Athens, GA
30602, USA Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, 
USA jkissing@uga.edu.

We provide the first comprehensive analysis of any transcription factor family in
Cryptosporidium, a basal-branching apicomplexan that is the second leading cause 
of infant diarrhea globally. AP2 domain-containing proteins have evolved to be
the major regulatory family in the phylum to the exclusion of canonical
regulators. We show that apicomplexan and perkinsid AP2 domains cluster
distinctly from other chromalveolate AP2s. Protein-binding specificity assays of 
C. parvum AP2 domains combined with motif conservation upstream of co-regulated
gene clusters allowed the construction of putative AP2 regulons across the in
vitro life cycle. Orthologous Apicomplexan AP2 (ApiAP2) expression has been
rearranged relative to the malaria parasite P. falciparum, suggesting ApiAP2
network rewiring during evolution. C. hominis orthologs of putative C. parvum
ApiAP2 proteins and target genes show greater than average variation. C. parvum
AP2 domains display reduced binding diversity relative to P. falciparum, with
multiple domains binding the 5'-TGCAT-3', 5'-CACACA-3' and G-box motifs
(5'-G[T/C]GGGG-3'). Many overrepresented motifs in C. parvum upstream regions are
not AP2 binding motifs. We propose that C. parvum is less reliant on ApiAP2
regulators in part because it utilizes E2F/DP1 transcription factors. C. parvum
may provide clues to the ancestral state of apicomplexan transcriptional
regulation, pre-AP2 domination.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gku500 
PMCID: PMC4117751
PMID: 24957599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

