
1. BMC Res Notes. 2014 Jun 24;7:388. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-7-388.

ClonorESTdb: a comprehensive database for Clonorchis sinensis EST sequences.

Kim DW, Yoo WG, Lee S, Lee MR, Kim YJ, Cho SH, Lee WJ(1), Ju JW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Malaria and Parasitic Diseases, Centre for Immunology and
Pathology, Korea National Institute of Health, Chungbuk 363-951, Republic of
Korea. leewonja@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Clonorchiasis, which is primarily caused by liver fluke
(Platyhelminthes), is a fatal infectious disease that is mainly associated with
bile duct malignancy and the subsequent development of cholangiocarcinoma. Thus, 
a genomic approach now represents an important step to further our knowledge of
biology and the pathology of these parasites. The results of expressed sequence
tags (ESTs) sequencing need to be well organized into databases to provide an
integrated set of tools and functional information.
FINDINGS: Here, the ClonorESTdb database represents a collection of Clonorchis
sinensis ESTs that is intended as a resource for parasite functional genomics. A 
total of 55,736 successful EST sequences, which are cleaned and clustered into
non-redundant 13,305 C. sinensis assembled EST sequences (6,497 clusters and
6,808 singletons), were obtained from three in-house prepared cDNA libraries of
C. sinensis at different developmental stages. The assembled consensus sequences 
were annotated using the BLAST algorithm or/and hmm against NCBI NR, UniProt,
KEGG and InterProScan. The ClonorESTdb database provides functional annotation,
their expression profiles, tandem repeats and putative single nucleotide
polymorphisms with utility tools such as local BLAST search and text retrieval.
CONCLUSIONS: This resource enables the researcher to identify and compare
expression signatures under different biological stages and promotes ongoing
parasite drug and vaccine development and biological research.Database
URL:http://pathod.cdc.go.kr/clonorestdb/.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-0500-7-388 
PMCID: PMC4094540
PMID: 24957044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

