
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jun 26;10(6):e1004231. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004231.
eCollection 2014 Jun.

Human IGF1 regulates midgut oxidative stress and epithelial homeostasis to
balance lifespan and Plasmodium falciparum resistance in Anopheles stephensi.

Drexler AL(1), Pietri JE(1), Pakpour N(1), Hauck E(1), Wang B(1), Glennon EK(1), 
Georgis M(1), Riehle MA(2), Luckhart S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of California, Davis, Davis, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Entomology, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, United
States of America.

Insulin and insulin-like growth factor signaling (IIS) regulates cell death,
repair, autophagy, and renewal in response to stress, damage, and pathogen
challenge. Therefore, IIS is fundamental to lifespan and disease resistance.
Previously, we showed that insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) within a
physiologically relevant range (0.013-0.13 µM) in human blood reduced development
of the human parasite Plasmodium falciparum in the Indian malaria mosquito
Anopheles stephensi. Low IGF1 (0.013 µM) induced FOXO and p70S6K activation in
the midgut and extended mosquito lifespan, whereas high IGF1 (0.13 µM) did not.
In this study the physiological effects of low and high IGF1 were examined in
detail to infer mechanisms for their dichotomous effects on mosquito resistance
and lifespan. Following ingestion, low IGF1 induced phosphorylation of midgut
c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK), a critical regulator of epithelial homeostasis,
but high IGF1 did not. Low and high IGF1 induced midgut mitochondrial reactive
oxygen species (ROS) synthesis and nitric oxide (NO) synthase gene expression,
responses which were necessary and sufficient to mediate IGF1 inhibition of P.
falciparum development. However, increased ROS and apoptosis-associated caspase-3
activity returned to baseline levels following low IGF1 treatment, but were
sustained with high IGF1 treatment and accompanied by aberrant expression of
biomarkers for mitophagy, stem cell division and proliferation. Low IGF1-induced 
ROS are likely moderated by JNK-induced epithelial cytoprotection as well as
p70S6K-mediated growth and inhibition of apoptosis over the lifetime of A.
stephensi to facilitate midgut homeostasis and enhanced survivorship. Hence,
mitochondrial integrity and homeostasis in the midgut, a key signaling center for
IIS, can be targeted to coordinately optimize mosquito fitness and anti-pathogen 
resistance for improved control strategies for malaria and other vector-borne
diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004231 
PMCID: PMC4072789
PMID: 24968248  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

