
1. Malar J. 2014 Jun 25;13:244. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-244.

Return of chloroquine-sensitive Plasmodium falciparum parasites and emergence of 
chloroquine-resistant Plasmodium vivax in Ethiopia.

Mekonnen SK(1), Aseffa A, Berhe N, Teklehaymanot T, Clouse RM, Gebru T, Medhin G,
Velavan TP.

Author information: 
(1)Aklilu Lemma Institute of Pathobiology, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia. se.kebede@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Increased resistance by Plasmodium falciparum parasites led to the
withdrawal of the antimalarial drugs chloroquine and sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine
in Ethiopia. Since 2004 artemether-lumefantrine has served to treat uncomplicated
P. falciparum malaria. However, increasing reports on delayed parasite clearance 
to artemisinin opens up a new challenge in anti-malarial therapy. With the
complete withdrawal of CQ for the treatment of Plasmodium falciparum malaria,
this study assessed the evolution of CQ resistance by investigating the
prevalence of mutant alleles in the pfmdr1 and pfcrt genes in P. falciparum and
pvmdr1 gene in Plasmodium vivax in Southern and Eastern Ethiopia.
METHODS: Of the 1,416 febrile patients attending primary health facilities in
Southern Ethiopia, 329 febrile patients positive for P. falciparum or P. vivax
were recruited. Similarly of the 1,304 febrile patients from Eastern Ethiopia, 81
febrile patients positive for P. falciparum or P. vivax were included in the
study. Of the 410 finger prick blood samples collected from malaria patients, we 
used direct sequencing to investigate the prevalence of mutations in pfcrt and
pfmdr1. This included determining the gene copy number in pfmdr1 in 195 P.
falciparum clinical isolates, and mutations in the pvmdr1 locus in 215 P. vivax
clinical isolates.
RESULTS: The pfcrt K76 CQ-sensitive allele was observed in 84.1% of the
investigated P.falciparum clinical isolates. The pfcrt double mutations (K76T and
C72S) were observed less than 3%. The pfcrt SVMNT haplotype was also found to be 
present in clinical isolates from Ethiopia. The pfcrt CVMNK-sensitive haplotypes 
were frequently observed (95.9%). The pfmdr1 mutation N86Y was observed only in
14.9% compared to 85.1% of the clinical isolates that carried sensitive alleles. 
Also, the sensitive pfmdr1 Y184 allele was more common, in 94.9% of clinical
isolates. None of the investigated P. falciparum clinical isolates carried
S1034C, N1042D and D1246Y pfmdr1 polymorphisms. All investigated P. falciparum
clinical isolates from Southern and Eastern Ethiopia carried only a single copy
of the mutant pfmdr1 gene.
CONCLUSION: The study reports for the first time the return of chloroquine
sensitive P. falciparum in Ethiopia. These findings support the rationale for the
use of CQ-based combination drugs as a possible future alternative.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-244 
PMCID: PMC4230645
PMID: 24964730  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

