
1. J Infect Dis. 2014 Jul 15;209 Suppl 3:S79-80. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu159.

Sex differences in infectious diseases-common but neglected.

van Lunzen J(1), Altfeld M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Unit, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Heinrich-Pette-Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg,
Germany.
(2)Heinrich-Pette-Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology,
Hamburg, Germany Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard, Ragon
Institute of Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston.

Women and men are different-and this fundamental observation extends to their
susceptibility and response to different diseases, including autoimmune and
infectious diseases. Apart from cultural and behavioral differences between the
sexes that play a prominent role in the exposure to pathogens, increasing data
show that women and men also differ in their immune responses to infections. This
applies to infections with viruses, bacteria, and parasites, including the
pathogens most relevant for human health, causing malaria, tuberculosis, AIDS,
hepatitis, and influenza. Only recently, the biological pathways responsible for 
these sex-based differences in the manifestations of infectious diseases have
been started to be unveiled. These include immunological pathways affected by sex
hormones, as well as consequences of differential expression of
X-chromosome-encoded genes on immune responses to pathogens. Further research is 
required to gain a better understanding of the differences in immunity to
infections between women and men in order to develop individualized treatment
concepts in infectious diseases that take sex-specific host factors into account.

Â© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiu159 
PMID: 24966193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

