
1. Front Genet. 2014 Jun 11;5:174. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2014.00174. eCollection 2014.

Evaluation of the Schistosoma mansoni Y-box-binding protein (SMYB1) potential as 
a vaccine candidate against schistosomiasis.

Dias SR(1), Boroni M(1), Rocha EA(1), Dias TL(1), de Laet Souza D(1), Oliveira
FM(2), Bitar M(1), Macedo AM(1), Machado CR(1), Caliari MV(2), Franco GR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica e Imunologia, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Patologia Geral, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais Belo Horizonte, Brazil.

Schistosomiasis is a neglected tropical disease, and after malaria, is the second
most important tropical disease in public health. A vaccine that reduces
parasitemia is desirable to achieve mass treatment with a low cost. Although
potential antigens have been identified and tested in clinical trials, no
effective vaccine against schistosomiasis is available. Y-box-binding proteins
(YBPs) regulate gene expression and participate in a variety of cellular
processes, including transcriptional and translational regulation, DNA repair,
cellular proliferation, drug resistance, and stress responses. The Schistosoma
mansoni ortholog of the human YB-1, SMYB1, is expressed in all stages of the
parasite life cycle. Although SMYB1 binds to DNA or RNA oligonucleotides,
immunohistochemistry assays demonstrated that it is primarily localized in the
cytoplasm of parasite cells. In addition, SMYB1 interacts with a protein involved
in mRNA processing, suggesting that SMYB1 functions in the turnover, transport,
and/or stabilization of RNA molecules during post-transcriptional gene
regulation. Here we report the potential of SMYB1 as a vaccine candidate. We
demonstrate that recombinant SMYB1 stimulates the production of high levels of
specific IgG1 antibodies in a mouse model. The observed levels of specific IgG1
and IgG2a antibodies indicate an actual protection against cercariae challenge.
Animals immunized with rSMYB1 exhibited a 26% reduction in adult worm burden and 
a 28% reduction in eggs retained in the liver. Although proteins from the worm
tegument are considered optimal targets for vaccine development, this study
demonstrates that unexposed cytoplasmic proteins can reduce the load of
intestinal worms and the number of eggs retained in the liver.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2014.00174 
PMCID: PMC4052899
PMID: 24966869 

