
1. BMC Microbiol. 2014 Jun 24;14:167. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-14-167.

Perturbation of copper homeostasis is instrumental in early developmental arrest 
of intraerythrocytic Plasmodium falciparum.

Asahi H(1), Tolba ME, Tanabe M, Sugano S, Abe K, Kawamoto F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, 23-1
Toyama 1-chome, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8640, Japan. asahih@nih.go.jp.

BACKGROUND: Malaria continues to be a devastating disease. The elucidation of
factors inducing asexual growth versus arrest of Plasmodium falciparum can
provide information about the development of the parasite, and may help in the
search for novel malaria medication. Based on information from genome-wide
transcriptome profiling of different developmental stages of P. falciparum, we
investigated the critical importance of copper homeostasis in the developmental
succession of P. falciparum with regard to three aspects of copper function.
These were:1) inhibition of copper-binding proteins, 2) copper-ion chelation, and
3) down-regulated expression of genes encoding copper-binding proteins associated
with a specific growth-promoting factor.
RESULTS: Inhibition of copper-binding proteins with tetrathiomolybdate (TTM)
caused cessation of growth of the parasite. TTM arrested the parasite
irreversibly during the trophozoite to schizont stage progression. Target
molecules for TTM may be present in P. falciparum. The involvement of copper ions
in developmental arrest was also investigated by copper-ion chelating methods,
which indicated a critical function of reduced copper ions (Cu1+) in the parasite
during the early developmental stage. Copper ions, not only in the parasite but
also in host cells, were targets of the chelators. Chelation of Cu1+caused
blockage of trophozoite progression from the ring stage. Profound growth arrest
was detected in parasites cultured in a chemically defined medium containing
hexadecanoic acid alone as a growth-promoting factor. This developmental arrest
was associated with down-regulated expression of genes encoding copper-binding
proteins. Cis-9-octadecenoic acid completely prevented the down-regulation of
gene expression and developmental arrest that were observed with the use of
hexadecanoic acid.
CONCLUSIONS: The critical importance of copper homeostasis in early developmental
stages of P. falciparum was confirmed. Perturbation of copper homeostasis induced
profound and early developmental arrest of P. falciparum. These findings should
help to elucidate the mechanisms behind the development of P. falciparum, and may
be applied in the development of effective antimalarial strategies.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-14-167 
PMCID: PMC4080775
PMID: 24961242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

