
1. mBio. 2014 Jul 1;5(4):e01414-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01414-14.

Efficient editing of malaria parasite genome using the CRISPR/Cas9 system.

Zhang C(1), Xiao B(1), Jiang Y(1), Zhao Y(1), Li Z(1), Gao H(1), Ling Y(1), Wei
J(1), Li S(1), Lu M(1), Su XZ(2), Cui H(3), Yuan J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Biology, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA
cuihuiting@xmu.edu.cn yuanjing@xmu.edu.cn.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Biology, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China
cuihuiting@xmu.edu.cn yuanjing@xmu.edu.cn.

Malaria parasites are unicellular organisms residing inside the red blood cells, 
and current methods for editing the parasite genes have been inefficient. The
CRISPR/Cas9 (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats and Cas9
endonuclease-mediated genome editing) system is a new powerful technique for
genome editing and has been widely employed to study gene function in various
organisms. However, whether this technique can be applied to modify the genomes
of malaria parasites has not been determined. In this paper, we demonstrated that
Cas9 is able to introduce site-specific DNA double-strand breaks in the
Plasmodium yoelii genome that can be repaired through homologous recombination.
By supplying engineered homologous repair templates, we generated targeted
deletion, reporter knock-in, and nucleotide replacement in multiple parasite
genes, achieving up to 100% efficiency in gene deletion and 22 to 45%
efficiencies in knock-in and allelic replacement. Our results establish
methodologies for introducing desired modifications in the P. yoelii genome with 
high efficiency and accuracy, which will greatly improve our ability to study
gene function of malaria parasites. Importance: Malaria, caused by infection of
Plasmodium parasites, remains a world-wide public health burden. Although the
genomes of many malaria parasites have been sequenced, we still do not know the
functions of approximately half of the genes in the genomes. Studying gene
function has become the focus of many studies; however, editing genes in malaria 
parasite genomes is still inefficient. Here we designed several efficient
approaches, based on the CRISPR/Cas9 system, to introduce site-specific DNA
double-strand breaks in the Plasmodium yoelii genome that can be repaired through
homologous recombination. Using this system, we achieved high efficiencies in
gene deletion, reporter tagging, and allelic replacement in multiple parasite
genes. This technique for editing the malaria parasite genome will greatly
facilitate our ability to elucidate gene function.

Copyright Â© 2014 Zhang et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01414-14 
PMCID: PMC4161241
PMID: 24987097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

