
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 7;9(7):e102006. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102006. eCollection
2014.

MLST subtypes and population genetic structure of Cryptosporidium andersoni from 
dairy cattle and beef cattle in northeastern China's Heilongjiang Province.

Zhao W(1), Wang R(2), Zhang W(1), Liu A(1), Cao J(3), Shen Y(3), Yang F(1), Zhang
L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang,
China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural
University Zhengzhou, Henan, China.
(3)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of
Health, WHO Collaborating Centre for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and Filariasis,
Shanghai, China.

Cattle are the main reservoir host of C. andersoni, which shows a predominance in
yearlings and adults of cattle. To understand the subtypes of C. andersoni and
the population genetic structure in Heilongjiang Province, fecal specimens were
collected from 420 dairy cattle and 405 beef cattle at the age of 12-14 months in
eight cattle farms in five areas within this province and were screened for the
presence of Cryptosporidium oocysts by microscopy after Sheather's sugar
flotation technique. The average prevalence of Cryptosporidium spp. was 19.15%
(158/825) and all the Cryptosporidium isolates were identified as C. andersoni by
the SSU rRNA gene nested PCR-RFLP using SspI, VspI and MboII restriction enzymes.
A total of 50 C. andersoni isolates were randomly selected and sequenced to
confirm the RFLP results before they were subtyped by multilocus sequence typing 
(MLST) at the four microsatellite/minisatellite loci (MS1, MS2, MS3 and MS16).
Four, one, two and one haplotypes were obtained at the four loci, respectively.
The MLST subtype A4,A4,A4,A1 showed an absolute predominance and a wide
distribution among the six MLST subtypes obtained in the investigated areas.
Linkage disequilibrium analysis showed the presence of a clonal population
genetic structure of C. andersoni in cattle, suggesting the absence of
recombination among lineages. The finding of a clonal population genetic
structure indicated that the prevalence of C. andersoni in cattle in Heilongjiang
Province is not attributed to the introduction of cattle. Thus, prevention and
control strategies should be focused on making stricter measures to avoid the
occurrence of cross-transmission and re-infection between cattle individuals.
These molecular data will also be helpful to explore the source attribution of
infection/contamination of C. andersoni and to elucidate its transmission
dynamics in Heilongjiang Province, even in China.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102006 
PMCID: PMC4084942
PMID: 24999982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

