
1. Acta Trop. 2014 Nov;139:39-43. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2014.06.016. Epub 2014 
Jul 5.

First record of the Asian malaria vector Anopheles stephensi and its possible
role in the resurgence of malaria in Djibouti, Horn of Africa.

Faulde MK(1), Rueda LM(2), Khaireh BA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Central Institute of the Bundeswehr Medical Service, Department of Medical
Entomology/Zoology, PO Box 7340, D-56065 Koblenz, Germany; Institute of Medical
Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, University Clinics Bonn, D-53105 Bonn,
Germany. Electronic address: MichaelFaulde@bundeswehr.org.
(2)Walter Reed Biosystematics Unit, Entomology Branch, Walter Reed Army Institute
of Research, 503 Robert Grant Avenue, Silver Spring, MD 20910, USA.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Epidemiology and Clinical Research,
Djiboutian Armed Forces Health Service, Djibouti City, Republic of Djibouti.

Anopheles stephensi is an important vector of urban malaria in India and the
Persian Gulf area. Its previously known geographical range includes southern Asia
and the Arab Peninsula. For the first time, we report A. stephensi from the
African continent, based on collections made in Djibouti, on the Horn of Africa, 
where this species' occurrence was linked to an unusual urban outbreak of
Plasmodium falciparum malaria, with 1228 cases reported from February to May
2013, and a second, more severe epidemic that emerged in November 2013 and
resulted in 2017 reported malaria cases between January and February 2014.
Anopheles stephensi was initially identified using morphological identification
keys, followed by sequencing of the Barcode cytochrome c-oxidase I (COI) gene and
the rDNA second internal transcribed spacer (ITS2). Positive tests for P.
falciparum circumsporozoite antigen in two of six female A. stephensi trapped in 
homes of malaria patients in March 2013 are evidence that autochthonous urban
malaria transmission by A. stephensi has occurred. Concurrent with the second
malaria outbreak, P. falciparum-positive A. stephensi females were detected in
Djibouti City starting in November 2013. In sub-Saharan Africa, newly present A. 
stephensi may pose a significant future health threat because of this species'
high susceptibility to P. falciparum infection and its tolerance of urban
habitats. This may lead to increased malaria outbreaks in African cities. Rapid
interruption of the urban malaria transmission cycle, based on integrated vector 
surveillance and control programs aimed at the complete eradication of A.
stephensi from the African continent, is strongly recommended.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2014.06.016 
PMID: 25004439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

