
1. Malar J. 2014 Jul 11;13:270. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-270.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase polymorphisms and susceptibility to mild
malaria in Dogon and Fulani, Mali.

Maiga B(1), Dolo A, Campino S, Sepulveda N, Corran P, Rockett KA, Troye-Blomberg 
M, Doumbo OK, Clark TG.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research and Training Centre, Department of Epidemiology of Parasitic 
Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, Pharmacy and Odonto - Stomatology, USTTB, BP 1805 
Bamako, Mali. bmaiga@icermali.org.

BACKGROUND: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is associated
with protection from severe malaria, and potentially uncomplicated malaria
phenotypes. It has been documented that G6PD deficiency in sub-Saharan Africa is 
due to the 202A/376G G6PD A-allele, and association studies have used genotyping 
as a convenient technique for epidemiological studies. However, recent studies
have shown discrepancies in G6PD202/376 associations with severe malaria. There
is evidence to suggest that other G6PD deficiency alleles may be common in some
regions of West Africa, and that allelic heterogeneity could explain these
discrepancies.
METHODS: A cross-sectional epidemiological study of malaria susceptibility was
conducted during 2006 and 2007 in the Sahel meso-endemic malaria zone of Mali.
The study included Dogon (n = 375) and Fulani (n = 337) sympatric ethnic groups, 
where the latter group is characterized by lower susceptibility to Plasmodium
falciparum malaria. Fifty-three G6PD polymorphisms, including 202/376, were
genotyped across the 712 samples. Evidence of association of these G6PD
polymorphisms and mild malaria was assessed in both ethnic groups using genotypic
and haplotypic statistical tests.
RESULTS: It was confirmed that the Fulani are less susceptible to malaria, and
the 202A mutation is rare in this group (<1% versus Dogon 7.9%). The Betica-Selma
968C/376G (~11% enzymatic activity) was more common in Fulani (6.1% vs Dogon
0.0%). There are differences in haplotype frequencies between Dogon and Fulani,
and association analysis did not reveal strong evidence of protective G6PD
genetic effects against uncomplicated malaria in both ethnic groups and gender.
However, there was some evidence of increased risk of mild malaria in Dogon with 
the 202A mutation, attaining borderline statistical significance in females. The 
rs915942 polymorphism was found to be associated with asymptomatic malaria in
Dogon females, and the rs61042368 polymorphism was associated with clinical
malaria in Fulani males.
CONCLUSIONS: The results highlight the need to consider markers in addition to
G6PD202 in studies of deficiency. Further, large genetic epidemiological studies 
of multi-ethnic groups in West Africa across a spectrum of malaria severity
phenotypes are required to establish who receives protection from G6PD
deficiency.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-270 
PMCID: PMC4110528
PMID: 25015414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

