
1. Sci Rep. 2014 Jul 11;4:5665. doi: 10.1038/srep05665.

Plasmodium yoelii vitamin B5 pantothenate transporter candidate is essential for 
parasite transmission to the mosquito.

Hart RJ(1), Lawres L(1), Fritzen E(2), Ben Mamoun C(3), Aly AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Tulane University, Department of Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, 
USA [2].
(2)Tulane University, Department of Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112,
USA.
(3)Yale University School of Medicine, Section of Infectious Diseases, New Haven,
CT 06520, USA.

In nearly all non-photosynthetic cells, pantothenate (vitamin B5) transport and
utilization are prerequisites for the synthesis of the universal essential
cofactor Coenzyme A (CoA). Early studies showed that human malaria parasites rely
on the uptake of pantothenate across the parasite plasma membrane for survival
within erythrocytes. Recently, a P. falciparum candidate pantothenate transporter
(PAT) was characterized by functional complementation in yeast. These studies
revealed that PfPAT mediated survival of yeast cells in low pantothenate
concentrations and restored sensitivity of yeast cells lacking pantothenate
uptake to fenpropimorph. In addition, PfPAT was refractory to deletion in P.
falciparum in vitro, but nothing is known about the in vivo functions of PAT in
Plasmodium life cycle stages. Herein, we used gene-targeting techniques to delete
PAT in Plasmodium yoelii. Parasites lacking PAT displayed normal asexual and
sexual blood stage development compared to wild-type (WT) and WT-like p230p(-)
parasites. However, progression from the ookinete to the oocyst stage and
sporozoite formation were completely abolished in pat(-) parasites. These studies
provide the first evidence for an essential role of a candidate pantothenate
transport in malaria transmission to Anopheles mosquitoes. This will set the
stage for the development of PAT inhibitors against multiple parasite life cycle 
stages.

DOI: 10.1038/srep05665 
PMCID: PMC4092334
PMID: 25012929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

