
1. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2014 Aug;20:153-61. doi: 10.1016/j.mib.2014.06.013. Epub
2014 Jul 12.

Noncoding RNAs as emerging regulators of Plasmodium falciparum virulence gene
expression.

Vembar SS(1), Scherf A(1), Siegel TN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biology of Host-Parasite Interactions Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France;
CNRS URA2581, Paris, France.
(2)Research Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Wuerzburg,
Josef-Schneider-Str. 2/Bau D15, 97080 Wuerzburg, Germany. Electronic address:
nicolai.siegel@uni-wuerzburg.de.

The eukaryotic unicellular pathogen Plasmodium falciparum tightly regulates gene 
expression, both during development and in adaptation to dynamic host
environments. This regulation is evident in the mutually exclusive expression of 
members of clonally variant virulence multigene families. While epigenetic
regulators have been selectively identified at active or repressed virulence
genes, their specific recruitment remains a mystery. In recent years, noncoding
RNAs (ncRNAs) have emerged as lynchpins of eukaryotic gene regulation; by binding
to epigenetic regulators, they provide target specificity to otherwise
non-specific enzyme complexes. Not surprisingly, there is great interest in
understanding the role of ncRNA in P. falciparum, in particular, their
contribution to the mutually exclusive expression of virulence genes. The current
repertoire of P. falciparum ncRNAs includes, but is not limited to, subtelomeric 
ncRNAs, virulence gene-associated ncRNAs and natural antisense RNA transcripts.
Continued improvement in high-throughput sequencing methods is sure to expand
this repertoire. Here, we summarize recent advances in P. falciparum ncRNA
biology, with an emphasis on ncRNA-mediated epigenetic modes of gene regulation.

Copyright Â© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mib.2014.06.013 
PMCID: PMC4157322
PMID: 25022240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

