
1. Genetica. 2014 Aug;142(4):295-315. doi: 10.1007/s10709-014-9775-4. Epub 2014 Jul 
20.

Molecular population genetics of the NADPH cytochrome P450 reductase (CPR) gene
in Anopheles minimus.

Srivastava H(1), Huong NT, Arunyawat U, Das A.

Author information: 
(1)Evolutionary Genomics and Bioinformatics Laboratory, Division of Genomics and 
Bioinformatics, National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector 8, Dwarka, New
Delhi, India.

Development of insecticide resistance (IR) in mosquito vectors is a primary
huddle to malaria control program. Since IR has genetic basis, and genes
constantly evolve with response to environment for adaptation to organisms, it is
important to know evolutionary pattern of genes conferring IR in malaria vectors.
The mosquito Anopheles minimus is a major malaria vector of the Southeast (SE)
Asia and India and is susceptible to all insecticides, and thus of interest to
know if natural selection has shaped variations in the gene conferring IR. If
not, the DNA fragment of such a gene could be used to infer population structure 
and demography of this species of malaria vector. We have therefore sequenced a
~569 bp DNA segment of the NADPH cytochrome P450 reductase (CPR) gene (widely
known to confer IR) in 123 individuals of An. minimus collected in 10 different
locations (eight Indian, one Thai and one Vietnamese). Two Indian population
samples were completely mono-morphic in the CPR gene. In general, low genetic
diversity was found with no evidence of natural selection in this gene. The data 
were therefore analyzed to infer population structure and demography of this
species. The 10 populations could be genetically differentiated into four
different groups; the samples from Thailand and Vietnam contained high nucleotide
diversity. All the 10 populations conform to demographic equilibrium model with
signature of past population expansion in four populations. The results in
general indicate that the An. minimus mosquitoes sampled in the two SE Asian
localities contain several genetic characteristics of being parts of the
ancestral population.

DOI: 10.1007/s10709-014-9775-4 
PMID: 25038863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

