
1. Biosens Bioelectron. 2014 Dec 15;62:295-301. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2014.06.052.
Epub 2014 Jun 30.

Silver quartz crystal microbalance for differential diagnosis of Plasmodium
falciparum and Plasmodium vivax in single and mixed infection.

Wangmaung N(1), Chomean S(2), Promptmas C(3), Mas-oodi S(1), Tanyong D(1),
Ittarat W(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Microscopy, Faculty of Medical Technology, Mahidol University, 999
Putthamonthon 4 Road, Salaya, Phutthamonthon, Nakhon Pathom 73170, Thailand.
(2)Medical Technology, Faculty of Allied Health Science, Thammasat University,
Thailand.
(3)Clinical Chemistry, Faculty of Medical Technology, Mahidol University,
Thailand.
(4)Clinical Microscopy, Faculty of Medical Technology, Mahidol University, 999
Putthamonthon 4 Road, Salaya, Phutthamonthon, Nakhon Pathom 73170, Thailand.
Electronic address: wanida.itt@mahidol.ac.th.

The most severe form of malaria is cerebral malaria caused by Plasmodium
falciparum. Standard malaria diagnosis is Giemsa stained peripheral blood smear
but false negative findings are always reported. Moreover, mixed infections are
underestimated by routine microscopy. Many methods have been developed to
overcome these disadvantages and the most specific and sensitive is molecular
diagnosis. Specific malaria genes are amplified by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) and many post-PCR methods have been created. We developed a gold fabricated
quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) as a post-PCR method of malaria diagnosis. In
this work a cheaper silver fabricated QCM was developed to identify both single
and mixed infection of P. falciparum and Plasmodium vivax. The biotinylated
malaria probe was immobilized on silver surface via specific avidin-biotin
interaction. The target DNA fragment of 18s rRNA gene was amplified and
hybridized with a QCM immobilized probe. Mass changes due to DNA hybridization
were indicated by changes of quartz resonance frequencies. Validation showed that
malaria silver QCM had high diagnostic potency. Evaluation of suspected 67
febrile blood samples from malaria endemic area demonstrated that the malaria
silver QCM could identify both false negative and misdiagnosis cases of routine
microscopy. The analysis cost of malaria silver QCM was $1/sample and analysis
time was 30 min after blood collection. The malaria silver QCM is stable at
tropical temperature for up to 6 months. Thus, it can be transported to be used
in a remote endemic area. Thus, the malaria silver QCM is accurate, precise,
rapid, cheap, and field applicable.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2014.06.052 
PMID: 25032680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

