
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2014 Oct;91(4):833-843. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.14-0031. Epub 2014 
Jul 21.

Polymorphisms in Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter and
multidrug resistance 1 genes: parasite risk factors that affect treatment
outcomes for P. falciparum malaria after artemether-lumefantrine and
artesunate-amodiaquine.

Venkatesan M, Gadalla NB, Stepniewska K, Dahal P, Nsanzabana C, Moriera C, Price 
RN, Mårtensson A, Rosenthal PJ, Dorsey G, Sutherland CJ, Guérin P, Davis TME,
Ménard D, Adam I, Ademowo G, Arze C, Baliraine FN, Berens-Riha N, Björkman A,
Borrmann S, Checchi F, Desai M, Dhorda M, Djimdé AA, El-Sayed BB, Eshetu T, Eyase
F, Falade C, Faucher JF, Fröberg G, Grivoyannis A, Hamour S, Houzé S, Johnson J, 
Kamugisha E, Kariuki S, Kiechel JR, Kironde F, Kofoed PE, LeBras J, Malmberg M,
Mwai L, Ngasala B, Nosten F, Nsobya SL, Nzila A, Oguike M, Otienoburu SD, Ogutu
B, Ouédraogo JB, Piola P, Rombo L, Schramm B, Somé AF, Thwing J, Ursing J, Wong
RPM, Zeynudin A, Zongo I, Plowe CV, Sibley CH, Asaq Molecular Marker Study Group.

Erratum in
    Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2015 May;92(5):1084.
    Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2019 Mar;100(3):766.

Adequate clinical and parasitologic cure by artemisinin combination therapies
relies on the artemisinin component and the partner drug. Polymorphisms in the
Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter (pfcrt) and P.
falciparum multidrug resistance 1 (pfmdr1) genes are associated with decreased
sensitivity to amodiaquine and lumefantrine, but effects of these polymorphisms
on therapeutic responses to artesunate-amodiaquine (ASAQ) and
artemether-lumefantrine (AL) have not been clearly defined. Individual patient
data from 31 clinical trials were harmonized and pooled by using standardized
methods from the WorldWide Antimalarial Resistance Network. Data for more than
7,000 patients were analyzed to assess relationships between parasite
polymorphisms in pfcrt and pfmdr1 and clinically relevant outcomes after
treatment with AL or ASAQ. Presence of the pfmdr1 gene N86 (adjusted hazards
ratio = 4.74, 95% confidence interval = 2.29 - 9.78, P < 0.001) and increased
pfmdr1 copy number (adjusted hazards ratio = 6.52, 95% confidence interval =
2.36-17.97, P < 0.001 : were significant independent risk factors for
recrudescence in patients treated with AL. AL and ASAQ exerted opposing selective
effects on single-nucleotide polymorphisms in pfcrt and pfmdr1. Monitoring
selection and responding to emerging signs of drug resistance are critical tools 
for preserving efficacy of artemisinin combination therapies; determination of
the prevalence of at least pfcrt K76T and pfmdr1 N86Y should now be routine.

© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.14-0031 
PMCID: PMC4183414
PMID: 25048375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

