
1. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jul 29;15:636. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-636.

In depth annotation of the Anopheles gambiae mosquito midgut transcriptome.

Padr√≥n A, Molina-Cruz A(1), Quinones M, Ribeiro JM, Ramphul U, Rodrigues J, Shen 
K, Haile A, Ramirez JL, Barillas-Mury C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA.
amolina-cruz@niaid.nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: Genome sequencing of Anopheles gambiae was completed more than ten
years ago and has accelerated research on malaria transmission. However,
annotation needs to be refined and verified experimentally, as most predicted
transcripts have been identified by comparative analysis with genomes from other 
species. The mosquito midgut-the first organ to interact with Plasmodium
parasites-mounts effective antiplasmodial responses that limit parasite survival 
and disease transmission. High-throughput Illumina sequencing of the midgut
transcriptome was used to identify new genes and transcripts, contributing to the
refinement of An. gambiae genome annotation.
RESULTS: We sequenced ~223 million reads from An. gambiae midgut cDNA libraries
generated from susceptible (G3) and refractory (L35) mosquito strains. Mosquitoes
were infected with either Plasmodium berghei or Plasmodium falciparum, and
midguts were collected after the first or second Plasmodium infection. In total, 
22,889 unique midgut transcript models were generated from both An. gambiae
strain sequences combined, and 76% are potentially novel. Of these novel
transcripts, 49.5% aligned with annotated genes and appear to be isoforms or
pre-mRNAs of reference transcripts, while 50.5% mapped to regions between
annotated genes and represent novel intergenic transcripts (NITs). Predicted
models were validated for midgut expression using qRT-PCR and microarray
analysis, and novel isoforms were confirmed by sequencing predicted intron-exon
boundaries. Coding potential analysis revealed that 43% of total midgut
transcripts appear to be long non-coding RNA (lncRNA), and functional annotation 
of NITs showed that 68% had no homology to current databases from other species. 
Reads were also analyzed using de novo assembly and predicted transcripts
compared with genome mapping-based models. Finally, variant analysis of G3 and
L35 midgut transcripts detected 160,742 variants with respect to the An. gambiae 
PEST genome, and 74% were new variants. Intergenic transcripts had a higher
frequency of variation compared with non-intergenic transcripts.
CONCLUSION: This in-depth Illumina sequencing and assembly of the An. gambiae
midgut transcriptome doubled the number of known transcripts and tripled the
number of variants known in this mosquito species. It also revealed existence of 
a large number of lncRNA and opens new possibilities for investigating the
biological function of many newly discovered transcripts.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-636 
PMCID: PMC4131051
PMID: 25073905  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

