
1. Parasitol Res. 2014 Nov;113(11):3957-62. doi: 10.1007/s00436-014-4060-0. Epub
2014 Aug 5.

Plasmodium knowlesi thioredoxin peroxidase 1 binds to nucleic acids and has RNA
chaperone activity.

Hakimi H(1), Suganuma K, Usui M, Masuda-Suganuma H, Angeles JM, Asada M, Kawai S,
Inoue N, Kawazu S.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases, Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, 080-8555, Obihiro, Hokkaido, Japan.

Malaria parasites are under oxidative attack throughout their life cycle in human
body and mosquito vector. Therefore, Plasmodium antioxidant defenses are crucial 
for its survival and being considered as interesting target for antimalarial drug
design. Plasmodium knowlesi has emerged recently from its simian host to human in
Southeast Asia and has been recognized as the fifth Plasmodium species that can
cause human malaria. In this study, we cloned and characterized thioredoxin
peroxidase 1 from P. knowlesi (PkTPx-1). PkTPx-1 gene was cloned, and recombinant
protein was produced by heterologous overexpression in Escherichia coli. The
recombinant protein was used for evaluation of enzymatic activity and polyclonal 
antibody production. Using the recombinant PkTPx-1 protein, its antioxidant
activity was confirmed in a mixed-function oxidation assay where PkTPx-1
prevented nicking of DNA by hydroxyl radicals. PkTPx-1 was able to bind to
double-strand DNA and RNA and had RNA chaperone activity in a nucleic acid
melting assay indicating new function of PkTPx-1 other than antioxidant activity.
Using specific polyclonal antibodies, it was indicated that PkTPx-1 is expressed 
in the cytoplasm of the parasite. Altogether, these results suggest that PkTPx-1 
not only protects the parasite from the adverse effects of reactive oxygen
species but also has RNA chaperone activity.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-014-4060-0 
PMID: 25092384  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

