
1. Anal Chem. 2014 Sep 2;86(17):8814-21. doi: 10.1021/ac502098w. Epub 2014 Aug 15.

Multicolor bioluminescence boosts malaria research: quantitative dual-color assay
and single-cell imaging in Plasmodium falciparum parasites.

Cevenini L(1), Camarda G, Michelini E, Siciliano G, Calabretta MM, Bona R, Kumar 
TR, Cara A, Branchini BR, Fidock DA, Roda A, Alano P.

Author information: 
(1)INBB, Istituto Nazionale di Biostrutture e Biosistemi , 00136 Rome, Italy.

New reliable and cost-effective antimalarial drug screening assays are urgently
needed to identify drugs acting on different stages of the parasite Plasmodium
falciparum, and particularly those responsible for human-to-mosquito
transmission, that is, the P. falciparum gametocytes. Low Z' factors, narrow
dynamic ranges, and/or extended assay times are commonly reported in current
gametocyte assays measuring gametocyte-expressed fluorescent or luciferase
reporters, endogenous ATP levels, activity of gametocyte enzymes, or
redox-dependent dye fluorescence. We hereby report on a dual-luciferase
gametocyte assay with immature and mature P. falciparum gametocyte stages
expressing red and green-emitting luciferases from Pyrophorus plagiophthalamus
under the control of the parasite sexual stage-specific pfs16 gene promoter. The 
assay was validated with reference antimalarial drugs and allowed to
quantitatively and simultaneously measure stage-specific drug effects on
parasites at different developmental stages. The optimized assay, requiring only 
48 h incubation with drugs and using a cost-effective luminogenic substrate,
significantly reduces assay cost and time in comparison to state-of-the-art
analogous assays. The assay had a Z' factor of 0.71 Â± 0.03, and it is suitable
for implementation in 96- and 384-well microplate formats. Moreover, the use of a
nonlysing D-luciferin substrate significantly improved the reliability of the
assay and allowed one to perform, for the first time, P. falciparum
bioluminescence imaging at single-cell level.

DOI: 10.1021/ac502098w 
PMCID: PMC4151787
PMID: 25102353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

