
1. Hum Genet. 2014 Oct;133(10):1217-33. doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1457-x. Epub 2014
Jun 5.

Human gene copy number variation and infectious disease.

Hollox EJ(1), Hoh BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Leicester, University Road, Leicester,
LE1 7RH, UK, ejh33@leicester.ac.uk.

Variability in the susceptibility to infectious disease and its clinical
manifestation can be determined by variation in the environment and by genetic
variation in the pathogen and the host. Despite several successes based on
candidate gene studies, defining the host variation affecting infectious disease 
has not been as successful as for other multifactorial diseases. Both single
nucleotide variation and copy number variation (CNV) of the host contribute to
the host's susceptibility to infectious disease. In this review we focus on CNV, 
particularly on complex multiallelic CNV that is often not well characterised
either directly by hybridisation methods or indirectly by analysis of genotypes
and flanking single nucleotide variants. We summarise the well-known examples,
such as Î±-globin deletion and susceptibility to severe malaria, as well as more
recent controversies, such as the extensive CNV of the chemokine gene CCL3L1 and 
HIV infection. We discuss the potential biological mechanisms that could underly 
any genetic association and reflect on the extensive complexity and functional
variation generated by a combination of CNV and sequence variation, as
illustrated by the Fc gamma receptor genes FCGR3A, FCGR3B and FCGR2C. We also
highlight some understudied areas that might prove fruitful areas for further
research.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-014-1457-x 
PMID: 25110110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

