
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Nov;82(11):4643-53. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01800-14. Epub 2014 Aug
25.

SSP3 is a novel Plasmodium yoelii sporozoite surface protein with a role in
gliding motility.

Harupa A(1), Sack BK(2), Lakshmanan V(2), Arang N(2), Douglass AN(2), Oliver
BG(2), Stuart AB(2), Sather DN(2), Lindner SE(2), Hybiske K(3), Torii M(4), Kappe
SH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA Institute of
Biology, Freie Universitaet Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Parasitology, Ehime University, Toon, Ehime, Japan.
(5)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA Department of 
Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
stefan.kappe@seattlebiomed.org.

Plasmodium sporozoites develop within oocysts in the mosquito midgut wall and
then migrate to the salivary glands. After transmission, they embark on a complex
journey to the mammalian liver, where they infect hepatocytes. Proteins on the
sporozoite surface likely mediate multiple steps of this journey, yet only a few 
sporozoite surface proteins have been described. Here, we characterize a novel,
conserved sporozoite surface protein (SSP3) in the rodent malaria parasite
Plasmodium yoelii. SSP3 is a putative type I transmembrane protein unique to
Plasmodium. By using epitope tagging and SSP3-specific antibodies in conjunction 
with immunofluorescence microscopy, we showed that SSP3 is expressed in mosquito 
midgut oocyst sporozoites, exhibiting an intracellular localization. In
sporozoites derived from the mosquito salivary glands, however, SSP3 localized
predominantly to the sporozoite surface as determined by immunoelectron
microscopy. However, the ectodomain of SSP3 appeared to be inaccessible to
antibodies in nonpermeabilized salivary gland sporozoites. Antibody-induced
shedding of the major surface protein circumsporozoite protein (CSP) exposed the 
SSP3 ectodomain to antibodies in some sporozoites. Targeted deletion of SSP3
adversely affected in vitro sporozoite gliding motility, which, surprisingly,
impacted neither their cell traversal capacity, host cell invasion in vitro, nor 
infectivity in vivo. Together, these data reveal a previously unappreciated
complexity of the Plasmodium sporozoite surface proteome and the roles of surface
proteins in distinct biological activities of sporozoites.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01800-14 
PMCID: PMC4249349
PMID: 25156733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

