
1. Malar J. 2014 Aug 25;13:333. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-333.

Cytoadherence phenotype of Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes is
associated with specific pfemp-1 expression in parasites from children with
cerebral malaria.

Almelli T, Ndam NT, Ezimegnon S, Alao MJ, Ahouansou C, Sagbo G, Amoussou A,
Deloron P, Tahar R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), UMR 216 Mère et Enfant Face
aux Infections Tropicales, 4, avenue de l'Observatoire, Paris 75270, France.
Rachida.Tahar@ird.fr.

BACKGROUND: Cytoadherence of Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes (IEs) in
deep microvasculature endothelia plays a major role in the pathogenesis of
cerebral malaria (CM). This biological process is thought to be mediated by P.
falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein-1 (PfEMP-1) and human receptors such as
CD36 and ICAM-1. The relationship between the expression of PfEMP-1 variants and 
cytoadherence phenotype in the pathology of malaria is not well established.
METHODS: Cytoadherence phenotypes of IEs to CD36, ICAM-1, CSPG and the
transcription patterns of A, B, var2csa, var3, var gene groups and domain
cassettes DC8 and DC13 were assessed in parasites from children with CM and
uncomplicated malaria (UM) to determine if cytoadherence is related to a specific
transcription profile of pfemp-1 variants.
RESULTS: Parasites from CM patients bind significantly more to CD36 than those
from UM patients, but no difference was observed in their binding ability to
ICAM-1 and CSPG. CM isolates highly transcribed groups A, B, var2csa, var3, DC8
and DC13 compared to UM parasites. The high transcription levels of var genes
belonging to group B positively correlated with increased binding level to CD36.
CONCLUSION: CM isolates bind significantly more to CD36 than to ICAM-1, which was
correlated with high transcription level of group B var genes, supporting their
implication in malaria pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-333 
PMCID: PMC4150962
PMID: 25156105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

