
1. Malar J. 2014 Aug 30;13:340. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-340.

Effects of the kdr resistance mutation on the susceptibility of wild Anopheles
gambiae populations to Plasmodium falciparum: a hindrance for vector control.

Ndiath MO(1), Cailleau A, Diedhiou SM, Gaye A, Boudin C, Richard V, Trape JF.

Author information: 
(1)G4 Group, Institut Pasteur International Network, Institut Pasteur de Bangui, 
Bangui BP 923, Central African Republic. ousmane.ndiath@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: In the context of generalization of insecticide resistance, the
hypothesis that insecticide resistance has a positive impact on the capacity of
mosquitoes to transmit malaria constitutes a hindrance for malaria elimination.
The aim of this study was to investigated populations of Anopheles coluzzii and
Anopheles gambiae S molecular form to assess whether different genotypes at the
kdr locus are responsible for different susceptibility to Plasmodium falciparum
infection.
METHODS: F3 progeny of An. gambiae s.l. collected in Dielmo were infected by
direct membrane feeding with P. falciparum gametocyte-containing blood sampled
from volunteer patients. The presence of oocysts was determined by light
microscopy after seven days, and the presence of sporozoites by ELISA after
14 days. Mosquito species and molecular forms were identified by PCR. Generalized
linear models were performed using the R software to test the effect of
explanatory variables including the genotype at the kdr locus on infection rate
and density.
RESULTS: The odds of being infected with oocysts and sporozoites were greater in 
RS and RR groups than in SS groups (χ2 = 42.8, df = 1, P(>χ2) = 6.1e-11). The
density of infection was also dependent on genotype, with RR and RS genotypes
showing denser infection than SS genotypes. Pairwise comparisons of oocyst number
and absorbance indicated sometime a small betwen species (i.e. between An.
gambiae S form, and An. coluzzii), but the effect of genotype was much more
important.
CONCLUSION: The presence of the resistance allele at the kdr locus increases
susceptibility to Plasmodium not only at the oocyst stage but also at the
sporozoite stage in non-genetically modified wild mosquitoes. These results have 
significant implications and should be taken into account in the development of
strategies for malaria control.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-340 
PMCID: PMC4159551
PMID: 25176292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

