
1. Parasit Vectors. 2014 Aug 29;7:409. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-409.

Molecular characterization of DDT resistance in Anopheles gambiae from Benin.

Djègbè I(1), Agossa FR, Jones CM, Poupardin R, Cornelie S, Akogbéto M, Ranson H, 
Corbel V.

Author information: 
(1)Ecole Normale Supérieure de Natitingou, Université de Parakou, BP 123 Parakou,
Benin. djegbe1@yahoo.fr.

BACKGROUND: Insecticide resistance in the mosquito vector is the one of the main 
obstacles against effective malaria control. In order to implement insecticide
resistance management strategies, it is important to understand the genetic
factors involved. In this context, we investigated the molecular basis of DDT
resistance in the main malaria vector from Benin.
METHODS: Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes were collected from four sites across Benin
and identified to species/molecular form. Mosquitoes from Cotonou (M-form),
Tori-Bossito (S-form) and Bohicon (S-form) were exposed to DDT 4% at a range of
exposure times (30 min to 300 min). Another batch of mosquitoes from Cotonou and 
Malanville were exposed to DDT for 1 hour and the survivors 48 hours post
exposure were used to quantify metabolic gene expression. Quantitative PCR assays
were used to quantify mRNA levels of metabolic enzymes: GSTE2, GSTD3, CYP6P3 and 
CYP6M2. Expression (fold-change) was calculated using the ∆∆Ct method and
compared to susceptible strains. Detection of target-site mutations (L1014F,
L1014S and N1575Y) was performed using allelic discrimination TaqMan assays.
RESULTS: DDT resistance was extremely high in all populations, regardless of
molecular form, with no observed mortality after 300 min exposure. In both
DDT-survivors and non-exposed mosquitoes, GSTE2 and GSTD3 were over-expressed in 
the M form at 4.4-fold and 3.5-fold in Cotonou and 1.5-fold and 2.5-fold in
Malanville respectively, when compared to the susceptible strain. The CYP6M2 and 
CYP6P3 were over-expressed at 4.6-fold and 3.8-fold in Cotonou and 1.2-fold and
2.5-fold in Malanville respectively. In contrast, no differences in GSTE2 and
CYP6M2 were observed between S form mosquitoes from Tori-Bossito and Bohicon
compared to susceptible strain. The 1014 F allele was fixed in the S-form and at 
high frequency in the M-form (0.7-0.914). The frequency of 1575Y allele was
0.29-0.36 in the S-form and nil in the M-form. The 1014S allele was detected in
the S form of An. gambiae in a 1014 F/1014S heterozygous specimen.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that the kdr 1014 F, 1014S and 1575Y alleles are
widespread in Benin and the expression of two candidate metabolic markers (GSTE2 
and CYP6M2) are over-expressed specifically in the M-form.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-7-409 
PMCID: PMC4164740
PMID: 25175167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

