
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2014 Dec;28:33-43. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.08.018. Epub
2014 Aug 29.

Molecular epidemiology, phylogeny and evolution of the filarial nematode
Wuchereria bancrofti.

Small ST(1), Tisch DJ(2), Zimmerman PA(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University,
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, United States. Electronic address:
sts45@case.edu.
(2)The Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University,
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, United States.

Wuchereria bancrofti (Wb) is the most widely distributed of the three nematodes
known to cause lymphatic filariasis (LF), the other two being Brugia malayi and
Brugia timori. Current tools available to monitor LF are limited to diagnostic
tests targeting DNA repeats, filarial antigens, and anti-filarial antibodies.
While these tools are useful for detection and surveillance, elimination programs
have yet to take full advantage of molecular typing for inferring infection
history, strain fingerprinting, and evolution. To date, molecular typing
approaches have included whole mitochondrial genomes, genotyping, targeted
sequencing, and random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPDs). These studies have
revealed much about Wb biology. For example, in one study in Papua New Guinea
researchers identified 5 major strains that were widespread and many minor
strains some of which exhibit geographic stratification. Genome data, while rare,
has been utilized to reconstruct evolutionary relationships among taxa of the
Onchocercidae (the clade of filarial nematodes) and identify gene synteny. Their 
phylogeny reveals that speciation from the common ancestor of both B. malayi and 
Wb occurred around 5-6 millions years ago with shared ancestry to other filarial 
nematodes as recent as 15 million years ago. These discoveries hold promise for
gene discovery and identifying drug targets in species that are more amenable to 
in vivo experiments. Continued technological developments in whole genome
sequencing and data analysis will likely replace many other forms of molecular
typing, multiplying the amount of data available on population structure, genetic
diversity, and phylogenetics. Once widely available, the addition of population
genetic data from genomic studies should hasten the elimination of LF parasites
like Wb. Infectious disease control programs have benefited greatly from
population genetics data and recently from population genomics data. However,
while there is currently a surplus of data for diseases like malaria and HIV,
there is a scarcity of this data for filarial nematodes. With the falling cost of
genome sequencing, research on filarial nematodes could benefit from the addition
of population genetics statistics and phylogenetics especially in dealing with
elimination programs. A comprehensive review focusing on population genetics of
filarial nematode does not yet exist. Here our goal is to provide a current
overview of the molecular epidemiology of W. bancrofti (Wb) the primary causative
agent of LF. We begin by reviewing studies utilizing molecular typing techniques 
with specific focus on genomic and population datasets. Next, we used whole
mitochondrial genome data to construct a phylogeny and examine the evolutionary
history of the Onchocercidae. Then, we provide a perspective to aid in
understanding how population genetic techniques translate to modern epidemiology.
Finally, we introduce the concept of genomic epidemiology and provide some
examples that will aid in future studies of Wb.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.08.018 
PMCID: PMC4257870
PMID: 25176600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

