
1. Immunogenetics. 2014 Dec;66(12):693-704. doi: 10.1007/s00251-014-0800-7. Epub
2014 Sep 4.

Variation in positively selected major histocompatibility complex class I loci in
rufous-collared sparrows (Zonotrichia capensis).

Jones MR(1), Cheviron ZA, Carling MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Physiology, Berry Biodiversity Conservation Center, 
University of Wyoming, 1000 E. University Ave., Dept. 4304, Laramie, WY, 82071,
USA, jonesmr9@gmail.com.

The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is a highly variable family of genes
involved in parasite recognition and the initiation of adaptive immune system
responses. Variation in MHC loci is maintained primarily through
parasite-mediated selection or disassortative mate choice. To characterize MHC
diversity of rufous-collared sparrows (Zonotrichia capensis), an abundant South
American passerine, we examined allelic and nucleotide variation in MHC class I
exon 3 using pyrosequencing. Exon 3 comprises a substantial portion of the
peptide-binding region (PBR) of class I MHC and thus plays an important role in
intracellular pathogen defense. We identified 98 putatively functional alleles
that produce 56 unique protein sequences across at least 6 paralogous loci.
Allelic diversity per individual and exon-wide nucleotide diversity were
relatively low; however, we found specific amino acid positions with high
nucleotide diversity and signatures of positive selection (elevated d N /d S )
that may correspond to the PBR. Based on the variation in physicochemical
properties of amino acids at these "positively selected sites," we identified ten
functional MHC supertypes. Spatial variation in nucleotide diversity and the
number of MHC alleles, proteins, and supertypes per individual suggests that
environmental heterogeneity may affect patterns of MHC diversity. Furthermore,
populations with high MHC diversity have higher prevalence of avian malaria,
consistent with parasite-mediated selection on MHC. Together, these results
provide a framework for subsequent investigations of selective agents acting on
MHC in Z. capensis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-014-0800-7 
PMID: 25186067  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

