
1. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2014 Aug;109(5):672-84.

Metagenomics, paratransgenesis and the Anopheles microbiome: a portrait of the
geographical distribution of the anopheline microbiota based on a meta-analysis
of reported taxa.

Villegas LM(1), Pimenta PF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Entomologia Médica, Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou-Fiocruz,
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brasil.

Anophelines harbour a diverse microbial consortium that may represent an extended
gene pool for the host. The proposed effects of the insect microbiota span
physiological, metabolic and immune processes. Here we synthesise how current
metagenomic tools combined with classical culture-dependent techniques provide
new insights in the elucidation of the role of the Anopheles-associated
microbiota. Many proposed malaria control strategies have been based upon the
immunomodulating effects that the bacterial components of the microbiota appear
to exert and their ability to express anti-Plasmodium peptides. The number of
identified bacterial taxa has increased in the current "omics" era and the
available data are mostly scattered or in "tables" that are difficult to exploit.
Published microbiota reports for multiple anopheline species were compiled in an 
Excel® spreadsheet. We then filtered the microbiota data using a
continent-oriented criterion and generated a visual correlation showing the
exclusive and shared bacterial genera among four continents. The data suggested
the existence of a core group of bacteria associated in a stable manner with
their anopheline hosts. However, the lack of data from Neotropical vectors may
reduce the possibility of defining the core microbiota and understanding the
mosquito-bacteria interactive consortium.

DOI: 10.1590/0074-0276140194 
PMCID: PMC4156461
PMID: 25185007  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

