
1. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 2014 Sep;78(3):469-86. doi: 10.1128/MMBR.00059-13.

DNA repair mechanisms and their biological roles in the malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum.

Lee AH(1), Symington LS(1), Fidock DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University, New York, New 
York, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University, New York, New 
York, USA Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Columbia
University, New York, New York, USA df2260@columbia.edu.

Research into the complex genetic underpinnings of the malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum is entering a new era with the arrival of site-specific
genome engineering. Previously restricted only to model systems but now expanded 
to most laboratory organisms, and even to humans for experimental gene therapy
studies, this technology allows researchers to rapidly generate previously
unattainable genetic modifications. This technological advance is dependent on
DNA double-strand break repair (DSBR), specifically homologous recombination in
the case of Plasmodium. Our understanding of DSBR in malaria parasites, however, 
is based largely on assumptions and knowledge taken from other model systems,
which do not always hold true in Plasmodium. Here we describe the causes of
double-strand breaks, the mechanisms of DSBR, and the differences between model
systems and P. falciparum. These mechanisms drive basic parasite functions, such 
as meiosis, antigen diversification, and copy number variation, and allow the
parasite to continually evolve in the contexts of host immune pressure and drug
selection. Finally, we discuss the new technologies that leverage DSBR mechanisms
to accelerate genetic investigations into this global infectious pathogen.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/MMBR.00059-13 
PMCID: PMC4187680
PMID: 25184562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

