
1. Parasitol Res. 2014 Nov;113(11):4177-88. doi: 10.1007/s00436-014-4093-4. Epub
2014 Sep 4.

Distinct temporal recruitment of Plasmodium alveolins to the subpellicular
network.

Tremp AZ(1), Al-Khattaf FS, Dessens JT.

Author information: 
(1)Pathogen Molecular Biology Department, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London, 
WC1E 7HT, UK.

The zoite stages of malaria parasites (merozoite, ookinete and sporozoite)
possess a distinctive cortical structure termed the pellicle, which is defined by
a double membrane layer named the inner membrane complex (IMC). The IMC is
supported by a cytoskeleton of intermediate filaments, termed the subpellicular
network (SPN). Plasmodium IMC1 proteins, or alveolins, make up a conserved family
of structurally related proteins that comprise building blocks of the SPN. Here, 
using green fluorescent protein (GFP) tagging in P. berghei, we show that the
alveolins PbIMC1c and PbIMC1e are expressed in all three zoite stages. Our data
reveal that PbIMC1e is assembled into the SPN concurrent with pellicle
development, while PbIMC1c is assembled after pellicle formation. In the sexual
stages, these processes are accompanied by different gene expressions from
maternal and paternal alleles: PbIMC1e is expressed uniquely from the maternal
allele, while PbIMC1c is expressed from the maternal allele in gametocytes, but
from both parental alleles during ookinete development. These findings establish 
biogenesis of the cortical cytoskeleton in Plasmodium to be a complex and dynamic
process, involving distinct parental gene expression and chronological
recruitment of its protein constituents. While allelic replacement of the pbimc1c
and pbimc1e genes with GFP-tagged versions was readily achieved using double
crossover homologous recombination, attempts to disrupt these genes by this
strategy only resulted in the integration of the selectable marker and GFP
reporter into non-specific genomic locations. The recurrent inability to disrupt 
these genes provides the first genetic evidence that alveolins are necessary for 
asexual blood-stage parasite development in Plasmodium.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-014-4093-4 
PMCID: PMC4200347
PMID: 25185663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

