
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2014 Nov;103:64-74. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2014.08.015. Epub 2014
Sep 4.

Cloning, overexpression and characterization of soluble 42kDa fragment of
merozoite surface protein-1 of Plasmodium vivax.

Sheikh IH(1), Kaushal DC(2), Singh V(3), Kumar N(3), Chandra D(4), Kaushal NA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow
226031, India; Department of Biochemistry, Lucknow University, Lucknow, India.
(2)Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow Campus, Lucknow 226010, India.
(3)Division of Parasitology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow
226031, India.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Lucknow University, Lucknow, India.
(5)Division of Parasitology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow
226031, India. Electronic address: nuzhatkaushal@hotmail.com.

Plasmodium vivax represents the second most prevalent malaria species of major
public health importance and the global eradication of malaria requires the
development of vaccines to prevent infection. The lack of in vitro culture and a 
suitable animal model for P. vivax malaria are the major problems for the delay
in developing a functional vivax vaccine. A number of antigens have been
identified for P. vivax as potential malaria vaccine candidates and among these
42kDa fragment of merozoite surface protein-1 (MSP-142) is one of most promising 
antigen of asexual blood stage. In most of the earlier studies, the MSP-142 of
malaria parasites was expressed as insoluble protein in inclusion bodies and it
is difficult to get purified protein in conformation form. In the present study, 
we have cloned, overexpressed and characterized the 42kDa fragment of P. vivax
MSP-1 as soluble protein in Escherichiacoli. The 42kDa gene fragment of P. vivax 
MSP-1 was PCR amplified using specific primers, sequenced and subcloned into
pTriEx-4 expression vector. The optimum expression of recombinant P. vivax
protein was obtained in SOC growth medium by inducing with 0.2mM IPTG at 37°C for
4h. The SDS-PAGE analysis showed a fusion protein of 55kDa and about 80% was
present in soluble form. The purified P. vivax MSP-142 was characterized and
found to be correctly folded and in conformation form as evident by CD
spectroscopy, presence of 1 free -SH group and the reactivity with reduction
sensitive conformational monoclonals against P. vivax MSP-142.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2014.08.015 
PMID: 25195175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

