
1. J Eukaryot Microbiol. 2014 Nov-Dec;61(6):655-71. doi: 10.1111/jeu.12176. Epub
2014 Oct 16.

From the genome to the phenome: tools to understand the basic biology of
Plasmodium falciparum.

Webster WA(1), McFadden GI.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Regional and Rural Futures, School of Life and Environmental
Sciences, Deakin University, Burwood, 3125, Victoria, Australia; Plant Cell
Biology Research Centre, School of Botany, University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
3010, Victoria, Australia.

Malaria plagues one out of every 30 humans and contributes to almost a million
deaths, and the problem could worsen. Our current therapeutic options are
compromised by emerging resistance by the parasite to our front line drugs. It is
thus imperative to better understand the basic biology of the parasite and
develop novel drugs to stem this disease. The most facile approach to analyse a
gene's function is to remove it from the genome or inhibit its activity. Although
genetic manipulation of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum is a
relatively standard procedure, there is no optimal method to perturb genes
essential to the intraerythrocytic development cycle--the part of the life cycle 
that produces the clinical manifestation of malaria. This is a severe impediment 
to progress because the phenotype we wish to study is exactly the one that is so 
elusive. In the absence of any utilitarian way to conditionally delete essential 
genes, we are prevented from investigating the parasite's most vulnerable points.
This review aims to focus on the development of tools identifying essential genes
of P. falciparum and our ability to elicit phenotypic mutation.

© 2014 The Author(s) Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology © 2014 International
Society of Protistologists.

DOI: 10.1111/jeu.12176 
PMID: 25227912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

