
1. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 16;9(9):e107727. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107727.
eCollection 2014.

Identification and characterization of the RouenBd1987 Babesia divergens
Rhopty-Associated Protein 1.

Rodriguez M(1), Alhassan A(1), Ord RL(1), Cursino-Santos JR(1), Singh M(1), Gray 
J(2), Lobo CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Blood-Borne Parasites, New York Blood Center, New York, New
York, United States of America.
(2)University College Dublin School of Biology and Environmental Science, Dublin,
Republic of Ireland.

Human babesiosis is caused by one of several babesial species transmitted by
ixodid ticks that have distinct geographical distributions based on the presence 
of competent animal hosts. The pathology of babesiosis, like malaria, is a
consequence of the parasitaemia which develops through the cyclical replication
of Babesia parasites in a patient's red blood cells, though symptoms typically
are nonspecific. We have identified the gene encoding Rhoptry-Associated Protein 
-1 (RAP-1) from a human isolate of B. divergens, Rouen1987 and characterized its 
protein product at the molecular and cellular level. Consistent with other
Babesia RAP-1 homologues, BdRAP-1 is expressed as a 46 kDa protein in the
parasite rhoptries, suggesting a possible role in red cell invasion. Native
BdRAP-1 binds to an unidentified red cell receptor(s) that appears to be
non-sialylated and non-proteinacious in nature, but we do not find significant
reduction in growth with anti-rRAP1 antibodies in vitro, highlighting the
possibility the B. divergens is able to use alternative pathways for invasion, or
there is an alternative, complementary, role for BdRAP-1 during the invasion
process. As it is the parasite's ability to recognize and then invade host cells 
which is central to clinical disease, characterising and understanding the role
of Babesia-derived proteins involved in these steps are of great interest for the
development of an effective prophylaxis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107727 
PMCID: PMC4166668
PMID: 25226276  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

