
1. Arch Dis Child. 2015 Jan;100(1):48-53. doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2013-303773.
Epub 2014 Sep 19.

Sickle cell disease: a neglected chronic disease of increasing global health
importance.

Chakravorty S(1), Williams TN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Imperial College, London, UK.
(2)Department of Medicine, Imperial College, London, UK KEMRI-Wellcome Trust
Research Programme, Kilifi, Kenya.

Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a single gene disorder causing a debilitating
systemic syndrome characterised by chronic anaemia, acute painful episodes, organ
infarction and chronic organ damage and by a significant reduction in life
expectancy. The origin of SCD lies in the malarial regions of the tropics where
carriers are protected against death from malaria and hence enjoy an evolutionary
advantage. More recently, population migration has meant that SCD now has a
worldwide distribution and that a substantial number of children are born with
the condition in higher-income areas, including large parts of Europe and North
and South America. Newborn screening, systematic clinical follow-up and
prevention of sepsis and organ damage have led to an increased life expectancy
among people with SCD in many such countries; however, in resource-limited
settings where the majority continue to be born, most affected children continue 
to die in early childhood, usually undiagnosed, due to the lack of effective
programmes for its early detection and treatment. As new therapies emerge,
potentially leading to disease amelioration or cure, it is of paramount
importance that the significant burden of SCD in resource-poor countries is
properly recognised.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/archdischild-2013-303773 
PMCID: PMC4285890
PMID: 25239949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

