
1. FEBS Lett. 2014 Nov 3;588(21):4018-25. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.09.021. Epub
2014 Sep 27.

Improper protein trafficking contributes to artemisinin sensitivity in cells
lacking the KDAC Rpd3p.

Jensen AN(1), Chindaudomsate W(2), Thitiananpakorn K(3), Mongkolsuk S(4), Jensen 
LT(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(3)Toxicology Graduate Program, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 
Thailand.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 
Thailand.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand. Electronic address: laran.jen@mahidol.ac.th.

Lysine deacetylases (KDACs) inhibitors may have therapeutic value in
anti-malarial combination therapies with artemisinin. To evaluate connections
between KDACs and artemisinin, Saccharomyces cerevisiae deletion mutants in KDAC 
genes were assayed. Deletion of RPD3, but not other KDAC genes, resulted in
strong sensitivity to artemisinin, which was also observed in sit4Δ mutants with 
impaired endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to Golgi protein trafficking. Decreased
accumulation of the transporters Pdr5p, Fur4p, and Tat2p was observed in rpd3Δ
and sit4Δ cells. The unfolded protein response is induced in rpd3Δ cells
consistent with retention of proteins in the ER. Disruption of protein
trafficking appears to sensitize cells to artemisinin and targeting these
pathways may be useful as part of artemisinin based anti-malarial therapy.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.09.021 
PMID: 25263705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

