
1. Mol Ecol. 2014 Nov;23(22):5599-618. doi: 10.1111/mec.12943. Epub 2014 Oct 30.

Multilocus nuclear DNA markers reveal population structure and demography of
Anopheles minimus.

Dixit J(1), Arunyawat U, Huong NT, Das A.

Author information: 
(1)Evolutionary Genomics and Bioinformatics Laboratory, Division of Genomics and 
Bioinformatics, National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector-8, Dwarka, New
Delhi, 110077, India.

Utilization of multiple putatively neutral DNA markers for inferring evolutionary
history of species population is considered to be the most robust approach.
Molecular population genetic studies have been conducted in many species of
Anopheles genus, but studies based on single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data
are still very scarce. Anopheles minimus is one of the principal malaria vectors 
of Southeast (SE) Asia including the Northeastern (NE) India. Although population
genetic studies with mitochondrial genetic variation data have been utilized to
infer phylogeography of the SE Asian populations of this species, limited
information on the population structure and demography of Indian An. minimus is
available. We herewith have developed multilocus nuclear genetic approach with
SNP markers located in X chromosome of An. minimus in eight Indian and two SE
Asian population samples (121 individual mosquitoes in total) to infer population
history and test several hypotheses on the phylogeography of this species. While 
the Thai population sample of An. minimus presented the highest nucleotide
diversity, majority of the Indian samples were also fairly diverse. In general,
An. minimus populations were moderately substructured in the distribution range
covering SE Asia and NE India, largely falling under three distinct genetic
clusters. Moreover, demographic expansion events could be detected in the
majority of the presently studied populations of An. minimus. Additional DNA
sequencing of the mitochondrial COII region in a subset of the samples (40
individual mosquitoes) corroborated the existing hypothesis of Indian An. minimus
falling under the earlier reported mitochondrial lineage B.

Â© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.12943 
PMID: 25266341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

