
1. Mol Biotechnol. 2015 Feb;57(2):101-10. doi: 10.1007/s12033-014-9806-5.

Development of a single-replicon miniBYV vector for co-expression of heterologous
proteins.

Prokhnevsky A(1), Mamedov T, Leffet B, Rahimova R, Ghosh A, Mett V, Yusibov V.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer USA Center for Molecular Biotechnology, 9 Innovation Way, Suite
200, Newark, DE, 19711, USA.

In planta production of recombinant proteins, including vaccine antigens and
monoclonal antibodies, continues gaining acceptance. With the broadening range of
target proteins, the need for vectors with higher performance is increasing.
Here, we have developed a single-replicon vector based on beet yellows virus
(BYV) that enables co-delivery of two target genes into the same host cell,
resulting in transient expression of each target. This BYV vector maintained
genetic stability during systemic spread throughout the host plant, Nicotiana
benthamiana. Furthermore, we have engineered a miniBYV vector carrying the
sequences encoding heavy and light chains of a monoclonal antibody (mAb) against 
protective antigen (PA) of Bacillius anthracis, and achieved the expression of
the full-length functional anti-PA mAb at ~300 mg/kg of fresh leaf tissue. To
demonstrate co-expression and functionality of two independent proteins, we
cloned the sequences of the Pfs48/45 protein of Plasmodium falciparum and
endoglycosidase F (PNGase F) from Flavobacterium meningosepticum into the miniBYV
vector under the control of two subgenomic RNA promoters. Agroinfiltration of N. 
benthamiana with this miniBYV vector resulted in accumulation of biologically
active Pfs48/45 that was devoid of N-linked glycosylation and had correct
conformation and epitope display. Overall, our findings demonstrate that the new 
BYV-based vector is capable of co-expressing two functionally active recombinant 
proteins within the same host cell.

DOI: 10.1007/s12033-014-9806-5 
PMID: 25280556  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

