
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 5;289(49):33815-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.611319. Epub 2014
Oct 6.

An alternative mechanism for the methylation of phosphoethanolamine catalyzed by 
Plasmodium falciparum phosphoethanolamine methyltransferase.

Saen-Oon S(1), Lee SG(2), Jez JM(3), Guallar V(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Joint Barcelona Supercomputing Center-Centre for Genomic
Regulation-Institute for Research in Biomedicine Research Program, Carrer de
Jordi Girona 29, 08034 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)the Department of Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63130,
and.
(3)the Department of Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63130,
and jjez@biology2.wustl.edu.
(4)From the Joint Barcelona Supercomputing Center-Centre for Genomic
Regulation-Institute for Research in Biomedicine Research Program, Carrer de
Jordi Girona 29, 08034 Barcelona, Spain, the Catalan Institution for Research and
Advanced Studies, Barcelona 08010, Spain victor.guallar@bsc.es.

The phosphobase methylation pathway catalyzed by the phosphoethanolamine
methyltransferase in Plasmodium falciparum (PfPMT), the malaria parasite, offers 
an attractive target for anti-parasitic drug development. PfPMT methylates
phosphoethanolamine (pEA) to phosphocholine for use in membrane biogenesis.
Quantum mechanics and molecular mechanics (QM/MM) calculations tested the
proposed reaction mechanism for methylation of pEA involving the previously
identified Tyr-19-His-132 dyad, which indicated an energetically unfavorable
mechanism. Instead, the QM/MM calculations suggested an alternative mechanism
involving Asp-128. The reaction coordinate involves the stepwise transfer of a
proton to Asp-128 via a bridging water molecule followed by a typical Sn2-type
methyl transfer from S-adenosylmethionine to pEA. Functional analysis of the
D128A, D128E, D128Q, and D128N PfPMT mutants shows a loss of activity with pEA
but not with the final substrate of the methylation pathway. X-ray crystal
structures of the PfPMT-D128A mutant in complex with S-adenosylhomocysteine and
either pEA or phosphocholine reveal how mutation of Asp-128 disrupts a hydrogen
bond network in the active site. The combined QM/MM, biochemical, and structural 
studies identify a key role for Asp-128 in the initial step of the phosphobase
methylation pathway in Plasmodium and provide molecular insight on the evolution 
of multiple activities in the active site of the PMT.

Â© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.611319 
PMCID: PMC4256317
PMID: 25288796  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

