
1. Malar J. 2014 Oct 15;13:406. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-406.

Genetic mutations in pfcrt and pfmdr1 at the time of artemisinin combination
therapy introduction in South Pacific islands of Vanuatu and Solomon Islands.

Gresty KJ, Gray KA, Bobogare A, Taleo G, Hii J, Wini L, Cheng Q, Waters NC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Australian Army Malaria Institute, Enoggera, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. 
norman.c.waters2.mil@mail.mil.

BACKGROUND: Chloroquine (CQ), alone or in combination with
sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine, was widely used for the treatment of Plasmodium
falciparum and Plasmodium vivax for several decades in both Vanuatu and Solomon
Islands prior to the introduction of artemether-lumefantrine (AL) in 2008.
However, the effect of chloroquine selection on parasite population, which may
affect the efficacy of lumefantrine or other partner drugs of artemisinin, has
not been well assessed. This study aims to provide baseline data on molecular
markers (pfcrt and pfmdr1), along with the origins of pfcrt, prior to the
introduction of AL.
METHODS: Blood spots were obtained from epidemiological surveys conducted on
Tanna Island, Tafea Province, Vanuatu and Temotu Province, Solomon Islands in
2008. Additional samples from Malaita Province, Solomon Islands were collected as
part of an artemether-lumefantrine efficacy study in 2008. Plasmodium falciparum 
pfcrt and pfmdr1 genes were examined for polymorphisms. Microsatellite markers
flanking pfcrt were also examined to ascertain origins of CQ resistance.
RESULTS: Pfcrt analysis revealed 100% of parasites from Tafea Province, Vanuatu
and Malaita Province, Solomon Islands and 98% of parasites from Temotu Province, 
Solomon Islands carried the K76T polymorphism that confers CQ resistance.
Comparison of pfcrt allelic patterns and microsatellite markers flanking pfcrt
revealed six haplotypes with more than 70% of isolates possessing haplotypes very
similar to those observed in Papua New Guinea. The dominant (98.5%) pfmdr1 allele
across all island groups was YYCND.
CONCLUSIONS: Prior to the introduction of AL in the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu, 
P. falciparum isolates possessed point mutations known to confer CQ resistance
and possibly associated with a decreased susceptibility to quinine and
halofantrine, but an increased susceptibility to artemisinin and lumefantrine.
Overall, pfcrt allelic types and the flanking microsatellite markers exhibited
similarities to those of Papua New Guinea, suggesting these parasites share a
common ancestry. The current use of AL for both P. falciparum and P. vivax
infections will enable changes in these markers, in the absence of CQ pressure,
to be monitored.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-406 
PMCID: PMC4210516
PMID: 25318907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

