
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2014 Oct 16;6(10):2883-96. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evu231.

Divergent and conserved elements comprise the chemoreceptive repertoire of the
nonblood-feeding mosquito Toxorhynchites amboinensis.

Zhou X(1), Rinker DC(2), Pitts RJ(3), Rokas A(4), Zwiebel LJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University.
(2)Center for Human Genetics Research, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University Vanderbilt Institute 
for Global Health, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University Center for Human
Genetics Research, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University Center for Human
Genetics Research, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee
Vanderbilt Institute for Global Health, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt Brain Institute,
Program in Developmental Biology and Institute of Chemical Biology, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee l.zwiebel@vanderbilt.edu.

Many mosquito species serve as vectors of diseases such as malaria and yellow
fever, wherein pathogen transmission is tightly associated with the reproductive 
requirement of taking vertebrate blood meals. Toxorhynchites is one of only three
known mosquito genera that does not host-seek and initiates egg development in
the absence of a blood-derived protein bolus. These remarkable differences make
Toxorhynchites an attractive comparative reference for understanding mosquito
chemosensation as it pertains to host-seeking. We performed deep transcriptome
profiling of adult female Toxorhynchites amboinensis bodies, antennae and
maxillary palps, and identified 25,084 protein-coding "genes" in the de novo
assembly. Phylogenomic analysis of 4,266 single-copy "genes" from T. amboinensis,
Aedes aegypti, Anopheles gambiae, and Culex quinquefasciatus robustly supported
Ae. aegypti as the closest relative of T. amboinensis, with the two species
diverged approximately 40 Ma. We identified a large number of T. amboinensis
chemosensory "genes," the majority of which have orthologs in other mosquitoes.
Finally, cross-species expression analyses indicated that patterns of
chemoreceptor transcript abundance were very similar for chemoreceptors that are 
conserved between T. amboinensis and Ae. aegypti, whereas T. amboinensis appeared
deficient in the variety of expressed, lineage-specific chemoreceptors. Our
transcriptome assembly of T. amboinensis represents the first comprehensive
genomic resource for a nonblood-feeding mosquito and establishes a foundation for
future comparative studies of blood-feeding and nonblood-feeding mosquitoes. We
hypothesize that chemosensory genes that display discrete patterns of evolution
and abundance between T. amboinensis and blood-feeding mosquitoes are likely to
play critical roles in host-seeking and hence the vectorial capacity.

Â© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evu231 
PMCID: PMC4224357
PMID: 25326137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

