
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2015 Jan;92(1):28-33. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.14-0309. Epub 2014
Nov 10.

Comparison of three molecular methods for the detection and speciation of five
human Plasmodium species.

Lau YL(1), Lai MY(2), Anthony CN(2), Chang PY(2), Palaeya V(2), Fong MY(2),
Mahmud R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Tropical Infectious Disease Research and Education Center (TIDREC), Department
of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia lauyeeling@um.edu.my.
(2)Tropical Infectious Disease Research and Education Center (TIDREC), Department
of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.

In this study, three molecular assays (real-time multiplex polymerase chain
reaction [PCR], merozoite surface antigen gene [MSP]-multiplex PCR, and the
PlasmoNex Multiplex PCR Kit) have been developed for diagnosis of Plasmodium
species. In total, 52 microscopy-positive and 20 malaria-negative samples were
used in this study. We found that real-time multiplex PCR was the most sensitive 
for detecting P. falciparum and P. knowlesi. The MSP-multiplex PCR assay and the 
PlasmoNex Multiplex PCR Kit were equally sensitive for diagnosing P. knowlesi
infection, whereas the PlasmoNex Multiplex PCR Kit and real-time multiplex PCR
showed similar sensitivity for detecting P. vivax. The three molecular assays
displayed 100% specificity for detecting malaria samples. We observed no
significant differences between MSP-multiplex PCR and the PlasmoNex multiplex PCR
kit (McNemar's test: P = 0.1489). However, significant differences were observed 
comparing real-time multiplex PCR with the PlasmoNex Multiplex PCR Kit (McNemar's
test: P = 0.0044) or real-time multiplex PCR with MSP-multiplex PCR (McNemar's
test: P = 0.0012).

Â© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.14-0309 
PMCID: PMC4347384
PMID: 25385862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

