
1. J Multidiscip Healthc. 2014 Nov 6;7:515-23. doi: 10.2147/JMDH.S67252. eCollection
2014.

Five-year tracking of Plasmodium falciparum allele frequencies in a holoendemic
area with indistinct seasonal transitions.

Akala HM(1), Achieng AO(1), Eyase FL(1), Juma DW(1), Ingasia L(1), Cheruiyot
AC(1), Okello C(1), Omariba D(1), Owiti EA(1), Muriuki C(1), Yeda R(1), Andagalu 
B(1), Johnson JD(1), Kamau E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Global Emerging Infections Surveillance Program, United States Army Medical
Research Unit-Kenya, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Walter Reed Project,
Kisumu and Nairobi, Kenya.

BACKGROUND: The renewed malaria eradication efforts require an understanding of
the seasonal patterns of frequency of polymorphic variants in order to focus
limited funds productively. Although cross-sectional studies in holoendemic areas
spanning a single year could be useful in describing parasite genotype status at 
a given point, such information is inadequate in describing temporal trends in
genotype polymorphisms. For Plasmodium falciparum isolates from Kisumu District
Hospital, Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine-resistance transporter gene
(Pfcrt-K76T) and P. falciparum multidrug resistance gene 1 (PfMDR1-N86Y), were
analyzed for polymorphisms and parasitemia changes in the 53 months from March
2008 to August 2012. Observations were compared with prevailing climatic factors,
including humidity, rainfall, and temperature.
METHODS: Parasitemia (the percentage of infected red blood cells per total red
blood cells) was established by microscopy for P. falciparum malaria-positive
samples. P. falciparum DNA was extracted from whole blood using a Qiagen DNA
Blood Mini Kit. Single nucleotide polymorphism identification at positions
Pfcrt-K76T and PfMDR1-N86Y was performed using real-time polymerase chain
reaction and/or sequencing. Data on climatic variables were obtained from
http://www.tutiempo.net/en/.
RESULTS: A total of 895 field isolates from 2008 (n=169), 2009 (n=161), 2010
(n=216), 2011 (n=223), and 2012 (n=126) showed large variations in monthly
frequency of PfMDR1-N86Y and Pfcrt-K76T as the mutant genotypes decreased from
68.4%±15% and 38.1%±13% to 29.8%±18% and 13.3%±9%, respectively. The mean
percentage of parasitemia was 2.61%±1.01% (coefficient of variation 115.86%;
n=895). There was no correlation between genotype or parasitemia and climatic
factors.
CONCLUSION: This study shows variability in the frequency of Pfcrt-K76T and
PfMDR1-N86Y polymorphisms during the study period, bringing into focus the role
of cross-sectional studies in describing temporal genotype trends. The lack of
correlation between genotypes and climatic changes, especially precipitation,
emphasizes the cost of investment in genotype change.

DOI: 10.2147/JMDH.S67252 
PMCID: PMC4227620
PMID: 25395861 

