
1. Evol Ecol. 2014 Nov 1;28(6):1019-1029.

Evidence of Taxa-, Clone-, and Kin-discrimination in Protists: Ecological and
Evolutionary Implications.

Espinosa A(1), Paz-Y-Mi√±o-C G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Roger Williams University, One Old Ferry Road, Bristol,
Rhode Island 02809, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, 285 Old Westport
Road, North Dartmouth, Massachusetts 02747-2300, USA.

Unicellular eukaryotes, or protists, are among the most ancient organisms on
Earth. Protists belong to multiple taxonomic groups; they are widely distributed 
geographically and in all environments. Their ability to discriminate among con- 
and heterospecifics has been documented during the past decade. Here we discuss
exemplar cases of taxa-, clone-, and possible kin-discrimination in five major
lineages: Mycetozoa (Dictyostelium, Polysphondylium), Dikarya (Saccharomyces),
Ciliophora (Tetrahymena), Apicomplexa (Plasmodium) and Archamoebae (Entamoeba).
We summarize the proposed genetic mechanisms involved in discrimination-mediated 
aggregation (self versus different), including the csA, FLO and trg (formerly
lag) genes, and the Proliferation Activation Factors (PAFs), which facilitate
clustering in some protistan taxa. We caution about the experimental challenges
intrinsic to studying recognition in protists, and highlight the opportunities
for exploring the ecology and evolution of complex forms of cell-cell
communication, including social behavior, in a polyphyletic, still superficially 
understood group of organisms. Because unicellular eukaryotes are the
evolutionary precursors of multicellular life, we infer that their mechanisms of 
taxa-, clone-, and possible kin-discrimination gave origin to the complex
diversification and sophistication of traits associated with species and kin
recognition in plants, fungi, invertebrates and vertebrates.

DOI: 10.1007/s10682-014-9721-z 
PMCID: PMC4228965
PMID: 25400313 

