
1. Genome Biol. 2014 Nov 3;15(11):493. doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0493-0.

Genome-wide RIP-Chip analysis of translational repressor-bound mRNAs in the
Plasmodium gametocyte.

Guerreiro A, Deligianni E, Santos JM, Silva PA, Louis C, Pain A, Janse CJ,
Franke-Fayard B, Carret CK, Siden-Kiamos I, Mair GR.

BACKGROUND: Following fertilization, the early proteomes of metazoans are defined
by the translation of stored but repressed transcripts; further embryonic
development relies on de novo transcription of the zygotic genome. During sexual 
development of Plasmodium berghei, a rodent model for human malaria species
including P. falciparum, the stability of repressed mRNAs requires the
translational repressors DOZI and CITH. When these repressors are absent,
Plasmodium zygote development and transmission to the mosquito vector is halted, 
as hundreds of transcripts become destabilized. However, which mRNAs are direct
targets of these RNA binding proteins, and thus subject to translational
repression, is unknown.
RESULTS: We identify the maternal mRNA contribution to post-fertilization
development of P. berghei using RNA immunoprecipitation and microarray analysis. 
We find that 731 mRNAs, approximately 50% of the transcriptome, are associated
with DOZI and CITH, allowing zygote development to proceed in the absence of RNA 
polymerase II transcription. Using GFP-tagging, we validate the repression
phenotype of selected genes and identify mRNAs relying on the 5' untranslated
region for translational control. Gene deletion reveals a novel protein located
in the ookinete crystalloid with an essential function for sporozoite
development.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study details for the first time the P. berghei maternal
repressome. This mRNA population provides the developing ookinete with coding
potential for key molecules required for life-cycle progression, and that are
likely to be critical for the transmission of the malaria parasite from the
rodent and the human host to the mosquito vector.

DOI: 10.1186/s13059-014-0493-0 
PMCID: PMC4234863
PMID: 25418785  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

