
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2015 Mar;49(1):170-8. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2014.10.016. Epub 2014
Nov 10.

MicroRNA-regulation of Anopheles gambiae immunity to Plasmodium falciparum
infection and midgut microbiota.

Dennison NJ(1), BenMarzouk-Hidalgo OJ(1), Dimopoulos G(2).

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, 615 N. Wolfe Street,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(2)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, 615 N. Wolfe Street,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. Electronic address: gdimopo1@jhu.edu.

Invasion of the malaria vector Anopheles gambiae midgut by Plasmodium parasites
triggers transcriptional changes of immune genes that mediate the antiparasitic
defense. This response is largely regulated by the Toll and Immune deficiency
(IMD) pathways. To determine whether A. gambiae microRNAs (miRNAs) are involved
in regulating the anti-Plasmodium defense, we showed that suppression of miRNA
biogenesis results in increased resistance to Plasmodium falciparum infection. In
silico analysis of A. gambiae immune effector genes identified multiple
transcripts with miRNA binding sites. A comparative miRNA microarray abundance
analysis of P. falciparum infected and naïve mosquito midgut tissues showed
elevated abundance of miRNAs aga-miR-989 and aga-miR-305 in infected midguts.
Antagomir inhibition of aga-miR-305 increased resistance to P. falciparum
infection and suppressed the midgut microbiota. Conversely, treatment of
mosquitoes with an artificial aga-miR-305 mimic increased susceptibility to
P. falciparum infection and resulted in expansion of midgut microbiota,
suggesting that aga-miR-305 acts as a P. falciparum and gut microbiota agonist by
negatively regulating the mosquito immune response. In silico prediction of
aga-miR-305 target genes identified several anti-Plasmodium effectors. Our study 
shows that A. gambiae aga-miR-305 regulates the anti-Plasmodium response and
midgut microbiota, likely through post-transcriptional modification of immune
effector genes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2014.10.016 
PMCID: PMC4447300
PMID: 25445902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

