
1. Antiviral Res. 2014 Dec;112:91-102. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2014.10.007. Epub
2014 Oct 23.

A stably expressed llama single-domain intrabody targeting Rev displays
broad-spectrum anti-HIV activity.

Boons E(1), Li G(2), Vanstreels E(3), Vercruysse T(4), Pannecouque C(5), Vandamme
AM(6), Daelemans D(7).

Author information: 
(1)Rega Institute for Medical Research, Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy, 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, KU Leuven, Minderbroedersstraat 10,
Leuven B-3000, Belgium. Electronic address: Eline.boons@rega.kuleuven.be.
(2)Rega Institute for Medical Research, Laboratory for Clinical and
Epidemiological Virology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, KU Leuven,
Minderbroedersstraat 10, Leuven B-3000, Belgium. Electronic address:
Guangdi.Li@rega.kuleuven.be.
(3)Rega Institute for Medical Research, Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy, 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, KU Leuven, Minderbroedersstraat 10,
Leuven B-3000, Belgium. Electronic address: Els.vanstreels@rega.kuleuven.be.
(4)Rega Institute for Medical Research, Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy, 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, KU Leuven, Minderbroedersstraat 10,
Leuven B-3000, Belgium. Electronic address: Thomas.vercruysse@rega.kuleuven.be.
(5)Rega Institute for Medical Research, Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy, 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, KU Leuven, Minderbroedersstraat 10,
Leuven B-3000, Belgium. Electronic address:
Christophe.pannecouque@rega.kuleuven.be.
(6)Rega Institute for Medical Research, Laboratory for Clinical and
Epidemiological Virology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, KU Leuven,
Minderbroedersstraat 10, Leuven B-3000, Belgium; Centro de Malária e Outras
Doenças Tropicais and Unidade de Microbiologia, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina
Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisboa 1349-008, Portugal. Electronic
address: Annemie.vandamme@uzleuven.be.
(7)Rega Institute for Medical Research, Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy, 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, KU Leuven, Minderbroedersstraat 10,
Leuven B-3000, Belgium. Electronic address: Dirk.daelemans@rega.kuleuven.be.

The HIV Rev protein mediates the transport of partially and unspliced HIV mRNA
from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Rev multimerizes on a secondary stem-loop
structure present in the viral intron-containing mRNA species and recruits the
cellular karyopherin CRM1 to export viral mRNAs from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm. Previously we have identified a single-domain intrabody (Nb(190)),
derived from a llama heavy-chain antibody, which efficiently inhibits Rev
multimerization and suppresses the production of infectious virus. We recently
mapped the epitope of this nanobody and demonstrated that Rev residues K20 and
Y23 are crucial for interaction while residues V16, H53 and L60 are important to 
a lesser extent. Here, we generated cell lines stably expressing Nb(190) and
assessed the capacity of these cell lines to suppress the replication of
different HIV-1 subtypes. These cells stably expressing the single-domain
antibody are protected from virus-induced cytopathogenic effect even in the
context of high multiplicity of infection. In addition, the replication of
different subtypes of group M and one strain of group O is significantly
suppressed in these cell lines. Next, we analysed the natural variations of Rev
amino acids in sequence samples from HIV-1 infected patients worldwide and
assessed the effect of Nb(190) on the most prevalent polymorphisms occurring at
the key epitope positions (K20 and Y23) in Rev. We found that Nb(190) was able to
suppress the function of these Rev variants except for the K20N mutant, which was
present in only 0.7% of HIV-1 sequence populations (n = 4632). Cells stably
expressing the single-domain intrabody Nb(190) are protected against
virus-induced cytopathogenic effect and display a selective survival advantage
upon infection. In addition, Nb(190) suppresses the replication of a wide range
of different HIV-1 subtypes. Large-scale sequence analysis reveals that the
Nb(190) epitope positions in Rev are well conserved across major HIV-1 subtypes
and groups. Altogether, our results indicate that Nb(190) may have broad
potential as a gene therapeutic agent against HIV-1.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2014.10.007 
PMID: 25453342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

