
1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 4;9(12):e114461. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114461.
eCollection 2014.

Inference of the oxidative stress network in Anopheles stephensi upon Plasmodium 
infection.

Shrinet J(1), Nandal UK(2), Adak T(3), Bhatnagar RK(1), Sunil S(1).

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi,
India.
(2)Bioinformatics Laboratory, Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics 
and Bioinformatics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)National Institute of Malaria Research, New Delhi, India.

Ookinete invasion of Anopheles midgut is a critical step for malaria
transmission; the parasite numbers drop drastically and practically reach a
minimum during the parasite's whole life cycle. At this stage, the parasite as
well as the vector undergoes immense oxidative stress. Thereafter, the vector
undergoes oxidative stress at different time points as the parasite invades its
tissues during the parasite development. The present study was undertaken to
reconstruct the network of differentially expressed genes involved in oxidative
stress in Anopheles stephensi during Plasmodium development and maturation in the
midgut. Using high throughput next generation sequencing methods, we generated
the transcriptome of the An. stephensi midgut during Plasmodium vinckei petteri
oocyst invasion of the midgut epithelium. Further, we utilized large datasets
available on public domain on Anopheles during Plasmodium ookinete invasion and
Drosophila datasets and arrived upon clusters of genes that may play a role in
oxidative stress. Finally, we used support vector machines for the functional
prediction of the un-annotated genes of An. stephensi. Integrating the results
from all the different data analyses, we identified a total of 516 genes that
were involved in oxidative stress in An. stephensi during Plasmodium development.
The significantly regulated genes were further extracted from this gene cluster
and used to infer an oxidative stress network of An. stephensi. Using system
biology approaches, we have been able to ascertain the role of several putative
genes in An. stephensi with respect to oxidative stress. Further experimental
validations of these genes are underway.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114461 
PMCID: PMC4256432
PMID: 25474020  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

