
1. Genes Immun. 2015 Apr-May;16(3):187-92. doi: 10.1038/gene.2014.66. Epub 2014 Dec 
18.

Genome-wide significant linkage to IgG subclass responses against Plasmodium
falciparum antigens on chromosomes 8p22-p21, 9q34 and 20q13.

Brisebarre A(1), Kumulungui B(2), Sawadogo S(3), Afridi S(1), Fumoux F(4), Rihet 
P(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] INSERM, UMR1090 TAGC, Marseille, France [2] Aix-Marseille Université,
Marseille, France.
(2)Université des Sciences et Techniques de Masuku, Institut National Supérieur
d'Agronomie et de Biotechnologies, Franceville, Gabon.
(3)University of Ouagadougou, UFR des Sciences de la Santé, Ouagadougou, Burkina 
Faso.
(4)1] Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France [2] UMR-MD3, Marseille, France.

A genome-wide scan was conducted for the levels of total immunoglobulin G (IgG)
and IgG subclasses directed against Plasmodium falciparum antigens in an urban
population living in Burkina Faso. Non-parametric multipoint linkage analysis
provided three chromosomal regions with genome-wide significant evidence
(logarithm of the odds (LOD) score >3.6), and five chromosomal regions with
genome-wide suggestive evidence (LOD score >2.2). IgG3 levels were significantly 
linked to chromosomes 8p22-p21 and 20q13, whereas IgG4 levels were significantly 
linked to chromosome 9q34. In addition, we detected suggestive linkage of IgG1
levels to chromosomes 18p11-q12 and 18q12-q21, IgG4 levels to chromosomes 1p31
and 12q24 and IgG levels to chromosome 6p24-p21. Moreover, we genotyped genetic
markers located within the regions of interest in a rural population living in
Burkina Faso. We detected genome-wide significant and suggestive linkage results 
when combining the two study populations for chromosomes 1p31, 6p24-p21,
8p22-p21, 9q34, 12q24 and 20q13. Because high anti-parasite IgG3 and low
anti-parasite IgG4 levels were associated with malaria resistance, the
chromosomal regions linked to IgG3 and IgG4 levels are of special interest.
Although the results should be confirmed in an independent population, they may
provide new insights in understanding both the genetic control of IgG production 
and malaria resistance.

DOI: 10.1038/gene.2014.66 
PMID: 25521226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

