
1. FEBS J. 2015 Feb;282(4):769-87. doi: 10.1111/febs.13181. Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Improving the accuracy of recombinant protein production through integration of
bioinformatics, statistical and mass spectrometry methodologies.

Ragionieri L(1), Vitorino R, Frommlet J, Oliveira JL, Gaspar P, Ribas de Pouplana
L, Santos MA, Moura GR.

Author information: 
(1)RNA and Genome Biology Laboratories, Department of Biology/Health Sciences,
Centro de Estudos do Ambiente e do Mar iBiMED, University of Aveiro, Portugal.

Erratum in
    FEBS J. 2016 Jan;283(2):395.

Heterologous protein production is a key technology for biotechnological, health 
sciences and many other research fields. Various approaches have been developed
for its optimization, but the research emphasis has been on optimization of
protein yield rather than protein quality. In this study, we have established a
workflow for synthetic gene optimization for heterologous protein expression that
combines bioinformatics, laboratory experiments, mass spectrometry and
statistical analysis. Two gene primary structure analysis platforms, Anaconda and
EuGene, and multivariate optimization methods were employed to re-design the
Plasmodium falciparum lysyl-tRNA synthetase gene for optimal expression in
Escherichia coli. Synthetic genes were expressed from common vectors, and amino
acid mis-incorporations in the expressed proteins were detected and quantified
using mass spectrometry. The association between the identified amino acid
mis-incorporations and 23 gene variables was then analysed. The synthetic genes
yielded significantly higher levels of protein relative to the wild-type gene,
but 71 amino acid mis-incorporation sites were observed along the whole protein
and across the synthetic genes that were statistically associated with specific
codons and protein secondary structures. The optimization method that led to
production of the most accurate protein was based on a multivariate approach that
combined variables that are known to influence mRNA translation.

Â© 2014 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.13181 
PMID: 25532829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

