
1. Korean J Parasitol. 2014 Dec;52(6):631-7. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2014.52.6.631. Epub
2014 Dec 23.

Plasmodium falciparum genotype diversity in artemisinin derivatives treatment
failure patients along the Thai-Myanmar border.

Congpuong K(1), Hoonchaiyapoom T(2), Inorn K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bansomdejchaopraya Rajabhat University, Bangkok 10600, Thailand.
(2)Bureau of Vector Borne Disease, Department of Disease Control, Ministry of
Public Health, Nonthaburi, Thailand.

Genetic characteristics of Plasmodium falciparum may play a role in the treatment
outcome of malaria infection. We have studied the association between diversity
at the merozoite surface protein-1 (msp-1), msp-2, and glutamate-rich protein
(glurp) loci and the treatment outcome of uncomplicated falciparum malaria
patients along the Thai-Myanmar border who were treated with artemisinin
derivatives combination therapy. P. falciparum isolates were collected prior to
treatment from 3 groups of patients; 50 cases of treatment failures, 50
recrudescences, and 56 successful treatments. Genotyping of the 3 polymorphic
markers was analyzed by nested PCR. The distribution of msp-1 alleles was
significantly different among the 3 groups of patients but not the msp-2 and
glurp alleles. The allelic frequencies of K1 and MAD20 alleles of msp1 gene were 
higher while RO33 allele was significantly lower in the successful treatment
group. Treatment failure samples had a higher median number of alleles as
compared to the successful treatment group. Specific genotypes of msp-1, msp-2,
and glurp were significantly associated with the treatment outcomes. Three
allelic size variants were significantly higher among the isolates from the
treatment failure groups, i.e., K1270-290, 3D7610-630, G650-690, while 2
variants, K1150-170, and 3D7670-690 were significantly lower. In conclusion, the 
present study reports the differences in multiplicity of infection and
distribution of specific alleles of msp-1, msp-2, and glurp genes in P.
falciparum isolates obtained from treatment failure and successful treatment
patients following artemisinin derivatives combination therapy.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2014.52.6.631 
PMCID: PMC4277025
PMID: 25548414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

