
1. J Proteomics. 2015 Apr 24;119:45-60. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2014.11.019. Epub 2014 
Dec 30.

AealRACK1 expression and localization in response to stress in C6/36 HT mosquito 
cells.

González-Calixto C(1), Cázares-Raga FE(1), Cortés-Martínez L(1), Del Angel RM(1),
Medina-Ramírez F(1), Mosso C(1), Ocádiz-Ruiz R(1), Valenzuela JG(2), Rodríguez
MH(3), Hernández-Hernández Fde L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Infectómica y Patogénesis Molecular, Centro de Investigación y
de Estudios Avanzados del IPN, Av. Instituto Politécnico Nacional # 2508, San
Pedro Zacatenco, 07360 México D.F., Mexico.
(2)Vector Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institute of
Health, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.
(3)Centro de Investigación Sobre Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional de 
Salud Pública, Av. Universidad 655, Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico.
(4)Departamento de Infectómica y Patogénesis Molecular, Centro de Investigación y
de Estudios Avanzados del IPN, Av. Instituto Politécnico Nacional # 2508, San
Pedro Zacatenco, 07360 México D.F., Mexico. Electronic address:
cruzcruz@cinvestav.mx.

The Receptor for Activated C Kinase 1 (RACK1), a scaffold protein member of the
tryptophan-aspartate (WD) repeat family, folds in a seven-bladed β-propeller
structure that permits the association of proteins to form active complexes.
Mosquitoes of the genus Aedes sp., are vectors of virus producing important
diseases such as: dengue, chikungunya and yellow fever. Based on the highly
conserved gene sequence of AeaeRACK1 of the mosquito Aedes aegypti we
characterized the mRNA and protein of the homologous AealRACK1 from the Ae.
albopictus-derived cell line C6/36 HT. Two protein species differing in MW/pI
values were observed at 35kDa/8.0 and 36kDa/6.5. The behavior of AealRACK1 was
studied inducing stress with serum deprivation and the glucocorticoid
dexamethasone. Both stressors induced increase of the expression of AealRACK1
mRNA and proteins. In serum-deprived cells AealRACK1 protein was located
cortically near the plasma membrane in contrast to dexamethasone-treated cells
where the protein formed a dotted pattern in the cytoplasm. In addition, 33
protein partners were identified by immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry.
Most of the identified proteins were ribosomal, involved in signaling pathways
and stress responses. Our results suggest that AealRACK1 in C6/36 HT cells
respond to stress increasing its synthesis and producing phosphorylated activated
form.BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Insect cells adapt to numerous environmental
stressors, including chemicals and invasion of pathogenic microorganisms among
others, coordinating cellular and organismal responses. Individual cells sense
the environment using receptors that trigger signaling pathways that regulate
expression of specific effector proteins and/or cellular responses as movement or
secretion. In the coordination of responses to stress, scaffold proteins are
pivotal molecules that recruit other proteins forming active complexes. The
Receptor for Activated C Kinase 1 (RACK1) is the best studied member of the
conserved tryptophan-aspartate (WD) repeat family. RACK1 folds in a seven-bladed 
β-propeller structure and it could be activated during stress, participating in
different signaling pathways. The presence and activities of RACK1 in mosquitoes 
had not been documented before, in this work the molecule is demonstrated in an
Aedes albopictus-derived cell line and its reaction to stress is observed under
the effect of serum deprivation and the presence of glucocorticoid analog
dexamethasone, a chemical used to cause stress in vitro.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2014.11.019 
PMCID: PMC6329303
PMID: 25555378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

