
1. Mol Microbiol. 2015 Apr;96(1):84-94. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12922. Epub 2015 Jan 30.

Pivotal and distinct role for Plasmodium actin capping protein alpha during blood
infection of the malaria parasite.

Ganter M(1), Rizopoulos Z, Schüler H, Matuschewski K.

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology Unit, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, 10117, Berlin, 
Germany; Department of Immunology and Infectious Disease, Harvard School of
Public Health, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.

Accurate regulation of microfilament dynamics is central to cell growth, motility
and response to environmental stimuli. Stabilizing and depolymerizing proteins
control the steady-state levels of filamentous (F-) actin. Capping protein (CP)
binds to free barbed ends, thereby arresting microfilament growth and restraining
elongation to remaining free barbed ends. In all CPs characterized to date, alpha
and beta subunits form the active heterodimer. Here, we show in a eukaryotic
parasitic cell that the two CP subunits can be functionally separated. Unlike the
beta subunit, the CP alpha subunit of the apicomplexan parasite Plasmodium is
refractory to targeted gene deletion during blood infection in the mammalian
host. Combinatorial complementation of Plasmodium berghei CP genes with the
orthologs from Plasmodium falciparum verified distinct activities of CP alpha and
CP alpha/beta during parasite life cycle progression. Recombinant Plasmodium CP
alpha could be produced in Escherichia coli in the absence of the beta subunit
and the protein displayed F-actin capping activity. Thus, the functional
separation of two CP subunits in a parasitic eukaryotic cell and the F-actin
capping activity of CP alpha expand the repertoire of microfilament regulatory
mechanisms assigned to CPs.

© 2015 The Authors. Molecular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12922 
PMCID: PMC4413046
PMID: 25565321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

