
1. Annu Rev Entomol. 2015 Jan 7;60:537-59. doi: 10.1146/annurev-ento-010814-020828.

Insecticide resistance in mosquitoes: impact, mechanisms, and research
directions.

Liu N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, Insect Molecular Toxicology and 
Physiology Program, Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama 36849; email:
liunann@auburn.edu.

Mosquito-borne diseases, the most well known of which is malaria, are among the
leading causes of human deaths worldwide. Vector control is a very important part
of the global strategy for management of mosquito-associated diseases, and
insecticide application is the most important component in this effort. However, 
mosquito-borne diseases are now resurgent, largely because of the insecticide
resistance that has developed in mosquito vectors and the drug resistance of
pathogens. A large number of studies have shown that multiple, complex resistance
mechanisms-in particular, increased metabolic detoxification of insecticides and 
decreased sensitivity of the target proteins-or genes are likely responsible for 
insecticide resistance. Gene overexpression and amplification, and mutations in
protein-coding-gene regions, have frequently been implicated as well. However, no
comprehensive understanding of the resistance mechanisms or regulation involved
has yet been developed. This article reviews current knowledge of the molecular
mechanisms, genes, gene interactions, and gene regulation governing the
development of insecticide resistance in mosquitoes and discusses the potential
impact of the latest research findings on the basic and practical aspects of
mosquito resistance research.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-ento-010814-020828 
PMID: 25564745  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

