
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015 Jan 8;9(1):e3332. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003332.
eCollection 2015 Jan.

Pyrethroid-resistance and presence of two knockdown resistance (kdr) mutations,
F1534C and a novel mutation T1520I, in Indian Aedes aegypti.

Kushwah RB(1), Dykes CL(1), Kapoor N(2), Adak T(1), Singh OP(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector 8, Dwarka, Delhi, India.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Indira Gandhi National Open University, Maidangarhi, 
New Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: Control of Aedes aegypti, the mosquito vector of dengue, chikungunya 
and yellow fever, is a challenging task. Pyrethroid insecticides have emerged as 
a preferred choice for vector control but are threatened by the emergence of
resistance. The present study reports a focus of pyrethroid resistance and
presence of two kdr mutations--F1534C and a novel mutation T1520I, in Ae. aegypti
from Delhi, India.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Insecticide susceptibility status of adult-female
Ae. aegypti against DDT (4%), deltamethrin (0.05%) and permethrin (0.75%) was
determined using WHO's standard insecticide susceptibility kit, which revealed
resistance to DDT, deltamethrin and permethrin with corrected mortalities of 35%,
72% and 76% respectively. Mosquitoes were screened for the presence of kdr
mutations including those reported earlier (I1011V/M, V1016G/I, F1534C, D1794Y
and S989P), which revealed the presence of F1534C and a novel mutation T1520I.
Highly specific PCR-RFLP assays were developed for genotyping of these two
mutations. Genotyping using allele specific PCR and new PCR-RFLP assays revealed 
a high frequency of F1534C (0.41-0.79) and low frequency of novel mutation T1520I
(0.13). The latter was observed to be tightly linked with F1534C and possibly
serve as a compensatory mutation. A positive association of F1534C mutation with 
DDT and deltamethrin resistance in Ae. aegypti was established. However,
F1534C-kdr did not show significant protection against permethrin.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The Aedes aegypti population of Delhi is resistant to
DDT, deltamethrin and permethrin. Two kdr mutations, F1534C and a novel mutation 
T1520I, were identified in this population. This is the first report of kdr
mutations being present in the Indian Ae. aegypti population. Highly specific
PCR-RFLP assays were developed for discrimination of alleles at both kdr loci. A 
positive association of F1534C mutation with DDT and deltamethrin resistance was 
confirmed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003332 
PMCID: PMC4287524
PMID: 25569164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

