
1. Sci Rep. 2015 Jan 19;5:7867. doi: 10.1038/srep07867.

Cell-free expression, purification, and ligand-binding analysis of Drosophila
melanogaster olfactory receptors DmOR67a, DmOR85b and DmORCO.

Tegler LT(1), Corin K(2), Hillger J(3), Wassie B(3), Yu Y(4), Zhang S(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Center for Bits and Atoms, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77
Massachusetts, Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA [2] Division of Chemistry,
Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology, Linkoping University, SE-581 83
Linkoping, Sweden.
(2)1] Center for Bits and Atoms, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77
Massachusetts, Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA [2] Biomedical Engineering Research 
Group, School of Electrical and Information Engineering University of the
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa [3] Department of Molecular Medicine
and Haematology, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(3)Center for Bits and Atoms, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77
Massachusetts, Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA.
(4)1] Center for Bits and Atoms, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77
Massachusetts, Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA [2] College of Electronics and
Information Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China 610065.

Insects transmit numerous devastating diseases, including malaria, dengue fever, 
and sleeping sickness. Olfactory cues guide insects to their hosts, and are thus 
responsible for disease transmission. Understanding the molecular basis of insect
olfaction could facilitate the development of interventions. The first step is to
heterologously overexpress and purify insect olfactory receptors (ORs). This is
challenging, as ORs are membrane proteins. Here, we show that insect ORs and
their co-receptor can be expressed in an E. coli cell-free system. After
immunoaffinity chromatography, the ORs are ~95% pure, and up to 1 mg/10 ml
reaction is obtained. Circular dichroism together with microscale thermophoresis 
indicate that each receptor is properly folded, and can bind its respective
ligand. This is the first time insect ORs have been expressed in an E. coli
system. The methods described here could facilitate future structure-function
studies, which may aid in developments to alleviate the suffering of millions
caused by insect-transmitted diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/srep07867 
PMCID: PMC4297953
PMID: 25597985  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

