
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015 Mar;81(6):2233-43. doi: 10.1128/AEM.03733-14. Epub
2015 Jan 16.

Elizabethkingia anophelis: molecular manipulation and interactions with mosquito 
hosts.

Chen S(1), Bagdasarian M(2), Walker ED(3).

Author information: 
(1)Deparment of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan, USA shicheng@msu.edu.
(2)Deparment of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(3)Deparment of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan, USA Department of Entomology, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, Michigan, USA.

Flavobacteria (members of the family Flavobacteriaceae) dominate the bacterial
community in the Anopheles mosquito midgut. One such commensal, Elizabethkingia
anophelis, is closely associated with Anopheles mosquitoes through transstadial
persistence (i.e., from one life stage to the next); these and other properties
favor its development for paratransgenic applications in control of malaria
parasite transmission. However, the physiological requirements of E. anophelis
have not been investigated, nor has its capacity to perpetuate despite digestion 
pressure in the gut been quantified. To this end, we first developed techniques
for genetic manipulation of E. anophelis, including selectable markers, reporter 
systems (green fluorescent protein [GFP] and NanoLuc), and transposons that
function in E. anophelis. A flavobacterial expression system based on the
promoter PompA was integrated into the E. anophelis chromosome and showed strong 
promoter activity to drive GFP and NanoLuc reporter production. Introduced,
GFP-tagged E. anophelis associated with mosquitoes at successive developmental
stages and propagated in Anopheles gambiae and Anopheles stephensi but not in
Aedes triseriatus mosquitoes. Feeding NanoLuc-tagged cells to A. gambiae and A.
stephensi in the larval stage led to infection rates of 71% and 82%,
respectively. In contrast, a very low infection rate (3%) was detected in Aedes
triseriatus mosquitoes under the same conditions. Of the initial E. anophelis
cells provided to larvae, 23%, 71%, and 85% were digested in A. stephensi, A.
gambiae, and Aedes triseriatus, respectively, demonstrating that E. anophelis
adapted to various mosquito midgut environments differently. Bacterial cell
growth increased up to 3-fold when arginine was supplemented in the defined
medium. Furthermore, the number of NanoLuc-tagged cells in A. stephensi
significantly increased when arginine was added to a sugar diet, showing it to be
an important amino acid for E. anophelis. Animal erythrocytes promoted E.
anophelis growth in vivo and in vitro, indicating that this bacterium could
obtain nutrients by participating in erythrocyte lysis in the mosquito midgut.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.03733-14 
PMCID: PMC4345385
PMID: 25595771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

