
1. Malar J. 2015 Jan 21;14:19. doi: 10.1186/s12936-014-0537-7.

Prevalence of pfhrp2 and pfhrp3 gene deletions in Puerto Lempira, Honduras.

Abdallah JF, Okoth SA, Fontecha GA, Torres RE, Banegas EI, Matute ML, Bucheli ST,
Goldman IF, de Oliveira AM, Barnwell JW, Udhayakumar V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Road, MS D-67,
Atlanta 30333, GA, USA. vxu0@cdc.gov.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have demonstrated the deletion of the histidine-rich
protein 2 (PfHRP2) gene (pfhrp2) in field isolates of Plasmodium falciparum,
which could result in false negative test results when PfHRP2-based rapid
diagnostic tests (RDTs) are used for malaria diagnosis. Although primary
diagnosis of malaria in Honduras is determined based on microscopy, RDTs may be
useful in remote areas. In this study, it was investigated whether there are
deletions of the pfhrp2, pfhrp3 and their respective flanking genes in 68 P.
falciparum parasite isolates collected from the city of Puerto Lempira, Honduras.
In addition, further investigation considered the possible correlation between
parasite population structure and the distribution of these gene deletions by
genotyping seven neutral microsatellites.
METHODS: Sixty-eight samples used in this study, which were obtained from a
previous chloroquine efficacy study, were utilized in the analysis. All samples
were genotyped for pfhrp2, pfhrp3 and flanking genes by PCR. The samples were
then genotyped for seven neutral microsatellites in order to determine the
parasite population structure in Puerto Lempira at the time of sample collection.
RESULTS: It was found that all samples were positive for pfhrp2 and its flanking 
genes on chromosome 8. However, only 50% of the samples were positive for pfhrp3 
and its neighboring genes while the rest were either pfhrp3-negative only or had 
deleted a combination of pfhrp3 and its neighbouring genes on chromosome 13.
Population structure analysis predicted that there are at least two distinct
parasite population clusters in this sample population. It was also determined
that a greater proportion of parasites with pfhrp3-(and flanking gene) deletions 
belonged to one cluster compared to the other.
CONCLUSION: The findings indicate that the P. falciparum parasite population in
the municipality of Puerto Lempira maintains the pfhrp2 gene and that
PfHRP2-based RDTs could be considered for use in this region; however continued
monitoring of parasite population will be useful to detect any parasites with
deletions of pfhrp2.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-014-0537-7 
PMCID: PMC4308922
PMID: 25604310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

