
1. Cell Calcium. 2015 Mar;57(3):186-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ceca.2014.12.010. Epub 2014
Dec 31.

The calcium signaling toolkit of the Apicomplexan parasites Toxoplasma gondii and
Plasmodium spp.

Lourido S(1), Moreno SN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(2)Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, Department of Cellular
Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA. Electronic address:
smoreno@uga.edu.

Apicomplexan parasites have complex life cycles, frequently split between
different hosts and reliant on rapid responses as the parasites react to changing
environmental conditions. Calcium ion (Ca(2+)) signaling is consequently
essential for the cellular and developmental changes that support Apicomplexan
parasitism. Apicomplexan genomes reveal a rich repertoire of genes involved in
calcium signaling, although many of the genes responsible for observed
physiological changes remain unknown. There is evidence, for example, for the
presence of a nifedipine-sensitive calcium entry mechanism in Toxoplasma, but the
molecular components involved in Ca(2+) entry in both Toxoplasma and Plasmodium, 
have not been identified. The major calcium stores are the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER), the acidocalcisomes, and the plant-like vacuole in Toxoplasma, or the food 
vacuole in Plasmodium spp. Pharmacological evidence suggests that Ca(2+) release 
from intracellular stores may be mediated by inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3)
or cyclic ADP ribose (cADPR) although there is no molecular evidence for the
presence of receptors for these second messengers in the parasites. Several
Ca(2+)-ATPases are present in Apicomplexans and a putative mitochondrial
Ca(2+)/H(+) exchanger has been identified. Apicomplexan genomes contain numerous 
genes encoding Ca(2+)-binding proteins, with the notable expansion of
calcium-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs), whose study has revealed roles in
gliding motility, microneme secretion, host cell invasion and egress, and
parasite differentiation. Microneme secretion has also been shown to depend on
the C2 domain containing protein DOC2 in both Plasmodium spp. and Toxoplasma,
providing further evidence for the complex transduction of Ca(2+) signals in
these organisms. The characterization of these pathways could lead to the
discovery of novel drug targets and to a better understanding of the role of
Ca(2+) in these parasites.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ceca.2014.12.010 
PMCID: PMC4428288
PMID: 25605521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

