
1. Transfus Med Hemother. 2014 Nov;41(6):436-45. doi: 10.1159/000369145. Epub 2014
Nov 17.

Genetics of transfusion recipient alloimmunization: can clues from susceptibility
to autoimmunity pave the way?

Tatari-Calderone Z(1), Luban NL(2), Vukmanovic S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sheikh Zayed Institute for Pediatric Surgical Innovation, Children's National 
Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA ; Department of Pediatrics, George Washington
University School of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, George Washington University School of Medicine,
Washington, DC, USA ; Division of Laboratory Medicine, Children's National
Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.

The search for genetic determinants of alloimmunization in sickle cell disease
transfusion recipients was based on two premises: i) that polymorphisms
responsible for stronger immune and/or inflammatory responses and hemoglobin β(S)
mutation were co-selected by malaria; and ii) that stronger responder status
contributes to development of lupus. We found a marker of alloimmunization in the
gene encoding for Ro52 protein, also known as Sjögren syndrome antigen 1 (SSA1)
and TRIM21. Surprisingly, the nature of the association was opposite of that with
lupus; the same variant of a polymorphism (rs660) that was associated with lupus 
incidence was also associated with induction of tolerance to red blood cell
antigens during early childhood. The dual function of Ro52 can explain this
apparent contradiction. We propose that other lupus/autoimmunity susceptibility
loci may reveal roles of additional molecules in various aspects of
alloimmunization induced by transfusion as well as during pregnancy.

DOI: 10.1159/000369145 
PMCID: PMC4280455
PMID: 25670931 

