
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 3;112(9):E982-91. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1420855112. Epub 2015 Feb 17.

Antisense long noncoding RNAs regulate var gene activation in the malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Amit-Avraham I(1), Pozner G(1), Eshar S(1), Fastman Y(1), Kolevzon N(2), Yavin
E(2), Dzikowski R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Institute for Medical
Research Israel-Canada, The Kuvin Center for the Study of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel;
and.
(2)Institute for Drug Research, School of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Institute for Medical
Research Israel-Canada, The Kuvin Center for the Study of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel;
and rond@ekmd.huji.ac.il.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2015 Apr;13(4):188-9.

The virulence of Plasmodium falciparum, the causative agent of the deadliest form
of human malaria, is attributed to its ability to evade human immunity through
antigenic variation. These parasites alternate between expression of variable
antigens, encoded by members of a multicopy gene family named var. Immune evasion
through antigenic variation depends on tight regulation of var gene expression,
ensuring that only a single var gene is expressed at a time while the rest of the
family is maintained transcriptionally silent. Understanding how a single gene is
chosen for activation is critical for understanding mutually exclusive expression
but remains a mystery. Here, we show that antisense long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs)
initiating from var introns are associated with the single active var gene at the
time in the cell cycle when the single var upstream promoter is active. We
demonstrate that these antisense transcripts are incorporated into chromatin, and
that expression of these antisense lncRNAs in trans triggers activation of a
silent var gene in a sequence- and dose-dependent manner. On the other hand,
interference with these lncRNAs using complement peptide nucleic acid molecules
down-regulated the active var gene, erased the epigenetic memory, and induced
expression switching. Altogether, our data provide evidence that these antisense 
lncRNAs play a key role in regulating var gene activation and mutually exclusive 
expression.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1420855112 
PMCID: PMC4352787
PMID: 25691743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

