
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Aug 18;112(33):10200-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1423790112. Epub 2015 Feb 25.

Factors mediating plastid dependency and the origins of parasitism in
apicomplexans and their close relatives.

Janouškovec J(1), Tikhonenkov DV(2), Burki F(3), Howe AT(3), Kolísko M(3),
Mylnikov AP(4), Keeling PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Botany Department, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T
1Z4; Program in Integrated Microbial Diversity, Canadian Institute for Advanced
Research, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1Z8; and pkeeling@mail.ubc.ca
janjan.cz@gmail.com.
(2)Botany Department, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T
1Z4; Institute for the Biology of Inland Waters, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Borok 152742, Russia.
(3)Botany Department, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T
1Z4;
(4)Institute for the Biology of Inland Waters, Russian Academy of Sciences, Borok
152742, Russia.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2015 Oct;13(10):603.

Apicomplexans are a major lineage of parasites, including causative agents of
malaria and toxoplasmosis. How such highly adapted parasites evolved from
free-living ancestors is poorly understood, particularly because they contain
nonphotosynthetic plastids with which they have a complex metabolic dependency.
Here, we examine the origin of apicomplexan parasitism by resolving the
evolutionary distribution of several key characteristics in their closest
free-living relatives, photosynthetic chromerids and predatory colpodellids.
Using environmental sequence data, we describe the diversity of these
apicomplexan-related lineages and select five species that represent this
diversity for transcriptome sequencing. Phylogenomic analysis recovered a
monophyletic lineage of chromerids and colpodellids as the sister group to
apicomplexans, and a complex distribution of retention versus loss for
photosynthesis, plastid genomes, and plastid organelles. Reconstructing the
evolution of all plastid and cytosolic metabolic pathways related to apicomplexan
plastid function revealed an ancient dependency on plastid isoprenoid
biosynthesis, predating the divergence of apicomplexan and dinoflagellates.
Similarly, plastid genome retention is strongly linked to the retention of two
genes in the plastid genome, sufB and clpC, altogether suggesting a relatively
simple model for plastid retention and loss. Lastly, we examine the broader
distribution of a suite of molecular characteristics previously linked to the
origins of apicomplexan parasitism and find that virtually all are present in
their free-living relatives. The emergence of parasitism may not be driven by
acquisition of novel components, but rather by loss and modification of the
existing, conserved traits.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1423790112 
PMCID: PMC4547307
PMID: 25717057  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

