
1. Version 2. F1000Res. 2014 Aug 13 [revised 2014 Oct 21];3:194. doi:
10.12688/f1000research.4980.2. eCollection 2014.

Case Report: Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria in a woman heterozygous for G6PD
A-.

Perdigones N(1), Morales M(1), Mason P(1), Bessler M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Pediatrics, Abramson Research Center,
The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 19104, USA.
(2)Division of Hematology, Department of Pediatrics, Abramson Research Center,
The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 19104, USA ; Division of
Hematology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
19104-4318, USA.

We describe a case of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) in a woman who is
heterozygous for the glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase A-   ( G6PDA-) allele. PNH
is associated with one or more clones of cells that lack complement inhibition
due to loss of function somatic mutations in the PIGA gene.  PIGA encodes the
enzyme phosphatidylinositol glycan anchor biosynthesis, class A, which catalyses 
the first step of glycosylphosphatidylinisotol ( GPI)  anchor synthesis. Two GPI 
anchored red cell surface antigens regulate complement lysis. G6PD catalyses the 
first step of the pentose phosphate pathway and enzyme variants, frequent in some
populations have been selected because they confer resistance to malaria, are
associated with hemolysis in the presence of oxidizing agents including several
drugs. The patient had suffered a hemolytic attack after taking co-trimoxazole, a
drug that precipitates hemolysis in G6PD deficient individuals. Since both G6PD
and PIGA are X-linked we hypothesized that the PIGA mutation was on the
X-chromosome carrying the G6PDA- allele. Investigations showed that in fact the
PIGA mutation was on the X-chromosome carrying the normal G6PD B allele. We
speculate that complement activation on G6PD A- red cells exposed to Bactrim
might have triggered complement activation inducing the lysis of G6PD B PNH Type 
II red blood cells or that the patient may have had a PNH clone expressing G6PDA-
at the time of the hemolytic episode.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.4980.2 
PMCID: PMC4335595
PMID: 25713697 

