
1. Genome Med. 2015 Feb 27;7(1):19. doi: 10.1186/s13073-015-0133-7. eCollection
2015.

Transcriptional profiling defines dynamics of parasite tissue sequestration
during malaria infection.

Pelle KG(1), Oh K(2), Buchholz K(1), Narasimhan V(2), Joice R(1), Milner DA(3),
Brancucci NM(4), Ma S(2), Voss TS(5), Ketman K(6), Seydel KB(7), Taylor TE(7),
Barteneva NS(8), Huttenhower C(9), Marti M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115 USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115
USA.
(3)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115 USA ; Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115 USA.
(4)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115 USA ; Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, 4051
Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, 4051 Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA
02115 USA.
(7)College of Osteopathic Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI
48825 USA ; Blantyre Malaria Project, University of Malawi College of Medicine,
Blantyre, 3 Malawi.
(8)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA
02115 USA ; Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115
USA.
(9)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115
USA ; The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA 02142 USA.

BACKGROUND: During intra-erythrocytic development, late asexually replicating
Plasmodium falciparum parasites sequester from peripheral circulation. This
facilitates chronic infection and is linked to severe disease and organ-specific 
pathology including cerebral and placental malaria. Immature gametocytes - sexual
stage precursor cells - likewise disappear from circulation. Recent work has
demonstrated that these sexual stage parasites are located in the hematopoietic
system of the bone marrow before mature gametocytes are released into the
bloodstream to facilitate mosquito transmission. However, as sequestration occurs
only in vivo and not during in vitro culture, the mechanisms by which it is
regulated and enacted (particularly by the gametocyte stage) remain poorly
understood.
RESULTS: We generated the most comprehensive P. falciparum functional gene
network to date by integrating global transcriptional data from a large set of
asexual and sexual in vitro samples, patient-derived in vivo samples, and a new
set of in vitro samples profiling sexual commitment. We defined more than 250
functional modules (clusters) of genes that are co-expressed primarily during the
intra-erythrocytic parasite cycle, including 35 during sexual commitment and
gametocyte development. Comparing the in vivo and in vitro datasets allowed us,
for the first time, to map the time point of asexual parasite sequestration in
patients to 22 hours post-invasion, confirming previous in vitro observations on 
the dynamics of host cell modification and cytoadherence. Moreover, we were able 
to define the properties of gametocyte sequestration, demonstrating the presence 
of two circulating gametocyte populations: gametocyte rings between 0 and
approximately 30 hours post-invasion and mature gametocytes after around 7 days
post-invasion.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides a bioinformatics resource for the functional
elucidation of parasite life cycle dynamics and specifically demonstrates the
presence of the gametocyte ring stages in circulation, adding significantly to
our understanding of the dynamics of gametocyte sequestration in vivo.

DOI: 10.1186/s13073-015-0133-7 
PMCID: PMC4342211
PMID: 25722744 

