
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2015 Jun;32:12-22. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.02.004. Epub
2015 Feb 23.

Molecular genetic analysis of Plasmodium vivax isolates from Eastern and Central 
Sudan using pvcsp and pvmsp-3α genes as molecular markers.

Talha AA(1), Pirahmadi S(2), Mehrizi AA(2), Djadid ND(2), Nour BY(1), Zakeri
S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Blue Nile National Institute for Communicable
Diseases, University of Gezira, P.O. Box 20, Wad Medani, Sudan; Department of
Parasitology, Faculty of Medical Laboratory Sciences, University of Gezira, P.O. 
Box 20, Wad Medani, Sudan.
(2)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Pasteur Avenue, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Pasteur Avenue, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran.
Electronic address: zakeris@yahoo.com.

In Sudan, Plasmodium vivax accounts for approximately 5-10% of malaria cases.
This study was carried out to determine the genetic diversity of P. vivax
population from Sudan by analyzing the polymorphism of P. vivax csp (pvcsp) and
pvmsp-3α genes. Blood samples (n=76) were taken from suspected malaria cases from
2012-2013 in three health centers of Eastern and Central Sudan. Parasite
detection was performed by microscopy and molecular techniques, and genotyping of
both genes was performed by PCR-RFLP followed by DNA sequence for only pvcsp gene
(n=30). Based on microscopy analysis, 76 (%100) patients were infected with P.
vivax, whereas nested-PCR results showed that 86.8% (n=66), 3.9% (n=3), and 3.9% 
(n=3) of tested samples had P. vivax as well as Plasmodium falciparum mono- and
mixed infections, respectively. Four out of 76 samples had no results in
molecular diagnosis. All sequenced samples were found to be of VK210 (100%)
genotype with six distinct amino acid haplotypes, and 210A (66.7%) was the most
prevalent haplotype. The Sudanese isolates displayed variations in the peptide
repeat motifs (PRMs) ranging from 17 to 19 with GDRADGQPA (PRM1), GDRAAGQPA
(PRM2) and DDRAAGQPA (PRM3). Also, 54 polymorphic sites with 56 mutations were
found in repeat and post-repeat regions of the pvcsp and the overall nucleotide
diversity (π) was 0.02149±0.00539. A negative value of dN-dS (-0.0344) was found 
that suggested a significant purifying selection of Sudanese pvcsp, (Z test,
P<0.05). Regarding pvmsp-3α, three types were detected: types A (94.6%, 52/55),
type C (3.6%, 2/55), and type B (1.8%, 1/55). No multiclonal infections were
detected, and RFLP analysis identified 13 (Hha I, A1-A11, B1, and C1) and 16 (Alu
I, A1-A14, B1, and C1) distinct allelic forms. In conclusion, genetic
investigation among Sudanese P. vivax isolates indicated that this antigen showed
limited antigenic diversity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.02.004 
PMID: 25721363  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

