
1. Korean J Parasitol. 2015 Feb;53(1):43-9. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2015.53.1.43. Epub 2015
Feb 27.

Plasmodium vivax drug resistance genes; Pvmdr1 and Pvcrt-o polymorphisms in
relation to chloroquine sensitivity from a malaria endemic area of Thailand.

Rungsihirunrat K(1), Muhamad P(2), Chaijaroenkul W(3), Kuesap J(4), Na-Bangchang 
K(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Public Health Sciences, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(2)Drug Discovery and Development Center, Thammasat University, Pathumthani,
Thailand.
(3)Center of Excellence in Molecular Biology and Pharmacology of Malaria and
Cholangiocarcinoma, Chulabhorn International College of Medicine, Thammasat
University, Patumthani, Thailand.
(4)Graduate Program in Biomedical Sciences, Allied Health Sciences, Thammasat
University, Pathumthani, Thailand.

The aim of the study was to explore the possible molecular markers of chloroquine
resistance in Plasmodium vivax isolates in Thailand. A total of 30 P. vivax
isolates were collected from a malaria endemic area along the Thai-Myanmar border
in Mae Sot district of Thailand. Dried blood spot samples were collected for
analysis of Pvmdr1 and Pvcrt-o polymorphisms. Blood samples (100 Î¼l) were
collected by finger-prick for in vitro chloroquine susceptibility testing by
schizont maturation inhibition assay. Based on the cut-off IC50 of 100 nM, 19
(63.3%) isolates were classified as chloroquine resistant P. vivax isolates.
Seven non-synonymous mutations and 2 synonymous were identified in Pvmdr1 gene.
Y976F and F1076L mutations were detected in 7 (23.3%) and 16 isolates (53.3%),
respectively. Analysis of Pvcrt-o gene revealed that all isolates were wild-type.
Our results suggest that chloroquine resistance gene is now spreading in this
area. Monitoring of chloroquine resistant molecular markers provide a useful tool
for future control of P. vivax malaria.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2015.53.1.43 
PMCID: PMC4384798
PMID: 25748708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

