
1. mBio. 2015 Mar 10;6(2):e00117. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00117-15.

Regulation of Plasmodium yoelii oocyst development by strain- and stage-specific 
small-subunit rRNA.

Qi Y, Zhu F, Eastman RT(1), Fu Y(2), Zilversmit M(1), Pattaradilokrat S, Hong
L(3), Liu S(3), McCutchan TF(4), Pan W(4), Xu W(2), Li J(5), Huang F(6), Su
XZ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, Maryland,
USA.
(2)Department of Pathogenic Biology, The Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing, People's Republic of China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signaling Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian,
People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Pathogen Biology, The Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signaling Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian,
People's Republic of China fushenghster@gmail.com jianli_204@xmu.edu.cn
xsu@niaid.nih.gov.
(6)Department of Pathogenic Biology, The Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing, People's Republic of China fushenghster@gmail.com
jianli_204@xmu.edu.cn xsu@niaid.nih.gov.
(7)fushenghster@gmail.com jianli_204@xmu.edu.cn xsu@niaid.nih.gov.

One unique feature of malaria parasites is the differential transcription of
structurally distinct rRNA (rRNA) genes at different developmental stages: the
A-type genes are transcribed mainly in asexual stages, whereas the S-type genes
are expressed mostly in sexual or mosquito stages. Conclusive functional evidence
of different rRNAs in regulating stage-specific parasite development, however, is
still absent. Here we performed genetic crosses of Plasmodium yoelii parasites
with one parent having an oocyst development defect (ODD) phenotype and another
producing normal oocysts to identify the gene(s) contributing to the ODD. The
parent with ODD--characterized as having small oocysts and lacking infective
sporozoites--was obtained after introduction of a plasmid with a green
fluorescent protein gene into the parasite genome and subsequent passages in
mice. Quantitative trait locus analysis of genome-wide microsatellite genotypes
of 48 progeny from the crosses linked an ~200-kb segment on chromosome 6
containing one of the S-type genes (D-type small subunit rRNA gene [D-ssu]) to
the ODD. Fine mapping of the plasmid integration site, gene expression pattern,
and gene knockout experiments demonstrated that disruption of the D-ssu gene
caused the ODD phenotype. Interestingly, introduction of the D-ssu gene into the 
same parasite strain (self), but not into a different subspecies, significantly
affected or completely ablated oocyst development, suggesting a stage- and
subspecies (strain)-specific regulation of oocyst development by D-ssu. This
study demonstrates that P. yoelii D-ssu is essential for normal oocyst and
sporozoite development and that variation in the D-ssu sequence can have dramatic
effects on parasite development.IMPORTANCE: Malaria parasites are the only known 
organisms that express structurally distinct rRNA genes at different
developmental stages. The differential expression of these genes suggests that
they play unique roles during the complex life cycle of the parasites. Conclusive
functional proof of different rRNAs in regulating parasite development, however, 
is still absent or controversial. Here we functionally demonstrate for the first 
time that a stage-specifically expressed D-type small-subunit rRNA gene (D-ssu)
is essential for oocyst development of the malaria parasite Plasmodium yoelii in 
the mosquito. This study also shows that variations in D-ssu sequence and/or the 
timing of transcription may have profound effects on parasite oocyst development.
The results show that in addition to protein translation, rRNAs of malaria
parasites also regulate parasite development and differentiation in a
strain-specific manner, which can be explored for controlling parasite
transmission.

Copyright Â© 2015 Qi et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00117-15 
PMCID: PMC4453563
PMID: 25759501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

