
1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2015 Apr;28:60-72. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2015.02.009. Epub
2015 Feb 20.

Comparative insight into nucleotide excision repair components of Plasmodium
falciparum.

Tajedin L(1), Anwar M(1), Gupta D(1), Tuteja R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
P.O. Box 10504, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India.
(2)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
P.O. Box 10504, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India. Electronic address:
renututeja@gmail.com.

Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is one of the DNA repair pathways crucial for
maintenance of genome integrity and deals with repair of DNA damages arising due 
to exogenous and endogenous factors. The multi-protein transcription initiation
factor TFIIH plays a critical role in NER and transcription and is highly
conserved throughout evolution. The malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum has
been a challenge for the researchers for a long time because of emergence of drug
resistance. The availability of its genome sequence has opened new avenues for
research. Antimalarial drugs like chloroquine and mefloquine have been reported
to inhibit NER pathway mediated repair reactions and thus promote mutagenesis.
Previous studies have validated existence and implied possible association of
defective or altered DNA repair pathways with development of drug resistant
phenotype in certain P. falciparum strains. We conjecture that a compromised NER 
pathway in combination with other DNA repair pathways might be conducive for the 
emergence and sustenance of drug resistance in P. falciparum. Therefore we
decided to unravel the components of NER pathway in P. falciparum and using
bioinformatics based approaches here we report a genome wide in silico analysis
of NER components from P. falciparum and their comparison with the human host.
Our results reveal that P. falciparum genome contains almost all the components
of NER but we were unable to find clear homologue for p62 and XPC in its genome. 
The structure modeling of all the components further suggests that their
structures are significantly conserved. Furthermore this study lays a foundation 
to perform similar comparative studies between drug resistant and drug sensitive 
strains of parasite in order to understand DNA repair-related mechanisms of drug 
resistance.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2015.02.009 
PMID: 25757193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

