
1. Int J Parasitol. 2015 May;45(6):375-84. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2015.01.008. Epub
2015 Mar 9.

Nycteria parasites of Afrotropical insectivorous bats.

Schaer J(1), Reeder DM(2), Vodzak ME(2), Olival KJ(3), Weber N(4), Mayer F(5),
Matuschewski K(6), Perkins SL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Parasitology Unit, 10117 Berlin,
Germany; Museum für Naturkunde - Leibniz Institute for Research on Evolution and 
Biodiversity, 10115 Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
schaer@mpiib-berlin.mpg.de.
(2)Department of Biology, Bucknell University, Lewisburg, PA 17837, USA.
(3)EcoHealth Alliance, New York, NY 10001, USA.
(4)Institute of Experimental Ecology, University of Ulm, 89069 Ulm, Germany.
(5)Museum für Naturkunde - Leibniz Institute for Research on Evolution and
Biodiversity, 10115 Berlin, Germany.
(6)Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Parasitology Unit, 10117 Berlin,
Germany; Institute of Biology, Humboldt University, 10117 Berlin, Germany.
(7)Sackler Institute for Comparative Genomics, American Museum of Natural
History, New York, NY 10024, USA.

Parasitic protozoan parasites have evolved many co-evolutionary paths towards
stable transmission to their host population. Plasmodium spp., the causative
agents of malaria, and related haemosporidian parasites are dipteran-borne
eukaryotic pathogens that actively invade and use vertebrate erythrocytes for
gametogenesis and asexual development, often resulting in substantial morbidity
and mortality of the infected hosts. Here, we present results of a survey of
insectivorous bats from tropical Africa, including new isolates of species of the
haemosporidian genus Nycteria. A hallmark of these parasites is their capacity to
infect bat species of distinct families of the two evolutionary distant
chiropteran suborders. We did detect Nycteria parasites in both rhinolophid and
nycterid bat hosts in geographically separate areas of Sub-Saharan Africa,
however our molecular phylogenetic analyses support the separation of the
parasites into two distinct clades corresponding to their host genera, suggestive
of ancient co-divergence and low levels of host switching. For one clade of these
parasites, cytochrome b genes could not be amplified and cytochrome oxidase I
sequences showed unusually high rates of evolution, suggesting that the
mitochondrial genome of these parasites may have either been lost or
substantially altered. This haemosporidian parasite-mammalian host system also
highlights that sequential population expansion in the liver and gametocyte
formation is a successful alternative to intermediate erythrocytic replication
cycles.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2015.01.008 
PMID: 25765623  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

