
1. Mutat Res. 2014 Dec;770:54-60. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2014.09.009. Epub 2014 Sep
28.

Emerging importance of mismatch repair components including UvrD helicase and
their cross-talk with the development of drug resistance in malaria parasite.

Ahmad M(1), Tuteja R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
P. O. Box 10504, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India.
(2)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
P. O. Box 10504, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India. Electronic
address: renu@icgeb.res.in.

Human malaria is an important parasitic infection responsible for a significant
number of deaths worldwide, particularly in tropical and subtropical regions. The
recent scenario has worsened mainly because of the emergence of drug-resistant
malaria parasites having the potential to spread across the world. Drug-resistant
parasites possess a defective mismatch repair (MMR); therefore, it is essential
to explore its mechanism in detail to determine the underlying cause. Recently,
artemisinin-resistant parasites have been reported to exhibit nonsynonymous
single nucleotide polymorphisms in genes involved in MMR pathways such as MutL
homolog (MLH) and UvrD. Plasmodium falciparum MLH is an endonuclease required to 
restore the defective MMR in drug-resistant W2 strain of P. falciparum. Although 
the role of helicases in eukaryotic MMR has been questioned, the identification
and characterization of the UvrD helicase and their cross-talk with MLH in P.
falciparum suggests the possible involvement of UvrD in MMR. A comparative
genome-wide analysis revealed the presence of the UvrD helicase in Plasmodium
species, while it is absent in human host. Therefore, PfUvrD may emerge as a
suitable drug target to control malaria. This review study is focused on recent
developments in MMR biochemistry, emerging importance of the UvrD helicase,
possibility of its involvement in MMR and the emerging cross-talk between MMR
components and drug resistance in malaria parasite.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2014.09.009 
PMID: 25771870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

