
1. Parasite. 2015;22:12. doi: 10.1051/parasite/2015012. Epub 2015 Mar 17.

Genetic polymorphism of merozoite surface protein-1 in Plasmodium falciparum
isolates from patients with mild to severe malaria in Libreville, Gabon.

Bouyou-Akotet MK(1), M'Bondoukwé NP(1), Mawili-Mboumba DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Parasitologie-Mycologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université des
Sciences de la Santé, Libreville, Gabon - Unité de Recherche Clinique et
Opérationnelle sur le Paludisme, Hôpital Régional de Melen, BP 4009, Libreville, 
Gabon.

We assessed Plasmodium (P.) falciparum allelic diversity based on clinical
severity and age. The study was conducted from 2011 to 2012 in Libreville, Gabon 
where malaria prevalence was 24.5%. The polymorphism of the merozoite surface
protein-1 (msp1) locus was analyzed in isolates from patients with complicated
and uncomplicated malaria. Blood was collected on filter paper. After DNA
extraction, genotyping of the msp1 gene was performed using nested PCR. The K1,
Ro33, and Mad20 allelic families were detected in 71 (63%), 64 (57%), and 38
(34%) of the 112 analyzed samples, respectively. Overall, 17 K1 and 11 Mad20
alleles were detected. There was no association between msp1 allelic families and
age. Mad20 allelic diversity increased with the severity of malaria. The number
of K1 and Mad20 alleles decreased with age. The multiplicity of infection (MOI)
was 1-6 genotypes and the complexity of infection (COI) 1.8 ± 1. The COI differed
based on age: it was 1.9 (±1.1) in the isolates from adults, 1.8 (±1.1) in those 
from 0-5 year-old children, whereas it tended to be lower (1.6 ± 0.8) in those
from 6-15 year-old children. Extensive genetic diversity is found in P.
falciparum strains circulating in Libreville. The number of specific msp1 alleles
increased with clinical severity, suggesting an association between the diversity
and the severity of malaria.

© M.K. Bouyou-Akotet et al., published by EDP Sciences, 2015.

DOI: 10.1051/parasite/2015012 
PMCID: PMC4365293
PMID: 25786326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

