
1. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jul;12(1):1465-72. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3517. Epub 2015 Mar
20.

Artesunate induces apoptosis and inhibits growth of Eca109 and Ec9706 human
esophageal cancer cell lines in vitro and in vivo.

Liu L(1), Zuo LF(1), Zuo J(1), Wang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of FCM Analysis, Tumor Institute, The Fourth Hospital of Hebei
Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050011, P.R. China.

Esophageal cancer is a common malignant tumor worldwide with a high incidence
rate in China and it is a great threat to human health. Combined modality therapy
is used for chemotherapeutic treatment of esophageal cancer; however, drug
resistance and side effects of the drugs is a major barrier to the success of
chemotherapy. As chemotherapy with common drugs is far from providing
satisfactory clinical outcomes for patients with esophageal cancer, more
efficient drugs are urgently required. Artesunate (Art) is the first-line
treatment option for malaria; however, it was recently revealed that Art has
remarkable anti-tumor activity, making it a novel candidate for cancer
chemotherapy. Although the anti-cancer effects of Art have been well documented, 
its potential against esophageal cancer has rarely been explored. The present
study aimed to investigate the significance and mechanism of the
anti-proliferative activity of Art on esophageal cancer cells in vitro and in
vivo. In the in vitro experiments, Art inhibited the growth as well as induced
cell apoptosis and cell cycle arrest of esophageal cancer cell lines (Eca109 and 
Ec9706) in a concentration-dependent manner. Furthermore, downregulation of
mitochondrial membrane potential, B-cell lymphoma-2 (BCL-2) and CDC25A, as well
as upregulation of BCL-2â€‘associated X protein (Bax) and caspase-3 expression in
Art-treated cells were identified. In addition, an in vivo study showed that Art 
produced a dose-dependent tumor regression in nude mice, while side effects were 
low. The anti-tumor activity of 200 mg/kg Art was similar to that of 3 mg/kg
cisplatin. In conclusion, Art exerted concentration-dependent inhibitory activity
against esophageal cancer in vivo and in vitro by inducing cell apoptosis and
cell cycle arrest through affecting mitochondrial membrane potential, BCL-2, Bax,
caspase-3 and CDC25A.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3517 
PMID: 25816175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

