
1. Int J Parasitol. 2015 Jun;45(7):449-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2015.02.004. Epub
2015 Mar 24.

Dimorphism in genes encoding sexual-stage proteins of Plasmodium ovale curtisi
and Plasmodium ovale wallikeri.

Oguike MC(1), Sutherland CJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infection, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, (LSHTM), UK. Electronic
address: mary.oguike@lshtm.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Immunology and Infection, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, (LSHTM), UK; Public
Health England Malaria Reference Laboratory, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, LSHTM, UK.

Plasmodium ovale curtisi and Plasmodium ovale wallikeri are distinct species of
malaria parasite which are sympatric throughout the tropics, except for the
Americas. Despite this complete overlap in geographic range, these two species do
not recombine. Although morphologically very similar, the two taxa must possess
distinct characters which prevent recombination between them. We hypothesised
that proteins required for sexual reproduction have sufficiently diverged between
the two species to prevent recombination in any mosquito blood meal in which
gametocytes of both species are ingested. In order to investigate possible
barriers to inter-species mating between P. ovale curtisi and P. ovale wallikeri,
homologues of genes encoding sexual stage proteins in other plasmodia were
identified and compared between the two species. Database searches with motifs
for 6-cysteine, Limulus Coagulation factor C domain-containing proteins and other
relevant sexual stage proteins in the genus Plasmodium were performed in the
available P. ovale curtisi partial genome database (Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, UK). Sequence fragments obtained were used as the basis for PCR
walking along each gene of interest in reference isolates of both P. ovale
curtisi and P. ovale wallikeri. Sequence alignment of the homologues of each gene
in each species showed complete dimorphism across all isolates. In conclusion,
substantial divergence between sexual stage proteins in the two P. ovale spp. was
observed, providing further evidence that these do not recombine in nature.
Incompatibility of proteins involved in sexual development and fertilisation thus
remains a plausible explanation for the observed lack of natural recombination
between P. ovale curtisi and P. ovale wallikeri.

Copyright Â© 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2015.02.004 
PMCID: PMC4428623
PMID: 25817462  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

