
1. Infect Immun. 2015 Jun;83(6):2466-74. doi: 10.1128/IAI.03116-14. Epub 2015 Mar
30.

Parity-dependent recognition of DBL1X-3X suggests an important role of the
VAR2CSA high-affinity CSA-binding region in the development of the humoral
response against placental malaria.

Dechavanne S(1), Srivastava A(1), Gangnard S(1), Nunes-Silva S(1), Dechavanne
C(1), Fievet N(2), Deloron P(2), Chêne A(1), Gamain B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm UMR_1134, Paris, France Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 
UMR_S1134, Paris, France Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine, Paris,
France Laboratory of Excellence GR-Ex, Paris, France.
(2)Laboratory of Excellence GR-Ex, Paris, France Institut de Recherche pour le
Développement, UMR_216, Mère et Enfant Face aux Infections Tropicales, Paris,
France PRES Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculté de Pharmacie, Paris, France.
(3)Inserm UMR_1134, Paris, France Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 
UMR_S1134, Paris, France Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine, Paris,
France Laboratory of Excellence GR-Ex, Paris, France Benoit.gamain@inserm.fr.

Plasmodium falciparum multidomain protein VAR2CSA stands today as the leading
vaccine candidate against pregnancy-associated malaria (PAM). Most of the studies
aiming to decrypt how naturally acquired immunity develops have assessed the
immune recognition of individual VAR2CSA Duffy-binding-like (DBL) domains, thus
overlooking the presence of conformational epitopes resulting from the overall
folding of the full-length protein. In order to characterize the development of
humoral immunity toward VAR2CSA, we made use of a large cohort of 293 Senegalese 
pregnant women to assess the level of recognition by plasma IgG of the
full-length VAR2CSA protein of the 3D7 parasite strain (3D7-VAR2CSA), the
CSA-binding multidomains 3D7-DBL1X to -DBL3X (3D7-DBL1X-3X), and the CSA
nonbinding multidomains 3D7-DBL4ε to -DBL6ε (3D7-DBL4ε-6ε), as well as individual
3D7-DBL domains. Our results revealed a parity-dependent recognition of the
full-length 3D7-VAR2CSA and of the CSA-binding region, 3D7-DBL1X-3X. Indeed,
multigravid women possess significantly higher levels of antibodies directed
against these constructs than primigravidae. Our results suggest an important
role of antibodies targeting the CSA-binding region in the development of
immunity against PAM, therefore providing new insights on how natural protection 
might be acquired and further information for the design of VAR2CSA-based
vaccines.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.03116-14 
PMCID: PMC4432739
PMID: 25824842  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

