
1. Vaccine. 2015 Jun 22;33(28):3248-55. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.03.039. Epub
2015 Apr 1.

Induction of CD8(+) T cell responses and protective efficacy following
microneedle-mediated delivery of a live adenovirus-vectored malaria vaccine.

Pearson FE(1), O'Mahony C(2), Moore AC(3), Hill AV(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, United
Kingdom. Electronic address: f.pearson@uq.edu.au.
(2)Tyndall National Institute, Lee Maltings, University College Cork, Cork,
Ireland. Electronic address: conor.omahony@tyndall.ie.
(3)School of Pharmacy, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland; Department of
Pharmacology, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. Electronic address:
anne.moore@ucc.ie.
(4)The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, United
Kingdom. Electronic address: adrian.hill@ndm.ox.ac.uk.

There is an urgent need for improvements in vaccine delivery technologies. This
is particularly pertinent for vaccination programmes within regions of limited
resources, such as those required for adequate provision for disposal of used
needles. Microneedles are micron-sized structures that penetrate the stratum
corneum of the skin, creating temporary conduits for the needle-free delivery of 
drugs or vaccines. Here, we aimed to investigate immunity induced by the
recombinant simian adenovirus-vectored vaccine ChAd63.ME-TRAP; currently
undergoing clinical assessment as a candidate malaria vaccine, when delivered
percutaneously by silicon microneedle arrays. In mice, we demonstrate that
microneedle-mediated delivery of ChAd63.ME-TRAP induced similar numbers of
transgene-specific CD8(+) T cells compared to intradermal (ID) administration
with needle-and-syringe, following a single immunisation and after a ChAd63/MVA
heterologous prime-boost schedule. When mice immunised with ChAd63/MVA were
challenged with live Plasmodium berghei sporozoites, microneedle-mediated
ChAd63.ME-TRAP priming demonstrated equivalent protective efficacy as did ID
immunisation. Furthermore, responses following ChAd63/MVA immunisation correlated
with a specific design parameter of the array used ('total array volume'). The
level of transgene expression at the immunisation site and skin-draining lymph
node (dLN) was also linked to total array volume. These findings have
implications for defining silicon microneedle array design for use with live,
vectored vaccines.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.03.039 
PMID: 25839104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

