
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Aug 18;112(33):10216-23. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1423959112. Epub 2015 Mar 23.

Mitochondrial ATP synthase is dispensable in blood-stage Plasmodium berghei
rodent malaria but essential in the mosquito phase.

Sturm A(1), Mollard V(1), Cozijnsen A(1), Goodman CD(1), McFadden GI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Plant Cell Biology Research Centre, School of BioSciences, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia.
(2)Plant Cell Biology Research Centre, School of BioSciences, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia gim@unimelb.edu.au.

Mitochondrial ATP synthase is driven by chemiosmotic oxidation of pyruvate
derived from glycolysis. Blood-stage malaria parasites eschew chemiosmosis,
instead relying almost solely on glycolysis for their ATP generation, which begs 
the question of whether mitochondrial ATP synthase is necessary during the blood 
stage of the parasite life cycle. We knocked out the mitochondrial ATP synthase β
subunit gene in the rodent malaria parasite, Plasmodium berghei, ablating the
protein that converts ADP to ATP. Disruption of the β subunit gene of the ATP
synthase only marginally reduced asexual blood-stage parasite growth but
completely blocked mouse-to-mouse transmission via Anopheles stephensi
mosquitoes. Parasites lacking the β subunit gene of the ATP synthase generated
viable gametes that fuse and form ookinetes but cannot progress beyond this
stage. Ookinetes lacking the β subunit gene of the ATP synthase had normal
motility but were not viable in the mosquito midgut and never made oocysts or
sporozoites, thereby abrogating transmission to naive mice via mosquito bite. We 
crossed the self-infertile ATP synthase β subunit knockout parasites with a
male-deficient, self-infertile strain of P. berghei, which restored fertility and
production of oocysts and sporozoites, which demonstrates that mitochondrial ATP 
synthase is essential for ongoing viability through the female,
mitochondrion-carrying line of sexual reproduction in P. berghei malaria.
Perturbation of ATP synthase completely blocks transmission to the mosquito
vector and could potentially be targeted for disease control.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1423959112 
PMCID: PMC4547259
PMID: 25831536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

