
1. Infect Immun. 2015 Jun;83(6):2566-74. doi: 10.1128/IAI.02966-14. Epub 2015 Apr
13.

A CLAG3 mutation in an amphipathic transmembrane domain alters malaria parasite
nutrient channels and confers leupeptin resistance.

Sharma P(1), Rayavara K(1), Ito D(1), Basore K(1), Desai SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, USA
sdesai@niaid.nih.gov.

Erythrocytes infected with malaria parasites have increased permeability to ions 
and nutrients, as mediated by the plasmodial surface anion channel (PSAC) and
recently linked to parasite clag3 genes. Although the encoded protein is integral
to the host membrane, its precise contribution to solute transport remains
unclear because it lacks conventional transmembrane domains and does not have
homology to ion channel proteins in other organisms. Here, we identified a
probable CLAG3 transmembrane domain adjacent to a variant extracellular motif.
Helical-wheel analysis revealed strict segregation of polar and hydrophobic
residues to opposite faces of a predicted α-helical transmembrane domain,
suggesting that the domain lines a water-filled pore. A single CLAG3 mutation
(A1210T) in a leupeptin-resistant PSAC mutant falls within this transmembrane
domain and may affect pore structure. Allelic-exchange transfection and
site-directed mutagenesis revealed that this mutation alters solute selectivity
in the channel. The A1210T mutation also reduces the blocking affinity of PSAC
inhibitors that bind on opposite channel faces, consistent with global changes in
channel structure. Transfected parasites carrying this mutation survived a
leupeptin challenge significantly better than a transfection control did. Thus,
the A1210T mutation contributes directly to both altered PSAC activity and
leupeptin resistance. These findings reveal the molecular basis of a novel
antimalarial drug resistance mechanism, provide a framework for determining the
channel's composition and structure, and should guide the development of
therapies targeting the PSAC.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.02966-14 
PMCID: PMC4432768
PMID: 25870226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

