
1. Malar J. 2015 Feb 14;14:75. doi: 10.1186/s12936-015-0588-4.

Assessment of molecular markers for anti-malarial drug resistance after the
introduction and scale-up of malaria control interventions in western Kenya.

Shah M(1)(2), Omosun Y(3)(4), Lal A(5)(6), Odero C(7), Gatei W(8), Otieno K(9),
Gimnig JE(10), ter Kuile F(11), Hawley WA(12)(13), Nahlen B(14), Kariuki S(15),
Walker E(16), Slutsker L(17), Hamel M(18)(19), Shi YP(20).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Branch and Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for
Global Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
MShah2@cdc.gov.
(2)Atlanta Research and Education Foundation, Atlanta, GA, USA. MShah2@cdc.gov.
(3)Malaria Branch and Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for
Global Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
gup4@cdc.gov.
(4)Atlanta Research and Education Foundation, Atlanta, GA, USA. gup4@cdc.gov.
(5)Malaria Branch and Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for
Global Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
Ashima_Lal11@gmail.com.
(6)Atlanta Research and Education Foundation, Atlanta, GA, USA.
Ashima_Lal11@gmail.com.
(7)Center for Global Health Research, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Kisumu,
Kenya. COdero@kemricdc.org.
(8)Malaria Branch and Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for
Global Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
wgg3@cdc.gov.
(9)Center for Global Health Research, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Kisumu,
Kenya. KOtieno@kemricdc.org.
(10)Malaria Branch and Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for
Global Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
hzg1@cdc.gov.
(11)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, UK.
Feiko.TerKuile@lstmed.ac.uk.
(12)Malaria Branch and Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for
Global Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
byh0@cdc.gov.
(13)UNICEF, Child Survival and Development Cluster, Jakarta, Indonesia.
byh0@cdc.gov.
(14)President's Malaria Initiative, Washington, DC, USA. bnahlen@usaid.gov.
(15)Center for Global Health Research, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Kisumu, 
Kenya. SKariuki@kemricdc.org.
(16)Michigan State University, East Lansing, USA. walker@msu.edu.
(17)Malaria Branch and Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for
Global Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
lms5@cdc.gov.
(18)Malaria Branch and Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for
Global Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
mlh8@cdc.gov.
(19)Center for Global Health Research, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Kisumu, 
Kenya. mlh8@cdc.gov.
(20)Malaria Branch and Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for
Global Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
yps0@cdc.gov.

BACKGROUND: Although it is well known that drug pressure selects for
drug-resistant parasites, the role of transmission reduction by
insecticide-treated bed nets (ITNs) on drug resistance remains unclear. In this
study, the drug resistance profile of current and previous first-line
anti-malarials in Kenya was assessed within the context of drug policy change and
scale-up of ITNs. National first-line treatment changed from chloroquine (CQ) to 
sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) in 1998 and to artemether-lumefantrine (AL) in
2004. ITN use was scaled-up in the Asembo, Gem and Karemo areas of western Kenya 
in 1997, 1999 and 2006, respectively.
METHODS: Smear-positive samples (N = 253) collected from a 2007 cross-sectional
survey among children in Asembo, Gem and Karemo were genotyped for mutations in
pfcrt and pfmdr1 (CQ), dhfr and dhps (SP), and at pfmdr-N86 and the gene copy
number in pfmdr1 (lumefantrine). Results were compared among the three geographic
areas in 2007 and to retrospective molecular data from children in Asembo in
2001.
RESULTS: In 2007, 69 and 85% of samples harboured the pfmdr1-86Y mutation and
dhfr/dhps quintuple mutant, respectively, with no significant differences by
study area. However, the prevalence of the pfcrt-76T mutation differed
significantly among areas (p <0.02), between 76 and 94%, with the highest
prevalence in Asembo. Several 2007 samples carried mutations at dhfr-164L,
dhps-436A, or dhps-613T. From 2001 to 2007, there were significant increases in
the pfcrt-76T mutation from 82 to 94% (p <0.03), dhfr/dhps quintuple mutant from 
62 to 82% (p <0.03), and an increase in the septuple CQ and SP combined mutant
haplotype, K 76 Y 86 I 51 R 59 N 108 G 437 E 540 , from 28 to 39%. The prevalence
of the pfmdr1-86Y mutation remained unchanged. All samples were single copy for
pfmdr1.
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular markers associated with lumefantrine resistance were not
detected in 2007. More recent samples will be needed to detect any selective
effects by AL. The prevalence of CQ and SP resistance markers increased from 2001
to 2007 in the absence of changes in transmission intensity. In 2007, only the
prevalence of pfcrt-76T mutation differed among study areas of varying
transmission intensity. Resistant parasites were most likely selected by
sustained drug pressure from the continued use of CQ, SP, and mechanistically
similar drugs, such as amodiaquine and cotrimoxazole. There was no clear evidence
that differences in transmission intensity, as a result of ITN scale-up,
influenced the prevalence of drug resistance molecular markers.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-015-0588-4 
PMCID: PMC4331436
PMID: 25889220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

