
1. Cytotechnology. 2016 Aug;68(4):1161-70. doi: 10.1007/s10616-015-9874-9. Epub 2015
Apr 17.

Cytotoxicity, genotoxicity and mechanism of action (via gene expression analysis)
of the indole alkaloid aspidospermine (antiparasitic) extracted from Aspidosperma
polyneuron in HepG2 cells.

Coatti GC(1), Marcarini JC(2), Sartori D(2), Fidelis QC(3), Ferreira DT(3),
Mantovani MS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Pesquisas do Genoma Humano e Células Tronco, Departamento de
Genética e Biologia Evolutiva, Biosciences Institute, Universidade de São Paulo
(USP), Rua do Matão, 106, Butantã, São Paulo, SP, 05508-900, Brazil.
giulianacastello_bio@yahoo.com.br.
(2)Departamento de Biologia Geral, Universidade Estadual de Londrina (UEL),
Londrina (PR), Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Química, Universidade Estadual de Londrina (UEL), Londrina
(PR), Brazil.

Aspidospermine is an indole alkaloid with biological properties associated with
combating parasites included in the genera Plasmodium, Leishmania and
Trypanossoma. The present study evaluated the cytotoxicity (resazurin test),
genotoxicity (comet assay) and mechanism of action (gene expression analysis via 
qRT-PCR) of this alkaloid in human HepG2 cells. The results demonstrated that
treatment with aspidospermine was both cytotoxic (starting at 75 μM) and
genotoxic (starting at 50 μM). There was no significant modulation of the
expression of the following genes: GSTP1 and GPX1 (xenobiotic metabolism); CAT
(oxidative stress); TP53 and CCNA2 (cell cycle); HSPA5, ERN1, EIF2AK3 and TRAF2
(endoplasmic reticulum stress); CASP8, CASP9, CASP3, CASP7, BCL-2, BCL-XL BAX and
BAX (apoptosis); and PCBP4, ERCC4, OGG1, RAD21 and MLH1 (DNA repair). At a
concentration of 50 μM (non-cytotoxic, but genotoxic), there was a significant
increase in the expression of CYP1A1 (xenobiotic metabolism) and APC (cell
cycle), and at a concentration of 100 μM, a significant increase in the
expression of CYP1A1 (xenobiotic metabolism), GADD153 (endoplasmic reticulum
stress) and SOD (oxidative stress) was detected, with repression of the
expression of GR (xenobiotic metabolism and oxidative stress). The results of
treatment with aspidospermine at a 100 μM concentration (the dose indicated in
the literature to achieve 89 % reduction of the growth of L. amazonensis) suggest
that increased oxidative stress and an unfolded protein response (UPR) occurred
in HepG2 cells. For the therapeutic use of aspidospermine (antiparasitic),
chemical alteration of the molecule to achieve a lower cytotoxicity/genotoxicity 
in host cells is recommended.

DOI: 10.1007/s10616-015-9874-9 
PMCID: PMC4960164
PMID: 25894792 

