
1. Infect Immun. 2015 Jul;83(7):2771-84. doi: 10.1128/IAI.03129-14. Epub 2015 Apr
27.

Disruption of Parasite hmgb2 Gene Attenuates Plasmodium berghei ANKA
Pathogenicity.

Briquet S(1), Lawson-Hogban N(2), Boisson B(3), Soares MP(4), Péronet R(5), Smith
L(5), Ménard R(3), Huerre M(6), Mécheri S(5), Vaquero C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Universités, Centre d'Immunologie et des Maladies Infectieuses
(CIMI-Paris), Paris, France INSERM, U1135, CIMI-Paris, Paris, France CNRS, ERL
8255, CIMI-Paris, Paris, France sylvie.briquet@upmc.fr catherine.vaquero@upmc.fr.
(2)Sorbonne Universités, Centre d'Immunologie et des Maladies Infectieuses
(CIMI-Paris), Paris, France INSERM, U1135, CIMI-Paris, Paris, France CNRS, ERL
8255, CIMI-Paris, Paris, France.
(3)Unité de Biologie et Génétique du Paludisme, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(4)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.
(5)Unité de Biologie des Interactions Hôtes Parasites, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France Centre National Scientifique, Unité de Recherche Associée 2581, Paris,
France.
(6)Unité de Recherche et Expertises en Histotechnologie et Pathologie, Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France Centre National Scientifique, Unité de Recherche Associée 
2581, Paris, France.

Eukaryotic high-mobility-group-box (HMGB) proteins are nuclear factors involved
in chromatin remodeling and transcription regulation. When released into the
extracellular milieu, HMGB1 acts as a proinflammatory cytokine that plays a
central role in the pathogenesis of several immune-mediated inflammatory
diseases. We found that the Plasmodium genome encodes two genuine HMGB factors,
Plasmodium HMGB1 and HMGB2, that encompass, like their human counterparts, a
proinflammatory domain. Given that these proteins are released from parasitized
red blood cells, we then hypothesized that Plasmodium HMGB might contribute to
the pathogenesis of experimental cerebral malaria (ECM), a lethal
neuroinflammatory syndrome that develops in C57BL/6 (susceptible) mice infected
with Plasmodium berghei ANKA and that in many aspects resembles human cerebral
malaria elicited by P. falciparum infection. The pathogenesis of experimental
cerebral malaria was suppressed in C57BL/6 mice infected with P. berghei ANKA
lacking the hmgb2 gene (Δhmgb2 ANKA), an effect associated with a reduction of
histological brain lesions and with lower expression levels of several
proinflammatory genes. The incidence of ECM in pbhmgb2-deficient mice was
restored by the administration of recombinant PbHMGB2. Protection from
experimental cerebral malaria in Δhmgb2 ANKA-infected mice was associated with
reduced sequestration in the brain of CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells, including CD8(+)
granzyme B(+) and CD8(+) IFN-γ(+) cells, and, to some extent, neutrophils. This
was consistent with a reduced parasite sequestration in the brain, lungs, and
spleen, though to a lesser extent than in wild-type P. berghei ANKA-infected
mice. In summary, Plasmodium HMGB2 acts as an alarmin that contributes to the
pathogenesis of cerebral malaria.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.03129-14 
PMCID: PMC4468538
PMID: 25916985  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

