
1. J Immunol. 2015 Jun 1;194(11):5346-54. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1403216. Epub 2015
Apr 24.

Early effector cells survive the contraction phase in malaria infection and
generate both central and effector memory T cells.

Opata MM(1), Carpio VH(2), Ibitokou SA(1), Dillon BE(1), Obiero JM(1), Stephens
R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555; and.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555; and Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555; and Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555
rostephe@utmb.edu.

CD4 T cells orchestrate immunity against blood-stage malaria. However, a major
challenge in designing vaccines to the disease is poor understanding of the
requirements for the generation of protective memory T cells (Tmem) from
responding effector T cells (Teff) in chronic parasite infection. In this study, 
we use a transgenic mouse model with T cells specific for the merozoite surface
protein (MSP)-1 of Plasmodium chabaudi to show that activated T cells generate
three distinct Teff subsets with progressive activation phenotypes. The earliest 
observed Teff subsets (CD127(-)CD62L(hi)CD27(+)) are less divided than CD62L(lo) 
Teff and express memory genes. Intermediate (CD62L(lo)CD27(+)) effector subsets
include the most multicytokine-producing T cells, whereas fully activated
(CD62L(lo)CD27(-)) late effector cells have a terminal Teff phenotype (PD-1(+),
Fas(hi), AnnexinV(+)). We show that although IL-2 promotes expansion, it actually
slows terminal effector differentiation. Using adoptive transfer, we show that
only early Teff survive the contraction phase and generate the terminal late Teff
subsets, whereas in uninfected recipients, they become both central and effector 
Tmem. Furthermore, we show that progression toward full Teff activation is
promoted by increased duration of infection, which in the long-term promotes Tem 
differentiation. Therefore, we have defined markers of progressive activation of 
CD4 Teff at the peak of malaria infection, including a subset that survives the
contraction phase to make Tmem, and show that Ag and cytokine levels during CD4 T
cell expansion influence the proportion of activated cells that can survive
contraction and generate memory in malaria infection.

Copyright Â© 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1403216 
PMCID: PMC4433766
PMID: 25911759  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

