
1. Korean J Parasitol. 2015 Apr;53(2):177-87. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2015.53.2.177. Epub
2015 Apr 22.

Allelic Diversity and Geographical Distribution of the Gene Encoding Plasmodium
falciparum Merozoite Surface Protein-3 in Thailand.

Sawaswong V(1), Simpalipan P(1), Siripoon N(2), Harnyuttanakorn P(1),
Pattaradilokrat S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok
10330, Thailand.
(2)College of Public Health Sciences, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330,
Thailand.

Merozoite surface proteins (MSPs) of malaria parasites play critical roles during
the erythrocyte invasion and so are potential candidates for malaria vaccine
development. However, because MSPs are often under strong immune selection, they 
can exhibit extensive genetic diversity. The gene encoding the merozoite surface 
protein-3 (MSP-3) of Plasmodium falciparum displays 2 allelic types, K1 and 3D7. 
In Thailand, the allelic frequency of the P. falciparum msp-3 gene was evaluated 
in a single P. falciparum population in Tak at the Thailand and Myanmar border.
However, no study has yet looked at the extent of genetic diversity of the msp-3 
gene in P. falciparum populations in other localities. Here, we genotyped the
msp-3 alleles of 63 P. falciparum samples collected from 5 geographical
populations along the borders of Thailand with 3 neighboring countries (Myanmar, 
Laos, and Cambodia). Our study indicated that the K1 and 3D7 alleles coexisted,
but at different proportions in different Thai P. falciparum populations. K1 was 
more prevalent in populations at the Thailand-Myanmar and Thailand-Cambodia
borders, whilst 3D7 was more prevalent at the Thailand-Laos border. Global
analysis of the msp-3 allele frequencies revealed that proportions of K1 and 3D7 
alleles of msp-3 also varied in different continents, suggesting the divergence
of malaria parasite populations. In conclusion, the variation in the msp-3
allelic patterns of P. falciparum in Thailand provides fundamental knowledge for 
inferring the P. falciparum population structure and for the best design of msp-3
based malaria vaccines.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2015.53.2.177 
PMCID: PMC4416369
PMID: 25925176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

