
1. PLoS One. 2015 May 4;10(5):e0125358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125358.
eCollection 2015.

Identification of Plasmodium falciparum DNA Repair Protein Mre11 with an
Evolutionarily Conserved Nuclease Function.

Badugu SB(1), Nabi SA(1), Vaidyam P(1), Laskar S(2), Bhattacharyya S(2),
Bhattacharyya MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad, 
Hyderabad, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences,
University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India.

The eukaryotic Meiotic Recombination protein 11 (Mre11) plays pivotal roles in
the DNA damage response (DDR). Specifically, Mre11 senses and signals DNA double 
strand breaks (DSB) and facilitates their repair through effector proteins
belonging to either homologous recombination (HR) or non-homologous end joining
(NHEJ) repair mechanisms. In the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, HR
and alternative-NHEJ have been identified; however, little is known about the
upstream factors involved in the DDR of this organism. In this report, we
identify a putative ortholog of Mre11 in P. falciparum (PfalMre11) that shares
22% sequence similarity to human Mre11. Homology modeling reveals striking
structural resemblance of the predicted PfalMre11 nuclease domain to the nuclease
domain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Mre11 (ScMre11). Complementation analyses
reveal functional conservation of PfalMre11 nuclease activity as demonstrated by 
the ability of the PfalMre11 nuclease domain, in conjunction with the C-terminal 
domain of ScMre11, to functionally complement an mre11 deficient yeast strain.
Functional complementation was virtually abrogated by an amino acid substitution 
in the PfalMre11 nuclease domain (D398N). PfalMre11 is abundant in the
mitotically active trophozoite and schizont stages of P. falciparum and is
up-regulated in response to DNA damage, suggesting a role in the DDR. PfalMre11
exhibits physical interaction with PfalRad50. In addition, yeast 2-hybrid studies
show that PfalMre11 interacts with ScRad50 and ScXrs2, two important components
of the well characterized Mre11-Rad50-Xrs2 complex which is involved in DDR
signaling and repair in S. cerevisiae, further supporting a role for PfalMre11 in
the DDR. Taken together, these findings provide evidence that PfalMre11 is an
evolutionarily conserved component of the DDR in Plasmodium.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125358 
PMCID: PMC4418825
PMID: 25938776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

