
1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 7;290(32):19496-511. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.588129. Epub
2015 May 10.

A Sporozoite- and Liver Stage-expressed Tryptophan-rich Protein Plays an
Auxiliary Role in Plasmodium Liver Stage Development and Is a Potential Vaccine
Candidate.

Jaijyan DK(1), Singh H(1), Singh AP(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Infectious Diseases Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology,
Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India.
(2)From the Infectious Diseases Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology,
Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India singhap@nii.res.in.

The liver stages of the malaria parasite are clinically silent and constitute
ideal targets for causal prophylactic drugs and vaccines. Cellular and molecular 
events responsible for liver stage development are poorly characterized. Here, we
show that sporozoite, liver stage tryptophan-rich protein (SLTRiP) forms large
multimers. Mice immunized with a purified recombinant SLTRiP protein gave high
antibody titers in both inbred and outbred mice. Immunized mice showed highly
significant levels of protection upon challenge with sporozoites and exhibited
10,000-fold fewer parasite 18S-rRNA copy numbers in their livers. The protection 
offered by immunization with SLTRiP came mainly from T-cells, and antibodies had 
little role to play despite their high titers. Immunofluorescence assays showed
that SLTRiP is expressed in the sporozoite and early to late liver stages of
malaria parasites. SLTRiP protein is exported to the cytosol of infected host
cells during the early hours of parasite infection. Parasites deficient in SLTRiP
were moderately defective in liver stage parasite development. A transcriptome
profile of SLTRiP-deficient parasite-infected hepatocytes highlighted that SLTRiP
interferes with multiple pathways in the host cell. We have demonstrated a role
for SLTRiP in sporozoites and the liver stage of malaria parasites.

Â© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.588129 
PMCID: PMC4528115
PMID: 25960542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

