
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2015 Jul;53(7):2251-7. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00542-15. Epub 2015 May
13.

Simple Real-Time PCR and Amplicon Sequencing Method for Identification of
Plasmodium Species in Human Whole Blood.

Lefterova MI(1), Budvytiene I(2), Sandlund J(3), Färnert A(4), Banaei N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, USA martinal@stanford.edu niazbanaei@stanford.edu.
(2)Clinical Microbiology Laboratory, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, USA.
(4)Infectious Diseases Unit, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institute, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, USA Clinical Microbiology Laboratory, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California, USA Department of Medicine, Division of
Infectious Diseases and Geographic Medicine, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California, USA martinal@stanford.edu
niazbanaei@stanford.edu.

Malaria is the leading identifiable cause of fever in returning travelers.
Accurate Plasmodium species identification has therapy implications for P. vivax 
and P. ovale, which have dormant liver stages requiring primaquine. Compared to
microscopy, nucleic acid tests have improved specificity for species
identification and higher sensitivity for mixed infections. Here, we describe a
SYBR green-based real-time PCR assay for Plasmodium species identification from
whole blood, which uses a panel of reactions to detect species-specific non-18S
rRNA gene targets. A pan-Plasmodium 18S rRNA target is also amplified to allow
species identification or confirmation by sequencing if necessary. An evaluation 
of assay accuracy, performed on 76 clinical samples (56 positives using thin
smear microscopy as the reference method and 20 negatives), demonstrated clinical
sensitivities of 95.2% for P. falciparum (20/21 positives detected) and 100% for 
the Plasmodium genus (52/52), P. vivax (20/20), P. ovale (9/9), and P. malariae
(6/6). The sensitivity of the P. knowlesi-specific PCR was evaluated using spiked
whole blood samples (100% [10/10 detected]). The specificities of the real-time
PCR primers were 94.2% for P. vivax (49/52) and 100% for P. falciparum (51/51),
P. ovale (62/62), P. malariae (69/69), and P. knowlesi (52/52). Thirty-three
specimens were used to test species identification by sequencing the
pan-Plasmodium 18S rRNA PCR product, with correct identification in all cases.
The real-time PCR assay also identified two samples with mixed P. falciparum and 
P. ovale infection, which was confirmed by sequencing. The assay described here
can be integrated into a malaria testing algorithm in low-prevalence areas,
allowing definitive Plasmodium species identification shortly after malaria
diagnosis by microscopy.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00542-15 
PMCID: PMC4473218
PMID: 25972416  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

