
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2015 May;201(1):5-15. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2015.05.004. Epub 2015 May 15.

Plasmodium falciparum Plasmepsin V (PfPMV): Insights into recombinant expression,
substrate specificity and active site structure.

Boonyalai N(1), Sittikul P(2), Yuvaniyama J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Special Research Unit for Protein Engineering
and Protein Bioinformatics, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, 50 Ngam
Wong Wan road, Lat Yao, Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900, Thailand; Center of Excellence 
for Innovation in Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, 50 Ngam
Wong Wan road, Lat Yao, Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900, Thailand. Electronic address:
nonlawat.b@ku.ac.th.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Special Research Unit for Protein Engineering
and Protein Bioinformatics, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, 50 Ngam
Wong Wan road, Lat Yao, Chatuchak, Bangkok 10900, Thailand.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Center for Excellence in Protein Structure and 
Function, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Rama 6 road, Phayathai, Bangkok
10400, Thailand.

Plasmepsin V from Plasmodium falciparum (PfPMV) is responsible for the cleavage
of the Plasmodium export element (PEXEL) motif at the N-terminus of several
hundreds of the exported proteins. PfPMV is necessary for parasite viability and 
has become a novel promising target for antimalarial therapy. The first
recombinant expression of soluble, active PfPMV as thioredoxin fusion proteins is
reported herein. Two truncated forms of PfPMV were fused to thioredoxin (Trx) to 
generate Trx-PfPMVp37 and Trx-PfPMVm84. The fusion proteins were successfully
purified using Ni(2+) affinity chromatography in combination with ATP treatment
to eliminate Escherichia coli HSP60 contaminant. Trx-PfPMVm84 could hydrolyze the
PEXEL-containing peptides more efficiently than Trx-PfPMVp37. Interestingly, both
Trx-PfPMVs preferred to cleave PfEMP2 peptide over HRPII peptide. The replacement
of Ser with Val or Glu at P1' position created a substrate with 75% reduction in 
the enzyme activity, whereas the substitution of Ile with Lys or Glu at P2
position reduced the cleavage efficiency by 30%. The activity of Trx-PfPMVm84 was
inhibited by PMSF and nelfinavir but not by pepstatin A. After the removal of Trx
domain, activities of both enzymes toward PfEMP2 and HRPII peptides were fitted
to the Michaelis-Menten model to determine kinetic parameters. The Km values
toward both peptides were apparently much lower than the previously reported data
although with similar kcat values. Along with an improved PfPMV preparation
protocol, these findings have provided insights into its substrate specificity at
P2 and P1' positions as well as interactions among the enzyme, substrates, and
inhibitors.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2015.05.004 
PMID: 25986559  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

