
1. J Exp Biol. 2015 May 15;218(Pt 10):1478-86. doi: 10.1242/jeb.118570.

Characterization of the target of ivermectin, the glutamate-gated chloride
channel, from Anopheles gambiae.

Meyers JI(1), Gray M(2), Kuklinski W(2), Johnson LB(3), Snow CD(3), Black WC
4th(2), Partin KM(4), Foy BD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, 1617 Campus
Delivery, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1617, USA Jacob.I.Meyers@gmail.com.
(2)Arthropod-borne and Infectious Diseases Laboratory, Department of
Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, Colorado State University, 1692 Campus
Delivery, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1692, USA.
(3)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Colorado State University, 
1370 Campus Delivery, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1370, USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, 1617 Campus
Delivery, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1617, USA.

The use of insecticide-treated nets and indoor residual insecticides targeting
adult mosquito vectors is a key element in malaria control programs. However,
mosquito resistance to the insecticides used in these applications threatens
malaria control efforts. Recently, the mass drug administration of ivermectin
(IVM) has been shown to kill Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes and disrupt Plasmodium 
falciparum transmission in the field. We cloned the molecular target of IVM from 
A. gambiae, the glutamate-gated chloride channel (AgGluCl), and characterized its
transcriptional patterns, protein expression and functional responses to
glutamate and IVM. AgGluCl cloning revealed an unpredicted fourth splice isoform 
as well as a novel exon and splice site. The predicted gene products contained
heterogeneity in the N-terminal extracellular domain and the intracellular loop
region. Responses to glutamate and IVM were measured using two-electrode voltage 
clamp on Xenopus laevis oocytes expressing AgGluCl. IVM induced non-persistent
currents in AgGluCl-a1 and did not potentiate glutamate responses. In contrast,
AgGluCl-b was insensitive to IVM, suggesting that the AgGluCl gene could produce 
IVM-sensitive and -insensitive homomultimers from alternative splicing. AgGluCl
isoform-specific transcripts were measured across tissues, ages, blood feeding
status and sex, and were found to be differentially transcribed across these
physiological variables. Lastly, we stained adult, female A. gambiae for GluCl
expression. The channel was expressed in the antenna, Johnston's organ,
supraesophageal ganglion and thoracic ganglia. In summary, we have characterized 
the first GluCl from a mosquito, A. gambiae, and described its unique activity
and expression with respect to it as the target of the insecticide IVM.

Â© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jeb.118570 
PMCID: PMC4448665
PMID: 25994631  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

