
1. Parasitol Int. 2015 Oct;64(5):369-76. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2015.05.013. Epub
2015 May 22.

In vivo study on splenomegaly inhibition by genistein in Plasmodium
berghei-infected mice.

Ha YR(1), Kang YJ(2), Lee SJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Integrative Bioscience and Bioengineering, Pohang University of
Science and Technology, Pohang 790-784, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Chosun University, Gwangju 501-759,
Republic of Korea.
(3)Center for Biofluid and Biomimic Research, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology, San 31, Hyojadong,
Namgu, Pohang, Kyungbook 790-784, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
sjlee@postech.ac.kr.

Spleen plays an important role in removing old and damaged red blood cells and
malaria-infected erythrocytes. When malaria parasites invade the spleen and
induce splenomegaly, splenic function tends to be impaired. Thus, the inhibition 
of splenomegaly is strongly required to protect the spleen. In this study,
malaria-induced splenomegaly is inhibited by injecting genistein into a
Plasmodium berghei-infected ICR mouse. To explain this phenomenon, the effect of 
genistein in spleen and liver of malaria-infected mice was evaluated by
histological examination. Malaria parasites disrupted splenic architecture. After
treating genistein, the disrupted architecture in which red and white pulp
regions were clearly separated in recovered to uninfected ones. Changes in
biophysical properties of blood were studied by measuring the viscosity of blood 
collected from malaria-infected and uninfected mice using a microfluidic
viscometer. Genistein also had a negligible influence on variation in blood
viscosity. The enzymatic activity and expression pattern of proteins were then
investigated to explain the genistein effect on malaria-induced splenomegaly.
Genistein is a potential drug for splenomegaly in P. berghei-infected mouse.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2015.05.013 
PMID: 26004668  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

