
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2015 Oct;52(2):172-81. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2015.05.004. Epub
2015 May 21.

Plasmodium berghei induced priming in Anopheles albimanus independently of
bacterial co-infection.

Contreras-Garduño J(1), Rodríguez MC(2), Hernández-Martínez S(2),
Martínez-Barnetche J(2), Alvarado-Delgado A(2), Izquierdo J(2), Herrera-Ortiz
A(2), Moreno-García M(2), Velazquez-Meza ME(2), Valverde V(2), Argotte-Ramos
R(2), Rodríguez MH(3), Lanz-Mendoza H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación Sobre Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional de 
Salud Pública, Av. Universidad 655, C. P. 62508 Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico;
Departamento de Biología, División de Ciencias Naturales y Exactas, Universidad
de Guanajuato, Noria Alta s/n, Noria Alta, 36050 Guanajuato, Guanajuato, Mexico.
(2)Centro de Investigación Sobre Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional de 
Salud Pública, Av. Universidad 655, C. P. 62508 Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico.
(3)Centro de Investigación Sobre Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional de 
Salud Pública, Av. Universidad 655, C. P. 62508 Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico.
Electronic address: mhenry@correo.insp.mx.
(4)Centro de Investigación Sobre Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional de 
Salud Pública, Av. Universidad 655, C. P. 62508 Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico.
Electronic address: humberto@insp.mx.

Priming in invertebrates is the acquired capacity to better combat a pathogen due
to a previous exposure to sub-lethal doses of the same organism. It is proposed
to be functionally analogous to immune memory in vertebrates. Previous studies
with Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes provide evidence that the inhibitory response
to a second challenge by the malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei resulted from a 
sustained activation of hemocytes by midgut bacteria. These bacteria probably
accessed the hemolymph during a first aborted infection through lesions produced 
by parasites invading the midgut. Since the mosquito immune responses to midgut
bacteria and Plasmodium overlap, it is difficult to determine the priming
responses of each. We herein document priming induced in the aseptic An.
albimanus midgut by P. berghei, probably independent of the immune response
induced by midgut bacteria. This idea is further evidenced by experiments with
Pbs 25-28 knock out parasites (having an impaired capacity for invading the
mosquito midgut) and dead ookinetes. Priming protection against a homologous
challenge with P. berghei lasted up to 12 days. There was greater incorporation
of 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine into midgut cell nuclei (indicative of DNA synthesis
without mitosis) and increased transcription of hnt (a gene required for the
endocycle of midgut cells) in primed versus unprimed mosquitoes, suggesting that 
endoreplication was the underlying mechanism of priming. Moreover, the
transcription of hnt and antimicrobial peptides related to an anti-Plasmodium
response (attacin, cecropin and gambicin) was enhanced in a biphasic rather than 
sustained response after priming An. albimanus with P. berghei.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2015.05.004 
PMID: 26004500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

