
1. Acta Trop. 2015 Sep;149:59-63. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2015.05.013. Epub 2015 
May 19.

Survey of chloroquine-resistant mutations in the Plasmodium falciparum pfcrt and 
pfmdr-1 genes in Hadhramout, Yemen.

Bamaga OA(1), Mahdy MA(2), Lim YA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; Tropical Disease Research Center, University of Science
and Technology, Sana'a, Yemen; Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine,
Sana'a University, Yemen. Electronic address: alsharaby9@yahoo.com.
(3)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Electronic address: limailian@um.edu.my.

Malaria is still a major public health problem in Yemen. More than 95% of the
malaria cases are due to Plasmodium ‎falciparum‎. Recently in Yemen, the
antimalarial treatment policy was changed from chloroquine (CQ) to artemisinin
combination therapy (ACTs). However, CQ is still available and prescribed in the 
Yemeni market. The persistence of CQ resistance will be prolonged if the shift to
ACT and the simultaneous withdrawal of CQ are not rigorously implemented. The aim
of the current survey is to detect chloroquine-resistant mutations in P.
falciparum chloroquine-resistance transporter (pfcrt) and P. falciparum
multi-drug resistance-1 (pfmdr1) genes. These data will be important for future
monitoring and assessment of antimalarial drug policy in Yemen. Blood specimens
were collected from 735 individuals from different districts of the Hadhramout
province, Yemen by house-to-house visit. Mutation-specific nested polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) and restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP)
methods were used to investigate the mutations in the pfmdr1(codons 86 and 1246) 
and pfcrt (codons 76, 271, 326, 356 and 371) genes. The overall prevalence of
pfcrt mutations at codons 76, 271, 326 and 371 were 50.4%, 58.7%, 54.3% and
44.9%, respectively. All isolates had wild-type pfcrt 356 allele. The majority of
pfmdr1 86 alleles (83.3%) and all pfmdr1 1246 alleles were wild type. There was
no association between pfcrt mutations and symptomatology, gender and age groups.
In conclusion, point mutations in codons 76, 271, 326 and 371 of pfcrt of P.
falciparum are high suggesting a sustained high CQ resistance even after 4 years 
of shifting to ACTs. These findings warrant complete withdrawal of CQ use from
the Yemeni market for P. falciparum and careful usage of CQ for treating
Plasmodium vivax.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2015.05.013 
PMID: 26001972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

