
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 4;10(6):e0128507. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128507.
eCollection 2015.

Genome-Wide Collation of the Plasmodium falciparum WDR Protein Superfamily
Reveals Malarial Parasite-Specific Features.

Chahar P(1), Kaushik M(1), Gill SS(1), Gakhar SK(1), Gopalan N(2), Datt M(3),
Sharma A(3), Gill R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biotechnology, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, Haryana,
India.
(2)DRDO-BU Centre for Life Sciences, Bharathiar University Campus, Coimbatore,
Tamil Nadu, India.
(3)Structural and Computational Biology Group, International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi, India.

Despite a significant drop in malaria deaths during the past decade, malaria
continues to be one of the biggest health problems around the globe. WD40 repeats
(WDRs) containing proteins comprise one of the largest and functionally diverse
protein superfamily in eukaryotes, acting as scaffolds for assembling large
protein complexes. In the present study, we report an extensive in silico
analysis of the WDR gene family in human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. 
Our genome-wide identification has revealed 80 putative WDR genes in P.
falciparum (PfWDRs). Five distinct domain compositions were discovered in
Plasmodium as compared to the human host. Notably, 31 PfWDRs were
annotated/re-annotated on the basis of their orthologs in other species.
Interestingly, most PfWDRs were larger as compared to their human homologs
highlighting the presence of parasite-specific insertions. Fifteen PfWDRs
appeared specific to the Plasmodium with no assigned orthologs. Expression
profiling of PfWDRs revealed a mixture of linear and nonlinear relationships
between transcriptome and proteome, and only nine PfWDRs were found to be
stage-specific. Homology modeling identified conservation of major binding sites 
in PfCAF-1 and PfRACK. Protein-protein interaction network analyses suggested
that PfWDRs are highly connected proteins with ~1928 potential interactions,
supporting their role as hubs in cellular networks. The present study highlights 
the roles and relevance of the WDR family in P. falciparum, and identifies unique
features that lay a foundation for further experimental dissection of PfWDRs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128507 
PMCID: PMC4456382
PMID: 26043001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

