
1. J Exp Biol. 2015 Aug;218(Pt 15):2482-8. doi: 10.1242/jeb.116798. Epub 2015 Jun 8.

Functional development of carbon dioxide detection in the maxillary palp of
Anopheles gambiae.

Omondi BA(1), Majeed S(2), Ignell R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Chemical Ecology, Department of Plant Protection Biology, Swedish
University of Agricultural Sciences, Alnarp 230 53, Sweden Department of
Evolutionary Neuroethology, Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology,
Hans-Knoell-Strasse 8, Jena 07745, Germany.
(2)Unit of Chemical Ecology, Department of Plant Protection Biology, Swedish
University of Agricultural Sciences, Alnarp 230 53, Sweden.
(3)Unit of Chemical Ecology, Department of Plant Protection Biology, Swedish
University of Agricultural Sciences, Alnarp 230 53, Sweden rickard.ignell@slu.se.

Olfactory information drives several behaviours critical for the survival and
persistence of insect pests and vectors. Insect behaviour is variable, linked to 
their biological needs, and regulated by physiological dynamics. For mosquitoes, 
CO2 is an important cue that signifies the presence of a host, and which elicits 
activation and attraction. To investigate the genetic basis of olfactory
modulation in mosquitoes, we assayed changes in CO2 detection from receptor gene 
expression through physiological function to behaviour, associated with the onset
of host seeking in the malaria vector, Anopheles gambiae. The gene encoding a
subunit of the CO2 receptor, AgGr22, was found to be significantly up-regulated
in host-seeking females, consistent with a significant increase in sensitivity of
CO2-responsive neurons (cpA) housed in capitate peg sensilla of the maxillary
palp. In addition, the odorant receptor AgOr28, which is expressed in cpC
neurons, was significantly up-regulated. In contrast, AgOr8, which is expressed
in cpB neurons, was not affected by this change in physiological state, in
agreement with results for the obligate co-receptor Orco. Moreover, the
sensitivity of the cpB neuron to (R)-1-octen-3-ol, a well-known mammalian
kairomone, did not change in response to the onset of host seeking. The
concentration of CO2 flux influenced both the propensity of A. gambiae to take
off into the wind and the speed with which this activation occurred. Female A.
gambiae mosquitoes responded to CO2 whether mature for host seeking or not, but
onset of host seeking enhanced sensitivity and speed of activation at relevant
doses of CO2.

Â© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jeb.116798 
PMCID: PMC4528704
PMID: 26056246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

