
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 8;10(6):e0128626. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128626.
eCollection 2015.

Deletion of Fifteen Open Reading Frames from Modified Vaccinia Virus Ankara Fails
to Improve Immunogenicity.

Alharbi NK(1), Spencer AJ(2), Hill AV(2), Gilbert SC(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom;
King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom.

Modified vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA) is a highly attenuated strain of vaccinia
virus, which has been used as a recombinant vaccine vector in many vaccine
development programmes. The loss of many immunosuppressive and host-range genes
resulted in a safe and immunogenic vaccine vector. However it still retains some 
immunomodulatory genes that may reduce MVA immunogenicity. Earlier reports
demonstrated that the deletion of the A41L, B15R, C6L, or C12L open reading
frames (ORFs) enhanced cellular immune responses in recombinant MVA (rMVA) by up 
to 2-fold. However, previously, we showed that deletion of the C12L, A44L, A46R, 
B7R, or B15R ORFs from rMVA, using MVA-BAC recombineering technology, did not
enhance rMVA immunogenicity at either peak or memory cellular immune responses.
Here, we extend our previous study to examine the effect of deleting clusters of 
genes on rMVA cellular immunogenicity. Two clusters of fifteen genes were deleted
in one rMVA mutant that encodes either the 85A antigen of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis or an immunodominant H2-Kd-restricted murine malaria epitope (pb9). 
The deletion mutants were tested in prime only or prime and boost vaccination
regimens. The responses showed no improved peak or memory CD8+ T cell
frequencies. Our results suggest that the reported small increases in MVA
deletion mutants could not be replicated with different antigens, or epitopes.
Therefore, the gene deletion strategy may not be taken as a generic approach for 
improving the immunogenicity of MVA-based vaccines, and should be carefully
assessed for every individual recombinant antigen.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128626 
PMCID: PMC4459983
PMID: 26053118  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

