
1. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2015 Jun;71(Pt 6):643-9. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X1500271X. Epub 2015 May 20.

The structure of hookworm platelet inhibitor (HPI), a CAP superfamily member from
Ancylostoma caninum.

Ma D(1), Francischetti IM(1), Ribeiro JM(1), Andersen JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, NIH/NIAID, 12735 Twinbrook Parkway,
Rockville, MD 20852, USA.

Secreted protein components of hookworm species include a number of
representatives of the cysteine-rich/antigen 5/pathogenesis-related 1 (CAP)
protein family known as Ancylostoma-secreted proteins (ASPs). Some of these have 
been considered as candidate antigens for the development of vaccines against
hookworms. The functions of most CAP superfamily members are poorly understood,
but one form, the hookworm platelet inhibitor (HPI), has been isolated as a
putative antagonist of the platelet integrins αIIbβ3 and α2β1. Here, the crystal 
structure of HPI is described and its structural features are examined in
relation to its possible function. The HPI structure is similar to those of other
ASPs and shows incomplete conservation of the sequence motifs CAP1 and CAP2 that 
are considered to be diagnostic of CAP superfamily members. The asymmetric unit
of the HPI crystal contains a dimer with an extensive interaction interface, but 
chromatographic measurements indicate that it is primarily monomeric in solution.
In the dimeric structure, the putative active-site cleft areas from both monomers
are united into a single negatively charged depression. A potential Lys-Gly-Asp
disintegrin-like motif was identified in the sequence of HPI, but is not
positioned at the apex of a tight turn, making it unlikely that it interacts with
the integrin. Recombinant HPI produced in Escherichia coli was found not to
inhibit the adhesion of human platelets to collagen or fibrinogen, despite having
a native structure as shown by X-ray diffraction. This result corroborates
previous analyses of recombinant HPI and suggests that it might require
post-translational modification or have a different biological function.

DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X1500271X 
PMCID: PMC4461323
PMID: 26057788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

