
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 12;10(6):e0129623. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129623.
eCollection 2015.

Flow Cytometry Based Detection and Isolation of Plasmodium falciparum Liver
Stages In Vitro.

Dumoulin PC(1), Trop SA(1), Ma J(1), Zhang H(1), Sherman MA(2), Levitskaya J(1).

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD,
21205, United States of America.
(2)Triangle Research Labs, 6 Davis Drive, Durham, NC, 27709, United States of
America.

Malaria, the disease caused by Plasmodium parasites, remains a major global
health burden. The liver stage of Plasmodium falciparum infection is a leading
target for immunological and pharmacological interventions. Therefore, novel
approaches providing specific detection and isolation of live P. falciparum
exoerythrocytic forms (EEFs) are warranted. Utilizing a recently generated
parasite strain expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) we established a
method which, allows for detection and isolation of developing live P. falciparum
liver stages by flow cytometry. Using this technique we compared the
susceptibility of five immortalized human hepatocyte cell lines and primary
hepatocyte cultures from three donors to infection by P. falciparum sporozoites. 
Here, we show that EEFs can be detected and isolated from in vitro infected
cultures of the HC-04 cell line and primary human hepatocytes. We confirmed the
presence of developing parasites in sorted live human hepatocytes and
characterized their morphology by fluorescence microscopy. Finally, we validated 
the practical applications of our approach by re-examining the importance of host
ligand CD81 for hepatocyte infection by P. falciparum sporozoites in vitro and
assessment of the inhibitory activity of anti-sporozoite antibodies. This
methodology provides us with the tools to study both, the basic biology of the P.
falciparum liver stage and the effects of host-derived factors on the development
of P. falciparum EEFs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129623 
PMCID: PMC4466555
PMID: 26070149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

