
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2015 Jun 15;7(7):1914-24. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evv115.

Complete Dosage Compensation in Anopheles stephensi and the Evolution of
Sex-Biased Genes in Mosquitoes.

Jiang X(1), Biedler JK(2), Qi Y(2), Hall AB(1), Tu Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program of Genetics, Bioinformatics, and Computational Biology, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, Virginia Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg,
Virginia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia.
(3)Program of Genetics, Bioinformatics, and Computational Biology, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, Virginia Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg,
Virginia jaketu@vt.edu.

Complete dosage compensation refers to hyperexpression of the entire X or Z
chromosome in organisms with heterogametic sex chromosomes (XY male or ZW female)
in order to compensate for having only one copy of the X or Z chromosome. Recent 
analyses suggest that complete dosage compensation, as in Drosophila
melanogaster, may not be the norm. There has been no systematic study focusing on
dosage compensation in mosquitoes. However, analysis of dosage compensation in
Anopheles mosquitoes provides opportunities for evolutionary insights, as the X
chromosome of Anopheles and that of its Dipteran relative, D. melanogaster formed
independently from the same ancestral chromosome. Furthermore, Culicinae
mosquitoes, including the Aedes genus, have homomorphic sex-determining
chromosomes, negating the need for dosage compensation. Thus, Culicinae genes
provide a rare phylogenetic context to investigate dosage compensation in
Anopheles mosquitoes. Here, we performed RNA-seq analysis of male and female
samples of the Asian malaria mosquito Anopheles stephensi and the yellow fever
mosquito Aedes aegypti. Autosomal and X-linked genes in An. stephensi showed very
similar levels of expression in both males and females, indicating complete
dosage compensation. The uniformity of average expression levels of autosomal and
X-linked genes remained when An. stephensi gene expression was normalized by that
of their Ae. aegypti orthologs, strengthening the finding of complete dosage
compensation in Anopheles. In addition, we comparatively analyzed the
differentially expressed genes between adult males and adult females in both
species, investigated sex-biased gene chromosomal distribution patterns in An.
stephensi and provided three examples where gene duplications may have enabled
the acquisition of sex-specific expression during mosquito evolution.

Â© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evv115 
PMCID: PMC4524482
PMID: 26078263  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

