
1. BMC Genomics. 2015;16 Suppl 7:S9. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-16-S7-S9. Epub 2015 Jun 
11.

Network-based gene prediction for Plasmodium falciparum malaria towards
genetics-based drug discovery.

Chen Y, Xu R.

BACKGROUND: Malaria is the most deadly parasitic infectious disease. Existing
drug treatments have limited efficacy in malaria elimination, and the complex
pathogenesis of the disease is not fully understood. Detecting novel
malaria-associated genes not only contributes in revealing the disease
pathogenesis, but also facilitates discovering new targets for anti-malaria
drugs.
METHODS: In this study, we developed a network-based approach to predict
malaria-associated genes. We constructed a cross-species network to integrate
human-human, parasite-parasite and human-parasite protein interactions. Then we
extended the random walk algorithm on this network, and used known malaria genes 
as the seeds to find novel candidate genes for malaria.
RESULTS: We validated our algorithms using 77 known malaria genes: 14 human genes
and 63 parasite genes were ranked averagely within top 2% and top 4%,
respectively among human and parasite genomes. We also evaluated our method for
predicting novel malaria genes using a set of 27 genes with literature supporting
evidence. Our approach ranked 12 genes within top 1% and 24 genes within top 5%. 
In addition, we demonstrated that top-ranked candied genes were enriched for drug
targets, and identified commonalities underlying top-ranked malaria genes through
pathway analysis. In summary, the candidate malaria-associated genes predicted by
our data-driven approach have the potential to guide genetics-based anti-malaria 
drug discovery.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-16-S7-S9 
PMCID: PMC4474419
PMID: 26099491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

