
1. J Proteomics. 2015 Aug 3;126:234-44. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2015.06.008. Epub 2015 
Jun 20.

Proteomic changes occurring in the malaria mosquitoes Anopheles gambiae and
Anopheles stephensi during aging.

Sikulu MT(1), Monkman J(2), Dave KA(3), Hastie ML(4), Dale PE(5), Kitching RL(6),
Killeen GF(7), Kay BH(8), Gorman JJ(9), Hugo LE(10).

Author information: 
(1)Mosquito Control Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. Electronic address:
Maggy.Sikulu@qimrberghofer.edu.au.
(2)Mosquito Control Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. Electronic address: James.monkman@gmail.com.
(3)The Protein Discovery Centre, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,
Brisbane, Australia. Electronic address: Keyur.Dave@qimrberghofer.edu.au.
(4)The Protein Discovery Centre, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,
Brisbane, Australia. Electronic address: Marcus.Hastie@qimrberghofer.edu.au.
(5)Environmental Research Institute and Griffith School of Environment, Griffith 
University, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. Electronic address:
P.dale@griffith.edu.au.
(6)Environmental Research Institute and Griffith School of Environment, Griffith 
University, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. Electronic address:
R.kitching@griffith.edu.au.
(7)Environmental Health and Ecological Sciences Thematic Group, Ifakara Health
Institute, Ifakara, United Republic of Tanzania; Vector Biology Department,
Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom. Electronic
address: gkilleen@ihi.or.tz.
(8)Mosquito Control Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. Electronic address:
Brian.Kay@qimrberghofer.edu.au.
(9)The Protein Discovery Centre, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,
Brisbane, Australia. Electronic address: Jeffery.Gorman@qimrberghofer.edu.au.
(10)Mosquito Control Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. Electronic address:
Leon.Hugo@qimrberghofer.edu.au.

The age of mosquitoes is a crucial determinant of their ability to transmit
pathogens and their resistance to insecticides. We investigated changes to the
abundance of proteins found in heads and thoraces of the malaria mosquitoes
Anopheles gambiae and Anopheles stephensi as they aged. Protein expression
changes were assessed using two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis and
the identity of differentially expressed proteins was determined by using either 
matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization tandem time-of-flight mass
spectrometry or capillary high-pressure liquid chromatography coupled with a
linear ion-trap (LTQ)-Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer. Protein biomarkers
were validated by semi quantitative Western blot analysis. Nineteen and nine age 
dependent protein spots were identified for A. stephensi and A. gambiae,
respectively. Among the proteins down-regulated with age were homologs of
ADF/Cofilin, cytochome c1, heat shock protein-70 and eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 5A (eIF5a). Proteins up-regulated with age included probable
methylmalonate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase, voltage-dependent anion-selective
channel and fructose bisphosphate aldolase. Semi quantitative Western blot
analysis confirmed expression patterns observed by 2-D DIGE for eIF5a and
ADF/Cofilin. Further work is recommended to determine whether these biomarkers
are robust to infection, blood feeding and insecticide resistance. Robust
biomarkers could then be incorporated into rapid diagnostic assays for ecological
and epidemiological studies.BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: In this study, we have
identified several proteins with characteristic changes in abundance in both A.
gambiae and A. stephensi during their aging process. These changes may highlight 
underlying mechanisms beneath the relationship between mosquito age and factors
affecting Plasmodium transmission and mosquito control. The similarity of changes
in protein abundance between these species and the primary dengue vector Aedes
aegypti, has revealed conserved patterns of aging-specific protein regulation.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2015.06.008 
PMID: 26100052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

