
1. Parasitol Res. 2015 Sep;114(9):3487-96. doi: 10.1007/s00436-015-4577-x. Epub 2015
Jun 27.

Monitoring artemisinin resistance in Plasmodium falciparum: comparison of
parasite clearance time by microscopy and real-time PCR and evaluation of
mutations in Pfatpase6 gene in Odisha state of India.

Gupta R(1), Mishra N, Kumar A, Rana R, Srivastava B, Tyagi PK, Anvikar AR,
Valecha N.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector 8, Dwarka, New Delhi, 110077,
India.

Antimalarial drug resistance including artemisinin resistance in Plasmodium
falciparum malaria is a major concern in combating malaria throughout the world. 
Delayed parasite clearance time (PCT) is indicative of emergence of artemisinin
resistance. Herein, PCT has been monitored with the help of gold standard
technique microscopy accompanied by a more sensitive real-time assay for academic
purpose. After the administration of artemisinin based combination therapy,
artesunate + sulfadoxine pyrimethamine (AS + SP), all the subjects were followed 
up to day 42 for monitoring the therapeutic efficacy of AS + SP in Bisra
Community Health Centre (CHC), Sundergarh district in the state of Odisha in
India. Further, representative samples were analyzed for L263E, E431K, A623E and 
S769N SNPs in Pfatpase6 gene and copy number polymorphisms in Pfmdr1 gene. Though
all the samples were found parasite negative according to microscopy by the end
of day 3 and attained adequate clinical and parasitological response (ACPR) at
the end of day 42, real-time PCR showed day 3 positivity in 12 of the total
analyzed samples (n = 43). This was further validated by end-point diagnostic PCR
and correlated with high initial parasite load. E431K mutation was observed in 2 
of the 12 samples (16.7 %) while the controls (n = 18) were all wild. L263E,
A623E and S769N were wild in all the analyzed samples (n = 30). Pfmdr1 copy
number analysis showed no change in the said trait. Conclusively, real-time PCR
could support microscopy for better monitoring of PCT and may provide as an
additional but useful research tool for artemisinin resistance studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-015-4577-x 
PMID: 26113507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

