
1. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 3;5:11820. doi: 10.1038/srep11820.

Comparative assessment of vaccine vectors encoding ten malaria antigens
identifies two protective liver-stage candidates.

Longley RJ(1), Salman AM(1)(2), Cottingham MG(1), Ewer K(1), Janse CJ(2), Khan
SM(2), Spencer AJ(1), Hill AVS(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2333 ZA Leiden, 
The Netherlands.

The development of an efficacious Plasmodium falciparum malaria vaccine remains a
top priority for global health. Vaccination with irradiated sporozoites is able
to provide complete sterile protection through the action of CD8(+) T cells at
the liver-stage of infection. However, this method is currently unsuitable for
large-scale deployment and focus has instead turned to the development of
sub-unit vaccines. Sub-unit vaccine efforts have traditionally focused on two
well-known pre-erythrocytic antigens, CSP and TRAP, yet thousands of genes are
expressed in the liver-stage. We sought to assess the ability of eight
alternative P. falciparum pre-erythrocytic antigens to induce a high proportion
of CD8(+) T cells. We show that all antigens, when expressed individually in the 
non-replicating viral vectors ChAd63 and MVA, are capable of inducing an immune
response in mice. Furthermore, we also developed chimeric P. berghei parasites
expressing the cognate P. falciparum antigen to enable assessment of efficacy in 
mice. Our preliminary results indicate that vectors encoding either PfLSA1 or
PfLSAP2 are capable of inducing sterile protection dependent on the presence of
CD8(+) T cells. This work has identified two promising P. falciparum liver-stage 
candidate antigens that will now undergo further testing in humans.

DOI: 10.1038/srep11820 
PMCID: PMC4490344
PMID: 26139288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

