
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 7;10(7):e0131576. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131576.
eCollection 2015.

Deletion of Plasmodium falciparum Histidine-Rich Protein 2 (pfhrp2) and
Histidine-Rich Protein 3 (pfhrp3) Genes in Colombian Parasites.

Murillo Solano C(1), Akinyi Okoth S(2), Abdallah JF(3), Pava Z(1), Dorado E(1),
Incardona S(4), Huber CS(3), Macedo de Oliveira A(3), Bell D(5), Udhayakumar
V(3), Barnwell JW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Internacional de Entrenamiento e Investigaciones Medicas (CIDEIM),
Carrera 125 #19-225 Av., La Maria, Cali, Colombia.
(2)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Road, Atlanta,
Georgia, United States of America; Atlanta Research and Education Foundation,
Decatur, Georgia, United States of America.
(3)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Road, Atlanta,
Georgia, United States of America.
(4)Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics, Chemin des Mines, 1202, Geneva,
Switzerland.
(5)Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics, Chemin des Mines, 1202, Geneva,
Switzerland; Global Good Fund/Intellectual Ventures Lab, 1807 132nd Ave NE,
Bellevue, Washington, United States of America.

A number of studies have analyzed the performance of malaria rapid diagnostic
tests (RDTs) in Colombia with discrepancies in performance being attributed to a 
combination of factors such as parasite levels, interpretation of RDT results
and/or the handling and storage of RDT kits. However, some of the inconsistencies
observed with results from Plasmodium falciparum histidine-rich protein 2
(PfHRP2)-based RDTs could also be explained by the deletion of the gene that
encodes the protein, pfhrp2, and its structural homolog, pfhrp3, in some parasite
isolates. Given that pfhrp2- and pfhrp3-negative P. falciparum isolates have been
detected in the neighboring Peruvian and Brazilian Amazon regions, we
hypothesized that parasites with deletions of pfhrp2 and pfhrp3 may also be
present in Colombia. In this study we tested 100 historical samples collected
between 1999 and 2009 from six Departments in Colombia for the presence of
pfhrp2, pfhrp3 and their flanking genes. Seven neutral microsatellites were also 
used to determine the genetic background of these parasites. In total 18 of 100
parasite isolates were found to have deleted pfhrp2, a majority of which (14 of
18) were collected from Amazonas Department, which borders Peru and Brazil.
pfhrp3 deletions were found in 52 of the 100 samples collected from all regions
of the country. pfhrp2 flanking genes PF3D7_0831900 and PF3D7_0831700 were
deleted in 22 of 100 and in 1 of 100 samples, respectively. pfhrp3 flanking genes
PF3D7_1372100 and PF3D7_1372400 were missing in 55 of 100 and in 57 of 100
samples. Structure analysis of microsatellite data indicated that Colombian
samples tested in this study belonged to four clusters and they segregated mostly
based on their geographic region. Most of the pfhrp2-deleted parasites were
assigned to a single cluster and originated from Amazonas Department although a
few pfhrp2-negative parasites originated from the other three clusters. The
presence of a high proportion of pfhrp2-negative isolates in the Colombian Amazon
may have implications for the use of PfHRP2-based RDTs in the region and may
explain inconsistencies observed when PfHRP2-based tests and assays are
performed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131576 
PMCID: PMC4494814
PMID: 26151448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

