
1. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 21;5:12376. doi: 10.1038/srep12376.

Ancestry, admixture and fitness in Colombian genomes.

Rishishwar L(1), Conley AB(2), Wigington CH(2), Wang L(2), Valderrama-Aguirre
A(3), Jordan IK(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA 
[2] PanAmerican Bioinformatics Institute, Cali, Valle del Cauca, Colombia [3]
BIOS Centro de Bioinformática y Biología Computacional, Manizales, Caldas,
Colombia.
(2)School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA.
(3)1] PanAmerican Bioinformatics Institute, Cali, Valle del Cauca, Colombia [2]
Biomedical Research Institute, Universidad Libre, Cali, Valle del Cauca, Colombia
[3] Regenerar - Center of Excellence for Regenerative and Personalized Medicine, 
Cali, Valle del Cauca, Colombia.

The human dimension of the Columbian Exchange entailed substantial genetic
admixture between ancestral source populations from Africa, the Americas and
Europe, which had evolved separately for many thousands of years. We sought to
address the implications of the creation of admixed American genomes, containing 
novel allelic combinations, for human health and fitness via analysis of an
admixed Colombian population from Medellin. Colombian genomes from Medellin show 
a wide range of three-way admixture contributions from ancestral source
populations. The primary ancestry component for the population is European
(average = 74.6%, range = 45.0%-96.7%), followed by Native American
(average = 18.1%, range = 2.1%-33.3%) and African (average = 7.3%,
range = 0.2%-38.6%). Locus-specific patterns of ancestry were evaluated to search
for genomic regions that are enriched across the population for particular
ancestry contributions. Adaptive and innate immune system related genes and
pathways are particularly over-represented among ancestry-enriched segments,
including genes (HLA-B and MAPK10) that are involved in defense against endemic
pathogens such as malaria. Genes that encode functions related to skin
pigmentation (SCL4A5) and cutaneous glands (EDAR) are also found in regions with 
anomalous ancestry patterns. These results suggest the possibility that
ancestry-specific loci were differentially retained in the modern admixed
Colombian population based on their utility in the New World environment.

DOI: 10.1038/srep12376 
PMCID: PMC4508918
PMID: 26197429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

