
1. Genome Res. 2015 Sep;25(9):1347-59. doi: 10.1101/gr.189225.115. Epub 2015 Jul 23.

Identifying genomic changes associated with insecticide resistance in the dengue 
mosquito Aedes aegypti by deep targeted sequencing.

Faucon F(1), Dusfour I(2), Gaude T(1), Navratil V(3), Boyer F(1), Chandre F(4),
Sirisopa P(5), Thanispong K(6), Juntarajumnong W(5), Poupardin R(7),
Chareonviriyaphap T(5), Girod R(2), Corbel V(8), Reynaud S(1), David JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Ecologie Alpine (LECA), CNRS, UMR 5553, 38041 Grenoble Cedex 9, 
France; Université Grenoble-Alpes, 38041 Grenoble Cedex 9, France; Environmental 
and Systems Biology (BEeSy), Université Grenoble-Alpes, 38041 Grenoble Cedex 9,
France;
(2)Unité d'Entomologie Médicale, Institut Pasteur de la Guyane, 97306 Cayenne
Cedex, France;
(3)Pôle Rhône Alpes de Bioinformatique, Université Lyon 1, 69100 Villeurbanne,
France;
(4)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), Maladies Infectieuses et
Vecteurs, Ecologie, Génétique, Evolution et Contrôle (IRD 224-CNRS 5290 UM1-UM2),
34394 Montpellier Cedex 5, France;
(5)Department of Entomology, Faculty of Agriculture, Kasetsart University, Lat
Yao Chatuchak Bangkok 10900, Thailand; Center for Advanced Studies for
Agriculture and Food, Kasetsart University Institute for Advanced Studies,
Kasetsart University, Bangkok 10900, Thailand (CASAF, NRU-KU, Thailand);
(6)Bureau of Vector Borne Diseases, Department of Disease Control, Ministry of
Public Health, Mueang, Nonthaburi 11000, Thailand;
(7)Vector Biology Group, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, L35QA Liverpool, 
United Kingdom.
(8)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), Maladies Infectieuses et
Vecteurs, Ecologie, Génétique, Evolution et Contrôle (IRD 224-CNRS 5290 UM1-UM2),
34394 Montpellier Cedex 5, France; Department of Entomology, Faculty of
Agriculture, Kasetsart University, Lat Yao Chatuchak Bangkok 10900, Thailand;
Center for Advanced Studies for Agriculture and Food, Kasetsart University
Institute for Advanced Studies, Kasetsart University, Bangkok 10900, Thailand
(CASAF, NRU-KU, Thailand);

The capacity of mosquitoes to resist insecticides threatens the control of
diseases such as dengue and malaria. Until alternative control tools are
implemented, characterizing resistance mechanisms is crucial for managing
resistance in natural populations. Insecticide biodegradation by detoxification
enzymes is a common resistance mechanism; however, the genomic changes underlying
this mechanism have rarely been identified, precluding individual resistance
genotyping. In particular, the role of copy number variations (CNVs) and
polymorphisms of detoxification enzymes have never been investigated at the
genome level, although they can represent robust markers of metabolic resistance.
In this context, we combined target enrichment with high-throughput sequencing
for conducting the first comprehensive screening of gene amplifications and
polymorphisms associated with insecticide resistance in mosquitoes. More than 760
candidate genes were captured and deep sequenced in several populations of the
dengue mosquito Ae. aegypti displaying distinct genetic backgrounds and
contrasted resistance levels to the insecticide deltamethrin. CNV analysis
identified 41 gene amplifications associated with resistance, most affecting
cytochrome P450s overtranscribed in resistant populations. Polymorphism analysis 
detected more than 30,000 variants and strong selection footprints in specific
genomic regions. Combining Bayesian and allele frequency filtering approaches
identified 55 nonsynonymous variants strongly associated with resistance. Both
CNVs and polymorphisms were conserved within regions but differed across
continents, confirming that genomic changes underlying metabolic resistance to
insecticides are not universal. By identifying novel DNA markers of insecticide
resistance, this study opens the way for tracking down metabolic changes
developed by mosquitoes to resist insecticides within and among populations.

© 2015 Faucon et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.189225.115 
PMCID: PMC4561493
PMID: 26206155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

