
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Oct;59(10):6203-9. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00899-15.
Epub 2015 Jul 27.

The Glucose Transporter PfHT1 Is an Antimalarial Target of the HIV Protease
Inhibitor Lopinavir.

Kraft TE(1), Armstrong C(1), Heitmeier MR(1), Odom AR(2), Hruz PW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA hruz_p@kids.wustl.edu.

Malaria and HIV infection are coendemic in a large portion of the world and
remain a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Growing resistance of Plasmodium
species to existing therapies has increased the need for new therapeutic
approaches. The Plasmodium glucose transporter PfHT is known to be essential for 
parasite growth and survival. We have previously shown that HIV protease
inhibitors (PIs) act as antagonists of mammalian glucose transporters. While the 
PI lopinavir is known to have antimalarial activity, the mechanism of action is
unknown. We report here that lopinavir blocks glucose uptake into isolated
malaria parasites at therapeutically relevant drug levels. Malaria parasites
depend on a constant supply of glucose as their primary source of energy, and
decreasing the available concentration of glucose leads to parasite death. We
identified the malarial glucose transporter PfHT as a target for inhibition by
lopinavir that leads to parasite death. This discovery provides a mechanistic
basis for the antimalarial effect of lopinavir and provides a direct target for
novel drug design with utility beyond the HIV-infected population.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00899-15 
PMCID: PMC4576095
PMID: 26248369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

