
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2016 Feb;113(2):384-92. doi: 10.1002/bit.25719. Epub 2015 Sep 
3.

Combinatorial pathway engineering for optimized production of the anti-malarial
FR900098.

Freestone TS(1), Zhao H(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering and Institute for Genomic 
Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering and Institute for Genomic 
Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois.
zhao5@illinois.edu.
(3)Departments of Chemistry, Biochemistry, and Bioengineering, Center for
Biophysics and Computational Biology, School of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, 61801.
zhao5@illinois.edu.

As resistance to current anti-malarial therapeutics spreads, new compounds to
treat malaria are increasingly needed. One promising compound is FR900098, a
naturally occurring phosphonate. Due to limitations in both chemical synthesis
and biosynthetic methods for FR900098 production, this potential therapeutic has 
yet to see widespread implementation. Here we applied a combinatorial pathway
engineering strategy to improve the production of FR900098 in Escherichia coli by
modulating each of the pathway's nine genes with four promoters of different
strengths. Due to the large size of the library and the low screening throughput,
it was necessary to develop a novel screening strategy that significantly reduced
the sample size needed to find an optimal strain. This was done by using biased
libraries that localize searching around top hits and home in on high-producing
strains. By incorporating this strategy, a significantly improved strain was
found after screening less than 3% of the entire library. When coupled with
culturing optimization, a strain was found to produce 96 mg/L, a 16-fold
improvement over the original strain. We believe the enriched library method
developed here can be used on other large pathways that may be difficult to
engineer by combinatorial methods due to low screening throughput.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.25719 
PMID: 26245694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

