
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2015 Oct;35:144-52. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.08.011. Epub
2015 Aug 6.

Morphogenetic characterisation, date of divergence, and evolutionary
relationships of malaria vectors Anopheles cruzii and Anopheles homunculus.

Lorenz C(1), Patané JS(2), Suesdek L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Parasitologia, Instituto Butantan, Avenida Vital Brasil, 1500, 
São Paulo CEP 05509-300, Brazil; Biologia da Relação Patógeno-Hospedeiro,
Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, University of Sao Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu
Prestes, 2415, São Paulo CEP 05508-000, Brazil. Electronic address:
camilalorenz@usp.br.
(2)Laboratório de Parasitologia, Instituto Butantan, Avenida Vital Brasil, 1500, 
São Paulo CEP 05509-300, Brazil; Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de
Química, University of Sao Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 748 - sala 911, São
Paulo CEP 05508-000, Brazil. Electronic address: jspatane@gmail.com.
(3)Laboratório de Parasitologia, Instituto Butantan, Avenida Vital Brasil, 1500, 
São Paulo CEP 05509-300, Brazil; Biologia da Relação Patógeno-Hospedeiro,
Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, University of Sao Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu
Prestes, 2415, São Paulo CEP 05508-000, Brazil; Instituto de Medicina Tropical,
Avenida Dr. Enéas Carvalho de Aguiar, 470, São Paulo CEP 05403-000, Brazil.
Electronic address: lincoln.suesdek@butantan.gov.br.

The mosquito species Anopheles cruzii and Anopheles homunculus are co-occurring
vectors for etiological agents of malaria in southeastern Brazil, a region known 
to be a major epidemic spot for malaria outside Amazon region. We sought to
better understand the biology of these species in order to contribute to future
control efforts by (1) improving species identification, which is complicated by 
the fact that the females are very similar, (2) investigating genetic composition
and morphological differences between the species, (3) inferring their
phylogenetic histories in comparison with those of other Anophelinae, and (4)
dating the evolutionary divergence of the two species. To characterise the
species we used wing geometry and mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase subunit I
(COI) gene as morphological and genetic markers, respectively. We also used the
genes white, 28S, ITS2, Cytb, and COI in our phylogenetic and dating analyses. A 
comparative analysis of wing thin-plate splines revealed species-specific wing
venation patterns, and the species An. cruzii showed greater morphological
diversity (8.74) than An. homunculus (5.58). Concerning the COI gene, An. cruzii 
was more polymorphic and also showed higher haplotype diversity than An.
homunculus, with many rare haplotypes that were displayed by only a few
specimens. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that all tree topologies converged and 
showed [Anopheles bellator+An. homunculus] and [Anopheles laneanus+An. cruzii] as
sister clades. Diversification within the subgenus Kerteszia occurred
2-14.2millionyears ago. The landmark data associated with wing shape were
consistent with the molecular phylogeny, indicating that this character can
distinguish higher level phylogenetic relationships within the Anopheles group.
Despite their morphological similarities and co-occurrence, An. cruzii and An.
homunculus show consistent differences. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the
species are not sister-groups but species that recently diverged within the
Kerteszia group, perhaps concomitantly with the radiation of bromeliads in South 
America or during the Pleistocene climate oscillations.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.08.011 
PMID: 26256676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

