
1. J Infect Public Health. 2016 Jan-Feb;9(1):52-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jiph.2015.06.009. 
Epub 2015 Aug 7.

A survey of malaria and some arboviral infections among suspected febrile
patients visiting a health centre in Simawa, Ogun State, Nigeria.

Ayorinde AF(1), Oyeyiga AM(2), Nosegbe NO(2), Folarin OA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Redeemers University, Ede, Osun State,
Nigeria. Electronic address: ayorindea@run.edu.ng.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Redeemers University, Ede, Osun State,
Nigeria.

Most febrile patients are often misdiagnosed with malaria due to similar
symptoms, such as fever shared by malaria and certain arboviral infections. This 
study surveyed the incidence of malaria, chikungunya and dengue infections among 
a number of suspected febrile patients visiting Simawa Health Centre, Ogun State,
Nigeria. Venous blood samples were obtained from 60 febrile patients (age 3-70
years) visiting the centre between April and May 2014. The rapid diagnostic test 
(RDT) was used to detect the presence of chikungunya (CHK) antibodies (IgM),
dengue (DEN) virus and antibodies (NS1, IgM and IgG) and malaria parasites
(Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax). Malarial confirmatory tests were by
microscopy and nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using the polymorphic
region of Glutamate-Rich Protein (GLURP) gene. The complexity of P. falciparum
infection in the community also determined by the use of nested PCR. These three 
mosquito-borne infections were observed in 63% (38) of the patients. The
prevalence of CHK, DEN and malarial infections singularly were 11%, 0% and 63%,
respectively, whereas malaria with either CHK or DEN infections were 24% (9) and 
3% (1), respectively. No subjects were positive for CHK and DEN co-infection.
Malarial microscopic confirmation was in 94% (32) of the malaria RDT-positive
samples, 50% (17) were successfully analysed by nested PCR and the mean
multiplicity of infection was 1.6 (1-3 clones). One patient sample harboured both
P. falciparum and P. vivax. The study reports the presence of some arboviral
infections having similar symptoms with malaria at Simawa, Ogun State. The proper
diagnosis of infectious diseases is important for controlling them.

Copyright Â© 2015 King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiph.2015.06.009 
PMID: 26256113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

