
1. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces. 2015 Nov 1;135:291-308. doi:
10.1016/j.colsurfb.2015.07.046. Epub 2015 Jul 26.

Micellar carriers for the delivery of multiple therapeutic agents.

Thipparaboina R(1), Chavan RB(1), Kumar D(1), Modugula S(1), Shastri NR(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education & Research (NIPER), Hyderabad, 
India.
(2)National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education & Research (NIPER), Hyderabad, 
India. Electronic address: nalini@niperhyd.ac.in.

Multi-drug therapy is described as a simultaneous or sequential administration of
two or more drugs with similar or different mechanisms of action and is
recognized as a more efficient solution to combat successfully, various ailments.
Polymeric micelles (PMs) are self-assemblies of block copolymers providing
numerous opportunities for drug delivery. To date various micellar formulations
were studied for delivery of drugs, nutraceuticals and genes; a few of them are
in clinical trials. It was observed that there is an immense need for the
development of PMs embedding multiple therapeutic agents to combat various
ailments, including cancers, HIV/AIDS, malaria, multiple sclerosis, hypertension,
infectious diseases, cardiovascular and metabolic diseases, immune disorders and 
many psychiatric disorders. Several combinations of drug-drug,
drug-nutraceutical, drug-gene and drug-siRNA explored to date are detailed in
this review, with a special emphasis on their potential and future perspectives. 
A summary of various preparation methods, characterization techniques and
applications of PMs are also provided. This review presents a holistic approach
on multi-drug delivery using micellar carriers and emphasizes on the development 
of therapeutic hybrids embedding novel combinations for safer and effective
therapy.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2015.07.046 
PMID: 26263217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

