
1. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2015 Sep;13(9):573-87. doi: 10.1038/nrmicro3519.

Sexual development in Plasmodium parasites: knowing when it's time to commit.

Josling GA(1), Llin√°s M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, W126 Millennium Science Complex, State College, Pennsylvania 16802,
USA.
(2)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, W126 Millennium Science Complex, State College, Pennsylvania 16802,
USA. [2] Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, W126
Millennium Science Complex, State College, Pennsylvania 16802, USA. [3] Center
for Malaria Research, The Pennsylvania State University, W126 Millennium Science 
Complex, State College, Pennsylvania 16802, USA. [4] Center for Infectious
Disease Dynamics, The Pennsylvania State University, W126 Millennium Science
Complex, State College, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

Malaria is a devastating infectious disease that is caused by blood-borne
apicomplexan parasites of the genus Plasmodium. These pathogens have a complex
lifecycle, which includes development in the anopheline mosquito vector and in
the liver and red blood cells of mammalian hosts, a process which takes days to
weeks, depending on the Plasmodium species. Productive transmission between the
mammalian host and the mosquito requires transitioning between asexual and sexual
forms of the parasite. Blood- stage parasites replicate cyclically and are mostly
asexual, although a small fraction of these convert into male and female sexual
forms (gametocytes) in each reproductive cycle. Despite many years of
investigation, the molecular processes that elicit sexual differentiation have
remained largely unknown. In this Review, we highlight several important recent
discoveries that have identified epigenetic factors and specific transcriptional 
regulators of gametocyte commitment and development, providing crucial insights
into this obligate cellular differentiation process.

DOI: 10.1038/nrmicro3519 
PMID: 26272409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

