
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2015 Dec;36:441-449. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.08.014. Epub
2015 Aug 18.

The Plasmodium gaboni genome illuminates allelic dimorphism of immunologically
important surface antigens in P. falciparum.

Roy SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, 1600 Holloway Ave, San 
Francisco, CA 94132, USA. Electronic address: scottwroy@gmail.com.

In the deadly human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, several major
merozoite surface proteins (MSPs) show a striking pattern of allelic diversity
called allelic dimorphism (AD). In AD, the vast majority of observed alleles fall
into two highly divergent allelic classes, with recombinant alleles being rare or
not observed, presumably due to repression by natural selection (recombination
suppression, or RS). The three AD loci, merozoite surface proteins (MSPs) 1, 2,
and 6, along with MSP3, which also exhibits RS among four allelic classes, can be
collectively called AD/RS. The causes of AD/RS and the evolutionary history of
allelic diversity at these loci remain mysterious. The few available sequences
from a single closely related chimpanzee parasite, P. reichenowi, have suggested 
that for 3/4 loci, AD/RS is an ancient state that has been retained in P.
falciparum since well before the P. falciparum-P. reichenowi ancestor. On the
other hand, based on comparative sequence analysis, we recently suggested that
(i) AD/RS P. falciparum loci have undergone interallelic recombination over
longer evolutionary times (on the timescale of recent speciation events), and
thus (ii) AD/RS may be a recent phenomenon. The recent publication of genomic
sequencing efforts for P. gaboni, an outgroup to P. falciparum and P. reichenowi,
allows for improved reconstruction of the evolutionary history of these loci. In 
this work, I report genic sequence for P. gaboni for all four AD/RS P. falciparum
loci (MSP1, 2, 3, and 6). Comparison of these sequences with available P.
falciparum and P. reichenowi data strengthens the evidence for interallelic
recombination over the evolutionary history of these species and also strengthens
the case that AD/RS at these loci is ancient. Combined with previous results,
these data provide evidence that AD/RS at different loci has evolved at several
different times in the evolutionary history of P. falciparum: (i) before the P.
gaboni-P. falciparum divergence, for much of MSP1 and MSP3; (ii) between the P.
gaboni-P. falciparum and P. reichenowi-P. falciparum divergences, for the 5' end 
of the AD region of MSP6 and block 3 of MSP1; (iii) near the P. reichenowi-P.
falciparum divergence, for the 3' end of the AD region of MSP6; and (iv) after
the P. reichenowi-P. falciparum divergence, for MSP2. Based on these results, I
suggest a new hypothesis for long-term evolutionary maintenance of AD/RS by
recombination within allelic groups.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.08.014 
PMID: 26296605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

