
1. Mol Divers. 2015 Nov;19(4):991-1002. doi: 10.1007/s11030-015-9632-0. Epub 2015
Aug 25.

Screening of potential targets in Plasmodium falciparum using stage-specific
metabolic network analysis.

Dholakia N(1), Dhandhukia P(2), Roy N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ashok and Rita Patel Institute of Integrated Study and Research in
Biotechnology and Allied Sciences (ARIBAS), New Vallabh Vidyanagar, Anand,
Gujarat, 388121, India.
(2)Ashok and Rita Patel Institute of Integrated Study and Research in
Biotechnology and Allied Sciences (ARIBAS), New Vallabh Vidyanagar, Anand,
Gujarat, 388121, India. pinakindhandhukia@aribas.edu.in.

The Apicomplexa parasite Plasmodium is a major cause of death in developing
countries which are less equipped to bring new medicines to the market. Currently
available drugs used for treatment of malaria are limited either by inadequate
efficacy, toxicity and/or increased resistance. Availability of the genome
sequence, microarray data and metabolic profile of Plasmodium parasite offers an 
opportunity for the identification of stage-specific genes important to the
organism's lifecycle. In this study, microarray data were analysed for
differential expression and overlapped onto metabolic pathways to identify
differentially regulated pathways essential for transition to successive
erythrocytic stages. The results obtained indicate that S-adenosylmethionine
decarboxylase/ornithine decarboxylase, a bifunctional enzyme required for
polyamine synthesis, is important for the Plasmodium cell growth in the absence
of exogenous polyamines. S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase/ornithine
decarboxylase is a valuable target for designing therapeutically useful
inhibitors. One such inhibitor, [Formula: see text]-difluoromethyl ornithine, is 
currently in use for the treatment of African sleeping sickness caused by
Trypanosoma brucei. Structural studies of ornithine decarboxylase along with
known inhibitors and their analogues were carried out to screen drug databases
for more effective and less toxic compounds.

DOI: 10.1007/s11030-015-9632-0 
PMID: 26303382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

