
1. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 28;10(8):e0136401. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136401.
eCollection 2015.

Characterization of Precursor PfHsp60 in Plasmodium falciparum Cytosol during Its
Asexual Development in Human Erythrocytes.

Padma Priya P(1), Grover M(2), Tatu US(2), Natarajan V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka,
India; Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore,
Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka,
India.
(3)Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka,
India.

Mitochondrial heat shock protein 60 (Hsp60) is a nuclear encoded gene product
that gets post-translationally translocated into the mitochondria. Using multiple
approaches such as immunofluorescence experiments, isoelectric point analysis
with two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, and mass spectrometric identification
of the signal peptide, we show that Hsp60 from Plasmodium falciparum (PfHsp60)
accumulates in the parasite cytoplasm during the ring, trophozoite, and schizont 
stages of parasite development before being imported into the parasite
mitochondria. Using co-immunoprecipitation experiments with antibodies specific
to cytoplasmic PfHsp90, PfHsp70-1, and PfHsp60, we show association of precursor 
PfHsp60 with cytoplasmic chaperone machinery. Metabolic labeling involving pulse 
and chase indicates translocation of the precursor pool into the parasite
mitochondrion during chase. Analysis of results obtained with Geldanamycin
treatment confirmed precursor PfHsp60 to be one of the clients for PfHsp90.
Cytosolic chaperones bind precursor PfHsp60 prior to its import into the
mitochondrion of the parasite. Our data suggests an inefficient co-ordination in 
the synthesis and translocation of mitochondrial PfHsp60 during asexual growth of
malaria parasite in human erythrocytes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136401 
PMCID: PMC4552884
PMID: 26317863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

