
1. Korean J Parasitol. 2015 Aug;53(4):413-9. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2015.53.4.413. Epub
2015 Aug 25.

Allelic Diversity of MSP1 Gene in Plasmodium falciparum from Rural and Urban
Areas of Gabon.

Mawili-Mboumba DP(1), Mbondoukwe N(1), Adande E(1), Bouyou-Akotet MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology-Mycology, Faculty of Medicine, Université des
Sciences de la Santé. BP4009, Libreville, Gabon.

The present study determined and compared the genetic diversity of Plasmodium
falciparum strains infecting children living in 2 areas from Gabon with different
malaria endemicity. Blood samples were collected from febrile children from 2008 
to 2009 in 2 health centres from rural (Oyem) and urban (Owendo) areas. Genetic
diversity was determined in P. falciparum isolates by analyzing the merozoite
surface protein-1 (msp1) gene polymorphism using nested-PCR. Overall, 168
children with mild falciparum malaria were included. K1, Ro33, and Mad20 alleles 
were found in 110 (65.5%), 94 (55.9%), and 35 (20.8%) isolates, respectively,
without difference according to the site (P>0.05). Allelic families' frequencies 
were comparable between children less than 5 years old from the 2 sites; while
among the older children the proportions of Ro33 and Mad20 alleles were 1.7 to
2.0 fold higher at Oyem. Thirty-three different alleles were detected, 16 (48.5%)
were common to both sites, and 10 out of the 17 specific alleles were found at
Oyem. Furthermore, multiple infection carriers were frequent at Oyem (57.7% vs
42.2% at Owendo; P=0.04) where the complexity of infection was of 1.88 (±0.95)
higher compared to that found at Owendo (1.55±0.75). Extended genetic diversity
of P. falciparum strains infecting Gabonese symptomatic children and high
multiplicity of infections were observed in rural area. Alleles common to the 2
sites were frequent; the site-specific alleles predominated in the rural area.
Such distribution of the alleles should be taken into accounts when designing
MSP1 or MSP2 malaria vaccine.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2015.53.4.413 
PMCID: PMC4566513
PMID: 26323839  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

