
1. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2015 Aug 24;7(1):e2015050. doi:
10.4084/MJHID.2015.050. eCollection 2015.

Influence of Sickle Cell Gene on the Allelic Diversity at the msp-1 locus of
Plasmodium falciparum in Adult Patients with Severe Malaria.

Patel DK(1), Mashon RS(1), Purohit P(1), Meher S(1), Dehury S(1), Marndi C(1),
Das K(1), Kullu BK(1), Patel S(1), Das P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sickle Cell Clinic and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Odisha Sickle Cell
Project, Veer Surendra Sai Medical College, Burla, Sambalpur, Odisha, India.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Asian Institute of Public Health,
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India.

Although several studies have supported that sickle cell trait (HbAS) protects
against falciparum malaria, the exact mechanism by which sickle gene confers
protection is unclear. Further, there is no information on the influence of the
sickle gene on the parasitic diversity of P. falciparum population in severe
symptomatic malaria. This study was undertaken to assess the effect of the sickle
gene on the parasite densities and diversities in hospitalized adult patients
with severe falciparum malaria. The study was carried out in 166 adults
hospitalized subjects with severe falciparum malaria at Sickle Cell Clinic and
Molecular Biology Laboratory, Veer Surendra Sai Institute of Medical Sciences and
Research, Burla, Odisha, India. They were divided into three groups on the basis 
of hemoglobin variants HbAA (n=104), HbAS (n=30) and HbSS (n=32). The msp-1 loci 
were genotyped using a PCR-based methodology. The parasite densities were
significantly high in HbAA compared to HbAS and HbSS. The multiplicity of
infection (MOI) and multi-clonality for msp-1 were significantly low in HbSS and 
HbAS compared to HbAA. The prevalence of K1 (p<0 .0001) and MAD20 (p=0.0003)
alleles were significantly high in HbAA. The RO33 allele was detected at a higher
frequency in HbSS and HbAS, compared to K1 and MAD20. Sickle gene was found to
reduce both the parasite densities and diversity of P. falciparum in adults with 
severe malaria.

DOI: 10.4084/MJHID.2015.050 
PMCID: PMC4560258
PMID: 26401239 

