
1. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:238139. doi: 10.1155/2015/238139. Epub 2015 Sep 3.

Constructing a Genome-Wide LD Map of Wild A. gambiae Using Next-Generation
Sequencing.

Wang X(1), Afrane YA(2), Yan G(3), Li J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK
73019, USA.
(2)Centre for Global Health Research, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Kisumu
40100, Kenya.
(3)Program in Public Health, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Anopheles gambiae is the major malaria vector in Africa. Examining the molecular 
basis of A. gambiae traits requires knowledge of both genetic variation and
genome-wide linkage disequilibrium (LD) map of wild A. gambiae populations from
malaria-endemic areas. We sequenced the genomes of nine wild A. gambiae
mosquitoes individually using next-generation sequencing technologies and
detected 2,219,815 common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), 88% of which
are novel. SNPs are not evenly distributed across A. gambiae chromosomes. The low
SNP-frequency regions overlay heterochromatin and chromosome inversion domains,
consistent with the lower recombinant rates at these regions. Nearly one million 
SNPs that were genotyped correctly in all individual mosquitoes with 99.6%
confidence were extracted from these high-throughput sequencing data. Based on
these SNP genotypes, we constructed a genome-wide LD map for wild A. gambiae from
malaria-endemic areas in Kenya and made it available through a public Website.
The average size of LD blocks is less than 40â€‰bp, and several large LD blocks
were also discovered clustered around the para gene, which is consistent with the
effect of insecticide selective sweeps. The SNPs and the LD map will be valuable 
resources for scientific communities to dissect the A. gambiae genome.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/238139 
PMCID: PMC4573223
PMID: 26421280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

