
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2015 Dec;36:356-362. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.10.008. Epub
2015 Oct 15.

Influence of common variants of TLR4 and TLR9 on clinical outcomes of Plasmodium 
falciparum malaria in Odisha, India.

Kar A(1), Panigrahi S(2), Tripathy S(2), Mohapatra MK(2), Tayung K(3),
Dhangadamajhi G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, North Orissa University, Baripada, Odisha 757003,
India.
(2)Department of General Medicine, VSS Medical College and Hospital, Burla
768017, India.
(3)Laboratory of Microbial Biotechnology, North Orissa University, Baripada,
Odisha 757003, India.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, North Orissa University, Baripada, Odisha 757003,
India. Electronic address: gunarmrc@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: In malaria, the toll-like receptors (TLRs) have recently emerged as
major player of innate immunity. However, implication of TLR variants on clinical
manifestations of malaria is conflicting. The present study aims to provide
relevant information of growing interest in understanding the role of TLR4D299G, 
TLR9T-1237C and TLR9T-1486C polymorphisms on clinical outcomes of malaria.
METHODS: We genotyped TLR4D299G, TLR9T-1237C and TLR9T-1486C polymorphisms by
PCR-RFLP methods and subsequently analyzed in 200 uncomplicated patients and 200 
severe patients. Further, the severe malaria categorized into sub-clinical groups
such as cerebral malaria (CM), non-cerebral severe malaria (NCSM), single organ
dysfunction (SOD) and multi-organ dysfunctions (MODS) are analyzed.
RESULT: The TLR9-1237CC genotype was observed at significantly low frequency in
MODS (p=0.0008), while in heterozygous state (TC) it was proportionately more
frequent in SOD (p=0.087) as compared to mild malaria. The TLR9T-1486C
heterozygote was more common in all categories of severe malaria. However, pair
wise LD analysis revealed significant linkage between T-1237C and T-1486C,
whereas haplotype analysis showed significantly low frequency of C-T haplotype in
CM (p=0.005, pc=0.02) and high frequency of T-C haplotype in NCSM as compared to 
mild malaria.
CONCLUSION: Although TLR9-1237C could be a risk factor for severe malaria in
heterozygous state, negative association of CC genotype with MODS warrants
caution of segregating severe malaria into its sub-clinical groups while
interpreting data. Further, clinical outcome in malaria was observed to be
apparently modulated by LD between TLR9 promoter variants.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.10.008 
PMID: 26462624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

