
1. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 5;10(11):e0140994. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140994.
eCollection 2015.

A Putative Non-Canonical Ras-Like GTPase from P. falciparum: Chemical Properties 
and Characterization of the Protein.

Kaiser A(1), Langer B(1)(2), Przyborski J(3), Kersting D(1), Krüger M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Centre, Institute for Pharmacogenetics, University
Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstrasse 55, 45147 Essen, Germany.
(2)Institute for Pharmacology, Hufelandstrasse 55, 45147 Essen, Germany.
(3)Department of Parasitology, FB Biology, Phillipps University Marburg, Karl-von
Frisch-Strasse 8, 34043 Marburg, Germany.

During its development the malaria parasite P. falciparum has to adapt to various
different environmental contexts. Key cellular mechanisms involving G-protein
coupled signal transduction chains are assumed to act at these interfaces.
Heterotrimeric G-proteins are absent in Plasmodium. We here describe the first
cloning and expression of a putative, non-canonical Ras-like G protein (acronym
PfG) from Plasmodium. PfG reveals an open reading frame of 2736 bp encoding a
protein of 912 amino acids with a theoretical pI of 8.68 and a molecular weight
of 108.57 kDa. Transcript levels and expression are significantly increased in
the erythrocytic phase in particular during schizont and gametocyte formation.
Most notably, PfG has GTP binding capacity and GTPase activity due to an EngA2
domain present in small Ras-like GTPases in a variety of Bacillus species and
Mycobacteria. By contrast, plasmodial PfG is divergent from any human
alpha-subunit. PfG was expressed in E. coli as a histidine-tagged fusion protein 
and was stable only for 3.5 hours. Purification was only possible under native
conditions by Nickel-chelate chromatography and subsequent separation by Blue
Native PAGE. Binding of a fluorescent GTP analogue BODIPY® FL guanosine
5'O-(thiotriphosphate) was determined by fluorescence emission. Mastoparan
stimulated GTP binding in the presence of Mg2+. GTPase activity was determined
colorimetrically. Activity expressed as absolute fluorescence was 50% higher for 
the human paralogue than the activity of the parasitic enzyme. The PfG protein is
expressed in the erythrocytic stages and binds GTP after immunoprecipitation.
Immunofluorescence using specific antiserum suggests that PfG localizes to the
parasite cytosol. The current data suggest that the putitative, Ras-like
G-protein might be involved in a non-canonical signaling pathway in Plasmodium.
Research on the function of PfG with respect to pathogenesis and antimalarial
chemotherapy is currently under way.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140994 
PMCID: PMC4634863
PMID: 26540393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

