
1. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 20;10(11):e0143387. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143387.
eCollection 2015.

Genomic Analysis of Detoxification Supergene Families in the Mosquito Anopheles
sinensis.

Zhou D(1), Liu X(1), Sun Y(1), Ma L(1), Shen B(1), Zhu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 
210029, P. R. China.

Anopheles sinensis is an important malaria vector in China and other Southeast
Asian countries, and the emergence of insecticide resistance in this mosquito
poses a serious threat to the efficacy of malaria control programs. The recently 
published An. sinensis genome and transcriptome provide an opportunity to
understand the molecular mechanisms of insecticide resistance. Analysis of the
An. sinensis genome revealed 174 detoxification genes, including 93 cytochrome
P450s (P450s), 31 glutathione-S-transferases (GSTs), and 50
choline/carboxylesterases (CCEs). The gene number was similar to that in An.
gambiae, but represented a decrease of 29% and 42% compared with Aedes aegypti
and Culex quinquefasciatus, respectively. The considerable contraction in gene
number in Anopheles mosquitoes mainly occurred in two detoxification supergene
families, P450s and CCEs. The available An. sinensis transcriptome was also
re-analyzed to further identify key resistance-associated detoxification genes.
Among 174 detoxification genes, 124 (71%) were detected. Several candidate genes 
overexpressed in a deltamethrin-resistant strain (DR-strain) were identified as
belonging to the CYP4 or CYP6 family of P450s and the Delta GST class. These
generated data provide a basis for identifying the resistance-associated genes of
An. sinensis at the molecular level.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143387 
PMCID: PMC4654499
PMID: 26588704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

