
1. Vaccine. 2016 Jan 2;34(1):49-55. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.11.028. Epub 2015
Nov 24.

Enhancing cellular immunogenicity of MVA-vectored vaccines by utilizing the F11L 
endogenous promoter.

Alharbi NK(1), Spencer AJ(2), Salman AM(2), Tully CM(2), Chinnakannan SK(2),
Lambe T(2), Yamaguchi Y(2), Morris SJ(2), Orubu T(2), Draper SJ(2), Hill AV(2),
Gilbert SC(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK; King Abdullah 
International Medical Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: 
naif.alharbi@ndm.ox.ac.uk.
(2)The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK.

Modified vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA)-vectored vaccines against malaria,
influenza, tuberculosis and recently Ebola virus are in clinical development.
Although this vector is safe and immunogenic in humans, efforts remain on-going
to enhance immunogenicity through various approaches such as using stronger
promoters to boost transgene expression. We previously reported that endogenous
MVA promoters such as pB8 and pF11 increased transgene expression and
immunogenicity, as compared to the conventional p7.5 promoter. Here, we show that
both promoters also rivalled the mH5 promoter in enhancing MVA immunogenicity. We
investigated the mechanisms behind this improved immunogenicity and show that it 
was a result of strong early transgene expression in vivo, rather than in vitro
as would normally be assessed. Moreover, keeping the TK gene intact resulted in a
modest improvement in immunogenicity. Utilizing pB8 or pF11 as ectopic promoters 
at the TK locus instead of their natural loci also increased transgene expression
and immunogenicity. In addition to a reporter antigen, the pF11 promoter was
tested with the expression of two vaccine antigens for which cellular
immunogenicity was significantly increased as compared to the p7.5 promoter. Our 
data support the use of the pF11 and pB8 promoters for improved immunogenicity in
future MVA-vectored candidate vaccines.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.11.028 
PMID: 26616553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

