
1. Immunol Res. 2016 Feb;64(1):291-302. doi: 10.1007/s12026-015-8749-7.

Genetic predisposition of variants in TLR2 and its co-receptors to severe malaria
in Odisha, India.

Panigrahi S(1), Kar A(2), Tripathy S(1), Mohapatra MK(1), Dhangadamajhi G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Medicine, VSS Medical College and Hospital, Sambalpur,
Odisha, 768017, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, North Orissa University, Baripada, Odisha,
757003, India.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, North Orissa University, Baripada, Odisha,
757003, India. gunarmrc@gmail.com.

Although the role of TLRs signalling in malaria pathogenesis is well established,
contribution of individual TLR to clinical outcome of malaria still remains
inconclusive. Given the importance of TLR2 and its co-receptors in recognising
distinct structural forms of key malaria toxins and mediating innate immune
response, it is essential to delineate their genetic contribution. Variants in
TLR1 (I602S) and TLR6 (P249S) were genotyped by PCR-RFLP methods, and TLR2 (I/D) 
was genotyped by PCR in 200 samples each from uncomplicated malaria (UM) and
severe malaria (SM). Further, SM was categorised into its sub-clinical groups (CM
and NCSM or SOD and MODS) and analysed. The results showed the PP genotype of
TLR6 (P249S) to be significantly more common in UM (P < 0.0001), whereas the 'SS'
genotype was the risk factor for SM including its sub-clinical categories. The
TLR1 (602S) and TLR2 (D) variants were significantly high in patients with CM;
however, negative LD was observed between TLR2 and TLR6 in NCSM and MODS.
Haplotype analysis showed significantly high frequency of I-I-S haplotype in all 
forms of subclinical SM and was associated with low parasite load in SM (P =
0.013). The haplotypes I-D-S and S-I-P were significantly high in SOD and CM,
respectively. The TLR6 '249S' variant appeared to be the dominant determinant for
genetic predisposition to SM and that its association with either TLR2 'D' or
TLR1 '602S' modulates for CM development. The present study opens up several new 
avenues for their exploration and validation in future studies in different
global settings for malaria.

DOI: 10.1007/s12026-015-8749-7 
PMID: 26621243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

