
1. J Parasitol Res. 2015;2015:985651. doi: 10.1155/2015/985651. Epub 2015 Nov 8.

Clinical Variation of Plasmodium falciparum eba-175, ama-1, and msp-3 Genotypes
in Young Children Living in a Seasonally High Malaria Transmission Setting in
Burkina Faso.

Soulama I(1), Sermé SS(1), Bougouma EC(1), Diarra A(1), Tiono AB(1), Ouedraogo
A(1), Konate AT(1), Nebie I(1), Sirima SB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de Recherche et de Formation sur le Paludisme (CNRFP), 01 BP
2208, Ouagadougou 01, Burkina Faso.
(2)Centre National de Recherche et de Formation sur le Paludisme (CNRFP), 01 BP
2208, Ouagadougou 01, Burkina Faso ; Groupe de Recherche Action en Santé, 06 BP
10248, Ouagadougou 06, Burkina Faso.

The association between P. falciparum eba-175, ama-1, and msp-3 polymorphism in
the pathogenicity of malaria disease was investigated. We therefore compared the 
prevalence of different alleles between symptomatic and asymptomatic malarial
children under five years of age living in Burkina Faso. Blood filter papers were
collected during the 2008 malaria transmission season from 228 symptomatic and
199 asymptomatic children under five years of age. All patients were living in
the rural area of Saponé at about 50 km from Ouagadougou, the capital city of
Burkina Faso. P. falciparum parasite DNA was extracted using QIAGEN kits and the 
alleles diversity was assessed by a nested PCR. PCR products were then digested
by restriction enzymes based on already described polymorphic regions of the
eba-175, ama-1, and msp-3 genes. The individual alleles eba-175_FCR3 and msp-3_K1
frequencies were statistically higher (p < 0.0001) in the asymptomatic group
compared to the symptomatic ones. No statistically significant difference was
noted in the prevalence of ama-1-3D7, ama-1-K1, and ama-1-HB3 genotypes between
the two groups (p > 0.05). The comparative analysis of P. falciparum genotypes
indicated that the polymorphism in eba-175 and msp-3 genotypes varied between
asymptomatic and symptomatic clinical groups and may contribute to the
pathogenesis of malaria.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/985651 
PMCID: PMC4655070
PMID: 26634149 

