
1. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Jan;13(1):1019-25. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4603. Epub 2015 Nov
23.

Rhus javanica Linn protects against hydrogen peroxide‑induced toxicity in human
Chang liver cells via attenuation of oxidative stress and apoptosis signaling.

Yoon C(1), Koppula S(2), Yoo S(1), Yum M(1), Kim J(1), Lee J(3), Song M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Life Science, Graduate School of Konkuk University,
Chungju, Chungbuk 380‑701, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, College of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Konkuk
University, Chungju, Chungbuk 380‑701, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Konkuk University,
Chungju, Chungbuk 380‑701, Republic of Korea.

Rhus javanica Linn, a traditional medicinal herb from the family Anacardiaceae,
has been used in the treatment of liver diseases, cancer, parasitic infections,
malaria and respiratory diseases in China, Korea and other Asian countries for
centuries. In the present study, the protective effects of R. javanica ethanolic 
extract (RJE) on hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)-induced oxidative stress in human Chang
liver cells was investigated. The cell cytotoxicity and viability were assessed
using a 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay.
The activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) were measured
using respective enzymatic kits. Cell cycle analysis was performed using flow
cytometric analysis. The protein expression levels of p53, B-cell lymphoma
(Bcl)-2, Bcl-2-associated X protein (Bax) and caspase-3 were assessed by western 
blotting. Human Chang liver cells were treated with different concentrations
(0.1, 0.3 or 0.5 mg/ml) of RJE, and were subsequently exposed to H2O2 (30 µM).
Treatment with H2O2 (30 µM) significantly induced cytotoxicity (P<0.05) and
reduced the viability of the Chang liver cells. However, pretreatment of the
cells with RJE (0.1, 0.3 or 0.5 mg/ml) significantly increased the cell viability
(P<0.001 at 0.5 mg/ml) in a concentration-dependent manner following H2O2
treatment. Furthermore, pretreatment with RJE increased the enzyme activities of 
SOD and CAT, and decreased the sub-G1 growth phase of the cell cycle in response 
to H2O2-induced oxidative stress (P<0.001 at 0.3 and 0.5 mg/ml H2O2). RJE also
regulated the protein expression levels of p53, Bax, caspase-3 and Bcl-2. These
results suggested that RJE may protect human Chang liver cells against oxidative 
damage by increasing the levels of antioxidant enzymes and regulating
antiapoptotic oxidative stress mechanisms, thereby providing insights into the
mechanism which underpins the traditional claims made for RJE in the treatment of
liver diseases.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4603 
PMID: 26648020  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

