
1. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2015 Aug;33(4):247-50.

[Analysis of MSP1 Allelotypes in Imported Cases of Plasmodium falciparum Malaria 
from Africa].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou SM, Yang Y, Wu K, Che Z, Xu MX, Jia XS.

OBJECTIVE: To understand the allelotype characteristics of the merozoite surface 
protein 1 (MSP1) in imported Plasmodium falciparum.
METHODS: Blood samples were collected from P. falciparum-infected patients
returning from African malaria endemic areas. Nested PCR was used to amplify gene
fragments of MSP1 coding for block 2 and block 3 motifs of MSP1 of P. falciparum 
by using the MSP1-specific primers. Then the allelotype of MSPI was analyzed.
RESULTS: The MSP1 allelotype was detected in 117 of 135 blood samples, with a
detection rate of 86.7%. In the 117 cases with successful PCR amplification, the 
detection rates for MAD20, K1, RO33, MAD20+K1, MAD20+RO33, K1+RO33 and
MAD20+K1+R033 were 6.0%(7/117), 36.8%(43/117), 20.5%(24/117), 6.8% (8/117), 3.4% 
(4/117), 17.1% (20/117) and 9.4% (11/117), respectively, wherein the mixed
infection accounted for 36.8%(43/135). The mean multiplicity of infection(MOI) of
MSP1 allelotype was 1.46. There was no significant difference in the proportion
of patients with major severity of illness among the MAD20, K1 and RO33
genotypes. The proportions of patients with major severity of illness were
25.7%(19/74) and 32.6%(14/43) in 74 cases of singular infection and 43 cases of
mixed infection, respectively. The two infection types of patients had 241 ± 176 
days and 285 ± 216 days of stay abroad, with no significant difference between
them.
CONCLUSION: The three genotypes of MSP1 and their four types of combination exist
in imported cases of P. falciparum malaria from Africa. K1 and RO33 are the
dominant genotves.


PMID: 26672211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

