
1. J R Soc Interface. 2015 Dec 6;12(113):20150848. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2015.0848.

Maintenance of phenotypic diversity within a set of virulence encoding genes of
the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Holding T(1), Recker M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Mathematics and the Environment, University of Exeter, Penryn
Campus, Penryn TR10 9EZ, UK.
(2)Centre for Mathematics and the Environment, University of Exeter, Penryn
Campus, Penryn TR10 9EZ, UK m.recker@exeter.ac.uk.

Infection by the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum results in a broad 
spectrum of clinical outcomes, ranging from severe and potentially
life-threatening malaria to asymptomatic carriage. In a process of naturally
acquired immunity, individuals living in malaria-endemic regions build up a level
of clinical protection, which attenuates infection severity in an
exposure-dependent manner. Underlying this shift in the immunoepidemiology as
well as the observed range in malaria pathogenesis is the var multigene family
and the phenotypic diversity embedded within. The var gene-encoded surface
proteins Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 mediate
variant-specific binding of infected red blood cells to a diverse set of host
receptors that has been linked to specific disease manifestations, including
cerebral and pregnancy-associated malaria. Here, we show that cross-reactive
immune responses, which minimize the within-host benefit of each additionally
expressed gene during infection, can cause selection for maximum phenotypic
diversity at the genome level. We further show that differential functional
constraints on protein diversification stably maintain uneven ratios between
phenotypic groups, in line with empirical observation. Our results thus suggest
that the maintenance of phenotypic diversity within P. falciparum is driven by an
evolutionary trade-off that optimizes between within-host parasite fitness and
between-host selection pressure.

Â© 2015 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1098/rsif.2015.0848 
PMCID: PMC4707858
PMID: 26674193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

