
1. J Vis Exp. 2015 Dec 4;(106):e53214. doi: 10.3791/53214.

Methods to Investigate the Regulatory Role of Small RNAs and Ribosomal Occupancy 
of Plasmodium falciparum.

LaMonte G(1), Walzer KA(1), Lacsina J(2), Nicchitta C(2), Chi JT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University School of
Medicine; Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke University School of
Medicine.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University School of Medicine.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University School of
Medicine; Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke University School of
Medicine; jentsan.chi@duke.edu.

The genetic variation responsible for the sickle cell allele (HbS) enables
erythrocytes to resist infection by the malaria parasite, P. falciparum. The
molecular basis of this resistance, which is known to be multifactorial, remains 
incompletely understood. Recent studies found that the differential expression of
erythrocyte microRNAs, once translocated into malaria parasites, affect both gene
regulation and parasite growth. These miRNAs were later shown to inhibit mRNA
translation by forming a chimeric RNA transcript via 5' RNA fusion with discreet 
subsets of parasite mRNAs. Here, the techniques that were used to study the
functional role and putative mechanism underlying erythrocyte microRNAs on the
gene regulation and translational potential of P. falciparum, including the
transfection of modified synthetic microRNAs into host erythrocytes, will be
detailed.Â  Finally, a polysome gradient method is used to determine the extent of
translation of these transcripts. Together, these techniques allowed us to
demonstrate that the dysregulated levels of erythrocyte microRNAs contribute to
cell-intrinsic malaria resistance of sickle erythrocytes.

DOI: 10.3791/53214 
PMCID: PMC4692797
PMID: 26709459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

