
1. Theor Popul Biol. 2016 Apr;108:51-69. doi: 10.1016/j.tpb.2015.11.005. Epub 2015
Dec 15.

Gene drive through a landscape: Reaction-diffusion models of population
suppression and elimination by a sex ratio distorter.

Beaghton A(1), Beaghton PJ(2), Burt A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Silwood Park Campus,
Ascot, Berkshire SL5 7PY, UK. Electronic address: a.beaghton@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Silwood Park Campus,
Ascot, Berkshire SL5 7PY, UK. Electronic address: p.beaghton@imperial.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Silwood Park Campus,
Ascot, Berkshire SL5 7PY, UK. Electronic address: a.burt@imperial.ac.uk.

Some genes or gene complexes are transmitted from parents to offspring at a
greater-than-Mendelian rate, and can spread and persist in populations even if
they cause some harm to the individuals carrying them. Such genes may be useful
for controlling populations or species that are harmful. Driving-Y chromosomes
may be particularly potent in this regard, as they produce a male-biased sex
ratio that, if sufficiently extreme, can lead to population elimination. To
better understand the potential of such genes to spread over a landscape, we have
developed a series of reaction-diffusion models of a driving-Y chromosome in 1-D 
and radially-symmetric 2-D unbounded domains. The wild-type system at carrying
capacity is found to be unstable to the introduction of driving-Y males for all
models investigated. Numerical solutions exhibit travelling wave pulses and
fronts, and analytical and semi-analytical solutions for the asymptotic wave
speed under bounded initial conditions are derived. The driving-Y male invades
the wild-type equilibrium state at the front of the wave and completely replaces 
the wild-type males, leaving behind, at the tail of the wave, a reduced- or
zero-population state of females and driving-Y males only. In our simplest model 
of a population with one life stage and density-dependent mortality, wave speed
depends on the strength of drive and the diffusion rate of Y-drive males, and is 
independent of the population dynamic consequences (suppression or elimination). 
Incorporating an immobile juvenile stage of fixed duration into the model reduces
wave speed approximately in proportion to the relative time spent as a juvenile. 
If females mate just once in their life, storing sperm for subsequent
reproduction, then wave speed depends on the movement of mated females as well as
Y-drive males, and may be faster or slower than in the multiple-mating model,
depending on the relative duration of juvenile and adult life stages. Numerical
solutions are shown for parameter values that may in part be representative for
Anopheles gambiae, the primary vector of malaria in sub-Saharan Africa.

Copyright Â© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tpb.2015.11.005 
PMID: 26704073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

