
1. Malar J. 2016 Jan 7;15:13. doi: 10.1186/s12936-015-1045-0.

Heterogeneous alleles comprising G6PD deficiency trait in West Africa exert
contrasting effects on two major clinical presentations of severe malaria.

Shah SS(1)(2), Rockett KA(3), Jallow M(4), Sisay-Joof F(4), Bojang KA(5), Pinder 
M(4), Jeffreys A(6), Craik R(7), Hubbart C(8), Wellems TE(9), Kwiatkowski
DP(10)(11); MalariaGEN Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
ssshah03@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
ssshah03@gmail.com.
(3)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
krockett@well.ox.ac.uk.
(4)Medical Research Council Laboratories, Banjul, Fajara, The Gambia.
info@cggh.org.
(5)Medical Research Council Laboratories, Banjul, Fajara, The Gambia.
kbojang@mrc.gm.
(6)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
anna.richardson@well.ox.ac.uk.
(7)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
rachel.craik@obs-gyn.ox.ac.uk.
(8)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
christina.hubbart@well.ox.ac.uk.
(9)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
TWELLEMS@niaid.nih.gov.
(10)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
dominic@well.ox.ac.uk.
(11)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK. dominic@well.ox.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency exhibits
considerable allelic heterogeneity which manifests with variable biochemical and 
clinical penetrance. It has long been thought that G6PD deficiency confers
partial protection against severe malaria, however prior genetic association
studies have disagreed with regard to the strength and specificity of a
protective effect, which might reflect differences in the host genetic
background, environmental influences, or in the specific clinical phenotypes
considered.
METHODS: A case-control association study of severe malaria was conducted in The 
Gambia, a region in West Africa where there is considerable allelic heterogeneity
underlying expression of G6PD deficiency trait, evaluating the three major
nonsynonymous polymorphisms known to be associated with enzyme deficiency (A968G,
T542A, and C202T) in a cohort of 3836 controls and 2379 severe malaria cases.
RESULTS: Each deficiency allele exhibited a similar trend toward protection
against severe malaria overall (15-26% reduced risk); however, in stratifying
severe malaria to two of its constituent clinical subphenotypes, severe malarial 
anaemia (SMA) and cerebral malaria (CM), the three deficiency alleles exhibited
trends of opposing effect, with risk conferred to SMA and protection with respect
to CM. To assess the overall effect of G6PD deficiency trait, deficiency alleles 
found across all three loci were pooled. G6PD deficiency trait was found to be
significantly associated with protection from severe malaria overall (OR 0.83
[0.75-0.92], P = 0.0006), but this was limited to CM (OR 0.73 [0.61-0.87], P =
0.0005), with a trend toward increased risk for SMA, especially in
fully-deficient individuals (OR 1.43 [0.99-2.08], P = 0.056). Sex-stratified
testing largely comported with these results, with evidence suggesting that
protection by G6PD deficiency trait is conferred to both males and females,
though susceptibility to SMA may be restricted to fully-deficient male
hemizygotes.
CONCLUSIONS: In a part of Africa where multiple alleles contribute to expression 
of G6PD deficiency trait, these findings clarify and extend previous work done in
populations where a single variant predominates, and taken together suggest a
causal role for G6PD deficiency trait itself with respect to severe malaria, with
opposing effects seen on two major clinical subphenotypes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-015-1045-0 
PMCID: PMC4704392
PMID: 26738565  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

