
1. World J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2016 Feb;32(2):19. doi: 10.1007/s11274-015-1972-5. 
Epub 2016 Jan 8.

Dual symbiosis between Piriformospora indica and Azotobacter chroococcum enhances
the artemisinin content in Artemisia annua L.

Arora M(1), Saxena P(2), Choudhary DK(1), Abdin MZ(2), Varma A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Amity Institute of Microbial Technology (AIMT), Block 'E-3', 4th Floor, Amity 
University Campus, Sector-125, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Noida, UP, 201313, India.
(2)Centre for Transgenic Plant Development, Faculty of Science, Hamdard
University, New Delhi, India.
(3)Amity Institute of Microbial Technology (AIMT), Block 'E-3', 4th Floor, Amity 
University Campus, Sector-125, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Noida, UP, 201313, India.
ajitvarma@amity.edu.

At present, Artemisia annua L. is the major source of artemisinin production. To 
control the outbreaks of malaria, artemisinin combination therapies (ACTs) are
recommended, and hence an ample amount of artemisinin is required for ACTs
manufacture to save millions of lives. The low yield of this antimalarial drug in
A. annua L. plants (0.01-1.1%) ensues its short supply and high cost, thus making
it a topic of scrutiny worldwide. In this study, the effects of root endophyte,
Piriformospora indica strain DSM 11827 and nitrogen fixing bacterium, Azotobacter
chroococcum strain W-5, either singly and/or in combination for artemisinin
production in A. annua L. plants have been studied under poly house conditions.
The plant growth was monitored by measuring parameters like height of plant,
total dry weight and leaf yield with an increase of 63.51, 52.61 and 79.70%
respectively, for treatment with dual biological consortium, as compared to that 
of control plants. This significant improvement in biomass was associated with
higher total chlorophyll content (59.29%) and enhanced nutrition (especially
nitrogen and phosphorus, 55.75 and 86.21% respectively). The concentration of
artemisinin along with expression patterns of artemisinin biosynthesis genes were
appreciably higher in dual treatment, which showed positive correlation. The
study suggested the potential use of the consortium P. indica strain DSM 11827
and A. chroococcum strain W-5 in A. annua L. plants for increased overall
productivity and sustainable agriculture.

DOI: 10.1007/s11274-015-1972-5 
PMID: 26745979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

