
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Jan 5;6:1500. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.01500. eCollection
2015.

Dynamics of Bacterial Community Composition in the Malaria Mosquito's Epithelia.

Tchioffo MT(1), Boissière A(2), Abate L(2), Nsango SE(3), Bayibéki AN(4),
Awono-Ambéné PH(4), Christen R(5), Gimonneau G(1), Morlais I(1).

Author information: 
(1)UMR Maladies Infectieuses Et Vecteurs Écologie, Génétique, Évolution Et
Contrôle, IRD 224- Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 5290- UM1-
UM2Montpellier, France; Laboratoire d'entomologie médicale, OCEAC-IRDYaoundé,
Cameroon.
(2)UMR Maladies Infectieuses Et Vecteurs Écologie, Génétique, Évolution Et
Contrôle, IRD 224- Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 5290- UM1- UM2
Montpellier, France.
(3)Laboratoire d'entomologie médicale, OCEAC-IRDYaoundé, Cameroon; Faculté de
Médecine et des Sciences Pharmaceutiques, Université de DoualaDouala, Cameroon.
(4)Laboratoire d'entomologie médicale, OCEAC-IRD Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(5)Faculté des Sciences, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR
7138Nice, France; Laboratoire de Biologie Virtuelle, Faculté des Sciences, UMR
713, Université de NiceNice, France.

The Anopheles midgut hosts diverse bacterial communities and represents a complex
ecosystem. Several evidences indicate that mosquito midgut microbiota interferes 
with malaria parasite transmission. However, the bacterial composition of
salivary glands and ovaries, two other biologically important tissues, has not
been described so far. In this study, we investigated the dynamics of the
bacterial communities in the mosquito tissues from emerging mosquitoes until 8
days after a blood meal containing Plasmodium falciparum gametocytes and
described the temporal colonization of the mosquito epithelia. Bacterial
communities were identified in the midgut, ovaries, and salivary glands of
individual mosquitoes using pyrosequencing of the 16S rRNA gene. We found that
the mosquito epithelia share a core microbiota, but some bacteria taxa were more 
associated with one or another tissue at a particular time point. The bacterial
composition in the tissues of emerging mosquitoes varied according to the
breeding site, indicating that some bacteria are acquired from the environment.
Our results revealed temporal variations in the bacterial community structure,
possibly as a result of the mosquito physiological changes. The abundance of
Serratia significantly correlated with P. falciparum infection both in the midgut
and salivary glands of malaria challenged mosquitoes, which suggests that
interactions occur between microbes and parasites. These bacteria may represent
promising targets for vector control strategies. Overall, this study points out
the importance of characterizing bacterial communities in malaria mosquito
vectors.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.01500 
PMCID: PMC4700937
PMID: 26779155 

