
1. Int J Parasitol. 2016 Apr;46(4):281-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2015.12.008. Epub
2016 Jan 29.

Avian malaria in a boreal resident species: long-term temporal variability, and
increased prevalence in birds with avian keratin disorder.

Wilkinson LC(1), Handel CM(2), Van Hemert C(2), Loiseau C(3), Sehgal RN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, 1600 Holloway Avenue,
San Francisco, CA 94132, USA. Electronic address: lcwilkinson4@gmail.com.
(2)U.S. Geological Survey, Alaska Science Center, 4210 University Drive,
Anchorage, AK 99508, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, 1600 Holloway Avenue,
San Francisco, CA 94132, USA.

The prevalence of vector-borne parasitic diseases is widely influenced by
biological and ecological factors. Environmental conditions such as temperature
and precipitation can have a marked effect on haemosporidian parasites
(Plasmodium spp.) that cause malaria and those that cause other malaria-like
diseases in birds. However, there have been few long-term studies monitoring
haemosporidian infections in birds in northern latitudes, where weather
conditions can be highly variable and the effects of climate change are becoming 
more pronounced. We used molecular methods to screen more than 2,000 blood
samples collected from black-capped chickadees (Poecile atricapillus), a resident
passerine bird. Samples were collected over a 10 year period, mostly during the
non-breeding season, at seven sites in Alaska, USA. We tested for associations
between Plasmodium prevalence and local environmental conditions including
temperature, precipitation, site, year and season. We also evaluated the
relationship between parasite prevalence and individual host factors of age, sex 
and presence or absence of avian keratin disorder. This disease, which causes
accelerated keratin growth in the beak, provided a natural study system in which 
to test the interaction between disease state and malaria prevalence. Prevalence 
of Plasmodium infection varied by year, site, age and individual disease status
but there was no support for an effect of sex or seasonal period. Significantly, 
birds with avian keratin disorder were 2.6 times more likely to be infected by
Plasmodium than birds without the disorder. Interannual variation in the
prevalence of Plasmodium infection at different sites was positively correlated
with summer temperatures at the local but not statewide scale. Sequence analysis 
of the parasite cytochrome b gene revealed a single Plasmodium spp. lineage, P43.
Our results demonstrate associations between prevalence of avian malaria and a
variety of biological and ecological factors. These results also provide
important baseline data that will be informative for predicting future changes in
Plasmodium prevalence in the subarctic.

Copyright Â© 2016 Australian Society for Parasitology Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2015.12.008 
PMID: 26828894  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

