
1. Mol Ecol. 2016 Apr;25(7):1494-510. doi: 10.1111/mec.13572. Epub 2016 Mar 17.

Evolution of GOUNDRY, a cryptic subgroup of Anopheles gambiae s.l., and its
impact on susceptibility to Plasmodium infection.

Crawford JE(1)(2), Riehle MM(3), Markianos K(4), Bischoff E(5), Guelbeogo WM(6), 
Gneme A(6), Sagnon N(6), Vernick KD(5), Nielsen R(2), Lazzaro BP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA,
USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN, USA.
(4)Program in Genomics, Harvard Medical School, Children's Hospital Boston,
Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Unit for Genetics and Genomics of Insect Vectors, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.
(6)Centre National de Recherche et de Formation sur le Paludisme, 1487 Avenue de 
l'Oubritenga, 01 BP 2208, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.

The recent discovery of a previously unknown genetic subgroup of Anopheles
gambiae sensu lato underscores our incomplete understanding of complexities of
vector population demographics in Anopheles. This subgroup, named GOUNDRY, does
not rest indoors as adults and is highly susceptible to Plasmodium infection in
the laboratory. Initial description of GOUNDRY suggested it differed from other
known Anopheles taxa in surprising and sometimes contradictory ways, raising a
number of questions about its age, population size and relationship to known
subgroups. To address these questions, we sequenced the complete genomes of 12
wild-caught GOUNDRY specimens and compared these genomes to a panel of Anopheles 
genomes. We show that GOUNDRY is most closely related to Anopheles coluzzii, and 
the timing of cladogenesis is not recent, substantially predating the advent of
agriculture. We find a large region of the X chromosome that has swept to
fixation in GOUNDRY within the last 100 years, which may be an inversion that
serves as a partial barrier to contemporary gene flow. Interestingly, we show
that GOUNDRY has a history of inbreeding that is significantly associated with
susceptibility to Plasmodium infection in the laboratory. Our results illuminate 
the genomic evolution of one of probably several cryptic, ecologically
specialized subgroups of Anopheles and provide a potent example of how vector
population dynamics may complicate efforts to control or eradicate malaria.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.13572 
PMID: 26846876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

