
1. Front Immunol. 2016 Jan 27;7:13. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00013. eCollection 2016.

Major Histocompatibility Complex and Malaria: Focus on Plasmodium vivax
Infection.

Lima-Junior Jda C(1), Pratt-Riccio LR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoparasitology, Oswaldo Cruz Institute - Fiocruz , Rio de
Janeiro , Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria Research, Oswaldo Cruz Institute - Fiocruz , Rio de
Janeiro , Brazil.

The importance of host and parasite genetic factors in malaria resistance or
susceptibility has been investigated since the middle of the last century.
Nowadays, of all diseases that affect man, malaria still plays one of the highest
levels of selective pressure on human genome. Susceptibility to malaria depends
on exposure profile, epidemiological characteristics, and several components of
the innate and adaptive immune system that influences the quality of the immune
response generated during the Plasmodium lifecycle in the vertebrate host. But it
is well known that the parasite's enormous capacity of genetic variation in
conjunction with the host genetics polymorphism is also associated with a wide
spectrum of susceptibility degrees to complicated or severe forms of the disease.
In this scenario, variations in genes of the major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) associated with host resistance or susceptibility to malaria have been
identified and used as markers in host-pathogen interaction studies, mainly those
evaluating the impact on the immune response, acquisition of resistance, or
increased susceptibility to infection or vulnerability to disease. However, due
to the intense selective pressure, number of cases, and mortality rates, the
majority of the reported associations reported concerned Plasmodium falciparum
malaria. Studies on the MHC polymorphism and its association with Plasmodium
vivax, which is the most widespread Plasmodium and the most prevalent species
outside the African continent, are less frequent but equally important. Despite
punctual contributions, there are accumulated evidences of human genetic control 
in P. vivax infection and disease. Herein, we review the current knowledge in the
field of MHC and derived molecules (HLA Class I, Class II, TNF-Î±, LTA, BAT1, and 
CTL4) regarding P. vivax malaria. We discuss particularly the results of P. vivax
studies on HLA class I and II polymorphisms in relation to host susceptibility,
naturally acquired immune response against specific antigens and the implication 
of this knowledge to overcome the parasite immune evasion. Finally, the potential
impact of such polymorphisms on the development of vaccine candidate antigens
against P. vivax will be studied.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00013 
PMCID: PMC4728299
PMID: 26858717 

