
1. Insect Sci. 2016 Jun;23(3):353-65. doi: 10.1111/1744-7917.12326. Epub 2016 May 5.

The complete mitochondrial genome of Anopheles minimus (Diptera: Culicidae) and
the phylogenetics of known Anopheles mitogenomes.

Hua YQ(1), Ding YR(1), Yan ZT(1), Si FL(1), Luo QC(1), Chen B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Entomology and Molecular Biology, College of Life Sciences,
Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing, China.

Anopheles minimus is an important vector of human malaria in southern China and
Southeast Asia. The phylogenetics of mosquitoes has not been well resolved, and
the mitochondrial genome (mtgenome) has proven to be an important marker in the
study of evolutionary biology. In this study, the complete mtgenome of An.
minimus was sequenced for the first time. It is 15 395 bp long and encodes 37
genes, including 13 protein-coding genes (PCGs), 22 transfer RNAs (tRNAs), two
ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) and a non-coding region. The gene organization is
consistent with those of known Anopheles mtgenomes. The mtgenome performs a clear
bias in nucleotide composition with a positive AT-skew and a negative GC-skew.
All 13 PCGs prefer to use the codon UUA (Leu), ATN as initiation codon but
cytochrome-oxidase subunit 1 (COI) and ND5, with TCG and GTG, and TAA as
termination codon, but COI, COII, COIII and ND4, all with the incomplete T. tRNAs
have the typical clover-leaf structure, but tRNA(Ser(AGN)) is consistent with
known Anopheles mtgenomes. The control region includes a conserved T-stretch and 
a (TA)n stretch, and has the highest A+T content at 93.1%. The phylogenetics of
An. minimus with 18 other Anopheles species was constructed by maximum likelihood
and Bayesian inference, based on concatenated PCG sequences. The subgenera,
Cellia and Anopheles, and Nyssorhynchus and Kerteszia have mutually close
relationships, respectively. The Punctulatus group and Leucosphyrus group of
Neomyzomyia Series, and the Albitarsis group of Albitarsis Series were suggested 
to be monophyletic. The monophyletic status of the subgenera, Cellia, Anopheles, 
Nyssorhynchus and Kerteszia need to be further elucidated.

© 2016 Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/1744-7917.12326 
PMID: 26852698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

