
1. New Phytol. 2016 Jun;210(4):1269-81. doi: 10.1111/nph.13874. Epub 2016 Feb 10.

The jasmonate-responsive AaMYC2 transcription factor positively regulates
artemisinin biosynthesis in Artemisia annua.

Shen Q(1), Lu X(2), Yan T(1), Fu X(1), Lv Z(1), Zhang F(1), Pan Q(1), Wang G(1), 
Sun X(1), Tang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South), Ministry of Agriculture, Plant
Biotechnology Research Center, Fudan-SJTU-Nottingham Plant Biotechnology R&D
Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, 200240, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, China Pharmaceutical University,
Nanjing, China.

The plant Artemisia annua is well known due to the production of artemisinin, a
sesquiterpene lactone that is widely used in malaria treatment. Phytohormones
play important roles in plant secondary metabolism, such as jasmonic acid (JA),
which can induce artemisinin biosynthesis in A. annua. Nevertheless, the
JA-inducing mechanism remains poorly understood. The expression of gene AaMYC2
was rapidly induced by JA and AaMYC2 binds the G-box-like motifs within the
promoters of gene CYP71AV1 and DBR2, which are key structural genes in the
artemisinin biosynthetic pathway. Overexpression of AaMYC2 in A. annua
significantly activated the transcript levels of CYP71AV1 and DBR2, which
resulted in an increased artemisinin content. By contrast, artemisinin content
was reduced in the RNAi transgenic A. annua plants in which the expression of
AaMYC2 was suppressed. Meanwhile, the RNAi transgenic A. annua plants showed
lower sensitivity to methyl jasmonate treatment than the wild-type plants. These 
results demonstrate that AaMYC2 is a positive regulator of artemisinin
biosynthesis and is of great value in genetic engineering of A. annua for
increased artemisinin production.

© 2016 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2016 New Phytologist Trust.

DOI: 10.1111/nph.13874 
PMID: 26864531  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

