
1. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist. 2015 Nov 28;6(1):1-11. doi:
10.1016/j.ijpddr.2015.11.003. eCollection 2016 Apr.

Targeting the Plasmodium vivax equilibrative nucleoside transporter 1 (PvENT1)
for antimalarial drug development.

Deniskin R(1), Frame IJ(1), Sosa Y(1), Akabas MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York, USA; Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA; Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA. Electronic address:
myles.akabas@einstein.yu.edu.

Infection with Plasmodium falciparum and vivax cause most cases of malaria.
Emerging resistance to current antimalarial medications makes new drug
development imperative. Ideally a new antimalarial drug should treat both
falciparum and vivax malaria. Because malaria parasites are purine auxotrophic,
they rely on purines imported from the host erythrocyte via Equilibrative
Nucleoside Transporters (ENTs). Thus, the purine import transporters represent a 
potential target for antimalarial drug development. For falciparum parasites the 
primary purine transporter is the P. falciparum Equilibrative Nucleoside
Transporter Type 1 (PfENT1). Recently we identified potent PfENT1 inhibitors with
nanomolar IC50 values using a robust, yeast-based high throughput screening
assay. In the current work we characterized the Plasmodium vivax ENT1 (PvENT1)
homologue and its sensitivity to the PfENT1 inhibitors. We expressed a yeast
codon-optimized PvENT1 gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. PvENT1-expressing yeast 
imported both purines ([(3)H]adenosine) and pyrimidines ([(3)H]uridine), whereas 
wild type (fui1Δ) yeast did not. Based on radiolabel substrate uptake inhibition 
experiments, inosine had the lowest IC50 (3.8 μM), compared to guanosine (14.9
μM) and adenosine (142 μM). For pyrimidines, thymidine had an IC50 of 183 μM (vs.
cytidine and uridine; mM range). IC50 values were higher for nucleobases compared
to the corresponding nucleosides; hypoxanthine had a 25-fold higher IC50 than
inosine. The archetypal human ENT1 inhibitor 4-nitrobenzylthioinosine (NBMPR) had
no effect on PvENT1, whereas dipyridamole inhibited PvENT1, albeit with a 40 μM
IC50, a 1000-fold less sensitive than human ENT1 (hENT1). The PfENT1 inhibitors
blocked transport activity of PvENT1 and the five known naturally occurring
non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with similar IC50 values.
Thus, the PfENT1 inhibitors also target PvENT1. This implies that development of 
novel antimalarial drugs that target both falciparum and vivax ENT1 may be
feasible.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpddr.2015.11.003 
PMCID: PMC4706624
PMID: 26862473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

