
1. J Eukaryot Microbiol. 2016 May;63(3):367-77. doi: 10.1111/jeu.12306. Epub 2016
Mar 2.

Kin Discrimination in Protists: From Many Cells to Single Cells and Backwards.

Paz-Y-Miño-C G(1), Espinosa A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)New England Center for the Public Understanding of Science, Roger Williams
University, One Old Ferry Road, Bristol, Rhode Island, 02809.
(2)Department of Biology, Roger Williams University, One Old Ferry Road, Bristol,
Rhode Island, 02809.

During four decades (1960-1990s), the conceptualization and experimental design
of studies in kin recognition relied on work with multicellular eukaryotes,
particularly Unikonta (including invertebrates and vertebrates) and some Bikonta 
(including plants). This pioneering research had an animal behavior approach.
During the 2000s, work on taxa-, clone- and kin-discrimination and recognition in
protists produced genetic and molecular evidence that unicellular organisms (e.g.
Saccharomyces, Dictyostelium, Polysphondylium, Tetrahymena, Entamoeba and
Plasmodium) could distinguish between same (self or clone) and different (diverse
clones), as well as among conspecifics of close or distant genetic relatedness.
Here, we discuss some of the research on the genetics of kin
discrimination/recognition and highlight the scientific progress made by
switching emphasis from investigating multicellular to unicellular systems (and
backwards). We document how studies with protists are helping us to understand
the microscopic, cellular origins and evolution of the mechanisms of kin
discrimination/recognition and their significance for the advent of
multicellularity. We emphasize that because protists are among the most ancient
organisms on Earth, belong to multiple taxonomic groups and occupy all
environments, they can be central to reexamining traditional hypotheses in the
field of kin recognition, reformulating concepts, and generating new knowledge.

© 2016 The Author(s) Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology © 2016 International
Society of Protistologists.

DOI: 10.1111/jeu.12306 
PMCID: PMC4856593
PMID: 26873616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

