
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2016 Jun;33(6):1554-70. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msw037. Epub 2016 Feb 
22.

Combinatorial Genetic Modeling of pfcrt-Mediated Drug Resistance Evolution in
Plasmodium falciparum.

Gabryszewski SJ(1), Modchang C(2), Musset L(3), Chookajorn T(4), Fidock DA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York.
(2)Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(3)Laboratoire de Parasitologie, WHO Collaborating Center for Surveillance of
Anti-Malarial Drug Resistance, Institut Pasteur de la Guyane, Cayenne, French
Guiana.
(4)Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine Unit, Center of Excellence in Malaria,
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, NY df2260@columbia.edu.

The emergence of drug resistance continuously threatens global control of
infectious diseases, including malaria caused by the protozoan parasite
Plasmodium falciparum A critical parasite determinant is the P. falciparum
chloroquine resistance transporter (PfCRT), the primary mediator of chloroquine
(CQ) resistance (CQR), and a pleiotropic modulator of susceptibility to several
first-line artemisinin-based combination therapy partner drugs. Aside from the
validated CQR molecular marker K76T, P. falciparum parasites have acquired at
least three additional pfcrt mutations, whose contributions to resistance and
fitness have been heretofore unclear. Focusing on the quadruple-mutant Ecuadorian
PfCRT haplotype Ecu1110 (K76T/A220S/N326D/I356L), we genetically modified the
pfcrt locus of isogenic, asexual blood stage P. falciparum parasites using
zinc-finger nucleases, producing all possible combinations of intermediate pfcrt 
alleles. Our analysis included the related quintuple-mutant PfCRT haplotype 7G8
(Ecu1110 + C72S) that is widespread throughout South America and the Western
Pacific. Drug susceptibilities and in vitro growth profiles of our combinatorial 
pfcrt-modified parasites were used to simulate the mutational trajectories
accessible to parasites as they evolved CQR. Our results uncover unique
contributions to parasite drug resistance and growth for mutations beyond K76T
and predict critical roles for the CQ metabolite monodesethyl-CQ and the related 
quinoline-type drug amodiaquine in driving mutant pfcrt evolution. Modeling
outputs further highlight the influence of parasite proliferation rates alongside
gains in drug resistance in dictating successful trajectories. Our findings
suggest that P. falciparum parasites have navigated constrained pfcrt adaptive
landscapes by means of probabilistically rare mutational bursts that led to the
infrequent emergence of pfcrt alleles in the field.

Â© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msw037 
PMCID: PMC4868112
PMID: 26908582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

