
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2016 Jun;40:162-166. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.02.038. Epub
2016 Mar 3.

Contribution of inflammasome genetics in Plasmodium vivax malaria.

Santos MLS(1), Reis EC(2), Bricher PN(2), Sousa TN(1), Brito CFA(1), Lacerda
MVG(3), Fontes CJF(4), Carvalho LH(1), Pontillo A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Malária, Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo
Cruz, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Imunogenética, Departamento de Imunologia, Instituto de
Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(3)Fundação de Medicina Tropical Dr. Heitor Vieira Dourado, Instituto de
Pesquisas Leônidas and Maria Deane, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Manaus, AM, Brazil.
(4)Hospital Julio Muller, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso, Cuiabá, MT,
Brazil.
(5)Laboratório de Imunogenética, Departamento de Imunologia, Instituto de
Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic
address: alepontillo@usp.br.

Recent reports showed that, in mice, symptomatic Plasmodium infection triggers
NLRP3/NLRP12-dependent inflammasome formation and caspase-1 activation in
monocytes. In humans, few works demonstrated that inflammasome is activated in
malaria. As Plasmodiumvivax is a potent inducer of inflammatory response we
hypothesised that inflammasome genetics might affect P. vivax malaria clinical
presentation. For this purpose, selected SNPs in inflammasome genes were analysed
among patients with symptomatic P. vivax malaria. 157 Brazilian Amazon patients
with P. vivax malaria were genotyped for 10 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in inflammasome genes NLRP1, NLRP3, AIM2, CARD8, IL1B, IL18 and MEFV.
Effect of SNPs on hematologic and clinical parameters was analysed by
multivariate analysis. Our data suggested an important role of NLRP1 inflammasome
receptor in shaping the clinical presentation of P. vivax malaria, in term of
presence of fever, anaemia and thrombocytopenia. Moreover IL1B rs1143634 resulted
significantly associated to patients' parasitaemia, while IL18 rs5744256 plays a 
protective role against the development of anaemia. Polymorphisms in inflammasome
genes could affect one or other aspects of malaria pathogenesis. Moreover, these 
data reveal novel aspects of P.vivax/host interaction that involved
NLRP1-inflammasome.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.02.038 
PMID: 26946405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

