
1. Mol Microbiol. 2016 Jun;100(6):1080-95. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13369. Epub 2016 Mar 30.

Polypeptide release factors and stop codon recognition in the apicoplast and
mitochondrion of Plasmodium falciparum.

Vaishya S(1), Kumar V(1), Gupta A(1), Siddiqi MI(1), Habib S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Structural Biology, CSIR-Central Drug Research
Institute, Lucknow, India.

Correct termination of protein synthesis would be a critical step in translation 
of organellar open reading frames (ORFs) of the apicoplast and mitochondrion of
the malaria parasite. We identify release factors (RFs) responsible for
recognition of the UAA and UGA stop-codons of apicoplast ORFs and the sole UAA
stop-codon that terminates translation from the three mitochondrial ORFs. A
single nuclear-encoded canonical RF2, PfRF2Api , localizes to the apicoplast. It 
has a conserved tripeptide motif (SPF) for stop-codon recognition and is
sufficient for peptidyl-tRNA hydrolysis (PTH) from both UAA and UGA. Two RF
family proteins are targeted to the parasite mitochondrion; a canonical RF1,
PfRF1Mit , with a variant codon-recognition motif (PxN instead of the conserved
RF1 PxT) is the major peptidyl-hydrolase with specific recognition of the UAA
codon relevant to mitochondrial ORFs. Mutation of the N residue of the PfRF1Mit
PxN motif and two other conserved residues of the codon recognition domain lowers
PTH activity from pre-termination ribosomes indicating their role in
codon-recognition. The second RF imported by the mitochondrion is the
non-canonical PfICT1 that functions as a dimer and mediates codon nonspecific
peptide release. Our results help delineate a critical step in organellar
translation in Plasmodium, which is an important target for anti-malarials.

Â© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13369 
PMID: 26946524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

