
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2016 Oct;91:1120-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2016.02.069.
Epub 2016 Mar 5.

Characterization, biomedical and agricultural applications of protease
inhibitors: A review.

Shamsi TN(1), Parveen R(1), Fatima S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Proteins Lab., Department of Biotechnology, Jamia Millia Islamia,
New Delhi 110025, India.
(2)Genes and Proteins Lab., Department of Biotechnology, Jamia Millia Islamia,
New Delhi 110025, India. Electronic address: amu.jmi@rediffmail.com.

This review describes Protease Inhibitors (PIs) which target or inhibit
proteases, protein digesting enzymes. These proteases play a crucial task in many
biological events including digestion, blood coagulation, apoptosis etc.
Regardless of their crucial roles, they need to be checked regularly by PIs as
their excess may possibly damage host organism. On basis of amino acid
composition of PIs where Protease-PI enzymatic reactions occur i.e. serine,
cysteine, and aspartic acid, they are classified. Nowadays, various PIs are being
worked upon to fight various parasitic or viral diseases including malaria,
schistosomiasis, colds, flu', dengue etc. They prevent an ongoing process begun
by carcinogen exposure by keeping a check on metastasis. They also possess
potential to reduce carcinogen-induced, increased levels of gene amplification to
almost normal levels. Some PIs can principally be used for treatment of
hypertension and congestive heart failure by blocking conversion of angiotensin I
to angiotensin II for example Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs).
Also PIs target amyloid β-peptide (Aβ) level in brain which is prime responsible 
for development of Alzheimer's Disease (AD). Also, PIs inhibit enzymatic activity
of HIV-1 Protease Receptor (PR) by preventing cleavage events in Gag and Gag-Pol 
that result in production of non-virulent virus particles.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2016.02.069 
PMID: 26955746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

