
1. Immunogenetics. 2016 Jul;68(6-7):461-475. doi: 10.1007/s00251-016-0908-z. Epub
2016 Mar 12.

Characterization of class II β chain major histocompatibility complex genes in a 
family of Hawaiian honeycreepers: 'amakihi (Hemignathus virens).

Jarvi SI(1), Bianchi KR(2), Farias ME(2), Txakeeyang A(2), McFarland T(2),
Belcaid M(3), Asano A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Daniel K. Inouye College of Pharmacy,
University of Hawaii at Hilo, Hilo, HI, 96720, USA. jarvi@hawaii.edu.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Daniel K. Inouye College of Pharmacy,
University of Hawaii at Hilo, Hilo, HI, 96720, USA.
(3)Pacific Center for Emerging Infectious Diseases Research, John A. Burns School
of Medicine, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813, Kane'ohe, HI,
USA.

Hawaiian honeycreepers (Drepanidinae) have evolved in the absence of mosquitoes
for over five million years. Through human activity, mosquitoes were introduced
to the Hawaiian archipelago less than 200 years ago. Mosquito-vectored diseases
such as avian malaria caused by Plasmodium relictum and Avipoxviruses have
greatly impacted these vulnerable species. Susceptibility to these diseases is
variable among and within species. Due to their function in adaptive immunity,
the role of major histocompatibility complex genes (Mhc) in disease
susceptibility is under investigation. In this study, we evaluate gene
organization and levels of diversity of Mhc class II β chain genes (exon 2) in a 
captive-reared family of Hawaii 'amakihi (Hemignathus virens). A total of 233
sequences (173 bp) were obtained by PCR+1 amplification and cloning, and 5720
sequences were generated by Roche 454 pyrosequencing. We report a total of 17
alleles originating from a minimum of 14 distinct loci. We detected three linkage
groups that appear to represent three distinct haplotypes. Phylogenetic analysis 
revealed one variable cluster resembling classical Mhc sequences (DAB) and one
highly conserved, low variability cluster resembling non-classical Mhc sequences 
(DBB). High net evolutionary divergence values between DAB and DBB resemble that 
seen between chicken BLB system and YLB system genes. High amino acid identity
among non-classical alleles from 12 species of passerines (DBB) and four species 
of Galliformes (YLB) was found, suggesting that these non-classical passerine
sequences may be related to the Galliforme YLB sequences.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-016-0908-z 
PMID: 26971289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

