
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 21;11(3):e0151400. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151400.
eCollection 2016.

A Deep Insight into the Sialome of Male and Female Aedes aegypti Mosquitoes.

Ribeiro JM(1), Martin-Martin I(1), Arc√† B(2), Calvo E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, Section of Vector Biology, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland, United States
of America.
(2)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, Parasitology Section,
Sapienza University of Rome, Roma, Italy.

Only adult female mosquitoes feed on blood, while both genders take sugar meals. 
Accordingly, several compounds associated with blood feeding (i.e. vasodilators, 
anti-clotting, anti-platelets) are found only in female glands, while enzymes
associated with sugar feeding or antimicrobials (such as lysozyme) are found in
the glands of both sexes. We performed de novo assembly of reads from adult Aedes
aegypti female and male salivary gland libraries (285 and 90 million reads,
respectively). By mapping back the reads to the assembled contigs, plus mapping
the reads from a publicly available Ae. aegypti library from adult whole bodies, 
we identified 360 transcripts (including splice variants and alleles)
overexpressed tenfold or more in the glands when compared to whole bodies.
Moreover, among these, 207 were overexpressed fivefold or more in female vs. male
salivary glands, 85 were near equally expressed and 68 were overexpressed in male
glands. We call in particular the attention to C-type lectins, angiopoietins,
female-specific Antigen 5, the 9.7 kDa, 12-14 kDa, 23.5 kDa, 62/34 kDa, 4.2 kDa, 
proline-rich peptide, SG8, 8.7 kDa family and SGS fragments: these polypeptides
are all of unknown function, but due to their overexpression in female salivary
glands and putative secretory nature they are expected to affect host physiology.
We have also found many transposons (some of which novel) and several endogenous 
viral transcripts (probably acquired by horizontal transfer) which are
overexpressed in the salivary glands and may play some role in tissue-specific
gene regulation or represent a mechanism of virus interference. This work
contributes to a near definitive catalog of male and female salivary gland
transcripts from Ae. aegypti, which will help to direct further studies aiming at
the functional characterization of the many transcripts with unknown function and
the understanding of their role in vector-host interaction and pathogen
transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151400 
PMCID: PMC4801386
PMID: 26999592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

