
1. Parasite Immunol. 2016 May;38(5):303-16. doi: 10.1111/pim.12318.

Differential T-cell responses to a chimeric Plasmodium falciparum antigen;
UB05-09, correlates with acquired immunity to malaria.

Dinga JN(1), Njimoh DL(1), Kiawa B(2), Djikeng A(2), Nyasa RB(3), Nkuo-Akenji
T(3), Pellé R(2), Titanji VP(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Unit, Faculty of Science, University of Buea, Buea, Cameroon.
(2)Biosciences Eastern and Central Africa -International Livestock Research
Institute-Hub, Nairobi, Kenya.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, University of Buea, Buea,
Cameroon.
(4)Cameroon Christian University Institute, Bali, Cameroon.

The development of a sterilizing and cost-effective vaccine against malaria
remains a major problem despite recent advances. In this study, it is
demonstrated that two antigens of P. falciparum UB05, UB09 and their chimera
UB05-09 can serve as protective immunity markers by eliciting higher T-cell
responses in malaria semi-immune subjects (SIS) than in frequently sick subjects 
(FSS) and could be used to distinguish these two groups. UB05, UB09 and UB05-09
were cloned, expressed in E. coli, purified and used to stimulate PBMCs isolated 
from 63 subjects in a malaria endemic area, for IFN-γ production, which was
measured by the ELISpot assay. The polymorphism of UB09 gene in the malaria
infected population was also studied by PCR/sequencing of the gene in
P. falciparum field isolates. All three antigens were preferentially recognized
by PBMCs from SIS. IFN-γ production induced by these antigens correlated with the
absence of fever and parasitaemia. UB09 was shown to be relatively well-conserved
in nature. It is concluded that UB05, UB09 and the chimera UB05-09 posses T-cell 
epitopes that are associated with protection against malaria and could thus be
used to distinguish SIS from FSS eventhough acute infection with malaria has been
shown to reduce cytokine production in some studies. Further investigations of
these antigens as potential diagnostic and/or vaccine candidates for malaria are 
indicated.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pim.12318 
PMID: 27012849  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

