
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 25;11(3):e0152197. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152197.
eCollection 2016.

Characterization of a Plasmodium falciparum Orthologue of the Yeast
Ubiquinone-Binding Protein, Coq10p.

Jenkins BJ(1), Daly TM(1), Morrisey JM(1), Mather MW(1), Vaidya AB(1), Bergman
LW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Parasitology, Drexel University College of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA, United States of America.

Coenzyme Q (CoQ, ubiquinone) is a central electron carrier in mitochondrial
respiration. CoQ is synthesized through multiple steps involving a number of
different enzymes. The prevailing view that the CoQ used in respiration exists as
a free pool that diffuses throughout the mitochondrial inner membrane bilayer has
recently been challenged. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, deletion of the 
gene encoding Coq10p results in respiration deficiency without inhibiting the
synthesis of CoQ, suggesting that the Coq10 protein is critical for the delivery 
of CoQ to the site(s) of respiration. The precise mechanism by which this is
achieved remains unknown at present. We have identified a Plasmodium orthologue
of Coq10 (PfCoq10), which is predominantly expressed in trophozoite-stage
parasites, and localizes to the parasite mitochondrion. Expression of PfCoq10 in 
the S. cerevisiae coq10 deletion strain restored the capability of the yeast to
grow on respiratory substrates, suggesting a remarkable functional conservation
of this protein over a vast evolutionary distance, and despite a relatively low
level of amino acid sequence identity. As the antimalarial drug atovaquone acts
as a competitive inhibitor of CoQ, we assessed whether over-expression of PfCoq10
altered the atovaquone sensitivity in parasites and in yeast mitochondria, but
found no alteration of its activity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152197 
PMCID: PMC4807763
PMID: 27015086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

