
1. Gene. 2016 Jul 1;585(1):159-165. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.03.041. Epub 2016 Mar
28.

Structural and functional characterization of an iron-sulfur cluster assembly
scaffold protein-SufA from Plasmodium vivax.

Pala ZR(1), Saxena V(1), Saggu GS(1), Yadav SK(2), Pareek RP(2), Kochar SK(3),
Kochar DK(4), Garg S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, 
Pilani, Rajasthan, India.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani,
Rajasthan, India.
(3)Department of Medicine, Sardar Patel Medical College, Bikaner, Rajasthan,
India.
(4)Department of Medicine, Rajasthan University of Health Sciences, Jaipur,
Rajasthan, India.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, 
Pilani, Rajasthan, India. Electronic address: shilpi@pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in.

Iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters are utilized as prosthetic groups in all living
organisms for diverse range of cellular processes including electron transport in
respiration and photosynthesis, sensing of ambient conditions, regulation of gene
expression and catalysis. In Plasmodium, two Fe-S cluster biogenesis pathways are
reported, of which the Suf pathway in the apicoplast has been shown essential for
the erythrocytic stages of the parasite. While the initial components of this
pathway detailing the sulfur mobilization have been elucidated, the components
required for the assembly and transfer of Fe-S clusters are not reported from the
parasite. In Escherichia coli, SufB acts as a scaffold protein and SufA traffics 
the assembled Fe-S cluster from SufB to target apo-proteins. However, in
Plasmodium, the homologs of these proteins are yet to be characterized for their 
function. Here, we report a putative SufA protein from Plasmodium vivax with
signature motifs of A-type scaffold proteins, which is evolutionarily conserved. 
The presence of the [Fe4S4](3+) cluster under reduced conditions was confirmed by
UV-visible and EPR spectroscopy and the interaction of these clusters with the
conserved cysteine residues of chains A and B of PvSufA, validates its existence 
as a dimer, similar to that in E. coli. The H-bond interactions at the
PvSufA-SufB interface demonstrate SufA as a scaffold protein in conjunction with 
SufB for the pre-assembly of Fe-S clusters and their transfer to the target
proteins. Co-localization of the protein to the apicoplast further provides an
experimental evidence of a functional scaffold protein SufA for the biogenesis of
Fe-S clusters in apicoplast of Plasmodium.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.03.041 
PMID: 27033210  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

