
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 31;11(3):e0151565. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151565.
eCollection 2016.

Artesunate-Amodiaquine and Artemether-Lumefantrine Therapies and Selection of
Pfcrt and Pfmdr1 Alleles in Nanoro, Burkina Faso.

Sondo P(1), Derra K(1), Diallo Nakanabo S(1)(2), Tarnagda Z(1), Kazienga A(1),
Zampa O(2), Valéa I(1)(2), Sorgho H(1), Owusu-Dabo E(3), Ouédraogo JB(1),
Guiguemdé TR(2), Tinto H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)IRSS / Clinical Research Unit of Nanoro (CRUN), Nanoro, Burkina Faso.
(2)Centre Muraz of Bobo-Dioulasso, Bobo-Dioulasso, Burkina Faso.
(3)Kumasi Center for Collaborative Research in Tropical Medicine (KCCR), Kumasi, 
Ghana.

The adoption of Artemisinin based combination therapies (ACT) constitutes a basic
strategy for malaria control in sub-Saharan Africa. Moreover, since cases of ACT 
resistance have been reported in South-East Asia, the need to understand P.
falciparum resistance mechanism to ACT has become a global research goal. The
selective pressure of ACT and the possibility that some specific Pfcrt and Pfmdr1
alleles are associated with treatment failures was assessed in a clinical trial
comparing ASAQ to AL in Nanoro. Dried blood spots collected on Day 0 and on the
day of recurrent parasitaemia during the 28-day follow-up were analyzed using the
restriction fragments length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method to detect single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in Pfcrt (codon76) and Pfmdr1 (codons 86, 184,
1034, 1042, and 1246) genes. Multivariate analysis of the relationship between
the presence of Pfcrt and Pfmdr1 alleles and treatment outcome was performed. AL 
and ASAQ exerted opposite trends in selecting Pfcrt K76T and Pfmdr1-N86Y alleles,
raising the potential beneficial effect of using diverse ACT at the same time as 
first line treatments to reduce the selective pressure by each treatment regimen.
No clear association between the presence of Pfcrt and Pfmdr1 alleles carried at 
baseline and treatment failure was observed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151565 
PMCID: PMC4816516
PMID: 27031231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

