
1. Pathog Glob Health. 2016;110(1):1-8. doi: 10.1080/20477724.2015.1133033. Epub
2016 Feb 18.

Primaquine treatment and relapse in Plasmodium vivax malaria.

Rishikesh K(1)(2), Saravu K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medicine , Kasturba Medical College, Manipal University ,
Madhav Nagar, Manipal 576104 , Karnataka , India.
(2)b Tropical Medicine Research Centre, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal
University , Madhav Nagar, Manipal 576104 , Karnataka , India.

The relapsing peculiarity of Plasmodium vivax is one of the prime reasons for
sustained global malaria transmission. Global containment of P. vivax is more
challenging and crucial compared to other species for achieving total malaria
control/elimination. Primaquine (PQ) failure and P. vivax relapse is a major
global public health concern. Identification and characterization of different
relapse strains of P. vivax prevalent across the globe should be one of the
thrust areas in malaria research. Despite renewed and rising global concern by
researchers on this once 'neglected' species, research and development on the
very topic of P. vivax reappearance remains inadequate. Many malaria endemic
countries have not mandated routine glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)
testing before initiating PQ radical cure in P. vivax malaria. This results in
either no PQ prescription or thoughtless prescription and administration of PQ to
P. vivax patients by healthcare providers without being concerned about patients'
G6PD status and associated complications. It is imperative to ascertain the G6PD 
status and optimum dissemination of PQ radical cure in all cases of P. vivax
malaria across the globe. There persists a compelling need to develop/validate a 
rapid, easy-to-perform, easy-to-interpret, quality controllable, robust, and
cost-effective G6PD assay. High-dose PQ of both standard and short duration
appears to be safe and more effective for preventing relapses and should be
practiced among patients with normal G6PD activity. Multicentric studies
involving adequately representative populations across the globe with reference
PQ dose must be carried out to determine the true distribution of PQ failure.
Study proving role of cytochrome P450-2D6 gene in PQ metabolism and association
of CYP2D6 metabolizer phenotypes and P. vivax relapse is of prime importance and 
should be carried forward in multicentric systems across the globe.

DOI: 10.1080/20477724.2015.1133033 
PMCID: PMC4870028
PMID: 27077309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

