
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Jul;1860(7):1489-97. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2016.04.003. Epub 2016 Apr 11.

Tumor necrosis factor reduces Plasmodium falciparum growth and activates calcium 
signaling in human malaria parasites.

Cruz LN(1), Wu Y(2), Ulrich H(3), Craig AG(2), Garcia CR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo,
Rua do Matão, travessa 14, n321, CEP 05508-900 São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Instituto de Química, Universidade de São Paulo,
São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(4)Department of Physiology, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo,
Rua do Matão, travessa 14, n321, CEP 05508-900 São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic 
address: cgarcia@usp.br.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium has a complex biology including the ability to interact
with host signals modulating their function through cellular machinery. Tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) elicits diverse cellular responses including effects in
malarial pathology and increased infected erythrocyte cytoadherence. As TNF
levels are raised during Plasmodium falciparum infection we have investigated
whether it has an effect on the parasite asexual stage.
METHODS: Flow cytometry, spectrofluorimetric determinations, confocal microscopy 
and PCR real time quantifications were employed for characterizing TNF induced
effects and membrane integrity verified by wheat germ agglutinin staining.
RESULTS: TNF is able to decrease intracellular parasitemia, involving calcium as 
a second messenger of the pathway. Parasites incubated for 48 h with TNF showed
reduced erythrocyte invasion. Thus, TNF induced rises in intracellular calcium
concentration, which were blocked by prior addition of the purinergic receptor
agonists KN62 and A438079, or interfering with intra- or extracellular calcium
release by thapsigargin or EGTA (ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid). Importantly, 
expression of PfPCNA1 which encodes the Plasmodium falciparum Proliferating-Cell 
Nuclear Antigen 1, decreased after P. falciparum treatment of TNF (tumor necrosis
factor) or 6-Bnz cAMP (N(6)-benzoyladenosine-3',5'-cyclic monophosphate sodium
salt).
CONCLUSIONS: This is potentially interesting data showing the relevance of
calcium in downregulating a gene involved in cellular proliferation, triggered by
TNF.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: The data show that Plasmodium may subvert the immunological
system and use TNF for the control of its proliferation within the vertebrate
host.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2016.04.003 
PMCID: PMC4876768
PMID: 27080559  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

