
1. Vet Parasitol. 2016 Nov 15;231:132-136. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2016.04.011. Epub
2016 Apr 14.

Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9: A realiable marker for inflammation in early
human trichinellosis.

Bruschi F(1), D'Amato C(2), Piaggi S(2), Bianchi C(2), Castagna B(2), Paolicchi
A(2), Pinto B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Research, N.T.M.S., Università di Pisa, Pisa,
Italy. Electronic address: fabrizio.bruschi@med.unipi.it.
(2)Department of Translational Research, N.T.M.S., Università di Pisa, Pisa,
Italy.

Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMPs) are involved in many physiological and
pathological processes. As regards parasitic infections, the role of these
proteins has been particularly studied in malaria, neurocysticercosis and
angiostrongyloidosis. Recently, we evaluated serum levels of MMP-9 and -2
(gelatinases) in mice experimentally infected with Trichinella spiralis or
Trichinella pseudospiralis, which cause different degrees of myositis and we
found their significant increase in the former and, at a lesser extent, in the
latter, thus suggesting the possibility that these gelatinases, particularly
MMP-9, represent a marker of inflammation. Our aim was to evaluate the levels of 
MMP-9 and 2 in trichinellosis patients, to assess their possible clinical
significance. Serum samples from 31 Trichinella britovi-infected individuals (20 
males and 11 females), living in Tuscany, Central Italy, were analysed for MMP-9 
and MMP-2 serum levels. Patients acquired infection with Trichinella after
consuming raw or undercooked meat of wild boar. Their median age was 49±0.33years
(range from 7 to 91). Sera was collected before starting anti-inflammatory
treatment, aliquoted and stored at -20°C until use. Sera from healthy subjects
was considered as controls. The gelatinolytic activity of MMPs was analysed by
gelatin zymography on 8% polyacrylamide-SDS gels containing 0.1% porcine gelatin,
under non-reducing conditions. Clear bands corresponding to the digested areas
were evaluated with an appropriate software. MMP-9 levels were additionally
determined in 15 patients using a commercial ELISA kit for human MMP-9. The
zymographic analysis of the gels showed the presence in serum samples of
gelatinase bands at approximately 125-kDa, 92-kDa and 72-kDa, corresponding to
the MMP-9/Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) complex and proenzyme
forms of MMP-9 and MMP-2, respectively. A significant (p<0.01) increase in
gelatinolytic activity in patients compared to the control group was observed for
pro-MMP-9 in 25 out of 31. The mean increase in activity was 39.25%±16.67%. No
significant differences were observed for pro-MMP-2 activity. The MMP-9 levels
detected by ELISA showed significant correlation with zymographic data (r2=0.62, 
p<0.003) and were higher in more affected patients (suffering diarrhea, facial
edemas and myalgia). In conclusion, MMP-9 might be considered as a marker of
inflammation in T. britovi patients. On the contrary, MMP-2 did not result
significantly different in patients, compared to controls.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2016.04.011 
PMID: 27117947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

