
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016 Jul 6;95(1):175-9. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0074. Epub 2016 
May 2.

Epidemiological Aspects of Blastocystis Colonization in Children in Ilero,
Nigeria.

Poulsen CS(1), Efunshile AM(2), Nelson JA(3), Stensvold CR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Parasitology, Department of Microbiology and Infection Control, 
Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Faculty
of Medicine, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. Department of Medical
Microbiology, Ebonyi State University, Abakaliki, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Public Health Studies, Elon University, Elon, North Carolina.
(4)Laboratory of Parasitology, Department of Microbiology and Infection Control, 
Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark. run@ssi.dk.

This study aimed to elucidate aspects of the epidemiology of Blastocystis in
Nigerian school children, including the distribution of subtypes (STs) and ST
alleles. A total of 199 genomic DNAs extracted from fecal samples from 199
Nigerian children aged 2-14 years were tested by real-time polymerase chain
reaction for Blastocystis Positive DNAs were submitted to barcoding by PCR and
sequencing to obtain information on STs and ST alleles. A total of 167 (84%)
samples were positive for Blastocystis, with prevalence increasing by age. No
association between Blastocystis colonization and gender (P = 0.51) or
type/presence of toilet facilities (P = 0.21) was observed. Blastocystis carriers
were more prone to using water collected from wells than from sachets (P =
0.0044). Moreover, Blastocystis positivity was associated with positivity for
fecal-orally transmitted protozoa (P = 0.018) and helminths (P < 0.0001). A clear
inverse association of Blastocystis colonization and malaria infection was
observed (P < 0.0001); however, malaria-positive children being younger than
malaria-negative children, this finding was attributed to the age effect of
Blastocystis colonization. ST data were available for 127/167 (76%) samples.
Fifty-one children were positive for ST1, while 42 and 33 children were colonized
with ST2 and ST3, respectively; a single case of ST7 was observed. By and large, 
the ST alleles identified for ST1 and ST2 did not differ from those observed in
humans in other regions of the world; meanwhile, the distribution of ST3 alleles 
was remarkably distinct and potentially specific to humans in sub-Saharan Africa.

Â© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0074 
PMCID: PMC4944538
PMID: 27139454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

