
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Jun 7;113(23):E3270-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1524294113. Epub 2016 May 16.

Severe adult malaria is associated with specific PfEMP1 adhesion types and high
parasite biomass.

Bernabeu M(1), Danziger SA(1), Avril M(1), Vaz M(2), Babar PH(3), Brazier AJ(1), 
Herricks T(3), Maki JN(3), Pereira L(3), Mascarenhas A(3), Gomes E(2), Chery
L(3), Aitchison JD(1), Rathod PK(3), Smith JD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Research, Seattle, WA 98109;
(2)Department of Medicine, Goa Medical College & Hospital, Bambolim, Goa 403202, 
India;
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195;
Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195.
(4)Center for Infectious Disease Research, Seattle, WA 98109;
joe.smith@cidresearch.org.

The interplay between cellular and molecular determinants that lead to severe
malaria in adults is unexplored. Here, we analyzed parasite virulence factors in 
an infected adult population in India and investigated whether severe malaria
isolates impair endothelial protein C receptor (EPCR), a protein involved in
coagulation and endothelial barrier permeability. Severe malaria isolates
overexpressed specific members of the Plasmodium falciparum var gene/PfEMP1 (P.
falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1) family that bind EPCR, including DC8
var genes that have previously been linked to severe pediatric malaria. Machine
learning analysis revealed that DC6- and DC8-encoding var transcripts in
combination with high parasite biomass were the strongest indicators of patient
hospitalization and disease severity. We found that DC8 CIDRÎ±1 domains from
severe malaria isolates had substantial differences in EPCR binding affinity and 
blockade activity for its ligand activated protein C. Additionally, even a low
level of inhibition exhibited by domains from two cerebral malaria isolates was
sufficient to interfere with activated protein C-barrier protective activities in
human brain endothelial cells. Our findings demonstrate an interplay between
parasite biomass and specific PfEMP1 adhesion types in the development of adult
severe malaria, and indicate that low impairment of EPCR function may contribute 
to parasite virulence.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1524294113 
PMCID: PMC4988613
PMID: 27185931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

