
1. Front Plant Sci. 2016 May 10;7:638. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2016.00638. eCollection
2016.

Isolation and Characterization of Three New Monoterpene Synthases from Artemisia 
annua.

Ruan JX(1), Li JX(1), Fang X(1), Wang LJ(1), Hu WL(1), Chen XY(2), Yang CQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics and National Plant Gene
Research Center (Shanghai), CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant
Sciences, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai China.
(2)National Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics and National Plant Gene
Research Center (Shanghai), CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant
Sciences, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, ShanghaiChina; Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Plant Functional Genomics and Resources, Shanghai Chenshan Plant
Science Research Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, ShanghaiChina.

Artemisia annua, an annual herb used in traditional Chinese medicine, produces a 
wealth of monoterpenes and sesquiterpenes, including the well-known sesquiterpene
lactone artemisinin, an active ingredient in the treatment for malaria. Here we
report three new monoterpene synthases of A. annua. From a glandular trichome
cDNA library, monoterpene synthases of AaTPS2, AaTPS5, and AaTPS6, were isolated 
and characterized. The recombinant proteins of AaTPS5 and AaTPS6 produced
multiple products with camphene and 1,8-cineole as major products, respectively, 
and AaTPS2 produced a single product, Î²-myrcene. Although both Mg(2+) and Mn(2+) 
were able to support their catalytic activities, altered product spectrum was
observed in the presence of Mn(2+) for AaTPS2 and AaTPS5. Analysis of extracts of
aerial tissues and root of A. annua with gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
detected more than 20 monoterpenes, of which the three enzymes constituted more
than 1/3 of the total. Mechanical wounding induced the expression of all three
monoterpene synthase genes, and transcript levels of AaTPS5 and AaTPS6 were also 
elevated after treatments with phytohormones of methyl jasmonate, salicylic acid,
and gibberellin, suggesting a role of these monoterpene synthases in
plant-environment interactions. The three new monoterpene synthases reported here
further our understanding of molecular basis of monoterpene biosynthesis and
regulation in plant.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2016.00638 
PMCID: PMC4861830
PMID: 27242840 

