
1. J Nat Med. 2016 Jul;70(3):318-34. doi: 10.1007/s11418-016-1008-y. Epub 2016 Jun
1.

Artemisinin-based antimalarial research: application of biotechnology to the
production of artemisinin, its mode of action, and the mechanism of resistance of
Plasmodium parasites.

Muangphrom P(1), Seki H(1), Fukushima EO(1)(2), Muranaka T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University,
2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
(2)Continuing Professional Development Center, Department of Biotechnology,
Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka,
565-0871, Japan.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University,
2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. muranaka@bio.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp.

Malaria is a worldwide disease caused by Plasmodium parasites. A sesquiterpene
endoperoxide artemisinin isolated from Artemisia annua was discovered and has
been accepted for its use in artemisinin-based combinatorial therapies, as the
most effective current antimalarial treatment. However, the quantity of this
compound produced from the A.Â annua plant is very low, and the availability of
artemisinin is insufficient to treat all infected patients. In addition, the
emergence of artemisinin-resistant Plasmodium has been reported recently. Several
techniques have been applied to enhance artemisinin availability, and studies
related to its mode of action and the mechanism of resistance of malaria-causing 
parasites are ongoing. In this review, we summarize the application of modern
technologies to improve the production of artemisinin, including our ongoing
research on artemisinin biosynthetic genes in other Artemisia species. The
current understanding of the mode of action of artemisinin as well as the
mechanism of resistance against this compound in Plasmodium parasites is also
presented. Finally, the current situation of malaria infection and the future
direction of antimalarial drug development are discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s11418-016-1008-y 
PMCID: PMC4935751
PMID: 27250562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

