
1. J Mol Evol. 2016 Jun;82(6):303-14. doi: 10.1007/s00239-016-9749-5. Epub 2016 Jun 
9.

Wider than Thought Phylogenetic Occurrence of Apicortin, A Characteristic Protein
of Apicomplexan Parasites.

Orosz F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Institute of Enzymology, Hungarian
Academy of Sciences, Magyar tudósok körútja 2, H-1117, Budapest, Hungary.
orosz.ferenc@ttk.mta.hu.

Apicomplexan parasites cause serious illnesses, including malaria, in humans and 
domestic animals. The presence of apicortins is predominantly characteristic of
this phylum. All the apicomplexan species sequenced contain an apicortin which
unites two conserved domains: DCX and partial p25alpha. This paper identifies
novel apicortin orthologs in silico and corrects in several cases the erroneous
sequences of hypothetical apicortin proteins of Cryptosporidium, Eimeria, and
Theileria genera published in databases. Plasmodium apicortins, except from
Plasmodium gallinaceum, differ significantly from the other apicomplexan
apicortins. The feature of this ortholog suggests that only orthologs of
Plasmodiums hosted by mammals altered significantly. The free-living Chromerida, 
Chromera velia, and Vitrella brassicaformis, contain three paralogs. Their
apicomplexan-type and nonapicomplexan-type apicortins might be "outparalogs." The
fungal ortholog, Rozella allomycis, found at protein level, and the algal Nitella
mirabilis, found as Transcriptome Shotgun Assembly (TSA), are similar to the
known Opisthokont (Trichoplax adhaerens, Spizellomyces punctatus) and
Viridiplantae (Nicotiana tabacum) ones, since they do not contain the long,
unstructured N-terminal part present in apicomplexan apicortins. A few eumetazoan
animals possess apicortin-like (partial) sequences at TSA level, which may be
either contaminations or the result of horizontal gene transfer; in some cases
the contamination has been proved.

DOI: 10.1007/s00239-016-9749-5 
PMID: 27282556  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

