
1. PLoS One. 2016 Jun 14;11(6):e0157390. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157390.
eCollection 2016.

Malaria Parasite CLAG3, a Protein Linked to Nutrient Channels, Participates in
High Molecular Weight Membrane-Associated Complexes in the Infected Erythrocyte.

Zainabadi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, NIH, Rockville, Maryland, United States of America.

Malaria infected erythrocytes show increased permeability to a number of solutes 
important for parasite growth as mediated by the Plasmodial Surface Anion Channel
(PSAC). The P. falciparum clag3 genes have recently been identified as key
determinants of PSAC, though exactly how they contribute to channel function and 
whether additional host/parasite proteins are required remain unknown. To begin
to answer these questions, I have taken a biochemical approach. Here I have used 
an epitope-tagged CLAG3 parasite to perform co-immunoprecipitation experiments
using membrane fractions of infected erythrocytes. Native PAGE and mass
spectrometry studies reveal that CLAG3 participate in at least three different
high molecular weight complexes: a ~720kDa complex consisting of CLAG3, RHOPH2
and RHOPH3; a ~620kDa complex consisting of CLAG3 and RHOPH2; and a ~480kDa
complex composed solely of CLAG3. Importantly, these complexes can be found
throughout the parasite lifecycle but are absent in untransfected controls.
Extracellular biotin labeling and protease susceptibility studies localize the
480kDa complex to the erythrocyte membrane. This complex, likely composed of a
homo-oligomer of 160kDa CLAG3, may represent a functional subunit, possibly the
pore, of PSAC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157390 
PMCID: PMC4907441
PMID: 27299521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

