
1. J Med Entomol. 2016 Nov;53(6):1482-1487. Epub 2016 Jun 12.

Detection of Plasmodium falciparum Infection in Anopheles squamosus (Diptera:
Culicidae) in an Area Targeted for Malaria Elimination, Southern Zambia.

Stevenson JC(1)(2), Simubali L(2), Mbambara S(2), Musonda M(2), Mweetwa S(2),
Mudenda T(2), Pringle JC(1), Jones CM(1), Norris DE(3).

Author information: 
(1)The W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
The Johns Hopkins Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health, 615 North Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD 21205
(jennyc.stevenson@macharesearch.org; jpringl3@jhu.edu; cjone176@jhu.edu;
douglas.norris@jhu.edu).
(2)Macha Research Trust, Choma, Zambia (limonty.simubali@macharesearch.org;
saidon.mbambara@macharesearch.org; Michael.musonda@macharesearch.org;
Sydney.mweetwa@macharesearch.org; twig.mudenda@gmail.com), and.
(3)The W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
The Johns Hopkins Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health, 615 North Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD 21205
(jennyc.stevenson@macharesearch.org; jpringl3@jhu.edu; cjone176@jhu.edu;
douglas.norris@jhu.edu) douglas.norris@jhu.edu.

Southern Zambia is the focus of strategies to create malaria-free zones.
Interventions being rolled out include test and treat strategies and distribution
of insecticide-treated bed nets that target vectors that host-seek indoors and
late at night. In Macha, Choma District, collections of mosquitoes were made
outdoors using barrier screens within homesteads or UV bulb light traps set next 
to goats, cattle, or chickens during the rainy season of 2015. Anopheline
mosquitoes were identified to species using molecular methods and Plasmodium
falciparum infectivity was determined by ELISA and real-time qPCR methods. More
than 40% of specimens caught were identified as Anopheles squamosus Theobald,
1901 of which six were found harboring malaria parasites. A single sample,
morphologically identified as Anopheles coustani Laveran, 1900, was also found to
be infectious. All seven specimens were caught outdoors next to goat pens.
Parasite-positive specimens as well as a subset of An. squamosus specimens from
either the same study or archive collections from the same area underwent
sequencing of the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase subunit I gene. Maximum
parsimony trees constructed from the aligned sequences indicated presence of at
least two clades of An. squamosus with infectious specimens falling in each
clade. The single infectious specimen identified morphologically as An. coustani 
could not be matched to reference sequences. This is the first report from Zambia
of infections in An. squamosus, a species which is described in literature to
display exophagic traits. The bionomic characteristics of this species needs to
be studied further to fully evaluate the implications for indoor-targeted vector 
control.

Â© The Authors 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Entomological Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jme/tjw091 
PMCID: PMC5106822
PMID: 27297214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

