
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jun 13;6:27806. doi: 10.1038/srep27806.

Comparative chemical genomics reveal that the spiroindolone antimalarial KAE609
(Cipargamin) is a P-type ATPase inhibitor.

Goldgof GM(1)(2), Durrant JD(3), Ottilie S(1), Vigil E(1), Allen KE(4), Gunawan
F(1), Kostylev M(2), Henderson KA(5), Yang J(1), Schenken J(1), LaMonte GM(1),
Manary MJ(1), Murao A(2), Nachon M(1), Stanhope R(1), Prescott M(1), McNamara
CW(6), Slayman CW(4), Amaro RE(3), Suzuki Y(2), Winzeler EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Drug Discovery, Department of Pediatrics,
University of California, San Diego, School of Medicine, La Jolla, California,
USA.
(2)Department of Synthetic Biology and Bioenergy, J. Craig Venter Institute, La
Jolla, California, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry &Biochemistry and the National Biomedical Computation 
Resource, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.
(5)Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, 
USA.
(6)Genomics Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation, San Diego, California,
USA.

The spiroindolones, a new class of antimalarial medicines discovered in a
cellular screen, are rendered less active by mutations in a parasite P-type
ATPase, PfATP4. We show here that S. cerevisiae also acquires mutations in a gene
encoding a P-type ATPase (ScPMA1) after exposure to spiroindolones and that these
mutations are sufficient for resistance. KAE609 resistance mutations in ScPMA1 do
not confer resistance to unrelated antimicrobials, but do confer cross
sensitivity to the alkyl-lysophospholipid edelfosine, which is known to displace 
ScPma1p from the plasma membrane. Using an in vitro cell-free assay, we
demonstrate that KAE609 directly inhibits ScPma1p ATPase activity. KAE609 also
increases cytoplasmic hydrogen ion concentrations in yeast cells. Computer
docking into a ScPma1p homology model identifies a binding mode that supports
genetic resistance determinants and in vitro experimental structure-activity
relationships in both P. falciparum and S. cerevisiae. This model also suggests a
shared binding site with the dihydroisoquinolones antimalarials. Our data support
a model in which KAE609 exerts its antimalarial activity by directly interfering 
with P-type ATPase activity.

DOI: 10.1038/srep27806 
PMCID: PMC4904242
PMID: 27291296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

