
1. Hum Immunol. 2016 Oct;77(10):961-971. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2016.06.010. Epub
2016 Jun 15.

Impact of genetic variations in C-C chemokine receptors and ligands on infectious
diseases.

Qidwai T(1), Khan MY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow
226 025, India. Electronic address: tabish.qidwai@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow
226 025, India. Electronic address: profmykhan@rediffmail.com.

Chemokine receptors and ligands are crucial for extensive immune response against
infectious diseases such as malaria, leishmaniasis, HIV and tuberculosis and a
wide variety of other diseases. Role of chemokines are evidenced in the
activation and regulation of immune cell migration which is important for immune 
response against diseases. Outcome of disease is determined by complex
interaction among pathogen, host genetic variability and surrounding milieu.
Variation in expression or function of chemokines caused by genetic polymorphisms
could be associated with attenuated immune responses. Exploration of chemokine
genetic polymorphisms in therapeutic response, gene regulation and disease
outcome is important. Infectious agents in human host alter the expression of
chemokines via epigenetic alterations and thus contribute to disease
pathogenesis. Although some fragmentary data are available on chemokine genetic
variations and their contribution in diseases, no unequivocal conclusion has been
arrived as yet. We therefore, aim to investigate the association of CCR5-CCL5 and
CCR2-CCL2 genetic polymorphisms with different infectious diseases,
transcriptional regulation of gene, disease severity and response to therapy.
Furthermore, the role of epigenetics in genes related to chemokines and
infectious disease are also discussed.

Copyright Â© 2016 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humimm.2016.06.010 
PMID: 27316325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

