
1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2016 Dec 1;611:51-57. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2016.06.011. Epub 
2016 Jun 15.

Zinc and infant nutrition.

Ackland ML(1), Michalczyk AA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, School of Life and Environmental
Sciences, Deakin University, Burwood, Victoria 3125, Australia. Electronic
address: leigha@deakin.edu.au.
(2)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, School of Life and Environmental
Sciences, Deakin University, Burwood, Victoria 3125, Australia.

Zinc is essential for a wide variety of cellular processes in all cells. It is a 
critical dietary nutrient, particularly in the early stages of life. In the early
neonatal period, adequate sources of zinc can be obtained from breast milk. In
rare circumstances, the mammary gland produces zinc deficient milk that is
potentially lethal for exclusively breast-fed infants. This can be overcome by
zinc supplementation to the infant. Alterations to key zinc transporters provide 
insights into the mechanisms of cellular zinc homeostasis. The bioavailability of
zinc in food depends on the presence of constituents that may complex zinc. In
many countries, zinc deficiency is a major health issue due to poor nourishment. 
Young children are particularly affected. Zinc deficiency can impair immune
function and contributes to the global burden of infectious diseases including
diarrhoea, pneumonia and malaria. Furthermore, zinc deficiency may extend its
influence across generations by inducing epigenetic effects that alter the
expression of genes. This review discusses the significance of adequate zinc
nutrition in infants, factors that influence zinc nutrition, the consequences of 
zinc deficiency, including its contribution to the global burden of disease, and 
addresses some of the knowledge gaps in zinc biology.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2016.06.011 
PMID: 27317042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

