
1. Genes Environ. 2015 Jun 16;37:3. doi: 10.1186/s41021-015-0002-z. eCollection
2015.

Toll-like receptor (TLR4) Asp299Gly and Thr399Ile polymorphisms in relation to
clinical falciparum malaria among Nigerian children: a multisite cross-sectional 
immunogenetic study in Lagos.

Iwalokun BA(1), Oluwadun A(2), Iwalokun SO(3), Agomo P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Nutrition Division, Nigerian Institute of Medical Research, 6
Edmund Crescent, Yaba. PMB. 2013, Lagos, Nigeria ; Department of Medical
Microbiology & Parasitology, Olabisi Onabanjo University, Sagamu, Ogun State
Nigeria.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology & Parasitology, Olabisi Onabanjo
University, Sagamu, Ogun State Nigeria.
(3)Iru Primary Health Centre, Victoria Island, Lagos, Nigeria.
(4)Biochemistry and Nutrition Division, Nigerian Institute of Medical Research, 6
Edmund Crescent, Yaba. PMB. 2013, Lagos, Nigeria.

INTRODUCTION: This study determined the association of TLR4 Asp299Gly and
Thr399Ile with uncomplicated and severe malaria among Nigerian children of
similar ethnic background in Lagos. The association of these SNPs with high
parasite density, malnutrition, hyperpyrexia and anaemia was also investigated.
METHODS: Genomic DNA of the study participants was screened for the genotypes of 
TLR4 Asp299Gly and Thr399Ile by PCR-RFLP. Anthropometric measurement was
performed on the Pf infected children stratified into asymptomatic malaria
(control), uncomplicated and severe malaria (case). Parasites were detected by
light microscopy and Hardy Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE) of SNP genotypes was also
determined.
RESULTS: A total of 279 children comprising 182 children (62.1 % male; mean ± SEM
age, 57.3 ± 1.7 months) with clinical falciparum malaria and 97 children (55.7 % 
male; mean ± SEM age, 55.6 ± 2.5 years) with asymptomatic falciparum malaria were
enrolled. All the genotypes of both TLR4 SNPs were found in the study population 
with their minor alleles: 299Gly and 399Ile, found to be 17.6 % and 14.7 % in
severe malaria children. Unlike in asymptomatic population, the genotype
distribution of TLR4 Asp299Gly SNP was not in HWE in the clinical malaria group
but did not condition susceptibility. However, Asp299Gly and Thr399Ile
polymorphisms were found to increase the risk of severe malaria 3-fold and 8-fold
respectively (P < 0.05). They also increased the risk of severe anaemia, high
parasite density and severe malnutrition 3.8 -5.3-fold, 3.3 - 4.4-fold and 4-fold
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the above findings, we conclude that TLR4 Asp299Gly and
Thr399Ile polymorphisms may modulate susceptibility to severe malaria among
Nigerian children of Yoruba ethnic background.

DOI: 10.1186/s41021-015-0002-z 
PMCID: PMC4910769
PMID: 27350800 

