
1. Life Sci. 2016 Aug 1;158:104-10. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2016.06.030. Epub 2016 Jul 2.

Understanding the biology of the Plasmodium falciparum apicoplast; an excellent
target for antimalarial drug development.

Chakraborty A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Biology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India. Electronic address: 
arnish@icgeb.res.in.

Malaria is a life-threatening tropical disease, caused by the intracellular
parasite Plasmodium falciparum. The World Health Organization counts malaria as
one of the top ten causes of worldwide death. The unavailability of a successful 
malaria vaccine and the ever-increasing instances of drug resistance in the
malaria parasite demand the discovery of new targets within P. falciparum for the
development of next generation antimalarials. Fortunately, all apicomplexan
parasites, including P. falciparum harbor a relict, non-photosynthetic plastid
known as the apicoplast. The apicoplast is a semi-autonomous organelle within P. 
falciparum containing a 35kb circular genome. Despite a genome of its own,
majority of the apicoplast proteins are encoded by the parasite nucleus and
imported into the apicoplast. The organelle has been shown to be essential to P. 
falciparum survival and the loss the apicoplast manifests as a 'delayed death'
response in the parasite. The apicoplast has evolved out of cyanobacteria in a
complex, two step endosymbiotic event. As a result the architecture and the gene 
expression machinery of the apicoplast is quite bacteria-like and is susceptible 
to a wide range of antibiotics such as fosmidomycin, tetracycline, azithromycin, 
clindamycin and triclosan. The biosynthetic pathways for isoprenoids, fatty acids
and heme operate within the malaria apicoplast, making the organelle an excellent
target for drug development. The review focuses on the evolution, biology and the
essentiality of the apicoplast within the malaria parasite and discusses some of 
the recent achievements towards the design and discovery of apicoplast targeted
antimalarial compounds.

Copyright Â© 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2016.06.030 
PMID: 27381078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

