
1. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2016 Jul;72(Pt 7):523-33. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X16008475. Epub 2016 Jun 22.

Crystal structure of truncated aspartate transcarbamoylase from Plasmodium
falciparum.

Lunev S(1), Bosch SS(2), Batista Fde A(1), Wrenger C(2), Groves MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Design, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy,
University of Groningen, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9700 AD Groningen, The
Netherlands.
(2)Unit for Drug Discovery, Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical
Science, University of São Paulo, Avenida Professor Lineu Prestes 1374, 05508-000
São Paulo-SP, Brazil.

The de novo pyrimidine-biosynthesis pathway of Plasmodium falciparum is a
promising target for antimalarial drug discovery. The parasite requires a supply 
of purines and pyrimidines for growth and proliferation and is unable to take up 
pyrimidines from the host. Direct (or indirect) inhibition of de novo pyrimidine 
biosynthesis via dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (PfDHODH), the fourth enzyme of the
pathway, has already been shown to be lethal to the parasite. In the second step 
of the plasmodial pyrimidine-synthesis pathway, aspartate and carbamoyl phosphate
are condensed to N-carbamoyl-L-aspartate and inorganic phosphate by aspartate
transcarbamoylase (PfATC). In this paper, the 2.5 Å resolution crystal structure 
of PfATC is reported. The space group of the PfATC crystals was determined to be 
monoclinic P21, with unit-cell parameters a = 87.0, b = 103.8, c = 87.1 Å, α =
90.0, β = 117.7, γ = 90.0°. The presented PfATC model shares a high degree of
homology with the catalytic domain of Escherichia coli ATC. There is as yet no
evidence of the existence of a regulatory domain in PfATC. Similarly to E. coli
ATC, PfATC was modelled as a homotrimer in which each of the three active sites
is formed at the oligomeric interface. Each active site comprises residues from
two adjacent subunits in the trimer with a high degree of evolutional
conservation. Here, the activity loss owing to mutagenesis of the key active-site
residues is also described.

DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X16008475 
PMCID: PMC4933002
PMID: 27380369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

