
1. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Jul 18;12(7):e1005734. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005734.
eCollection 2016 Jul.

A Putative Small Solute Transporter Is Responsible for the Secretion of G377 and 
TRAP-Containing Secretory Vesicles during Plasmodium Gamete Egress and Sporozoite
Motility.

Kehrer J(1), Singer M(1), Lemgruber L(1), Silva PA(2), Frischknecht F(1), Mair
GR(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Parasitology, Center for Infectious Diseases, University of
Heidelberg Medical School, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Instituto Medicina Molecular, Lisbon, Portugal.

Regulated protein secretion is required for malaria parasite life cycle
progression and transmission between the mammalian host and mosquito vector.
During transmission from the host to the vector, exocytosis of highly specialised
secretory vesicles, such as osmiophilic bodies, is key to the dissolution of the 
red blood cell and parasitophorous vacuole membranes enabling gamete egress. The 
positioning of adhesins from the TRAP family, from micronemes to the sporozoite
surface, is essential for gliding motility of the parasite and transmission from 
mosquito to mammalian host. Here we identify a conserved role for the putative
pantothenate transporter PAT in Plasmodium berghei in vesicle fusion of two
distinct classes of vesicles in gametocytes and sporozoites. PAT is a membrane
component of osmiophilic bodies in gametocytes and micronemes in sporozoites.
Despite normal formation and trafficking of osmiophilic bodies to the cell
surface upon activation, PAT-deficient gametes fail to discharge their contents, 
remain intraerythrocytic and unavailable for fertilisation and further
development in the mosquito. Sporozoites lacking PAT fail to secrete TRAP, are
immotile and thus unable to infect the subsequent rodent host. Thus, P. berghei
PAT appears to regulate exocytosis in two distinct populations of vesicles in two
different life cycle forms rather than acting as pantothenic transporter during
parasite transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005734 
PMCID: PMC4948853
PMID: 27427910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

