
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Aug 16;113(33):9268-73. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1608295113. Epub 2016 Jul 20.

Cytochrome P450 associated with insecticide resistance catalyzes cuticular
hydrocarbon production in Anopheles gambiae.

Balabanidou V(1), Kampouraki A(2), MacLean M(3), Blomquist GJ(3), Tittiger C(3), 
Juárez MP(4), Mijailovsky SJ(4), Chalepakis G(2), Anthousi A(2), Lynd A(5),
Antoine S(5), Hemingway J(6), Ranson H(5), Lycett GJ(5), Vontas J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology-Hellas, Heraklion 70013, Greece; Department of Biology, University of 
Crete, Vassilika Vouton, Heraklion 70013, Greece;
(2)Department of Biology, University of Crete, Vassilika Vouton, Heraklion 70013,
Greece;
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV 89557;
(4)Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas de La Plata, Centro Científico
Tecnológico La Plata, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas 
- Facultad de Ciencias Médicas, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, La Plata 1900, 
Argentina;
(5)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool
L3 5QA, United Kingdom;
(6)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool
L3 5QA, United Kingdom; janet.hemingway@lstmed.ac.uk vontas@imbb.forth.gr.
(7)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology-Hellas, Heraklion 70013, Greece; Pesticide Science Laboratory,
Department of Crop Science, Agricultural University of Athens, 11855 Athens,
Greece janet.hemingway@lstmed.ac.uk vontas@imbb.forth.gr.

The role of cuticle changes in insecticide resistance in the major malaria vector
Anopheles gambiae was assessed. The rate of internalization of (14)C deltamethrin
was significantly slower in a resistant strain than in a susceptible strain.
Topical application of an acetone insecticide formulation to circumvent
lipid-based uptake barriers decreased the resistance ratio by ∼50%. Cuticle
analysis by electron microscopy and characterization of lipid extracts indicated 
that resistant mosquitoes had a thicker epicuticular layer and a significant
increase in cuticular hydrocarbon (CHC) content (∼29%). However, the CHC profile 
and relative distribution were similar in resistant and susceptible insects. The 
cellular localization and in vitro activity of two P450 enzymes, CYP4G16 and
CYP4G17, whose genes are frequently overexpressed in resistant Anopheles
mosquitoes, were analyzed. These enzymes are potential orthologs of the CYP4G1/2 
enzymes that catalyze the final step of CHC biosynthesis in Drosophila and Musca 
domestica, respectively. Immunostaining indicated that both CYP4G16 and CYP4G17
are highly abundant in oenocytes, the insect cell type thought to secrete
hydrocarbons. However, an intriguing difference was indicated; CYP4G17 occurs
throughout the cell, as expected for a microsomal P450, but CYP4G16 localizes to 
the periphery of the cell and lies on the cytoplasmic side of the cell membrane, 
a unique position for a P450 enzyme. CYP4G16 and CYP4G17 were functionally
expressed in insect cells. CYP4G16 produced hydrocarbons from a C18 aldehyde
substrate and thus has bona fide decarbonylase activity similar to that of
dmCYP4G1/2. The data support the hypothesis that the coevolution of multiple
mechanisms, including cuticular barriers, has occurred in highly
pyrethroid-resistant An gambiae.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1608295113 
PMCID: PMC4995928
PMID: 27439866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

