
1. PLoS One. 2016 Jul 20;11(7):e0158724. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0158724.
eCollection 2016.

Mitochondrial Complex I Is a Global Regulator of Secondary Metabolism, Virulence 
and Azole Sensitivity in Fungi.

Bromley M(1), Johns A(1), Davies E(2), Fraczek M(1), Mabey Gilsenan J(1),
Kurbatova N(3), Keays M(3), Kapushesky M(3), Gut M(4), Gut I(4), Denning DW(2),
Bowyer P(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Manchester Fungal Infection Group, Institute of Inflammation and Repair,
Faculty of Medicine and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, 2.24 Core
technology Building, Grafton St., Manchester, M13 9NT, United Kingdom.
(2)National Aspergillosis Centre, University Hospital of South Manchester,
University of Manchester, School of Translational Medicine, Manchester Academic
Health Science Centre, 2nd Floor Education & Research Centre, University of
Manchester, Manchester, M23 9LT, United Kingdom.
(3)The EMBL-European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus,
Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SD, United Kingdom.
(4)Centro Nacional de Analisis Genomico, Parc Cientific de Barcelona, Baldiri
Reixac, 4, PCB - Tower I, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2017 Feb 2;12 (2):e0171787.

Recent estimates of the global burden of fungal disease suggest that that their
incidence has been drastically underestimated and that mortality may rival that
of malaria or tuberculosis. Azoles are the principal class of antifungal drug and
the only available oral treatment for fungal disease. Recent occurrence and
increase in azole resistance is a major concern worldwide. Known azole resistance
mechanisms include over-expression of efflux pumps and mutation of the gene
encoding the target protein cyp51a, however, for one of the most important fungal
pathogens of humans, Aspergillus fumigatus, much of the observed azole resistance
does not appear to involve such mechanisms. Here we present evidence that azole
resistance in A. fumigatus can arise through mutation of components of
mitochondrial complex I. Gene deletions of the 29.9KD subunit of this complex are
azole resistant, less virulent and exhibit dysregulation of secondary metabolite 
gene clusters in a manner analogous to deletion mutants of the secondary
metabolism regulator, LaeA. Additionally we observe that a mutation leading to an
E180D amino acid change in the 29.9 KD subunit is strongly associated with
clinical azole resistant A. fumigatus isolates. Evidence presented in this paper 
suggests that complex I may play a role in the hypoxic response and that one
possible mechanism for cell death during azole treatment is a dysfunctional
hypoxic response that may be restored by dysregulation of complex I. Both
deletion of the 29.9 KD subunit of complex I and azole treatment alone profoundly
change expression of gene clusters involved in secondary metabolism and
immunotoxin production raising potential concerns about long term azole therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0158724 
PMCID: PMC4954691
PMID: 27438017  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

