
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jul 19;6:29755. doi: 10.1038/srep29755.

Interactive cost of Plasmodium infection and insecticide resistance in the
malaria vector Anopheles gambiae.

Alout H(1), Dabiré RK(2), Djogbénou LS(3), Abate L(1), Corbel V(1)(4), Chandre
F(1), Cohuet A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherche pour le développement (IRD), Maladies Infectieuses et
Vecteurs, Ecologie, Génétique, Evolution et Contrôle (MIVEGEC), UM1-UM2-CNRS 5290
IRD 224, Montpellier, France.
(2)Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé (IRSS), 01 BP 545 Bobo-Dioulasso
01, Burkina Faso.
(3)Institut Régional de Santé Publique/Université d'Abomey-Calavi, 01 BP 918
Cotonou, Bénin.
(4)Department of Entomology, Faculty of Agriculture, Kasetsart University,
Bangkok 10900, Thailand.

Insecticide resistance raises concerns for the control of vector-borne diseases. 
However, its impact on parasite transmission could be diverse when considering
the ecological interactions between vector and parasite. Thus we investigated the
fitness cost associated with insecticide resistance and Plasmodium falciparum
infection as well as their interactive cost on Anopheles gambiae survival and
fecundity. In absence of infection, we observed a cost on fecundity associated
with insecticide resistance. However, survival was higher for mosquito bearing
the kdr mutation and equal for those with the ace-1(R) mutation compared to their
insecticide susceptible counterparts. Interestingly, Plasmodium infection reduced
survival only in the insecticide resistant strains but not in the susceptible one
and infection was associated with an increase in fecundity independently of the
strain considered. This study provides evidence for a survival cost associated
with infection by Plasmodium parasite only in mosquito selected for insecticide
resistance. This suggests that the selection of insecticide resistance mutation
may have disturbed the interaction between parasites and vectors, resulting in
increased cost of infection. Considering the fitness cost as well as other
ecological aspects of this natural mosquito-parasite combination is important to 
predict the epidemiological impact of insecticide resistance.

DOI: 10.1038/srep29755 
PMCID: PMC4949420
PMID: 27432257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

