
1. Parasit Vectors. 2016 Jul 26;9(1):416. doi: 10.1186/s13071-016-1692-1.

Genetic diversity of Plasmodium falciparum isolates from uncomplicated malaria
cases in Ghana over a decade.

Duah NO(1), Matrevi SA(2), Quashie NB(2)(3), Abuaku B(2), Koram KA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology Department, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research,
College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, P. O. Box LG581, Legon, Ghana.
nduah@noguchi.ug.edu.gh.
(2)Epidemiology Department, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research,
College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, P. O. Box LG581, Legon, Ghana.
(3)Centre for Tropical Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, School of Medicine
and Dentistry, College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, P. O. Box GP
4260, Accra, Ghana.

BACKGROUND: Genotyping malaria parasites to assess their diversity in different
geographic settings have become necessary for the selection of antigenic epitopes
for vaccine development and for antimalarial drug efficacy or resistance
investigations. This study describes the genetic diversity of Plasmodium
falciparum isolates from uncomplicated malaria cases over a ten year period
(2003-2013) in Ghana using the polymorphic antigenic marker, merozoite surface
protein 2 (msp2).
METHODS: Archived filter paper blood blots from children aged nine years and
below with uncomplicated malaria collected from nine sites in Ghana were typed
for the presence of the markers. A total of 880 samples were genotyped for msp2
for the two major allelic families, FC27 and 3D7, using nested polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). The allele frequencies and the multiplicity of infection were
determined for the nine sites for five time points over a period of ten years,
2003-2004, 2005-2006, 2007-2008, 2010 and 2012-2013 malaria transmission seasons.
RESULTS: The number of different alleles detected for the msp2 gene by resolving 
PCR products on agarose gels was 14. Both of the major allelic families, 3D7 and 
FC27 were common in all population samples. The highest multiplicity of infection
(MOI) was observed in isolates from Begoro (forest zone, rural site): 3.31 for
the time point 2007-2008. A significant variation was observed among the sites in
the MOIs detected per infection (Fisher's exact test, P < 0.001) for the 2007
isolates and also at each of the three sites with data for three different years,
Hohoe, P = 0.03; Navrongo, P < 0.001; Cape Coast, P < 0.001. Overall, there was
no significant difference between the MOIs of the three ecological zones over the
years (P = 0.37) and between the time points when data from all sites were pooled
(P = 0.40).
CONCLUSIONS: The diversity and variation between isolates detected using the msp2
gene in Ghanaian isolates were observed to be profound; however, there was
homogeneity throughout the three ecological zones studied. This is indicative of 
gene flow between the parasite populations across the country probably due to
human population movements (HPM).

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-016-1692-1 
PMCID: PMC4962487
PMID: 27460474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

