
1. Proteins. 2016 Nov;84(11):1658-1669. doi: 10.1002/prot.25107. Epub 2016 Aug 13.

Role of W181 in modulating kinetic properties of Plasmodium falciparum
hypoxanthine guanine xanthine phosphoribosyltransferase.

Roy S(1), Karmakar T(2), Nagappa LK(1), Prahlada Rao VS(1), Balasubramanian S(3),
Balaram H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced
Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore, 560064, India.
(2)Chemistry and Physics of Materials Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced 
Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore, 560064, India.
(3)Chemistry and Physics of Materials Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced 
Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore, 560064, India. bala@jncasr.ac.in.
(4)Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced
Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore, 560064, India. hb@jncasr.ac.in.

Hypoxanthine-guanine-xanthine phosphoribosyltransference (HGXPRT), a key enzyme
in the purine salvage pathway of the malarial parasite, Plasmodium falciparum
(Pf), catalyses the conversion of hypoxanthine, guanine, and xanthine to their
corresponding mononucleotides; IMP, GMP, and XMP, respectively. Out of the five
active site loops (I, II, III, III', and IV) in PfHGXPRT, loop III' facilitates
the closure of the hood over the core domain which is the penultimate step during
enzymatic catalysis. PfHGXPRT mutants were constructed wherein Trp 181 in loop
III' was substituted with Ser, Thr, Tyr, and Phe. The mutants (W181S, W181Y and
W181F), when examined for xanthine phosphoribosylation activity, showed an
increase in Km for PRPP by 2.1-3.4 fold under unactivated condition and a
decrease in catalytic efficiency by more than 5-fold under activated condition as
compared to that of the wild-type enzyme. The W181T mutant showed 10-fold reduced
xanthine phosphoribosylation activity. Furthermore, molecular dynamics
simulations of WT and in silico W181S/Y/F/T PfHGXPRT mutants bound to
IMP.PPi.Mg2+ have been carried out to address the effect of the mutation of W181 
on the overall dynamics of the systems and identify local changes in loop III'.
Dynamic cross-correlation analyses show a communication between loop III' and the
substrate binding site. Differential cross-correlation maps indicate altered
communication among different regions in the mutants. Changes in the local
contacts and hydrogen bonding between residue 181 with the nearby residues cause 
altered substrate affinity and catalytic efficiency of the mutant enzymes.
Proteins 2016; 84:1658-1669. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.25107 
PMID: 27479359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

