
1. J Immunol. 2016 Sep 1;197(5):1884-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1600284. Epub 2016
Jul 29.

Prolonged PD1 Expression on Neonatal Vδ2 Lymphocytes Dampens Proinflammatory
Responses: Role of Epigenetic Regulation.

Hsu H(1), Boudova S(2), Mvula G(3), Divala TH(3), Mungwira RG(3), Harman C(4),
Laufer MK(2), Pauza CD(1), Cairo C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Virology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201;
(2)Division of Malaria Research at the Institute for Global Health, School of
Medicine, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201;
(3)Blantyre Malaria Project, University of Malawi College of Medicine, Blantyre
3, Malawi; and.
(4)Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Health, University of Maryland,
Baltimore, MD 21201.
(5)Institute of Human Virology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201;
ccairo@ihv.umaryland.edu.

A successful pregnancy depends on the maintenance of tolerance at the
fetal-maternal interface; strong inflammation in the placental bed is generally
associated with adverse fetal outcomes. Among the mechanisms that foster
tolerance and limit inflammation, the fetal immune system favors Th2 or
regulatory responses over Th1 responses. The unintended consequence of this
functional program is high susceptibility to infections. Human Vδ2 T cells mount 
innate-like responses to a broad range of microorganisms and are poised for Th1
responses before birth. In infants they likely play a key role in protection
against pathogens by exerting early Th1 effector functions, improving function of
other innate cells, and promoting Th1 polarization of adaptive responses.
However, their propensity to release Th1 mediators may require careful regulation
during fetal life to avoid exaggerated proinflammatory responses. We investigated
molecules with the potential to act as a rheostat for fetal Vδ2 cells. Programmed
death 1 (PD1) is a negative regulator of T cell responses and a determinant of
tolerance, particularly at the fetal-maternal interface. Neonatal Vδ2 cells
upregulate PD1 shortly after activation and, unlike their adult counterparts,
express this molecule for at least 28 d. Engagement of PD1 by one of its ligands,
PDL1, effectively dampens TCR-mediated responses (TNF-α production and
degranulation) by neonatal Vδ2 cells and may thus help maintain their activity
within safe limits. PD1 expression by neonatal Vδ2 cells is inversely associated 
with promoter DNA methylation. Prolonged PD1 expression may be part of a
functional program to control Vδ2 cell inflammatory responses during fetal life.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1600284 
PMCID: PMC4992653
PMID: 27474072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

