
1. PeerJ. 2016 Jul 12;4:e2191. doi: 10.7717/peerj.2191. eCollection 2016.

Different patterns of pfcrt and pfmdr1 polymorphism in Plasmodium falciparum
isolates from Tehama region, Yemen.

Atroosh WM(1), Al-Mekhlafi HM(2), Al-Jasari A(3), Sady H(4), Dawaki SS(4), Elyana
FN(4), Al-Areeqi MA(4), Nasr NA(4), Abdulsalam AM(4), Subramaniam LR(4), Azzani
M(5), Ithoi I(4), Lau YL(4), Surin J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia; Unit of Microbiology and Parasitology, Department of
Para-Clinic, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Aden,
Khormaksar, Aden, Yemen.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia; Endemic and Tropical Diseases Unit, Medical Research Centre,
Jazan University, Jazan, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia; Department of Parasitology,
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Sana'a University, Sana'a, Yemen.
(3)National Malaria Control Programme, Ministry of Health and Population , Sana'a
, Yemen.
(4)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya , Kuala 
Lumpur , Malaysia.
(5)Department of Social and Preventive Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Malaya , Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia.
(6)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia; Centre for Research and Innovation, Taylor's University, Subang
Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia.

Introduction. Despite the efforts of the malaria control programme, malaria
morbidity is still a common health problem in Yemen, with 60% of the population
at risk. Plasmodium falciparum is responsible for 99% of malaria cases. The
emergence in Yemen of parasite resistance to chloroquine (CQ) prompted the
adoption of artemisinin combination therapy (ACT) in 2009, which involves the use
of artesunate plus sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (AS + SP). However, CQ was retained
as the drug of choice for vivax malaria. To assess the impact of the change in
the malaria treatment policy five years after its introduction, the present study
investigated the mutations in the CQ resistance transporter (pfcrt) and multidrug
resistance 1 (pfmdr1) genes. Method. A molecular investigation of 10 codons of
pfcrt (72-76, 220, 271, 326, 356, and 371) and five codons of pfmdr1 (86, 184,
1034, 1042, and 1246) was conducted on P. falciparum isolates from districts with
the highest malaria endemicity in the Hodeidah and Al-Mahwit governorates in
Tehama region, Yemen. A total of 86 positive cases of falciparum monoinfection
were investigated for the presence of mutations related to CQ and other
antimalarials using a PCR-RFLP assay. Results. There was a wide prevalence of
pfcrt gene mutations with the pfcrt 76T CQ resistance marker being predominant
(97.7%). The prevalence of other pfcrt mutations varied from high (75E: 88%) to
moderate (74I: 79.1%, 220S: 69.8%, 271E and 371I: 53.5%) or low (326S: 36%, 72S: 
10.5%). Mutated pfcrt 72-76 amino acids haplotypes were highly prevalent (98.8%).
Among these, the CVIET classic, old-world African/Southeast Asian haplotype was
the most predominant, and was mostly found in the isolates from the Khamis Bani
Saad district of Al-Mahwit (93.1%) and the AdDahi district of Hodeidah (88.9%).
However, it was only found in 26.3% of the isolates from the Bajil district of
Hodeidah. Surprisingly, the SVMNT new-world South American haplotype was
exclusively detected in 9.3% of the isolates from the Bajil district of Hodeidah.
Mutations at Y184F of pfmdr1 were found in all isolates (100%) from all
districts. The mutation for codons 1034C and 86Y were found only in the isolates 
from the AdDahi and Khamis Bani Saad districts. Overall, the AdDahi and Khamis
Bani Saad districts were similar in terms of carrying most of the mutations in
the pfcrt and pfmdr1 genes, while there was a lower prevalence of mutation in the
isolates from the Bajil district. Conclusion. The high prevalence of mutations in
pfcrt 5 years after the official cessation of CQ use against P. falciparum
suggests that there is sustained CQ pressure on P. falciparum isolates in the
study area. Moreover, the low prevalence of mutations in the pfmdr1 gene could be
a good indicator of the high susceptibility of P. falciparum isolates to
antimalarials other than CQ. A new strategy to ensure the complete nationwide
withdrawal of CQ from the private drug market is recommended.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.2191 
PMCID: PMC4950566
PMID: 27478699 

