
1. Genom Data. 2016 Jul 20;9:118-25. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2016.07.006. eCollection
2016 Sep.

A cross strain Plasmodium falciparum microarray optimized for the transcriptome
analysis of Plasmodium falciparum patient derived isolates.

Subudhi AK(1), Boopathi PA(1), Middha S(2), Acharya J(2), Rao SN(3),
Mugasimangalam RC(3), Sirohi P(2), Kochar SK(2), Kochar DK(4), Das A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science
(BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan, India.
(2)Department of Medicine, S.P. Medical College, Bikaner, Rajasthan, India.
(3)Genotypic Technology Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore, India.
(4)Rajasthan University of Health Sciences, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India.

Malarial parasite P. falciparum, an apicomplexan protozoan has a 23.3 MB nuclear 
genome and encodes ~ 5600 transcripts. The genetic diversity of the parasite
within and across geographical zones is a challenge to gene expression studies
which are essential for understanding of disease process, outcome and developing 
markers for diagnostics and prognostics. Here, we describe the strategy involved 
in designing a custom P. falciparum 15K array using the Agilent platform and
Genotypic's Right Design methodology to study the transcriptome of Indian field
isolates for which genome sequence information is limited. The array contains
probes representing genome sequences of two distinct geographical isolates (i.e. 
3D7 and HB3) and sub-telomeric var gene sequences of a third isolate (IT4) known 
to adhere in culture condition. Probes in the array have been selected based on
their efficiency to detect transcripts through a 244K array experimentation.
Array performance for the 15K array, was evaluated and validated using RNA
materials from P. falciparum clinical isolates. A large percentage (91%) of the
represented transcripts was detected from Indian P. falciparum patient isolates. 
Replicated probes and multiple probes representing the same gene showed perfect
correlation between them suggesting good probe performance. Additional
transcripts could be detected due to inclusion of unique probes representing HB3 
strain transcripts. Variant surface antigen (VSA) transcripts were detected by
optimized probes representing the VSA genes of three geographically distinct
strains. The 15K cross strain P. falciparum array has shown good efficiency in
detecting transcripts from P. falciparum parasite samples isolated from patients.
The low parasite loads and presence of host RNA makes arrays a preferred platform
for gene expression studies over RNA-Seq.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gdata.2016.07.006 
PMCID: PMC4961827
PMID: 27489776 

