
1. Infect Immun. 2016 Sep 19;84(10):2974-81. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00187-16. Print 2016
Oct.

Pyrimidine Pathway-Dependent and -Independent Functions of the Toxoplasma gondii 
Mitochondrial Dihydroorotate Dehydrogenase.

Hortua Triana MA(1), Cajiao Herrera D(2), Zimmermann BH(2), Fox BA(1), Bzik
DJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, Lebanon, New Hampshire, USA.
(2)Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá,
Colombia.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, Lebanon, New Hampshire, USA david.j.bzik@dartmouth.edu.

Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) mediates the fourth step of de novo
pyrimidine biosynthesis and is a proven drug target for inducing
immunosuppression in therapy of human disease as well as a rapidly emerging drug 
target for treatment of malaria. In Toxoplasma gondii, disruption of the first,
fifth, or sixth step of de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis induced uracil
auxotrophy. However, previous attempts to generate uracil auxotrophy by
genetically deleting the mitochondrion-associated DHODH of T. gondii (TgDHODH)
failed. To further address the essentiality of TgDHODH, mutant gene alleles
deficient in TgDHODH activity were designed to ablate the enzyme activity.
Replacement of the endogenous DHODH gene with catalytically deficient DHODH gene 
alleles induced uracil auxotrophy. Catalytically deficient TgDHODH localized to
the mitochondria, and parasites retained mitochondrial membrane potential. These 
results show that TgDHODH is essential for the synthesis of pyrimidines and
suggest that TgDHODH is required for a second essential function independent of
its role in pyrimidine biosynthesis.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00187-16 
PMCID: PMC5038078
PMID: 27481247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

