
1. Structure. 2016 Sep 6;24(9):1476-87. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2016.06.018. Epub 2016
Aug 5.

Dimerization of Arginyl-tRNA Synthetase by Free Heme Drives Its Inactivation in
Plasmodium falciparum.

Jain V(1), Yogavel M(1), Sharma A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology (ICGEB), Aruna Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi 110067, India.
(2)Molecular Medicine Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology (ICGEB), Aruna Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi 110067, India. Electronic
address: amit.icgeb@gmail.com.

Excess cellular heme is toxic, and malaria parasites regulate its levels during
hemoglobin digestion. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases are ubiquitous enzymes, and of
these, arginyl-tRNA synthetase (RRS) is unique as its enzymatic product of
charged tRNA is required for protein synthesis and degradation. We show that
Plasmodium falciparum arginyl-tRNA synthetase (PfRRS) is an active, cytosolic,
and monomeric enzyme. Its high-resolution crystal structure highlights critical
structural differences with the human enzyme. We further show that hemin binds to
and inhibits the aminoacylation activity of PfRRS. Hemin induces a dimeric form
of PfRRS that is thus rendered enzymatically dead as it is unable to recognize
its cognate tRNA(arg). Excessive hemin in chloroquine-treated malaria parasites
results in significantly reduced charged tRNA(arg) levels, thus suggesting
deceleration of protein synthesis. These data together suggest that the
inhibition of Plasmodium falciparum arginyl-tRNA synthetase can now be synergized
with existing antimalarials for more potent drug cocktails against malaria
parasites.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2016.06.018 
PMID: 27502052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

