
1. Genome Med. 2016 Sep 7;8(1):92. doi: 10.1186/s13073-016-0343-7.

Recent advances in malaria genomics and epigenomics.

Kirchner S(1), Power BJ(1), Waters AP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Molecular Parasitology, Institute of Infection,
Immunity and Inflammation, College of Medical Veterinary & Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8TA, UK.
(2)Wellcome Trust Centre for Molecular Parasitology, Institute of Infection,
Immunity and Inflammation, College of Medical Veterinary & Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8TA, UK. AndyWaters@Glasgow.ac.uk.

Malaria continues to impose a significant disease burden on low- and
middle-income countries in the tropics. However, revolutionary progress over the 
last 3Â years in nucleic acid sequencing, reverse genetics, and post-genome
analyses has generated step changes in our understanding of malaria parasite
(Plasmodium spp.) biology and its interactions with its host and vector. Driven
by the availability of vast amounts of genome sequence data from Plasmodium
species strains, relevant human populations of different ethnicities, and
mosquito vectors, researchers can consider any biological component of the
malarial process in isolation or in the interactive setting that is infection. In
particular, considerable progress has been made in the area of population
genomics, with Plasmodium falciparum serving as a highly relevant model. Such
studies have demonstrated that genome evolution under strong selective pressure
can be detected. These data, combined with reverse genetics, have enabled the
identification of the region of the P. falciparum genome that is under selective 
pressure and the confirmation of the functionality of the mutations in the
kelch13 gene that accompany resistance to the major frontline antimalarial,
artemisinin. Furthermore, the central role of epigenetic regulation of gene
expression and antigenic variation and developmental fate in P. falciparum is
becoming ever clearer. This review summarizes recent exciting discoveries that
genome technologies have enabled in malaria research and highlights some of their
applications to healthcare. The knowledge gained will help to develop
surveillance approaches for the emergence or spread of drug resistance and to
identify new targets for the development of antimalarial drugs and perhaps
vaccines.

DOI: 10.1186/s13073-016-0343-7 
PMCID: PMC5015228
PMID: 27605022  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

