
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016 Nov;15(11):3373-3387. Epub 2016 Sep 13.

Molecular Profiling of Phagocytic Immune Cells in Anopheles gambiae Reveals
Integral Roles for Hemocytes in Mosquito Innate Immunity.

Smith RC(1)(2), King JG(1)(3), Tao D(1)(4), Zeleznik OA(5)(6)(7), Brando C(1),
Thallinger GG(5)(6)(7), Dinglasan RR(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)From the ‡W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology and the Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of 
Public Health, 615 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21205.
(2)**Department of Entomology, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011.
(3)‡‡Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, Entomology, and Plant
Pathology, Mississippi State University, Starkville, Mississippi 39762.
(4)§§Division of Pre-clinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland 20850.
(5)§Bioinformatics, Institute for Knowledge Discovery, Graz University of
Technology, 8010 Graz, Austria.
(6)¶Core Facility Bioinformatics, Austrian Centre of Industrial Biotechnology,
8010 Graz, Austria.
(7)‖BioTechMed OMICS Center Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria.
(8)From the ‡W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology and the Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of 
Public Health, 615 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21205;
rdinglasan@epi.ufl.edu.
(9)¶¶Emerging Pathogens Institute, Department of Infectious Diseases &
Immunology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611.

The innate immune response is highly conserved across all eukaryotes and has been
studied in great detail in several model organisms. Hemocytes, the primary immune
cell population in mosquitoes, are important components of the mosquito innate
immune response, yet critical aspects of their biology have remained
uncharacterized. Using a novel method of enrichment, we isolated phagocytic
granulocytes and quantified their proteomes by mass spectrometry. The data
demonstrate that phagocytosis, blood-feeding, and Plasmodium falciparum infection
promote dramatic shifts in the proteomic profiles of An. gambiae granulocyte
populations. Of interest, large numbers of immune proteins were induced in
response to blood feeding alone, suggesting that granulocytes have an integral
role in priming the mosquito immune system for pathogen challenge. In addition,
we identify several granulocyte proteins with putative roles as membrane
receptors, cell signaling, or immune components that when silenced, have either
positive or negative effects on malaria parasite survival. Integrating existing
hemocyte transcriptional profiles, we also compare differences in hemocyte
transcript and protein expression to provide new insight into hemocyte gene
regulation and discuss the potential that post-transcriptional regulation may be 
an important component of hemocyte gene expression. These data represent a
significant advancement in mosquito hemocyte biology, providing the first
comprehensive proteomic profiling of mosquito phagocytic granulocytes during
homeostasis blood-feeding, and pathogen challenge. Together, these findings
extend current knowledge to further illustrate the importance of hemocytes in
shaping mosquito innate immunity and their principal role in defining malaria
parasite survival in the mosquito host.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M116.060723 
PMCID: PMC5098036
PMID: 27624304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

