
1. PLoS Genet. 2016 Sep 15;12(9):e1006303. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006303.
eCollection 2016 Sep.

The Genetic Basis of Host Preference and Resting Behavior in the Major African
Malaria Vector, Anopheles arabiensis.

Main BJ(1), Lee Y(1), Ferguson HM(2), Kreppel KS(2)(3), Kihonda A(3), Govella
NJ(3), Collier TC(1), Cornel AJ(4), Eskin E(5), Kang EY(5), Nieman CC(1), Weakley
AM(1), Lanzaro GC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Genetics Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Microbiology and
Immunology/University of California, Davis, Davis, California, United States of
America.
(2)Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, University 
of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(3)Environmental Health and Ecological Sciences Group, Ifakara Health Institute, 
Ifakara, United Republic of Tanzania.
(4)Department of Entomology and Nematology, University of California, Davis,
Davis, California, United States of America.
(5)Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California, United States of America.

Malaria transmission is dependent on the propensity of Anopheles mosquitoes to
bite humans (anthropophily) instead of other dead end hosts. Recent increases in 
the usage of Long Lasting Insecticide Treated Nets (LLINs) in Africa have been
associated with reductions in highly anthropophilic and endophilic vectors such
as Anopheles gambiae s.s., leaving species with a broader host range, such as
Anopheles arabiensis, as the most prominent remaining source of transmission in
many settings. An. arabiensis appears to be more of a generalist in terms of its 
host choice and resting behavior, which may be due to phenotypic plasticity
and/or segregating allelic variation. To investigate the genetic basis of host
choice and resting behavior in An. arabiensis we sequenced the genomes of 23
human-fed and 25 cattle-fed mosquitoes collected both in-doors and out-doors in
the Kilombero Valley, Tanzania. We identified a total of 4,820,851 SNPs, which
were used to conduct the first genome-wide estimates of "SNP heritability" for
host choice and resting behavior in this species. A genetic component was
detected for host choice (human vs cow fed; permuted P = 0.002), but there was no
evidence of a genetic component for resting behavior (indoors versus outside;
permuted P = 0.465). A principal component analysis (PCA) segregated individuals 
based on genomic variation into three groups which were characterized by
differences at the 2Rb and/or 3Ra paracentromeric chromosome inversions. There
was a non-random distribution of cattle-fed mosquitoes between the PCA clusters, 
suggesting that alleles linked to the 2Rb and/or 3Ra inversions may influence
host choice. Using a novel inversion genotyping assay, we detected a significant 
enrichment of the standard arrangement (non-inverted) of 3Ra among cattle-fed
mosquitoes (N = 129) versus all non-cattle-fed individuals (N = 234; Ï‡2, p =
0.007). Thus, tracking the frequency of the 3Ra in An. arabiensis populations may
be of use to infer selection on host choice behavior within these vector
populations; possibly in response to vector control. Controlled host-choice
assays are needed to discern whether the observed genetic component has a direct 
relationship with innate host preference. A better understanding of the genetic
basis for host feeding behavior in An. arabiensis may also open avenues for novel
vector control strategies based on driving genes for zoophily into wild mosquito 
populations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006303 
PMCID: PMC5025075
PMID: 27631375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

