
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Sep 20;6:33518. doi: 10.1038/srep33518.

Genetic Characterization of Plasmodium Putative Pantothenate Kinase Genes Reveals
Their Essential Role in Malaria Parasite Transmission to the Mosquito.

Hart RJ(1), Cornillot E(2), Abraham A(1), Molina E(1), Nation CS(1), Ben Mamoun
C(3), Aly AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tulane University, Department of Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112,
USA.
(2)Institut de Biologie Computationnelle, Universit√© Montpellier, 34095
Montpellier, France.
(3)Yale University School of Medicine, Section of Infectious Diseases, New Haven,
CT 06520, USA.

The metabolic machinery for the biosynthesis of Coenzyme A (CoA) from exogenous
pantothenic acid (Vitamin B5) has long been considered as an excellent target for
the development of selective antimicrobials. Earlier studies in the human malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum have shown that pantothenate analogs interfere
with pantothenate phosphorylation and block asexual blood stage development.
Although two eukaryotic-type putative pantothenate kinase genes (PanK1 and PanK2)
have been identified in all malaria parasite species, their role in the
development of Plasmodium life cycle stages remains unknown. Here we report on
the genetic characterization of PanK1 and PanK2 in P. yoelii. We show that P.
yoelii parasites lacking either PanK1 or PanK2 undergo normal asexual stages
development and sexual stages differentiation, however they are severely
deficient in ookinete, oocyst and sporozoite formation inside the mosquito
vector. Quantitative transcriptional analyses in wild-type and knockout parasites
demonstrate an important role for these genes in the regulation of expression of 
other CoA biosynthesis genes. Together, our data provide the first genetic
evidence for the importance of the early steps of pantothenate utilization in the
regulation of CoA biosynthesis and malaria parasite transmission to Anopheles
mosquitoes.

DOI: 10.1038/srep33518 
PMCID: PMC5028760
PMID: 27644319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

