
1. Gene. 2017 Jan 5;596:89-97. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.09.022. Epub 2016 Oct 15.

The evolutionary divergence of STAT transcription factor in different Anopheles
species.

Gupta K(1), Dhawan R(1), Kajla M(1), Misra T(1), Kumar S(2), Gupta L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology & Sciences (BITS) - Pilani, Pilani
333031, Rajasthan, India.
(2)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology & Sciences (BITS) - Pilani, Pilani
333031, Rajasthan, India; Department of Biotechnology, Ch. Bansi Lal University, 
Bhiwani, Haryana, India.
(3)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology & Sciences (BITS) - Pilani, Pilani
333031, Rajasthan, India; Department of Zoology, Ch. Bansi Lal University,
Bhiwani, Haryana, India. Electronic address: lalitagupta@yahoo.com.

Anopheles mosquito transmits Plasmodium, the malaria causing parasite. Different 
species of Anopheles mosquito dominate in a particular geographical location and 
are capable of transmitting specific strains of Plasmodium. It is important to
understand the biology of different anophelines to control the parasite
transmission. STAT is an evolutionary conserved transcription factor that
regulates the parasite development in African malaria vector Anopheles gambiae.
Unlike Drosophila and Aedes aegypti, where a single STAT gene plays an important 
role in immunity, An. gambiae contains one evolutionary conserved STAT-A and
another retro-duplicated, introns-less STAT-B gene. To find out whether other
species of Anopheles also have two STATs, the available genomic data of different
anophelines were used to annotate their STATs through in silico analyses. Our
results revealed that Indian malaria vector An. stephensi genome contains two
STATs, AsSTAT-A and AsSTAT-B genes. These genes were cloned and confirmed by
sequencing. Both AsSTATs were found to be expressed in different development
stages of mosquito. However, the relative mRNA levels of evolutionary conserved
AsSTAT-A gene were always higher than the retroduplicated AsSTAT-B gene. STAT
pathway was activated upon Plasmodium berghei infection, indicated its role in
immunity. Furthermore, comparative in silico analysis of eighteen Anopheles
species revealed that five species: An. sinensis, An. albimanus, An. darlingi,
An. dirus andAn. farauti do not contain STAT-B gene in their genome.
Interestingly, thirteen species of the subgenus Anopheles and Cellia that contain
both STATs were also mutually diverged. This consequence leads to sequence
variability in some significant protein motifs within the STAT-B genes.
Phylogenetic analyses indicated that an independent, lineage-specific duplication
occurred in the subgenus Cellia after the diversification of series Neomyzomyia
from its last common ancestor. In An. atroparvus (subgenus Anopheles), STAT gene 
underwent recent lineage-specific duplication and give rise to a highly similar
STAT-B gene. This suggested that the genetic divergence in various Anopheles
species might appeared due to their adaptations to the altered environmental
conditions or pathogen encounters.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.09.022 
PMID: 27664587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

