
1. Nat Immunol. 2017 Jan;18(1):54-63. doi: 10.1038/ni.3581. Epub 2016 Oct 10.

USP15 regulates type I interferon response and is required for pathogenesis of
neuroinflammation.

Torre S(1)(2), Polyak MJ(2)(3), Langlais D(2)(3), Fodil N(2)(3), Kennedy
JM(2)(3), Radovanovic I(2)(3), Berghout J(2)(3), Leiva-Torres GA(1)(2), Krawczyk 
CM(4), Ilangumaran S(5), Mossman K(6), Liang C(7), Knobeloch KP(8), Healy LM(9), 
Antel J(9), Arbour N(10), Prat A(10), Majewski J(1)(11), Lathrop M(1)(11), Vidal 
SM(1)(2), Gros P(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)McGill Center for Complex Traits, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(4)Department of Microbiology, and Immunology, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Department of Medicine, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.
(8)Institute for Neuropathology, University Clinic Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(9)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.
(10)Department of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(11)McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Center, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2016 Nov 16;17 (12 ):1479.

Genes and pathways in which inactivation dampens tissue inflammation present new 
opportunities for understanding the pathogenesis of common human inflammatory
diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease, rheumatoid arthritis and multiple
sclerosis. We identified a mutation in the gene encoding the deubiquitination
enzyme USP15 (Usp15L749R) that protected mice against both experimental cerebral 
malaria (ECM) induced by Plasmodium berghei and experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis (EAE). Combining immunophenotyping and RNA sequencing in brain 
(ECM) and spinal cord (EAE) revealed that Usp15L749R-associated resistance to
neuroinflammation was linked to dampened type I interferon responses in situ. In 
hematopoietic cells and in resident brain cells, USP15 was coexpressed with, and 
functionally acted together with the E3 ubiquitin ligase TRIM25 to positively
regulate type I interferon responses and to promote pathogenesis during
neuroinflammation. The USP15-TRIM25 dyad might be a potential target for
intervention in acute or chronic states of neuroinflammation.

DOI: 10.1038/ni.3581 
PMID: 27721430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

