
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Oct 13;6:35030. doi: 10.1038/srep35030.

Cloning and in vitro characterization of a Schistosoma japonicum aquaglyceroporin
that functions in osmoregulation.

Huang Y(1)(2), Li W(3), Lu W(1)(2), Xiong C(3), Yang Y(1)(2), Yan H(1)(2), Liu
KC(4), Cao P(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Affiliated Hospital of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine,
Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210028, China.
(2)Jiangsu Province Academy of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, Jiangsu
210028, China.
(3)Jiangsu Institute of Parasitic Diseases, key Laboratory on Technology for
Parasitic Diseases Prevention and Control, Ministry of Health, Wuxi, Jiangsu
214064, China.
(4)Johns Hopkins Malaria Research Institute, Dept. Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, The Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

As one of the three major human pathogens that cause schistosomiasis, Schistosoma
japonicum is the only one that is endemic in China. Despite great progress on
schistosomiasis control over the past 50 years in China, S. japonicum
transmission still occurs in certain endemic regions, which causes significant
public health problems and enormous economic losses. During different life
stages, parasites are able to survive dramatic osmolality changes between its
vector, fresh water, and mammal host. However, the molecular mechanism of
parasite osmoregulation remains unknown. To address this challenging question, we
report the first cloning of an S. japonicum aquaglyceroporin (SjAQP) from an
isolate from Jiangsu province, China. Expressing SjAQP in Xenopus oocytes
facilitated the permeation of water, glycerol, and urea. The water permeability
of SjAQP was inhibited by 1 mM HgCl2, 3 mM tetraethylammonium, 1 mM ZnCl2, and
1 mM CuSO4. SjAQP was constitutively expressed throughout the S. japonicum life
cycle, including in the egg, miracidia, cercaria, and adult stages. The highest
expression was detected during the infective cercaria stage. Our results suggest 
that SjAQP plays a role in osmoregulation throughout the S. japonicum life cycle,
especially during cercariae transformation, which enables parasites to survive
osmotic challenges.

DOI: 10.1038/srep35030 
PMCID: PMC5062077
PMID: 27733755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

