
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2017 Jan;211:62-66. doi: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2016.10.002.
Epub 2016 Oct 11.

Receptor for Activated C-Kinase 1 (PfRACK1) is required for Plasmodium falciparum
intra-erythrocytic proliferation.

Blomqvist K(1), DiPetrillo C(2), Streva VA(2), Pine S(2), Dvorin JD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Boston Children's Hospital, Division of Infectious Diseases, Boston, MA 02115,
USA; Harvard Medical School, Department of Pediatrics, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
Karolinska Institutet, Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, 171 77
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Boston Children's Hospital, Division of Infectious Diseases, Boston, MA 02115,
USA; Harvard Medical School, Department of Pediatrics, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Boston Children's Hospital, Division of Infectious Diseases, Boston, MA 02115,
USA; Harvard Medical School, Department of Pediatrics, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
Electronic address: jeffrey.dvorin@childrens.harvard.edu.

Emerging resistance to current anti-malarials necessitates a more detailed
understanding of the biological processes of Plasmodium falciparum proliferation,
thus allowing identification of new drug targets. The well-conserved protein
Receptor for Activated C-Kinase 1 (RACK1) was originally identified in mammalian 
cells as an anchoring protein for protein kinase C (PKC) and has since been shown
to be important for cell migration, cytokinesis, transcription, epigenetics, and 
protein translation. The P. falciparum ortholog, PfRACK1, is expressed in blood
stages of the parasite and is diffusely localized in the parasite cytoplasm.
Using a destabilizing domain to allow inducible knockdown of the endogenous
protein level, we evaluated the requirement for PfRACK1 during blood-stage
replication. Following destabilization, the parasites demonstrate a nearly
complete growth arrest at the trophozoite stage. The essential nature of PfRACK1 
suggests that the protein itself or the pathways regulated by the protein are
potential targets for novel anti-malarial therapeutics.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2016.10.002 
PMCID: PMC5219851
PMID: 27732881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

