
1. Genomics. 2016 Dec;108(5-6):224-231. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2016.10.004. Epub 2016 
Oct 24.

Genome-wide regulatory dynamics of G-quadruplexes in human malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum.

Bhartiya D(1), Chawla V(2), Ghosh S(3), Shankar R(4), Kumar N(5).

Author information: 
(1)ICMR-Institute of Cytology and Preventive Oncology, Noida 201301, Uttar
Pradesh, India.
(2)CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology, Palampur 176061, Himachal 
Pradesh, India.
(3)CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, Mathura Road Campus, Delhi
110020, India.
(4)CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology, Palampur 176061, Himachal 
Pradesh, India; Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Delhi,
India.
(5)CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow 226031, Uttar Pradesh, India;
Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Delhi, India. Electronic
address: niti.kumar@cdri.res.in.

The AT-rich genome of P. falciparum has uniquely localized G-rich stretches that 
have propensity to form G-quadruplexes. However, their global occurrence and
potential biological roles in the parasite are poorly explored. Our genome-wide
analysis revealed unique enrichment of quadruplexes in P. falciparum genome which
was remarkably different from other Plasmodium species. A distinct predominance
of quadruplexes was observed in nuclear and organellar genes that participate in 
antigenic variation, pathogenesis, DNA/RNA regulation, metabolic and protein
quality control processes. Data also suggested association of quadruplexes with
SNPs and DNA methylation. Furthermore, analysis of steady state mRNA (RNA-seq)
and polysome-associated mRNA (Ribosome profiling) data revealed stage-specific
differences in translational efficiency of quadruplex harboring genes. Taken
together, our findings hint towards existence of regulatory dynamics associated
with quadruplexes that may modulate translational efficiency of quadruplex
harboring genes to provide survival advantage to the parasite against host immune
response and antimalarial drug pressure.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2016.10.004 
PMID: 27789319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

