
1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2017 Jan 15;124:57-68. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2016.10.007. Epub
2016 Oct 24.

Artesunate suppresses RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis through inhibition of
PLCγ1-Ca2+-NFATc1 signaling pathway and prevents ovariectomy-induced bone loss.

Zeng X(1), Zhang Y(2), Wang S(3), Wang K(2), Tao L(2), Zou M(2), Chen N(2), Xu
J(4), Liu S(5), Li X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of New Drug Screening, School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China;
Department of Pharmacology, Hainan Medical College, Haikou 571199, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of New Drug Screening, School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.
(3)Department of Surgery, Guangdong Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Guangzhou 510120, China.
(4)School of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Western Australia, 
Crawley, Australia.
(5)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of New Drug Screening, School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.
Electronic address: liusw@smu.edu.cn.
(6)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of New Drug Screening, School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.
Electronic address: lixiaoj@smu.edu.cn.

Bone lytic diseases including osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and bone
metastatic tumors affect hundreds of millions people worldwide. Targeting
over-activated osteoclasts as an anti-resorptive treatment becomes an important
strategy to treat osteolytic diseases. Artesunate is a compound derived from
artemisinin (qinghaosu) and has been used to treat malaria and rheumatoid
arthritis clinically in China, but its role in osteolysis is unknown. Here, we
found that artesunate could suppress RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis and bone
resorption from 1.56 to 12.5μM. Artesunate obviously reduced RANKL-induced
NF-κB-luc activity at 50μM, but had no effects on RANKL-induced NF-κB activation 
(NF-κB luciferase activity, IκB-α degradation and nuclear NF-κB p65 protein
level) from 3.125 to 12.5μM in pre-osteoclastic RAW264.7 cells. Interestingly,
artesunate could significantly inhibit RANKL-induced NFATc1 activation measured
by NFAT luciferase activity, NFATc1 mRNA and nuclear NFATc1 protein levels from
3.125 to 12.5μM. Further study revealed that artesunate inhibited RANKL
up-regulated PLCγ1 activation, intracellular calcium, and calcineurin (PP2B-Aα)
protein expression from 3.125 to 12.5μM. In addition, the NFATc1 targeted
osteoclast-specific genes expression including cathepsin K, MMP-9, and TRAP was
reduced by artesunate. Finally, we showed that artesunate was able to reverse the
bone loss in an ovariectomized mouse model in vivo accompanied with reduced
RANKL, RANKL/OPG, and TRAP-5b levels. This study indicates that artesunate
inhibits RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis and bone loss by inhibiting
PLCγ1-Ca2+-calcineurin-NFATc1 pathway. Collectively, our data suggest that
artesunate is a potential treatment option against RANKL-mediated osteolytic bone
disease.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2016.10.007 
PMID: 27789216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

