
1. Parasitol Int. 2017 Feb;66(1):964-971. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2016.10.024. Epub
2016 Nov 2.

Simple detection of single nucleotide polymorphism in Plasmodium falciparum by
SNP-LAMP assay combined with lateral flow dipstick.

Yongkiettrakul S(1), Kampeera J(1), Chareanchim W(1), Rattanajak R(1),
Pornthanakasem W(1), Kiatpathomchai W(1), Kongkasuriyachai D(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency, 113 Phahonyothin Road, Klong Nueng
sub-district, Klong Luang district, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand.
(2)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency, 113 Phahonyothin Road, Klong Nueng
sub-district, Klong Luang district, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand. Electronic
address: darin@biotec.or.th.

The significant strides made in reducing global malaria burden over the past
decades are being threatened by the emergence of multi-drug resistant malaria.
Mechanisms of resistance to several classes of antimalarial drugs have been
linked to key mutations in the Plasmodium falciparum genes. Pyrimethamine targets
the dihydrofolate reductase of the bifunctional dihydrofolate reductase
thymidylate synthase (DHFR-TS), and specific point mutations in the dhfr-ts gene 
have been assigned to resistant phenotypes. Several molecular methods are
available to detect the mutant genotypes including DNA sequencing and PCR-based
methods. In this study, we report the development of PfSNP-LAMP to detect
nucleotide polymorphism in the dhfr gene associated with N51I mutation and
antifolate resistance. The PfSNP-LAMP method was validated with genomic DNA
samples and parasite lysates prepared from sensitive and pyrimethamine resistant 
strains of P. falciparum.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2016.10.024 
PMID: 27816495  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

