
1. Zootaxa. 2016 Oct 17;4175(4):377-389. doi: 10.11646/zootaxa.4175.4.7.

Use of DNA barcoding to distinguish the malaria vector Anopheles neivai in
Colombia.

López-Rubio A(1), Suaza-Vasco J(2), Marcet PL(3), Ruíz-Molina N(2), Cáceres L(3),
Porter C(3), Uribe S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Nacional de Colombia - Sede Medellín - Facultad de Ciencias -
Escuela de Biociencias - Grupo de Investigación en Sistemática Molecular. Calle
53A 63-20, Medellín. Código Postal 050034 - Colombia.; Email:
andreslop27@gmail.com.
(2)Universidad Nacional de Colombia - Sede Medellín - Facultad de Ciencias -
Escuela de Biociencias - Grupo de Investigación en Sistemática Molecular. Calle
53A 63-20, Medellín. Código Postal 050034 - Colombia.; Email: unknown.
(3)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Division of Parasitic
Diseases and Malaria, Entomology Branch. Atlanta, USA; Email: unknown.

A reference 535 bp barcode sequence from a fragment of the mitochondrial gene
cytochrome oxidase I (COI), acquired from specimens of An. neivai Howard, Dyar & 
Knab, 1913 from its type locality in Panama, was used as a tool for
distinguishing this species from others in the subgenus Kerteszia. Comparisons
with corresponding regions of COI between An. neivai and other species in the
subgenus (An. bellator Dyar & Knab 1906, An. homunculus Komp 1937, An cruzii Dyar
& Knab, 1908 and An. laneanus Corrêa & Cerqueira, 1944) produced K2P genetic
distances of 8.3-12.6%, values well above those associated with intraspecific
variation. In contrast, genetic distances among 55 specimens from five
municipalities in the Colombian Pacific coastal state of Chocó were all within
the range of 0-2.5%, with an optimized barcode threshold of 1.3%, the limit for
unambiguous differentiation of An. neivai. Among specimens from the Chocó region,
18 haplotypes were detected, two of which were widely distributed over the
municipalities sampled. The barcode sequence permits discrimination of An. neivai
from sympatric species and indicates genetic variability within the species;
aspects key to malaria surveillance and control as well as defining geographic
distribution and dispersion patterns.

DOI: 10.11646/zootaxa.4175.4.7 
PMCID: PMC5116811
PMID: 27811749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

