
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Nov 22;113(47):E7474-E7482. Epub 2016 Nov 7.

Protein aggregation as a cellular response to oxidative stress induced by heme
and iron.

Vasconcellos LR(1), Dutra FF(2), Siqueira MS(1), Paula-Neto HA(3), Dahan J(2),
Kiarely E(1), Carneiro LA(2), Bozza MT(2), Travassos LH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Imunoreceptores e Sinalização, Instituto de Biofísica Carlos
Chagas Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro RJ
21.941-902, Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Inflamação e Imunidade, Instituto de Microbiologia Paulo de
Góes, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro RJ 21.941-902,
Brazil.
(3)Laboratório de Alvos Moleculares, Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade Federal 
do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro RJ 21.941-902, Brazil.
(4)Laboratório de Imunoreceptores e Sinalização, Instituto de Biofísica Carlos
Chagas Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro RJ
21.941-902, Brazil; leo.travassos@biof.ufrj.br.

Hemolytic diseases include a variety of conditions with diverse etiologies in
which red blood cells are destroyed and large amounts of hemeproteins are
released. Heme has been described as a potent proinflammatory molecule that is
able to induce multiple innate immune responses, such as those triggered by TLR4 
and the NLRP3 inflammasome, as well as necroptosis in macrophages. The mechanisms
by which eukaryotic cells respond to the toxic effects induced by heme to
maintain homeostasis are not fully understood, however. Here we describe a
previously uncharacterized cellular response induced by heme: the formation of
p62/SQTM1 aggregates containing ubiquitinated proteins in structures known as
aggresome-like induced structures (ALIS). This action is part of a response
driven by the transcription factor NRF2 to the excessive generation of reactive
oxygen species induced by heme that results in the expression of genes involved
in antioxidant responses, including p62/SQTM1. Furthermore, we show that heme
degradation by HO-1 is required for ALIS formation, and that the free iron
released on heme degradation is necessary and sufficient to induce ALIS.
Moreover, ferritin, a key protein in iron metabolism, prevents excessive ALIS
formation. Finally, in vivo, hemolysis promotes an increase in ALIS formation in 
target tissues. Our data unravel a poorly understood aspect of the cellular
responses induced by heme that can be explored to better understand the effects
of free heme and free iron during hemolytic diseases such as sickle cell disease,
dengue fever, malaria, and sepsis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1608928113 
PMCID: PMC5127311
PMID: 27821769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

