
1. mSphere. 2016 Oct 26;1(5). pii: e00273-16. eCollection 2016 Sep-Oct.

Phenotypic Screens Identify Parasite Genetic Factors Associated with Malarial
Fever Response in Plasmodium falciparum piggyBac Mutants.

Thomas P(1), Sedillo J(1), Oberstaller J(1), Li S(1), Zhang M(1), Singh N(1),
Wang CC(1), Udenze K(1), Jiang RH(1), Adams JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Health and Infectious Diseases Research, Department of
Global Health, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA.

Malaria remains one of the most devastating parasitic diseases worldwide, with
90% of the malaria deaths in Africa in 2013 attributable to Plasmodium
falciparum. The clinical symptoms of malaria include cycles of fever,
corresponding to parasite rupture from red blood cells every 48 h. Parasite
pathways involved in the parasite's ability to survive the host fever response,
and indeed, the functions of ~40% of P. falciparum genes as a whole, are still
largely unknown. Here, we evaluated the potential of scalable forward-genetic
screening methods to identify genes involved in the host fever response. We
performed a phenotypic screen for genes linked to the parasite response to
febrile temperatures by utilizing a selection of single-disruption P. falciparum 
mutants generated via random piggyBac transposon mutagenesis in a previous study.
We identified several mutants presenting significant phenotypes in febrile
response screens compared to the wild type, indicating possible roles for the
disrupted genes in this process. We present these initial studies as proof that
forward genetics can be used to gain insight into critical factors associated
with parasite biology. IMPORTANCE Though the P. falciparum genome sequence has
been available for many years, ~40% of its genes do not have informative
annotations, as they show no detectable homology to those of studied organisms.
More still have not been evaluated via genetic methods. Scalable forward-genetic 
approaches that allow interrogation of gene function without any pre-existing
knowledge are needed to hasten understanding of parasite biology, which will
expedite the identification of drug targets and the development of future
interventions in the face of spreading resistance to existing frontline drugs. In
this work, we describe a new approach to pursue forward-genetic phenotypic
screens for P. falciparum to identify factors associated with virulence. Future
large-scale phenotypic screens developed to probe other such interesting
phenomena, when considered in parallel, will prove a powerful tool for functional
annotation of the P. falciparum genome, where so much remains undiscovered.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00273-16 
PMCID: PMC5082630
PMID: 27830190 

