
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2017 Jan 22;482(4):700-705. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.11.097. Epub 2016 Nov 16.

Expression and characterization of the Plasmodium translocon of the exported
proteins component EXP2.

Hakamada K(1), Watanabe H(1), Kawano R(1), Noguchi K(2), Yohda M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Life Science, Tokyo University of Agriculture 
and Technology, 2-24-16 Naka-cho, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan.
(2)Instrumentation Analysis Center, Tokyo University of Agriculture and
Technology, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan.
(3)Department of Biotechnology and Life Science, Tokyo University of Agriculture 
and Technology, 2-24-16 Naka-cho, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan; Institute of
Global Innovation Research, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology,
Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan. Electronic address: yohda@cc.tuat.ac.jp.

The malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum requires the Plasmodium translocon of 
exported proteins (PTEX) to proliferate in human red blood cells. During the
blood stages of malaria, several hundred parasite-encoded proteins are exported
from the parasite into the cytosol of red blood cells. PTEX is the translocon for
protein export and comprises 5 proteins: EXP2, PTEX150, PTEX88, Hsp101 and TRX2. 
Among them, EXP2 is thought to constitute the transmembrane pore, whereas the
other components seem to play a role in unfolding the luggage proteins or
providing a driving force. However, detailed functional and structural
characterizations of PTEX proteins have not been performed. In this study, we
expressed and characterized the membrane-associated component EXP2. Because
expression of EXP2 is lethal to E. coli, EXP2 was expressed as a fusion protein
with GST, and the recombinant EXP2 was obtained by protease digestion. The
recombinant EXP2 formed pores in bilayer lipid membranes. The inner diameter of
the pore was estimated to be approximately 3.5 nm based on electron microscopy
images and channel currents. From this size and the molecular mass as determined 
by size exclusion chromatography and blue native polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis, we determined that the pore comprises approximately 10-12 EXP2
subunits. However, there is a possibility that the pore structure is different in
the PTEX complex. These results provide important insights in the protein
transport mechanism of PTEX, which will aid in developing new drugs targeting
PTEX.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.11.097 
PMID: 27865834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

