
1. J Parasit Dis. 2016 Dec;40(4):1414-1421. Epub 2016 Jan 13.

Characterization and control of symbiotic Bacillus cereus isolated from the mid
gut of Anopheles subpictus Grassi.

Mukhopadhyay P(1), Chatterjee S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Parasitology Research Laboratory, Department of Zoology, The 
University of Burdwan, Burdwan, West Bengal 713 104 India.

An investigation was done to find out the role of gut bacterium on the larval
development and survival of Anopheles subpictus, the vector responsible for the
transmission of malaria. An. subpictus mosquitoes breed exclusively in stagnant
water, including shrimp/fish ponds with high nutrient level. One bacterial strain
(CX2) was isolated from the midgut of late third instar of mosquito larvae. The
bacterial isolate was sensitive to recommended doses of tetracyclin (30 µg/disc),
doxycycline (30 µg/disc), kanamycin (30 µg/disc), gentamycin (10 µg/disc),
streptomycin (10 µg/disc), vancomycin (30 µg/disc), ofloxacin (5 µg/disc),
levofloxacin (5 µg/disc), gatifloxacin (10 µg/disc), but resistant to ampicillin 
(10 µg/disc).The larvae which were fed with the mixture of two antibiotics
tetracylin (30 µg/disc) and doxycyclin (30 µg/disc) (1:1) could not survive in
rice-field water. In the control experiments without any antibiotic treatment,
95-100 % survival and 95 % adult emergence were observed. The study indicates
that the elimination of gut bacteria suppressed larval growth. Phylogenetic
analysis of the 16S rRNA gene sequence was also done. Based on the morphological,
biochemical, FAME analysis and phylogenetic analysis, the bacterial isolate CX2
was identified as Bacillus cereus. Poly acrylamide gel electrophoresis analysis
revealed that the isolate showed discrete bands ranging from 24.272 to 60.049 kDa
proteins. Water extract and methanol extract of Tamarindus indica showed
inhibitory effect against B. cereus.

DOI: 10.1007/s12639-015-0704-y 
PMCID: PMC5118330
PMID: 27876960 

Conflict of interest statement: None.

