
1. Int J Parasitol. 2017 Jun;47(7):409-423. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2016.10.002. Epub 
2016 Nov 27.

The s48/45 six-cysteine proteins: mediators of interaction throughout the
Plasmodium life cycle.

Arredondo SA(1), Kappe SHI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Research, formerly Seattle Biomedical Research
Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Center for Infectious Disease Research, formerly Seattle Biomedical Research
Institute, Seattle, WA, USA; Department of Global Health, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Electronic address: stefan.kappe@cidresearch.org.

During their life cycle Plasmodium parasites rely upon an arsenal of proteins
that establish key interactions with the host and vector, and between the
parasite sexual stages, with the purpose of ensuring infection, reproduction and 
proliferation. Among these is a group of secreted or membrane-anchored proteins
known as the six-cysteine (6-cys) family. This is a small but important family
with only 14 members thus far identified, each stage-specifically expressed
during the parasite life cycle. 6-cys proteins often localise at the parasite
surface or interface with the host and vector, and are conserved in different
Plasmodium species. The unifying feature of the family is the s48/45 domain,
presumably involved in adhesion and structurally related to Ephrins, the ligands 
of Eph receptors. The most prominent s48/45 members are currently under
functional investigation and are being pursued as vaccine candidates. In this
review, we examine what is known about the 6-cys family, their structure and
function, and discuss future research directions.

Copyright Â© 2016 Australian Society for Parasitology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2016.10.002 
PMCID: PMC5446806
PMID: 27899328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

