
1. Turkiye Parazitol Derg. 2016 Sep;40(3):126-131. doi: 10.5152/tpd.2016.4711.

Diagnosis and Species Discrimination of Positive Malaria Samples by Real-Time
Polymerase Chain Reaction.

Atalay Şahar E(1), Karakavuk M, Can H, Nergiz Ş, Gül K, Değirmenci Döşkaya A,
Gürüz Y, Döşkaya M.

Author information: 
(1)Ege Üniversitesi Tıp Fakültesi, Parazitoloji Anabilim Dalı, İzmir, Türkiye.
huseyin.can@ege.edu.tr.

OBJECTIVE: Malaria is an important tropical disease that is detected in 198
million people and causes 367-755 thousand deaths annually. Recently, the
real-time Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) technique has enabled quick
determination of Plasmodium spp. and species identification in the same assay
with a low contamination risk. In the present study, we aimed to use real-time
PCR targeting the 18S rRNA gene to diagnose Plasmodium spp. and perform species
identification.
METHODS: DNA samples of 15 patients with malaria (14 caused by P. vivax, 1 caused
by P. falciparum) confirmed by microscopy as well as positive control plasmids
were used. As the negative control, DNA samples of 15 individuals without malaria
were used.
RESULTS: According to the results of real-time PCR, samples of 15 patients with
malaria were found to be positive for Plasmodium spp. Melting curve analysis
showed that 14 of them were P. vivax and the remaining was P. falciparum. In
addition, mixed infection with P. falciparum and P. vivax was successfully
detected by real-time PCR when DNA of P. falciparum- and P. vivax-positive
samples was experimentally mixed.
CONCLUSION: The present study showed that real-time PCR can be useful in the
diagnosis and species identification of Plasmodium spp. as well as the detection 
of mixed infections in addition to microscopy in Turkey.

DOI: 10.5152/tpd.2016.4711 
PMID: 27905280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

