
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Dec 2;10(12):e0005160. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0005160. eCollection 2016 Dec.

DNA Microarray Detection of 18 Important Human Blood Protozoan Species.

Chen MX(1)(2), Ai L(2), Chen JH(2), Feng XY(2), Chen SH(2), Cai YC(2), Lu Y(2),
Zhou XN(2), Chen JX(2), Hu W(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Microbial Engineering, School of Life Sciences,
Fudan University, Shanghai, PR China.
(2)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, WHO Collaborating Center for Tropical Diseases, Key Laboratory of
Parasite and Vector Biology, National Health and Family Planning Commission,
Shanghai, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Accurate detection of blood protozoa from clinical samples is
important for diagnosis, treatment and control of related diseases. In this
preliminary study, a novel DNA microarray system was assessed for the detection
of Plasmodium, Leishmania, Trypanosoma, Toxoplasma gondii and Babesia in humans, 
animals, and vectors, in comparison with microscopy and PCR data. Developing a
rapid, simple, and convenient detection method for protozoan detection is an
urgent need.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The microarray assay simultaneously identified 18
species of common blood protozoa based on the differences in respective target
genes. A total of 20 specific primer pairs and 107 microarray probes were
selected according to conserved regions which were designed to identify 18
species in 5 blood protozoan genera. The positive detection rate of the
microarray assay was 91.78% (402/438). Sensitivity and specificity for blood
protozoan detection ranged from 82.4% (95%CI: 65.9% ~ 98.8%) to 100.0% and 95.1% 
(95%CI: 93.2% ~ 97.0%) to 100.0%, respectively. Positive predictive value (PPV)
and negative predictive value (NPV) ranged from 20.0% (95%CI: 2.5% ~ 37.5%) to
100.0% and 96.8% (95%CI: 95.0% ~ 98.6%) to 100.0%, respectively. Youden index
varied from 0.82 to 0.98. The detection limit of the DNA microarrays ranged from 
200 to 500 copies/reaction, similar to PCR findings. The concordance rate between
microarray data and DNA sequencing results was 100%.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Overall, the newly developed microarray platform
provides a convenient, highly accurate, and reliable clinical assay for the
determination of blood protozoan species.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005160 
PMCID: PMC5135439
PMID: 27911895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

