
1. J Hered. 2017 Mar 1;108(2):127-134. doi: 10.1093/jhered/esw082.

Population Differences at MHC Do Not Explain Enhanced Resistance of Song Sparrows
to Local Parasites.

Slade JW(1), Sarquis-Adamson Y(1), Gloor GB(2), Lachance MA(1),
MacDougall-Shackleton EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada.

Infectious disease represents an emerging threat to natural populations,
particularly when hosts are more susceptible to novel parasites (allopatric) than
to parasites from the local area (sympatric). This pattern could arise through
evolutionary processes (host populations become adapted to their local parasites 
and genetically differentiated from other populations at immune-related loci)
and/or through ecological interactions (host individuals develop resistance to
local parasites through previous exposure). The relative importance of these
candidate mechanisms remains unclear. In jawed vertebrates, genes of the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) play a fundamental role in immunity and are
compelling candidates for spatially varying selection. We recently showed that
song sparrows (Melospiza melodia) are more susceptible to allopatric than to
sympatric strains of malaria (Plasmodium). In the current study, to determine
whether population differences at MHC explain this pattern, we characterized the 
peptide-binding regions of MHC (classes I and II) of birds that did or did not
become infected in the previous experiment. We recovered up to 4 alleles per
individual at class I, implying at least 2 loci, and up to 26 alleles per
individual at class II, implying at least 13 loci. Individuals with more class I 
alleles were less likely to become infected by Plasmodium, consistent with
parasite-mediated balancing selection. However, we found no evidence for
population genetic differentiation at either class of MHC, based on 36
individuals sequenced. Resistance to sympatric parasites previously described for
this system likely stems from individuals' prior immune experience, not from
population differentiation and locally protective alleles at MHC.

Â© The American Genetic Association 2016. All rights reserved. For permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jhered/esw082 
PMID: 27940472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

