
1. Insect Sci. 2018 Jun;25(3):368-378. doi: 10.1111/1744-7917.12431. Epub 2017 Feb
21.

Sialotranscriptome sequencing and analysis of Anopheles sinensis and comparison
with Psorophora albipes sialotranscriptome (Diptera: Culicidae).

Fang YJ(1), Yan ZT(1), Chen B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Vector Insects; Institute of Entomology and
Molecular Biology, College of Life Sciences, Chongqing Normal University,
Chongqing, 401331, China.

Most of adult female mosquitoes secrete saliva to facilitate blood sucking,
digestion and nutrition, and mosquito-borne disease prevention. The knowledge of 
classification and characteristics of sialotranscriptome genes are still quite
limited. Anopheles sinensis is a major malaria vector in China and southeast
Asian countries. In this study, the An. sinensis sialotranscriptome was sequenced
using Illumina sequencing technique with a total of 10 907 unigenes to be
obtained and annotated in biological functions and pathways, and 10 470 unigenes 
were mapped to An. sinensis reference genome with 70.46% of genes having 90%-100%
genome mapping through bioinformatics analysis. These mapped genes were
classified into four categories: housekeeping (6632 genes), secreted (1177),
protein-coding genes with function-unknown (2646) and transposable element (15). 
The housekeeping genes were divided into 27 classes, and the secreted genes were 
divided into 11 classes and 96 families. The classification, characteristics and 
evolution of these classes/families of secreted genes are further described and
discussed. The comparison of the 1177 secreted genes in An. sinensis in the
Anophelinae subfamily with 811 in Psorophora albipes in the Culicinae subfamily
show that six classes/subclasses have the gene number more than twice and two
classes (uniquely found in anophelines, and Orphan proteins of unique standing)
are unique in the former compared with the latter, whereas four
classes/subclasses are much expanded and uniquely found in the Aedes class and is
unique in the later. The An. sinensis sialotranscriptome sequence data is the
most complete in mosquitoes to date, and the analyses provide a comprehensive
information frame for further research of mosquito sialotranscriptome.

© 2016 Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/1744-7917.12431 
PMID: 27996203  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

