
1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2017 Mar 1;127:28-33. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2016.12.018. Epub
2016 Dec 23.

Antileishmanial activity of verbascoside: Selective arginase inhibition of
intracellular amastigotes of Leishmania (Leishmania) amazonensis with resistance 
induced by LPS plus IFN-γ.

Maquiaveli CDC(1), Rochetti AL(2), Fukumasu H(2), Vieira PC(3), da Silva ER(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Universidade Federal de São Carlos, Rod. Washington
Luís, Km 235, 13565-905 São Carlos, SP, Brazil. Electronic address:
cmaquiaveli40@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Universidade de São Paulo, Avenida Duque de
Caxias Norte, 225, 13635-900 Pirassununga, SP, Brazil.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Universidade Federal de São Carlos, Rod. Washington
Luís, Km 235, 13565-905 São Carlos, SP, Brazil.

Verbascoside is the main component of the traditional medicinal plants that were 
used against protozoa parasites that cause malaria and leishmaniasis. Previously,
we have described verbascoside inhibition of Leishmania amazonensis arginase as
well as its antileishmanial action against extracellular promastigotes. In this
study, we have assessed arginase parasite inhibition in intracellular
amastigotes. In addition, we verified whether verbascoside can influence the host
defense against the parasite by measuring gene expression of cytokines IL-1b,
IL-10, IL-18, TNF-α and murine macrophage arginase as well as nitric oxide
synthase enzymes. Our results show that verbascoside acts on intracellular
amastigotes of L. amazonensis (EC50=32μM) by selectively inhibiting the parasite 
arginase. Verbascoside did not affect the expression of cytokines or enzymes by
murine macrophages. However, verbascoside was active against L. (L.) amazonensis 
amastigotes that were resistant to treatment with LPS and IFN-γ. Verbascoside
action on L. amazonensis can be associated with reduction of the protective
oxidative mechanism of the parasite leading to impaired trypanothione synthesis
that is induced by the parasite arginase inhibition.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2016.12.018 
PMID: 28017773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

