
1. Cell Microbiol. 2017 Jun;19(6). doi: 10.1111/cmi.12719. Epub 2017 Jan 24.

The chaperonin TRiC forms an oligomeric complex in the malaria parasite cytosol.

Spillman NJ(1), Beck JR(1), Ganesan SM(2), Niles JC(2), Goldberg DE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Molecular Microbiology, Washington University
School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, 63110, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02139, USA.

The malaria parasite exports numerous proteins into its host red blood cell
(RBC). The trafficking of these exported effectors is complex. Proteins are first
routed through the secretory system, into the parasitophorous vacuole (PV), a
membranous compartment enclosing the parasite. Proteins are then translocated
across the PV membrane in a process requiring ATP and unfolding. Once in the RBC 
compartment the exported proteins are then refolded and further trafficked to
their final localizations. Chaperones are important in the unfolding and
refolding processes. Recently, it was suggested that the parasite TRiC chaperonin
complex is exported, and that it is involved in trafficking of exported
effectors. Using a parasite-specific antibody and epitope-tagged transgenic
parasites we could observe no export of Plasmodium TRiC into the RBC. We tested
the importance of the parasite TRiC by creating a regulatable knockdown line of
the TRiC-θ subunit. Loss of the parasite TRiC-θ led to a severe growth defect in 
asexual development, but did not alter protein export into the RBC. These
observations indicate that the TRiC proteins play a critical role in parasite
biology, though their function, within the parasite, appears unrelated to protein
trafficking in the RBC compartment.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12719 
PMCID: PMC5429184
PMID: 28067475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

