
1. J Microbiol Immunol Infect. 2017 Oct;50(5):559-564. doi:
10.1016/j.jmii.2016.08.004. Epub 2016 Dec 18.

Two sympatric types of Plasmodium ovale and discrimination by molecular methods.

Zaw MT(1), Lin Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological and Medical Diagnostics, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Pathobiological and Medical Diagnostics, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia.
Electronic address: 56dr.zawlin@gmail.com.

Plasmodium ovale is widely distributed in tropical countries, whereas it has not 
been reported in the Americas. It is not a problem globally because it is rarely 
detected by microscopy owing to low parasite density, which is a feature of
clinical ovale malaria. P.o. curtisi and P.o. wallikeri are widespread in both
Africa and Asia, and were known to be sympatric in many African countries and in 
southeast Asian countries. Small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSUrRNA) gene, cytochrome
b (cytb) gene, and merozoite surface protein-1 (msp-1) gene were initially
studied for molecular discrimination of P.o. curtisi and P.o. wallikeri using
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and DNA sequencing. DNA sequences of other genes 
from P. ovale in Southeast Asia and the southwestern Pacific regions were also
targeted to differentiate the two sympatric types. In terms of clinical
manifestations, P.o. wallikeri tended to produce higher parasitemia levels and
more severe symptoms. To date, there have been a few studies that used the
quantitative PCR method for discrimination of the two distinct P. ovale types.
Conventional PCR with consequent DNA sequencing is the common method used to
differentiate these two types. It is necessary to identify these two types
because relapse periodicity, drug susceptibility, and mosquito species preference
need to be studied to reduce ovale malaria. In this article, an easier method of 
molecular-level discrimination of P.o. curtisi and P.o. wallikeri is proposed.

Copyright Â© 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmii.2016.08.004 
PMID: 28065415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

