
1. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2017 Oct;42(5):745-756. doi:
10.1007/s13318-016-0399-1.

A Review of Pharmacogenetics of Antimalarials and Associated Clinical
Implications.

Elewa H(1), Wilby KJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Qatar University, PO Box 2713, Doha, Qatar.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Qatar University, PO Box 2713, Doha, Qatar.
kjw@qu.edu.qa.

Genetic variability in drug-metabolizing enzymes and drug transporters is known
to influence the pharmacokinetics of many drugs. Antimalarial drugs are a class
of agents known to utilize metabolic and elimination pathways prone to genetic
variation. This paper aims to review the genetic variants affecting antimalarial 
medications and discuss their clinical implications. Data were identified for the
genes coding for the cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes: CYP2C8, CYP2C19, CYP2A6,
CYP2D6, CYP2B6, and the P-glycoprotein drug transporter. Adverse effects of
amodiaquine were more common in patients with decreased CYP2C8 metabolism.
CYP2C19 variants influenced the metabolism of proguanil but no differences in
efficacy outcomes were observed. Ultra-metabolizers of CYP2A6 showed increased
incidence of adverse effects of artesunate (prodrug for active metabolite,
dihydroartemisinin). In the presence of efavirenz, mutations in CYP2B6 influenced
the number of patients achieving day-7 lumefantrine concentrations above accepted
therapeutic cut-offs. Lumefantrine concentrations were also influenced by ABCB1
variants in the presence of nevirapine. The most critical pharmacogenetic
consideration identified was the association of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency with development of hemolytic anemia and decreased hemoglobin levels
in patients treated with primaquine or a combination of
chlorproguanil-dapsone-artesunate. These findings demonstrate a need for close
monitoring of patients originating from populations where genetic variation in
metabolizing enzymes is prevalent, so as to ensure that optimal clinical outcomes
are achieved. Future studies should determine which populations are at greatest
risk of potential treatment failures and/or adverse effects, which drugs are most
susceptible to genetic variation in metabolizing enzymes, and the impact of
genetic influence on the efficacy and safety of first-line treatment regimens.

DOI: 10.1007/s13318-016-0399-1 
PMID: 28070879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

