
1. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist. 2017 Apr;7(1):42-50. doi:
10.1016/j.ijpddr.2016.12.005. Epub 2016 Dec 23.

Effect of clinically approved HDAC inhibitors on Plasmodium, Leishmania and
Schistosoma parasite growth.

Chua MJ(1), Arnold MS(1), Xu W(2), Lancelot J(3), Lamotte S(4), Späth GF(4),
Prina E(4), Pierce RJ(3), Fairlie DP(2), Skinner-Adams TS(1), Andrews KT(5).

Author information: 
(1)Griffith Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, Queensland,
Australia.
(2)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
4072, Australia.
(3)Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, U1019 - UMR
8204- CIIL -Centre D'Infection et D'Immunité de Lille, F-59000 Lille, France.
(4)Institut Pasteur and INSERM U1201, Unité de Parasitologie Moléculaire et
Signalisation, Paris, France.
(5)Griffith Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, Queensland,
Australia. Electronic address: k.andrews@griffith.edu.au.

Malaria, schistosomiasis and leishmaniases are among the most prevalent tropical 
parasitic diseases and each requires new innovative treatments. Targeting
essential parasite pathways, such as those that regulate gene expression and cell
cycle progression, is a key strategy for discovering new drug leads. In this
study, four clinically approved anti-cancer drugs (Vorinostat, Belinostat,
Panobinostat and Romidepsin) that target histone/lysine deacetylase enzymes were 
examined for in vitro activity against Plasmodium knowlesi, Schistosoma mansoni, 
Leishmania amazonensis and L. donovani parasites and two for in vivo activity in 
a mouse malaria model. All four compounds were potent inhibitors of P. knowlesi
malaria parasites (IC50 9-370 nM), with belinostat, panobinostat and vorinostat
having 8-45 fold selectivity for the parasite over human neonatal foreskin
fibroblast (NFF) or human embryonic kidney (HEK 293) cells, while romidepsin was 
not selective. Each of the HDAC inhibitor drugs caused hyperacetylation of
P. knowlesi histone H4. None of the drugs was active against Leishmania
amastigote or promastigote parasites (IC50 > 20 μM) or S. mansoni schistosomula
(IC50 > 10 μM), however romidepsin inhibited S. mansoni adult worm parings and
egg production (IC50 ∼10 μM). Modest in vivo activity was observed in P. berghei 
infected mice dosed orally with vorinostat or panobinostat (25 mg/kg twice daily 
for four days), with a significant reduction in parasitemia observed on days 4-7 
and 4-10 after infection (P < 0.05), respectively.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpddr.2016.12.005 
PMCID: PMC5241585
PMID: 28107750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

