
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jan 24;7:41303. doi: 10.1038/srep41303.

Culture adaptation of malaria parasites selects for convergent loss-of-function
mutants.

Claessens A(1)(2), Affara M(2), Assefa SA(1), Kwiatkowski DP(3), Conway DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(2)Medical Research Council Unit The Gambia, Atlantic Road, Fajara, P.O. Box 273,
Banjul, The Gambia.
(3)The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Cultured human pathogens may differ significantly from source populations. To
investigate the genetic basis of laboratory adaptation in malaria parasites,
clinical Plasmodium falciparum isolates were sampled from patients and cultured
in vitro for up to three months. Genome sequence analysis was performed on
multiple culture time point samples from six monoclonal isolates, and single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variants emerging over time were detected. Out of a
total of five positively selected SNPs, four represented nonsense mutations
resulting in stop codons, three of these in a single ApiAP2 transcription factor 
gene, and one in SRPK1. To survey further for nonsense mutants associated with
culture, genome sequences of eleven long-term laboratory-adapted parasite strains
were examined, revealing four independently acquired nonsense mutations in two
other ApiAP2 genes, and five in Epac. No mutants of these genes exist in a large 
database of parasite sequences from uncultured clinical samples. This implicates 
putative master regulator genes in which multiple independent stop codon
mutations have convergently led to culture adaptation, affecting most laboratory 
lines of P. falciparum. Understanding the adaptive processes should guide
development of experimental models, which could include targeted gene disruption 
to adapt fastidious malaria parasite species to culture.

DOI: 10.1038/srep41303 
PMCID: PMC5259787
PMID: 28117431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

