
1. Biotechnol Prog. 2017 May;33(3):832-837. doi: 10.1002/btpr.2440. Epub 2017 Feb 6.

Cell-free translational screening of an expression sequence tag library of
Clonorchis sinensis for novel antigen discovery.

Kasi D(1), Catherine C(1), Lee SW(1), Lee KH(1), Kim YJ(2), Ro Lee M(2), Ju
JW(2), Kim DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, Chungnam National
University, Daejeon, 305-764, Korea.
(2)Div. of Malaria and Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Health, Osong,
361-951, Korea.

The rapidly evolving cloning and sequencing technologies have enabled
understanding of genomic structure of parasite genomes, opening up new ways of
combatting parasite-related diseases. To make the most of the exponentially
accumulating genomic data, however, it is crucial to analyze the proteins encoded
by these genomic sequences. In this study, we adopted an engineered cell-free
protein synthesis system for large-scale expression screening of an expression
sequence tag (EST) library of Clonorchis sinensis to identify potential antigens 
that can be used for diagnosis and treatment of clonorchiasis. To allow
high-throughput expression and identification of individual genes comprising the 
library, a cell-free synthesis reaction was designed such that both the template 
DNA and the expressed proteins were co-immobilized on the same microbeads,
leading to microbead-based linkage of the genotype and phenotype. This reaction
configuration allowed streamlined expression, recovery, and analysis of proteins.
This approach enabled us to identify 21 antigenic proteins. © 2017 American
Institute of Chemical Engineers Biotechnol. Prog., 33:832-837, 2017.

© 2017 American Institute of Chemical Engineers.

DOI: 10.1002/btpr.2440 
PMID: 28127897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

