
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2017 Apr;49:251-255. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2017.01.026. Epub
2017 Jan 27.

Evolution of Fseg/Cseg dimorphism in region III of the Plasmodium falciparum
eba-175 gene.

Yasukochi Y(1), Naka I(2), Patarapotikul J(3), Hananantachai H(4), Ohashi J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Functional Genomics, Advanced Science Research Promotion
Center, Mie University, 1577 Kurima-machiya, Tsu, Mie 514-8507, Japan. Electronic
address: hyasukou@proof.ocn.ne.jp.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. Electronic address: izumin-tky@umin.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. Electronic address:
jintana.pat@mahidol.ac.th.
(4)Department of Social and Environmental Medicine, Faculty of Tropical Medicine,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. Electronic address:
hathairad.han@mahidol.ac.th.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. Electronic address: juno-tky@umin.ac.jp.

The 175-kDa erythrocyte binding antigen (EBA-175) of the malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum is important for its invasion into human erythrocytes. The 
primary structure of eba-175 is divided into seven regions, namely I to VII.
Region III contains highly divergent dimorphic segments, termed Fseg and Cseg.
The allele frequencies of segmental dimorphism within a P. falciparum population 
have been extensively examined; however, the molecular evolution of segmental
dimorphism is not well understood. A comprehensive comparison of nucleotide
sequences among 32 P. falciparum eba-175 alleles identified in our previous
study, two Plasmodium reichenowi, and one P. gaboni orthologous alleles obtained 
from the GenBank database was conducted to uncover the origin and evolutionary
processes of segmental dimorphism in P. falciparum eba-175. In the eba-175
nucleotide sequence derived from a P. reichenowi CDC strain, both Fseg and Cseg
were found in region III, which implies that the original eba-175 gene had both
segments, and deletions of F- and C-segments generated Cseg and Fseg alleles,
respectively. We also confirmed the presence of allele with Fseg and Cseg in
another P. reichenowi strain (SY57), by re-mapping short reads obtained from the 
GenBank database. On the other hand, the segmental sequence of eba-175 ortholog
in P. gaboni was quite diverged from those of the other species, suggesting that 
the original eba-175 dimorphism of P. falciparum can be traced back to the stem
linage of P. falciparum and P. reichenowi. Our findings suggest that Fseg and
Cseg alleles are derived from a single eba-175 allele containing both segments in
the ancestral population of P. falciparum and P. reichenowi, and that the allelic
dimorphism of eba-175 was shaped by the independent emergence of similar
dimorphic lineage in different species that has never been observed in any
evolutionary mode of allelic dimorphism at other loci in malaria genomes.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2017.01.026 
PMID: 28137625  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

