
1. Parasitol Res. 2017 Mar;116(3):1089-1097. doi: 10.1007/s00436-017-5394-1. Epub
2017 Feb 3.

Redescription of Babesia ardeae Toumanoff, 1940, a parasite of Ardeidae,
including molecular characterization.

Chavatte J-(1)(2), Okumura C(3), Landau I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Molécules de Communication et Adaptation des Micro-organismes (MCAM), UMR 7245
CNRS/MNHN, Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, 61 rue Buffon, CP 52, 75231,
Paris Cedex 05, France. jean-marc_chavatte@moh.gov.sg.
(2)Malaria Reference Centre - National Public Health Laboratory, Ministry of
Health, 3 Biopolis Drive, Synapse #05/14-16, Singapore, 138623, Singapore.
jean-marc_chavatte@moh.gov.sg.
(3)Veterinary Hospital - Jurong Bird Park, 2 Jurong Hill, Singapore, 628925,
Singapore.
(4)Molécules de Communication et Adaptation des Micro-organismes (MCAM), UMR 7245
CNRS/MNHN, Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, 61 rue Buffon, CP 52, 75231,
Paris Cedex 05, France.

Among the actual 16 identified and thought to be valid avian piroplasm species,
certain parasites are only known from their original description with no
subsequent report. Babesia ardeae Toumanoff, 1940 is one of them. It was
described from a single sacrificed gray heron (Ardea cinerea) from Vietnam and
had never been reported since this date despite inhabiting a very common avian
host. The present study reports the accidental rediscovery of B. ardeae from an
injured wild gray heron rescued in Singapore. This report confirms the existence 
of this parasite species in the gray heron from Southeast Asia, highlights the
similarities with the original description, provides additional morphologic and
morphometric data, and designates neotype material for B. ardeae. Additionally,
the report also furnishes the first molecular data about B. ardeae with the
amplification and sequencing of the near-full-length 18S rRNA gene sequence and
its comparison with the other available sequences of avian piroplasms.
Phylogenetic analysis based on this gene was performed to study the relationship 
of B. ardeae with the other piroplasms from mammals and birds and indicated that 
B. ardeae appears as a brother group of a clade formed by several avian piroplasm
species isolated from seabirds, altogether clustering in a well-supported clade
related to the "Babesia duncani group" and protothelerids. Scarcity of this
parasite is discussed as well as its taxonomy in relation to the conundrum about 
the systematics of piroplasms.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-017-5394-1 
PMID: 28160075  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

