
1. PLoS Pathog. 2017 Feb 8;13(2):e1006172. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006172.
eCollection 2017 Feb.

Substrate-analogous inhibitors exert antimalarial action by targeting the
Plasmodium lactate transporter PfFNT at nanomolar scale.

Golldack A(1), Henke B(1), Bergmann B(2), Wiechert M(1), Erler H(1), Blancke
Soares A(2), Spielmann T(2), Beitz E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Institute, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Germany.
(2)Bernhard-Nocht-Institute for Tropical Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.

Resistance against all available antimalarial drugs calls for novel compounds
that hit unexploited targets in the parasite. Here, we show that the recently
discovered Plasmodium falciparum lactate/proton symporter, PfFNT, is a valid
druggable target, and describe a new class of fluoroalkyl vinylogous acids that
potently block PfFNT and kill cultured parasites. The original compound,
MMV007839, is derived from the malaria box collection of potent antimalarials
with unknown targets and contains a unique internal prodrug principle that
reversibly switches between a lipophilic transport form and a polar,
substrate-analogous active form. Resistance selection of cultured P. falciparum
parasites with sub-lethal concentrations of MMV007839 produced a single
nucleotide exchange in the PfFNT gene; this, and functional characterization of
the resulting PfFNT G107S validated PfFNT as a novel antimalarial target. From
quantitative structure function relations we established the compound binding
mode and the pharmacophore. The pharmacophore largely circumvents the resistance 
mutation and provides the basis for a medicinal chemistry program that targets
lactate and proton transport as a new mode of antimalarial action.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006172 
PMCID: PMC5298233
PMID: 28178358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

