
1. Infect Immun. 2017 Apr 21;85(5). pii: e00985-16. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00985-16. Print
2017 May.

Perforin Expression by CD8 T Cells Is Sufficient To Cause Fatal Brain Edema
during Experimental Cerebral Malaria.

Huggins MA(1)(2), Johnson HL(3), Jin F(2), N Songo A(3), Hanson LM(2), LaFrance
SJ(2), Butler NS(4), Harty JT(5), Johnson AJ(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, Mayo Graduate School, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(3)Neurobiology of Disease Program, Mayo Graduate School, Rochester, Minnesota,
USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Department of Pathology, and Interdisciplinary
Graduate Program in Immunology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(6)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA
Johnson.Aaron2@mayo.edu.
(7)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Human cerebral malaria (HCM) is a serious complication of Plasmodium falciparum
infection. The most severe outcomes for patients include coma, permanent
neurological deficits, and death. Recently, a large-scale magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) study in humans identified brain swelling as the most prominent
predictor of fatal HCM. Therefore, in this study, we sought to define the
mechanism controlling brain edema through the use of the murine experimental
cerebral malaria (ECM) model. Specifically, we investigated the ability of CD8 T 
cells to initiate brain edema during ECM. We determined that areas of blood-brain
barrier (BBB) permeability colocalized with a reduction of the cerebral
endothelial cell tight-junction proteins claudin-5 and occludin. Furthermore,
through small-animal MRI, we analyzed edema and vascular leakage. Using
gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted MRI, we determined that vascular permeability is 
not homogeneous but rather confined to specific regions of the brain. Our
findings show that BBB permeability was localized within the brainstem, olfactory
bulb, and lateral ventricle. Concurrently with the initiation of vascular
permeability, T2-weighted MRI revealed edema and brain swelling. Importantly,
ablation of the cytolytic effector molecule perforin fully protected against
vascular permeability and edema. Furthermore, perforin production specifically by
CD8 T cells was required to cause fatal edema during ECM. We propose that CD8 T
cells initiate BBB breakdown through perforin-mediated disruption of tight
junctions. In turn, leakage from the vasculature into the parenchyma causes brain
swelling and edema. This results in a breakdown of homeostatic maintenance that
likely contributes to ECM pathology.

Copyright Â© 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00985-16 
PMCID: PMC5400849
PMID: 28264905  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

