
1. RNA Biol. 2017 Apr 3;14(4):442-449. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2017.1294307. Epub 2017
Feb 17.

Trans-kingdom small RNA transfer during host-pathogen interactions: The case of
P. falciparum and erythrocytes.

Walzer KA(1)(2), Chi JT(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology , Duke University School
of Medicine , Durham , North Carolina , USA.
(2)b Center for Genomic and Computational Biology , Duke University School of
Medicine , Durham , North Carolina , USA.

This review focuses on the role of trans-kingdom movement of small RNA (sRNA)
molecules between parasites, particularly Plasmodium falciparum, and their
respective host cells. While the intercellular transfer of sRNAs within organisms
is well recognized, recent studies illustrate many examples of trans-kingdom sRNA
exchange within the context of host-parasite interactions. These interactions are
predominantly found in the transfer of host sRNAs between erythrocytes and the
invading P. falciparum, as well as other host cell types. In addition,
parasite-encoded sRNAs can also be transferred to host cells to evade the immune 
system. The transport of these parasite sRNAs in the body fluids of the host may 
also offer means to detect and monitor the parasite infection. These isolated
examples may only represent the tip of the iceberg in which the transfer of sRNA 
between host and parasites is a critical aspect of host-pathogen interactions. In
addition, the levels of these sRNAs and their speed of transfer may vary
dramatically under different contexts to push the biologic equilibrium toward the
benefit of hosts vs. parasites. Therefore, these sRNA transfers may offer
potential strategies to detect, prevent or treat parasite infections. Here, we
review a brief history of the discovery of host erythrocyte sRNAs, their
transfers and interactions in the context of P. falciparum infection. We also
provide examples and discuss the functional significance of the reciprocal
transfer of parasite-encoded sRNAs into hosts. These understandings of sRNA
exchanges are put in the context of their implications for parasite pathogenesis,
host defenses and the evolution of host polymorphisms driven by host interactions
with these parasites.

DOI: 10.1080/15476286.2017.1294307 
PMCID: PMC5411123
PMID: 28277932  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

