
1. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2017 Mar 1;9(1):e2017023. doi:
10.4084/MJHID.2017.023. eCollection 2017.

A Strange Manifestation of Malaria in a Native Nigerian Boy.

Magro P(1), Izzo I(1), Saccani B(1), Casari S(1), Caligaris S(1), Tomasoni LR(1),
Matteelli A(1), Lombardi A(2), Meini A(2), Castelli F(1).

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, University of
Brescia and Spedali Civili General Hospital, Brescia, Italy.
(2)University Department of Pediatrics, University of Brescia and Spedali Civili 
General Hospital, Brescia, Italy.

Comment in
    Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2018 Jan 01;10 (1):e2018003.

The protective role of Sickle Cell Trait (SCT) in malaria endemic areas has been 
proved, and prevalence of HbS gene in malaria endemic areas is high. Splenic
infarction is a well-known complication of SCT, while the association with
malaria is considered rare. A Nigerian boy was admitted to our ward after
returning from his country of origin, for P. falciparum malaria. He underwent
abdominal ultrasound for upper right abdominal pain, showing cholecystitis and
multiple splenic lesions suggestive of abscesses. Empiric antibiotic therapy was 
undertaken. Bartonella, Echinococcus, Entamoeba serologies, blood cultures,
Quantiferon test, copro-parasitologic exam were negative; endocarditis was
excluded. He underwent further blood exams and abdomen MRI, confirming the
presence of signal alterations areas, with radiographic appearance of recent
post-infarction outcomes. Hemoglobin electrophoresis showed a percentage of HbS
of 40.6% and a diagnosis of SCT was then made. Splenic infarction should be taken
into account in patients with malaria and localized abdominal pain. Moreover,
diagnosis of SCT should be considered.

DOI: 10.4084/MJHID.2017.023 
PMCID: PMC5333739
PMID: 28293411 

