
1. PLoS One. 2017 Mar 16;12(3):e0173564. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0173564.
eCollection 2017.

Green tea proanthocyanidins cause impairment of hormone-regulated larval
development and reproductive fitness via repression of juvenile hormone acid
methyltransferase, insulin-like peptide and cytochrome P450 genes in Anopheles
gambiae sensu stricto.

Muema JM(1), Nyanjom SG(1), Mutunga JM(2), Njeru SN(3), Bargul JL(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and
Technology, Nairobi, Kenya.
(2)Malaria Research Programme, International Centre of Insect Physiology and
Ecology, Nairobi, Kenya.
(3)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Kisii University, Kisii,
Kenya.
(4)Molecular Biology and Bioinformatics Unit, International Centre of Insect
Physiology and Ecology, Nairobi, Kenya.

Successful optimization of plant-derived compounds into control of nuisance
insects would benefit from scientifically validated targets. However, the close
association between the genotypic responses and physiological toxicity effects
mediated by these compounds remains underexplored. In this study, we evaluated
the sublethal dose effects of proanthocyanidins (PAs) sourced from green tea
(Camellia sinensis) on life history traits of Anopheles gambiae (sensu stricto)
mosquitoes with an aim to unravel the probable molecular targets. Based on the
induced phenotypic effects, genes selected for study targeted juvenile hormone
(JH) biosynthesis, signal transduction, oxidative stress response and xenobiotic 
detoxification in addition to vitellogenesis in females. Our findings suggest
that chronic exposure of larval stages (L3/L4) to sublethal dose of 5 ppm
dramatically extended larval developmental period for up to 12 days, slowed down 
pupation rates, induced abnormal larval-pupal intermediates and caused 100%
inhibition of adult emergence. Further, females exhibited significant
interference of fecundity and egg hatchability relative to controls (p < 0.001). 
Using reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR), our
findings show that PA-treated larvae exhibited significant repression of
AgamJHAMT (p < 0.001), AgamILP1 (p < 0.001) and AgamCYP6M2 (p < 0.001) with
up-regulation of Hsp70 (p < 0.001). Females exposed as larvae demonstrated
down-regulation of AgamVg (p = 0.03), AgamILP1 (p = 0.009), AgamCYP6M2 (p = 0.05)
and AgamJHAMT (p = 0.02). Our findings support that C. sinensis proanthocyanidins
affect important vectorial capacity components such as mosquito survival rates
and reproductive fitness thus could be potentially used for controlling
populations of malaria vectors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0173564 
PMCID: PMC5354366
PMID: 28301607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

