
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Mar 14;8:249. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00249. eCollection
2017.

Anopheles stephensi Heme Peroxidase HPX15 Suppresses Midgut Immunity to Support
Plasmodium Development.

Kajla M(1), Kakani P(1), Choudhury TP(1), Kumar V(1), Gupta K(1), Dhawan R(1),
Gupta L(2), Kumar S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS) , Pilani , India.
(2)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani, India;
Department of Zoology, Ch. Bansi Lal University, Bhiwani, India.
(3)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani, India;
Department of Biotechnology, Ch. Bansi Lal University, Bhiwani, India.

The heme peroxidase HPX15 is an evolutionary conserved anopheline
lineage-specific gene. Previously, we found that this gene is present in the
genome of 19 worldwide distributed different species of Anopheles mosquito and
its orthologs are absent in other mosquitoes, insects, or human. In addition,
65-99% amino acid identity among these 19 orthologs permitted us to hypothesize
that the functional aspects of this gene might be also conserved in different
anophelines. In this study, we found that Anopheles stephensi AsHPX15 gene is
mainly expressed in the midgut and highly induced after uninfected or Plasmodium 
berghei-infected blood feeding. RNA interference-mediated silencing of midgut
AsHPX15 gene drastically reduced the number of developing P. berghei oocysts. An 
antiplasmodial gene nitric oxide synthase was induced 13-fold in silenced midguts
when compared to the unsilenced controls. Interestingly, the induction of
antiplasmodial immunity in AsHPX15-silenced midguts is in absolute agreement with
Anopheles gambiae. In A. gambiae, AgHPX15 catalyzes the formation of a dityrosine
network at luminal side of the midgut that suppresses the activation of mosquito 
immunity against the bolus bacteria. Thus, a low-immunity zone created by this
mechanism indirectly supports Plasmodium development inside the midgut lumen.
These indistinguishable functional behaviors and conserved homology indicates
that HPX15 might be a potent target to manipulate the antiplasmodial immunity of 
the anopheline midgut, and it will open new frontiers in the field of malaria
control.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00249 
PMCID: PMC5348522
PMID: 28352267 

