
1. Microb Cell. 2015 Jan 5;2(1):5-13. doi: 10.15698/mic2015.01.182.

Prokaryotic ancestry and gene fusion of a dual localized peroxiredoxin in malaria
parasites.

Djuika CF(1), Huerta-Cepas J(2), Przyborski JM(3), Deil S(1), Sanchez CP(1),
Doerks T(2), Bork P(2), Lanzer M(1), Deponte M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Ruprecht-Karls University, D-69120 Heidelberg,
Germany.
(2)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology
Laboratory (EMBL), D-69117 Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Parasitology, Philipps University, D-35043 Marburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Microb Cell. 2015 Jan 28;2(2):33-37.

Horizontal gene transfer has emerged as a crucial driving force for the evolution
of eukaryotes. This also includes Plasmodium falciparum and related economically 
and clinically relevant apicomplexan parasites, whose rather small genomes have
been shaped not only by natural selection in different host populations but also 
by horizontal gene transfer following endosymbiosis. However, there is rather
little reliable data on horizontal gene transfer between animal hosts or bacteria
and apicomplexan parasites. Here we show that apicomplexan homologues of
peroxiredoxin 5 (Prx5) have a prokaryotic ancestry and therefore represent a
special subclass of Prx5 isoforms in eukaryotes. Using two different
immunobiochemical approaches, we found that the P. falciparum Prx5 homologue is
dually localized to the parasite plastid and cytosol. This dual localization is
reflected by a modular Plasmodium-specific gene architecture consisting of two
exons. Despite the plastid localization, our phylogenetic analyses contradict an 
acquisition by secondary endosymbiosis and support a gene fusion event following 
a horizontal prokaryote-to-eukaryote gene transfer in early apicomplexans. The
results provide unexpected insights into the evolution of apicomplexan parasites 
as well as the molecular evolution of peroxiredoxins, an important family of
ubiquitous, usually highly concentrated thiol-dependent hydroperoxidases that
exert functions as detoxifying enzymes, redox sensors and chaperones.

DOI: 10.15698/mic2015.01.182 
PMCID: PMC5361646
PMID: 28357258 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no
conflict of interest.

