
1. Front Physiol. 2017 Mar 14;8:103. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00103. eCollection
2017.

The 1-Particle-per-k-Nucleotides (1PkN) Elastic Network Model of DNA Dynamics
with Sequence-Dependent Geometry.

Kameda T(1), Isami S(1), Togashi Y(2), Nishimori H(3), Sakamoto N(3), Awazu A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematical and Life Sciences, Hiroshima University Hiroshima, 
Japan.
(2)Research Center for the Mathematics on Chromatin Live Dynamics, Hiroshima
University Hiroshima, Japan.
(3)Department of Mathematical and Life Sciences, Hiroshima UniversityHiroshima,
Japan; Research Center for the Mathematics on Chromatin Live Dynamics, Hiroshima 
UniversityHiroshima, Japan.

Coarse-grained models of DNA have made important contributions to the
determination of the physical properties of genomic DNA, working as a molecular
machine for gene regulation. In this study, to analyze the global dynamics of
long DNA sequences with consideration of sequence-dependent geometry, we propose 
elastic network models of DNA where each particle represents k nucleotides
(1-particle-per-k-nucleotides, 1PkN). The models were adjusted according to
profiles of the anisotropic fluctuations obtained from our previous
1-particle-per-1-nucleotide (1P1N) model, which was proven to reproduce such
profiles of all-atom models. We confirmed that the 1P3N and 1P4N models are
suitable for the analysis of detailed dynamics such as local twisting motion. The
models are intended for the analysis of large structures, e.g., 10-nm fibers in
the nucleus, and nucleoids of mitochondrial or phage DNA at low computational
costs. As an example, we surveyed the physical characteristics of the whole
mitochondrial human and Plasmodium falciparum genomes.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00103 
PMCID: PMC5361685
PMID: 28382002 

