
1. Malar J. 2017 Apr 19;16(1):152. doi: 10.1186/s12936-017-1806-z.

Assessment of copy number variation in genes related to drug resistance in
Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium falciparum isolates from the Brazilian Amazon and
a systematic review of the literature.

Costa GL(1), Amaral LC(1), Fontes CJF(2), Carvalho LH(1), de Brito CFA(1), de
Sousa TN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Malaria Immunology Research Group, Centro de Pesquisas
René Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais,
Brazil.
(2)Hospital Julio Muller, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso, Cuiabá, Mato
Grosso, Brazil.
(3)Molecular Biology and Malaria Immunology Research Group, Centro de Pesquisas
René Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais,
Brazil. tais@cpqrr.fiocruz.br.

BACKGROUND: Parasite resistance to anti-malarials represents a great obstacle for
malaria elimination. The majority of studies have investigated the association
between single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and drug resistance; however, it
is becoming clear that the copy number variation (CNV) is also associated with
this parasite phenotype. To provide a baseline for molecular surveillance of
anti-malarial drug resistance in the Brazilian Amazon, the present study
characterized the genetic profile of both markers in the most common genes
associated with drug resistance in Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax
isolates. Additionally, these data were compared to data published elsewhere
applying a systematic review of the literature published over a 20-year time
period.
METHODS: The genomic DNA of 67 patients infected by P. falciparum and P. vivax
from three Brazilian States was obtained between 2002 and 2012. CNV in P.
falciparum multidrug resistance gene-1 (pfmdr1), GTP cyclohydrolase 1 (pfgch1)
and P. vivax multidrug resistance gene-1 (pvmdr1) were assessed by real-time PCR 
assays. SNPs in the pfmdr1 and pfcrt genes were assessed by PCR-RFLP. A
literature search for studies that analysed CNP in the same genes of P.
falciparum and P. vivax was conducted between May 2014 and March 2017 across four
databases.
RESULTS: All analysed samples of P. falciparum carried only one copy of pfmdr1 or
pfgch1. Although the pfcrt K76T polymorphism, a determinant of CQ resistance, was
present in all samples genotyped, the pfmdr1 N86Y was absent. For P. vivax
isolates, an amplification rate of 20% was found for the pvmdr1 gene. The results
of the study are in agreement with the low amplification rates for pfmdr1 gene
evidenced in the Americas and Africa, while higher rates have been described in
Southeast Asia. For P. vivax, very low rates of amplification for pvmdr1 have
been described worldwide, with exceptions in French Guiana, Cambodia, Thailand
and Brazil.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study was the first to evaluate gch1 CNV in P.
falciparum isolates from Brazil, showing an absence of amplification of this gene
more than 20 years after the withdrawal of the Brazilian antifolates therapeutic 
scheme. Furthermore, the rate of pvmdr1 amplification was significantly higher
than that previously reported for isolates circulating in Northern Brazil.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-017-1806-z 
PMCID: PMC5395969
PMID: 28420389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

