
1. PLoS One. 2017 Apr 19;12(4):e0175702. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175702.
eCollection 2017.

Genetic and epigenetic changes in host ABCB1 influences malaria susceptibility to
Plasmodium falciparum.

Gupta H(1), Chaudhari S(1), Rai A(1), Bhat S(1), Sahu PK(2), Hande MH(3), D'Souza
SC(4), Shashikiran U(5), Satyamoorthy K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Manipal University,
Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, VIMSAR, Burla, Sambalpur,
Odisha, India.
(3)Department of Medicine, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Manipal University,
Karnataka, India.
(4)Department of Medicine, Kasturba Medical College, Mangalore, Manipal
University, Karnataka, India.
(5)Department of Medicine, Dr TMA Pai Hospital, Udupi, Karnataka, India.

Multiple mechanisms such as genetic and epigenetic variations within a key gene
may play a role in malarial susceptibility and response to anti-malarial drugs in
the population. ABCB1 is one of the well-studied membrane transporter genes that 
code for the P-glycoprotein (an efflux protein) and whose effect on malaria
disease predisposition and susceptibility to drugs remains to be understood. We
studied the association of single nucleotide variations in human ABCB1 that
influences its function in subjects with uncomplicated and complicated malaria
caused by Plasmodium falciparum (Pf). Global DNA methylation and ABCB1 DNA
promoter methylation levels were performed along with transcriptional response
and protein expression in subjects with malaria and healthy controls. The
rs2032582 locus was significantly associated with complicated and combined
malaria groups when compared to controls (p < 0.05). Significant DNA methylation 
difference was noticed between case and control (p < 0.05). In addition, global
DNA methylation levels of the host DNA were inversely proportional to parasitemia
in individuals with Pf infection. Our study also revealed the correlation between
ABCB1 DNA promoter methylation with rs1128503 and rs2032582 polymorphisms in
malaria and was related to increased expression of ABCB1 protein levels in
complicated malaria group (p < 0.05) when compared to uncomplicated malaria and
control groups. The study provides evidence for multiple mechanisms that may
regulate the role of host ABCB1 function to mediate aetiology of malaria
susceptibility, prognosis and drug response. These may have clinical implications
and therapeutic application for various malarial conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175702 
PMCID: PMC5397027
PMID: 28422980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

