
1. Mol Biotechnol. 2017 Jun;59(6):179-191. doi: 10.1007/s12033-017-0004-0.

Metal-DNA Interactions Improve signal in High-Resolution Melting of DNA for
Species Differentiation of Plasmodium Parasite.

Jain P(1), Chakma B(1), Singh N(1), Patra S(1), Goswami P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Guwahati, Guwahati, 781039, India.
(2)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Guwahati, Guwahati, 781039, India. pgoswami@iitg.ernet.in.

The success of high-resolution melting (HRM) analysis for distinguishing similar 
DNAs with minor base mismatch differences is limited. Here, metal-mediated
structural change in DNA has been exploited to amplify HRM signals leading to
differentiation of target DNAs in an orthologous gene corresponding to four
Plasmodium species. Conserved 26-mer ssDNAs from ldh gene of the four Plasmodium 
species were employed as targets. A capture probe (CP) that is fully
complementary to the Plasmodium falciparum target (FT) and has two base
mismatches each, with the targets of Plasmodium vivax (VT), Plasmodium malariae, 
(MT), and Plasmodium ovale (OT), was considered. The DNA duplexes were treated
with metal ions for structural perturbation and analyzed by HRM. Distinct
resolution of melting fluorescence signal in otherwise identical HRM profiles for
each of the DNA duplexes was achieved by using Ca+2 or Mg+2 ions, where, Ca+2
conferred higher resolution. The increase in resolution for CP-FT versus CP-OT,
CP-FT versus CP-VT, CP-FT versus CP-MT, CP-VT versus CP-OT, and CP-MT versus
CP-OT with Ca-DNA as compared to control was 67.3-, 20.4-, 22.0-, 10.9-, and
8.3-fold, respectively. The signal resolution was the highest at pH 8. The method
could detect 0.25 pmol/µl of the target DNA. Structural analysis showed that Ca+2
and Mg+2 ions perturbed the structure of DNA. This perturbation helped to improve
HRM signal resolution among DNA targets corresponding to the orthologous gene of 
four Plasmodium species. This novel approach has potential application not only
for Plasmodium species-specific diagnosis but also for differentiation of DNAs
with minor sequence variation.

DOI: 10.1007/s12033-017-0004-0 
PMID: 28421327  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

