
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2017 Jun 27;61(7). pii: e02655-16. doi:
10.1128/AAC.02655-16. Print 2017 Jul.

Molecular Profile of Malaria Drug Resistance Markers of Plasmodium falciparum in 
Suriname.

Chenet SM(1), Okoth SA(1)(2), Kelley J(1)(2), Lucchi N(1), Huber CS(1), Vreden
S(3), Macedo de Oliveira A(1), Barnwell JW(1), Udhayakumar V(1), Adhin MR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Atlanta Research and Education Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)Foundation for Scientific Research Suriname (SWOS), Paramaribo, Suriname.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Anton de Kom (ADEK)
University of Suriname, Paramaribo, Suriname m.adhin@uvs.edu.

In Suriname, an artesunate monotherapy therapeutic efficacy trial was recently
conducted to evaluate partial artemisinin resistance emerging in Plasmodium
falciparum We genotyped the PfK13 propeller domain of P. falciparum in 40 samples
as well as other mutations proposed to be associated with artemisinin-resistant
mutants. We did not find any mutations previously associated with artemisinin
resistance in Southeast Asia, but we found fixed resistance mutations for
chloroquine (CQ) and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine. Additionally, the PfCRT C350R
mutation, associated with reversal of CQ resistance and piperaquine-selective
pressure, was present in 62% of the samples. Our results from neutral
microsatellite data also confirmed a high parasite gene flow in the Guiana
Shield. Although recruiting participants for therapeutic efficacy studies is
challenging in areas where malaria endemicity is very low due to the low number
of malaria cases reported, conducting these studies along with molecular
surveillance remains essential for the monitoring of artemisinin-resistant
alleles and for the characterization of the population structure of P. falciparum
in areas targeted for malaria elimination.

Copyright Â© 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02655-16 
PMCID: PMC5487647
PMID: 28438929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

