
1. Sci Rep. 2017 May 2;7(1):1308. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-01506-9.

Sequence variation in Plasmodium falciparum Histidine Rich Proteins 2 and 3 in
Indian isolates: Implications for Malaria Rapid Diagnostic Test Performance.

Kumar Bharti P(1), Singh Chandel H(1), Krishna S(1), Nema S(1), Ahmad A(1),
Udhayakumar V(2), Singh N(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Research in Tribal Health (NIRTH), Garha, Jabalpur,
482003, India.
(2)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, 30329, USA.
(3)National Institute for Research in Tribal Health (NIRTH), Garha, Jabalpur,
482003, India. neeru.singh@gmail.com.

Commercial malaria rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) detect P. falciparum histidine
rich protein 2 (PfHRP2) and cross react with PfHRP3, a structural homologue.
Here, we analysed natural variations in PfHRP2 and PfHRP3 sequences from Indian
isolates and correlated these variations with RDT reactivity. A total 1392â€‰P.
falciparum positive samples collected from eight endemic states were PCR
amplified for Pfhrp2 and Pfhrp3 genes and were sequenced. The deduced protein
sequences were analysed for repeat variations and correlated with RDT reactivity.
Out of 1392 PCR amplified samples, a single sample was Pfhrp2 negative and two
samples were Pfhrp3 negative. Complete Pfhrp2 and Pfhrp3 sequences were obtained 
for 769 samples and 750 samples, respectively. A total of 16 distinct repeat
motifs were observed for Pfhrp2 and 11 for Pfhrp3, including some new repeat
types. No correlation was found between variations in the size of Pfhrp2 repeat
types 2 and 7, nor between any combinations of repeat motifs, and performance of 
a commercial RDT at low parasite densities. The findings suggest that sequence
diversity in Pfhrp2 and Pfhrp3 genes in Indian isolates is not likely to
negatively influence performance of currently used PfHRP2 RDTs.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-01506-9 
PMCID: PMC5430971
PMID: 28465622  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

