
1. Korean J Parasitol. 2017 Apr;55(2):207-212. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2017.55.2.207. Epub 
2017 Apr 30.

Serological and Molecular Detection of Toxoplasma gondii and Babesia microti in
the Blood of Rescued Wild Animals in Gangwon-do (Province), Korea.

Hong SH(1), Kim HJ(2), Jeong YI(1), Cho SH(1), Lee WJ(1), Kim JT(2), Lee SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Malaria and Parasitc Diseases, Korea National Institute of Health,
Korea Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Cheongju 28159, Korea.
(2)Colleage of Veterinary Medicine, Gangwon National University, Chuncheon 24341,
Korea.

Infections of Toxoplasma gondii and Babesia microti are reported in many wild
animals worldwide, but information on their incidence and molecular detection in 
Korean wild fields is limited. In this study, the prevalence of T. gondii and B. 
microti infection in blood samples of 5 animal species (37 Chinese water deer, 23
raccoon dogs, 6 roe deer, 1 wild boar, and 3 Eurasian badgers) was examined
during 2008-2009 in Gangwon-do (Province), the Republic of Korea (=Korea) by
using serological and molecular tests. The overall seropositivity of T. gondii
was 8.6% (6/70); 10.8% in Chinese water deer, 4.3% in raccoon dogs, and 16.7% in 
roe deer. PCR revealed only 1 case of T. gondii infection in Chinese water deer, 
and phylogenic analysis showed that the positive isolate was practically
identical to the highly pathogenetic strain type I. In B. microti PCR, the
positive rate was 5.7% (4/70), including 2 Chinese water deer and 2 Eurasian
badgers. Phylogenetic analysis results of 18S rRNA and the Î²-tubulin gene showed 
that all positive isolates were US-type B. microti. To our knowledge, this is the
first report of B. microti detected in Chinese water deer and Eurasian badger
from Korea. These results indicate a potentially high prevalence of T. gondii and
B. microti in wild animals of Gangwon-do, Korea. Furthermore, Chinese water deer 
might act as a reservoir for parasite infections of domestic animals.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2017.55.2.207 
PMCID: PMC5450965
PMID: 28506045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

