
1. Crit Rev Immunol. 2016;36(5):359-378. doi: 10.1615/CritRevImmunol.2017018316.

Flow Cytometric Characterization of Antigen-Specific T Cells Based on RNA and Its
Advantages in Detecting Infections and Immunological Disorders.

Radford F(1), Tyagi S(2), Gennaro ML(2), Pine R(2), Bushkin Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520.
(2)Public Health Research Institute, New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers
University, Newark, NJ 07103.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization coupled with flow cytometry (FISH-Flow) is a
highly quantitative, high-throughput platform allowing precise quantification of 
total mRNA transcripts in single cells. In undiagnosed infections posing a
significant health burden worldwide, such as latent tuberculosis or asymptomatic 
recurrent malaria, an important challenge is to develop accurate diagnostic
tools. Antigen-specific T cells create a persistent memory to pathogens, making
them useful for diagnosis of infection. Stimulation of memory response initiates 
T-cell transitions between functional states. Numerous studies have shown that
changes in protein levels lag real-time T-cell transitions. However, analysis at 
the single-cell transcriptional level can determine the differences. FISH-Flow is
a powerful tool with which to study the functional states of T-cell subsets and
to identify the gene expression profiles of antigen-specific T cells during
disease progression. Advances in instrumentation, fluorophores, and FISH
methodologies will broaden and deepen the use of FISH-Flow, changing the
immunological field by allowing determination of functional immune signatures at 
the mRNA level and the development of new diagnostic tools.

DOI: 10.1615/CritRevImmunol.2017018316 
PMCID: PMC5548664
PMID: 28605344  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

