
1. Infect Immun. 2017 Aug 18;85(9). pii: e00364-17. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00364-17. Print
2017 Sep.

The Transcription Factor NFAT1 Participates in the Induction of CD4+ T Cell
Functional Exhaustion during Plasmodium yoelii Infection.

Ames RY(1), Ting LM(2), Gendlina I(2), Kim K(2), Macian F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York,
USA.
(2)Departments of Medicine, Pathology, and Microbiology and Immunology, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York,
USA fernando.macian@einstein.yu.edu.

Repeated stimulation of T cells that occurs in the context of chronic infection
results in progressively reduced responsiveness of T cells to pathogen-derived
antigens. This phenotype, known as T cell exhaustion, occurs during chronic
infections caused by a variety of pathogens, from persistent viruses to
parasites. Unlike the memory cells that typically form after successful pathogen 
clearance following an acute infection, exhausted T cells secrete lower levels of
effector cytokines, proliferate less in response to cognate antigen, and
upregulate cell surface inhibitory molecules such as PD-1 and LAG-3. The
molecular events that lead to the induction of this phenotype have, however, not 
been fully characterized. In T cells, members of the NFAT family of transcription
factors not only are responsible for the expression of many activation-induced
genes but also are crucial for the induction of transcriptional programs that
inhibit T cell activation and maintain tolerance. Here we show that
NFAT1-deficient CD4+ T cells maintain higher proliferative capacity and
expression of effector cytokines following Plasmodium yoelii infection and are
therefore more resistant to P. yoelii-induced exhaustion than their wild-type
counterparts. Consequently, gene expression microarray analysis of CD4+ T cells
following P. yoelii-induced exhaustion shows upregulation of effector T
cell-associated genes in the absence of NFAT1 compared with wild-type exhausted T
cells. Furthermore, adoptive transfer of NFAT1-deficient CD4+ T cells into mice
infected with P. yoelii results in increased production of antibodies to cognate 
antigen. Our results support the idea that NFAT1 is necessary to fully suppress
effector responses during Plasmodium-induced CD4+ T cell exhaustion.

Copyright Â© 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00364-17 
PMCID: PMC5563568
PMID: 28630062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

