
1. mBio. 2017 Jun 27;8(3). pii: e00950-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00950-17.

A Plastid Protein That Evolved from Ubiquitin and Is Required for Apicoplast
Protein Import in Toxoplasma gondii.

Fellows JD(1), Cipriano MJ(2), Agrawal S(1), Striepen B(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA.
(2)Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia,
Athens, Georgia, USA.
(3)Department of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
striepen@uga.edu.

Apicomplexan parasites cause a variety of important infectious diseases,
including malaria, toxoplasma encephalitis, and severe diarrhea due to
Cryptosporidium Most apicomplexans depend on an organelle called the apicoplast
which is derived from a red algal endosymbiont. The apicoplast is essential for
the parasite as the compartment of fatty acid, heme, and isoprenoid biosynthesis.
The majority of the approximate 500 apicoplast proteins are nucleus encoded and
have to be imported across the four membranes that surround the apicoplast.
Import across the second outermost membrane of the apicoplast, the periplastid
membrane, depends on an apicoplast-specific endoplasmic reticulum-associated
protein degradation (ERAD) complex and on enzymes of the associated
ubiquitination cascade. However, identification of an apicoplast ubiquitin
associated with this machinery has long been elusive. Here we identify a plastid 
ubiquitin-like protein (PUBL), an apicoplast protein that is derived from a
ubiquitin ancestor but that has significantly changed in its primary sequence.
PUBL is distinct from known ubiquitin-like proteins, and phylogenomic analyses
suggest a clade specific to apicomplexans. We demonstrate that PUBL and the AAA
ATPase CDC48AP both act to translocate apicoplast proteins across the periplastid
membrane during protein import. Conditional null mutants and genetic
complementation show that both proteins are critical for this process and for
parasite survival. PUBL residues homologous to those that are required for
ubiquitin conjugation onto target proteins are essential for this function, while
those required for polyubiquitination and preprotein processing are dispensable. 
Our experiments provide a mechanistic understanding of the molecular machinery
that drives protein import across the membranes of the apicoplast.IMPORTANCE
Apicomplexan parasites are responsible for important human diseases. There are no
effective vaccines for use in humans, and drug treatment faces multiple
challenges, including emerging resistance, lack of efficacy across the lifecycle,
and adverse drug effects. The apicoplast is a promising target for novel
treatments: this chloroplast-like organelle is derived from an algal symbiont, is
absent from the host, and is essential for parasite growth and pathogenesis. We
use Toxoplasma gondii as a model to study the apicoplast due to its strong
genetic tools and established functional assays. We identify a plastid
ubiquitin-like protein (PUBL) which is a novel ubiquitin-like protein and
demonstrate its importance and that of the motor protein CDC48AP for apicoplast
protein import. These findings broaden our understanding of the evolution and
mechanistic workings of a unique parasite organelle and may lead to new
opportunities for treatments against important human pathogens.

Copyright Â© 2017 Fellows et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00950-17 
PMCID: PMC5487736
PMID: 28655825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

