
1. IUBMB Life. 2017 Sep;69(9):706-719. doi: 10.1002/iub.1653. Epub 2017 Jul 10.

Transcriptomic profile analysis of mouse neural tube development by RNA-Seq.

Yu J(1), Mu J(2), Guo Q(1), Yang L(1), Zhang J(1), Liu Z(1), Yu B(1), Zhang T(3),
Xie J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shanxi Key Laboratory of
Birth Defect and Cell Regeneration, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, China.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MA, USA.
(3)Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, China.

The neural tube is the primordium of the central nervous system (CNS) in which
its development is not entirely clear. Understanding the cellular and molecular
basis of neural tube development could, therefore, provide vital clues to the
mechanism of neural tube defects (NTDs). Here, we investigated the gene
expression profiles of three different time points (embryonic day (E) 8.5, 9.5
and 10.5) of mouse neural tube by using RNA-seq approach. About 391
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were screened during mouse neural tube
development, including 45 DEGs involved in CNS development, among which Bmp2,
Ascl1, Olig2, Lhx1, Wnt7b and Eomes might play the important roles. Of 45 DEGs,
Foxp2, Eomes, Hoxb3, Gpr56, Hap1, Nkx2-1, Sez6l2, Wnt7b, Tbx20, Nfib, Cntn1 and
Dcx had different isoforms, and the opposite expression pattern of different
isoforms was observed for Gpr56, Nkx2-1 and Sez6l2. In addition, alternative
splicing, such as mutually exclusive exon, retained intron, skipped exon and
alternative 3' splice site was identified in 10 neural related differentially
splicing genes, including Ngrn, Ddr1, Dctn1, Dnmt3b, Ect2, Map2, Mbnl1, Meis2,
Vcan and App. Moreover, seven neural splicing factors, such as Nova1/2,
nSR100/Srrm4, Elavl3/4, Celf3 and Rbfox1 were differentially expressed during
mouse neural tube development. Interestingly, nine DEGs identified above were
dysregulated in retinoic acid-induced NTDs model, indicating the possible
important role of these genes in NTDs. Taken together, our study provides more
comprehensive information on mouse neural tube development, which might provide
new insights on NTDs occurrence. © 2017 IUBMB Life, 69(9):706-719, 2017.

© 2017 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/iub.1653 
PMID: 28691208  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

