
1. mBio. 2017 Jul 11;8(4). pii: e00729-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00729-17.

CRISPR/Cas9 Genome Editing Reveals That the Intron Is Not Essential for var2csa
Gene Activation or Silencing in Plasmodium falciparum.

Bryant JM(1)(2)(3), Regnault C(4), Scheidig-Benatar C(4)(2)(3), Baumgarten
S(4)(2)(3), Guizetti J(1)(2)(3), Scherf A(4)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Biologie des Interactions Hôte-Parasite, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France jessica.bryant@pasteur.fr julien.guizetti@gmail.com.
(2)INSERM U1201, Paris, France.
(3)CNRS ERL9195, Paris, France.
(4)Unité de Biologie des Interactions Hôte-Parasite, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

Plasmodium falciparum relies on monoallelic expression of 1 of 60 var virulence
genes for antigenic variation and host immune evasion. Each var gene contains a
conserved intron which has been implicated in previous studies in both activation
and repression of transcription via several epigenetic mechanisms, including
interaction with the var promoter, production of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs),
and localization to repressive perinuclear sites. However, functional studies
have relied primarily on artificial expression constructs. Using the recently
developed P. falciparum clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
(CRISPR)/Cas9 system, we directly deleted the var2csa P. falciparum 3D7_1200600
(Pf3D7_1200600) endogenous intron, resulting in an intronless var gene in a
natural, marker-free chromosomal context. Deletion of the var2csa intron resulted
in an upregulation of transcription of the var2csa gene in ring-stage parasites
and subsequent expression of the PfEMP1 protein in late-stage parasites. Intron
deletion did not affect the normal temporal regulation and subsequent
transcriptional silencing of the var gene in trophozoites but did result in
increased rates of var gene switching in some mutant clones. Transcriptional
repression of the intronless var2csa gene could be achieved via long-term culture
or panning with the CD36 receptor, after which reactivation was possible with
chondroitin sulfate A (CSA) panning. These data suggest that the var2csa intron
is not required for silencing or activation in ring-stage parasites but point to 
a subtle role in regulation of switching within the var gene
family.IMPORTANCEPlasmodium falciparum is the most virulent species of malaria
parasite, causing high rates of morbidity and mortality in those infected.
Chronic infection depends on an immune evasion mechanism termed antigenic
variation, which in turn relies on monoallelic expression of 1 of ~60 var genes. 
Understanding antigenic variation and the transcriptional regulation of
monoallelic expression is important for developing drugs and/or vaccines. The var
gene family encodes the antigenic surface proteins that decorate infected
erythrocytes. Until recently, studying the underlying genetic elements that
regulate monoallelic expression in P. falciparum was difficult, and most studies 
relied on artificial systems such as episomal reporter genes. Our study was the
first to use CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing for the functional study of an important,
conserved genetic element of var genes-the intron-in an endogenous, episome-free 
manner. Our findings shed light on the role of the var gene intron in
transcriptional regulation of monoallelic expression.

Copyright © 2017 Bryant et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00729-17 
PMCID: PMC5513710
PMID: 28698275  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

