
1. J Vet Med Sci. 2017 Aug 18;79(8):1404-1411. doi: 10.1292/jvms.17-0119. Epub 2017 
Jul 13.

Biochemical characterization of aminopeptidase N2 from Toxoplasma gondii.

Li Q(1), Jia H(2), Cao S(2), Zhang Z(2), Zheng J(2), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The Affiliated Tumor Hospital
of Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150001, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin 150001, China.

Aminopeptidase N (APN) is a member of the highly conserved M1 family of
metalloproteases, and is considered to be a valuable target for the treatment of 
a variety of diseases, e.g., cancer, malaria, and coccidiosis. In this study, we 
identified an APN gene (TgAPN2) in the Toxoplasma gondii genome, and performed a 
biochemical characterization of the recombinant TgAPN2 (rTgAPN2) protein. Active 
rTgAPN2 was first produced and purified in Escherichia coli. The catalytic
activity of the enzyme was verified using a specific fluorescent substrate,
H-Ala-MCA; the rTgAPN2 was relatively active in the absence of added metal ions. 
The addition of some metal ions, especially Zn2+, inhibited the activity of the
recombinant enzyme. The activity of rTgAPN2 was reduced in the presence of the
EDTA chelator in the absence of added metal ions. The optimum pH for enzyme
activity was 8.0; the enzyme was active in the 3-10 pH range. The substrate
preference of rTgAPN2 was evaluated. The enzyme showed a preference for
substrates containing N-terminal Ala and Arg residues. Finally, bestatin and
amastatin were shown to inhibit the activity of the enzyme. In conclusion,
rTgAPN2 shared general characteristics with the M1 family of aminopeptidases but 
also had some unique characteristics. This provides a basis for the function of
aminopeptidases and the study of drug targets.

DOI: 10.1292/jvms.17-0119 
PMCID: PMC5573830
PMID: 28701624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

