
1. PLoS One. 2017 Jul 17;12(7):e0181399. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181399.
eCollection 2017.

The antenna transcriptome changes in mosquito Anopheles sinensis, pre- and post- 
blood meal.

Chen Q(1), Pei D(1), Li J(1), Jing C(1), Wu W(1)(2), Man Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha,
Hunan, China.
(2)State Key Lab on NBC Protection for Civilian, Research Institute of Chemical
Defense, Beijing, China.

Antenna is the main chemosensory organ in mosquitoes. Characterization of the
transcriptional changes after blood meal, especially those related to
chemoreception, may help to explain mosquito blood sucking behavior and to
identify novel targets for mosquito control. Anopheles sinensis is an Asiatic
mosquito species which transmits malaria and lymphatic filariasis. However,
studies on chemosensory biology in female An. sinensis are quite lacking. Here we
report a transcriptome analysis of An. sinensis female antennae pre- and post-
blood meal. We created six An. sinensis antenna RNA-seq libraries, three from
females without blood meal and three from females five hours after a blood meal. 
Illumina sequencing was conducted to analyze the transcriptome differences
between the two groups. In total, the sequenced fragments created 21,643 genes,
1,828 of them were novel. 12,861 of these genes were considered to be expressed
(FPKM >1.0) in at least one of the two groups, with 12,159 genes expressed in
both groups. 548 genes were differentially expressed in the blood-fed group, with
331 genes up-regulated and 217 genes down-regulated. GO enrichment analysis of
the differentially expressed genes suggested that there were no statistically
over represented GO terms among down-regulated genes in blood-fed mosquitoes,
while the enriched GO terms of the up-regulated genes occurred mainly in
metabolic process. For the chemosensory gene families, a subtle distinction in
the expression levels can be observed according to our statistical analysis.
However, the firstly comprehensive identification of these chemosensory gene
families in An. sinensis antennae will help to characterize the precise function 
of these proteins in odor recognition in mosquitoes. This study provides a first 
global view in the changes of transcript accumulation elicited by blood meal in
An. sinensis female antennae.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181399 
PMCID: PMC5513552
PMID: 28715466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

