
1. Life Sci. 2017 Sep 15;185:8-14. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2017.07.017. Epub 2017 Jul 17.

Role of miRNAs in development and disease: Lessons learnt from small organisms.

Chandra S(1), Vimal D(1), Sharma D(1), Rai V(2), Gupta SC(3), Chowdhuri DK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Embryotoxicology Laboratory, Environmental Toxicology Group, CSIR-Indian
Institute of Toxicology Research (CSIR-IITR), Lucknow 226 001, India; Academy of 
Scientific Innovation & Research (AcSIR), CSIR-IITR Campus, Lucknow, India.
(2)Laboratory for Translational Cancer Research, Department of Biochemistry,
Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi 221 005, India.
(3)Laboratory for Translational Cancer Research, Department of Biochemistry,
Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi 221 005, India.
Electronic address: sgupta@bhu.ac.in.
(4)Embryotoxicology Laboratory, Environmental Toxicology Group, CSIR-Indian
Institute of Toxicology Research (CSIR-IITR), Lucknow 226 001, India. Electronic 
address: dkchowdhuri@iitr.res.in.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) constitute a class of small (18-22 nucleotides) non-coding
RNAs that regulate gene expression at the post-transcriptional level.
Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, and many other small organisms
have been instrumental in deciphering the biological functions of miRNAs. While
some miRNAs from small organisms are highly conserved across the taxa, others are
organism specific. The miRNAs are known to play a crucial role during development
and in various cellular functions such as cell survival, cell proliferation, and 
differentiation. The miRNAs associated with fragile X syndrome, Parkinson's
disease, Alzheimer's disease, diabetes, cancer, malaria, infectious diseases and 
several other human diseases have been identified from small organisms. These
organisms have been used as platforms in deciphering the functions of miRNAs in
the pathogenesis of human diseases and to study miRNA biogenesis. Small organisms
have also been used in the development of miRNA-based diagnostic, prognostic and 
therapeutic strategies. The molecular techniques such as genome sequencing,
northern blot analysis, and quantitative RT-PCR, have been used in deciphering
the functions of miRNAs in small organisms. How miRNAs from small organisms
especially those from Drosophila and C. elegans regulate development and disease 
pathogenesis is the focus of this review. The outstanding questions raised by our
current understanding are discussed.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2017.07.017 
PMID: 28728902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

