
1. Wellcome Open Res. 2017 Jul 24;2:45. doi: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.11896.2.
eCollection 2017.

PhenoPlasm: a database of disruption phenotypes for malaria parasite genes.

Sanderson T(1), Rayner JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Programme, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus,
Hinxton, Cambridge, UK.

Two decades after the first Plasmodium transfection, attempts have been made to
disrupt more than 3,151 genes in malaria parasites, across five Plasmodium
species. While results from rodent malaria transfections have been curated and
systematised, empowering large-scale analysis, phenotypic data from human malaria
parasite transfections currently exists as individual reports scattered across a 
the literature. To facilitate systematic analysis of published experimental
genetic data across Plasmodium species, we have built PhenoPlasm (
http://www.phenoplasm.org), a database of phenotypes generated by transfection
experiments in all Plasmodium parasites. The site provides a simple interface
linking citation-backed Plasmodium reverse-genetic phenotypes to gene IDs. The
database has been populated with phenotypic data on 367 P. falciparum genes,
curated from 176 individual publications, as well as existing data on rodent
Plasmodium species from RMgmDB and PlasmoGEM. This is the first time that all
available data on P. falciparum transfection experiments has been brought
together in a single place. These data are presented using ortholog mapping to
allow a researcher interested in a gene in one species to see results across
other Plasmodium species. The collaborative nature of the database enables any
researcher to add new phenotypes as they are discovered. As an example of
database utility, we use the currently available datasets to identify RAP
(RNA-binding domain abundant in Apicomplexa)-domain containing proteins as
crucial to parasite survival.

DOI: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.11896.2 
PMCID: PMC5500895
PMID: 28748223 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: No competing interests were 
disclosed.

