
1. Oecologia. 2017 Aug;184(4):813-823. doi: 10.1007/s00442-017-3919-z. Epub 2017 Jul
29.

Age-specific patterns of infection with haemosporidians and trypanosomes in a
warbler: implications for sexual selection.

Freeman-Gallant CR(1), Taff CC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs, NY, 12866, USA.
cfreeman@skidmore.edu.
(2)Laboratory of Ornithology, Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.

Although the selective loss of individuals susceptible to disease can favor the
evolution of female preference for older males, the interrelationship between
age, infection, longevity, and mating success remains poorly characterized in
natural populations. In a longitudinal study of 61 male common yellowthroats
(Geothlypis trichas), we found that the probability of infection with hematozoa
increased as males aged from 1 to 5Â years. Despite a significant, negative
association between infection and longevity that partially masked age-effects,
the odds that a male was infected with Trypanosoma, Plasmodium, or Leucocytozoon 
increased 71-212% per year. Nearly 75% of males in their first breeding season
were either uninfected or infected with only a single parasite, while 50% of
older males were infected with at least two parasites and 16% were infected with 
all three. No males escaped infection after their second breeding season. Older
males were also more likely to sire extra-pair young (EPY) and, as a consequence,
infection with multiple parasites was associated with a fourfold increase in the 
odds of producing EPY. Unlike younger males, 80% of the oldest males had a
history of either surviving chronic infection or recovering. Combined with
previous work showing higher diversity at the major histocompatibility complex
among older males, our results suggest that the song and plumage traits that
signal male age in common yellowthroats also, perforce, signal resistance to
parasites. By preferring older males, females may obtain good genes for disease
resistance even in the absence of any effect of infection on male ornamentation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00442-017-3919-z 
PMID: 28756490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

