
1. J Biol Chem. 2017 Sep 15;292(37):15329-15339. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M117.802009. Epub 
2017 Jul 27.

A mosquito hemolymph odorant-binding protein family member specifically binds
juvenile hormone.

Kim IH(1), Pham V(1), Jablonka W(1), Goodman WG(2), Ribeiro JMC(1), Andersen
JF(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, NIAID, National Institutes
of Health, Rockville, Maryland 20852 and.
(2)the Department of Entomology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706.
(3)From the Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, NIAID, National Institutes
of Health, Rockville, Maryland 20852 and john.andersen@nih.gov.

Juvenile hormone (JH) is a key regulator of insect development and reproduction. 
In adult mosquitoes, it is essential for maturation of the ovary and normal male 
reproductive behavior, but how JH distribution and activity is regulated after
secretion is unclear. Here, we report a new type of specific JH-binding protein, 
given the name mosquito juvenile hormone-binding protein (mJHBP), which
circulates in the hemolymph of pupal and adult Aedes aegypti males and females.
mJHBP is a member of the odorant-binding protein (OBP) family, and orthologs are 
present in the genomes of Aedes, Culex, and Anopheles mosquito species. Using
isothermal titration calorimetry, we show that mJHBP specifically binds JH II and
JH III but not eicosanoids or JH derivatives. mJHBP was crystallized in the
presence of JH III and found to have a double OBP domain structure reminiscent of
salivary "long" D7 proteins of mosquitoes. We observed that a single JH III
molecule is contained in the N-terminal domain binding pocket that is closed in
an apparent conformational change by a C-terminal domain-derived Î±-helix. The
electron density for the ligand indicated a high occupancy of the natural 10R
enantiomer of JH III. Of note, mJHBP is structurally unrelated to hemolymph JHBP 
from lepidopteran insects. A low level of expression of mJHBP in Ae. aegypti
larvae suggests that it is primarily active during the adult stage where it could
potentially influence the effects of JH on egg development, mating behavior,
feeding, or other processes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M117.802009 
PMCID: PMC5602393
PMID: 28751377  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

