
1. Acta Trop. 2017 Dec;176:29-33. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2017.07.025. Epub 2017 
Jul 24.

New insights into the factors affecting synonymous codon usage in human infecting
Plasmodium species.

Gajbhiye S(1), Patra PK(1), Yadav MK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Pt. J.N.M. Medical College, Raipur, CG 492001,
India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Pt. J.N.M. Medical College, Raipur, CG 492001,
India. Electronic address: manojiids@gmail.com.

Codon usage bias is due to the non-random usage of synonymous codons for coding
amino acids. The synonymous sites are under weak selection, and codon usage bias 
is maintained by the equilibrium in mutational bias, genetic drift and selection 
pressure. The differential codon usage choices are also relevant to human
infecting Plasmodium species. Recently, P. knowlesi switches its natural host,
long-tailed macaques, and starts infecting humans. This review focuses on the
comparative analysis of codon usage choices among human infecting P. falciparum
and P. vivax along with P. knowlesi species taking their coding sequence data.
The variation in GC content, amino acid frequencies, effective number of codons
and other factors plays a crucial role in determining synonymous codon choices.
Within species codon choices are more similar for P. vivax and P. knowlesi in
comparison with P. falciparum species. This study suggests that synonymous codon 
choice modulates the gene expression level, mRNA stability, ribosome speed,
protein folding, translation efficiency and its accuracy in Plasmodium species,
and provides a valuable information regarding the codon usage pattern to
facilitate gene cloning as well as expression and transfection studies for
malaria causing species.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2017.07.025 
PMID: 28751162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

