
1. Conserv Biol. 2017 Dec;31(6):1477-1482. doi: 10.1111/cobi.12995. Epub 2017 Aug
30.

The malaria parasite Plasmodium relictum in the endemic avifauna of eastern Cuba.

Soares L(1)(2), Marra P(3), Gray L(1), Ricklefs RE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Missouri-St. Louis, One University
Boulevard, St. Louis, MO 63121, U.S.A.
(2)Department of Biology, Saint Louis University, 3507 Laclede Avenue, St. Louis,
MO 63103, U.S.A.
(3)Migratory Bird Center, Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute, National
Zoological Park, P.O. Box 37012, MRC 5516, Washington, D.C. 20013, U.S.A.

Island populations are vulnerable to introduced pathogens, as evidenced by
extinction or population decline of several endemic Hawaiian birds caused by the 
malaria parasite, Plasmodium relictum (order Haemosporida). We analyzed blood
samples from 363 birds caught near Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, for the presence of
haemosporidian infections. We characterized parasite lineages by determining
nucleotide variation of the parasite's mitochondrial cyt b gene. Fifty-nine
individuals were infected, and we identified 7 lineages of haemosporidian
parasites. Fifty individuals were infected by 6 Haemoproteus sp. lineages,
including a newly characterized lineage of Haem. (Parahaemoproteus) sp. CUH01.
Nine individuals carried the P. relictum lineage GRW4, including 5 endemic Cuban 
Grassquits (Tiaris canorus) and 1 migratory Cape May Warbler (Setophaga tigrina).
A sequence of the merozoite surface protein gene from one Cuban Grassquit
infected with GRW4 matched that of the Hawaiian haplotype Pr9. Our results
indicate that resident and migratory Cuban birds are infected with a malaria
lineage that has severely affected populations of several endemic Hawaiian birds.
We suggest GRW4 may be associated with the lack of several bird species on Cuba
that are ubiquitous elsewhere in the West Indies. From the standpoint of avian
conservation in the Caribbean Basin, it will be important to determine the
distribution of haemosporidian parasites, especially P. relictum GRW4, in Cuba as
well as the pathogenicity of this lineage in species that occur and are absent
from Cuba.

© 2017 Society for Conservation Biology.

DOI: 10.1111/cobi.12995 
PMID: 28766818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

