
1. Heliyon. 2017 Jul 20;3(7):e00361. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2017.e00361. eCollection
2017 Jul.

Sex specific molecular responses of quick-to-court protein in Indian malarial
vector Anopheles culicifacies: conflict of mating versus blood feeding behaviour.

Das De T(1)(2), Sharma P(1), Rawal C(1), Kumari S(1), Tavetiya S(1), Yadav J(1), 
Hasija Y(2), Dixit R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Host-Parasite Interaction Studies, National Institute of Malaria
Research, Sector-8, Dwarka, Delhi 110077, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Delhi Technological University, Shahbad
Daulatpur, Main Bawana Road, Delhi 110042, India.

Understanding the molecular basis of mosquito behavioural complexity plays a
central role in designing novel molecular tools to fight against their
vector-borne diseases. Although the olfactory system plays an important role in
guiding and managing many behavioural responses including feeding and mating, but
the sex-specific regulation of olfactory responses remain poorly investigated.
From our ongoing transcriptomic data annotation of olfactory tissue of blood fed 
adult female An. culicifacies mosquitoes; we have identified a 383 bp long unique
transcript encoding a Drosophila homolog of the quick-to-court protein.
Previously this was shown to regulate courtship behaviour in adult male
Drosophila. A comprehensive in silico analysis of the quick-to-court (qtc) gene
of An. culicifacies (Ac-qtc) predicts a 1536 bp single copy gene encoding 511
amino acid protein, having a high degree of conservation with other insect
homologs. The age-dependent increased expression of putative Ac-qtc correlated
with the maturation of the olfactory system, necessary to meet the sex-specific
conflicting demand of mating (mate finding) versus host-seeking behavioural
responses. Sixteen to eighteen hours of starvation did not alter Ac-qtc
expression in both sexes, however, blood feeding significantly modulated its
response in the adult female mosquitoes, confirming that it may not be involved
in sugar feeding associated behavioural regulation. Finally, a dual behavioural
and molecular assay indicated that natural dysregulation of Ac-qtc in the late
evening might promote the mating events for successful insemination. We
hypothesize that Ac-qtc may play a unique role to regulate the sex-specific
conflicting demand of mosquito courtship behaviour versus blood feeding behaviour
in the adult female mosquitoes. Further elucidation of this molecular mechanism
may provide further information to evaluate Ac-qtc as a key molecular target for 
mosquito-borne disease management.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2017.e00361 
PMCID: PMC5524224
PMID: 28765838 

