
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Aug 7;7(1):7389. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-06708-9.

Mapping sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine-resistant Plasmodium falciparum malaria in
infected humans and in parasite populations in Africa.

Okell LC(1), Griffin JT(2), Roper C(3).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Outbreak Analysis and Modelling, Department of Infectious
Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College London, London, UK.
l.okell@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(3)Department of Pathogen Molecular Biology, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK.

Intermittent preventive treatment (IPT) with sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine in
vulnerable populations reduces malaria morbidity in Africa, but resistance
mutations in the parasite dhps gene (combined with dhfr mutations) threaten its
efficacy. We update a systematic review to map the prevalence of K540E and A581G 
mutations in 294 surveys of infected humans across Africa from 2004-present.
Interpreting these data is complicated by multiclonal infections in humans,
especially in high transmission areas. We extend statistical methods to estimate 
the frequency, i.e. the proportion of resistant clones in the parasite population
at each location, and so standardise for varying transmission levels. Both K540E 
and A581G mutations increased in prevalence and frequency in 60% of areas after
2008, highlighting the need for ongoing surveillance. Resistance measures within 
countries were similar within 300â€‰km, suggesting an appropriate spatial scale for
surveillance. Spread of the mutations tended to accelerate once their prevalence 
exceeded 10% (prior to fixation). Frequencies of resistance in parasite
populations are the same or lower than prevalence in humans, so more areas would 
be classified as likely to benefit from IPT if similar frequency thresholds were 
applied. We propose that the use of resistance frequencies as well as prevalence 
measures for policy decisions should be evaluated.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-06708-9 
PMCID: PMC5547055
PMID: 28785011  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

