
1. Comp Biochem Physiol Part D Genomics Proteomics. 2017 Dec;24:41-50. doi:
10.1016/j.cbd.2017.07.005. Epub 2017 Aug 2.

Profiles of soluble proteins in chemosensory organs of three members of the
afro-tropical Anopheles gambiae complex.

Iovinella I(1), Caputo B(2), Calzetta M(2), Zwiebel LJ(3), Dani FR(4), Della
Torre A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Università di Firenze, Italy; Department of Public Health 
& Infectious Diseases, Laboratory Affiliated to Istituto Pasteur
Italia-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, University of Rome "Sapienza", Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Public Health & Infectious Diseases, Laboratory Affiliated to
Istituto Pasteur Italia-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, University of Rome
"Sapienza", Rome, Italy.
(3)Departments of Biological Sciences and Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, USA.
(4)Biology Department, Università di Firenze, Italy; CISM, Mass Spectrometry
Centre, Università di Firenze, Italy. Electronic address:
francescaromana.dani@unifi.it.

In female mosquitoes, host-seeking and preference as well as several other
important behaviors are largely driven by olfaction. Species of the Afrotropical 
Anopheles gambiae complex display divergent host-preference that are associated
with significant differences in their vectorial capacity for human malaria.
Olfactory sensitivity begins with signal transduction and activation of
peripheral sensory neurons that populate the antennae, maxillary palps and other 
appendages. We have used shotgun proteomics to characterize the profile of
soluble proteins of antennae and maxillary palps of three different species: An. 
coluzzii, An. arabiensis and An. quadriannulatus that display remarkable
differences in anthropophilic behavior. This analysis revealed interspecific
differences in the abundance of several proteins that comprise cuticular
components, glutathione S-transferase and odorant binding proteins, the latter of
which known to be directly involved in odor recognition.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbd.2017.07.005 
PMCID: PMC7208630
PMID: 28822866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

