
1. J Mol Diagn. 2017 Sep;19(5):638-650. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2017.05.007.

High-Throughput, Multiplex Genotyping Directly from Blood or Dried Blood Spot
without DNA Extraction for the Screening of Multiple G6PD Gene Variants at Risk
for Drug-Induced Hemolysis.

Tian X(1), Zhou J(2), Zhao Y(2), Cheng Z(2), Song W(3), Sun Y(2), Sun X(4), Zheng
Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and School of Basic Medicine,
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China; Department of Clinical Laboratory
Center, Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical University, National Center 
for Children's Health, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and School of Basic Medicine,
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory Center, Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital
Medical University, National Center for Children's Health, Beijing, China.
(4)Yunnan Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Yunnan Center for Malaria Research,
Institute of Vector and Pathogen Biology of Dali University, Yunnan, China.
Electronic address: sxdsxyab@163.com.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and School of Basic Medicine,
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. Electronic address:
zhizheng100@126.com.

Clinical or epidemiologic screening of single-nucleotide polymorphism markers
requires large-scale multiplexed genotyping. Available genotyping tools require
DNA extraction and multiplex PCR, which may limit throughput and suffer
amplification bias. Herein, a novel genotyping approach has been developed,
multiplex extension and ligation-based probe amplification (MELPA), which
eliminates DNA extraction and achieves uniform PCR amplification. MELPA lyses
blood or dried blood spot and directly captures specific target DNA to 96-well
plates using tailed probes. Subsequent enzymatic extension and ligation form
target single-nucleotide polymorphism-spanning single-stranded templates, which
are PCR-amplified using universal primers. Multiplexed genotyping by single-base 
primer extension is analyzed by mass spectrometry, with a call rate >97%. MELPA
was compared with a commercial assay (iPLEX) for detecting 24 G6PD variants known
to be at risk for primaquine-induced hemolysis. MELPA provided results that were 
more reliable than iPLEX, with higher throughput and lower cost. Genotyping
archival blood from 106 malaria patients taking primaquine found 10
G6PD-deficient variants, including 1 patient with a hemizygous Mahidol mutation
who had hemolysis. Preemptive G6PD genotyping of 438 dried blood spots from a
malaria-endemic area identified three variants. MELPA also enabled pooled
genotyping without diluting rare alleles, in which undesired common-allele
background increased by sample pooling can be repressed by adding specific common
allele blockers. Thus, MELPA represents a high-throughput, cost-effective
approach to targeted genotyping at the population level.

Copyright Â© 2017 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the Association
for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2017.05.007 
PMID: 28826608  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

