
1. Med Vet Entomol. 2018 Mar;32(1):61-69. doi: 10.1111/mve.12264. Epub 2017 Aug 28.

Development of a genetic sexing strain of Anopheles arabiensis for KwaZulu-Natal,
South Africa.

Dandalo LC(1)(2), Munhenga G(1)(2), Kaiser ML(1)(2), Koekemoer LL(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wits Research Institute for Malaria, MRC Collaborating Centre for
Multi-Disciplinary Research on Malaria, School of Pathology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(2)Vector Reference Laboratory, Centre for Emerging Zoonotic and Parasitic
Diseases, National Institute for Communicable Diseases, National Health
Laboratory Services, Johannesburg, South Africa.

An efficient sexing system is important for the release of sterile males for any 
control programme using the sterile insect technique. This study describes the
development and characterization of a new genetic sexing strain from South Africa
(GMK), needed for the planned implementation of such a programme in northern
KwaZulu-Natal Province. The base colony used was a locally modified laboratory
strain of Anopheles arabiensis containing a sex-linked gene conferring dieldrin
resistance to male mosquitoes. Female A. arabiensis mosquitoes from northern
KwaZulu-Natal were mated with these males and backcrossed to introduce the
dieldrin resistance gene to the Y chromosome. The resulting strain therefore had 
an overall genotype representing the local population but with the Y chromosome
containing the dieldrin resistance gene. Life-history characteristics, stability 
of the sex-linked resistance marker, and reduction in dieldrin waste were
investigated. The strain showed semi-sterility exhibited by low egg hatch rates, 
faster development in the immature stages and longer adult survivorship compared 
with the parental strains. While the GMK strain carrying the dieldrin-resistant
gene was successfully established, the stability of the gene is limited,
requiring periodic purification. Dieldrin waste can be limited by treating many
more eggs than currently recommended.

Â© 2017 The Royal Entomological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/mve.12264 
PMID: 28846145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

