
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Sep 5;7(1):10449. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-10093-8.

Hydrogen peroxide dynamics in subcellular compartments of malaria parasites using
genetically encoded redox probes.

Rahbari M(1), Rahlfs S(1), Przyborski JM(2), Schuh AK(1), Hunt NH(3), Fidock
DA(4), Grau GE(3), Becker K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Interdisciplinary Research Center, Justus 
Liebig University Giessen, 35392, Giessen, Germany.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Philipps University Marburg, 35043, Marburg,
Germany.
(3)Discipline of Pathology, Sydney Medical School and Bosch Institute, University
of Sydney, Medical Foundation Building (K25), Camperdown, NSW, 2050, Australia.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Division of Infectious Diseases,
Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, 10032, USA.
(5)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Interdisciplinary Research Center, Justus 
Liebig University Giessen, 35392, Giessen, Germany. katja.becker@uni-giessen.de.

Redox balance is essential for the survival, growth and multiplication of malaria
parasites and oxidative stress is involved in the mechanism of action of many
antimalarial drugs. Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) plays an important role in redox
signalling and pathogen-host cell interactions. For monitoring intra- and
subcellular redox events, highly sensitive and specific probes are required.
Here, we stably expressed the ratiometric H2O2 redox sensor roGFP2-Orp1 in the
cytosol and the mitochondria of Plasmodium falciparum (P. falciparum) NF54-attB
blood-stage parasites and evaluated its sensitivity towards oxidative stress,
selected antimalarial drugs, and novel lead compounds. In both compartments, the 
sensor showed reproducible sensitivity towards H2O2 in the low micromolar range
and towards antimalarial compounds at pharmacologically relevant concentrations. 
Upon short-term exposure (4 h), artemisinin derivatives, quinine and mefloquine
impacted H2O2 levels in mitochondria, whereas chloroquine and a
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) inhibitor affected the cytosol; 24 h
exposure to arylmethylamino steroids and G6PD inhibitors revealed oxidation of
mitochondria and cytosol, respectively. Genomic integration of an H2O2 sensor
expressed in subcellular compartments of P. falciparum provides the basis for
studying complex parasite-host cell interactions or drug effects with
spatio-temporal resolution while preserving cell integrity, and sets the stage
for high-throughput approaches to identify antimalarial agents perturbing redox
equilibrium.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-10093-8 
PMCID: PMC5585161
PMID: 28874682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

