
1. Infect Immun. 2017 Oct 18;85(11). pii: e01035-16. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01035-16.
Print 2017 Nov.

Gamma Interferon Mediates Experimental Cerebral Malaria by Signaling within Both 
the Hematopoietic and Nonhematopoietic Compartments.

Villegas-Mendez A(1), Strangward P(2), Shaw TN(2), Rajkovic I(2), Tosevski V(3), 
Forman R(2), Muller W(2), Couper KN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester,
United Kingdom ana.villegas-mendez@manchester.ac.uk
kevin.couper@manchester.ac.uk.
(2)Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester,
United Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Experimental Immunology, Inflammation Research Unit, University
of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Experimental cerebral malaria (ECM) is a gamma interferon (IFN-γ)-dependent
syndrome. However, whether IFN-γ promotes ECM through direct and synergistic
targeting of multiple cell populations or by acting primarily on a specific
responsive cell type is currently unknown. Here, using a panel of cell- and
compartment-specific IFN-γ receptor 2 (IFN-γR2)-deficient mice, we show that
IFN-γ causes ECM by signaling within both the hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic 
compartments. Mechanistically, hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic
compartment-specific IFN-γR signaling exerts additive effects in orchestrating
intracerebral inflammation, leading to the development of ECM. Surprisingly, mice
with specific deletion of IFN-γR2 expression on myeloid cells, T cells, or
neurons were completely susceptible to terminal ECM. Utilizing a reductionist in 
vitro system, we show that synergistic IFN-γ and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
stimulation promotes strong activation of brain blood vessel endothelial cells.
Combined, our data show that within the hematopoietic compartment, IFN-γ causes
ECM by acting redundantly or by targeting non-T cell or non-myeloid cell
populations. Within the nonhematopoietic compartment, brain endothelial cells,
but not neurons, may be the major target of IFN-γ leading to ECM development.
Collectively, our data provide information on how IFN-γ mediates the development 
of cerebral pathology during malaria infection.

Copyright © 2017 Villegas-Mendez et al.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01035-16 
PMCID: PMC5649021
PMID: 28874445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

