
1. BMC Genomics. 2017 Sep 18;18(1):734. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-4100-0.

Comparative transcriptomics of female and male gametocytes in Plasmodium berghei 
and the evolution of sex in alveolates.

Yeoh LM(1)(2), Goodman CD(2), Mollard V(2), McFadden GI(3), Ralph SA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 3010, Australia.
(2)School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 3010,
Australia.
(3)School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 3010,
Australia. g.mcfadden@unimelb.edu.au.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 3010, Australia.
saralph@unimelb.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: The clinical symptoms of malaria are caused by the asexual
replication of Plasmodium parasites in the blood of the vertebrate host. To
spread to new hosts, however, the malaria parasite must differentiate into sexual
forms, termed gametocytes, which are ingested by a mosquito vector. Sexual
differentiation produces either female or male gametocytes, and involves
significant morphological and biochemical changes. These transformations prepare 
gametocytes for the rapid progression to gamete formation and fertilisation,
which occur within 20 min of ingestion. Here we present the transcriptomes of
asexual, female, and male gametocytes in P. berghei, and a comprehensive
statistically-based differential-expression analysis of the transcriptional
changes that underpin this sexual differentiation.
RESULTS: RNA-seq analysis revealed numerous differences in the transcriptomes of 
female and male gametocytes compared to asexual stages. Overall, there is net
downregulation of transcripts in gametocytes compared to asexual stages, with
this trend more marked in female gametocytes. Our analysis identified
transcriptional changes in previously-characterised gametocyte-specific pathways,
which validated our approach. We also detected many previously-unreported female-
and male-specific pathways and genes. Transcriptional biases in stage and gender 
were then used to investigate sex-specificity and sexual dimorphism of Plasmodium
in an evolutionary context. Sex-related gene expression is well conserved between
Plasmodium species, but relatively poorly conserved in related organisms outside 
this genus. This pattern of conservation is most evident in genes necessary for
both male and female gametocyte formation. However, this trend is less pronounced
for male-specific genes, which are more highly conserved outside the genus than
genes specific to female development.
CONCLUSIONS: We characterised the transcriptional changes that are integral to
the development of the female and male sexual forms of Plasmodium. These
differential-expression patterns provide a vital insight into understanding the
gender-specific characteristics of this essential stage that is the primary
target for treatments that block parasite transmission. Our results also offer
insight into the evolution of sex genes through Alveolata, and suggest that many 
Plasmodium sex genes evolved within the genus. We further hypothesise that male
gametocytes co-opted pre-existing cellular machinery in their evolutionary
history, whereas female gametocytes evolved more through the development of
novel, parasite-specific pathways.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-017-4100-0 
PMCID: PMC5604118
PMID: 28923023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

