
1. J Parasitol. 2018 Feb;104(1):70-78. doi: 10.1645/16-189. Epub 2017 Nov 8.

Molecular and Morphological Characterization of a Brazilian Lineage of Plasmodium
( Novyella) Unalis in Turdus Spp. (Passeriformes) of the Atlantic Forest, with
Remarks on New Hosts and High Genetic Variation.

Tostes R(1), Dias RJP(1), de Oliveira L(1), Senra MVX(1), Massard CL(1), D'Agosto
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pós-graduação em Ciências Veterinárias, Instituto de Veterinária, Universidade
Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro, Seropédica 23890-000, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Plasmodium spp. are haemosporidian protozoans that alternate their live cycles
between bloodsucking Culicidae dipterans and vertebrate hosts (mammals, reptiles,
and birds). In birds, these parasites are the causative agents of the so-called
avian malaria, a disease associated with considerable declines and extinctions in
the avifauna in different geographical regions. In this work, we applied a
multidisciplinary approach, light microscopy and cytochrome oxidase b (cyt b)
gene sequence analysis, for characterization of Plasmodium spp. found in
association with wild birds of the genus Turdus, collected in Atlantic forest
fragments of southeastern Brazil. From the total 90 analyzed birds, 58 (47 Turdus
rufiventris, 9 Turdus leucomelas, 1 Turdus albicollis, and 1 Turdus flavipes)
were positively infected with Plasmodium unalis, a haemosporidian that was
previously detected in Turdus fuscater in Colombia and in penguins in Brazil, but
has never been found in association with these Turdus species of this present
work. Moreover, all 7 new sequences of P. unalis cyt b gene clustered into a
monophyletic clade with previously characterized P. unalis sequences with a mean 
genetic divergence of 1.6% and with a maximum divergence of 3.1%, indicating for 
a high degree of intraspecific polymorphism within this parasitic species.
Together, our data highlight the existence a high degree of intraspecific
variation within P. unalis and highlight the importance of integrative taxonomy
to an accurate identification and characterization of avian haemosporidian
parasites.

DOI: 10.1645/16-189 
PMID: 28930498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

