
1. Paediatr Int Child Health. 2017 Nov;37(4):259-268. doi:
10.1080/20469047.2017.1374002. Epub 2017 Sep 26.

Childhood nephrotic syndrome in tropical Africa: then and now.

Olowu WA(1)(2), Ademola A(3), Ajite AB(4), Saad YM(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Paediatric Nephrology and Hypertension Unit , Obafemi Awolowo University
Teaching Hospitals Complex , Ile-Ife , Nigeria.
(2)d Department of Paediatrics , University of Maiduguri/University of Maiduguri 
Teaching Hospital , Maiduguri , Nigeria.
(3)b Department of Paediatrics , University of Ibadan/University College Hospital
, Ibadan , Nigeria.
(4)c Department of Paediatrics , Ekiti State University Teaching Hospital ,
Ado-Ekiti , Nigeria.

This descriptive and comparative review examines the changing epidemiology,
treatment, renal and patient outcome of childhood nephrotic syndrome (NS) in
tropical Africa (TpAfr). In the 1960s to 1980s, corticosteroid-resistant
non-minimal change disease (nMCD) including quartan malaria nephropathy (QMN) was
the dominant renal histopathology type. The overall incidence of NS was
0.35-1.34% of hospital admissions. Median age at onset of NS ranged between 4.0
and 12.0 years while the mean (SD) age range was 5.8 (3.8) to 10.3 (4.8) years
across studies. The male: female ratio was 1.6:1.0. The overall mean (SD)
incidence of idiopathic minimal change disease (MCD) [21.6 (18.6%)] compared with
idiopathic nMCD [59.1 (25.7%)] demonstrates significant dominance of the latter
(p = 0.0001). Post-1989, the following mean (SD) incidences of histopathological 
types were: MCD 20.4 (17.7%), focal segmental glomerulosclerosis 39.0 (26.3%),
membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis 25.4 (16.8%), proliferative
glomerulonephritis 16.7 (27.0%) and membranous nephropathy 7.4 (4.5%). While the 
mean (SD) proportion of steroid resistance (SR) [73.5 (19.2%)] was significantly 
greater than the mean complete remission (CR) [26.5 (19.2%)] during 1960-1989
(p=0.005), mean (SD) SR [27.4 (25.3%)] was significantly lower than mean (SD) CR 
[66.1 (28.0%)] post-1989 (p < 0.001). Unlike QMN, hepatitis B virus, HIV
infection, sickle cell disease and systemic lupus erythematosus are now
increasingly being associated with NS in TpAfr. Mean (SD) renal survival
post-1989 was 58.3 (37.0%) while all-cause mortality was 9.8%. Children with NS
now survive better than before, reflecting improved access to healthcare and
transition to a clinical pattern favouring idiopathic NS and increased
sensitivity to corticosteroids.

DOI: 10.1080/20469047.2017.1374002 
PMID: 28949280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

