
1. J Med Entomol. 2017 Nov 7;54(6):1674-1683. doi: 10.1093/jme/tjx164.

The Role of Detoxification Enzymes in the Adaptation of the Major Malaria Vector 
Anopheles gambiae (Giles; Diptera: Culicidae) to Polluted Water.

King SA(1)(2)(3), Onayifeke B(1), Akorli J(1)(2), Sibomana I(4), Chabi J(1),
Manful-Gwira T(2)(3), Dadzie S(1), Suzuki T(5), Wilson MD(1), Boakye DA(1), de
Souza DK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology Department, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research,
University of Ghana, Legon-Accra, Ghana.
(2)West African Centre for Cell Biology of Infectious Pathogens, University of
Ghana, Legon-Accra, Ghana.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Ghana,
Legon-Accra, Ghana.
(4)Molecular Bioeffects Branch, Airman Systems Directorate, 711th Human
Performance Wing, Air Force Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base,
Dayton, OH 45433.
(5)Section of Environmental Parasitology, Kobe-Tokiwa University, Japan.

The main malaria vectors in sub-Saharan Africa, the Anopheles gambiae (Giles;
Diptera: Culicidae), normally breed in clean water sources. However, evidence
suggests an on-going adaptation of Anopheline species to polluted breeding
habitats in urban settings. This study aimed at understanding the adaptation to
breeding in water bodies with different qualities, in five selected mosquito
breeding sites in urban Accra, Ghana. The study sites were also evaluated for the
WHO water-quality parameters as a measure of pollution, and insecticide residues.
Field mosquitoes were evaluated for five genes; CYP6P3, CYP4H19, CYP4H24,
GSTD1-4, and ABCC11-associated with insecticide detoxification-using quantitative
RT-PCR, as well as Mono-oxygenase, Alpha Esterase, Glutathione S-transferase, and
insensitive acetylcholinesterase (AChE) using biochemical enzyme assays. The
lab-reared, insecticide susceptible An. gambiae Kisumu strain was bred in the
most polluted water source for 10 generations and evaluated for the same genes
and enzymes. The results revealed that the fold expression of the genes was
higher in the larvae compared with the adults. The results also suggest that
detoxification enzymes could be involved in the adaptation of An. gambiae to
polluted breeding sites. Correlation analysis revealed a highly positive
significant correlation between calcium levels and all five genes (P < 0.05).
Stepwise linear regression to understand which of the variables predicted the
expression of the genes revealed that sulphate was responsible for ABCC11 and
CYP4H24, alkalinity for GSTD1-4, and calcium for CYP4H19 and CYP6P3. The detailed
genetic basis of this adaptation need to be further investigated. A further
understanding of this adaptation may provide outlooks for controlling malaria and
other disease vectors adapted to polluted breeding water sources.

Â© The Authors 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Entomological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jme/tjx164 
PMID: 28968911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

