
1. Int J Parasitol Parasites Wildl. 2017 Sep 19;6(3):299-309. doi:
10.1016/j.ijppaw.2017.09.007. eCollection 2017 Dec.

Prevalence of avian haemosporidia among injured wild birds in Tokyo and environs,
Japan.

Inumaru M(1), Murata K(2), Sato Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biomedical Science, Department of Veterinary Medicine, College
of Bioresource Sciences, Nihon University, Fujisawa 252-0880, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Wildlife Science, Department of Animal Resource Sciences,
College of Bioresource Sciences, Nihon University, Fujisawa 252-0880, Japan.

Avian haemosporidia have been reported in various birds of Japan, which is part
of the East Asian-Australian flyway and is an important stopover site for
migratory birds potentially carrying new pathogens from other areas. We
investigated the prevalence of avian malaria in injured wild birds, rescued in
Tokyo and surrounding areas. We also evaluated the effects of migration by
examining the prevalence of avian malaria for each migratory status. 475 birds of
80 species were sampled from four facilities. All samples were examined for
haemosporidian infection via nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of the
cytochrome b (cytb) gene. 100 birds (21.1%) of 43 species were PCR positive for
avian haemosporidia. Prevalence in wintering birds, migratory breeders, and
resident birds was 46.0%, 19.3%, 17.3% respectively. There was a bias in
wintering birds due to Eurasian coot (Fulica atra) and Anseriformes. In wintering
birds, lineages which are likely to be transmitted by Culiseta sp. in Northern
Japan and lineages from resident species of Northern Japan or continental Asia
were found, suggesting that wintering birds are mainly infected at their breeding
sites. Meanwhile, there were numerous lineages found from resident and migratory 
breeders, suggesting that they are transmitted in Japan, some possibly unique to 
Japan. Although there are limits in studying rescued birds, rehabilitation
facilities make sampling of difficult-to-catch migratory species possible and
also allow for long-term monitoring within areas.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijppaw.2017.09.007 
PMCID: PMC5614597
PMID: 28971016 

