
1. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2018;18(12):1008-1021. doi: 10.2174/1389557517666170927130526.

Ornithine Decarboxylase Inhibition: A Strategy to Combat Various Diseases.

Somani RR(1), Rai PR(1), Kandpile PS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Vivekanand Education Society`s College
of Pharmacy, Chembur (E), Mumbai 400074, India.

Ornithine decarboxylase is the first enzyme in the polyamine biosynthetic
pathway. It is the rate-limiting enzyme which is included during the change of
ornithine to putrescine which is the first polyamine. Polyamines (putrescine,
spermidine, spermine) are natural and synthetic compounds which contain two or
more amino group. Polyamines are highly implicated in cellular functions such as 
cell growth & multiplication, DNA stabilization, gene transcription and
translation, ion-channel activity, etc. Elevated levels of polyamines are found
in highly proliferating tumor cells. Hence inhibition of this enzyme was found
useful in cancer. α-DL-difluoromethylornithine(DFMO) (Eflornithine) an enzyme-
activated irreversible inhibitor was the first of this type. However, its use as 
an anticancer agent did not continue for long due to various reasons. Polyamines 
have also been found to play an important role in other infectious
microorganisms. Eflornithine is successfully used in diseases such as African
sleeping sickness and is being researched against a number of tropical diseases. 
It is widely used against hirsutism in women. Various other product (putrescine) 
based analogs and transition state or PLP (cofactor) based analogs are being
synthesized against diseases such as Leishmaniasis, Malaria and others discussed 
in the article.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1389557517666170927130526 
PMID: 28971766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

