
1. Acta Trop. 2018 Feb;178:27-33. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2017.09.026. Epub 2017 
Oct 7.

Spatial and temporal distribution of Pfmsp1 and Pfmsp2 alleles and genetic
profile change of Plasmodium falciparum populations in Gabon.

Ndong Ngomo JM(1), M'Bondoukwe NP(2), Yavo W(3), Bongho Mavoungou LC(4),
Bouyou-Akotet MK(5), Mawili-Mboumba DP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Parasitology and Mycology, University des
Sciences de la Santé, BP 4009, Libreville, Gabon. Electronic address:
wendongj@outlook.fr.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Parasitology and Mycology, University des
Sciences de la Santé, BP 4009, Libreville, Gabon. Electronic address:
mbondoukwenoe@yahoo.fr.
(3)Malaria Research and Control Centre, National Institute of Public Health, BPV 
47, Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire; Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Parasitology and
Mycology, Félix Houphouët-Boigny University, BPV 34, Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire.
Electronic address: yavowilliam@yahoo.fr.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Parasitology and Mycology, University des
Sciences de la Santé, BP 4009, Libreville, Gabon. Electronic address:
urcpdpmmt@yahoo.fr.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Parasitology and Mycology, University des
Sciences de la Santé, BP 4009, Libreville, Gabon. Electronic address:
mariellebouyou@yahoo.fr.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Parasitology and Mycology, University des
Sciences de la Santé, BP 4009, Libreville, Gabon. Electronic address:
dpmawili@gmail.com.

Plasmodium population dynamics analysis may help to assess the impact of malaria 
control strategies deployment. In Gabon, new strategies have been introduced, but
malaria is still a public health problem marked by a rebound of the prevalence in
2011. The aim of the study was to investigate the spatial and temporal
distribution of P. falciparum strains in different areas in Gabon during a period
of malaria transmission transition, between 2008 and 2011. A total of 109P.
falciparum isolates were genotyped using nested-PCR of Pfmsp1 and Pfmsp2 genes.
3D7, FC27 and K1 allele frequencies were comparable between sites (p=0.9); those 
of Ro33 (93.6%; 44/47) and Mad20 (60%; 12/20) were significantly higher in
isolates from Oyem (p<0.01) and Port-Gentil (p=0.02), respectively. The frequency
of multiples infections (77%) and the complexity of infection (2.66±1.44) were
the highest at Oyem. Pfmsp1 gene analysis highlighted a trend of a decreasing
frequency of K1 family, in Libreville and Oyem between 2008 and 2011; while that 
of Ro33 (p<0.01) and Mad20 (p<0.01) increased. The prevalence of multiple
infections was comparable between both periods in each site: 42.2% vs 47.6%
(p=0.6) in Libreville and 57.7% vs 61.7% in Oyem (p=0.8). In contrast, in 2011,
the COI tends to be higher in Libreville and did not vary in Oyem. These data
confirm an extended genetic diversity of P. falciparum isolates over time and
according to geographic location in Gabon. Nevertheless, the impact of the
deployment of malaria control strategies on the parasites genetic profile is not 
clearly established here.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2017.09.026 
PMID: 28993182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

