
1. BMC Genomics. 2017 Oct 11;18(1):770. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-4144-1.

Deciphering the olfactory repertoire of the tiger mosquito Aedes albopictus.

Lombardo F(1), Salvemini M(2), Fiorillo C(3), Nolan T(4), Zwiebel LJ(5), Ribeiro 
JM(6), Arc√† B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, Division of Parasitology,
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. fabrizio.lombardo@uniroma1.it.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, Division of Parasitology,
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(6)NIAID, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, NIH, Rockville, 20852, MD,
USA.

BACKGROUND: The Asian tiger mosquito Aedes albopictus is a highly invasive
species and competent vector of several arboviruses (e.g. dengue, chikungunya,
Zika) and parasites (e.g. dirofilaria) of public health importance. Compared to
other mosquito species, Ae. albopictus females exhibit a generalist host seeking 
as well as a very aggressive biting behaviour that are responsible for its high
degree of nuisance. Several complex mosquito behaviours such as host seeking,
feeding, mating or oviposition rely on olfactory stimuli that target a range of
sensory neurons localized mainly on specialized head appendages such as antennae,
maxillary palps and the mouthparts.
RESULTS: With the aim to describe the Ae. albopictus olfactory repertoire we have
used RNA-seq to reveal the transcriptome profiles of female antennae and
maxillary palps. Male heads and whole female bodies were employed as reference
for differential expression analysis. The relative transcript abundance within
each tissue (TPM, transcripts per kilobase per million) and the pairwise
differential abundance in the different tissues (fold change values and false
discovery rates) were evaluated. Contigs upregulated in the antennae (620) and
maxillary palps (268) were identified and relative GO and PFAM enrichment
profiles analysed. Chemosensory genes were described: overall, 77 odorant binding
proteins (OBP), 82 odorant receptors (OR), 60 ionotropic receptors (IR) and 30
gustatory receptors (GR) were identified by comparative genomics and
transcriptomics. In addition, orthologs of genes expressed in the female/male
maxillary palps and/or antennae and involved in thermosensation (e.g. pyrexia and
arrestin1), mechanosensation (e.g. piezo and painless) and neuromodulation were
classified.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide here the first detailed transcriptome of the main Ae.
albopictus sensory appendages, i.e. antennae and maxillary palps. A deeper
knowledge of the olfactory repertoire of the tiger mosquito will help to better
understand its biology and may pave the way to design new attractants/repellents.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-017-4144-1 
PMCID: PMC5637092
PMID: 29020917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

