
1. Ecol Evol. 2017 Sep 3;7(19):8040-8057. doi: 10.1002/ece3.3319. eCollection 2017
Oct.

Seasonal dynamics in mosquito abundance and temperature do not influence avian
malaria prevalence in the Himalayan foothills.

Ishtiaq F(1)(2), Bowden CGR(3), Jhala YV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecological Sciences Indian Institute of Science Bangalore India.
(2)Wildlife Institute of India Dehradun Uttarakhand India.
(3)Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, The Lodge Sandy Bedfordshire UK.

We examined seasonal prevalence in avian haemosporidians (Plasmodium and
Haemoproteus) in migrant and resident birds in western Himalaya, India. We
investigated how infection with haemosporidians in avian hosts is associated with
temporal changes in temperature and mosquito abundance along with host abundance 
and life-history traits (body mass). Using molecular methods for parasite
detection and sequencing partial cytochrome b gene, 12 Plasmodium and 27
Haemoproteus lineages were isolated. Our 1-year study from December 2008 to
December 2009 in tropical Himalayan foothills revealed a lack of seasonal
variation in Plasmodium spp. prevalence in birds despite a strong correlation
between mosquito abundance and temperature. The probability of infection with
Plasmodium decreased with increase in temperature. Total parasite prevalence and 
specifically Plasmodium prevalence showed an increase with average avian body
mass. In addition, total prevalence exhibited a U-shaped relationship with avian 
host abundance. There was no difference in prevalence of Plasmodium spp. or
Haemoproteus spp. across altitudes; parasite prevalence in high-altitude
locations was mainly driven by the seasonal migrants. One Haemoproteus lineage
showed cross-species infections between migrant and resident birds. This is the
first molecular study in the tropical Himalayan bird community that emphasizes
the importance of studying seasonal variation in parasite prevalence. Our study
provides a basis for further evolutionary study on the epidemiology of avian
malaria and spread of disease across Himalayan bird communities, which may not
have been exposed to vectors and parasites throughout the year, with
consequential implications to the risk of infection to na√Øve resident birds in
high altitude.

DOI: 10.1002/ece3.3319 
PMCID: PMC5632643
PMID: 29043055 

