
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2017 Dec 1;9(12):3516-3524. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evx216.

Variation and Functional Impact of Neanderthal Ancestry in Western Asia.

Taskent RO(1), Alioglu ND(2), Fer E(2), Melike Donertas H(2)(3), Somel M(2),
Gokcumen O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University at Buffalo.
(2)Department of Biology, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute,
Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton CB10 1SD, UK.

Neanderthals contributed genetic material to modern humans via multiple admixture
events. Initial admixture events presumably occurred in Western Asia shortly
after humans migrated out of Africa. Despite being a focal point of admixture,
earlier studies indicate lower Neanderthal introgression rates in some Western
Asian populations as compared with other Eurasian populations. To better
understand the genome-wide and phenotypic impact of Neanderthal introgression in 
the region, we sequenced whole genomes of nine present-day Europeans, Africans,
and the Western Asian Druze at high depth, and analyzed available whole genome
data from various other populations, including 16 genomes from present-day
Turkey. Our results confirmed previous observations that contemporary Western
Asian populations, on an average, have lower levels of Neanderthal-introgressed
DNA relative to other Eurasian populations. Modern Western Asians also show
comparatively high variability in Neanderthal ancestry, which may be attributed
to the complex demographic history of the region. We further replicated the
previously described depletion of putatively functional sequences among
Neanderthal-introgressed haplotypes. Still, we find dozens of common
Neanderthal-introgressed haplotypes in the Turkish sample associated with human
phenotypes, including anthropometric and metabolic traits, as well as the immune 
response. One of these haplotypes is unusually long and harbors variants that
affect the expression of members of the CCR gene family and are associated with
celiac disease. Overall, our results paint a complex first picture of the genomic
impact of Neanderthal introgression in the Western Asian populations.

Â© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evx216 
PMCID: PMC5751057
PMID: 29040546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

