
1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2018 Jun;1864(6 Pt B):2329-2340. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2017.10.023. Epub 2017 Oct 22.

Metabolic modeling helps interpret transcriptomic changes during malaria.

Tang Y(1), Gupta A(2), Garimalla S(3); MaHPIC Consortium. Electronic address:
http://systemsbiology.emory.edu(4), Galinski MR(5), Styczynski MP(1), Fonseca
LL(2), Voit EO(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Tech, Atlanta, GA
30332, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Tech, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Tech, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA.
(4)Malaria Host-Pathogen Interaction Center, USA.
(5)Emory Vaccine Center at Yerkes, Emory University, 954 Gatewood Road, EVC 003, 
Atlanta, GA 30329, USA; Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA 30329, USA.
(6)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Tech, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA.
Electronic address: Eberhard.voit@bme.gatech.edu.

Disease represents a specific case of malfunctioning within a complex system.
Whereas it is often feasible to observe and possibly treat the symptoms of a
disease, it is much more challenging to identify and characterize its molecular
root causes. Even in infectious diseases that are caused by a known parasite, it 
is often impossible to pinpoint exactly which molecular profiles of components or
processes are directly or indirectly altered. However, a deep understanding of
such profiles is a prerequisite for rational, efficacious treatments. Modern
omics methodologies are permitting large-scale scans of some molecular profiles, 
but these scans often yield results that are not intuitive and difficult to
interpret. For instance, the comparison of healthy and diseased transcriptome
profiles may point to certain sets of involved genes, but a host of
post-transcriptional processes and regulatory mechanisms renders predictions
regarding metabolic or physiological consequences of the observed changes in gene
expression unreliable. Here we present proof of concept that dynamic models of
metabolic pathway systems may offer a tool for interpreting transcriptomic
profiles measured during disease. We illustrate this strategy with the
interpretation of expression data of genes coding for enzymes associated with
purine metabolism. These data were obtained during infections of rhesus macaques 
(Macaca mulatta) with the malaria parasite Plasmodium cynomolgi or P. coatneyi.
The model-based interpretation reveals clear patterns of flux redistribution
within the purine pathway that are consistent between the two malaria pathogens
and are even reflected in data from humans infected with P. falciparum. This
article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Accelerating Precision Medicine
through Genetic and Genomic Big Data Analysis edited by Yudong Cai & Tao Huang.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2017.10.023 
PMCID: PMC5911422
PMID: 29069611  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

