
1. Malar J. 2017 Nov 3;16(1):442. doi: 10.1186/s12936-017-2090-7.

Long-term in vitro culture of Plasmodium vivax isolates from Madagascar
maintained in Saimiri boliviensis blood.

Mehlotra RK(1), Blankenship D(1), Howes RE(1)(2), Rakotomanga TA(3)(4),
Ramiranirina B(4), Ramboarina S(1)(4), Franchard T(3)(4), Linger MH(1),
Zikursh-Blood M(1), Ratsimbasoa AC(3)(4), Zimmerman PA(5), Grimberg BT(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University School 
of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, 44106-4983, USA.
(2)Oxford Big Data Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)National Malaria Control Programme, Ministry of Health, Antananarivo,
Madagascar.
(4)Faculty of Sciences, University of Antananarivo, Antananarivo, Madagascar.
(5)Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University School 
of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, 44106-4983, USA. paz@case.edu.
(6)Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University School 
of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, 44106-4983, USA. bxg43@case.edu.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax is the most prevalent human malaria parasite and is 
likely to increase proportionally as malaria control efforts more rapidly impact 
the prevalence of Plasmodium falciparum. Despite the prominence of P. vivax as a 
major human pathogen, vivax malaria qualifies as a neglected and under-studied
tropical disease. Significant challenges bringing P. vivax into the laboratory,
particularly the capacity for long-term propagation of well-characterized
strains, have limited the study of this parasite's red blood cell (RBC) invasion 
mechanism, blood-stage development, gene expression, and genetic manipulation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Patient isolates of P. vivax have been collected and
cryopreserved in the rural community of Ampasimpotsy, located in the
Tsiroanomandidy Health District of Madagascar. Periodic, monthly overland
transport of these cryopreserved isolates to the country's National Malaria
Control Programme laboratory in Antananarivo preceded onward sample transfer to
laboratories at Case Western Reserve University, USA. There, the P. vivax
isolates have been cultured through propagation in the RBCs of Saimiri
boliviensis. For the four patient isolates studied to-date, the median time
interval between sample collection and in vitro culture has been 454 days (range 
166-961 days). The median time in culture, continually documented by light
microscopy, has been 159 days; isolate AMP2014.01 was continuously propagated for
233 days. Further studies show that the P. vivax parasites propagated in Saimiri 
RBCs retain their ability to invade human RBCs, and can be cryopreserved, thawed 
and successfully returned to productive in vitro culture.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Long-term culture of P. vivax is possible in the RBCs
of Saimiri boliviensis. These studies provide an alternative to propagation of P.
vivax in live animals that are becoming more restricted. In vitro culture of P.
vivax in Saimiri RBCs provides an opening to stabilize patient isolates, which
would serve as precious resources to apply new strategies for investigating the
molecular and cellular biology of this important malaria parasite.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-017-2090-7 
PMCID: PMC5670718
PMID: 29100506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

