
1. Biochemistry. 2017 Dec 5;56(48):6368-6376. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b01027. Epub
2017 Nov 21.

Kinetic Isotope Effects and Transition State Structure for
Hypoxanthine-Guanine-Xanthine Phosphoribosyltransferase from Plasmodium
falciparum.

Ducati RG(1), Firestone RS(1), Schramm VL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine , 1300 Morris 
Park Avenue, Bronx, New York 10461, United States.

Plasmodium falciparum parasites are purine auxotrophs that rely exclusively on
the salvage of preformed purines from their human hosts to supply the requirement
for purine nucleotides. Hypoxanthine-guanine-xanthine phosphoribosyltransferase
(HGXPRT) catalyzes the freely reversible Mg2+-dependent conversion of 6-oxopurine
bases to their respective nucleotides and inorganic pyrophosphate. The
phosphoribosyl group is derived from 5-phospho-Î±-d-ribosyl 1-pyrophosphate
(PRPP). The enzyme from malaria parasites (PfHGXPRT) is essential as hypoxanthine
is the major precursor in purine metabolism. We used specific heavy atom labels
in PRPP and hypoxanthine to measure primary (1-14C and 9-15N) and secondary (1-3H
and 7-15N) intrinsic kinetic isotope effect (KIE) values for PfHGXPRT. Intrinsic 
isotope effects contain information for understanding enzymatic transition state 
properties. The transition state of PfHGXPRT was explored by matching KIE values 
predicted from quantum mechanical calculations to the intrinsic values determined
experimentally. This approach provides information about PfHGXPRT transition
state bond lengths, geometry, and atomic charge distribution. The transition
state structure of PfHGXPRT was determined in the physiological direction of
addition of ribose 5-phosphate to hypoxanthine by overcoming the chemical
instability of PRPP. The transition state for PfHGXPRT forms nucleotides through 
a well-developed and near-symmetrical DN*AN, SN1-like transition state.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b01027 
PMCID: PMC5926801
PMID: 29131588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

