
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 Jan;98(1):51-56. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0286. Epub 2018
Jan 1.

In Vitro Sensitivity of Pyronaridine in Thai Isolates of Plasmodium falciparum.

Mahotorn K(1), Tan-Ariya P(1), Thita T(1), Ruang-Areerate T(2), Sittichot N(2),
Suwandittakul N(2), Mungthin M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok
10400, Thailand.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Phramongkutklao College of Medicine, Bangkok
10400, Thailand.

Pyronaridine, a Mannich base antimalarial agent with a high activity against
chloroquine-resistant Plasmodium falciparum, has been combined with artesunate as
a new artemisinin based combination therapy (ACT). Pyronaridine-artesunate
combination could be one of the choices for the treatment of uncomplicated
falciparum malaria in multidrug-resistant areas including Thailand. The aim of
this study was to determine in vitro sensitivity and cross-resistance pattern of 
pyronaridine in Thai isolates of P. falciparum. In addition, the influence of
resistant genes concerning in vitro pyronaridine sensitivity was determined. The 
mean pyronaridine 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) of 118 parasite isolates
was 5.6 ± 3.1 nM (range = 0.2-15.4 nM) with a significant positive correlation
with artesunate IC50 (r = 0.246, P = 0.008) and amodiaquine IC50 (r = 0.220, P = 
0.042) and a significant negative correlation with quinine IC50 (r = -0.185, P = 
0.047). Parasites containing the pfmdr1 86Y allele exhibited significantly
reduced pyronaridine sensitivity compared with those with the pfmdr1 N86 allele
(7.6 ± 3.3 nM and 5.4 ± 3.0 nM, respectively, P = 0.032, independent t test);
however, the difference may not be clinically relevant. Pyronaridine-artesunate
could be the candidate ACT to treat multidrug-resistant falciparum malaria in
Thailand with careful monitoring.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0286 
PMCID: PMC5928699
PMID: 29141758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

