
1. Cancer Sci. 2018 Jan;109(1):24-32. doi: 10.1111/cas.13443. Epub 2017 Dec 3.

Oncogenic spiral by infectious pathogens: Cooperation of multiple factors in
cancer development.

Yasunaga JI(1), Matsuoka M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virus Control, Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences,
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Hematology, Rheumatology, and Infectious Diseases, Kumamoto
University School of Medicine, Kumamoto, Japan.

Chronic infection is one of the major causes of cancer, and there are several
mechanisms for infection-mediated oncogenesis. Some pathogens encode gene
products that behave like oncogenic factors, hijacking cellular pathways to
promote the survival and proliferation of infected cells in vivo. Some of these
viral oncoproteins trigger a cellular damage defense response leading to
senescence; however, other viral factors hinder this suppressive effect,
suggesting that cooperation of those viral factors is important for malignant
transformation. Coinfection with multiple agents is known to accelerate cancer
development in certain cases. For example, parasitic or bacterial infection is a 
risk factor for adult T-cell leukemia-lymphoma induced by human T-cell leukemia
virus type 1, and Epstein-Barr virus and malaria are closely associated with
endemic Burkitt lymphoma. Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection is
accompanied by various types of infection-related cancer. These findings indicate
that these oncogenic pathogens can cooperate to overcome host barriers against
cancer development. In this review, the authors focus on the collaborative
strategies of pathogens for oncogenesis from two different points of view: (i)
the cooperation of two or more different factors encoded by a single pathogen;
and (ii) the acceleration of oncogenesis by coinfection with multiple agents.

Â© 2017 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.13443 
PMCID: PMC5765297
PMID: 29143406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

