
1. Molecules. 2017 Dec 5;22(12). pii: E2139. doi: 10.3390/molecules22122139.

(-)-Epigallocatechin-3-Gallate Inhibits the Chaperone Activity of Plasmodium
falciparum Hsp70 Chaperones and Abrogates Their Association with Functional
Partners.

Zininga T(1), Ramatsui L(2), Makhado PB(3), Makumire S(4), Achilinou I(5), Hoppe 
H(6), Dirr H(7), Shonhai A(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Mathematics and Natural Science,
University of Venda, Thohoyandou 0950, South Africa. tzininga@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, School of Mathematics and Natural Science,
University of Venda, Thohoyandou 0950, South Africa. lebogangramatsui@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, School of Mathematics and Natural Science,
University of Venda, Thohoyandou 0950, South Africa. bveledzanimakhado@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, School of Mathematics and Natural Science,
University of Venda, Thohoyandou 0950, South Africa. stanmakster@gmail.com.
(5)Protein Structure-Function Research Unit, School of Molecular & Cell Biology, 
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 2050, South Africa.
Ikechukwu.Achilonu@wits.ac.za.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology & Biotechnology, Rhodes University,
Grahamstown 6140, South Africa. h.hoppe@ru.ac.za.
(7)Protein Structure-Function Research Unit, School of Molecular & Cell Biology, 
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 2050, South Africa.
heinrich.dirr@wits.ac.za.
(8)Department of Biochemistry, School of Mathematics and Natural Science,
University of Venda, Thohoyandou 0950, South Africa.
addmore.shonhai@univen.ac.za.

Heat shock proteins (Hsps), amongst them, Hsp70 and Hsp90 families, serve mainly 
as facilitators of protein folding (molecular chaperones) of the cell. The Hsp70 
family of proteins represents one of the most important molecular chaperones in
the cell. Plasmodium falciparum, the main agent of malaria, expresses six Hsp70
isoforms. Two (PfHsp70-1 and PfHsp70-z) of these localize to the parasite
cytosol. PHsp70-1 is known to occur in a functional complex with another
chaperone, PfHsp90 via a co-chaperone, P. falciparum Hsp70-Hsp90 organising
protein (PfHop). (-)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) is a green tea constituent
that is thought to possess antiplasmodial activity. However, the mechanism by
which EGCG exhibits antiplasmodial activity is not fully understood. A previous
study proposed that EGCG binds to the N-terminal ATPase domain of Hsp70. In the
current study, we overexpressed and purified recombinant forms of two P.
falciparum cytosol localized Hsp70s (PfHsp70-1 and PfHsp70-z), and PfHop, a
co-chaperone of PfHsp70-1. Using the surface plasmon resonance approach, we
demonstrated that EGCG directly binds to the two Hsp70s. We further observed that
binding of EGCG to the two proteins resulted in secondary and tertiary
conformational changes. In addition, EGCG inhibited the ATPase and chaperone
function of the two proteins. Furthermore, EGCG abrogated association of the two 
Hsp70s with their functional partners. Using parasites cultured in vitro at the
blood stages, we observed that 2.9 ÂµM EGCG suppressed 50% P. falciparum parasite 
growth (IC50). Our findings demonstrate that EGCG directly binds to PfHsp70-1 and
PfHsp70-z to inhibit both the ATPase and chaperone functions of the proteins. Our
study constitutes the first direct evidence suggesting that the antiplasmodial
activity of EGCG is at least in part accounted for by its inhibition of Hsp70
function.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules22122139 
PMCID: PMC6149709
PMID: 29206141  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funding sponsors had no role in the design of the study; in the collection,
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the 
decision to publish the results.

