
1. PLoS One. 2017 Dec 20;12(12):e0189724. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189724.
eCollection 2017.

Interaction between environment, nutrient-derived metabolites and immunity: A
possible role in malaria susceptibility/resistance in Fulani and Dogon of Mali.

Traore K(1)(2), Thera MA(1), Bienvenu AL(2)(3), Arama C(1), Bonnot G(2),
Lavoignat A(2), Doumbo OK(1), Picot S(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research and Training Centre, Université des Sciences, des Techniques 
et des Technologies de Bamako, MRTC/USTTB, Bamako, Mali.
(2)Univ Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Institut de Chimie et Biochimie
Moléculaire et Supramoléculaire, UMR-5246 CNRS-INSA-CPE, Malaria Research Unit,
Lyon, France.
(3)Institut de Parasitologie et Mycologie Médicale, Hospices Civils de Lyon,
Lyon, France.

The role of some nutrient-derived metabolites on the innate and adaptive immune
responses is now established. Global research approach investigating the
interplay between environment, lifestyle and the host's immune responses is
crucial in the understanding of malaria susceptibility. Advanced Glycation end
products (AGE), which are food-derived metabolites result from the link between
reducing sugar and amino group of proteins, lipids or nucleic acids. The level of
exposure to AGEs varies depending on the type of diet. The dysfunction of the
immune system induced by AGE and the cellular receptors for AGEs (RAGE) in
susceptibility to bacterial infection has been described. But no study has yet
explored their role in susceptibility to malaria. Therefore, we aimed to evaluate
systemic AGE and RAGE gene polymorphism in two sympatric populations with
previously described difference of susceptibility to malaria. We measured by
ELISA the plasma levels of AGEs, and their soluble receptors (sRAGE) from 170
volunteers (68 Fulani and 102 Dogon). We also determined by real-time
quantitative PCR the expression of RAGE, and the -374 T/A, -429 T/C polymorphisms
and 63 bp deletion by fragment length restriction polymorphism. The prevalence
rate of Plasmodium in Fulani and Dogon were respectively 42.64% and 51.30% for P.
falciparum, 5.88% and 6.5% for P. malariae, 0% and 2.6% for P. ovale. The average
AGE was 12.65 μg/ml, and 496.48pg/ml for sRAGE. Highest levels of sRAGE were
observed in Fulani (563,07pg/ml, 95% CI [547.81-580.13] vs 465.68pg/ml, 95% CI
[331.19-467.51]) for Dogon, p = 0.00001. Fulani had the lowest mean of AGE
(10.21μg/ml, 95% CI [8.02-10.92]) compared to Dogon (16.88μg/ml, 95% CI
[13.92-17.96]; p = 0.00001. RAGE was more expressed in Dogon than Fulani (0.08 vs
0.04), P = 0.08. The -374A polymorphism vas more frequent in Fulani (32%)
compared to Dogon (20%). The chronic exposure to dietary AGE could lead to immune
responses impairment and polymorphism with implications in malaria
susceptibility. More studies are necessary to better investigate this hypothesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189724 
PMCID: PMC5738089
PMID: 29261755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

