
1. FEBS J. 2018 May;285(10):1767-1782. doi: 10.1111/febs.14376. Epub 2018 Jan 12.

Genome-wide survey and phylogenetic analysis of histone acetyltransferases and
histone deacetylases of Plasmodium falciparum.

Kanyal A(1), Rawat M(1), Gurung P(1), Choubey D(2), Anamika K(2), Karmodiya K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research,
Pashan, Pune, India.
(2)Labs, Persistent Systems Limited, Pune, India.

Malaria parasites can readily sense and adapt to environmental changes, thus
making the control and eradication of this disease difficult. Molecular studies
have unraveled a very tightly coordinated transcriptional machinery governed by
complex regulatory mechanisms including chromatin modification and spatiotemporal
compartmentalization. Histone modifying enzymes play key roles in the regulation 
of chromatin modification and gene expression, which are associated with cell
cycle progression, antigenic variation and immune evasion. Here, we present a
comprehensive review of the key regulators of the Plasmodium falciparum histone
acetylome; histone acetyltransferases (HATs); and histone deacetylases (HDACs).
We describe the genome-wide occurrence of HATs and HDACs in the P. falciparum
genome and identify novel, as well as previously unclassified HATs. We re-confirm
the presence of five known HDACs and identify, a novel putative HDAC.
Interestingly, we identify several HATs and HDACs with unique and noncanonical
domain combinations indicating their involvement in other associated functions.
Moreover, the phylogenetic analyses of HATs and HDACs suggest that many of them
are close to the prokaryotic systems and thus potential candidates for drug
development. Our review deciphers the phylogeny of HATs and HDACs of the malaria 
parasite, investigates their role in drug-resistance generation, and highlights
their potential as therapeutic targets.

Â© 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.14376 
PMID: 29284196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

