
1. R Soc Open Sci. 2017 Nov 8;4(11):170758. doi: 10.1098/rsos.170758. eCollection
2017 Nov.

Phylogeny of Anophelinae using mitochondrial protein coding genes.

Foster PG(1), de Oliveira TMP(2), Bergo ES(3), Conn JE(4)(5), Sant'Ana DC(2),
Nagaki SS(2), Nihei S(6), Lamas CE(7), González C(8), Moreira CC(2), Sallum
MAM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Natural History Museum, London, UK.
(2)Departamento de Epidemiologia, Faculdade de Saude Publica, Universidade de São
Paulo, CEP 01246-904 São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(3)Superintendencia de Controle de Endemias, Secretaria de Estado da Saude de São
Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(4)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, Albany, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Public Health, State University
of New York-Albany, Albany, NY, USA.
(6)Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo, CEP 05508-900 São Paulo, 
SP, Brazil.
(7)Museu de Zoologia, Universidade de São Paulo, CEP 04263-000, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil.
(8)Instituto de Entomología, Universidad Metropolitana de Ciencias de la
Educación, Santiago, Chile.

Malaria is a vector-borne disease that is a great burden on the poorest and most 
marginalized communities of the tropical and subtropical world. Approximately 41 
species of Anopheline mosquitoes can effectively spread species of Plasmodium
parasites that cause human malaria. Proposing a natural classification for the
subfamily Anophelinae has been a continuous effort, addressed using both
morphology and DNA sequence data. The monophyly of the genus Anopheles, and
phylogenetic placement of the genus Bironella, subgenera Kerteszia, Lophopodomyia
and Stethomyia within the subfamily Anophelinae, remain in question. To
understand the classification of Anophelinae, we inferred the phylogeny of all
three genera (Anopheles, Bironella, Chagasia) and major subgenera by analysing
the amino acid sequences of the 13 protein coding genes of 150 newly sequenced
mitochondrial genomes of Anophelinae and 18 newly sequenced Culex species as
outgroup taxa, supplemented with 23 mitogenomes from GenBank. Our analyses
generally place genus Bironella within the genus Anopheles, which implies that
the latter as it is currently defined is not monophyletic. With some
inconsistencies, Bironella was placed within the major clade that includes
Anopheles, Cellia, Kerteszia, Lophopodomyia, Nyssorhynchus and Stethomyia, which 
were found to be monophyletic groups within Anophelinae. Our findings provided
robust evidence for elevating the monophyletic groupings Kerteszia,
Lophopodomyia, Nyssorhynchus and Stethomyia to genus level; genus Anopheles to
include subgenera Anopheles, Baimaia, Cellia and Christya; Anopheles parvus to be
placed into a new genus; Nyssorhynchus to be elevated to genus level; the genus
Nyssorhynchus to include subgenera Myzorhynchella and Nyssorhynchus; Anopheles
atacamensis and Anopheles pictipennis to be transferred from subgenus
Nyssorhynchus to subgenus Myzorhynchella; and subgenus Nyssorhynchus to encompass
the remaining species of Argyritarsis and Albimanus Sections.

DOI: 10.1098/rsos.170758 
PMCID: PMC5717642
PMID: 29291068 

Conflict of interest statement: We declare we have no competing interests.

