
1. Cell Microbiol. 2018 May;20(5):e12821. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12821. Epub 2018 Jan 23.

A male gametocyte osmiophilic body and microgamete surface protein of the rodent 
malaria parasite Plasmodium yoelii (PyMiGS) plays a critical role in male
osmiophilic body formation and exflagellation.

Tachibana M(1), Ishino T(1), Takashima E(2), Tsuboi T(2), Torii M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Parasitology, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University,
Toon, Ehime, Japan.
(2)Division of Malaria Research, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University,
Matsuyama, Ehime, Japan.

Anopheles mosquitoes transmit Plasmodium parasites of mammals, including the
species that cause malaria in humans. Malaria pathology is caused by rapid
multiplication of parasites in asexual intraerythrocytic cycles. Sexual stage
parasites are also produced during the intraerythrocytic cycle and are ingested
by the mosquito, initiating gametogenesis and subsequent sporogonic stage
development. Here, we present a Plasmodium protein, termed microgamete surface
protein (MiGS), which has an important role in male gametocyte osmiophilic body
(MOB) formation and microgamete function. MiGS is expressed exclusively in male
gametocytes and microgametes, in which MiGS localises to the MOB and microgamete 
surface. Targeted gene disruption of MiGS in a rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium
yoelii 17XNL generated knockout parasites (ΔPyMiGS) that proliferate normally in 
erythrocytes and form male and female gametocytes. The number of MOB in male
gametocyte cytoplasm is markedly reduced and the exflagellation of microgametes
is impaired in ΔPyMiGS. In addition, anti-PyMiGS antibody severely blocked the
parasite development in the Anopheles stephensi mosquito. MiGS might thus be a
potential novel transmission-blocking vaccine target candidate.

© 2018 The Authors Cellular Microbiology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12821 
PMCID: PMC5901010
PMID: 29316140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

