
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Jan 18;8(1):1125. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-19456-1.

Novel Immunoinformatics Approaches to Design Multi-epitope Subunit Vaccine for
Malaria by Investigating Anopheles Salivary Protein.

Pandey RK(1), Bhatt TK(2), Prajapati VK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Central University of
Rajasthan, Bandarsindri, Kishangarh, Ajmer, 305817, Rajasthan, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Central University of
Rajasthan, Bandarsindri, Kishangarh, Ajmer, 305817, Rajasthan, India.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Central University of
Rajasthan, Bandarsindri, Kishangarh, Ajmer, 305817, Rajasthan, India.
vkprajapati@curaj.ac.in.

Malaria fever has been pervasive for quite a while in tropical developing regions
causing high morbidity and mortality. The causal organism is a protozoan parasite
of genus Plasmodium which spreads to the human host by the bite of hitherto
infected female Anopheles mosquito. In the course of biting, a salivary protein
of Anopheles helps in blood feeding behavior and having the ability to elicit the
host immune response. This study represents a series of immunoinformatics
approaches to design multi-epitope subunit vaccine using Anopheles mosquito
salivary proteins. Designed subunit vaccine was evaluated for its immunogenicity,
allergenicity and physiochemical parameters. To enhance the stability of vaccine 
protein, disulfide engineering was performed in a region of high mobility. Codon 
adaptation and in silico cloning was also performed to ensure the higher
expression of designed subunit vaccine in E. coli K12 expression system. Finally,
molecular docking and simulation study was performed for the vaccine protein and 
TLR-4 receptor, to determine the binding free energy and complex stability.
Moreover, the designed subunit vaccine was found to induce anti-salivary immunity
which may have the ability to prevent the entry of Plasmodium sporozoites into
the human host.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-19456-1 
PMCID: PMC5773588
PMID: 29348555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

