
1. Zhongguo Xue Xi Chong Bing Fang Zhi Za Zhi. 2016 Jul 18;28(4):411-417. doi:
10.16250/j.32.1374.2016113.

[Analysis of polymorphism of Pfhrp2 gene in Plasmodium falciparum from falciparum
malaria patients in Yunnan Province].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Ying D(1), Ai-Ming S(1)(2), Meng-Ni C(1), Yan-Chun X(1), Xiang-Hua M(1), Yan
D(1), Hen-Lin Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yunnan Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Yunnan Center of Malaria Research,
Yunnan Provincial Key Laboratory of Vector-borne Diseases Control and Research,
Pu'er 665000, China.
(2)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Dali University, China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the polymorphism of histidine rich protein 2 (HRP II) gene 
in Plasmodium falciparum (Pfhrp2) from falciparum malaria patients in Yunnan
Province, so as to lay the foundation for studying the defection of antigen genes
of Plasmodium.
METHODS: The filter paper blood samples and related information of falciparum
malaria cases reported were obtained in Yunnan Province from August 2012 to
September 2015. Under the guidance of the specific primers, the exon2 regions in 
Pfhrp2 gene in P. falciparum from DNA samples were amplified by PCR, and the PCR 
products were sequenced. The sequences of exon2 region in Pfhrp2 gene were
blasted by comparing with the reference sequences AY816237, AY816240, and
AY816301. Next, the polymorphism of the sequence in exon2 region of Pfhrp2 gene
was analyzed by MEGA 5.04 software. The conserved sites and genetic distances
between sequences were calculated by using the software as well, and the
clustering tree was drawn according to the genetic distances between the amino
acid sequences.
RESULTS: A total of 218 bloods samples from the falciparum malaria cases in 15
prefectures of Yunnan Province were collected, and the sources of infection
included Yunnan, Africa and Myanmar. The PCR results showed that the exon2
regions in Pfhrp2 genes of 155 samples were positive by amplification and their
products were sequenced successfully. The sequence analysis showed that the
length range of the amino acid residues of exon2 region in Pfhrp2 gene was from
115 aa to 298 aa, the average length was 239.7 aa. There was no statistically
significance among the means of the amino acid residues of the isolates from
Africa (239.9 aa), Myanmar (239.5 aa) and Yunnan (241.6 aa) (F = 0.025, P >
0.05). All the 155 amino acid sequences ended with type 12 repeat, 98.1%
(152/155) of them started with type 1 repeat and 1.9% (3/155) of them started
with type 2. Type 2 presented most frequently repeat in all the sequences and the
average repeat times were 12.9. The homologous locus of the DNA sequences in
exon2 regions of the 155 Pfhrp2 genes was 894 bp, among which the conservative
sites accounted for 20.6% (186/894), and the variable sites for 78.2% (699/ 894).
The genetic distances between the sequences of Africa isolates ranged from 0 to
0.741, and those of the Myanmar and Yunnan isolates were 0-0.948 and 0-0.750,
respectively. The cluster analysis showed that all the 155 sequences clustered
into 3 categories on genetic distances between amino acid sequences according to 
the size of the amino acid sequence length. At the same level, the sequences had 
approximate lengths and amino acid repeat types.
CONCLUSIONS: The sequence of exon2 region in Pfhrp2 gene of P. falciparum from
falciparum malaria cases in Yunnan Province is highly polymorphic, the P.
falciparum isolates are clustered mainly according to the size of the amino acid 
sequence of exon2 region in Pfhrp2 gene.

Publisher: ［摘要］目的 分析云南省恶性疟病例疟原虫虫株的富组氨酸蛋白Ⅱ (Histidine-rich protein-2, HRPⅡ) 基因
(Pfhrp2) 序 列的多态性, 为研究疟原虫抗原基因缺失奠定基础。方法 搜集2012年8月-2015年9月云南省恶性疟现症病例的滤纸 血样和相关信息,
用PCR 技术扩增血样中恶性疟原虫Pfhrp2 基因exon2 区并测序, 测序成功序列与AY816237、 AY816240、AY816301参比序列比对;
用Mega 5.04分析Pfhrp2基因exon2区序列多态性, 计算序列间保守位点、遗传距离 等; 根据氨基酸序列间遗传距离绘制聚类树状图。结果
共收集云南省15个州 (市) 的恶性疟现症病例血样218份, 病例
感染来源地包括云南本地、非洲、缅甸等流行区。其中155份Pfhrp2基因exon2区扩增阳性和测序成功, 编码氨基酸数在 115～298之间, 平均为239.7 
aa, 非洲 (239.9 aa) 、缅甸 (239.5 aa) 、云南 (241.6 aa) 感染虫株的氨基酸残基均数差异无统计 学意义 (F = 0.025,
P > 0.05) 。所有氨基酸残基序列均以12型重复作为结尾, 以1型、2型重复为起始, 比例各占98.1% (152/155) 和1.9% (3/155), 
2型重复次数最多, 为12.9次。155条Pfhrp2 基因exon2区DNA序列的同源位点为894 bp, 保 守位点占20.8% (186/894),
变异位点占78.2% (699/894), 非洲虫株序列间遗传距离为0.000～0.741, 缅甸为0.000～ 0.948,
云南为0.000～0.750。所有155条序列按氨基酸序列大小聚类成3个大类, 同一个层级的序列具有近似的序列长 度和氨基酸重复类型。结论
云南省恶性疟现症病例所感染疟原虫的Pfhrp2基因exon2区存在高度多态性, 恶性疟原虫 株主要按Pfhrp2基因exon2区的氨基酸序列长度进行聚类。.
DOI: 10.16250/j.32.1374.2016113 
PMID: 29376283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

