
1. PLoS One. 2018 Jan 25;13(1):e0191886. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0191886.
eCollection 2018.

A novel PCR-based system for the detection of four species of human malaria
parasites and Plasmodium knowlesi.

Komaki-Yasuda K(1), Vincent JP(1)(2), Nakatsu M(1), Kato Y(3), Ohmagari N(3),
Kano S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine and Malaria, Research Institute, National
Center for Global Health and Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 
Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(3)Disease Control and Prevention Center of National Center for Global Health and
Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

A microscopy-based diagnosis is the gold standard for the detection and
identification of malaria parasites in a patient's blood. However, the detection 
of cases involving a low number of parasites and the differentiation of species
sometimes requires a skilled microscopist. Although PCR-based diagnostic methods 
are already known to be very powerful tools, the time required to apply such
methods is still much longer in comparison to traditional microscopic
observation. Thus, improvements to PCR systems are sought to facilitate the more 
rapid and accurate detection of human malaria parasites Plasmodium falciparum, P.
vivax, P. ovale, and P. malariae, as well as P. knowlesi, which is a simian
malaria parasite that is currently widely distributed in Southeast Asia. A nested
PCR that targets the small subunit ribosomal RNA genes of malaria parasites was
performed using a "fast PCR enzyme". In the first PCR, universal primers for all 
parasite species were used. In the second PCR, inner-specific primers, which
targeted sequences from P. falciparum, P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae, and P.
knowlesi, were used. The PCR reaction time was reduced with the use of the "fast 
PCR enzyme", with only 65 minutes required to perform the first and second PCRs. 
The specific primers only reacted with the sequences of their targeted parasite
species and never cross-reacted with sequences from other species under the
defined PCR conditions. The diagnoses of 36 clinical samples that were obtained
using this new PCR system were highly consistent with the microscopic diagnoses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0191886 
PMCID: PMC5785027
PMID: 29370297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

