
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2018 Apr;59:113-125. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.01.023. Epub
2018 Jan 31.

Analysis of genetic diversity and population structure of gene encoding
cell-traversal protein for ookinetes and sporozoites (CelTOS) vaccine candidate
antigen in global Plasmodium falciparum populations.

Pirahmadi S(1), Zakeri S(2), Mehrizi AA(1), Djadid ND(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran, Pasteur Avenue, P.O. Box 1316943551,
Tehran, Iran.
(2)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran, Pasteur Avenue, P.O. Box 1316943551,
Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: zakeris@pasteur.ac.ir.

Plasmodium falciparum cell-traversal protein for ookinetes and sporozoites
(PfCelTOS) has been reported as one of the most attractive malaria vaccine
candidate antigens. To design a broadly effective malaria vaccine based on this
antigen, it is crucial to have adequate information on genetic diversity in
global PfCelTOS. Therefore, the extent of sequence diversity at the full-length
of the pfceltos was assessed among both natural P. falciparum isolates collected 
from Iran (n = 93) and from available global pfceltos sequence data retrieved
from PlasmoDB database (n = 159). Also, recombination, natural selection, the
degree of genetic differentiation as well as the predicted immunodominant regions
in PfCelTOS were analyzed. In total, 40 SNPs (including 1 synonymous and 39
non-synonymous) were detected in 34 positions, as compared to 3D7 sequence, which
led to 66 distinct haplotypes with different frequencies. Among those haplotypes,
34 (51.5%, excluded from further analysis) were singleton haplotype and mostly
detected among Senegalese parasite isolates. PfCelt-1 was found as predominant
haplotype (32.6% total frequency) that was only detected in Iranian P. falciparum
isolates. Nucleotide diversity was low in French Guiana (0.00236 ± 0.00203) and
Iranian (0.00259 ± 0.00048) P. falciparum isolates in comparison with African
populations. Evidence for positive selection by host immunity and intragenic
recombination were detected that are two key factors responsible for gene
evolution and genetic diversity of pfceltos gene. The results of Fst analysis and
haplotype network revealed that PfCelTOS antigen displayed evident genetic
structure between geographical parasite populations. In conclusion, the present
analysis demonstrates that there is a limited antigenic diversity and geographic 
variation in global PfCelTOS, and this finding may be associated with the
critical function of this antigen in cell traversal of the parasite in sporozoite
and ookinete. Besides, most of the predicted B- and T-cell epitopes were located 
in the conserved region of the gene, but most of the amino acid replacements were
located at the C-terminal region of PfCelTOS. The obtained results in this
investigation could provide knowledge for better design of PfCelTOS-based malaria
vaccine.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.01.023 
PMID: 29391203  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

