
1. Pest Manag Sci. 2018 Aug;74(8):1810-1820. doi: 10.1002/ps.4879. Epub 2018 Mar 25.

Genome-wide and expression-profiling analyses suggest the main cytochrome P450
genes related to pyrethroid resistance in the malaria vector, Anopheles sinensis 
(Diptera Culicidae).

Yan ZW(1), He ZB(1), Yan ZT(1), Si FL(1), Zhou Y(1), Chen B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Vector Insects; Institute of Entomology and
Molecular Biology, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles sinensis is one of the major malaria vectors. However,
pyrethroid resistance in An. sinensis is threatening malaria control. Cytochrome 
P450-mediated detoxification is an important pyrethroid resistance mechanism that
has been unexplored in An. sinensis. In this study, we performed a comprehensive 
analysis of the An. sinensis P450 gene superfamily with special attention to
their role in pyrethroid resistance using bioinformatics and molecular
approaches.
RESULTS: Our data revealed the presence of 112 individual P450 genes in An.
sinensis, which were classified into four major clans (mitochondrial, CYP2, CYP3 
and CYP4), 18 families and 50 subfamilies. Sixty-seven genes formed nine gene
clusters, and genes within the same cluster and the same gene family had a
similar gene structure. Phylogenetic analysis showed that most of An. sinensis
P450s (82/112) had very close 1: 1 orthology with Anopheles gambiae P450s. Five
genes (AsCYP6Z2, AsCYP6P3v1, AsCYP6P3v2, AsCYP9J5 and AsCYP306A1) were
significantly upregulated in three pyrethroid-resistant populations in both
RNA-seq and RT-qPCR analyses, suggesting that they could be the most important
P450 genes involved in pyrethroid resistance in An. sinensis.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides insight on the diversity of An. sinensis P450
superfamily and basis for further elucidating pyrethroid resistance mechanism in 
this mosquito species. © 2018 Society of Chemical Industry.

© 2018 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/ps.4879 
PMID: 29393554  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

