
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Feb 6;8(1):2464. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-20816-0.

Heterologous Expression of a Novel Drug Transporter from the Malaria Parasite
Alters Resistance to Quinoline Antimalarials.

Tindall SM(1), Vallières C(1), Lakhani DH(1), Islahudin F(2), Ting KN(3), Avery
SV(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, University Park,
Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, Universiti Kebangsaan, Kuala Lumpur, 50300, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Nottingham Malaysia Campus,
Semenyih, Malaysia.
(4)School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, University Park,
Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK. Simon.Avery@nottingham.ac.uk.

Antimalarial drug resistance hampers effective malaria treatment. Critical SNPs
in a particular, putative amino acid transporter were recently linked to
chloroquine (CQ) resistance in malaria parasites. Here, we show that this
conserved protein (PF3D7_0629500 in Plasmodium falciparum; AAT1 in P. chabaudi)
is a structural homologue of the yeast amino acid transporter Tat2p, which
is known to mediate quinine uptake and toxicity. Heterologous expression of
PF3D7_0629500 in yeast produced CQ hypersensitivity, coincident with increased CQ
uptake. PF3D7_0629500-expressing cultures were also sensitized to related
antimalarials; amodiaquine, mefloquine and particularly quinine. Drug sensitivity
was reversed by introducing a SNP linked to CQ resistance in the parasite. Like
Tat2p, PF3D7_0629500-dependent quinine hypersensitivity was suppressible with
tryptophan, consistent with a common transport mechanism. A four-fold increase in
quinine uptake by PF3D7_0629500 expressing cells was abolished by the resistance 
SNP. The parasite protein localised primarily to the yeast plasma membrane. Its
expression varied between cells and this heterogeneity was used to show that
high-expressing cell subpopulations were the most drug sensitive. The results
reveal that the PF3D7_0629500 protein can determine the level of sensitivity to
several major quinine-related antimalarials through an amino acid-inhibitable
drug transport function. The potential clinical relevance is discussed.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-20816-0 
PMCID: PMC5802821
PMID: 29410428  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

