
1. Ann Parasitol. 2017;63(4):323-330. doi: 10.17420/ap6304.119.

Detection of Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter (PfCRT)
mutant gene amongst malaria-infected pregnant women in Calabar, Nigeria

Monjol BE(1), Useh MF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology/Parasitology Unit, Department of Medical Laboratory
Science, University of Calabar, Cross River State, Nigeria

Chemotherapy is the mainstay in malaria control and management. For some time,
chloroquine (CQ) was a drug of choice for the treatment of malaria. It was
effective against all forms of malaria, cheap and readily available. The
increased resistance of malaria parasites to CQ led to widespread abandonment of 
the drug in African and Asian countries on the prompting of the World Health
Organization. Currently, artemisinin-based combination therapy is the gold
standard for the treatment of malaria. This study investigates the presence of
the Plasmodium falciparum Chloroquine Resistance Transporter (PfCRT) mutant gene,
a molecular marker responsible for CQ resistance in malaria parasites. A total of
369 pregnant women were microscopically screened for malaria infection using thin
and thick blood films stained with Giemsa. Subsequently, malaria parasite DNA was
extracted from the blood of malaria positive participants. The PfCRT gene was
amplified using Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR). A Restriction Fragment Length
Polymorphism analysis of the gene was performed to confirm mutant forms. The
results showed that 251 (68.0%) of the participants had Plasmodium falciparum in 
their blood. Molecular examination revealed the presence of PfCRT mutant genes in
28% of the study population. Notwithstanding the decline in the prevalence of
PfCRT T76 mutation since the antimalarial policy change in Nigeria, the 28%
prevalence recorded in this study is considered high after ten years of the
withdrawal of CQ in the treatment of uncomplicated malaria.

DOI: 10.17420/ap6304.119 
PMID: 29419995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

