
1. Front Genet. 2018 Jan 25;9:10. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2018.00010. eCollection 2018.

Identifying Potential Plasmodium vivax Sporozoite Stage Vaccine Candidates: An
Analysis of Genetic Diversity and Natural Selection.

Garzón-Ospina D(1)(2), Buitrago SP(1), Ramos AE(1), Patarroyo MA(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Immunology Laboratory, Fundación Instituto de
Inmunología de Colombia, Bogotá, Colombia.
(2)PhD Programme in Biomedical and Biological Sciences, School of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá, Colombia.
(3)Basic Sciences Department, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universidad
del Rosario, Bogotá, Colombia.

Parasite antigen genetic diversity represents a great obstacle when designing a
vaccine against malaria caused by Plasmodium vivax. Selecting vaccine candidate
antigens has been focused on those fulfilling a role in invasion and which are
conserved, thus avoiding specific-allele immune responses. Most antigens
described to date belong to the blood stage, thereby blocking parasite
development within red blood cells, whilst studying antigens from other stages
has been quite restricted. Antigens from different parasite stages are required
for developing a completely effective vaccine; thus, pre-erythrocyte stage
antigens able to block the first line of infection becoming established should
also be taken into account. However, few antigens from this stage have been
studied to date. Several P. falciparum sporozoite antigens are involved in
invasion. Since 77% of genes are orthologous amongst Plasmodium parasites, P.
vivax sporozoite antigen orthologs to those of P. falciparum might be present in 
its genome. Although these genes might have high genetic diversity, conserved
functionally-relevant regions (ideal for vaccine development) could be predicted 
by comparing genetic diversity patterns and evolutionary rates. This study was
thus aimed at searching for putative P. vivax sporozoite genes so as to analyse
their genetic diversity for determining their potential as vaccine candidates.
Several DNA sequence polymorphism estimators were computed at each locus. The
evolutionary force (drift, selection and recombination) drawing the genetic
diversity pattern observed was also determined by using tests based on
polymorphism frequency spectrum as well as the type of intra- and inter-species
substitutions. Likewise, recombination was assessed both indirectly and directly.
The results showed that sporozoite genes were more conserved than merozoite genes
evaluated to date. Putative domains implied in cell traversal, gliding motility
and hepatocyte interaction had a negative selection signal, being conserved
amongst different species in the genus. PvP52, PvP36, PvSPATR, PvPLP1, PvMCP1,
PvTLP, PvCelTOS, and PvMB2 antigens or functionally restricted regions within
them would thus seem promising vaccine candidates and could be used when
designing a pre-erythrocyte and/or multi-stage vaccine against P. vivax to avoid 
allele-specific immune responses that could reduce vaccine efficacy.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2018.00010 
PMCID: PMC5788960
PMID: 29422913 

