
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 Mar 27;62(4). pii: e02474-17. doi:
10.1128/AAC.02474-17. Print 2018 Apr.

Next-Generation Sequencing and Bioinformatics Protocol for Malaria Drug
Resistance Marker Surveillance.

Talundzic E(1), Ravishankar S(2), Kelley J(3), Patel D(4), Plucinski M(4),
Schmedes S(4)(5), Ljolje D(3), Clemons B(6), Madison-Antenucci S(6), Arguin
PM(4), Lucchi NW(4), Vannberg F(2), Udhayakumar V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA
etalundzic@cdc.gov.
(2)School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)Atlanta Research and Education Foundation, VAMC, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(5)Association of Public Health Laboratories, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA.
(6)Parasitology Laboratory, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health, Albany, New York, USA.

The recent advances in next-generation sequencing technologies provide a new and 
effective way of tracking malaria drug-resistant parasites. To take advantage of 
this technology, an end-to-end Illumina targeted amplicon deep sequencing (TADS) 
and bioinformatics pipeline for molecular surveillance of drug resistance in P.
falciparum, called malaria resistance surveillance (MaRS), was developed. TADS
relies on PCR enriching genomic regions, specifically target genes of interest,
prior to deep sequencing. MaRS enables researchers to simultaneously collect data
on allele frequencies of multiple full-length P. falciparum drug resistance genes
(crt, mdr1, k13, dhfr, dhps, and the cytochrome b gene), as well as the
mitochondrial genome. Information is captured at the individual patient level for
both known and potential new single nucleotide polymorphisms associated with drug
resistance. The MaRS pipeline was validated using 245 imported malaria cases that
were reported to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The
chloroquine resistance crt CVIET genotype (mutations underlined) was observed in 
42% of samples, the highly pyrimethamine-resistant dhpsIRN triple mutant in 92%
of samples, and the sulfadoxine resistance dhps mutation SGEAA in 26% of samples.
The mdr1 NFSND genotype was found in 40% of samples. With the exception of two
cases imported from Cambodia, no artemisinin resistance k13 alleles were
identified, and 99% of patients carried parasites susceptible to
atovaquone-proguanil. Our goal is to implement MaRS at the CDC for routine
surveillance of imported malaria cases in the United States and to aid in the
adoption of this system at participating state public health laboratories, as
well as by global partners.

Copyright Â© 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02474-17 
PMCID: PMC5913988
PMID: 29439965  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

