
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Feb 27;115(9):2114-2119. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1525670115. Epub 2018 Feb 12.

Genetic resistance to purine nucleoside phosphorylase inhibition in Plasmodium
falciparum.

Ducati RG(1), Namanja-Magliano HA(1), Harijan RK(1), Fajardo JE(2), Fiser A(2),
Daily JP(3)(4), Schramm VL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461.
(2)Department of Systems and Computational Biology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461; johanna.daily@einstein.yu.edu
vern.schramm@einstein.yu.edu.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461; johanna.daily@einstein.yu.edu vern.schramm@einstein.yu.edu.

Plasmodium falciparum causes the most lethal form of human malaria and is a
global health concern. The parasite responds to antimalarial therapies by
developing drug resistance. The continuous development of new antimalarials with 
novel mechanisms of action is a priority for drug combination therapies. The use 
of transition-state analog inhibitors to block essential steps in purine salvage 
has been proposed as a new antimalarial approach. Mutations that reduce
transition-state analog binding are also expected to reduce the essential
catalytic function of the target. We have previously reported that inhibition of 
host and P. falciparum purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PfPNP) by
DADMe-Immucillin-G (DADMe-ImmG) causes purine starvation and parasite death in
vitro and in primate infection models. P. falciparum cultured under incremental
DADMe-ImmG drug pressure initially exhibited increased PfPNP gene copy number and
protein expression. At increased drug pressure, additional PfPNP gene copies
appeared with point mutations at catalytic site residues involved in drug
binding. Mutant PfPNPs from resistant clones demonstrated reduced affinity for
DADMe-ImmG, but also reduced catalytic efficiency. The catalytic defects were
partially overcome by gene amplification in the region expressing PfPNP. Crystal 
structures of native and mutated PfPNPs demonstrate altered catalytic site
contacts to DADMe-ImmG. Both point mutations and gene amplification are required 
to overcome purine starvation induced by DADMe-ImmG. Resistance developed slowly,
over 136 generations (2136 clonal selection). Transition-state analog inhibitors 
against PfPNP are slow to induce resistance and may have promise in malaria
therapy.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1525670115 
PMCID: PMC5834662
PMID: 29440412  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

