
1. J Biol Chem. 2018 Apr 20;293(16):5878-5894. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M117.816298. Epub
2018 Feb 15.

Biochemical characterization and essentiality of Plasmodium fumarate hydratase.

Jayaraman V(1), Suryavanshi A(1), Kalale P(1), Kunala J(1), Balaram H(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for
Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR), Bengaluru, Karnataka 560064, India.
(2)From the Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for
Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR), Bengaluru, Karnataka 560064, India
hb@jncasr.ac.in.

Plasmodium falciparum (Pf), the causative agent of malaria, has an iron-sulfur
cluster-containing class I fumarate hydratase (FH) that catalyzes the
interconversion of fumarate to malate, a well-known reaction in the tricarboxylic
acid cycle. In humans, the same reaction is catalyzed by class II FH that has no 
sequence or structural homology with the class I enzyme from Plasmodium Fumarate 
is generated in large quantities in the parasite as a by-product of AMP synthesis
and is converted to malate by FH and then used in the generation of the key
metabolites oxaloacetate, aspartate, and pyruvate. Previous studies have
identified the FH reaction as being essential to P. falciparum, but biochemical
characterization of PfFH that may provide leads for the development of specific
inhibitors is lacking. Here, we report on the kinetic characterization of
purified recombinant PfFH, functional complementation of fh deficiency in
Escherichia coli, and mitochondrial localization in the parasite. We found that
the substrate analog mercaptosuccinic acid is a potent PfFH inhibitor, with a Ki 
value in the nanomolar range. The fh gene could not be knocked out in Plasmodium 
berghei when transfectants were introduced into BALB/c mice; however, fh knockout
was successful when C57BL/6 mice were used as host, suggesting that the
essentiality of the fh gene to the parasite was mouse strain-dependent.

Â© 2018 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M117.816298 
PMCID: PMC5912476
PMID: 29449371  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

