
1. Infect Immun. 2018 Apr 23;86(5). pii: e00708-17. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00708-17. Print
2018 May.

Fetal and Maternal Innate Immunity Receptors Have Opposing Effects on the
Severity of Experimental Malaria in Pregnancy: Beneficial Roles for Fetus-Derived
Toll-Like Receptor 4 and Type I Interferon Receptor 1.

Rodrigues-Duarte L(1), Pandya Y(1), Neres R(1), Penha-Gonçalves C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.
(2)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal cpenha@igc.gulbenkian.pt.

Malaria in pregnancy (MiP) is a distinctive clinical form of Plasmodium infection
and is a cause of placental insufficiency leading to poor pregnancy outcomes.
Maternal innate immunity responses play a decisive role in the development of
placental inflammation, but the action of fetus-derived factors in MiP outcomes
has been overlooked. We investigated the role of the Tlr4 and Ifnar1 genes,
taking advantage of heterogenic mating strategies to dissect the effects mediated
by maternally and fetally derived Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) or type I
interferon receptor 1 (IFNAR1). Using a mouse infection system displaying severe 
MiP outcomes, we found that the expressions of TLR4 and IFNAR1 in the maternal
compartment take part in deleterious MiP outcomes, but their fetal counterparts
patently counteract these effects. We uncovered that fetal TLR4 contributes to
the in vitro uptake of infected erythrocytes by trophoblasts and to the innate
immune response in the placenta, offering robust protection of fetus viability,
but had no sensible impact on the placental parasite burden. In contrast, we
observed that the expression of IFNAR1 in the fetal compartment was associated
with a reduced placental parasite burden but had little beneficial effect on
fetus outcomes. Furthermore, the downregulation of Ifnar1 expression in infected 
placentas and in trophoblasts exposed to infected erythrocytes indicated that the
interferon-IFNAR1 pathway is involved in the trophoblast response to infection.
This work unravels that maternal and fetal counterparts of innate immune pathways
drive opposing responses in murine placental malaria and implicates the
activation of innate receptors in fetal trophoblast cells in the control of
placental infection and in the protection of the fetus.

Copyright © 2018 Rodrigues-Duarte et al.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00708-17 
PMCID: PMC5913849
PMID: 29440369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

