
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018 Feb 20;12(2):e0006243. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0006243. eCollection 2018 Feb.

An insight into the salivary gland and fat body transcriptome of Panstrongylus
lignarius (Hemiptera: Heteroptera), the main vector of Chagas disease in Peru.

Nevoa JC(1), Mendes MT(2), da Silva MV(1), Soares SC(1), Oliveira CJF(1), Ribeiro
JMC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Natural and Biological Sciences, Laboratory of Immunology,
Federal University of Tri√¢ngulo Mineiro, Uberaba, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(2)University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas, United States of America.
(3)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), Laboratory of
Malaria and Vector Research (LMVR), Rockville, Maryland, United States of
America.

Triatomines are hematophagous arthropod vectors of Trypanosoma cruzi, the
causative agent of Chagas Disease. Panstrongylus lignarius, also known as
Panstrongylus herreri, is considered one of the most versatile triatomines
because it can parasitize different hosts, it is found in different habitats and 
countries, it has sylvatic, peridomestic and domestic behavior and it is a very
important vector of Chagas disease, especially in Peru. Molecules produced and
secreted by salivary glands and fat body are considered of important adaptational
value for triatomines because, among other functions, they subvert the host
haemostatic, inflammatory and immune systems and detoxify or protect them against
environmental aggressors. In this context, the elucidation of the molecules
produced by these tissues is highly valuable to understanding the ability of this
species to adapt and transmit pathogens. Here, we use high-throughput sequencing 
techniques to assemble and describe the coding sequences resulting from the
transcriptome of the fat body and salivary glands of P. lignarius. The final
assembly of both transcriptomes together resulted in a total of 11,507 coding
sequences (CDS), which were mapped from a total of 164,676,091 reads. The CDS
were subdivided according to their 10 folds overexpression on salivary glands
(513 CDS) or fat body (2073 CDS). Among the families of proteins found in the
salivary glands, lipocalins were the most abundant. Other ubiquitous families of 
proteins present in other sialomes were also present in P. lignarius, including
serine protease inhibitors, apyrase and antigen-5. The unique transcriptome of
fat body showed proteins related to the metabolic function of this organ.
Remarkably, nearly 20% of all reads mapped to transcripts coded by Triatoma
virus. The data presented in this study improve the understanding on triatomines'
salivary glands and fat body function and reveal important molecules used in the 
interplay between vectors and vertebrate hosts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006243 
PMCID: PMC5834209
PMID: 29462134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

