
1. Malar J. 2018 Mar 5;17(1):103. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2237-1.

Analysis of polymorphisms in the circumsporozoite protein gene of Plasmodium
vivax isolates from Henan Province, China.

Liu Y(1), Zhou RM(2), Zhang YL(2), Wang DQ(3), Li SH(2), Yang CY(2), Qian D(2),
Zhao YL(2), Zhang HW(2), Xu BL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Henan Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.
liuying@hncdc.com.cn.
(2)Henan Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.
(3)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, WHO Collaborating Centre for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and
Filariasis, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of Health,
Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax malaria has historically been a major source of
disease in Henan, China. In the 1970s, the morbidity of malaria was highest in
the country. With support from the government and the efforts of healthcare
personnel, the reported malaria cases have declined dramatically and a national
elimination programme was launched in 2010. To achieve the goal, it is essential 
to study the diversity of autochthonous malaria and transmission of Plasmodium
parasites, which will provide baseline data for disease control and management.
METHODS: Thirty-two P. vivax isolates from Henan province were collected from
2008 to 2011, and circumsporozoite protein (csp) genes were analysed to estimate 
the genetic diversity of this parasite.
RESULTS: The assessment of csp sequences indicated that all the isolates were the
VK210 type, however, none of them was identical to the VK210 strain. The
sequences displayed variations in the central region, and eight sub-types were
observed. Among the sub-types, HN7 was the most prevalent (37.5%), followed by
HN3 (34.4%). A total of 653 repeat units were discovered in 32 Henan isolates.
Nucleotide sequences were grouped in 13 unique repeat nucleotide sequence
allotypes that coded for 7 different repeated amino acid allotypes. B (GNGAGGQAA)
and D (GDRAAGQPA) were more frequent based on the results; they represented 53.9%
(352/653) of the total. In comparison to the basic repeat units of VK210, more
than 75% of the central repeat units had at least one non-synonymous nucleotide
change.
CONCLUSIONS: Recent P. vivax populations in Henan province showed some degree of 
genetic diversity in csp, with 8 sub-types among 32 samples. Meantime, the
results also suggested its relative conserved parasite populations. This could
provide interesting baseline data that allow identifying whether potential new
cases differ from the parasites already circulating in the area.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2237-1 
PMCID: PMC5838951
PMID: 29506527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

