
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2018 Apr;95:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2018.03.001. Epub
2018 Mar 8.

A deep insight into the male and female sialotranscriptome of adult Culex
tarsalis mosquitoes.

Ribeiro JMC(1), Martin-Martin I(2), Moreira FR(3), Bernard KA(3), Calvo E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Vector Biology, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 12735 Twinbrook Parkway Room 2E32D,
Rockville, MD, 20852, United States. Electronic address: jribeiro@niaid.nih.gov.
(2)Section of Vector Biology, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 12735 Twinbrook Parkway Room 2E32D,
Rockville, MD, 20852, United States.
(3)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2015 Linden Dr., Madison, WI, 53706, United
States.

Previously, a Sanger-based sialotranscriptome analysis of adult female Culex
tarsalis was published based on ∼2000 ESTs. During the elapsed 7.5 years,
pyrosequencing has been discontinued and Illumina sequences have increased
considerable in size and decreased in price. We here report an Illumina-based
sialotranscriptome that allowed finding the missing apyrase from the salivary
transcriptome of C. tarsalis, to determine several full-length members of the
34-62 kDa family, when a single EST has been found previously, in addition to
identifying many salivary families with lower expression levels that were not
detected previously. The use of multiple libraries including salivary glands and 
carcasses from male and female organisms allowed for an unprecedented insight
into the tissue specificity of transcripts, and in this particular case
permitting identification of transcripts putatively associated with blood
feeding, when exclusive of female salivary glands, or associated with sugar
feeding, when transcripts are found upregulated in both male and female glands.

© 2018 Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2018.03.001 
PMCID: PMC5927831
PMID: 29526772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

