
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Mar 19;8(1):4789. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-22659-1.

Differential expression pattern of co-inhibitory molecules on CD4+ T cells in
uncomplicated versus complicated malaria.

Abel A(1), Steeg C(1), Aminkiah F(2), Addai-Mensah O(3), Addo M(4)(5), Gagliani
N(4), Casar C(4), Yar DD(2), Owusu-Dabo E(2), Jacobs T(1), Mackroth MS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Protozoa Immunology, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, 20359,
Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Kumasi Centre for Collaborative Research in Tropical Medicine, Kumasi, Ghana.
(3)Department of Medical Laboratory Technology, Faculty of Allied Health
Sciences, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana.
(4)I. Medical Department, Division of Tropical Medicine and Infectious Diseases, 
University Medical Centre Hamburg Eppendorf, 20246, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), partner site
Hamburg-LÃ¼beck-Borstel-Riems, Germany.
(6)I. Medical Department, Division of Tropical Medicine and Infectious Diseases, 
University Medical Centre Hamburg Eppendorf, 20246, Hamburg, Germany.
m.mackroth@uke.de.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2018 Nov 29;8(1):17587.

The immune response of malaria patients is a main factor influencing the clinical
severity of malaria. A tight regulation of the CD4+ T cell response or the
induction of tolerance have been proposed to contribute to protection from severe
or clinical disease. We therefore compared the CD4+ T cell phenotypes of Ghanaian
children with complicated malaria, uncomplicated malaria, asymptomatic Plasmodium
falciparum (Pf) infection or no infection. Using flow cytometric analysis and
automated multivariate clustering, we characterized the expression of the
co-inhibitory molecules CTLA-4, PD-1, Tim-3, and LAG-3 and other molecules
implicated in regulatory function on CD4+ T cells. Children with complicated
malaria had higher frequencies of CTLA-4+ or PD-1+ CD4+ T cells than children
with uncomplicated malaria. Conversely, children with uncomplicated malaria
showed a higher proportion of CD4+ T cells expressing CD39 and Granzyme B,
compared to children with complicated malaria. In contrast, asymptomatically
infected children expressed only low levels of co-inhibitory molecules. Thus,
different CD4+ T cell phenotypes are associated with complicated versus
uncomplicated malaria, suggesting a two-sided role of CD4+ T cells in malaria
pathogenesis and protection. Deciphering the signals that shape the CD4+ T cell
phenotype in malaria will be important for new treatment and immunization
strategies.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-22659-1 
PMCID: PMC5859076
PMID: 29555909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

