
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 Jun;98(6):1788-1797. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0879. Epub
2018 Apr 5.

Biomarkers for the Diagnosis of Cholangiocarcinoma: A Systematic Review.

Tshering G(1), Dorji PW(1), Chaijaroenkul W(1), Na-Bangchang K(2)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chulabhorn International College of Medicine, Thammasat University, Rangsit
Center, Klong Luang, Pathum Thani, Thailand.
(2)Center of Excellence in Pharmacology and Molecular Biology of Malaria and
Cholangiocarcinoma, Chulabhorn International College of Medicine, Thammasat
University, Rangsit Center, Klong Luang, Pathum Thani, Thailand.

Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA), a malignant tumor of the bile duct, is a major public
health problem in many Southeast Asian countries, particularly Thailand. The slow
progression makes it difficult for early diagnosis and most patients are detected
in advanced stages. This study aimed to review all relevant articles related to
the biomarkers for the diagnosis of CCA and point out potential biomarkers. A
thorough search was performed in PubMed and ScienceDirect for CCA biomarker
articles. Required data were extracted. A total of 46 articles that fulfilled the
inclusion and had none of the exclusion criteria were included in the analysis
(17, 22, 3, 4, and 1 articles on blood, tissue, bile, both blood and tissue, and 
urine biomarkers, respectively). Carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) and
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), either alone or in combination with other
biomarkers, are the most commonly studied biomarkers in the serum. Their
sensitivity and specificity ranged from 47.2% to 98.2% and 89.7% to 100%,
respectively. However, in the tissue, gene methylations and DNA-related markers
were the most studied CCA biomarkers. Their sensitivity and specificity ranged
from 58% to 87% and 98% to 100%, respectively. Some articles investigated
biomarkers both in blood and tissues, particularly CA19-9 and CEA, with
sensitivity and specificity ranging from 33% to 100% and 50% to 97.7%,
respectively. Although quite a number of biomarkers with a potential role in the 
early detection of CCA have been established, it is difficult to single out any
particular marker that could be used in the routine clinical settings.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0879 
PMCID: PMC6086160
PMID: 29637880  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

