
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 Jun;98(6):1692-1698. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0887. Epub
2018 Apr 5.

Type I Interferon Receptor Variants in Gene Regulatory Regions are Associated
with Susceptibility to Cerebral Malaria in Malawi.

Feintuch CM(1), Tare A(2), Cusumano LR(1), Benayoun J(1), Ryu S(2), Sixpence
A(3), Seydel K(4)(3), Laufer M(5), Taylor T(4)(3), Suh Y(2), Daily JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York.
(2)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York.
(3)Blantyre Malaria Project, University of Malawi College of Medicine, Blantyre, 
Malawi.
(4)Department of Osteopathic Medical Specialties, College of Osteopathic
Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan.
(5)Division of Malaria Research, Institute for Global Health, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.

Cerebral malaria (CM) remains an important cause of morbidity and mortality. Risk
for developing CM partially depends on host genetic factors, including variants
encoded in the type I interferon (IFN) receptor 1 (IFNAR1). Type I IFNs bind to
IFNAR1 resulting in increased expression of IFN responsive genes, which modulate 
innate and adaptive immune responses. To comprehensively study IFNAR1 genetic
variant associations in Malawians with CM or uncomplicated malaria, we used a tag
single nucleotide polymorphism approach, based on the HapMap Yoruba in Ibadan,
Nigeria, population database. We identified three novel (rs914142, rs12626750,
and rs1041867) and one previously published (Chr21:34696785 [C > G]) IFNAR1
variants to be associated with CM. Some of these variants are in gene regulatory 
regions. Chr21:34696785 (C > G) is in a region encoding histone modifications and
transcription factor-binding sites, which suggests gene regulatory activity.
Rs12626750 is predicted to bind embryonic lethal abnormal vision system-like
RNA-binding protein 1, a RNA-binding protein which can increase the type I IFN
response. Furthermore, we examined these variants in an expression quantitative
trait loci database and found that a protective variant, rs914142, is associated 
with lower expression of IFNAR1, whereas the CM-associated variant rs12626750 was
associated with increased IFNAR1 expression, suggesting that activation of the
type I IFN pathway may contribute to pathogenesis of CM. Future functional
studies of IFNAR1 variants are now needed to clarify the role of this pathway in 
severe malarial diseases.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0887 
PMCID: PMC6086175
PMID: 29637882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

