
1. Parasit Vectors. 2018 Apr 16;11(1):246. doi: 10.1186/s13071-018-2826-4.

Spatio-temporal genetic structure of Anopheles gambiae in the Northwestern Lake
Victoria Basin, Uganda: implications for genetic control trials in malaria
endemic regions.

Lukindu M(1), Bergey CM(1), Wiltshire RM(1), Small ST(1), Bourke BP(1), Kayondo
JK(2), Besansky NJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Eck Institute for Global Health,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, 46556, USA.
(2)Department of Entomology, Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI), Entebbe,
Uganda.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences and Eck Institute for Global Health,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, 46556, USA. nbesansk@nd.edu.

BACKGROUND: Understanding population genetic structure in the malaria vector
Anopheles gambiae (s.s.) is crucial to inform genetic control and manage
insecticide resistance. Unfortunately, species characteristics such as high
nucleotide diversity, large effective population size, recent range expansion,
and high dispersal ability complicate the inference of genetic structure across
its range in sub-Saharan Africa. The ocean, along with the Great Rift Valley, is 
one of the few recognized barriers to gene flow in this species, but the effect
of inland lakes, which could be useful sites for initial testing of genetic
control strategies, is relatively understudied. Here we examine Lake Victoria as 
a barrier between the Ugandan mainland and the Ssese Islands, which lie up to 60 
km offshore. We use mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) from populations sampled in 2002,
2012 and 2015, and perform Bayesian cluster analysis on mtDNA combined with
microsatellite data previously generated from the same 2002 mosquito DNA samples.
RESULTS: Hierarchical analysis of molecular variance and Bayesian clustering
support significant differentiation between the mainland and lacustrine islands. 
In an mtDNA haplotype network constructed from this and previous data, haplotypes
are shared even between localities separated by the Rift Valley, a result that
more likely reflects retention of shared ancestral polymorphism than contemporary
gene flow.
CONCLUSIONS: The relative genetic isolation of An. gambiae on the Ssese Islands, 
their small size, level terrain and ease of access from the mainland, the
relative simplicity of the vectorial system, and the prevalence of malaria, are
all attributes that recommend these islands as possible sites for the testing of 
genetic control strategies.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-018-2826-4 
PMCID: PMC5902950
PMID: 29661226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

