
1. PLoS Pathog. 2018 May 18;14(5):e1007057. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007057.
eCollection 2018 May.

Plasmodium parasite exploits host aquaporin-3 during liver stage malaria
infection.

Posfai D(1), Sylvester K(1), Reddy A(2), Ganley JG(3), Wirth J(3), Cullen QE(3), 
Dave T(2), Kato N(4), Dave SS(2), Derbyshire ER(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, North Carolina, United States of America.
(2)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, United States of America.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, United
States of America.
(4)The Broad Institute, 7 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United
States of America.

Within the liver a single Plasmodium parasite transforms into thousands of
blood-infective forms to cause malaria. Here, we use RNA-sequencing to identify
host genes that are upregulated upon Plasmodium berghei infection of hepatocytes 
with the hypothesis that host pathways are hijacked to benefit parasite
development. We found that expression of aquaporin-3 (AQP3), a water and glycerol
channel, is significantly induced in Plasmodium-infected hepatocytes compared to 
uninfected cells. This aquaglyceroporin localizes to the parasitophorous vacuole 
membrane, the compartmental interface between the host and pathogen, with a
temporal pattern that correlates with the parasite's expansion in the liver.
Depletion or elimination of host AQP3 expression significantly reduces P. berghei
parasite burden during the liver stage and chemical disruption by a known AQP3
inhibitor, auphen, reduces P. falciparum asexual blood stage and P. berghei liver
stage parasite load. Further use of this inhibitor as a chemical probe suggests
that AQP3-mediated nutrient transport is an important function for parasite
development. This study reveals a previously unknown potential route for
host-dependent nutrient acquisition by Plasmodium which was discovered by mapping
the transcriptional changes that occur in hepatocytes throughout P. berghei
infection. The dataset reported may be leveraged to identify additional host
factors that are essential for Plasmodium liver stage infection and highlights
Plasmodium's dependence on host factors within hepatocytes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007057 
PMCID: PMC5979039
PMID: 29775485  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

