
1. Glob Health Epidemiol Genom. 2017 Nov 27;2:e17. doi: 10.1017/gheg.2017.14.
eCollection 2017.

Beta-globin gene haplotypes and selected Malaria-associated variants among black 
Southern African populations.

Pule GD(1), Chimusa ER(1), Mnika K(1), Mhandire K(2), Kampira E(3), Dandara C(1),
Wonkam A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pathology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)Departments of Chemical Pathology, University of Zimbabwe, Harare, Zimbabwe.
(3)Malawi College of Health Sciences, University of Malawi, Blantyre, Malawi.

Partial carrier-resistance to Plasmodium falciparum malaria conferred by the
sickle cell (HbS) mutation has resulted in the local amplification and positive
selection of sickle cell disease (SCD) in malaria-endemic regions and
particularly in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). The present study investigated the
Î²-globin gene haplotypes, and selected malaria-associated variants among three
cohorts of Bantu-speaking individuals from Malawi, Zimbabwe and South Africa
compared with reports with data from others SSA populations. The data suggest a
south-ward frequency decrease of malaria-associated variants in SSA linked to the
evolutionary dynamics of various African populations' genomes through selective
pressure of malaria. These selected genomics differences, positive selection of
SCD in malaria-endemic regions among 'Bantus' from various part of Africa
emphasise the evidence of the dissociation between genetics, anthropology and
culture. The present study also showed a relatively prevalent Benin haplotype,
which is mostly found in West Africa, among Southern African Blacks and very low 
Bantu haplotype, which could suggest a major migration route, of Southern Africa 
Bantu, along the African west coast, post-occurrence of the Sickle cell mutation,
which date remain to be fully elucidated.

DOI: 10.1017/gheg.2017.14 
PMCID: PMC5870409
PMID: 29868223 

