
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2018 Jun 13;14(6):e1006174. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006174. 
eCollection 2018 Jun.

Identifying functional groups among the diverse, recombining antigenic var genes 
of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum from a local community in Ghana.

Rorick MM(1)(2), Baskerville EB(1), Rask TS(3)(4), Day KP(3)(4), Pascual M(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL,
United States of America.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States
of America.
(3)School of Biosciences, Bio21 Institute, The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, AU.
(4)Department of Microbiology, New York University, New York, NY, United States
of America.
(5)The Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM, United States of America.

A challenge in studying diverse multi-copy gene families is deciphering distinct 
functional types within immense sequence variation. Functional changes can in
some cases be tracked through the evolutionary history of a gene family; however 
phylogenetic approaches are not possible in cases where gene families diversify
primarily by recombination. We take a network theoretical approach to
functionally classify the highly recombining var antigenic gene family of the
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. We sample var DBLÎ± sequence types from a 
local population in Ghana, and classify 9,276 of these variants into just 48
functional types. Our approach is to first decompose each sequence type into its 
constituent, recombining parts; we then use a stochastic block model to identify 
functional groups among the parts; finally, we classify the sequence types based 
on which functional groups they contain. This method for functional
classification does not rely on an inferred phylogenetic history, nor does it
rely on inferring function based on conserved sequence features. Instead, it
infers functional similarity among recombining parts based on the sharing of
similar co-occurrence interactions with other parts. This method can therefore
group sequences that have undetectable sequence homology or even distinct
origination. Describing these 48 var functional types allows us to simplify the
antigenic diversity within our dataset by over two orders of magnitude. We
consider how the var functional types are distributed in isolates, and find a
nonrandom pattern reflecting that common var functional types are non-randomly
distinct from one another in terms of their functional composition. The
coarse-graining of var gene diversity into biologically meaningful functional
groups has important implications for understanding the disease ecology and
evolution of this system, as well as for designing effective epidemiological
monitoring and intervention.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006174 
PMCID: PMC6016947
PMID: 29897905  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

