
1. Mamm Genome. 2018 Aug;29(7-8):488-506. doi: 10.1007/s00335-018-9752-9. Epub 2018 
Jun 19.

Genetic analysis of cerebral malaria in the mouse model infected with Plasmodium 
berghei.

Torre S(1), Langlais D(1)(2), Gros P(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Department of Human Genetics, McGill University
Research Centre on Complex Traits, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Department of Human Genetics, McGill University
Research Centre on Complex Traits, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
philippe.gros@mcgill.cag.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, 3649 Sir William Osler
Promenade, room 366, Montreal, QC, H3G-0B1, Canada. philippe.gros@mcgill.cag.

Malaria is a common and sometimes fatal disease caused by infection with
Plasmodium parasites. Cerebral malaria (CM) is a most severe complication of
infection with Plasmodium falciparum parasites which features a complex
immunopathology that includes a prominent neuroinflammation. The experimental
mouse model of cerebral malaria (ECM) induced by infection with Plasmodium
berghei ANKA has been used abundantly to study the role of single genes, proteins
and pathways in the pathogenesis of CM, including a possible contribution to
neuroinflammation. In this review, we discuss the Plasmodium berghei ANKA
infection model to study human CM, and we provide a summary of all host genetic
effects (mapped loci, single genes) whose role in CM pathogenesis has been
assessed in this model. Taken together, the reviewed studies document the many
aspects of the immune system that are required for pathological inflammation in
ECM, but also identify novel avenues for potential therapeutic intervention in CM
and in diseases which feature neuroinflammation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00335-018-9752-9 
PMID: 29922917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

