
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2018 Sep 5;503(2):1004-1010. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.06.109. Epub 2018 Jun 22.

RNA interference in vivo in Schistosoma japonicum: Establishing and optimization 
of RNAi mediated suppression of gene expression by long dsRNA in the
intra-mammalian life stages of worms.

Li J(1), Xiang M(1), Zhang R(1), Xu B(2), Hu W(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Genetics and Development, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai,
200438, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology of the Chinese Ministry of
Health, WHO Collaborating Center for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and Filariasis,
National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Shanghai, 200025, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Genetics and Development, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai,
200438, China; Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology of the Chinese
Ministry of Health, WHO Collaborating Center for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and
Filariasis, National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Shanghai, 200025, China. Electronic address:
huw@fudan.edu.cn.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2019 Feb 26;510(1):85.

Schistosomes are parasitic platyhelminths that threaten over 600 million people
globally. In recent years, RNA interference (RNAi) has been widely used as a
molecular tool in research into the genomic function of parasites. We aim to
develop effective protocols for application of RNAi technology in the
intra-mammalian life stages of Schistosoma japonicum. In this work, the
expression of the parasite gene encoding cathepsin B1 (SjCB1) was targeted by
exposing the worms to 10 μg of long dsRNA dissolved in 0.1 ml of 0.7% NaCl
injected into the tail vein of infected mice. This method was effective and
specific for eliciting SjCB1 gene suppression in both male and female adult worms
in vivo (>79.4% in male and >91.5% in female knockdown relative to control). In
60 cercaria infected mice, RNAi suppression of gene expression was best achieved 
by using 10 μg of target dsRNA for at least 4 days. The recommended procedure for
interference producing long-term suppression was an injection of dsRNA on the
first day of infection with booster injections administered every 4 days for up
to 26 days. Long-term suppression of three published functional genes
(peroxiredoxin-1, mago nashi, insulin receptor) in S. japonicum provided more
information about the role of the expression of these genes in producing
particular phenotypes. The protocols described here may be more convenient,
economical and applicable, than currently available technology and have
contributed to the observation of more phenotypes during worm development from
schistosomula to adult. These approaches may promote and facilitate further
studies into functional schistosome genomics.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.06.109 
PMID: 29935182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

