
1. F1000Res. 2018 Feb 20;7:208. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.13273.1. eCollection
2018.

Cross sectional study to determine chloroquine resistance among Plasmodium
falciparum clinical isolates from Khartoum, Sudan.

Abdulla Mohammed WS(1), Yasin K(2), Mahgoub NS(3)(4)(5), Abdel Hamid MM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Sudan International University, Khartoum, Sudan.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, International University of Africa, Khartoum, Sudan.
(3)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Sinnar
University, Sinnar, Sudan.
(4)Department of Parasitology and Medical Entomology, Nile College, Khartoum,
Sudan.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology, National University Research Institute
(NURI), National University, Khartoum, Sudan.
(6)Department of Parasitology and Medical Entomology, Institute of Endemic
Diseases, University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan.

Background:  Malaria continues to present a global health threat; the World
Health Organization (WHO) reported 214 million cases of malaria by the year 2015 
with a death rate of 438000. Sudan is endemic to malaria with over 95% of malaria
cases due to Plasmodium falciparum. Chloroquine is a well-established drug in the
treatment of P. falciparum malaria although its use has declined since its
introduction as the drug of choice in treatment of malaria in Sudan. The
mechanism of resistance has been attributed to mutations in P. falciparum
Chloroquine resistance transporter gene coding for a key food vacuole proteins.
In current study we aimed at verifying the genetic cause of resistance to
Chloroquine in field isolates of P. falciparum. Methods: Twenty P. falciparum
cases were diagnosed from East Nile hospital in Khartoum and recruited in the
investigation. Nested PCR was conducted to isolate mutation region in the PfCRT
gene and the amplicons were sequenced using Sanger sequencing technique
(Macrogen, Soule Korea). Results: 16/20 (80%) of the field isolates contained
base pair mutation of codon 76 in the pfcrt gene thus being resistant to
chloroquine treatment and only 4/20 (20%) did not contain such mutation.
Conclusions: High treatment failures associated with Chloroquine treatment is
evident of the high prevalence of mutant strains of P. falciparum field isolates 
thus suggesting the reduced relevance of Chloroquine as a treatment choice in the
management of P. falciparum malaria.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.13273.1 
PMCID: PMC5958312
PMID: 29946436 

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.

