
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 Sep;99(3):697-703. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.18-0137. Epub 2018 
Jun 28.

Plasmodium falciparum Histidine-Rich Protein 2 Gene Variation in a
Malaria-Endemic Area of Papua New Guinea.

Willie N(1), Zimmerman PA(1), Mehlotra RK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University School 
of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio.

Histidine-rich protein 2 of Plasmodium falciparum (PfHRP2) forms the basis of
many current malaria rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs). It is concerning that there
are parasites that lack part or all of the pfhrp2 gene, and thus do not express
the PfHRP2 protein; such parasites are not identifiable by PfHRP2-detecting RDTs.
Very limited information is available regarding pfhrp2 genetic variation in Papua
New Guinea (PNG). In the present study, this gene variation was evaluated using
169 samples previously collected from the Wosera area in East Sepik Province of
PNG. Molecular diagnosis of these samples showed that 81% were infected, and P.
falciparum was present in 91% of those infected samples. One hundred and twenty
samples were amplified for pfhrp2 exon-2, from which 12 randomly selected
amplicons were sequenced, yielding 18 sequences, all of which were unique. Baker 
repeat type 2 Ã— type 7 numbers ranged from 0 to 108. Epitope mapping analysis
revealed that three major epitopes, DAHHAHHA, AHHAADAHHA, and AHHAADAHH, were
present in high prevalence and frequencies. These major epitopes have been shown 
to be recognized by the monoclonal antibodies 3A4 and PTL-3 (DAHHAHHA), C1-13
(AHHAADAHHA), and S2-5 and C2-3 (AHHAADAHH). This study provides further
information on the high genetic variation of pfhrp2 and its unclear relationship 
with prediction of RDT detection sensitivity, and identifies major epitopes in
this gene from PNG. These results could be relevant and useful to understand the 
genetic diversity of this gene and the performance of current and future RDTs in 
this malarious region of the world.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.18-0137 
PMCID: PMC6169185
PMID: 29968556  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

