
1. PLoS One. 2018 Jul 5;13(7):e0200032. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0200032.
eCollection 2018.

Plasmodium sporozoites can invade hepatocytic cells independently of the Ephrin
receptor A2.

Langlois AC(1), Marinach C(1), Manzoni G(1), Silvie O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Universit√©, INSERM, CNRS, Centre d'Immunologie et des Maladies
Infectieuses, CIMI-Paris, Paris, France.

Sporozoite forms of the malaria parasite Plasmodium are transmitted by mosquitoes
and first infect the liver for an initial round of replication before parasite
proliferation in the blood. The molecular mechanisms involved during sporozoite
invasion of hepatocytes remain poorly understood. In previous studies, two
receptors of the Hepatitis C virus (HCV), the tetraspanin CD81 and the Scavenger 
Receptor BI (SR-BI), were shown to play an important role during entry of
Plasmodium sporozoites into hepatocytic cells. In contrast to HCV entry, which
requires both CD81 and SR-BI together with additional host factors, CD81 and
SR-BI operate independently during malaria liver infection, as sporozoites can
use CD81 and/or SR-BI, depending on the Plasmodium species, to invade
hepatocytes. However, the molecular function of CD81 and SR-BI during parasite
entry remains unknown. Another HCV entry factor, the Ephrin receptor A2 (EphA2), 
was recently reported to play a key role as a host cell entry factor during
malaria liver infection. Here, we investigated the contribution of EphA2 during
CD81-dependent and SR-BI-dependent sporozoite infection. Using small interfering 
RNA (siRNA) and antibodies against EphA2, combined with direct detection of
parasites by flow cytometry or microscopy, we show that blocking EphA2 has no
significant impact on P. yoelii or P. berghei host cell infection, irrespective
of the entry route. Thus, our findings argue against an important role of EphA2
during malaria liver infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0200032 
PMCID: PMC6033427
PMID: 29975762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

