
1. PLoS One. 2018 Jul 11;13(7):e0192492. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0192492.
eCollection 2018.

Efficacy of two PBO long lasting insecticidal nets against natural populations of
Anopheles gambiae s.l. in experimental huts, Kolokopé, Togo.

Ketoh GK(1), Ahadji-Dabla KM(1), Chabi J(2), Amoudji AD(1), Apetogbo GY(1),
Awokou F(3), Glitho IA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Insect Pest and Insect Vector Management/Ecotoxicology, Unité de Recherche en 
Ecotoxicologie (URET), Laboratoire d'Entomologie Appliquée (LEA), Faculté des
Sciences, Université de Lomé, Lomé, Togo.
(2)Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research (NMIMR), University of Ghana, 
Legon, Accra, Ghana.
(3)Programme National de Lutte contre le Paludisme (PNLP), Ministère de la Santé,
Lomé, Togo.

LLINs containing an insecticide plus the synergist, piperonyl butoxide (PBO) have
been designed for increased efficacy against pyrethroid-resistant malaria
vectors. In this study, two LLINs with PBO, PermaNet® 3.0 and Olyset® Plus, and a
pyrethroid-only LLIN, Yorkool®, were evaluated in experimental huts against a
free-flying, wild population of Anopheles gambiae s.l. in Kolokopé, a cotton
cultivated area of Togo. WHO susceptibility tube tests and subsequent molecular
assays determine the An. gambiae s.l. populations to be resistant to pyrethroids 
and DDT with both target site kdr and metabolic resistance mechanisms involved in
the resistance observed. Anopheles gambiae s.s. and An. coluzzi were present in
sympatry though the kdr (L1014F) mutation was observed at a higher frequency in
An. gambiae s.s. The experimental hut results showed that both PermaNet® 3.0 and 
Olyset® Plus nets induced similar levels of deterrence, exophily, and reduced
blood feeding rate against wild An. gambiae s.l. in contrast to the pyrethroid
only LLIN, Yorkool®. The proportion of wild An. gambiae s.l. killed by unwashed
PermaNet® 3.0 was significantly higher than unwashed Olyset® Plus (corrected
mortality 80.5% compared to 66.6%). Similar blood feeding inhibition rates were
observed for unwashed PermaNet® 3.0 and Olyset® Plus; however, PermaNet® 3.0
washed 20 times demonstrated significantly higher blood feeding inhibition rate
than Olyset® Plus washed 20 times (91.1% compared with 85.6% respectively).
Yorkool® performed the worst for all the parameters evaluated. In an area of
pyrethroid resistance of An. gambiae s.l involving kdr target site and metabolic 
resistance mechanisms, LLINs with PBO can provide additional protection in terms 
of reduction in blood feeding and increase in mosquito mortality compared to a
pyrethroid-only net, and should be considered in malaria vector control
strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0192492 
PMCID: PMC6040683
PMID: 29995894  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

