
1. Oncol Lett. 2018 Aug;16(2):2344-2354. doi: 10.3892/ol.2018.8882. Epub 2018 Jun 4.

Hub genes and key pathways of non-small lung cancer identified using
bioinformatics.

Tang Q(1), Zhang H(2), Kong M(2), Mao X(2), Cao X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Tongji Hospital, Wuhan, Hubei 430014, P.R. 
China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Central Hospital of Wuhan, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei
430014, P.R. China.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most common type of lung cancer,
accounting for ~80% of all lung cancer cases. The aim of the present study was to
identify key genes and pathways in NSCLC, in order to improve understanding of
the mechanism of lung cancer. The GSE33532 gene expression dataset, containing 20
normal and 80 NSCLC samples, was used. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia 
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses were performed to obtain the enrichment data
of differently expressed genes (DEGs). Disease modules within NSCLC were
constructed by Cytoscape, using protein-protein interaction (PPI) from the Search
Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes database. In addition, the Kaplan
Meier plotter KMplot was used to assess the top hub genes in the PPI network. As 
a result, 1,795 genes were identified in NSCLC; 729 were upregulated and 1,066
were downregulated. The results of the GO analysis indicated that the upregulated
DEGs were significantly enriched in 'biological processes' (BP), including 'cell 
cycle and nuclear division'; the downregulated DEGs were also significantly
enriched in BP, including 'response to wounding', 'anatomical structure
morphogenesis' and 'response to stimulus'. Upregulated DEGs were also enriched in
'cell cycle', 'DNA replication' and the 'tumor protein 53 signaling pathway',
while the downregulated DEGs were also enriched in 'complement and coagulation
cascades', 'malaria' and 'cell adhesion molecules'. The top 9 hub genes were
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK1), polo-like kinase 1, aurora kinase B, cell
division cycle 20, baculoviral initiator of apoptosis repeat containing 5,
mitotic checkpoint serine/threonine kinase B, proliferating cell nuclear antigen 
(PCNA), centromere protein A and MAD2 mitotic arrest deficient-like 1, and the
KMplot results revealed that the high expression levels of these genes resulted
in significantly low survival rates, compared with low expression samples
(P<0.05), with the exception of PCNA and CDK1. In the pathway crosstalk analysis,
26 nodes and 41 interactions were divided into two groups: One module of the two 
groups primarily included 'metabolism of amino acid' and the other primarily
contained 'tumor necrosis signaling' pathways. In conclusion, the present study
assisted in improving the understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying
NSCLC development, and the results may help the understanding of the biological
mechanism of NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2018.8882 
PMCID: PMC6036325
PMID: 30008938 

