
1. Parasitology. 2019 Feb;146(2):213-219. doi: 10.1017/S0031182018001130. Epub 2018 
Jul 16.

The global biogeography of avian haemosporidian parasites is characterized by
local diversification and intercontinental dispersal.

Ellis VA(1), Sari EHR(1), Rubenstein DR(2), Dickerson RC(3), Bensch S(1),
Ricklefs RE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Molecular Ecology and Evolution Lab,Lund
University,Lund,Sweden.
(2)Department of Ecology, Evolution and Environmental Biology,Columbia
University,New York, NY 10027,USA.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Missouri,Columbia, MO 65211,USA.
(4)Department of Biology,University of Missouri-St. Louis,St. Louis, MO
63121,USA.

The biogeographic histories of parasites and pathogens are infrequently compared 
with those of free-living species, including their hosts. Documenting the
frequency with which parasites and pathogens disperse across geographic regions
contributes to understanding not only their evolution, but also the likelihood
that they may become emerging infectious diseases. Haemosporidian parasites of
birds (parasite genera Plasmodium, Haemoproteus and Leucocytozoon) are globally
distributed, dipteran-vectored parasites. To date, over 2000 avian haemosporidian
lineages have been designated by molecular barcoding methods. To achieve their
current distributions, some lineages must have dispersed long distances, often
over water. Here we quantify such events using the global avian haemosporidian
database MalAvi and additional records primarily from the Americas. We scored
lineages as belonging to one or more global biogeographic regions based on
infection records. Most lineages were restricted to a single region but some were
globally distributed. We also used part of the cytochrome b gene to create
genus-level parasite phylogenies and scored well-supported nodes as having
descendant lineages in regional sympatry or allopatry. Descendant sister lineages
of Plasmodium, Haemoproteus and Leucocytozoon were distributed in allopatry in
11, 16 and 15% of investigated nodes, respectively. Although a small but
significant fraction of the molecular variance in cytochrome b of all three
genera could be explained by biogeographic region, global parasite dispersal
likely contributed to the majority of the unexplained variance. Our results
suggest that avian haemosporidian parasites have faced few geographic barriers to
dispersal over their evolutionary history.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182018001130 
PMID: 30009719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

