
1. Parasitol Int. 2018 Dec;67(6):706-714. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2018.07.006. Epub
2018 Jul 17.

Critical role of Erythrocyte Binding-Like protein of the rodent malaria parasite 
Plasmodium yoelii to establish an irreversible connection with the erythrocyte
during invasion.

Kegawa Y(1), Asada M(2), Ishizaki T(3), Yahata K(4), Kaneko O(5).

Author information: 
(1)Program for Nurturing Global Leaders in Tropical and Emerging Communicable
Diseases, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, 1-12-4
Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan; Department of Protozoology, Institute of
Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN), Nagasaki University, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki
852-8523, Japan. Electronic address: yuto_kegawa@yahoo.co.jp.
(2)Program for Nurturing Global Leaders in Tropical and Emerging Communicable
Diseases, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, 1-12-4
Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan; Department of Protozoology, Institute of
Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN), Nagasaki University, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki
852-8523, Japan. Electronic address: masahitoasada@nagasaki-u.ac.jp.
(3)Program for Nurturing Global Leaders in Tropical and Emerging Communicable
Diseases, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, 1-12-4
Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan; Department of Protozoology, Institute of
Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN), Nagasaki University, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki
852-8523, Japan. Electronic address: takahiro.ishizaki.0616@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Protozoology, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN), Nagasaki 
University, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan. Electronic address:
kyahata@nagasaki-u.ac.jp.
(5)Program for Nurturing Global Leaders in Tropical and Emerging Communicable
Diseases, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, 1-12-4
Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan; Department of Protozoology, Institute of
Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN), Nagasaki University, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki
852-8523, Japan. Electronic address: okaneko@nagasaki-u.ac.jp.

Plasmodium malaria parasites multiply within erythrocytes and possess a
repertoire of proteins whose function is to recognize and invade these vertebrate
host cells. One such protein involved in erythrocyte invasion is the micronemal
protein, Erythrocyte Binding-Like (EBL), which has been studied as a potential
target of vaccine development in Plasmodium vivax (PvDBP) and Plasmodium
falciparum (EBA-175). In the rodent malaria parasite model Plasmodium yoelii,
specific substitutions in the EBL regions responsible for intracellular
trafficking (17XL parasite line) or receptor recognition (17X1.1pp. parasite
line), paradoxically increase invasion ability and virulence rather than abolish 
EBL function. Attempts to disrupt the ebl gene locus in the 17XL and 17XNL lines 
were unsuccessful, suggesting EBL essentiality. To understand the mechanisms
behind these potentially conflicting outcomes, we generated 17XL-based
transfectants in which ebl expression is suppressed with anhydrotetracycline
(ATc) and investigated merozoite behavior during erythrocyte invasion. In the
absence of ATc, EBL was secreted to the merozoite surface, whereas following ATc 
administration parasitemia was negligible in vivo. Merozoites lacking EBL were
unable to invade erythrocytes in vitro, indicating that EBL has a critical role
for erythrocyte invasion. Quantitative time-lapse imaging revealed that with ATc 
administration a significant number of merozoites were detached from the
erythrocyte after the erythrocyte deformation event and no echinocytosis was
observed, indicating that EBL is required for merozoites to establish an
irreversible connection with erythrocytes during invasion.

Copyright Â© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2018.07.006 
PMID: 30025976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

