
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2018 Sep;224:37-43. doi: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2018.07.010.
Epub 2018 Jul 21.

Generation of Plasmodium yoelii malaria parasite carrying double fluorescence
reporters in gametocytes.

Liu C(1), Li Z(1), Jiang Y(1), Cui H(2), Yuan J(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signal Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian
361102, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signal Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian
361102, China. Electronic address: cuihuiting@xmu.edu.cn.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signal Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian
361102, China. Electronic address: yuanjing@xmu.edu.cn.

Male and female gametocytes are the infectious forms critical for malaria
transmission and targets of intervention. Gametocytes are generally produced in
relatively small numbers, and it has been difficult to obtain pure male and
female gametocytes for various studies. Male and female gametocytes expressing
unique fluorescence reporters have been generated for both Plasmodium falciparum 
and Plasmodium berghei parasites, which allows isolation of large numbers of pure
male and female gametocytes and has greatly contributed to our understanding of
gametocyte biology. To establish Plasmodium yoelii as another model for studying 
gametocytogenesis, here we generate a parasite line with male and female
gametocytes expressing GFP or mCherry reporter, respectively, using
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing method. We first inserted genes encoding intact
fluorescence proteins downstream of parasite coding region of ccp2 and Dhc1
genes, respectively, generating the knockin parasites producing ccp2::mCherry
(female) and Dhc1::gfp (male) gametocytes. We next obtained a parasite clone
carrying double-fluorescent reporters by genetically crossing the ccp2::mCherry
and Dhc1::gfp lines. The resulting double-labeled DFsc7 parasite displays normal 
development during the whole life cycle and expresses the fluorescence proteins
in male and female gametocyte separately. This parasite strain provides a new
platform for facilitating studies of gametocyte biology and malaria transmission.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2018.07.010 
PMID: 30040976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

