
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2018 Dec;152:122-130. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2018.07.012. Epub
2018 Jul 27.

Downstream processing of a plant-derived malaria transmission-blocking vaccine
candidate.

Menzel S(1), Holland T(2), Boes A(1), Spiegel H(1), Fischer R(3), Buyel JF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME, Aachen,
Germany.
(2)Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME, Aachen,
Germany; Eppendorf AG, Bioprocess Center, Rudolf-Schulten-Str. 5, 52428, Juelich,
Germany.
(3)Institute for Molecular Biotechnology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen,
Germany.
(4)Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME, Aachen,
Germany; Institute for Molecular Biotechnology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen,
Germany. Electronic address: johannes.buyel@ime.fraunhofer.de.

Plants as a platform for recombinant protein expression are now economically
comparable to well-established systems, such as microbes and mammalian cells,
thanks to advantages such as scalability and product safety. However, downstream 
processing accounts for the majority of the final product costs because plant
extracts contain large quantities of host cell proteins (HCPs) that must be
removed using elaborate purification strategies. Heat precipitation in planta
(blanching) can remove ∼80% of HCPs and thus simplify further purification steps,
but this is only possible if the target protein is thermostable. Here we describe
a combination of blanching and chromatography to purify the thermostable
transmission-blocking malaria vaccine candidate FQS, which was transiently
expressed in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves. If the blanching temperature exceeded 
a critical threshold of ∼75 °C, FQS was no longer recognized by the malaria
transmission-blocking monoclonal antibody 4B7. A design-of-experiments approach
revealed that reducing the blanching temperature from 80 °C to 70 °C restored
antibody binding while still precipitating most HCPs. We also found that
blanching inhibited the degradation of FQS in plant extracts, probably due to the
thermal inactivation of proteases. We screened hydrophobic interaction
chromatography materials using miniature columns and a liquid-handling station.
Octyl Sepharose achieved the highest FQS purity during the primary capture step
and led to a final purity of ∼72% with 60% recovery via step elution. We found
that 30-75% FQS was lost during ultrafiltration/diafiltration, giving a final
yield of 9 mg kg-1 plant material after purification based on an initial yield of
∼49 mg kg-1 biomass after blanching.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2018.07.012 
PMID: 30059744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

