
1. J Immunol Res. 2018 Jul 5;2018:6709424. doi: 10.1155/2018/6709424. eCollection
2018.

Differential Gene Expression Profile of Human Neutrophils Cultured with
Plasmodium falciparum-Parasitized Erythrocytes.

Terkawi MA(1)(2), Takano R(1), Kato K(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases, Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Inada-cho, Obihiro, Hokkaido 080-8555,
Japan.
(2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine and Graduate School of
Medicine, Hokkaido University, Kita-15, Nish-7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.
(3)Research Center for Global Agromedicine, Obihiro University of Agriculture and
Veterinary Medicine, Inada-cho, Obihiro, Hokkaido 080-8555, Japan.

Neutrophils (PMNs) are the most abundant cellular component of our innate immune 
system, where they play central roles in the pathogenesis of and resistance to a 
broad range of diseases. However, their roles in malarial infection remain poorly
understood. Therefore, we examined the transcriptional gene profile of human PMNs
in response to Plasmodium falciparum-parasitized erythrocytes (iRBCs) by using
oligonucleotide microarrays. Results revealed that PMNs induced a broad and
vigorous set of changes in gene expression in response to malarial parasites,
represented by 118 upregulated and 216 downregulated genes. The transcriptional
response was characterized by the upregulation of numerous genes encoding
multiple surface receptors, proteins involved in signal transduction pathways,
and defense response proteins. This response included a number of genes which are
known to be involved in the pathogenesis of malaria and other inflammatory
diseases. Gene enrichment analysis suggested that the biological pathways
involved in the PMN responses to the iRBCs included insulin receptor, Jak-STAT
signaling pathway, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), and interleukin and
interferon-gamma (IFN-Î³) signaling pathways. The current study provides
fundamental knowledge on the molecular responses of neutrophils to malarial
parasites, which may aid in the discovery of novel therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/6709424 
PMCID: PMC6057315
PMID: 30069491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

