
1. BMC Proc. 2018 Jul 19;12(Suppl 8):11. doi: 10.1186/s12919-018-0108-y. eCollection
2018.

Strengthening regulatory capacity for gene drives in Africa: leveraging NEPAD's
experience in establishing regulatory systems for medicines and GM crops in
Africa.

Glover B(1), Akinbo O(2), Savadogo M(2), Timpo S(2), Lemgo G(3), Sinebo W(4),
Akile S(4), Obukosia S(4), Ouedraogo J(3), Ndomondo-Sigonda M(1), Koch M(5),
Makinde D(1), Ambali A(1).

Author information: 
(1)NEPAD Agency, Industrialization, Science, Technology and Innovation Hub,
Midrand, South Africa.
(2)African Biosafety Network of Expertise, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.
(3)African Biosafety Network of Expertise, Dakar, Senegal.
(4)African Biosafety Network of Expertise, Kampala, Uganda.
(5)Simpot Plant Sciences, Boise, ID USA.

The New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) Agency recognizes that
Africa is in a period of transition and that this demands exploring and
harnessing safe advances made in science-based innovations including modern
biotechnology. To advance the science of biotechnology in Africa effectively,
while at the same time safeguarding human health and the environment, the African
Union (AU) adopted a High-Level Panel report on modern biotechnology entitled,
Freedom to Innovate, which advocated for a coevolutionary approach where
technology development goes hand in hand with regulation. Furthermore, most AU
member states are Parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (CPB), a legally
binding international agreement negotiated, concluded and adopted within the
framework of the Convention on Biological Diversity. This seeks to guide Parties 
in developing systems for the environmentally sound management of modern
biotechnology applications. Currently, 49Â AU Member States have signed and
ratified the CPB, of which 12 have passed biosafety laws. African Union (AU)
member states are at different stages in the development of regulatory frameworks
for applications of modern biotechnology, which include genetically modified (GM)
products and other emerging technologies. Biosafety regulatory frameworks
comprise: biotechnology and/or biosafety policy; laws, regulations and
guidelines; administrative systems; decision-making systems; and mechanisms for
public engagement. To assist Member States to implement functional regulatory
frameworks for both agriculture and health applications, the NEPAD Agency
established the African Biosafety Network of Expertise (ABNE) and the African
Medicines Regulatory Harmonization (AMRH). Currently, transgenic insects and GM
crops are regulated by Competent National Authorities whose mandate derives from 
national biosafety laws. For GM crops, a lot of research has been conducted up to
the confined field trial (CFT) and multi-location trials stages in a number of
African countries. Burkina Faso has fully functional containment facilities for
transgenic mosquitoes while Mali and Uganda are developing theirs. The Burkina
Faso regulatory agency has granted permits and has already received sets of
sterile mosquito eggs for trials in the contained facility. It is instructive to 
note that both ABNE and AMRH have worked with national and regional regulatory
bodies in Africa to enhance their technical capacities for informed decision
making, adoption of best practices, and compliance with international standards. 
It is against the backdrop of a rich blend of on-the-ground knowledge,
experience, expertise, and insight into the context and political sensitivities
of member states that the NEPAD Agency seeks to expand existing support. This
would include capacity strengthening in the regulation of emerging technologies, 
such as the application of gene drives in the development of transgenic mosquito 
for the control of malaria transmission.

DOI: 10.1186/s12919-018-0108-y 
PMCID: PMC6069767
PMID: 30079102 

Conflict of interest statement: Not applicable.Not applicable.The authors declare
that they have no competing interests.Springer Nature remains neutral with regard
to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

