
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Aug 15;8(1):12183. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-30713-1.

Unraveling the Plasmodium vivax sporozoite transcriptional journey from mosquito 
vector to human host.

Roth A(1), Adapa SR(1), Zhang M(1), Liao X(1), Saxena V(2), Goffe R(1), Li S(1), 
Ubalee R(3), Saggu GS(4), Pala ZR(2), Garg S(2), Davidson S(3), Jiang RHY(5),
Adams JH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Health and Infectious Diseases Research, College of Public
Health, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(2)Molecular Parasitology and System Biology Lab, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan, India.
(3)Department of Entomology, Armed Forces Research Institute of Medical Sciences,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergic and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Health, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(5)Center for Global Health and Infectious Diseases Research, College of Public
Health, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA. jiang2@health.usf.edu.
(6)Center for Global Health and Infectious Diseases Research, College of Public
Health, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA. jadams3@health.usf.edu.

Malaria parasites transmitted by mosquito bite are remarkably efficient in
establishing human infections. The infection process requires roughly 30â€‰minutes 
and is highly complex as quiescent sporozoites injected with mosquito saliva must
be rapidly activated in the skin, migrate through the body, and infect the liver.
This process is poorly understood for Plasmodium vivax due to low infectivity in 
the in vitro models. To study this skin-to-liver-stage of malaria, we used
quantitative bioassays coupled with transcriptomics to evaluate parasite changes 
linked with mammalian microenvironmental factors. Our in vitro phenotyping and
RNA-seq analyses revealed key microenvironmental relationships with distinct
biological functions. Most notable, preservation of sporozoite quiescence by
exposure to insect-like factors coupled with strategic activation limits untimely
activation of invasion-associated genes to dramatically increase hepatocyte
invasion rates. We also report the first transcriptomic analysis of the P. vivax 
sporozoite interaction in salivary glands identifying 118 infection-related
differentially-regulated Anopheles dirus genes. These results provide important
new insights in malaria parasite biology and identify priority targets for
antimalarial therapeutic interventions to block P. vivax infection.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-30713-1 
PMCID: PMC6093925
PMID: 30111801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

