
1. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2016 Jun;34(3):220-6.

[Species Identification and Sequence Analysis of Plasmodium spp. in Border Areas 
of Yunnan Province by 18S rRNA-based Nested PCR]

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang CL, Zhou HN, Nie RH, Liu H, Wang J, Li CF, Yang YM.

Objective: To analyze blood samples from patients with falciparum malaria and
vivax malaria in border areas of Yunnan Province, using 18S rRNA-based nested
PCR, and compare 18S rRNA sequences.
Methods: Blood or filter blood samples with positive microscopic results for
Plasmodium falciparum or P. vivax infection were collected from Laza, Nankajiang,
Mangdong and Nawei of Myanmar, and from Mengla, Tengchong and Yingjiang of Yunnan
Province between 2004 and 2011. 18S rRNA-based nested PCR was conducted on the
samples, and PCR products were sequenced and blasted. Phylogenetic tree was
constructed using the neighbor-joining method with MEGA software (version 6.06).
Results: Microscopic examination revealed P. falciparum infection in 256 samples 
and P. vivax infection in 219 samples. The 18S rRNA-based PCR further confirmed
P. falciparum infection in 242 samples, P. vivax infection in 176 samples, and
mixed infection in 57 samples. The consistency rate was 81.7% （388/475） between
microscopic and PCR results. The inconsistency rate significantly correlated with
parasite density （Spearman’s r=-0.408， P<0.05）. Sequence alignment revealed 11
and 10 homologous sequences for P. falciparum and P. vivax 18S rRNA gene,
comprising 2.9%（6/205） and 22.5%（27/120） variable sites, respectively. The 18S
rRNA of P. falciparum clustered with that from Cameroon（GenBank accession number 
KC428742）, but was distantly related with the S-type 18S rRNA from the
Netherlands （U36465） and Brazil （U36466 and U36467）. The 18S rRNA of P. vivax
clustered with A-type 18S rRNA from Thailand （U07367）, but was distantly related 
with the C-type 18S rRNA from Thailand（U07368）.
Conclusion: Nested PCR revealed mixed infection in 57 samples among those
identified with single infection by microscopy. There is no significant
difference in 18S rRNA sequence in seven counties/cities in Yunnan Province.


PMID: 30129721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

