
1. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2016
Oct;34(5):399-404.

[Analysis of Pfcrt Gene Polymorphism in Imported Falciparum Malaria Cases in
Henan Province in 2015].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou RM, Wang YN, Qian D, Li SH, Liu Y, Yang CY, Zhao YL, Xu BL, Zhang HW.

Objective: To analyze Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine resistant transporter
(Pfcrt) gene polymorphism in imported falciparum malaria cases in Henan Province 
in 2015.
Methods: Blood samples were collected from 132 cases of imported falciparum
malaria in Henan Province in 2015. DNA was extracted from the samples, and the
Pfcrt was amplified by nested PCR using specific primers. The PCR products were
digested by restriction endonuclease enzyme Apol I and sequenced. Pfcrt gene
polymorphism and distribution were analyzed.
Results: Most of the 132 cases of imported malaria were young male adults
returning from the Africa, with the highest percentage in those from West
Africa（38.6%, 51/132）, then Central Africa（26.5%, 35/132）, South Africa（25.0%,
33/132）, East Africa（8.3%, 11/132）, and North Africa（1.5%, 2/132）. The nested PCR
yielded a 145-bp product for each sample, and 66.7%（88/132） of the products were 
completely digested by Apol I, resulting in two fragments of 114 bp and 31 bp;
32.6%（43/132） could not been digested and only a single fragment of 145 bp was
shown; and 0.8%（1/132） were incompletely digested, yielding three fragments of
145 bp, 114 bp and 31 bp. By blasting against chloroquine sensitive strain 3D7,
we found mutations of Pfcrt at sites correspondig to residues 74, 75 and 76 from 
ATG, AAT and AAA to ATT, GAA and ACA （i.e. M74I, N75E and K76T） in 43 of the 132 
blood samples, and mixed type mutations into ATG/T, A/GAA/T and AA/CA at sites
correspondig to residues 74, 75 and 76（CVM/I, N/E/D/K, T/K） in one blood sample. 
The other 88 blood samples showed a wild type with no mutation (CVMNK). Mutations
occurred mainly in cases from West Africa（41.2%, 21/51）, then East Africa（36.4%, 
4/11）, South Africa（30.3%, 10/33）, and Central Africa（22.9%, 8/27）（χ2=4.07,
P＞0.05）. The 2 cases from the North Africa both had wild type Pfcrt; the one with
mixed type mutation was from West Africa.
Conclusion: Three haplotypes of Pfcrt have been found, including wild type
(CVMNK), mutation type (CVIET) and mixed type (CVM/I, N/E/D/K, K/T) in the
imported malaria cases. The wild type occupies the highest proportion （66.7%）,
while the mutation type possesses a high proportion of 41.2% in cases from West
Africa.


PMID: 30130006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

