
1. PLoS Biol. 2018 Aug 24;16(8):e2006035. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2006035.
eCollection 2018 Aug.

Plasmodium vivax-like genome sequences shed new insights into Plasmodium vivax
biology and evolution.

Gilabert A(1), Otto TD(2)(3), Rutledge GG(2), Franzon B(1), Ollomo B(4), Arnathau
C(1), Durand P(1), Moukodoum ND(4), Okouga AP(4), Ngoubangoye B(4), Makanga B(4),
Boundenga L(4), Paupy C(1)(4), Renaud F(1), Prugnolle F(1)(4), Rougeron V(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)MIVEGEC, IRD, CNRS, University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(2)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Cambridge,
United Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Glasgow,
College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(4)Centre International de Recherches MÃ©dicales de Franceville, Franceville,
Gabon.

Although Plasmodium vivax is responsible for the majority of malaria infections
outside Africa, little is known about its evolution and pathway to humans. Its
closest genetic relative, P. vivax-like, was discovered in African great apes and
is hypothesized to have given rise to P. vivax in humans. To unravel the
evolutionary history and adaptation of P. vivax to different host environments,
we generated using long- and short-read sequence technologies 2 new P. vivax-like
reference genomes and 9 additional P. vivax-like genotypes. Analyses show that
the genomes of P. vivax and P. vivax-like are highly similar and colinear within 
the core regions. Phylogenetic analyses clearly show that P. vivax-like parasites
form a genetically distinct clade from P. vivax. Concerning the relative
divergence dating, we show that the evolution of P. vivax in humans did not occur
at the same time as the other agents of human malaria, thus suggesting that the
transfer of Plasmodium parasites to humans happened several times independently
over the history of the Homo genus. We further identify several key genes that
exhibit signatures of positive selection exclusively in the human P. vivax
parasites. Two of these genes have been identified to also be under positive
selection in the other main human malaria agent, P. falciparum, thus suggesting
their key role in the evolution of the ability of these parasites to infect
humans or their anthropophilic vectors. Finally, we demonstrate that some gene
families important for red blood cell (RBC) invasion (a key step of the life
cycle of these parasites) have undergone lineage-specific evolution in the human 
parasite (e.g., reticulocyte-binding proteins [RBPs]).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2006035 
PMCID: PMC6130868
PMID: 30142149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

