
1. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2016 Dec;34(6):493-9.

[Sequencing and Phylogenetic Tree Construction of 18S Ribosomal DNA from Five
Species of Plasmodium from Yunnan Border between China and Myanmar and Other
Areas].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen MX, Chen JX, Liu W, Feng XY, Chen SB, Chen SH, Cai YC, Xu B, Hu W.

Objective: To analyze sequence variation and construct phylogenetic tree based on
18S ribosomal DNA among five species of Plasmodium in Yunnan border between China
and Myanmar and other areas.
Methods: Blood samples (or DNA samples)from malaria patients were collected from 
2000 to 2015 in Yunnan border and Myanmar and other areas. DNA was extracted from
blood samples, and the 18S rDNA fragment was amplified, sequenced and aligned
with relevant sequences available in the GenBank. The phylogenetic tree was
constructed by methods of neighbor joining (NJ), maximum likelihood (ML), and
maximum parsimony (MP), respectively.
Results: A total of 94 blood samples or DNA from malaria patients were collected.
The 18S rDNA was successfully amplified from all the samples. Sequence alignment 
revealed variations of 0-0.2%, 0-0.1%, 0-0.1%, 0-0.1% and 0 for 18S rDNA sequence
among Plasmodium falciparum, P. vivax, P. malariae, P. ovale and P. knowlesi,
respectively. The phylogenetic tree constructed with the three method showed
consistency. Phylogenic analysis revealed that there were five big branches of
Plasmodium spp. studied. The P. falciparum branch clustered with the isolates
from Cameroon（KC428741, KC428742）, Brazil（KC906718）, and Malaysia（HQ283221） in
GenBank. The P. vivax branch clustered with isolates from Cameroon（HF945443）,
India （HM014361, JQ627158）, and Colombia （U83877）. However, the samples Pv11,
Pv18 and Pv21 formed a small branch that showed closer phylogenetic relationship 
with P. cynomolgi（L07559）, an isolate from Macaca fascicularis. Moreover, P.
malariae samples from Yunnan Province including Pm1, Pm3 and Pm4 clustered to
form a small branch, and then clustered with samples from Hainan Province,
showing geographical diversity. All the isolates of P. ovale clustered with
isolates from Vietnam（EU935736 and AF387038）. All the isolates of P. knowlesi
clustered into a branch, and showed close relationship with those from Myanmar
(GU816250 and GU816246).
Conclusion: There is no significant difference in 18S rDNA gene of the five
species of Plasmodium from Yunnan border between China and Myanmar and other
areas. The phylogenetic tree constructed with the NJ, MP and ML methods shows
consistency.


PMID: 30141590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

