
1. Curr Biol. 2018 Sep 10;28(17):2763-2776.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2018.06.069. Epub 
2018 Aug 23.

ISP1-Anchored Polarization of GCβ/CDC50A Complex Initiates Malaria Ookinete
Gliding Motility.

Gao H(1), Yang Z(1), Wang X(1), Qian P(1), Hong R(1), Chen X(1), Su XZ(2), Cui
H(1), Yuan J(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signal Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian
361102, China.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signal Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian
361102, China. Electronic address: yuanjing@xmu.edu.cn.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2018 Sep 10;28(17):R939-R941.

Ookinete gliding motility is essential for penetration of the mosquito midgut
wall and transmission of malaria parasites. Cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)
signaling has been implicated in ookinete gliding. However, the upstream
mechanism of how the parasites activate cGMP signaling and thus initiate ookinete
gliding remains unknown. Using real-time imaging to visualize Plasmodium yoelii
guanylate cyclase β (GCβ), we show that cytoplasmic GCβ translocates and
polarizes to the parasite plasma membrane at "ookinete extrados site" (OES)
during zygote-to-ookinete differentiation. The polarization of enzymatic active
GCβ at OES initiates gliding of matured ookinete. Both the P4-ATPase-like domain 
and guanylate cyclase domain are required for GCβ polarization and ookinete
gliding. CDC50A, a co-factor of P4-ATPase, binds to and stabilizes GCβ during
ookinete development. Screening of inner membrane complex proteins identifies
ISP1 as a key molecule that anchors GCβ/CDC50A complex at the OES of mature
ookinetes. This study defines a spatial-temporal mechanism for the initiation of 
ookinete gliding, where GCβ polarization likely elevates local cGMP levels and
activates cGMP-dependent protein kinase signaling.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2018.06.069 
PMID: 30146157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

