
1. Microbiome. 2018 Aug 27;6(1):148. doi: 10.1186/s40168-018-0528-y.

Factors shaping the gut bacterial community assembly in two main Colombian
malaria vectors.

Bascuñán P(1), Niño-Garcia JP(2), Galeano-Castañeda Y(1), Serre D(3), Correa
MM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Microbiología Molecular, Escuela de Microbiología, Universidad de
Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia.
(2)Escuela de Microbiología, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia.
(3)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Grupo de Microbiología Molecular, Escuela de Microbiología, Universidad de
Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia. margarita.correao@udea.edu.co.

BACKGROUND: The understanding of the roles of gut bacteria in the fitness and
vectorial capacity of mosquitoes that transmit malaria, is improving; however,
the factors shaping the composition and structure of such bacterial communities
remain elusive. In this study, a high-throughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing was
conducted to understand the effect of developmental stage, feeding status,
species, and geography on the composition of the gut bacterial microbiota of two 
main Colombian malaria vectors, Anopheles nuneztovari and Anopheles darlingi.
RESULTS: The results revealed that mosquito developmental stage, followed by
geographical location, are more important determinants of the gut bacterial
composition than mosquito species or adult feeding status. Further, they showed
that mosquito gut is a major filter for environmental bacteria colonization.
CONCLUSIONS: The sampling design and analytical approach of this study allowed to
untangle the influence of factors that are simultaneously shaping the microbiota 
composition of two Latin-American malaria vectors, essential aspect for the
design of vector biocontrol strategies.

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-018-0528-y 
PMCID: PMC6112144
PMID: 30149801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

