
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Aug 3;9:1733. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01733. eCollection
2018.

Epigenetics and Malaria Susceptibility/Protection: A Missing Piece of the Puzzle.

Arama C(1), Quin JE(2), Kouriba B(1), Ã–stlund Farrants AK(2), Troye-Blomberg
M(2), Doumbo OK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research and Training Centre, Department of Epidemiology of Parasitic 
Diseases, International Center of Excellence in Research, University of Sciences,
Technique and Technology of Bamako, Bamako, Mali.
(2)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm
University, Stockholm, Sweden.

A better understanding of stable changes in regulation of gene expression that
result from epigenetic events is of great relevance in the development of
strategies to prevent and treat infectious diseases. Histone modification and DNA
methylation are key epigenetic mechanisms that can be regarded as marks, which
ensure an accurate transmission of the chromatin states and gene expression
profiles over generations of cells. There is an increasing list of these
modifications, and the complexity of their action is just beginning to be
understood. It is clear that the epigenetic landscape plays a fundamental role in
most biological processes that involve the manipulation and expression of DNA.
Although the molecular mechanism of gene regulation is relatively well
understood, the hierarchical order of events and dependencies that lead to
protection against infection remain largely unknown. In this review, we propose
that host epigenetics is an essential, though relatively under studied, factor in
the protection or susceptibility to malaria.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01733 
PMCID: PMC6104485
PMID: 30158923  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

