
1. Anal Chem. 2018 Oct 16;90(20):11972-11980. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b02416.
Epub 2018 Oct 2.

Allele-Specific Isothermal Amplification Method Using Unmodified Self-Stabilizing
Competitive Primers.

Malpartida-Cardenas K(1), Rodriguez-Manzano J(1), Yu LS(1), Delves MJ(2), Nguon
C(3), Chotivanich K(4), Baum J(2), Georgiou P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Bio-Inspired Technology, Department of Electrical and Electronic
Engineering , Imperial College London , London , SW7 2AZ , United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London , South Kensington Campus
, SW7 2AZ , London , United Kingdom.
(3)National Centre for Parasitology , Entomology and Malaria Control , Phnom Penh
12302 , Cambodia.
(4)Department of Clinical Tropical Medicine, Faculty of Tropical Medicine ,
Mahidol University , Bangkok 10400 , Thailand.

Rapid and specific detection of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) related to
drug resistance in infectious diseases is crucial for accurate prognostics,
therapeutics and disease management at point-of-care. Here, we present a novel
amplification method and provide universal guidelines for the detection of SNPs
at isothermal conditions. This method, called USS-sbLAMP, consists of SNP-based
loop-mediated isothermal amplification (sbLAMP) primers and unmodified
self-stabilizing (USS) competitive primers that robustly delay or prevent
unspecific amplification. Both sets of primers are incorporated into the same
reaction mixture, but always targeting different alleles; one set specific to the
wild type allele and the other to the mutant allele. The mechanism of action
relies on thermodynamically favored hybridization of totally complementary
primers, enabling allele-specific amplification. We successfully validate our
method by detecting SNPs, C580Y and Y493H, in the Plasmodium falciparum kelch 13 
gene that are responsible for resistance to artemisinin-based combination
therapies currently used globally in the treatment of malaria. USS-sbLAMP primers
can efficiently discriminate between SNPs with high sensitivity (limit of
detection of 5 Ã— 101 copies per reaction), efficiency, specificity and rapidness 
(<35 min) with the capability of quantitative measurements for point-of-care
diagnosis, treatment guidance, and epidemiological reporting of drug-resistance.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b02416 
PMCID: PMC6195307
PMID: 30226760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

