
1. Malar J. 2018 Sep 17;17(1):333. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2481-4.

Comparison of three diagnostic methods (microscopy, RDT, and PCR) for the
detection of malaria parasites in representative samples from Equatorial Guinea.

Berzosa P(1)(2), de Lucio A(3), Romay-Barja M(3)(4), Herrador Z(3)(4), González
V(3)(4), García L(3)(4), Fernández-Martínez A(3)(4), Santana-Morales M(4)(5),
Ncogo P(6), Valladares B(4)(5), Riloha M(7), Benito A(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Laboratory, National Centre of Tropical Medicine, Institute of Health 
Carlos III, C/Monforte de Lemos 5, 28029, Madrid, Spain. pberzosa@isciii.es.
(2)Network Collaborative Research in Tropical Diseases, RICET, Madrid, Spain.
pberzosa@isciii.es.
(3)Malaria Laboratory, National Centre of Tropical Medicine, Institute of Health 
Carlos III, C/Monforte de Lemos 5, 28029, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Network Collaborative Research in Tropical Diseases, RICET, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Instituto Universitario de Enfermedades Tropicales y Salud Pública de
Canarias, Universidad de la Laguna, Tenerife, Spain.
(6)Reference Centre for Control of Endemic Diseases (CRCE), Malabo, Equatorial
Guinea.
(7)Ministry of Health and Social Welfare of Equatorial Guinea, Malabo, Equatorial
Guinea.

BACKGROUND: Malaria in Equatorial Guinea remains a major public health problem.
The country is a holo-endemic area with a year-round transmission pattern. In
2016, the prevalence of malaria was 12.09% and malaria caused 15% of deaths among
children under 5 years. In the Continental Region, 95.2% of malaria infections
were Plasmodium falciparum, 9.5% Plasmodium vivax, and eight cases mixed
infection in 2011. The main strategy for malaria control is quick and accurate
diagnosis followed by effective treatment. Early and accurate diagnosis of
malaria is essential for both effective disease management and malaria
surveillance. The quality of malaria diagnosis is important in all settings, as
misdiagnosis can result in significant morbidity and mortality. Microscopy and
RDTs are the primary choices for diagnosing malaria in the field. However,
false-negative results may delay treatment and increase the number of persons
capable of infecting mosquitoes in the community. The present study analysed the 
performance of microscopy and RDTs, the two main techniques used in Equatorial
Guinea for the diagnosis of malaria, compared to semi-nested multiplex PCR
(SnM-PCR).
RESULTS: A total of 1724 samples tested by microscopy, RDT, and SnM-PCR were
analysed. Among the negative samples detected by microscopy, 335 (19.4%) were
false negatives. On the other hand, the negative samples detected by RDT, 128
(13.3%) were false negatives based on PCR. This finding is important, especially 
since it is a group of patients who did not receive antimalarial treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Owing to the high number of false negatives in microscopy, it is
necessary to reinforce training in microscopy, the "Gold Standard" in endemic
areas. A network of reference centres could potentially support ongoing
diagnostic and control efforts made by malaria control programmes in the long
term, as the National Centre of Tropical Medicine currently supports the National
Programme against Malaria of Equatorial Guinea to perform all of the molecular
studies necessary for disease control. Taking into account the results obtained
with the RDTs, an exhaustive study of the deletion of the hrp2 gene must be done 
in EG to help choose the correct RDT for this area.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2481-4 
PMCID: PMC6142353
PMID: 30223852  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

