
1. Malar J. 2018 Oct 1;17(1):345. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2475-2.

An expanded global inventory of allelic variation in the most extremely
polymorphic region of Plasmodium falciparum merozoite surface protein 1 provided 
by short read sequence data.

Aspeling-Jones H(1), Conway DJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pathogen Molecular Biology Department, School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
London, Keppel St, London, WC1E 7HT, UK. harvey.aspelingjones@gmail.com.
(2)Pathogen Molecular Biology Department, School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
London, Keppel St, London, WC1E 7HT, UK. david.conway@lshtm.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Within Plasmodium falciparum merozoite surface protein 1 (MSP1), the 
N-terminal block 2 region is a highly polymorphic target of naturally acquired
antibody responses. The antigenic diversity is determined by complex repeat
sequences as well as non-repeat sequences, grouping into three major allelic
types that appear to be maintained within populations by natural selection.
Within these major types, many distinct allelic sequences have been described in 
different studies, but the extent and significance of the diversity remains
unresolved.
METHODS: To survey the diversity more extensively, block 2 allelic sequences in
the msp1 gene were characterized in 2400 P. falciparum infection isolates with
whole genome short read sequence data available from the Pf3K project, and
compared with the data from previous studies.
RESULTS: Mapping the short read sequence data in the 2400 isolates to a reference
library of msp1 block 2 allelic sequences yielded 3815 allele scores at the level
of major allelic family types, with 46% of isolates containing two or more of
these major types. Overall frequencies were similar to those previously reported 
in other samples with different methods, the K1-like allelic type being most
common in Africa, MAD20-like most common in Southeast Asia, and RO33-like being
the third most abundant type in each continent. The rare MR type, formed by
recombination between MAD20-like and RO33-like alleles, was only seen in Africa
and very rarely in the Indian subcontinent but not in Southeast Asia. A
combination of mapped short read assembly approaches enabled 1522 complete msp1
block 2 sequences to be determined, among which there were 363 different allele
sequences, of which 246 have not been described previously. In these data, the
K1-like msp1 block 2 alleles are most diverse and encode 225 distinct amino acid 
sequences, compared with 123 different MAD20-like, 9 RO33-like and 6 MR type
sequences. Within each of the major types, the different allelic sequences show
highly skewed geographical distributions, with most of the more common sequences 
being detected in either Africa or Asia, but not in both.
CONCLUSIONS: Allelic sequences of this extremely polymorphic locus have been
derived from whole genome short read sequence data by mapping to a reference
library followed by assembly of mapped reads. The catalogue of sequence variation
has been greatly expanded, so that there are now more than 500 different msp1
block 2 allelic sequences described. This provides an extensive reference for
molecular epidemiological genotyping and sequencing studies, and potentially for 
design of a multi-allelic vaccine.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2475-2 
PMCID: PMC6167803
PMID: 30285849  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

