
1. Parasitol Res. 2018 Dec;117(12):3965-3978. doi: 10.1007/s00436-018-6106-1. Epub
2018 Oct 10.

Evaluation of Plasmodium vivax isolates in Thailand using polymorphic markers
Plasmodium merozoite surface protein (PvMSP) 1 and PvMSP3.

Suphakhonchuwong N(1), Chaijaroenkul W(2), Rungsihirunrat K(3), Na-Bangchang
K(2), Kuesap J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Thammasat University, Pathumthani,
Thailand.
(2)Chulabhorn International College of Medicine, Thammasat University,
Pathumthani, Thailand.
(3)College of Public Health Sciences, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(4)Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Thammasat University, Pathumthani,
Thailand. jirajira28@yahoo.com.

Malaria is a significant public health problem in several tropical countries
including Thailand. The prevalence of Plasmodium vivax infection has been
increasing in the past decades. Plasmodium vivax merozoite surface protein
(PvMSP) gene encodes a malaria vaccine candidate antigen. Its polymorphic nature 
leads to antigenic variation, the barrier for vaccine development, drug
resistance, and potential for multiple-clone infections within the malaria
patients. The objective of this study was to investigate the genetic diversity of
PvMSP1 and PvMSP3 gene in P. vivax populations in Thailand. A total of 100 P.
vivax isolates collected from the western (Kanchanaburi and Tak Provinces) and
southern (Ranong Provinces) regions along the Thai-Myanmar border were analyzed
using polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length polymorphism
(PCR-RFLP). Analysis of the F1, F2, and F3 regions of PvMSP1 revealed 5, 2, and 3
allelic variants, respectively. Three major types of PvMSP3-α and two major types
of PvMSP3-β were identified based on the PCR product sizes. After digestion with 
restriction enzymes, 29, 25, 26, and 18 patterns were distinguished by RFLP for
PvMSP1 (F2, Alu I), PvMSP1 (F2, Mnl I), PvMSP3-α, and PvMSP3-β, respectively.
Combination of each family variant (PvMSP1 and PvMSP3) resulted in high genetic
polymorphism of P. vivax population. Additionally, using PvMSP1 polymorphic
marker revealed a significant association between multiple-genotype infections
and P. vivax parasitemia. The results strongly supported that P. vivax
populations in the endemic areas along the Thai-Myanmar border are highly
diverse.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-018-6106-1 
PMID: 30306265  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

