
1. Cell Microbiol. 2019 Jan;21(1):e12964. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12964. Epub 2018 Oct 30.

Rhoptry neck protein 2 expressed in Plasmodium sporozoites plays a crucial role
during invasion of mosquito salivary glands.

Ishino T(1), Murata E(1)(2), Tokunaga N(1), Baba M(1), Tachibana M(1),
Thongkukiatkul A(3), Tsuboi T(2), Torii M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Parasitology, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University,
Toon, Japan.
(2)Division of Malaria Research, Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University,
Matsuyama, Japan.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Burapha University, Chonburi,
Thailand.

Malaria parasite transmission to humans is initiated by the inoculation of
Plasmodium sporozoites into the skin by mosquitoes. Sporozoites develop within
mosquito midgut oocysts, first invade the salivary glands of mosquitoes, and
finally infect hepatocytes in mammals. The apical structure of sporozoites is
conserved with the infective forms of other apicomplexan parasites that have
secretory organelles, such as rhoptries and micronemes. Because some rhoptry
proteins are crucial for Plasmodium merozoite infection of erythrocytes, we
examined the roles of rhoptry proteins in sporozoites. Here, we demonstrate that 
rhoptry neck protein 2 (RON2) is also localized to rhoptries in sporozoites. To
elucidate RON2 function in sporozoites, we applied a promoter swapping strategy
to restrict ron2 transcription to the intraerythrocytic stage in the rodent
malaria parasite, Plasmodium berghei. Ron2 knockdown sporozoites were severely
impaired in their ability to invade salivary glands, via decreasing the
attachment capacity to the substrate. This is the first rhoptry protein
demonstrated to be involved in salivary gland invasion. In addition, ron2
knockdown sporozoites showed less infectivity to hepatocytes, possibly due to
decreased attachment/gliding ability, indicating that parts of the parasite
invasion machinery are conserved, but their contribution might differ among
infective forms. Our sporozoite stage-specific knockdown system will help to
facilitate understanding the comprehensive molecular mechanisms of parasite
invasion of target cells.

Â© 2018 The Authors Cellular Microbiology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12964 
PMCID: PMC6587811
PMID: 30307699  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

