
1. Parasit Vectors. 2018 Oct 17;11(1):548. doi: 10.1186/s13071-018-3129-5.

Diverse target gene modifications in Plasmodium falciparum using Bxb1 integrase
and an intronic attB.

Balabaskaran-Nina P(1)(2), Desai SA(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, 20852,
USA.
(2)Present Address: Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Central
University of Tamil Nadu, Thiruvarur, India.
(3)The Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, 20852,
USA. sdesai@niaid.nih.gov.

Genetic manipulation of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum is
needed to explore pathogen biology and evaluate antimalarial targets. It is,
however, aggravated by a low transfection efficiency, a paucity of selectable
markers and a biased A/T-rich genome. While various enabling technologies have
been introduced over the past two decades, facile and broad-range modification of
essential genes remains challenging. We recently devised a new application of the
Bxb1 integrase strategy to meet this need through an intronic attB sequence
within the gene of interest. Although this attB is silent and without effect on
intron splicing or protein translation and function, it allows efficient gene
modification with minimal risk of unwanted changes at other genomic sites. We
describe the range of applications for this new method as well as specific cases 
where it is preferred over CRISPR-Cas9 and other technologies. The advantages and
limitations of various strategies for endogenous gene editing are also discussed.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-018-3129-5 
PMCID: PMC6192176
PMID: 30333047  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

