
1. Malar J. 2018 Oct 29;17(1):394. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2502-3.

High proportions of pfhrp2 gene deletion and performance of HRP2-based rapid
diagnostic test in Plasmodium falciparum field isolates of Odisha.

Pati P(1), Dhangadamajhi G(2), Bal M(3), Ranjit M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Epidemiology Laboratory, ICMR-Regional Medical Research Centre,
Bhubaneswar, 751023, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, North Orissa University, Baripada, Odisha,
757003, India.
(3)Immunology Laboratory, ICMR-Regional Medical Research Centre, Bhubaneswar,
751023, India.
(4)Molecular Epidemiology Laboratory, ICMR-Regional Medical Research Centre,
Bhubaneswar, 751023, India. ranjit62@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: With the documentation of cases of falciparum malaria negative by
rapid diagnostic tests (RDT), though at low frequency from natural isolates in a 
small pocket of Odisha, it became absolutely necessary to investigate the status 
of HRP-2 based RDT throughout the state and in different seasons of the year.
METHODS: Suspected individuals were screened for malaria infection by microscopy 
and RDT in 25/30 districts of Odisha, India. Discrepancies in results were
confirmed by PCR. False negative RDT samples for Plasmodium falciparum
mono-infection were evaluated for detection of HRP2 antigen in ELISA and
genotyped for pfhrp2, pfhrp3 and their flanking genes. Multiplicity of infection 
was ascertained based on msp1 and msp2 genotyping and parasitaemia level was
determined by microscopy.
RESULTS: Of the total 1058 patients suspected for malaria, 384 were
microscopically confirmed for P. falciparum mono-infection and RDT failure was
observed in 58 samples at varying proportion in different regions of the state.
The failure in detection was due to undetectable level of HRP-2. Although most of
these samples were screened during rainy season (45/345), significantly high
proportion (9/17) of RDT negative samples were obtained during the summer
compared to rainy season (P = 0.0002; OR = 7.5). PCR genotyping of pfhrp2 and
pfhrp3 in RDT negative samples showed 38/58 (65.5) samples to be pfhrp2 negative 
and 24/58 (41.4) to be pfhrp3 negative including dual negative in 17/58 (29.3).
Most of the RDT negative samples (39/58) were with single genotype infection and 
high proportions of pfhrp2 deletion (7/9) was observed in summer. No difference
in parasitaemia level was observed between RDT positive and RDT negative
patients.
CONCLUSION: High prevalence of parasites with pfhrp2 deletion including dual
deletions (pfhrp2 and pfhrp3) is a serious cause of concern, as these patients
could not be given a correct diagnosis and treatment. Therefore, HRP2-based RDT
for diagnosing P. falciparum infection in Odisha is non-reliable and must be
performed in addition to or replaced by other appropriate diagnostic tools for
clinical management of the disease.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2502-3 
PMCID: PMC6206925
PMID: 30373573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

