
1. Int J Parasitol. 2018 Dec;48(14):1127-1136. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.09.004.
Epub 2018 Nov 2.

Identification of Plasmodium berghei Oocyst Rupture Protein 2 (ORP2) domains
involved in sporozoite egress from the oocyst.

Siden-Kiamos I(1), Pace T(2), Klonizakis A(3), Nardini M(4), Garcia CRS(5), Currà
C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Foundation for Research and Technology-Hellas, Institute of Molecular Biology 
and Biotechnology, N. Plastira 100, GR 700 13 Heraklion, Greece.
(2)Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Dipartimento di Malattie Infettive, Parassitarie
ed Immunomediate, 00161 Rome, Italy.
(3)Foundation for Research and Technology-Hellas, Institute of Molecular Biology 
and Biotechnology, N. Plastira 100, GR 700 13 Heraklion, Greece; University of
Crete, Biology Department, Voutes University Campus, GR-70013 Heraklion, Greece.
(4)Department of BioSciences, University of Milano, via Celoria 26, I-20133
Milano, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical and Toxicological Analyses, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of São Paulo Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 580, São Paulo, SP
05508-090, Brazil.
(6)Foundation for Research and Technology-Hellas, Institute of Molecular Biology 
and Biotechnology, N. Plastira 100, GR 700 13 Heraklion, Greece. Electronic
address: curra@imbb.forth.gr.

Sporozoites are the infective form of malaria parasites which are transmitted
from the mosquito salivary glands to a new host in a mosquito blood meal. The
sporozoites develop inside the sporogonic oocyst and it is crucial for the
continuation of the life cycle that the oocyst ruptures to release sporozoites.
We recently described two Plasmodium Oocyst Rupture Proteins (ORP1 and ORP2),
localized at the oocyst capsule, that are each essential for rupture of the
oocysts. Both ORPs contain a histone fold domain implicated in the mechanism of
oocyst rupture, possibly through the formation of a heterodimer between the two
histone fold domains. To gain an understanding of the function of the different
regions of the ORP2 protein, we generated deletion mutants. We monitored oocyst
formation and rupture as well as sporozoites in the salivary gland. Our results
show that different regions of ORP2 play independent roles in sporozoite egress. 
Deleting the N-terminal histone fold domain of ORP2 blocked sporozoite egress
from the oocyst. Progressive deletions from the C-terminal resulted in no or
significantly impaired sporozoite egress.

Copyright © 2018 Australian Society for Parasitology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.09.004 
PMID: 30391497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

