
1. Int J Parasitol. 2019 Mar;49(3-4):199-210. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.11.001.
Epub 2018 Nov 22.

Avian malaria on Madagascar: prevalence, biodiversity and specialization of
haemosporidian parasites.

Musa S(1), Mackenstedt U(2), Woog F(3), Dinkel A(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Hohenheim, Emil-Wolff-Str. 34, 70599 Stuttgart, Germany.
Electronic address: sandrine.musa@uni-hohenheim.de.
(2)University of Hohenheim, Emil-Wolff-Str. 34, 70599 Stuttgart, Germany.
(3)State Museum of Natural History Stuttgart, Rosenstein 1, 70191 Stuttgart,
Germany.

Previous studies about geographic patterns of species diversity of avian malaria 
parasites and others in the Order Haemosporida did not include the avian
biodiversity hotspot Madagascar. Since there are few data available on avian
malaria parasites on Madagascar, we conducted the first known large-scale
molecular-based study to investigate their biodiversity. Samples (1067) from 55
bird species were examined by a PCR method amplifying nearly the whole
haemosporidian cytochrome b gene (1063 bp). The parasite lineages found were
further characterized phylogenetically and the degree of specialization was
determined with a newly introduced host diversity index (Hd). Our results
demonstrate that Madagascar indeed represents a biodiversity hotspot for avian
malaria parasites as we detected 71 genetically distinct parasite lineages of the
genera Plasmodium and Haemoproteus. Furthermore, by using a phylogenetic approach
and including the sequence divergence we suspect that the detected haemosporidian
lineages represent at least 29 groups i.e. proposed species. The here presented
Hd values for each parasite regarding host species, genus and family strongly
support previous works demonstrating the elastic host ranges of some avian
parsites of the Order Haemosporida. Representatives of the avian parasite genera 
Plasmodium and Leucocytozoon tend to more often be generalists than those of the 
genus Haemoproteus. However, as demonstrated in various examples, there is a
large overlap and single parasite lineages frequently deviate from this rule.

Copyright © 2018 Australian Society for Parasitology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.11.001 
PMID: 30471288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

