
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2019 Mar 1;124:505-514. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.11.180.
Epub 2018 Nov 22.

Peyer's patch-immunomodulating glucans from sugar cane enhance protective
immunity through stimulation of the hemopoietic system.

Sakai Y(1), Sato M(1), Funami Y(1), Ishiyama A(2), Hokari R(2), Iwatsuki M(3),
Nagai T(4), Otoguro K(2), Yamada H(4), Ōmura S(2), Kiyohara H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Infection Control Sciences, Kitasato University, Tokyo
108-8641, Japan.
(2)Kitasato Institute for Life Sciences, Kitasato University, Tokyo 108-8641,
Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Infection Control Sciences, Kitasato University, Tokyo
108-8641, Japan; Kitasato Institute for Life Sciences, Kitasato University, Tokyo
108-8641, Japan.
(4)Graduate School of Infection Control Sciences, Kitasato University, Tokyo
108-8641, Japan; Kitasato Institute for Life Sciences, Kitasato University, Tokyo
108-8641, Japan; Oriental Medicine Research Center, Kitasato University, Tokyo
108-8642, Japan.
(5)Graduate School of Infection Control Sciences, Kitasato University, Tokyo
108-8641, Japan; Kitasato Institute for Life Sciences, Kitasato University, Tokyo
108-8641, Japan; Oriental Medicine Research Center, Kitasato University, Tokyo
108-8642, Japan. Electronic address: kiyohara@lisci.kitasato-u.ac.jp.

The aim of the present study was chemical clarification of in vitro Peyer's
patch-immunomodulating polysaccharides in sugar cane molasses, and evaluation of 
in vivo modulating activity on immune function of T lymphocytes in Peyer's
patches and on microenvironment of hemopoietic system. Five kinds of glucans,
comprising of dextranase-sensitive and activity-related d-glucosyl moieties, were
purified as in vitro Peyer's patch-immunomodulating polysaccharides from the
molasses. Oral administration of a glucan-enriched subfraction induced IL-2 and
GM-CSF-producing T lymphocytes in Peyer's patches, resulting in enhancement of
IL-6 production in a hemopoietic microenvironment to boost neutrophil numbers in 
the peripheral blood stream. Oral administration of purified glucan or
glucan-enrich sub-fraction of sugar cane reduced the number of Plasmodium
berghei- or P. yoelii-infected erythrocytes in a murine infection model, using
polysaccharide alone or via co-administration with the antimalarial drug,
artesunate. These results suggested that Peyer's patch-immunomodulating glucans
enhanced protective immunity through axis of Peyer's patches-hemopoietic system.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.11.180 
PMID: 30471397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

