
1. Microbiol Insights. 2018 Nov 27;11:1178636118808529. doi:
10.1177/1178636118808529. eCollection 2018.

Exploration of the Plasmodium falciparum Resistome and Druggable Genome Reveals
New Mechanisms of Drug Resistance and Antimalarial Targets.

Cowell A(1), Winzeler E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA.
(2)Division of Host-Microbe Systems & Therapeutics, Department of Pediatrics,
University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA.

Comment on
    Science. 2018 Jan 12;359(6372):191-199.

Plasmodium parasites, the causative agent of malaria infections, rapidly evolve
drug resistance and escape detection by the human immune response via the
incredible mutability of its genome. Understanding the genetic mechanisms by
which Plasmodium parasites develop antimalarial resistance is essential to
understanding why most drugs fail in the clinic and designing the next generation
of therapies. A systematic genomic analysis of 262 Plasmodium falciparum clones
with stable in vitro resistance to 37 diverse compounds with potent antimalarial 
activity was undertaken with the main goal of identifying new drug targets.
Despite several challenges inherent to this method of in vitro drug resistance
generation followed by whole genome sequencing, the study was able to identify a 
likely drug target or resistance gene for every compound for which resistant
parasites could be generated. Known and novel P falciparum resistance mediators
were discovered along with several new promising antimalarial drug targets.
Surprisingly, gene amplification events contributed to one-third of the drug
resistance acquisition events. The study can serve as a model for drug discovery 
and resistance analyses in other similar microbial pathogens amenable to in vitro
culture.

DOI: 10.1177/1178636118808529 
PMCID: PMC6259053
PMID: 30505148 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests:The
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

