
1. Mol Biotechnol. 2019 Feb;61(2):102-110. doi: 10.1007/s12033-018-0140-1.

Expression of Recombinant PfCelTOS Antigen in the Chloroplast of Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii and its Potential Use in Detection of Malaria.

Shamriz S(1), Ofoghi H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Iranian Research Organization for Science and
Technology, P.O. BOX: 3353-51111, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Iranian Research Organization for Science and
Technology, P.O. BOX: 3353-51111, Tehran, Iran. Ofoghi@irost.ir.

Malaria is a serious but preventable and treatable infectious disease that is
found in over 100 countries around the world. Correct and rapid diagnosis of
malaria infection can rescue the patient of getting sicker and reduces the risk
of disease spreading among humans. Chlamydomonas reinhardtii chloroplast is an
attractive platform for expressing malaria antigens because it is capable of
folding complex proteins, including those requiring disulfide bond formation,
while lack the ability to glycosylate proteins; a valuable quality of any malaria
protein expression system, since the Plasmodium parasite lacks N-linked
glycosylation machinery. In this study, Cell-traversal protein for ookinetes and 
sporozoites (CelTOS) antigen from Plasmodium falciparum was expressed in the
chloroplast of C. reinhardtii and a highly sensitive and specific indirect ELISA 
test was developed using C. reinhardtii expressed PfCelTOS to detect malaria.
Results obtained demonstrated that expressed recombinant PfCelTOS accumulates as 
a soluble, properly folded and functional protein within C. reinhardtii
chloroplast and indirect ELISA using sera from malaria-positive donors suggested 
the potential use of expressed PfCelTOS as a malaria antigen for diagnosis tests.

DOI: 10.1007/s12033-018-0140-1 
PMID: 30506260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

