
1. Front Plant Sci. 2018 Nov 28;9:1777. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2018.01777. eCollection
2018.

AaABF3, an Abscisic Acid-Responsive Transcription Factor, Positively Regulates
Artemisinin Biosynthesis in Artemisia annua.

Zhong Y(1), Li L(1), Hao X(1), Fu X(1), Ma Y(1), Xie L(1), Shen Q(1), Kayani
S(1), Pan Q(1), Sun X(1), Tang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic and Developmental
Sciences, Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South) Ministry of Agriculture,
Plant Biotechnology Research Center, Fudan-SJTU-Nottingham Plant Biotechnology
R&D Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China.

Artemisinin is well known for its irreplaceable curative effect on the
devastating parasitic disease, Malaria. This sesquiterpenoid is specifically
produced in Chinese traditional herbal plant Artemisia annua. Earlier studies
have shown that phytohormone abscisic acid (ABA) plays an important role in
increasing the artemisinin content, but how ABA regulates artemisinin
biosynthesis is still poorly understood. In this study, we identified that AaABF3
encoded an ABRE (ABA-responsive elements) binding factor. qRT-PCR analysis showed
that AaABF3 was induced by ABA and expressed much higher in trichomes where
artemisinin is synthesized and accumulated. To further investigate the mechanism 
of AaABF3 regulating the artemisinin biosynthesis, we carried out dual-luciferase
analysis, yeast one-hybrid assay and electrophoretic mobility shift assay. The
results revealed that AaABF3 could directly bind to the promoter of ALDH1 gene,
which is a key gene in artemisinin biosynthesis, and activate the expression of
ALDH1. Functional analysis revealed that overexpression of AaABF3 in A. annua
enhanced the production of artemisinin, while RNA interference of AaABF3 resulted
in decreased artemisinin content. Taken together, our results demonstrated that
AaABF3 played an important role in ABA-regulated artemisinin biosynthesis through
direct regulation of artemisinin biosynthesis gene, ALDH1.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2018.01777 
PMCID: PMC6279931
PMID: 30546379 

