
1. Microbiologyopen. 2018 Dec 17:e777. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.777. [Epub ahead of print]

Co-occurrence of pederin-producing and Wolbachia endobacteria in Paederus
fuscipes Curtis, 1840 (Coleoptera: Staphilinidae) and its evolutionary
consequences.

Maleki-Ravasan N(1), Akhavan N(1)(2), Raz A(1), Jafari M(3), Zakeri S(1),
Dinparast Djadid N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Advanced Sciences and Technology,
Pharmaceutical Sciences Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Geology, Faculty of Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University,
Tehran, Iran.

The dual occurrence of Pseudomonas-like and Wolbachia endobacteria has not been
investigated in the Pederus beetles yet. We investigated pederin-producing
bacteria (PPB) infection in Paederus fuscipes specimens from the southern margins
of the Caspian Sea by designed genus-specific (OprF) and species-specific (16S
rRNA) primers. Wolbachia infection was studied through a nested-PCR assay of
Wolbachia surface protein (wsp) gene. Of the 125 analyzed beetles, 42 females
(82.35%) and 15 males (20.27%) were positive to PPB infection; this is the first 
study reporting male P. fuscipes infection to PPB. Wolbachia infection was found 
in 45 female (88.23%) and 50 male (67.57%) analyzed beetles. Surprisingly, a
number of 36 females (70.59%) and 13 males (17.57%) were found to be infected
with both PPB and Wolbachia endosymbionts. In general, population infection rates
to PPB and Wolbachia were determined to be 45.6% and 76%, respectively. The
infection rates of female beetles to PPB and PPB-Wolbachia were significantly
higher than males. In Paederus species, only female beetles shelter PPB and the
discovery of this bacterium in adult males may reflect their cannibalistic
behavior on the contaminated stages. Phylogenetic analysis showed that the
sequences of OprF gene were unique among Pseudomonas spp.; however, sequences of 
16S rRNA gene were related to the PPB of Pederus species. The co-occurrence and
random distribution of these endobacteria may imply putative tripartite
interactions among PPB, Wolbachia, and Paederus. In order to elucidate these
possible tripartite interactions, further studies are required even at gender
level.

© 2018 The Authors. MicrobiologyOpen published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mbo3.777 
PMCID: PMC6612549
PMID: 30560551 

