
1. Br J Haematol. 2019 Feb;184(4):497-507. doi: 10.1111/bjh.15730. Epub 2018 Dec 27.

The Duffy antigen receptor for chemokines, ACKR1,- 'Jeanne DARC' of benign
neutropenia.

Rappoport N(1), Simon AJ(1)(2), Amariglio N(1)(2)(3), Rechavi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Centre, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel 
Aviv, Israel.
(2)Institute of Haematology, Sheba Medical Centre, Tel Hashomer, Sackler Faculty 
of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar Ilan University,
Ramat-Gan, Israel.

Benign neutropenia, observed in different ethnic groups, is the most common form 
of neutropenia worldwide. A specific single nucleotide polymorphism, rs2814778,
located at the promoter of the ACKR1 (previously termed DARC) gene, which
disrupts a binding site for the GATA1 erythroid transcription factor, resulting
in a ACKR1-null phenotype, was found to serve as a predictor of low white blood
cell and neutrophil counts in African-Americans and Yemenite Jews. Individuals
with benign neutropenia due to the ACKR1-null allele have been found to have an
increased susceptibility to human immunodeficiency virus infection and, on the
other hand, a protective effect against malaria. The associated protective effect
may explain the spread of the ACKR1-null allele by natural selection. The
reviewed relationships between ACKR1 polymorphism and various pathological states
may have important clinical implications to individuals with and without benign
neutropenia. Potential mechanisms for ACKR1 (previously termed DARC) modulation
during neutrophil recruitment to inflammation, and chemokine bioavailability in
the circulation and in local tissue are reviewed and discussed.

Â© 2018 British Society for Haematology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/bjh.15730 
PMID: 30592023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

