
1. Front Microbiol. 2018 Dec 19;9:3106. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.03106. eCollection
2018.

Bradykinin Sequestration by Plasmodium berghei Infected Erythrocytes Conditions
B2R Signaling and Parasite Uptake by Fetal Trophoblasts.

de Moraes LV(1), Barateiro A(1), Sousa PM(1), Penha-Gonçalves C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Disease Genetics, Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.

Plasmodium infection during pregnancy causes placental malfunction reducing fetus
sustainability and leading to abortions, stillbirths, low birth weight or
premature delivery. Accumulation of infected erythrocytes (IE) in the placenta is
a key factor in placental malaria pathogenesis but the role played by fetal
trophoblast that contact maternal blood has been neglected. Here we explore the
hypothesis that interactions between Plasmodium-IE and fetal trophoblast cells
impact on vasoactive alterations underlying placental dysfunction. We screened
gene expression of key mediators in vasoactive pathways. We found that mRNA of
bradykinin receptor 2 (B2R) and nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), as well as levels
of bradykinin (BK), were decreased in late gestation placentas of pregnant
Plasmodium berghei-infected mice. Co-culturing mouse trophoblasts with IE
down-regulated B2R transcription and interleukin (IL)-6 secretion in a
B2R-signaling dependent manner. IE showed increased levels of surface B2R and
enhanced capacity to bind BK. We propose that down-regulation of B2R signaling in
the course of IE-trophoblast interactions is due to BK sequestration by IE. In
corroboration, levels of BK were lower in infected placentas and the positive
correlation of B2R gene expression and fetal weight was disrupted by infection.
This indicates that deregulation of the BK-B2R pathway is associated to placental
dysfunction provoked by malaria infection. We further found that upon inhibition 
of B2R signaling, trophoblasts engulf IE to a lesser extent and show reduced
production of IL-6. Our data suggest that BK sequestration by P. berghei
represents a strategy for the parasite to ameliorate the risk of phagocytic
capture by down modulating B2R activation.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.03106 
PMCID: PMC6305765
PMID: 30619185 

