
1. Sci Adv. 2018 Nov 14;4(11):eaas9357. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aas9357. eCollection
2018 Nov.

Jasmonate promotes artemisinin biosynthesis by activating the TCP14-ORA complex
in Artemisia annua.

Ma YN(1), Xu DB(1), Li L(1), Zhang F(1), Fu XQ(1), Shen Q(1), Lyu XY(1), Wu
ZK(1), Pan QF(1), Shi P(1), Hao XL(1), Yan TX(1), Chen MH(1), Liu P(1), He Q(1), 
Xie LH(1), Zhong YJ(1), Tang YL(1), Zhao JY(1), Zhang LD(1), Sun XF(1), Tang
KX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic and Developmental
Sciences, Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South) Ministry of Agriculture,
Plant Biotechnology Research Center, Fudan-SJTU-Nottingham Plant Biotechnology
R&D Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200240, China.

Artemisia annua produces the valuable medicinal component, artemisinin, which is 
a sesquiterpene lactone widely used in malaria treatment. AaORA, a homolog of
CrORCA3, which is involved in activating terpenoid indole alkaloid biosynthesis
in Catharanthus roseus, is a jasmonate (JA)-responsive and trichome-specific
APETALA2/ETHYLENE-RESPONSE FACTOR that plays a pivotal role in artemisinin
biosynthesis. However, the JA signaling mechanism underlying AaORA-mediated
artemisinin biosynthesis remains enigmatic. Here, we report that AaORA forms a
transcriptional activator complex with AaTCP14 (TEOSINTE BRANCHED
1/CYCLOIDEA/PROLIFERATING CELL FACTOR 14), which is also predominantly expressed 
in trichomes. AaORA and AaTCP14 synergistically bind to and activate the
promoters of two genes, double bond reductase 2 (DBR2) and aldehyde dehydrogenase
1 (ALDH1), both of which encode enzymes vital for artemisinin biosynthesis.
AaJAZ8, a repressor of the JA signaling pathway, interacts with both AaTCP14 and 
AaORA and represses the ability of the AaTCP14-AaORA complex to activate the DBR2
promoter. JA treatment induces AaJAZ8 degradation, allowing the AaTCP14-AaORA
complex to subsequently activate the expression of DBR2, which is essential for
artemisinin biosynthesis. These data suggest that JA activation of the
AaTCP14-AaORA complex regulates artemisinin biosynthesis. Together, our findings 
reveal a novel artemisinin biosynthetic pathway regulatory network and provide
new insight into how specialized metabolism is modulated by the JA signaling
pathway in plants.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aas9357 
PMCID: PMC6317983
PMID: 30627665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

