
1. BMC Syst Biol. 2019 Jan 11;13(1):5. doi: 10.1186/s12918-018-0669-4.

Plasmodium vivax readiness to transmit: implication for malaria eradication.

Adapa SR(1), Taylor RA(2), Wang C(1), Thomson-Luque R(1), Johnson LR(2), Jiang
RHY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Health (GH) & Center for Drug Discovery and Innovation
(CDDI), College of Public Health, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, 33612, 
USA.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL,
USA.
(3)Department of Global Health (GH) & Center for Drug Discovery and Innovation
(CDDI), College of Public Health, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, 33612, 
USA. jiang2@health.usf.edu.

BACKGROUND: The lack of a continuous long-term in vitro culture system for
Plasmodium vivax severely limits our knowledge of pathophysiology of the most
widespread malaria parasite. To gain direct understanding of P. vivax human
infections, we used Next Generation Sequencing data mining to unravel parasite in
vivo expression profiles for P. vivax, and P. falciparum as comparison.
RESULTS: We performed cloud and local computing to extract parasite
transcriptomes from publicly available raw data of human blood samples. We
developed a Poisson Modelling (PM) method to confidently identify parasite
derived transcripts in mixed RNAseq signals of infected host tissues. We
successfully retrieved and reconstructed parasite transcriptomes from infected
patient blood as early as the first blood stage cycle; and the same methodology
did not recover any significant signal from controls. Surprisingly, these first
generation blood parasites already show strong signature of transmission, which
indicates the commitment from asexual-to-sexual stages. Further, we place the
results within the context of P. vivax's complex life cycle, by developing
mathematical models for P. vivax and P. falciparum and using sensitivity analysis
assess the relative epidemiological impact of possible early stage transmission.
CONCLUSION: The study uncovers the earliest onset of P. vivax blood pathogenesis 
and highlights the challenges of P. vivax eradication programs.

DOI: 10.1186/s12918-018-0669-4 
PMCID: PMC6330404
PMID: 30634978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

