
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2019 Apr;69:107-116. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.01.025. Epub
2019 Jan 21.

Evolutionary interplay of single nucleotide polymorphisms at the promoter region 
of TNF-α gene in different clinical outcomes of malaria in India.

Mohanty S(1), Singh US(2), Mohanty S(3), Mohanty AK(4), Pande V(5), Das A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vector Borne Diseases, ICMR-National Institute of Research in
Tribal Health, Garha, Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India.
(2)Division of Vector Borne Diseases, ICMR-National Institute of Research in
Tribal Health, Garha, Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India; School of Earth and
Environmental Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester M139PL, United
Kingdom.
(3)Community Welfare Society Hospital, Rourkela, Odisha, India.
(4)Institute of Life Sciences/IDBU, Ispat General Hospital, Rourkela, Odisha,
India.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, Kumaun University, Nainital, Uttarakhand, India.
(6)Division of Vector Borne Diseases, ICMR-National Institute of Research in
Tribal Health, Garha, Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India. Electronic address:
aparupdas@nirth.res.in.

Host genetic factors are frequently ascribed to differential malaria outcomes as 
a by-product of evolutionary adaptation. To this respect, Tumor Necrosis factor
alpha (TNF-α), a human cytokine, is known to be associated with malaria through
its differential regulation in diverse malaria manifestations. Since diversity in
differential malaria outcome is uncommon in every endemic settings, possible
association of TNF-α and malaria is not commonly established. In order to check
for association between the occurrence of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) 
in the TNF-α gene with different malaria manifestations, we have sequenced a
4011 bp region constituting the promoter and the whole gene of human TNF-α in 61 
patients [(16 cerebral plus severe (SCM), 21 severe (SM) and 24 uncomplicated
(UM)] samples in a highly malaria endemic state (Odisha) of India. Multiple
sequence alignment revealed presence of six SNPs (-1031 T > C, -863C > A,
-857C > T, -308G > A, -806C > T, +787C > A), out of which the -806C > T and
+787C > A are novel in malaria patients in general and the +787C > A was detected
for the first time in humans. Although alleles due to six different SNPs
segregate differentially in the three groups of malaria (SCM, SM and UM) in the
present study, interestingly, for the -1031 T > C position, the frequency of
individuals possessing the homozygous rare allele was higher in the SCM group
with a higher number of heterozygotes in the UM group. The Tajima's D values
considering all the SNPs in a defined group were positive and statistically
insignificant conforming no evolutionary constraint. However, statistically
significant deviation from expectation under Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for
-1031 T > C SNP in the UM group points towards the probable role of natural
selection providing some kind of protection to malaria in Odisha, India.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.01.025 
PMID: 30677532  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

