
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2019 Apr;107:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2019.01.007. Epub 
2019 Jan 25.

Complement-like proteins TEP1, TEP3 and TEP4 are positive regulators of
periostial hemocyte aggregation in the mosquito Anopheles gambiae.

Yan Y(1), Hillyer JF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA. 
Electronic address: julian.hillyer@vanderbilt.edu.

The mosquito immune and circulatory systems are functionally integrated. During
an infection, hemocytes aggregate around the ostia (valves) of the dorsal vessel 
- areas of the heart called the periostial regions - where they phagocytose live 
and melanized pathogens. Although periostial hemocyte aggregation is an immune
response that occurs following infection with bacteria and malaria parasites, the
molecular basis of this process remains poorly understood. Here, we show that the
thioester-containing proteins, TEP1, TEP3 and TEP4 are positive regulators of
periostial hemocyte aggregation in the African malaria mosquito, Anopheles
gambiae. RNAi-based knockdown of TEP1, TEP3 and TEP4 resulted in fewer periostial
hemocytes following Escherichia coli infection, without affecting the adjacent
population of non-periostial, sessile hemocytes. Moreover, knockdown of TEP1,
TEP3 and TEP4 expression resulted in reduced bacterial accumulation and melanin
deposition at the periostial regions. Finally, this study confirmed the role that
TEP1 plays in reducing infection intensity in the hemocoel. Overall, this
research shows that the complement-like proteins, TEP1, TEP3 and TEP4, are
positive regulators of the functional integration between the immune and
circulatory systems of mosquitoes.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2019.01.007 
PMID: 30690067  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

