
1. PeerJ. 2019 Jan 31;6:e6259. doi: 10.7717/peerj.6259. eCollection 2019.

Blood parasites in Passeriformes in central Germany: prevalence and lineage
diversity of Haemosporida (Haemoproteus, Plasmodium and Leucocytozoon) in six
common songbirds.

Schumm YR(1), Wecker C(1), Marek C(1), Wassmuth M(1), Bentele A(1), Willems H(2),
Reiner G(2), Quillfeldt P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Ecology & Systematics, Justus Liebig University, Giessen,
Germany.
(2)Department of Clinical Veterinary Sciences, Justus Liebig University, Giessen,
Germany.

Background: Avian Haemosporida are vector-borne parasites that commonly infect
Passeriformes. Molecular analyses revealed a high number of different lineages
and lineage specific traits like prevalence and host-specificity, but knowledge
of parasite prevalence and lineage diversity in wild birds in Central Germany is 
still lacking.
Results: Blood samples from a total of 238 adult and 122 nestling songbirds
belonging to six species were investigated for infections with avian
haemosporidian genera and lineages (Haemoproteus spp., Plasmodium spp.,
Leucocytozoon spp.) and Trypanosoma avium using PCR, targeting the parasite
mitochondrial cytochrome b gene and 18S ribosomal RNA. In total, the prevalence
in adult birds was 31.3% infected with Haemoproteus, 12.5% with Plasmodium and
71.0% with Leucocytozoon (nestlings excluded). None of the tested birds was
infected with Trypanosoma avium. Only in two nestling birds, aged 12-17 days, a
Leucocytozoon spp. infection was proven. Among 225 successfully sequenced
samples, we found four Haemoproteus, three Plasmodium and 19 Leucocytozoon
lineages, including two new Leucocytozoon lineages. Furthermore, we report two
new host-lineage associations.
Conclusions: As first study investigating avian haemosporidian parasites in
Central Germany, we provide new information on genetic diversity of Haemosporida 
infecting Passeriformes. We show that even with a small sample size new lineages 
as well as previously unknown linkages between certain lineages and host species 
can be detected. This may help to elucidate the diversity of lineages as well as 
lineage-host-connections of avian Haemosporida.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.6259 
PMCID: PMC6360073
PMID: 30723612 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing
interests.

