
1. Trends Parasitol. 2019 May;35(5):356-368. doi: 10.1016/j.pt.2019.01.007. Epub
2019 Feb 4.

Babesia Life Cycle - When Phylogeny Meets Biology.

Jalovecka M(1), Sojka D(2), Ascencio M(3), Schnittger L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences,
CZ-370 05 Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic; Faculty of Science, University of
South Bohemia, CZ-370 05 Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic. Electronic address:
jalovecka@paru.cas.cz.
(2)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences,
CZ-370 05 Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic.
(3)Instituto de Patobiología Veterinaria, Centro de Investigaciones en Ciencias
Veterinarias y Agronómicas (CICVyA), INTA-Castelar, Los Reseros y Nicolas Repetto
s/n, Hurlingham 1686, Argentina; National Council of Scientific and Technological
Research (CONICET), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires C1033AAJ, Argentina.

Although Babesia represents an important worldwide veterinary threat and an
emerging risk to humans, this parasite has been poorly studied as compared to
Plasmodium, its malaria-causing relative. In fact, Babesia employs highly
specific survival strategies during its intraerythrocytic development and its
intricate journey through the tick vector. This review introduces a substantially
extended molecular phylogeny of the order Piroplasmida, challenging previous
taxonomic classifications. The intriguing developmental proficiencies of Babesia 
are highlighted and compared with those of other haemoparasitic Apicomplexa.
Molecular mechanisms associated with distinctive events in the Babesia life cycle
are emphasized as potential targets for the development of Babesia-specific
treatments.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pt.2019.01.007 
PMID: 30733093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

