
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Jan 25;10:35. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00035. eCollection
2019.

Ankylosing Spondylitis: A Trade Off of HLA-B27, ERAP, and Pathogen
Interconnections? Focus on Sardinia.

Paladini F(1), Fiorillo MT(1), Tedeschi V(1), Cauli A(2), Mathieu A(2),
Sorrentino R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnology "Charles Darwin", Sapienza University,
Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health, Chair of Rheumatology and
Rheumatology Unit, University and AOU of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.

The frequency of HLA-B27 in patients with Ankylosing Spondylitis (AS) is over
85%. There are more than 170 recognized HLA-B27 alleles but the majority of them 
is not sufficiently represented for genetic association studies. So far only two 
alleles, the HLA-B*2706 in Asia and the HLA-B*2709 in Sardinia, have not been
found to be associated with AS. The highly homogenous genetic structure of the
Sardinian population has favored the search of relevant variants for
disease-association studies. Moreover, malaria, once endemic in the island, has
been shown to have contributed to shape the native population genome affecting
the relative allele frequency of relevant genes. In Sardinia, the prevalence of
HLA-B*2709, which differs from the strongly AS-associated B*2705 prototype for
one amino acid (His/Asp116) in the F pocket of the peptide binding groove, is
around 20% of all HLA-B27 alleles. We have previously hypothesized that malaria
could have contributed to the establishment of this allele in Sardinia. Based on 
our recent findings, in this perspective article we speculate that the
Endoplasmic Reticulum Amino Peptidases, ERAP1 and 2, associated with AS and
involved in antigen presentation, underwent co-selection by malaria. These genes,
besides shaping the immunopeptidome of HLA-class I molecules, have other
biological functions that could also be involved in the immunosurveillance
against malaria.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00035 
PMCID: PMC6355666
PMID: 30740100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

