
1. Data Brief. 2019 Jan 11;22:1068-1073. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2019.01.016. eCollection
2019 Feb.

Dataset on fat body proteome of Anopheles stephensi Liston.

Kumar M(1)(2), Mohanty AK(3), Dey G(1)(2), Sreenivasamurthy SK(1)(2), Kumar A(3),
Prasad K(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore 560066, 
Karnataka, India.
(2)Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal 576104, Karnataka, India.
(3)ICMR-National Institute of Malaria Research, Field Station, Goa 403001, India.
(4)Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya Research Center,
Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), University Road, Mangalore 575018, India.

Fat body from Anopheles stephensi female mosquitoes were dissected and processed 
for proteomic analysis. Both SDS-PAGE and basic Reverse Phase Liquid
Chromatography-based fractionation strategies were used to achieve a broad
coverage of protein identification. The fractionated peptides were then analyzed 
on a high-resolution mass spectrometer. Searching the raw data against the
protein database of An. stephensi resulted in identification of 4535 proteins,
which is, to our knowledge, the largest catalog of fat body proteome in any
mosquito vector species reported so far. Bioinformatics analysis on these fat
body proteins suggested the enrichment of biological processes including carbon
and lipid metabolism, amino acid metabolism, signal peptide processing and
oxidation-reduction. In addition, using proteogenomic approaches, 43 novel
proteins were identified, which were not listed in the annotated gene annotations
of An. stephensi. The data used in the analysis are related to the article
'Integrating transcriptomic and proteomic data for accurate assembly and
annotation of genomes' (Prasad et al., 2017).

DOI: 10.1016/j.dib.2019.01.016 
PMCID: PMC6355961
PMID: 30740495 

