
1. PLoS One. 2019 Feb 19;14(2):e0212024. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0212024.
eCollection 2019.

Spatial and temporal development of deltamethrin resistance in malaria vectors of
the Anopheles gambiae complex from North Cameroon.

Mandeng SE(1)(2), Awono-Ambene HP(1), Bigoga JD(3), Ekoko WE(1)(4), Binyang J(2),
Piameu M(1)(5), Mbakop LR(1)(2), Fesuh BN(6), Mvondo N(2), Tabue R(3)(7), Nwane
P(1), Mimpfoundi R(2), Toto JC(1), Kleinschmidt I(8)(9), Knox TB(10), Mnzava
AP(11), Donnelly MJ(12), Fondjo E(7), Etang J(1)(13)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche de Yaoundé (IRY), Organisation de Coordination pour la
lutte contre les Endémies en Afrique Centrale (OCEAC), Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(2)Laboratory of General Biology, University of Yaounde I, Yaounde, Cameroon.
(3)Laboratory for Vector Biology and control, National Reference Unit for Vector 
Control, The Biotechnology Center, Nkolbisson-University of Yaounde I, Yaounde,
Cameroon.
(4)Laboratory of Animal Biology and Physiology, Faculty of Science, University of
Douala, Douala, Cameroon.
(5)Ecole des Sciences de la Santé, Université Catholique d'Afrique Centrale,
Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(6)National Advanced School of Engineering, University of Yaounde I, Yaounde,
Cameroon.
(7)Ministry of Public Health, National Malaria Control Programme, Yaounde,
Cameroon.
(8)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, London School of Tropical
Medicine & Hygiene, MRC Tropical Epidemiology Group, London, United Kingdom.
(9)School of Public Health, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South 
Africa.
(10)Global Malaria Programme, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
(11)African Leaders Malaria Alliance (ALMA), Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(12)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(13)Department of biological sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Douala, Douala, Cameroon.
(14)Institute for Insect Biotechnology, Justus Liebig University Gießen,
Heinrich-Buff-Ring, Germany.

The effectiveness of insecticide-based malaria vector control interventions in
Africa is threatened by the spread and intensification of pyrethroid resistance
in targeted mosquito populations. The present study aimed at investigating the
temporal and spatial dynamics of deltamethrin resistance in An. gambiae s.l.
populations from North Cameroon. Mosquito larvae were collected from 24 settings 
of the Garoua, Pitoa and Mayo Oulo Health Districts (HDs) from 2011 to 2015. Two 
to five days old female An. gambiae s.l. emerging from larval collections were
tested for deltamethrin resistance using the World Health Organization's (WHO)
standard protocol. Sub samples of test mosquitoes were identified to species
using PCR-RFLP and genotyped for knockdown resistance alleles (Kdr 1014F and
1014S) using Hot Ligation Oligonucleotide Assay (HOLA). All the tested mosquitoes
were identified as belonging to the An. gambiae complex, including 3 sibling
species mostly represented by Anopheles arabiensis (67.6%), followed by Anopheles
coluzzii (25.4%) and Anopheles gambiae (7%). Deltamethrin resistance frequencies 
increased significantly between 2011 and 2015, with mosquito mortality rates
declining from 70-85% to 49-73% in the three HDs (Jonckheere-Terstra test
statistic (JT) = 5638, P< 0.001), although a temporary increase of mortality
rates (91-97%) was seen in the Pitoa and Mayo Oulo HDs in 2012. Overall,
confirmed resistance emerged in 10 An. gambiae s.l. populations over the 24 field
populations monitored during the study period, from 2011 to 2015. Phenotypic
resistance was mostly found in urban settings compared with semi-urban and rural 
settings (JT = 5282, P< 0.0001), with a spatial autocorrelation between
neighboring localities. The Kdr 1014F allelic frequencies in study HDs increased 
from 0-30% in 2011 to 18-61% in 2014-2015 (JT = 620, P <0.001), especially in An.
coluzzii samples. The overall frequency of the Kdr 1014S allele was 0.1%. This
study revealed a rapid increase and widespread deltamethrin resistance frequency 
as well as Kdr 1014F allelic frequencies in An. gambiae s.l. populations over
time, emphasizing the urgent need for vector surveillance and insecticide
resistance management strategies in Cameroon.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0212024 
PMCID: PMC6380565
PMID: 30779799  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

