
1. J Immunol. 2019 Apr 15;202(8):2320-2331. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1801210. Epub 2019
Mar 4.

Modified MHC Class II-Associated Invariant Chain Induces Increased Antibody
Responses against Plasmodium falciparum Antigens after Adenoviral Vaccination.

Fougeroux C(1), Turner L(2), Bojesen AM(3), Lavstsen T(2), Holst PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Parasitology, Department of International Health,
Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark; 
and cyrielle@sund.ku.dk.
(2)Center for Medical Parasitology, Department of International Health,
Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark; 
and.
(3)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 1870
Frederiksberg, Denmark.

Adenoviral vectors can induce T and B cell immune responses to Ags encoded in the
recombinant vector. The MHC class II invariant chain (Ii) has been used as an
adjuvant to enhance T cell responses to tethered Ag encoded in adenoviral
vectors. In this study, we modified the Ii adjuvant by insertion of a furin
recognition site (Ii-fur) to obtain a secreted version of the Ii. To test the
capacity of this adjuvant to enhance immune responses, we recombined vectors to
encode Plasmodium falciparum virulence factors: two cysteine-rich interdomain
regions (CIDR) α1 (IT4var19 and PFCLINvar30 var genes), expressed as a dimeric
Ag. These domains are members of a highly polymorphic protein family involved in 
the vascular sequestration and immune evasion of parasites in malaria. The Ii-fur
molecule directed secretion of both Ags in African green monkey cells and
functioned as an adjuvant for MHC class I and II presentation in T cell
hybridomas. In mice, the Ii-fur adjuvant induced a similar T cell response, as
previously demonstrated with Ii, accelerated and enhanced the specific Ab
response against both CIDR Ags, with an increased binding capacity to the cognate
endothelial protein C receptor, and enhanced the breadth of the response toward
different CIDRs. We also demonstrate that the endosomal sorting signal,
secretion, and the C-terminal part of Ii were needed for the full adjuvant effect
for Ab responses. We conclude that engineered secretion of Ii adjuvant-tethered
Ags establishes a single adjuvant and delivery vehicle platform for potent T and 
B cell-dependent immunity.

Copyright © 2019 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1801210 
PMCID: PMC6452028
PMID: 30833346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

