
1. Parasitol Int. 2019 Jun;70:92-97. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2019.03.001. Epub 2019
Mar 2.

Polymorphisms in genes associated with drug resistance of Plasmodium vivax in
India.

Anantabotla VM(1), Antony HA(1), Parija SC(2), Rajkumari N(1), Kini JR(3),
Manipura R(4), Nag VL(5), Gadepalli R(5), Chayani N(6), Patro S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical
Education and Research (JIPMER), Puducherry, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical
Education and Research (JIPMER), Puducherry, India. Electronic address:
subhashparija@yahoo.co.in.
(3)Department of Pathology, Kasturba Medical College (KMC), Mangaluru, Karnataka,
India; Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka 575001, India.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Kasturba Medical College (KMC), Mangaluru,
Karnataka, India.
(5)Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS),
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Srirama Chandra Bhanja Medical College and
Hospital, Cuttack, Odisha, India.
(7)District Headquarter Hospital, Puri, Odisha, India.

Malaria is a sterning public health concern in India and contribute to a major
part of malaria burden in Southeast Asia. Being more populated and diverse
geographic conditions makes more suitable place for sustaining malaria parasite
in India. Anti-malarial resistance is a major concern in the battle against
malaria, and the identified molecular markers will aid us to monitor the drug
resistance in endemic areas. The aim of the current study is to determine the
genotype of drug resistance associated genes pvmdr-1 and pvcrt-o from four
different regions of India. Especially from Puducherry and Jodhpur, there were no
prior studies focused on screening of drug resistance genes in P. vivax parasite.
A total of 240 positive P. vivax infected patient samples were collected from
four tertiary care hospitals from four different regions of India, namely,
Puducherry (PDY), Mangaluru (MAQ), Cuttack (CTC), Jodhpur (JDH). All samples were
screened by microscopy, RDT, QBC, and further DNA was extracted and vivax
mono-infection was confirmed by nested PCR. Randomly selected amplicons were
further subjected to nucleotide sequencing. The prevalence of K10 insertion in
pvcrt-o gene was detected with 18.8% in PDY, 12.5% in MAQ and 6.3% in CTC P.
vivax isolates, whereas no change in nucleotide was identified in P. vivax
isolates collected from JDH region. Based on the F1076L mutation in pvmdr-1 gene,
resistant P. vivax isolates was highly predominant in both the regions, JDH and
CTC, with 100%, followed by MAQ with 93.3% and PDY with 73.3%. This study showed 
less frequency of pvcrt-o and high frequency of pvmdr-1 gene variants associated 
with CQ resistance, which act as an indicator and the onset of P. vivax drug
resistance trend in four different regions of India. Due to the poor phenotypic
studies available for P. vivax parasite, the present study data for CQ resistance
based on pvcrt-o and pvmdr-1 markers should assist by providing base-line data
for future monitoring of drug resistance.

Copyright Â© 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2019.03.001 
PMID: 30836136  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

