
1. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2019 Jun;19(6):385-394. doi: 10.1089/vbz.2018.2329.
Epub 2019 Mar 13.

Stomoxyinae Flies in Thailand: A Précis, with Abridged Taxonomic Key to the Adult
Species.

Malaithong N(1)(2), Duvallet G(3), Ngoen-Klan R(1), Bangs MJ(1)(4),
Chareonviriyaphap T(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Entomology, Faculty of Agriculture, Kasetsart University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)2 Center for Advanced Studies for Agriculture and Food (CASAF), Kasetsart
University Institute for Advanced Studies (NRU-KU), Kasetsart University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)3 UMR5175 CEFE, Centre d'Écologie Fonctionnelle et Évolutive, Université
Paul-Valéry, Montpellier, France.
(4)4 Public Health & Malaria Control Department, Kuala Kencana, Indonesia.

Stomoxyinae flies (Diptera: Muscidae) are cosmopolitan obligate hematophagous
insects of medical and veterinary importance. The subfamily Stomoxyinae includes 
51 known species within 10 genera. Five genera, Stomoxys, Haematobosca,
Haematobia, Haematostoma, and Stygeromyia, represent important livestock pests
causing substantial economic losses in the commercial animal industry. The
majority of Stomoxyinae research and control efforts have focused on Stomoxys
species. Following the earliest descriptions of Stomoxyinae in Asia in the
beginning of the past century, the first published list of species identified in 
Thailand did not occur until 1978. Currently, there are 11 confirmed species in
the country with 3 others suspected present. This includes six species of
Stomoxys with Stomoxys calcitrans the most common and widespread in the country. 
Since 1978, 20 publications, 17 of which since 2006, have covered original
research on Stomoxyinae fly biology, species distribution, patterns of daily and 
seasonal activity, gene flow, and phylogenetics in Thailand. All
Stomoxyinae-related published research from Thailand through 2017 is reviewed
herein, and include an updated identification key to the Stomoxyinae genera and
all known or suspected species, both male and female adults, present in Thailand.

DOI: 10.1089/vbz.2018.2329 
PMID: 30864904  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

