
1. Parasitol Int. 2019 Aug;71:18-26. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2019.03.008. Epub 2019
Mar 11.

Impact of autophagic regulation on splenic red pulp macrophages during cerebral
malarial infection.

Sengupta A(1), Sarkar S(1), Keswani T(2), Mukherjee S(1), Ghosh S(1),
Bhattacharyya A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Laboratory, Department of Zoology, University of Calcutta, 35,
Ballygunge Circular Road, Kolkata 700019, India.
(2)Basic and Clinical Immunology of Parasitic Diseases, Univ. Lille, CNRS,
Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, U1019, UMR 8204, CIIL - Centre of
Infection and Immunity Lille, F-59000 Lille, 1 rue du Professeur Calmette, 59019 
Lille, France.
(3)Immunology Laboratory, Department of Zoology, University of Calcutta, 35,
Ballygunge Circular Road, Kolkata 700019, India. Electronic address:
arindam19@gmail.com.

Splenic red pulp macrophages play a critical role infiltration of infected RBC
and elimination of pathogens during malarial infection. However, the efficiency
of pathogenic processing and the intricate pathway followed by them to boost the 
downstream immune response has not been studied in details. We checked the status
of autophagic regulation within the cells both before and after the infection and
also modulated the autophagic flux with either its inducer or inhibitor. We found
that the upregulation of autophagic gene and the corresponding pathway is
correlated with better parasite clearance and survivability, with an enhanced
downstream immune response. It also increases their phagocytic potential with
better Lysosomal associated protein I and II synthesis. The autophagolysosome
formation increases as well, and more vacuole bound LC3B protein are detected.
Chemokine synthesized from Red Pulp macrophage helps in mediating the induction
for recruiting neutrophil and CD4 + T cells to the splenic red pulp region. The
skewing of M1 macrophage polarity is observed post autophagic induction with a
better costimulatory molecule like CD80, CD86 expression and antigen presenting
molecule MHC I, MHC II is observed. This study shows the possibility of an
alternative or adjuvant therapy regimen for the malarial patient by inducing the 
autophagic pathway that targets the red pulp macrophages. This might be helpful
for better pathogen degradation and processing. The subsequent clearance of
parasite will result in a better outcome for the patients.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2019.03.008 
PMID: 30872003  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

