
1. Healthcare (Basel). 2019 Mar 20;7(1). pii: E46. doi: 10.3390/healthcare7010046.

Presence of Babesia odocoilei and Borrelia burgdorferi Sensu Stricto in a Tick
and Dual Parasitism of Amblyomma inornatum and Ixodes scapularis on a Bird in
Canada.

Scott JD(1), Clark KL(2), Durden LA(3).

Author information: 
(1)International Lyme and Associated Diseases Society, 2 Wisconsin Circle, Suite 
700, Chevy Chase, MD 20185-7007, USA. jkscott@bserv.com.
(2)Environmental Epidemiology Research Laboratory, Department of Public Health,
University of North Florida, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA. kclark@unf.edu.
(3)Department of Biology, Georgia Southern University, Statesboro, GA 30458, USA.
ldurden@georgiasouthern.edu.

Wild birds transport ticks into Canada that harbor a diversity of zoonotic
pathogens. However, medical practitioners often question how these zoonotic
pathogens are present in their locality. In this study, we provide the first
report of an Amblyomma inornatum tick cofeeding with a blacklegged tick, Ixodes
scapularis, which parasitized a Veery, Catharus fuscescens-a neotropical
songbird. Using the flagellin (flaB) gene of the Lyme disease bacterium, Borrelia
burgdorferi sensu lato, and the 18S rRNA gene of the Babesia piroplasm, a
malaria-like microorganism, we detected Borrelia burgdorferi sensu stricto and
Babesia odocoilei, respectively, in an I. scapularis nymph. After the molt, these
ticks can bite humans. Furthermore, this is the first-ever documentation of B.
odocoilei in a tick parasitizing a bird. Our findings substantiate the fact that 
migratory songbirds transport neotropical ticks long distances, and import them
into Canada during northward spring migration. Health care practitioners need to 
be aware that migratory songbirds transport pathogen-laden ticks into Canada
annually, and pose an unforeseen health risk to Canadians.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare7010046 
PMCID: PMC6473902
PMID: 30897803 

