
1. Sci Transl Med. 2019 Mar 20;11(484). pii: eaat7386. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.aat7386.

A cytochrome P450 allele confers pyrethroid resistance on a major African malaria
vector, reducing insecticide-treated bednet efficacy.

Weedall GD(1)(2), Mugenzi LMJ(3)(4), Menze BD(1)(3)(4), Tchouakui M(3)(4),
Ibrahim SS(1)(5), Amvongo-Adjia N(4)(6), Irving H(1), Wondji MJ(1)(3)(4), Tchoupo
M(3)(4), Djouaka R(7), Riveron JM(1)(3)(4), Wondji CS(8)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke 
Place, Liverpool L3 5QA, UK.
(2)School of Natural Sciences and Psychology, Liverpool John Moores University,
Liverpool L3 3AF, U.K.
(3)LSTM Research Unit at the Organisation de Coordination pour la lutte contre
les Endémies en Afrique Centrale (OCEAC), P.O. Box 288, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(4)Centre for Research in Infectious Diseases (CRID), P.O. Box 13591, Yaoundé,
Cameroon.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Bayero University, PMB 3011, Kano, Nigeria.
(6)Centre for Medical Research, Institute of Medical Research and Medicinal
Plants Studies (IMPM), P.O. Box 13033, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(7)International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA), Cotonou 08 BP 0932,
Benin.
(8)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke 
Place, Liverpool L3 5QA, UK. charles.wondji@lstmed.ac.uk.

Metabolic resistance to insecticides such as pyrethroids in mosquito vectors
threatens control of malaria in Africa. Unless it is managed, recent gains in
reducing malaria transmission could be lost. To improve monitoring and assess the
impact of insecticide resistance on malaria control interventions, we elucidated 
the molecular basis of pyrethroid resistance in the major African malaria vector,
Anopheles funestus We showed that a single cytochrome P450 allele (CYP6P9a_R) in 
A. funestus reduced the efficacy of insecticide-treated bednets for preventing
transmission of malaria in southern Africa. Expression of key insecticide
resistance genes was detected in populations of this mosquito vector throughout
Africa but varied according to the region. Signatures of selection and adaptive
evolutionary traits including structural polymorphisms and cis-regulatory
transcription factor binding sites were detected with evidence of selection due
to the scale-up of insecticide-treated bednet use. A cis-regulatory polymorphism 
driving the overexpression of the major resistance gene CYP6P9a allowed us to
design a DNA-based assay for cytochrome P450-mediated resistance to pyrethroid
insecticides. Using this assay, we tracked the spread of pyrethroid resistance
and found that it was almost fixed in mosquitoes from southern Africa but was
absent from mosquitoes collected elsewhere in Africa. Furthermore, a field study 
in experimental huts in Cameroon demonstrated that mosquitoes carrying the
resistance CYP6P9a_R allele survived and succeeded in blood feeding more often
than did mosquitoes that lacked this allele. Our findings highlight the need to
introduce a new generation of insecticide-treated bednets for malaria control
that do not rely on pyrethroid insecticides.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aat7386 
PMID: 30894503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

