
1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2019 Jun 15;27(12):2553-2571. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2019.03.039.
Epub 2019 Mar 22.

In silico study of M18 aspartyl amino peptidase (M18AAP) of Plasmodium vivax as
an antimalarial drug target.

Rout S(1), Mahapatra RK(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, KIIT University, Bhubaneswar 751024, Odisha, India.
(2)School of Biotechnology, KIIT University, Bhubaneswar 751024, Odisha, India.
Electronic address: rmahapatra@kiitbiotech.ac.in.

Plasmodium vivax (Pv) is the second most malaria causing pathogen among
Plasmodium species. M18 aspartic aminopeptidase (M18AAP) protein is a single gene
copy present in Plasmodium. This protein is functional at the terminal stage of
hemoglobin degradation of host and completes the hydrolysis process which makes
it an important target for new chemotherapeutics. No experimental and structural 
study on M18AAP protein of P. vivax is reported till today. This paper advocates 
the application of multiple computational approaches like protein model
prediction, ligand-based 3D QSAR study, pharmacophore, structure-based virtual
screening and molecular docking simulation for identification of potent lead
molecules against the enzyme. The 3D QSAR model was developed using known
bioactive compounds against the PvM18AAP protein which statistically signify the 
k-NN model with q^2 = 0.7654. The study reports a lead molecule from
ligand-centric approach with good binding affinity and possessing lowest docking 
score. The findings will be helpful for in-vivo and in-vitro validations and
development of potent anti-malarial molecules against the drug resistant strains 
of malaria parasite.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2019.03.039 
PMID: 30929948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

