
1. Nature. 2019 Apr;568(7750):103-107. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1072-z. Epub 2019 Apr
3.

A widespread coral-infecting apicomplexan with chlorophyll biosynthesis genes.

Kwong WK(1), Del Campo J(2), Mathur V(2), Vermeij MJA(3)(4), Keeling PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. waldankwong@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Botany, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.
(3)Aquatic Microbiology, Institute for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)CARMABI Foundation, Willemstad, Curaçao, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Nature. 2019 Apr;568(7750):41-42.

Apicomplexa is a group of obligate intracellular parasites that includes the
causative agents of human diseases such as malaria and toxoplasmosis.
Apicomplexans evolved from free-living phototrophic ancestors, but how this
transition to parasitism occurred remains unknown. One potential clue lies in
coral reefs, of which environmental DNA surveys have uncovered several lineages
of uncharacterized basally branching apicomplexans1,2. Reef-building corals have 
a well-studied symbiotic relationship with photosynthetic Symbiodiniaceae
dinoflagellates (for example, Symbiodinium3), but the identification of other key
microbial symbionts of corals has proven to be challenging4,5. Here we use
community surveys, genomics and microscopy analyses to identify an apicomplexan
lineage-which we informally name 'corallicolids'-that was found at a high
prevalence (over 80% of samples, 70% of genera) across all major groups of
corals. Corallicolids were the second most abundant coral-associated
microeukaryotes after the Symbiodiniaceae, and are therefore core members of the 
coral microbiome. In situ fluorescence and electron microscopy confirmed that
corallicolids live intracellularly within the tissues of the coral gastric
cavity, and that they possess apicomplexan ultrastructural features. We sequenced
the genome of the corallicolid plastid, which lacked all genes for photosystem
proteins; this indicates that corallicolids probably contain a non-photosynthetic
plastid (an apicoplast6). However, the corallicolid plastid differs from all
other known apicoplasts because it retains the four ancestral genes that are
involved in chlorophyll biosynthesis. Corallicolids thus share characteristics
with both their parasitic and their free-living relatives, which suggests that
they are evolutionary intermediates and implies the existence of a unique
biochemistry during the transition from phototrophy to parasitism.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-019-1072-z 
PMID: 30944491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

