
1. Malar J. 2019 Apr 11;18(1):132. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2770-6.

HSP superfamily of genes in the malaria vector Anopheles sinensis: diversity,
phylogenetics and association with pyrethroid resistance.

Si FL(1)(2), Qiao L(2), He QY(2), Zhou Y(2), Yan ZT(2), Chen B(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 401331, China.
(2)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Vector Insects, Institute of Entomology and
Molecular Biology, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing, 401331, China.
(3)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Vector Insects, Institute of Entomology and
Molecular Biology, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing, 401331, China.
bin.chen@cqnu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are molecular chaperones that are involved
in many normal cellular processes and various kinds of environmental stress.
There is still no report regarding the diversity and phylogenetics research of
HSP superfamily of genes at whole genome level in insects, and the HSP gene
association with pyrethroid resistance is also not well known. The present study 
investigated the diversity, classification, scaffold location, characteristics,
and phylogenetics of the superfamily of genes in Anopheles sinensis genome, and
the HSP genes associated with pyrethroid resistance.
METHODS: The present study identified the HSP genes in the An. sinensis genome,
analysed their characteristics, and deduced phylogenetic relationships of all
HSPs in An. sinensis, Anopheles gambiae, Culex quinquefasciatus and Aedes aegypti
by bioinformatic methods. Importantly, the present study screened the HSPs
associated with pyrethroid resistance using three field pyrethroid-resistant
populations with RNA-seq and RT-qPCR, and looked over the HSP gene expression
pattern for the first time in An. sinensis on the time-scale post insecticide
treatment with RT-qPCR.
RESULTS: There are 72 HSP genes in An. sinensis genome, and they are classified
into five families and 11 subfamilies based on their molecular weight, homology
and phylogenetics. Both RNA-seq and qPCR analysis revealed that the expression of
AsHSP90AB, AsHSP70-2 and AsHSP21.7 are significantly upregulated in at least one 
field pyrethroid-resistant population. Eleven genes are significantly upregulated
in different period after pyrethroid exposure. The HSP90, sHSP and HSP70 families
are proposed to be involved in pyrethroid stress response based in expression
analyses of three field pyrethroid-resistant populations, and expression pattern 
on the time scale post insecticide treatment. The AsHSP90AB gene is proposed to
be the essential HSP gene for pyrethroid stress response in An. sinensis.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the information frame for HSP superfamily of
genes, and lays an important basis for the better understanding and further
research of HSP function in insect adaptability to diverse environments.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-2770-6 
PMCID: PMC6460852
PMID: 30975215  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

