
1. Acta Trop. 2019 Aug;196:126-134. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.05.020. Epub
2019 May 17.

Modulation of in vitro antimalarial responses by polymorphisms in Plasmodium
falciparum ABC transporters (pfmdr1 and pfmdr5).

Gendrot M(1), Wague Gueye M(2), Tsombeng Foguim F(1), Madamet M(3), Wade KA(4),
Bou Kounta M(4), Fall M(5), Diawara S(2), Benoit N(3), Lo G(6), Bercion R(7),
Amalvict R(3), Mosnier J(3), Fall B(2), Briolant S(1), Diatta B(8), Pradines
B(9).

Author information: 
(1)Unité Parasitologie et entomologie, Département Microbiologie et maladies
infectieuses, Institut de recherche biomédicale des armées, Marseille, France;
Aix Marseille Univ, IRD, AP-HM, SSA, VITROME, Marseille, France; IHU Méditerranée
Infection, Marseille, France.
(2)Laboratoire d'étude de la chimiosensibilité du paludisme, Fédération des
laboratoires, Hôpital Principal de Dakar, Dakar, Senegal.
(3)Unité Parasitologie et entomologie, Département Microbiologie et maladies
infectieuses, Institut de recherche biomédicale des armées, Marseille, France;
Aix Marseille Univ, IRD, AP-HM, SSA, VITROME, Marseille, France; IHU Méditerranée
Infection, Marseille, France; Centre national de référence du Paludisme, Institut
hospitalo-universitaire (IHU) Méditerranée Infection, Marseille, France.
(4)Service des urgences, Hôpital Principal de Dakar, Dakar, Senegal.
(5)Service de réanimation médicale, Hôpital Principal de Dakar, Dakar, Senegal.
(6)Centre médical interarmées, Dakar, Senegal; Laboratoire de bactériologie
virologie, Université Cheikh Anta Diop, CHU Le Dantec, Dakar, Senegal.
(7)Laboratoire d'analyses médicales, Institut Pasteur, Dakar, Senegal.
(8)Chefferie, Hôpital Principal de Dakar, Dakar, Senegal.
(9)Unité Parasitologie et entomologie, Département Microbiologie et maladies
infectieuses, Institut de recherche biomédicale des armées, Marseille, France;
Aix Marseille Univ, IRD, AP-HM, SSA, VITROME, Marseille, France; IHU Méditerranée
Infection, Marseille, France; Laboratoire d'étude de la chimiosensibilité du
paludisme, Fédération des laboratoires, Hôpital Principal de Dakar, Dakar,
Senegal; Centre national de référence du Paludisme, Institut
hospitalo-universitaire (IHU) Méditerranée Infection, Marseille, France.
Electronic address: bruno.pradines@gmail.com.

The emergence of resistance to artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACT) was 
described in Southeast Asia. In this context, the identification of molecular
markers of ACT resistance partner drugs is urgently needed for monitoring the
emergence and spread of resistance. Polymorphisms in transporter genes,
especially of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) superfamily, have been involved in
anti-malarial drug resistance. In this study, the association between the
mutations in the P. falciparum multidrug resistance 1 gene (pfmdr1, N86Y, Y184 F,
S1034C, N1042D and D1246Y) or repetitive amino acid motifs in pfmdr5 and the ex
vivo susceptibility to anti-malarial drugs was evaluated. Susceptibility to
chloroquine, quinine, monodesethylamodiaquine, lumefantrine, piperaquine,
pyronaridine, mefloquine and dihydroartemisinin was assessed in 67 Senegalese
isolates. The shorter DNNN motif ranged from to 2 to 11 copy repeats, and the
longer DHHNDHNNDNNN motif ranged from 0 to 2 in pfmdr5. The present study showed 
the association between repetitive amino acid motifs (DNNN-DHHNDDHNNDNNN) in
pfmdr5 and in vitro susceptibility to 4-aminoquinoline-based antimalarial drugs. 
The parasites with 8 and more copy repeats of DNNN in pfmdr5 were significantly
more susceptible to piperaquine. There was a significant association between
parasites whose DHHNDHNNDNNN motif was absent and replaced by DHHNDNNN,
DHHNDHNNDHNNDNNN or DHHNDHNNDHNNDHNNDNNN and increased susceptibility to
chloroquine, monodesethylamodiaquine and pyronaridine. A significant association 
between both the wild-type allele N86 in pfmdr1 and the N86-184 F haplotype and
reduced susceptibility to lumefantrine was confirmed. Further studies with a
large number of samples are required to validate the association between these
pfmdr5 alleles and the modulation of 4-aminoquinoline-based antimalarial drug
susceptibility.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.05.020 
PMID: 31108084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

