
1. Acta Trop. 2019 Oct;198:105033. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.05.024. Epub 2019
May 20.

Cadmium tolerance pathway in Anopheles gambiae senso stricto.

Rono MK(1), Muturi CN(2), Ochieng R(3), Mwakubabanya R(2), Wachira FN(4),
Mwangangi J(5), Kinyanjui S(6), Njunge J(5), Mireji PO(7).

Author information: 
(1)KEMRI Centre for Geographic Medicine Research, Coast, P.O. Box 230-80108,
Kilifi, Kenya; Pwani University Bioscience Research Centre, Pwani University,
P.O. Box 195, Kilifi, Kenya. Electronic address: mrono@kemri-wellcome.org.
(2)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Egerton University, P.O. Box
536-20115, Egerton, Kenya.
(3)International Centre of Insect Physiology and Ecology, P.O. Box 30772-00100,
Nairobi, Kenya.
(4)South Eastern Kenya University, P.O. Box 170-90200, Kitui, Kenya.
(5)KEMRI Centre for Geographic Medicine Research, Coast, P.O. Box 230-80108,
Kilifi, Kenya.
(6)KEMRI Centre for Geographic Medicine Research, Coast, P.O. Box 230-80108,
Kilifi, Kenya; Pwani University Bioscience Research Centre, Pwani University,
P.O. Box 195, Kilifi, Kenya; Nuffield Department of Medicine, Oxford University.
(7)KEMRI Centre for Geographic Medicine Research, Coast, P.O. Box 230-80108,
Kilifi, Kenya; Biotechnology Research Institute- Kenya Agricultural and Livestock
Research Organization, P.O. Box 362-00902, Kikuyu, Kenya. Electronic address:
mireji.paul@gmail.com.

Cadmium is one of the widely used heavy metals (HM) in commercial and industrial 
products and contributes to environmental contamination in an urban setting. In
our previous studies, we established that An. gambiae sensu stricto, a vector of 
malaria, had adapted to HM pollutants in nature despite their proclivity for
unpolluted aquatic habitats. We further demonstrated that heavy metal tolerance
adaptation process impacts a biological cost to the fitness of the mosquito and
potentially involves the induction of specific HM-responsive transcripts and
proteins. Here we interrogated differential proteomic profiles of the cadmium
tolerant vs. naïve strains of An. gambiae to shed light on proteomic processes
that underpinned biological cost to fitness. We identified a total of 1067 larval
proteins and observed significant down-regulation of proteins involved in larval 
immune responses, energy metabolism, antioxidant enzymes, protein synthesis, and 
proton transport. Our results suggest that mosquitoes can adjust their biological
program through proteome changes to counter HM pollution. Since our study was
done in controlled laboratory settings, we acknowledge this may not wholly
represent the conditions HM polluted environments. Nevertheless, mosquitoes
deploying this strategy have the potential of creating an urban enclave for
breeding and thrive and become agents of sporadic malaria epidemics.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.05.024 
PMID: 31121147  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

