
1. Curr Opin Immunol. 2019 Aug;59:88-100. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2019.03.008. Epub 2019 
May 20.

Human inborn errors of immunity to infection affecting cells other than
leukocytes: from the immune system to the whole organism.

Zhang SY(1), Jouanguy E(1), Zhang Q(2), Abel L(1), Puel A(1), Casanova JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA; Laboratory of Human 
Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM UMR 1163, Necker Hospital 
for Sick Children, 75015 Paris, France; Paris Descartes University, Imagine
Institute, 75015 Paris, France.
(2)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(3)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA; Laboratory of Human 
Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM UMR 1163, Necker Hospital 
for Sick Children, 75015 Paris, France; Paris Descartes University, Imagine
Institute, 75015 Paris, France; Pediatric Hematology-Immunology Unit, Necker
Hospital for Sick Children, 75015 Paris, France; Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address:
jean-laurent.casanova@rockefeller.edu.

Studies of vertebrate immunity have traditionally focused on professional cells, 
including circulating and tissue-resident leukocytes. Evidence that
non-professional cells are also intrinsically essential (i.e. not via their
effect on leukocytes) for protective immunity in natural conditions of infection 
has emerged from three lines of research in human genetics. First, studies of
Mendelian resistance to infection have revealed an essential role of
DARC-expressing erythrocytes in protection against Plasmodium vivax infection,
and an essential role of FUT2-expressing intestinal epithelial cells for
protection against norovirus and rotavirus infections. Second, studies of inborn 
errors of non-hematopoietic cell-extrinsic immunity have shown that APOL1 and
complement cascade components secreted by hepatocytes are essential for
protective immunity to trypanosome and pyogenic bacteria, respectively. Third,
studies of inborn errors of non-hematopoietic cell-intrinsic immunity have
suggested that keratinocytes, pulmonary epithelial cells, and cortical neurons
are essential for tissue-specific protective immunity to human papillomaviruses, 
influenza virus, and herpes simplex virus, respectively. Various other types of
genetic resistance or predisposition to infection in human populations are not
readily explained by inborn variants of genes operating in leukocytes and may,
therefore, involve defects in other cells. The probing of this unchartered
territory by human genetics is reshaping immunology, by scaling immunity to
infection up from the immune system to the whole organism.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coi.2019.03.008 
PMCID: PMC6774828
PMID: 31121434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

