
1. Mol Microbiol. 2019 Aug;112(2):699-717. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14313. Epub 2019 Jul 5.

Biochemical and physiological investigations on adenosine 5' monophosphate
deaminase from Plasmodium spp.

Nagappa LK(1), Singh D(2), Dey S(2), Kumar KA(2), Balaram H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced
Scientific Research (JNCASR), Bengaluru, India.
(2)Department of Animal Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of
Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India.

The interplay between ATP generating and utilizing pathways in a cell is
responsible for maintaining cellular ATP/energy homeostasis that is reflected by 
Adenylate Energy Charge (AEC) ratio. Adenylate kinase (AK), that catalyzes
inter-conversion of ADP, ATP and AMP, plays a major role in maintaining AEC and
is regulated by cellular AMP levels. Hence, the enzymes AMP deaminase (AMPD) and 
nucleotidases, which catabolize AMP, indirectly regulate AK activity and in-turn 
affect AEC. Here, we present the first report on AMPD from Plasmodium, the
causative agent of malaria. The recombinant enzyme expressed in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae was studied using functional complementation assay and residues vital 
for enzyme activity have been identified. Similarities and differences between
Plasmodium falciparum AMPD (PfAMPD) and its homologs from yeast, Arabidopsis and 
humans are also discussed. The AMPD gene was deleted in the murine malaria
parasite P. berghei and was found to be dispensable during all stages of the
parasite life cycle. However, when episomal expression was attempted, viable
parasites were not obtained, suggesting that perturbing AMP homeostasis by
over-expressing AMPD might be lethal. As AMPD is known to be allosterically
modulated by ATP, GTP and phosphate, allosteric activators of PfAMPD could be
developed as anti-parasitic agents.

Â© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14313 
PMID: 31132185  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

