
1. Mol Med Rep. 2019 Jul;20(1):417-432. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2019.10300. Epub 2019 May
27.

Bioinformatics analysis of a long non‑coding RNA and mRNA regulation network in
rats with middle cerebral artery occlusion based on RNA sequencing.

Duan X(1), Han L(2), Peng D(2), Peng C(2), Xiao L(3), Bao Q(3), Peng H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui University of
Chinese Medicine, Hefei, Anhui 230031, P.R. China.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Anhui University of Chinese Medicine, Hefei, Anhui 230012,
P.R. China.
(3)School of Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211198, 
P.R. China.

Long non‑coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been proven to be critical gene regulators of
development and disease. The main aim of the present study was to elucidate the
lncRNA‑mRNA regulation network in ischemic stroke induced by middle cerebral
artery occlusion (MCAO) using RNA sequencing (RNA‑seq) in rats. lncRNA expression
profiles were screened in brain tissues to identify a number of differentially
expressed lncRNAs (DELs) and genes (DEGs) by RNA‑seq. Reverse
transcription‑quantitative polymerase chain reaction was performed to further
confirm the lncRNA expression data. Furthermore, Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis were used to mine mRNA 
functions, and a lncRNA‑mRNA network was constructed. Additionally, cis‑ and
trans‑regulatory gene analyses of DELs were predicted. A total of 134 DELs (fold 
change >2, false discovery rate <0.05) and 1,006 DEGs (fold change >2 and P<0.05)
were identified. Eighteen lncRNAs were predicted to regulate heme oxygenase 1,
mitotic checkpoint serine/threonine kinase B, chemokine ligand 2 and DNA
Topoisomerase IIα, amongst other genes. These genes are all associated with a
cellular response to inorganic substances, alkaloids, estradiol, reactive oxygen 
species, metal ions, oxidative stress, and are associated with metabolic
pathways, chemokine signaling pathways, malaria, Parkinson's disease, the cell
cycle and other GO and KEGG pathway enrichments. The present study identifies
novel DELs and an lncRNA‑mRNA regulatory network that may allow for an improved
understanding of the molecular mechanism of ischemic stroke induced by MCAO.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2019.10300 
PMCID: PMC6580035
PMID: 31180537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

