
1. PLoS One. 2019 Jun 14;14(6):e0218210. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0218210.
eCollection 2019.

Plasmodium falciparum glutamate dehydrogenase is genetically conserved across
eight malaria endemic states of India: Exploring new avenues of malaria
elimination.

Ahmad A(1), Verma AK(1), Krishna S(1), Sharma A(2), Singh N(1), Bharti PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)ICMR-National Institute of Research in Tribal Health (NIRTH), Garha, Jabalpur,
India.
(2)Department of P. G. Studies and Research in Biological Science, Rani Durgavati
University, Pachpedi, Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India.

Accurate and timely diagnosis is very critical for management, control and
elimination of the malaria. Malaria rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) have improved
the diagnosis and management of malaria in remote areas, community and places
where microscopy is not available for diagnosis. According to WHO report 2018,
Plasmodium falciparum malaria constitutes more than 50% of malaria cases in
India. Most of the RDTs used for diagnosis of falciparum malaria today employ
HRP2 as a target antigen. However, low density parasitemia and deletion of hrp-2 
gene in P. falciparum leads to false negative results and necessitates the
development of alternative/ new or improved RDT for malaria diagnosis. We have
analysed the genetic diversity and homology modelling of Pfgdh (glutamate
dehydrogenase), ldh (lactate dehydrogenase) and aldolase genes in P. falciparum
isolates from the eight endemic states of India to assess their potential as
antigen for RDT development. We observed negligible sequence diversity in Pfgdh
in comparison to the low level of diversity in ldh and aldolase gene. No
structural or functional changes were observed in modelling studies and all three
genes were under negative purifying selection pressure. The highly conserved
nature of pfgdh gene suggests that GDH could be a potential target molecule for
Pan/Pf diagnostic test for malaria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0218210 
PMCID: PMC6568416
PMID: 31199842  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

