
1. Int J Parasitol. 2019 Aug;49(9):705-714. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2019.04.003. Epub 
2019 Jun 13.

Generation and functional characterisation of Plasmodium yoelii csp deletion
mutants using a microhomology-based CRISPR/Cas9 method.

Xu R(1), Liu Y(1), Fan R(1), Liang R(1), Yue L(1), Liu S(1), Su XZ(2), Li J(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signaling Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian
361102, China.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
Electronic address: xsu@niaid.nih.gov.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signaling Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian
361102, China. Electronic address: jianli_204@xmu.edu.cn.

CRISPR/Cas9 is a powerful genome editing method that has greatly facilitated
functional studies in many eukaryotic organisms including malaria parasites. Due 
to the lack of genes encoding enzymes necessary for the non-homologous end
joining DNA repair pathway, genetic manipulation of malaria parasite genomes is
generally accomplished through homologous recombination requiring the presence of
DNA templates. Recently, an alternative double-strand break repair pathway,
microhomology-mediated end joining, was found in the Plasmodium falciparum
parasite. Taking advantage of the MMEJ pathway, we developed a MMEJ-based
CRISPR/Cas9 (mCRISPR) strategy to efficiently generate multiple mutant parasites 
simultaneously in genes with repetitive sequences. As a proof of principle, we
successfully produced various size mutants in the central repeat region of the
Plasmodium yoelii circumsporozoite surface protein without the use of template
DNA. Monitoring mixed parasite populations and individual parasites with
different sizes of CSP-CRR showed that the CSP-CRR plays a role in the
development of mosquito stages, with severe developmental defects in parasites
with large deletions in the repeat region. However, the majority of the csp
mutant parasite clones grew similarly to the wild type P. yoelii 17XL parasite in
mice. This study develops a useful technique to efficiently generate mutant
parasites with deletions or insertions, and shows that the CSP-CRR plays a role
in parasite development in mosquito.

Copyright Â© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2019.04.003 
PMID: 31202685  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

