
1. Malar J. 2019 Jun 20;18(1):202. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2834-7.

Development of molecular assays to detect target-site mechanisms associated with 
insecticide resistance in malaria vectors from Latin America.

Lol JC(1), Castañeda D(1), Mackenzie-Impoinvil L(2), Romero CG(3), Lenhart A(2), 
Padilla NR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Biología y Control de Vectores, Centro de Estudios en Salud,
Universidad del Valle de Guatemala (CES-UVG), 18 Avenida 11-95, Zona 15, Vista
Hermosa 3, Guatemala, Guatemala.
(2)Division of Parasitic Disease and Malaria, Entomology Branch, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Center for Global Health, 1600 Clifton
Road, Atlanta, GA, 30329, USA.
(3)Programa Nacional de Dengue, Chikingunya, y Zika, Ministerio de Salud, Esquina
Cañada Strongest, Plaza del Estudiante, Zona Central, La Paz, Bolivia.
(4)Grupo de Biología y Control de Vectores, Centro de Estudios en Salud,
Universidad del Valle de Guatemala (CES-UVG), 18 Avenida 11-95, Zona 15, Vista
Hermosa 3, Guatemala, Guatemala. npadilla@ces.uvg.edu.gt.

BACKGROUND: Malaria remains an important public health problem in Latin America, 
and the development of insecticide resistance in malaria vectors poses a major
threat to malaria elimination efforts. Monitoring of insecticide susceptibility
and the determination of the mechanisms involved in insecticide resistance are
needed to effectively guide the deployment of appropriate vector control
measures. Here, molecular assays have been developed to screen for mutations
associated with insecticide resistance on the voltage-gated sodium channel (VGSC)
and acetylcholinesterase-1 (Ace-1) genes in four malaria vectors from Latin
America.
METHODS: Degenerate primers were designed to amplify a partial fragment on the
VGSC and Ace-1 genes. Wild-caught individuals for Anopheles albimanus (also
historical samples and individuals from a laboratory strain), Anopheles darlingi,
Anopheles vestitipennis and Anopheles pseudopunctipennis were used to optimize
the PCR assays. All samples were sequenced to validate the PCR results and DNA
alignments were constructed for each gene using the unique haplotypes observed.
RESULTS: Primers designed successfully amplified the VGSC gene in An. albimanus, 
An. darlingi, An. vestitipennis and An. pseudopunctipennis, and the Ace-1 gene in
both An. albimanus and An. darlingi. DNA sequencing revealed that compared with
Anopheles gambiae, there were a total of 29, 28, 21 and 24 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) on the VGSC gene for An. albimanus (308 bp), An. darlingi
(311 bp), An. pseudopunctipennis (263 bp) and An. vestitipennis (254 bp),
respectively. On the 459 bp fragment of the Ace-1 gene, a total of 70 SNPs were
detected in An. darlingi and 59 SNPs were detected in An. albimanus compared with
An. gambiae. The SNPs detected on the VGSC gene were all synonymous. On the Ace-1
gene, non-synonymous substitutions were identified on three different codons. All
species showed the homozygous wild-type kdr allele (coding for leucine) at codon 
995 (formerly reported as codon 1014) on the VGSC gene, but one sample was
heterozygous at codon 280 (formerly reported as codon 119) on the Ace-1 gene,
coding for both the resistant (serine) and susceptible (glycine) amino acids.
CONCLUSIONS: New molecular assays to amplify and screen the regions of the VGSC
and Ace-1 genes associated with insecticide resistance are reported for An.
albimanus, An. darlingi, An. vestitipennis, and An. pseudopunctipennis. The
development of these PCR assays presents an important advance in the analysis of 
target-site resistance in malaria vectors in the Americas, and will further
facilitate the characterization of insecticide resistance mechanisms in these
species.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-2834-7 
PMCID: PMC6585033
PMID: 31221148  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

