
1. Mol Microbiol. 2020 Jan;113(1):40-51. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14334. Epub 2019 Aug 2.

Female-specific gene regulation in malaria parasites by an AP2-family
transcription factor.

Yuda M(1), Kaneko I(1), Iwanaga S(1), Murata Y(1), Kato T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Zoology, Mie University School of Medicine, Tsu, Mie,
514-8507, Japan.

The malaria gametocyte, the gamete precursor, is the essential stage for malaria 
transmission to the mosquito vector. In the vertebrate host's blood, it develops 
into a mature male or female capable of transforming into a gamete in the
mosquito blood meal. Despite the importance of this stage in the malaria life
cycle, the genetic regulation of gametocyte development is poorly understood. In 
particular, transcription factors involved in sex-specific gene expression have
not been identified. In this paper, we report that an AP2-family transcription
factor, AP2-FG, is responsible for female-specific gene regulation. AP2-FG
expression in Plasmodium berghei was observed exclusively in female gametocytes, 
in the beginning of 4-6 h before sexual dimorphism manifests in developing
gametocytes. AP2-FG disruption resulted in the arrest of female maturation, but
did not affect the development of males. Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing
analysis suggested that AP2-FG directly regulates over 700 genes. Its targets
include genes for female gametocyte-specific functions, such as gametogenesis,
fertilization and zygote development. AP2-FG binding to target gene promoters was
associated with a 10 bp sequence motif. These results indicate that AP2-FG plays 
a role in the differentiation of early gametocytes to mature females by governing
a female-specific gene expression repertoire.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14334 
PMID: 31231888  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

