
1. PLoS One. 2019 Jun 25;14(6):e0218203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0218203.
eCollection 2019.

Anopheles gambiae TEP1 forms a complex with the coiled-coil domain of LRIM1/APL1C
following a conformational change in the thioester domain.

Williams M(1)(2), Contet A(1)(2), Hou CD(3), Levashina EA(4), Baxter
RHG(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Chemistry, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of 
America.
(2)Dept. of Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut, United States of America.
(3)Dept. of Medical Genetics & Molecular Biochemistry, Lewis Katz School of
Medicine at Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of
America.
(4)Vector Biology Unit, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin,
Germany.

The complement-like protein thioester-containing protein 1 (TEP1) is a key factor
in the immune response of the malaria vector Anopheles gambiae to pathogens.
Multiple allelic variants of TEP1 have been identified in laboratory strains and 
in the field, and are correlated with distinct immunophenotypes. TEP1 is tightly 
regulated by conformational changes induced by cleavage in a protease-sensitive
region. Cleaved TEP1 forms exhibit significant variation in stability from hours 
to days at room temperature. In particular, the refractory allele TEP1*R1 is
significantly more stable than the susceptible allele TEP1*S1. This raises the
question of whether the stability of cleaved TEP1 is linked to allelic variation 
and varying immunophenotypes. We have analyzed the stability of the cleaved form 
of additional TEP1 alleles and constructs. We show that stability is correlated
with allelic variation within two specific loops in direct proximity to the
thioester bond. The variable loops are part of an interface between the TED and
MG8 domains of TEP1 that protect the thioester from hydrolysis. Engineering
specific disulfide bonds to prevent separation of the TED-MG8 interface
stabilizes the cleaved form of TEP1 for months at room temperature. Cleaved TEP1 
forms a soluble complex with a heterodimer of two leucine-rich repeat proteins,
LRIM1 and APL1C, and precipitates in the absence of this complex. The molecular
structure and oligomeric state of the TEP1/LRIM1/APL1C complex is unclear. The
C-terminal coiled-coil domain of the LRIM1/APL1C complex is sufficient to
stabilize the cleaved form of TEP1 in solution but cleaved forms of
disulfide-stabilized TEP1 do not interact with LRIM1/APL1C. This implies that
formation of the TEP1cut/LRIM1/APL1C complex is related to the conformational
change that induces the precipitation of cleaved TEP1.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0218203 
PMCID: PMC6592522
PMID: 31237887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MW declares the following potential competing
interest: Shift Health (paid employment). AC declares the following potential
competing interest: Pierre Fabre (paid employment) This does not alter our
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.

