
1. ACS Infect Dis. 2019 Aug 9;5(8):1269-1278. doi: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.9b00093. Epub
2019 Jun 20.

Post-Genomic Approaches to Understanding Malaria Parasite Biology: Linking Genes 
to Biological Functions.

Sexton AE(1), Doerig C(2), Creek DJ(1), Carvalho TG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Delivery Disposition and Dynamics, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical
Sciences , Monash University , 381 Royal Parade , Parkville , VIC 3052 ,
Australia.
(2)Centre for Chronic, Inflammatory and Infectious Diseases, Biomedical Sciences 
Cluster, School of Health and Biomedical Sciences , RMIT University , 264 Plenty 
Road , Bundoora , VIC 3083 , Australia.
(3)Molecular Parasitology Laboratory, Department of Physiology, Anatomy and
Microbiology , La Trobe University , Kingsbury Drive , Bundoora , VIC 3086 ,
Australia.

Plasmodium species are evolutionarily distant from model eukaryotes, and as a
consequence they exhibit many non-canonical cellular processes. In the
post-genomic era, functional "omics" disciplines (transcriptomics, proteomics,
and metabolomics) have accelerated our understanding of unique aspects of the
biology of malaria parasites. Functional "omics" tools, in combination with
genetic manipulations, have offered new opportunities to investigate the function
of previously uncharacterized genes. Knowledge of basic parasite biology is
fundamental to understanding drug modes of action, mechanisms of drug resistance,
and relevance of vaccine candidates. This Perspective highlights recent
"omics"-based discoveries in basic biology and gene function of the most virulent
human malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum.

DOI: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.9b00093 
PMID: 31243988  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

