
1. Cell Chem Biol. 2019 Sep 19;26(9):1253-1262.e5. doi:
10.1016/j.chembiol.2019.05.011. Epub 2019 Jun 27.

Discovery of Druggable Host Factors Critical to Plasmodium Liver-Stage Infection.

Raphemot R(1), Toro-Moreno M(1), Lu KY(2), Posfai D(2), Derbyshire ER(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Duke University, 124 Science Drive, Durham, NC 27708,
USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, 213 Research Drive, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Duke University, 124 Science Drive, Durham, NC 27708,
USA; Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, 213 Research Drive, Durham, NC 27710, USA. Electronic address:
emily.derbyshire@duke.edu.

Plasmodium parasites undergo an obligatory and asymptomatic developmental stage
within the liver before infecting red blood cells to cause malaria. The hijacked 
host pathways critical to parasite infection during this hepatic phase remain
poorly understood. Here, we implemented a forward genetic screen to identify over
100 host factors within the human druggable genome that are critical to
P. berghei infection in hepatoma cells. Notably, we found knockdown of genes
involved in protein trafficking pathways to be detrimental to parasite infection.
The disruption of protein trafficking modulators, including COPB2 and GGA1,
decreases P. berghei parasite size, and an immunofluorescence study suggests that
these proteins are recruited to the Plasmodium parasitophorous vacuole in
infected hepatocytes. These findings reveal that various host intracellular
protein trafficking pathways are subverted by Plasmodium parasites during the
liver stage and provide new insights into their manipulation for growth and
development.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2019.05.011 
PMCID: PMC6754275
PMID: 31257182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

