
1. Proc Biol Sci. 2019 Jul 10;286(1906):20191080. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2019.1080. Epub 
2019 Jul 10.

Premeiotic and meiotic failures lead to hybrid male sterility in the Anopheles
gambiae complex.

Liang J(1), Sharakhov IV(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Entomology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University , Blacksburg, VA , USA.
(2)2 Department of Cytology and Genetics, Tomsk State University , Tomsk ,
Russian Federation.

Hybrid male sterility (HMS) contributes to speciation by restricting gene flow
between related taxa. Detailed cytological characterization of reproductive
organs in hybrid males is important for identifying phenotypes that can help
guide searches of speciation genes. To investigate possible cellular causes of
HMS, we performed crosses between closely related species of the Anopheles
gambiae complex: An. merus with An. gambiae or An. coluzzii. We demonstrate that 
HMS in African malaria mosquitoes involves two defects in the reciprocal crosses:
a premeiotic arrest of germline stem cells in degenerate testes and a failure of 
the reductional meiotic division of primary spermatocytes in normal-like testes. 
The premeiotic arrest in degenerate testes of hybrids is accompanied by a strong 
suppression of meiotic and postmeiotic genes. Unlike pure species, sex
chromosomes in normal-like testes of F1 hybrids are largely unpaired during
meiotic prophase I and all chromosomes show various degrees of insufficient
condensation. Instead of entering reductional division in meiosis I, primary
spermatocytes prematurely undergo an equational mitotic division producing
non-motile diploid sperm. Thus, our study identified cytogenetic errors in
interspecies hybrids that arise during the early stages of postzygotic isolation.

DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2019.1080 
PMCID: PMC6650711
PMID: 31288705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

