
1. Int J Mol Med. 2019 Oct;44(4):1541-1551. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2019.4290. Epub 2019
Jul 26.

Artesunate alleviates interleukin‑1β‑induced inflammatory response and apoptosis 
by inhibiting the NF‑κB signaling pathway in chondrocyte‑like ATDC5 cells, and
delays the progression of osteoarthritis in a mouse model.

Li Y(1), Mu W(1), Ren J(1), Wuermanbieke S(1), Wahafu T(1), Ji B(1), Ma H(2),
Amat A(1), Zhang K(1), Cao L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830054, P.R. China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Pathogenesis, Prevention and Treatment of High
Incidence Diseases in Central Asian Xinjiang Key Laboratory of Echinococcosis,
Clinical Medical Research Institute, First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang
Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830054, P.R. China.

Osteoarthritis (OA) is a progressive and degenerative joint disorder that is
highly prevalent worldwide and for which there is currently no effective medical 
therapy. Artesunate (ART), a natural compound used to treat malaria, possesses
diverse biological properties, including the regulation of inflammation and
apoptosis in various cells; however, its role in OA remains unclear. The aim of
the present study was to investigate the effects of ART on interleukin
(IL)‑1β‑induced chondrocyte‑like ATDC5 cells and in an OA mouse model. The
results revealed that ART dose‑dependently relieved the inhibitory effect of
IL‑1β on cell viability. Moreover, ART significantly reduced the overexpression
of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)‑3, MMP‑13, a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 
with thrombospondin motifs‑5 and cyclooxygenase‑2 at both the gene and protein
levels in chondrocyte‑like ATDC5 cells stimulated by IL‑1β. Furthermore, ART
decreased the expression of pro‑apoptotic Bax, cleaved caspase‑3 and cleaved
caspase‑7 in a dose‑dependent manner, and increased the expression of the
anti‑apoptotic factor Bcl‑2. These changes were mediated by the inhibitory effect
of ART on the nuclear factor‑κB signaling pathway, defined as repression of the
phosphorylation of IκBα and p65, and improved redistribution of p65.
Additionally, ART blocked the advancement of the calcified cartilage zone and the
loss of proteoglycan, and lowered histological scoring of OA in a mouse model.
Taken together, these results indicate that ART may be of value as a therapeutic 
agent for OA.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2019.4290 
PMID: 31364719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

