
1. PLoS One. 2019 Sep 4;14(9):e0222098. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0222098.
eCollection 2019.

Expression of sphingosine kinase 1 and sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor 3 in
malaria-associated acute lung injury/acute respiratory distress syndrome in a
mouse model.

Punsawad C(1)(2), Viriyavejakul P(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Walailak University, Nakhon Si Thammarat, Thailand.
(2)Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Research Institute for Health Sciences,
Walailak University, Nakhon Si Thammarat, Thailand.
(3)Department of Tropical Pathology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand.

This study aimed to investigate the expression of sphingosine kinase 1 (SphK-1)
and sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor 3 (S1PR-3) in a mouse model of
malaria-associated acute lung injury/acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ALI/ARDS). DBA/2 mice were infected with Plasmodium berghei ANKA to generate an 
experimental model of malaria-associated ALI/ARDS. The infected mice were divided
into 2 groups based on the histopathological study of lung tissues: those with
and those without ALI/ARDS. The expression of the SphK-1 and S1PR-3 proteins in
the lung tissues was investigated using immunohistochemical staining and Western 
blot analysis. In addition, the S1P level was quantified in plasma and lung
tissues using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The results
demonstrated that the cellular expression of the SphK-1 and S1PR-3 proteins was
significantly upregulated in endothelial cells, alveolar epithelial cells and
alveolar macrophages in the lung tissues of malaria-infected mice with ALI/ARDS
compared with those in the control groups. The increased expression of the SphK-1
and S1PR-3 proteins was confirmed using Western blot analysis. The concentration 
of S1P in plasma and lung tissues was significantly decreased in malaria-infected
mice with ALI/ARDS compared with non-ALI/ARDS and control mice. Furthermore,
increased expression of the SphK-1 and S1PR-3 proteins significantly correlated
with lung injury scores and S1P concentrations in malaria-infected mice with
ALI/ARDS. These findings highlight increased expression of SphK-1 and S1PR-3 in
the lung tissues of malaria-infected mice with ALI/ARDS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0222098 
PMCID: PMC6726369
PMID: 31483837  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

