
1. Mol Microbiol. 2019 Dec;112(6):1658-1673. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14388. Epub 2019 Sep
30.

The molecular machinery of translational control in malaria parasites.

Bennink S(1), Pradel G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Applied Infection Biology, Institute of Zoology, RWTH
Aachen University, Worringerweg 1, 52074, Aachen, Germany.

Translational control regulates the levels of protein synthesized from its
transcript and is key for the rapid adjustment of gene expression in response to 
environmental stimuli. The regulation of translation is of special importance for
malaria parasites, which pass through a complex life cycle that includes various 
replication phases in the different organs of the human and mosquito hosts and a 
sexual reproduction phase in the mosquito midgut. In particular, the quiescent
transmission stages rely on translational control to rapidly adapt to the new
environment, once they switch over from the human to the mosquito and vice versa.
Three control mechanisms are currently proposed in Plasmodium, (1) global
regulation that acts on the translation initiation complex; (2) mRNA-specific
regulation, involving cis control elements, mRNA-binding proteins and
translational repressors; and (3) induced mRNA decay by the Ccr4-Not and the RNA 
exosome complex. The main molecules controlling translation are highly conserved 
in malaria parasites and an increasing number of studies shed light on the
interwoven pathways leading to the up or downregulation of protein synthesis in
the diverse plasmodial stages. We here highlight recent findings on translational
control during life cycle progression of Plasmodium and discuss the molecules
involved in regulating protein synthesis.

Â© 2019 The Authors. Molecular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14388 
PMID: 31531994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

