
1. Hematol Rep. 2019 Jun 24;11(3):8167. doi: 10.4081/hr.2019.8167. eCollection 2019 
Sep 18.

Concurrent juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia with thalassemia in a case with
Plasmodium knowlesi infection from Sabah, Malaysian Borneo.

Abdullah MA(1), Abdullah SM(2), Kumar SV(3), Hoque MZ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sabah Women and Children Hospital, Kota Kinabalu,
Sabah, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Medical Laboratory, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, Jazan
University, Jazan, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(3)Biotechnology Research Institute, University Malaysia Sabah, Kota Kinabalu,
Sabah, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Pathobiology and Medical Diagnostics, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, University Malaysia Sabah, Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia.

A 3-year-old male child was presented with worsening abdominal pain, abdominal
distension, lethargy, pallor and hepatosplenomegaly. The patient had multiple
outpatient visits in the past and was treated with oral antibiotics, oral
anthelmintic agents, albeit with minimal benefit. The patient also had
non-neutropenic pyrexia spikes and oral ulcers. The patient was an adopted child;
hence details about his biological parents' previous history were unclear.
Differential diagnosis of Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia (CMML), Juvenile
Myelomonocytic Leukemia (JMML), Gaucher's disease, Thalassemia and discrete
pancreatic pathology was considered. Hemoglobin electrophoresis was indicative of
thalassemia. Also, molecular detection method by polymerase chain reaction
confirms a concurrent infection with Plasmodium knowlesi malaria. The BCR-ABL
fusion gene was found to be negative. Correlating with peripheral monocytosis,
bone marrow aspiration and trephine biopsy with blasts only 3-4% and
hepatosplenomegaly, a diagnosis of JMML was established. We present a rare
phenomenon with an overlap of signs and symptoms between JMML, underlying
thalassemia, and Plasmodium knowlesi, posing a diagnostic challenge to
physicians.

Â©Copyright: the Author(s), 2019.

DOI: 10.4081/hr.2019.8167 
PMCID: PMC6761570
PMID: 31579124 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: the authors declare no
potential conflict of interest.

