
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Oct 16;9(1):14841. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-51181-1.

High-resolution transcriptional profiling of Anopheles gambiae spermatogenesis
reveals mechanisms of sex chromosome regulation.

Taxiarchi C(1)(2), Kranjc N(1), Kriezis A(1), Kyrou K(1), Bernardini F(1),
Russell S(3), Nolan T(1)(4), Crisanti A(1), Galizi R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(3)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Liverpool, UK.
(5)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
r.galizi@outlook.com.

Although of high priority for the development of genetic tools to control
malaria-transmitting mosquitoes, only a few germline-specific regulatory regions 
have been characterised to date and the presence of global regulatory mechanisms,
such as dosage compensation and meiotic sex chromosome inactivation (MSCI), are
mostly assumed from transcriptomic analyses of reproductive tissues or whole
gonads. In such studies, samples include a significant portion of somatic tissues
inevitably complicating the reconstruction of a defined transcriptional map of
gametogenesis. By exploiting recent advances in transgenic technologies and gene 
editing tools, combined with fluorescence-activated cell sorting and RNA
sequencing, we have separated four distinct cell lineages from the Anopheles
gambiae male gonads: premeiotic, meiotic (primary and secondary spermatocytes)
and postmeiotic. By comparing the overall expression levels of X-linked and
autosomal genes across the four populations, we revealed a striking
transcriptional repression of the X chromosome coincident with the meiotic phase,
classifiable as MSCI, and highlighted genes that may evade silencing. In
addition, chromosome-wide median expression ratios of the premeiotic population
confirmed the absence of dosage compensation in the male germline. Applying
differential expression analysis, we highlighted genes and transcript isoforms
enriched at specific timepoints and reconstructed the expression dynamics of the 
main biological processes regulating the key stages of sperm development and
maturation. We generated the first transcriptomic atlas of A. gambiae
spermatogenesis that will expand the available toolbox for the genetic
engineering of vector control technologies. We also describe an innovative and
multidimensional approach to isolate specific cell lineages that can be used for 
the targeted analysis of other A. gambiae organs or transferred to other
medically relevant species and modelÂ organisms.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-51181-1 
PMCID: PMC6795909
PMID: 31619757 

