
1. AMB Express. 2019 Oct 19;9(1):167. doi: 10.1186/s13568-019-0890-6.

Codon harmonization reduces amino acid misincorporation in bacterially expressed 
P. falciparum proteins and improves their immunogenicity.

Punde N(1)(2), Kooken J(1), Leary D(3), Legler PM(3), Angov E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Biologics Branch, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver
Spring, MD, 20910, USA.
(2)The Geneva Foundation, 917 Pacific Avenue, Tacoma, WA, 98402, USA.
(3)Naval Research Laboratories, 4555 Overlook Ave, Washington, DC, 20375, USA.
(4)Malaria Biologics Branch, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver
Spring, MD, 20910, USA. evelina.angov.civ@mail.mil.

Codon usage frequency influences protein structure and function. The frequency
with which codons are used potentially impacts primary, secondary and tertiary
protein structure. Poor expression, loss of function, insolubility, or truncation
can result from species-specific differences in codon usage. "Codon
harmonization" more closely aligns native codon usage frequencies with those of
the expression host particularly within putative inter-domain segments where
slower rates of translation may play a role in protein folding. Heterologous
expression of Plasmodium falciparum genes in Escherichia coli has been a
challenge due to their AT-rich codon bias and the highly repetitive DNA
sequences. Here, codon harmonization was applied to the malarial antigen, CelTOS 
(Cell-traversal protein for ookinetes and sporozoites). CelTOS is a highly
conserved P. falciparum protein involved in cellular traversal through mosquito
and vertebrate host cells. It reversibly refolds after thermal denaturation
making it a desirable malarial vaccine candidate. Protein expressed in E. coli
from a codon harmonized sequence of P. falciparum CelTOS (CH-PfCelTOS) was
compared with protein expressed from the native codon sequence (N-PfCelTOS) to
assess the impact of codon usage on protein expression levels, solubility, yield,
stability, structural integrity, recognition with CelTOS-specific mAbs and
immunogenicity in mice. While the translated proteins were expected to be
identical, the translated products produced from the codon-harmonized sequence
differed in helical content and showed a smaller distribution of polypeptides in 
mass spectra indicating lower heterogeneity of the codon harmonized version and
fewer amino acid misincorporations. Substitutions of hydrophobic-to-hydrophobic
amino acid were observed more commonly than any other. CH-PfCelTOS induced
significantly higher antibody levels compared with N-PfCelTOS; however, no
significant differences in either IFN-Î³ or IL-4 cellular responses were detected 
between the two antigens.

DOI: 10.1186/s13568-019-0890-6 
PMCID: PMC6800875
PMID: 31630257 

