
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 Dec 20;64(1). pii: e01542-19. doi:
10.1128/AAC.01542-19. Print 2019 Dec 20.

Modification of pfap2μ and pfubp1 Markedly Reduces Ring-Stage Susceptibility of
Plasmodium falciparum to Artemisinin In Vitro.

Henrici RC(1), van Schalkwyk DA(1), Sutherland CJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Infection Biology, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom
colin.sutherland@lshtm.ac.uk.

Management of uncomplicated malaria worldwide is threatened by the emergence in
Asia of Plasmodium falciparum carrying variants of the pfk13 locus and exhibiting
reduced susceptibility to artemisinin. Mutations in two other genes, ubp1 and
ap2μ, are associated with artemisinin resistance in rodent malaria and with
clinical failure of combination therapy in African malaria patients. Transgenic
P. falciparum clones, each carrying orthologues of mutations in pfap2μ and pfubp1
associated with artemisinin resistance in Plasmodium chabaudi, were derived by
Cas9 gene editing. Susceptibility to artemisinin and other antimalarial drugs was
determined. Following exposure to 700 nM dihydroartemisinin in the ring-stage
survival assay, we found strong evidence that transgenic parasites expressing the
I592T variant (11% survival), but not the S160N variant (1% survival), of the
AP2μ adaptin subunit were significantly less susceptible than the parental
wild-type parasite population. The V3275F variant of UBP1, but not the V3306F
variant, also displayed reduced susceptibility to dihydroartemisinin (8.5%
survival versus 0.5% survival). AP2μ and UBP1 variants did not elicit reduced
susceptibility to 48 h of exposure to artemisinin or to other antimalarial drugs.
Therefore, variants of the AP2 adaptor complex μ-subunit and of the ubiquitin
hydrolase UBP1 reduce in vitro artemisinin susceptibility at the early ring stage
in P. falciparum These findings confirm the existence of multiple pathways to
perturbation of either the mode of action of artemisinin, the parasite's adaptive
mechanisms of resistance, or both. The cellular role of UBP1 and AP2μ in
Plasmodium parasites should now be elucidated.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01542-19 
PMCID: PMC7187599
PMID: 31636063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

