
1. Mol Biol Rep. 2020 Jan;47(1):211-224. doi: 10.1007/s11033-019-05121-x. Epub 2019 
Oct 23.

Bacterial communities associated with the midgut microbiota of wild Anopheles
gambiae complex in Burkina Faso.

Zoure AA(1)(2), Sare AR(3), Yameogo F(4), Somda Z(4), Massart S(3), Badolo A(4), 
Francis F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Functional and Evolutionary Entomology, TERRA, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech,
University of Liège, Passage des Déportés 2, 5030, Gembloux, Belgium.
abdouazaque@gmail.com.
(2)(IRSS/CNRST)/Department of Biomedical and Public Health, Institute of Health
Sciences Research, Ouagadougou, 03 BP 7192, Burkina Faso. abdouazaque@gmail.com.
(3)Integrated and Urban Plant Pathology Laboratory, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech,
University of Liège, Passage des Déportés 2, 5030, Gembloux, Belgium.
(4)Laboratoire d'Entomologie Fondamentale et Appliquée, UFR/SVT, Université
Joseph KI-ZERBO, Ouagadougou, 03 BP 7021, Burkina Faso.
(5)Functional and Evolutionary Entomology, TERRA, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech,
University of Liège, Passage des Déportés 2, 5030, Gembloux, Belgium.

Plasmodium falciparum is transmitted by mosquitoes from the Anopheles gambiae
sensu lato (s.l) species complex and is responsible for severe forms of malaria. 
The composition of the mosquitoes' microbiota plays a role in P. falciparum
transmission, so we studied midgut bacterial communities of An. gambiae s.l from 
Burkina Faso. DNA was extracted from 17 pools of midgut of mosquitoes from the
Anopheles gambiae complex from six localities in three climatic areas, including 
cotton-growing and cotton-free localities to include potential differences in
insecticide selection pressure. The v3-v4 region of the 16S rRNA gene was
targeted and sequenced using Illumina Miseq (2 × 250 nt). Diversity analysis was 
performed using QIIME and R software programs. The major bacterial phylum was
Proteobacteria (97.2%) in all samples. The most abundant genera were Enterobacter
(32.8%) and Aeromonas (29.8%), followed by Pseudomonas (11.8%), Acinetobacter
(5.9%) and Thorsellia (2.2%). No statistical difference in operational taxonomic 
units (OTUs) was found (Kruskal-Wallis FDR-p > 0.05) among the different areas,
fields or localities. Richness and diversity indexes (observed OTUs, Chao1,
Simpson and Shannon indexes) showed significant differences in the cotton-growing
fields and in the agroclimatic zones, mainly in the Sudano-Sahelian area. OTUs
from seven bacterial species that mediate refractoriness to Plasmodium infection 
in An. gambiae s.l were detected. The beta diversity analysis did not show any
significant difference. Therefore, a same control strategy of using bacterial
species refractoriness to Plasmodium to target mosquito midgut bacterial
community and affect their fitness in malaria transmission may be valuable tool
for future malaria control efforts in Burkina Faso.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-019-05121-x 
PMID: 31643044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

