
1. Hum Genet. 2019 Dec;138(11-12):1341-1357. doi: 10.1007/s00439-019-02079-5. Epub
2019 Oct 30.

First genome-wide association study of non-severe malaria in two birth cohorts in
Benin.

Milet J(1), Boland A(2), Luisi P(3)(4), Sabbagh A(5), Sadissou I(6), Sonon P(6), 
Domingo N(7), Palstra F(5), Gineau L(5), Courtin D(5), Massougbodji A(7), Garcia 
A(5)(7), Deleuze JF(2), Perdry H(8).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Paris, MERIT, IRD, F-75006, Paris, France.
jacqueline.milet@ird.fr.
(2)Centre National de Recherche en Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), Institut de
Biologie François Jacob, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, 91057, Evry, France.
(3)Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Inmunología y Enfermedades
Infecciosas, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Córdoba,
Argentina.
(4)Facultad de Filosofía y Humanidades, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba,
Argentina.
(5)Université de Paris, MERIT, IRD, F-75006, Paris, France.
(6)Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, São Paulo,
Brazil.
(7)Centre d'Etude et de Recherche sur le Paludisme Associé à la Grossesse et
l'Enfance, Faculté des Sciences de la Santé, Cotonou, Benin.
(8)Université Paris-Saclay, Centre de recherche en Epidémiologie et Santé des
Populations, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Villejuif, France.

Recent research efforts to identify genes involved in malaria susceptibility
using genome-wide approaches have focused on severe malaria. Here, we present the
first GWAS on non-severe malaria designed to identify genetic variants involved
in innate immunity or innate resistance mechanisms. Our study was performed on
two cohorts of infants from southern Benin (525 and 250 individuals used as
discovery and replication cohorts, respectively) closely followed from birth to
18-24 months of age, with an assessment of a space- and time-dependent
environmental risk of exposure. Both the recurrence of mild malaria attacks and
the recurrence of malaria infections as a whole (symptomatic and asymptomatic)
were considered. Post-GWAS functional analyses were performed using positional,
eQTL, and chromatin interaction mapping to identify the genes underlying
association signals. Our study highlights a role of PTPRT, a tyrosine phosphatase
receptor involved in STAT3 pathway, in the protection against both mild malaria
attacks and malaria infections (p = 9.70 × 10-8 and p = 1.78 × 10-7,
respectively, in the discovery cohort). Strong statistical support was also found
for a role of MYLK4 (meta-analysis, p = 5.29 × 10-8 with malaria attacks), and
for several other genes, whose biological functions are relevant in malaria
infection. Results shows that GWAS on non-severe malaria can successfully
identify new candidate genes and inform physiological mechanisms underlying
natural protection against malaria.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-019-02079-5 
PMID: 31667592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

