
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Oct 9;10:2328. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02328. eCollection
2019.

Exploring Plasmodium falciparum Var Gene Expression to Assess Host Selection
Pressure on Parasites During Infancy.

Kivisi CA(1)(2)(3), Muthui M(1), Hunt M(4), Fegan G(1), Otto TD(4), Githinji
G(1), Warimwe GM(1)(5), Rance R(2), Marsh K(1)(5), Bull PC(1), Abdi AI(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)KEMRI Wellcome Trust Research Programme, Kilifi, Kenya.
(2)Pwani University Biosciences Research Centre, Pwani University, Kilifi, Kenya.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Pwani University, Kilifi, Kenya.
(4)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(5)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.

In sub-Saharan Africa, children below 5 years bear the greatest burden of severe 
malaria because they lack naturally acquired immunity that develops following
repeated exposure to infections by Plasmodium falciparum. Antibodies to the
surface of P. falciparum infected erythrocytes (IE) play an important role in
this immunity. In children under the age of 6 months, relative protection from
severe malaria is observed and this is thought to be partly due to
trans-placental acquired protective maternal antibodies. However, the protective 
effect of maternal antibodies has not been fully established, especially the role
of antibodies to variant surface antigens (VSA) expressed on IE. Here, we
assessed the immune pressure on parasites infecting infants using markers
associated with the acquisition of naturally acquired immunity to surface
antigens. We hypothesized that, if maternal antibodies to VSA imposed a selection
pressure on parasites, then the expression of a relatively conserved subset of
var genes called group A var genes in infants should change with waning maternal 
antibodies. To test this, we compared their expression in parasites from children
between 0 and 12 months and above 12 months of age. The transcript quantity and
the proportional expression of group A var subgroup, including those containing
domain cassette 13, were positively associated with age during the first year of 
life, which contrasts with above 12 months. This was accompanied by a decline in 
infected erythrocyte surface antibodies and an increase in parasitemia during
this period. The observed increase in group A var gene expression with age in the
first year of life, when the maternal antibodies are waning and before
acquisition of naturally acquired antibodies with repeated exposure, is
consistent with the idea that maternally acquired antibodies impose a selection
pressure on parasites that infect infants and may play a role in protecting these
infants against severe malaria.

Copyright Â© 2019 Kivisi, Muthui, Hunt, Fegan, Otto, Githinji, Warimwe, Rance,
Marsh, Bull and Abdi.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02328 
PMCID: PMC6798654
PMID: 31681266 

