
1. EC Microbiol. 2018 Dec;14(12):813-821. Epub 2018 Nov 27.

Molecular Detection of Leptospira spp. in Rodents Trapped in the Mozambique
Island City, Nampula Province, Mozambique.

Comia I(1), Madureira AC(2)(3), Schooley RT(4), Vieira ML(5), Noormahomed
EV(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)LÃºrio University, Nampula, Mozambique.
(2)Parasitology Laboratory, Microbiology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Eduardo
Mondlane University, Maputo, Mozambique.
(3)Mozambique Institute of Health Education and Research, Maputo, Mozambique.
(4)Department of Medicine, Infectious Disease Division, University of California,
San Diego, USA.
(5)Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisbon,
Portugal.

Introduction: Leptospirosis is a neglected zoonotic disease caused by a bacteria 
of the genus Leptospira. In Africa it is frequently mistaken for frequently
occurring conditions such as malaria. The aim of this study was to identify
rodent species involved in the transmission of the disease, the prevalence of
pathogenic Leptospira spp. in selected rodent species and risk factors for human 
leptospirosis.
Material and Methods: We conducted a descriptive and exploratory epidemiological 
and molecular study in Mozambique Island city in 2015. Six neighborhoods,
comprising 30 households each were randomly selected. People from the selected
180 households were interviewed regarding their awareness of the disease, the
presence of rodents in their houses, chemicals used to eliminate them, sewage
disposal, water supply system, and other key issues related to the disease. In
each neighborhood we trapped 10 rodents for morphometric study to identify their 
species and for molecular isolation of Leptospira DNA. We extracted kidneys from 
57/60 of rodents trapped, and performed nested polymerase chain reaction
targeting rrs 16S ribosomal DNA and lipL32 genes for identification of Leptospira
genus and pathogenic Leptospira spp. respectively.
Results: Of the 180 participants 92 (51%) reported having heard of leptospirosis;
107 (59%) have had the disease; 151 (83%) reported the existence of rats in their
house; 100 (56%) had latrines; 118 (66%) used chemicals to kill the rats; 102
(57%) used well water and 114 (63%) used trash containers. The most prevalent
rodent species captured was Rattus norvegicus 36/60 (60%), followed by Rattus
rattus 19/60 (31.67%) and Mus musculus 3/60 (5%). rrs 16S ribosomal DNA was
identified in 20/57 (35.%) rodents. Out these two were positive for lipL32 gene, 
giving an overall pathogenic Leptospira infection of 3.5% (2/57). The rodent
species identified as carriers of pathogenic Leptospira were Rattus norvegicus
(1) and R. rattus (1).
Conclusion: This is the first study in Mozambique to identify the presence of
pathogenic species of Leptospira using molecular tools. Leptospirosis risk
factors in Mozambique Island city are rodent's infestation, limited disease
awareness, lack of access to clean water, insufficient resources for waste
collection, greater clustering of households, poor sanitation environment and
degradation of living conditions. Pathogenic Leptospira spp. are present in the
area studied and at least two species of rodents, the R. rattus and R.
norvegi-cus are potentially involved in the transmission of the causal agents of 
the disease.


PMCID: PMC6824726
PMID: 31681910 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Authors declare no conflict 
of interest.

