
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020 Jan 8;48(D1):D65-D69. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz1014.

EPD in 2020: enhanced data visualization and extension to ncRNA promoters.

Meylan P(1), Dreos R(1), Ambrosini G(1)(2), Groux R(1)(2), Bucher P(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, CH-1015
Lausanne, Switzerland.

The Eukaryotic Promoter Database (EPD), available online at https://epd.epfl.ch, 
provides accurate transcription start site (TSS) information for promoters of 15 
model organisms plus corresponding functional genomics data that can be viewed in
a genome browser, queried or analyzed via web interfaces, or exported in standard
formats (FASTA, BED, CSV) for subsequent analysis with other tools. Recent work
has focused on the improvement of the EPD promoter viewers, which use the UCSC
Genome Browser as visualization platform. Thousands of high-resolution tracks for
CAGE, ChIP-seq and similar data have been generated and organized into public
track hubs. Customized, reproducible promoter views, combining EPD-supplied
tracks with native UCSC Genome Browser tracks, can be accessed from the organism 
summary pages or from individual promoter entries. Moreover, thanks to recent
improvements and stabilization of ncRNA gene catalogs, we were able to release
promoter collections for certain classes of ncRNAs from human and mouse.
Furthermore, we developed automatic computational protocols to assign orphan TSS 
peaks to downstream genes based on paired-end (RAMPAGE) TSS mapping data, which
enabled us to add nearly 9000 new entries to the human promoter collection. Since
our last article in this journal, EPD was extended to five more model organisms: 
rhesus monkey, rat, dog, chicken and Plasmodium falciparum.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz1014 
PMCID: PMC7145694
PMID: 31680159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

