
1. Cell Death Dis. 2019 Nov 13;10(11):862. doi: 10.1038/s41419-019-2084-1.

Artesunate induces mitochondria-mediated apoptosis of human retinoblastoma cells 
by upregulating Kruppel-like factor 6.

Yang Y(1), Wu N(1), Wu Y(1), Chen H(1), Qiu J(1), Qian X(1), Zeng J(1), Chiu
K(2), Gao Q(3)(4), Zhuang J(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510060, P. R. China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, P. R.
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510060, P. R. China. gaoqy@hotmail.com.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, The 2nd Affiliate Hospital, Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou, 325000, P. R. China. gaoqy@hotmail.com.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510060, P. R. China. zhuangj@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Retinoblastoma (RB) is the most common primary intraocular malignancy in
children. Intravitreal chemotherapy achieves favorable clinical outcomes in
controlling RB vitreous seeds, which are a common reason for treatment failure.
Thus, a novel, effective and safe intravitreal chemotherapeutic drug is urgently 
required. The malaria drug artesunate (ART) recently demonstrated remarkable
anticancer effects with mild side effects. The purpose of this study is to
investigate the anti-RB efficacy, the underlying mechanism and the intraocular
safety of ART. Herein, we verified that ART inhibits RB cell viability and
induces cell apoptosis in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Microarray analysis 
revealed that Kruppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) was upregulated after ART treatment,
and this was further confirmed by real-time PCR and western blot assays.
Silencing of KLF6 expression significantly reversed ART-induced RB cell growth
inhibition and apoptosis. Furthermore, ART activated mitochondria-mediated
apoptosis of RB cells, while silencing KLF6 expression significantly inhibited
this effect. In murine xenotransplantation models of RB, we further confirmed
that ART inhibits RB tumor growth, induces tumor cell apoptosis and upregulates
KLF6 expression. In addition, KLF6 silencing attenuates ART-mediated inhibition
of tumor growth in vivo. Furthermore, we proved that intravitreal injection of
ART in Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats is safe, with no obvious retinal function damage 
or structural disorders observed by electrophysiology (ERG), fundal photographs, 
fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) or optical coherence tomography (OCT)
examinations. Collectively, our study revealed that ART induces mitochondrial
apoptosis of RB cells via upregulating KLF6, and our results may extend the
application of ART to the clinic as an effective and safe intravitreal
chemotherapeutic drug to treat RB, especially RB with vitreous seeds.

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-019-2084-1 
PMCID: PMC6853908
PMID: 31723124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

