
1. Front Genet. 2019 Oct 29;10:1065. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01065. eCollection
2019.

Genome-Wide Analysis of Genetic Diversity in Plasmodium falciparum Isolates From 
China-Myanmar Border.

Ye R(1), Tian Y(1), Huang Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Wang J(2), Sun X(2), Zhou H(2), Zhang
D(1), Pan W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Diseases, Naval Medical University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Yunnan Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Puer, China.

Plasmodium falciparum isolates from China-Myanmar border (CMB) have experienced
regional special selective pressures and adaptive evolution. However, the genomes
of P. falciparum isolates from this region to date are poorly characterized.
Herein, we performed whole-genome sequencing of 34 P. falciparum isolates from
CMB and a series of genome-wide sequence analyses to reveal their genetic
diversity, population structures, and comparisons with the isolates from other
epidemic regions (Thai-Cambodia border, Thai-Myanmar border, and West Africa).
Totally 59,720 high-quality single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
identified in the P. falciparum isolates from CMB, with average nucleotide
diversity (π = 4.59 × 10-4) and LD decay (132 bp). The Tajima's D and Fu and Li's
D values of the CMB isolates were -0.8 (p < 0.05) and -0.84 (p < 0.05),
respectively, suggesting a demographic history of recent population expansion or 
purifying selection. Moreover, 78 genes of the parasite were identified that
could be under positive selection, including those genes conferring drug
resistance such as pfubp1. In addition, 33 SNPs were identified for tracing the
source of the parasites with a high accuracy by analysis of the most differential
SNPs among the four epidemic regions. Collectively, our data demonstrated high
diversity of the CMB isolates' genomes forming a distinct population, and the
identification of 33-SNP barcode provides a valuable surveillance of parasite
migration among the regions.

Copyright © 2019 Ye, Tian, Huang, Zhang, Wang, Sun, Zhou, Zhang and Pan.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01065 
PMCID: PMC6830057
PMID: 31737048 

