
1. PLoS One. 2019 Dec 5;14(12):e0226117. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0226117.
eCollection 2019.

Plasmodium falciparum infection dysregulates placental autophagy.

Lima FA(1), Barateiro A(1), Dombrowski JG(1), de Souza RM(2), Costa DS(1),
Murillo O(1), Epiphanio S(3), Gonçalves LA(1), Marinho CRF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Multidisciplinary Centre, Federal University of Acre, Acre, Brazil.
(3)Department of Clinical and Toxicological Analysis, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Plasmodium (P.) falciparum malaria during pregnancy has been frequently
associated with severe consequences such as maternal anemia, abortion, premature 
birth, and reduced birth weight. Placental damage promotes disruption of the
local homeostasis; though, the mechanisms underlying these events are still to be
elucidated. Autophagy is a fundamental homeostatic mechanism in the natural
course of pregnancy by which cells self-recycle in order to survive in stressful 
environments. Placentas from non-infected and P. falciparum-infected women during
pregnancy were selected from a previous prospective cohort study conducted in the
Brazilian Amazon (Acre, Brazil). Newborns from infected women experienced reduced
birth weight (P = 0.0098) and placental immunopathology markers such as monocyte 
infiltrate (P < 0.0001) and IL-10 production (P = 0.0122). The placentas were
evaluated for autophagy-related molecules. As a result, we observed reduced mRNA 
levels of ULK1 (P = 0.0255), BECN1 (P = 0.0019), and MAP1LC3B (P = 0.0086) genes 
in placentas from P. falciparum-infected, which was more striking in those
diagnosed with placental malaria. Despite the protein levels of these genes
followed the same pattern, the observed reduction was not statistically
significant in placentas from P. falciparum-infected women. Nevertheless, our
data suggest that chronic placental immunopathology due to P. falciparum
infection leads to autophagy dysregulation, which might impair local homeostasis 
during malaria in pregnancy that may result in poor pregnancy outcomes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0226117 
PMCID: PMC6894763
PMID: 31805150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

