
1. PLoS Genet. 2019 Dec 19;15(12):e1008440. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008440.
eCollection 2019 Dec.

Experimental population modification of the malaria vector mosquito, Anopheles
stephensi.

Pham TB(1), Phong CH(1), Bennett JB(2), Hwang K(1), Jasinskiene N(1), Parker
K(1), Stillinger D(1), Marshall JM(3)(4), Carballar-Lejarazú R(1), James
AA(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, California, United States of America.
(2)Biophysics Graduate Group, University of California, Berkeley, California,
United States of America.
(3)Division of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University 
of California, Berkeley, California, United States of America.
(4)Innovative Genomics Institute, Berkeley, California, United States of America.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology & Biochemistry, University of California,
Irvine, California, United States of America.

Small laboratory cage trials of non-drive and gene-drive strains of the Asian
malaria vector mosquito, Anopheles stephensi, were used to investigate release
ratios and other strain properties for their impact on transgene spread during
simulated population modification. We evaluated the effects of transgenes on
survival, male contributions to next-generation populations, female reproductive 
success and the impact of accumulation of gene drive-resistant genomic target
sites resulting from nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) mutagenesis during Cas9,
guide RNA-mediated cleavage. Experiments with a non-drive, autosomally-linked
malaria-resistance gene cassette showed 'full introduction' (100% of the insects 
have at least one copy of the transgene) within 8 weeks (≤ 3 generations)
following weekly releases of 10:1 transgenic:wild-type males in an overlapping
generation trial design. Male release ratios of 1:1 resulted in cages where
mosquitoes with at least one copy of the transgene fluctuated around 50%. In
comparison, two of three cages in which the malaria-resistance genes were linked 
to a gene-drive system in an overlapping generation, single 1:1 release reached
full introduction in 6-8 generations with a third cage at ~80% within the same
time. Release ratios of 0.1:1 failed to establish the transgenes. A
non-overlapping generation, single-release trial of the same gene-drive strain
resulted in two of three cages reaching 100% introduction within 6-12 generations
following a 1:1 transgenic:wild-type male release. Two of three cages with 0.33:1
transgenic:wild-type male single releases achieved full introduction in 13-16
generations. All populations exhibiting full introduction went extinct within
three generations due to a significant load on females having disruptions of both
copies of the target gene, kynurenine hydroxylase. While repeated releases of
high-ratio (10:1) non-drive constructs could achieve full introduction, results
from the 1:1 release ratios across all experimental designs favor the use of gene
drive, both for efficiency and anticipated cost of the control programs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008440 
PMCID: PMC6922335
PMID: 31856182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

