
1. J Cell Sci. 2020 Jan 9;133(1). pii: jcs236489. doi: 10.1242/jcs.236489.

Plasmodium falciparum GCN5 acetyltransferase follows a novel proteolytic
processing pathway that is essential for its function.

Bhowmick K(1), Tehlan A(1), Sunita(2), Sudhakar R(3), Kaur I(4), Sijwali PS(3),
Krishnamachari A(2), Dhar SK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi 
110067, India.
(2)School of Computational and Integrative Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University,
New Delhi 110067, India.
(3)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, Telengana 500007, India.
(4)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi
110067, India.
(5)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi 
110067, India skdhar@mail.jnu.ac.in.

The pathogenesis of human malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum is interlinked 
with its timely control of gene expression during its complex life cycle. In this
organism, gene expression is partially controlled through epigenetic mechanisms, 
the regulation of which is, hence, of paramount importance to the parasite. The
P. falciparum (Pf)-GCN5 histone acetyltransferase (HAT), an essential enzyme,
acetylates histone 3 and regulates global gene expression in the parasite. Here, 
we show the existence of a novel proteolytic processing for PfGCN5 that is
crucial for its activity in vivo We find that a cysteine protease-like enzyme is 
required for the processing of PfGCN5 protein. Immunofluorescence and
immuno-electron microscopy analysis suggest that the processing event occurs in
the vicinity of the digestive vacuole of the parasite following its trafficking
through the classical ER-Golgi secretory pathway, before it subsequently reaches 
the nucleus. Furthermore, blocking of PfGCN5 processing leads to the concomitant 
reduction of its occupancy at the gene promoters and a reduced H3K9 acetylation
level at these promoters, highlighting the important correlation between the
processing event and PfGCN5 activity. Altogether, our study reveals a unique
processing event for a nuclear protein PfGCN5 with unforeseen role of a food
vacuolar cysteine protease. This leads to a possibility of the development of new
antimalarials against these targets.This article has an associated First Person
interview with the first author of the paper.

Â© 2020. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.236489 
PMID: 31862795 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no
competing or financial interests.

