
1. Expert Opin Drug Discov. 2020 Apr;15(4):415-425. doi:
10.1080/17460441.2020.1704251. Epub 2019 Dec 23.

Developments in drug design strategies for bromodomain protein inhibitors to
target Plasmodium falciparum parasites.

Nguyen HHT(1)(2), Yeoh LM(1), Chisholm SA(1), Duffy MF(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)The School of BioSciences, Bio21 Institute, The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia.
(2)The Dept of Medicine and Radiology, Royal Melbourne Hospital, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.

Introduction: Bromodomains (BRDs) bind to acetylated lysine residues, often on
histones. The BRD proteins can contribute to gene regulation either directly
through enzymatic activity or indirectly through recruitment of
chromatin-modifying complexes or transcription factors. There is no evidence of
direct orthologues of the Plasmodium falciparum BRD proteins (PfBDPs) outside the
apicomplexans. PfBDPs are expressed during the parasite's life cycle in both the 
human host's blood and in the mosquito. PfBDPs could also prove to be promising
targets for novel antimalarials, which are urgently required to address
increasing drug resistance.Areas covered: This review discusses recent studies of
the biology of PfBDPs, current target-based strategies for PfBDP inhibitor
discovery, and different approaches to the important step of validating the
specificity of hit compounds for PfBDPs.Expert opinion: The novelty of Plasmodium
BRDs suggests that they could be targeted by selective compounds. Chemical series
that showed promise in screens against human BRDs could be leveraged to create
targeted compound libraries, as could hits from P. falciparum phenotypic screens.
These targeted libraries and hits could be screened in target-based strategies
aimed at discovery and optimization of novel inhibitors of PfBDPs. A key task for
the field is to generate parasite assays to validate the hit compounds'
specificity for PfBDPs.

DOI: 10.1080/17460441.2020.1704251 
PMID: 31870185 

