
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Dec 27;9(1):19952. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-56513-9.

Lyse-Reseal Erythrocytes for Transfection of Plasmodium falciparum.

Govindarajalu G(1), Rizvi Z(1), Kumar D(1), Sijwali PS(2).

Author information: 
(1)CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, 500007, TS, India.
(2)CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, 500007, TS, India. 
psijwali@ccmb.res.in.

Simple and efficient transfection methods for genetic manipulation of Plasmodium 
falciparum are desirable to identify, characterize and validate the genes with
therapeutic potential and better understand parasite biology. Among the available
transfection techniques for P. falciparum, electroporation-based methods,
particularly electroporation of ring-infected RBCs is routinely used.
Nonetheless, transfection of P. falciparum remains a resource-intensive
procedure. Here, we report a simple and economic transfection method for P.
falciparum, which is termed as the lyse-reseal erythrocytes for transfection
(LyRET). It involved lysis of erythrocytes with a hypotonic RBC lysis buffer
containing the desired plasmid DNA, followed by resealing by adding a high salt
buffer. These DNA-encapsulated lyse-reseal erythrocytes were mixed with P.
falciparum trophozoite/schizont stages and subjected to selection for the
plasmid-encoded drug resistance. In parallel, transfections were also done by the
methods utilizing electroporation of DNA into uninfected RBCs and
parasite-infected RBCs. The LyRET method successfully transfected 3D7 and D10
strains with different plasmids in 63 of the 65 attempts, with success rate
similar to transfection by electroporation of DNA into infected RBCs. The cost
effectiveness and comparable efficiency of LyRET method makes it an alternative
to the existing transfection methods for P. falciparum, particularly in
resource-limited settings.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-56513-9 
PMCID: PMC6934678
PMID: 31882761 

