
1. Food Res Int. 2020 Jan;127:108741. doi: 10.1016/j.foodres.2019.108741. Epub 2019 
Oct 14.

Comparative analysis of whey proteins in donkey colostrum and mature milk using
quantitative proteomics.

Li W(1), Li M(1), Cao X(1), Han H(1), Kong F(1), Yue X(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Food Science, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang, Liaoning 
Province, China.
(2)College of Food Science, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang, Liaoning 
Province, China. Electronic address: yxqsyau@126.com.

Donkey milk is attracting increasing attention as a nutritional milk source
similar to human milk. In this study, we carried out qualitative and quantitative
analysis of the donkey whey proteome using a label-free proteomic approach,
combined with parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) as a validation method. A total 
of 300 whey proteins were identified in donkey colostrum (DC) and donkey mature
(DM) milk, of which 18 were differentially expressed (P < 0.05) between the two
types of milk. Gene ontology (GO) analysis showed that differentially and
uniquely expressed proteins were mainly involved in cellular processes, response 
to stimulus, metabolic processes, and biological regulation. Their molecular
functions included binding, catalytic activity, and molecular functional
regulation, and their main annotated areas of origin were the cell, cell-part,
and the extracellular region. Most differentially and uniquely expressed proteins
were linked with malaria, systemic lupus erythematosus, or antigen processing and
presentation. Our results provide insight into the complexity of the donkey whey 
proteome and molecular evidence for nutritional differences between different
lactation stages.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodres.2019.108741 
PMID: 31882075 

