
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2020 Jan 21:1-12. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2020.1711807. [Epub 
ahead of print]

In-silico profiling and structural insights into the impact of nSNPs in the P.
falciparum acetyl-CoA transporter gene to understand the mechanism of drug
resistance in malaria.

Sardar R(1)(2), Katyal N(1), Ahamad S(1), Jade DD(1), Ali S(2), Gupta D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Bioinformatics Group, International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi, India.

The continuous emergence of resistance to the available drugs poses major
constraints in the development of effective therapeutics against malaria. Malaria
drug resistance has been attributed to be the manifestation of numerous factors. 
For example, mutations in the parasite transporter protein acetyl-CoA transporter
(Pfact) can remarkably affect its uptake affinity for a drug molecule against
malaria, and hence enhance its susceptibility to resistance. To identify major
contributors to its loss of functionality, we have thoroughly scrutinized eight
such recently reported resistant mutants, via in-silico tools in terms of
alterations in different properties. We performed molecular dynamics simulations 
of the selected Pfact mutants to gain deeper insights into the structural
perturbation and dynamicity. Comparison of residue interaction network map of
mutants with that of Wild type (WT) protein suggests structural changes as a
result of the mutation(s) that translate into the weakening of intra-protein
interactions, especially around the drug binding pocket. This, in turn,
diminishes the affinity of drug molecules towards the binding site, which was
validated by docking analysis. Finally, collating all the observations, we have
delineated R108K mutant to deviate the most from WT protein, which, intriguingly 
suggests that replacing an amino acid with another of similar nature can even
translate into greater functional effects as those with dissimilar
substitutions.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2020.1711807 
PMID: 31903842 

