
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2020 Jun;80:104188. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104188. Epub
2020 Jan 9.

Joint selection for two malaria resistance mutations in a south-west Colombian
population.

Ortega DC(1), Cárdenas H(1), Barreto G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Group, Department of Biology, Universidad del Valle, 
Cali, Colombia.
(2)Human Molecular Genetics Group, Department of Biology, Universidad del Valle, 
Cali, Colombia. Electronic address: guillermo.barreto@correounivalle.edu.co.

In regions with an Afro-descendant population and where malaria is endemic, high 
frequencies of polymorphisms have been found that confer resistance to this
disease, such as the haemoglobin S (HbS) and Duffy genes, which provide
resistance to P. falciparum and P. vivax infection, respectively. The objective
of this study was to evaluate the individual and joint selection actions of these
two genes in an Afro-descendant Colombian population. A total of 819 individuals 
were analysed using stratified random sampling. PCR-RFLP and Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium deviation analysis (H-W eq.), linkage disequilibrium (LD), D'IS2 and 
D'ST2 indexes, neutrality tests, correlations and fitness were performed using
Arlequin 3.5.2.2 and R 3.4.1 software. In general, the population showed
neutrality and H-W eq. for the HbS gene but not for the Duffy gene (FYA/FYB,
FYA/FYBES and FYB/FYBES genotypes were responsible for this deviation). LD
between the HbS locus and the promoter region of the Duffy gene, a value
D'IS2 = 0.001 and D'ST2 = 0.020 was found, an increase in fitness of the
AS*FYBES/FYBES genotype combination (marked in adolescents and adults), and a
strong correlation between these genotypes (Rho = 90%, p = .001) were found,
evidencing a possible joint selection action for these two alleles. This work
presents evidence of the action of natural selection, both individually and
jointly, on malaria resistance genes, HbS and Duffy, in the Buenaventura
population.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104188 
PMID: 31927074 

