
1. Malar J. 2020 Jan 17;19(1):29. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-3058-6.

Molecular characteristics of odorant-binding protein 1 in Anopheles maculipennis.

Ghavami MB(1), Khoeini S(2), Djadid ND(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Entomology and Vector Control, School of Medicine,
Zanjan University of Medical Sciences, Zanjan, Iran. Ghavami@zums.ac.ir.
(2)Department of Medical Entomology and Vector Control, School of Medicine,
Zanjan University of Medical Sciences, Zanjan, Iran.
(3)Malaria and Vector Research Group, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles maculipennis complex, the historic vector of malaria,
causes serious medical problems worldwide and exhibits different behaviours.
Studying the odorant-binding proteins (OBPs), which influence the chemosensory
system and behavioural responses, is essential to understanding the population
structure and developing effective control measures against this vector. The
present study was designed to identify and analyse the obp1 gene in An.
maculipennis.
METHODS: Adults of An. maculipennis sensu stricto were collected in Zanjan
Province, northwest of Iran, and gDNAs of female mosquitoes were extracted.
Fragments of An. maculipennis obp1 (Amacobp1) gene were amplified using
degenerate and specific primers, and some of amplicons were selected for
sequencing.
RESULTS: Analysis of amplified products identified that the sequence of Amacobp1 
gene was 1341 bp long. This gene contains three exons (5', internal, and 3'of
160, 256, and 18 bp, respectively) and encodes 144 amino acids. The sizes of
introns I and II in deduced gene are 268 and 358 nucleotides, respectively. The
amino acid sequence in the C-terminal of AmacOBP1 is similar to that of major
malaria vector Anopheles species. However, its N-terminal has a specific signal
peptide with 19 amino acids. This peptide is conserved in different studied
populations, and its sequence of amino acids shows the most variation among
anopheline species.
CONCLUSIONS: Degenerate primers in this study are suggested for studying obp1
gene in Anopheles species. Amacobp1 gene is proposed as a molecular marker for
the detection of intraspecific ecotypes and diagnosis of different species within
Maculipennis Group. Moreover, the N-terminal of AmacOBP1 peptide is recommended
as a molecular marker to identify the Amacobp1 expression patterns in different
chemosensory organs for assessing the molecular mechanisms and developing novel
behavioural disturbance agents to control An. maculipennis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-3058-6 
PMCID: PMC6969430
PMID: 31952536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

