
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2020 Jun;80:104197. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104197. Epub
2020 Jan 16.

Population genetic structure analysis of thrombospondin-related adhesive protein 
(TRAP) as a vaccine candidate antigen in worldwide Plasmodium falciparum
isolates.

Mehrizi AA(1), Jafari Zadeh A(2), Zakeri S(2), Djadid ND(2).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, P.O.BOX 1316943551, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: 
abouei@pasteur.ac.ir.
(2)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, P.O.BOX 1316943551, Tehran, Iran.

Antigenic diversity is a major concern in malaria vaccine development that
requires to be considered in developing a malaria vaccine. Plasmodium falciparum 
thrombospondin-related adhesive protein (PfTRAP) is a leading malaria vaccine
candidate antigen. In the current study, we investigated the level of genetic
diversity and natural selection of pftrap sequences in P. falciparum isolates
from Iran (n = 47). The gene diversity of Iranian pftrap sequences was also
compared to available global pftrap sequences deposited in the GenBank or
PlasmoDB databases (n = 220). Comparison of Iranian PfTRAP sequences with T9/96
reference sequence showed the presence of 35 amino acid changes in 32 positions
and a limited variation in repeat sequences, leading to 13 distinct haplotypes.
The overall nucleotide diversity (π) for the ectodomain of Iranian pftrap
sequences was 0.00444 ± 0.00043, with the highest diversity in Domain IV.
Alignment comparison of global PfTRAP sequences with T9/96 reference sequence
indicated 96 amino acid replacements as well as extensive variable repeat
sequences (9-23 repeats), which led to 192 haplotypes. Among the global isolates,
the lowest nucleotide diversity was detected in French Guianan
(0.00428 ± 0.00163) and Iranian (0.00444 ± 0.00043) pftrap sequences, and the
most variation was observed in domains II and IV in all populations. The dN-dS
value displayed the evidence of positive selection due to recombination and
immune system pressure. The Fst analysis revealed a gene flow between African
populations; however, genetic differentiation observed between Iranian and other 
populations probably was due to gene flow barriers. Both conserved and variable
epitopes were predicted in B- and T-cell epitopes of PfTRAP antigen. The obtained
results from this study could be helpful for developing a PfTRAP-based malaria
vaccine.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104197 
PMID: 31954917 

