
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Feb 4;117(5):2613-2621. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1914423117. Epub 2020 Jan 21.

Single-cell RNA sequencing of Trypanosoma brucei from tsetse salivary glands
unveils metacyclogenesis and identifies potential transmission blocking antigens.

Vigneron A(1), O'Neill MB(2), Weiss BL(2), Savage AF(2), Campbell OC(2), Kamhawi 
S(3), Valenzuela JG(3), Aksoy S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology of Microbial Diseases, Yale School of Public
Health, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520; aurelien.vigneron@yale.edu
serap.aksoy@yale.edu.
(2)Department of Epidemiology of Microbial Diseases, Yale School of Public
Health, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520.
(3)Vector Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, MD 20852.

Tsetse-transmitted African trypanosomes must develop into mammalian-infectious
metacyclic cells in the fly's salivary glands (SGs) before transmission to a new 
host. The molecular mechanisms that underlie this developmental process, known as
metacyclogenesis, are poorly understood. Blocking the few metacyclic parasites
deposited in saliva from further development in the mammal could prevent disease.
To obtain an in-depth perspective of metacyclogenesis, we performed single-cell
RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) from a pool of 2,045 parasites collected from infected
tsetse SGs. Our data revealed three major cell clusters that represent the
epimastigote, and pre- and mature metacyclic trypanosome developmental stages.
Individual cell level data also confirm that the metacyclic pool is diverse, and 
that each parasite expresses only one of the unique metacyclic variant surface
glycoprotein (mVSG) coat protein transcripts identified. Further clustering of
cells revealed a dynamic transcriptomic and metabolic landscape reflective of a
developmental program leading to infectious metacyclic forms preadapted to
survive in the mammalian host environment. We describe the expression profile of 
proteins that regulate gene expression and that potentially play a role in
metacyclogenesis. We also report on a family of nonvariant surface proteins
(Fam10) and demonstrate surface localization of one member (named SGM1.7) on
mature metacyclic parasites. Vaccination of mice with recombinant SGM1.7 reduced 
parasitemia early in the infection. Future studies are warranted to investigate
Fam10 family proteins as potential trypanosome transmission blocking vaccine
antigens. Our experimental approach is translationally relevant for developing
strategies to prevent other insect saliva-transmitted parasites from infecting
and causing disease in mammalian hosts.

Copyright Â© 2020 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1914423117 
PMCID: PMC7007551
PMID: 31964820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interest statement: The authors declare
that a Provisional Patent Application describing the contents of this manuscript 
has been filed, Yale ref: OCR7835 || Saul ref: 047162-7268P1(01042).

