
1. PLoS One. 2020 Jan 22;15(1):e0216260. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0216260.
eCollection 2020.

Design and assessment of TRAP-CSP fusion antigens as effective malaria vaccines.

Lu C(1), Song G(1), Beale K(1), Yan J(1), Garst E(1), Feng J(1), Lund E(2),
Catteruccia F(2), Springer TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

The circumsporozoite protein (CSP) and thrombospondin-related adhesion protein
(TRAP) are major targets for pre-erythrocytic malaria vaccine development.
However, the CSP-based vaccine RTS,S provides only marginal protection,
highlighting the need for innovative vaccine design and development. Here we
design and characterize expression and folding of P. berghei (Pb) and P.
falciparum (Pf) TRAP-CSP fusion proteins, and evaluate immunogenicity and
sterilizing immunity in mice. TRAP N-terminal domains were fused to the CSP
C-terminal Î±TSR domain with or without the CSP repeat region, expressed in
mammalian cells, and evaluated with or without N-glycan shaving. Pb and Pf
fusions were each expressed substantially better than the TRAP or CSP components 
alone; furthermore, the fusions but not the CSP component could be purified to
homogeneity and were well folded and monomeric. As yields of TRAP and CSP
fragments were insufficient, we immunized BALB/c mice with Pb TRAP-CSP fusions in
AddaVax adjuvant and tested the effects of absence or presence of the CSP repeats
and absence or presence of high mannose N-glycans on total antibody titer and
protection from infection by mosquito bite both 2.5 months and 6 months after the
last immunization. Fusions containing the repeats were completely protective
against challenge and re-challenge, while those lacking repeats were
significantly less effective. These results correlated with higher total antibody
titers when repeats were present. Our results show that TRAP-CSP fusions increase
protein antigen production, have the potential to yield effective vaccines, and
also guide design of effective proteins that can be encoded by nucleic acid-based
and virally vectored vaccines.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0216260 
PMCID: PMC6975556
PMID: 31967991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

