
1. Dose Response. 2020 Jan 13;18(1):1559325819897180. doi: 10.1177/1559325819897180.
eCollection 2020 Jan-Mar.

Cardiotoxicity and Cardioprotection by Artesunate in Larval Zebrafish.

Zheng C(1), Shan L(1), Tong P(1), Efferth T(2).

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, Institute of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, 
Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.

Although artesunate (ART) is generally accepted as a safe and well-tolerated
first-line treatment of severe malaria, cases of severe side effects and toxicity
of this compound are also documented. This study applied larval zebrafishes to
determine the acute toxicity and efficacy of ART and performed RNA-sequencing
analyses to unravel the underlying signaling pathways contributing to ART's
activities. Results from acute toxicity assay showed that a single-dose
intravenous injection of ART from 3.6 ng/fish (1/9 maximum nonlethal
concentration) to 41.8 ng/fish (lethal dose 10%) obviously induced pericardial
edema, circulation defects, yolk sac absorption delay, renal edema, and swim
bladder loss, indicating acute cardiotoxicity, nephrotoxicity, and developmental 
toxicity of ART. Efficacy assay showed that ART at 1/2 lowest observed adverse
effect level (LOAEL) exerted cardioprotective effects on zebrafishes with
verapamil-induced heart failure. Artesunate significantly restored cardiac
malformation, venous stasis, cardiac output decrease, and blood flow dynamics
reduction. No adverse events were observed with this treatment, indicating that
ART at doses below LOAEL was effective and safe. These results indicate that ART 
at low doses was cardioprotective, but revealed cardiotoxicity at high doses.
RNA-sequencing analysis showed that gene expression of frizzled class receptor 7a
(fzd7a) was significantly upregulated in zebrafishes with verapamil-induced heart
failure and significantly downregulated if ART at 1/2 LOAEL was coadministrated, 
indicating that fzd7a-modulated Wnt signaling may mediate the cardioprotective
effect of ART. For the first time, this study revealed the biphasic property of
ART, providing in-depth knowledge on the pharmacological efficacy-safety profile 
for its therapeutic and safe applications in clinic.

Â© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1177/1559325819897180 
PMCID: PMC6958657
PMID: 31975974 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

