
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2020 Feb 7;14(2):e0008059. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008059.
eCollection 2020 Feb.

Exposure of Anopheles mosquitoes to trypanosomes reduces reproductive fitness and
enhances susceptibility to Plasmodium.

Dieme C(1)(2)(3), Zmarlak NM(1)(2)(4), Brito-Fravallo E(1)(2), Travaillé C(3),
Pain A(1)(2)(5), Cherrier F(1)(2), Genève C(1)(2), Calvo-Alvarez E(3), Riehle
MM(6), Vernick KD(1)(2), Rotureau B(3), Mitri C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Genomics of Insect Vectors Unit, Department of Parasites and
Insect Vectors, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(2)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR2000, Paris, France.
(3)Trypanosome Transmission Group, Trypanosome Cell Biology Unit, Department of
Parasites and Insect Vectors, INSERM U1201, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(4)Graduate School of Life Sciences ED515, Sorbonne Universities, UPMC Paris VI, 
Paris, France.
(5)Institut Pasteur-Bioinformatics and Biostatistics Hub-C3BI, USR 3756 IP
CNRS-Paris, France.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States of America.

During a blood meal, female Anopheles mosquitoes are potentially exposed to
diverse microbes in addition to the malaria parasite, Plasmodium. Human and
animal African trypanosomiases are frequently co-endemic with malaria in Africa. 
It is not known whether exposure of Anopheles to trypanosomes influences their
fitness or ability to transmit Plasmodium. Using cell and molecular biology
approaches, we found that Trypanosoma brucei brucei parasites survive for at
least 48h after infectious blood meal in the midgut of the major malaria vector, 
Anopheles coluzzii before being cleared. This transient survival of trypanosomes 
in the midgut is correlated with a dysbiosis, an alteration in the abundance of
the enteric bacterial flora in Anopheles coluzzii. Using a developmental biology 
approach, we found that the presence of live trypanosomes in mosquito midguts
also reduces their reproductive fitness, as it impairs the viability of laid eggs
by affecting their hatching. Furthermore, we found that Anopheles exposure to
trypanosomes enhances their vector competence for Plasmodium, as it increases
their infection prevalence. A transcriptomic analysis revealed that expression of
only two Anopheles immune genes are modulated during trypanosome exposure and
that the increased susceptibility to Plasmodium was microbiome-dependent, while
the reproductive fitness cost was dependent only on the presence of live
trypanosomes but was microbiome independent. Taken together, these results
demonstrate multiple effects upon Anopheles vector competence for Plasmodium
caused by eukaryotic microbes interacting with the host and its microbiome, which
may in turn have implications for malaria control strategies in co-endemic areas.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008059 
PMCID: PMC7032731
PMID: 32032359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

