
1. J Cell Mol Med. 2020 Mar;24(6):3549-3559. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.15044. Epub 2020 Feb 
13.

A novel tumour suppressor lncRNA F630028O10Rik inhibits lung cancer angiogenesis 
by regulating miR-223-3p.

Qin L(1)(2), Zhong M(2), Adah D(3), Qin L(3), Chen X(3), Ma C(2), Fu Q(2), Zhu
X(2), Li Z(2), Wang N(2), Chen Y(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Molecular Design and Precise
Breeding, Foshan University, Guangdong, China.
(2)School of Life Science and Engineering, Foshan University, Guangdong, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institutes of
Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Science, Guangdong, China.

Lung cancer is the world's leading cause of cancer-related morbidity and
mortality despite advances in surgery, chemotherapy and immunotherapy; thus,
there is an urgent need to find new molecules to develop novel treatment
strategies. Although ncRNAs were found to account for 98% transcripts, the number
of lncRNAs with distinct function in lung cancer is extremely limited. We
previously demonstrated that Plasmodium infection inhibits tumour growth and
metastasis, but the exact mechanisms involved have not been fully understood. In 
this study, we carried out RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) of tumour tissues isolated
from LLC tumour-bearing mice treated with either Plasmodium yoelli (Py)-infected 
red blood cells or uninfected red blood cells. We found that F630028O10Rik
(abbreviated as F63) is a novel lncRNA that was significantly up-regulated in
tumours isolated from mice treated with Py-infected red blood cells compared to
the control. By using gene silencing technique, F63 was found to inhibit both
tumour Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A (VEGFA) secretion and endothelial
cells clone formation, migration, invasion and tube formation. Injection of
cholesterol-modified siRNA-F63 into mice tumour tissues produced a significant
increase in tumour volume, blood vessel formation and angiogenesis 17 days after 
injection. We further showed that inhibiting miR-223-3p results in the
down-regulation of VEGFA and VEGFR2 which are vital molecules for angiogenesis.
These results reveal that F63 inhibit tumour growth and progression by modulating
tumour angiogenesis suggesting F63 can be a novel lncRNA with great potential as 
a candidate molecule for gene therapy in lung cancer.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by
Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.15044 
PMCID: PMC7131933
PMID: 32052546 

