
1. mBio. 2020 Feb 25;11(1). pii: e03078-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.03078-19.

An Endoplasmic Reticulum CREC Family Protein Regulates the Egress Proteolytic
Cascade in Malaria Parasites.

Fierro MA(1)(2), Asady B(1), Brooks CF(1), Cobb DW(1)(2), Villegas A(1)(2),
Moreno SNJ(1)(2), Muralidharan V(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia,
Athens, Georgia, USA.
(2)Department of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA.
(3)Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia,
Athens, Georgia, USA vasant@uga.edu.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is thought to play an essential role during egress
of malaria parasites because the ER is assumed to be required for biogenesis and 
secretion of egress-related organelles. However, no proteins localized to the
parasite ER have been shown to play a role in egress of malaria parasites. In
this study, we generated conditional mutants of the Plasmodium falciparum
endoplasmic reticulum-resident calcium-binding protein (PfERC), a member of the
CREC family. Knockdown of the PfERC gene showed that this gene is essential for
asexual growth of P. falciparum Analysis of the intraerythrocytic life cycle
revealed that PfERC is essential for parasite egress but is not required for
protein trafficking or calcium storage. We found that PfERC knockdown prevents
the rupture of the parasitophorous vacuole membrane. This is because PfERC
knockdown inhibited the proteolytic maturation of the subtilisin-like serine
protease SUB1. Using double mutant parasites, we showed that PfERC is required
for the proteolytic maturation of the essential aspartic protease plasmepsin X,
which is required for SUB1 cleavage. Further, we showed that processing of
substrates downstream of the proteolytic cascade is inhibited by PfERC knockdown.
Thus, these data establish that the ER-resident CREC family protein PfERC is a
key early regulator of the egress proteolytic cascade of malaria
parasites.IMPORTANCE The divergent eukaryotic parasites that cause malaria grow
and divide within a vacuole inside a host cell, which they have to break open
once they finish cell division. The egress of daughter parasites requires the
activation of a proteolytic cascade, and a subtilisin-like protease initiates a
proteolytic cascade to break down the membranes blocking egress. It is assumed
that the parasite endoplasmic reticulum plays a role in this process, but the
proteins in this organelle required for egress remain unknown. We have identified
an early ER-resident regulator essential for the maturation of the recently
discovered aspartic protease in the egress proteolytic cascade, plasmepsin X,
which is required for maturation of the subtilisin-like protease. Conditional
loss of PfERC results in the formation of immature and inactive egress proteases 
that are unable to breakdown the vacuolar membrane barring release of daughter
parasites.

Copyright Â© 2020 Fierro et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.03078-19 
PMCID: PMC7042697
PMID: 32098818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

