
1. Microbiome. 2020 Mar 12;8(1):34. doi: 10.1186/s40168-020-00798-w.

Deep-sea corals provide new insight into the ecology, evolution, and the role of 
plastids in widespread apicomplexan symbionts of anthozoans.

Vohsen SA(1), Anderson KE(2), Gade AM(2), Gruber-Vodicka HR(3), Dannenberg
RP(2)(4), Osman EO(2)(5), Dubilier N(3), Fisher CR(2), Baums IB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA.
sav146@psu.edu.
(2)Biology Department, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Symbiosis, Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen,
Germany.
(4)Epic, Madison, WI, USA.
(5)Marine Biology Department, Faculty of Science, Al Azhar University, Cairo,
Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Apicomplexans are the causative agents of major human diseases such
as malaria and toxoplasmosis. A novel group of apicomplexans, recently named
corallicolids, have been detected in corals inhabiting tropical shallow reefs.
These apicomplexans may represent a transitional lifestyle between free-living
phototrophs and obligate parasites. To shed light on the evolutionary history of 
apicomplexans and to investigate their ecology in association with corals, we
screened scleractinians, antipatharians, alcyonaceans, and zoantharians from
shallow, mesophotic, and deep-sea communities. We detected corallicolid plastids 
using 16S metabarcoding, sequenced the nuclear 18S rRNA gene of corallicolids
from selected samples, assembled and annotated the plastid and mitochondrial
genomes from a corallicolid that associates with a deep-sea coral, and screened
the metagenomes of four coral species for corallicolids.
RESULTS: We detected 23 corallicolid plastotypes that were associated with 14
coral species from three orders and depths down to 1400Â m. Individual plastotypes
were restricted to coral hosts within a single depth zone and within a single
taxonomic order of corals. Some clusters of closely related corallicolids were
revealed that associated with closely related coral species. However, the
presence of divergent corallicolid lineages that associated with similar coral
species and depths suggests that corallicolid/coral relations are flexible over
evolutionary timescales and that a large diversity of apicomplexans may remain
undiscovered. The corallicolid plastid genome from a deep-sea coral contained
four genes involved in chlorophyll biosynthesis: the three genes of the LIPOR
complex and acsF.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of corallicolid apicomplexans in corals below the
photic zone demonstrates that they are not restricted to shallow-water reefs and 
are more general anthozoan symbionts. The presence of LIPOR genes in the deep-sea
corallicolid precludes a role involving photosynthesis and suggests they may be
involved in a different function. Thus, these genes may represent another set of 
genetic tools whose function was adapted from photosynthesis as the ancestors of 
apicomplexans evolved towards parasitic lifestyles. Video abstract.

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-020-00798-w 
PMCID: PMC7068898
PMID: 32164774 

