
1. PLoS Genet. 2020 Mar 13;16(3):e1008647. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008647.
eCollection 2020 Mar.

A fly model establishes distinct mechanisms for synthetic CRISPR/Cas9 sex
distorters.

Fasulo B(1), Meccariello A(1), Morgan M(1), Borufka C(1), Papathanos PA(2),
Windbichler N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Sir Alexander Fleming
Building, South Kensington Campus, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Entomology, Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and
Environment, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot, Israel.

Synthetic sex distorters have recently been developed in the malaria mosquito,
relying on endonucleases that target the X-chromosome during spermatogenesis.
Although inspired by naturally-occurring traits, it has remained unclear how they
function and, given their potential for genetic control, how portable this
strategy is across species. We established Drosophila models for two distinct
mechanisms for CRISPR/Cas9 sex-ratio distortion-"X-shredding" and
"X-poisoning"-and dissected their target-site requirements and repair dynamics.
X-shredding resulted in sex distortion when Cas9 endonuclease activity occurred
during the meiotic stages of spermatogenesis but not when Cas9 was expressed from
the stem cell stages onwards. Our results suggest that X-shredding is
counteracted by the NHEJ DNA repair pathway and can operate on a single repeat
cluster of non-essential sequences, although the targeting of a number of such
repeats had no effect on the sex ratio. X-poisoning by contrast, i.e. targeting
putative haplolethal genes on the X chromosome, induced a high bias towards males
(>92%) when we directed Cas9 cleavage to the X-linked ribosomal target gene RpS6.
In the case of X-poisoning sex distortion was coupled to a loss in reproductive
output, although a dominant-negative effect appeared to drive the mechanism of
female lethality. These model systems will guide the study and the application of
sex distorters to medically or agriculturally important insect target species.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008647 
PMCID: PMC7108745
PMID: 32168334  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

