
1. BMC Genomics. 2020 Mar 17;21(1):236. doi: 10.1186/s12864-020-6625-x.

Conserved associations between G-quadruplex-forming DNA motifs and virulence gene
families in malaria parasites.

Gage HL(1), Merrick CJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cambridge University, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge,
CB2 1QP, UK.
(2)Department of Pathology, Cambridge University, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge,
CB2 1QP, UK. cjm48@cam.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The Plasmodium genus of malaria parasites encodes several families of
antigen-encoding genes. These genes tend to be hyper-variable, highly
recombinogenic and variantly expressed. The best-characterized family is the var 
genes, exclusively found in the Laveranian subgenus of malaria parasites
infecting humans and great apes. Var genes encode major virulence factors
involved in immune evasion and the maintenance of chronic infections. In the
human parasite P. falciparum, var gene recombination and diversification appear
to be promoted by G-quadruplex (G4) DNA motifs, which are strongly associated
with var genes in P. falciparum. Here, we investigated how this association might
have evolved across Plasmodium species - both Laverania and also more distantly
related species which lack vars but encode other, more ancient variant gene
families.
RESULTS: The association between var genes and G4-forming motifs was conserved
across Laverania, spanning ~â€‰1 million years of evolutionary time, with
suggestive evidence for evolution of the association occurring within this
subgenus. In rodent malaria species, G4-forming motifs were somewhat associated
with pir genes, but this was not conserved in the Laverania, nor did we find a
strong association of these motifs with any gene family in a second outgroup of
avian malaria parasites. Secondly, we compared two different G4 prediction
algorithms in their performance on extremely A/T-rich Plasmodium genomes, and
also compared these predictions with experimental data from G4-seq, a DNA
sequencing method for identifying G4-forming motifs. We found a surprising lack
of concordance between the two algorithms and also between the algorithms and
G4-seq data.
CONCLUSIONS: G4-forming motifs are uniquely strongly associated with Plasmodium
var genes, suggesting a particular role for G4s in recombination and
diversification of these genes. Secondly, in the A/T-rich genomes of Plasmodium
species, the choice of prediction algorithm may be particularly influential when 
studying G4s in these important protozoan pathogens.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-020-6625-x 
PMCID: PMC7077173
PMID: 32183702 

