
1. J Adv Res. 2020 Feb 26;24:29-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jare.2020.02.016. eCollection
2020 Jul.

Immune responses in liver and spleen against Plasmodium yoelii pre-erythrocytic
stages in Swiss mice model.

Siddiqui AJ(1)(2), Bhardwaj J(3), Goyal M(2), Prakash K(4), Adnan M(1), Alreshidi
MM(1), Patel M(5), Soni A(2), Redman W(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Sciences, University of Ha'il, Ha'il, Saudi 
Arabia.
(2)Division of Parasitology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, Uttar
Pradesh, India.
(3)Indiana University, School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States.
(4)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, College of
Medicine, University of Vermont, VT, United States.
(5)Bapalal Vaidya Botanical Research Centre, Department of Biosciences, Veer
Narmad South Gujarat University, Surat, Gujarat, India.
(6)Surgery Department, Division of Biomedical Research, Texas Tech University
Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX, United States.

Though the immunity to malaria has been associated with cellular immune
responses, the exact function of the phenotypic cell population is still unclear.
This study investigated the host immune responses elicited during the
pre-erythrocytic stage, post-Plasmodium yoelii sporozoite infection in Swiss mice
model. For this purpose, we analyzed the dynamics of different subsets of immune 
cells population and cytokine levels in the hepatic mononuclear and splenic cells
population during pre-erythrocytic liver-stage infection. We observed a
significant reduction in the effectors immune cells population including CD8+ T
cell, F4/80+ macrophage and in plasmacytoid dendritic cells (CD11c+ B220+).
Interestingly, substantial down-regulation was also noted in pro-inflammatory
cytokines (i.e. IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-12, IL-2, IL-17 and iNOS), while, up-regulation 
of anti-inflammatory cytokines (i.e. IL-10, IL-4 and TGF-β) during asymptomatic
pre-erythrocytic liver-stage infection. Collectively, this study demonstrated
that during pre-erythrocytic development, Plasmodium yoelii sporozoite impaired
the host activators of innate and adaptive immune responses by regulating the
immune effector cells, gene expression and cytokines levels for the establishment
of infection and subsequent development in the liver and spleen. The results in
this study provided a better understanding of the events leading to malarial
infection and will be helpful in supportive treatment and vaccine development
strategy.

© 2020 THE AUTHORS. Published by Elsevier BV on behalf of Cairo University.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jare.2020.02.016 
PMCID: PMC7063113
PMID: 32181014 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

