
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2020;2116:295-301. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-0294-2_18.

The Tethering Assay: A Simple Method for the Characterization of mRNA-Fate
Regulators.

Mugo E(1), Erben ED(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Microbiology, Institute for
Sustainable Malaria Control, University of Pretoria, Hatfield, South Africa.
(2)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, Heidelberg, Germany.
e.erben@dkfz-heidelberg.de.

In trypanosomatids, posttranscriptional controls are very important in regulation
of individual gene expression. These are achieved through combinatorial sets of
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) which recognize RNA regulatory motifs or regions of
secondary structure within RNAs. To analyze the potential functional impact of an
RBP on their mRNA targets, we have applied a robust technique called tethering
assay. In this method, the protein under study is attached to an mRNA reporter
through an artificial RNA-protein interaction. Therefore, the functional activity
of a protein can be analyzed independently of its intrinsic ability to bind to
RNA. By making use of a cell line expressing a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase 
(CAT) reporter mRNA, we have characterized dozens of novel mRNA-fate regulators
in cultured Trypanosoma brucei. After induction of the candidate fusion protein, 
the effect on the reporter expression is determined by a rapid CAT assay. The
protocol is simple and typically takes one working day for analysis of a single
protein and controls. In this chapter, we provide a description of materials and 
methods for the tethering method and should allow the assay to be successfully
deployed in any laboratory with minimal user training.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-0294-2_18 
PMID: 32221927 

