
1. Cell Rep. 2020 Mar 31;30(13):4343-4354.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.03.032.

Targeting the Extrinsic Pathway of Hepatocyte Apoptosis Promotes Clearance of
Plasmodium Liver Infection.

Ebert G(1), Lopaticki S(2), O'Neill MT(2), Steel RWJ(1), Doerflinger M(1),
Rajasekaran P(1), Yang ASP(1), Erickson S(1), Ioannidis L(1), Arandjelovic P(1), 
Mackiewicz L(2), Allison C(1), Silke J(1), Pellegrini M(3), Boddey JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC,
Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville,
VIC, Australia.
(2)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC,
Australia.
(3)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC,
Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville,
VIC, Australia. Electronic address: pellegrini@wehi.edu.au.
(4)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC,
Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville,
VIC, Australia. Electronic address: boddey@wehi.edu.au.

Plasmodium sporozoites infect the liver and develop into exoerythrocytic
merozoites that initiate blood-stage disease. The hepatocyte molecular pathways
that permit or abrogate parasite replication and merozoite formation have not
been thoroughly explored, and a deeper understanding may identify therapeutic
strategies to mitigate malaria. Cellular inhibitor of apoptosis (cIAP) proteins
regulate cell survival and are co-opted by intracellular pathogens to support
development. Here, we show that cIAP1 levels are upregulated during Plasmodium
liver infection and that genetic or pharmacological targeting of cIAPs using
clinical-stage antagonists preferentially kills infected hepatocytes and promotes
immunity. Using gene-targeted mice, the mechanism was defined as
TNF-TNFR1-mediated apoptosis via caspases 3 and 8 to clear parasites. This study 
reveals the importance of cIAPs to Plasmodium infection and demonstrates that
host-directed antimalarial drugs can eliminate liver parasites and induce
immunity while likely providing a high barrier to resistance in the parasite.

Copyright Â© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.03.032 
PMID: 32234472 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no
competing interests.

