
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2020 Aug;82:104304. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104304. Epub
2020 Apr 2.

Low level of genetic diversity and high occurrence of vector-borne protozoa in
water buffaloes in Thailand based on 18S ribosomal RNA and mitochondrial
cytochrome b genes.

Nguyen AHL(1), Tiawsirisup S(2), Kaewthamasorn M(3).

Author information: 
(1)The International Graduate Course of Veterinary Science and Technology (VST), 
Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand;
Veterinary Parasitology Research Group, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
(2)Animal Vector-Borne Disease Research Unit, The Veterinary Parasitology Unit,
Department of Veterinary Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn 
University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
(3)Veterinary Parasitology Research Group, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand; Animal Vector-Borne Disease
Research Unit, The Veterinary Parasitology Unit, Department of Veterinary
Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok
10330, Thailand. Electronic address: morakot.k@chula.ac.th.

Vector-borne pathogens (VBPs) pose a great risk to ruminant production through
significant economic losses. Several previous studies in Thailand have mainly
been focused on the health of dairy and beef cattle. Water buffaloes are one of
the important ruminants in the country, but studies on their infection with VBPs 
remains limited. We conducted a molecular survey on blood samples from 456
buffaloes obtained from eight provinces across different geographical locations
of Thailand. The PCR diagnostics indicated that 116 (25.4%) and 59 (12.9%) of
these 456 samples were positive for piroplasm and Plasmodium spp., respectively, 
and were found in six and all eight regions, respectively, across Thailand.
Co-infections of piroplasm and Plasmodium spp. were observed in 24 cases (5.26%).
Babesia spp. was not detected in any of the 12 sequenced piroplasm-positive
samples in the present study. Genetic comparisons and phylogenetic analyses of
within and between parasite populations, based on the 18S ribosomal (r)RNA and
cytochrome b (cytb) genes for T. orientalis and P. bubalis, respectively,
revealed that T. orientalis shared a high similarity within its population and
could be divided into four distinct haplotypes. Haplotypes 1 and 4 were placed in
the same clade with the samples previously isolated from cattle in Korea, Japan, 
Australia, and the USA. Haplotypes 2, and 3 were novel and were placed in a
separate clade not shared with the other isolates. We also confirmed our previous
investigation that at least three cytb haplotypes of P. bubalis were distributed 
in the country with a relatively high degree of genetic polymorphisms within its 
population (based on cytb sequences). Type II P. bubalis was phylogenetically
closely related to P. caprae in goats in Zambia and Thailand. This study improves
our current understanding on the distribution, intra- and inter-population
genetic diversity, and genetic relationship of piroplasms and Plasmodium spp. in 
water buffaloes.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104304 
PMID: 32247866 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None of the
authors have a conflict of interest to declare. The final version of article has 
been read and approved by all authors.

