
1. Plants (Basel). 2020 Apr 21;9(4). pii: E537. doi: 10.3390/plants9040537.

Agrobacterium-Mediated Transformation of Chrysanthemum with Artemisinin
Biosynthesis Pathway Genes.

Firsov A(1), Mitiouchkina T(1), Shaloiko L(1), Pushin A(1), Vainstein A(2),
Dolgov S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Branch of the Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the
RAS, Moscow Region, 142290 Pushchino, Russia.
(2)The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture,
Food and Environment, POB 12, Rehovot 76100, Israel.

Artemisinin-based drugs are the most effective medicine for the malaria
treatment. To date, the main method of artemisinin production is its extraction
from wormwood plants Artemisia annua L. Due to the limitation of this source,
considerable efforts are now directed to the development of methods for
artemisinin production using heterologous expression systems. Artemisinin is a
sesquiterpene lactone, synthesized through the cyclization of farnesyl
diphosphate involved in other sesquiterpene biosynthetic systems. Chrysanthemum
species as well as A. annua, belong to Asteraceae family, and had been
characterized by containing highly content of sesquiterpenes and their
precursors. This makes chrysanthemum a promising target for the production of
artemisinin in heterologous host plants. Chrysanthemum (C. morifolium Ramat.) was
transformed by Agrobacterium tumefaciens carrying with the binary vectors p1240
and p1250, bearing artemisinin biosynthesis genes coding: amorpha-4,11-diene
synthase, artemisinic aldehyde Î”11(13) reductase, amorpha-4,11-diene
monooxygenase (p1240 was targeted to the mitochondria and p1250 was targeted to
the cytosol), cytochrome P450 reductase from A. annua, as well as yeast truncated
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutarylcoenzyme A reductase. This study obtained 8
kanamycin-resistant lines after transformation with the p1240 and 2 lines from
p1250. All target genes were detected in 2 and 1 transgenic lines of the 2
vectors. The transformation frequency of all target genes were 0.33% and 0.17%
for p1240 and p1250, relative to the total transformed explant numbers. RT-PCR
analysis revealed the transcription of all transferred genes in two lines
obtained after transformation with the p1240 vector, confirming the possibility
of transferring genetic modules encoding entire biochemical pathways into the
chrysanthemum genome. This holds promise for the development of a
chrysanthemum-based expression system to produce non-protein substances, such as 
artemisinin.

DOI: 10.3390/plants9040537 
PMCID: PMC7238074
PMID: 32326167 

