
1. Parasitology. 2020 Aug;147(9):957-971. doi: 10.1017/S0031182020000633. Epub 2020 
Apr 27.

The first case of microsporidiosis in Paramecium.

Yakovleva Y(1), Nassonova E(2)(3), Lebedeva N(4), Lanzoni O(5), Petroni G(5),
Potekhin A(6), Sabaneyeva E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytology and Histology, Saint Petersburg State University,
Universitetskaya emb. 7/9, 199034Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation.
(2)Laboratory of Cytology of Unicellular Organisms, Institute of Cytology RAS,
Tikhoretsky ave. 4, 194064Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation.
(3)Department of Invertebrate Zoology, Saint Petersburg State University,
Universitetskaya emb. 7/9, 199034Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation.
(4)Core Facility Center for Cultivation of Microorganisms, Saint Petersburg State
University, Peterhof, Botanicheskaya st. 17, 198504Saint Petersburg, Russian
Federation.
(5)Department of Biology, University of Pisa, via A Volta 4, 56126Pisa, Italy.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Saint Petersburg State University, 16th line,
Vasilyevsky Island, 29, 199178Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation.

A new microsporidian species, Globosporidium paramecii gen. nov., sp. nov., from 
Paramecium primaurelia is described on the basis of morphology, fine structure,
and SSU rRNA gene sequence. This is the first case of microsporidiosis in
Paramecium reported so far. All observed stages of the life cycle are
monokaryotic. The parasites develop in the cytoplasm, at least some part of the
population in endoplasmic reticulum and its derivates. Meronts divide by binary
fission. Sporogonial plasmodium divides by rosette-like budding. Early
sporoblasts demonstrate a well-developed exospore forming blister-like
structures. Spores with distinctive spherical shape are dimorphic in size (3.7 ± 
0.2 and 1.9 ± 0.2 μm). Both types of spores are characterized by a thin
endospore, a short isofilar polar tube making one incomplete coil, a bipartite
polaroplast, and a large posterior vacuole. Experimental infection was successful
for 5 of 10 tested strains of the Paramecium aurelia species complex. All
susceptible strains belong to closely related P. primaurelia and P. pentaurelia
species. Phylogenetic analysis placed the new species in the Clade 4 of
Microsporidia and revealed its close relationship to Euplotespora binucleata (a
microsporidium from the ciliate Euplotes woodruffi), to Helmichia lacustris and
Mrazekia macrocyclopis, microsporidia from aquatic invertebrates.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182020000633 
PMID: 32338239 

