
1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 Apr 24;16(4):e1008453. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008453.
eCollection 2020 Apr.

Broad spectrum immunomodulatory effects of Anopheles gambiae microRNAs and their 
use for transgenic suppression of Plasmodium.

Dong S(1), Fu X(2), Dong Y(1), Sim√µes ML(1), Zhu J(3), Dimopoulos G(1).

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD,
United States of America.
(2)The Interdisciplinary Ph.D. Program in Genetics, Bioinformatics, and
Computational Biology, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, United States of
America.

Malaria, caused by the protozoan parasite Plasmodium and transmitted by Anopheles
mosquitoes, represents a major threat to human health. Plasmodium's infection
cycle in the Anopheles vector is critical for transmission of the parasite
between humans. The midgut-stage bottleneck of infection is largely imposed by
the mosquito's innate immune system. microRNAs (miRNAs, small noncoding RNAs that
bind to target RNAs to regulate gene expression) are also involved in regulating 
immunity and the anti-Plasmodium defense in mosquitoes. Here, we characterized
the mosquito's miRNA responses to Plasmodium infection using an improved
crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP) method, termed covalent ligation of
endogenous Argonaute-bound RNAs (CLEAR)-CLIP. Three candidate miRNAs' influence
on P. falciparum infection and midgut microbiota was studied through
transgenically expressed miRNA sponges (miR-SPs) in midgut and fat body tissues. 
MiR-SPs mediated conditional depletion of aga-miR-14 or aga-miR-305, but not
aga-miR-8, increased mosquito resistance to both P. falciparum and P. berghei
infection, and enhanced the mosquitoes' antibacterial defenses. Transcriptome
analysis revealed that depletion of aga-miR-14 or aga-miR-305 resulted in an
increased expression of multiple immunity-related and anti-Plasmodium genes in
mosquito midguts. The overall fitness cost of conditionally expressed miR-SPs was
low, with only one of eight fitness parameters being adversely affected. Taken
together, our results demonstrate that targeting mosquito miRNA by conditional
expression of miR-SPs may have potential for the development of malaria control
through genetically engineered mosquitoes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008453 
PMCID: PMC7202664
PMID: 32330198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

