
1. Sci Adv. 2020 May 13;6(20):eaay5898. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aay5898. eCollection
2020 May.

Versatile transgenic multistage effector-gene combinations for Plasmodium
falciparum suppression in Anopheles.

Dong Y(1), Simões ML(1), Dimopoulos G(1).

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, 615 N. Wolfe Street,
Baltimore, MD 21205-2179, USA.

The malaria parasite's complex journey through the Anopheles mosquito vector
provides multiple opportunities for targeting Plasmodium with recombinant
effectors at different developmental stages and different host tissues. We have
designed and expressed transgenes that efficiently suppress Plasmodium infection 
by targeting the parasite with multiple independent endogenous and exogenous
effectors at multiple infection stages to potentiate suppression and minimize the
probability for development of resistance to develop. We have also addressed the 
fitness impact of transgene expression on the mosquito. We show that highly
potent suppression can be achieved by targeting both pre-oocyst stages by
transgenically overexpressing either the endogenous immune deficiency immune
pathway transcription factor Rel2 or a polycistronic mRNA encoding multiple
antiparasitic effectors and simultaneously targeting the sporozoite stages with
an anti-sporozoite single-chain antibody fused to the antiparasitic protein
Scorpine. Expression of the selected endogenous effector systems appears to pose 
a lower fitness cost than does the use of foreign genes.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0
(CC BY-NC).

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aay5898 
PMCID: PMC7220273
PMID: 32426491 

