
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Jun 9;117(23):13056-13065. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1920596117. Epub 2020 May 21.

Plasmodium vivax spleen-dependent genes encode antigens associated with
cytoadhesion and clinical protection.

Fernandez-Becerra C(1)(2), Bernabeu M(3), Castellanos A(4), Correa BR(5), Obadia 
T(6), Ramirez M(3), Rui E(3), Hentzschel F(3), López-Montañés M(3),
Ayllon-Hermida A(3), Martin-Jaular L(3), Elizalde-Torrent A(3), Siba P(7), Vêncio
RZ(5), Arevalo-Herrera M(4), Herrera S(4), Alonso PL(3), Mueller I(6)(8), Del
Portillo HA(1)(2)(9).

Author information: 
(1)ISGlobal, Hospital Clínic, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona 08036, Spain;
carmen.fernandez@isglobal.org hernandoa.delportillo@isglobal.org.
(2)Institut d'Investigació Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona 08916, Spain.
(3)ISGlobal, Hospital Clínic, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona 08036, Spain.
(4)Centro de Investigación Científica Caucaseco, Cali, Valle, Colombia.
(5)Department of Computing and Mathematics FFCLRP, Ribeirao Preto, Universidade
de São Paulo, São Paulo 14040-900, Brazil.
(6)Department of Parasites and Insect Vectors, Institut Pasteur, Paris 75015,
France.
(7)Papua New Guinea Institute of Medical Research, Madang, Papua New Guinea.
(8)Population Health and Immunity Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute
of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia.
(9)Institució Catalana de Recerca I Estudis Avançats, Barcelona 08010, Spain.

Plasmodium vivax, the most widely distributed human malaria parasite, causes
severe clinical syndromes despite low peripheral blood parasitemia. This
conundrum is further complicated as cytoadherence in the microvasculature is
still a matter of investigations. Previous reports in Plasmodium knowlesi,
another parasite species shown to infect humans, demonstrated that variant genes 
involved in cytoadherence were dependent on the spleen for their expression.
Hence, using a global transcriptional analysis of parasites obtained from
spleen-intact and splenectomized monkeys, we identified 67 P. vivax genes whose
expression was spleen dependent. To determine their role in cytoadherence, two
Plasmodium falciparum transgenic lines expressing two variant proteins pertaining
to VIR and Pv-FAM-D multigene families were used. Cytoadherence assays
demonstrated specific binding to human spleen but not lung fibroblasts of the
transgenic line expressing the VIR14 protein. To gain more insights, we expressed
five P. vivax spleen-dependent genes as recombinant proteins, including members
of three different multigene families (VIR, Pv-FAM-A, Pv-FAM-D), one membrane
transporter (SECY), and one hypothetical protein (HYP1), and determined their
immunogenicity and association with clinical protection in a prospective study of
383 children in Papua New Guinea. Results demonstrated that spleen-dependent
antigens are immunogenic in natural infections and that antibodies to HYP1 are
associated with clinical protection. These results suggest that the spleen plays 
a major role in expression of parasite proteins involved in cytoadherence and can
reveal antigens associated with clinical protection, thus prompting a paradigm
shift in P. vivax biology toward deeper studies of the spleen during infections.

Copyright © 2020 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1920596117 
PMCID: PMC7293605
PMID: 32439708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.

