
1. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2020 May;45(10):2454-2463. doi:
10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.20191031.401.

[Method for rapid synchronization of different growth cycles of Plasmodium
falciparum in vitro and application in differential gene expression profile of
3D7 after dihydroartemisinin treatment].

[Article in Chinese]

Zheng ZY(1), Chen LN(2), Yang T(1), Liu H(3), Qu SQ(3), Yang YM(2), Li YJ(2),
Zhang SQ(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Shanxi Medical University Taiyuan 030001, China
Artemisinin Research Center, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences Beijing
100700, China.
(2)Artemisinin Research Center, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences Beijing
100700, China Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, China Academy of Chinese
Medical Sciences Beijing 100700, China.
(3)Artemisinin Research Center, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences Beijing
100700, China School of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Guangdong Pharmaceutical
University Guangdong 510006, China.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Shanxi Medical University Taiyuan 030001, China.

Plasmodium culture in vitro is often used as an antimalarial drug evaluation
model, but the lifecycle of P. falciparum culture in vitro tends to be
disordered, which affects the research and evaluation of antimalarial drug
mechanism in vitro. By combining magnetic bead separation method with sorbitol
synchronization method, a synchronization method was constructed to quickly
acquire different lifecycles of P. falciparum and obtain large amounts of
parasite with a narrow synchronization window in a short period. Furthermore, the
dihydroartemisinin(DHA) was used to treat the early trophozoite phase of P.
falciparum 3 D7 for 4 h. Then mRNA was extracted and RNA-seq was conducted to
analyze the differential expression of mRNA after drug treatment and obtain the
differential gene expression profile. Differential expression of up-regulated
genes and down-regulated genes was analyzed according to the screening criteria
of |log_2FC|&gt;1 and P&lt;0.05. There, 262 genes were up-regulated and 77 genes 
were down-regulated. GO functional enrichment analysis of all the differentially 
expressed genes showed that the enrichment items mainly included cell membrane
components, transporter activity, serine/threonine kinase activity, Maurer's
clefts(MCs), rhoptry, antigen variation and immune evasion. The enrichment of
KEGG pathway included malaria, fatty acid metabolism and peroxisome.
Protein-protein interaction(PPI) analysis showed that the down-regulated genes in
the modules with high degree of association included rhoptry, myosin complex,
transporter and other genes related to the important life activities of malaria
invasion and immune escape; the up-regulated genes were mainly related to various
toxic exportins of malaria, such as PfSBP1 of MCs. qRT-PCR was used to verify the
expression level of some genes, and most of the results were the same as the
sequencing results. SBP1 was significantly up-regulated, while some antigenic
protein expression levels were down-regulated. Above all, key molecules of DHA
therapy were mainly involved in the parasites' rhoptry, transporter, antigenic
variation, plasmodium exportin. These results offer us many hints to guide the
further studies on mechanism of artemisinin and provide a new way for development
of new antimalarial drugs.

DOI: 10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.20191031.401 
PMID: 32495606  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

