
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2020 Jul;238:111292. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2020.111292. Epub 2020 Jun 4.

Use of split-dihydrofolate reductase for the detection of protein-protein
interactions and simultaneous selection of multiple plasmids in Plasmodium
falciparum.

Levray YS(1), Berhe AD(2), Osborne AR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom.
(2)Pomona College, 333 N. College Way, Claremont, CA 91711, United States.
(3)Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom; Institute of Structural and
Molecular Biology, Department of Biological Sciences, Birkbeck, Malet Street,
London, WC1E 7HX, United Kingdom. Electronic address: a.osborne@ucl.ac.uk.

Defining protein-protein interactions is fundamental to the understanding of gene
function. Protein-fragment complementation assays have been used for the analysis
of protein-protein interactions in various organisms. The split-dihydrofolate
reductase (DHFR) protein-fragment complementation assay utilises two
complementary fragments of the enzyme fused to a pair of potentially interacting 
proteins. If these proteins interact, the DHFR fragments associate, fold into
their native structure, reconstitute their function and confer resistance to
antifolate drugs. We show that murine DHFR fragments fused to interacting
proteins reconstitute a functional enzyme and confer resistance to the antifolate
drug WR99210 in Plasmodium falciparum. These data demonstrate that the split-DHFR
method can be used to detect in vivo protein-protein interactions in the
parasite. Additionally, we show that split-DHFR fragments can be used as
selection markers, permitting simultaneous selection of two plasmids in the
presence of a single antifolate drug. Taken together, these experiments show that
split-DHFR represents a valuable tool for the characterisation of Plasmodium
protein function and genetic manipulation of the parasite.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2020.111292 
PMID: 32505674 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.

