
1. Biochemistry. 2020 Jul 14;59(27):2494-2506. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00259.
Epub 2020 Jul 1.

Heterologous Expression, Purification, and Functional Analysis of the Plasmodium 
falciparum Phosphatidylinositol 4-Kinase IIIβ.

Sternberg AR(1), Roepe PD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Department of Biochemistry and Cellular and
Molecular Biology, Georgetown University, 37th & O Street Northwest, Washington, 
D.C. 20057, United States.

Recently, we heterologously expressed, purified, and analyzed the function of the
sole Plasmodium falciparum phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), found that the
enzyme is a "class III" or "Vps34" PI3K, and found that it is irreversibly
inhibited by Fe2+-mediated covalent, nonspecific interactions with the leading
antimalarial drug, dihydroartemisinin [Hassett, M. R., et al. (2017) Biochemistry
56, 4335-4345]. One of several P. falciparum phosphatidylinositol 4-kinases
[putative IIIβ isoform (PfPI4KIIIβ)] has generated similar interest as a
druggable target; however, no validation of the mechanism of action for putative 
PfPI4K inhibitors has yet been possible due to the lack of purified PfPI4KIIIβ.
We therefore codon optimized the pfpi4kIIIβ gene, successfully expressed the
protein in yeast, and purified an N-lobe catalytic domain PfPI4KIIIβ protein.
Using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay strategy previously perfected for
analysis of PfPI3K (PfVps34), we measured the apparent initial rate, Km,app(ATP),
and other enzyme characteristics and found full activity for the construct and
that PfPI4KIIIβ activity is most consistent with the class IIIβ designation.
Because several novel antimalarial drug candidates with different chemical
scaffolds have been proposed to target PfPI4KIIIβ, we titrated enzyme inhibition 
for these candidates versus purified PfPI4KIIIβ and PfVps34. We also analyzed the
activity versus purified PfPI4KIIIβ mutants previously expressed in P. falciparum
selected for resistance to these drugs. Interestingly, we found that a putative
PfPI4KIIIβ inhibitor currently in advanced trials (MMV390048; MMV '0048) is a
potent inhibitor of both PfVps34 and PfPI4KIIIβ. These data are helpful for
further preclinical optimization of an exciting new class of P. falciparum PI
kinase inhibitor ("PfPIKi") antimalarial drugs.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00259 
PMID: 32543181 

