
1. Heliyon. 2020 Jun 27;6(6):e04313. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e04313. eCollection
2020 Jun.

Sub-acute toxicity study of methanol extract of Tetrorchidium didymostemon leaves
using biochemical analyses and gene expression in Wistar rats.

Ebohon O(1), Irabor F(1), Omoregie ES(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Natural and Applied Sciences, Michael
and Cecilia Ibru University, Agbarha-Otor, Delta, Nigeria.
(2)Malaria Research, Molecular Biology and Toxicology Unit, Department of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Benin, PMB 1154, Benin
City, Nigeria.

Tetrorchidium didymostemon is widely used by traditional medicine practitioners
to manage and treat several diseases. Despite its known ethnomedicinal uses,
there are no scientific studies on the toxic effects of this plant. This study
was performed to evaluate the potential toxicity of methanol extracts
Tetrorchidium didymostemon leaves through sub-acute oral administration in rats. 
Twenty four (24) male albino rats (Wistar strain) of average weight 150 ± 20 g
were randomly divided into 4 groups of 6 rats each. Group 1 was the control while
groups 2, 3 and 4 were administered 100, 300 and 600 mg/kg body weight of the
plant extracts respectively for 14 consecutively days. The extract did not induce
any treatment related changes in body weight, organ/body weight ratio,
biochemical parameters (aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase, total
protein, albumin, creatinine and urea), oxidative stress indices
(malondialdehyde, superoxide dismutase and reduced glutathione) and
histopathology (liver and kidney) of the treated groups when compared to the
control. However, at 600 mg/kg body weight dose, the extract caused a significant
(p < 0.05) decrease in hemoglobin level, packed cell volume and the expression of
albumin gene of rats. Similarly, at 300 and 600 mg/kg body weight, the extract
also caused a non-significant (p > 0.05) decrease in red blood cell count.
Furthermore, the extract at 100 and 300 mg/kg body weight induced a significant
(p < 0.05) increase in the expression of tumor necrosis factor - alpha and kidney
injury molecule - 1 (KIM-1) genes. Catalase gene expression especially in the
kidney was up-regulated in the groups administered the extract. Our study
suggests that oral administration of T. didymostemon leaves extract is relatively
safe. However, there is need for caution due to the observed changes in
hematological profile, up-regulation of KIM-1 genes as well as down regulation of
albumin gene.

© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e04313 
PMCID: PMC7327260
PMID: 32637701 

