
1. Microb Pathog. 2020 Oct;147:104391. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104391. Epub 2020
Jul 14.

Genetic engineering and bacterial pathogenesis against the vectorial capacity of 
mosquitoes.

Qasim M(1), Xiao H(2), He K(3), Omar MAA(3), Liu F(3), Ahmed S(4), Li F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Agricultural and Rural Affairs Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology
of Crop Pathogens and Insects, Institute of Insect Sciences, College of
Agriculture & Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China.
Electronic address: cmqasimgill@zju.edu.cn.
(2)Ministry of Agricultural and Rural Affairs Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology
of Crop Pathogens and Insects, Institute of Insect Sciences, College of
Agriculture & Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China;
College of Life Sciences and Resource Environment, Key Laboratory of Crop Growth 
and Development Regulation of Jiangxi Province, Yichun University, Yichun,
336000, China.
(3)Ministry of Agricultural and Rural Affairs Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology
of Crop Pathogens and Insects, Institute of Insect Sciences, College of
Agriculture & Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China.
(4)Department of Entomology, University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, 38040,
Pakistan.
(5)Ministry of Agricultural and Rural Affairs Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology
of Crop Pathogens and Insects, Institute of Insect Sciences, College of
Agriculture & Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China.
Electronic address: lifei18@zju.edu.cn.

Mosquitoes are the main vector of multiple diseases worldwide and transmit viral 
(malaria, chikungunya, encephalitis, yellow fever, as well as dengue fever), as
well as bacterial diseases (tularemia). To manage the outbreak of mosquito
populations, various management programs include the application of chemicals,
followed by biological and genetic control. Here we aimed to focus on the role of
bacterial pathogenesis and molecular tactics for the management of mosquitoes and
their vectorial capacity. Bacterial pathogenesis and molecular manipulations have
a substantial impact on the biology of mosquitoes, and both strategies change the
gene expression and regulation of disease vectors. The strategy for genetic
modification is also proved to be excellent for the management of mosquitoes,
which halt the development of population via incompatibility of different sex.
Therefore, the purpose of the present discussion is to illustrate the impact of
both approaches against the vectorial capacity of mosquitoes. Moreover, it could 
be helpful to understand the relationship of insect-pathogen and to manage
various insect vectors as well as diseases.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104391 
PMID: 32679245 

