
1. J Proteomics. 2020 Oct 30;229:103899. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2020.103899. Epub 2020
Jul 14.

Integrated analysis of sialotranscriptome and sialoproteome of the brown dog tick
Rhipicephalus sanguineus (s.l.): Insights into gene expression during blood
feeding.

Tirloni L(1), Lu S(2), Calvo E(2), Sabadin G(3), Di Maggio LS(3), Suzuki M(4),
Nardone G(4), da Silva Vaz I Jr(5), Ribeiro JMC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto
Alegre, RS, Brazil; Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic address:
lucas.tirloni@nih.gov.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto
Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(4)Research Technologies Branch, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto
Alegre, RS, Brazil; Faculdade de Veterin√°ria, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande 
do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

Tick salivary glands secrete a complex saliva into their hosts which modulates
vertebrate hemostasis, immunity and tissue repair mechanisms. Transcriptomic
studies revealed a large number of transcripts coding for structural and secreted
protein products in a single tick species. These transcripts are organized in
several large families according to their products. Not all transcripts are
expressed at the same time, transcription profile switches at intervals,
characterizing the phenomenon of "sialome switching". In this work, using
transcriptomic and proteomic analysis we explored the sialome of Rhipicephalus
sanguineus (s.l.) adult female ticks feeding on a rabbit. The correlations
between transcriptional and translational results in the different groups were
evaluated, confirming the "sialome switching" and validating the idea that the
expression switch may serve as a mechanism of escape from the host immunity.
Recombination breakpoints were identified in lipocalin and metalloprotease
families, indicating this mechanism could be a possible source of diversity in
the tick sialome. Another remarkable observation was the identification of
host-derived proteins as a component of tick salivary gland content. These
results and disclosed sequences contribute to our understanding of tick feeding
biology, to the development of novel anti-tick methods, and to the discovery of
novel pharmacologically active products. SIGNIFICANCE: Ticks are a burden by
themselves to humans and animals, and vectors of viral, bacterial, protozoal and 
helminthic diseases. Their saliva has anti-clotting, anti-platelet, vasodilatory 
and immunomodulatory activities that allows successful feeding and pathogen
transmission. Previous transcriptomic studies indicate ticks to have over one
thousand transcripts coding for secreted salivary proteins. These transcripts
code for proteins of diverse families, but not all are transcribed
simultaneously, but rather transiently, in a succession. Here we explored the
salivary transcriptome and proteome of the brown dog tick, Rhipicephalus
sanguineus. A protein database of over 20 thousand sequences was "de novo"
assembled from over 600 million nucleotide reads, from where over two thousand
polypeptides were identified by mass spectrometry. The proteomic data was shown
to vary in time with the transcription profiles, validating the idea that the
expression switch may serve as a mechanism of escape from the host immunity.
Analysis of the transcripts coding for lipocalin and metalloproteases indicate
their genes to contain signals of breakpoint recombination suggesting a new
mechanism responsible for the large diversity in tick salivary proteins. These
results and the disclosed sequences contribute to our understanding of the
success ticks enjoy as ectoparasites, to the development of novel anti-tick
methods, and to the discovery of novel pharmacologically active products.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2020.103899 
PMID: 32673754 

