
1. PLoS One. 2020 Jul 23;15(7):e0236369. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0236369.
eCollection 2020.

One-step PCR: A novel protocol for determination of pfhrp2 deletion status in
Plasmodium falciparum.

Jones S(1)(2), Subramaniam G(1)(3), Plucinski MM(1)(4), Patel D(1)(2), Padilla
J(3)(5), Aidoo M(1), Talundzic E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, United
States of America.
(2)Williams Consulting, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education, Atlanta, Georgia, United States
of America.
(4)President's Malaria Initiative, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.
(5)Biotechnology Core Facilities Branch, Division of Scientific Resources,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of
America.

Histidine-rich protein 2 (HRP2) detecting rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) have
played an important role in enabling prompt malaria diagnosis in remote
locations. However, emergence of pfhrp2 deleted parasites is threatening the
efficacy of RDTs, and the World Health Organization (WHO) has highlighted
surveillance of these deletions as a priority. Nested PCR is used to confirm
pfhrp2 deletion but is costly and laborious. Due to spurious amplification of
paralogue pfhrp3, the identity of nested exon 1 PCR product must be confirmed by 
sequencing. Here we describe a new one-step PCR method for detection of pfhrp2.
To determine sensitivity and specificity, all PCRs were performed in triplicate. 
Using photo-induced electron transfer (PET) PCR detecting 18srRNA as true
positive, one-step had comparable sensitivity of 95.0% (88.7-98.4%) to nested
exon 1, 99.0% (94.6-99.9%) and nested exon 2, 98.0% (93.0-99.8%), and comparable 
specificity 93.8% (69.8-99.8%) to nested exon 1 100.0% (79.4-100.0%) and nested
exon 2, 100.0% (74.4-100.0%). Sequencing revealed that one step PCR does not
amplify pfhrp3. Logistic regression models applied to measure the 95% level of
detection of the one-step PCR in clinical isolates provided estimates of 133p/μL 
(95% confidence interval (CI): 3-793p/μL) for whole blood (WB) samples and
385p/μL (95% CI: 31-2133 p/μL) for dried blood spots (DBSs). When considering
protocol attributes, the one-step PCR is less expensive, faster and more suitable
for high throughput. In summary, we have developed a more accurate PCR method
that may be ideal for the application of the WHO protocol for investigating
pfhrp2 deletions in symptomatic individuals presenting to health care facilities.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0236369 
PMCID: PMC7377462
PMID: 32702040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors Gireesh Subramaniam and Jasmine Padilla
are employed by the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE). ORISE 
provided support in the form of salary for authors GS and JP, but did not have
any additional role role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision 
to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. Competing Interests statement:
Authors Sophie Jones and Dhruviben Patel are employed by Williams Consulting LLC.
There are no patents, products in development or marketed products to declare.
This does not alter our adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data
and materials. Authors Gireesh Subramaniam and Jasmine Padilla are employed by
the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE). There are no patents, 
products in development or marketed products to declare. This does not alter our 
adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.

