
1. BMC Nephrol. 2020 Aug 5;21(1):327. doi: 10.1186/s12882-020-01959-7.

A case series of distal renal tubular acidosis, Southeast Asian ovalocytosis and 
metabolic bone disease.

Gunaratne W(1), Dissanayake D(2), Jayaratne K(3), Premawardhana NP(4),
Siribaddana S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Professorial Medical Unit Teaching Hospital Anuradhapura, Anuradhapura, Sri
Lanka. sujeewa.gunaratne@gmail.com.
(2)Medical unit A Teaching Hospital Anuradhapura, Anuradhapura, Sri Lanka.
(3)Consultant hematologist Teaching Hospital Anuradhapura, Anuradhapura, Sri
Lanka.
(4)Professorial Medical Unit Teaching Hospital Anuradhapura, Anuradhapura, Sri
Lanka.
(5)Faculty of Medicine and Allied Sciences, Rajarata University of Sri Lanka,
Anuradhapura, Sri Lanka.

BACKGROUND: Familial distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA) associated with
mutations of solute carrier family 4 membrane -â€‰1 (SLC4A1) gene could co-exist
with red cell membrane abnormality, Southeast Asian ovalocytosis (SAO). Although 
this association is well described in Southeast Asian countries, it is less
frequently found in Sri Lanka.
CASE PRESENTATION: We describe six patients who had dRTA co-existing with SAO.
All of them initially presented with severe hypokalemia and paralysis. They
presented within a period of six months to the Teaching Hospital Anuradhapura,
Sri Lanka. All had metabolic acidosis indicated by low serum bicarbonate. Three
of them were having underlying chronic kidney disease as well. Those three
patients had mixed high and normal anion gap metabolic acidosis indicated by low 
delta ratio. In all dRTA was confirmed by presence of normal anion gap,
hyperchloraemia, high urine pH and positive urine anion gap. Examination of blood
films of all of them revealed presence of stomatocytes and macro-ovalocytosis
compatible with SAO. In relation to complications of dRTA, two patients had
medullary nephrocalcinosis. Three patients had biochemical evidence of
osteomalacia, with two of them having radiological evidence of diffuse
osteosclerosis. One patient had secondary hyperparathyroidism and a pathological 
fracture.
CONCLUSIONS: Erythrocyte in SAO is exceptionally rigid and this abnormality is
said to be evolved as it protects against Plasmodium vivax malaria and cerebral
malaria cause by Plasmodium falciparum. Although two families of SAO was
described earlier, SAO and dRTA combination was reported only once in a patient
from Anuradhapura district. Distal renal tubular acidosis, SAO combination and
its related complications including nephrocalcinosis, chronic kidney disease and 
metabolic bone disease was not described in Sri-Lankan literature. This case
series emphasize the importance of investigating recurrent/ chronic hypokalemia
to diagnose dRTA and its associations, as early correction of acidosis could
prevent development of chronic kidney disease and metabolic bone disease.

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-020-01959-7 
PMCID: PMC7409414
PMID: 32758154 

