
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2020 Aug 24. pii: AAC.00981-20. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00981-20. [Epub ahead of print]

Prevalence of Plasmodium falciparum Kelch 13 (PfK13) and ubiquitin-specific
protease 1 (pfubp1) gene polymorphisms in returning travellers from Africa
reported in Eastern China.

Yan H(1), Kong X(2), Zhang T(3), Xiao H(4), Feng X(1), Tu H(1), Feng J(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention; Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, MOH; WHO
Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases; National Center for International
Research on Tropical Diseases; The School of Global Health, Chinese Center for
Tropical Diseases Research, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200025, People's Republic of China.
(2)Shandong Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Shandong First Medical University & 
Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Shandong, People's Republic of China.
(3)Anhui Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Anhui, People's
Republic of China.
(4)Changsha Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Hunan, People's Republic
of China.
(5)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention; Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, MOH; WHO
Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases; National Center for International
Research on Tropical Diseases; The School of Global Health, Chinese Center for
Tropical Diseases Research, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200025, People's Republic of China fengjun@nipd.chinacdc.com.

Delayed clearance of Plasmodium falciparum by artemisinin-based combination
therapies (ACTs) has already been observed in African isolates. Here, we aimed to
investigate the prevalence of polymorphisms in two genes correlated with delayed 
parasite clearance, P. falciparum Kelch 13 (PfK13) and ubiquitin-specific
protease 1 (pfubp1), among returning travellers from African countries reported
in eastern China and to provide baseline data for antimalarial drug resistance
(ART) surveillance and evaluation. A total of 153 filter-paper blood spots
collected in 2017-2019 from uncomplicated P. falciparum cases in Anhui and
Shandong Provinces were included in this study. Among them, 3.3% (5/153) of the
isolates carried PfK13 mutations, and 3 of them harboured the same synonymous
mutation, C469C. A total of 13.1% (20/153) of the isolates were found to contain 
pfubp1 mutations, and all were non-synonymous. The pfubp1 genotypes associated
with ART resistance that occurred in this study included E1528D (6.5%, 10/153)
and D1525E (2.6%, 4/153). However, a high prevalence of the previously unreported
mutation E1531D (5.9%, 9/153) was also detected. In addition, 2 types of
deletions (encoding KID and KIE, respectively) and 2 types of insertions
(encoding KYE and KYDKYD, respectively) were found in 16 isolates and 6 isolates,
respectively. This study showed limited variation in PfK13 among returning
travellers from African countries and suggested other potential molecular
markers, such as pfubp1, for use in surveillance of African isolates in ACT
susceptibility studies. Further clinical trials research is under way to
investigate these PfK13 and pfubp1 mutations, as well as other candidate
molecular markers, and their roles in delaying parasite clearance.

Copyright Â© 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00981-20 
PMID: 32839222 

