
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Aug 31;10(1):14316. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-71186-5.

Analysis of blood-induced Anopheles gambiae midgut proteins and sexual stage
Plasmodium falciparum interaction reveals mosquito genes important for malaria
transmission.

Cui Y(1), Niu G(1), Li VL(1), Wang X(1), Li J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Biomolecular Sciences Institute, Florida
International University, 11200 SW 8th Street, Miami, FL, 33199, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Biomolecular Sciences Institute, Florida
International University, 11200 SW 8th Street, Miami, FL, 33199, USA.
lij@fiu.edu.

Plasmodium invasion of mosquito midguts is a mandatory step for malaria
transmission. The roles of mosquito midgut proteins and parasite interaction
during malaria transmission are not clear. This study aims to identify mosquito
midgut proteins that interact with and affect P. falciparum invasion. Based on
gene expression profiles and protein sequences, 76 mosquito secretory proteins
that are highly expressed in midguts and up-regulated by blood meals were chosen 
for analysis. About 61 candidate genes were successfully cloned from Anopheles
gambiae and expressed in insect cells. ELISA analysis showed that 25 of the
insect cell-expressed recombinant mosquito proteins interacted with the P.
falciparum-infected cell lysates. Indirect immunofluorescence assays confirmed 17
of them interacted with sexual stage parasites significantly stronger than
asexual stage parasites. Knockdown assays found that seven candidate genes
significantly changed mosquitoes' susceptibility to P. falciparum. Four of them
(AGAP006268, AGAP002848, AGAP006972, and AGAP002851) played a protective function
against parasite invasion, and the other three (AGAP008138, FREP1, and HPX15)
facilitated P. falciparum transmission to mosquitoes. Notably, AGAP008138 is a
unique gene that only exists in Anopheline mosquitoes. These gene products are
ideal targets to block malaria transmission.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-71186-5 
PMCID: PMC7459308
PMID: 32868841 

