
1. Invest New Drugs. 2020 Sep 3. doi: 10.1007/s10637-020-00996-1. [Epub ahead of
print]

The anti-malaria agent artesunate exhibits cytotoxic effects in primary effusion 
lymphoma.

Ishikawa C(1)(2), Mori N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
University of the Ryukyus, 207 Uehara, Nishihara, Okinawa, 903-0215, Japan.
(2)Division of Health Sciences, Transdisciplinary Research Organization for
Subtropics and Island Studies, University of the Ryukyus, 1 Senbaru, Nishihara,
Okinawa, 903-0213, Japan.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
University of the Ryukyus, 207 Uehara, Nishihara, Okinawa, 903-0215, Japan.
naokimori50@gmail.com.

Primary effusion lymphoma (PEL), caused by Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus (KSHV), presents as a lymphomatous effusion in body cavities and has 
a poor prognosis. The anti-malaria drug, artesunate, possesses anti-neoplastic
potential. Therefore, we aimed to investigate its effect on KSHV-infected PEL
cell lines. Artesunate inhibited cell growth and viability of PEL cells, but its 
effect on peripheral blood mononuclear cells was less pronounced. Artesunate
induced G1 phase arrest by downregulating cyclin D1/D2, CDK2/6 and c-Myc.
Artesunate increased reactive oxygen species and DNA damage, but did not affect
the expression of latent and lytic genes of KSHV. It exhibited cytotoxicity
through caspase-dependent and -independent pathways and reduced Bcl-xL, survivin,
XIAP and c-IAP1/2 levels. Furthermore, artesunate suppressed NF-κB and AP-1 by
inhibiting IκB kinase and IκBα phosphorylation as well as JunB expression.
Finally, artesunate treatment attenuated PEL development in mice. Our data
support that artesunate is a potential drug for PEL treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-020-00996-1 
PMID: 32885355 

