
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2020 Sep;239:111315. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2020.111315. Epub 2020 Sep 2.

The endoplasmic reticulum-resident serpentine receptor SR10 has important
functions for asexual and sexual blood stage development of Plasmodium
falciparum.

Njila Tchoufack EJ(1), Hahnfeld L(1), Pitschelatow G(1), Bennink S(1), Pradel
G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Applied Infection Biology, Institute of Biology 2,
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Division of Cellular and Applied Infection Biology, Institute of Biology 2,
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. Electronic address:
pradel@bio2.rwth-aachen.de.

Serpentine receptors (SRs) are transmembrane proteins generally acting as
mediators to facilitate the communication between a cell and its environment. At 
least six putative SR-like proteins are encoded in the genome of the malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum. For two of them, roles in cell stress control
were reported; however, for most of the SR-like proteins the functions are not
yet known. In this study, we provide a first phenotypic analysis of the
plasmodial SR10. The transmembrane protein is expressed in the asexual and sexual
blood stages of P. falciparum. Co-localization and co-immunoprecipitation assays 
demonstrated an association of SR10 with the endoplasmic reticulum protein ERC.
Gene disruption of SR10 leads to impaired intraerythrocytic replication and
strongly reduces gametocyte numbers. We thus propose that SR10 is a protein
associated with the endoplasmic reticulum that has important functions for
asexual and sexual blood stage development.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2020.111315 
PMID: 32890576 

