
1. Ann Hum Genet. 2020 Sep 8. doi: 10.1111/ahg.12405. [Epub ahead of print]

Genotyping complex structural variation at the malaria-associated human
glycophorin locus using a PCR-based strategy.

Algady W(1), Weyell E(1), Mateja D(1), Garcia A(2), Courtin D(2), Hollox EJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Genome Biology, University of Leicester, Leicester,
UK.
(2)UMR 261 MERIT, Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), Université
de Paris, Paris, France.

Structural variation in the human genome can affect risk of disease. An example
is a complex structural variant of the human glycophorin gene cluster, called
DUP4, which is associated with a clinically significant level of protection
against severe malaria. The human glycophorin gene cluster harbours at least 23
distinct structural variants, and accurate genotyping of this complex structural 
variation remains a challenge. Here, we use a polymerase chain reaction-based
strategy to genotype structural variation at the human glycophorin gene cluster, 
including the alleles responsible for the U- blood group. We validate our
approach, based on a triplex paralogue ratio test, on publically available
samples from the 1000 Genomes project. We then genotype 574 individuals from a
longitudinal birth cohort (Tori-Bossito cohort) using small amounts of DNA at low
cost. Our approach readily identifies known deletions and duplications, and can
potentially identify novel variants for further analysis. It will allow
exploration of genetic variation at the glycophorin locus, and investigation of
its relationship with malaria, in large sample sets at minimal cost, using
standard molecular biology equipment.

© 2020 The Authors. Annals of Human Genetics published by University College
London (UCL) and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ahg.12405 
PMID: 32895931 

