
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2020 Sep 4;85:104530. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104530. [Epub
ahead of print]

Allelic variation of msp-3α gene in Plasmodium vivax isolates and its correlation
with the severity of disease in vivax malaria.

Upmanyu K(1), Matlani M(2), Yadav P(1), Rathi U(2), Mallick PK(3), Singh R(4).

Author information: 
(1)ICMR-National Institute of Pathology, Safdarjung Hospital Campus, New Delhi,
India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, VMMC, Safdarjung Hospital Campus, New Delhi,
India.
(3)ICMR-National Institute of Malaria Research, Dwarka, Sector-8, New Delhi,
India.
(4)ICMR-National Institute of Pathology, Safdarjung Hospital Campus, New Delhi,
India. Electronic address: ruchisingh.nip@gov.in.

Malaria is a global socio-economic burden of which Plasmodium vivax contributes
for about 70-80 million cases on an annual basis worldwide and 60-65% cases in
India. Diversity observed in highly polymorphic Merozoite Surface Protein-3α
(msp-3α) encoded by MSP-3 gene family, has been used efficiently for genotyping
of P. vivax infection. This study aims to correlate the severity of clinical
symptoms with parasite load, genotype of P. vivax and multiplicity of infection. 
Based on clinical symptoms classification, 31 (67.9%) out of 46 cases were found 
to be severe while 15 (32.6%) were non-severe and correlation of the severity of 
vivax infection with parasite load was not observed. Analysis of msp3-α allele
genotype showed that out of 31 severe cases, 19 (61.2%) were single-clone
infection cases whereas 12 (38.7%) were multi-clone infections. Similarly, out of
15 non-severe cases, 9 (60%) were single clone and 6 (40%) were multi-clone
infections indicating the absence of a correlation between the multiplicity of
infection and disease severity. Allele frequency observed was 65.9%, 23.4%,
23.4%, and 28.2% for allele A, B, C and D, respectively. An important finding was
the greater distribution of allele D than alleles B and C, which has been
reported as a rare allele otherwise. Further, of 13 cases with allele D, 76.9%
(10/13) cases were severe. This study showed the absence of a correlation between
the severity of clinical symptoms with parasite load and multiplicity of
infection but at the same time drives a possibility of severe vivax malarial
symptoms to have an association with the persistence of allele D in the
population. This upon exploration can lead to the development of a target in
detection of severe cases of malaria.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104530 
PMID: 32896637 

