
1. Acta Trop. 2020 Sep 29;212:105704. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2020.105704. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Surveillance of molecular markers for antimalarial resistance in Zambia:
Polymorphism of Pfkelch 13, Pfmdr1 and Pfdhfr/Pfdhps genes.

Sitali L(1), Mwenda MC(2), Miller JM(2), Bridges DJ(2), Hawela MB(3), Hamainza
B(3), Mudenda-Chilufya M(3), Chizema-Kawesha E(4), Daniels RF(5), Eisele TP(6),
Nerland AH(7), Chipeta J(8), Lindtjorn B(9).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for International Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway; University of Zambia, School of Health Sciences, Department of
Biomedical Sciences, Lusaka, Zambia; School of Medicine and University Teaching
Hospital Malaria Research Unit, University of Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia. Electronic 
address: lungowesitali@unza.zm.
(2)PATH Malaria Control and Elimination Partnership in Africa, National Malaria
Elimination Centre, Ministry of Health, Lusaka, Zambia.
(3)National Malaria Elimination Centre, Ministry of Health, Lusaka, Zambia.
(4)End Malaria Council, African Leaders Malaria Alliance, National Malaria
Elimination Centre, Ministry of Health, Lusaka, Zambia.
(5)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA; Department of
Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Centre for Applied Malaria Research and Evaluation, Department of Tropical
Medicine, Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, New
Orleans, LA, USA.
(7)Department of Clinical Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway.
(8)School of Medicine and University Teaching Hospital Malaria Research Unit,
University of Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia; University of Zambia School of Medicine,
Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Lusaka, Zambia.
(9)Centre for International Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway.

Antimalarial resistance is an inevitable feature of control efforts and a key
threat to achieving malaria elimination. Plasmodium falciparum, the deadliest of 
several species causing human malaria, has developed resistance to essentially
all antimalarials. This study sought to investigate the prevalence of molecular
markers associated with resistance to sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) and
artemether-lumefantrine (AL) in Southern and Western provinces in Zambia. SP is
used primarily for intermittent preventive treatment during pregnancy, while AL
is the first-line antimalarial for uncomplicated malaria in Zambia. Blood samples
were collected from household members of all ages in a cross-sectional survey
conducted during peak malaria transmission, April to May of 2017, and amplified
by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Amplicons were then analysed by
high-resolution melt following PCR to identify mutations associated with SP
resistance in the P. falciparum dihydrofolate reductase (Pfdhfr) and P.
falciparum dihydropteroate synthase (Pfdhps) genes and lumefantrine resistance in
the P. falciparum multi-drug resistance 1 (Pfmdr1) gene. Finally, artemether
resistance was assessed in the P. falciparum Kelch 13 (PfK13) gene using nested
PCR followed by amplicon sequencing. The results showed a high frequency of
genotypic-resistant Pfdhps A437G (93.2%) and Pfdhfr C59R (86.7%), N51I (80.9%),
and S108N (80.8%) of which a high proportion (82.4%) were quadruple mutants
(Pfdhfr N51I, C59R, S108N +Pfdhps A437G). Pfmrd1 N86Y, Y186F, and D1246Y - NFD
mutant haplotypes were observed in 41.9% of isolates. The high prevalence of
quadruple dhps/dhfr mutants indicates strong antifolate drug pressure from SP or 
other drugs (e.g., co-trimoxazole). Three samples contained PfK13 mutations, two 
synonymous (T478 and V666) and one non-synonymous (A578S), none of which have
been associated with delayed clearance. This suggests that artemisinin remains
efficacious in Zambia, however, the moderately high prevalence of approximately
40% Pfmdr1 NFD mutations calls for close monitoring of AL.

Copyright Â© 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2020.105704 
PMID: 33002448 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

