
1. Front Physiol. 2020 Sep 8;11:572340. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.572340. eCollection 
2020.

Heme-Peroxidase 2, a Peroxinectin-Like Gene, Regulates Bacterial Homeostasis in
Anopheles stephensi Midgut.

Kakani P(1)(2), Gupta L(1)(3), Kumar S(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani, India.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and
Research (IISER), Bhopal, India.
(3)Department of Zoology, Chaudhary Bansi Lal University, Bhiwani, India.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Chaudhary Bansi Lal University, Bhiwani, India.

The dynamic nature of mosquito gut microbiome is associated with different stages
of development and feeding behaviors. Therefore, mosquito gut harbors a wide
range of endogenous microbes that promote numerous life processes such as,
nutrition, reproduction and immunity. In addition, gut microbiota also play an
important role in the regulation of Plasmodium (malaria parasite) development.
Thus, understanding the mechanism of microbial homeostasis in mosquito gut might 
be one of the strategies to manipulate malaria parasite development. In the
present study, we characterized a 692 amino acids long secreted midgut
heme-peroxidase 2 (AsHPX2) in Anopheles stephensi, the major Indian malaria
vector. The presence of putative integrin binding motifs, LDV (Leu-Asp-Val),
indicated its peroxinectin-like nature. Our phylogenetic analysis revealed that
AsHPX2 is a Culicinae lineage-specific gene. RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated
silencing of AsHPX2 gene significantly enhanced the growth of midgut bacteria in 
sugar-fed mosquitoes against sham-treated controls. Interestingly, blood-feeding 
drastically reduced AsHPX2 gene expression and enhanced the growth of midgut
bacteria. These results revealed a negative correlation between the expression of
AsHPX2 gene and gut bacterial growth. We proposed that AsHPX2, being a
mosquito-specific gene, might serve as a "potent target" to manipulate midgut
microbiota and vector competence.

Copyright Â© 2020 Kakani, Gupta and Kumar.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.572340 
PMCID: PMC7506126
PMID: 33013485 

