
1. mBio. 2020 Oct 6;11(5). pii: e01492-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01492-20.

CaaX-Like Protease of Cyanobacterial Origin Is Required for Complex Plastid
Biogenesis in Malaria Parasites.

Meister TR(1), Tang Y(2), Pulkoski-Gross MJ(2), Yeh E(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, California,
USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, California,
USA ellenyeh@stanford.edu.
(4)Department of Pathology, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, California,
USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford School of Medicine,
Stanford, California, USA.
(6)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, California, USA.

Plasmodium parasites and related apicomplexans contain an essential "complex
plastid" organelle of secondary endosymbiotic origin, the apicoplast. Biogenesis 
of this complex plastid poses a unique challenge requiring evolution of new
cellular machinery. We previously conducted a mutagenesis screen for essential
apicoplast biogenesis genes to discover organellar pathways with evolutionary and
biomedical significance. Here we validate and characterize a gene candidate from 
our screen, Pf3D7_0913500. Using a conditional knockdown strain, we show that
Pf3D7_0913500 depletion causes growth inhibition that is rescued by the sole
essential product of the apicoplast, isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP), and results
in apicoplast loss. Because Pf3D7_0913500 had no previous functional annotation, 
we name it apicoplast-minus IPP-rescued 4 (AMR4). AMR4 has an annotated CaaX
protease and bacteriocin processing (CPBP) domain, which in eukaryotes typically 
indicates a role in CaaX postprenylation processing. Indeed, AMR4 is the only
putative CaaX-like protease in Plasmodium parasites which are known to require
protein prenylation, and we confirm that the conserved catalytic residue of AMR4 
(E352) is required for its apicoplast function. However, we unexpectedly find
that AMR4 does not act in a CaaX postprenylation processing pathway in Plasmodium
falciparum Instead, we find that AMR4 is imported into the apicoplast and is
derived from a cyanobacterial CPBP gene which was retained through both primary
and secondary endosymbiosis. Our findings suggest that AMR4 is not a true CaaX
protease, but instead it performs a conserved, uncharacterized chloroplast
function that has been retained for complex plastid biogenesis.IMPORTANCE
Plasmodium parasites, which cause malaria, and related apicomplexans are
important human and veterinary pathogens. These parasites represent a highly
divergent and understudied branch of eukaryotes, and as such often defy the
expectations set by model organisms. One striking example of unique apicomplexan 
biology is the apicoplast, an essential but nonphotosynthetic plastid derived
from an unusual secondary (eukaryote-eukaryote) endosymbiosis. Endosymbioses are 
a major driver of cellular innovation, and apicoplast biogenesis pathways
represent a hot spot for molecular evolution. We previously conducted an unbiased
screen for apicoplast biogenesis genes in P. falciparum to uncover these
essential and innovative pathways. Here, we validate a novel gene candidate from 
our screen and show that its role in apicoplast biogenesis does not match its
functional annotation predicted by model eukaryotes. Our findings suggest that an
uncharacterized chloroplast maintenance pathway has been reused for complex
plastid biogenesis in this divergent branch of pathogens.

Copyright Â© 2020 Meister et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01492-20 
PMCID: PMC7542359
PMID: 33024034 

