
1. mar drugs. 2016 jun 18;14(6). pii: e116. doi: 10.3390/md14060116.

synthesis anti-influenza virus activity of
6'-amino-6'-deoxy-glucoglycerolipids analogs.

ren l(1), zhang j(2), h(3), sun l(4), zhang x(5), yu g(6), guan h(7), wang
w(8), li c(9).

author information: 
(1)shandong provincial key laboratory glycoscience glycoengineering, key
laboratory marine drugs ministry education, school medicine and
pharmacy, ocean university china, 5 yushan road, qingdao 266003, china.
renli@vip.163.com.
(2)shandong provincial key laboratory glycoscience glycoengineering, key
laboratory marine drugs ministry education, school medicine and
pharmacy, ocean university china, 5 yushan road, qingdao 266003, china.
junerjasmine@163.com.
(3)shandong provincial key laboratory glycoscience glycoengineering, key
laboratory marine drugs ministry education, school medicine and
pharmacy, ocean university china, 5 yushan road, qingdao 266003, china.
zhangxtxm@163.com.
(4)shandong provincial key laboratory glycoscience glycoengineering, key
laboratory marine drugs ministry education, school medicine and
pharmacy, ocean university china, 5 yushan road, qingdao 266003, china.
sunlinlinenjoylife@163.com.
(5)shandong provincial key laboratory glycoscience glycoengineering, key
laboratory marine drugs ministry education, school medicine and
pharmacy, ocean university china, 5 yushan road, qingdao 266003, china.
xiaoshuangzhang89@126.com.
(6)shandong provincial key laboratory glycoscience glycoengineering, key
laboratory marine drugs ministry education, school medicine and
pharmacy, ocean university china, 5 yushan road, qingdao 266003, china.
glyu@ouc.edu.cn.
(7)shandong provincial key laboratory glycoscience glycoengineering, key
laboratory marine drugs ministry education, school medicine and
pharmacy, ocean university china, 5 yushan road, qingdao 266003, china.
hsguan@ouc.edu.cn.
(8)shandong provincial key laboratory glycoscience glycoengineering, key
laboratory marine drugs ministry education, school medicine and
pharmacy, ocean university china, 5 yushan road, qingdao 266003, china.
wwwakin@ouc.edu.cn.
(9)shandong provincial key laboratory glycoscience glycoengineering, key
laboratory marine drugs ministry education, school medicine and
pharmacy, ocean university china, 5 yushan road, qingdao 266003, china.
lchunxia@ouc.edu.cn.

a series aminoglucoglycerolipids derivatives synthesized, including
6'-acylamido-glucoglycerolipids 1a-1f corresponding
2'-acylamido-glucoglycerolipids 2a-2c bearing different fatty acids, glucosyl
diglycerides 3a-3e bearing different functional groups c-6' ether-linked
glucoglycerolipids 4a-4c double-tailed alkyl alcohol. anti-influenza a
virus (iav) activity evaluated cytopathic effects (cpe) inhibition
assay. results indicated integral structure the
aminoglycoglycerolipid essential inhibition iav mdck cells.
furthermore, oral administration compound 1d able significantly improve
survival decrease pulmonary viral titers iav-infected mice, which
suggested compound 1d merited investigation novel anti-iav
candidate future.

doi: 10.3390/md14060116 
pmcid: pmc4926075
pmid: 27322292  [indexed medline]

