
1. Int J Parasitol. 2011 Mar;41(3-4):417-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2010.11.003. Epub
2010 Dec 14.

Interaction of apicoplast-encoded elongation factor (EF) EF-Tu with
nuclear-encoded EF-Ts mediates translation in the Plasmodiumfalciparum plastid.

Biswas S(1), Lim EE, Gupta A, Saqib U, Mir SS, Siddiqi MI, Ralph SA, Habib S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Structural Biology, Central Drug Research Institute,
PO Box 173, Chattar Manzil, Mahatma Gandhi Marg, Lucknow 226001, India.

Protein translation in the plastid (apicoplast) of Plasmodium spp. is of immense 
interest as a target for potential anti-malarial drugs. However, the molecular
data on apicoplast translation needed for optimisation and development of novel
inhibitors is lacking. We report characterisation of two key translation
elongation factors in Plasmodium falciparum, apicoplast-encoded elongation factor
PfEF-Tu and nuclear-encoded PfEF-Ts. Recombinant PfEF-Tu hydrolysed GTP and
interacted with its presumed nuclear-encoded partner PfEF-Ts. The EF-Tu inhibitor
kirromycin affected PfEF-Tu activity in vitro, indicating that apicoplast EF-Tu
is indeed the target of this drug. The predicted PfEF-Ts leader sequence targeted
GFP to the apicoplast, confirming that PfEF-Ts functions in this organelle.
Recombinant PfEF-Ts mediated nucleotide exchange on PfEF-Tu and homology modeling
of the PfEF-Tu:PfEF-Ts complex revealed PfEF-Ts-induced structural alterations
that would expedite GDP release from PfEF-Tu. Our results establish functional
interaction between two apicoplast translation factors encoded by genes residing 
in different cellular compartments and highlight the significance of their
sequence/structural differences from bacterial elongation factors in relation to 
inhibitor activity. These data provide an experimental system to study the
effects of novel inhibitors targeting PfEF-Tu and PfEF-Tu.PfEF-Ts interaction.
Our finding that apicoplast EF-Tu possesses chaperone-related disulphide
reductase activity also provides a rationale for retention of the tufA gene on
the plastid genome.

Copyright Â© 2010 Australian Society for Parasitology Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2010.11.003 
PMID: 21163263  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

