
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jan 4;108(1):244-9. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1013648108. 
Epub 2010 Dec 20.

Adaptive divergence between incipient species of Anopheles gambiae increases
resistance to Plasmodium.

White BJ(1), Lawniczak MK, Cheng C, Coulibaly MB, Wilson MD, Sagnon N, Costantini
C, Simard F, Christophides GK, Besansky NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Eck Institute for Global Health, Department of Biological Sciences, University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA.

The African malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae is diversifying into ecotypes
known as M and S forms. This process is thought to be promoted by adaptation to
different larval habitats, but its genetic underpinnings remain elusive. To
identify candidate targets of divergent natural selection in M and S, we
performed genomewide scanning in paired population samples from Mali, followed by
resequencing and genotyping from five locations in West, Central, and East
Africa. Genome scans revealed a significant peak of M-S divergence on chromosome 
3L, overlapping five known or suspected immune response genes. Resequencing
implicated a selective target at or near the TEP1 gene, whose complement C3-like 
product has antiparasitic and antibacterial activity. Sequencing and
allele-specific genotyping showed that an allelic variant of TEP1 has been swept 
to fixation in M samples from Mali and Burkina Faso and is spreading into
neighboring Ghana, but is absent from M sampled in Cameroon, and from all sampled
S populations. Sequence comparison demonstrates that this allele is related to,
but distinct from, TEP1 alleles of known resistance phenotype. Experimental
parasite infections of advanced mosquito intercrosses demonstrated a strong
association between this TEP1 variant and resistance to both rodent malaria and
the native human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Although malaria
parasites may not be direct agents of pathogen-mediated selection at TEP1 in
nature--where larvae may be the more vulnerable life stage--the process of
adaptive divergence between M and S has potential consequences for malaria
transmission.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1013648108 
PMCID: PMC3017163
PMID: 21173248  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

