
1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Dec 16;6(12):e1001223. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001223.

H2A.Z demarcates intergenic regions of the plasmodium falciparum epigenome that
are dynamically marked by H3K9ac and H3K4me3.

Bártfai R(1), Hoeijmakers WA, Salcedo-Amaya AM, Smits AH, Janssen-Megens E, Kaan 
A, Treeck M, Gilberger TW, Françoijs KJ, Stunnenberg HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Radboud University, Nijmegen Center for
Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Epigenetic regulatory mechanisms and their enzymes are promising targets for
malaria therapeutic intervention; however, the epigenetic component of gene
expression in P. falciparum is poorly understood. Dynamic or stable association
of epigenetic marks with genomic features provides important clues about their
function and helps to understand how histone variants/modifications are used for 
indexing the Plasmodium epigenome. We describe a novel, linear amplification
method for next-generation sequencing (NGS) that allows unbiased analysis of the 
extremely AT-rich Plasmodium genome. We used this method for high resolution,
genome-wide analysis of a histone H2A variant, H2A.Z and two histone H3 marks
throughout parasite intraerythrocytic development. Unlike in other organisms,
H2A.Z is a constant, ubiquitous feature of euchromatic intergenic regions
throughout the intraerythrocytic cycle. The almost perfect colocalisation of
H2A.Z with H3K9ac and H3K4me3 suggests that these marks are preferentially
deposited on H2A.Z-containing nucleosomes. By performing RNA-seq on 8
time-points, we show that acetylation of H3K9 at promoter regions correlates very
well with the transcriptional status whereas H3K4me3 appears to have
stage-specific regulation, being low at early stages, peaking at trophozoite
stage, but does not closely follow changes in gene expression. Our improved NGS
library preparation procedure provides a foundation to exploit the malaria
epigenome in detail. Furthermore, our findings place H2A.Z at the cradle of P.
falciparum epigenetic regulation by stably defining intergenic regions and
providing a platform for dynamic assembly of epigenetic and other transcription
related complexes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001223 
PMCID: PMC3002978
PMID: 21187892  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

