
1. Biochemistry. 2011 Feb 22;50(7):1247-54. doi: 10.1021/bi101642d. Epub 2011 Jan
25.

Methylthioinosine phosphorylase from Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Structure and
annotation of a novel enzyme in quorum sensing.

Guan R(1), Ho MC, Almo SC, Schramm VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Yeshiva
University, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, New York 10461, United States.

The PA3004 gene of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 was originally annotated as a
5'-methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP). However, the PA3004 encoded protein 
uses 5'-methylthioinosine (MTI) as a preferred substrate and represents the only 
known example of a specific MTI phosphorylase (MTIP). MTIP does not utilize
5'-methylthioadenosine (MTA). Inosine is a weak substrate with a k(cat)/K(m)
value 290-fold less than MTI and is the second best substrate identified. The
crystal structure of P. aeruginosa MTIP (PaMTIP) in complex with hypoxanthine was
determined to 2.8 Å resolution and revealed a 3-fold symmetric homotrimer. The
methylthioribose and phosphate binding regions of PaMTIP are similar to MTAPs,
and the purine binding region is similar to that of purine nucleoside
phosphorylases (PNPs). The catabolism of MTA in P. aeruginosa involves
deamination to MTI and phosphorolysis to hypoxanthine (MTA → MTI → hypoxanthine).
This pathway also exists in Plasmodium falciparum, where the purine nucleoside
phosphorylase (PfPNP) acts on both inosine and MTI. Three tight-binding
transition state analogue inhibitors of PaMTIP are identified with dissociation
constants in the picomolar range. Inhibitor specificity suggests an early
dissociative transition state for PaMTIP. Quorum sensing molecules are associated
with MTA metabolism in bacterial pathogens suggesting PaMTIP as a potential
therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.1021/bi101642d 
PMCID: PMC3040260
PMID: 21197954  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

