
1. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 27;6(1):e16544. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016544.

Allelic diversity of the Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1
entails variant-specific red cell surface epitopes.

Vigan-Womas I(1), Guillotte M, Juillerat A, Vallieres C, Lewit-Bentley A, Tall A,
Baril L, Bentley GA, Mercereau-Puijalon O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité d'Immunologie Moléculaire des Parasites, Paris,
France.

The clonally variant Plasmodium falciparum PfEMP1 adhesin is a virulence factor
and a prime target of humoral immunity. It is encoded by a repertoire of
functionally differentiated var genes, which display architectural diversity and 
allelic polymorphism. Their serological relationship is key to understanding the 
evolutionary constraints on this gene family and rational vaccine design. Here,
we investigated the Palo Alto/VarO and IT4/R29 and 3D7/PF13_003 parasites lines. 
VarO and R29 form rosettes with uninfected erythrocytes, a phenotype associated
with severe malaria. They express an allelic Cys2/group A NTS-DBL1α(1) PfEMP1
domain implicated in rosetting, whose 3D7 ortholog is encoded by PF13_0003. Using
these three recombinant NTS-DBL1α(1) domains, we elicited antibodies in mice that
were used to develop monovariant cultures by panning selection. The 3D7/PF13_0003
parasites formed rosettes, revealing a correlation between sequence identity and 
virulence phenotype. The antibodies cross-reacted with the allelic domains in
ELISA but only minimally with the Cys4/group B/C PFL1955w NTS-DBL1α. By contrast,
they were variant-specific in surface seroreactivity of the monovariant-infected 
red cells by FACS analysis and in rosette-disruption assays. Thus, while ELISA
can differentiate serogroups, surface reactivity assays define the more
restrictive serotypes. Irrespective of cumulated exposure to infection,
antibodies acquired by humans living in a malaria-endemic area also displayed a
variant-specific surface reactivity. Although seroprevalence exceeded 90% for
each rosetting line, the kinetics of acquisition of surface-reactive antibodies
differed in the younger age groups. These data indicate that humans acquire an
antibody repertoire to non-overlapping serotypes within a serogroup, consistent
with an antibody-driven diversification pressure at the population level. In
addition, the data provide important information for vaccine design, as
production of a vaccine targeting rosetting PfEMP1 adhesins will require
engineering to induce variant-transcending responses or combining multiple
serotypes to elicit a broad spectrum of immunity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016544 
PMCID: PMC3029348
PMID: 21298021  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

