
1. Eukaryot Cell. 2011 Apr;10(4):530-9. doi: 10.1128/EC.00329-10. Epub 2011 Feb 11.

Plasmodium falciparum var gene silencing is determined by cis DNA elements that
form stable and heritable interactions.

Swamy L(1), Amulic B, Deitsch KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Antigenic variation in the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum depends
on the transcriptional regulation of the var gene family. In each individual
parasite, mRNA is expressed exclusively from 1 var gene out of âˆ¼60, while the
rest of the genes are transcriptionally silenced. Both modifications to chromatin
structure and DNA regulatory elements associated with each var gene have been
implicated in the organization and maintenance of the silent state. Whether
silencing is established at the level of entire chromosomal regions via
heterochromatin spreading or at the level of individual var promoters through the
action of a silencing element within each var intron has been debated. Here, we
consider both possibilities, using clonal parasite lines carrying chromosomally
integrated transgenes. We confirm a previous finding that the loss of an adjacent
var intron results in var promoter activation and further show that
transcriptional activation of a var promoter within a cluster does not affect the
transcriptional activity of neighboring var promoters. Our results provide more
evidence for the hypothesis that var genes are primarily silenced at the level of
an individual gene, rather than by heterochromatin spreading. We also tested the 
intrinsic directionality of an intron's silencing effect on upstream or
downstream var promoters. We found that an intron is capable of silencing in
either direction and that, once established, a var promoter-intron pair is stably
maintained through many generations, suggesting a possible role in epigenetic
memory. This study provides insights into the regulation of endogenous var gene
clusters.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.00329-10 
PMCID: PMC3127639
PMID: 21317310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

