
1. Genes Immun. 2011 Sep;12(6):481-9. doi: 10.1038/gene.2011.19. Epub 2011 Mar 31.

Evidence for epistasis between hemoglobin C and immune genes in human P.
falciparum malaria: a family study in Burkina Faso.

Atkinson A(1), Barbier M, Afridi S, Fumoux F, Rihet P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR928-TAGC, Marseille, France.

Hemoglobin C (HbC) has been recently associated with protection against
Plasmodium falciparum malaria. It is thought that HbC influences the development 
of immune responses against malaria, suggesting that the variation at the HbC
locus (rs33930165) may interact with polymorphic sites in immune genes. We
investigated, in 198 individuals belonging to 34 families living in Burkina Faso,
statistical interactions between HbC and 11 polymorphisms within interleukin-4
(IL4), IL12B, NCR3, tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and lymphotoxin-Î± (LTA), which
have been previously associated with malaria-related phenotypes. We searched for 
multilocus interactions by using the pedigree-based generalized multifactor
dimensionality reduction approach. We detected 29 multilocus interactions for
mild malaria, maximum parasitemia or asymptomatic parasitemia after correcting
for multiple tests. All the single-nucleotide polymorphisms studied are included 
in several multilocus models. Nevertheless, most of the significant multilocus
models included IL12B 3' untranslated region, IL12Bpro or LTA+80, suggesting that
those polymorphisms play a particular role in the interactions detected.
Moreover, we identified six multilocus models involving NCR3 that encodes the
activating natural killer (NK) receptor NKp30, suggesting an interaction between 
HbC and genes involved in the activation of NK cells. More generally, our
findings suggest an interaction between HbC and genes influencing the activation 
of effector cells for phenotypes related to mild malaria.

DOI: 10.1038/gene.2011.19 
PMID: 21451558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

