
1. Acta Trop. 2011 Jul;119(1):44-9. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2011.04.005. Epub
2011 Apr 12.

Anopheline species composition in borderline of Iran-Azerbaijan.

Oshaghi MA(1), Vatandoost H, Gorouhi A, Abai MR, Madjidpour A, Arshi S, Sadeghi
H, Nazari M, Mehravaran A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Entomology, School of Public Health, Tehran University
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. moshaghi@sina.tums.ac.ir

Malaria is still one of the most important health-problems in the world and is
endemic in Iran. Since 1994, after collapse of former Soviet Union, a new threat 
of malaria importation emerged from those countries into the northern Iran. This 
work was carried out to provide further evidence on the status of anopheline
species composition, the malaria parasite species, and natural infectivity of
mosquitoes distributed in Pars-Abad district, on the borderline of Azerbaijan in 
northwestern Iran. Mosquitoes were collected from May to December 2008 in
anopheline seasonal activity and were identified at the species level. The genus-
and species-specific primers against Plasmodium ssrDNA gene were used for
specific amplification on female mosquito head+thorax. Members of the Anoheles
maculipennis complex were identified by sequence analysis of the ribosomal
internal transcribed spacer II (ITS2-rDNA). Morphological character-based
identification showed that out of 1455 anopheline female specimens, 1121 (77%)
were of A. maculipennis s.l. and 334 (23%) were of Anoheles hyrcanus. Molecular
analysis of the species complex indicated the presence of Anoheles sacharovi 984 
(67.6%) and A. maculipennis 137 (9.4%) in the region. None of themosquito's
head-thorax was found to be naturally infected by malaria parasite. Results of
this study, particularly high dominance of A. sacharovi, suggest a potential risk
of malaria epidemic in the region, and the need for a continuous epidemiological 
surveillance.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2011.04.005 
PMID: 21513694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

