
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2011 Jul-Aug;178(1-2):29-39. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2011.04.004. Epub 2011 Apr 16.

Transcriptional profiling of stage specific gene expression in the parasitic
ciliate Ichthyophthirius multifiliis.

Cassidy-Hanley DM(1), Cordonnier-Pratt MM, Pratt LH, Devine C, Mozammal Hossain
M, Dickerson HW, Clark TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, United States. dmc4@cornell.edu

The parasitic ciliate, Ichthyophthirius multifiliis (Ich), is among the most
important protozoan pathogens of freshwater fish. Ichthyophthirius cannot be
grown in cell culture, and the development of effective prophylactic and
therapeutic treatments has been hampered by a lack of information regarding genes
involved in virulence, differentiation and growth. To help address this issue, we
have generated EST libraries from the two major stages of the parasite life cycle
that infect and develop within host tissues. A total of 25,084 ESTs were
generated from non-normalized libraries prepared from polyA+ RNA of infective
theronts and host-associated trophonts, respectively. Cluster analysis identified
5311 unique transcripts (UniScripts), of which 2091 were contigs and 3220
singletons. Extrapolation of the data based on rates of EST discovery suggests
that more than half the expected protein-coding genes of I. multifiliis are
represented in this data. BLASTX comparisons against GenBank nr, UniProtKB
(SwissProt and TrEMBL), as well as Tetrahymena thermophila, Plasmodium
falciparum, and Paramecium tetraurelia protein databases produced 3694
significant (E-value ≤1e(-10)) hits, of which 1178 were annotated using gene
ontology (GO) analysis. A high proportion of UniScripts (63%) showed similarity
to other ciliate proteins. When combined with expression profiling data, GO
ontology analysis of Biological Process, Cellular Component, and Molecular
Function revealed interesting differences in gene families expressed in the two
stages. Indeed, the most abundant transcripts were highly stage-specific and
coincided with the metabolic activities associated with each stage. This work
provides an effective genomics resource to further our understanding of
Ichthyophthirius biology, and lays the groundwork for the identification of
potential drug targets and vaccines candidates for the control of this
devastating fish pathogen.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2011.04.004 
PMID: 21524669  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

