
1. J Parasitol. 2011 Oct;97(5):939-42. doi: 10.1645/GE-2792.1. Epub 2011 May 9.

SYBR Green I and TaqMan quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction methods 
for the determination of amplification of Plasmodium falciparum multidrug
resistance-1 gene (pfmdr1).

Muhamad P(1), Chaijaroenkul W, Congpuong K, Na-Bangchang K.

Author information: 
(1)Thailand Center of Excellence on Discovery and Development, Thammasat
University (Rangsit Campus), Paholyothin Road, Klong Luang District, Pathumtanee,
Thailand.

The pfmdr1 gene, which encodes P-glycoprotein homolog 1, has been shown to be a
reliable marker of resistance for Plasmodium falciparum related to artesunate and
mefloquine combination therapy. The aims of this study are to investigate the
copy number of pfmdr1 in P. falciparum isolates collected from the 4
malaria-endemic areas of Thailand (Kanchanaburi, Mae Hongson, Ranong, and Tak)
along the Thailand-Myanmar (Burma) border (Thai-Myanmar border) by using SYBR
Green I and the standard method TaqMan real-time polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and to compare the efficiency (sensitivity and specificity) of SYBR
Green I with TaqMan RT-quantitative (q)PCR methods in determining pfmdr1 gene
copy number. Ninety-six blood samples were collected onto filter paper from
patients with uncomplicated falciparum malaria who attended malaria clinics in
the Kanchanaburi (n  =  45), Mae Hongson (n  =  18), Ranong (n  =  11), and Tak
(n  =  22) provinces in Thailand. Parasite genomic DNA was extracted from dried
blood spots by using QIAcube™ automated sample preparation. Pfmdr1 gene copy
number was determined by TaqMan (63 samples) and SYBR Green I (96 samples)
real-time PCR. Seventy-one (74.0%), 14 (14.6%), 10 (10.4%), and 1 (1%) isolates
carried 1, 2, 3, and 4 pfmdr1 gene copies, respectively. Forty-three of 48
(89.6%), 6 of 11 (54.5%), and 3 of 4 (75.0%) samples, respectively, showed
agreement with results of 1, 2, and 3 pfmdr1 gene copies as determined by both
methods. The efficiency of SYBR Green I in identifying pfmdr1 gene copy number
was found to be significantly correlated with that of TaqMan. Considering its
simplicity and relatively low cost, SYBR Green I RT-qPCR is therefore a promising
alternative technique for the determination of pfmdr1 copy number.

DOI: 10.1645/GE-2792.1 
PMID: 21554069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

