
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2011 Sep;179(1):8-17. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2011.05.001. Epub 2011 May 10.

Plasmodium falciparum enolase complements yeast enolase functions and associates 
with the parasite food vacuole.

Das S(1), Shevade S, LaCount DJ, Jarori GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Homi Bhabha Road, Colaba, Mumbai 400 005, India.

Plasmodium falciparum enolase (Pfeno) localizes to the cytosol, nucleus, cell
membrane and cytoskeletal elements, suggesting multiple non-glycolytic functions 
for this protein. Our recent observation of association of enolase with the food 
vacuole (FV) in immuno-gold electron microscopic images of P. falciparum raised
the possibility for yet another moonlighting function for this protein. Here we
provide additional support for this localization by demonstrating the presence of
Pfeno in purified FVs by immunoblotting. To examine the potential functional role
of FV-associated Pfeno, we assessed the ability of Pfeno to complement a mutant
Saccharomyces cervisiae strain deficient in enolase activity. In this strain
(Tetr-Eno2), the enolase 1 gene is deleted and expression of the enolase 2 gene
is under the control of a tetracycline repressible promoter. Enolase deficiency
in this strain was previously shown to cause growth retardation, vacuolar
fragmentation and altered expression of certain vacuolar proteins. Expression of 
Pfeno in the enolase-deficient yeast strain restored all three phenotypic
effects. However, transformation of Tetr-eno2 with an enzymatically active,
monomeric mutant form of Pfeno (Δ(5)Pfeno) fully restored cell growth, but only
partially rescued the fragmented vacuolar phenotype, suggesting that the dimeric 
structure of Pfeno is required for the optimal vacuolar functions. Bioinformatic 
searches revealed the presence of Plasmodium orthologs of several yeast vacuolar 
proteins that are predicted to form complexes with Pfeno. Together, these
observations raise the possibility that association of Pfeno with food vacuole in
Plasmodium may have physiological function(s).

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2011.05.001 
PMCID: PMC3353271
PMID: 21600245  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

