
1. Mol Plant Pathol. 2012 Feb;13(2):105-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1364-3703.2011.00729.x.
Epub 2011 Jun 1.

Plasmodiophora brassicae: a review of an emerging pathogen of the Canadian canola
(Brassica napus) crop.

Hwang SF(1), Strelkov SE, Feng J, Gossen BD, Howard RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Crop Diversification Centre North, Alberta Agriculture and Rural Development, 
Edmonton, AB, Canada, T5Y 6H3. sheau-fang.hwang@gov.ab.ca

Plasmodiophora brassicae causes clubroot disease in cruciferous plants, and is an
emerging threat to Canadian canola (Brassica napus) production. This review
focuses on recent studies into the pathogenic diversity of P. brassicae
populations, mechanisms of pathogenesis and resistance, and the development of
diagnostic tests for pathogen detection and quantification.TAXONOMY:
Plasmodiophora brassicae is a soil-borne, obligate parasite within the class
Phytomyxea (plasmodiophorids) of the protist supergroup Rhizaria.
DISEASE SYMPTOMS: Clubroot development is characterized by the formation of
club-shaped galls on the roots of affected plants. Above-ground symptoms include 
wilting, stunting, yellowing and premature senescence. DISEASE CYCLE:
Plasmodiophora brassicae first infects the root hairs, producing motile zoospores
that invade the cortical tissue. Secondary plasmodia form within the root cortex 
and, by triggering the expression of genes involved in the production of auxins, 
cytokinins and other plant growth regulators, divert a substantial proportion of 
plant resources into hypertrophic growth of the root tissues, resulting in the
formation of galls. The secondary plasmodia are cleaved into millions of resting 
spores and the root galls quickly disintegrate, releasing long-lived resting
spores into the soil. A serine protease, PRO1, has been shown to trigger resting 
spore germination. PHYSIOLOGICAL SPECIALIZATION: Physiological specialization
occurs in populations of P. brassicae, and various host differential sets,
consisting of different collections of Brassica genotypes, are used to
distinguish among pathotypes of the parasite. DETECTION AND QUANTIFICATION: As P.
brassicae cannot be cultured, bioassays with bait plants were traditionally used 
to detect the pathogen in the soil. More recent innovations for the detection and
quantification of P. brassicae include the use of antibodies, quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and qPCR in conjunction with signature fatty
acid analysis, all of which are more sensitive than bioassays. RESISTANCE IN
CANOLA: Clubroot-resistant canola hybrids, recently introduced into the Canadian 
market, represent an important new tool for clubroot management in this crop.
Genetic resistance must be carefully managed, however, as it has been quickly
overcome in other regions. At least three resistance genes and one or two
quantitative trait loci are involved in conferring resistance to P. brassicae.
Root hair infection still occurs in resistant cultivars, but secondary plasmodia 
often remain immature and unable to produce resting spores. Fewer cell wall
breakages occur in resistant hosts, and spread of the plasmodium through cortical
tissue is restricted. More information on the genetics of clubroot resistance in 
canola is needed to ensure more effective resistance stewardship.
USEFUL WEBSITES: http://www.canolacouncil.org/clubroot/resources.aspx,
http://tu-dresden.de/die_tu_dresden/fakultaeten/fakultaet_mathematik_und_naturwis
senschaften/fachrichtung_biologie/botanik/pflanzenphysiologie/clubroot,
http://www.ohio.edu/people/braselto/plasmos/

© 2011 THE AUTHORS. MOLECULAR PLANT PATHOLOGY © 2011 BSPP AND BLACKWELL
PUBLISHING LTD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1364-3703.2011.00729.x 
PMCID: PMC6638701
PMID: 21726396  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

