
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22463. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022463. Epub 2011 Jul 21.

Alba-domain proteins of Trypanosoma brucei are cytoplasmic RNA-binding proteins
that interact with the translation machinery.

Mani J(1), Güttinger A, Schimanski B, Heller M, Acosta-Serrano A, Pescher P,
Späth G, Roditi I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

Trypanosoma brucei and related pathogens transcribe most genes as polycistronic
arrays that are subsequently processed into monocistronic mRNAs. Expression is
frequently regulated post-transcriptionally by cis-acting elements in the
untranslated regions (UTRs). GPEET and EP procyclins are the major surface
proteins of procyclic (insect midgut) forms of T. brucei. Three regulatory
elements common to the 3' UTRs of both mRNAs regulate mRNA turnover and
translation. The glycerol-responsive element (GRE) is unique to the GPEET 3' UTR 
and regulates its expression independently from EP. A synthetic RNA encompassing 
the GRE showed robust sequence-specific interactions with cytoplasmic proteins in
electromobility shift assays. This, combined with column chromatography, led to
the identification of 3 Alba-domain proteins. RNAi against Alba3 caused a growth 
phenotype and reduced the levels of Alba1 and Alba2 proteins, indicative of
interactions between family members. Tandem-affinity purification and
co-immunoprecipitation verified these interactions and also identified Alba4 in
sub-stoichiometric amounts. Alba proteins are cytoplasmic and are recruited to
starvation granules together with poly(A) RNA. Concomitant depletion of all four 
Alba proteins by RNAi specifically reduced translation of a reporter transcript
flanked by the GPEET 3' UTR. Pulldown of tagged Alba proteins confirmed
interactions with poly(A) binding proteins, ribosomal protein P0 and, in the case
of Alba3, the cap-binding protein eIF4E4. In addition, Alba2 and Alba3 partially 
cosediment with polyribosomes in sucrose gradients. Alba-domain proteins seem to 
have exhibited great functional plasticity in the course of evolution. First
identified as DNA-binding proteins in Archaea, then in association with nuclear
RNase MRP/P in yeast and mammalian cells, they were recently described as
components of a translationally silent complex containing stage-regulated mRNAs
in Plasmodium. Our results are also consistent with stage-specific regulation of 
translation in trypanosomes, but most likely in the context of initiation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022463 
PMCID: PMC3141063
PMID: 21811616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

