
1. Vet Parasitol. 2012 Feb 10;183(3-4):244-8. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2011.07.027.
Epub 2011 Jul 23.

Prevalence of avian haematozoa in wild birds in a high-altitude forest in Japan.

Imura T(1), Suzuki Y, Ejiri H, Sato Y, Ishida K, Sumiyama D, Murata K, Yukawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biomedical Science, Department of Veterinary Medicine, College
of Bioresource Sciences, Nihon University, Fujisawa 252-0880, Japan.

The infection dynamics of avian haematozoa, which includes the genera Plasmodium,
Haemoproteus, and Leucocytozoon, are complicated by a variety of environmental
factors and host-parasite interactions. In Japan, the prevalence of haematozoa in
wild birds has recently been determined in several local areas. However, no
information on the annual prevalence of avian haematozoa in a single study site
has been reported. Here, we investigated the long-term infection dynamics of
haematozoa in wild birds inhabiting a mountain forest of Japan. Blood samples
were collected from 415 wild birds captured in the Chichibu mountains in Saitama 
Prefecture at an altitude of 1650 m between 2007 and 2010. All obtained samples
were examined for haematozoan infection using nested polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) of the cytochrome b (cytb) genes of haematozoa. A total of 62 out of 415
(14.9%) forest birds were PCR positive for haematozoa. Relatively high infection 
rates of Leucocytozoon were found among several bird species (Parus ater, 64.3%; 
Parus montanus, 81.8%) and may be due to the host preference of vector black
flies and host nestling pattern in this forest. Phylogenetic analysis of
amplified cytb sequences revealed for the first time that a variety of lineages
of avian haematozoa are distributed among wild bird hosts in a high-altitude
forest stand in Japan. Notably, significant seasonal changes of the prevalence of
avian haematozoa were not observed; however, continuous investigation will likely
provide detailed information on host-parasite interactions, including local
environmental factors, that influence the dynamics of avian haematozoan
infections.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2011.07.027 
PMID: 21831523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

