
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2011 Nov;49(11):3885-91. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01157-11. Epub 2011
Aug 31.

Prevalence and density-related concordance of three diagnostic tests for malaria 
in a region of Tanzania with hypoendemic malaria.

Schachterle SE(1), Mtove G, Levens JP, Clemens EG, Shi L, Raj A, Munoz B, Reller 
ME, West S, Dumler JS, Sullivan D; PRET Project Team.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Accurate malaria diagnosis has dual roles in identification of symptomatic
persons for effective malaria treatment and also enumeration of asymptomatic
persons who contribute to the epidemiologic determinants of transmission. Three
currently used diagnostic tests, microscopy, rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs), and
real-time PCR, all have different sensitivities and specificities, which are
parasite density dependent. Here, we compare their concordance among 451 febrile 
episodes in a cohort of 2,058 children and adults followed over 6 months in a
region in central Tanzania with hypoendemic malaria. Microscopy, a histidine-rich
protein-based RDT, and two different real-time PCR gene probes detected
Plasmodium falciparum in 20, 54, 41, and 78 episodes of fever, respectively. They
had complete concordance in only 9 episodes. Real-time PCR with an 18S probe was 
more sensitive than with a mitochondrial probe for cytochrome b despite higher
copy numbers of mitochondrial DNA. Both PCR yields were increased 4-fold by
glycogen/acetate precipitation with low-speed centrifugation. Duplicate PCR
increases low-density malaria detection. RDT had the highest number of unique
positives, presumably from persistent antigen despite the absence of parasites,
although RDT did not detect 3 parasitemias with over 1,000 parasites/Î¼l. In a
latent class analysis, real-time PCR had significantly higher sensitivity than
did microscopy or RDT. Agreement between real-time PCR, RDT, and microscopy was
highest in March and April, when both the P. falciparum parasite rate and
parasite densities are highest. Real-time PCR is more sensitive and specific than
RDT and microscopy in low-prevalence, low-parasite-density settings.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01157-11 
PMCID: PMC3209109
PMID: 21880972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

