
1. Malar J. 2011 Sep 19;10:271. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-271.

Genetic polymorphisms linked to susceptibility to malaria.

Driss A(1), Hibbert JM, Wilson NO, Iqbal SA, Adamkiewicz TV, Stiles JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Immunology, Morehouse School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. adel@weboris.com

The influence of host genetics on susceptibility to Plasmodium falciparum malaria
has been extensively studied over the past twenty years. It is now clear that
malaria parasites have imposed strong selective forces on the human genome in
endemic regions. Different genes have been identified that are associated with
different malaria related phenotypes. Factors that promote severity of malaria
include parasitaemia, parasite induced inflammation, anaemia and sequestration of
parasitized erythrocytes in brain microvasculature.Recent advances in human
genome research technologies such as genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and
fine genotyping tools have enabled the discovery of several genetic polymorphisms
and biomarkers that warrant further study in host-parasite interactions. This
review describes and discusses human gene polymorphisms identified thus far that 
have been shown to be associated with susceptibility or resistance to P.
falciparum malaria. Although some polymorphisms play significant roles in
susceptibility to malaria, several findings are inconclusive and contradictory
and must be considered with caution. The discovery of genetic markers associated 
with different malaria phenotypes will help elucidate the pathophysiology of
malaria and enable development of interventions or cures. Diversity in human
populations as well as environmental effects can influence the clinical
heterogeneity of malaria, thus warranting further investigations with a goal of
developing new interventions, therapies and better management against malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-271 
PMCID: PMC3184115
PMID: 21929748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

