
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2011 Dec;55(12):5834-41. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00477-11. 
Epub 2011 Sep 26.

Differential association of Plasmodium falciparum Na+/H+ exchanger polymorphism
and quinine responses in field- and culture-adapted isolates of Plasmodium
falciparum.

Pelleau S(1), Bertaux L, Briolant S, Ferdig MT, Sinou V, Pradines B, Parzy D,
Jambou R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur de Dakar, BP 220 Dakar, Senegal.

Plasmodium falciparum isolates with decreased susceptibility to quinine are
increasingly being found in malaria patients. Mechanisms involved in this
resistance are not yet understood. Several studies claim that alongside mutations
in the Pfcrt and Pfmdr1 genes, the Pfnhe-1 Na(+)/H(+) exchanger polymorphism
plays a role in decreasing susceptibility. However, conflicting results on the
link between the Pfnhe-1 gene and quinine resistance arise from field- and
culture-adapted isolates. We tested the association between Pfnhe-1, Pfcrt, and
Pfmdr1 polymorphisms in field- and culture-adapted isolates from various
countries with their in vitro susceptibility to quinine. Field isolates presented
a higher diversity of the Pfnhe-1 microsatellite sequence than culture-adapted
isolates. In culture-adapted isolates but not in field isolates, mutations in the
Pfcrt and Pfmdr1 genes, as well as a higher number of DNNND repeats in the
Pfnhe-1 gene, were associated with a higher 50% inhibitory concentration (IC(50))
of quinine. Furthermore, most of the culture-adapted isolates with more than one 
DNNND repeat in the Pfnhe-1 gene also harbored mutated Pfcrt and Pfmdr1 genes
with an apparent cumulative effect on quinine susceptibility. This study supports
the involvement of the Pfnhe-1 gene in the modulation of the in vitro quinine
response when associated with mutated Pfcrt and Pfmdr1 genes. Culture adaptation 
could be responsible for selection of specific haplotypes of these three genes.
Methods used for drug testing might thus influence the association between
Pfnhe-1 polymorphism and quinine susceptibility. However, we do not exclude the
possibility that in particular settings, Pfnhe-1 polymorphism can be used as a
molecular marker for surveillance of quinine resistance.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00477-11 
PMCID: PMC3232819
PMID: 21947391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

