
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2011 Oct;85(4):606-11. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.2011.11-0108.

Role of Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter and multidrug
resistance 1 genes on in vitro chloroquine resistance in isolates of Plasmodium
falciparum from Thailand.

Setthaudom C(1), Tan-ariya P, Sitthichot N, Khositnithikul R, Suwandittakul N,
Leelayoova S, Mungthin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand. chavachol@hotmail.com

Resistance to chloroquine is a public health problem worldwide. Polymorphisms of 
the Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter (pfcrt) and P.
falciparum multidrug resistance 1 (pfmdr1) genes have been linked to chloroquine 
resistance. Although the K76T mutation in the pfcrt gene has been shown to be a
key determinant in chloroquine resistance, evidence suggests that the pfmdr1 gene
could modulate the level of chloroquine resistance. However, few studies of field
isolates could identify the interactive role of these two genes in chloroquine
resistance. Thus, we evaluated the influence of pfcrt and pfmdr1 polymorphisms on
in vitro chloroquine sensitivity in 89 adapted isolates of P. falciparum from
Thailand. We found that 87 of 89 isolates contained the CVIET haplotype of the
pfcrt gene. Two additional mutations in the pfcrt gene were identified, i.e., K6Q
and H97L. For the pfmdr1 polymorphisms, the 184F allele was common in the
parasites isolated along the Thailand-Cambodia border, and those isolated along
the Thailand-Myanmar border contained higher copy numbers. Our results indicate
that the additional mutations, in particular H97L in the pfcrt gene and Y184F in 
the pfmdr1 gene and its copy number, influence the level of chloroquine
resistance.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.2011.11-0108 
PMCID: PMC3183763
PMID: 21976558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

