
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25189. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025189. Epub 2011 Oct 3.

Identification of Plasmodium vivax proteins with potential role in invasion using
sequence redundancy reduction and profile hidden Markov models.

Restrepo-Montoya D(1), Becerra D, Carvajal-Patiño JG, Mongui A, Niño LF,
Patarroyo ME, Patarroyo MA.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics and Intelligent Systems Research Laboratory - BIOLISI,
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá D.C., Colombia.

BACKGROUND: This study describes a bioinformatics approach designed to identify
Plasmodium vivax proteins potentially involved in reticulocyte invasion.
Specifically, different protein training sets were built and tuned based on
different biological parameters, such as experimental evidence of secretion
and/or involvement in invasion-related processes. A profile-based sequence method
supported by hidden Markov models (HMMs) was then used to build classifiers to
search for biologically-related proteins. The transcriptional profile of the P.
vivax intra-erythrocyte developmental cycle was then screened using these
classifiers.
RESULTS: A bioinformatics methodology for identifying potentially secreted P.
vivax proteins was designed using sequence redundancy reduction and probabilistic
profiles. This methodology led to identifying a set of 45 proteins that are
potentially secreted during the P. vivax intra-erythrocyte development cycle and 
could be involved in cell invasion. Thirteen of the 45 proteins have already been
described as vaccine candidates; there is experimental evidence of protein
expression for 7 of the 32 remaining ones, while no previous studies of
expression, function or immunology have been carried out for the additional 25.
CONCLUSIONS: The results support the idea that probabilistic techniques like
profile HMMs improve similarity searches. Also, different adjustments such as
sequence redundancy reduction using Pisces or Cd-Hit allowed data clustering
based on rational reproducible measurements. This kind of approach for selecting 
proteins with specific functions is highly important for supporting large-scale
analyses that could aid in the identification of genes encoding potential new
target antigens for vaccine development and drug design. The present study has
led to targeting 32 proteins for further testing regarding their ability to
induce protective immune responses against P. vivax malaria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025189 
PMCID: PMC3184965
PMID: 21984903  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

