
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25430. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025430. Epub 2011 Sep 29.

Wolbachia-mediated antibacterial protection and immune gene regulation in
Drosophila.

Wong ZS(1), Hedges LM, Brownlie JC, Johnson KN.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.

The outcome of microbial infection of insects is dependent not only on
interactions between the host and pathogen, but also on the interactions between 
microbes that co-infect the host. Recently the maternally inherited endosymbiotic
bacteria Wolbachia has been shown to protect insects from a range of microbial
and eukaryotic pathogens. Mosquitoes experimentally infected with Wolbachia have 
upregulated immune responses and are protected from a number of pathogens
including viruses, bacteria, Plasmodium and filarial nematodes. It has been
hypothesised that immune upregulation underpins Wolbachia-mediated protection.
Drosophila is a strong model for understanding host-Wolbachia-pathogen
interactions. Wolbachia-mediated antiviral protection in Drosophila has been
demonstrated for a number of different Wolbachia strains. In this study we
investigate whether Wolbachia-infected flies are also protected against
pathogenic bacteria. Drosophila simulans lines infected with five different
Wolbachia strains were challenged with the pathogenic bacteria Pseudomonas
aeruginosa PA01, Serratia marcescens and Erwinia carotovora and mortality
compared to paired lines without Wolbachia. No difference in mortality was
observed in the flies with or without Wolbachia. Similarly no antibacterial
protection was observed for D. melanogaster infected with Wolbachia.
Interestingly, D. melanogaster Oregon RC flies which are naturally infected with 
Wolbachia showed no upregulation of the antibacterial immune genes TepIV,
Defensin, Diptericin B, PGRP-SD, Cecropin A1 and Attacin D compared to paired
flies without Wolbachia. Taken together these results indicate that
Wolbachia-mediated antibacterial protection is not ubiquitous in insects and
furthermore that the mechanisms of antibacterial and antiviral protection are
independent. We suggest that the immune priming and antibacterial protection
observed in Wolbachia-infected mosquitoes may be a consequence of the recent
artificial introduction of the symbiont into insects that normally do not carry
Wolbachia and that antibacterial protection is unlikely to be found in insects
carrying long-term Wolbachia infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025430 
PMCID: PMC3183045
PMID: 21980455  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

