
1. J Infect Dis. 2011 Dec 1;204(11):1772-8. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir629. Epub 2011
Oct 12.

Human genetic variation is associated with Plasmodium falciparum drug resistance.

Paganotti GM(1), Gallo BC, Verra F, Sirima BS, Nebié I, Diarra A, Coluzzi M,
Modiano D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, La Sapienza University,
Rome, Italy. giacomo.paganotti@uniroma1.it

Comment in
    J Infect Dis. 2013 Feb 15;207(4):687-8.
    J Infect Dis. 2013 Feb 15;207(4):688-9.

One approach to investigate if human genetic variation influences the selection
of Plasmodium falciparum drug resistance is to compare the frequency of resistant
infections among human populations differing in their genetic background and
living in the same epidemiological context. A further complementary approach
consists in comparing drug resistance among subjects differing for genes involved
in drug metabolism. Here we report, from malariological surveys performed in
Burkina Faso, that the prevalence of P. falciparum chloroquine-resistant
infections (pfcrt 76T and/or pfmdr1 86Y alleles) differs among sympatric ethnic
groups, being higher in the Mossi and Rimaibé groups than in the Fulani group
(odds ratio [OR], 2.24; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.27-3.92; P = .007). The
association analysis revealed that the human CYP2C8*2 variant, known to determine
a poor drug metabolizer phenotype, was associated with P. falciparum
chloroquine-resistant infections (OR, 1.66; 95% CI, 1.13-2.43; P = .008). This
variant is more frequent in the Mossi-Rimaibé group (23.7% ± 1.4%) than in the
Fulani group (9.9% ± 2.5%; P = .0003). This study provides an example of how host
genetic variation may influence the selection dynamics of a pathogen's drug
resistance.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jir629 
PMID: 21998472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

