
1. Parasit Vectors. 2011 Oct 25;4:204. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-4-204.

Loop-mediated isothermal amplification: rapid detection of Angiostrongylus
cantonensis infection in Pomacea canaliculata.

Chen R(1), Tong Q, Zhang Y, Lou D, Kong Q, Lv S, Zhuo M, Wen L, Lu S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitology, Zhejiang Academy of Medical Sciences, Hangzhou,
People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Angiostrongylus cantonensis is a zoonotic parasite that causes
eosinophilic meningitis in humans. The most common source of infection with A.
cantonensis is the consumption of raw or undercooked mollusks (e.g., snails and
slugs) harbouring infectious third-stage larvae (L3). However, the parasite is
difficult to identify in snails. The purpose of this study was to develop a
quick, simple molecular method to survey for A. cantonensis in intermediate host 
snails.
FINDINGS: We used a loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) assay, which
was performed using Bst DNA polymerase. Reactions amplified the A. cantonensis
18S rRNA gene and demonstrated high sensitivity; as little as 1 fg of DNA was
detected in the samples. Furthermore, no cross-reactivity was found with other
parasites such as Toxoplasma gondii, Plasmodium falciparum, Schistosoma
japonicum, Clonorchis sinensis, Paragonimus westermani and Anisakis. Pomacea
canaliculata snails were exposed to A. cantonensis first-stage larvae (L1) in the
laboratory, and L3 were observed in the snails thirty-five days after infection. 
All nine samples were positive as determined by the LAMP assay for A.
cantonensis, which was identified as positive by using PCR and microscopy, this
demonstrates that LAMP is sensitive and effective for diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: LAMP is an appropriate diagnostic method for the routine
identification of A. cantonensis within its intermediate host snail P.
canaliculata because of its simplicity, sensitivity, and specificity. It holds
great promise as a useful monitoring tool for A. cantonensis in endemic regions.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-4-204 
PMCID: PMC3213046
PMID: 22023992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

