
1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 2;287(1):222-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.313676. Epub 2011
Nov 4.

Identification of gene encoding Plasmodium knowlesi phosphatidylserine
decarboxylase by genetic complementation in yeast and characterization of in
vitro maturation of encoded enzyme.

Choi JY(1), Augagneur Y, Ben Mamoun C, Voelker DR.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Science Section, Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver,
Colorado 80206, USA.

The 23-megabase genome of Plasmodium falciparum, the causative agent of severe
human malaria, contains ∼5300 genes, most of unknown function or lacking homologs
in other organisms. Identification of these gene functions will help in the
discovery of novel targets for the development of antimalarial drugs and
vaccines. The P. falciparum genome is unusually A+T-rich, which hampers cloning
and expressing these genes in heterologous systems for functional analysis. The
large repertoire of genetic tools available for Saccharomyces cerevisiae makes
this yeast an ideal system for large scale functional complementation analyses of
parasite genes. Here, we report the construction of a cDNA library from P.
knowlesi, which has a lower A+T content compared with P. falciparum. This library
was applied in a yeast complementation assay to identify malaria genes involved
in the decarboxylation of phosphatidylserine. Transformation of a psd1Δpsd2Δdpl1Δ
yeast strain, defective in phosphatidylethanolamine synthesis, with the P.
knowlesi library led to identification of a new parasite phosphatidylserine
decarboxylase (PkPSD). Unlike phosphatidylserine decarboxylase enzymes from other
eukaryotes that are tightly associated with membranes, the PkPSD enzyme expressed
in yeast was equally distributed between membrane and soluble fractions. In vitro
studies reveal that truncated forms of PkPSD are soluble and undergo
auto-endoproteolytic maturation in a phosphatidylserine-dependent reaction that
is inhibited by other anionic phospholipids. This study defines a new system for 
probing the function of Plasmodium genes by library-based genetic complementation
and its usefulness in revealing new biochemical properties of encoded proteins.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.313676 
PMCID: PMC3249073
PMID: 22057268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

