
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2011 Nov;5(11):e1317. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001317. Epub
2011 Nov 1.

The JAK-STAT pathway controls Plasmodium vivax load in early stages of Anopheles 
aquasalis infection.

Bahia AC(1), Kubota MS, Tempone AJ, Araújo HR, Guedes BA, Orfanó AS, Tadei WP,
Ríos-Velásquez CM, Han YS, Secundino NF, Barillas-Mury C, Pimenta PF, Traub-Csekö
YM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular de Parasitas e Vetores, Instituto Oswaldo
Cruz, Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Malaria affects 300 million people worldwide every year and 450,000 in Brazil. In
coastal areas of Brazil, the main malaria vector is Anopheles aquasalis, and
Plasmodium vivax is responsible for the majority of malaria cases in the
Americas. Insects possess a powerful immune system to combat infections. Three
pathways control the insect immune response: Toll, IMD, and JAK-STAT. Here we
analyze the immune role of the A. aquasalis JAK-STAT pathway after P. vivax
infection. Three genes, the transcription factor Signal Transducers and
Activators of Transcription (STAT), the regulatory Protein Inhibitors of
Activated STAT (PIAS) and the Nitric Oxide Synthase enzyme (NOS) were
characterized. Expression of STAT and PIAS was higher in males than females and
in eggs and first instar larvae when compared to larvae and pupae. RNA levels for
STAT and PIAS increased 24 and 36 hours (h) after P. vivax challenge. NOS
transcription increased 36 h post infection (hpi) while this protein was already 
detected in some midgut epithelial cells 24 hpi. Imunocytochemistry experiments
using specific antibodies showed that in non-infected insects STAT and PIAS were 
found mostly in the fat body, while in infected mosquitoes the proteins were
found in other body tissues. The knockdown of STAT by RNAi increased the number
of oocysts in the midgut of A. aquasalis. This is the first clear evidence for
the involvement of a specific immune pathway in the interaction of the Brazilian 
malaria vector A. aquasalis with P. vivax, delineating a potential target for the
future development of disease controlling strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001317 
PMCID: PMC3206008
PMID: 22069502  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

