
1. Nature. 2011 Nov 9;480(7378):534-7. doi: 10.1038/nature10606.

Basigin is a receptor essential for erythrocyte invasion by Plasmodium
falciparum.

Crosnier C(1), Bustamante LY, Bartholdson SJ, Bei AK, Theron M, Uchikawa M, Mboup
S, Ndir O, Kwiatkowski DP, Duraisingh MT, Rayner JC, Wright GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Surface Signalling Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, 
Cambridge CB10 1HH, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2012 Jan;10(1):3.

Erythrocyte invasion by Plasmodium falciparum is central to the pathogenesis of
malaria. Invasion requires a series of extracellular recognition events between
erythrocyte receptors and ligands on the merozoite, the invasive form of the
parasite. None of the few known receptor-ligand interactions involved are
required in all parasite strains, indicating that the parasite is able to access 
multiple redundant invasion pathways. Here, we show that we have identified a
receptor-ligand pair that is essential for erythrocyte invasion in all tested P. 
falciparum strains. By systematically screening a library of erythrocyte
proteins, we have found that the Ok blood group antigen, basigin, is a receptor
for PfRh5, a parasite ligand that is essential for blood stage growth.
Erythrocyte invasion was potently inhibited by soluble basigin or by basigin
knockdown, and invasion could be completely blocked using low concentrations of
anti-basigin antibodies; importantly, these effects were observed across all
laboratory-adapted and field strains tested. Furthermore, Ok(a-) erythrocytes,
which express a basigin variant that has a weaker binding affinity for PfRh5, had
reduced invasion efficiencies. Our discovery of a cross-strain dependency on a
single extracellular receptor-ligand pair for erythrocyte invasion by P.
falciparum provides a focus for new anti-malarial therapies.

DOI: 10.1038/nature10606 
PMCID: PMC3245779
PMID: 22080952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

