
1. J Gene Med. 2011 Dec;13(12):670-9. doi: 10.1002/jgm.1627.

ΔE1 and high-capacity adenoviral vectors expressing full-length codon-optimized
merozoite surface protein 1 for vaccination against Plasmodium falciparum.

Zong S(1), Kron MW, Epp C, Engler T, Bujard H, Kochanek S, Kreppel F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Therapy, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The merozoite surface protein (MSP)-1 of Plasmodium falciparum, the
causative agent of malaria tropica, is considered to be a promising vaccine
candidate. Although its stable cloning and expression has been difficult in the
past, adenoviral vectors expressing the complex protein are described in the
present study.
METHODS: Codon-optimized msp-1 was used to construct a set of first generation
(ΔE1Ad) and high-capacity adenovirus (HC-Ad) vectors, and cellular and humoral
immune responses induced by the vectors were characterized in detail in mice.
RESULTS: Generation of stable ΔE1Ad and HC-Ad vectors expressing full-length
MSP-1 and their production to high vector titers was found to be feasible.
Epitope identification and analysis of frequencies of specific CD8 T-cells
revealed that MSP-1 expressing HC-Ad vectors induced higher frequencies of
interferon-γ + CD8 T-cells than ΔE1 vectors. Irrespective of the vector format,
higher titers of MSP-1 specific antibodies were generated by Ad vectors
expressing MSP-1 from a chicken β-actin (CAG) promoter comprising the
cytomegalovirus early enhancer element and the chicken β-actin promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of the present study suggest that Ad vectors expressing
full-length codon-optimized MSP-1 are promising candidate vaccines against
P. falciparum infections. Use of the HC-Ad vector type for delivery, as well as
the CAG promoter to control MSP-1 expression, may further increase the efficacy
of this vaccine candidate.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jgm.1627 
PMID: 22095915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

