
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2012 Mar;12(2):282-90. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.11.006. Epub
2011 Nov 20.

Adaptive evolution and fixation of drug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum genotypes
in pregnancy-associated malaria: 9-year results from the QuEERPAM study.

Taylor SM(1), Antonia A, Feng G, Mwapasa V, Chaluluka E, Molyneux M, ter Kuile
FO, Rogerson SJ, Meshnick SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. taylo115@email.unc.edu

Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) has been widely deployed in Africa for malaria
control and molecular evidence of parasite drug-resistance is prevalent. However,
the temporal effects on the selection of Plasmodium falciparum are not well
understood. We conducted a retrospective serial cross-sectional study between
1997 and 2006 to investigate changes in drug-resistant malaria among pregnant
women delivering at a single hospital in Blantyre, Malawi. P. falciparum
parasites were genotyped for parasite clone multiplicity and drug-resistance
mutations, and the strength of selection upon mutant genotypes was quantified.
Five mutations in the dihydrofolate reductase and dihydropteroate synthase genes 
began at moderate frequencies and achieved fixation by 2005; the frequency of the
highly-SP-resistant "quintuple mutant" haplotype increased from 19% to 100%. The 
selective advantage of alleles and haplotypes were quantified with selection
coefficients: Selection was positive on all mutant alleles and haplotypes
associated with SP resistance, and the relative fitness of the quintuple mutant
haplotype was 0.139 (95% C.I. 0.067-0.211), indicating a substantial positive
selective advantage. Mutations that confer higher levels of resistance to SP did 
not emerge. SP-resistant haplotypes were rapidly selected for and fixed in P.
falciparum populations infecting pregnant women while SP was widely deployed in
Malawi. These results underscore the pressing need for new preventive measures
for pregnancy-associated malaria and provide a real-world model of the selection 
landscape malaria parasites.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.11.006 
PMCID: PMC3293939
PMID: 22119749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

