
1. Malar J. 2011 Dec 19;10:374. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-374.

Plasmodium vivax lineages: geographical distribution, tandem repeat polymorphism,
and phylogenetic relationship.

Prajapati SK(1), Joshi H, Shalini S, Patarroyo MA, Suwanarusk R, Kumar A, Sharma 
SK, Eapen A, Dev V, Bhatt RM, Valecha N, Nosten F, Rizvi MA, Dash AP.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Division, National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector-8, 
Dwarka, New Delhi, India. surendramrc@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Multi-drug resistance and severe/complicated cases are the emerging
phenotypes of vivax malaria, which may deteriorate current anti-malarial control 
measures. The emergence of these phenotypes could be associated with either of
the two Plasmodium vivax lineages. The two lineages had been categorized as Old
World and New World, based on geographical sub-division and genetic and
phenotypical markers. This study revisited the lineage hypothesis of P. vivax by 
typing the distribution of lineages among global isolates and evaluated their
genetic relatedness using a panel of new mini-satellite markers.
METHODS: 18S SSU rRNA S-type gene was amplified from 420 Plasmodium vivax field
isolates collected from different geographical regions of India, Thailand and
Colombia as well as four strains each of P. vivax originating from Nicaragua,
Panama, Thailand (Pak Chang), and Vietnam (ONG). A mini-satellite marker panel
was then developed to understand the population genetic parameters and tested on 
a sample subset of both lineages.
RESULTS: 18S SSU rRNA S-type gene typing revealed the distribution of both
lineages (Old World and New World) in all geographical regions. However,
distribution of Plasmodium vivax lineages was highly variable in every
geographical region. The lack of geographical sub-division between lineages
suggests that both lineages are globally distributed. Ten mini-satellites were
scanned from the P. vivax genome sequence; these tandem repeats were located in
eight of the chromosomes. Mini-satellites revealed substantial allelic diversity 
(7-21, AE = 14.6 ± 2.0) and heterozygosity (He = 0.697-0.924, AE = 0.857 ± 0.033)
per locus. Mini-satellite comparison between the two lineages revealed high but
similar pattern of genetic diversity, allele frequency, and high degree of allele
sharing. A Neighbour-Joining phylogenetic tree derived from genetic distance data
obtained from ten mini-satellites also placed both lineages together in every
cluster.
CONCLUSIONS: The global lineage distribution, lack of genetic distance, similar
pattern of genetic diversity, and allele sharing strongly suggested that both
lineages are a single species and thus new emerging phenotypes associated with
vivax malaria could not be clearly classified as belonging to a particular
lineage on basis of their geographical origin.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-374 
PMCID: PMC3258263
PMID: 22182774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

