
1. Malar J. 2012 Jan 10;11:14. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-14.

Understanding the population genetics of Plasmodium vivax is essential for
malaria control and elimination.

Arnott A(1), Barry AE, Reeder JC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Population Health, Burnet Institute, Melbourne, Australia.

Traditionally, infection with Plasmodium vivax was thought to be benign and
self-limiting, however, recent evidence has demonstrated that infection with P.
vivax can also result in severe illness and death. Research into P. vivax has
been relatively neglected and much remains unknown regarding the biology,
pathogenesis and epidemiology of this parasite. One of the fundamental factors
governing transmission and immunity is parasite diversity. An understanding of
parasite population genetic structure is necessary to understand the
epidemiology, diversity, distribution and dynamics of natural P. vivax
populations. In addition, studying the population structure of genes under immune
selection also enables investigation of the dynamic interplay between
transmission and immunity, which is crucial for vaccine development. A lack of
knowledge regarding the transmission and spread of P. vivax has been particularly
highlighted in areas where malaria control and elimination programmes have made
progress in reducing the burden of Plasmodium falciparum, yet P. vivax remains as
a substantial obstacle. With malaria elimination back on the global agenda,
mapping of global and local P. vivax population structure is essential prior to
establishing goals for elimination and the roll-out of interventions. A detailed 
knowledge of the spatial distribution, transmission and clinical burden of P.
vivax is required to act as a benchmark against which control targets can be set 
and measured. This paper presents an overview of what is known and what is yet to
be fully understood regarding P. vivax population genetics, as well as the
importance and application of P. vivax population genetics studies.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-14 
PMCID: PMC3298510
PMID: 22233585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

