
1. Infect Immun. 2012 Apr;80(4):1399-407. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05861-11. Epub 2012 Jan
17.

Plasmodium yoelii macrophage migration inhibitory factor is necessary for
efficient liver-stage development.

Miller JL(1), Harupa A, Kappe SH, Mikolajczak SA.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Mammalian macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is a multifaceted cytokine
involved in both extracellular and intracellular functions. Malaria parasites
express a MIF homologue that might modulate host immune responses against
blood-stage parasites, but the potential importance of MIF against other life
cycle stages remains unstudied. In this study, we characterized the MIF homologue
of Plasmodium yoelii throughout the life cycle, with emphasis on preerythrocytic 
stages. P. yoelii MIF (Py-MIF) was expressed in blood-stage parasites and
detected at low levels in mosquito salivary gland sporozoites. MIF expression was
strong throughout liver-stage development and localized to the cytoplasm of the
parasite, with no evidence of release into the host hepatocyte. To examine the
importance of Py-MIF for liver-stage development, we generated a Py-mif knockout 
parasite (P. yoelii Δmif). P. yoelii Δmif parasites grew normally as asexual
erythrocytic-stage parasites and showed normal infection of mosquitoes. In
contrast, the P. yoelii Δmif strain was attenuated during the liver stage. Mice
infected with P. yoelii Δmif sporozoites either did not develop blood-stage
parasitemia or exhibited a delay in the onset of blood-stage patency.
Furthermore, P. yoelii Δmif parasites exhibited growth retardation in vivo.
Combined, the data indicate that Plasmodium MIF is important for liver-stage
development of P. yoelii, during which it is likely to play an intrinsic role in 
parasite development rather than modulating host immune responses to infection.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.05861-11 
PMCID: PMC3318411
PMID: 22252874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

