
1. Exp Parasitol. 2012 Apr;130(4):456-62. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2012.01.006. Epub
2012 Jan 28.

Genetic diversity and natural selection at the domain I of apical membrane
antigen-1 (AMA-1) of Plasmodium falciparum in isolates from Iran.

Mardani A(1), Keshavarz H, Heidari A, Hajjaran H, Raeisi A, Khorramizadeh MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Parasitology and Mycology, School of Public Health,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences (TUMS), Tehran, Iran.

The apical membrane antigen-1 (AMA-1) of Plasmodium falciparum is a prime malaria
asexual blood-stage vaccine candidate. Antigenic variation is one of the main
obstacles in the development of a universal effective malaria vaccine. The
extracellular region of P. falciparum AMA-1 (PfAMA-1) consists of three domains
(I-III), of which the domain I is the most diverse region of this antigen. The
objective of our study was to investigate and analyze the extent of genetic
diversity and the effectiveness of natural selection at the AMA-1 domain I of P. 
falciparum in isolates from Iran. A fragment of ama-1 gene spanning domain I was 
amplified by nested PCR from 48 P. falciparum isolates collected from two major
malaria endemic areas of Iran during 2009 to August 2010 and sequenced. Genetic
polymorphism and statistical analyses were performed using DnaSP and MEGA
software packages. Analysis of intrapopulation diversity revealed relatively high
nucleotide and haplotype diversity at the PfAMA-1 domain I of Iranian isolates.
Neutrality tests provided strong evidence of positive natural selection acting on
the sequenced gene region. The findings also demonstrated that, in addition to
natural selection, intragenic recombination may contribute to the diversity
observed at the domain I. The results obtained will have significant implications
in the design and the development of an AMA-1-based vaccine against falciparum
malaria.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2012.01.006 
PMID: 22306282  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

