
1. Parasitol Res. 2012 Aug;111(2):525-9. doi: 10.1007/s00436-012-2864-3. Epub 2012
Mar 6.

Cloning and characterization of Plasmodium vivax thioredoxin peroxidase-1.

Hakimi H(1), Asada M, Angeles JM, Inoue N, Kawazu S.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases, Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Inada-cho, Obihiro, Hokkaido 080-8555,
Japan.

Reactive oxygen species produced from hemoglobin digestion and the host immune
system could have adverse effects on malaria parasites. To protect themselves,
malaria parasites are highly dependent on the antioxidant enzymes, including
superoxide dismutases and thioredoxin-dependent peroxidases. To date, several
thioredoxin peroxidases (TPx) have been characterized in Plasmodium falciparum,
but the TPx in Plasmodium vivax has not yet been characterized. The complete
sequence of gene coding for thioredoxin peroxidase-1 of P. vivax (PvTPx-1) was
amplified by PCR and cloned. Using the recombinant PvTPx-1 (rPvTPx-1), polyclonal
antibody was produced in mice for immunolocalization of the enzyme in the
parasite. The antioxidant activity of rPvTPx-1 was evaluated by mixed-function
oxidation assay. PvTPx-1 has two conserved cysteine residues in the amino acid
sequence at the positions 50 and 170 which formed a dimer under a non-reducing
condition. Using a thiol mixed-function oxidation assay, the antioxidant activity
of rPvTPx-1 was revealed. Indirect immunofluorescence microscopy with the
specific antibody indicated that PvTPx-1 was expressed in the cytoplasm of the
erythrocytic stage of the parasite in a dots-like pattern. The results suggest
that P. vivax uses TPx-1 to reduce and detoxify hydrogen peroxides in order to
maintain their redox homeostasis and proliferation in the host body.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-012-2864-3 
PMID: 22392134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

