
1. Infect Immun. 2012 Jun;80(6):2240-6. doi: 10.1128/IAI.06414-11. Epub 2012 Mar 26.

Impact of mosquito bites on asexual parasite density and gametocyte prevalence in
asymptomatic chronic Plasmodium falciparum infections and correlation with IgE
and IgG titers.

Lawaly R(1), Konate L, Marrama L, Dia I, Diallo D, Diène Sarr F, Schneider BS,
Casademont I, Diallo M, Brey PT, Sakuntabhai A, Mecheri S, Paul R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur de Dakar, Laboratoire d'Entomologie Médicale, Dakar, Senegal.

An immunomodulatory role of arthropod saliva has been well documented, but
evidence for an effect on Plasmodium sp. infectiousness remains controversial.
Mosquito saliva may orient the immune response toward a Th2 profile, thereby
priming a Th2 response against subsequent antigens, including Plasmodium.
Orientation toward a Th1 versus a Th2 profile promotes IgG and IgE proliferation,
respectively, where the former is crucial for the development of an efficient
antiparasite immune response. Here we assessed the direct effect of mosquito
bites on the density of Plasmodium falciparum asexual parasites and the
prevalence of gametocytes in chronic, asymptomatic infections in a longitudinal
cohort study of seasonal transmission. We additionally correlated these
parasitological measures with IgE and IgG antiparasite and anti-salivary gland
extract titers. The mosquito biting density was positively correlated with the
asexual parasite density but not asexual parasite prevalence and was negatively
correlated with gametocyte prevalence. Individual anti-salivary gland IgE titers 
were also negatively correlated with gametocyte carriage and were strongly
positively correlated with antiparasite IgE titers, consistent with the
hypothesis that mosquito bites predispose individuals to develop an IgE
antiparasite response. We provide evidence that mosquito bites have an impact on 
asymptomatic infections and differentially so for the production of asexual and
sexual parasites. An increased research focus on the immunological impact of
mosquito bites during asymptomatic infections is warranted, to establish whether 
strategies targeting the immune response to saliva can reduce the duration of
infection and the onward transmission of the parasite.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.06414-11 
PMCID: PMC3370602
PMID: 22451520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

