
1. BMC Genomics. 2012 Mar 29;13:125. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-125.

Characterization and gene expression analysis of the cir multi-gene family of
Plasmodium chabaudi chabaudi (AS).

Lawton J(1), Brugat T, Yan YX, Reid AJ, BÃ¶hme U, Otto TD, Pain A, Jackson A,
Berriman M, Cunningham D, Preiser P, Langhorne J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, London,
UK.

BACKGROUND: The pir genes comprise the largest multi-gene family in Plasmodium,
with members found in P. vivax, P. knowlesi and the rodent malaria species.
Despite comprising up to 5% of the genome, little is known about the functions of
the proteins encoded by pir genes. P. chabaudi causes chronic infection in mice, 
which may be due to antigenic variation. In this model, pir genes are called cirs
and may be involved in this mechanism, allowing evasion of host immune responses.
In order to fully understand the role(s) of CIR proteins during P. chabaudi
infection, a detailed characterization of the cir gene family was required.
RESULTS: The cir repertoire was annotated and a detailed bioinformatic
characterization of the encoded CIR proteins was performed. Two major
sub-families were identified, which have been named A and B. Members of each
sub-family displayed different amino acid motifs, and were thus predicted to have
undergone functional divergence. In addition, the expression of the entire cir
repertoire was analyzed via RNA sequencing and microarray. Up to 40% of the cir
gene repertoire was expressed in the parasite population during infection, and
dominant cir transcripts could be identified. In addition, some differences were 
observed in the pattern of expression between the cir subgroups at the peak of P.
chabaudi infection. Finally, specific cir genes were expressed at different time 
points during asexual blood stages.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, the large number of cir genes and their expression
throughout the intraerythrocytic cycle of development indicates that CIR proteins
are likely to be important for parasite survival. In particular, the detection of
dominant cir transcripts at the peak of P. chabaudi infection supports the idea
that CIR proteins are expressed, and could perform important functions in the
biology of this parasite. Further application of the methodologies described here
may allow the elucidation of CIR sub-family A and B protein functions, including 
their contribution to antigenic variation and immune evasion.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-125 
PMCID: PMC3384456
PMID: 22458863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

