
1. Cell Microbiol. 2012 Sep;14(9):1391-401. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2012.01803.x.
Epub 2012 May 15.

Plasmodium falciparum centromeres display a unique epigenetic makeup and cluster 
prior to and during schizogony.

Hoeijmakers WA(1), Flueck C, Françoijs KJ, Smits AH, Wetzel J, Volz JC, Cowman
AF, Voss T, Stunnenberg HG, Bártfai R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Radboud University, Nijmegen Centre for
Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Centromeres are essential for the faithful transmission of chromosomes to the
next generation, therefore being essential in all eukaryotic organisms. The
centromeres of Plasmodium falciparum, the causative agent of the most severe form
of malaria, have been broadly mapped on most chromosomes, but their epigenetic
composition remained undefined. Here, we reveal that the centromeric histone
variant PfCENH3 occupies a 4-4.5 kb region on each P. falciparum chromosome,
which is devoid of pericentric heterochromatin but harbours another histone
variant, PfH2A.Z. These CENH3 covered regions pinpoint the exact position of the 
centromere on all chromosomes and revealed that all centromeric regions have
similar size and sequence composition. Immunofluorescence assay of PfCENH3
strongly suggests that P. falciparum centromeres cluster to a single nuclear
location prior to and during mitosis and cytokinesis but dissociate soon after
invasion. In summary, we reveal a dynamic association of Plasmodium centromeres, 
which bear a unique epigenetic signature and conform to a strict structure. These
findings suggest that DNA-associated and epigenetic elements play an important
role in centromere establishment in this important human pathogen.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2012.01803.x 
PMID: 22507744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

