
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2012 Aug;67(8):1895-904. doi: 10.1093/jac/dks132. Epub
2012 Apr 17.

Curcumin enhances non-opsonic phagocytosis of Plasmodium falciparum through
up-regulation of CD36 surface expression on monocytes/macrophages.

Mimche PN(1), Thompson E, Taramelli D, Vivas L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infection, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine-LSHTM, Keppel Street,
London WC1E 7HT, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Curcumin is a natural plant product with antimalarial activity and
immunomodulatory properties. In this study we aimed to investigate its effects on
CD36 expression and CD36-mediated Plasmodium falciparum phagocytosis as well as
the role played by reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor γ retinoid X receptor (PPARγ-RXR) in these
processes.
METHODS: In vitro antimalarial activity was evaluated by the [³H]hypoxanthine
assay. ROS production and surface CD36 in human monocyte/macrophages were
measured by flow cytometry. PPARγ and CD36 mRNA expression was determined by the 
QuantiGene Plex® assay and RT-qPCR. Nuclear PPARγ activation was analysed by a
DNA-binding ELISA while nuclear erythroid-related factor 2 (Nrf2) expression was 
analysed by western blotting. P. falciparum phagocytosis was assessed by light
microscopy.
RESULTS: Curcumin's antimalarial activity was confirmed and did not differ
between drug-susceptible and -resistant P. falciparum strains. Curcumin increased
monocyte ROS production and expression of PPARγ and CD36 at the mRNA and protein 
levels. Although PPARγ activation was blocked by the PPARγ antagonist GW9662,
CD36 expression and CD36-mediated P. falciparum phagocytosis were only inhibited 
by N-acetylcysteine (NAC), suggesting a PPARγ-independent CD36 expression
pathway. We then identified seven putative Nrf2 antioxidant response elements on 
the CD36 gene promoter and showed that NAC inhibited curcumin-induced Nrf2
protein expression.
CONCLUSIONS: CD36 expression and CD36-mediated P. falciparum phagocytosis by
curcumin are dependent on ROS production and probably involve the Nrf2 pathway.
The dual immunomodulatory and antimalarial mechanisms of curcumin action may mean
that curcumin has potential as an adjuvant treatment limiting the risk of
recrudescence following standard antimalarial therapy.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dks132 
PMID: 22511637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

