
1. Malar J. 2012 Apr 17;11:115. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-115.

Analysis for genotyping Duffy blood group in inhabitants of Sudan, the fourth
cataract of the Nile.

Kempi≈Ñska-Podhorodecka A(1), Knap O, Drozd A, Kaczmarczyk M, Parafiniuk M,
Parczewski M, Ciechanowicz A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biology Laboratory, Pomeranian Medical University, Powstancow Wlkp 72,
Szczecin, Poland. agnieszkakempinska@interia.eu

BACKGROUND: Genetic polymophisms of the Duffy antigen receptor for the chemokines
(DARC) gene successfully protected against blood stage infection by Plasmodium
vivax infection. The Fy (a-, b-) phenotype is predominant among African
populations, particularly those originating from West Africa, and it is rare
among non-African populations. The aim of this study was to analyse the frequency
of four Duffy blood groups based on SNPs (T-33C, G125A, G298A and C5411T) in two 
local tribes of Sudanese Arabs, the Shagia and Manasir, which are both from the
region of the Fourth Nile cataract in Sudan.
METHODS: An analysis of polymorphisms was performed on 217 individuals (126
representatives of the Shagia tribe and 91 of the Manasir). Real-time PCR and
TaqMan Genotyping Assays were used to study the prevalence of alleles and
genotypes.
RESULTS: The analysis of allelic and genotype frequency in the T-33C
polymorphisms demonstrated a significant dominance of the C allele and CC
genotype (OR = 0.53 [0.32-0.88]; p = 0.02) in both tribes. The G125A polymorphism
is associated with phenotype Fy(a-, b-) and was identified in 83% of Shagia and
77% of Manasir. With regard to G298A polymorphisms, the genotype frequencies were
different between the tribes (p = 0,002) and no single AA homozygote was found.
Based on four SNPs examined, 20 combinations of genotypes for the Shagia and
Manasir tribes were determined. The genotype CC/AA/GG/CT occurred most often in
Shagia tribe (45.9%) but was rare in the Manasir tribe (6.6%) (p < 0.001 Shagia
versus Manasir). The FY*AES allele was identified in both analysed tribes. The
presence of individuals with the FY*A/FY*A genotype was demonstrated only in the 
Shagia tribe.
CONCLUSION: This is probably the first report showing genotypically
Duffy-negative people who carry both FY*BES and FY*AES. The identification of the
FY*AES allele in both tribes may be due to admixture of the non-African genetic
background. Taken as a whole, allele and genotype frequencies between the Shagia 
and the Manasir were statistically different. However, the presence of
individuals with the FY*A/FY*A genotype was demonstrated only in the Shagia
tribe.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-115 
PMCID: PMC3375187
PMID: 22510366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

