
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2012 Aug;184(2):71-81. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.04.009. Epub 2012 May 8.

Biochemical and molecular characterization of the pyrimidine biosynthetic enzyme 
dihydroorotate dehydrogenase from Toxoplasma gondii.

Hortua Triana MA(1), Huynh MH, Garavito MF, Fox BA, Bzik DJ, Carruthers VB,
Löffler M, Zimmermann BH.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciencias Biologicas, Universidad de los Andes, Carrera 1, No. 
18A-10, Bogotá, Colombia.

The pyrimidine biosynthesis pathway in the protozoan pathogen Toxoplasma gondii
is essential for parasite growth during infection. To investigate the properties 
of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (TgDHOD), the fourth enzyme in the T. gondii
pyrimidine pathway, we expressed and purified recombinant TgDHOD. TgDHOD
exhibited a specific activity of 84U/mg, a k(cat) of 89s(-1), a K(m)=60μM for
l-dihydroorotate, and a K(m)=29μM for decylubiquinone (Q(D)). Quinones lacking or
having short isoprenoid side chains yielded lower k(cat)s than Q(D). As expected,
fumarate was a poor electron acceptor for this family 2 DHOD. The IC(50)s
determined for A77-1726, the active derivative of the human DHOD inhibitor
leflunomide, and related compounds MD249 and MD209 were, 91μM, 96μM, and 60μM,
respectively. The enzyme was not significantly affected by brequinar or TTFA,
known inhibitors of human DHOD, or by atovaquone. DSM190, a known inhibitor of
Plasmodium falciparum DHOD, was a poor inhibitor of TgDHOD. TgDHOD exhibits a
lengthy 157-residue N-terminal extension, consistent with a potential organellar 
targeting signal. We constructed C-terminally c-myc tagged TgDHODs to examine
subcellular localization of TgDHOD in transgenic parasites expressing the tagged 
protein. Using both exogenous and endogenous expression strategies, anti-myc
fluorescence signal colocalized with antibodies against the mitochondrial marker 
ATPase. These findings demonstrate that TgDHOD is associated with the parasite's 
mitochondrion, revealing this organelle as the site of orotate production in T.
gondii. The TgDHOD gene appears to be essential because while gene tagging was
successful at the TgDHOD gene locus, attempts to delete the TgDHOD gene were not 
successful in the KU80 background. Collectively, our study suggests that TgDHOD
is an excellent target for the development of anti-Toxoplasma drugs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2012.04.009 
PMCID: PMC3855825
PMID: 22580100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

