
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 26;109(26):E1772-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1120461109. Epub 2012 May 22.

A subset of group A-like var genes encodes the malaria parasite ligands for
binding to human brain endothelial cells.

Claessens A(1), Adams Y, Ghumra A, Lindergard G, Buchan CC, Andisi C, Bull PC,
Mok S, Gupta AP, Wang CW, Turner L, Arman M, Raza A, Bozdech Z, Rowe JA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunity, Infection and Evolution, Institute of Immunology and
Infection Research, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EH9 3JT, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 26;109(26):10130-1.

Cerebral malaria is the most deadly manifestation of infection with Plasmodium
falciparum. The pathology of cerebral malaria is characterized by the
accumulation of infected erythrocytes (IEs) in the microvasculature of the brain 
caused by parasite adhesins on the surface of IEs binding to human receptors on
microvascular endothelial cells. The parasite and host molecules involved in this
interaction are unknown. We selected three P. falciparum strains (HB3, 3D7, and
IT/FCR3) for binding to a human brain endothelial cell line (HBEC-5i). The whole 
transcriptome of isogenic pairs of selected and unselected parasites was analyzed
using a variant surface antigen-supplemented microarray chip. After selection,
the most highly and consistently up-regulated genes were a subset of group A-like
var genes (HB3var3, 3D7_PFD0020c, ITvar7, and ITvar19) that showed 11- to
>100-fold increased transcription levels. These var genes encode P. falciparum
erythrocyte membrane protein (PfEMP)1 variants with distinct N-terminal domain
types (domain cassette 8 or domain cassette 13). Antibodies to HB3var3 and
PFD0020c recognized the surface of live IEs and blocked binding to HBEC-5i,
thereby confirming the adhesive function of these variants. The clinical in vivo 
relevance of the HBEC-selected parasites was supported by significantly higher
surface recognition of HBEC-selected parasites compared with unselected parasites
by antibodies from young African children suffering cerebral malaria
(Mann-Whitney test, P = 0.029) but not by antibodies from controls with
uncomplicated malaria (Mann-Whitney test, P = 0.58). This work describes a
binding phenotype for virulence-associated group A P. falciparum erythrocyte
membrane protein 1 variants and identifies targets for interventions to treat or 
prevent cerebral malaria.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1120461109 
PMCID: PMC3387129
PMID: 22619330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

