
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(5):e1002742. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002742. Epub 2012 May
31.

Midgut microbiota of the malaria mosquito vector Anopheles gambiae and
interactions with Plasmodium falciparum infection.

Boissi√®re A(1), Tchioffo MT, Bachar D, Abate L, Marie A, Nsango SE, Shahbazkia
HR, Awono-Ambene PH, Levashina EA, Christen R, Morlais I.

Author information: 
(1)UMR MIVEGEC (IRD 224- CNRS 5290- UM1- UM2), Montpellier, France.

The susceptibility of Anopheles mosquitoes to Plasmodium infections relies on
complex interactions between the insect vector and the malaria parasite. A number
of studies have shown that the mosquito innate immune responses play an important
role in controlling the malaria infection and that the strength of parasite
clearance is under genetic control, but little is known about the influence of
environmental factors on the transmission success. We present here evidence that 
the composition of the vector gut microbiota is one of the major components that 
determine the outcome of mosquito infections. A. gambiae mosquitoes collected in 
natural breeding sites from Cameroon were experimentally challenged with a wild
P. falciparum isolate, and their gut bacterial content was submitted for
pyrosequencing analysis. The meta-taxogenomic approach revealed a broader
richness of the midgut bacterial flora than previously described. Unexpectedly,
the majority of bacterial species were found in only a small proportion of
mosquitoes, and only 20 genera were shared by 80% of individuals. We show that
observed differences in gut bacterial flora of adult mosquitoes is a result of
breeding in distinct sites, suggesting that the native aquatic source where
larvae were grown determines the composition of the midgut microbiota.
Importantly, the abundance of Enterobacteriaceae in the mosquito midgut
correlates significantly with the Plasmodium infection status. This striking
relationship highlights the role of natural gut environment in parasite
transmission. Deciphering microbe-pathogen interactions offers new perspectives
to control disease transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002742 
PMCID: PMC3364955
PMID: 22693451  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

