
1. Parasitol Int. 2012 Dec;61(4):726-8. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2012.06.002. Epub 2012
Jun 12.

Toward understanding the role of mitochondrial complex II in the
intraerythrocytic stages of Plasmodium falciparum: gene targeting of the Fp
subunit.

Tanaka TQ(1), Hirai M, Watanabe Y, Kita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Malaria parasites in human hosts depend on glycolysis for most of their energy
production, and the mitochondrion of the intraerythrocytic form is acristate.
Although the genes for all tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle members are found in
the parasite genome, the presence of a functional TCA cycle in the
intraerythrocytic stage is still controversial. To elucidate the physiological
role of Plasmodium falciparum mitochondrial complex II (succinate-ubiquinone
reductase (SQR) or succinate dehydrogenase (SDH)) in the TCA cycle, the gene for 
the flavoprotein subunit (Fp) of the enzyme, pfsdha (P.falciparum gene for SDH
subunit A, PlasmoDB ID: PF3D7_1034400) was disrupted. SDH is a well-known marker 
enzyme for mitochondria. In the pfsdha disruptants, Fp mRNA and polypeptides were
decreased, and neither SQR nor SDH activity of complex II was detected. The
suppression of complex II caused growth retardation of the intraerythrocytic
forms, suggesting that complex II contributes to intraerythrocytic parasite
growth, although it is not essential for survival. The growth retardation in the 
pfsdha disruptant was rescued by the addition of succinate, but not by fumarate. 
This indicates that complex II functions as a quinol-fumarate reductase (QFR) to 
form succinate from fumarate in the intraerythrocytic parasite.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2012.06.002 
PMID: 22698672  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

