
1. BMC Microbiol. 2012 Jun 13;12:107. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-12-107.

In vitro and in vivo silencing of plasmodial dhs and eIf-5a genes in a putative, 
non-canonical RNAi-related pathway.

Schwentke A(1), Krepstakies M, Mueller AK, Hammerschmidt-Kamper C, Motaal BA,
Bernhard T, Hauber J, Kaiser A.

Author information: 
(1)University Duisburg-Essen, Medical Research Centre, Institute of
Pharmacogenetics, Essen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Deoxyhypusine synthase (DHS) catalyzes the first step in hypusine
biosynthesis of eukaryotic initiation factor 5A (eIF-5A) in Plasmodium
falciparum. Target evaluation of parasitic DHS has recently been performed with
CNI-1493, a novel selective pro-inflammatory cytokine inhibitor used in clinical 
phase II for the treatment of Crohn's disease. CNI-1493 prevented infected mice
from experimental cerebral malaria by decreasing the levels in hypusinated eIF-5A
and serum TNF, implicating a link between cytokine signaling and the hypusine
pathway.Therefore we addressed the question whether either DHS itself or eIF-5A
is required for the outcome of severe malaria. In a first set of experiments we
performed an in vitro knockdown of the plasmodial eIF-5A and DHS proteins by RNA 
interference (RNAi) in 293 T cells. Secondly, transfection of siRNA constructs
into murine Plasmodium schizonts was performed which, in turn, were used for
infection.
RESULTS: 293 T cells treated with plasmodial DHS- and eIF-5A specific siRNAs or
control siRNAs were analyzed by RT-PCR to determine endogenous dhs -and eIF-5A
mRNA levels. The expressed DHS-shRNA and EIF-5A-shRNA clearly downregulated the
corresponding transcript in these cells. Interestingly, mice infected with
transgenic schizonts expressing either the eIF-5A or dhs shRNA showed an elevated
parasitemia within the first two days post infection which then decreased
intermittently. These results were obtained without drug selection. Blood
samples, which were taken from the infected mice at day 5 post infection with
either the expressed EIF-5A-shRNA or the DHS-shRNA were analyzed by RT-PCR and
Western blot techniques, demonstrating the absence of either the hypusinated form
of eIF-5A or DHS.
CONCLUSIONS: Infection of NMRI mice with schizonts from the lethal P. berghei
ANKA wildtype strain transgenic for plasmodial eIF-5A-specific shRNA or
DHS-specific shRNA resulted in low parasitemia 2-9 days post infection before
animals succumbed to hyperparasitemia similar to infections with the related but 
non-lethal phenotype P. berghei strain NK65. RT-PCR and Western blot experiments 
performed with blood from the transfected erythrocytic stages showed that both
genes are important for the proliferation of the parasite. Moreover, these
experiments clearly demonstrate that the hypusine pathway in Plasmodium is linked
to human iNos induction.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-12-107 
PMCID: PMC3438091
PMID: 22694849  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

