
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39335. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039335. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

A statistically rigorous method for determining antigenic switching networks.

Noble R(1), Recker M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Many vector-borne pathogens rely on antigenic variation to prolong infections and
increase their likelihood of onward transmission. This immune evasion strategy
often involves mutually exclusive switching between members of gene families that
encode functionally similar but antigenically different variants during the
course of a single infection. Studies of different pathogens have suggested that 
switching between variant genes is non-random and that genes have intrinsic
probabilities of being activated or silenced. These factors could create a
hierarchy of gene expression with important implications for both infection
dynamics and the acquisition of protective immunity. Inferring complete switching
networks from gene transcription data is problematic, however, because of the
high dimensionality of the system and uncertainty in the data. Here we present a 
statistically rigorous method for analysing temporal gene transcription data to
reconstruct an underlying switching network. Using artificially generated
transcription profiles together with in vitro var gene transcript data from two
Plasmodium falciparum laboratory strains, we show that instead of relying on data
from long-term parasite cultures, accuracy can be greatly improved by using
transcription time courses of several parasite populations from the same isolate,
each starting with different variant distributions. The method further provides
explicit indications about the reliability of the resulting networks and can thus
be used to test competing hypotheses with regards to the underlying switching
pathways. Our results demonstrate that antigenic switch pathways can be
determined reliably from short gene transcription profiles assessing multiple
time points, even when subject to moderate levels of experimental error. This
should yield important new information about switching patterns in antigenically 
variable organisms and might help to shed light on the molecular basis of
antigenic variation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039335 
PMCID: PMC3382232
PMID: 22761765  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

