
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40981. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040981. Epub 2012 Jul 16.

Systematic analysis of FKBP inducible degradation domain tagging strategies for
the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

de Azevedo MF(1), Gilson PR, Gabriel HB, Simões RF, Angrisano F, Baum J, Crabb
BS, Wunderlich G.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade 
de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brasil.

Targeted regulation of protein levels is an important tool to gain insights into 
the role of proteins essential to cell function and development. In recent years,
a method based on mutated forms of the human FKBP12 has been established and used
to great effect in various cell types to explore protein function. The mutated
FKBP protein, referred to as destabilization domain (DD) tag when fused with a
native protein at the N- or C-terminus targets the protein for proteosomal
degradation. Regulated expression is achieved via addition of a compound, Shld-1,
that stabilizes the protein and prevents degradation. A limited number of studies
have used this system to provide powerful insight into protein function in the
human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. In order to better understand the
DD inducible system in P. falciparum, we studied the effect of Shld-1 on parasite
growth, demonstrating that although development is not impaired, it is delayed,
requiring the appropriate controls for phenotype interpretation. We explored the 
quantified regulation of reporter Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) and luciferase 
constructs fused to three DD variants in parasite cells either via transient or
stable transfection. The regulation obtained with the original FKBP derived DD
domain was compared to two triple mutants DD24 and DD29, which had been described
to provide better regulation for C-terminal tagging in other cell types. When
cloned to the C-terminal of reporter proteins, DD24 provided the strongest
regulation allowing reporter activity to be reduced to lower levels than DD and
to restore the activity of stabilised proteins to higher levels than DD29.
Importantly, DD24 has not previously been applied to regulate proteins in P.
falciparum. The possibility of regulating an exported protein was addressed by
targeting the Ring-Infected Erythrocyte Surface Antigen (RESA) at its C-terminus.
The tagged protein demonstrated an important modulation of its expression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040981 
PMCID: PMC3397994
PMID: 22815885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

