
1. BMC Genomics. 2012 Jul 24;13:341. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-341.

A tale of three next generation sequencing platforms: comparison of Ion Torrent, 
Pacific Biosciences and Illumina MiSeq sequencers.

Quail MA(1), Smith M, Coupland P, Otto TD, Harris SR, Connor TR, Bertoni A,
Swerdlow HP, Gu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK. mq1@sanger.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Next generation sequencing (NGS) technology has revolutionized
genomic and genetic research. The pace of change in this area is rapid with three
major new sequencing platforms having been released in 2011: Ion Torrent's PGM,
Pacific Biosciences' RS and the Illumina MiSeq. Here we compare the results
obtained with those platforms to the performance of the Illumina HiSeq, the
current market leader. In order to compare these platforms, and get sufficient
coverage depth to allow meaningful analysis, we have sequenced a set of 4
microbial genomes with mean GC content ranging from 19.3 to 67.7%. Together,
these represent a comprehensive range of genome content. Here we report our
analysis of that sequence data in terms of coverage distribution, bias, GC
distribution, variant detection and accuracy.
RESULTS: Sequence generated by Ion Torrent, MiSeq and Pacific Biosciences
technologies displays near perfect coverage behaviour on GC-rich, neutral and
moderately AT-rich genomes, but a profound bias was observed upon sequencing the 
extremely AT-rich genome of Plasmodium falciparum on the PGM, resulting in no
coverage for approximately 30% of the genome. We analysed the ability to call
variants from each platform and found that we could call slightly more variants
from Ion Torrent data compared to MiSeq data, but at the expense of a higher
false positive rate. Variant calling from Pacific Biosciences data was possible
but higher coverage depth was required. Context specific errors were observed in 
both PGM and MiSeq data, but not in that from the Pacific Biosciences platform.
CONCLUSIONS: All three fast turnaround sequencers evaluated here were able to
generate usable sequence. However there are key differences between the quality
of that data and the applications it will support.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-341 
PMCID: PMC3431227
PMID: 22827831  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

