
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2012 Oct;42(10):758-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2012.07.003.
Epub 2012 Jul 31.

CpG-containing oligodeoxynucleotides increases resistance of Anopheles mosquitoes
to Plasmodium infection.

Silveira H(1), Gabriel A, Ramos S, Palma J, Felix R, Custódio A, Collins LV.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Malária e Outras Doenças Tropicais, UEI Parasitologia Médica,
Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua da
Junqueira, 100, 1349-008 Lisboa, Portugal. hsilveira@ihmt.unl.pt

Unmethylated CpG dinucleotide motifs in bacterial DNA or in synthetic
oligodeoxynucleotides (ODN) are potent stimulators of the vertebrate innate
immune system. However, the potential of these DNA species to modulate mosquito
immunity have not been explored. In the present study, we investigated the
effects of CpG-ODN on the outcome of Plasmodium infection in insects and on the
modulation of mosquito immunity to Plasmodium. Anopheles stephensi and Anopheles 
gambiae mosquitoes inoculated with CpG-ODN showed significant reductions in the
prevalence of Plasmodium infection, intensity of Plasmodium infection, and number
of eggs produced. Microarrays were used to elucidate the transcriptional profiles
of the fat bodies of CpG-ODN-treated mosquitoes. In total, 172 genes were
differentially expressed, of which 136 were up-regulated and 36 were
down-regulated. The major functional class of CpG-ODN-regulated genes encoded
immune response-related proteins (31%). Within this group, genes associated with 
coagulation/wound healing were the most frequently represented (23%). Knockdown
of a transglutaminase gene that was up-regulated by the CpG-ODN and chemical
inhibition of the enzyme resulted in a significant increase in Plasmodium
infection. Mosquitoes that were treated with CpG-ODNs were found to be less
susceptible to Plasmodium infection. Transcriptional profiling of the fat body
suggests that protection is associated with coagulation/wound healing. We show
for the first time that transglutaminase activity plays a role in the control of 
Plasmodium infection.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2012.07.003 
PMID: 22885118  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

