
1. Mol Pharmacol. 2012 Dec;82(6):1104-14. doi: 10.1124/mol.112.081224. Epub 2012 Sep
4.

Solute restriction reveals an essential role for clag3-associated channels in
malaria parasite nutrient acquisition.

Pillai AD(1), Nguitragool W, Lyko B, Dolinta K, Butler MM, Nguyen ST, Peet NP,
Bowlin TL, Desai SA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

The plasmodial surface anion channel (PSAC) increases erythrocyte permeability to
many solutes in malaria but has uncertain physiological significance. We used a
PSAC inhibitor with different efficacies against channels from two Plasmodium
falciparum parasite lines and found concordant effects on transport and in vitro 
parasite growth when external nutrient concentrations were reduced. Linkage
analysis using this growth inhibition phenotype in the Dd2 Ã— HB3 genetic cross
mapped the clag3 genomic locus, consistent with a role for two clag3 genes in
PSAC-mediated transport. Altered inhibitor efficacy, achieved through allelic
exchange or expression switching between the clag3 genes, indicated that the
inhibitor kills parasites through direct action on PSAC. In a parasite unable to 
undergo expression switching, the inhibitor selected for ectopic homologous
recombination between the clag3 genes to increase the diversity of available
channel isoforms. Broad-spectrum inhibitors, which presumably interact with
conserved sites on the channel, also exhibited improved efficacy with nutrient
restriction. These findings indicate that PSAC functions in nutrient acquisition 
for intracellular parasites. Although key questions regarding the channel and its
biological role remain, antimalarial drug development targeting PSAC should be
pursued.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.112.081224 
PMCID: PMC3502622
PMID: 22949525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

