
1. mBio. 2012 Sep 4;3(5):e00204-12. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00204-12. Print 2012.

Comparative genome analysis of three eukaryotic parasites with differing
abilities to transform leukocytes reveals key mediators of Theileria-induced
leukocyte transformation.

Hayashida K(1), Hara Y, Abe T, Yamasaki C, Toyoda A, Kosuge T, Suzuki Y, Sato Y, 
Kawashima S, Katayama T, Wakaguri H, Inoue N, Homma K, Tada-Umezaki M, Yagi Y,
Fujii Y, Habara T, Kanehisa M, Watanabe H, Ito K, Gojobori T, Sugawara H,
Imanishi T, Weir W, Gardner M, Pain A, Shiels B, Hattori M, Nene V, Sugimoto C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Collaboration and Education, Research Center for Zoonosis Control,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan.

We sequenced the genome of Theileria orientalis, a tick-borne apicomplexan
protozoan parasite of cattle. The focus of this study was a comparative genome
analysis of T. orientalis relative to other highly pathogenic Theileria species, 
T. parva and T. annulata. T. parva and T. annulata induce transformation of
infected cells of lymphocyte or macrophage/monocyte lineages; in contrast, T.
orientalis does not induce uncontrolled proliferation of infected leukocytes and 
multiplies predominantly within infected erythrocytes. While synteny across
homologous chromosomes of the three Theileria species was found to be well
conserved overall, subtelomeric structures were found to differ substantially, as
T. orientalis lacks the large tandemly arrayed subtelomere-encoded variable
secreted protein-encoding gene family. Moreover, expansion of particular gene
families by gene duplication was found in the genomes of the two transforming
Theileria species, most notably, the TashAT/TpHN and Tar/Tpr gene families. Gene 
families that are present only in T. parva and T. annulata and not in T.
orientalis, Babesia bovis, or Plasmodium were also identified. Identification of 
differences between the genome sequences of Theileria species with different
abilities to transform and immortalize bovine leukocytes will provide insight
into proteins and mechanisms that have evolved to induce and regulate this
process. The T. orientalis genome database is available at
http://totdb.czc.hokudai.ac.jp/.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00204-12 
PMCID: PMC3445966
PMID: 22951932  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

