
1. J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3618-28. doi: 10.1172/JCI62684. Epub 2012 Sep 10.

Complete Plasmodium falciparum liver-stage development in liver-chimeric mice.

Vaughan AM(1), Mikolajczak SA, Wilson EM, Grompe M, Kaushansky A, Camargo N, Bial
J, Ploss A, Kappe SH.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA.

Plasmodium falciparum, which causes the most lethal form of human malaria,
replicates in the host liver during the initial stage of infection. However, in
vivo malaria liver-stage (LS) studies in humans are virtually impossible, and in 
vitro models of LS development do not reconstitute relevant parasite growth
conditions. To overcome these obstacles, we have adopted a robust mouse model for
the study of P. falciparum LS in vivo: the immunocompromised and
fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase-deficient mouse (Fah-/-, Rag2-/-, Il2rg-/-, termed 
the FRG mouse) engrafted with human hepatocytes (FRG huHep). FRG huHep mice
supported vigorous, quantifiable P. falciparum LS development that culminated in 
complete maturation of LS at approximately 7 days after infection, providing a
relevant model for LS development in humans. The infections allowed observations 
of previously unknown expression of proteins in LS, including P. falciparum
translocon of exported proteins 150 (PTEX150) and exported protein-2 (EXP-2),
components of a known parasite protein export machinery. LS schizonts exhibited
exoerythrocytic merozoite formation and merosome release. Furthermore, FRG mice
backcrossed to the NOD background and repopulated with huHeps and human red blood
cells supported reproducible transition from LS infection to blood-stage
infection. Thus, these mice constitute reliable models to study human LS directly
in vivo and demonstrate utility for studies of LS-to-blood-stage transition of a 
human malaria parasite.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI62684 
PMCID: PMC3461911
PMID: 22996664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

