
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45861. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045861. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

Strain-specific protective effect of the immunity induced by live malarial
sporozoites under chloroquine cover.

Wijayalath W(1), Cheesman S, Tanabe K, Handunnetti S, Carter R, Pathirana S.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research Unit, Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Colombo, Colombo, Sri Lanka.

The efficacy of a whole-sporozoite malaria vaccine would partly be determined by 
the strain-specificity of the protective responses against malarial sporozoites
and liver-stage parasites. Evidence from previous reports were inconsistent,
where some studies have shown that the protective immunity induced by irradiated 
or live sporozoites in rodents or humans were cross-protective and in others
strain-specific. In the present work, we have studied the strain-specificity of
live sporozoite-induced immunity using two genetically and immunologically
different strains of Plasmodium cynomolgi, Pc746 and PcCeylon, in toque monkeys. 
Two groups of monkeys were immunized against live sporozoites of either the Pc746
(n = 5), or the PcCeylon (n = 4) strain, by the bites of 2-4 sporozoite-infected 
Anopheles tessellates mosquitoes per monkey under concurrent treatments with
chloroquine and primaquine to abrogate detectable blood infections. Subsequently,
a group of non-immunized monkeys (n = 4), and the two groups of immunized monkeys
were challenged with a mixture of sporozoites of the two strains by the bites of 
2-5 infective mosquitoes from each strain per monkey. In order to determine the
strain-specificity of the protective immunity, the proportions of parasites of
the two strains in the challenge infections were quantified using an allele
quantification assay, Pyrosequencing™, based on a single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) in the parasites' circumsporozoite protein gene. The Pyrosequencing™ data
showed that a significant reduction of parasites of the immunizing strain in each
group of strain-specifically immunized monkeys had occurred, indicating a
stronger killing effect on parasites of the immunizing strain. Thus, the
protective immunity developed following a single, live sporozoite/chloroquine
immunization, acted specifically against the immunizing strain and was,
therefore, strain-specific. As our experiment does not allow us to determine the 
parasite stage at which the strain-specific protective immunity is directed, it
is possible that the target of this immunity could be either the pre-erythrocytic
stage, or the blood-stage, or both.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045861 
PMCID: PMC3454320
PMID: 23029282  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

