
1. Infect Immun. 2012 Dec;80(12):4435-43. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00945-12. Epub 2012 Oct
8.

Polymorphisms in the Fc gamma receptor IIIA and Toll-like receptor 9 are
associated with protection against severe malarial anemia and changes in
circulating gamma interferon levels.

Munde EO(1), Okeyo WA, Anyona SB, Raballah E, Konah S, Okumu W, Ogonda L, Vulule 
J, Ouma C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Public Health and Community
Development, Maseno University, Maseno, Kenya.

An understanding of the immunogenetic basis of naturally acquired immunity to
Plasmodium falciparum infection would aid in the designing of a rationally based 
malaria vaccine. Variants within the Fc gamma receptors (FcγRs) mediate immunity 
through engagement of immunoglobulin G and other immune mediators, such as gamma 
interferon (IFN-γ), resulting in erythrophagocytosis and production of
inflammatory cytokines in severe malarial anemia (SMA). The Toll-like receptors
(TLRs) trigger transcription of proinflammatory cytokines and induce adaptive
immune responses. Therefore, these receptors may condition malaria disease
pathogenesis through alteration in adaptive and innate immune responses. To
further delineate the impacts of FcγRIIIA and TLR9 in SMA pathogenesis, the
associations between FcγRIIIA -176F/V and TLR9 -1237T/C variants, SMA (hemoglobin
[Hb] < 6.0 g/dl), and circulating IFN-γ levels were investigated in children (n =
301) from western Kenya with acute malaria. Multivariate logistic regression
analysis (controlling for potential confounders) revealed that children with the 
FcγRIIIA -176V/TLR9 -1237C (VC) variant combination had 64% reduced odds of
developing SMA (odds ratio [OR], 0.36; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.20 to
0.64; P = 0.001), while carriers of the FcγRIIIA -176V/TLR9 -1237T (VT) variant
combination were twice as susceptible to SMA (OR, 2.04; 95% CI, 1.19 to 3.50; P =
0.009). Children with SMA had higher circulating IFN-γ levels than non-SMA
children (P = 0.008). Hemoglobin levels were negatively correlated with IFN-γ
levels (r = -0.207, P = 0.022). Consistently, the FcγRIIIA -176V/TLR9 -1237T (VT)
carriers had higher levels of circulating IFN-γ (P = 0.011) relative to
noncarriers, supporting the observation that higher IFN-γ levels are associated
with SMA. These results demonstrate that FcγRIIIA-176F/V and TLR9 -1237T/C
variants condition susceptibility to SMA and functional changes in circulating
IFN-γ levels.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00945-12 
PMCID: PMC3497437
PMID: 23045477  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

