
1. Avian Dis. 2012 Sep;56(3):583-8.

Hemosporidian parasites in forest birds from Venezuela: genetic lineage analyses.

Mijares A(1), Rosales R, Silva-Iturriza A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Fisiología de Parásitos, Centro de Biofísica y Bioquímica,
Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas, Altos de Pipe, 1020A
Venezuela.

Avian hemosporidian parasites of the genera Haemoproteus, Plasmodium, and
Leucocytozoon are transmitted by different dipteran vectors. In the present work,
we looked for the presence of these parasites in 47 birds from 12 families, which
were sampled in the migratory corridor Paso de Portachuelo, located at the Henri 
Pittier National Park, Venezuela. The presence of the parasites was evidenced by 
amplification of a region of 471 bp of their cytochrome b gene. This region of
the marker presents enough polymorphism to identify most of the mitochondrial
lineages. Therefore, the obtained amplicons were sequenced, not only to identify 
the genus of the parasites sampled, but also to analyze their genetic diversity
in the study area. The overall parasite prevalence was low (11%). We reported,
for the first time, Plasmodium in birds of the species Formicarius analis and
Chamaeza campanisona (Formicariidae) and Haemoproteus in Geotrygon linearis
(Columbidae). A phylogenetic tree was generated using the Haemoproteus,
Plasmodium, and Leucocytozoon sequences obtained in this study, together with
representative sequences from previous studies. The highest genetic diversities
between the two Haemoproteus lineages (11.70%) and among the three Plasmodium
lineages (7.86%) found in this study are also similar to those found when
lineages reported in the literature were used. These results indicate that in the
migratory corridor Paso de Portachuleo, representative parasite lineages are
found, making this location an attractive location for future studies.

DOI: 10.1637/10058-011312-ResNote.1 
PMID: 23050478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

