
1. J Med Assoc Thai. 2012 Jun;95 Suppl 6:S135-40.

The geographical distribution of allele polymorphisms of Plasmodium vivax in
different regions of Thailand.

Kosaisavee V(1), Hastings I, Craig A, Lek-Uthai U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology and Entomology, Faculty of Public Health, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the genetic structure of Plasmodium vivax
circumsporozoite surface protein (PvCSP) and P. vivax merozoite surface protein 1
(PvMSP1) genes from field isolates of malaria parasites from four different
regions of Thailand.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: The data was collected by cross-sectional survey, consisting
of 273 P. vivax infected blood samples from malaria clinics in 4 different border
regions of Thailand from February 2008 to February 2009. The dried blood spots
were extracted for DNA and Plasmodium species confirmed by species-specific
primer sets. PvCSP and PvMSP1 genes were amplified and their population genetics 
were analyzed by using the Heterozygosity (H) formula, F-STAT and LIAN programs.
RESULT: There was considerable variation in the PvMSP1 gene within 2 fragments
for which HE was 0.8303, whereas PvCSP showed low HE at 0.1418. Significant
differences in allele frequencies between sites were quantified by Fst, Linkage
disequilibrium (LD). The results showed PvMSP1 F2; Fst = 0.063, p = 0.07; PvMSP1 
F2 RFLP pattern; Fst = 0.154, p = 0.005; PvMSP1 F3; Fst = 0.23, p = 0.005 and the
overall loci showed Fst = 0.151, p = 0.005 (Fisher's exact test). All values of
Index association (I(S)A) were non-significant. There was no evidence of LD
within the P. vivax populations.
CONCLUSION: H(E) at each locus of the PvMSP1 gene showed significant differences 
in allele frequencies between sites.


PMID: 23130499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

