
1. Iran J Parasitol. 2012;7(1):26-31.

Sequence Analysis of Different Domains of Plasmodium vivax Apical Membrane
Antigen (PvAMA-1 gene) Locus in Iran.

Motevalli Haghi A(1), Nateghpour M, Edrissian G, Sepehrizadeh Z, Mohebali M,
Khoramizade M, Shahrbabak SS, Moghimi H.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medical Parasitology and Mycology, School of Public Health, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax is responsible for approximately 80 million malaria 
cases in the world. Apical membrane antigen1 (AMA-1) is a type I integral
membrane protein present in all Plasmodium species. AMA-1 interferes in critical 
steps of invasion of human hepatocytes by sporozoites and red blood cells by
merozoites and is one of the most immunodominant antigens for eliciting a
protective immune response in human. It is considered as a promising antigen for 
inclusion in a vaccine against P. vivax. Since more knowledge is needed to
lighten the scope of such antigen we compared genetic variation in P. vivax
AMA-1from an Iranian isolate with those reported from some of the other malarious
countries so far.
METHODS: P. vivax genomic DNA was extracted from the whole blood of an Iranian
patient with patent P. vivax infection. The nucleotide sequence for 446 amino
acid (AA) residues (42-488 of PvAMA-1) was amplified by PCR and cloned in pUC19
vector for sequencing.
RESULTS: Sequence analysis of the antigen showed a high degree of identity (99%) 
with strong homology to the PvAMA-1 gene of P. vivax S3 and SKO814 isolates from 
India and Korea (Asian isolates) respectively, and 96% similarity with P. vivax
Sal-1 AMA-1 gene from El Salvador.
CONCLUSIONS: We cloned and characterized three domains of PvAMA-1 gene from an
Iranian patient. Predicted protein sequence of this gene showed some
discrepancies in corresponding protein in comparing with similar genes reported
from other malarious countries.


PMCID: PMC3488817
PMID: 23133468 

