
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e47557. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047557. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Identification of an AP2-family protein that is critical for malaria liver stage 
development.

Iwanaga S(1), Kaneko I, Kato T, Yuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Zoology, Mie University School of Medicine, Tsu, Mie,
Japan.

Liver-stage malaria parasites are a promising target for drugs and vaccines
against malaria infection. However, little is currently known about gene
regulation in this stage. In this study, we used the rodent malaria parasite
Plasmodium berghei and showed that an AP2-family transcription factor, designated
AP2-L, plays a critical role in the liver-stage development of the parasite.
AP2-L-depleted parasites proliferated normally in blood and in mosquitoes.
However, the ability of these parasites to infect the liver was approximately
10,000 times lower than that of wild-type parasites. In vitro assays showed that 
the sporozoites of these parasites invaded hepatocytes normally but that their
development stopped in the middle of the liver schizont stage. Expression
profiling using transgenic P. berghei showed that fluorescent protein-tagged
AP2-L increased rapidly during the liver schizont stage but suddenly disappeared 
with the formation of the mature liver schizont. DNA microarray analysis showed
that the expression of several genes, including those of parasitophorous vacuole 
membrane proteins, was significantly decreased in the early liver stage of
AP2-L-depleted parasites. Investigation of the targets of this transcription
factor should greatly promote the exploration of liver-stage antigens and the
elucidation of the mechanisms of hepatocyte infection by malaria parasites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047557 
PMCID: PMC3492389
PMID: 23144823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

