
1. G3 (Bethesda). 2012 Nov;2(11):1305-15. doi: 10.1534/g3.112.003582. Epub 2012 Nov 
1.

Gal4-based enhancer-trapping in the malaria mosquito Anopheles stephensi.

O'Brochta DA(1), Pilitt KL, Harrell RA 2nd, Aluvihare C, Alford RT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Bioscience and Biotechnology Research, University of Maryland,
College Park, Rockville, MD 20850, USA. dobrocht@umd.edu

Transposon-based forward and reverse genetic technologies will contribute greatly
to ongoing efforts to study mosquito functional genomics. A piggyBac
transposon-based enhancer-trap system was developed that functions efficiently in
the human malaria vector, Anopheles stephensi. The system consists of six
transgenic lines of Anopheles stephensi, each with a single piggyBac-Gal4 element
in a unique genomic location; six lines with a single piggyBac-UAStdTomato
element; and two lines, each with a single Minos element containing the
piggyBac-transposase gene under the regulatory control of the hsp70 promoter from
Drosophila melanogaster. Enhancer detection depended upon the efficient
remobilization of piggyBac-Gal4 transposons, which contain the yeast
transcription factor gene Gal4 under the regulatory control of a basal promoter. 
Gal4 expression was detected through the expression of the fluorescent protein
gene tdTomato under the regulatory control of a promoter with Gal4-binding UAS
elements. From five genetic screens for larval- and adult-specific enhancers, 314
progeny were recovered from 24,250 total progeny (1.3%) with unique patterns of
tdTomato expression arising from the influence of an enhancer. The frequency of
piggyBac remobilization and enhancer detection was 2.5- to 3-fold higher in
female germ lines compared with male germ lines. A small collection of
enhancer-trap lines are described in which Gal4 expression occurred in adult
female salivary glands, midgut, and fat body, either singly or in combination.
These three tissues play critical roles during the infection of Anopheles
stephensi by malaria-causing Plasmodium parasites. This system and the lines
generated using it will be valuable resources to ongoing mosquito functional
genomics efforts.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.112.003582 
PMCID: PMC3484661
PMID: 23173082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

