
1. Mol Microbiol. 2013 Jan;87(1):66-79. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12083. Epub 2012 Dec 10.

Liver-specific protein 2: a Plasmodium protein exported to the hepatocyte
cytoplasm and required for merozoite formation.

Orito Y(1), Ishino T, Iwanaga S, Kaneko I, Kato T, Menard R, Chinzei Y, Yuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Zoology, Mie University School of Medicine, Mie, Tsu
514-0001, Japan.

The liver stage is the first stage of the malaria parasite that replicates in the
vertebrate host. However, little is known about the interplay between the
parasite liver stage and its host cell, the hepatocyte. In this study, we
identified an exported protein that has a critical role in parasite development
in host hepatocytes. Expressed sequence tag analysis of Plasmodium berghei
liver-stage parasites indicated that transcripts encoding a protein with an
N-terminal signal peptide, designated liver-specific protein 2 (LISP2), are
highly expressed in this stage. Expression of LISP2 was first observed 24 h after
infection and rapidly increased during the liver-stage schizogony.
Immunofluorescent staining with anti-LSP2 antibodies showed that LISP2 was
carried to the parasitophorous vacuole and subsequently transported to the
cytoplasm and nucleus of host hepatocytes. Gene targeting experiments
demonstrated that majority of the LISP2-mutant liver-stage parasites arrested
their development during formation of merozoites. These results indicate that
exported LISP2 is involved in parasite-host interactions required for the
development of liver-stage parasites inside hepatocytes. This study demonstrated 
that mid-to-late liver-stage malarial parasites have a system for exporting
proteins to the host cell as intraerythrocytic stages do and presumably to use
the proteins to modify the host cell and improve the environment.

Â© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12083 
PMID: 23216750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

