
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Mar;57(3):1246-51. doi: 10.1128/AAC.02050-12.
Epub 2012 Dec 21.

In vivo therapeutic efficacy of chloroquine alone or in combination with
primaquine against vivax malaria in Kolkata, West Bengal, India, and polymorphism
in pvmdr1 and pvcrt-o genes.

Ganguly S(1), Saha P, Guha SK, Das S, Bera DK, Biswas A, Kundu PK, Saha B, Ray K,
Maji AK.

Author information: 
(1)Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, Kolkata, India.

Plasmodium vivax malaria, though benign, has now become a matter of concern due
to recent reports of life-threatening severity and development of parasite
resistance to different antimalarial drugs. The magnitude of the problem is still
undetermined. The present study was undertaken to determine the in vivo efficacy 
of chloroquine (CQ) and chloroquine plus primaquine in P. vivax malaria in
Kolkata and polymorphisms in the pvmdr1 and pvcrt-o genes. A total of 250
patients with P. vivax monoinfection were recruited and randomized into two
groups, A and B; treated with chloroquine and chloroquine plus primaquine,
respectively; and followed up for 42 days according to the WHO protocol of 2009. 
Data were analyzed using per-protocol analyses. We assessed polymorphisms of the 
pvmdr1 and pvcrt-o genes by a DNA-sequencing method. Out of the 250 patients
recruited, 204 completed a 42-day follow-up period, 101 in group A and 103 in
group B. In group A, the non-PCR-corrected efficacy of CQ was 99% (95% confidence
interval [CI], 0.944 to 1.00), and in group B, all cases were classified as
adequate clinical and parasitological response (ACPR). Day 3 positivity was
observed in 11 (5.3%) cases. No specific mutation pattern was recorded in the
pvcrt-o gene. Eight nonsynonymous mutations were found in the pvmdr1 gene, three 
of which were new. The Y976F mutation was not detected in any isolate.
Chloroquine, either alone or in combination with primaquine, is still effective
against P. vivax malaria in the study area. (The study protocol was registered in
CTRI [Clinical Trial Registry-India] of the Indian council of Medical Research
under registration no. CTRI/2011/09/002031.).

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02050-12 
PMCID: PMC3591881
PMID: 23262997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

