
1. Bioinformation. 2012;8(24):1230-9. doi: 10.6026/97320630081230. Epub 2012 Dec 8.

Comparative genome analysis of six malarial parasites using codon usage bias
based tools.

Yadav MK(1), Swati D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, MMV, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi-221005, 
INDIA.

Codon usage bias (CUB) is an omnipresent phenomenon, which occurs in nearly all
organisms. Previous studies of codon bias in Plasmodium species were based on a
limited dataset. This study uses whole genome datasets for comparative genome
analysis of six Plasmodium species using CUB and other related methods for the
first time. Codon usage bias, compositional variation in translated amino acid
frequency, effective number of codons and optimal codons are analyzed for
P.falciparum, P.vivax, P.knowlesi, P.berghei, P.chabaudii and P.yoelli. A plot of
effective number of codons versus GC3 shows their differential codon usage
pattern arises due to a combination of mutational and translational selection
pressure. The increased relative usage of adenine and thymine ending optimal
codons in highly expressed genes of P.falciparum is the result of higher
composition biased pressure, and usage of guanine and cytosine bases at third
codon position can be explained by translational selection pressure acting on
them. While higher usage of adenine and thymine bases at third codon position in 
optimal codons of P.vivax highlights the role of translational selection pressure
apart from composition biased mutation pressure in shaping their codon usage
pattern. The frequency of those amino acids that are encoded by AT ending codons 
are significantly high in P.falciparum due to action of high composition biased
mutational pressure compared with other Plasmodium species. The CUB variation in 
the three rodent parasites, P.berghei, P.chabaudii and P.yoelli is strikingly
similar to that of P.falciparum. The simian and human malarial parasite,
P.knowlesi shows a variation in codon usage bias similar to P.vivax but on closer
study there are differences confirmed by the method of Principal Component
Analysis (PCA).ABBREVIATIONS: CDS - Coding sequences, GC1 - GC composition at
first site of codon, GC2 - GC composition at second site of codon, GC3 - GC
composition at third site of codon, Ala - Alanine, Arg - Arginine, Asn -
Asparagine, Asp - Aspartic acid, Cys - Cysteine, Gln - Glutamine Glu - Glutamic
acid Gly - Glycine His - Histidine Ile - Isoleucine Leu - Leucine Lys - Lysine
Met - Methionine Phe - Phenylalanine Pro - Proline Ser - Serine Thr - Threonine
Trp - Tryptophan Tyr - Tyrosine Val - Valine.

DOI: 10.6026/97320630081230 
PMCID: PMC3530877
PMID: 23275725 

