
1. Hematol Rep. 2011 Oct 19;3(3):e24. doi: 10.4081/hr.2011.e24. Epub 2011 Nov 4.

Sickle cell protection from malaria.

Eridani S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Technology, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy.

A linkage between presence of Sickle Haemoglobin (HbS) and protection from
malaria infection and clinical manifestations in certain areas was suspected from
early observations and progressively elucidated by more recent studies. Research 
has confirmed the abovementioned connection, but also clarified how such
protection may be abolished by coexistence of sickle cell trait (HbS trait) and
alpha thalassemia, which may explain the relatively low incidence of HbS trait in
the Mediterranean. The mechanisms of such protective effect are now being
investigated: factors of genetic, molecular and immunological nature are
prominent. As for genetic factors attention is given to the role of the red blood
cell (RBC) membrane complement regulatory proteins as polymorphisms of these
components seem to be associated with resistance to severe malaria; genetic
ligands like the Duffy group blood antigen, necessary for erythrocytic invasion, 
and human protein CD36, a major receptor for P. falciparum-infected RBC's, are
also under scrutiny: attention is focused also on plasmodium erythrocyte-binding 
antigens, which bind to RBC surface components. Genome-wide linkage and
association studies are now carried out too, in order to identify genes
associated with malaria resistance. Only a minor role is attributed to
intravascular sickling, phagocytosis and haemolysis, while specific molecular
mechanisms are the object of intensive research: among these a decisive role is
played by a biochemical sequence, involving activation of haeme oxygenase
(HMO-1), whose effect appears mediated by carbon monoxide (CO). A central role in
protection from malaria is also played by immunological factors, which may
stimulate antibody production to plasmodium antigens in the early years of life; 
the role of agents like pathogenic CD8 T-cells has been suggested while the
effects of molecular actions on the immunity mechanism are presently
investigated. It thus appears that protection from malaria can be explained by
interaction of different factors: the elucidation of such mechanisms may prove
valuable for the prevention and treatment strategy of a disease which still
affects large parts of the world.

DOI: 10.4081/hr.2011.e24 
PMCID: PMC3269803
PMID: 23285410 

