
1. BMC Syst Biol. 2012;6 Suppl 3:S5. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-6-S3-S5. Epub 2012 Dec
17.

Module-based subnetwork alignments reveal novel transcriptional regulators in
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Cai H(1), Hong C, Gu J, Lilburn TG, Kuang R, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX
78249, USA.

BACKGROUND: Malaria causes over one million deaths annually, posing an enormous
health and economic burden in endemic regions. The completion of genome
sequencing of the causative agents, a group of parasites in the genus Plasmodium,
revealed potential drug and vaccine candidates. However, genomics-driven target
discovery has been significantly hampered by our limited knowledge of the
cellular networks associated with parasite development and pathogenesis. In this 
paper, we propose an approach based on aligning neighborhood PPI subnetworks
across species to identify network components in the malaria parasite P.
falciparum.
RESULTS: Instead of only relying on sequence similarities to detect functional
orthologs, our approach measures the conservation between the neighborhood
subnetworks in protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks in two species, P.
falciparum and E. coli. 1,082 P. falciparum proteins were predicted as functional
orthologs of known transcriptional regulators in the E. coli network, including
general transcriptional regulators, parasite-specific transcriptional regulators 
in the ApiAP2 protein family, and other potential regulatory proteins. They are
implicated in a variety of cellular processes involving chromatin remodeling,
genome integrity, secretion, invasion, protein processing, and metabolism.
CONCLUSIONS: In this proof-of-concept study, we demonstrate that a subnetwork
alignment approach can reveal previously uncharacterized members of the
subnetworks, which opens new opportunities to identify potential therapeutic
targets and provide new insights into parasite biology, pathogenesis and
virulence. This approach can be extended to other systems, especially those with 
poor genome annotation and a paucity of knowledge about cellular networks.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-6-S3-S5 
PMCID: PMC3524314
PMID: 23282319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

