
1. J Vis Exp. 2013 Jan 9;(71). pii: 3281. doi: 10.3791/3281.

A simple Chelex protocol for DNA extraction from Anopheles spp.

Musapa M(1), Kumwenda T, Mkulama M, Chishimba S, Norris DE, Thuma PE, Mharakurwa 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Institute at Macha.

Endemic countries are increasingly adopting molecular tools for efficient typing,
identification and surveillance against malaria parasites and vector mosquitoes, 
as an integral part of their control programs. For sustainable establishment of
these accurate approaches in operations research to strengthen malaria control
and elimination efforts, simple and affordable methods, with parsimonious reagent
and equipment requirements are essential. Here we present a simple Chelex-based
technique for extracting malaria parasite and vector DNA from field collected
mosquito specimens. We morphologically identified 72 Anopheles gambiae sl. from
156 mosquitoes captured by pyrethrum spray catches in sleeping rooms of
households within a 2,000 km(2) vicinity of the Malaria Institute at Macha. After
dissection to separate the head and thorax from the abdomen for all 72 Anopheles 
gambiae sl. mosquitoes, the two sections were individually placed in 1.5 ml
microcentrifuge tubes and submerged in 20 μl of deionized water. Using a sterile 
pipette tip, each mosquito section was separately homogenized to a uniform
suspension in the deionized water. Of the ensuing homogenate from each mosquito
section, 10 μl was retained while the other 10 μl was transferred to a separate
autoclaved 1.5 ml tube. The separate aliquots were subjected to DNA extraction by
either the simplified Chelex or the standard salting out extraction
protocol(9,10). The salting out protocol is so-called and widely used because it 
employs high salt concentrations in lieu of hazardous organic solvents (such as
phenol and chloroform) for the protein precipitation step during DNA
extraction(9). Extracts were used as templates for PCR amplification using
primers targeting arthropod mitochondrial nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
dehydrogenase (NADH) subunit 4 gene (ND4) to check DNA quality, a PCR for
identification of Anopheles gambiae sibling species(10) and a nested PCR for
typing of Plasmodium falciparum infection. Comparison using DNA quality (ND4) PCR
showed 93% sensitivity and 82% specificity for the Chelex approach relative to
the established salting out protocol. Corresponding values of sensitivity and
specificity were 100% and 78%, respectively, using sibling species identification
PCR and 92% and 80%, respectively for P. falciparum detection PCR. There were no 
significant differences in proportion of samples giving amplicon signal with the 
Chelex or the regular salting out protocol across all three PCR applications. The
Chelex approach required three simple reagents and 37 min to complete, while the 
salting out protocol entailed 10 different reagents and 2 hr and 47 min'
processing time, including an overnight step. Our results show that the Chelex
method is comparable to the existing salting out extraction and can be
substituted as a simple and sustainable approach in resource-limited settings
where a constant reagent supply chain is often difficult to maintain.

DOI: 10.3791/3281 
PMCID: PMC3658367
PMID: 23328684  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

