
1. Malar J. 2013 Feb 27;12:80. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-80.

Diversity of the var gene family of Indonesian Plasmodium falciparum isolates.

Sulistyaningsih E(1), Fitri LE, Löscher T, Berens-Riha N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine and Infectious Diseases, University of Munich,
Munich 80802, Germany. berens@lrz.uni-muenchen.de

BACKGROUND: The large polymorphic protein PfEMP1 is encoded by the var gene
family. PfEMP1 has been shown to play an important role as cytoadherence ligand
on the surface of infected erythrocytes and thereby contributes to the distinct
pathogenesis of malaria. The study explored the diversity of the DBL1α and
DBL2β-C2 domains of the protein from Indonesian Plasmodium falciparum field
isolates.
METHODS: Samples of patients with severe and uncomplicated malaria from two
different malaria-endemic areas in Indonesia were collected and DNA directly
extracted. Dried blood on filter paper was prepared for RNA extraction. PCR
amplicons were either cloned and subsequently sequenced or directly sequenced for
analysis on nucleotide and amino acid level. Recently published as well as
self-designed primers were used for amplification.
RESULTS: Blood from eight patients was finally used for analysis. Seventy-one
different sequences out of over 500 DBL1α sequenced clones were observed,
resulting in an average of 8.9 different DBL1α sequences per isolate. The average
DBL1α sequence similarity within isolates was similar to between isolates.
Phylogenetic analysis demonstrated no clustering of sequences regarding strain or
geographical origin. The DBL1α sequences were analysed by distribution of
semi-conserved features (cysteine/PoLV1-4 grouping) and classified into six
sequence groups. The DBL1α cys2 type was observed in all expressed sequences in
vivo. Expression of certain DBL sequences implied potential involvement in the
pathogenesis. As expected, the DBL2β-C2 domains showed high to moderate homology 
among each other.
CONCLUSION: The DBL1α domains of PfEMP1 from clinical Indonesian isolates showed 
high divergence among same isolates and some similarities with other Asia-Pacific
strains. Further investigations of important var gene domains with a larger
sample size are required to confirm with statistical significance observed
associations with severe malaria in Indonesian samples.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-80 
PMCID: PMC3614516
PMID: 23446319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

