
1. Malar J. 2013 Mar 12;12:91. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-91.

Insights into the role of the junctional region of Plasmodium falciparum
dihydrofolate reductase-thymidylate synthase.

Chaianantakul N(1), Sirawaraporn R, Sirawaraporn W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok
10400, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum dihydrofolate reductase-thymidylate synthase
(pfDHFR-TS) is a well-defined target of anti-malarial drug, such as pyrimethamine
and cycloguanil. Emergence of malaria parasites resistant to these drugs has been
shown to be associated with point mutations of the gene coding for the target
enzymes. Although the 3D-structure of P. falciparum bifunctional pfDHFR-TS has
been reported previously, relatively little is known about the interactions
between the pfDHFR and pfTS domains and the roles of the junctional region that
links the two domains together. Therefore, a thorough understanding of the
interaction of the two domains and the role of the junctional region of this
target is important as the knowledge could assist the development of new
effective anti-malarial drugs aimed at overcoming drug-resistant malaria.
METHODS: A system was developed to investigate the interaction between pfDHFR and
pfTS domains and the role of the junctional region on the activity of the
recombinant pfTS. Based on the ability of co-transformed plasmids coding for
pfDHFR and pfTS with truncated junctional region to complement the growth of
TS-deficient Escherichia coli strain χ2913recA(DE3) on minimum media without
thymidine supplementation, active pfTS mutants with minimal length of junctional 
region were identified. Interactions between active pfDHFR and the pfTS domains
were demonstrated by using a bacterial two-hybrid system.
RESULTS: Using TS-deficient E. coli strain χ2913recA(DE3), the authors have shown
for the first time that in P. falciparum a junctional region of at least 44 amino
acids or longer was necessary for the pfTS domain to be active for the synthesis 
of thymidylate for the cells. Truncation of the junctional region of the
bifunctional pfDHFR-TS further confirmed the above results, and suggested that a 
critical length of the junctional peptide of pfDHFR-TS would be essential for the
activity of TS to catalyze the synthesis of thymidylate.
CONCLUSION: The present study demonstrated the interactions between the pfDHFR
and pfTS domains of the bifunctional pfDHFR-TS, and revealed that the junctional 
region linking the two protein domains is essential for the expression of
catalytically active pfTS domain. The findings could be useful since inhibition
of the pfDHFR-TS domain-domain interaction could form a basis for the development
of new anti-malarial drugs based on targeting the non-active site region of this 
important enzyme.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-91 
PMCID: PMC3623654
PMID: 23497065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

