
1. J Med Entomol. 2013 Mar;50(2):404-14.

16S rRNA gene-based identification of Elizabethkingia meningoseptica
(Flavobacteriales: Flavobacteriaceae) as a dominant midgut bacterium of the Asian
malaria vector Anopheles stephensi (Dipteria: Culicidae) with antimicrobial
activities.

Ngwa CJ(1), Glöckner V, Abdelmohsen UR, Scheuermayer M, Fischer R, Hentschel U,
Pradel G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Würzburg, Research Center for Infectious Diseases,
Josef-Schneider-Str. 2/D15, 97080 Würzburg, Germany.

Following their transmission from the human to the mosquito with the bloodmeal,
malaria parasites have to persevere in the mosquito midgut for approximately 1 d.
During this period the parasites are highly vulnerable to factors of the mosquito
midgut, including bacteria. We here aimed at determining the microbial diversity 
of gut bacteria of the Asian malaria vector Anopheles stephensi (Liston) during
development and under different feeding regimes, including feeds on malaria
parasite-infected blood. 16S rRNA and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis
analyses demonstrated an increasing reduction in the microbial diversity during
mosquito development from egg to adult and identified the gram-negative bacterium
Elizabethkingia meningoseptica King as the dominant species in the midgut of
lab-reared male and female mosquitoes. E. meningoseptica is transmitted between
generations and its predominance in the mosquito midgut was not altered by diet, 
when the gut microbiota was compared between sugar-fed and blood-fed female
mosquitoes. Furthermore, feeds on blood infected with malaria parasites did not
impact the presence of E. meningoseptica in the gut. Extracts from cultured E.
meningoseptica were active against gram-positive and negative bacteria and yeast 
and against the blood and gametocyte transmission stages of the malaria parasite 
Plasmodium falciparum Welch. The antimicrobial and antiplasmodial activities of
E. meningoseptica may account for its dominance in the midgut of the malaria
vector.

DOI: 10.1603/me12180 
PMID: 23540130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

