
1. Exp Parasitol. 2013 Jul;134(3):318-26. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2013.03.029. Epub
2013 Apr 4.

Higher microsatellite diversity in Plasmodium vivax than in sympatric Plasmodium 
falciparum populations in Pursat, Western Cambodia.

Orjuela-Sánchez P(1), Sá JM, Brandi MC, Rodrigues PT, Bastos MS, Amaratunga C,
Duong S, Fairhurst RM, Ferreira MU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Previous microsatellite analyses of sympatric populations of Plasmodium vivax and
Plasmodium falciparum in Brazil revealed higher diversity in the former species. 
However, it remains unclear whether regional species-specific differences in
prevalence and transmission levels might account for these findings. Here, we
examine sympatric populations of P. vivax (n=87) and P. falciparum (n=164)
parasites from Pursat province, Western Cambodia, where both species are
similarly prevalent. Using 10 genome-wide microsatellites for P. falciparum and
13 for P. vivax, we found that the P. vivax population was more diverse than the 
sympatric P. falciparum population (average virtual heterozygosity [HE], 0.87 vs.
0.66, P=0.003), with more multiple-clone infections (89.6% vs. 47.6%) and larger 
mean number of alleles per marker (16.2 vs. 11.1, P=0.07). Both populations
showed significant multi-locus linkage disequilibrium suggestive of a
predominantly clonal mode of parasite reproduction. The higher microsatellite
diversity found in P. vivax isolates, compared to sympatric P. falciparum
isolates, does not necessarily result from local differences in transmission
level and may reflect differences in population history between species or
increased mutation rates in P. vivax.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2013.03.029 
PMCID: PMC3691688
PMID: 23562882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

