
1. J Biotechnol. 2013 Aug 10;167(1):64-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2013.05.012. Epub 
2013 May 31.

Optimization of photobioreactor growth conditions for a cyanobacterium expressing
mosquitocidal Bacillus thuringiensis Cry proteins.

Ketseoglou I(1), Bouwer G.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of the Witwatersrand, Private
Bag 3, Wits 2050, South Africa.

An Anabaena strain (PCC 7120#11) that was genetically engineered to express
Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis cry genes has shown good larvicidal
activity against Anopheles arabiensis, a major vector of malaria in Africa.
Response surface methodology was used to evaluate the relationship between key
growth factors and the volumetric productivity of PCC 7120#11 in an indoor,
flat-plate photobioreactor. The interaction of input CO₂ concentration and
airflow rate had a statistically significant effect on the volumetric
productivity of PCC 7120#11, as did the interaction of airflow rate and
photosynthetic photon flux density. Model-based numerical optimization indicated 
that the optimal factor level combination for maximizing PCC 7120#11 volumetric
productivity was a photosynthetic photon flux density of 154 μmol m⁻² s⁻¹ and air
enriched with 3.18% (v/v) CO₂ supplied at a flow rate of 1.02 vessel volumes per 
minute. At the levels evaluated in the study, none of the growth factors had a
significant effect on the median lethal concentration of PCC 7120#11 against An. 
arabiensis larvae. This finding is important because loss of mosquitocidal
activity under growth conditions that maximize volumetric productivity would
impact on the feasibility of using PCC 7120#11 in malaria vector control
programs. The study showed the usefulness of response surface methodology for
determination of the optimal growth conditions for a cyanobacterium that is
genetically engineered to have larvicidal activity against malaria vectors.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2013.05.012 
PMID: 23732832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

