
1. Parasit Vectors. 2013 Jun 6;6:167. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-167.

5-methyl-cytosine and 5-hydroxy-methyl-cytosine in the genome of Biomphalaria
glabrata, a snail intermediate host of Schistosoma mansoni.

Fneich S(1), Dheilly N, Adema C, Rognon A, Reichelt M, Bulla J, Grunau C, Cosseau
C.

Author information: 
(1)Universit√© de Perpignan Via Domitia, Perpignan, France.

BACKGROUND: Biomphalaria glabrata is the mollusc intermediate host for
Schistosoma mansoni, a digenean flatworm parasite that causes human intestinal
schistosomiasis. An estimated 200 million people in 74 countries suffer from
schistosomiasis, in terms of morbidity this is the most severe tropical disease
after malaria. Epigenetic information informs on the status of gene activity that
is heritable, for which changes are reversible and that is not based on the DNA
sequence. Epigenetic mechanisms generate variability that provides a source for
potentially heritable phenotypic variation and therefore could be involved in the
adaptation to environmental constraint. Phenotypic variations are particularly
important in host-parasite interactions in which both selective pressure and rate
of evolution are high. In this context, epigenetic changes are expected to be
major drivers of phenotypic plasticity and co-adaptation between host and
parasite. Consequently, with characterization of the genomes of invertebrates
that are parasite vectors or intermediate hosts, it is also essential to
understand how the epigenetic machinery functions to better decipher the
interplay between host and parasite.
METHODS: The CpGo/e ratios were used as a proxy to investigate the occurrence of 
CpG methylation in B. glabrata coding regions. The presence of DNA methylation in
B. glabrata was also confirmed by several experimental approaches: restriction
enzymatic digestion with isoschizomers, bisulfite conversion based techniques and
LC-MS/MS analysis.
RESULTS: In this work, we report that DNA methylation, which is one of the
carriers of epigenetic information, occurs in B. glabrata; approximately 2% of
cytosine nucleotides are methylated. We describe the methylation machinery of B. 
glabrata. Methylation occurs predominantly at CpG sites, present at high ratios
in coding regions of genes associated with housekeeping functions. We also
demonstrate by bisulfite treatment that methylation occurs in multiple copies of 
Nimbus, a transposable element.
CONCLUSIONS: This study details DNA methylation for the first time, one of the
carriers of epigenetic information in B. glabrata. The general characteristics of
DNA methylation that we observed in the B. glabrata genome conform to what
epigenetic studies have reported from other invertebrate species.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-167 
PMCID: PMC3681652
PMID: 23742053  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

