
1. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2013 Apr;238(4):350-9. doi: 10.1177/1535370213477973.

The Cry4B toxin of Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis kills
Permethrin-resistant Anopheles gambiae, the principal vector of malaria.

Ibrahim MA(1), Griko NB, Bulla LA Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, The University of Texas at Dallas,
PO Box 830688, Richardson, TX 75083-0688, USA.

Resurgence of malaria has been attributed, in part, to the development of
resistance by Anopheles gambiae, a principal vector of the disease, to various
insecticidal compounds such as Permethrin. Permethrin, a neurotoxicant, is widely
used to impregnate mosquito nets. An alternative strategy to control mosquitoes
is the use of Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis (Bti) because there is no
observable resistance in the field to the bacterium. Bti kills mosquitoes by
targeting cadherin molecules residing in the midgut epithelium of larvae of the
insect. Cry proteins (Cry4A, Cry4B, Cry10A and Cry11A) produced by the bacterium 
during the sporulation phase of its life cycle bind to the cadherin molecules,
which serve as receptors for the proteins. These Cry proteins have variable
specificity to a variety of mosquitoes, including Culex and Aedes as well as
Anopheles. Importantly, selective mosquitocidal action is occasioned by binding
of the respective Cry toxins to cadherins distinctive to individual mosquito
species. Differential fractionation of the four Cry proteins from a novel Bti
isolate (M1) and cloning and expression of their genes in Escherichia coli
revealed that Cry4B is the only Cry protein that exerts insecticidal action
against An. gambiae. Indeed, it does so against a Permethrin-resistant strain of 
the mosquito. The other three Cry proteins are ineffective. Multiple sequence
alignments of the four Cry proteins revealed a divergent sequence motif in the
Cry4B toxin, which most likely determines binding of the toxin to its cognate
receptor, BT-R3, in An. gambiae and to its specific toxicity. A model showing
Cry4B toxin binding to BT-R3 is presented.

DOI: 10.1177/1535370213477973 
PMID: 23760000  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

