
1. J Immunol. 2013 Jul 15;191(2):785-94. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300444. Epub 2013
Jun 17.

Erythrocyte-binding antigens of Plasmodium falciparum are targets of human
inhibitory antibodies and function to evade naturally acquired immunity.

Persson KE(1), Fowkes FJ, McCallum FJ, Gicheru N, Reiling L, Richards JS, Wilson 
DW, Lopaticki S, Cowman AF, Marsh K, Beeson JG.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, 17177 Stockholm, 
Sweden. kristina.persson@ki.se

Abs that inhibit Plasmodium falciparum invasion of erythrocytes form an important
component of human immunity against malaria, but key target Ags are largely
unknown. Phenotypic variation by P. falciparum mediates the evasion of inhibitory
Abs, contributing to the capacity of P. falciparum to cause repeat and chronic
infections. However, Ags involved in mediating immune evasion have not been
defined, and studies of the function of human Abs are limited. In this study, we 
used novel approaches to determine the importance of P. falciparum
erythrocyte-binding Ags (EBAs), which are important invasion ligands, as targets 
of human invasion-inhibitory Abs and define their role in contributing to immune 
evasion through variation in function. We evaluated the invasion-inhibitory
activity of acquired Abs from malaria-exposed children and adults from Kenya,
using P. falciparum with disruption of genes encoding EBA140, EBA175, and EBA181,
either individually or combined as EBA140/EBA175 or EBA175/EBA181 double
knockouts. Our findings provide important new evidence that variation in the
expression and function of the EBAs plays an important role in evasion of
acquired Abs and that a substantial amount of phenotypic diversity results from
variation in expression of different EBAs that contributes to immune evasion by
P. falciparum. All three EBAs were identified as important targets of naturally
acquired inhibitory Abs demonstrated by differential inhibition of parental
parasites greater than EBA knockout lines. This knowledge will help to advance
malaria vaccine development and suggests that multiple invasion ligands need to
be targeted to overcome the capacity of P. falciparum for immune evasion.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300444 
PMCID: PMC3785134
PMID: 23776178  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

