
1. Acta Trop. 2013 Oct;128(1):7-17. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2013.06.004. Epub
2013 Jun 17.

Insecticide resistance in Bemisia tabaci Gennadius (Homoptera: Aleyrodidae) and
Anopheles gambiae Giles (Diptera: Culicidae) could compromise the sustainability 
of malaria vector control strategies in West Africa.

Gnankiné O(1), Bassolé IH, Chandre F, Glitho I, Akogbeto M, Dabiré RK, Martin T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Entomologie Appliquée, Université de Ouagadougou, BP 7021
Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso. Electronic address: olivier.gnankine@univ-ouaga.bf.

Insecticides from the organophosphate (OP) and pyrethroid (PY) chemical families,
have respectively, been in use for 50 and 30 years in West Africa, mainly against
agricultural pests, but also against vectors of human disease. The selection
pressure, with practically the same molecules year after year (mainly on cotton),
has caused insecticide resistance in pest populations such as Bemisia tabaci,
vector of harmful phytoviruses on vegetables. The evolution toward insecticide
resistance in malaria vectors such as Anopheles gambiae sensus lato (s.l.) is
probably related to the current use of these insecticides in agriculture. Thus,
successful pest and vector control in West Africa requires an investigation of
insect susceptibility, in relation to the identification of species and sub
species, such as molecular forms or biotypes. Identification of knock down
resistance (kdr) and acetylcholinesterase gene (Ace1) mutations modifying
insecticide targets in individual insects and measure of enzymes activity
typically involved in insecticide metabolism (oxidase, esterase and
glutathion-S-transferase) are indispensable in understanding the mechanisms of
resistance. Insecticide resistance is a good example in which genotype-phenotype 
links have been made successfully. Insecticides used in agriculture continue to
select new resistant populations of B. tabaci that could be from different
biotype vectors of plant viruses. As well, the evolution of insecticide
resistance in An. gambiae threatens the management of malaria vectors in West
Africa. It raises the question of priority in the use of insecticides in health
and/or agriculture, and more generally, the question of sustainability of crop
protection and vector control strategies in the region. Here, we review the
susceptibility tests, biochemical and molecular assays data for B. tabaci, a
major pest in cotton and vegetable crops, and An. gambiae, main vector of
malaria. The data reviewed was collected in Benin and Burkina Faso between 2008
and 2010 under the Corus 6015 research program. This review aims to show: (i) the
insecticide resistance in B. tabaci as well as in An. gambiae; and (ii) due to
this, the impact of selection of resistant populations on malaria vector control 
strategies. Some measures that could be beneficial for crop protection and vector
control strategies in West Africa are proposed.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2013.06.004 
PMID: 23792227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

