
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Oct;19:164-75. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.07.009. Epub
2013 Jul 17.

Microsatellite analysis of chloroquine resistance associated alleles and neutral 
loci reveal genetic structure of Indian Plasmodium falciparum.

Mallick PK(1), Sutton PL, Singh R, Singh OP, Dash AP, Singh AK, Carlton JM,
Bhasin VK.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Malaria Research, Indian Council of Medical Research,
Dwarka Sector-8, New Delhi 110077, India.

Efforts to control malignant malaria caused by Plasmodium falciparum are hampered
by the parasite's acquisition of resistance to antimalarial drugs, e.g.,
chloroquine. This necessitates evaluating the spread of chloroquine resistance in
any malaria-endemic area. India displays highly variable malaria epidemiology and
also shares porous international borders with malaria-endemic Southeast Asian
countries having multi-drug resistant malaria. Malaria epidemiology in India is
believed to be affected by two major factors: high genetic diversity and evolving
drug resistance in P. falciparum. How transmission intensity of malaria can
influence the genetic structure of chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum population
in India is unknown. Here, genetic diversity within and among P. falciparum
populations is analyzed with respect to their prevalence and chloroquine
resistance observed in 13 different locations in India. Microsatellites developed
for P. falciparum, including three putatively neutral and seven microsatellites
thought to be under a hitchhiking effect due to chloroquine selection were used. 
Genetic hitchhiking is observed in five of seven microsatellites flanking the
gene responsible for chloroquine resistance. Genetic admixture analysis and
F-statistics detected genetically distinct groups in accordance with transmission
intensity of different locations and the probable use of chloroquine. A large
genetic break between the chloroquine-resistant parasite of the
Northeast-East-Island group and Southwest group (FST=0.253, P<0.001) suggests a
long period of isolation or a possibility of different origin between them. A
pattern of significant isolation by distance was observed in low transmission
areas (r=0.49, P=0.003, N=83, Mantel test). An unanticipated pattern of spread of
hitchhiking suggests genetic structure for Indian P. falciparum population.
Overall, the study suggests that transmission intensity can be an efficient
driver for genetic differentiation at both neutral and adaptive loci across
India.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.07.009 
PMCID: PMC3799960
PMID: 23871774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

