
1. Hemoglobin. 2013;37(5):435-43. doi: 10.3109/03630269.2013.801851.

The changing epidemiology of β-thalassemia in the Greek-Cypriot population.

Kyrri AR(1), Kalogerou E, Loizidou D, Ioannou C, Makariou C, Kythreotis L,
Phylactides M, Kountouris P, Angastiniotis M, Modell B, Kleanthous M.

Author information: 
(1)Thalassaemia Centre, Makarios III Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus.
arkyrri@cytanet.com.cy

The first epidemiological study for thalassemia in Cyprus was performed by Fawdry
in 1946. The study determined that the frequency of β-thalassemia (β-thal)
carriers was around 18.0% and that of α(0)-thal carriers (individuals with both
cis α-globin genes inactive) at around 2.0%. In 1998, another study concluded
that Cyprus had one of the highest frequencies of β-thal carriers worldwide
(17.2%). Based on Haldane's hypothesis that malaria might be the selective agent 
responsible for the maintenance of high levels of thalassemia and sickle cell
disease in many populations around the world, it is expected that following the
eradication of the disease in Cyprus in 1948, the carriers of β-thal should
decline with each generation. In order to determine whether this has been the
case, we compiled frequency data for β-thal carriers from three separate surveys 
performed as part of the Cyprus National Thalassaemia Screening Programme (NTSP).
The surveys were carried out in 1986, 2003 and 2010 involving 9622, 6711 and 5228
subjects, respectively. The expected drop in the prevalence of β-thal carriers
for each successive generation following the eradication of malaria, i.e., in the
absence of selection pressure, was calculated using the Hardy-Weinberg equation
and the mathematical model of Hartl and Clark. The surveys provide supporting
evidence for the decrease of the frequency of the β-thal carriers in the Greek
Cypriot population, with a drop of 1.89% in 24 years.

DOI: 10.3109/03630269.2013.801851 
PMID: 24006929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

