
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013 Dec;12(12):3976-86. doi: 10.1074/mcp.O113.028357. Epub 
2013 Sep 16.

A library of functional recombinant cell-surface and secreted P. falciparum
merozoite proteins.

Crosnier C(1), Wanaguru M, McDade B, Osier FH, Marsh K, Rayner JC, Wright GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Surface Signalling laboratory, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge
CB10 1HH, UK;

Malaria, an infectious disease caused by parasites of the Plasmodium genus, is
one of the world's major public health concerns causing up to a million deaths
annually, mostly because of P. falciparum infections. All of the clinical
symptoms are associated with the blood stage of the disease, an obligate part of 
the parasite life cycle, when a form of the parasite called the merozoite
recognizes and invades host erythrocytes. During erythrocyte invasion, merozoites
are directly exposed to the host humoral immune system making the blood stage of 
the parasite a conceptually attractive therapeutic target. Progress in the
functional and molecular characterization of P. falciparum merozoite proteins,
however, has been hampered by the technical challenges associated with expressing
these proteins in a biochemically active recombinant form. This challenge is
particularly acute for extracellular proteins, which are the likely targets of
host antibody responses, because they contain structurally critical
post-translational modifications that are not added by some recombinant
expression systems. Here, we report the development of a method that uses a
mammalian expression system to compile a protein resource containing the entire
ectodomains of 42 P. falciparum merozoite secreted and cell surface proteins,
many of which have not previously been characterized. Importantly, we are able to
recapitulate known biochemical activities by showing that recombinant MSP1-MSP7
and P12-P41 directly interact, and that both recombinant EBA175 and EBA140 can
bind human erythrocytes in a sialic acid-dependent manner. Finally, we use sera
from malaria-exposed immune adults to profile the relative immunoreactivity of
the proteins and show that the majority of the antigens contain conformational
(heat-labile) epitopes. We envisage that this resource of recombinant proteins
will make a valuable contribution toward a molecular understanding of the blood
stage of P. falciparum infections and facilitate the comparative screening of
antigens as blood-stage vaccine candidates.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.O113.028357 
PMCID: PMC3861738
PMID: 24043421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

