
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Dec;20:239-48. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.09.011. Epub
2013 Sep 14.

The evolution and diversity of a low complexity vaccine candidate, merozoite
surface protein 9 (MSP-9), in Plasmodium vivax and closely related species.

Chenet SM(1), Pacheco MA, Bacon DJ, Collins WE, Barnwell JW, Escalante AA.

Author information: 
(1)Arizona State University, School of Life Sciences, Tempe, AZ, USA; Center for 
Evolutionary Medicine and Informatics, The Biodesign Institute, Arizona State
University, Tempe, AZ, USA. Electronic address: schenet@asu.edu.

The merozoite surface protein-9 (MSP-9) has been considered a target for an
anti-malarial vaccine since it is one of many proteins involved in the
erythrocyte invasion, a critical step in the parasite life cycle. Orthologs
encoding this antigen have been found in all known species of Plasmodium
parasitic to primates. In order to characterize and investigate the extent and
maintenance of MSP-9 genetic diversity, we analyzed DNA sequences of the
following malaria parasite species: Plasmodium falciparum, Plasmodium reichenowi,
Plasmodium chabaudi, Plasmodium yoelii, Plasmodium berghei, Plasmodium coatneyi, 
Plasmodium gonderi, Plasmodium knowlesi, Plasmodium inui, Plasmodium simiovale,
Plasmodium fieldi, Plasmodium cynomolgi and Plasmodium vivax and evaluated the
signature of natural selection in all MSP-9 orthologs. Our findings suggest that 
the gene encoding MSP-9 is under purifying selection in P. vivax and closely
related species. We further explored how selection affected different regions of 
MSP-9 by comparing the polymorphisms in P. vivax and P. falciparum, and found
contrasting patterns between these two species that suggest differences in
functional constraints. This observation implies that the MSP-9 orthologs in
human parasites may interact differently with the host immune response. Thus,
studies carried out in one species cannot be directly translated into the other.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.09.011 
PMCID: PMC4066979
PMID: 24044894  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

