
1. BMC Genomics. 2013 Aug 1;14:528. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-528.

Genomic distribution of AFLP markers relative to gene locations for different
eukaryotic species.

Caballero A(1), García-Pereira MJ, Quesada H.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Genética e Inmunología, Facultad de Biología,
Universidade de Vigo, 36310 Vigo, Spain. armando@uvigo.es

BACKGROUND: Amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) markers are frequently 
used for a wide range of studies, such as genome-wide mapping, population genetic
diversity estimation, hybridization and introgression studies, phylogenetic
analyses, and detection of signatures of selection. An important issue to be
addressed for some of these fields is the distribution of the markers across the 
genome, particularly in relation to gene sequences.
RESULTS: Using in-silico restriction fragment analysis of the genomes of nine
eukaryotic species we characterise the distribution of AFLP fragments across the 
genome and, particularly, in relation to gene locations. First, we identify the
physical position of markers across the chromosomes of all species. An observed
accumulation of fragments around (peri) centromeric regions in some species is
produced by repeated sequences, and this accumulation disappears when AFLP bands 
rather than fragments are considered. Second, we calculate the percentage of AFLP
markers positioned within gene sequences. For the typical EcoRI/MseI enzyme pair,
this ranges between 28 and 87% and is usually larger than that expected by chance
because of the higher GC content of gene sequences relative to intergenic ones.
In agreement with this, the use of enzyme pairs with GC-rich restriction sites
substantially increases the above percentages. For example, using the enzyme
system SacI/HpaII, 86% of AFLP markers are located within gene sequences in A.
thaliana, and 100% of markers in Plasmodium falciparun. We further find that for 
a typical trait controlled by 50 genes of average size, if 1000 AFLPs are used in
a study, the number of those within 1 kb distance from any of the genes would be 
only about 1-2, and only about 50% of the genes would have markers within that
distance.
CONCLUSIONS: The high coverage of AFLP markers across the genomes and the high
proportion of markers within or close to gene sequences make them suitable for
genome scans and detecting large islands of differentiation in the genome.
However, for specific traits, the percentage of AFLP markers close to genes can
be rather small. Therefore, genome scans directed towards the search of markers
closely linked to selected loci can be a difficult task in many instances.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-528 
PMCID: PMC3750350
PMID: 24060007  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

