
1. J Eukaryot Microbiol. 2013 Nov-Dec;60(6):646-51. doi: 10.1111/jeu.12080. Epub
2013 Sep 16.

The structurally related auxin and melatonin tryptophan-derivatives and their
roles in Arabidopsis thaliana and in the human malaria parasite Plasmodium
falciparum.

Koyama FC(1), Carvalho TL, Alves E, da Silva HB, de Azevedo MF, Hemerly AS,
Garcia CR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade 
de São Paulo, 05508-000, São Paulo, Brazil; Departamento de Fisiologia, Instituto
de Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo, 05508-090, São Paulo, Brazil.

Indole compounds are involved in a range of functions in many organisms. In the
human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, melatonin and other tryptophan
derivatives are able to modulate its intraerythrocytic cycle, increasing the
schizont population as well as parasitemia, likely through ubiquitin-proteasome
system (UPS) gene regulation. In plants, melatonin regulates root development, in
a similar way to that described for indoleacetic acid, suggesting that melatonin 
and indoleacetic acid could co-participate in some physiological processes due to
structural similarities. In the present work, we evaluate whether the chemical
structure similarity found in indoleacetic acid and melatonin can lead to similar
effects in Arabidopsis thaliana lateral root formation and P. falciparum cell
cycle modulation, as well as in the UPS of gene regulation, by qRT-PCR. Our data 
show that P. falciparum is not able to respond to indoleacetic acid either in the
modulation of the intraerythrocytic cycle or in the gene regulation mediated by
the UPS as observed for melatonin. The similarities of these indole compounds are
not sufficient to confer synergistic functions in P. falciparum cell cycle
modulation, but could interplay in A. thaliana lateral root formation.

© 2013 The Author(s) Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology © 2013 International
Society of Protistologists.

DOI: 10.1111/jeu.12080 
PMID: 24102716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

