
1. Ecol Evol. 2013 Oct;3(11):4000-15. doi: 10.1002/ece3.737. Epub 2013 Sep 12.

Release of genetically engineered insects: a framework to identify potential
ecological effects.

David AS(1), Kaser JM, Morey AC, Roth AM, Andow DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior, University of Minnesota St.
Paul, Minnesota, 55108, USA.

Genetically engineered (GE) insects have the potential to radically change pest
management worldwide. With recent approvals of GE insect releases, there is a
need for a synthesized framework to evaluate their potential ecological and
evolutionary effects. The effects may occur in two phases: a transitory phase
when the focal population changes in density, and a steady state phase when it
reaches a new, constant density. We review potential effects of a rapid change in
insect density related to population outbreaks, biological control, invasive
species, and other GE organisms to identify a comprehensive list of potential
ecological and evolutionary effects of GE insect releases. We apply this
framework to the Anopheles gambiae mosquito - a malaria vector being engineered
to suppress the wild mosquito population - to identify effects that may occur
during the transitory and steady state phases after release. Our methodology
reveals many potential effects in each phase, perhaps most notably those dealing 
with immunity in the transitory phase, and with pathogen and vector evolution in 
the steady state phase. Importantly, this framework identifies knowledge gaps in 
mosquito ecology. Identifying effects in the transitory and steady state phases
allows more rigorous identification of the potential ecological effects of GE
insect release.

DOI: 10.1002/ece3.737 
PMCID: PMC3810890
PMID: 24198955 

