
1. PLoS Biol. 2013 Oct;11(10):e1001695. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001695. Epub 2013
Oct 29.

The interaction between a sexually transferred steroid hormone and a female
protein regulates oogenesis in the malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae.

Baldini F(1), Gabrieli P, South A, Valim C, Mancini F, Catteruccia F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America ; Dipartimento di
Medicina Sperimentale e Scienze Biochimiche, Universit√† degli Studi di Perugia,
Terni, Italy.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2013 Oct;11(10):e1001694.

Molecular interactions between male and female factors during mating profoundly
affect the reproductive behavior and physiology of female insects. In natural
populations of the malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae, blood-fed females direct
nutritional resources towards oogenesis only when inseminated. Here we show that 
the mating-dependent pathway of egg development in these mosquitoes is regulated 
by the interaction between the steroid hormone 20-hydroxy-ecdysone (20E)
transferred by males during copulation and a female Mating-Induced Stimulator of 
Oogenesis (MISO) protein. RNAi silencing of MISO abolishes the increase in
oogenesis caused by mating in blood-fed females, causes a delay in oocyte
development, and impairs the function of male-transferred 20E.
Co-immunoprecipitation experiments show that MISO and 20E interact in the female 
reproductive tract. Moreover MISO expression after mating is induced by 20E via
the Ecdysone Receptor, demonstrating a close cooperation between the two factors.
Male-transferred 20E therefore acts as a mating signal that females translate
into an increased investment in egg development via a MISO-dependent pathway. The
identification of this male-female reproductive interaction offers novel
opportunities for the control of mosquito populations that transmit malaria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001695 
PMCID: PMC3812110
PMID: 24204210  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

