
1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2014 Apr;30(4):355-62. doi: 10.1089/AID.2013.0218.
Epub 2013 Dec 24.

Transient increase of interferon-stimulated genes and no clinical benefit by
chloroquine treatment during acute simian immunodeficiency virus infection of
macaques.

Vaccari M(1), Fenizia C, Ma ZM, Hryniewicz A, Boasso A, Doster MN, Miller CJ,
Lindegardh N, Tarning J, Landay AL, Shearer GM, Franchini G.

Author information: 
(1)1 Animal Models and Retroviral Vaccines Section, NCI , NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland.

Simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection leads to AIDS in experimentally
infected Rhesus macaques similarly to HIV-infected humans. In contrast, SIV
infection of natural hosts is characterized by a down-regulation of innate acute 
responses to the virus within a few weeks of infection and results in limited
pathology. Chloroquine (CQ) has been used in the treatment or prevention of
malaria and has recently been shown to cause a decrease of immune activation and 
CD4 cell loss in HIV-infected individuals treated with antiretroviral therapy.
Here, we treated Rhesus macaques with CQ during the acute phase of SIVmac251
infection with the intent to decrease viral-induced immune activation and
possibly limit disease progression. Contrary to what was expected, CQ treatment
resulted in a temporary increased expression of interferon (IFN)-stimulating
genes and it worsened the recovery of CD4(+) T cells in the blood. Our findings
confirm recent results observed in asymptomatic HIV-infected patients and suggest
that CQ does not provide an obvious benefit in the absence of antiretroviral
therapy.

DOI: 10.1089/AID.2013.0218 
PMCID: PMC3976588
PMID: 24251542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

