
1. Genome Biol. 2013 Nov 22;14(11):R128. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-11-r128.

Polysome profiling reveals translational control of gene expression in the human 
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Bunnik EM, Chung DW, Hamilton M, Ponts N, Saraf A, Prudhomme J, Florens L, Le
Roch KG.

BACKGROUND: In eukaryotic organisms, gene expression is regulated at multiple
levels during the processes of transcription and translation. The absence of a
tight regulatory network for transcription in the human malaria parasite suggests
that gene expression may largely be controlled at post-transcriptional and
translational levels.
RESULTS: In this study, we compare steady-state mRNA and polysome-associated mRNA
levels of Plasmodium falciparum at different time points during its asexual cell 
cycle. For more than 30% of its genes, we observe a delay in peak transcript
abundance in the polysomal fraction as compared to the steady-state mRNA
fraction, suggestive of strong translational control. Our data show that key
regulatory mechanisms could include inhibitory activity of upstream open reading 
frames and translational repression of the major virulence gene family by
intronic transcripts. In addition, we observe polysomal mRNA-specific alternative
splicing events and widespread transcription of non-coding transcripts.
CONCLUSIONS: These different layers of translational regulation are likely to
contribute to a complex network that controls gene expression in this eukaryotic 
pathogen. Disrupting the mechanisms involved in such translational control could 
provide novel anti-malarial strategies.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-11-r128 
PMCID: PMC4053746
PMID: 24267660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

