
1. BMC Plant Biol. 2013 Dec 20;13:220. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-13-220.

Differential transcriptome analysis of glandular and filamentous trichomes in
Artemisia annua.

Soetaert SS, Van Neste CM, Vandewoestyne ML, Head SR, Goossens A, Van
Nieuwerburgh FC, Deforce DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Ghent University, Harelbekestraat 72, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
Dieter.Deforce@UGent.be.

BACKGROUND: The medicinal plant Artemisia annua is covered with filamentous
trichomes and glandular, artemisinin producing trichomes. A high artemisinin
supply is needed at a reduced cost for treating malaria. Artemisinin production
in bioreactors can be facilitated if a better insight is obtained in the
biosynthesis of artemisinin and other metabolites. Therefore, metabolic
activities of glandular and filamentous trichomes were investigated at the
transcriptome level.
RESULTS: By laser pressure catapulting, glandular and filamentous trichomes as
well as apical and sub-apical cells from glandular trichomes were collected and
their transcriptome was sequenced using Illumina RNA-Seq. A de novo transcriptome
was assembled (Trinity) and studied with a differential expression analysis
(edgeR).A comparison of the transcriptome from glandular and filamentous
trichomes shows that MEP, MVA, most terpene and lipid biosynthesis pathways are
significantly upregulated in glandular trichomes. Conversely, some transcripts
coding for specific sesquiterpenoid and triterpenoid enzymes such as 8-epi-cedrol
synthase and an uncharacterized oxidosqualene cyclase were significantly
upregulated in filamentous trichomes. All known artemisinin biosynthesis genes
are upregulated in glandular trichomes and were detected in both the apical and
sub-apical cells of the glandular trichomes. No significant differential
expression could be observed between the apical and sub-apical cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results underscore the vast metabolic capacities of A. annua
glandular trichomes but nonetheless point to the existence of specific terpene
metabolic pathways in the filamentous trichomes. Candidate genes that might be
involved in artemisinin biosynthesis are proposed based on their putative
function and their differential expression level.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2229-13-220 
PMCID: PMC3878173
PMID: 24359620  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

