
1. Acta Trop. 2014 Apr;132:39-44. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2013.12.022. Epub 2014 
Jan 6.

Prevailing Plasmodium falciparum dihydrofolate reductase 108-asparagine in
Hodeidah, Yemen: a questionable sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine partner within the
artemisinin-based combination therapy.

Abdul-Ghani R(1), Farag HF(2), Allam AF(2), Shawky SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Medical Research Institute, Alexandria University,
Alexandria, Egypt; Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Sana'a University, Sana'a, Yemen. Electronic address:
rashadqb@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Medical Research Institute, Alexandria University,
Alexandria, Egypt.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Medical Research Institute, Alexandria University,
Alexandria, Egypt.

Given that the evolution and spread of resistance to sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine
(SP) have been documented at a quick pace worldwide, the present study
investigated the mutant Plasmodium falciparum dihydrofolate reductase
108-asparagine (dhfr 108 N) as a key marker of resistance to the combination
among parasite isolates from Hodeidah. The association of parasitologic indices
with the dhfr 108 N mutant allele was also studied. Ninety patients with
microscopically confirmed P. falciparum infection from Hodeidah were included in 
the present study. Polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length
polymorphism approach was adopted for the molecular detection of this marker. The
dhfr 108 N was detected among about 61% of P. falciparum isolates, in its pure
and mixed-type forms, from Hodeidah. Age, gender and residence of patients were
not significant predictors for the presence of the mutant allele among parasite
isolates. In contrast, a history of malaria and antimalarial drug intake in the
year preceding the study as well as frequent antimalarial drug intake were
significantly associated with this mutant allele. The high frequency of dhfr 108 
N among parasites isolates makes the role of SP questionable as a partner with
outstanding effectiveness within the ACT, at least, in the near future. SP plus
artesunate should be monitored for its antimalarial efficacy at regular
intervals, preferably through the molecular detection of resistance-associated
mutations.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2013.12.022 
PMID: 24406851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

