
1. Biochem J. 2014 Mar 15;458(3):513-23. doi: 10.1042/BJ20131451.

A dual-targeted aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase in Plasmodium falciparum charges
cytosolic and apicoplast tRNACys.

Pham JS(1), Sakaguchi R(2), Yeoh LM, De Silva NS(1), McFadden GI(3), Hou YM(2),
Ralph SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010,
Australia.
(2)†Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, U.S.A.
(3)‡School of Botany, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010,
Australia.

Plasmodium parasites possess two endosymbiotic organelles: a mitochondrion and a 
relict plastid called the apicoplast. To accommodate the translational
requirements of these organelles in addition to its cytosolic translation
apparatus, the parasite must maintain a supply of charged tRNA molecules in each 
of these compartments. In the present study we investigate how the parasite
manages these translational requirements for charged tRNACys with only a single
gene for CysRS (cysteinyl-tRNA synthetase). We demonstrate that the single
PfCysRS (Plasmodium falciparum CysRS) transcript is alternatively spliced, and,
using a combination of endogenous and heterologous tagging experiments in both P.
falciparum and Toxoplasma gondii, we show that CysRS isoforms traffic to the
cytosol and apicoplast. PfCysRS can recognize and charge the eukaryotic tRNACys
encoded by the Plasmodium nucleus as well as the bacterial-type tRNA encoded by
the apicoplast genome, albeit with a preference for the eukaryotic type cytosolic
tRNA. The results of the present study indicate that apicomplexan parasites have 
lost their original plastidic cysteinyl-tRNA synthetase, and have replaced it
with a dual-targeted eukaryotic type CysRS that recognizes plastid and nuclear
tRNACys. Inhibitors of the Plasmodium dual-targeted CysRS would potentially offer
a therapy capable of the desirable immediate effects on parasite growth as well
as the irreversibility of inhibitors that disrupt apicoplast inheritance.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20131451 
PMID: 24428730  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

