
1. Parasitology. 2014 Apr;141(5):641-5. doi: 10.1017/S003118201300214X. Epub 2014
Jan 27.

Identification of a vir-orthologous immune evasion gene family from primate
malaria parasites.

Prajapati SK(1), Singh OP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Division, National Institute of Malaria Research, Sector 8, 
Dwarka, New Delhi-110077, India.

The immune evasion gene family of malaria parasites encodes variant surface
proteins that are expressed at the surface of infected erythrocytes and help the 
parasite in evading the host immune response by means of antigenic variation. The
identification of Plasmodium vivax vir orthologous immune evasion gene family
from primate malaria parasites would provide new insight into the evolution of
virulence and pathogenesis. Three vir subfamilies viz. vir-B, vir-D and vir-G
were successfully PCR amplified from primate malaria parasites, cloned and
sequenced. DNA sequence analysis confirmed orthologues of vir-D subfamily in
Plasmodium cynomolgi, Plasmodium simium, Plasmodium simiovale and Plasmodium
fieldi. The identified vir-D orthologues are 1-9 distinct members of the immune
evasion gene family which have 68-83% sequence identity with vir-D and 71.2-98.5%
sequence identity within the members identified from primate malaria parasites.
The absence of other vir subfamilies among primate malaria parasites reflects the
limitations in the experimental approach. This study clearly identified the
presence of vir-D like sequences in four species of Plasmodium infecting primates
that would be useful in understanding the evolution of virulence in malaria
parasites.

DOI: 10.1017/S003118201300214X 
PMID: 24477117  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

