
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 29;9(1):e87673. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087673. eCollection
2014.

Complementation of essential yeast GPI mannosyltransferase mutations suggests a
novel specificity for certain Trypanosoma and Plasmodium PigB proteins.

Cortes LK(1), Scarcelli JJ(1), Taron CH(1).

Author information: 
(1)New England Biolabs, Ipswich, Massachusetts, United States of America.

The glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor is an essential glycolipid that
tethers certain eukaryotic proteins to the cell surface. The core structure of
the GPI anchor is remarkably well conserved across evolution and consists of
NH2-CH2-CH2-PO4-6Manα1,2Manα1,6Manα1,4-GlcNα1,6-myo-inositol-PO4-lipid. The
glycan portion of this structure may be modified with various side-branching
sugars or other compounds that are heterogeneous and differ from organism to
organism. One such modification is an α(1,2)-linked fourth mannose (Man-IV) that 
is side-branched to the third mannose (Man-III) of the trimannosyl core. In fungi
and mammals, addition of Man-III and Man-IV occurs by two distinct Family 22
α(1,2)-mannosyltransferases, Gpi10/PigB and Smp3/PigZ, respectively. However, in 
the five protozoan parasite genomes we examined, no genes encoding Smp3/PigZ
proteins were observed, despite reports of tetramannosyl-GPI structures
(Man4-GPIs) being produced by some parasites. In this study, we tested the
hypothesis that the Gpi10/PigB proteins produced by protozoan parasites have the 
ability to add both Man-III and Man-IV to GPI precursors. We used yeast genetics 
to test the in vivo specificity of Gpi10/PigB proteins from several Plasmodium
and Trypanosoma species by examining their ability to restore viability to
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains harboring lethal defects in Man-III (gpi10Δ) or 
Man-IV (smp3Δ) addition to GPI precursor lipids. We demonstrate that genes
encoding PigB enzymes from T. cruzi, T. congolense and P. falciparum are each
capable of separately complementing essential gpi10Δ and smp3Δ mutations, while
PIGB genes from T. vivax and T. brucei only complement gpi10Δ. Additionally, we
show the ability of T. cruzi PIGB to robustly complement a gpi10Δ/smp3Δ double
mutant. Our data suggest that certain Plasmodium and Trypanosoma PigB
mannosyltransferases can transfer more than one mannose to GPI precursors in
vivo, and suggest a novel biosynthetic mechanism by which Man4-GPIs may be
synthesized in these organisms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087673 
PMCID: PMC3906172
PMID: 24489949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

