
1. Evol Med Public Health. 2013 Jan;2013(1):3-13. doi: 10.1093/emph/eos003. Epub
2012 Sep 27.

Why are male malaria parasites in such a rush?: Sex-specific evolution and
host-parasite interactions.

Khan SM(1), Reece SE, Waters AP, Janse CJ, Kaczanowski S.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden Malaria Research Group, Department of Parasitology, LUMC, Albinusdreef 
2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands; Centre for Immunity, Infection and Evolution,
Institutes of Evolution, Infection and Immunity, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3JT, UK; Division of Infection and
Immunity, Institute of Biomedical Life Sciences & Wellcome Centre for Molecular
Parasitology, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8TA, UK; Department of
Bioinformatics, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Pawinskiego 5a, 02-106 Warszawa, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Disease-causing organisms are notorious for fast rates of molecular
evolution and the ability to adapt rapidly to changes in their ecology. Sex plays
a key role in evolution, and recent studies, in humans and other multicellular
organisms, document that genes expressed principally or exclusively in males
exhibit the fastest rates of adaptive evolution. However, despite the importance 
of sexual reproduction for many unicellular taxa, sex-biased gene expression and 
its evolutionary implications have been overlooked.
METHODS: We analyse genomic data from multiple malaria parasite (Plasmodium)
species and proteomic data sets from different parasite life cycle stages.
RESULTS: The accelerated evolution of male-biased genes has only been examined in
multicellular taxa, but our analyses reveal that accelerated evolution in genes
with male-specific expression is also a feature of unicellular organisms. This
'fast-male' evolution is adaptive and likely facilitated by the male-biased sex
ratio of gametes in the mating pool. Furthermore, we propose that the exceptional
rates of evolution we observe are driven by interactions between males and host
immune responses.
CONCLUSIONS: We reveal a novel form of host-parasite coevolution that enables
parasites to evade host immune responses that negatively impact upon fertility.
The identification of parasite genes with accelerated evolution has important
implications for the identification of drug and vaccine targets. Specifically,
vaccines targeting males will be more vulnerable to parasite evolution than those
targeting females or both sexes.

DOI: 10.1093/emph/eos003 
PMCID: PMC4183958
PMID: 24481180 

