
1. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist. 2012 Oct 26;3:8-19. doi:
10.1016/j.ijpddr.2012.10.001. eCollection 2013 Dec.

Global analysis of Plasmodium falciparum Na(+)/H(+) exchanger (pfnhe-1) allele
polymorphism and its usefulness as a marker of in vitro resistance to quinine.

Ménard D(1), Andriantsoanirina V(2), Khim N(1), Ratsimbasoa A(3), Witkowski B(1),
Benedet C(1), Canier L(1), Mercereau-Puijalon O(4), Durand R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Epidémiologie Moléculaire du Paludisme, Institut Pasteur du Cambodge, 
Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(2)Laboratoire de Parasitologie-Mycologie, Hôpital Avicenne, AP-HP, Bobigny,
France.
(3)Ministère de la Santé, du Planning Familial et de la Protection Sociale,
Programme National de Lutte contre le Paludisme, BP 1869 Antananarivo,
Madagascar.
(4)Unité d'Immunologie Moléculaire des Parasites, Institut Pasteur & Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité de Recherche Associée 2581, Paris,
France.

The aim of this study was to provide a comprehensive analysis of the worldwide
genetic polymorphism of ms4760 alleles of the pfnhe-1 gene and to discuss their
usefulness as molecular marker of quinine resistance (QNR). A new numbering of
ms4760 allele, classification grouping ms4760 alleles according to the number of 
DNNND and DDNHNDNHNND repeat motifs in blocks II and V was also proposed. A total
of 1508 ms4760 sequences from isolates, culture-adapted parasites or reference
strains from various geographical regions were retrieved from GenBank (last
update on 15th June 2012) or from publications and were used for genetic
analyses. The association of different alleles of pfnhe-1 with resistance to
quinoline antimalarial drugs showed marked geographic disparities. The validity
and reliability of candidate polymorphisms in pfnhe-1 gene as molecular markers
of QNR appeared restricted to endemic areas from South Asia or possibly East
African countries and needs to be confirmed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpddr.2012.10.001 
PMCID: PMC3862431
PMID: 24533289 

