
1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 21;9(2):e89718. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089718. eCollection
2014.

Identification of vital and dispensable sulfur utilization factors in the
Plasmodium apicoplast.

Haussig JM(1), Matuschewski K(2), Kooij TW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology Unit, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin,
Germany.
(2)Parasitology Unit, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, Germany
; Institute of Biology, Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany.

Iron-sulfur [Fe-S] clusters are ubiquitous and critical cofactors in diverse
biochemical processes. They are assembled by distinct [Fe-S] cluster biosynthesis
pathways, typically in organelles of endosymbiotic origin. Apicomplexan
parasites, including Plasmodium, the causative agent of malaria, harbor two
separate [Fe-S] cluster biosynthesis pathways in the their mitochondrion and
apicoplast. In this study, we systematically targeted the five nuclear-encoded
sulfur utilization factors (SUF) of the apicoplast [Fe-S] cluster biosynthesis
pathway by experimental genetics in the murine malaria model parasite Plasmodium 
berghei. We show that four SUFs, namely SUFC, D, E, and S are refractory to
targeted gene deletion, validating them as potential targets for antimalarial
drug development. We achieved targeted deletion of SUFA, which encodes a
potential [Fe-S] transfer protein, indicative of a dispensable role during
asexual blood stage growth in vivo. Furthermore, no abnormalities were observed
during Plasmodium life cycle progression in the insect and mammalian hosts.
Fusion of a fluorescent tag to the endogenous P. berghei SUFs demonstrated that
all loci were accessible to genetic modification and that all five tagged SUFs
localize to the apicoplast. Together, our experimental genetics analysis
identifies the key components of the SUF [Fe-S] cluster biosynthesis pathway in
the apicoplast of a malarial parasite and shows that absence of SUFC, D, E, or S 
is incompatible with Plasmodium blood infection in vivo.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089718 
PMCID: PMC3931816
PMID: 24586983  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

