
1. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2014 Aug;84(2):158-68. doi: 10.1111/cbdd.12315. Epub 2014 May
12.

In silico characterization of an atypical MAPK phosphatase of Plasmodium
falciparum as a suitable target for drug discovery.

Campbell CO(1), Santiago DN, Guida WC, Manetsch R, Adams JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Health, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, 33612,
USA.

Plasmodium falciparum, the causative agent of malaria, contributes to significant
morbidity and mortality worldwide. Forward genetic analysis of the blood-stage
asexual cycle identified the putative phosphatase from PF3D7_1305500 as an
important element of intraerythrocytic development expressed throughout the life 
cycle. Our preliminary evaluation identified it as an atypical mitogen-activated 
protein kinase phosphatase. Additional bioinformatic analysis delineated a
conserved signature motif and three residues with potential importance to
functional activity of the atypical dual-specificity phosphatase domain. A
homology model of the dual-specificity phosphatase domain was developed for use
in high-throughput in silico screening of the available library of antimalarial
compounds from ChEMBL-NTD. Seven compounds from this set with predicted affinity 
to the active site were tested against in vitro cultures, and three had reduced
activity against a ∆PF3D7_1305500 parasite, suggesting PF3D7_1305500 is a
potential target of the selected compounds. Identification of these compounds
provides a novel starting point for a structure-based drug discovery strategy
that moves us closer toward the discovery of new classes of clinical antimalarial
drugs. These data suggest that mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatases
represent a potentially new class of P. falciparum drug target.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/cbdd.12315 
PMCID: PMC4497549
PMID: 24605883  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

