
1. J Lipid Res. 2014 May;55(5):929-38. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M048017. Epub 2014 Mar 13.

Genome profiling of sterol synthesis shows convergent evolution in parasites and 
guides chemotherapeutic attack.

Fügi MA(1), Gunasekera K, Ochsenreiter T, Guan X, Wenk MR, Mäser P.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

Sterols are an essential class of lipids in eukaryotes, where they serve as
structural components of membranes and play important roles as signaling
molecules. Sterols are also of high pharmacological significance:
cholesterol-lowering drugs are blockbusters in human health, and inhibitors of
ergosterol biosynthesis are widely used as antifungals. Inhibitors of ergosterol 
synthesis are also being developed for Chagas's disease, caused by Trypanosoma
cruzi. Here we develop an in silico pipeline to globally evaluate sterol
metabolism and perform comparative genomics. We generate a library of hidden
Markov model-based profiles for 42 sterol biosynthetic enzymes, which allows
expressing the genomic makeup of a given species as a numerical vector.
Hierarchical clustering of these vectors functionally groups eukaryote proteomes 
and reveals convergent evolution, in particular metabolic reduction in obligate
endoparasites. We experimentally explore sterol metabolism by testing a set of
sterol biosynthesis inhibitors against trypanosomatids, Plasmodium falciparum,
Giardia, and mammalian cells, and by quantifying the expression levels of sterol 
biosynthetic genes during the different life stages of T. cruzi and Trypanosoma
brucei. The phenotypic data correlate with genomic makeup for simvastatin, which 
showed activity against trypanosomatids. Other findings, such as the activity of 
terbinafine against Giardia, are not in agreement with the genotypic profile.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.M048017 
PMCID: PMC3995470
PMID: 24627128  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

