
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2014 Jun;90(6):1133-4. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.14-0050. Epub 2014
Apr 7.

No association of the p53 codon 72 polymorphism with malaria in Ghanaian
primiparae and Rwandan children.

Gai PP(1), Meese S(1), Bedu-Addo G(1), Gahutu JB(1), Mockenhaupt FP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tropical Medicine and International Health,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Department of Medicine,
Komfo Anoyke Teaching Hospital, School of Medical Sciences, Kwame Nkrumah
University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana; University Teaching Hospital
of Butare, School of Medicine, University of Rwanda, Huye, Rwanda.
(2)Institute of Tropical Medicine and International Health,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Department of Medicine,
Komfo Anoyke Teaching Hospital, School of Medical Sciences, Kwame Nkrumah
University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana; University Teaching Hospital
of Butare, School of Medicine, University of Rwanda, Huye, Rwanda
frank.mockenhaupt@charite.de.

The p53 protein is a key cell-signaling mediator integrating host responses to
various types of stress. A common polymorphism of the encoding TP53 gene (codon
72, Pro > Arg, rs1042522) is associated with susceptibility to virus-related and 
other cancers. The p53 has also been shown to be central for successful
Plasmodium liver stage infection. We examined whether the polymorphism is
associated with P. falciparum infection in Ghanaian primiparae and Rwandan
children. The allele frequency of TP53 codon 72 Arg was 0.30 among 314 Ghanaian
primiparae and 0.31 among 545 Rwandan children, respectively, and it was not
associated with infection prevalence or parasite density. This does not exclude
p53 to be of pathophysiological relevance in malaria but argues against a major
respective role of the TP53 codon 72 polymorphism.

© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.14-0050 
PMCID: PMC4047741
PMID: 24710610  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

