
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014 Jul;58(7):3737-43. doi: 10.1128/AAC.02472-14.
Epub 2014 Apr 21.

Polymorphisms in Pfmdr1, Pfcrt, and Pfnhe1 genes are associated with reduced in
vitro activities of quinine in Plasmodium falciparum isolates from western Kenya.

Cheruiyot J(1), Ingasia LA(2), Omondi AA(1), Juma DW(2), Opot BH(2), Ndegwa
JM(1), Mativo J(2), Cheruiyot AC(1), Yeda R(2), Okudo C(2), Muiruri P(2), Bidii
NS(2), Chebon LJ(2), Angienda PO(3), Eyase FL(2), Johnson JD(2), Bulimo WD(2),
Andagalu B(2), Akala HM(2), Kamau E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Global Emerging Infections Surveillance Program, United States Army Medical
Research Unit-Kenya, Kenya Medical Research Institute-Walter Reed Project, Kisumu
and Nairobi, Kenya School of Biological/Physical Sciences, Department of Zoology,
Maseno University, Maseno, Kenya.
(2)Global Emerging Infections Surveillance Program, United States Army Medical
Research Unit-Kenya, Kenya Medical Research Institute-Walter Reed Project, Kisumu
and Nairobi, Kenya.
(3)School of Biological/Physical Sciences, Department of Zoology, Maseno
University, Maseno, Kenya.
(4)Global Emerging Infections Surveillance Program, United States Army Medical
Research Unit-Kenya, Kenya Medical Research Institute-Walter Reed Project, Kisumu
and Nairobi, Kenya Edwin.Kamau@us.army.mil.

In combination with antibiotics, quinine is recommended as the second-line
treatment for uncomplicated malaria, an alternative first-line treatment for
severe malaria, and for treatment of malaria in the first trimester of pregnancy.
Quinine has been shown to have frequent clinical failures, and yet the mechanisms
of action and resistance have not been fully elucidated. However, resistance is
linked to polymorphisms in multiple genes, including multidrug resistance 1
(Pfmdr1), the chloroquine resistance transporter (Pfcrt), and the sodium/hydrogen
exchanger gene (Pfnhe1). Here, we investigated the association between in vitro
quinine susceptibility and genetic polymorphisms in Pfmdr1codons 86 and 184,
Pfcrt codon 76, and Pfnhe1 ms4760 in 88 field isolates from western Kenya. In
vitro activity was assessed based on the drug concentration that inhibited 50% of
parasite growth (the IC50), and parasite genetic polymorphisms were determined
from DNA sequencing. Data revealed there were significant associations between
polymorphism in Pfmdr1-86Y, Pfmdr1-184F, or Pfcrt-76T and quinine susceptibility 
(P < 0.0001 for all three associations). Eighty-two percent of parasites
resistant to quinine carried mutant alleles at these codons (Pfmdr1-86Y,
Pfmdr1-184F, and Pfcrt-76T), whereas 74% of parasites susceptible to quinine
carried the wild-type allele (Pfmdr1-N86, Pfmdr1-Y184, and Pfcrt-K76,
respectively). In addition, quinine IC50 values for parasites with Pfnhe1 ms4760 
3 DNNND repeats were significantly higher than for those with 1 or 2 repeats (P =
0.033 and P = 0.0043, respectively). Clinical efficacy studies are now required
to confirm the validity of these markers and the importance of parasite genetic
background.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02472-14 
PMCID: PMC4068580
PMID: 24752268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

