
1. PLoS One. 2014 May 7;9(5):e96923. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096923. eCollection 
2014.

Development of a transgenic Plasmodium berghei line (Pb pfpkg) expressing the P. 
falciparum cGMP-dependent protein kinase, a novel antimalarial drug target.

Tewari R(1), Patzewitz EM(1), Poulin B(1), Stewart L(2), Baker DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genetics and Genomics, School of Life Sciences, Queens Medical
Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Pathogen Molecular Biology, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

With the inevitable selection of resistance to antimalarial drugs in treated
populations, there is a need for new medicines to enter the clinic and new
targets to progress through the drug discovery pipeline. In this study we set out
to develop a transgenic rodent model for testing inhibitors of the Plasmodium
falciparum cyclic GMP-dependent kinase in vivo. A model was needed that would
allow us to investigate whether differences in amino acid sequence of this enzyme
between species influences in vivo efficacy. Here we report the successful
development of a transgenic P. berghei line in which the cyclic GMP-dependent
protein kinase (PKG) was replaced by the P. falciparum orthologue. We demonstrate
that the P. falciparum orthologue was able to functionally complement the
endogenous P. berghei pkg gene throughout blood stage development and early
sexual development. However, subsequent development in the mosquito was severely 
compromised. We show that this is due to a defect in the female lineage of the
transgenic by using genetic crosses with both male and female deficient P.
berghei lines. This defect could be due to expression of a female-specific target
in the mosquito stages of P. berghei that cannot be phosphorylated by the P.
falciparum kinase. Using a previously reported anti-coccidial inhibitor of the
cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase, we show no difference in in vivo efficacy
between the transgenic and control P. berghei lines. This in vivo model will be
useful for screening future generations of cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase
inhibitors and allowing us to overcome any species-specific differences in the
enzyme primary sequence that would influence in vivo efficacy in the rodent
model. The approach will also be applicable to in vivo testing of other
antimalarial compounds where the target is known.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096923 
PMCID: PMC4013051
PMID: 24805991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

