
1. PLoS One. 2014 May 20;9(5):e97557. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097557. eCollection
2014.

First steps towards underdominant genetic transformation of insect populations.

Reeves RG(1), Bryk J(1), Altrock PM(2), Denton JA(1), Reed FA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Biology, Plön, Germany.
(2)Department of Evolutionary Theory, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Biology, Plön, Germany.

The idea of introducing genetic modifications into wild populations of insects to
stop them from spreading diseases is more than 40 years old. Synthetic disease
refractory genes have been successfully generated for mosquito vectors of dengue 
fever and human malaria. Equally important is the development of population
transformation systems to drive and maintain disease refractory genes at high
frequency in populations. We demonstrate an underdominant population
transformation system in Drosophila melanogaster that has the property of being
both spatially self-limiting and reversible to the original genetic state. Both
population transformation and its reversal can be largely achieved within as few 
as 5 generations. The described genetic construct {Ud} is composed of two genes; 
(1) a UAS-RpL14.dsRNA targeting RNAi to a haploinsufficient gene RpL14 and (2) an
RNAi insensitive RpL14 rescue. In this proof-of-principle system the
UAS-RpL14.dsRNA knock-down gene is placed under the control of an Actin5c-GAL4
driver located on a different chromosome to the {Ud} insert. This configuration
would not be effective in wild populations without incorporating the Actin5c-GAL4
driver as part of the {Ud} construct (or replacing the UAS promoter with an
appropriate direct promoter). It is however anticipated that the approach that
underlies this underdominant system could potentially be applied to a number of
species.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097557 
PMCID: PMC4028297
PMID: 24844466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

