
1. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:869401. doi: 10.1155/2014/869401. Epub 2014 Apr 27.

Role of calcium signaling in the transcriptional regulation of the apicoplast
genome of Plasmodium falciparum.

Cheemadan S(1), Ramadoss R(1), Bozdech Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang
Drive, Singapore 637551.

Calcium is a universal second messenger that plays an important role in
regulatory processes in eukaryotic cells. To understand calcium-dependent
signaling in malaria parasites, we analyzed transcriptional responses of
Plasmodium falciparum to two calcium ionophores (A23187 and ionomycin) that cause
redistribution of intracellular calcium within the cytoplasm. While ionomycin
induced a specific transcriptional response defined by up- or downregulation of a
narrow set of genes, A23187 caused a developmental arrest in the schizont stage. 
In addition, we observed a dramatic decrease of mRNA levels of the transcripts
encoded by the apicoplast genome during the exposure of P. falciparum to both
calcium ionophores. Neither of the ionophores caused any disruptions to the DNA
replication or the overall apicoplast morphology. This suggests that the mRNA
downregulation reflects direct inhibition of the apicoplast gene transcription.
Next, we identify a nuclear encoded protein with a calcium binding domain
(EF-hand) that is localized to the apicoplast. Overexpression of this protein
(termed PfACBP1) in P. falciparum cells mediates an increased resistance to the
ionophores which suggests its role in calcium-dependent signaling within the
apicoplast. Our data indicate that the P. falciparum apicoplast requires
calcium-dependent signaling that involves a novel protein PfACBP1.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/869401 
PMCID: PMC4022301
PMID: 24877144  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

