
1. Malar J. 2014 Jul 9;13:262. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-262.

Genetic diversity and population structure of Plasmodium vivax in Central China.

Liu Y, Auburn S, Cao J, Trimarsanto H, Zhou H, Gray KA, Clark TG, Price RN, Cheng
Q, Huang R(1), Gao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, People's Republic of
China. hruisdm@163.com.

BACKGROUND: In Central China the declining incidence of Plasmodium vivax has been
interrupted by epidemic expansions and imported cases. The impact of these
changes on the local parasite population, and concurrent risks of future
resurgence, was assessed.
METHODS: Plasmodium vivax isolates collected from Anhui and Jiangsu provinces,
Central China between 2007 and 2010 were genotyped using capillary
electrophoresis at seven polymorphic short tandem repeat markers. Spatial and
temporal analyses of within-host and population diversity, population structure, 
and relatedness were conducted on these isolates.
RESULTS: Polyclonal infections were infrequent in the 94 isolates from Anhui (4%)
and 25 from Jiangsu (12%), with a trend for increasing frequency from 2008 to
2010 (2 to 19%) when combined. Population diversity was high in both provinces
and across the years tested (H(E) = 0.8 - 0.85). Differentiation between Anhui
and Jiangsu was modest (F'(ST) = 0.1). Several clusters of isolates with
identical multi-locus haplotypes were observed across both Anhui and Jiangsu.
Linkage disequilibrium was strong in both populations and in each year tested
(I(A)(S) = 0.2 - 0.4), but declined two- to four-fold when identical haplotypes
were accounted for, indicative of occasional epidemic transmission dynamics. None
of five imported isolates shared identical haplotypes to any of the central
Chinese isolates.
CONCLUSIONS: The population genetic structure of P. vivax in Central China
highlights unstable transmission, with limited barriers to gene flow between the 
central provinces. Despite low endemicity, population diversity remained high,
but the reservoirs sustaining this diversity remain unclear. The challenge of
imported cases and risks of resurgence emphasize the need for continued
surveillance to detect early warning signals. Although parasite genotyping has
potential to inform the management of outbreaks, further studies are required to 
identify suitable marker panels for resolving local from imported P. vivax
isolates.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-262 
PMCID: PMC4094906
PMID: 25008859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

