
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 5;289(36):24885-97. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.554519. Epub 2014
Jul 17.

Innexin AGAP001476 is critical for mediating anti-Plasmodium responses in
Anopheles mosquitoes.

Li MW(1), Wang J(2), Zhao YO(3), Fikrig E(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520 and the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland 20815 wingmanmichelle.li@yale.edu.
(2)From the Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520 and.
(3)From the Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520 and the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland 20815.

The Toll and IMD pathways are known to be induced upon Plasmodium berghei and
Plasmodium falciparum infection, respectively. It is unclear how Plasmodium or
other pathogens in the blood meal and their invasion of the midgut epithelium
would trigger the innate immune responses in immune cells, in particular
hemocytes. Gap junctions, which can mediate both cell-to-cell and
cell-to-extracellular communication, may participate in this signal transduction.
This study examined whether innexins, gap junction proteins in insects, are
involved in anti-Plasmodium responses in Anopheles gambiae. Inhibitor studies
using carbenoxolone indicated that blocking innexons resulted in an increase in
Plasmodium oocyst number and infection prevalence. This was accompanied by a
decline in TEP1 levels in carbenoxolone-treated mosquitoes. Innexin AGAP001476
mRNA levels in midguts were induced during Plasmodium infection and a knockdown
of AGAP001476, but not AGAP006241, caused an induction in oocyst number.
Silencing AGAP001476 caused a concurrent increase in vitellogenin levels, a TEP1 
inhibitor, in addition to a reduced level of TEP1-LRIM1-APL1C complex in
hemolymph. Both vitellogenin and TEP1 are regulated by Cactus under the Toll
pathway. Simultaneous knockdown of cactus and AGAP001476 failed to reverse the
near refractoriness induced by the knockdown of cactus, suggesting that the
AGAP001476-mediated anti-Plasmodium response is Cactus-dependent. These data
demonstrate a critical role for innexin AGAP001476 in mediating innate immune
responses against Plasmodium through Toll pathway in mosquitoes.

Â© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.554519 
PMCID: PMC4155657
PMID: 25035430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

