
1. Parasitol Int. 2014 Dec;63(6):794-801. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2014.07.013. Epub
2014 Aug 4.

Expression and localization of rhoptry neck protein 5 in merozoites and
sporozoites of Plasmodium yoelii.

Mutungi JK(1), Yahata K(2), Sakaguchi M(3), Kaneko O(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Protozoology, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN), Nagasaki 
University, Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan; Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Nagasaki University, Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan. Electronic
address: joemutungi@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Protozoology, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN), Nagasaki 
University, Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan. Electronic address:
kyahata@nagasaki-u.ac.jp.
(3)Central Laboratory, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN), Nagasaki
University, Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan. Electronic address:
miako@nagasaki-u.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Protozoology, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN), Nagasaki 
University, Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan. Electronic address:
okaneko@nagasaki-u.ac.jp.

Host cell invasion by Apicomplexan parasites marks a crucial step in disease
establishment and pathogenesis. The moving junction (MJ) is a conserved and
essential feature among parasites of this phylum during host cell invasion, thus 
proteins that associate at this MJ are potential targets of drug and vaccine
development. In both Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium falciparum, a micronemal
protein, Apical Membrane Antigen 1 (AMA1), and Rhoptry Neck proteins (RONs; RON2 
and RON4) form an essential complex at the MJ. A new RON member, RON5, was shown 
to be important to stabilize RON2 during development and to associate with the MJ
complex in T. gondii and also to be immunoprecipitated by anti-AMA1 antibody in
P. falciparum. However, the detailed molecular nature of RON5 in Plasmodium is
not well understood. In this study, Plasmodium yoelii RON5 gene (pyron5) was
identified as an ortholog of P. falciparum and Plasmodium berghei ron5. The
pyron5 exon-intron structure was validated by comparing genomic DNA sequences and
experimentally determining full-length complementary DNA sequence. PyRON5 was
detected in water-insoluble fractions but no reliable transmembrane domain(s)
were predicted by transmembrane prediction algorithms. PyRON5 formed a complex
with PyRON4, PyRON2, and PyAMA1 in late schizont protein extract. Taken together,
we infer that these results suggest that PyRON5 associates with membrane
indirectly via other MJ components. Indirect immunofluorescence assay and
immunoelectron microscopy localized PyRON5 at the rhoptry neck of the late
schizont merozoites and at the rhoptry of sporozoites. The two-stage expression
of PyRON5 suggests that PyRON5 plays roles in invasion not only of erythrocytes, 
but also of mosquito salivary glands and/or mammalian hepatocytes.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2014.07.013 
PMID: 25102354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

