
1. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:686319. doi: 10.1155/2014/686319. Epub 2014 Jul 14.

Mass spectrometry based proteomic analysis of salivary glands of urban malaria
vector Anopheles stephensi.

Vijay S(1), Rawat M(2), Sharma A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Protein Biochemistry and Structural Biology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Malaria Research (ICMR), Sector-8, Dwarka, New Delhi 110077, India.
(2)Protein Biochemistry and Structural Biology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Malaria Research (ICMR), Sector-8, Dwarka, New Delhi 110077, India ; Department
of Internal Medicine, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, Albuquerque,
NM 87106, USA.

Salivary gland proteins of Anopheles mosquitoes offer attractive targets to
understand interactions with sporozoites, blood feeding behavior, homeostasis,
and immunological evaluation of malaria vectors and parasite interactions. To
date limited studies have been carried out to elucidate salivary proteins of An. 
stephensi salivary glands. The aim of the present study was to provide detailed
analytical attributives of functional salivary gland proteins of urban malaria
vector An. stephensi. A proteomic approach combining one-dimensional
electrophoresis (1DE), ion trap liquid chromatography mass spectrometry
(LC/MS/MS), and computational bioinformatic analysis was adopted to provide the
first direct insight into identification and functional characterization of known
salivary proteins and novel salivary proteins of An. stephensi. Computational
studies by online servers, namely, MASCOT and OMSSA algorithms, identified a
total of 36 known salivary proteins and 123 novel proteins analysed by LC/MS/MS. 
This first report describes a baseline proteomic catalogue of 159 salivary
proteins belonging to various categories of signal transduction, regulation of
blood coagulation cascade, and various immune and energy pathways of An.
stephensi sialotranscriptome by mass spectrometry. Our results may serve as basis
to provide a putative functional role of proteins in concept of blood feeding,
biting behavior, and other aspects of vector-parasite host interactions for
parasite development in anopheline mosquitoes.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/686319 
PMCID: PMC4122192
PMID: 25126571  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

