
1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 18;9(8):e105201. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105201.
eCollection 2014.

Genome-wide prediction of the polymorphic Ser gene family in Tetrahymena
thermophila based on motif analysis.

Ponsuwanna P(1), KÃ¼mpornsin K(1), Chookajorn T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(2)Center of Excellence in Malaria, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Even though antigenic variation is employed among parasitic protozoa for host
immune evasion, Tetrahymena thermophila, a free-living ciliate, can also change
its surface protein antigens. These cysteine-rich glycosylphosphatidylinositol
(GPI)-linked surface proteins are encoded by a family of polymorphic Ser genes.
Despite the availability of T. thermophila genome, a comprehensive analysis of
the Ser family is limited by its high degree of polymorphism. In order to
overcome this problem, a new approach was adopted by searching for Ser candidates
with common motif sequences, namely length-specific repetitive cysteine pattern
and GPI anchor site. The candidate genes were phylogenetically compared with the 
previously identified Ser genes and classified into subtypes. Ser candidates were
often found to be located as tandem arrays of the same subtypes on several
chromosomal scaffolds. Certain Ser candidates located in the same chromosomal
arrays were transcriptionally expressed at specific T. thermophila developmental 
stages. These Ser candidates selected by the motif analysis approach can form the
foundation for a systematic identification of the entire Ser gene family, which
will contribute to the understanding of their function and the basis of T.
thermophila antigenic variation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105201 
PMCID: PMC4136848
PMID: 25133747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

