
1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 21;9(8):e105690. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105690.
eCollection 2014.

Polymorphisms in K13 and falcipain-2 associated with artemisinin resistance are
not prevalent in Plasmodium falciparum isolated from Ugandan children.

Conrad MD(1), Bigira V(2), Kapisi J(2), Muhindo M(2), Kamya MR(3), Havlir DV(1), 
Dorsey G(1), Rosenthal PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California, United States of America.
(2)Infectious Diseases Research Collaboration, Kampala, Uganda.
(3)Department of Medicine, Makerere University College of Health Sciences,
Kampala, Uganda.

The emergence of resistance to artemisinin derivatives in Southeast Asia,
manifested as delayed clearance of Plasmodium falciparum following treatment with
artemisinins, is a major concern. Recently, the artemisinin resistance phenotype 
was attributed to mutations in portions of a P. falciparum gene (PF3D7_1343700)
encoding kelch (K13) propeller domains, providing a molecular marker to monitor
the spread of resistance. The P. falciparum cysteine protease falcipain-2 (FP2;
PF3D7_1115700) has been shown to contribute to artemisinin action, as hemoglobin 
degradation is required for potent drug activity, and a stop mutation in the FP2 
gene was identified in parasites selected for artemisinin resistance. Although
delayed parasite clearance after artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) has 
not yet been noted in Uganda and ACTs remain highly efficacious, characterizing
the diversity of these genes is important to assess the potential for resistance 
selection and to provide a baseline for future surveillance. We therefore
sequenced the K13-propeller domain and FP2 gene in P. falciparum isolates from
children previously treated with ACT in Uganda, including samples from 2006-7
(n = 49) and from 2010-12 (n = 175). Using 3D7 as the reference genome, we
identified 5 non-synonymous polymorphisms in the K13-propeller domain (133
isolates) and 35 in FP2 (160 isolates); these did not include the polymorphisms
recently associated with resistance after in vitro selection or identified in
isolates from Asia. The prevalence of K13-propeller and FP2 polymorphisms did not
increase over time, and was not associated with either time since prior receipt
of an ACT or the persistence of parasites ≥2 days following treatment with an
ACT. Thus, the K13-propeller and FP2 polymorphisms associated with artemisinin
resistance are not prevalent in Uganda, and we did not see evidence for selection
of polymorphisms in these genes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105690 
PMCID: PMC4140830
PMID: 25144768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

