
1. BMC Genomics. 2014 Aug 26;15:719. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-719.

A microarray platform and novel SNP calling algorithm to evaluate Plasmodium
falciparum field samples of low DNA quantity.

Jacob CG, Tan JC, Miller BA, Tan A, Takala-Harrison S, Ferdig MT, Plowe CV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Group, Howard Hughes Medical Institute / Center for Vaccine
Development, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
cplowe@medicine.umaryland.edu.

BACKGROUND: Analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) derived from
whole-genome studies allows for rapid evaluation of genome-wide diversity, and
genomic epidemiology studies of Plasmodium falciparum provide insights into
parasite population structure, gene flow, drug resistance and vaccine
development. In areas with adequate cold chain facilities, large volumes of
leukocyte-depleted patient blood can be frozen for use in parasite genomic
analyses. In more remote endemic areas smaller volumes of infected blood are
taken by finger prick, and dried and stored on filter paper. These dried blood
spots do not generally yield enough concentrated parasite DNA for whole-genome
sequencing.
RESULTS: A DNA microarray was designed for use on field samples to type a
genome-wide set of SNPs which prior sequencing had shown to be variable in
Africa, Southeast Asia, and Papua New Guinea. An algorithm was designed to call
SNPs in samples with low parasite DNA. With this new algorithm SNP-calling
accuracy of 98% was measured by hybridizing purified DNA from malaria lab strains
and comparing calls with SNPs called from full genome sequences. An average
accuracy of >98% was likewise obtained for DNA extracted from malaria field
samples collected in studies in Southeast Asia, with an average call rate of >
82%.
CONCLUSION: This new high-density microarray provided high quality SNP calls from
a wide range of parasite DNA quantities, and represents a robust tool for
genome-wide analysis of malaria parasites in diverse settings.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-719 
PMCID: PMC4153902
PMID: 25159520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

