
1. Innate Immun. 2015 Jul;21(5):463-76. doi: 10.1177/1753425914547744. Epub 2014 Sep
7.

Tracing evolutionary relicts of positive selection on eight malaria-related
immune genes in mammals.

Huang BH(1), Liao PC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan,
Republic of China.
(2)Department of Life Science, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan,
Republic of China pcliao@ntnu.edu.tw.

Plasmodium-induced malaria widely infects primates and other mammals. Multiple
past studies have revealed that positive selection could be the main evolutionary
force triggering the genetic diversity of anti-malaria resistance-associated
genes in human or primates. However, researchers focused most of their attention 
on the infra-generic and intra-specific genome evolution rather than analyzing
the complete evolutionary history of mammals. Here we extend previous research by
testing the evolutionary link of natural selection on eight candidate genes
associated with malaria resistance in mammals. Three of the eight genes were
detected to be affected by recombination, including TNF-α, iNOS and DARC.
Positive selection was detected in the rest five immunogenes multiple times in
different ancestral lineages of extant species throughout the mammalian
evolution. Signals of positive selection were exposed in four malaria-related
immunogenes in primates: CCL2, IL-10, HO1 and CD36. However, selection signals of
G6PD have only been detected in non-primate eutherians. Significantly higher
evolutionary rates and more radical amino acid replacement were also detected in 
primate CD36, suggesting its functional divergence from other eutherians.
Prevalent positive selection throughout the evolutionary trajectory of mammalian 
malaria-related genes supports the arms race evolutionary hypothesis of host
genetic response of mammalian immunogenes to infectious pathogens.

© The Author(s) 2014 Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav.

DOI: 10.1177/1753425914547744 
PMID: 25201904  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

