
1. Malar J. 2014 Sep 23;13:379. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-379.

Development and application of an AllGlo probe-based qPCR assay for detecting
knockdown resistance (kdr) mutations in Anopheles sinensis.

Bai L, Zhu GD, Zhou HY, Tang JX, Li JL, Xu S, Zhang MH, Yao LN, Huang GQ, Wang
YB, Zhang HW, Wang SB, Cao J(1), Gao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Parasitic Disease Control and Prevention (Ministry of
Health), and Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory of Parasite Molecular Biology,
Jiangsu Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Wuxi, Jiangsu Province, People's
Republic of China. caojuncn@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles sinensis is one of the most important malaria vectors in
China and other Southeast Asian countries. High levels of resistance have been
reported in this species due to the long-term use of insecticides, especially
pyrethroids, for public health and agricultural purposes. Knockdown resistance
(kdr) caused by a single base pair mutation in the gene encoding the sodium
channel is strongly associated with pyrethroid insecticide resistance in many
Anopheles mosquitoes. There are few methods currently available for detecting kdr
mutations in An. sinensis.
METHODS: A novel AllGlo probe-based qPCR (AllGlo-qPCR) method was developed to
screen for the predominant kdr mutations in An. sinensis mosquitoes from the
Jiangsu Province. The results from AllGlo-qPCR, allele-specific PCR (AS-PCR), and
TaqMan-MGB probe-based qPCR (TaqMan-qPCR) were compared. A comparative analysis
of the equipment required, ease of use and cost of the available methods was also
performed. Finally, the AllGlo-qPCR method was used to detect the frequencies of 
kdr mutations from the other four provinces in central China.
RESULTS: Six kdr genotypes were detected in An. sinensis from the Jiangsu
Province by DNA sequencing. The AllGlo-qPCR method detected all of the kdr
genotypes with a high level of accuracy (97% sensitivity and 98% specificity).
AllGlo-qPCR correctly determined the kdr genotypes of 98.73% of 158 An. sinensis 
samples, whereas TaqMan-qPCR and AS-PCR correctly identified 96.84% and 88.61% of
mutations, respectively. Furthermore, the AllGlo-qPCR method is simpler to
perform, requires less equipment, and exhibits a moderate expense cost comparing 
with the other tested methods of kdr mutation detection. Samples collected from
four of the other provinces in central China showed a high frequency of kdr
mutation in An. sinensis, as detected by the established AllGlo-qPCR method.
CONCLUSION: The novel AllGlo-qPCR method developed for kdr mutation detection in 
An. sinensis exhibits greater specificity and sensitivity than currently
available methods and is more cost-effective; therefore, it represents a useful
tool for entomological surveillance.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-379 
PMCID: PMC4182860
PMID: 25245258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

