
1. Chem Senses. 2014 Nov;39(9):761-9. doi: 10.1093/chemse/bju048. Epub 2014 Sep 30.

A determinant of odorant specificity is located at the extracellular loop
2-transmembrane domain 4 interface of an Anopheles gambiae odorant receptor
subunit.

Hughes DT(1), Wang G(2), Zwiebel LJ(3), Luetje CW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33101, USA and Present address: University of
Colorado School of Medicine, 13001 E. 17th Place, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232,
USA Present address: State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and
Insect Pests, Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232,
USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33101, USA and cluetje@med.miami.edu.

To explore the structural basis for odorant specificity in odorant receptors of
the human malaria vector mosquito, Anopheles gambiae, odorant-binding subunits
(Agam\Ors) expressed in Xenopus oocytes in combination with Agam\Orco (coreceptor
subunit) were assayed by 2-electrode voltage clamp against 25 structurally
related odorants. Agam\Or13 and Agam\Or15 display 82% amino acid identity and had
similar, but somewhat distinct odorant response profiles. The ratio of
acetophenone to 4-methylphenol responses was used in a mutation-based analysis of
Agam\Or15, interchanging 37 disparate residues between Agam\Or15 and Agam\Or13.
Eleven mutations caused significant changes in odorant responsiveness. Mutation
of alanine 195 resulted in the largest shift in response ratio from Agam\Or15
toward Agam\Or13. Concentration-response analysis for a series of mutations of
residue 195 revealed a large effect on acetophenone sensitivity, with EC50 values
varying by >1800-fold and correlating with residue side chain length. Similar
results were obtained for propiophenone and benzaldehyde. But, for other
odorants, such as 4-methylphenol, 4-methylbenzaldehyde, and
4-methylpropiophenone, the effect of mutation was much smaller (EC50 values
varied by ≤16-fold). These results show that alanine 195, putatively located at
the second extracellular loop/fourth transmembrane domain interface, plays a
critical role in determining the odorant response specificity of Agam\Or15.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/chemse/bju048 
PMCID: PMC4201304
PMID: 25270378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

