
1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 20;9(10):e111344. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111344.
eCollection 2014.

A multicopper oxidase-related protein is essential for insect viability,
longevity and ovary development.

Peng Z(1), Green PG(2), Arakane Y(1), Kanost MR(1), Gorman MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Kansas State University, 
Manhattan, Kansas, United States of America.
(2)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of California
Davis, Davis, California, United States of America.

Typical multicopper oxidases (MCOs) have ten conserved histidines and one
conserved cysteine that coordinate four copper atoms. These copper ions are
required for oxidase activity. During our studies of insect MCOs, we discovered a
gene that we named multicopper oxidase-related protein (MCORP). MCORPs share
sequence similarity with MCOs, but lack many of the copper-coordinating residues.
We identified MCORP orthologs in many insect species, but not in other
invertebrates or vertebrates. We predicted that MCORPs would lack oxidase
activity due to the absence of copper-coordinating residues. To test this
prediction, we purified recombinant Tribolium castaneum (red flour beetle) MCORP 
and analyzed its enzymatic activity using a variety of substrates. As expected,
no oxidase activity was detected. To study MCORP function in vivo, we analyzed
expression profiles of TcMCORP and Anopheles gambiae (African malaria mosquito)
MCORP, and assessed RNAi-mediated knockdown phenotypes. We found that both MCORPs
are constitutively expressed at a low level in all of the tissues we analyzed.
Injection of TcMCORP dsRNA into larvae resulted in 100% mortality prior to adult 
eclosion, with death occurring mainly during the pharate pupal stage or late
pharate adult stage. Injection of TcMCORP dsRNA into pharate pupae resulted in
the death of approximately 20% of the treated insects during the pupal to adult
transition and a greatly shortened life span for the remaining insects. In
addition, knockdown of TcMCORP in females prevented oocyte maturation and, thus, 
greatly decreased the number of eggs laid. These results indicate that TcMCORP is
an essential gene and that its function is required for reproduction. An
understanding of the role MCORP plays in insect physiology may help to develop
new strategies for controlling insect pests.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111344 
PMCID: PMC4203857
PMID: 25330116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

