
1. Parasitology. 2015 Apr;142(4):612-22. doi: 10.1017/S0031182014001668. Epub 2014
Oct 29.

Differential patterns of molecular evolution among Haemosporidian parasite
groups.

Outlaw RK(1), Counterman B(1), Outlaw DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences,Mississippi State University,Mississippi
State,Mississippi 39762,USA.

Malaria parasites have had profound effects on human populations for millennia,
but other terrestrial vertebrates are impacted by malaria as well. Entire species
of birds have been driven to extinction, and many others are threatened by
population declines. Recent studies have shown that host-switching is quite
common among malaria parasite lineages, and these switches often involve a
significant shift in the environment in which the parasites find themselves,
including nucleated vs non-nucleated red blood cells and red vs white blood
cells. Therefore, it is important to understand how parasites adapt to these
different host environments. The mitochondrial cytochrome b (cyt b) gene shows
evidence of adaptive molecular evolution among malaria parasite groups,
putatively because of its critical role in the electron transport chain (ETC) in 
cellular metabolism. Two hypotheses were addressed here: (1) mitochondrial
components of the ETC (cyt b and cytochrome oxidase 1 [COI]) should show evidence
of adaptive evolution (i.e., selection) and (2) selection should be evident in
host switches. Overall we found a signature of constraint (e.g., purifying
selection) across the four genes included here, but we also found evidence of
positive selection associated with host switches in cyt b and, surprisingly, in
(apicoplast) caseinolytic protease C. These results suggest that evidence of
selection should be widespread across these parasite genomes.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182014001668 
PMID: 25351897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

