
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Jan;59(1):437-43. doi: 10.1128/AAC.04181-14.
Epub 2014 Nov 3.

Efficacy of artemether-lumefantrine and dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine for
treatment of uncomplicated malaria in children in Zaire and Uíge Provinces,
angola.

Plucinski MM(1), Talundzic E(2), Morton L(2), Dimbu PR(3), Macaia AP(4), Fortes
F(3), Goldman I(2), Lucchi N(2), Stennies G(2), MacArthur JR(2), Udhayakumar
V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Branch and President's Malaria Initiative, Division of Parasitic
Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global Health, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA Epidemic Intelligence Service, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA mplucinski@cdc.gov.
(2)Malaria Branch and President's Malaria Initiative, Division of Parasitic
Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global Health, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)National Malaria Control Program, Ministry of Health, Luanda, Angola.
(4)Field Epidemiology and Laboratory Training Program, Ministry of Health,
Luanda, Angola.

Comment in
    Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Sep;59(9):5865-6.
    Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Sep;59(9):5867-8.

The development of resistance to antimalarials is a major challenge for global
malaria control. Artemisinin-based combination therapies, the newest class of
antimalarials, are used worldwide but there have been reports of artemisinin
resistance in Southeast Asia. In February through May 2013, we conducted
open-label, nonrandomized therapeutic efficacy studies of artemether-lumefantrine
(AL) and dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (DP) in Zaire and Uíge Provinces in
northern Angola. The parasitological and clinical responses to treatment in
children with uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum monoinfection were measured
over 28 days, and the main outcome was a PCR-corrected adequate clinical and
parasitological response (ACPR) proportion on day 28. Parasites from treatment
failures were analyzed for the presence of putative molecular markers of
resistance to lumefantrine and artemisinins, including the recently identified
mutations in the K13 propeller gene. In the 320 children finishing the study, 25 
treatment failures were observed: 24 in the AL arms and 1 in the DP arm. The
PCR-corrected ACPR proportions on day 28 for AL were 88% (95% confidence interval
[CI], 78 to 95%) in Zaire and 97% (91 to 100%) in Uíge. For DP, the proportions
were 100% (95 to 100%) in Zaire, and 100% (96 to 100%) in Uíge. None of the
treatment failures had molecular evidence of artemisinin resistance. In contrast,
91% of AL late-treatment failures had markers associated with lumefantrine
resistance on the day of failure. The absence of molecular markers for
artemisinin resistance and the observed efficacies of both drug combinations
suggest no evidence of artemisinin resistance in northern Angola. There is
evidence of increased lumefantrine resistance in Zaire, which should continue to 
be monitored.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.04181-14 
PMCID: PMC4291383
PMID: 25367912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

