
1. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 4;9(11):e112096. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112096.
eCollection 2014.

Vesicles bearing Toxoplasma apicoplast membrane proteins persist following loss
of the relict plastid or Golgi body disruption.

Bouchut A(1), Geiger JA(2), DeRocher AE(1), Parsons M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, WA, United States of America.
(2)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, WA, United States of America; 
Dept. of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States of
America.

Toxoplasma gondii and malaria parasites contain a unique and essential relict
plastid called the apicoplast. Most apicoplast proteins are encoded in the
nucleus and are transported to the organelle via the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). 
Three trafficking routes have been proposed for apicoplast membrane proteins: (i)
vesicular trafficking from the ER to the Golgi and then to the apicoplast, (ii)
contiguity between the ER membrane and the apicoplast allowing direct flow of
proteins, and (iii) vesicular transport directly from the ER to the apicoplast.
Previously, we identified a set of membrane proteins of the T. gondii apicoplast 
which were also detected in large vesicles near the organelle. Data presented
here show that the large vesicles bearing apicoplast membrane proteins are not
the major carriers of luminal proteins. The vesicles continue to appear in
parasites which have lost their plastid due to mis-segregation, indicating that
the vesicles are not derived from the apicoplast. To test for a role of the Golgi
body in vesicle formation, parasites were treated with brefeldin A or transiently
transfected with a dominant-negative mutant of Sar1, a GTPase required for ER to 
Golgi trafficking. The immunofluorescence patterns showed little change. These
findings were confirmed using stable transfectants, which expressed the toxic
dominant-negative sar1 following Cre-loxP mediated promoter juxtaposition. Our
data support the hypothesis that the large vesicles do not mediate the
trafficking of luminal proteins to the apicoplast. The results further show that 
the large vesicles bearing apicoplast membrane proteins continue to be observed
in the absence of Golgi and plastid function. These data raise the possibility
that the apicoplast proteome is generated by two novel ER to plastid trafficking 
pathways, plus the small set of proteins encoded by the apicoplast genome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112096 
PMCID: PMC4219833
PMID: 25369183  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

