
1. Malar J. 2014 Dec 3;13:470. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-470.

Mosquito Akirin as a potential antigen for malaria control.

da Costa M, Pinheiro-Silva R, Antunes S, Moreno-Cid JA, Cust√≥dio A, Villar M,
Silveira H, de la Fuente J, Domingos A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Rua da Junqueira 100, 1349-008
Lisbon, Portugal. adomingos@ihmt.unl.pt.

BACKGROUND: The control of vector-borne diseases is important to improve human
and animal health worldwide. Malaria is one of the world's deadliest diseases and
is caused by protozoan parasites of the genus Plasmodium, which are transmitted
by Anopheles spp. mosquitoes. Recent evidences using Subolesin (SUB) and Akirin
(AKR) vaccines showed a reduction in the survival and/or fertility of
blood-sucking ectoparasite vectors and the infection with vector-borne pathogens.
These experiments suggested the possibility of using AKR for malaria control.
METHODS: The role of AKR on Plasmodium berghei infection and on the fitness and
reproduction of the main malaria vector, Anopheles gambiae was characterized by
evaluating the effect of akr gene knockdown or vaccination with recombinant
mosquito AKR on parasite infection levels, fertility and mortality of female
mosquitoes.
RESULTS: Gene knockdown by RNA interference in mosquitoes suggested a role for
akr in mosquito survival and fertility. Vaccination with recombinant Aedes
albopictus AKR reduced parasite infection in mosquitoes fed on immunized mice
when compared to controls.
CONCLUSIONS: These results showed that recombinant AKR could be used to develop
vaccines for malaria control. If effective, AKR-based vaccines could be used to
immunize wildlife reservoir hosts and/or humans to reduce the risk of pathogen
transmission. However, these vaccines need to be evaluated under field conditions
to characterize their effect on vector populations and pathogen infection and
transmission.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-470 
PMCID: PMC4265507
PMID: 25472895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

