
1. Hemoglobin. 2015;39(1):1-8. doi: 10.3109/03630269.2014.985831. Epub 2014 Dec 19.

β-globin genes: mutation hot-spots in the global thalassemia belt.

Kumar R(1), Sagar C, Sharma D, Kishor P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Microbiology, Abhilashi Institute of Life
Sciences , Mandi, Himachal Pradesh , India.

The concurrence of malaria and hemoglobinopathies, observed in malaria endemic
regions, reflects the phenomenon of natural selection. Since the life cycle of
the malaria parasite has an erythrocytic stage, abnormalities in the red blood
cells (RBCs) hinder the parasite's survival in the human host. Hemoglobin (Hb)
variants affect the life span of RBCs and thus lower the chance of infection by
the parasite. While a change in just one of the Hb genes offers some protection
against malaria, change in both alleles results in β-thalassemia major (β-TM). A 
striking geographical heterogeneity of β-thalassemia (β-thal) has been observed. 
Moving from Mexico in the west to China towards the east, the spectrum of
mutations in the β-globin gene has been seen to vary. In the western end of the
thalassemia belt, defects in the first intervening sequence (IVS-I) and exon 2 of
the β-globin gene are more common, while on the eastern coast, IVS-II and exon 1 
are also vulnerable to mutations. The worldwide increase in the incidence of β-TM
mandates the need for efficient measures to reduce β-thal births, and the
geographical heterogeneity of β-thal alleles reduces the burden of genetic
testing of fetuses suspected of carrying a mutant allele. In the present review, 
the common mutations in the global thalassemia belt have been illustrated, and
the possible factors that affect the mutagenicity of sites have been discussed. A
biogeographic analysis that may provide insight into the non biological factors
influencing different loci in the β-globin gene in different geographical regions
is suggested.

DOI: 10.3109/03630269.2014.985831 
PMID: 25523871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

