
1. J Proteomics. 2015 Feb 6;115:157-76. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2014.12.010. Epub 2014 
Dec 27.

Plasmodium vivax trophozoite-stage proteomes.

Anderson DC(1), Lapp SA(2), Akinyi S(2), Meyer EV(2), Barnwell JW(3),
Korir-Morrison C(2), Galinski MR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer and Metabolism, SRI International, Harrisonburg, VA 22802,
United States. Electronic address: dave.anderson@sri.com.
(2)Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA 30329, United States.
(3)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30333, United States.
(4)Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA 30329, United States; Department of Medicine, Division of
Infectious Diseases, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322,
United States.

Plasmodium vivax is the causative infectious agent of 80-300 million annual cases
of malaria. Many aspects of this parasite's biology remain unknown. To further
elucidate the interaction of P. vivax with its Saimiri boliviensis host, we
obtained detailed proteomes of infected red blood cells, representing the
trophozoite-enriched stage of development. Data from two of three biological
replicate proteomes, emphasized here, were analyzed using five search engines,
which enhanced identifications and resulted in the most comprehensive P. vivax
proteomes to date, with 1375 P. vivax and 3209 S. boliviensis identified
proteins. Ribosome subunit proteins were noted for both P. vivax and S.
boliviensis, consistent with P. vivax's known reticulocyte host-cell specificity.
A majority of the host and pathogen proteins identified belong to specific
functional categories, and several parasite gene families, while 33% of the P.
vivax proteins have no reported function. Hemoglobin was significantly oxidized
in both proteomes, and additional protein oxidation and nitration was detected in
one of the two proteomes. Detailed analyses of these post-translational
modifications are presented. The proteins identified here significantly expand
the known P. vivax proteome and complexity of available host protein
functionality underlying the host-parasite interactive biology, and reveal
unsuspected oxidative modifications that may impact protein function.BIOLOGICAL
SIGNIFICANCE: Plasmodium vivax malaria is a serious neglected disease, causing an
estimated 80 to 300 million cases annually in 95 countries. Infection can result 
in significant morbidity and possible death. P. vivax, unlike the much
better-studied Plasmodium falciparum species, cannot be grown in long-term
culture, has a dormant form in the liver called the hypnozoite stage, has a
reticulocyte host-cell preference in the blood, and creates caveolae vesicle
complexes at the surface of the infected reticulocyte membranes. Studies of
stage-specific P. vivax expressed proteomes have been limited in scope and
focused mainly on pathogen proteins, thus limiting understanding of the biology
of this pathogen and its host interactions. Here three P. vivax proteomes are
reported from biological replicates based on purified trophozoite-infected
reticulocytes from different Saimiri boliviensis infections (the main non-human
primate experimental model for P. vivax biology and pathogenesis). An in-depth
analysis of two of the proteomes using 2D LC/MS/MS and multiple search engines
identified 1375 pathogen proteins and 3209 host proteins. Numerous functional
categories of both host and pathogen proteins were identified, including several 
known P. vivax protein family members (e.g., PHIST, eTRAMP and VIR), and 33% of
protein identifications were classified as hypothetical. Ribosome subunit
proteins were noted for both P. vivax and S. boliviensis, consistent with this
parasite species' known reticulocyte host-cell specificity. In two biological
replicates analyzed for post-translational modifications, hemoglobin was
extensively oxidized, and various other proteins were also oxidized or nitrated
in one of the two replicates. The cause of such protein modification remains to
be determined but could include oxidized heme and oxygen radicals released from
the infected red blood cell's parasite-induced acidic digestive vacuoles. In any 
case, the data suggests the presence of distinct infection-specific conditions
whereby both the pathogen and host infected red blood cell proteins may be
subject to significant oxidative stress.

Copyright Â© 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2014.12.010 
PMCID: PMC4436379
PMID: 25545414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

