
1. Folia Parasitol (Praha). 2014 Oct;61(5):385-93.

Genetic diversity and effect of natural selection at apical membrane antigen-1
(AMA-1) among Iranian Plasmodium vivax isolates.

Esmaeili Rastaghi AR(1), Nedaei F, Nahrevanian H, Hoseinkhan N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Pasteur Institute or Iran, Tehran, Iran.
aresmar40@yahoo.com

Apical membrane antigen-1 (AMA-1) of Plasmodium vivax Grassi et Feletti, 1890 is 
a promising malaria vaccine candidate. However, antigenic variation is a major
problem to design a universal malaria vaccine. Hence, detailed understanding of
the pvama-1 gene polymorphism can provide conductive information on this
potential vaccine component. Therefore, this study investigated the extent of
genetic polymorphisms at domain I (DI), DII and partial DIII of AMA-1 among
Iranian P. vivax isolates. Out of 107 blood samples, 92 were analysed based on
the quality of the sequencing data. The sequences were classified into 53
haplotypes. Amino acid changes were observed at 31 positions that 17 were located
at DI, 11 were at DII and the rest of them (3 positions) were at DIII. Thus,
codon polymorphisms at DI were found to be higher than DII. Also, five of these
polymorphic codons (D242E, T374P, S389R, Y391F, I395F) were novel and have not
been reported yet. Neutrality analysis by using the dN-dS difference (the
difference between the rate of non-synonymous and synonymous mutations) showed a 
negative diversifying selection at DI, DII and across the length of both domains.
The potential B-cell epitopes were found in 5 regions of the PvAMA-1 with 10
mutation sites (E145A, K188N, E189N/K/D, K190Q/E, P210S, E227V, D242E, R249H,
G253E, K352E), whereas only one mutation (G288E) has been detected in
intrinsically unstructured/disordered regions. Fixation index (Fst) estimation
between Iranian and Indian isolates (0.0131) indicated a significant low genetic 
differentiation. Distribution of the polymorphic sites and IURs mapped on a three
dimensional structure of PvAMA-1 showed that these regions were located at two
opposite faces of the molecule. In conclusion, the results have significant value
in the design and development of a malaria vaccine based on this antigen.


PMID: 25549495  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

