
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2015 Apr;108:48-53. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2015.01.003. Epub 2015
Jan 14.

Expression and biochemical characterization of a type I methionine aminopeptidase
of Plasmodium vivax.

Kang JM(1), Ju JW(2), Kim JY(2), Ju HL(1), Lee J(1), Lee KH(3), Lee WJ(2), Sohn
WM(1), Kim TS(4), Na BK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology and Tropical Medicine, and Institute of Health
Sciences, Gyeongsang National University School of Medicine, Jinju 660-751,
Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Malaria and Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Health,
Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Osong 363-951, Republic of
Korea.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Health Sciences and PMBBRC,
Gyeongsang National University School of Medicine, Jinju 660-751, Republic of
Korea.
(4)Department of Tropical Medicine, and Inha Research Institute for Medical
Sciences, Inha University School of Medicine, Incheon 400-712, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Parasitology and Tropical Medicine, and Institute of Health
Sciences, Gyeongsang National University School of Medicine, Jinju 660-751,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: bkna@gnu.ac.kr.

Methionine aminopeptidases (MetAPs), ubiquitous enzymes that play an important
role in nascent protein maturation, have been recognized as attractive targets
for the development of drugs against pathogenic protozoa including Plasmodium
spp. Here, we characterized partial biochemical properties of a type I MetAP of
Plasmodium vivax (PvMetAP1). PvMetAP1 had the typical amino acid residues
essential for metal binding and substrate binding sites, which are well conserved
in the type I MetAP family enzymes. Recombinant PvMetAP1 showed activity in a
broad range of neutral pHs, with optimum activity at pH 7.5. PvMetAP1 was stable 
under neutral and alkaline pHs, but was relatively unstable under acidic
conditions. PvMetAP1 activity was highly increased in the presence of Mn(2+), and
was effectively inhibited by a metal chelator, EDTA. Fumagillin and
aminopeptidase inhibitors, amastatin and bestatin, also showed an inhibitory
effect on PvMetAP1. The enzyme had a highly specific hydrolytic activity for
N-terminal methionine. These results collectively suggest that PvMetAP1 belongs
to the family of type I MetAPs and may play a pivotal role for the maintenance of
P. vivax physiology by mediating protein maturation and processing of the
parasite.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2015.01.003 
PMID: 25595410  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

