
1. Parasitol Int. 2015 Aug;64(4):48-59. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2015.01.007. Epub 2015
Jan 29.

Avian haemosporidians from Neotropical highlands: Evidence from morphological and
molecular data.

González AD(1), Lotta IA(2), García LF(3), Moncada LI(4), Matta NE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional de
Colombia, Sede Bogotá Carrera 30 No 45-03, Bogotá, Colombia. Electronic address: 
adgonzalezg@unal.edu.co.
(2)Departamento de Biología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional de
Colombia, Sede Bogotá Carrera 30 No 45-03, Bogotá, Colombia. Electronic address: 
ialottaa@unal.edu.co.
(3)Departamento de Biología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional de
Colombia, Sede Bogotá Carrera 30 No 45-03, Bogotá, Colombia. Electronic address: 
lfgarciap@unal.edu.co.
(4)Departamento de Salud Pública, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional de
Colombia, Sede Bogotá, Carrera 30 No 45-03, Bogotá, Colombia. Electronic address:
limoncadaa@unal.edu.co.
(5)Departamento de Biología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional de
Colombia, Sede Bogotá Carrera 30 No 45-03, Bogotá, Colombia. Electronic address: 
nemattac@unal.edu.co.

Avian haemosporidian parasites have been scarcely studied in the Neotropical
highlands despite the high avian diversity reported and the uniqueness of these
ecosystems. The aims of this study were to examine Haemoproteus and Plasmodium
diversity based on morphological and molecular data, as well as to explore the
concordance between these two approaches, when identifying species. We sampled
1487 birds belonging to 166 species, in localities of the Colombian Andean region
at elevations ranging from 2100 to 4000 m above sea level. Here, we report twelve
morphological parasite species, of which five are undescribed. Thirty parasite
cytochrome b lineages are reported, 17 of which for the first time. We provide
morphological information and illustrations, as well as, cytochrome b lineages
for six morphospecies: Haemoproteus columbae, Haemoproteus witti, Haemoproteus
coatneyi, Haemoproteus vireonis, Plasmodium lutzi, and Plasmodium unalis. This is
the first report to provide a linkage between morphology and a molecular lineage 
for H. witti. Cytochrome b gene proved to be useful for species determination as 
DNA barcoding. Differences in parasite composition between lowlands and highlands
in Colombia suggest a replacement of avian Plasmodium fauna. Parasite lineages
restricted to either Colombian resident or Nearctic migratory birds were found;
but a single lineage common in both has not been recorded in Nearctic
non-migratory birds. We generated valuable information by using both
morphological and molecular data representing competent host-parasite
relationships which are based on observation of gametocytes in circulation; and
increased the taxon sampling of avian haemosporidian.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2015.01.007 
PMID: 25638289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

