
1. Parasitol Res. 2015 Apr;114(4):1455-62. doi: 10.1007/s00436-015-4328-z. Epub 2015
Feb 1.

In situ hybridization and sequence analysis reveal an association of Plasmodium
spp. with mortalities in wild passerine birds in Austria.

Dinhopl N(1), Nedorost N, Mostegl MM, Weissenbacher-Lang C, Weissenböck H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology and Forensic Veterinary Medicine, Department of
Pathobiology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Veterinärplatz 1, A-1210,
Vienna, Austria.

Native European passerine birds are frequently clinically inapparent carriers of 
haemosporidian parasites of the genus Plasmodium. Clinical disease and death are 
only exceptionally reported. In the present study, tissue samples of 233 wild
passerine birds found dead in Eastern Austria were examined by in situ
hybridization (ISH) and partial cytochrome B gene sequence analysis for the
presence, abundance and taxonomic assignment of Plasmodium spp. In 34 cases
(14.6%), ISH yielded a positive result with large numbers of developmental stages
in different cell types of the spleen, liver, brain and lung. The abundance of
the tissue stages, which was comparable to fatal cases of avian malaria in
penguins, suggested a major contribution to the cause of death. Genetic analysis 
revealed infections with representatives of three different valid species of
Plasmodium, Plasmodium elongatum, Plasmodium lutzi and Plasmodium vaughani.
Genetically identical parasite lineages had been found in a previous study in
penguins kept in the Vienna zoo, providing evidence for the role of wild birds as
reservoir hosts. Further, this study provides evidence that several species of
Plasmodium are able to abundantly proliferate in endemic wild birds ultimately
resulting in mortalities.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-015-4328-z 
PMID: 25636246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

