
1. Pathog Glob Health. 2015 Mar;109(2):61-7. doi: 10.1179/2047773215Y.0000000005.
Epub 2015 Feb 23.

In silico analysis for structure, function and T-cell epitopes of a hypothetical 
conserved (HP-C) protein coded by PVX_092425 in Plasmodium vivax.

Mo J, Li J.

OBJECTIVE: Plasmodium spp. merozoite glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored
proteins (GPI-APs) considered as protective immunogen in novel vaccines against
malaria. To analyze the structure and function of a hypothetical conserved (HP-C)
GPI-AP coded by gene PVX_092425 from Plasmodium vivax, and find its potential
T-cell epitopes for further vivax malaria vaccine study.
METHODS: The structure, function and T-cell epitopes of the HP-C protein named
Pvx_092425 were analyzed and predicted by online and offline bioinformatics
software.
RESULTS: The bioinformatics data showed that the Pvx_092425 is an 830 amino acid 
(AA) long polypeptide encoded by five exons gene PVX_092425.It contains a pectin 
lyase-like superfamily, an AA repeats region, a cys-rich region and a
transmembrane domain (TM) in C-terminal region. The alignment analysis drew it
has a unique AA repeats region among Plasmodium spp. It was located in the
cytoplasm, secretory system or cellular nucleus of P. vivax merozoite. For the
sequence, the fragment of I823-V829 inserts in the interior side of the membrane,
and M1--A812 belongs to the cytoplasmic tail. It has seven protein-protein
binding sites. The peptides with the best predicted binding affinities were human
leucocyte antigen (HLA) HLA-A*0203, HLA-DRB1*0101 and HLA- DRB1*0701.Among these 
predicted peptides, 582FLWDKALFD590 epitope interacted with HLA-DRB1*0101 allele 
showed best binding affinity compared to others. Structural analysis explained
that the epitope fits well into the epitope-binding groove of HLA-DRB1*0101.
CONCLUSIONS: It proposes that the Pvx_092425 plays a key role during erythrocyte 
stage and generates information that is useful for development of blood-stage
vaccine to block the merozoites invasion.

DOI: 10.1179/2047773215Y.0000000005 
PMCID: PMC4571820
PMID: 25706099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

