
1. Med Vet Entomol. 2015 Sep;29(3):230-7. doi: 10.1111/mve.12113. Epub 2015 Mar 17.

A standard photomap of ovarian nurse cell chromosomes in the European malaria
vector Anopheles atroparvus.

Artemov GN(1), Sharakhova MV(1)(2), Naumenko AN(2), Karagodin DA(3), Baricheva
EM(3), Stegniy VN(1), Sharakhov IV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Evolutionary Cytogenetics, Tomsk State University, Tomsk,
Russia.
(2)Department of Entomology, Fralin Life Science Institute, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA, U.S.A.
(3)Laboratory of Cell Differentiation Mechanisms, Institute of Cytology and
Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russia.

Anopheles atroparvus (Diptera: Culicidae) is one of the main malaria vectors of
the Maculipennis group in Europe. Cytogenetic analysis based on salivary gland
chromosomes has been used in taxonomic and population genetic studies of
mosquitoes from this group. However, a high-resolution cytogenetic map that could
be used in physical genome mapping in An. atroparvus is still lacking. In the
present study, a high-quality photomap of the polytene chromosomes from ovarian
nurse cells of An. atroparvus was developed. Using fluorescent in situ
hybridization, 10 genes from the five largest genomic supercontigs on the
polytene chromosome were localized and 28% of the genome was anchored to the
cytogenetic map. The study established chromosome arm homology between
An. atroparvus and the major African malaria vector Anopheles gambiae, suggesting
a whole-arm translocation between autosomes of these two species. The standard
photomap constructed for ovarian nurse cell chromosomes of An. atroparvus will be
useful for routine physical mapping. This map will assist in the development of a
fine-scale chromosome-based genome assembly for this species and will also
facilitate comparative and evolutionary genomics studies in the genus Anopheles.

© 2015 The Royal Entomological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/mve.12113 
PMCID: PMC4515173
PMID: 25776224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

