
1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 17;10(3):e0119836. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119836.
eCollection 2015.

Distinct mechanisms of inadequate erythropoiesis induced by tumor necrosis factor
alpha or malarial pigment.

Lamikanra AA(1), Merryweather-Clarke AT(1), Tipping AJ(1), Roberts DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Division of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, University of Oxford,
Oxford OX3 9BQ, United Kingdom; National Health Service Blood and Transplant,
John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 9BQ, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(4):e0127124.

The role of infection in erythropoietic dysfunction is poorly understood. In
children with P. falciparum malaria, the by-product of hemoglobin digestion in
infected red cells (hemozoin) is associated with the severity of anemia which is 
independent of circulating levels of the inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis
alpha (TNF-α). To gain insight into the common and specific effects of TNF-α and 
hemozoin on erythropoiesis, we studied the gene expression profile of purified
primary erythroid cultures exposed to either TNF-α (10 ng/ml) or to hemozoin
(12.5 μg/ml heme units) for 24 hours. Perturbed gene function was assessed using 
co-annotation of associated gene ontologies and expression of selected genes
representative of the profile observed was confirmed by real time PCR (rtPCR).
The changes in gene expression induced by each agent were largely distinct; many 
of the genes significantly modulated by TNF-α were not affected by hemozoin. The 
genes modulated by TNF-α were significantly enriched for those encoding proteins 
involved in the control of type 1 interferon signalling and the immune response
to viral infection. In contrast, genes induced by hemozoin were significantly
enriched for functional roles in regulation of transcription and apoptosis.
Further analyses by rtPCR revealed that hemozoin increases expression of
transcription factors that form part of the integrated stress response which is
accompanied by reduced expression of genes involved in DNA repair. This study
confirms that hemozoin induces cellular stress on erythroblasts that is
additional to and distinct from responses to inflammatory cytokines and
identifies new genes that may be involved in the pathogenesis of severe malarial 
anemia. More generally the respective transcription profiles highlight the varied
mechanisms through which erythropoiesis may be disrupted during infectious
disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119836 
PMCID: PMC4363658
PMID: 25781011  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

