
1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 24;10(3):e0121379. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121379.
eCollection 2015.

Ectopic expression of a Neospora caninum Kazal type inhibitor triggers
developmental defects in Toxoplasma and Plasmodium.

Tampaki Z(1), Mwakubambanya RS(1), Goulielmaki E(1), Kaforou S(2), Kim K(3),
Waters AP(4), Carruthers VB(5), Siden-Kiamos I(2), Loukeris TG(2), Koussis K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology-Hellas, Heraklion, Greece; Department of Biology, University of Crete,
Heraklion, Greece.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology-Hellas, Heraklion, Greece.
(3)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, United
States of America.
(4)Faculty of Biomedical & Life Sciences, Glasgow Biomedical Research Centre,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(4):e0125852.

Regulated proteolysis is known to control a variety of vital processes in
apicomplexan parasites including invasion and egress of host cells. Serine
proteases have been proposed as targets for drug development based upon inhibitor
studies that show parasite attenuation and transmission blockage. Genetic studies
suggest that serine proteases, such as subtilisin and rhomboid proteases, are
essential but functional studies have proved challenging as active proteases are 
difficult to express. Proteinaceous Protease Inhibitors (PPIs) provide an
alternative way to address the role of serine proteases in apicomplexan biology. 
To validate such an approach, a Neospora caninum Kazal inhibitor (NcPI-S) was
expressed ectopically in two apicomplexan species, Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites 
and Plasmodium berghei ookinetes, with the aim to disrupt proteolytic processes
taking place within the secretory pathway. NcPI-S negatively affected
proliferation of Toxoplasma tachyzoites, while it had no effect on invasion and
egress. Expression of the inhibitor in P. berghei zygotes blocked their
development into mature and invasive ookinetes. Moreover, ultra-structural
studies indicated that expression of NcPI-S interfered with normal formation of
micronemes, which was also confirmed by the lack of expression of the micronemal 
protein SOAP in these parasites. Our results suggest that NcPI-S could be a
useful tool to investigate the function of proteases in processes fundamental for
parasite survival, contributing to the effort to identify targets for parasite
attenuation and transmission blockage.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121379 
PMCID: PMC4372514
PMID: 25803874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

