
1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2015 May 15;23(10):2303-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.03.081. Epub 
2015 Apr 7.

The β-carbonic anhydrase from the malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae is highly
inhibited by sulfonamides.

Syrjänen L(1), Kuuslahti M(1), Tolvanen M(2), Vullo D(3), Parkkila S(4), Supuran 
CT(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Tampere and Tampere University Hospital,
Tampere, Finland.
(2)School of Medicine, University of Tampere and Tampere University Hospital,
Tampere, Finland; Department of Information Technology, University of Turku,
Turku, Finland; Department of Information Technology, University of Turku, Turku,
Finland.
(3)Università degli Studi di Firenze, Dipartimento di Chimica, Laboratorio di
Chimica Bioinorganica, Via della Lastruccia 3, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino (Firenze), 
Italy.
(4)School of Medicine, University of Tampere and Tampere University Hospital,
Tampere, Finland; Fimlab Laboratories Ltd, Tampere, Finland.
(5)Università degli Studi di Firenze, Dipartimento di Chimica, Laboratorio di
Chimica Bioinorganica, Via della Lastruccia 3, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino (Firenze), 
Italy; Università degli Studi di Firenze, Neurofarba Dipartment, Sezione di
Scienza Farmaceutiche e Nutraceutiche, Via Ugo Schiff 6, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino
(Firenze), Italy. Electronic address: claudiu.supuran@unifi.it.

A β-carbonic anhydrase (CA, EC 4.2.1.1) was cloned, purified and characterized
from Anopheles gambiae, the mosquito species mainly involved in the transmission 
of malaria. The new enzyme, AgaCA, showed a significant catalytic activity for
the physiologic reaction, CO2 hydration to bicarbonate and protons, with a kcat
of 7.2×10(5)s(-1) and kcat/Km of 5.6×10(7)M(-1)s(-1), being thus similar to
parasite β-CAs which were discovered earlier as drug targets for antifungal or
anti-protozoan agents. An inhibition study of AgaCA with a panel of aromatic,
aliphatic and heterocyclic sulfonamides allowed us to identify several low
nanomolar inhibitors of the enzyme. Benzolamide and aminobenzolamide showed
inhibition constants of 6.8-9.8nM, whereas a structurally related aromatic
derivative, 4-(2-hydroxymethyl-4-nitrophenyl-sulfonamidoethyl)-benzenesulfonamide
was the strongest inhibitor with a KI of 6.1nM. As β-CAs are not present in
mammals, including humans, finding effective and selective A. gambiae CA
inhibitors may lead to alternative procedures for controlling malaria by
impairing the growth of its transmission vector, the mosquito.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.03.081 
PMID: 25882523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

