
1. PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr 30;11(4):e1005131. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005131.
eCollection 2015 Apr.

Imputation-based population genetics analysis of Plasmodium falciparum malaria
parasites.

Samad H(1), Coll F(1), Preston MD(1), Ocholla H(2), Fairhurst RM(3), Clark TG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Malawi-Liverpool-Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Programme, Blantyre, Malawi 
and Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(3)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United
States of America.
(4)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom; Faculty of Epidemiology and Population
Health, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2016 Aug;12(8):e1006300.

Whole-genome sequencing technologies are being increasingly applied to Plasmodium
falciparum clinical isolates to identify genetic determinants of malaria
pathogenesis. However, genome-wide discovery methods, such as haplotype scans for
signatures of natural selection, are hindered by missing genotypes in sequence
data. Poor correlation between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the P.
falciparum genome complicates efforts to apply established missing-genotype
imputation methods that leverage off patterns of linkage disequilibrium (LD). The
accuracy of state-of-the-art, LD-based imputation methods (IMPUTE, Beagle) was
assessed by measuring allelic r2 for 459 P. falciparum samples from malaria
patients in 4 countries: Thailand, Cambodia, Gambia, and Malawi. In restricting
our analysis to 86 k high-quality SNPs across the populations, we found that the 
complete-case analysis was restricted to 21k SNPs (24.5%), despite no single SNP 
having more than 10% missing genotypes. The accuracy of Beagle in filling in
missing genotypes was consistently high across all populations (allelic r2,
0.87-0.96), but the performance of IMPUTE was mixed (allelic r2, 0.34-0.99)
depending on reference haplotypes and population. Positive selection analysis
using Beagle-imputed haplotypes identified loci involved in resistance to
chloroquine (crt) in Thailand, Cambodia, and Gambia, sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine
(dhfr, dhps) in Cambodia, and artemisinin (kelch13) in Cambodia. Tajima's D-based
analysis identified genes under balancing selection that encode
well-characterized vaccine candidates: apical merozoite antigen 1 (ama1) and
merozoite surface protein 1 (msp1). In contrast, the complete-case analysis
failed to identify any well-validated drug resistance or candidate vaccine loci, 
except kelch13. In a setting of low LD and modest levels of missing genotypes,
using Beagle to impute P. falciparum genotypes is a viable strategy for
conducting accurate large-scale population genetics and association analyses, and
supporting global surveillance for drug resistance markers and candidate vaccine 
antigens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005131 
PMCID: PMC4415759
PMID: 25928499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

