
1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2015 Dec;1362:68-76. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12791. Epub 2015 May 18.

New insights into heterogeneity of peritoneal B-1a cells.

Wang H(1), Lin JX(2), Li P(2), Skinner J(3), Leonard WJ(2), Morse HC 3rd(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Virology and Cellular Immunology Section, Laboratory of Immunogenetics,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, Maryland.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology and Immunology Center, National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(3)Malaria Infection Biology and Immunity Unit, Laboratory of Immunogenetics,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, Maryland.

Peritoneal B-1a cells are characterized by their expression of CD5 and enrichment
for germline-encoded IgM B cell receptors. Early studies showing expression of a 
diverse array of VDJ sequences among purified B-1a cells provided a molecular
basis for understanding the heterogeneity of the B-1a cell repertoire.
Antigen-driven positive selection and the identification of B-1a specific
progenitors suggest multiple origins of B-1a cells. The introduction of new
markers such as PD-L2, CD25, CD73, and PC1 (plasma cell alloantigen 1, also known
as ectonucleotide phosphodiesterase/pyrophosphatase 1) further helped to identify
phenotypically and functionally distinct B-1a subsets. Among many B-1a subsets
defined by these new markers, PC1 is unique in that it subdivides B-1a cells into
PC1(hi) and PC1(lo) subpopulations with distinct functions, such as production of
natural IgM and gut IgA, response to the pneumococcal antigen PPS-3, secretion of
interleukin-10, and support for T helper 1 (TH 1) cell differentiation. RNA
sequencing of these subsets revealed differential expression of genes involved in
cellular movement and immune cell trafficking. We will discuss these new insights
underlying the heterogeneous nature of the B-1a cell repertoire.

Published 2015. This article is U.S. Government work and is in the public domain 
in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/nyas.12791 
PMCID: PMC4651667
PMID: 25988856  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

