
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2015 May;201(1):31-46. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2015.05.005. Epub 2015 May 27.

Plasmodium falciparum complicated malaria: Modulation and connectivity between
exportome and variant surface antigen gene families.

Subudhi AK(1), Boopathi PA(2), Pandey I(3), Kohli R(4), Karwa R(5), Middha S(6), 
Acharya J(7), Kochar SK(8), Kochar DK(9), Das A(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science
(BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan, India. Electronic address: amit4help@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science
(BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan, India. Electronic address:
boopathiarunachalam@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science
(BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan, India. Electronic address: aahana10123@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science
(BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan, India. Electronic address: ramanme24@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science
(BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan, India. Electronic address: sayrohan@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Medicine, S.P. Medical College, Bikaner, Rajasthan, India.
Electronic address: sheetumig21@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Medicine, S.P. Medical College, Bikaner, Rajasthan, India.
Electronic address: jyotiacharya2@gmail.com.
(8)Department of Medicine, S.P. Medical College, Bikaner, Rajasthan, India.
Electronic address: drskkochar@rediffmail.com.
(9)Rajasthan University of Health Sciences, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India. Electronic 
address: drdkkochar@yahoo.com.
(10)Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science 
(BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan, India. Electronic address: ashisd28@gmail.com.

In temperate and sub-tropical regions of Asia and Latin America, complicated
malaria manifested as hepatic dysfunction or renal dysfunction is seen in all age
groups. There has been a concerted focus on understanding the patho-physiological
and molecular basis of complicated malaria in children, much less is known about 
it in adults. We report here, the analysis of data from a custom, cross strain
microarray (Agilent Platform) using material from adult patient samples, showing 
hepatic dysfunction or renal failure. These are the most common manifestations
seen in adults along with cerebral malaria. The data has been analyzed with
reference to variant surface antigens, encoded by the var, rifin and stevor gene 
families. The differential regulation profiles of key genes (comparison between
Plasmodium falciparum complicated and uncomplicated isolates) have been observed.
The exportome has been analyzed using similar parameters. Gene ontology term
based functional enrichment of differentially regulated genes identified,
up-regulated genes statistically enriched (P<0.05) to critical biological
processes like generation of precursor metabolite and energy, chromosome
organization and electron transport chain. Systems network based functional
enrichment of overall differentially regulated genes yielded a similar result. We
are reporting here, up-regulation of var group B and C genes whose proteins are
predicted to interact with CD36 receptor in the host, the up-regulation of domain
cassette 13 (DC13) containing var group A, as also the up-regulation of group A
rifins and many of the stevors. This is contrary to most other reports from
pediatric patients, with cerebral malaria where the up-regulation of mostly var A
group genes have been seen. A protein-protein interaction based network has been 
created and analysis performed. This co-expression and text mining based network 
has shown overall connectivity between the variant surface antigens (VSA) and the
exportome. The up-regulation of var group B and C genes encoding PfEMP1 with
different domain architecture would be important for deciding strategies for
disease prevention.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2015.05.005 
PMID: 26022315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

