
1. mBio. 2015 Jun 2;6(3):e00725. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00725-15.

Inhibiting the Mammalian target of rapamycin blocks the development of
experimental cerebral malaria.

Gordon EB(1), Hart GT(1), Tran TM(1), Waisberg M(1), Akkaya M(1), Skinner J(1),
Zinöcker S(1), Pena M(1), Yazew T(1), Qi CF(1), Miller LH(2), Pierce SK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, USA
spierce@nih.gov.

Malaria is an infectious disease caused by parasites of several Plasmodium spp.
Cerebral malaria (CM) is a common form of severe malaria resulting in nearly
700,000 deaths each year in Africa alone. At present, there is no adjunctive
therapy for CM. Although the mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of CM are
incompletely understood, it is likely that both intrinsic features of the
parasite and the human host's immune response contribute to disease. The kinase
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a central regulator of immune responses, 
and drugs that inhibit the mTOR pathway have been shown to be antiparasitic. In a
mouse model of CM, experimental CM (ECM), we show that the mTOR inhibitor
rapamycin protects against ECM when administered within the first 4 days of
infection. Treatment with rapamycin increased survival, blocked breakdown of the 
blood-brain barrier and brain hemorrhaging, decreased the influx of both CD4(+)
and CD8(+) T cells into the brain and the accumulation of parasitized red blood
cells in the brain. Rapamycin induced marked transcriptional changes in the
brains of infected mice, and analysis of transcription profiles predicted that
rapamycin blocked leukocyte trafficking to and proliferation in the brain.
Remarkably, animals were protected against ECM even though rapamycin treatment
significantly increased the inflammatory response induced by infection in both
the brain and spleen. These results open a new avenue for the development of
highly selective adjunctive therapies for CM by targeting pathways that regulate 
host and parasite metabolism.IMPORTANCE: Malaria is a highly prevalent infectious
disease caused by parasites of several Plasmodium spp. Malaria is usually
uncomplicated and resolves with time; however, in about 1% of cases, almost
exclusively among young children, malaria becomes severe and life threatening,
resulting in nearly 700,000 deaths each year in Africa alone. Among the most
severe complications of Plasmodium falciparum infection is cerebral malaria with 
a fatality rate of 15 to 20%, despite treatment with antimalarial drugs. Cerebral
malaria takes a second toll on African children, leaving survivors at high risk
of debilitating neurological defects. At present, we have no effective adjunctive
therapies for cerebral malaria, and developing such therapies would have a large 
impact on saving young lives in Africa. Here we report results that open a new
avenue for the development of highly selective adjunctive therapies for cerebral 
malaria by targeting pathways that regulate host and parasite metabolism.

Copyright © 2015 Gordon et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00725-15 
PMCID: PMC4453009
PMID: 26037126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

