
1. Vaccine. 2015 Sep 29;33(40):5241-8. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.05.098. Epub 2015
Jun 21.

Systems integration of innate and adaptive immunity.

Zak DE(1), Aderem A(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Infectious Disease Research, formerly Seattle Biomedical
Research Institute, 307 Westlake Ave N, Suite 500, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(2)The Center for Infectious Disease Research, formerly Seattle Biomedical
Research Institute, 307 Westlake Ave N, Suite 500, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
Electronic address: alan.aderem@seattlebiomed.org.

The pathogens causing AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis have proven too complex to 
be overcome by classical approaches to vaccination. The complexities of human
immunology and pathogen-induced modulation of the immune system mandate new
approaches to vaccine discovery and design. A new field, systems vaccinology,
weds holistic analysis of innate and adaptive immunity within a quantitative
framework to enable rational design of new vaccines that elicit tailored
protective immune responses. A key step in the approach is to discover
relationships between the earliest innate inflammatory responses to vaccination
and the subsequent vaccine-induced adaptive immune responses and efficacy.
Analysis of these responses in clinical studies is complicated by the
inaccessibility of relevant tissue compartments (such as the lymph node),
necessitating reliance upon peripheral blood responses as surrogates. Blood
transcriptomes, although indirect to vaccine mechanisms, have proven very
informative in systems vaccinology studies. The approach is most powerful when
innate and adaptive immune responses are integrated with vaccine efficacy, which 
is possible for malaria with the advent of a robust human challenge model. This
is more difficult for AIDS and tuberculosis, given that human challenge models
are lacking and efficacy observed in clinical trials has been low or highly
variable. This challenge can be met by appropriate clinical trial design for
partially efficacious vaccines and by analysis of natural infection cohorts.
Ultimately, systems vaccinology is an iterative approach in which mechanistic
hypotheses-derived from analysis of clinical studies-are evaluated in model
systems, and then used to guide the development of new vaccine strategies. In
this review, we will illustrate the above facets of the systems vaccinology
approach with case studies.

Copyright Â© 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.05.098 
PMID: 26102534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

