
1. Parasitology. 2015 Sep;142(11):1404-14. doi: 10.1017/S0031182015000803. Epub 2015
Jul 9.

Immunophilin-protein interactions in Plasmodium falciparum.

Leneghan D(1), Bell A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology,School of Genetics and Microbiology,Moyne Institute
of Preventive Medicine,Trinity College Dublin,Dublin,Ireland.

Immunophilins comprise two protein families, cyclophilins (CYPs) and
FK506-binding proteins (FKBPs), and are the major receptors for the
immunosuppressive drugs cyclosporin A (CsA) and FK506 (tacrolimus), respectively.
Most eukaryotic species have at least one immunophilin and some of them have been
associated with pathogenesis of infectious or parasitic diseases or the action of
antiparasitic drugs. The human malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum has 13
immunophilin or immunophilin-like genes but the functions of their products are
unknown. We set out to identify the parasite proteins that interact with the
major CYPs, PfCYP19A and PfCYP19B, and the FKBP, PfFKBP35, using a combination of
co-immunoprecipitation and yeast two-hybrid screening. We identified a cohort of 
putative interacting partners and further investigation of some of these revealed
potentially novel roles in parasite biology. We demonstrated that (i) P.
falciparum CYPs interacted with the heat shock protein 70, (ii) treatment of
parasites with CYP ligands disrupted transport of the rhoptry-associated protein 
1, and (iii) PfFKBP35 interacted with parasite histones in a way that might
modulate gene expression. These findings begin to elucidate the functions of
immunophilins in malaria. Furthermore, the known antimalarial effects of CsA,
FK506 and non-immunosuppressive derivatives of these immunophilin ligands could
be mediated through these partner proteins.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182015000803 
PMID: 26156578  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

