
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Sep 30;43(17):8243-57. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv730. Epub 2015
Jul 21.

Deciphering the principles that govern mutually exclusive expression of
Plasmodium falciparum clag3 genes.

Rovira-Graells N(1), Crowley VM(2), Bancells C(3), Mira-Martínez S(3), Ribas de
Pouplana L(4), Cortés A(5).

Author information: 
(1)ISGlobal, Barcelona Ctr. Int. Health Res. (CRESIB), Hospital
Clínic-Universitat de Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain Institute for 
Research in Biomedicine (IRB), 08028 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB), 08028 Barcelona, Catalonia,
Spain.
(3)ISGlobal, Barcelona Ctr. Int. Health Res. (CRESIB), Hospital
Clínic-Universitat de Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(4)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB), 08028 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain
Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), 08010 Barcelona,
Catalonia, Spain.
(5)ISGlobal, Barcelona Ctr. Int. Health Res. (CRESIB), Hospital
Clínic-Universitat de Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain Institute for 
Research in Biomedicine (IRB), 08028 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain Catalan
Institution for Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), 08010 Barcelona,
Catalonia, Spain alfred.cortes@cresib.cat.

The product of the Plasmodium falciparum genes clag3.1 and clag3.2 plays a
fundamental role in malaria parasite biology by determining solute transport into
infected erythrocytes. Expression of the two clag3 genes is mutually exclusive,
such that a single parasite expresses only one of the two genes at a time. Here
we investigated the properties and mechanisms of clag3 mutual exclusion using
transgenic parasite lines with extra copies of clag3 promoters located either in 
stable episomes or integrated in the parasite genome. We found that the
additional clag3 promoters in these transgenic lines are silenced by default, but
under strong selective pressure parasites with more than one clag3 promoter
simultaneously active are observed, demonstrating that clag3 mutual exclusion is 
strongly favored but it is not strict. We show that silencing of clag3 genes is
associated with the repressive histone mark H3K9me3 even in parasites with
unusual clag3 expression patterns, and we provide direct evidence for
heterochromatin spreading in P. falciparum. We also found that expression of a
neighbor ncRNA correlates with clag3.1 expression. Altogether, our results reveal
a scenario where fitness costs and non-deterministic molecular processes that
favor mutual exclusion shape the expression patterns of this important gene
family.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv730 
PMCID: PMC4787829
PMID: 26202963  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

