
1. Acta Parasitol. 2015 Jun;60(2):218-25. doi: 10.1515/ap-2015-0031.

Frequencies of dhfr/dhps multiple mutations and Plasmodium falciparum
submicroscopic gametocyte carriage in Gabonese pregnant women following IPTp-SP
implementation.

Bouyou-Akotet MK, Tshibola ML, Mawili-Mboumba DP, Nzong J, Bahamontes-Rosa N,
Tsoumbou-Bakana G, Kombila M.

This study analyzed the relationship between intermittent preventive treatment
with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) (IPTp-SP), the rate of multiple resistant
parasites and of submicroscopic gametocyte carriage among pregnant women at the
beginning of IPTp implementation in Gabon (2005) and six years after (2011). The 
detection of pfdhfr and pfdhps gene mutations was performed by PCR-RFLP in
Plasmodium (P.) falciparum positive samples collected from pregnant women in 2005
and 2011. Gametocytes carriage was detected by Pfs25mRNA amplification using
QT-NASBA. Data were analyzed according to the time of collection (study period)
and IPTp-SP doses. The proportion of isolates with at least a triple Pfdhfr
mutation (n = 39/42, 92.9% versus 100%, n = 78/78)) and of those isolates with
the S108N/C59R/N51I/S436A/A437G multiple mutation (17.9% versus 75.6%)
significantly increased between 2005 and 2011 (p<0.01). Mutations I164L and A581G
were not found, while higher proportions of 436 and 437 mutations were detected
in 2011.A trend toward a higher frequency of isolates with five mutations was
observed in women who received two SP doses (p<0.01). Pfs25mRNA was found in 6.8 
% (n = 3/44) and 34.6% (n = 27/78) of the samples collected in 2005 and 2011
respectively (p<0.01). In 2011, 74.0% (n = 20/27) of women with detected
submicroscopic gametocytes carried parasites with the S108N/C59R/N51/S436A/A437G 
multiple mutation. All the ten delivering women who received three IPTp-SP doses 
had a submicroscopic Plasmodium falciparum infection, but none had detected
gametocytes. Following IPTp-SP implementation, an increase in the frequency of
multiple mutant parasites and of submicroscopic gametocyte carriage was observed 
among pregnant women living in Gabon.

DOI: 10.1515/ap-2015-0031 
PMID: 26203988  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

