
1. Acta Trop. 2015 Nov;151:80-7. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2015.07.014. Epub 2015
Jul 26.

The Chagas disease domestic transmission cycle in Guatemala: Parasite-vector
switches and lack of mitochondrial co-diversification between Triatoma dimidiata 
and Trypanosoma cruzi subpopulations suggest non-vectorial parasite dispersal
across the Motagua valley.

Pennington PM(1), Messenger LA(2), Reina J(3), Juárez JG(3), Lawrence GG(4),
Dotson EM(4), Llewellyn MS(5), Cordón-Rosales C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad del Valle de Guatemala, Centro de Estudios en Salud, 18 Avenida
11-95 Z. 15 VH III, Guatemala, Guatemala. Electronic address: pamelap@uvg.edu.gt.
(2)London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine (University of London),
Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, Keppel Street, London WC1E 7HT,
UK.
(3)Universidad del Valle de Guatemala, Centro de Estudios en Salud, 18 Avenida
11-95 Z. 15 VH III, Guatemala, Guatemala.
(4)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Division of Parasitic Diseases and
Malaria, 1600 Clifton Rd, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA.
(5)Molecular Ecology and Fisheries Genetics Laboratory, School of Biological
Sciences,University of Wales, Bangor, Deiniol Road, Bangor, Gwynedd, LL57 2UW,
UK.
(6)Universidad del Valle de Guatemala, Centro de Estudios en Salud, 18 Avenida
11-95 Z. 15 VH III, Guatemala, Guatemala. Electronic address:
ccordon@ces.uvg.edu.gt.

Parasites transmitted by insects must adapt to their vectors and reservoirs.
Chagas disease, an American zoonosis caused by Trypanosoma cruzi, is transmitted 
by several species of triatomines. In Central America, Triatoma dimidiata is a
widely dispersed vector found in sylvatic and domestic habitats, with distinct
populations across the endemic region of Guatemala. Our aim was to test the
strength of association between vector and parasite genetic divergence in
domestic environments. Microsatellite (MS) loci were used to characterize
parasites isolated from T. dimidiata (n=112) collected in domestic environments. 
Moderate genetic differentiation was observed between parasites north and south
of the Motagua Valley, an ancient biogeographic barrier (FST 0.138, p=0.009).
Slightly reduced genotypic diversity and increased heterozygosity in the north
(Allelic richness (Ar)=1.00-6.05, FIS -0.03) compared to the south (Ar=1.47-6.30,
FIS 0.022) suggest either a selective or demographic process during parasite
dispersal. Based on parasite genotypes and geographic distribution, 15 vector
specimens and their parasite isolates were selected for mitochondrial
co-diversification analysis. Genetic variability and phylogenetic congruence were
determined with mitochondrial DNA sequences (10 parasite maxicircle gene
fragments and triatomine ND4+CYT b). A Mantel test as well as phylogenetic,
network and principal coordinates analyses supported at least three T. dimidiata 
haplogroups separated by geographic distance across the Motagua Valley.
Maxicircle sequences showed low T. cruzi genetic variability (π nucleotide
diversity 0.00098) with no evidence of co-diversification with the vector, having
multiple host switches across the valley. Sylvatic Didelphis marsupialis captured
across the Motagua Valley were found to be infected with T. cruzi strains sharing
MS genotypes with parasites isolated from domiciliated triatomines. The current
parasite distribution in domestic environments can be explained by multiple
parasite-host switches between vector populations and selection or bottleneck
processes across the Motagua Valley, with a possible role for didelphids in
domestic transmission.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2015.07.014 
PMID: 26215126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

