
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Nov;59(11):6952-9. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01255-15.
Epub 2015 Aug 31.

Artemisinin resistance at the China-Myanmar border and association with mutations
in the K13 propeller gene.

Wang Z(1), Wang Y(2), Cabrera M(1), Zhang Y(2), Gupta B(1), Wu Y(2), Kemirembe
K(1), Hu Y(2), Liang X(1), Brashear A(1), Shrestha S(1), Li X(1), Miao J(1), Sun 
X(3), Yang Z(2), Cui L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Pathogen Biology and Immunology, Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, China.
(3)Yunnan Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Puer, Yunnan Province, China.
(4)Department of Entomology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
Pennsylvania, USA luc2@psu.edu.

Artemisinin resistance in Plasmodium falciparum parasites in Southeast Asia is a 
major concern for malaria control. Its emergence at the China-Myanmar border,
where there have been more than 3 decades of artemisinin use, has yet to be
investigated. Here, we comprehensively evaluated the potential emergence of
artemisinin resistance and antimalarial drug resistance status in P. falciparum
using data and parasites from three previous efficacy studies in this region.
These efficacy studies of dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine combination and
artesunate monotherapy of uncomplicated falciparum malaria in 248 P. falciparum
patients showed an overall 28-day adequate clinical and parasitological response 
of >95% and day 3 parasite-positive rates of 6.3 to 23.1%. Comparison of the 57
K13 sequences (24 and 33 from day 3 parasite-positive and -negative cases,
respectively) identified nine point mutations in 38 (66.7%) samples, of which
F446I (49.1%) and an N-terminal NN insertion (86.0%) were predominant. K13
propeller mutations collectively, the F446I mutation alone, and the NN insertion 
all were significantly associated with day 3 parasite positivity. Increased
ring-stage survival determined using the ring-stage survival assay (RSA) was
highly associated with the K13 mutant genotype. Day 3 parasite-positive isolates 
had ∼10 times higher ring survival rates than day 3 parasite-negative isolates.
Divergent K13 mutations suggested independent evolution of artemisinin
resistance. Taken together, this study confirmed multidrug resistance and
emergence of artemisinin resistance in P. falciparum at the China-Myanmar border.
RSA and K13 mutations are useful phenotypic and molecular markers for monitoring 
artemisinin resistance.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01255-15 
PMCID: PMC4604380
PMID: 26324266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

