
1. J Biosci. 2015 Sep;40(3):539-47.

Diversity of sickle cell trait in Jharkhand state in India: Is it the zone of
contact between two geographically and ethnically distinct populations in India?

Nagar R(1), Raman R.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics Laboratory, Department of Zoology, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi, India.

Incidence of sickle cell trait in India is high in peninsular south,
south-eastern, central and south-western India, while in north and north-eastern 
India, it is absent. Unicentric origin of SCD in the tribals of nilgiri hills in 
southern India has been proposed. The present study on the frequency of HbS trait
and beta-globin gene haplotypes was conducted in the tribal-rich states of
Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand to get an insight into the uneven distribution of HbS 
in India. Jharkhand borders with the HbS-high Odisha and Chhattisgarh, and
HbS-low UP, Bihar and Bengal. Cellulose acetate gel electrophoresis was performed
on the collected blood samples, to detect sickle haemoglobin (HbS) followed by
DNA analysis. HbS associated beta-gene haplotype was constructed for the samples 
positive for HbS and all the tribals by PCR-RFLP. Out of 805 (Chhattisgarh - 261,
Jharkhand - 544; greater than 36 percent tribals) samples analysed HbS frequency 
was 13 percent in Chhattisgarh and 3.3 percent in Jharkhand. Within Jharkhand,
frequencies varied considerably from 10 percent in Tatanagar to nil in Sahibganj.
The Arab-India (AI) haplotype of beta-globin cluster occurred in low frequency,
confined mainly to Chhattisgarh. The most abundant haplotype in all the
populations was the East Asian, + - - - - - +, rare in HbS, mainly in Sahibganj
in east Jharkhand, which lacked AI. Our results indicate that besides the
heterozygote advantage againstmalaria, the uneven regional distribution of HbS
trait is because of restricted movement of two different populations, Dravidian
from the south and Tibeto-Burman from the east into the Indianmainland which
failed tomeet, we conjecture, due to severe climatic conditions (deserts and
heat) prevailing through parts of central India. Apparently, Jharkhand became a
zone of contact between them in recent times.

DOI: 10.1007/s12038-015-9541-5 
PMID: 26333400  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

