
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2015 Dec;36:174-183. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.09.018. Epub
2015 Sep 21.

Understanding the contrasting spatial haplotype patterns of malaria-protective
β-globin polymorphisms.

Hockham C(1), Piel FB(2), Gupta S(3), Penman BS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. Electronic address:
carinna.hockham@zoo.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. Electronic address:
fred.piel@zoo.ox.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. Electronic address:
sunetra.gupta@zoo.ox.ac.uk.
(4)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. Electronic address:
bridget.penman@zoo.ox.ac.uk.

The malaria-protective β-globin polymorphisms, sickle-cell (β(S)) and
β(0)-thalassaemia, are canonical examples of human adaptation to infectious
disease. Occurring on distinct genetic backgrounds, they vary markedly in their
patterns of linked genetic variation at the population level, suggesting
different evolutionary histories. β(S) is associated with five classical
restriction fragment length polymorphism haplotypes that exhibit remarkable
specificity in their geographical distributions; by contrast, β(0)-thalassaemia
mutations are found on haplotypes whose distributions overlap considerably. Here,
we explore why these two polymorphisms display contrasting spatial haplotypic
distributions, despite having malaria as a common selective pressure. We present 
a meta-population genetic model, incorporating individual-based processes, which 
tracks the evolution of β-globin polymorphisms on different haplotypic
backgrounds. Our simulations reveal that, depending on the rate of mutation, a
large population size and/or high population growth rate are required for both
the β(S)- and the β(0)-thalassaemia-like patterns. However, whilst the β(S)-like 
pattern is more likely when population subdivision is high, migration low and
long-distance migration absent, the opposite is true for β(0)-thalassaemia.
Including gene conversion has little effect on the overall probability of each
pattern; however, when inter-haplotype fitness variation exists, gene conversion 
is more likely to have contributed to the diversity of haplotypes actually
present in the population. Our findings highlight how the contrasting spatial
haplotype patterns exhibited by β(S) and β(0)-thalassaemia may provide important 
indications as to the evolution of these adaptive alleles and the demographic
history of the populations in which they have evolved.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2015.09.018 
PMCID: PMC4653953
PMID: 26394108  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

