
1. Acta Trop. 2015 Dec;152:170-175. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2015.09.014. Epub
2015 Sep 25.

Molecular characterization of SOCS gene and its expression analysis on Plasmodium
berghei infection in Anopheles culicifacies.

Dhawan R(1), Gupta K(1), Kajla M(1), Kumar S(1), Gakhar SK(2), Kakani P(1),
Choudhury TP(1), Gupta L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology & Science (BITS)-Pilani, Pilani 333031,
Rajasthan, India.
(2)Centres for Biotechnology, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak 124001,
Haryana, India.
(3)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology & Science (BITS)-Pilani, Pilani 333031,
Rajasthan, India. Electronic address: lalita@pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in.

Anopheles culicifacies mosquitoes are able to transmit both falciparum and vivax 
malaria in India. More than 65% of malaria cases reported annually spread through
this vector. Despite the fact that it poses major vectorial burden in India, the 
molecular basis of its immune role against Plasmodium development has not been
explored intensively. Here, we characterized An. culicifacies SOCS (suppressor of
cytokine signaling) gene, a regulator of STAT pathway and its expression analysis
upon Plasmodium infection. Our analysis has demonstrated that An. culicifacies
SOCS gene shares strikingly high level of sequence similarity in SH2 domain and
SOCS box region with other mosquito species. However, its N-terminal identity is 
limited to Anophelines mosquito only, suggesting its genus specific role. SOCS
mRNA is expressed in all developmental stages of mosquito and its expression is
higher in male than female adults. SOCS mRNA is significantly induced after
Plasmodium infection in midgut tissue indicating its involvement in the immune
defense responses. This is the first evidence of involvement of SOCS as an immune
gene in Indian malaria vector An. culicifacies.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2015.09.014 
PMID: 26407822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

