
1. Brief Bioinform. 2016 Jul;17(4):576-92. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbv078. Epub 2015 Sep
26.

Big-data-based edge biomarkers: study on dynamical drug sensitivity and
resistance in individuals.

Zeng T, Zhang W, Yu X, Liu X, Li M, Chen L.

Big-data-based edge biomarker is a new concept to characterize disease features
based on biomedical big data in a dynamical and network manner, which also
provides alternative strategies to indicate disease status in single samples.
This article gives a comprehensive review on big-data-based edge biomarkers for
complex diseases in an individual patient, which are defined as biomarkers based 
on network information and high-dimensional data. Specifically, we firstly
introduce the sources and structures of biomedical big data accessible in public 
for edge biomarker and disease study. We show that biomedical big data are
typically 'small-sample size in high-dimension space', i.e. small samples but
with high dimensions on features (e.g. omics data) for each individual, in
contrast to traditional big data in many other fields characterized as
'large-sample size in low-dimension space', i.e. big samples but with low
dimensions on features. Then, we demonstrate the concept, model and algorithm for
edge biomarkers and further big-data-based edge biomarkers. Dissimilar to
conventional biomarkers, edge biomarkers, e.g. module biomarkers in module
network rewiring-analysis, are able to predict the disease state by learning
differential associations between molecules rather than differential expressions 
of molecules during disease progression or treatment in individual patients. In
particular, in contrast to using the information of the common molecules or edges
(i.e.molecule-pairs) across a population in traditional biomarkers including
network and edge biomarkers, big-data-based edge biomarkers are specific for each
individual and thus can accurately evaluate the disease state by considering the 
individual heterogeneity. Therefore, the measurement of big data in a
high-dimensional space is required not only in the learning process but also in
the diagnosing or predicting process of the tested individual. Finally, we
provide a case study on analyzing the temporal expression data from a malaria
vaccine trial by big-data-based edge biomarkers from module network
rewiring-analysis. The illustrative results show that the identified module
biomarkers can accurately distinguish vaccines with or without protection and
outperformed previous reported gene signatures in terms of effectiveness and
efficiency.

Â© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. For Permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbv078 
PMID: 26411472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

