
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Oct;94(40):e1681. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001681.

High Incidence of Malaria Along the Sino-Burmese Border Is Associated With
Polymorphisms of CR1, IL-1A, IL-4R, IL-4, NOS, and TNF, But Not With G6PD
Deficiency.

Ren N(1), Kuang YM, Tang QL, Cheng L, Zhang CH, Yang ZQ, He YS, Zhu YC.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (NR, LC, C-HZ, Q-LT,
Z-QY, Y-SH, Y-CZ); and First Affiliated Hospital, Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, Yunnan, PR China (Y-MK).

Malaria is highly endemic in Yunnan Province, China, with the incidence of
malaria being highest along the Sino-Burmese border. The aim of our study was to 
determine whether genetic polymorphisms are associated with the prevalence of
malaria among Chinese residents of the Sino-Burmese border region. Fourteen
otherwise healthy people with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)
deficiency, 50 malaria patients, and 67 healthy control subjects were included in
our cross-sectional study. We analyzed the frequency of the G3093T and T520C
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of CR1. Logistic regression was used to
calculate the prevalence odds ratio (POR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) of
malaria for the T520C SNP of CR1 and SNPs of G6PD, IL-4, IL-4R, IL-1A, NOS,
CD40LG, TNF, and LUC7L. The frequency of the 3093T/3093T genotype of CR1 in the
malaria group (0.16) was significantly higher than that in the control group
(0.045, P < 0.05), and significantly lower than that in the G6PD deficiency group
(0.43, P < 0.01). The frequency of the 520T/520T genotype of CR1 was
significantly higher in the malaria patients (0.78) than that in the control
group (0.67, P < 0.05) and G6PD-deficiency group (0.36, P < 0.05). The T allele
of the T520C variant of CR1 was significantly associated with the prevalence of
malaria (POR: 1.460; 95% CI: 0.703-3.034). Polymorphisms of G6PD did not
significantly influence the prevalence malaria (P > 0.05). A GTGTGTC haplotype
consisting of IL-1A (rs17561), IL-4 (rs2243250), TNF (rs1800750), IL-4R
(rs1805015), NOS (rs8078340), CD40LG (rs1126535), and LUC7L (rs1211375) was
significantly associated with the prevalence of malaria (POR: 1.822, 95% CI:
0.998-3.324). The 3093G/3093G and 520T/520T genotypes are the predominant genetic
variants of CR1 among Chinese residents near the Sino-Burmese border, and the T
allele of T520C is associated with the prevalence of malaria in this region.
Although G6PD deficiency does not protect against malaria, it may diminish the
association between malaria and the CR1 polymorphisms in this population. The
GTGTGTC haplotype is also associated with the prevalence of malaria in this
region.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001681 
PMCID: PMC4616751
PMID: 26448013  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

