
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015 Oct 20;9(10):e0004168. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0004168. eCollection 2015.

Development of a Luminex Bead Based Assay for Diagnosis of Toxocariasis Using
Recombinant Antigens Tc-CTL-1 and Tc-TES-26.

Anderson JP(1), Rascoe LN(1), Levert K(1), Chastain HM(1), Reed MS(2), Rivera
HN(1), McAuliffe I(1), Zhan B(3), Wiegand RE(1), Hotez PJ(3), Wilkins PP(1), Pohl
J(2), Handali S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.
(2)National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.
(3)National School of Tropical Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas, United States of America.

The clinical spectrum of human disease caused by the roundworms Toxocara canis
and Toxocara cati ranges from visceral and ocular larva migrans to covert
toxocariasis. The parasite is not typically recovered in affected tissues, so
detection of parasite-specific antibodies is usually necessary for establishing a
diagnosis. The most reliable immunodiagnostic methods use the Toxocara
excretory-secretory antigens (TES-Ag) in ELISA formats to detect
Toxocara-specific antibodies. To eliminate the need for native parasite
materials, we identified and purified immunodiagnostic antigens using 2D gel
electrophoresis followed by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. Three
predominant immunoreactive proteins were found in the TES; all three had been
previously described in the literature: Tc-CTL-1, Tc-TES-26, and Tc-MUC-3. We
generated Escherichia coli expressed recombinant proteins for evaluation in
Luminex based immunoassays. We were unable to produce a functional assay with the
Tc-MUC-3 recombinant protein. Tc-CTL-1 and Tc-TES-26 were successfully coupled
and tested using defined serum batteries. The use of both proteins together
generated better results than if the proteins were used individually. The
sensitivity and specificity of the assay for detecting visceral larval migrans
using Tc-CTL-1 plus Tc-TES-26 was 99% and 94%, respectively; the sensitivity for 
detecting ocular larval migrans was 64%. The combined performance of the new
assay was superior to the currently available EIA and could potentially be
employed to replace current assays that rely on native TES-Ag.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004168 
PMCID: PMC4618131
PMID: 26485145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

