
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015 Oct 20;9(10):e0004068. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0004068. eCollection 2015.

Delayed Onset of Symptoms and Atovaquone-Proguanil Chemoprophylaxis Breakthrough 
by Plasmodium malariae in the Absence of Mutation at Codon 268 of pmcytb.

Teo BH(1), Lansdell P(2), Smith V(2), Blaze M(2), Nolder D(2), Beshir KB(1),
Chiodini PL(3), Cao J(4), FÃ¤rnert A(5), Sutherland CJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology & Infection, Faculty of Infectious & Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Public Health England Malaria Reference Laboratory, London School of Hygiene &
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Public Health England Malaria Reference Laboratory, London School of Hygiene &
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom; Department of Clinical Parasitology,
Hospital for Tropical Diseases, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Jiangsu Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Wuxi, China.
(5)Dept Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of
Infectious Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Department of Immunology & Infection, Faculty of Infectious & Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom;
Public Health England Malaria Reference Laboratory, London School of Hygiene &
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom; Department of Clinical Parasitology,
Hospital for Tropical Diseases, London, United Kingdom.

Plasmodium malariae is widely distributed across the tropics, causing symptomatic
malaria in humans with a 72-hour fever periodicity, and may present after latency
periods lasting up to many decades. Delayed occurrence of symptoms is observed in
humans using chemoprophylaxis, or patients having received therapies targeting P.
falciparum intraerythrocytic asexual stages, but few investigators have addressed
the biological basis of the ability of P. malariae to persist in the human host. 
To investigate these interesting features of P. malariae epidemiology, we
assembled, here, an extensive case series of P. malariae malaria patients
presenting in non-endemic China, Sweden, and the UK who returned from travel in
endemic countries, mainly in Africa. Out of 378 evaluable P. malariae cases, 100 
(26.2%) reported using at least partial chemoprophylaxis, resembling the pattern 
seen with the relapsing parasites P. ovale spp. and P. vivax. In contrast, for
only 7.5% of imported UK cases of non-relapsing P. falciparum was any
chemoprophylaxis use reported. Genotyping of parasites from six patients
reporting use of atovaquone-proguanil chemoprophylaxis did not reveal mutations
at codon 268 of the cytb locus of the P. malariae mitochondrial genome. While
travellers with P. malariae malaria are significantly more likely to report
prophylaxis use during endemic country travel than are those with P. falciparum
infections, atovaquone-proguanil prophylaxis breakthrough was not associated with
pmcytb mutations. These preliminary studies, together with consistent
observations of the remarkable longevity of P. malariae, lead us to propose
re-examination of the dogma that this species is not a relapsing parasite.
Further studies are needed to investigate our favoured hypothesis, namely that P.
malariae can initiate a latent hypnozoite developmental programme in the human
hepatocyte: if validated this will explain the consistent observations of
remarkable longevity of parasitism, even in the presence of antimalarial
prophylaxis or treatment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004068 
PMCID: PMC4618945
PMID: 26485258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

