
1. Korean J Parasitol. 2015 Oct;53(5):583-95. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2015.53.5.583. Epub
2015 Oct 29.

DEAD/DExH-Box RNA Helicases in Selected Human Parasites.

Marchat LA(1), Arzola-Rodr√≠guez SI(2), Hernandez-de la Cruz O(2), Lopez-Rosas
I(1), Lopez-Camarillo C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institutional Program of Molecular Biomedicine, Biotechnology Program,
National School of Medicine and Homeopathy of the National Polytechnic Institute,
Mexico City, CP 07320, Mexico.
(2)Genomics Sciences Program, Autonomous University of Mexico City, Mexico City, 
CP 03100, Mexico.

DEAD/DExH-box RNA helicases catalyze the folding and remodeling of RNA molecules 
in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, as well as in many viruses. They are
characterized by the presence of the helicase domain with conserved motifs that
are essential for ATP binding and hydrolysis, RNA interaction, and unwinding
activities. Large families of DEAD/DExH-box proteins have been described in
different organisms, and their role in all molecular processes involving RNA,
from transcriptional regulation to mRNA decay, have been described. This review
aims to summarize the current knowledge about DEAD/DExH-box proteins in selected 
protozoan and nematode parasites of medical importance worldwide, such as
Plasmodium falciparum, Leishmania spp., Trypanosoma spp., Giardia lamblia,
Entamoeba histolytica, and Brugia malayi. We discuss the functional
characterization of several proteins in an attempt to understand better the
molecular mechanisms involving RNA in these pathogens. The current data also
highlight that DEAD/DExH-box RNA helicases might represent feasible drug targets 
due to their vital role in parasite growth and development.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2015.53.5.583 
PMCID: PMC4635832
PMID: 26537038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

