
1. BMC Genomics. 2015 Nov 25;16:1005. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2214-9.

Analysis of nucleosome positioning landscapes enables gene discovery in the human
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Lu XM(1), Bunnik EM(2), Pokhriyal N(3), Nasseri S(4), Lonardi S(5), Le Roch
KG(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Institute for Integrative Genome 
Biology, Center for Disease Vector Research, University of California, Riverside,
900 University Avenue, Riverside, CA, 92521, USA. xlu006@ucr.edu.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Institute for Integrative Genome 
Biology, Center for Disease Vector Research, University of California, Riverside,
900 University Avenue, Riverside, CA, 92521, USA. evelien.bunnik@ucr.edu.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California,
Riverside, 900 University Avenue, Riverside, CA, 92521, USA.
neetipok@buffalo.edu.
(4)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California,
Riverside, 900 University Avenue, Riverside, CA, 92521, USA.
sara.nasseri@email.ucr.edu.
(5)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California,
Riverside, 900 University Avenue, Riverside, CA, 92521, USA. stelo@cs.ucr.edu.
(6)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Institute for Integrative Genome 
Biology, Center for Disease Vector Research, University of California, Riverside,
900 University Avenue, Riverside, CA, 92521, USA. karine.leroch@ucr.edu.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum, the deadliest malaria-causing parasite, has an
extremely AT-rich (80.7 %) genome. Because of high AT-content, sequence-based
annotation of genes and functional elements remains challenging. In order to
better understand the regulatory network controlling gene expression in the
parasite, a more complete genome annotation as well as analysis tools adapted for
AT-rich genomes are needed. Recent studies on genome-wide nucleosome positioning 
in eukaryotes have shown that nucleosome landscapes exhibit regular
characteristic patterns at the 5'- and 3'-end of protein and non-protein coding
genes. In addition, nucleosome depleted regions can be found near transcription
start sites. These unique nucleosome landscape patterns may be exploited for the 
identification of novel genes. In this paper, we propose a computational approach
to discover novel putative genes based exclusively on nucleosome positioning data
in the AT-rich genome of P. falciparum.
RESULTS: Using binary classifiers trained on nucleosome landscapes at the gene
boundaries from two independent nucleosome positioning data sets, we were able to
detect a total of 231 regions containing putative genes in the genome of
Plasmodium falciparum, of which 67 highly confident genes were found in both data
sets. Eighty-eight of these 231 newly predicted genes exhibited transcription
signal in RNA-Seq data, indicative of active transcription. In addition, 20 out
of 21 selected gene candidates were further validated by RT-PCR, and 28 out of
the 231 genes showed significant matches using BLASTN against an expressed
sequence tag (EST) database. Furthermore, 108 (47%) out of the 231 putative novel
genes overlapped with previously identified but unannotated long non-coding RNAs.
Collectively, these results provide experimental validation for 163 predicted
genes (70.6%). Finally, 73 out of 231 genes were found to be potentially
translated based on their signal in polysome-associated RNA-Seq representing
transcripts that are actively being translated.
CONCLUSION: Our results clearly indicate that nucleosome positioning data
contains sufficient information for novel gene discovery. As distinct nucleosome 
landscapes around genes are found in many other eukaryotic organisms, this
methodology could be used to characterize the transcriptome of any organism,
especially when coupled with other DNA-based gene finding and experimental
methods (e.g., RNA-Seq).

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-015-2214-9 
PMCID: PMC4658763
PMID: 26607328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

