
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2015 Nov 28;7(11):3116-31. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evv203.

Reticulate Speciation and Barriers to Introgression in the Anopheles gambiae
Species Complex.

Crawford JE(1), Riehle MM(2), Guelbeogo WM(3), Gneme A(3), Sagnon N(3), Vernick
KD(4), Nielsen R(5), Lazzaro BP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Cornell University Department of Integrative
Biology, University of California, Berkeley j.crawford@berkeley.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota.
(3)Centre National de Recherche et de Formation sur le Paludisme, Ouagadougou,
Burkina Faso.
(4)Unit of Insect Vector Genetics and Genomics, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley.
(6)Department of Entomology, Cornell University.

Speciation as a process remains a central focus of evolutionary biology, but our 
understanding of the genomic architecture and prevalence of speciation in the
face of gene flow remains incomplete. The Anopheles gambiae species complex of
malaria mosquitoes is a radiation of ecologically diverse taxa. This complex is
well-suited for testing for evidence of a speciation continuum and genomic
barriers to introgression because its members exhibit partially overlapping
geographic distributions as well as varying levels of divergence and reproductive
isolation. We sequenced 20 genomes from wild A. gambiae s.s., Anopheles coluzzii,
Anopheles arabiensis, and compared these with 12 genomes from the "GOUNDRY"
subgroup of A. gambiae s.l. Amidst a backdrop of strong reproductive isolation,
we find strong evidence for a speciation continuum with introgression of
autosomal chromosomal regions among species and subgroups. The X chromosome,
however, is strongly differentiated among all taxa, pointing to a
disproportionately large effect of X chromosome genes in driving speciation among
anophelines. Strikingly, we find that autosomal introgression has occurred from
contemporary hybridization between A. gambiae and A. arabiensis despite strong
divergence (∼5× higher than autosomal divergence) and isolation on the X
chromosome. In addition to the X, we find strong evidence that lowly recombining 
autosomal regions, especially pericentromeric regions, serve as barriers to
introgression secondarily to the X. We show that speciation with gene flow
results in genomic mosaicism of divergence and introgression. Such a reticulate
gene pool connecting vector taxa across the speciation continuum has important
implications for malaria control efforts.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evv203 
PMCID: PMC4994751
PMID: 26615027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

