
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Jan 8;10(1):e0004298. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004298.
eCollection 2016 Jan.

In Vitro Mode of Action and Anti-thrombotic Activity of Boophilin, a
Multifunctional Kunitz Protease Inhibitor from the Midgut of a Tick Vector of
Babesiosis, Rhipicephalus microplus.

Assumpção TC(1), Ma D(1), Mizurini DM(2), Kini RM(3), Ribeiro JM(1), Kotsyfakis
M(4), Monteiro RQ(2), Francischetti IM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research (LMVR),
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National
Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)Instituto de Bioquímica Médica Leopoldo de Meis, Universidade Federal do Rio
de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Protein Science Laboratory, Department of Biological Sciences, National
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Institute of Parasitology,
České Budějovice, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: Hematophagous mosquitos and ticks avoid host hemostatic system
through expression of enzyme inhibitors targeting proteolytic reactions of the
coagulation and complement cascades. While most inhibitors characterized to date 
were found in the salivary glands, relatively few others have been identified in 
the midgut. Among those, Boophilin is a 2-Kunitz multifunctional inhibitor
targeting thrombin, elastase, and kallikrein. However, the kinetics of Boophilin 
interaction with these enzymes, how it modulates platelet function, and whether
it inhibits thrombosis in vivo have not been determined.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Boophilin was expressed in HEK293 cells and
purified to homogeneity. Using amidolytic assays and surface plasmon resonance
experiments, we have demonstrated that Boophilin behaves as a classical,
non-competitive inhibitor of thrombin with respect to small chromogenic
substrates by a mechanism dependent on both exosite-1 and catalytic site.
Inhibition is accompanied by blockade of platelet aggregation, fibrin formation, 
and clot-bound thrombin in vitro. Notably, we also identified Boophilin as a
non-competitive inhibitor of FXIa, preventing FIX activation. In addition,
Boophilin inhibits kallikrein activity and the reciprocal activation, indicating 
that it targets the contact pathway. Furthermore, Boophilin abrogates cathepsin
G- and plasmin-induced platelet aggregation and partially affects
elastase-mediated cleavage of Tissue Factor Pathway Inhibitor (TFPI). Finally,
Boophilin inhibits carotid artery occlusion in vivo triggered by FeCl3, and
promotes bleeding according to the mice tail transection method.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Through inhibition of several enzymes involved in
proteolytic cascades and cell activation, Boophilin plays a major role in keeping
the midgut microenvironment at low hemostatic and inflammatory tonus. This
response allows ticks to successfully digest a blood meal which is critical for
metabolism and egg development. Boophilin is the first tick midgut FXIa
anticoagulant also found to inhibit thrombosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004298 
PMCID: PMC4706430
PMID: 26745503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

