
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 8;6:18848. doi: 10.1038/srep18848.

Enhancing immunogenicity and transmission-blocking activity of malaria vaccines
by fusing Pfs25 to IMX313 multimerization technology.

Li Y(1), Leneghan DB(1), Miura K(2), Nikolaeva D(1)(2), Brian IJ(1), Dicks MD(1),
Fyfe AJ(1), Zakutansky SE(1), de Cassan S(1), Long CA(2), Draper SJ(1), Hill
AV(1), Hill F(3), Biswas S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7DQ, UK.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious. Disease/National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(3)IMAXIO, 69007 Lyon, France.

Transmission-blocking vaccines (TBV) target the sexual-stages of the malaria
parasite in the mosquito midgut and are widely considered to be an essential tool
for malaria elimination. High-titer functional antibodies are required against
target antigens to achieve effective transmission-blocking activity. We have
fused Pfs25, the leading malaria TBV candidate antigen to IMX313, a molecular
adjuvant and expressed it both in ChAd63 and MVA viral vectors and as a secreted 
protein-nanoparticle. Pfs25-IMX313 expressed from viral vectors or as a
protein-nanoparticle is significantly more immunogenic and gives significantly
better transmission-reducing activity than monomeric Pfs25. In addition, we
demonstrate that the Pfs25-IMX313 protein-nanoparticle leads to a qualitatively
improved antibody response in comparison to soluble Pfs25, as well as to
significantly higher germinal centre (GC) responses. These results demonstrate
that antigen multimerization using IMX313 is a very promising strategy to enhance
antibody responses against Pfs25, and that Pfs25-IMX313 is a highly promising TBV
candidate vaccine.

DOI: 10.1038/srep18848 
PMCID: PMC4705524
PMID: 26743316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

