
1. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 11;11(1):e0143565. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143565.
eCollection 2016.

The Genotypic and Phenotypic Stability of Plasmodium falciparum Field Isolates in
Continuous In Vitro Culture.

Yeda R(1), Ingasia LA(1), Cheruiyot AC(1), Okudo C(1), Chebon LJ(1)(2), Cheruiyot
J(1), Akala HM(1), Kamau E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emerging Infectious Diseases-Global Emerging Infections
Surveillance and Response System (DEID-GEIS) Program, United States Army Medical 
Research Directorate-Kenya (USAMRD-K), Kenya Medical Research Institute
(KEMRI)-Walter Reed Project, Kisumu, Kenya.
(2)Institute of Tropical Medicine and Infectious Diseases, College of Health
Sciences, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology, Nairobi, Kenya.

The Plasmodium falciparum in vitro culture system is critical for genotypic and
phenotypic analyses of the parasites. For genotypic analysis, the genomic DNA can
be obtained directly from the patient blood sample or from culture adapted
parasites whereas for phenotypic analysis, immediate ex vivo or in vitro culture 
adapted parasites are used. However, parasite biology studies have not
investigated whether culture adaptation process affects genotypic and/or
phenotypic characteristics of the parasites in short- or long-term cultures.
Here, we set out to study the dynamics and stability of parasite genetic and
phenotypic profiles as field isolate parasites were adapted in continuous
cultures. Parasites collected from three different patients presenting with
uncomplicated malaria were adapted and maintained in drug-free continuous
cultures. Aliquots from the continuous cultures were collected every 24-48 hours 
for analyses. Each aliquot was treated as a separate parasite sample. For genetic
analysis, microsatellite (MS) typing and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
analyses of 23 drug resistance markers were done. The 50% inhibitory
concentrations (IC50) for some of the samples were also established for four
antimalarial drugs. Samples from each patient (parasite-line) were compared as
they were passed through the continuous culture. Data revealed genotypic and
phenotypic profiles for the three parasite-lines fluctuated from one generation
to the next with no specific pattern or periodicity. With few exceptions,
multilocus analysis revealed samples from each parasite-line had high genetic
diversity with unique haplotypes. Interestingly, changes in MS and SNP profiles
occurred simultaneously. The difference in the IC50s of samples in each
parasite-line reached statistical significance. However, phenotypic changes did
not correspond or correlate to genotypic changes. Our study revealed parasite
genetic and phenotypic characteristics fluctuates in short- and long-term
cultures, which indicates parasite genetic information obtained even in short
cultures is likely to be different from the natural infection parasites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143565 
PMCID: PMC4713440
PMID: 26751382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

