
1. J Parasitol Res. 2015;2015:721201. doi: 10.1155/2015/721201. Epub 2015 Dec 6.

Plasmodium falciparum msp2 Genotypes and Multiplicity of Infections among
Children under Five Years with Uncomplicated Malaria in Kibaha, Tanzania.

Kidima W(1), Nkwengulila G(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Natural and Applied Sciences, Department of Zoology and Wildlife
Conservation, University of Dar es Salaam, P.O. Box 35064, Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania.

Genetic diversity of Plasmodium falciparum may pose challenges in malaria
treatment and prevention through chemotherapy and vaccination. We assessed
Plasmodium falciparum genetic diversity and multiplicity of infection (MOI) of P.
falciparum infections and sort relationship of parasitaemia with P. falciparum
msp2 genotypes as well as with the number of infecting clones. The study was
carried out in Kibaha, Tanzania. Ninety-nine children under five years with
uncomplicated malaria were recruited. Genetic diversity was analyzed by
genotyping the msp2 gene using PCR-Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism.
Thirty-two different msp2 alleles were obtained. The msp2 3D7 allelic frequency
was higher (48.1%) and more prevalent than FC27 (27.3%) (p < 0.05). Twenty-four
percent of the infections were mixed alleles. The individuals with FC27 had high 
parasitemia compared to those with 3D7 alleles (p = 0.038). The mean MOI was low 
(1.4 clones, 95% CI 1.2-1.5). The P. falciparum population among children at
Kibaha is composed of distinct P. falciparum clones, and parasites having 3D7 are
more frequent than those with FC27 alleles. Individuals with parasite having FC27
alleles have high parasite densities suggesting that parasites with FC27 alleles 
may associate with severity of disease in Kibaha. Low MOI at Kibaha suggests low 
malaria transmission rate.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/721201 
PMCID: PMC4684896
PMID: 26770821 

