
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 25;6:19882. doi: 10.1038/srep19882.

Global selection of Plasmodium falciparum virulence antigen expression by host
antibodies.

Abdi AI(1)(2), Warimwe GM(3)(4), Muthui MK(1), Kivisi CA(1), Kiragu EW(1), Fegan 
GW(1)(5), Bull PC(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, P.O. Box 230-80108, Kilifi, Kenya.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Chemistry, Pwani University, P.O. Box 195,
80108, Kilifi, Kenya.
(3)The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, ORCRB, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford,
OX3 7DQ, UK.
(4)Centre for Research in Therapeutic Sciences and, Institute for Healthcare
Management, Strathmore University, P.O. Box 59857-00200 Nairobi, Kenya.
(5)Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, University 
of Oxford, Oxford, OX3.

Parasite proteins called PfEMP1 that are inserted on the surface of infected
erythrocytes, play a key role in the severe pathology associated with infection
by the Plasmodium falciparum malaria parasite. These proteins mediate binding of 
infected cells to the endothelial lining of blood vessels as a strategy to avoid 
clearance by the spleen and are major targets of naturally acquired immunity.
PfEMP1 is encoded by a large multi-gene family called var. Mutually-exclusive
transcriptional switching between var genes allows parasites to escape host
antibodies. This study examined in detail the patterns of expression of var in a 
well-characterized sample of parasites from Kenyan Children. Instead of observing
clear inverse relationships between the expression of broad sub-classes of
PfEMP1, we found that expression of different PfEMP1 groups vary relatively
independently. Parasite adaptation to host antibodies also appears to involve a
general reduction in detectable var gene expression. We suggest that parasites
switch both between different PfEMP1 variants and between high and low expression
states. Such a strategy could provide a means of avoiding immunological detection
and promoting survival under high levels of host immunity.

DOI: 10.1038/srep19882 
PMCID: PMC4726288
PMID: 26804201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

