
1. Int J Parasitol. 2016 May;46(5-6):323-32. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2016.01.001. Epub
2016 Feb 6.

The FIKK kinase of Toxoplasma gondii is not essential for the parasite's lytic
cycle.

Skariah S(1), Walwyn O(2), Engelberg K(3), Gubbels MJ(3), Gaylets C(2), Kim N(2),
Lynch B(2), Sultan A(1), Mordue DG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Weill Cornell Medical College in Qatar, Doha, Qatar.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, New York Medical College, Valhalla,
NY 10595, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA 02467, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, New York Medical College, Valhalla,
NY 10595, USA. Electronic address: Dana_Mordue@nymc.edu.

FIKK kinases are a novel family of kinases unique to the Apicomplexa. While most 
apicomplexans encode a single FIKK kinase, Plasmodium falciparum expresses 21 and
piroplasms do not encode a FIKK kinase. FIKK kinases share a conserved C-terminal
catalytic domain, but the N-terminal region is highly variable and contains no
known functional domains. To date, FIKK kinases have been primarily studied in P.
falciparum and Plasmodium berghei. Those that have been studied are exported from
the parasite and associate with diverse locations in the infected erythrocyte
cytosol or membrane. Deletion of individual P. falciparum FIKK kinases indicates 
that they may play a role in modification of the infected erythrocyte. The
current study characterises the single FIKK gene in Toxoplasma gondii to evaluate
the importance of the FIKK kinase in an apicomplexan that has a single FIKK
kinase. The TgFIKK gene encoded a protein of approximately 280kDa. Endogenous
tagging of the FIKK protein with Yellow Fluorescent Protein showed that the FIKK 
protein exclusively localised to the posterior end of tachyzoites. A Yellow
Fluorescent Protein-tagged FIKK and a Ty-tagged FIKK both co-localised with T.
gondii membrane occupation and recognition nexus protein to the basal complex and
were localised apical to inner membrane complex protein-5 and Centrin2. Deletion 
of TgFIKK, surprisingly, had no detectable effect on the parasite's lytic cycle
in vitro in human fibroblast cells or in acute virulence in vivo. Thus, our
results clearly show that while the FIKK kinase is expressed in tachyzoites, it
is not essential for the lytic cycle of T. gondii.

Copyright Â© 2016 Australian Society for Parasitology Inc. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2016.01.001 
PMCID: PMC4844859
PMID: 26859096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

