
1. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 17;11(2):e0149296. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149296.
eCollection 2016.

Contrasting Inducible Knockdown of the Auxiliary PTEX Component PTEX88 in P.
falciparum and P. berghei Unmasks a Role in Parasite Virulence.

Chisholm SA(1), McHugh E(2), Lundie R(3), Dixon MW(2), Ghosh S(1), O'Keefe M(3), 
Tilley L(2), Kalanon M(1), de Koning-Ward TF(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Deakin University, Waurn Ponds, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Institute, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(3)The Burnet Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Pathogenesis of malaria infections is linked to remodeling of erythrocytes, a
process dependent on the trafficking of hundreds of parasite-derived proteins
into the host erythrocyte. Recent studies have demonstrated that the Plasmodium
translocon of exported proteins (PTEX) serves as the central gateway for
trafficking of these proteins, as inducible knockdown of the core PTEX
constituents blocked the trafficking of all classes of cargo into the
erythrocyte. However, the role of the auxiliary component PTEX88 in protein
export remains less clear. Here we have used inducible knockdown technologies in 
P. falciparum and P. berghei to assess the role of PTEX88 in parasite development
and protein export, which reveal that the in vivo growth of PTEX88-deficient
parasites is hindered. Interestingly, we were unable to link this observation to 
a general defect in export of a variety of known parasite proteins, suggesting
that PTEX88 functions in a different fashion to the core PTEX components.
Strikingly, PTEX88-deficient P. berghei were incapable of causing cerebral
malaria despite a robust pro-inflammatory response from the host. These parasites
also exhibited a reduced ability to sequester in peripheral tissues and were
removed more readily from the circulation by the spleen. In keeping with these
findings, PTEX88-deficient P. falciparum-infected erythrocytes displayed reduced 
binding to the endothelial cell receptor, CD36. This suggests that PTEX88 likely 
plays a specific direct or indirect role in mediating parasite sequestration
rather than making a universal contribution to the trafficking of all exported
proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149296 
PMCID: PMC4757573
PMID: 26886275  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

