
1. Gene. 2016 Jul 10;585(2):177-90. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.02.031. Epub 2016 Feb
23.

Hemocytome: deep sequencing analysis of mosquito blood cells in Indian malarial
vector Anopheles stephensi.

Thomas T(1), De TD(1), Sharma P(1), Lata S(1), Saraswat P(1), Pandey KC(1), Dixit
R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Host-Parasite Interaction Biology Group, National Institute of Malaria
Research, Sector-8, Dwarka, Delhi -110077, (India).
(2)Host-Parasite Interaction Biology Group, National Institute of Malaria
Research, Sector-8, Dwarka, Delhi -110077, (India). Electronic address:
dixit2k@yahoo.com.

Hemocytes are tiny circulating blood cells of insects known to play multiple
roles in physiological as well as cellular immune responses. However, the
molecular nature of hemocytes in blood feeding insects, especially mosquitoes
which transmit several deadly diseases such as malaria, dengue etc. is still
limited. Therefore, to know the basic molecular composition of naïve mosquito
hemocyte encoded proteins, we sequenced RNA-Seq library and analyzed a total of
13,105,858 Illumina sequencing reads in the mosquito Anopheles stephensi, an
urban malarial vector in India. Denovo assembly approach yielded a buildup of
3025 contigs, for molecular and functional annotation. A total of 1829 contigs
(48%) could be mapped to the mosquito transcript database, while out of remaining
1196 unmatched contigs, at least 1108 contigs i.e. 40% of total contigs, yielded 
a significant match to the available draft genome. ImmunoDB analysis predicted a 
total of 88 putative hemocyte transcripts belonging to 11 immune family proteins.
A comprehensive molecular analysis of several unique transcripts including novel 
LRR, Holotricin, OBP, NiFU, that are involved in immunity, chemo sensing,
cell-cell communication, nitrogen fixation/metabolism etc. provides initial
evidence that mosquito hemocytes carry unique ability to meet and manage cell
specific diverse functions of the mosquito blood. An unexpected observation of
abundant transcripts encoding hypothetical proteins with unknown functions
indicated that a much of the hemocyte biology remains to be understood.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.02.031 
PMID: 26915489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

