
1. Parasitol Res. 2016 Jun;115(6):2191-202. doi: 10.1007/s00436-016-4961-1. Epub
2016 Feb 27.

Novel insights on ENTH domain-containing proteins in apicomplexan parasites.

Kibria KM(1), Hossain MU(2), Oany AR(2), Ahmad SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Mawlana Bhashani Science 
and Technology University, Santosh, Tangail, 1902, Bangladesh.
km_kibria@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Mawlana Bhashani Science 
and Technology University, Santosh, Tangail, 1902, Bangladesh.

The phylum Apicomplexa includes a large group of early branching eukaryotes
having significant medical and economical importance. The molecular machinery
responsible for protein trafficking is poorly understood in these apicomplexans. 
One of the most important proteins involved in clathrin-mediated protein
trafficking is Epsin, which contains ENTH domain, a conserved domain crucial for 
membrane bending leading to vesicle formation. We undertook homology searching
and phylogenetic analyses to produce a rigorously annotated set of Epsin homologs
retrieved from diverse apicomplexan genomes. Genomic and phylogenetic comparisons
revealed that apicomplexans contain unusual Epsin homologs that are distinct from
those observed in mammals and yeast. Although there are four Epsin genes in
mammalian system and five in the yeast genome, apicomplexan parasites consist
only a single Epsin gene. The apicomplexan Epsin contains the conserved ENTH
domain consisting of phosphoinositide (PtdIns)-binding sites which indicate about
their functional significance in the formation of vesicles; however, the absence 
of ubiquitin-interacting motif (UIM) suggests a possible different mechanism for 
protein trafficking. The existence of dileucine motif in Plasmodium,
Cryptosporidum parvum and Eimeria tenella Epsins might solve their functionality 
while lacking a lot of conserved motifs as this motif is known to interact with
different adaptor protein complexes (AP1, AP2 and AP3). Other Epsin homologs are 
also shown to have different peptide motifs reported for possible interaction
with α-ear appendage, γ-ear appendage and EH domain present in different
adaptors. Bioinformatic and phylogenetic analyses suggest that the apicomplexan
Epsins have unusual functionality from that of the mammalian Epsins. This
detailed study may greatly facilitate future molecular cell biological
investigation for the role of Epsins in these parasites.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-016-4961-1 
PMID: 26922178  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

