
1. Acta Trop. 2016 Jun;158:107-116. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.02.028. Epub
2016 Mar 2.

Characterization and expression analysis of gene encoding heme peroxidase HPX15
in major Indian malaria vector Anopheles stephensi (Diptera: Culicidae).

Kajla M(1), Kakani P(1), Choudhury TP(1), Gupta K(1), Gupta L(1), Kumar S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani Campus,
Pilani, 333031 Rajasthan, India.
(2)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani Campus,
Pilani, 333031 Rajasthan, India. Electronic address:
sanjeev@pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in.

The interaction of mosquito immune system with Plasmodium is critical in
determining the vector competence. Thus, blocking the crucial mosquito molecules 
that regulate parasite development might be effective in controlling the disease 
transmission. In this study, we characterized a full-length AsHPX15 gene from the
major Indian malaria vector Anopheles stephensi. This gene is true ortholog of
Anopheles gambiae heme peroxidase AgHPX15 (AGAP013327), which modulates midgut
immunity and regulates Plasmodium falciparum development. We found that AsHPX15
is highly induced in mosquito developmental stages and blood fed midguts. In
addition, this is a lineage-specific gene that has identical features and 65-99% 
amino acids identity with other HPX15 genes present in eighteen
worldwide-distributed anophelines. We discuss that the conserved HPX15 gene might
serve as a common target to manipulate mosquito immunity and arresting Plasmodium
development inside the vector host.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.02.028 
PMID: 26943999  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

