
1. Exp Parasitol. 2016 May;164:84-90. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2016.03.008. Epub 2016 
Mar 4.

Inhibition of Plasmodium falciparum proliferation in vitro by double-stranded RNA
nanoparticle against malaria topoisomerase II.

Attasart P(1), Boonma S(2), Sunintaboon P(3), Tanwilai D(3), Pothikasikorn J(4), 
Noonpakdee WT(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Mahidol University, Salaya, Nakornpathom
73170, Thailand.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok
10400, Thailand.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok
10400, Thailand.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok
10400, Thailand.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok
10400, Thailand. Electronic address: wilai.noo@mahidol.ac.th.

The need to develop new effective antimalarial agents is urgent due to the rapid 
emergence of drug resistance to all current drugs by the most virulent human
malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum. A promising avenue is in the development
of antimalarials based on RNA interference targeting expression of malaria
parasite vital genes, viz. DNA topoisomerase II gene (PfTOP2). Biodegradable
chitosan nanoparticle system has proven to be effective in delivering DNA and
small double-stranded interfering RNA to target cells. We have employed a long
double-stranded (dsRNA) targeting the coding region of PfTOP2 that is complexed
with chitosan nanoparticles in order to interfere with the cognate mRNA
expression and examined its effect on P. falciparum growth in culture. Exposure
of ring stage-infected erythrocytes to 10 μg/ml PfTOP2 chitosan/dsRNA
nanoparticles for 48 h resulted in 71% growth inhibition as determined by [(3)H] 
hypoxanthine incorporation and microscopic assays, compared with 41% inhibition
using an equivalent amount of free PfTOP2 dsRNA or 12% with unrelated
chitosan/dsRNA nanoparticles. This inhibition was shown to occur during
maturation of trophozoite to schizont stages. RT-PCR analysis indicated 56% and
38% decrease in PfTOP2 transcript levels in P. falciparum trophozoites treated
with PfTOP2 dsRNA nanoparticles and free PfTOP2 dsRNA respectively. These results
suggest that chitosan-based nanoparticles might be a useful tool for delivering
dsRNA into malaria parasites.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2016.03.008 
PMID: 26953249  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

