
1. J Innate Immun. 2016;8(3):314-26. doi: 10.1159/000443883. Epub 2016 Mar 8.

Functional Interaction between Apolipophorins and Complement Regulate the
Mosquito Immune Response to Systemic Infections.

Kamareddine L(1), Nakhleh J, Osta MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.

The complement-like protein thioester-containing protein 1 (TEP1) is the hallmark
effector molecule against Plasmodium ookinetes in the malaria vector Anopheles
gambiae. We have previously shown that the knockdown of the noncatalytic clip
domain serine protease CLIPA2 increased TEP1-mediated killing rendering
mosquitoes more resistant to Plasmodium, bacterial and fungal infections. Here,
CLIPA2 coimmunoprecipitation from the hemolymph of Beauveria bassiana-infected
mosquitoes followed by mass spectrometry and functional genetic analysis led to
the identification of the Apolipophorin-II/I gene, encoding the two lipid carrier
proteins Apo-I and II, as a novel negative regulator of TEP1-mediated immune
response during mosquito systemic infections. Apo-II/I exhibits a similar RNAi
phenotype as CLIPA2 in mosquito bioassays characterized by increased resistance
to B. bassiana and Escherichia coli infections. We provide evidence that this
enhanced resistance to systemic infections is TEP1 dependent. Interestingly,
silencing Apo-II/I but not CLIPA2 upregulated the expression of TEP1 following
systemic infections with E. coli and B. bassiana in a c-Jun N-terminal kinase
pathway-dependent manner. Our results suggest that mosquito Apo-II/I plays an
important immune regulatory role during systemic infections and provide novel
insight into the functional interplay between lipid metabolism and immune gene
regulation.

Â© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000443883 
PMCID: PMC6738827
PMID: 26950600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

