
1. Genom Data. 2015 Dec 1;7:79-81. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2015.11.026. eCollection
2016 Mar.

Plasmodium falciparum epigenome: A distinct dynamic epigenetic regulation of gene
expression.

Rawat M(1), Bhosale MA(1), Karmodiya K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research,
Pune, Maharashtra, India.

Histone modification profiles are predictive of gene expression and most of the
knowledge gained is acquired through studies done in higher eukaryotes. However, 
genome-wide studies involving Plasmodium falciparum, the causative agent of
malaria, have been rather few, at lower resolution (mostly using ChIP-on-chip),
and covering limited number of histone modifications. In our recent study [1], we
have performed extensive genome-wide analyses of multiple histone modifications
including the active (H3K4me2, H3K4me3, H3K9ac, H3K14ac, H3K27ac and H4ac),
inactive (H3K9me3 and H3K27me3), elongation (H3K79me3) and regulatory element
(H3K4me1) in a stage-specific manner. Furthermore, we used a ligation-based
method suitable for sequencing homopolymeric stretches as seen in P. falciparum
for next-generation sequencing library amplification [2], enabling highly
quantitative analysis of the extremely AT-rich P. falciparum genome. Our recently
published study suggests that transcription regulation by virtue of poised
chromatin and differential histone modifications is unique to P. falciparum [1]. 
Here we describe the experiments, quality controls and chromatin
immunoprecipitation-sequencing data analysis of our associated study published in
Epigenetics and Chromatin [1]. Stage-specific ChIP-sequencing data for histone
modifications is submitted to Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database under the
accession number GSE63369.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gdata.2015.11.026 
PMCID: PMC4778637
PMID: 26981368 

