
1. Acta Trop. 2016 Jul;159:83-94. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.02.025. Epub 2016 
Mar 16.

Haemoproteus erythrogravidus n. sp. (Haemosporida, Haemoproteidae): Description
and molecular characterization of a widespread blood parasite of birds in South
America.

Mantilla JS(1), González AD(1), Lotta IA(1), Moens M(2), Pacheco MA(3), Escalante
AA(3), Valkiūnas G(4), Moncada LI(5), Pérez-Tris J(2), Matta NE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Sede Bogotá-Facultad de Ciencias,
Departamento de Biología, Grupo de Investigación Caracterización genética e
inmunología, Carrera 30 No. 45-03, Bogotá 111321, Colombia.
(2)Departamento de Zoología y Antropología Física, Facultad de Biología,
Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Calle José Antonio Novais 12, 28040 Madrid,
Spain.
(3)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine (igem), Temple University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Nature Research Centre, Akademijos 2, LT-08412 Vilnius, Lithuania.
(5)Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Sede Bogotá-Facultad de Medicina,
Departamento de Salud Pública-Grupo de Investigación Infecciones y Salud en el
Trópico, Carrera 30 No. 45-03, Bogotá 111321, Colombia.
(6)Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Sede Bogotá-Facultad de Ciencias,
Departamento de Biología, Grupo de Investigación Caracterización genética e
inmunología, Carrera 30 No. 45-03, Bogotá 111321, Colombia. Electronic address:
nemattac@unal.edu.co.

The great diversity of birds and ecosystems in the Andean mountains has been
understudied in terms of their parasite species. We describe a new Haemoproteus
parasite, H. (Parahaemoproteus) erythrogravidus infecting Zonotrichia capensis
(Rufous-Collared Sparrow) in South America. The description of this blood
parasite species is supported by morphological and molecular data based on a
fragment of cytochrome b gene (cyt b) and complete mitochondrial genome
sequences. The new species is closely related to H. (Parahaemoproteus) coatneyi, 
and it can be readily distinguished from the latter parasite due to morphology of
its blood stages, particularly 1) the formation of a marked protrusion on
envelope of infected erythrocytes by the majority of developing gametocytes, a
feature which is unique for this Haemoproteus species and 2) the extremely
attenuated width of the growing dumbbell-shaped macro- and microgametocytes.
Additionally, Haemoproteus erythrogravidus is shown to be a monophyletic taxon
that diverges from Haemoproteus coatneyi at the molecular level. We provide the
complete mitochondrial DNA genome for both H. coatneyi and H. erythrogravidus.
Molecular and morphological evidences indicate that H. erythrogravidus is present
in Ecuador and Colombia, and genetic lineages with 100% of identity for the cyt b
gene were reported in Chile, Perú, and Venezuela. Our study also indicates that
H. erythrogravidus and H. coatneyi are sympatric sister taxa sharing Z. capensis 
as a host species across its distribution, which could be the result of sympatric
speciation or complex biogeographic processes. Further studies on the
distribution and evolutionary history of Z. capensis and its parasites H.
erythrogravidus and H. coatneyi insight for our better understanding of the
factors and dynamics driving parasite speciation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.02.025 
PMID: 26995696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

