
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 31;11(3):e0152322. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152322.
eCollection 2016.

Enhanced Methylation Analysis by Recovery of Unsequenceable Fragments.

McInroy GR(1), Beraldi D(2), Raiber EA(1), Modrzynska K(3), van Delft P(1),
Billker O(3), Balasubramanian S(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire,
United Kingdom.
(2)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge,
Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom.
(3)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom.
(4)School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom.

Bisulfite sequencing is a valuable tool for mapping the position of
5-methylcytosine in the genome at single base resolution. However, the associated
chemical treatment causes strand scission, which depletes the number of
sequenceable DNA fragments in a library and thus necessitates PCR amplification. 
The AT-rich nature of the library generated from bisulfite treatment adversely
affects this amplification, resulting in the introduction of major biases that
can confound methylation analysis. Here, we report a method that enables more
accurate methylation analysis, by rebuilding bisulfite-damaged components of a
DNA library. This recovery after bisulfite treatment (ReBuilT) approach enables
PCR-free bisulfite sequencing from low nanogram quantities of genomic DNA. We
apply the ReBuilT method for the first whole methylome analysis of the highly
AT-rich genome of Plasmodium berghei. Side-by-side comparison to a commercial
protocol involving amplification demonstrates a substantial improvement in
uniformity of coverage and reduction of sequence context bias. Our method will be
widely applicable for quantitative methylation analysis, even for technically
challenging genomes, and where limited sample DNA is available.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152322 
PMCID: PMC4816320
PMID: 27031619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

