
1. Nat Commun. 2016 Apr 15;7:11301. doi: 10.1038/ncomms11301.

Characterization of eukaryotic DNA N(6)-methyladenine by a highly sensitive
restriction enzyme-assisted sequencing.

Luo GZ(1), Wang F(1)(2), Weng X(1)(3), Chen K(1), Hao Z(1), Yu M(1), Deng X(1),
Liu J(1), He C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Institute for Biophysical Dynamics, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The
University of Chicago, 929 East 57th Street, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.
(2)Wuhan University School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Wuhan 430071, China.
(3)College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Biomedical
Polymers of Ministry of Education, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China.

Although extensively studied in prokaryotes, the prevalence and significance of
DNA N(6)-methyladenine (6mA or m(6)dA) in eukaryotes had been underappreciated
until recent studies, which have demonstrated that 6mA regulates gene expression 
as a potential heritable mark. To interrogate 6mA sites at single-base
resolution, we report DA-6mA-seq (DpnI-Assisted N(6)-methylAdenine sequencing),
an approach that uses DpnI to cleave methylated adenine sites in duplex DNA. We
find that DpnI cuts other sequence motifs besides the canonical GATC restriction 
sites, thereby expanding the utility of this method. DA-6mA-seq achieves higher
sensitivity with nanograms of input DNA and lower sequencing depth than
conventional approaches. We study 6mA at base resolution in the Chlamydomonas
genome and apply the new method to two other eukaryotic organisms, Plasmodium and
Penicillium. Combined with conventional approaches, our method further shows that
most 6mA sites are fully methylated on both strands of DNA at various sequence
contexts.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11301 
PMCID: PMC4835550
PMID: 27079427  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

