
1. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2016 May;111(5):322-9. doi: 10.1590/0074-02760150429. Epub
2016 May 3.

Assessing the mitochondrial DNA diversity of the Chagas disease vector Triatoma
sordida (Hemiptera: Reduviidae).

Pessoa GC(1), Sousa TN(2), Sonoda IV(1), Diotaiuti L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Referência em Triatomíneos e Epidemiologia da Doença de Chagas,
Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Belo Horizonte, MG,
Brasil.
(2)Laboratório de Malária, Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo
Cruz, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brasil.

Triatoma sordida is a species that transmits Trypanosoma cruzi to humans. In
Brazil, T. sordida currently deserves special attention because of its wide
distribution, tendency to invade domestic environments and vectorial competence. 
For the planning and execution of control protocols to be effective against
Triatominae, they must consider its population structure. In this context, this
study aimed to characterise the genetic variability of T. sordida populations
collected in areas with persistent infestations from Minas Gerais, Brazil. Levels
of genetic variation and population structure were determined in peridomestic T. 
sordida by sequencing a polymorphic region of the mitochondrial cytochrome b
gene. Low nucleotide and haplotype diversity were observed for all 14 sampled
areas; π values ranged from 0.002-0.006. Most obtained haplotypes occurred at low
frequencies, and some were exclusive to only one of the studied populations.
Interpopulation genetic diversity analysis revealed strong genetic structuring.
Furthermore, the genetic variability of Brazilian populations is small compared
to that of Argentinean and Bolivian specimens. The possible factors related to
the reduced genetic variability and strong genetic structuring obtained for
studied populations are discussed in this paper.

DOI: 10.1590/0074-02760150429 
PMCID: PMC4878301
PMID: 27143491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

