
1. Int J Parasitol. 2016 Jul;46(8):527-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2016.04.002. Epub
2016 May 2.

Identifying antimalarial compounds targeting dihydrofolate reductase-thymidylate 
synthase (DHFR-TS) by chemogenomic profiling.

Aroonsri A(1), Akinola O(2), Posayapisit N(1), Songsungthong W(1), Uthaipibull
C(1), Kamchonwongpaisan S(1), Gbotosho GO(3), Yuthavong Y(1), Shaw PJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), 113 Thailand Science Park,
Thanon Phahonyothin, Tambon Khlong Neung, Amphoe Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani
12120, Thailand.
(2)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), 113 Thailand Science Park,
Thanon Phahonyothin, Tambon Khlong Neung, Amphoe Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani
12120, Thailand; Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of
Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Ibadan, Ibadan,
Nigeria.
(4)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), 113 Thailand Science Park,
Thanon Phahonyothin, Tambon Khlong Neung, Amphoe Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani
12120, Thailand. Electronic address: philip@biotec.or.th.

The mode of action of many antimalarial drugs is unknown. Chemogenomic profiling 
is a powerful method to address this issue. This experimental approach entails
disruption of gene function and phenotypic screening for changes in sensitivity
to bioactive compounds. Here, we describe the application of reverse genetics for
chemogenomic profiling in Plasmodium. Plasmodium falciparum parasites harbouring 
a transgenic insertion of the glmS ribozyme downstream of the dihydrofolate
reductase-thymidylate synthase (DHFR-TS) gene were used for chemogenomic
profiling of antimalarial compounds to identify those which target DHFR-TS.
DHFR-TS expression can be attenuated by exposing parasites to glucosamine.
Parasites with attenuated DHFR-TS expression were significantly more sensitive to
antifolate drugs known to target DHFR-TS. In contrast, no change in sensitivity
to other antimalarial drugs with different modes of action was observed.
Chemogenomic profiling was performed using the Medicines for Malaria Venture
(Switzerland) Malaria Box compound library, and two compounds were identified as 
novel DHFR-TS inhibitors. We also tested the glmS ribozyme in Plasmodium berghei,
a rodent malaria parasite. The expression of reporter genes with downstream glmS 
ribozyme could be attenuated in transgenic parasites comparable with that
obtained in P. falciparum. The chemogenomic profiling method was applied in a P. 
berghei line expressing a pyrimethamine-resistant Toxoplasma gondii DHFR-TS
reporter gene under glmS ribozyme control. Parasites with attenuated expression
of this gene were significantly sensitised to antifolates targeting DHFR-TS, but 
not other drugs with different modes of action. In conclusion, these data show
that the glmS ribozyme reverse genetic tool can be applied for identifying
primary targets of antimalarial compounds in human and rodent malaria parasites.

Copyright Â© 2016 Australian Society for Parasitology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2016.04.002 
PMID: 27150044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

