
1. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2016 Jun;9(6):525-34. doi: 10.1016/j.apjtm.2016.04.012.
Epub 2016 Apr 16.

Insights into the pyrimidine biosynthetic pathway of human malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum as chemotherapeutic target.

Krungkrai SR(1), Krungkrai J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Biochemistry, Department of Medical Science, Faculty of Science,
Rangsit University, Pathumthani 12000, Thailand.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Pathumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand. Electronic address: jerapan.k@chula.ac.th.

Malaria is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in humans. Artemisinins
remain as the first-line treatment for Plasmodium falciparum (P. falciparum)
malaria although drug resistance has already emerged and spread in Southeast
Asia. Thus, to fight this disease, there is an urgent need to develop new
antimalarial drugs for malaria chemotherapy. Unlike human host cells,
P. falciparum cannot salvage preformed pyrimidine bases or nucleosides from the
extracellular environment and relies solely on nucleotides synthesized through
the de novo biosynthetic pathway. This review presents significant progress on
understanding the de novo pyrimidine pathway and the functional enzymes in the
human parasite P. falciparum. Current knowledge in genomics and metabolomics are 
described, particularly focusing on the parasite purine and pyrimidine nucleotide
metabolism. These include gene annotation, characterization and molecular
mechanism of the enzymes that are different from the human host pathway. Recent
elucidation of the three-dimensional crystal structures and the catalytic
reactions of three enzymes: dihydroorotate dehydrogenase, orotate
phosphoribosyltransferase, and orotidine 5'-monophosphate decarboxylase, as well 
as their inhibitors are reviewed in the context of their therapeutic potential
against malaria.

Copyright © 2016 Hainan Medical College. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apjtm.2016.04.012 
PMID: 27262062 

