
1. ISRN Parasitol. 2012 Nov 28;2013:495304. doi: 10.5402/2013/495304. eCollection
2013.

Searching Before It Is Too Late: A Survey of Blood Parasites in Ctenosaura
melanosterna, a Critically Endangered Reptile of Honduras.

Davis AK(1), Benz AC(2), Ruyle LE(3), Kistler WM(4), Shock BC(4), Yabsley MJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Odum School of Ecology, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA; Odum
School of Ecology, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
(2)Division of Biological Sciences, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, 
USA.
(3)Odum School of Ecology, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA;
Applied Biodiversity Science Program, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX
77843-2258, USA.
(4)Warnell School of Forestry and Natural Resources, The University of Georgia,
Athens, GA 30602, USA; The Southeastern Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study,
Department of Population Health, College of Veterinary Medicine, The University
of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

For species at risk of extinction, any parasites they have would be expected to
face a similar fate. In such cases, time is running out for efforts to identify
and study their parasitic fauna before they are gone. We surveyed the
hemoparasite fauna of 50 black-chested, spiny-tailed iguanas (Ctenosaura
melanosterna), a critically-endangered species, on an island off the coast of
Honduras. Blood samples from captured animals were tested for hemoparasites by
thin blood smear and molecular analyses. Based on microscopy, two parasites were 
identified, a Plasmodium sp. in 14% of iguanas and a Hepatozoon sp. in 32%. For
both parasites, parasitemia levels were <0.1%. Prevalence and parasitemias of
Hepatozoon declined with increasing host size, a pattern differing from most
prior studies of saurian reptiles. From a subset of iguanas with
microscopy-confirmed Plasmodium infections, sequence analysis of 454â€‰bp of the
cytochrome b gene indicated that the Plasmodium species was distinct from known
Plasmodium and was most closely related to P. chiricahuae (96.5% similarity)
followed by P. mexicanum (95.8% similarity). Efforts to amplify the Hepatozoon
parasite using PCR were not successful. Additional surveys and studies of this
host-parasite system would be valuable, both to science and to the management of 
this endangered animal.

DOI: 10.5402/2013/495304 
PMCID: PMC4890925
PMID: 27335849 

