
1. Int J Parasitol. 2016 Oct;46(11):697-707. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2016.05.005. Epub
2016 Jun 25.

Description, molecular characterisation, diagnostics and life cycle of Plasmodium
elongatum (lineage pERIRUB01), the virulent avian malaria parasite.

Palinauskas V(1), Žiegytė R(2), Iezhova TA(2), Ilgūnas M(2), Bernotienė R(2),
Valkiūnas G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nature Research Centre, Akademijos 2, LT-08412 Vilnius, Lithuania. Electronic 
address: vaidas@ekoi.lt.
(2)Nature Research Centre, Akademijos 2, LT-08412 Vilnius, Lithuania.

Plasmodium elongatum causes severe avian malaria and is distributed worldwide.
This parasite is of particular importance due to its ability to develop and cause
lethal malaria not only in natural hosts, but also in non-adapted endemic birds
such as the brown kiwi and different species of penguins. Information on vectors 
of this infection is available but is contradictory. PCR-based analysis indicated
the possible existence of a cluster of closely related P. elongatum lineages
which might differ in their ability to develop in certain mosquitoes and birds.
This experimental study provides information about molecular and morphological
characterisation of a virulent P. elongatum strain (lineage pERIRUB01) isolated
from a naturally infected European robin, Erithacus rubecula. Phylogenetic
analysis based on partial cytochrome b gene sequences showed that this parasite
lineage is closely related to P. elongatum (lineage pGRW6). Blood stages of both 
parasite lineages are indistinguishable, indicating that they belong to the same 
species. Both pathogens develop in experimentally infected canaries, Serinus
canaria, causing death of the hosts. In both these lineages, trophozoites and
erythrocytic meronts develop in polychromatic erythrocytes and erythroblasts,
gametocytes parasitize mature erythrocytes, exoerythrocytic stages develop in
cells of the erythrocytic series in bone marrow and are occasionally reported in 
spleen and liver. Massive infestation of bone marrow cells is the main reason for
bird mortality. We report here on syncytium-like remnants of tissue meronts,
which slip out of the bone marrow into the peripheral circulation, providing
evidence that the syncytia can be a template for PCR amplification. This finding 
contributes to better understanding positive PCR amplifications in birds when
parasitemia is invisible and improved diagnostics of abortive haemosporidian
infections. Sporogony of P. elongatum (pERIRUB01) completes the cycle and
sporozoites develop in widespread Culex quinquefasciatus and Culex pipiens
pipiens form molestus mosquitoes. This experimental study provides information on
virulence and within species lineage diversity in a single pathogenic species of 
haemosporidian parasite.

Copyright © 2016 Australian Society for Parasitology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2016.05.005 
PMID: 27349510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

