
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2016 Oct;44:450-458. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.07.003. Epub
2016 Jul 5.

Analysis of genetic diversity in the chloroquine-resistant gene Pfcrt in field
Plasmodium falciparum isolates from five regions of the southern Cameroon.

Ngassa Mbenda HG(1), Das A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Evolutionary Genomics and Bioinformatics Laboratory, Division of Genomics and 
Bioinformatics, National Institute of Malaria Research, Dwarka Sector 8, New
Delhi-110077, India.
(2)Evolutionary Genomics and Bioinformatics Laboratory, Division of Genomics and 
Bioinformatics, National Institute of Malaria Research, Dwarka Sector 8, New
Delhi-110077, India. Electronic address: aparupdas.crme@gmail.com.

Understanding the population genetics of genes which shape resistance to
antimalarial drugs can help in devising novel control strategies. The high spread
of the resistant strains of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum pose a
greater challenge than before to the control programs across the world. Specific 
mutations in the P. falciparum chloroquine resistant transporter gene "Pfcrt"
have been associated with resistance to not only chloroquine, but also to
amodiaquine, one of the artemisinin partners used in Cameroon for the treatment
of uncomplicated malaria. We here present data on genetic variation at the Single
Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) level in the Pfcrt gene in five distinct
geographical settings of the Southern-Cameroon (the most malaria endemic part),
i.e. Ebolowa, Yaounde, Bertoua, Douala and Kye-ossi (a city bordering Cameroon
and two others African countries). Two novel mutations, hitherto unreported (in
Cameroon) were found in the Pfcrt gene and variable genetic diversity was
observed across the populations. High linkage disequilibrium was found between
few SNPs including one of the novel mutations suggesting a synergistic work for
conferring/maintaining a higher level of resistance. The inference of
evolutionary pattern of this gene in Cameroon based on the genetic diversity data
depicts a signature of Darwinian positive natural selection on these loci.
Observation of novel mutations might traduce new variants in chloroquine/or
amodiaquine resistance (proposal awaiting an experimental verification) and
signal of positive selection can be the result of drug pressure exerted by misuse
of chloroquine (though officially banned from the country) and/or amodiaquine.
Our findings thus, provide a baseline understanding of the evolution of a malaria
drug resistant gene in Cameroon and suggest a successful establishment of
chloroquine-resistant strains which requires urgent attention of the malaria
control program in Cameroon.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.07.003 
PMID: 27389361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

