
1. PLoS One. 2016 Jul 28;11(7):e0160172. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0160172.
eCollection 2016.

Variation in Human Cytochrome P-450 Drug-Metabolism Genes: A Gateway to the
Understanding of Plasmodium vivax Relapses.

Silvino AC(1), Costa GL(1), Araújo FC(1), Ascher DB(2)(3), Pires DE(2), Fontes
CJ(4), Carvalho LH(1), Brito CF(1), Sousa TN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Malaria Immunology Research Group, Centro de Pesquisas
René Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais,
Brazil.
(2)Biosystems Informatics Research Group, Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou,
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.
(4)Hospital Julio Muller, Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso, Cuiabá, Mato
Grosso, Brazil.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2018 Feb 1;13(2):e0192534.

Although Plasmodium vivax relapses are classically associated with hypnozoite
activation, it has been proposed that a proportion of these cases are due to
primaquine (PQ) treatment failure caused by polymorphisms in cytochrome P-450 2D6
(CYP2D6). Here, we present evidence that CYP2D6 polymorphisms are implicated in
PQ failure, which was reinforced by findings in genetically similar parasites,
and may explain a number of vivax relapses. Using a computational approach, these
polymorphisms were predicted to affect the activity of CYP2D6 through changes in 
the structural stability that could lead to disruption of the PQ-enzyme
interactions. Furthermore, because PQ is co-administered with chloroquine (CQ),
we investigated whether CQ-impaired metabolism by cytochrome P-450 2C8 (CYP2C8)
could also contribute to vivax recurrences. Our results show that CYP2C8-mutated 
patients frequently relapsed early (<42 days) and had a higher proportion of
genetically similar parasites, suggesting the possibility of recrudescence due to
CQ therapeutic failure. These results highlight the importance of pharmacogenetic
studies as a tool to monitor the efficacy of antimalarial therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0160172 
PMCID: PMC4965052
PMID: 27467145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

