
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2016 Nov - Dec;210(1-2):58-70. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2016.08.007. Epub 2016 Sep 13.

An insertion in the methyltransferase domain of P. falciparum trimethylguanosine 
synthase harbors a classical nuclear localization signal.

Babar PH(1), Dey V(1), Jaiswar P(1), Patankar S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences & Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay, Powai, Mumbai 400076, India.
(2)Department of Biosciences & Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay, Powai, Mumbai 400076, India. Electronic address: patankar@iitb.ac.in.

Many Plasmodium falciparum proteins do not share homology with, and are generally
longer than their respective orthologs. This, to some extent, can be attributed
to insertions. Here, we studied a P. falciparum RNA hypermethylase,
trimethylguanosine synthase (PfTGS1) that harbors a 76 amino acid insertion in
its methyltransferase domain. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that this
insertion was present in TGS1 orthologs from other Plasmodium species as well.
Interestingly, a classical nuclear localization signal (NLS) was predicted in the
insertions of primate parasite TGS1 proteins. To check whether these predicted
NLS are functional, we developed an in vivo heterologous system using S.
cerevisiae. The predicted NLS when fused to dimeric GFP were able to localize the
fusion protein to the nucleus in yeast indicating that it is indeed recognized by
the yeast nuclear import machinery. We further showed that the PfTGS1 NLS binds
to P. falciparum importin-α in vitro, confirming that the NLS is also recognized 
by the P. falciparum classical nuclear import machinery. Thus, in this study we
report a novel function of the insertion in PfTGS1.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2016.08.007 
PMID: 27619053  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

