
1. FEMS Microbiol Rev. 2017 Jan;41(1):34-48. doi: 10.1093/femsre/fuw037. Epub 2016
Sep 8.

The clinical impact of artemisinin resistance in Southeast Asia and the potential
for future spread.

Woodrow CJ(1), White NJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, 420/6, Rajvithi Road, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.
(2)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, 420/6, Rajvithi Road, Bangkok 10400, Thailand
nickw@tropmedres.ac.

Artemisinins are the most rapidly acting of currently available antimalarial
drugs. Artesunate has become the treatment of choice for severe malaria, and
artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs) are the foundation of modern
falciparum malaria treatment globally. Their safety and tolerability profile is
excellent. Unfortunately, Plasmodium falciparum infections with mutations in the 
'K13' gene, with reduced ring-stage susceptibility to artemisinins, and slow
parasite clearance in patients treated with ACTs, are now widespread in Southeast
Asia. We review clinical efficacy data from the region (2000-2015) that provides 
strong evidence that the loss of first-line ACTs in western Cambodia, first
artesunate-mefloquine and then DHA-piperaquine, can be attributed primarily to
K13 mutated parasites. The ring-stage activity of artemisinins is therefore
critical for the sustained efficacy of ACTs; once it is lost, rapid selection of 
partner drug resistance and ACT failure are inevitable consequences. Consensus
methods for monitoring artemisinin resistance are now available. Despite
increased investment in regional control activities, ACTs are failing across an
expanding area of the Greater Mekong subregion. Although multiple K13 mutations
have arisen independently, successful multidrug-resistant parasite genotypes are 
taking over and threaten to spread to India and Africa. Stronger containment
efforts and new approaches to sustaining long-term efficacy of antimalarial
regimens are needed to prevent a global malaria emergency.

Â© FEMS 2016.

DOI: 10.1093/femsre/fuw037 
PMCID: PMC5424521
PMID: 27613271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

