
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Aug 31;7:1351. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01351. eCollection
2016.

Silencing of Anopheles stephensi Heme Peroxidase HPX15 Activates Diverse Immune
Pathways to Regulate the Growth of Midgut Bacteria.

Kajla M(1), Choudhury TP(1), Kakani P(1), Gupta K(1), Dhawan R(1), Gupta L(2),
Kumar S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science Pilani, India.
(2)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and SciencePilani, India; Department of
Zoology, Chaudhary Bansi Lal UniversityBhiwani, India.
(3)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and SciencePilani, India; Department of
Biotechnology, Chaudhary Bansi Lal UniversityBhiwani, India.

Anopheles mosquito midgut harbors a diverse group of endogenous bacteria that
grow extensively after the blood feeding and help in food digestion and nutrition
in many ways. Although, the growth of endogenous bacteria is regulated by various
factors, however, the robust antibacterial immune reactions are generally
suppressed in this body compartment by a heme peroxidase HPX15 crosslinked mucins
barrier. This barrier is formed on the luminal side of the midgut and blocks the 
direct interactions and recognition of bacteria or their elicitors by the immune 
reactive midgut epithelium. We hypothesized that in the absence of HPX15, an
increased load of exogenous bacteria will enormously induce the mosquito midgut
immunity and this situation in turn, can easily regulate mosquito-pathogen
interactions. In this study, we found that the blood feeding induced AsHPX15 gene
in Anopheles stephensi midgut and promoted the growth of endogenous as well as
exogenous fed bacteria. In addition, the mosquito midgut also efficiently
regulated the number of these bacteria through the induction of classical Toll
and Imd immune pathways. In case of AsHPX15 silenced midguts, the growth of
midgut bacteria was largely reduced through the induction of nitric oxide
synthase (NOS) gene, a downstream effector molecule of the JAK/STAT pathway.
Interestingly, no significant induction of the classical immune pathways was
observed in these midguts. Importantly, the NOS is a well known negative
regulator of Plasmodium development, thus, we proposed that the induction of
diverged immune pathways in the absence of HPX15 mediated midgut barrier might be
one of the strategies to manipulate the vectorial capacity of Anopheles mosquito.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01351 
PMCID: PMC5006007
PMID: 27630620 

