
1. PLoS One. 2016 Sep 23;11(9):e0163127. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0163127.
eCollection 2016.

Transcriptome Sequencing Analysis and Functional Identification of Sex
Differentiation Genes from the Mosquito Parasitic Nematode, Romanomermis
wuchangensis.

Duan M(1), Xiong J(1), Lu D(1), Wang G(1), Ai H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Genetic Regulation and Integrative Biology, School of 
Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China.

Mosquito-transmitted diseases like malaria and dengue fever are global problem
and an estimated 50-100 million of dengue or dengue hemorrhagic fever cases are
reported worldwide every year. The mermithid nematode Romanomermis wuchangensis
has been successfully used as an ecosystem-friendly biocontrol agent for mosquito
prevention in laboratory studies. However, this nematode can not undergo sex
differentiation in vitro culture, which has seriously affected their application 
of biocontrol in the field. In this study, based on transcriptome sequencing
analysis of R. wuchangensis, Rwucmab-3, Rwuclaf-1 and Rwuctra-2 were cloned and
used to investigate molecular regulatory function of sex differentiation. qRT-PCR
results demonstrated that the expression level of Rwucmab-3 between male and
female displayed obvious difference on the 3rd day of parasitic stage, which was 
earlier than Rwuclaf-1 and Rwuctra-2, highlighting sex differentiation process
may start on the 3rd day of parasitic stage. Besides, FITC was used as a marker
to test dsRNA uptake efficiency of R. wuchangensis, which fluorescence intensity 
increased with FITC concentration after 16 h incubation, indicating this nematode
can successfully ingest soaking solution via its cuticle. RNAi results revealed
the sex ratio of R. wuchangensis from RNAi treated groups soaked in dsRNA of
Rwucmab-3 was significantly higher than gfp dsRNA treated groups and control
groups, highlighting RNAi of Rwumab-3 may hinder the development of male
nematodes. These results suggest that Rwucmab-3 mainly involves in the initiation
of sex differentiation and the development of male sexual dimorphism. Rwuclaf-1
and Rwuctra-2 may play vital role in nematode reproductive and developmental
system. In conclusion, transcript sequences presented in this study could provide
more bioinformatics resources for future studies on gene cloning and other
molecular regulatory mechanism in R. wuchangensis. Moreover, identification and
functional analysis of sex differentiation genes may clarify the sex
differentiation mechanism of R. wuchangensis, which are helpful to solve the
uncompleted sex differentiation problem in vitro culture and the potential
large-scale field application controlling the larvae of C. quinquefasciatus, A.
aegypti and A. albopictus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0163127 
PMCID: PMC5035087
PMID: 27662191 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

