
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Sep 28;6:34084. doi: 10.1038/srep34084.

A natural Anopheles-associated Penicillium chrysogenum enhances mosquito
susceptibility to Plasmodium infection.

Angleró-Rodríguez YI(1), Blumberg BJ(1), Dong Y(1), Sandiford SL(1), Pike A(1),
Clayton AM(1), Dimopoulos G(1).

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns 
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 615 N Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD 21205, 
USA.

Whereas studies have extensively examined the ability of bacteria to influence
Plasmodium infection in the mosquito, the tripartite interactions between
non-entomopathogenic fungi, mosquitoes, and Plasmodium parasites remain largely
uncharacterized. Here we report the isolation of a common mosquito-associated
ascomycete fungus, Penicillium chrysogenum, from the midgut of field-caught
Anopheles mosquitoes. Although the presence of Pe. chrysogenum in the Anopheles
gambiae midgut does not affect mosquito survival, it renders the mosquito
significantly more susceptible to Plasmodium infection through a secreted
heat-stable factor. We further provide evidence that the mechanism of the
fungus-mediated modulation of mosquito susceptibility to Plasmodium involves an
upregulation of the insect's ornithine decarboxylase gene, which sequesters
arginine for polyamine biosynthesis. Arginine plays an important role in the
mosquito's anti-Plasmodium defense as a substrate of nitric oxide production, and
its availability therefore has a direct impact on the mosquito's susceptibility
to the parasite. While this type of immunomodulatory mechanism has already been
demonstrated in other host-pathogen interaction systems, this is the first report
of a mosquito-associated fungus that can suppress the mosquito's innate immune
system in a way that would favor Plasmodium infection and possibly malaria
transmission.

DOI: 10.1038/srep34084 
PMCID: PMC5039729
PMID: 27678168 

