
1. J Parasitol. 2017 Feb;103(1):118-122. doi: 10.1645/16-88. Epub 2016 Oct 10.

Transient Expression of Plasmodium berghei MSP8 and HAP2 in the Marine Protozoan 
Parasite Perkinsus marinus.

Cold ER(1), Vasta GR(1), Robledo JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, East Boothbay, Maine 04544.

Perkinsus marinus is a protozoan parasite of molluscs that can be propagated in
vitro in a defined culture medium, in the absence of host cells. We previously
reported that P. marinus trophozoites can be transfected with high efficiency by 
electroporation using a plasmid based on MOE, a highly expressed gene, and
proposed its potential use as a "pseudoparasite." This is a novel gene expression
platform for parasites of medical relevance for which the choice of the surrogate
organism is based on phylogenetic affinity to the parasite of interest, while
taking advantage of the whole engineered surrogate organism as a vaccination
adjuvant. Here we improved the original transfection plasmid by incorporating a
multicloning site, an enterokinase recognition sequence upstream of GFP, and a
His-tag and demonstrate its potential suitability for the heterologous expression
of Plasmodium sp. genes relevant to the development of anti-malarial vaccines.
Plasmodium berghei HAP2 and MSP8, currently considered candidate genes for a
malaria vaccine, were cloned into p[MOE]:GFP, and the constructs were used to
transfect P. marinus trophozoites. Within 48 hr of transfection we observed
fluorescent cells indicating that the P. berghei genes fused to GFP were
expressed. The expression appeared to be transient for both P. berghei genes, as 
florescence of the transfectants diminished gradually over time. Although this
heterologous expression system will require optimization for integration and
constitutive expression of Plasmodium genes, our results represent attainment of 
proof for the "pseudoparasite" concept we previously proposed, as we show that
the engineered P. marinus system has the potential to become a surrogate system
suitable for expression of Plasmodium spp. genes of interest, which could
eventually be used as a malaria vaccine delivery platform. The aim of the present
study was to test the ability of marine protozoan parasite P. marinus to express 
genes of P. berghei .

DOI: 10.1645/16-88 
PMID: 27723436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

