
1. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Nov 3;12(11):e1005963. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005963.
eCollection 2016 Nov.

Tissue Degeneration following Loss of Schistosoma mansoni cbp1 Is Associated with
Increased Stem Cell Proliferation and Parasite Death In Vivo.

Collins JN(1), Collins JJ 3rd(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.

Schistosomiasis is second only to malaria in terms of the global impact among
diseases caused by parasites. A striking feature of schistosomes are their
ability to thrive in their hosts for decades. We have previously demonstrated
that stem cells, called neoblasts, promote homeostatic tissue maintenance in
adult schistosomes and suggested these cells likely contribute to parasite
longevity. Whether these schistosome neoblasts have functions independent of
homeostatic tissue maintenance, for example in processes such as tissue
regeneration following injury, remains unexplored. Here we characterize the
schistosome CBP/p300 homolog, Sm-cbp1. We found that depleting cbp1 transcript
levels with RNA interference (RNAi) resulted in increased neoblast proliferation 
and cell death, eventually leading to organ degeneration. Based on these
observations we speculated this increased rate of neoblast proliferation may be a
response to mitigate tissue damage due to increased cell death. Therefore, we
tested if mechanical injury was sufficient to stimulate neoblast proliferation.
We found that mechanical injury induced both cell death and neoblast
proliferation at wound sites, suggesting that schistosome neoblasts are capable
of mounting proliferative responses to injury. Furthermore, we observed that the 
health of cbp1(RNAi) parasites progressively declined during the course of our in
vitro experiments. To determine the fate of cbp1(RNAi) parasites in the context
of a mammalian host, we coupled RNAi with an established technique to transplant 
schistosomes into the mesenteric veins of uninfected mice. We found transplanted 
cbp1(RNAi) parasites were cleared from vasculature of recipient mice and were
incapable of inducing measurable pathology in their recipient hosts. Together our
data suggest that injury is sufficient to induce neoblast proliferation and that 
cbp1 is essential for parasite survival in vivo. These studies present a new
methodology to study schistosome gene function in vivo and highlight a potential 
role for schistosome neoblasts in promoting tissue repair following injury.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005963 
PMCID: PMC5094730
PMID: 27812220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

