
1. Parasite. 2016;23:52. Epub 2016 Nov 24.

Subtyping of Cryptosporidium cuniculus and genotyping of Enterocytozoon bieneusi 
in rabbits in two farms in Heilongjiang Province, China.

Yang Z(1), Zhao W(1), Shen Y(2), Zhang W(1), Shi Y(1), Ren G(1), Yang D(1), Ling 
H(1), Yang F(1), Liu A(1), Cao J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang
150081, China.
(2)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of
Health, WHO Collaborating Centre for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and Filariasis,
Shanghai 200025, China.

Cryptosporidium spp. and Enterocytozoon bieneusi are two prevalent opportunistic 
pathogens in humans and animals. Currently, few data are available on genetic
characterization of both pathogens in rabbits in China. The aim of the present
study was to understand prevalence and genetic characterization of
Cryptosporidium spp. and E. bieneusi in rabbits. We collected 215 fecal samples
from 150 Rex rabbits and 65 New Zealand White rabbits on two different farms in
Heilongjiang Province, China. Cryptosporidium spp. and E. bieneusi were tested by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and sequencing the partial small subunit of
ribosomal DNA (SSU rDNA) and the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of
rDNA, respectively. Cryptosporidium was detected in 3.3% (5/150) of Rex rabbits
and 29.2% (19/65) of New Zealand White rabbits. All the 24 Cryptosporidium
isolates were identified as C. cuniculus. Enterocytozoon bieneusi was only found 
in 14.7% (22/150) of Rex rabbits. Five known genotypes: CHN-RD1 (n = 12), D
(n = 3), Type IV (n = 2), Peru6 (n = 1), and I (n = 1), and three novel ones
CHN-RR1 to CHN-RR3 (one each) were detected. By analyzing the 60-kDa glycoprotein
(gp60) gene sequences of C. cuniculus isolates, three subtypes were obtained:
VbA28 (n = 2), VbA29 (n = 16), and VbA32 (n = 3). All these three C. cuniculus
subtypes were reported previously in humans. Four known E. bieneusi genotypes
have been found to be present in humans. The three novel ones fell into zoonotic 
group 1. The results suggest zoonotic potential of C. cuniculus and E. bieneusi
isolates in rabbits.

© Z. Yang et al., published by EDP Sciences, 2016.

DOI: 10.1051/parasite/2016063 
PMCID: PMC5134669
PMID: 27882867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

