
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Dec 27;113(52):15150-15155. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1611567113. Epub 2016 Dec 7.

Artemisia annua mutant impaired in artemisinin synthesis demonstrates importance 
of nonenzymatic conversion in terpenoid metabolism.

Czechowski T(1), Larson TR(1), Catania TM(1), Harvey D(1), Brown GD(2), Graham
IA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Novel Agricultural Products, Department of Biology, University of
York, Heslington, York YO10 5DD, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Reading, Reading RG6 6AD, United
Kingdom.
(3)Centre for Novel Agricultural Products, Department of Biology, University of
York, Heslington, York YO10 5DD, United Kingdom; ian.graham@york.ac.uk.

Artemisinin, a sesquiterpene lactone produced by Artemisia annua glandular
secretory trichomes, is the active ingredient in the most effective treatment for
malaria currently available. We identified a mutation that disrupts the
amorpha-4,11-diene C-12 oxidase (CYP71AV1) enzyme, responsible for a series of
oxidation reactions in the artemisinin biosynthetic pathway. Detailed metabolic
studies of cyp71av1-1 revealed that the consequence of blocking the artemisinin
biosynthetic pathway is the redirection of sesquiterpene metabolism to a
sesquiterpene epoxide, which we designate arteannuin X. This sesquiterpene
approaches half the concentration observed for artemisinin in wild-type plants,
demonstrating high-flux plasticity in A. annua glandular trichomes and their
potential as factories for the production of novel alternate sesquiterpenes at
commercially viable levels. Detailed metabolite profiling of leaf maturation
time-series and precursor-feeding experiments revealed that nonenzymatic
conversion steps are central to both artemisinin and arteannuin X biosynthesis.
In particular, feeding studies using 13C-labeled dihydroartemisinic acid (DHAA)
provided strong evidence that the final steps in the synthesis of artemisinin are
nonenzymatic in vivo. Our findings also suggest that the specialized subapical
cavity of glandular secretory trichomes functions as a location for both the
chemical conversion and the storage of phytotoxic compounds, including
artemisinin. We conclude that metabolic engineering to produce high yields of
novel secondary compounds such as sesquiterpenes is feasible in complex glandular
trichomes. Such systems offer advantages over single-cell microbial hosts for
production of toxic natural products.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1611567113 
PMCID: PMC5206525
PMID: 27930305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

