
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Jan 10;114(2):E255-E264. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1611064114. Epub 2016 Dec 27.

Impact of mosquito gene drive on malaria elimination in a computational model
with explicit spatial and temporal dynamics.

Eckhoff PA(1), Wenger EA(2), Godfray HC(3), Burt A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Disease Modeling, Bellevue, WA 98005; peckhoff@idmod.org.
(2)Institute for Disease Modeling, Bellevue, WA 98005.
(3)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PS, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Silwood Park, Ascot,
Berkshire SL5 7PY, United Kingdom.

The renewed effort to eliminate malaria and permanently remove its tremendous
burden highlights questions of what combination of tools would be sufficient in
various settings and what new tools need to be developed. Gene drive mosquitoes
constitute a promising set of tools, with multiple different possible approaches 
including population replacement with introduced genes limiting malaria
transmission, driving-Y chromosomes to collapse a mosquito population, and gene
drive disrupting a fertility gene and thereby achieving population suppression or
collapse. Each of these approaches has had recent success and advances under
laboratory conditions, raising the urgency for understanding how each could be
deployed in the real world and the potential impacts of each. New analyses are
needed as existing models of gene drive primarily focus on nonseasonal or
nonspatial dynamics. We use a mechanistic, spatially explicit, stochastic,
individual-based mathematical model to simulate each gene drive approach in a
variety of sub-Saharan African settings. Each approach exhibits a broad region of
gene construct parameter space with successful elimination of malaria
transmission due to the targeted vector species. The introduction of realistic
seasonality in vector population dynamics facilitates gene drive success compared
with nonseasonal analyses. Spatial simulations illustrate constraints on release 
timing, frequency, and spatial density in the most challenging settings for
construct success. Within its parameter space for success, each gene drive
approach provides a tool for malaria elimination unlike anything presently
available. Provided potential barriers to success are surmounted, each achieves
high efficacy at reducing transmission potential and lower delivery requirements 
in logistically challenged settings.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1611064114 
PMCID: PMC5240713
PMID: 28028208  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

