
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Dec 23;7:2095. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.02095. eCollection
2016.

Diversity of the Bacterial Microbiota of Anopheles Mosquitoes from Binh Phuoc
Province, Vietnam.

Ngo CT(1), Romano-Bertrand S(2), Manguin S(3), Jumas-Bilak E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement France, UMR-MD3, Faculté de
PharmacieMontpellier, France; National Institute of Veterinary ResearchHanoi,
Vietnam.
(2)UMR 5569 Hydrosciences, Equipe Pathogènes Hydriques, Santé et Environnements, 
Faculté de Pharmacie, Université de MontpellierMontpellier, France; Département
d'Hygiène Hospitalière, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
MontpellierMontpellier, France.
(3)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement France, UMR-MD3, Faculté de
Pharmacie Montpellier, France.

The naturally acquired microbiota of Anopheles can influence vector's
susceptibility to Plasmodium and its capacity to transmit them. Microbiota
modification is a new challenge to limit disease transmission but it still needs 
advanced knowledges on bacterial community in Anopheles, especially in wild and
infected specimens from diverse origin and species. Bacterial culture and 16S
rRNA gene-PCR associated to Temporal Temperature Gradient Electrophoresis (TTGE) 
were applied to explore the bacterial diversity in the abdomen of 100 wild
specimens (eight Anopheles species) collected in the Binh Phuoc Province,
Vietnam. Culture and PCR-TTGE were complementary. The bacterial richness of the
mosquito collection encompassed 105 genera belonging to seven phyla, mostly
Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Actinobacteria. Staphylococcus, Clostridium, and 
Bacillus in Firmicutes were the most prevalent genera. However, Proteobacteria
represented by 57 genera was the most diversified phylum in Anopheles microbiota.
The high overall of Anopheles-associated bacteria is confirmed with, to our
knowledge, 51 genera described for the first time in Anopheles microbiota.
However, the diversity per specimen was low with average diversity index and the 
average Shannon-Wiener score (H) of 4.843 and 5.569, respectively. The most
represented bacterial genera were present in <30% of the specimens. Consequently,
the core microbiota share by Anopheles from Binh Phuoc was very narrow,
suggesting that Anopheles microbiota was greatly influenced by local
environments. The repertory of bacterial genera in two specimens of An. dirus and
An. pampanai naturally infected by Plasmodium vivax was also described as
preliminary results. Finally, this study completed the repertory of bacteria
associated to wild Anopheles. Anopheles associated-bacteria appeared
specimen-dependent rather than mosquitoe species- or group-dependent. Their
origin and the existence of Anopheles-specific bacterial taxa are discussed.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.02095 
PMCID: PMC5181100
PMID: 28066401 

