
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jan 9;7:40297. doi: 10.1038/srep40297.

Variant Ionotropic Receptors in the Malaria Vector Mosquito Anopheles gambiae
Tuned to Amines and Carboxylic Acids.

Pitts RJ(1)(2), Derryberry SL(1), Zhang Z(1)(3), Zwiebel LJ(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA.
(2)Vanderbilt Institute for Global Health, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(3)College of Forestry, Shanxi Agricultural University, Shanxi, P. R. China.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt Brain Institute, Program in
Developmental Biology and Institute of Chemical Biology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

The principal Afrotropical human malaria vector mosquito, Anopheles gambiae,
remains a significant threat to global health. A critical component in the
transmission of malaria is the ability of An. gambiae females to detect and
respond to human-derived chemical kairomones in their search for blood meal
hosts. The basis for host odor responses resides in olfactory receptor neurons
(ORNs) that express chemoreceptors encoded by large gene families, including the 
odorant receptors (ORs) and the variant ionotropic receptors (IRs). While ORs
have been the focus of extensive investigation, functional IR complexes and the
chemical compounds that activate them have not been identified in An. gambiae.
Here we report the transcriptional profiles and functional characterization of
three An. gambiae IR (AgIr) complexes that specifically respond to amines or
carboxylic acids - two classes of semiochemicals that have been implicated in
mediating host-seeking by adult females but are not known to activate An. gambiae
ORs (AgOrs). Our results suggest that AgIrs play critical roles in the detection 
and behavioral responses to important classes of host odors that are
underrepresented in the AgOr chemical space.

DOI: 10.1038/srep40297 
PMCID: PMC5220300
PMID: 28067294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

