
1. Malar J. 2017 Jan 13;16(1):28. doi: 10.1186/s12936-016-1672-0.

Profile of molecular mutations in pfdhfr, pfdhps, pfmdr1, and pfcrt genes of
Plasmodium falciparum related to resistance to different anti-malarial drugs in
the Bata District (Equatorial Guinea).

Berzosa P(1)(2), Esteban-Cantos A(3), García L(3)(4), González V(3)(4), Navarro
M(3), Fernández T(3), Romay-Barja M(3)(4), Herrador Z(3), Rubio JM(5), Ncogo
P(3)(6), Santana-Morales M(7), Valladares B(4)(7), Riloha M(6), Benito A(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Laboratory, National Centre of Tropical Medicine, Institute of Health 
Carlos III, C/Monforte de Lemos 5, 28029, Madrid, Spain. pberzosa@isciii.es.
(2)Network Collaborative Research in Tropical Diseases, RICET, Madrid, Spain.
pberzosa@isciii.es.
(3)Malaria Laboratory, National Centre of Tropical Medicine, Institute of Health 
Carlos III, C/Monforte de Lemos 5, 28029, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Network Collaborative Research in Tropical Diseases, RICET, Madrid, Spain.
(5)National Centre of Microbiology, Institute of Health Carlos III, Madrid,
Spain.
(6)Ministry of Health and Social Welfare of Equatorial Guinea, Malabo, Equatorial
Guinea.
(7)Instituto Universitario de Enfermedades Tropicales y Salud Pública de
Canarias, Universidad de la Laguna, Tenerife, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The emergence of drug resistance in Plasmodium falciparum has been a 
major contributor to the global burden of malaria. Drug resistance complicates
treatment, and it is one of the most important problems in malaria control. This 
study assessed the level of mutations in P. falciparum genes, pfdhfr, pfdhps,
pfmdr1, and pfcrt, related to resistance to different anti-malarial drugs, in the
Continental Region of Equatorial Guinea, after 8 years of implementing artesunate
combination therapies as the first-line treatment.
RESULTS: A triple mutant of pfdhfr (51I/59R/108N), which conferred resistance to 
sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine (SP), was found in 78% of samples from rural settings; 
its frequency was significantly different between urban and rural settings
(p = 0.007). The 164L mutation was detected for the first time in this area, in
rural settings (1.4%). We also identified three classes of previously described
mutants and their frequencies: the partially resistant (pfdhfr
51I/59R/108N + pfdhps 437G), found at 54% (95% CI 47.75-60.25); the fully
resistant (pfdhfr 51I/59R/108N + pfdhps 437G/540E), found at 28% (95% CI
7.07-14.93); and the super resistant (pfdhfr 51I/59R/108N + pfdhps
437G/540E/581G), found at 6% (95% CI 0.48-4.32). A double mutation in pfmdr1
(86Y + 1246Y) was detected at 2% (95% CI 0.24-3.76) frequency, distributed in
both urban and rural samples. A combination of single mutations in the pfmdr1 and
pfcrt genes (86Y + 76T), which was related to resistance to chloroquine and
amodiaquine, was detected in 22% (95% CI 16.8-27.2) of samples from the area.
CONCLUSIONS: The high level of mutations detected in P. falciparum genes related 
to SP resistance could be linked to the unsuccessful withdrawal of SP treatment
in this area. Drug resistance can reduce the efficacy of intermittent
prophylactic treatment with SP for children under 5 years old and for pregnant
women. Although a high number of mutations was detected, the efficacy of the
first-line treatment, artemisinin/amodiaquine, was not affected. To avoid
increases in the numbers, occurrence, and spread of mutations, and to protect the
population, the Ministry of Health should ensure that health centres and
hospitals are supplied with appropriate first-line treatments for malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1672-0 
PMCID: PMC5237300
PMID: 28086777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

