
1. PLoS Pathog. 2017 Jan 17;13(1):e1006130. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006130.
eCollection 2017 Jan.

Leishmania HASP and SHERP Genes Are Required for In Vivo Differentiation,
Parasite Transmission and Virulence Attenuation in the Host.

Doehl JS(1), Sádlová J(2), Aslan H(3), Pružinová K(2), Metangmo S(3), Votýpka
J(2), Kamhawi S(3), Volf P(2), Smith DF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunology and Infection, Department of Biology, University of
York, York, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague,
Czech Republic.
(3)Vector Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, Maryland, United States of America.

Differentiation of extracellular Leishmania promastigotes within their sand fly
vector, termed metacyclogenesis, is considered to be essential for parasites to
regain mammalian host infectivity. Metacyclogenesis is accompanied by changes in 
the local parasite environment, including secretion of complex glycoconjugates
within the promastigote secretory gel and colonization and degradation of the
sand fly stomodeal valve. Deletion of the stage-regulated HASP and SHERP genes on
chromosome 23 of Leishmania major is known to stall metacyclogenesis in the sand 
fly but not in in vitro culture. Here, parasite mutants deficient in specific
genes within the HASP/SHERP chromosomal region have been used to investigate
their role in metacyclogenesis, parasite transmission and establishment of
infection. Metacyclogenesis was stalled in HASP/SHERP mutants in vivo and,
although still capable of osmotaxis, these mutants failed to secrete promastigote
secretory gel, correlating with a lack of parasite accumulation in the thoracic
midgut and failure to colonise the stomodeal valve. These defects prevented
parasite transmission to a new mammalian host. Sand fly midgut homogenates
modulated parasite behaviour in vitro, suggesting a role for molecular
interactions between parasite and vector in Leishmania development within the
sand fly. For the first time, stage-regulated expression of the small HASPA
proteins in Leishmania (Leishmania) has been demonstrated: HASPA2 is expressed
only in extracellular promastigotes and HASPA1 only in intracellular amastigotes.
Despite its lack of expression in amastigotes, replacement of HASPA2 into the
null locus background delays onset of pathology in BALB/c mice. This
HASPA2-dependent effect is reversed by HASPA1 gene addition, suggesting that the 
HASPAs may have a role in host immunomodulation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006130 
PMCID: PMC5271408
PMID: 28095465  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

