
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2017 Mar 24;61(4). pii: e02048-16. doi:
10.1128/AAC.02048-16. Print 2017 Apr.

Use of Optical Imaging Technology in the Validation of a New, Rapid,
Cost-Effective Drug Screen as Part of a Tiered In Vivo Screening Paradigm for
Development of Drugs To Treat Cutaneous Leishmaniasis.

Caridha D(1), Parriot S(2), Hudson TH(2), Lang T(3), Ngundam F(2), Leed S(2),
Sena J(2), Harris M(2), O'Neil M(2), Sciotti R(2), Read L(2), Lecoeur H(3),
Hickman M(1), Grogl M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Experimental Therapeutics Branch of
the Military Malaria Research Program, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA
diana.caridha2.ctr@mail.mil mark_r_hickman@yahoo.com.
(2)Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Experimental Therapeutics Branch of
the Military Malaria Research Program, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA.
(3)Institut Pasteur, Unité d'Immunophysiologie et Parasitisme Intracellulaire,
Département de Parasitologie et Mycologie, Paris, France.

In any drug discovery and development effort, a reduction in the time of the lead
optimization cycle is critical to decrease the time to license and reduce costs. 
In addition, ethical guidelines call for the more ethical use of animals to
minimize the number of animals used and decrease their suffering. Therefore, any 
effort to develop drugs to treat cutaneous leishmaniasis requires multiple tiers 
of in vivo testing that start with higher-throughput efficacy assessments and
progress to lower-throughput models with the most clinical relevance. Here, we
describe the validation of a high-throughput, first-tier, noninvasive model of
lesion suppression that uses an in vivo optical imaging technology for the
initial screening of compounds. A strong correlation between luciferase activity 
and the parasite load at up to 18 days postinfection was found. This correlation 
allows the direct assessment of the effects of drug treatment on parasite burden.
We demonstrate that there is a strong correlation between drug efficacy measured 
on day 18 postinfection and the suppression of lesion size by day 60
postinfection, which allows us to reach an accurate conclusion on drug efficacy
in only 18 days. Compounds demonstrating a significant reduction in the
bioluminescence signal compared to that in control animals can be tested in
lower-throughput, more definitive tests of lesion cure in BALB/c mice and Golden 
Syrian hamsters (GSH) using Old World and New World parasites.

Copyright © 2017 Caridha et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02048-16 
PMCID: PMC5365718
PMID: 28137819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

