
1. PLoS One. 2017 Feb 3;12(2):e0171290. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0171290.
eCollection 2017.

Tissue-specific features of the X chromosome and nucleolus spatial dynamics in a 
malaria mosquito, Anopheles atroparvus.

Bondarenko SM(1), Artemov GN(1), Sharakhov IV(1)(2), Stegniy VN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Ecology, Genetics and Environmental Protection, Tomsk State
University, Tomsk, Russia.
(2)Department of Entomology, Fralin Life Science Institute, Virginia Polytechnic 
Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA, United States of America.

Spatial organization of chromosome territories is important for maintenance of
genomic stability and regulation of gene expression. Recent studies have shown
tissue-specific features of chromosome attachments to the nuclear envelope in
various organisms including malaria mosquitoes. However, other spatial
characteristics of nucleus organization, like volume and shape of chromosome
territories, have not been studied in Anopheles. We conducted a thorough analysis
of tissue-specific features of the X chromosome and nucleolus volume and shape in
follicular epithelium and nurse cells of the Anopheles atroparvus ovaries using a
modern open-source software. DNA of the polytene X chromosome from ovarian nurse 
cells was obtained by microdissection and was used as a template for
amplification with degenerate oligo primers. A fluorescently labeled X chromosome
painting probe was hybridized with formaldehyde-fixed ovaries of mosquitoes using
a 3D-FISH method. The nucleolus was stained by immunostaining with an
anti-fibrillarin antibody. The analysis was conducted with TANGO-a software for a
chromosome spatial organization analysis. We show that the volume and position of
the X chromosome have tissue-specific characteristics. Unlike nurse cell nuclei, 
the growth of follicular epithelium nuclei is not accompanied with the
proportional growth of the X chromosome. However, the shape of the X chromosome
does not differ between the tissues. The dynamics of the X chromosome attachment 
regions location is tissue-specific and it is correlated with the process of
nucleus growth in follicular epithelium and nurse cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0171290 
PMCID: PMC5291520
PMID: 28158219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

