
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2017 Jun;50:7-19. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2017.01.024. Epub 2017
Feb 2.

Evolution of the merozoite surface protein 7 (msp7) family in Plasmodium vivax
and P. falciparum: A comparative approach.

Castillo AI(1), Andreína Pacheco M(2), Escalante AA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Arizona State University, School of Life Sciences, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine
(igem), Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine
(igem), Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address:
Ananias.Escalante@temple.edu.

Malaria parasites (genus Plasmodium) are a diverse group found in many species of
vertebrate hosts. These parasites invade red blood cells in a complex process
comprising several proteins, many encoded by multigene families, one of which is 
merozoite surface protein 7 (msp7). In the case of Plasmodium vivax, the most
geographically widespread human-infecting species, differences in the number of
paralogs within multigene families have been previously explained, at least in
part, as potential adaptations to the human host. To explore this in msp7, we
studied its orthologs in closely related nonhuman primate parasites;
investigating both paralog evolutionary history and genetic polymorphism. The
emerging patterns were then compared with the human parasite Plasmodium
falciparum. We found that the evolution of the msp7 family is consistent with a
birth-and-death model, where duplications, pseudogenizations, and gene loss
events are common. However, all paralogs in P. vivax and P. falciparum had
orthologs in their closely related species in non-human primates indicating that 
the ancestors of those paralogs precede the events leading to their origins as
human parasites. Thus, the number of paralogs cannot be explained as an
adaptation to human hosts. Although there is no functional information for msp7
in P. vivax, we found evidence for purifying selection in the genetic
polymorphism of some of its paralogs as well as their orthologs in closely
related non-human primate parasites. We also found evidence indicating that a few
of P. vivax's paralogs may have diverged from their orthologs in non-human
primates by episodic positive selection. Hence, they may had been under selection
when the lineage leading to P. vivax diverged from the Asian non-human primates
and switched into Homininae. All these lines of evidence suggest that msp7 is
functionally important in P. vivax.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2017.01.024 
PMCID: PMC5919258
PMID: 28163236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

