
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2017 Apr 24;61(5). pii: e01867-16. doi:
10.1128/AAC.01867-16. Print 2017 May.

Within-Host Selection of Drug Resistance in a Mouse Model Reveals Dose-Dependent 
Selection of Atovaquone Resistance Mutations.

Nuralitha S(1)(2), Murdiyarso LS(3), Siregar JE(3), Syafruddin D(3), Roelands
J(3), Verhoef J(4), Hoepelman AIM(5), Marzuki S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eijkman Institute for Molecular Biology, Jakarta, Indonesia suci@eijkman.go.id
smarzuki@eijkman.go.id.
(2)Department of Physiology, University of Sumatera Utara, Medan, Indonesia.
(3)Eijkman Institute for Molecular Biology, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University Medical
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine and Infectious Diseases, University Medical
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.

The evolutionary selection of malaria parasites within an individual host plays a
critical role in the emergence of drug resistance. We have compared the selection
of atovaquone resistance mutants in mouse models reflecting two different causes 
of failure of malaria treatment, an inadequate subtherapeutic dose and an
incomplete therapeutic dose. The two models are based on cycles of insufficient
treatment of Plasmodium berghei-infected mice: repeated inadequate treatment
associated with a subtherapeutic dose (RIaT) (0.1 mg kg-1 of body weight) and
repeated incomplete treatment with a therapeutic dose (RIcT) (14.4 mg kg-1 of
body weight). The number of treatment cycles for the development of a stable
resistance phenotype during RIaT was 2.00 ± 0.00 cycles (n = 9), which is not
statistically different from that during RIcT (2.57 ± 0.85 cycles; combined n =
14; P = 0.0591). All mutations underlying atovaquone resistance selected by RIaT 
(M133I, T142N, and L144S) were found to be in the Qo1 (quinone binding 1) domain 
of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene, in contrast to those selected by RIcT
(Y268N/C, L271V, K272R, and V284F) in the Qo2 domain or its neighboring sixth
transmembrane region. Exposure of mixed populations of resistant parasites from
RIaT to the higher therapeutic dose of RIcT revealed further insights into the
dynamics of within-host selection of resistance to antimalarial drugs. These
results suggest that both inadequate subtherapeutic doses and incomplete
therapeutic doses in malaria treatment pose similar threats to the emergence of
drug resistance. RIcT and RIaT could be developed as useful tools to predict the 
potential emergence of resistance to newly introduced and less-understood
antimalarials.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01867-16 
PMCID: PMC5404568
PMID: 28193656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

