
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2017 May 1;34(5):1261-1275. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msx087.

Pollutants and Insecticides Drive Local Adaptation in African Malaria Mosquitoes.

Kamdem C(1), Fouet C(1), Gamez S(1), White BJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of California, Riverside, CA.
(2)Center for Disease Vector Research, Institute for Integrative Genome Biology, 
University of California, Riverside, CA.

The Anopheles gambiae complex contains a number of highly anthropophilic mosquito
species that have acquired exceptional ability to thrive in complex human
habitats. Thus, examining the evolutionary history of this Afrotropical mosquito 
may yield vital information on the selective processes that occurred during the
adaptation to human-dominated environments. We performed reduced representation
sequencing on 941 mosquitoes of the Anopheles gambiae complex collected across
four ecogeographic zones in Cameroon. We find evidence for genetic and geographic
subdivision within An. coluzzii and An. gambiae sensu stricto-the two most
significant malaria vectors in the region. Importantly, in both species, rural
and urban populations are genetically differentiated. Genome scans reveal
pervasive signatures of selection centered on genes involved in xenobiotic
resistance. Notably, a selective sweep containing detoxification enzymes is
prominent in urban mosquitoes that exploit polluted breeding sites. Overall, our 
study suggests that recent anthropogenic environmental modifications and
widespread use of insecticides are driving population differentiation and local
adaptation in vectors with potentially significant consequences for malaria
epidemiology.

Â© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msx087 
PMCID: PMC5400387
PMID: 28204524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

