
1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Feb 9;8:130. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00130. eCollection
2017.

Genome Wide In silico Analysis of the Mismatch Repair Components of Plasmodium
falciparum and Their Comparison with Human Host.

Tarique M(1), Ahmad M(1), Chauhan M(1), Tuteja R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Parasite Biology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology New Delhi, India.

Malaria a major parasitic infection globally particularly in tropical and
sub-tropical regions of the world is responsible for about 198 million cases and 
estimated deaths due to this disease are about 0.6 million. The emergence of drug
resistance in the malaria parasite is alarming and it is necessary to understand 
its underlying cause and molecular mechanisms. It has been established that drug 
resistant malaria parasites have defective mismatch repair (MMR) therefore it is 
essential to study this pathway and its components in detail. Recently a number
of non-synonymous Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms have been reported in genes
involved in MMR pathways. PfMLH is an endonuclease essential to restore the MMR
in drug resistant strains of Plasmodium falciparum. Considering all these facts
about the role of MMR in emergence of drug resistant parasite, in this manuscript
we report a genome wide analysis of the components of the MMR pathway such as
MLH, Pms1, MSH2-1, MSH2-2, MSH6, and UvrD using in silico bioinformatics based
approaches. The phylogenetic analysis revealed evolutionary closeness with the
MMR components of various organisms. It is noteworthy that P. falciparum contains
two homologs of MSH2, which are located on different chromosomes. The structural 
modeling of these components showed their similarity with the human/yeast MMR
components. The docking studies reveal that PfUvrD and PfMLH interact with each
other. The in silico identification of interacting partners of the major MMR
components identified numerous P. falciparum specific proteins. In line with our 
previous studies the present study will also contribute significantly to
understand the MMR pathway of malaria parasite.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00130 
PMCID: PMC5298969
PMID: 28232818 

