
1. Acta Trop. 2017 Jul;171:24-29. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2017.03.005. Epub 2017 
Mar 7.

Transdermal delivery of oleanolic acid attenuates pro-inflammatory cytokine
release and ameliorates anaemia in P. berghei malaria.

Sibiya H(1), Musabayane CT(2), Mabandla MV(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Laboratory Medicine and Medical Sciences, University of
KwaZulu-Natal, Private Bag X54001, Durban 4000, South Africa. Electronic address:
208512882@stu.ukzn.ac.za.
(2)School of Laboratory Medicine and Medical Sciences, University of
KwaZulu-Natal, Private Bag X54001, Durban 4000, South Africa.

Malaria remains a major health problem in many tropical areas. Severe malaria
infection is associated with secondary complications including anaemia leading to
a need for the search of affordable antimalarial agents that can clear the
parasitaemia and ameliorate anaemia during infection. The current study
investigated the effects of transdermally delivered OA on malaria parasites, HCT 
and selected plasma cytokine concentrations in P. berghei-infected male
Sprague-Dawley rats. The study was carried out over a period of 21days, divided
into pre-treatment (day 0-7), treatment (day 8-12) and post-treatment (day 13-21)
periods. Parasitaemia, HCT, RBC count, Hgb, plasma TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-10
concentrations were monitored in non-infected and infected rats following a
once-off application of an OA-pectin patch (34mg/kg). Animals treated with
drug-free pectin and CHQ (30mg/kg, p.o) twice daily for 5 consecutive days acted 
as negative and positive controls respectively. Infected control animals
exhibited increased percentage parasitaemia, TNF-α, IL-6, IL-10 and a reduction
in HCT. Interestingly, OA-pectin patch application cleared the malaria parasites 
and increased HCT values back to normalcy. Furthermore, TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-10
were reduced by day 12 of the study. These findings suggest that the OA-pectin
patch delivers therapeutic doses of OA which are able to attenuate cytokine
release and ameliorate anaemia during malaria infection. Therefore, transdermally
delivered OA may be a potent therapeutic agent for malaria and amelioration of
anaemia.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2017.03.005 
PMID: 28283442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

