
1. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2017 Jun;15(6):527-543. doi:
10.1080/14787210.2017.1313703. Epub 2017 Apr 10.

pfmdr1 (Plasmodium falciparum multidrug drug resistance gene 1): a pivotal factor
in malaria resistance to artemisinin combination therapies.

Gil JP(1), Krishna S(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Physiology and Pharmacology Department , Karolinska Institutet , Stockholm ,
Sweden.
(2)b St George's University Hospital , Institute for Infection and Immunity ,
London , United Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: Plasmodium falciparum, the deadly agent of malaria, is notorious
for its capacity to develop drug resistance. Treatment failures of artemisinin
therapy regimens (ACTc), the present mainstay, is emerging. The transporter
coding pfmdr1 gene is a central node in this process, having been associated with
in vitro and in vivo parasite response to a broad range of ACT antimalarials.
Areas covered: The review covers the historical origins of the pfmdr1 discovery, 
followed by a detailed description of its sequence and expression
characteristics, as well as the structural and functional characteristics of its 
coded transmembrane protein. pfmdr1 association with ACT drugs response in vivo
and in vitro is thoroughly reviewed. A reference is made to significant compounds
presently in the development pipeline. The literature search was focused on
Pubmed based searches with occasional resource to edited books, World Health
Organization documentation and conference reports for adding valuable details.
Expert commentary: Pfmdr1 has emerged as the central gene in P. falciparum ACT
resistance. Understanding the basis of this role is critical for epidemiologic
surveillance and design of improved resistance-refractory antimalarials.
Specifically, unveiling situations of drug collateral sensitivity associated with
specific pfmdr1 genetic variation will provide opportunities for personalized
optimal therapy options.

DOI: 10.1080/14787210.2017.1313703 
PMID: 28355493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

