
1. PLoS One. 2017 Apr 24;12(4):e0175984. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175984.
eCollection 2017.

Insecticide resistance status of malaria vectors in Lao PDR.

Marcombe S(1), Bobichon J(1), Somphong B(1), Phommavan N(1), Maithaviphet S(2),
Nambanya S(2), Corbel V(3), Brey PT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur du Laos, Ministry of Health, Vientiane, Lao PDR.
(2)Center for Malariology, Parasitology and Entomology, Ministry of Health,
Vientiane, Lao PDR.
(3)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), Maladies Infectieuses et
Vecteurs, Ecologie, Génétique, Evolution et Contrôle (MIVEGEC, UM1-CNRS 5290-IRD 
224), Montpellier, France.

Knowledge on insecticide resistance in Anopheles species is a basic requirement
to guide malaria vector control programs. In Lao PDR, vector control relies on
insecticide residual spraying (IRS) and impregnated bed-nets (ITNs) with the use 
of pyrethroids. Here, the susceptibility of Anopheles species, including several 
malaria vectors (An. maculatus and An. minimus), to various insecticides was
investigated in ten provinces of Lao PDR through a north-south transect.
Bioassays were performed on field caught female mosquitoes using the standard WHO
susceptibility tests with DDT (4%), deltamethrin (0.05%) and permethrin (0.75%). 
In addition, the DIIS6 region of the para-type sodium channel gene was amplified 
and sequenced to identify knockdown resistance mutations (kdr). Resistance to DDT
and permethrin was detected in suspected malaria vectors, such as An. nivipes and
An. philippinensis in Lao PDR. Resistance to the formerly used DDT was found in a
population of An. maculatus s.l. from Luang Prabang province. No resistance to
pyrethroids was found in primary vectors, indicating that these insecticides are 
still adequate for malaria vector control. However, high resistance levels to
pyrethroids was found in-vector species and reduced susceptibility to permethrin 
in An. minimus and An. maculatus was reported in specific localities which raises
concerns for pyrethroid-based control in the future. No kdr mutation was found in
any of the resistant populations tested hence suggesting a probable role
detoxification enzymes in resistance. This study highlights the necessity to
continue the monitoring of insecticide susceptibility to early detect potential
occurrence and/or migration of insecticide resistance in malaria vectors in Lao
PDR.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175984 
PMCID: PMC5402946
PMID: 28437449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

