
1. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2017 Apr;29(5):985-997. doi: 10.1071/RD15214.

Prion protein 2 (dublet) gene (PRND): role in ovine semen capacitation,
cryopreservation and fertility.

Ferreira LM(1), Garcia-Herreros M(2), Domingos A(3), Marques CC(1), Mesquita
P(1), Barbas JP(1), Baptista MC(1), Pimenta J(1), Horta AEM(1), Prates JAM(4),
Pereira RMLN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Biotecnologia e Recursos Genéticos, Instituto Nacional de
Investigação Agrária e Veterinária, Quinta da Fonte Boa, 2005-048 Vale de
Santarém, Portugal.
(2)National Secretariat of Higher Education, Science, Technology, and Innovation 
(SENESCYT), Av. 9 de Octubre N22-64 and Ramírez Dávalos, PC 170517 Quito,
Ecuador.
(3)Global Health and Tropical Medicine, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical,
Centro de Malária e Doenças Tropicais, Rua da Junqueira 100, 1349-008 Lisboa,
Portugal.
(4)CIISA (Centro de Investigação Interdisciplinar em Sanidade Animal), Faculdade 
de Medicina Veterinária, Universidade de Lisboa, Avenida da Universidade Técnica,
1300-477 Lisboa, Portugal.

The aim of the present study was to examine the role of Doppel protein in the
capacitation process and fertilising ability of both fresh and frozen-thawed (FT)
spermatozoa from rams carrying different prion protein 2 (dublet) (PRND) gene
polymorphisms. The detection efficacy of new anti-Doppel monoclonal antibodies
and PRND mRNA quantification were also explored in ovine spermatozoa. Three
different genotypes (AA, GA, GG) were identified for codon 26 of ovine
PRND-c.78G>A. Using flow cytometry, a higher fluorescence was detected in fresh
compared with FT sperm samples incubated with anti-Doppel primary and fluorescein
isothiocyanate-conjugated secondary antibodies (P<0.05). Capacitation was
affected by semen treatment (fresh and FT) and male PRND genotype (P<0.05). After
IVF, the use of fresh semen resulted in a higher cleavage rate than the use of FT
spermatozoa (P=0.004). IVF using spermatozoa from individuals classified as
carriers of the AA or GA PRND genotypes resulted in higher cleavage rates than
seen using spermatozoa from GG carriers (P≤0.0006). Finally, using semen from
rams with the AA PRND genotype resulted in the highest Day 6 and Day 8 embryo
rates (P≤0.04). In conclusion, the results of the present study confirm that the 
identification of different PRND genotypes is important for studying the sperm
capacitation process and for improving sperm cryoresistance and embryo
production. Furthermore, the detection of Doppel in ejaculated ovine spermatozoa,
along with its low expression after cryopreservation, strongly suggests an
important physiological function of this protein in male fertility.

DOI: 10.1071/RD15214 
PMID: 28442049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

