
1. Insect Sci. 2018 Oct;25(5):739-750. doi: 10.1111/1744-7917.12483. Epub 2017 Jul
12.

Genome-wide identification, characterization and evolution of cuticular protein
genes in the malaria vector Anopheles sinensis (Diptera: Culicidae).

Liu BQ(1), Qiao L(1), He QY(1), Zhou Y(1), Ren S(1), Chen B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Vector Insects, Institute of Entomology and
Molecular Biology, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing, China.

Thirteen cuticular protein (CP) families have been recognized in arthropods. In
this study, 250 Anopheles sinensis CP genes were identified and named based on
genome and transcriptome sequences. They were classified into 10 families based
on motifs and phylogenetic analyses. In 11 other insect species, nine had CP
numbers > 150 while Apis mellifera and Tribolium castaneum had CP numbers less
than 52. The CPs of eight species occupied > 1.4% of the total genomic gene
number, whereas in three species the CPs occupied < 1%. The phylogenies for each 
CP family in An. sinensis were constructed and discussed. The 250 CPs each had
1-8 exons with 144 CPs (57.6%) having two exons. The intron length ranged from
66-3888 bp with 174 introns (54.0%) being 66-100 bp long. Except for two CPs on
two contigs, 248 CPs were mapped onto 28 scaffolds with 136 genes (54.4%)
restricted to five scaffolds. A total of 107 CPs were clustered and located at 27
loci. The CPR family had the conserved motif GSYSLVEPDGTVRTV. The RR-1 subfamily 
had an additional 21 amino acid (aa) motifs with the YVADENGF sequence that is
common in insects. The RR-2 subfamily had an additional 50 aa motifs with two
additional regions RDGDVVKG and G-x(3)-VV. A comparison with 115 orthologous
counterparts of An. gambiae CPs suggested purifying selection for all of these
genes. This study provides basic information useful for further studies on
biological functions of An. sinensis CPs as well as for comparative genomics of
insect CPs.

Â© 2017 Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/1744-7917.12483 
PMID: 28544438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

