
1. Infect Immun. 2017 Jul 19;85(8). pii: e00139-17. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00139-17. Print
2017 Aug.

Plasmodium berghei PIMMS2 Promotes Ookinete Invasion of the Anopheles gambiae
Mosquito Midgut.

Ukegbu CV(1), Akinosoglou KA(1), Christophides GK(1), Vlachou D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Insect Immunogenomics, Department of Life Sciences, Imperial
College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Laboratory of Insect Immunogenomics, Department of Life Sciences, Imperial
College London, London, United Kingdom d.vlachou@imperial.ac.uk.

Mosquito midgut stages of the malaria parasite present an attractive biological
system to study host-parasite interactions and develop interventions to block
disease transmission. Mosquito infection ensues upon oocyst development that
follows ookinete invasion and traversal of the mosquito midgut epithelium. Here, 
we report the characterization of PIMMS2 (Plasmodium invasion of mosquito midgut 
screen candidate 2), a Plasmodium berghei protein with structural similarities to
subtilisin-like proteins. PIMMS2 orthologs are present in the genomes of all
plasmodia and are mapped between the subtilisin-encoding genes SUB1 and SUB3 P.
berghei PIMMS2 is specifically expressed in zygotes and ookinetes and is
localized on the ookinete surface. Loss of PIMMS2 function through gene
disruption by homologous recombination leads to normal development of motile
ookinetes that exhibit a severely impaired capacity to traverse the mosquito
midgut and transform to oocysts. Genetic complementation of the disrupted locus
with a mutated PIMMS2 allele reveals that amino acid residues corresponding to
the putative subtilisin-like catalytic triad are important but not essential for 
protein function. Our data demonstrate that PIMMS2 is a novel ookinete-specific
protein that promotes parasite traversal of the mosquito midgut epithelium and
establishment of mosquito infection.

Copyright Â© 2017 Ukegbu et al.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00139-17 
PMCID: PMC5520436
PMID: 28559405 

