
1. FEBS J. 2017 Aug;284(16):2604-2628. doi: 10.1111/febs.14130. Epub 2017 Jul 3.

Proteases as antimalarial targets: strategies for genetic, chemical, and
therapeutic validation.

Deu E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Biology Approaches to Malaria Laboratory, The Francis Crick
Institute, London, UK.

Malaria is a devastating parasitic disease affecting half of the world's
population. The rapid emergence of resistance against new antimalarial drugs,
including artemisinin-based therapies, has made the development of drugs with
novel mechanisms of action extremely urgent. Proteases are enzymes proven to be
well suited for target-based drug development due to our knowledge of their
enzymatic mechanisms and active site structures. More importantly, Plasmodium
proteases have been shown to be involved in a variety of pathways that are
essential for parasite survival. However, pharmacological rather than
target-based approaches have dominated the field of antimalarial drug
development, in part due to the challenge of robustly validating Plasmodium
targets at the genetic level. Fortunately, over the last few years there has been
significant progress in the development of efficient genetic methods to modify
the parasite, including several conditional approaches. This progress is finally 
allowing us not only to validate essential genes genetically, but also to study
their molecular functions. In this review, I present our current understanding of
the biological role proteases play in the malaria parasite life cycle. I also
discuss how the recent advances in Plasmodium genetics, the improvement of
protease-oriented chemical biology approaches, and the development of
malaria-focused pharmacological assays, can be combined to achieve a robust
biological, chemical and therapeutic validation of Plasmodium proteases as viable
drug targets.

Â© 2017 The Authors. The FEBS Journal published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf
of Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.14130 
PMCID: PMC5575534
PMID: 28599096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

