
1. PLoS Pathog. 2017 Jun 15;13(6):e1006396. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006396.
eCollection 2017 Jun.

A novel genetic technique in Plasmodium berghei allows liver stage analysis of
genes required for mosquito stage development and demonstrates that de novo heme 
synthesis is essential for liver stage development in the malaria parasite.

Rathnapala UL(1), Goodman CD(1), McFadden GI(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of BioSciences, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia.

The combination of drug resistance, lack of an effective vaccine, and ongoing
conflict and poverty means that malaria remains a major global health crisis.
Understanding metabolic pathways at all parasite life stages is important in
prioritising and targeting novel anti-parasitic compounds. The unusual heme
synthesis pathway of the rodent malaria parasite, Plasmodium berghei, requires
eight enzymes distributed across the mitochondrion, apicoplast and cytoplasm.
Deletion of the ferrochelatase (FC) gene, the final enzyme in the pathway,
confirms that heme synthesis is not essential in the red blood cell stages of the
life cycle but is required to complete oocyst development in mosquitoes. The
lethality of FC deletions in the mosquito stage makes it difficult to study the
impact of these mutations in the subsequent liver stage. To overcome this, we
combined locus-specific fluorophore expression with a genetic complementation
approach to generate viable, heterozygous oocysts able to produce a mix of FC
expressing and FC deficient sporozoites. These sporozoites show normal motility
and can invade liver cells, where FC deficient parasites can be distinguished by 
fluorescence and phenotyped. Parasites lacking FC exhibit a severe growth defect 
within liver cells, with development failure detectable in the early to mid
stages of liver development in vitro. FC deficient parasites could not complete
liver stage development in vitro nor infect na√Øve mice, confirming liver stage
arrest. These results validate the heme pathway as a potential target for
prophylactic drugs targeting liver stage parasites. In addition, we demonstrate
that our simple genetic approach can extend the phenotyping window beyond the
insect stages, opening considerable scope for straightforward reverse genetic
analysis of genes that are dispensable in blood stages but essential for
completing mosquito development.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006396 
PMCID: PMC5472305
PMID: 28617870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

