
1. Front Plant Sci. 2017 Jun 8;8:971. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2017.00971. eCollection
2017.

Transcriptome Analysis of Genes Associated with the Artemisinin Biosynthesis by
Jasmonic Acid Treatment under the Light in Artemisia annua.

Hao X(1), Zhong Y(1), Fu X(1), Lv Z(1), Shen Q(1), Yan T(1), Shi P(1), Ma Y(1),
Chen M(1), Lv X(1), Wu Z(1), Zhao J(1), Sun X(1), Li L(1), Tang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South) Ministry of Agriculture, Plant
Biotechnology Research Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao
Tong UniversityShanghai, China.

Artemisinin is a sesquiterpene lactone endoperoxide extracted from a traditional 
Chinese medicinal plant Artemisia annua. Artemisinin-based combination therapies 
(ACTs) are recommended as the best treatment of malaria by the World Health
Organization (WHO). Both the phytohormone jasmonic acid (JA) and light promote
artemisinin biosynthesis in A. annua. Interestingly, we found that the increase
of artemisinin biosynthesis by JA was dependent on light. However, the
relationship between the two signal pathways mediated by JA and light remains
unclear. Here, we collected the A. annua seedlings of 24 h continuous light
(Light), 24 h dark treatment (Dark), 4 h MeJA treatment under the continuous
light conditions (Light-MeJA-4h) and 4 h MeJA treatment under the dark conditions
(Dark-MeJA-4h) and performed the transcriptome sequencing using Illumina HiSeq
4000 System. A total of 266.7 million clean data were produced and assembled into
185,653 unigenes, with an average length of 537 bp. Among them, 59,490 unigenes
were annotated and classified based on the public information. Differential
expression analyses were performed between Light and Dark, Light and
Light-MeJA-4h, Dark and Dark-MeJA-4h, Light-MeJA-4h, and Dark-MeJA-4h,
respectively. Furthermore, transcription factor (TF) analysis revealed that 1588 
TFs were identified and divided into 55 TF families, with 284 TFs down-regulated 
in the Dark relative to Light and 96 TFs up-regulated in the Light-MeJA-4h
relative to Light. 8 TFs were selected as candidates for regulating the
artemisinin biosynthesis and one of them was validated to be involved in
artemisinin transcriptional regulation by Dual-Luciferase (Dual-LUC) assay. The
transcriptome data shown in our study offered a comprehensive transcriptional
expression pattern influenced by the MeJA and light in A. annua seedling, which
will serve as a valuable resource for further studies on transcriptional
regulation mechanisms underlying artemisinin biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2017.00971 
PMCID: PMC5463050
PMID: 28642777 

