
1. Nat Commun. 2017 Jul 10;8:16044. doi: 10.1038/ncomms16044.

An exported protein-interacting complex involved in the trafficking of virulence 
determinants in Plasmodium-infected erythrocytes.

Batinovic S(1), McHugh E(1), Chisholm SA(2), Matthews K(2), Liu B(1), Dumont
L(1), Charnaud SC(3), Schneider MP(1), Gilson PR(3), de Koning-Ward TF(2), Dixon 
MWA(1), Tilley L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Institute, The
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.
(2)School of Medicine, Deakin University, Waurn Ponds, Victoria 3220, Australia.
(3)Macfarlane Burnet Institute for Medical Research and Public Health, Melbourne,
Victoria 3004, Australia.

The malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, displays the P. falciparum
erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) on the surface of infected red blood
cells (RBCs). We here examine the physical organization of PfEMP1 trafficking
intermediates in infected RBCs and determine interacting partners using an
epitope-tagged minimal construct (PfEMP1B). We show that parasitophorous vacuole 
(PV)-located PfEMP1B interacts with components of the PTEX (Plasmodium Translocon
of EXported proteins) as well as a novel protein complex, EPIC (Exported
Protein-Interacting Complex). Within the RBC cytoplasm PfEMP1B interacts with
components of the Maurer's clefts and the RBC chaperonin complex. We define the
EPIC interactome and, using an inducible knockdown approach, show that depletion 
of one of its components, the parasitophorous vacuolar protein-1 (PV1), results
in altered knob morphology, reduced cell rigidity and decreased binding to CD36. 
Accordingly, we show that deletion of the Plasmodium berghei homologue of PV1 is 
associated with attenuation of parasite virulence in vivo.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms16044 
PMCID: PMC5508133
PMID: 28691708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

