
1. Biochemistry. 2017 Sep 5;56(35):4607-4615. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00648. Epub
2017 Aug 23.

Specific Acetylation Patterns of H2A.Z Form Transient Interactions with the BPTF 
Bromodomain.

Perell GT(1), Mishra NK(1), Sudhamalla B(2), Ycas PD(1), Islam K(2), Pomerantz
WCK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Minnesota , 207 Pleasant Street
Southeast, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Pittsburgh , 1307 Chevron Science
Center, 219 Parkman Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260, United States.

Post-translational lysine acetylation of histone tails affects both chromatin
accessibility and recruitment of multifunctional bromodomain-containing proteins 
for modulating transcription. The bromodomain- and PHD finger-containing
transcription factor (BPTF) regulates transcription but has also been implicated 
in high gene expression levels in a variety of cancers. In this report, the
histone variant H2A.Z, which replaces H2A in chromatin, is evaluated for its
affinity for BPTF with a specific recognition pattern of acetylated lysine
residues of the N-terminal tail region. Although BPTF immunoprecipitates
H2A.Z-containing nucleosomes, a direct interaction with its bromodomain has not
been reported. Using protein-observed fluorine nuclear magnetic resonance (PrOF
NMR) spectroscopy, we identified a diacetylation of H2A.Z on lysine residues 4
and 11, with the highest affinity for BPTF with a Kd of 780 μM. A combination of 
subsequent 1H NMR Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill experiments and photo-cross-linking
further confirmed the specificity of the diacetylation pattern at lysines 4 and
11. Because of an adjacent PHD domain, this transient interaction may contribute 
to a higher-affinity bivalent interaction. Further evaluation of specificity
toward a set of bromodomains, including two BET bromodomains (Brd4 and BrdT) and 
two Plasmodium falciparum bromodomains, resulted in one midmicromolar affinity
binder, PfGCN5 (Kd = 650 μM). With these biochemical experiments, we have
identified a direct interaction of histone H2A.Z with bromodomains with a
specific acetylation pattern that further supports the role of H2A.Z in
epigenetic regulation.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00648 
PMCID: PMC5779092
PMID: 28771339  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

