
1. Pathog Glob Health. 2017 Sep;111(6):297-305. doi: 10.1080/20477724.2017.1358846. 
Epub 2017 Aug 4.

Diagnostic potential of monoclonal antibodies developed against C-terminal
polypeptide of P. falciparum Histidine Rich Protein2 (PfHRP2) in malaria infected
patients from India.

Verma R(1), Chandy S(2), Jayaprakash NS(1), Manoharan A(2), Vijayalakshmi MA(1), 
Venkataraman K(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Centre for BioSeparation Technology (CBST) , VIT University , Vellore ,
India.
(2)b Benjamin Pulimood Laboratory for Infection, Inflammation and Immunity
(BMPLIII), Department of Medicine-1 , Christian Medical College (CMC) , Vellore ,
India.

Malaria, caused by Plasmodium falciparum has become a major health burden in most
tropical and developing countries. P. falciparum Histidine Rich Protein2
(PfHRP2), which exhibits polymorphism, is being widely used as a diagnostic
marker. Recently, we reported the development of monoclonal antibodies against
conserved C-terminal 105 amino acids of PfHRP2 for malaria diagnosis. Now, in
this study, the diagnostic performance of two anti-C-terminal PfHRP2 mAbs (b10c1 
and Aa3c10) were evaluated with 100 blood samples from clinically identified
malaria patients from seven different geographical centers in India. Sandwich
ELISA, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and statistical tools were used for the
evaluation of the performance of the anti-C-terminal PfHRP2 mAb. These mAbs
detected P. falciparum (mean OD value 1.525 ± 0.56) malaria with great accuracy
with no cross reactivity with P. Plasmodium vivax (mean OD value 0.285 ± 0.051)
and normal healthy control samples (mean OD value 0.185 ± 0.06) in Sandwich ELISA
assay. The samples which were RDT negative for P. falciparum were also reactive
in Sandwich ELISA with mean OD value of (1.303 ± 0.532). The amount of PfHRP2
antigen in the patients' blood sample was quantified and categorized into three
distinct groups having the HRP2 antigen in high, intermediate and low amounts.
The presence of Pfhrp2 gene was also confirmed by PCR analysis. The sensitivity
and specificity of the mAb were found to be 95 and 96% respectively. These data
strongly suggest that the anti-C-terminal PfHRP2 mAbs b10c1 and Aa3c10 have
merits for improvising the existing malarial diagnostics.

DOI: 10.1080/20477724.2017.1358846 
PMCID: PMC5694857
PMID: 28777043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

