
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2017 Jul 24;7:320. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00320.
eCollection 2017.

Transcriptional Profiling Defines Histone Acetylation as a Regulator of Gene
Expression during Human-to-Mosquito Transmission of the Malaria Parasite
Plasmodium falciparum.

Ngwa CJ(1), Kiesow MJ(1), Papst O(1), Orchard LM(2), Filarsky M(3), Rosinski
AN(1), Voss TS(3), Llin√°s M(2)(4), Pradel G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Applied Infection Biology, RWTH Aachen
UniversityAachen, Germany.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
UniversityUniversity Park, PA, United States.
(3)Department of Medical Parasitology and Infection Biology, Swiss Tropical and
Public Health InstituteBasel, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Huck Center for Malaria Research, The Pennsylvania
State UniversityUniversity Park, PA, United States.

Transmission of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum from the human to the 
mosquito is mediated by the intraerythrocytic gametocytes, which, once taken up
during a blood meal, become activated to initiate sexual reproduction. Because
gametocytes are the only parasite stages able to establish an infection in the
mosquito, they are crucial for spreading the tropical disease. During gametocyte 
maturation, different repertoires of genes are switched on and off in a
well-coordinated sequence, pointing to regulatory mechanisms of gene expression. 
While epigenetic gene control has been studied during erythrocytic schizogony of 
P. falciparum, little is known about this process during human-to-mosquito
transmission of the parasite. To unveil the potential role of histone acetylation
during gene expression in gametocytes, we carried out a microarray-based
transcriptome analysis on gametocytes treated with the histone deacetylase
inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA). TSA-treatment impaired gametocyte maturation and 
lead to histone hyper-acetylation in these stages. Comparative transcriptomics
identified 294 transcripts, which were more than 2-fold up-regulated during
gametocytogenesis following TSA-treatment. In activated gametocytes, which were
less sensitive to TSA, the transcript levels of 48 genes were increased.
TSA-treatment further led to repression of ~145 genes in immature and mature
gametocytes and 7 genes in activated gametocytes. Up-regulated genes are mainly
associated with functions in invasion, cytoadherence, and protein export, while
down-regulated genes could particularly be assigned to transcription and
translation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated a link between gene
activation and histone acetylation for selected genes. Among the genes
up-regulated in TSA-treated mature gametocytes was a gene encoding the ring
finger (RING)-domain protein PfRNF1, a putative E3 ligase of the
ubiquitin-mediated signaling pathway. Immunochemistry demonstrated PfRNF1
expression mainly in the sexual stages of P. falciparum with peak expression in
stage II gametocytes, where the protein localized to the nucleus and cytoplasm.
Pfrnf1 promoter and coding regions associated with acetylated histones, and
TSA-treatment resulted in increased PfRNF1 levels. Our combined data point to an 
essential role of histone acetylation for gene regulation in gametocytes, which
can be exploited for malaria transmission-blocking interventions.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00320 
PMCID: PMC5522858
PMID: 28791254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

