
1. Elife. 2017 Aug 24;6. pii: e25008. doi: 10.7554/eLife.25008.

Modelling the drivers of the spread of Plasmodium falciparum hrp2 gene deletions 
in sub-Saharan Africa.

Watson OJ(1), Slater HC(1), Verity R(1), Parr JB(2), Mwandagalirwa MK(2)(3),
Tshefu A(3), Meshnick SR(2), Ghani AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Outbreak Analysis and Modelling,
Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College London, London,
United Kingdom.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
United States.
(3)Ecole de Santé Publique, Faculté de Medecine, Université de Kinshasa,
Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) have transformed malaria diagnosis. The most
prevalent P. falciparum RDTs detect histidine-rich protein 2 (PfHRP2). However,
pfhrp2 gene deletions yielding false-negative RDTs, first reported in South
America in 2010, have been confirmed in Africa and Asia. We developed a
mathematical model to explore the potential for RDT-led diagnosis to drive
selection of pfhrp2-deleted parasites. Low malaria prevalence and high
frequencies of people seeking treatment resulted in the greatest selection
pressure. Calibrating our model against confirmed pfhrp2-deletions in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, we estimate a starting frequency of 6%
pfhrp2-deletion prior to RDT introduction. Furthermore, the patterns observed
necessitate a degree of selection driven by the introduction of PfHRP2-based
RDT-guided treatment. Combining this with parasite prevalence and treatment
coverage estimates, we map the model-predicted spread of pfhrp2-deletion, and
identify the geographic regions in which surveillance for pfhrp2-deletion should 
be prioritised.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.25008 
PMCID: PMC5602420
PMID: 28837020  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

