
1. mBio. 2017 Aug 29;8(4). pii: e01298-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01298-17.

Multifunctional Involvement of a C2H2 Zinc Finger Protein (PbZfp) in Malaria
Transmission, Histone Modification, and Susceptibility to DNA Damage Response.

Gopalakrishnan AM(1), Aly ASI(1), Aravind L(2), Kumar N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine, School of Public Health and Tropical
Medicine, Vector-Borne Infectious Diseases Research Center, Tulane University,
New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.
(2)National Center for Biotechnology Information, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Tropical Medicine, School of Public Health and Tropical
Medicine, Vector-Borne Infectious Diseases Research Center, Tulane University,
New Orleans, Louisiana, USA nkumar@tulane.edu.

In sexually reproducing organisms, meiosis is an essential step responsible for
generation of haploid gametes from diploid somatic cells. The quest for
understanding regulatory mechanisms of meiotic recombination in Plasmodium led to
identification of a gene encoding a protein that contains 11 copies of C2H2 zinc 
fingers (ZnF). Reverse genetic approaches were used to create Plasmodium berghei 
parasites either lacking expression of full-length Plasmodium berghei zinc finger
protein (PbZfp) (knockout [KO]) or expressing PbZfp lacking C-terminal zinc
finger region (truncated [Trunc]). Mice infected with KO parasites survived two
times longer (P < 0.0001) than mice infected with wild-type (WT) parasites. In
mosquito transmission experiments, the infectivity of KO and Trunc parasites was 
severely compromised (>95% oocyst reduction). KO parasites revealed a total lack 
of trimethylation of histone 3 at several lysine residues (K4, K27, and K36)
without any effect on acetylation patterns (H3K9, H3K14, and H4K16). Reduced DNA 
damage and reduced expression of topoisomerase-like Spo11 in the KO parasites
with normal Rad51 expression further suggest a functional role for PbZfp during
genetic recombination that involves DNA double-strand break (DSB) formation
followed by DNA repair. These finding raise the possibility of some convergent
similarities of PbZfp functions to functions of mammalian PRDM9, also a C2H2 ZnF 
protein with histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4) methyltransferase activity. These
functions include the major role played by the latter in binding recombination
hotspots in the genome during meiosis and trimethylation of the associated
histones and subsequent chromatin recruitment of topoisomerase-like Spo11 to
catalyze DNA DSB formation and DMC1/Rad51-mediated DNA repair and homologous
recombination.IMPORTANCE Malaria parasites are haploid throughout their life
cycle except for a brief time period when zygotes are produced as a result of
fertilization between male and female gametes during transmission through the
mosquito vector. The reciprocal recombination events that follow zygote formation
ensure orderly segregation of homologous chromosomes during meiosis, creating
genetic diversity among offspring. Studies presented in the current manuscript
identify a novel C2H2 ZnF-containing protein exhibiting multifunctional roles in 
parasite virulence, mosquito transmission, and homologous recombination during
meiosis. Understanding the transmission biology of malaria will result in the
identification of novel targets for transmission-blocking intervention
approaches.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01298-17 
PMCID: PMC5574716
PMID: 28851851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

