
1. J Biol Chem. 2017 Nov 3;292(44):18217-18226. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M117.797787. Epub
2017 Sep 19.

The serine protease homolog CLIPA14 modulates the intensity of the immune
response in the mosquito Anopheles gambiae.

Nakhleh J(1), Christophides GK(2), Osta MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biology, American University of Beirut, Beirut 1107
2020, Lebanon and.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United
Kingdom.
(3)From the Department of Biology, American University of Beirut, Beirut 1107
2020, Lebanon and mo07@aub.edu.lb.

Clip domain serine protease homologs (SPHs) are positive and negative regulators 
of Anopheles gambiae immune responses mediated by the complement-like protein
TEP1 against Plasmodium malaria parasites and other microbial infections. We have
previously reported that the SPH CLIPA2 is a negative regulator of the
TEP1-mediated response by showing that CLIPA2 knockdown (kd) enhances mosquito
resistance to infections with fungi, bacteria, and Plasmodium parasites. Here, we
identify another SPH, CLIPA14, as a novel regulator of mosquito immunity. We
found that CLIPA14 is a hemolymph protein that is rapidly cleaved following a
systemic infection. CLIPA14 kd mosquitoes elicited a potent melanization response
against Plasmodium berghei ookinetes and exhibited significantly increased
resistance to Plasmodium infections as well as to systemic and oral bacterial
infections. The activity of the enzyme phenoloxidase, which initiates melanin
biosynthesis, dramatically increased in the hemolymph of CLIPA14 kd mosquitoes in
response to systemic bacterial infections. Ookinete melanization and hemolymph
phenoloxidase activity were further increased after cosilencing CLIPA14 and
CLIPA2, suggesting that these two SPHs act in concert to control the melanization
response. Interestingly, CLIPA14 RNAi phenotypes and its infection-induced
cleavage were abolished in a TEP1 loss-of-function background. Our results
suggest that a complex network of SPHs functions downstream of TEP1 to regulate
the melanization reaction.

Â© 2017 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M117.797787 
PMCID: PMC5672044
PMID: 28928218  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

