
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2017 Sep;97(3):753-757. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0345.

Plasmodium Species Infecting Children Presenting with Malaria in Uganda.

Asua V(1), Tukwasibwe S(1), Conrad M(2), Walakira A(1), Nankabirwa JI(3)(1),
Mugenyi L(1), Kamya MR(3)(1), Nsobya SL(3)(1), Rosenthal PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Research Collaboration, Kampala, Uganda.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California; 3Department of Medicine, Makerere University, Kampala,
Uganda.
(3)Deparment of Pathology, Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda.

Contributions of species other than Plasmodium falciparum to human malaria in
sub-Saharan Africa are uncertain. We collected blood from children aged 6 months 
to 10 years diagnosed with malaria by Giemsa-stained blood smears (176 subjects) 
or histidine rich protein-2-based rapid diagnostic tests (323 subjects) in 2016; 
50 samples from each of 10 sites across Uganda were studied to identify infecting
species. Of 499 available samples, 474 demonstrated plasmodial infection by
polymerase chain reaction amplification of 18S ribosomal RNA genes, including P. 
falciparum in 472, Plasmodium malariae in 22, Plasmodium ovale in 15, and
Plasmodium vivax in four; 435 were pure P. falciparum, two did not contain P.
falciparum, and the remainder were mixed infections including P. falciparum. The 
prevalence of nonfalciparum species varied geographically. Stratifying based on
recent history of indoor residual spraying (IRS) of insecticides, nonfalciparum
infections were seen in 27/189 (14.8%) samples from sites that received and
13/285 (4.6%) samples from sites that did not receive IRS since 2010 (P =
0.0013). Overall, 39/474 (8.2%) samples from individuals diagnosed with malaria
included nonfalciparum infections. Thus, a substantial proportion of episodes of 
malaria in Uganda include infections with plasmodial species other than P.
falciparum.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0345 
PMCID: PMC5590612
PMID: 28990911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

