
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Sep 28;8:1199. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01199. eCollection
2017.

Plasmodium berghei NK65 in Combination with IFN-γ Induces Endothelial
Glucocorticoid Resistance via Sustained Activation of p38 and JNK.

Zielińska KA(1), de Cauwer L(2), Knoops S(1), Van der Molen K(1), Sneyers A(1),
Thommis J(2), De Souza JB(3), Opdenakker G(1), De Bosscher K(2), Van den Steen
PE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rega
Institute for Medical Research, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Receptor Research Laboratories, Nuclear Receptor Lab, VIB-UGent Center for
Medical Biotechnology, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, Department of Immunology and
Infection, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United
Kingdom.

Malaria-associated acute respiratory distress syndrome (MA-ARDS) is an often
lethal complication of malaria. Currently, no adequate therapy for this syndrome 
exists. Although glucocorticoids (GCs) have been used to improve clinical outcome
of ARDS, their therapeutic benefits remain unclear. We previously developed a
mouse model of MA-ARDS, in which dexamethasone treatment revealed GC resistance. 
In the present study, we investigated GC sensitivity of mouse microvascular lung 
endothelial cells stimulated with interferon-γ (IFN-γ) and Plasmodium berghei
NK65 (PbNK65). Upon challenge with IFN-γ alone, dexamethasone inhibited the
expression of CCL5 (RANTES) by 90% and both CCL2 (MCP-1) and CXCL10 (IP-10) by
50%. Accordingly, whole transcriptome analysis revealed that dexamethasone
differentially affected several gene clusters and in particular inhibited a large
cluster of IFN-γ-induced genes, including chemokines. In contrast, combined
stimulation with IFN-γ and PbNK65 extract impaired inhibitory actions of GCs on
chemokine release, without affecting the capacity of the GC receptor to
accumulate in the nucleus. Subsequently, we investigated the effects of GCs on
two signaling pathways activated by IFN-γ. Dexamethasone left phosphorylation and
protein levels of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1)
unhampered. In contrast, dexamethasone inhibited the IFN-γ-induced activation of 
two mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK), JNK, and p38. However, PbNK65
extract abolished the inhibitory effects of GCs on MAPK signaling, inducing GC
resistance. These data provide novel insights into the mechanisms of GC actions
in endothelial cells and show how malaria may impair the beneficial effects of
GCs.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01199 
PMCID: PMC5625030
PMID: 29033931 

