
1. Nature. 2017 Dec 7;552(7683):96-100. doi: 10.1038/nature24995. Epub 2017 Nov 29.

Genetic diversity of the African malaria vector Anopheles gambiae.

Anopheles gambiae 1000 Genomes Consortium; Data analysis group; Partner working
group; Sample collections—Angola:; Burkina Faso:; Cameroon:; Gabon:; Guinea:;
Guinea-Bissau:; Kenya:; Uganda:; Crosses:; Sequencing and data production; Web
application development; Project coordination.

Collaborators: Miles A, Harding NJ, Bottà G, Clarkson CS, Antão T, Kozak K,
Schrider DR, Kern AD, Redmond S, Sharakhov I, Pearson RD, Bergey C, Fontaine MC, 
Donnelly MJ, Lawniczak MKN, Kwiatkowski DP, Donnelly MJ, Ayala D, Besansky NJ,
Burt A, Caputo B, Della Torre A, Fontaine MC, Godfray HCJ, Hahn MW, Kern AD,
Kwiatkowski DP, Lawniczak MKN, Midega J, Neafsey DE, O'Loughlin S, Pinto J,
Riehle MM, Sharakhov I, Vernick KD, Weetman D, Wilding CS, White BJ, Troco AD,
Pinto J, Diabaté A, O'Loughlin S, Burt A, Costantini C, Rohatgi KR, Besansky NJ, 
Elissa N, Pinto J, Coulibaly B, Riehle MM, Vernick KD, Pinto J, Dinis J, Midega
J, Mbogo C, Bejon P, Wilding CS, Weetman D, Mawejje HD, Donnelly MJ, Weetman D,
Wilding CS, Donnelly MJ, Stalker J, Rockett K, Drury E, Mead D, Jeffreys A,
Hubbart C, Rowlands K, Isaacs AT, Jyothi D, Malangone C, Vauterin P, Jeffery B,
Wright I, Hart L, Kluczyński K, Cornelius V, MacInnis B, Henrichs C,
Giacomantonio R, Kwiatkowski DP, Cornelius V, MacInnis B, Henrichs C,
Giacomantonio R, Kwiatkowski DP.

The sustainability of malaria control in Africa is threatened by the rise of
insecticide resistance in Anopheles mosquitoes, which transmit the disease. To
gain a deeper understanding of how mosquito populations are evolving, here we
sequenced the genomes of 765 specimens of Anopheles gambiae and Anopheles
coluzzii sampled from 15 locations across Africa, and identified over 50 million 
single nucleotide polymorphisms within the accessible genome. These data revealed
complex population structure and patterns of gene flow, with evidence of ancient 
expansions, recent bottlenecks, and local variation in effective population size.
Strong signals of recent selection were observed in insecticide-resistance genes,
with several sweeps spreading over large geographical distances and between
species. The design of new tools for mosquito control using gene-drive systems
will need to take account of high levels of genetic diversity in natural mosquito
populations.

DOI: 10.1038/nature24995 
PMCID: PMC6026373
PMID: 29186111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

