
1. Virusdisease. 2017 Dec;28(4):422-424. doi: 10.1007/s13337-017-0404-6. Epub 2017
Oct 19.

A clinical report on mixed infection of malaria, dengue and chikungunya from New 
Delhi, India.

Abdullah M(#)(1)(2), Tazeen A(#)(1), Hisamuddin M(1)(2), Naqvi IH(3), Verma
HN(2), Ahmed A(4), Parveen S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Basic Sciences, Jamia Millia Islamia,
New Delhi, India.
(2)Schools of Life and Basic Sciences, Jaipur National University, Jaipur, India.
(3)Dr. M.A. Ansari Health Centre, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi, India.
(4)Protein Research Chair, Department of Biochemistry, College of Science, King
Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(#)Contributed equally

Arthropod-borne infections like malaria, dengue and chikungunya fever are
transmitted by mosquitoes. The present report describes an unusual case of mixed 
infection with malaria, dengue and chikungunya viruses in a 21Â year old male
patient from New Delhi, India during monsoon season of 2016. The malarial fever
was diagnosed by thin slide microscopy and antigen test. Chikungunya virus IgM
was detected in the sample by the card test. Dengue and chikungunya viruses were 
further confirmed by RT-PCR for CprM and E1 gene respectively. Phylogenetic
analysis clustered the study dengue virus serotype 3 sequence in the genotype
III. Thus, the mono infections can not be differentiated from concurrent
infections on the basis of clinical symptoms, the appropriate laboratory
diagnosis is essential for the accurate pathogen confirmation. Precise and
appropriate identification of the multiple pathogens in such clinical cases will 
assist in the effective management of these arthropod mediated infections.

DOI: 10.1007/s13337-017-0404-6 
PMCID: PMC5747841
PMID: 29291234 

