
1. Malar J. 2018 Jan 5;17(1):3. doi: 10.1186/s12936-017-2156-6.

Status of insecticide resistance in malaria vectors in Kwale County, Coastal
Kenya.

Kiuru CW(1)(2), Oyieke FA(1), Mukabana WR(1)(3), Mwangangi J(2)(4), Kamau L(5),
Muhia-Matoke D(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nairobi, P.O. Box 30197, Nairobi,
00100, Kenya.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Pwani University, Kilifi, Kenya.
(3)Man & Well-Being Research Office, Science for Health, P.O. Box 44970, Nairobi,
00100, Kenya.
(4)KEMRI-Centre for Geographic Medicine Research, Kilifi, Kenya.
(5)KEMRI-Centre for Biotechnology Research and Development, Nairobi, Kenya.
(6)KEMRI-Centre for Biotechnology Research and Development, Nairobi, Kenya.
dmatoke@kemri.org.

BACKGROUND: The strategy for malaria vector control in the context of reducing
malaria morbidity and mortality has been the scale-up of long-lasting
insecticidal nets to universal coverage and indoor residual spraying. This has
led to significant decline in malaria transmission. However, these vector control
strategies rely on insecticides which are threatened by insecticide resistance.
In this study the status of pyrethroid resistance in malaria vectors and it's
implication in malaria transmission at the Kenyan Coast was investigated.
RESULTS: Using World Health Organization diagnostic bioassay, levels of
phenotypic resistance to permethrin and deltamethrin was determined. Anopheles
arabiensis showed high resistance to pyrethroids while Anopheles gambiae sensu
stricto (s.s.) and Anopheles funestus showed low resistance and susceptibility,
respectively. Anopheles gambiae sensu lato (s.l.) mosquitoes were further
genotyped for L1014S and L1014F kdr mutation by real time PCR. An allele
frequency of 1.33% for L1014S with no L1014F was detected. To evaluate the
implication of pyrethroid resistance on malaria transmission, Plasmodium
falciparum infection rates in field collected adult mosquitoes was determined
using enzyme linked immunosorbent assay and further, the behaviour of the vectors
was assessed by comparing indoor and outdoor proportions of mosquitoes collected.
Sporozoite infection rate was observed at 4.94 and 2.60% in An. funestus s.l. and
An. gambiae s.l., respectively. A higher density of malaria vectors was collected
outdoor and this also corresponded with high Plasmodium infection rates outdoor.
CONCLUSIONS: This study showed phenotypic resistance to pyrethroids and low
frequency of L1014S kdr mutation in An. gambiae s.l. The occurrence of phenotypic
resistance with low levels of kdr frequencies highlights the need to investigate 
other mechanisms of resistance. Despite being susceptible to pyrethroids An.
funestus s.l. could be driving malaria infections in the area.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-017-2156-6 
PMCID: PMC5755433
PMID: 29304805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

