
1. G3 (Bethesda). 2018 Mar 2;8(3):999-1018. doi: 10.1534/g3.117.300557.

Tuning CRISPR-Cas9 Gene Drives in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Roggenkamp E(1), Giersch RM(2), Schrock MN(1)(2), Turnquist E(1), Halloran M(1), 
Finnigan GC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Kansas State University, 
Manhattan, Kansas 66506.
(2)Department of Biology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Kansas State University, 
Manhattan, Kansas 66506 gfinnigan@ksu.edu.

Erratum in
    G3 (Bethesda). 2018 Oct 3;8(10):3383.

Control of biological populations is an ongoing challenge in many fields,
including agriculture, biodiversity, ecological preservation, pest control, and
the spread of disease. In some cases, such as insects that harbor human pathogens
(e.g., malaria), elimination or reduction of a small number of species would have
a dramatic impact across the globe. Given the recent discovery and development of
the CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing technology, a unique arrangement of this system, a
nuclease-based "gene drive," allows for the super-Mendelian spread and forced
propagation of a genetic element through a population. Recent studies have
demonstrated the ability of a gene drive to rapidly spread within and nearly
eliminate insect populations in a laboratory setting. While there are still
ongoing technical challenges to design of a more optimal gene drive to be used in
wild populations, there are still serious ecological and ethical concerns
surrounding the nature of this powerful biological agent. Here, we use budding
yeast as a safe and fully contained model system to explore mechanisms that might
allow for programmed regulation of gene drive activity. We describe four
conserved features of all CRISPR-based drives and demonstrate the ability of each
drive component-Cas9 protein level, sgRNA identity, Cas9 nucleocytoplasmic
shuttling, and novel Cas9-Cas9 tandem fusions-to modulate drive activity within a
population.

Copyright Â© 2018 Roggenkamp et al.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.117.300557 
PMCID: PMC5844318
PMID: 29348295 

