
1. Gates Open Res. 2017 Dec 11;1:14. doi: 10.12688/gatesopenres.12771.1.

Informed consent in field trials of gene-drive mosquitoes.

Kolopack PA(1), Lavery JV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dalla Lana School of Public Health, and Joint Centre for Bioethics, University
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5T 3M7, Canada.
(2)Hubert Department of Global Health, Rollins School of Public Health, and
Center for Ethics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA.

The US National Academies' (NAS) recent report 'Gene Drives on the Horizon:
Advancing Science, Navigating Uncertainty, and Aligning Research with Public
Values' examines the requirements of responsible conduct in research involving
gene drives in non-human organisms. Many of the complex ethical issues raised by 
the introduction of gene drive technologies for mosquito population control have 
been anticipated during the development and field-testing of earlier-generation
genetic engineering approaches with mosquitoes. One issue-the requirement for
informed consent in field trials-is not addressed explicitly in the NAS' report. 
Some commentators have presumed that informed consent should play a role as a
protection for research participants in studies of genetically modified
mosquitoes. Others have argued that there are no human subjects of field trials, 
so the informed consent requirement does not apply. It is both ethically and
practically important that these presumptions are adequately scrutinized to
ensure that any applications of informed consent in these trials are properly
justified. We argue that informed consent from individual research participants
in gene drive trials may be required: (1) when blood and other forms of clinical 
data are collected from them, as will likely be the case in some studies
involving epidemiological endpoints, such as the incidence of new infections with
dengue and malaria; (2) when they participate in social science and/or behavioral
research involving the completion of surveys and questionnaires; or (3) when
their home or property is accessed and the location recorded as a spatial
variable for the release or collection of mosquitoes because the precise location
of the household is important for entomological reasons and these data constitute
identifiable private information at the household level. Importantly, most
regulations and guidelines allow these requirements to be waived or modified, to 
various degrees, according to the judgment of Institutional Review Boards.

DOI: 10.12688/gatesopenres.12771.1 
PMCID: PMC5757819
PMID: 29355214 

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.

