
1. J Exp Biol. 2018 Mar 21;221(Pt 6). pii: jeb174433. doi: 10.1242/jeb.174433.

Distinct physiological, biochemical and morphometric adjustments in the malaria
vectors Anopheles gambiae and A. coluzzii as means to survive dry season
conditions in Burkina Faso.

Hidalgo K(1)(2), Montazeau C(3), Siaussat D(4), Braman V(4), Trabalon M(5),
Simard F(3), Renault D(6)(7), Dabiré RK(8), Mouline K(3)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Rennes 1, UMR CNRS 6553 Ecobio, Campus de Beaulieu, 263 Avenue
du General Leclerc, CS 74205 35042 Rennes, Cedex, France kevin.hidalgo@gmx.com.
(2)INRA UR370 QuaPA, MASS Group, 63122 Saint-Genès-Champanelle, France.
(3)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), UMR IRD 224-CNRS
5290-Université de Montpellier 1-Université de Montpellier 2 MIVEGEC, 911 Avenue 
Agropolis, BP 64501, 34394 Montpellier, Cedex 5, France.
(4)UMR 7618 Institute of Ecology and Environmental Sciences of Paris, Department 
of Sensory Ecology, Université Pierre et Marie Curie (UPMC), 4 Place Jussieu,
Tour 44-45, 3ème étage, 75005 Paris, France.
(5)Université de Rennes 1, UMR CNRS 6552 Ethologie animale et humaine, Campus de 
Beaulieu, 263 Avenue du General Leclerc, 35042 Rennes, Cedex, France.
(6)Université de Rennes 1, UMR CNRS 6553 Ecobio, Campus de Beaulieu, 263 Avenue
du General Leclerc, CS 74205 35042 Rennes, Cedex, France.
(7)Institut Universitaire de France, 1 rue Descartes, 75231 Paris, Cedex 05,
France.
(8)Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé (IRSS), Direction Régionale de
l'Ouest (DRO), 399 Avenue de la Liberté, 01 BP 545, Bobo-Dioulasso, Burkina Faso.

Aestivation and dispersive migration are the two strategies evoked in the
literature to explain the way in which malaria vectors Anopheles coluzzii and A. 
gambiae survive the harsh climatic conditions of the dry season in sub-Saharan
Africa. However, the physiological mechanisms regulating these two strategies are
unknown. In the present study, mosquito species were exposed to controlled
environmental conditions mimicking the rainy and dry seasons of south western
Burkina Faso. Survival strategies were studied through morphometric (wing
length), ecophysiological (respiratory gas exchanges), biochemical (cuticular
hydrocarbons composition) and molecular (AKH mRNA expression levels) parameters, 
variations of which are usually considered to be hallmarks of aestivation and
dispersion mechanisms in various insects. Our results showed that
ecophysiological and morphometric adjustments are made in both species to prevent
water losses during the dry season. However, the usual metabolic rate
modifications expected as signatures of aestivation and migration were not
observed, highlighting specific and original physiological mechanisms sustaining 
survival in malaria mosquitoes during the dry season. Differences in epicuticular
hydrocarbon composition and AKH levels of expression were found between the
permanent and temporary A. coluzzii populations, illustrating the great
phenotypic plasticity of this mosquito species. Altogether, our work underlines
the diverse and complex pattern of changes occurring in the two mosquito species 
and at the population level to cope with the dry season and highlights potential 
targets of future control tools.

© 2018. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jeb.174433 
PMID: 29378815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no
competing or financial interests.

