
1. Infect Immun. 2018 Apr 23;86(5). pii: e00088-18. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00088-18. Print
2018 May.

A Plasmodium Parasite with Complete Late Liver Stage Arrest Protects against
Preerythrocytic and Erythrocytic Stage Infection in Mice.

Vaughan AM(1), Sack BK(2), Dankwa D(2), Minkah N(2), Nguyen T(2), Cardamone H(2),
Kappe SHI(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Research, Seattle, Washington, USA
ashley.vaughan@cidresearch.org stefan.kappe@cidresearch.org.
(2)Center for Infectious Disease Research, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA.

Genetically attenuated malaria parasites (GAP) that arrest during liver stage
development are powerful immunogens and afford complete and durable protection
against sporozoite infection. Late liver stage-arresting GAP provide superior
protection against sporozoite challenge in mice compared to early live
stage-arresting attenuated parasites. However, very few late liver
stage-arresting GAP have been generated to date. Therefore, identification of
additional loci that are critical for late liver stage development and can be
used to generate novel late liver stage-arresting GAPs is of importance. We
further explored genetic attenuation in Plasmodium yoelii by combining two gene
deletions, PlasMei2 and liver-specific protein 2 (LISP2), that each cause late
liver stage arrest with various degrees of infrequent breakthrough to blood stage
infection. The dual gene deletion resulted in a synthetic lethal phenotype that
caused complete attenuation in a highly susceptible mouse strain. P.
yoeliiplasmei2-lisp2- arrested late in liver stage development and did not
persist in livers beyond 3 days after infection. Immunization with this GAP
elicited robust protective antibody responses in outbred and inbred mice against 
sporozoites, liver stages, and blood stages as well as eliciting protective
liver-resident T cells. The immunization afforded protection against both
sporozoite challenge and blood stage challenge. These findings provide evidence
that completely attenuated late liver stage-arresting GAP are achievable via the 
synthetic lethal approach and might enable a path forward for the creation of a
completely attenuated late liver stage-arresting P. falciparum GAP.

Copyright Â© 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00088-18 
PMCID: PMC5913857
PMID: 29440367  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

