
1. Acta Trop. 2018 Sep;185:371-379. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2018.03.020. Epub
2018 Mar 17.

Molecular characterization of Babesia microti seroreactive antigen 5-1-1 and
development of rapid detection methods for anti-B. microti antibodies in serum.

Cai YC(1), Wu F(2), Hu W(3), Chen J(4), Chen SH(5), Xu B(6), Lu Y(7), Ai L(8),
Yang CL(9), Zhao S(10).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433, China; National
Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, China; Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of Public 
Health, China; WHO Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases, National Center
for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Ministry of Science and
Technology, Shanghai 200025, China. Electronic address: cyuchun@126.com.
(2)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, China; Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of
Public Health, China; WHO Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases, National
Center for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Ministry of Science and
Technology, Shanghai 200025, China. Electronic address: wufen0730@163.com.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433, China; National
Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, China; Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of Public 
Health, China; WHO Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases, National Center
for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Ministry of Science and
Technology, Shanghai 200025, China. Electronic address: huw@fudan.edu.cn.
(4)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, China; Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of
Public Health, China; WHO Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases, National
Center for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Ministry of Science and
Technology, Shanghai 200025, China. Electronic address: chenjiaxu1962@163.com.
(5)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, China; Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of
Public Health, China; WHO Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases, National
Center for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Ministry of Science and
Technology, Shanghai 200025, China. Electronic address: chensh637@163.com.
(6)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, China; Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of
Public Health, China; WHO Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases, National
Center for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Ministry of Science and
Technology, Shanghai 200025, China. Electronic address: xubin677@hotmail.com.
(7)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, China; Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of
Public Health, China; WHO Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases, National
Center for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Ministry of Science and
Technology, Shanghai 200025, China. Electronic address: lyyaner@163.com.
(8)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, China; Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of
Public Health, China; WHO Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases, National
Center for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Ministry of Science and
Technology, Shanghai 200025, China. Electronic address: aileen-252120016@qq.com.
(9)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, China; Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of
Public Health, China; WHO Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases, National
Center for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Ministry of Science and
Technology, Shanghai 200025, China. Electronic address: chunliyang2014@163.com.
(10)School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433, China.
Electronic address: zhaosm@fudan.edu.cn.

Babesiosis has become a new global threat impacting human health, and most human 
babesiosis cases are caused by Babesia microti. Until now few antigens of B.
microti have been described which can be used for the diagnosis of human
babesiosis. In the present study, we report on the bioinformatic analysis,
cloning and expression of the sequence encoding the B. microti seroreactive
antigen 5-1-1 to investigate its potential incorporation in serologic diagnostic 
tools for babesiosis. Bioinformatic analysis and recombinant gene expression were
performed to molecularly characterize seroreactive antigen 5-1-1. Enhanced
chemiluminescence (ECL)-Western blot methods were used to detect specific
antibodies in infected mice. Immunofluorescence antibody assays (IFA) were
performed to detect the localization of BmSA5-1-1 in B. microti parasites. ELISA 
and immunochromatographic (ICT) tests were developed using recombinant BmSA5-1-1 
to evaluate its potential use in rapid detection methods for B. microti
antibodies and for the diagnosis of babesiosis. A recombinant expression plasmid 
was constructed by inserting the target gene fragment in the pET28a vector after 
double digestion with BamHI and XhoI restriction enzymes. The recombinant
BmSA5-1-1 protein was expressed in Escherichia coli (rBmSA5-1-1) and purified by 
means of Ni-nitrilotriacetic acid (NTA) agarose columns. Polyclonal antibodies
were generated against rBmSA5-1-1. Based on indirect immunofluorescence assay
results, BmSA5-1-1 appeared to localize on the surface of B. microti. ELISA tests
using the rBmSA5-1-1 antigen detected specific antibodies from infected mice as
early as 4 days post-infection. Our results indicate that the two methods we
developed can detect specific antibodies in mice at different stages of infection
with sensitivities of 100% (rBmSA5-1-1 ELISA) and 90% (ICT). The specificity of
the two methods was 100%. Sera of patients suffering from other closely related
parasitic diseases, such as malaria and toxoplasmosis, produced negative results.
In conclusion, seroreactive antigen 5-1-1, a member of the BMN1 protein family,
is expressed on the outer surface of B. microti and is a promising candidate
antigen for the early diagnosis of babesiosis. rBmSA5-1-1 ELISA and ICT methods
show good potential for detecting specific antibodies in mice at different stages
of infection.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2018.03.020 
PMID: 29559329  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

