
1. Science. 2018 May 4;360(6388). pii: eaap7847. doi: 10.1126/science.aap7847.

Uncovering the essential genes of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium
falciparum by saturation mutagenesis.

Zhang M(1), Wang C(1), Otto TD(2), Oberstaller J(1), Liao X(1), Adapa SR(1),
Udenze K(1), Bronner IF(2), Casandra D(1), Mayho M(2), Brown J(2), Li S(1),
Swanson J(1), Rayner JC(3), Jiang RHY(4), Adams JH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Global Health and Infectious Diseases, Department of Global Health,
University of South Florida, 3720 Spectrum Boulevard, Suite 404, Tampa, FL 33612,
USA.
(2)Malaria Programme, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Genome Campus, Hinxton
Cambridgeshire CB10 1SA, UK.
(3)Malaria Programme, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Genome Campus, Hinxton
Cambridgeshire CB10 1SA, UK. jadams3@health.usf.edu jiang2@health.usf.edu
jr9@sanger.ac.uk.
(4)Center for Global Health and Infectious Diseases, Department of Global Health,
University of South Florida, 3720 Spectrum Boulevard, Suite 404, Tampa, FL 33612,
USA. jadams3@health.usf.edu jiang2@health.usf.edu jr9@sanger.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Science. 2018 May 4;360(6388):490-491.

Severe malaria is caused by the apicomplexan parasite Plasmodium falciparum.
Despite decades of research, the distinct biology of these parasites has made it 
challenging to establish high-throughput genetic approaches to identify and
prioritize therapeutic targets. Using transposon mutagenesis of P. falciparum in 
an approach that exploited its AT-rich genome, we generated more than 38,000
mutants, saturating the genome and defining mutability and fitness costs for over
87% of genes. Of 5399 genes, our study defined 2680 genes as essential for
optimal growth of asexual blood stages in vitro. These essential genes are
associated with drug resistance, represent leading vaccine candidates, and
include approximately 1000 Plasmodium-conserved genes of unknown function. We
validated this approach by testing proteasome pathways for individual mutants
associated with artemisinin sensitivity.

Copyright Â© 2018 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aap7847 
PMCID: PMC6360947
PMID: 29724925  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

