
1. J Virol. 2018 Jun 29;92(14). pii: e00694-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00694-18. Print
2018 Jul 15.

Comparative Characterization of the Sindbis Virus Proteome from Mammalian and
Invertebrate Hosts Identifies nsP2 as a Component of the Virion and Sorting Nexin
5 as a Significant Host Factor for Alphavirus Replication.

Schuchman R(1), Kilianski A(2), Piper A(1), Vancini R(1), Ribeiro JMC(3), Sprague
TR(4), Nasar F(4), Boyd G(5), Hernandez R(6), Glaros T(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.
(2)U.S. Army Edgewood Chemical Biological Center, Aberdeen Proving Ground,
Maryland, USA.
(3)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Laboratory of Malaria
and Vector Research, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(4)U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, Fort Detrick,
Maryland, USA.
(5)Excet, Inc., Springfield, Virginia, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA Raquel_Hernandez@NCSU.edu
trevor.g.glaros.civ@mail.mil.
(7)U.S. Army Edgewood Chemical Biological Center, Aberdeen Proving Ground,
Maryland, USA Raquel_Hernandez@NCSU.edu trevor.g.glaros.civ@mail.mil.

Recent advances in mass spectrometry methods and instrumentation now allow for
more accurate identification of proteins in low abundance. This technology was
applied to Sindbis virus, the prototypical alphavirus, to investigate the viral
proteome. To determine if host proteins are specifically packaged into alphavirus
virions, Sindbis virus (SINV) was grown in multiple host cells representing
vertebrate and mosquito hosts, and total protein content of purified virions was 
determined. This analysis identified host factors not previously associated with 
alphavirus entry, replication, or egress. One host protein, sorting nexin 5
(SNX5), was shown to be critical for the replication of three different
alphaviruses, Sindbis, Mayaro, and Chikungunya viruses. The most significant
finding was that in addition to the host proteins, SINV nonstructural protein 2
(nsP2) was detected within virions grown in all host cells examined. The protein 
and RNA-interacting capabilities of nsP2 coupled with its presence in the virion 
support a role for nsP2 during packaging and/or entry of progeny virus. This
function has not been identified for this protein. Taken together, this strategy 
identified at least one host factor integrally involved in alphavirus
replication. Identification of other host proteins provides insight into
alphavirus-host interactions during viral replication in both vertebrate and
invertebrate hosts. This method of virus proteome analysis may also be useful for
the identification of protein candidates for host-based therapeutics.IMPORTANCE
Pathogenic alphaviruses, such as Chikungunya and Mayaro viruses, continue to
plague public health in developing and developed countries alike. Alphaviruses
belong to a group of viruses vectored in nature by hematophagous (blood-feeding) 
insects and are termed arboviruses (arthropod-borne viruses). This group of
viruses contains many human pathogens, such as dengue fever, West Nile, and
Yellow fever viruses. With few exceptions, there are no vaccines or prophylactics
for these agents, leaving one-third of the world population at risk of infection.
Identifying effective antivirals has been a long-term goal for combating these
diseases not only because of the lack of vaccines but also because they are
effective during an ongoing epidemic. Mass spectrometry-based analysis of the
Sindbis virus proteome can be effective in identifying host genes involved in
virus replication and novel functions for virus proteins. Identification of these
factors is invaluable for the prophylaxis of this group of viruses.

Copyright Â© 2018 Schuchman et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00694-18 
PMCID: PMC6026752
PMID: 29743363  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

