
1. Phytother Res. 2018 Sep;32(9):1795-1802. doi: 10.1002/ptr.6113. Epub 2018 May 11.

Apigenin inhibits growth of the Plasmodium berghei and disrupts some metabolic
pathways in mice.

Amiri M(1), Nourian A(1), Khoshkam M(2), Ramazani A(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Parasitology and Mycology, Zanjan University of Medical 
Sciences, Zanjan, Iran.
(2)Chemistry Group, Faculty of Basic Sciences, University of Mohaghegh Ardabili, 
Ardabil, Iran.
(3)Cancer Gene Therapy Research Center, Zanjan University of Medical Sciences,
Zanjan, Iran.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Zanjan University of Medical
Sciences, Zanjan, Iran.

Due to the challenges in the control, prevention, and eradication of parasitic
diseases like malaria, there is an urgent need to discover new therapeutic
agents. Plant-derived medicines may open new ways in the field of antiplasmodial 
therapy. This study is aimed to investigate the toxicity and in vivo
antiplasmodial activity of apigenin, a dietary flavonoid. Apigenin cytotoxicity
was investigated on Huh7 cell line, brine shrimp (Artemia salina) larva, and
human red blood cells. In vivo toxicity of apigenin was assessed by metabolomics 
approaches. Apigenin exhibited significant suppression of parasitemia in a
dose-dependent manner; it suppressed Plasmodium berghei growth by 69.74%, 50.3%, 
and 49.23% at concentrations of 70, 35, and 15 mg/kg/day, respectively. The IC50 
value for apigenin after 24 hr exposure to Huh7 cells was 225 μg/ml. Apigenin did
not show noticeable toxicity on A. salina and also on the membrane integrity of
red blood cells. After 24 hr exposure of mice to apigenin, alterations were seen 
in the metabolism of glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids, bile acid metabolism
(alternative pathway), sulfur metabolism, bile acid metabolism, metabolism of
estrogens and androgens, cholesterol catabolism, and biosynthesis of cholesterol.
These findings indicate that apigenin has potential in vivo antiplasmodial
activity against P. berghei infected mice with high selectivity against malaria, 
but it can disrupt some metabolic pathways in mice.

Copyright © 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ptr.6113 
PMID: 29748995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

