
1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2019 Mar;133:46-54. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2018.06.037. Epub 2018 Jun 30.

Transferrin and transferrin receptors update.

Kawabata H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Immunology, Kanazawa Medical University, 1-1
Daigaku, Uchinada-machi, Ishikawa-ken 920-0293, Japan. Electronic address:
hkawabat@kanazawa-med.ac.jp.

In vertebrates, transferrin (Tf) safely delivers iron through circulation to
cells. Tf-bound iron is incorporated through Tf receptor (TfR) 1-mediated
endocytosis. TfR1 can mediate cellular uptake of both Tf and H-ferritin, an iron 
storage protein. New World arenaviruses, which cause hemorrhagic fever, and
Plasmodium vivax use TfR1 for entry into host cells. Human TfR2, another receptor
for Tf, is predominantly expressed in hepatocytes and erythroid precursors, and
holo-Tf dramatically upregulates its expression. TfR2 forms a complex with
hemochromatosis protein, HFE, and serves as a component of the iron sensing
machinery in hepatocytes. Defects in TfR2 cause systemic iron overload,
hemochromatosis, through down-regulation of hepcidin. In erythroid cells, TfR2
forms a complex with the erythropoietin receptor and regulates erythropoiesis.
TfR2 facilitates iron transport from lysosomes to mitochondria in erythroblasts
and dopaminergic neurons. Administration of apo-Tf, which scavenges free iron,
has been explored for various clinical conditions including atransferrinemia,
iron overload, and tissue ischemia. Apo-Tf has also been shown to ameliorate
anemia in animal models of β-thalassemia. In this review, I provide an update and
summary on our knowledge of mammalian Tf and its receptors.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2018.06.037 
PMID: 29969719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

