
1. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2016 Jun;34(3):227-32.

[Polymorphism of 72-76 Coding Sequence within Exon 2 Region of Pfcrt in Yunnan
Province].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu YJ, Chen MN, Xu YC, Mao XH, Deng Y, Dong Y.

Objective: To understand the endemic situation of chloroquine-resistant
falciparum malaria in Yunnan Province by analyzing the polymorphism of the 72-76 
amino-acid coding sequence within exon 2 region of Plasmodium falciparum
chloroquine resistant transporter (Pfcrt) gene （referred to as the 72-76 coding
region） in malaria patients.
Methods: The filter paper blood samples and relative information of falciparum
malaria cases were collected in 13 prefectures of Yunnan Province （excluding
Diqing, Wenshan, Zhaotong prefectures） from August 2012 to September 2015. The
source of infection was determined by epidemiological investigation and the place
of case discovery was confirmed according to the endemic registration in the
Infectious Diseases Reporting Manage System, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention. The exon2 region of Pfcrt gene was amplified by nested PCR and
sequenced. The polymorphism of the 72-76 coding region was analyzed with MEGA
5.04. The variable sites and genetic distance between sequences were calculated. 
The constituent ratio of the polymorphism in sub-populations was analyzed with
IBM SPSS Statistics 21 software.
Results: Two hundred and thirty-two blood samples were collected in the period
and source of infection included Yunnan of China, Africa and Myanma. Nested-PCR
resulted in positive products in 210 samples. Sequence analysis showed the
presence of chloroquine-sensitive genotype（CVMNK）（15.2%, 32/210） and mutated
chloroquine-resistant genotype（CVIET, SVMNT and CVMNT）（76.2%, 160/210; 6.7%,
14/210; 1.9%, 4/210） 72-76 coding regions. The proportion of the CVMNK type was
100%（32/32） in cases with the range of 19-55 years, 46.9% （15/32） in farmers, and
59.4% （19/32） in patients with infection source in Southeast Asia, all
significantly higher than those of other cases in the same groups（0; 31.3%,
10/32; and 37.5%, 12/32 respectively, χ2=13.674, 8.478, 6.292, P<0.05）. The
proportion of the CVIET and SVMNT genotypes in patients with infection source in 
Myanma and Cambodia was 81.3%（130/160） and 78.6%（11/14） respectively,
significantly higher than those in patients with infection source in Yunnan
Province（6.3%, 10/160; 21.4%, 3/14）（χ2=6.519 and 6.620, P<0.05）. In samples with 
Africa infection source, the proportion of CVIET was 12.5%（20/160）, with no
detection of SVMNT. There was a 145 bp homologous locus among the 210 exon2
regions, of which the conservative sites accounted for 95.2%（138/145） and
variable sites for 4.8%（7/145）. The genetic distance between the 210 sequences
ranged 0.000-0.036（0.012±0.005）. The genetic distances from genotypes CVIET,
SVMNT and CVMNT to the chloroquine-sensitive genotype CVMNK were（0.029±0.015）,
（0.021±0.013） and （0.014±0.001） respectively. 178 cases with
chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum distributed in all the 13 prefectures. Among 
them, the regions with top detection rate of chloroquine-resistant genotypes were
Dehong（51.7%, 92/178）, Baoshan（24.7%, 44/178） and Lincang（5.6%, 10/178） bordering
on Myanmar and Kunming (4.5%, 8/178).
Conclusion: There are three chloroquine-resistant genotypes of the 72-76 coding
region in falciparum malaria cases in Yunnan Province, which distribute in
81.3%（13/16） of prefectures in the Province.


PMID: 30129722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

