
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Aug 28;8(1):12951. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-31207-w.

Surveillance of Antimalarial Resistance Pfcrt, Pfmdr1, and Pfkelch13
Polymorphisms in African Plasmodium falciparum imported to Shandong Province,
China.

Xu C(1), Wei Q(1), Yin K(1), Sun H(1), Li J(1), Xiao T(1), Kong X(1), Wang Y(1), 
Zhao G(1), Zhu S(1), Kou J(1), Yan G(1), Huang B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Shandong Academy of Medical
Sciences, Shandong Provincial Reference Laboratory for Malaria Diagnosis, Jining,
272033, China.
(2)Shandong Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Shandong Academy of Medical
Sciences, Shandong Provincial Reference Laboratory for Malaria Diagnosis, Jining,
272033, China. hbc863@hotmail.com.

Antimalarial drug resistance is a major public health problem in China. From 2012
to 2015, more than 75% of malaria cases in Shandong Province were P. falciparum
returned from Africa. However, molecular marker polymorphisms of drug resistance 
in imported P. falciparum cases have not been evaluated. In this study, we
analyzed polymorphisms of the Pfcrt, Pfmdr1, and Pfkelch13 genes in 282â€‰P.
falciparum cases returned from Africa to Shandong between 2012 and 2015. Among
the isolates, polymorphisms were detected in codons 74-76 of Pfcrt and 86, 184,
1246 of Pfmdr1, among which K76T (36.6%) and Y184F (60.7%) were the most
prevalent, respectively. Six Pfcrt haplotypes and 11 Pfmdr1 haplotypes were
identified and a comparison was made on the prevalence of haplotypes among East
Africa, West Africa, Central Africa and South Africa. One synonymous and 9
nonsynonymous mutations in Pfkelch13 were detected in the isolates (4.6%), among 
which a candidate artemisinin (ART) resistance mutation P553L was observed. The
study establishes fundamental data for detection of chloroquine resistance (CQR) 
and ART resistance with molecular markers of the imported P. falciparum in China,
and it also enriches the genetic data of antimalarial resistance for the malaria 
endemic countries in Africa.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-31207-w 
PMCID: PMC6113250
PMID: 30154519  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

