
1. Nat Microbiol. 2018 Nov;3(11):1206-1213. doi: 10.1038/s41564-018-0223-6. Epub
2018 Sep 3.

Inducible developmental reprogramming redefines commitment to sexual development 
in the malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei.

Kent RS(1)(2), Modrzynska KK(3)(4), Cameron R(1), Philip N(1)(5), Billker O(6),
Waters AP(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, UK.
(2)Department of Microbiology and molecular genetics, University of Vermont,
Burlington, VT, USA.
(3)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, UK. katarzyna.modrzynska@glasgow.ac.uk.
(4)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK.
katarzyna.modrzynska@glasgow.ac.uk.
(5)Institute of Immunology and Infection Research, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, UK.
(6)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK. ob4@Sanger.ac.uk.
(7)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, UK. Andy.Waters@glasgow.ac.uk.

During malaria infection, Plasmodium spp. parasites cyclically invade red blood
cells and can follow two different developmental pathways. They can either
replicate asexually to sustain the infection, or differentiate into gametocytes, 
the sexual stage that can be taken up by mosquitoes, ultimately leading to
disease transmission. Despite its importance for malaria control, the process of 
gametocytogenesis remains poorly understood, partially due to the difficulty of
generating high numbers of sexually committed parasites in laboratory
conditions1. Recently, an apicomplexa-specific transcription factor (AP2-G) was
identified as necessary for gametocyte production in multiple Plasmodium
species2,3, and suggested to be an epigenetically regulated master switch that
initiates gametocytogenesis4,5. Here we show that in a rodent malaria parasite,
Plasmodium berghei, conditional overexpression of AP2-G can be used to
synchronously convert the great majority of the population into fertile
gametocytes. This discovery allowed us to redefine the time frame of sexual
commitment, identify a number of putative AP2-G targets and chart the sequence of
transcriptional changes through gametocyte development, including the observation
that gender-specific transcription occurred within 6â€‰h of induction. These data
provide entry points for further detailed characterization of the key process
required for malaria transmission.

DOI: 10.1038/s41564-018-0223-6 
PMCID: PMC6317699
PMID: 30177743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

