
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2018 Oct;101:108-123. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2018.08.005.
Epub 2018 Aug 29.

Lipid metabolism in insect disease vectors.

Gondim KC(1), Atella GC(2), Pontes EG(3), Majerowicz D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Bioquímica Médica Leopoldo de Meis, Universidade Federal do Rio
de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. Electronic address:
katia@bioqmed.ufrj.br.
(2)Instituto de Bioquímica Médica Leopoldo de Meis, Universidade Federal do Rio
de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Química, Universidade Federal Rural
do Rio de Janeiro, Seropédica, RJ, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Biotecnologia Farmacêutica, Faculdade de Farmácia,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. Electronic
address: majerowicz@pharma.ufrj.br.

More than a third of the world population is at constant risk of contracting some
insect-transmitted disease, such as Dengue fever, Zika virus disease, malaria,
Chagas' disease, African trypanosomiasis, and others. Independent of the life
cycle of the pathogen causing the disease, the insect vector hematophagous habit 
is a common and crucial trait for the transmission of all these diseases. This
lifestyle is unique, as hematophagous insects feed on blood, a diet that is rich 
in protein but relatively poor in lipids and carbohydrates, in huge amounts and
low frequency. Another unique feature of these insects is that blood meal
triggers essential metabolic processes, as molting and oogenesis and, in this
way, regulates the expression of various genes that are involved in these events.
In this paper, we review current knowledge of the physiology and biochemistry of 
lipid metabolism in insect disease vectors, comparing with classical models
whenever possible. We address lipid digestion and absorption, hemolymphatic
transport, and lipid storage by the fat body and ovary. In this context, both de 
novo fatty acid and triacylglycerol synthesis are discussed, including the
related fatty acid activation process and the intracellular lipid binding
proteins. As lipids are stored in order to be mobilized later on, e.g. for flight
activity or survivorship, lipolysis and β-oxidation are also considered. All
these events need to be finely regulated, and the role of hormones in this
control is summarized. Finally, we also review information about infection, when 
vector insect physiology is affected, and there is a crosstalk between its immune
system and lipid metabolism. There is not abundant information about lipid
metabolism in vector insects, and significant current gaps in the field are
indicated, as well as questions to be answered in the future.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2018.08.005 
PMID: 30171905  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

