
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018 Sep 4;12(9):e0006769. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006769.
eCollection 2018 Sep.

Optimization of sand fly embryo microinjection for gene editing by CRISPR/Cas9.

Martin-Martin I(1), Aryan A(2), Meneses C(1), Adelman ZN(3), Calvo E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, United
States of America.
(2)Department of Entomology and Fralin Life Science Institute, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, Virginia, United States of America.
(3)Department of Entomology and Agrilife Research, Texas A&M University, College 
Station, Texas, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats
(CRISPR)/Cas9 technology has rapidly emerged as a very effective tool for gene
editing. Although great advances on gene editing in the medical entomology field 
have arisen, no attempts of gene editing have been reported in sand flies, the
vectors of Leishmaniasis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we described a detailed protocol for sand
fly embryo microinjection taking into consideration the sand fly life cycle, and 
manipulation and oviposition requirements of this non-model organism. Following
our microinjection protocol, a hatching rate of injected embryos of 11.90%-14.22%
was achieved, a rate consistent with other non-model organism dipterans such as
mosquitoes. Essential factors for the adaptation of CRISPR/Cas9 technology to the
sand fly field were addressed including the selection of a target gene and the
design and production of sgRNA. An in vitro cleavage assay was optimized to test 
the activity of each sgRNA and a protocol for Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9
(spCas9) protein expression and purification was described. Relevant
considerations for a successful gene editing in the sand fly such as specifics of
embryology and double-stranded break DNA repair mechanisms were discussed.
CONCLUSION AND SIGNIFICANCE: The step-by-step methodology reported in this
article will be of significant use for setting up a sand fly embryo
microinjection station for the incorporation of CRISPR/Cas9 technology in the
sand fly field. Gene editing strategies used in mosquitoes and other model
insects have been adapted to work with sand flies, providing the tools and
relevant information for adapting gene editing techniques to the vectors of
Leishmaniasis. Gene editing in sand flies will provide essential information on
the biology of these vectors of medical and veterinary relevance and will rise a 
better understanding of vector-parasite-host interactions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006769 
PMCID: PMC6150542
PMID: 30180160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

