
1. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2019;422:121-156. doi: 10.1007/82_2018_143.

The Clock Keeps on Ticking: Emerging Roles for Circadian Regulation in the
Control of Fungal Physiology and Pathogenesis.

Larrondo LF(1)(2), Canessa P(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Millennium Institute for Integrative Biology (iBio), Santiago, Chile.
llarrondo@bio.puc.cl.
(2)Departamento de Genética Molecular y Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias
Biológicas, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
llarrondo@bio.puc.cl.
(3)Millennium Institute for Integrative Biology (iBio), Santiago, Chile.
(4)Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida, Centro de Biotecnologia Vegetal, Universidad 
Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile.

Tic-tac, tic-tac, the sound of time is familiar to us, yet, it also silently
shapes daily biological processes conferring 24-hour rhythms in, among others,
cellular and systemic signaling, gene expression, and metabolism. Indeed,
circadian clocks are molecular machines that permit temporal control of a variety
of processes in individuals, with a close to 24-hour period, optimizing cellular 
dynamics in synchrony with daily environmental cycles. For over three decades,
the molecular bases of these clocks have been extensively described in the
filamentous fungus Neurospora crassa, yet, there have been few molecular studies 
in fungi other than Neurospora, despite evidence of rhythmic phenomena in many
fungal species, including pathogenic ones. This chapter will revise the
mechanisms underlying clock regulation in the model fungus N. crassa, as well as 
recent findings obtained in several fungi. In particular, this chapter will
review the effect of circadian regulation of virulence and organismal
interactions, focusing on the phytopathogen Botrytis cinerea, as well as several 
entomopathogenic fungi, including the behavior-manipulating species
Ophiocordyceps kimflemingiae and Entomophthora muscae. Finally, this review will 
comment current efforts in the study of mammalian pathogenic fungi, while
highlighting recent circadian lessons from parasites such as Trypanosoma and
Plasmodium. The clock keeps on ticking, whether we can hear it or not.

DOI: 10.1007/82_2018_143 
PMID: 30255278  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

