
1. PLoS One. 2018 Oct 1;13(10):e0204923. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0204923.
eCollection 2018.

Ziziphus spina-christi leaf extract ameliorates schistosomiasis liver granuloma, 
fibrosis, and oxidative stress through downregulation of fibrinogenic signaling
in mice.

Almeer RS(1), El-Khadragy MF(1)(2), Abdelhabib S(3), Abdel Moneim AE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia.
(2)Department of Zoology and Entomology, Faculty of Science, Helwan University,
Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Genome Research Chair, Department of Biochemistry, College of Science, King
Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Schistosomiasis is a widespread parasitic infection that affects humans, as well 
as wild and domestic animals. It ranks second after malaria, with a significant
health and socio-economic impact in the developing countries. The objective of
this study was to assess the anti-schistosomal impact of Ziziphus spina-christi
leaf extract (ZLE) on Schistosoma mansoni-induced liver fibrosis in CD-1 Swiss
male albino mice. S. mansoni infection was achieved by dipping of mouse tails in 
schistosomal cercariae. ZLE treatment was initiated at 46 days post-infection by 
administering a dose of the extract on a daily basis for 10 consecutive days. S. 
mansoni infection resulted in liver granuloma and fibrosis, with a drastic
elevation in liver function factors, nitric oxide, and lipid peroxidation, which 
were associated with a reduction in glutathione content and substantial
inhibition of antioxidant enzyme activities compared to those of the control.
Induction of hepatic granuloma, oxidative stress, and fibrosis in the liver was
controlled by ZLE administration, which also produced inhibition of matrix
metalloproteinase-9, alpha-smooth muscle actin, transforming growth factor-Î², and
tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases expressions. In addition, the S.
mansoni-infected group exhibited an increase in Bax and caspase-3 levels and a
decrease in Bcl-2 level. However, treatment with ZLE mainly mitigated apoptosis
in the liver. Thus, the findings of this study revealed that Ziziphus
spina-christi had anti-apoptotic, anti-fibrotic, antioxidant, and protective
effects on S. mansoni-induced liver wounds. The benefits of Ziziphus
spina-christi extract on S. mansoni were partly partially mediated by enhancing
anti-fibrinogenic and nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)
pathways.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0204923 
PMCID: PMC6166951
PMID: 30273397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

