
1. mBio. 2018 Oct 2;9(5). pii: e01510-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01510-18.

A Member of the Ferlin Calcium Sensor Family Is Essential for Toxoplasma gondii
Rhoptry Secretion.

Coleman BI(#)(1), Saha S(#)(1), Sato S(2), Engelberg K(1), Ferguson DJP(3),
Coppens I(4), Lodoen MB(2), Gubbels MJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology & Biochemistry and the Institute for
Immunology, University of California, Irvine, California, USA.
(3)Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Science, University of Oxford John 
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins University 
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(5)Department of Biology, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts, USA
gubbelsj@bc.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Invasion of host cells by apicomplexan parasites such as Toxoplasma gondii is
critical for their infectivity and pathogenesis. In Toxoplasma, secretion of
essential egress, motility, and invasion-related proteins from microneme
organelles is regulated by oscillations of intracellular Ca2+ Later stages of
invasion are considered Ca2+ independent, including the secretion of proteins
required for host cell entry and remodeling from the parasite's rhoptries. We
identified a family of three Toxoplasma proteins with homology to the ferlin
family of double C2 domain-containing Ca2+ sensors. In humans and model
organisms, such Ca2+ sensors orchestrate Ca2+-dependent exocytic membrane fusion 
with the plasma membrane. Here we focus on one ferlin that is conserved across
the Apicomplexa, T. gondii FER2 (TgFER2). Unexpectedly, conditionally
TgFER2-depleted parasites secreted their micronemes normally and were completely 
motile. However, these parasites were unable to invade host cells and were
therefore not viable. Knockdown of TgFER2 prevented rhoptry secretion, and these 
parasites failed to form the moving junction at the parasite-host interface
necessary for host cell invasion. Collectively, these data demonstrate the
requirement of TgFER2 for rhoptry secretion in Toxoplasma tachyzoites and suggest
a possible Ca2+ dependence of rhoptry secretion. These findings provide the first
mechanistic insights into this critical yet poorly understood aspect of
apicomplexan host cell invasion.IMPORTANCE Apicomplexan protozoan parasites, such
as those causing malaria and toxoplasmosis, must invade the cells of their hosts 
in order to establish a pathogenic infection. Timely release of proteins from a
series of apical organelles is required for invasion. Neither the vesicular
fusion events that underlie secretion nor the observed reliance of the various
processes on changes in intracellular calcium concentrations is completely
understood. We identified a group of three proteins with strong homology to the
calcium-sensing ferlin family, which are known to be involved in protein
secretion in other organisms. Surprisingly, decreasing the amounts of one of
these proteins (TgFER2) did not have any effect on the typically
calcium-dependent steps in invasion. Instead, TgFER2 was essential for the
release of proteins from organelles called rhoptries. These data provide a
tantalizing first look at the mechanisms controlling the very poorly understood
process of rhoptry secretion, which is essential for the parasite's infection
cycle.

Copyright Â© 2018 Coleman et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01510-18 
PMCID: PMC6168857
PMID: 30279285  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

