
1. J Vector Borne Dis. 2018 Apr-Jun;55(2):89-97. doi: 10.4103/0972-9062.242569.

Transcriptional responses of attractin gene in the mosquito Anopheles
culicifacies: A synergistic neuro-olfactory regulation.

Das De T(1), Hasija Y(2), Dixit R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Host-Parasite Interaction Studies, ICMR-National Institute of
Malaria Research; Department of Biotechnology, Delhi Technological University,
New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Delhi Technological University, New Delhi, India.
(3)Laboratory of Host-Parasite Interaction Studies, ICMR-National Institute of
Malaria Research, New Delhi, India.

Background & objectives: Attractin, is a large multi-domain protein which has
regulatory functions in multiple physiological processes and thus have strong
therapeutic potential. In invertebrates, it was first identified as a water-borne
protein pheromone that plays important role in chemical communication and
coordinates reproductive activities. But its role in mosquitoes/insects remains
unknown. Our unexpected discovery of attractin homolog from the olfactory tissue 
of Anopheles culicifacies mosquito prompted us to investigate the possible role
of Ac-attractin (Ac-atrn) in diverse behavioural responses, e.g. feeding, mating 
and other non-genetic stresses.
Methods: A homology search analysis was performed to identify the full length
attractin (Ac-atrn) gene of Anopheles culicifacies mosquito. To unravel its
molecular function during external and internal stresses, extensive real-time PCR
was performed in the neuro-olfactory tissues of the adult mosquitoes as well as
in the larval stages. Further, a behavioural assay was conducted to elucidate its
role in mosquitoes mating behaviour.
Results: The results indicated that Ac-atrn is a 3942 bp long transcript which
encodes a 1313 amino acid protein, having multiple domains including CUB, EGF,
Keltch, etc, with 80-90% homology to other insect/mosquito homologs. Ac-atrn gene
was dominantly expressed in the young larvae and its expression was elevated in
response to the fresh food supply in the starved larvae. Cold stress temporarily 
arrested the expression of Ac-atrn gene. In case of adult mosquitoes, olfactory
and brain tissue showed relatively higher expression of Ac-atrn than reproductive
organs. Although, starvation did not yield significant changes in olfactory
tissues, but aging and nutritional stress modulated Ac-atrn expression in the
brain tissue. Furthermore, a circadian rhythm dependent change in the expression 
of Ac-atrn of virgin and mated mosquitoes (both sexes), indicates that Ac-atrn
might also have a pheromone guided role during swarm formation and mating
behaviour.
Interpretation & conclusion: The relative expression profiling of Ac-atrn gene in
the larvae during nutritional and cold stress suggested its possible role in
mediating chemical communication towards the food source and in thermal
regulation of young larvae. Similarly, it might have crucial regulatory role in
the stress management and survival of adult mosquitoes. The results revealed that
Ac-atrn gene is a global regulator of many physiological processes in mosquitoes 
including stress response and mating behaviour and thus might be a potential
target to design novel intervention strategy against mosquitoes.

DOI: 10.4103/0972-9062.242569 
PMID: 30280706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest

