
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 Dec;99(6):1499-1503. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.18-0440.

Molecular Surveillance of Plasmodium falciparum Drug Resistance Markers in
Clinical Samples from Botswana.

Tawe L(1)(2)(3), Menegon M(4), Ramatlho P(5), Muthoga CW(2), Mutukwa N(6),
Vurayai M(7), Bothudile W(3), Motshoge T(5), L'Episcopia M(4), Mosweunyane T(8), 
Kasvosve I(3), Severini C(4), Paganotti GM(9)(2)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Sub-Saharan African Network for TB/HIV Research Excellence (SANTHE) at
Botswana-Harvard Partnership, Gaborone, Botswana.
(2)Botswana-University of Pennsylvania Partnership, Gaborone, Botswana.
(3)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, University of Botswana, Gaborone,
Botswana.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Istituto Superiore di Sanita', Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Botswana, Gaborone, Botswana.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of Botswana, Gaborone, Botswana.
(7)National Health Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, Gaborone, Botswana.
(8)Ministry of Health and Wellness, National Malaria Programme, Gaborone,
Botswana.
(9)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Botswana, Gaborone, Botswana.
(10)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.

Drug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum is a major threat to global malaria control 
and elimination efforts. In Botswana, a southern African country approaching
malaria elimination, P. falciparum molecular data are not available. Parasites
were assessed through pollymerase chain reaction (PCR) for confirmation of
positive rapid diagnostic tests, multiplicity of infection (MOI), and drug
resistance markers among isolates from clinical uncomplicated malaria cases
collected at health facilities. Of 211 dried blood spot samples selected for the 
study, 186 (88.2%) were PCR positive for P. falciparum. The mean MOI based on
MSP1 genotyping was 2.3 and was not associated with age. A high prevalence of
wild-type parasites for pfcrt and pfmdr1 was found, with a haplotype frequency
(K76/N86) of 88.8% and 17.7% of the isolates having two copies of the pfmdr1
gene. For pfATPase6, all the parasites carried the wild-type S769 allele.
Sequencing showed no evidence of non-synonymous mutations associated with reduced
artemisinin derivative sensitivity in the P. falciparum k13 gene. In conclusion, 
we found that P. falciparum parasites in Botswana were mostly wild type for the
drug resistance markers evaluated. Yet, there was a high rate of a molecular
marker associated to reduced sensitivity to lumefantrine. Our results indicate
the need for systematic drug efficacy surveillance to complement malaria
elimination efforts.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.18-0440 
PMCID: PMC6283485
PMID: 30350774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

