
1. Malar J. 2018 Oct 26;17(1):389. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2539-3.

Population genetic structure of domain I of apical membrane antigen-1 in
Plasmodium falciparum isolates from Hazara division of Pakistan.

Afridi SG(1), Irfan M(2), Ahmad H(2)(3), Aslam M(1), Nawaz M(1), Ilyas M(2), Khan
A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Abdul Wali Khan University Mardan, Mardan, Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa, 23200, Pakistan.
(2)Center for Human Genetics, Hazara University, Mansehra, 21310, Pakistan.
(3)Center for OMIC Studies, Islamia College University, Peshawar, 25000,
Pakistan.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Abdul Wali Khan University Mardan, Mardan, Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa, 23200, Pakistan. asif@awkum.edu.pk.

BACKGROUND: The Plasmodium falciparum apical membrane antigen-1 (PfAMA1) is
considered as an ideal vaccine candidate for malaria control due to its high
level of immunogenicity and essential role in parasite survival. Among the three 
domains of PfAMA1 protein, hyper-variable region (HVR) of domain I is the most
immunogenic. The present study was conducted to evaluate the extent of genetic
diversity across HVR domain I of the pfama1 gene in P. falciparum isolates from
Hazara division of Pakistan.
METHODS: The HVR domain I of the pfama1 was amplified and sequenced from 20 P.
falciparum positive cases from Hazara division of Pakistan. The sequences were
analysed in context of global population data of P. falciparum from nine malaria 
endemic countries. The DNA sequence reads quality assessment, reads assembling,
sequences alignment/phylogenetic and population genetic analyses were performed
using Staden, Lasergene v. 7.1, MEGA7 and DnaSP v.5 software packages
respectively.
RESULTS: Total 14 mutations were found in Pakistani isolates with 12 parsimony
informative sites. During comparison with global isolates, a novel non-synonymous
mutation (Y240F) was found specifically in a single Pakistani sample with 5%
frequency. The less number of mutations, haplotypes, recombination and low
pairwise nucleotide differences revealed tightly linked uniform genetic structure
with low genetic diversity at HVR domain I of pfama1 among P. falciparum isolates
from Hazara region of Pakistan. This uniform genetic structure may be shaped
across Pakistani P. falciparum isolates by bottleneck or natural selection
events.
CONCLUSION: The Pakistani P. falciparum isolates were found to maintain a
distinct genetic pattern at HVR pfama1 with some extent of genetic relationship
with geographically close Myanmar and Indian samples. However, the exact pattern 
of gene flow and demographic events may infer from whole genome sequence data
with large sample size of P. falciparum collected from broad area of Pakistan.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2539-3 
PMCID: PMC6203999
PMID: 30367656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

