
1. Biomed Res Int. 2018 Oct 3;2018:2305062. doi: 10.1155/2018/2305062. eCollection
2018.

Status of Artemisinin Resistance in Malaria Parasite Plasmodium falciparum from
Molecular Analyses of the Kelch13 Gene in Southwestern Nigeria.

Oboh MA(1), Ndiaye D(1), Antony HA(2), Badiane AS(1), Singh US(2), Ali NA(2),
Bharti PK(2), Das A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology and Mycology Laboratory, Universit√© Cheikh Anta Diop, Dakar,
Senegal.
(2)Division of Vector Borne Diseases, ICMR-National Institute of Research in
Tribal Health, Jabalpur, India.

Evolution and spread of malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum capable of evading
antimalarials are the prime concern to malaria control. The currently effective
drug, artemisinin (ART), is under threat due to detection of ART-resistant P.
falciparum parasites in the Southeast Asian countries. It has been shown that
amino acid (AA) mutations at the P. falciparum Kelch13 (Pfk13) gene provide
resistance to ART. Nigeria, a part of the Sub-Saharan Africa, is highly endemic
to malaria, contributing quite significantly to malaria, and resistance to
chloroquine (CQ) and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) combination drugs has already
been reported. Since artemisinin combined therapy (ACT) is the first-line drug
for treatment of uncomplicated malaria in Nigeria and five amino acid mutations
have been validated in the Pfk13 gene alongside with candidate mutations for ART 
resistance, we performed molecular surveillance for mutations (following PCR and 
DNA sequence analyses) in this gene from two southwestern states of Nigeria.
Statistical analyses of DNA sequences were also performed following different
evolutionary models. None of the different validated and candidate AA mutations
of Pfk13 gene conferring resistance to ART could be detected in P. falciparum
sampled in the two southwestern states of Nigeria. In addition, DNA sequencing
and sequence analyses indicated neither evolutionary selection pressure on the
Pfk13 gene nor association of mutations in Pfk13 gene with mutations of other
three genes conferring resistance to CQ and SP. Therefore, based on the
monomorphism at the Pfk13 gene and nonassociation of mutations of this gene with 
mutations in three other drug-resistant genes in malaria parasite P. falciparum, 
it can be proposed that malaria public health is not under immediate threat in
southwestern Nigeria concerning ART resistance.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/2305062 
PMCID: PMC6192135
PMID: 30402465  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

