
1. Pathog Glob Health. 2018 Oct;112(7):349-359. doi: 10.1080/20477724.2018.1541160. 
Epub 2018 Nov 15.

Exploring insecticide resistance mechanisms in three major malaria vectors from
Bangui in Central African Republic.

Kamgang B(1), Tchapga W(1), Ngoagouni C(2), Sangbakembi-Ngounou C(2), Wondji
M(1)(3), Riveron JM(1)(3), Wondji CS(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medical Entomology , Centre for Research in Infectious
Diseases (CRID) , Yaoundé , Cameroon.
(2)b Service d'Entomologie Medicale , Institut Pasteur de Bangui , Bangui ,
Central African Republic.
(3)c Vector Biology Department , Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine ,
Liverpool , UK.

Malaria remains the main cause of mortality and morbidity in the Central African 
Republic. However, the main malaria vectors remain poorly characterised,
preventing the design of suitable control strategies. Here, we characterised the 
patterns and mechanisms of insecticide resistance in three important vectors from
Bangui. Mosquitoes were collected indoors, using electrical aspirators in July
2016 in two neighborhoods at Bangui. WHO bioassays performed, using F2 An.
gambiae sensu lato (s.l.), revealed a high level of resistance to type I
(permethrin) and II (deltamethrin) pyrethroids and
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (< 3% mortality). Molecular analysis revealed the
co-occurrence of Anopheles coluzzii (56.8 %) and An. gambiae s.s. (43.2%) within 
the An. gambiae complex. Anopheles funestus s.s. was the sole species belonging
to An. funestus group. Both kdr-w (40% of homozygotes and 60% of
heterozygotes/kdr-w/wild type) and kdr-e (37.5% of heterozygotes) mutations were 
found in An. gambiae. Contrariwise, only the kdr-w (9.5% homozygotes and 85.7% of
heterozygotes) was detected in An. coluzzii. Quantitative RT-PCR showed that
CYP6M2 and CYP6P3 are not upregulated in An. coluzzii from Bangui. Analysis of
the sodium channel gene revealed a reduced diversity in An. coluzzii and An.
gambiae s.s. In An. funestus s.s., the pyrethroid/DDT GSTe2 L119F resistance
allele was detected at high frequency (54.7%) whereas a very low frequency for
Rdl was observed. Polymorphism analysis of GSTe2 and GABA receptor gene in An.
funestus revealed the presence of one resistant haplotype for each gene. This
study provides baseline information to help guide current and future malaria
vector control interventions in CAR.

DOI: 10.1080/20477724.2018.1541160 
PMCID: PMC6300743
PMID: 30433868  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

