
1. Hemoglobin. 2018 Jul;42(4):236-242. doi: 10.1080/03630269.2018.1536666. Epub 2018
Nov 29.

Effect of Assorted Globin Haplotypes and α-Thalassemia on the Clinical
Heterogeneity of Hb S-β-Thalassemia.

Dash PM(1)(2), Sahu PK(3), Patel S(2), Mashon RS(2)(4), Kharat KR(1), Mukherjee
MB(5).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biotechnology, Centre for Advanced Life Sciences , Deogiri
College , Aurangabad , Maharashtra , India.
(2)b Sickle Cell Clinic and Malaria Research Centre , Veer Surendra Sai (VSS)
Institute of Medical Sciences and Research , Burla, Sambalpur , Odisha , India.
(3)c Molecular and Immunology Laboratory , Ispat General Hospital , Rourkela ,
Odisha , India.
(4)d Department of Haematopathology , Christian Medical College , Ludhiana ,
India.
(5)e Department of Haematogenetics , National Institute of Immuno-Haematology ,
Parel, Mumbai , India.

Hemoglobinopathies and thalassemias are the most commonly encountered monogenic
disorders of blood in humans, posing a major genetic and public health problem
round the globe. Hb S (HBB: c.20A>T)-β-thalassemia (β-thal) is a compound
aberrant heterozygosity with inconsistent phenotypic expression, which are poorly
described and clinically mapped. Comprehensive genetic characterization of such a
population is highly warranted for complete understanding of the clinical
heterogeneity, disease prognosis and therapeutic management. In this study, Hb
S-β-thal (n = 60) patients, strictly defined by varying degrees of clinical
presentations, were selected to evaluate their genotype-phenotype agreement.
Furthermore, β-globin (n = 120) and α-globin gene clusters (n = 60) were
genetically characterized and statistically correlated with clinical
terminologies to explain the clinical heterogeneity. Our results revealed the
association of the Arab-Indian haplotypes with nine different frameworks of
β-thal together with the modulating role of α-thalassemia (α-thal). The study
subjects, including carriers of β-thal haplotype III [- - - - - - -] (8.0%),
presented with varying severe patterns of clinical symptoms such as painful
crisis, multiple infections and splenomegaly, as an outcome of significantly less
Hb F and higher Hb S levels (p < 0.5). The study findings indicated that together
with α-thal, β-thal haplotypes and Hb F levels, may possibly provide a close
justification to support the clinical heterogeneity in the study population.

DOI: 10.1080/03630269.2018.1536666 
PMID: 30486691  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

