
1. Version 2. Wellcome Open Res. 2018 Dec 6 [revised 2018 Dec 6];3:142. doi:
10.12688/wellcomeopenres.14797.2. eCollection 2018.

Genomic and transcriptomic comparisons of closely related malaria parasites
differing in virulence and sequestration pattern.

Lin JW(#)(1)(2), Reid AJ(#)(3), Cunningham D(1), BÃ¶hme U(3), Tumwine I(1),
Keller-Mclaughlin S(1), Sanders M(3), Berriman M(3), Langhorne J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Immunology laboratory, Francis Crick Institute, London, NW1 1AT, UK.
(2)Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Sichuan University and
Collaboration Innovation Centre, Chengdu, 610041, China.
(3)Parasites & Microbes, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, CB10 1SA,
UK.
(#)Contributed equally

Background: Malaria parasite species differ greatly in the harm they do to
humans. While P. falciparum kills hundreds of thousands per year, P. vivax kills 
much less often and P. malariae is relatively benign. Strains of the rodent
malaria parasite Plasmodium chabaudi show phenotypic variation in virulence
during infections of laboratory mice. This make it an excellent species to study 
genes which may be responsible for this trait. By understanding the mechanisms
which underlie differences in virulence we can learn how parasites adapt to their
hosts and how we might prevent disease. Methods: Here we present a complete
reference genome sequence for a more virulent P. chabaudi strain, PcCB, and
perform a detailed comparison with the genome of the less virulent PcAS strain.
Results: We found the greatest variation in the subtelomeric regions, in
particular amongst the sequences of the pir gene family, which has been
associated with virulence and establishment of chronic infection. Despite
substantial variation at the sequence level, the repertoire of these genes has
been largely maintained, highlighting the requirement for functional conservation
as well as diversification in host-parasite interactions. However, a subset of
pir genes, previously associated with increased virulence, were more highly
expressed in PcCB, suggesting a role for this gene family in virulence
differences between strains. We found that core genes involved in red blood cell 
invasion have been under positive selection and that the more virulent strain has
a greater preference for reticulocytes, which has elsewhere been associated with 
increased virulence. Conclusions: These results provide the basis for a
mechanistic understanding of the phenotypic differences between Plasmodium
chabaudi strains, which might ultimately be translated into a better
understanding of malaria parasites affecting humans.

DOI: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.14797.2 
PMCID: PMC6259598
PMID: 30542666 

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.

