
1. Elife. 2018 Dec 27;7. pii: e41081. doi: 10.7554/eLife.41081.

Transcriptomic analysis reveals reduced transcriptional activity in the malaria
parasite Plasmodium cynomolgi during progression into dormancy.

Bertschi NL(#)(1), Voorberg-van der Wel A(#)(2), Zeeman AM(2), Schuierer S(1),
Nigsch F(1), Carbone W(1), Knehr J(1), Gupta DK(3), Hofman SO(2), van der Werff
N(2), Nieuwenhuis I(2), Klooster E(2), Faber BW(2), Flannery EL(3), Mikolajczak
SA(3), Chuenchob V(3), Shrestha B(1), Beibel M(1), Bouwmeester T(1),
Kangwanrangsan N(4), Sattabongkot J(5), Diagana TT(3), Kocken CH(2), Roma G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Novartis Pharma AG, Basel,
Europe.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Biomedical Primate Research Centre, Rijswijk, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Novartis Institute for Tropical Diseases, Novartis Pharma AG, Emeryville,
United States.
(4)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(5)Mahidol Vivax Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(#)Contributed equally

Relapses of Plasmodium dormant liver hypnozoites compromise malaria eradication
efforts. New radical cure drugs are urgently needed, yet the vast gap in
knowledge of hypnozoite biology impedes drug discovery. We previously unraveled
the transcriptome of 6 to 7 day-old P. cynomolgi liver stages, highlighting
pathways associated with hypnozoite dormancy (Voorberg-van der Wel et al., 2017).
We now extend these findings by transcriptome profiling of 9 to 10 day-old liver 
stage parasites, thus revealing for the first time the maturation of the dormant 
stage over time. Although progression of dormancy leads to a 10-fold decrease in 
transcription and expression of only 840 genes, including genes associated with
housekeeping functions, we show that pathways involved in quiescence, energy
metabolism and maintenance of genome integrity remain the prevalent pathways
active in mature hypnozoites.

Â© 2018, Bertschi et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.41081 
PMCID: PMC6344078
PMID: 30589413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: NB, SS, FN, WC, JK, DG, EF, SM, VC, BS, MB, TB,
TD, GR Employed by and/or shareholder of Novartis Pharma AG. AV, AZ, SH, Nv, IN, 
EK, BF, NK, JS, CK No competing interests declared

