
1. Parasit Vectors. 2019 Jan 9;12(1):22. doi: 10.1186/s13071-018-3267-9.

New strains of Japanese encephalitis virus circulating in Shanghai, China after a
ten-year hiatus in local mosquito surveillance.

Fang Y(1), Zhang Y(2), Zhou ZB(1), Xia S(1), Shi WQ(1), Xue JB(1), Li YY(1), Wu
JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention; WHO Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases; National Center
for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Ministry of Science and
Technology; Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of Health,
Shanghai, 20025, People's Republic of China.
(2)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention; WHO Collaborating Centre for Tropical Diseases; National Center
for International Research on Tropical Diseases, Ministry of Science and
Technology; Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of Health,
Shanghai, 20025, People's Republic of China. zhang1972003@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Continuous vector pathogen surveillance is essential for preventing
outbreaks of mosquito-borne diseases. Several mosquito species acting as vectors 
of Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), dengue virus, Zika virus, malaria parasites
and other pathogens are primary mosquito species in Shanghai, China. However, few
surveys of human pathogenic arboviruses in mosquitoes in Shanghai have been
reported in the last ten years. Therefore, in this study, we evaluated mosquito
activity in Shanghai, China during 2016 and tested for the presence of
alphaviruses, flaviviruses, orthobunyaviruses and several parasitic pathogens.
RESULTS: Five pooled samples were JEV-positive [4/255 pools of Culex
tritaeniorhynchus and 1/256 pools of Cx. pipiens (s.l.)] based on analysis of the
NS5 gene. Alphaviruses, orthobunyaviruses, Plasmodium and filariasis were not
found in this study. Phylogenetic and molecular analyses revealed that the JEV
strains belonged to genotype I. Moreover, newly detected Shanghai JEV strains
were genetically close to previously isolated Shandong strains responsible for
transmission during the 2013 Japanese encephalitis (JE) outbreak in Shandong
Province, China but were more distantly related to other Shanghai strains
detected in the early 2000s. The E proteins of the newly detected Shanghai JEV
strains differed from that in the live attenuated vaccine SA14-14-2-derived
strain at six amino residues: E130 (Ile→Val), E222 (Ala→Ser), E327 (Ser→Thr),
E366 (Arg→Ser/Pro), E393 (Asn→Ser) and E433 (Val→Ile). However, no differences
were observed in key amino acid sites related to antigenicity. Minimum JEV
infection rates were 1.01 and 0.65 per 1000 Cx. tritaeniorhynchus and Cx. pipiens
(s.l.), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Five new Shanghai JEV genotype I strains, detected after a ten-year 
hiatus in local mosquito surveillance, were genetically close to strains involved
in the 2013 Shandong JE outbreak. Because JEV is still circulating, vaccination
in children should be extensively and continuously promoted. Moreover, JEV
mosquito surveillance programmes should document the genotype variation,
intensity and distribution of circulating viruses for use in the development and 
implementation of disease prevention and control strategies.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-018-3267-9 
PMCID: PMC6327439
PMID: 30626442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

