
1. PLoS One. 2019 Feb 22;14(2):e0212425. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0212425.
eCollection 2019.

Avian haemosporidians in the cattle egret (Bubulcus ibis) from central-western
and southern Africa: High diversity and prevalence.

Villar Couto CM(1), Cumming GS(2), Lacorte GA(3), Congrains C(1), Izbicki R(4),
Braga EM(5), Rocha CD(1), Moralez-Silva E(1), Henry DAW(2), Manu SA(6), Abalaka
J(6), Regalla A(7), da Silva AS(7), Diop MS(8), Del Lama SN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética e Evolução, Centro de Ciências Biológicas e da
Saúde,Universidade Federal de São Carlos, São Carlos, SP, Brazil.
(2)Percy FitzPatrick Institute, DST/NRF Centre of Excellence, University of Cape 
Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(3)Departamento de Ciências e Linguagens, Instituto Federal de Minas Gerais,
Bambuí, MG, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Estatística, Centro de Ciências Exatas e
Tecnológicas,Universidade Federal de São Carlos, Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil.
(5)Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade 
Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(6)A.P Leventis Ornithological Research Institute, Laminga, Jos, Nigeria.
(7)Instituto da Biodiversidade e das Áreas Protegidas (IBAP), Bissau, Rep. da
Guiné-Bissau.
(8)AfriWet Consultants, Dakar, Thiaroye, Senegal.

We described the geographic distribution of 82 haemosporidian lineages
(Plasmodium, Haemoproteus, and Leucocytozoon) in the cattle egret sampled in five
countries in central-western and southern Africa. Seventy-three lineages have not
previously been reported. We determined the prevalence of three haemosporidians
in the samples. We investigated the influence of the internal environment of the 
host and environmental variables on the Plasmodium diversity and whether
environmental variables may explain spatial variations in the prevalence of
Plasmodium. We screened DNA from 509 blood samples from nestlings in 15 African
colonies for infection by sequencing the cytochrome b gene of parasites. The
molecular phylogenetic analysis was performed using Bayesian methods and
including sequences from the MalAvi and GeneBank databases. We found 62 new
Plasmodium lineages in a clade with MYCAME02, which is a lineage described in
waterbirds and recently identified in birds of prey as Plasmodium
paranucleophilum. Two Haemoproteus lineages identified in cattle egret formed a
distinct group with Haemoproteus catharti and MYCAMH1 (Haemoproteus spp.). Seven 
Leucocytozoon lineages found in the cattle egret clustered with Leucocytozoon
californicus. We found different Plasmodium diversities among the colonies
sampled, demonstrating that the internal environment of the host is not the
primary determinant of diversity. A linear mixed-effects multivariate model
showed that precipitation was positively associated with Plasmodium diversity
when controlling for the effects of temperature, colony composition (mixed and
non-mixed species) and country. Moreover, a generalized mixed model showed that
temperature was positively associated with the prevalence of Plasmodium when
controlling for precipitation, elevation and country. We conclude that the cattle
egret is a good model for future haemosporidian studies, as we found a
significant number of new lineages in this host, which occupies regions with
different climate characteristics where environmental variables exert an
influence on the diversity and prevalence of Plasmodium.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0212425 
PMCID: PMC6386389
PMID: 30794584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Moussa Diop is employed by AfriWet Consultants.
There are no patents, products in development or marketed products to declare.
This does not alter our adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data
and materials, as detailed online in the guide for authors.

