
1. Bull Soc Pathol Exot. 2018;111(3):176-182. doi: 10.3166/bspe-2018-0040.

[Susceptibility status of Anopheles gambiae s.s. and An. coluzzii to
Organophosphates and Carbamates in the Agricultural Exploitation Zones of oil
Palm at Mouila, Gabon].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Koumba AA(1)(2)(3), Zinga Koumba CR(1), Mintsa Nguema R(1), Obame Ondo P(4),
Bibang Bengono G(5), Comlan P(6), Ketoh GK(7), Djogbenou LS(2)(3), Faye O(8),
M'batchi B(5), Mavoungou JF(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherche en écologie tropicale (IRET), BP 13354, Libreville,
Gabon.
(2)Université d'Abomey-Calavi (UAC), 05 BP 1604, Cotonou, Benin.
(3)Institut régional de santé publique (IRSP), BP 918, Ouidah, Bénin.
(4)Programme national de lutte contre le Paludisme (PNLP), BP 14426, Libreville, 
Gabon.
(5)Université des sciences et techniques de Masuku (USTM), BP 941, Franceville,
Gabon.
(6)Université des sciences de la santé (USS), BP 4009, Libreville, Gabon.
(7)Unité de recherche en écotoxicologue, Université de Lomé (UL), BP 1515, Lomé, 
Togo.
(8)Université Cheikh Anta Diop de Dakar (UCAD), BP 5005, Dakar, Sénégal.

This study was conducted during the rainy season of 2017 in the agricultural
areas at Mouila, with the aim to assess the determination of susceptibility of
Anopheles gambiae complex to insecticides and the detection of Ace 1R mutation.
Mosquito larvae were collected by using the dipping method and nursed to adult
stage. The susceptibility of adult Anopheles gambiae s.l. populations to
organophosphates and carbamates was assessed using the standard WHO
susceptibility test protocol. The tested mosquitoes species were identified by
PCR. These tested mosquitoes were used to search for the Ace 1R mutation. The
insecticides used were pirimiphos-methyl 0.25% and 1.25%, fenitrothion 1%,
malathion 5%, propoxur 0.1%, bendiocarb 0.1%, 0.5% and 1%. In the prospected
areas, An. gambiae s.l. included An. gambiae s.s. and An. coluzzii sympatric in
their larval habitats. However, An. gambiae s.s. was predominant in all studied
areas (99.1%) comparatively to An. coluzzii Moreover, the susceptibility tests of
Anopheles to organophosphates and carbamates revealed mortality rates of 100%
regardless of the origin of the mosquitoes. PCR diagnosis of Ace 1R mutation
showed that none tested mosquito (An. gambiae s.s. and An. coluzzii) from
prospected areas harbored the Ace 1R gene in all prospected areas. The lack of
Ace 1R mutation in An. gambiae s.l. reveals the current effectiveness of
organophosphates and carbamates for the control of these mosquitoes. Bboth these 
classes of insecticides could be used for the anopheline populations control in
the agricultural spaces at Mouila.

Publisher: Cette étude a été menée en 2017 pendant la saison des pluies dans les 
zones d’exploitations agricoles à Mouila, afin de déterminer le statut de
sensibilité des membres du complexe Anopheles gambiae aux insecticides et de
rechercher la présence de la mutation Ace 1R. Les moustiques ont été collectés au
stade larvaire par la méthode du « dipping », puis élevés jusqu’au stade adulte. 
La susceptibilité des adultes d’An. gambiae s.l. aux organophosphorés et aux
carbamates a été évaluée par la méthode standard de l’OMS concernant les tests de
sensibilité aux insecticides. Les classes d’insecticides testées étaient les
organophosphorés (pirimiphos-méthyl 0,25 % et 1,25 %, fénitrothion 1 %, malathion
5 %) et les carbamates (propoxur 0,1 %, bendiocarb 0,1 %, 0,5 % et 1 %). Les
moustiques testés ont été identifiés par PCR. Les anophèles issus des tests ont
été utilisés pour la recherche de la mutation Ace 1R par PCR. Dans les sites
d’étude, Anopheles gambiae s.l. était composé d’An. gambiae s.s. et An. coluzzii 
vivant en sympatrie dans leurs habitats larvaires, avec une prédominance d’An.
gambiae s.s. (99,1 %) sur An. coluzzii. Les tests de sensibilité des anophèles
aux organophosphorés et aux carbamates ont révélé des taux de mortalité de 100 % 
quelle que soit l’origine des anophèles. La PCR diagnostique de la mutation Ace
1R a montré qu’aucun moustique issu des tests de sensibilité n’était porteur de
gènes de résistance Ace 1R. L’absence de mutation Ace 1R chez An. gambiae s.l.
révèle l’efficacité actuelle des carbamates et des organophosphorés dans la lutte
contre ces moustiques. Ces familles d’insecticides pourraient être utilisées pour
la lutte contre les anophèles dans les espaces agricoles de Mouila.
DOI: 10.3166/bspe-2018-0040 
PMID: 30793573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare

