
1. Hepatology. 2019 Jul;70(1):358-371. doi: 10.1002/hep.30594. Epub 2019 Apr 25.

The Capicua/ETS Translocation Variant 5 Axis Regulates Liver-Resident Memory CD8+
T-Cell Development and the Pathogenesis of Liver Injury.

Park S(1), Park J(1), Kim E(1), Lee Y(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology
(POSTECH), Pohang, Kyungbuk, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Integrative Bioscience and Biotechnology, Pohang University of
Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, Kyungbuk, Republic of Korea.

Liver-resident memory T (liver TRM ) cells exert protective immune responses
following liver infection by malaria parasites. However, how these TRM cells are 
developed and what the consequence is if they are not properly maintained remain 
poorly understood. Here, we show that the transcriptional repressor, Capicua
(CIC), controls liver CD8+ TRM cell development to maintain normal liver
function. Cic-deficient mice have a greater number of liver CD8+ TRM cells and
liver injury phenotypes accompanied by increased levels of proinflammatory
cytokine genes in liver tissues. Excessive formation of CD69+ CD8+ TRM -like
cells was also observed in mice with acetaminophen-induced liver injury (AILI).
Moreover, expansion of liver CD8+ TRM cell population and liver injury phenotypes
in T-cell-specific Cic null mice were rescued by codeletion of ETS translocation 
variant [Etv]5 alleles, indicating that Etv5 is a CIC target gene responsible for
regulation of CD8+ TRM cell development and liver function. We also discovered
that ETV5 directly regulates expression of Hobit, a master transcription factor
for TRM cell development, in CD8+ T cells. Conclusion: Our findings suggest the
CIC-ETV5 axis as a key molecular module that controls CD8+ TRM cell development, 
indicating a pathogenic role for CD8+ TRM cells in liver injury.

Â© 2019 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.30594 
PMID: 30810242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

