
1. G3 (Bethesda). 2019 May 7;9(5):1507-1517. doi: 10.1534/g3.119.400104.

Small RNA-Seq Analysis Reveals miRNA Expression Dynamics Across Tissues in the
Malaria Vector, Anopheles gambiae.

Bryant WB(1)(2), Mills MK(3)(2), Olson BJ(3), Michel K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506 and
WilliamB@usca.edu.
(2)Department of Biology & Geology, University of South Carolina-Aiken.
(3)Division of Biology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506 and.

Malaria continues to be a major global health problem, where disease transmission
is deeply linked to the repeated blood feeding nature of the anautogenous
mosquito. Given the tight link between blood feeding and disease transmission,
understanding basic biology behind mosquito physiology is a requirement for
developing effective vector-borne disease control strategies. In the mosquito,
numerous loss of function studies with notable phenotypes demonstrate microRNAs
(miRNAs) play significant roles in mosquito physiology. While the field
appreciates the importance of a handful of miRNAs, we still need global mosquito 
tissue miRNA transcriptome studies. To address this need, our goal was to
determine the miRNA transcriptome for multiple tissues of the pre-vitellogenic
mosquito. To this end, by using small RNA-Seq analysis, we determined miRNA
transcriptomes in tissues critical for mosquito reproduction and immunity
including (i) fat body-abdominal wall enriched tissues, (ii) midguts, (iii)
ovaries, and (iv) remaining tissues comprised of the head and thorax. We found
numerous examples of miRNAs exhibiting pan-tissue high- or low- expression,
tissue exclusion, and tissue enrichment. We also updated and consolidated the
miRNA catalog and provided a detailed genome architecture map for the malaria
vector, Anopheles gambiae This study aims to build a foundation for future
research on how miRNAs and potentially other small RNAs regulate mosquito
physiology as it relates to vector-borne disease transmission.

Copyright Â© 2019 Bryant et al.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.119.400104 
PMCID: PMC6505144
PMID: 30846481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

