
1. Acta Trop. 2019 Jul;195:68-77. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.04.027. Epub 2019 
Apr 26.

Exploring deeper genetic structures: Aedes aegypti in Brazil.

Maitra A(1), Cunha-Machado AS(1), Souza Leandro A(2), Costa FMD(3), Scarpassa
VM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Genética, Conservação e Biologia Evolutiva,
Instituto Nacional Pesquisas da Amazônia, Manaus, CEP 69.067-375, Amazonas,
Brazil.
(2)Centro de Zoonoses, Secretaria Municipal de Saúde e Saneamento, Prefeitura
Municipal de Foz do Iguaçu, Paraná, Brazil.
(3)Oikos Consultoria e Projetos, Departamento de Meio Ambiente, Estrada de Santo 
Antônio, 3903 Apto 103 - Triângulo, Porto Velho, CEP 76.805 - 696, Rondônia,
Brazil.
(4)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Genética, Conservação e Biologia Evolutiva,
Instituto Nacional Pesquisas da Amazônia, Manaus, CEP 69.067-375, Amazonas,
Brazil; Laboratório de Genética de Populações e Evolução de Vetores de Malária e 
Dengue, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazônia, Manaus, CEP 69.067-375,
Amazonas, Brazil. Electronic address: vera@inpa.gov.br.

Aedes aegypti, being the principal vector of dengue (DENV1 to 4), chikungunya and
Zika viruses, is considered as one of the most important mosquito vectors. In
Brazil, despite regular vector control programs, Ae. aegypti still persists with 
high urban density in all the states. This study aimed to estimate the intra and 
inter population genetic diversity and genetic structure among 15 Brazilian
populations of Ae. aegypti based on 12 microsatellite loci. A total of 510
specimens were analyzed comprising eight locations from northern (Itacoatiara,
Manaus, Novo Airão, Boa Vista, Rio Branco, Porto Velho, Guajará-Mirim and
Macapá), three from southeastern (Araçatuba, São José de Rio Preto and Taubaté), 
one from southern (Foz do Iguaçu), one from central west (Cuiabá) and two from
northeastern (Campina Grande and Teresina) regions of Brazil. Genetic distances
(pairwise values of FST and Nm) and the analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA)
were statistically significant, independent of geographic distances among the
sites analyzed, indicating that them are under a complex dynamic process that
influence the levels of gene flow within and among regions of the country.
Bayesian analysis in STRUCTURE revealed the existence of two major genetic
clusters, as well as there was genetic substructure within them; these results
were confirmed by AMOVA, BAPS and DAPC analyses. This differentiation is the
cumulative result of several factors combined as events of multiple introduction,
passive dispersal, environmental and climatic conditions, use of insecticides,
cycles of extinction and re-colonization followed by microevolutionary processes 
throughout the country. Isolation by distance also contributed to this
differentiation, especially among geographically closer localities. These genetic
differences may affect its vector competence to transmit dengue, chikungunya,
Zika and the response to vector control programs.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.04.027 
PMID: 31034798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

