
1. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2019 Jun 20;51(6):615-626. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmz040.

Identification and characterization of stearoyl-CoA desaturase in Toxoplasma
gondii.

Hao P(1)(2)(3), Cui X(4), Liu J(1)(2), Li M(1)(2), Fu Y(1)(2), Liu Q(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Animal Protozoa Laboratory, College of Veterinary Medicine, China
Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology and Zoonosis, Ministry of Agriculture,
College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(3)Patent Examination Cooperation Sichuan Center of the Patent Office, CNIPA,
Chengdu, China.
(4)Beijing Key Laboratory of Diagnostic and Traceability Technologies for Food
Poisoning, Beijing Research Centre for Preventive Medicine, Beijing, China.

Few information of the function of stearoyl-coenzyme A (CoA) desaturase (SCD) in 
apicomplaxan parasite has been obtained. In this study, we retrieved a putative
fatty acyl-CoA desaturase (TGGT1_238950) by a protein alignment with Plasmodium
falciparum SCD in ToxoDB. A typical Δ9-desaturase domain was revealed in this
protein. The putative desaturase was tagged with HA endogenously in Toxoplasma
gondii, and the endoplasmic reticulum localization of the putative desaturase was
revealed, which was consistent with the fatty acid desaturases in other
organisms. Therefore, the TGGT1_238950 was designated T. gondii SCD. Based on
CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing technology, SCD conditional knockout mutants in the T.
gondii TATi strain were obtained. The growth in vitro and pathogenicity in mice
of the mutants suggested that SCD might be dispensable for tachyzoite growth and 
proliferation. The SCD-overexpressing line was constructed to further explore SCD
function. The portion of palmitoleic acid and oleic acid were increased in
SCD-overexpressing parasites, compared with the RH parental strain, indicating
that T. gondii indeed is competent for unsaturated fatty acid synthesis. The
SCD-overexpressing tachyzoites propagated slower than the parental strain, with a
decreased invasion capability and weaker pathogenicity in mice. The TgIF2α
phosphorylation and the expression changes of several genes demonstrated that ER 
stress was triggered in the SCD-overexpressing parasites, which were more apt
toward autophagy and apoptosis. The function of unsaturated fatty acid synthesis 
of TgSCD was consistent with our hypothesis. On the other hand, SCD might also be
involved in tachyzoite autophagy and apoptosis.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. For permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/abbs/gmz040 
PMCID: PMC6574064
PMID: 31139819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

