
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Jun 4;10:1254. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01254. eCollection
2019.

Functional Comparison of Blood-Stage Plasmodium falciparum Malaria Vaccine
Candidate Antigens.

Illingworth JJ(1), Alanine DG(1), Brown R(1), Marshall JM(1), Bartlett HE(1),
Silk SE(1), Labb√© GM(1), Quinkert D(1), Cho JS(1), Wendler JP(2), Pattinson
DJ(1), Barfod L(1), Douglas AD(1), Shea MW(1), Wright KE(3), de Cassan SC(1),
Higgins MK(3), Draper SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

The malaria genome encodes over 5,000 proteins and many of these have also been
proposed to be potential vaccine candidates, although few of these have been
tested clinically. RH5 is one of the leading blood-stage Plasmodium falciparum
malaria vaccine antigens and Phase I/II clinical trials of vaccines containing
this antigen are currently underway. Its likely mechanism of action is to elicit 
antibodies that can neutralize merozoites by blocking their invasion of red blood
cells (RBC). However, many other antigens could also elicit neutralizing
antibodies against the merozoite, and most of these have never been compared
directly to RH5. The objective of this study was to compare a range of
blood-stage antigens to RH5, to identify any antigens that outperform or
synergize with anti-RH5 antibodies. We selected 55 gene products, covering 15
candidate antigens that have been described in the literature and 40 genes
selected on the basis of bioinformatics functional prediction. We were able to
make 20 protein-in-adjuvant vaccines from the original selection. Of these,
S-antigen and CyRPA robustly elicited antibodies with neutralizing properties.
Anti-CyRPA IgG generally showed additive GIA with anti-RH5 IgG, although high
levels of anti-CyRPA-specific rabbit polyclonal IgG were required to achieve 50% 
GIA. Our data suggest that further vaccine antigen screening efforts are required
to identify a second merozoite target with similar antibody-susceptibility to
RH5.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01254 
PMCID: PMC6558156
PMID: 31214195 

