
1. mSphere. 2019 Jun 26;4(3). pii: e00386-19. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00386-19.

Optimizing Systems for Cas9 Expression in Toxoplasma gondii.

Markus BM(1)(2), Bell GW(1), Lorenzi HA(3), Lourido S(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)University of Freiburg, Faculty of Biology, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(4)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
lourido@wi.mit.edu.
(5)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA.

CRISPR-Cas9 technologies have enabled genome engineering in an unprecedented
array of species, accelerating biological studies in both model and nonmodel
systems. However, Cas9 can be inherently toxic, which has limited its use in some
organisms. We previously described the serendipitous discovery of a single guide 
RNA (sgRNA) that helped overcome Cas9 toxicity in the apicomplexan parasite
Toxoplasma gondii, enabling the first genome-wide loss-of-function screens in any
apicomplexan. Even in the presence of the buffering sgRNA, low-level Cas9
toxicity persists and results in frequent loss of Cas9 expression, which can
affect the outcome of these screens. Similar Cas9-mediated toxicity has also been
described in other organisms. We therefore sought to define the requirements for 
stable Cas9 expression, comparing different expression constructs and
characterizing the role of the buffering sgRNA to understand the basis of Cas9
toxicity. We find that viral 2A peptides can substantially improve the selection 
and stability of Cas9 expression. We also demonstrate that the sgRNA has two
functions: primarily facilitating integration of the Cas9-expression construct
following initial genome targeting and secondarily improving long-term parasite
fitness by alleviating Cas9 toxicity. We define a set of guidelines for the
expression of Cas9 with improved stability and selection stringency, which are
directly applicable to a variety of genetic approaches in diverse organisms. Our 
work also emphasizes the need for further characterizing the effects of Cas9
expression.IMPORTANCE Toxoplasma gondii is an intracellular parasite that causes 
life-threatening disease in immunocompromised patients and affects the developing
fetus when contracted during pregnancy. Closely related species cause malaria and
severe diarrhea, thereby constituting leading causes for childhood mortality.
Despite their importance to global health, this family of parasites has remained 
enigmatic. Given its remarkable experimental tractability, T. gondii has emerged 
as a model also for the study of related parasites. Genetic approaches are
important tools for studying the biology of organisms, including T. gondii As
such, the recent developments of CRISPR-Cas9-based techniques for genome editing 
have vastly expanded our ability to study the biology of numerous species. In
some organisms, however, CRISPR-Cas9 has been difficult to implement due to its
inherent toxicity. Our research characterizes the basis of the observed toxicity,
using T. gondii as a model, allowing us to develop approaches to aid the use of
CRISPR-Cas9 in diverse species.

Copyright Â© 2019 Markus et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00386-19 
PMCID: PMC6595152
PMID: 31243081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

