
1. Elife. 2019 Jul 19;8. pii: e49030. doi: 10.7554/eLife.49030.

Formin-2 drives polymerisation of actin filaments enabling segregation of
apicoplasts and cytokinesis in Plasmodium falciparum.

Stortz JF(1), Del Rosario M(1), Singer M(2), Wilkes JM(1), Meissner M(1)(2), Das 
S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Centre for Integrative Parasitology, Institute of Infection, Immunity
& Inflammation, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(2)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Experimental Parasitology, Ludwig Maximilian
University, Munich, Germany.

In addition to its role in erythrocyte invasion, Plasmodium falciparum actin is
implicated in endocytosis, cytokinesis and inheritance of the chloroplast-like
organelle called the apicoplast. Previously, the inability to visualise
filamentous actin (F-actin) dynamics had restricted the characterisation of both 
F-actin and actin regulatory proteins, a limitation we recently overcame for
Toxoplasma (Periz et al, 2017). Here, we have expressed and validated
actin-binding chromobodies as F-actin-sensors in Plasmodium falciparum and
characterised in-vivo actin dynamics. F-actin could be chemically modulated, and 
genetically disrupted upon conditionally deleting actin-1. In a comparative
approach, we demonstrate that Formin-2, a predicted nucleator of F-actin, is
responsible for apicoplast inheritance in both Plasmodium and Toxoplasma, and
additionally mediates efficient cytokinesis in Plasmodium. Finally, time-averaged
local intensity measurements of F-actin in Toxoplasma conditional mutants
revealed molecular determinants of spatiotemporally regulated F-actin flow.
Together, our data indicate that Formin-2 is the primary F-actin nucleator during
apicomplexan intracellular growth, mediating multiple essential functions.

Â© 2019, Stortz et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.49030 
PMCID: PMC6688858
PMID: 31322501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JS, MD, MS, JW, MM, SD No competing interests
declared

