
1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2019 Aug;1450(1):32-46. doi: 10.1111/nyas.14200. Epub 2019 Aug 
5.

Genetic variation influencing hemoglobin levels and risk for anemia across
populations.

Barrera-Reyes PK(1)(2), Tejero ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Nutrigenómica y Nutrigenética, Instituto Nacional de Medicina
Genómica, Ciudad de, México, Mexico.
(2)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Ciudad de, México, Mexico.

Hemoglobin (Hb) concentration is the outcome of the interaction between genetic
variation and environmental factors, including nutritional status, sex, age, and 
altitude. Genetic diversity influencing this protein is complex and varies widely
across populations. Variants related to abnormal Hb or altered characteristics of
the erythrocytes increase the risk for anemia. The most prevalent are related to 
the inherited globin abnormalities affecting Hb production and structure.
Malaria-endemic regions harbor the highest frequencies of variants associated
with the most frequent monogenic diseases and the risk for nonnutritional anemia 
and are considered as public health problems. Variation in genes encoding for
enzymes and membrane proteins in red blood cells also influence erythrocyte life 
span and risk for anemia. Most of these variants are rare. Interindividual
variability of hematological parameters is also influenced by common genetic
variation across the whole genome. Some of the identified variants are associated
with Hb production, erythropoiesis, and iron metabolism. Specialized databases
have been developed to organize and update the large body of available
information on genetic variation related to Hb variation, their frequency,
geographical distribution, and clinical significance. Our present review analyzed
the underlying genetic factors that affect Hb concentrations, their clinical
relevance, and geographical distribution across populations.

© 2019 New York Academy of Sciences. The World Health Organization retains
copyright and all other rights in the manuscript of this article as submitted for
publication.

DOI: 10.1111/nyas.14200 
PMID: 31385320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

