
1. Biomolecules. 2019 Aug 19;9(8). pii: E378. doi: 10.3390/biom9080378.

There Is Treasure Everywhere: Reductive Plastid Evolution in Apicomplexa in Light
of Their Close Relatives.

Salomaki ED(1), Kolisko M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre Czech Acad. Sci., České Budějovice
370 05, Czech Republic. eric.salomaki@gmail.com.
(2)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre Czech Acad. Sci., České Budějovice
370 05, Czech Republic. kolisko@paru.cas.cz.

The phylum Apicomplexa (Alveolates) comprises a group of host-associated
protists, predominately intracellular parasites, including devastating parasites 
like Plasmodium falciparum, the causative agent of malaria. One of the more
fascinating characteristics of Apicomplexa is their highly reduced (and
occasionally lost) remnant plastid, termed the apicoplast. Four core metabolic
pathways are retained in the apicoplast: heme synthesis, iron-sulfur cluster
synthesis, isoprenoid synthesis, and fatty acid synthesis. It has been suggested 
that one or more of these pathways are essential for plastid and plastid genome
retention. The past decade has witnessed the discovery of several apicomplexan
relatives, and next-generation sequencing efforts are revealing that they retain 
variable plastid metabolic capacities. These data are providing clues about the
core genes and pathways of reduced plastids, while at the same time further
confounding our view on the evolutionary history of the apicoplast. Here, we
examine the evolutionary history of the apicoplast, explore plastid metabolism in
Apicomplexa and their close relatives, and propose that the differences among
reduced plastids result from a game of endosymbiotic roulette. Continued
exploration of the Apicomplexa and their relatives is sure to provide new
insights into the evolution of the apicoplast and apicomplexans as a whole.

DOI: 10.3390/biom9080378 
PMCID: PMC6722601
PMID: 31430853  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

