
1. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2019 Nov;84(5):959-975. doi:
10.1007/s00280-019-03932-0. Epub 2019 Sep 4.

Polymorphisms of genes encoding drug transporters or cytochrome P450 enzymes and 
association with clinical response in cancer patients: a systematic review.

Kulma I(1)(2), Boonprasert K(1)(2), Na-Bangchang K(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Bioclinical Sciences, Chulabhorn International College of 
Medicine, Thammasat University (Rangsit Campus), Pathumtani, 12121, Thailand.
(2)Center of Excellence in Pharmacology and Molecular Biology of Malaria and
Cholangiocarcinoma, Thammasat University (Rangsit Campus), Pathumtani, 12121,
Thailand.
(3)Graduate Program in Bioclinical Sciences, Chulabhorn International College of 
Medicine, Thammasat University (Rangsit Campus), Pathumtani, 12121, Thailand.
kesaratmu@yahoo.com.
(4)Center of Excellence in Pharmacology and Molecular Biology of Malaria and
Cholangiocarcinoma, Thammasat University (Rangsit Campus), Pathumtani, 12121,
Thailand. kesaratmu@yahoo.com.
(5)Drug Discovery and Development Center, Office of Advanced Science and
Technology, Thammasat University (Rangsit Campus), Pathumtani, 12121, Thailand.
kesaratmu@yahoo.com.

PURPOSE: Not all patients respond well to cancer chemotherapy. One of the most
important factors contributing to treatment response (efficacy and toxicity) is
genetic determinant. The current systematic review aims to provide current status
of the information on the genetic contribution of genes encoding drug transport
proteins and drug metabolizing enzyme, cytochrome P450 (CYP), and relationship
with clinical outcomes of cancer chemotherapy.
METHODS: The literature search was performed through PubMed and ScienceDirect
databases. One hundred and four research articles that fulfilled the inclusion
criteria and had none of the exclusion criteria were included in the analysis.
RESULTS: Various studies reported conflicting results for the polymorphisms of
the major genes and association with treatment outcomes in patients with various 
types of cancer. Nevertheless, among the investigated gene polymorphisms, it
appears that the 1236C>T, 3435C>T and 2677 G>T/A SNPs of the drug transporter
gene ABCB1 were the most promising determinants of clinical outcomes. Although
both 1236C>T and 3435C>T polymorphism are synonymous SNPs, several studies have
demonstrated that not all synonymous SNPs are silent. Therefore, using the
haplotype (1236C>T, 2677G>T, and 3435C>T) analysis rather than a single SNP may
be a more useful approach for phenotype prediction. Some of the patients with
variants of CYP genes were associated with unsatisfactory treatment response
(efficacy and toxicity), suggesting that these variants may be associated with
either reduction or absence of CYP enzyme activity.
CONCLUSIONS: The controversial results may be due to several factors including
difference in populations studied, sample size, tumor sites and stages,
chemotherapeutic drug regimens, and evaluation parameters for efficacy and/or
toxicity. Before the information can be successfully applied to individualized
cancer chemotherapy, further studies should be focused on these promising genetic
markers and their association with clinical outcomes using standardized
protocols.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-019-03932-0 
PMID: 31482229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

