
1. EBioMedicine. 2019 Oct;48:442-452. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.09.001. Epub 2019
Sep 11.

Transcriptome profiling reveals functional variation in Plasmodium falciparum
parasites from controlled human malaria infection studies.

Hoo R(1), Bruske E(2), Dimonte S(2), Zhu L(1), Mordmüller B(3), Sim BKL(4),
Kremsner PG(5), Hoffman SL(4), Bozdech Z(1), Frank M(6), Preiser PR(7).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
(2)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Wilhelmstr. 27, University of Tübingen, 72074 
Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Wilhelmstr. 27, University of Tübingen, 72074 
Tübingen, Germany; German Center for Infection Research, partner site Tübingen,
Germany.
(4)Sanaria Inc, 9800 Medical Center Dr A209, Rockville, MD 20850, USA.
(5)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Wilhelmstr. 27, University of Tübingen, 72074 
Tübingen, Germany; Centre de Recherches Médicales de Lambaréné, BP 242 Lambaréné,
Gabon.
(6)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Wilhelmstr. 27, University of Tübingen, 72074 
Tübingen, Germany. Electronic address: Matthias.frank@praxis-frank-tuebingen.de.
(7)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Electronic address: prpreiser@ntu.edu.sg.

BACKGROUND: The transcriptome of Plasmodium falciparum clinical isolates varies
according to strain, mosquito bites, disease severity and clinical history.
Therefore, it remains a challenge to directly interpret the parasite's
transcriptomic information into a more general biological signature in a natural 
human malaria infection. These confounding variations can be potentially overcome
with parasites derived from controlled-human malaria infection (CHMI) studies.
METHODS: We performed CHMI studies in healthy and immunologically naïve
volunteers receiving the same P. falciparum strain ((Sanaria® PfSPZ Challenge
(NF54)), but with different sporozoite dosage and route of infection. Parasites
isolated from these volunteers at the day of patency were subjected to in vitro
culture for several generations and synchronized ring-stage parasites were
subjected to transcriptome profiling.
FINDINGS: We observed clear deviations between CHMI-derived parasites from
volunteer groups receiving different PfSPZ dose and route. CHMI-derived parasites
and the pre-mosquito strain used for PfSPZ generation showed significant
transcriptional variability for gene clusters associated with malaria
pathogenesis, immune evasion and transmission. These transcriptional variation
signature clusters were also observed in the transcriptome of P. falciparum
isolates from acute clinical infections.
INTERPRETATION: Our work identifies a previously unrecognized transcriptional
pattern in malaria infections in a non-immune background. Significant
transcriptome heterogeneity exits between parasites derived from human infections
and the pre-mosquito strain, implying that the malaria parasites undergo a change
in functional state to adapt to its host environment. Our work also highlights
the potential use of transcriptomics data from CHMI study advance our
understanding of malaria parasite adaptation and transmission in humans. FUND:
This work is supported by German Israeli Foundation, German ministry for
education and research, MOE Tier 1 from the Singapore Ministry of Education
Academic Research Fund, Singapore Ministry of Health's National Medical Research 
Council, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, USA and the German Centre for Infection Research (Deutsches
Zentrum für Infektionsforschung-DZIF).

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.09.001 
PMCID: PMC6838377
PMID: 31521613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

