
1. Elife. 2019 Oct 8;8. pii: e46711. doi: 10.7554/eLife.46711.

Embryo polarity in moth flies and mosquitoes relies on distinct old genes with
localized transcript isoforms.

Yoon Y(1), Klomp J(1), Martin-Martin I(2), Criscione F(2), Calvo E(2), Ribeiro
J(2), Schmidt-Ott U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, University of Chicago, Chicago, 
United States.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, Rockville, United States.

Unrelated genes establish head-to-tail polarity in embryos of different fly
species, raising the question of how they evolve this function. We show that in
moth flies (Clogmia, Lutzomyia), a maternal transcript isoform of odd-paired
(Zic) is localized in the anterior egg and adopted the role of anterior
determinant without essential protein change. Additionally, Clogmia lost maternal
germ plasm, which contributes to embryo polarity in fruit flies (Drosophila). In 
culicine (Culex, Aedes) and anopheline mosquitoes (Anopheles), embryo polarity
rests on a previously unnamed zinc finger gene (cucoid), or pangolin (dTcf),
respectively. These genes also localize an alternative transcript isoform at the 
anterior egg pole. Basal-branching crane flies (Nephrotoma) also enrich maternal 
pangolin transcript at the anterior egg pole, suggesting that pangolin functioned
as ancestral axis determinant in flies. In conclusion, flies evolved an
unexpected diversity of anterior determinants, and alternative transcript
isoforms with distinct expression can adopt fundamentally distinct developmental 
roles.

Â© 2019, Yoon et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.46711 
PMCID: PMC6783274
PMID: 31591963  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: YY, JK, IM, FC, EC, JR, US No competing interests
declared

