
1. Klin Lab Diagn. 2019;64(9):560-564. doi: 10.18821/0869-2084-2019-64-9-560-564.

[Laboratory diagnostic of human babesiosis.]

[Article in Russian]

Kukina IV(1), Zelya OP(1), Karan LS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University (Sechenov University), 119991, 
Moscow, Russia.
(2)Central Research Institute of Epidemiology, 111123, Moscow, Russia.

Human babesiosis caused by parasitic protozoan Babesia spp. is sporadic zoonotic 
vector-borne infection. The course of babesiosis and prognosis depend on the type
of pathogen and on the patient's immunological status. Significance this disease 
is a severe, often fatal course with immunocompromissed patients resembling
complicated falciparum malaria. In Europe to date, more than 50 cases of
confirmed human babesiosis have been reported in most cases caused by Babesia
divergens. Possible there are unrecognized cases. Pathogen is an obligate
intraerythrocyte parasite of vertebrate animals. The organism is transmitted from
animal to man through bite of Ixodidae tick. Asexual reproduction of the parasite
occurs in a vertebrate host. The pathogenesis of babesiosis is caused by the
destruction of host cells. Intensive haemolysis of red blood cells leads to the
development of haemolytic anemia, haematuria, jaundice, and polyorgan failure may
develop. The clinical manifestations of the disease are nonspecific. Detection of
intraerythrocyte parasites in blood smears stained Gimsa-Romanovsky confirms the 
proposed diagnosis. Blood smears and some laboratory signs from fatal cases were 
analyzed in the Reference-centre of E. I. Martsinovskiĭ Institute. Original
microphotographs B. divergens are shown. The main morphological forms of the
parasite are shown. In addition to the well-known tetrades of parasites «Maltese 
Cross», for the first time, the parasites dividing into 6 interconnected
trophozoites - "sextet" - were found. Originally, the invasion of Babesia in a
normoblast is shown. An unusually high multiple invasion (14 parasites) of
erythrocytes is noted. Because the patients, initially, were incorrectly
diagnosed with malaria, the differential diagnosis of Babesia with Plasmodium is 
described step-by-step. It is important, since the treatment with antimalarial
drugs is ineffective. Deviation laboratory signs are discussed. Complex
morphological characteristics allowed us to speciated the parasites as B.
divergens. DNA was detected in the sample with specific primers Bab di hsp70F/Bab
di hsp70R and the probe Bab di hsp70P. The sequence demonstrated 99-100% and 98% 
similarity to the 18S rRNA gene fragment of B. divergence and Babesia venatorum, 
respectively. Molecular biological and serological methods of laboratory
diagnosis of babesiosis are considered.

DOI: 10.18821/0869-2084-2019-64-9-560-564 
PMID: 31610109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

