
1. Mol Omics. 2019 Dec 2;15(6):431-441. doi: 10.1039/c9mo00124g.

A network-based approach reveals novel invasion and Maurer's clefts-related
proteins in Plasmodium falciparum.

Das D(1), Krishnan SR, Roy A, Bulusu G.

Author information: 
(1)TCS Innovation Labs - Hyderabad (Life Sciences Division), Tata Consultancy
Services Limited, Hyderabad, India. roy.arijit3@tcs.com g.bulusu@tcs.com.

Malaria continues to be a major concern in developing countries despite
continuous efforts to find a cure for the disease. Understanding the pathogenesis
mechanism is necessary to identify more effective drug targets against malaria.
Many years of experimental research have generated a large amount of data for the
malarial parasite, Plasmodium falciparum. These data are useful to understand the
importance of certain parasite proteins, but it often remains unclear how these
proteins come together, interact with other proteins and carry out their
function. Identification of all proteins involved in pathogenesis is an important
step towards understanding the molecular mechanism of pathogenesis. In this
study, dynamic stage-specific protein-protein interaction networks were created
based on gene expression data during the parasite's intra-erythrocytic stages and
static protein-protein interaction data. Using previously known proteins of a
biological event as seed proteins, the random walk with restart (RWR) method was 
used on the dynamic protein-protein interaction networks to identify novel
proteins related to that event. Two screening procedures namely, permutation test
and GO enrichment test were performed to increase the reliability of the RWR
predictions. The proposed method was first validated on Plasmodium falciparum
proteins related to invasion, where it could reproduce the existing knowledge
from a small set of seed proteins. It was then used to identify novel Maurer's
clefts resident proteins, where it could identify 152 parasite proteins. We show 
that the current approach can annotate conserved proteins with unknown function. 
The predicted proteins can help build a mechanistic model for disease
pathogenesis, which will be useful in identifying new drug targets.

DOI: 10.1039/c9mo00124g 
PMID: 31631203  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

