
1. Infect Immun. 2020 Jan 22;88(2). pii: e00504-19. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00504-19. Print
2020 Jan 22.

Plasmodium falciparum Clag9-Associated PfRhopH Complex Is Involved in Merozoite
Binding to Human Erythrocytes.

Chourasia BK(#)(1)(2)(3)(4), Deshmukh A(#)(1), Kaur I(1), Paul G(1), Panda A(5), 
Rathore S(1), Singh SK(2)(3)(4), Theisen M(2)(3)(4), Mohmmed A(6), Malhotra P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
New Delhi, India.
(2)Department for Congenital Diseases, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(3)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of International Health,
Immunology, and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital,
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.
(6)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
New Delhi, India amohd@icgeb.res.in pawanm@icgeb.res.in.
(#)Contributed equally

Cytoadherence-linked asexual gene 9 (Clag9), a conserved Plasmodium protein
expressed during the asexual blood stages, is involved in the cytoadherence of
infected red blood cells (RBCs) to the endothelial lining of blood vessels. Here,
we show that Plasmodium falciparum Clag9 (PfClag9) is a component of the
PfClag9-RhopH complex that is involved in merozoite binding to human
erythrocytes. To characterize PfClag9, we expressed four fragments of PfClag9,
encompassing the entire protein. Immunostaining analysis using anti-PfClag9
antibodies showed expression and localization of PfClag9 at the apical end of the
merozoites. Mass spectrometric analysis of merozoite extracts after
immunoprecipitation using anti-PfClag9 antibody identified P. falciparum
rhoptry-associated protein 1 (PfRAP1), PfRAP2, PfRAP3, PfRhopH2, and PfRhopH3 as 
associated proteins. The identified rhoptry proteins were expressed, and their
association with PfClag9 domains was assessed by using protein-protein
interaction tools. We further showed that PfClag9 binds human RBCs by interacting
with the glycophorin A-band 3 receptor-coreceptor complex. In agreement with its 
cellular localization, PfClag9 was strongly recognized by antibodies generated
during natural infection. Mice immunized with the C-terminal domain of PfClag9
were partially protected against a subsequent challenge infection with Plasmodium
berghei, further supporting a biological role of PfClag9 during natural
infection. Taken together, these results provide direct evidence for the
existence of a PfRhopH-Clag9 complex on the Plasmodium merozoite surface that
binds to human RBCs.

Copyright Â© 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00504-19 
PMCID: PMC6977125
PMID: 31712270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

