
1. PLoS One. 2019 Nov 14;14(11):e0225005. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0225005.
eCollection 2019.

Minimal genetic differentiation of the malaria vector Nyssorhynchus darlingi
associated with forest cover level in Amazonian Brazil.

Prussing C(1), Emerson KJ(2), Bickersmith SA(3), Sallum MAM(4), Conn JE(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)University at Albany, State University of New York, School of Public Health,
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Albany, NY, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biology, St. Mary's College of Maryland, St. Mary's City, MD,
United States of America.
(3)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, Albany, NY, United
States of America.
(4)Departamento de Epidemiologia, Faculdade de Saúde Pública, Universidade de São
Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

The relationship between deforestation and malaria in Amazonian Brazil is
complex, and a deeper understanding of this relationship is required to inform
effective control measures in this region. Here, we are particularly interested
in characterizing the impact of land use and land cover change on the genetics of
the major regional vector of malaria, Nyssorhynchus darlingi (Root). We used
nextera-tagmented, Reductively Amplified DNA (nextRAD) genotyping-by-sequencing
to genotype 164 Ny. darlingi collected from 16 collection sites with divergent
forest cover levels in seven municipalities in four municipality groups that span
the state of Amazonas in northwestern Amazonian Brazil: São Gabriel da Cachoeira,
Presidente Figueiredo, four municipalities in the area around Cruzeiro do Sul,
and Lábrea. Using a dataset of 5,561 Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs), we
investigated the genetic structure of these Ny. darlingi populations with a
combination of model- and non-model-based analyses. We identified weak to
moderate genetic differentiation among the four municipality groups. There was no
evidence for microgeographic genetic structure of Ny. darlingi among forest cover
levels within the municipality groups, indicating that there may be gene flow
across areas of these municipalities with different degrees of deforestation.
Additionally, we conducted an environmental association analysis using two
outlier detection methods to determine whether individual SNPs were associated
with forest cover level without affecting overall population genetic structure.
We identified 14 outlier SNPs, and investigated functions associated with their
proximal genes, which could be further characterized in future studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0225005 
PMCID: PMC6855485
PMID: 31725789  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

