
1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2019 Nov 1;7:264. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2019.00264. eCollection
2019.

TRIBE Uncovers the Role of Dis3 in Shaping the Dynamic Transcriptome in Malaria
Parasites.

Liu M(1), Lu B(2), Fan Y(2), He X(2), Shen S(1), Jiang C(1)(3), Zhang Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Translational Research, Tongji Hospital, Shanghai Key Laboratory 
of Signaling and Disease Research, The School of Life Sciences and Technology,
Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Research Center for Translational Medicine, Key Laboratory of Arrhythmias of
the Ministry of Education of China, East Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)The Research Center of Stem Cells and Ageing, Tsingtao Advanced Research
Institute, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.

Identification of RNA targets of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) is essential for
complete understanding of their biological functions. However, it is still a
challenge to identify the biologically relevant targets of RBPs through in vitro 
strategies of RIP-seq, HITS-CLIP, or GoldCLIP due to the potentially high
background and complicated manipulation. In malaria parasites, RIP-seq and gene
disruption are the few tools available currently for identification of RBP
targets. Here, we have adopted the TRIBE (Targets of RNA binding proteins
identified by editing) system to in vivo identify the RNA targets of PfDis3, a
key exoribonuclease subunit of RNA exosome in Plasmodium falciparum. We generated
a transgenic parasite line of PfDis3-ADARcd, which catalyzes an adenosine
(A)-to-inosine (I) conversion at the potential interacting sites of
PfDis3-targeting RNAs. Most of PfDis3 target genes contain one edit site. The
majority of the edit sites detected by PfDis3-TRIBE locate in exons and spread
across the entire coding regions. The nucleotides adjacent to the edit sites
contain ∼75% of A + T. PfDis3-TRIBE target genes are biases toward higher RIP
enrichment, suggesting that PfDis3-TRIBE preferentially detects stronger PfDis3
RIP targets. Collectively, PfDis3-TRIBE is a favorable tool to identify in vivo
target genes of RBP with high efficiency and reproducibility. Additionally, the
PfDis3-targeting genes are involved in stage-related biological processes during 
the blood-stage development. Thus PfDis3 appears to shape the dynamic
transcriptional transcriptome of malaria parasites through post-transcriptional
degradation of a variety of unwanted transcripts from both strands in the asexual
blood stage.

Copyright © 2019 Liu, Lu, Fan, He, Shen, Jiang and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2019.00264 
PMCID: PMC6838019
PMID: 31737630 

