
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2020 Mar;78:104121. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.104121. Epub
2019 Nov 19.

Prevalence of mutations in Plasmodium falciparum genes associated with resistance
to different antimalarial drugs in Nyando, Kisumu County in Kenya.

Musyoka KB(1), Kiiru JN(2), Aluvaala E(3), Omondi P(4), Chege WK(3), Judah T(2), 
Kiboi D(5), Nganga JK(5), Kimani FT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and
Technology, Nairobi, Kenya; Centre for Biotechnology Research and Development,
Kenya Medical Research Institute, Nairobi, Kenya. Electronic address:
musyoka618@gmail.com.
(2)Centre for Microbiology Research, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Nairobi,
Kenya.
(3)Centre for Biotechnology Research and Development, Kenya Medical Research
Institute, Nairobi, Kenya.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Biotechnology, Kenyatta
University, Nairobi, Kenya.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and
Technology, Nairobi, Kenya.

Resistance to the mainstay antimalarial drugs is a major concern in the control
of malaria. Delayed Plasmodium falciparum parasite clearance has been associated 
with Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) in the kelch propeller region (K13). 
However, SNPs in the Pf-adaptor protein complex 2 mu subunit (Pfap2-mu), Pfcrt
and Pfmdr1 are possible markers associated with multi-drug resistance. Here, we
explored the prevalence of SNPs in the K13, Pfap2-mu, Pfcrt, and Pfmdr1 in 94
dried blood spot field isolates collected from children aged below 12 years
infected with P. falciparum during a cross-sectional study. The samples were
collected in 2015 during the peak malaria transmission season in the Nyando
region of Western Kenya before treatment with Artemether-Lumefantrine, the
first-line artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) in Kenya. However, 47 of
the 94 samples had recurrent parasitemia and were interrogated for the presence
of the SNPs in K13 and Pfap2-mu. We used PCR amplification and sequencing to
evaluate specific regions of K13 (codons 432-702), Pfap2-mu (codons 1-350),
Pfmdr1 (codons 86, 1034-1246), and Pfcrt (codons 72-76) gene(s). The majority of 
parasites harbored the wild type K13 sequence. However, we found a unique
non-synonymous W611S change. In silico studies on the impact of the W611S
predicted structural changes in the overall topology of the K13 protein. Of the
47 samples analyzed for SNPs in the Pfap2-mu gene, 14 (29%) had S160 N/T
mutation. The CVIET haplotype associated with CQ resistance in the Pfcrt yielded 
a 7.44% (7/94), while CVMNK haplotype was at 92.56%. Mutations in the Pfmdr1
region were detected only in three samples (3/94; 3.19%) at codon D1246Y. Our
data suggest that parasites in the western part of Kenya harbor the wildtype
strains. However, the detection of the unique SNP in K13 and Pfap2-mu linked with
ACT delayed parasite clearance may suggest slow filtering of ACT-resistant
parasites.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.104121 
PMID: 31756512 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None declared.

