
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2020 Mar;78:104123. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.104123. Epub
2019 Nov 18.

Molecular identification of Haemosporidia in avian endemics of Gorgona Island
within a context for the eastern tropical Pacific region.

Sedano-Cruz R(1), Castillo A(2), Gil-Vargas DL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Ecología Animal, Department of Biology, Universidad del Valle, Calle 
13 No 100-00, Edif. E20, Office 3120, Cali, Colombia; Grupo de Investigación en
Ecofisiología, Evolución y Biogeografía, Department of Biology, Universidad del
Valle, Calle 13 No 100-00, Edif. E20, Office 3120, Cali, Colombia. Electronic
address: raul.sedano@correounivalle.edu.co.
(2)Grupo de Ecología Animal, Department of Biology, Universidad del Valle, Calle 
13 No 100-00, Edif. E20, Office 3120, Cali, Colombia. Electronic address:
andres.castillo.g@correounivalle.edu.co.
(3)Grupo de Ecología Animal, Department of Biology, Universidad del Valle, Calle 
13 No 100-00, Edif. E20, Office 3120, Cali, Colombia; Grupo de Investigación en
Ecofisiología, Evolución y Biogeografía, Department of Biology, Universidad del
Valle, Calle 13 No 100-00, Edif. E20, Office 3120, Cali, Colombia. Electronic
address: diana.gil@correounivalle.edu.co.

Island bird populations and their obligate blood parasites are of interest for
understanding the accumulation of biodiversity and the evolutionary relationship 
with their mainland congeners. We examined avian Haemosporidia cytochrome b gene 
among terrestrial birds on Gorgona Island National Park, Colombia. Three
Haemoproteus haplotype groups found on Gorgona Island have a higher genetic
similarity to Haemoproteus found in the eastern tropical Pacific than those
documented in Africa, Asia, Europe and Oceania. Two of the haplotype groups on
the island are generalists in terms of infecting multiple hosts and their wide
geographical distribution within the eastern tropical Pacific region, a third
Haemoproteus haplogroup appears endemic to Gorgona Island. The overall prevalence
of haemosporidian parasites is 57,9% for birds on Gorgona island, which is higher
than local reports of prevalence documented in other archipelagos or the
mainland. The island population of Cyanerpes cyaneus gigas seems to be the most
susceptible to Haemoproteus infection when compared to Thamnophilus atrinucha
gorgonae and Coereba flaveola gorgonae. Our findings support an ubiquitous
pattern of endemism among organisms including avian haemosporidian parasites on
Gorgona Island and also highlight the potential exposure of island bird
populations to avian malaria.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.104123 
PMID: 31751754 

