
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2020 Feb;117:103284. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2019.103284.
Epub 2019 Nov 22.

CO2 per se activates carbon dioxide receptors.

Xu P(1), Wen X(1), Leal WS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California-Davis, 
Davis, CA, 95616, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California-Davis, 
Davis, CA, 95616, USA. Electronic address: wsleal@ucdavis.edu.

Carbon dioxide has been used in traps for more than six decades to monitor
mosquito populations and help make informed vector management decisions. CO2 is
sensed by gustatory receptors (GRs) housed in neurons in the maxillary palps.
CO2-sensitive GRs have been identified from the vinegar fly and mosquitoes, but
it remains to be resolved whether these receptors respond to CO2 or bicarbonate. 
As opposed to the vinegar fly, mosquitoes have three GR subunits, but it is
assumed that subunits GR1 and GR3 form functional receptors. In our attempt to
identify the chemical species that bind these receptors, we discovered that GR2
and GR3 are essential for receptor function and that GR1 appears to function as a
modulator. While Xenopus oocytes coexpressing Culex quinquefasciatus subunits
CquiGR1/3 and CquiGR1/2 were not activated, CquiGR2/3 gave robust responses to
sodium bicarbonate. Interestingly, CquiGR1/2/3-coexpressing oocytes gave
significantly lower responses. That the ternary combination is markedly less
sensitive than the GR2/GR3 combination was also observed with orthologs from the 
yellow fever and the malaria mosquito. By comparing responses of
CquiGR2/CquiGR3-coexpressing oocytes to sodium bicarbonate samples (with or
without acidification) and measuring the concentration of aqueous CO2, we showed 
that there is a direct correlation between dissolved CO2 and receptor response.
We then concluded that subunits GR2 and GR3 are essential for these carbon
dioxide-sensitive receptors and that they are activated by CO2 per se, not
bicarbonate.

Copyright Â© 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2019.103284 
PMCID: PMC6980743
PMID: 31760135  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

