
1. Front Plant Sci. 2019 Nov 7;10:1294. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2019.01294. eCollection
2019.

The Transcription Factor Aabzip9 Positively Regulates the Biosynthesis of
Artemisinin in Artemisia annua.

Shen Q(1), Huang H(1), Zhao Y(1), Xie L(1), He Q(1), Zhong Y(1), Wang Y(1), Wang 
Y(1), Tang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South) Ministry of Agriculture, Plant
Biotechnology Research Center, Fudan-SJTU-Nottingham Plant Biotechnology R&D
Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China.

Artemisinin-based therapies are the only effective treatment for malaria, which
reached to 219 million cases and killed 435,000 people in 2017. To meet the
growing demand for artemisinin and make it accessible to the poorest, genetic
engineering of Artemisia annua becomes one of the most promising approaches to
improve artemisinin yield. In this work, AabZIP9 transcription factor has been
identified and characterized. The expression profile of AabZIP9 revealed that it 
was clustered with the artemisinin specific biosynthetic pathway genes ADS,
CYP71AV1, DBR2, and ALDH1. Furthermore, the transiently dual-LUC analysis showed 
that the activation of ADS promoter was enhanced by AabZIP9. Meanwhile, yeast
one-hybrid assay showed that AabZIP9 was able to bind to the "ACGT" cis-element
present in both ADS and CYP71AV1 promoters. AabZIP9 gene was driven by the
constitutive CaMV35S promoter and the glandular trichome specific CYP71AV1
promoter and stably transformed into A. annua plants. The transcript level of
AabZIP9 was increased in both of the 35S and CYP71AV1 driven transgenic plants
compared with the wild type or GUS control plants. All the transgenic A. annua
plants overexpressing AabZIP9 showed elevated transcript level of ADS, but the
transcription levels of CYP71AV1, DBR2, and ALDH1 have no significant change in
both types of transgenic plants. The significantly upregulated ADS promoted the
accumulation of artemisinin, dihydroartemisinic acid, and artemisinic acid
biosynthesis in the transgenic A. annua plants. These results suggest that
AabZIP9 can positively regulate the biosynthesis of artemisinin.

Copyright Â© 2019 Shen, Huang, Zhao, Xie, He, Zhong, Wang, Wang and Tang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2019.01294 
PMCID: PMC6855008
PMID: 31787989 

