
1. Parasitol Open. 2019;5. pii: e3363. doi: 10.1017/pao.2019.3. Epub 2019 Jun 24.

Molecular evolution in immune genes across the avian tree of life.

Outlaw DC(1), Walstrom VW(1), Bodden HN(1), Hsu CY(2), Arick M 2nd(2), Peterson
DG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences Mississippi State University, PO Box GY,
Mississippi State, MS. 39762.
(2)Institute for Genomics, Biocomputing & Biotechnology Mississippi State
University, 2 Research Boulevard, Box 9627, Starkville, MS 39759.

All organisms encounter pathogens, and birds are especially susceptible to
infection by malaria parasites and other haemosporidians. It is important to
understand how immune genes, primarily innate immune genes which are the first
line of host defense, have evolved across birds, a highly diverse group of
tetrapods. Here, we find that innate immune genes are highly conserved across the
avian tree of life and that although most show evidence of positive or
diversifying selection within specific lineages or clades, the number of sites is
often proportionally low in this broader context of putative constraint. Rather, 
the evidence shows a much higher level of negative or purifying selection in
these innate immune genes - rather than adaptive immune genes - which is
consistent with birds' long coevolutionary history with pathogens and the need to
maintain a rapid response to infection. We further explored avian responses to
haemosporidians by comparing differential gene expression in wild birds (1)
uninfected with haemosporidians, (2) infected with Plasmodium, and (3) infected
with Haemoproteus (Parahaemoproteus). We found patterns of significant
differential expression with some genes unique to infection with each genus and a
few shared between "treatment" groups, but none that overlapped with the genes
included in the phylogenetic study.

DOI: 10.1017/pao.2019.3 
PMCID: PMC6890419
PMID: 31798943 

