
1. Parasit Vectors. 2020 Jan 6;13(1):3. doi: 10.1186/s13071-019-3876-y.

Gut microbiota is essential in PGRP-LA regulated immune protection against
Plasmodium berghei infection.

Gao L(1)(2), Song X(1)(2), Wang J(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan
University, Shanghai, 200438, People's Republic of China.
(2)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, School of
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200438, People's Republic of China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan
University, Shanghai, 200438, People's Republic of China.
jingwenwang@fudan.edu.cn.
(4)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, School of
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200438, People's Republic of China.
jingwenwang@fudan.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Malaria remains to be one of the deadliest infectious diseases and
imposes substantial financial and social costs in the world. Mosquitoes rely on
the immune system to control parasite infection. Peptidoglycan recognition
proteins (PGRPs), a family of pattern-recognition receptors (PRR), are
responsible for initiating and regulating immune signaling pathways. PGRP-LA is
involved in the regulation of immune defense against the Plasmodium parasite,
however, the underlying mechanism needs to be further elucidated.
METHODS: The spatial and temporal expression patterns of pgrp-la in Anopheles
stephensi were analyzed by qPCR. The function of PGRP-LA was examined using a
dsRNA-based RNA interference strategy. Western blot and periodic acid schiff
(PAS) staining were used to assess the structural integrity of peritrophic matrix
(PM).
RESULTS: The expression of pgrp-la in An. stephensi was induced in the midgut in 
response to the rapid proliferating gut microbiota post-blood meal. Knocking down
of pgrp-la led to the downregulation of immune effectors that control gut
microbiota growth. The decreased expression of these immune genes also
facilitated P. berghei infection. However, such dsLA treatment did not influence 
the structural integrity of PM. When gut microbiota was removed by antibiotic
treatment, the regulation of PGRP-LA on immune effectors was abolished and the
knock down of pgrp-la failed to increase susceptibility of mosquitoes to parasite
infection.
CONCLUSIONS: PGRP-LA regulates the immune responses by sensing the dynamics of
gut microbiota. A mutual interaction between gut microbiota and PGRP-LA
contributes to the immune defense against Plasmodium parasites in An. stephensi.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-019-3876-y 
PMCID: PMC6945779
PMID: 31907025  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

