
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2020 Apr 2;524(2):418-423. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.01.094. Epub 2020 Jan 30.

Artemisinin sensitizes tumor cells to NK cell-mediated cytolysis.

Lu Z(1), Bi J(1), Wan X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Protein and Cell-based Drugs, Institute of Biomedicine and
Biotechnology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shenzhen, People's Republic of China; University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Center for Protein and Cell-based Drugs, Institute of Biomedicine and
Biotechnology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shenzhen, People's Republic of China; University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
xc.wan@siat.ac.cn.

The antimalarial drug Artemisinin has been reported to possess direct anti-tumor 
effects on various types of tumor cells. However, its anti-tumor potential has
not been fully revealed, and its effects on tumor susceptibility to immune
surveillance by the host are still unknown. Natural killer (NK) cells are the
first line in tumor surveillance by the host, and have been recognized as a
promising target for tumor immunotherapy. Here, we reported that Artemisinin
sensitized tumor cells to NK cell cytolysis. Both human K562 and Raji tumor
cells, and mouse YAC-1 tumor cells were more susceptible to human or mouse NK
cell cytolysis in vitro after Artemisinin pretreatment. Conjugation formation
between tumor cells and NK cells was increased after pretreatment with
Artemisinin. Such effects on tumor cells by Artemisinin might not be the results 
of tumor recognition by NK cells, since major ligands of NK cell surface
receptors were not affected. Mechanistically, although Artemisinin didn't induce 
tumor cell apoptosis, Artemisinin enriched apoptosis-related gene sets in these
tumor cells, which might predispose tumor cells to apoptosis upon NK cell
cytolysis. Moreover, NK cell numbers, percentages, maturation and functions were 
preserved in the presence of Artemisinin in vitro, suggesting that Artemisinin
displays detrimental effects only on tumor cells but not on immune cells. These
data reveal a novel anti-tumor mechanism of Artemisinin and demonstrate that
Artemisinin could be a promising drug candidate for cancer treatment.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.01.094 
PMID: 32007276  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

