
1. Biochemistry. 2020 Mar 3;59(8):911-920. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.9b01105. Epub
2020 Feb 24.

Tafenoquine: A Step toward Malaria Elimination.

Lu KY(1), Derbyshire ER(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, School of Medicine, Duke
University, Durham, North Carolina 27708, United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27708, United
States.

There is a pressing need for compounds with broad-spectrum activity against
malaria parasites at various life cycle stages to achieve malaria elimination.
However, this goal cannot be accomplished without targeting the tenacious dormant
liver-stage hypnozoite that causes multiple relapses after the first episode of
illness. In the search for the magic bullet to radically cure Plasmodium vivax
malaria, tafenoquine outperformed other candidate drugs and was approved by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 2018. Tafenoquine is an 8-aminoquinoline
that inhibits multiple life stages of various Plasmodium species. Additionally,
its much longer half-life allows for single-dose treatment, which will improve
the compliance rate. Despite its approval and the long-time use of other
8-aminoquinolines, the mechanisms behind tafenoquine's activity and adverse
effects are still largely unknown. In this Perspective, we discuss the plausible 
underlying mechanisms of tafenoquine's antiparasitic activity and highlight its
role as a cellular stressor. We also discuss potential drug combinations and the 
development of next-generation 8-aminoquinolines to further improve the
therapeutic index of tafenoquine for malaria treatment and prevention.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.9b01105 
PMID: 32073254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

