
1. mBio. 2020 Feb 25;11(1). pii: e02918-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02918-19.

The Plasmodium falciparum Artemisinin Susceptibility-Associated AP-2 Adaptin μ
Subunit is Clathrin Independent and Essential for Schizont Maturation.

Henrici RC(1), Edwards RL(#)(2), Zoltner M(#)(3), van Schalkwyk DA(1), Hart
MN(1)(4), Mohring F(1), Moon RW(1), Nofal SD(5), Patel A(5), Flueck C(5), Baker
DA(5), Odom John AR(2)(6), Field MC(3)(7), Sutherland CJ(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, Faculty of Infectious Diseases, London School
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA.
(3)School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Crystallography, Birkbeck, University of London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(5)Department of Pathogen Molecular Biology, Faculty of Infectious Diseases,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(7)Biology Centre, Institute of Parasitology, Czech Academy of Sciences, Budweis,
Czech Republic.
(8)Department of Infection Biology, Faculty of Infectious Diseases, London School
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom
colin.sutherland@lshtm.ac.uk.
(9)PHE Malaria Reference Laboratory, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(#)Contributed equally

The efficacy of current antimalarial drugs is threatened by reduced
susceptibility of Plasmodium falciparum to artemisinin, associated with mutations
in pfkelch13 Another gene with variants known to modulate the response to
artemisinin encodes the μ subunit of the AP-2 adaptin trafficking complex. To
elucidate the cellular role of AP-2μ in P. falciparum, we performed a conditional
gene knockout, which severely disrupted schizont organization and maturation,
leading to mislocalization of key merozoite proteins. AP-2μ is thus essential for
blood-stage replication. We generated transgenic P. falciparum parasites
expressing hemagglutinin-tagged AP-2μ and examined cellular localization by
fluorescence and electron microscopy. Together with mass spectrometry analysis of
coimmunoprecipitating proteins, these studies identified AP-2μ-interacting
partners, including other AP-2 subunits, the K10 kelch-domain protein, and PfEHD,
an effector of endocytosis and lipid mobilization, but no evidence was found of
interaction with clathrin, the expected coat protein for AP-2 vesicles. In
reverse immunoprecipitation experiments with a clathrin nanobody, other
heterotetrameric AP-complexes were shown to interact with clathrin, but AP-2
complex subunits were absent.IMPORTANCE We examine in detail the AP-2 adaptin
complex from the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum In most studied
organisms, AP-2 is involved in bringing material into the cell from outside, a
process called endocytosis. Previous work shows that changes to the μ subunit of 
AP-2 can contribute to drug resistance. Our experiments show that AP-2 is
essential for parasite development in blood but does not have any role in
clathrin-mediated endocytosis. This suggests that a specialized function for AP-2
has developed in malaria parasites, and this may be important for understanding
its impact on drug resistance.

Copyright © 2020 Henrici et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02918-19 
PMCID: PMC7042695
PMID: 32098816  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

