
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Feb 26;10(1):3500. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-60549-7.

Detection of mutations associated with artemisinin resistance at k13-propeller
gene and a near complete return of chloroquine susceptible falciparum malaria in 
Southeast of Tanzania.

Bwire GM(1), Ngasala B(2), Mikomangwa WP(3), Kilonzi M(3), Kamuhabwa AAR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Muhimbili University of Health and 
Allied Sciences, P.O. Box 65013, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. georgebwire@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Parasitology and Medical Entomology, Muhimbili University of
Health and Allied Sciences, P.O. Box 65001, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(3)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, Muhimbili University of
Health and Allied Sciences, P.O. Box 65013, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.

In Tanzania, chloroquine was replaced by sulphadoxine- pyrimethamine (SP) as a
first-line for treatment of uncomplicated malaria. Due to high resistance in
malaria parasites, SP lasted for only 5 years and by the end of 2006 it was
replaced with the current artemisinin combination therapy. We therefore, set a
study to determine the current genotypic mutations associated with Plasmodium
falciparum resistance to artemisinin, partner drugs and chloroquine. Parasites
DNA were extracted from dried blood spots collected by finger-prick from
Tanzanian malaria infected patients. DNA were sequenced using MiSeq then
genotypes were translated into drug resistance haplotypes at Wellcome Sanger
Institute, UK. About 422 samples were successful sequenced for K13 gene (marker
for artemisinin resistance), the wild type (WT) was found in 391 samples (92.7%) 
whereby 31 samples (7.3%) had mutations in K13 gene. Of 31 samples with
mutations, one sample had R561H, a mutation that has been associated with delayed
parasite clearance in Southeast Asia, another sample had A578S, a mutation not
associated with artemisinin whilst 29 samples had K13 novel mutations. There were
no mutations in PGB, EXO, P23_BP and PfMDR1 at position 86 and 1246 (markers for 
resistance in artemisinin partner drugs) but 270 samples (60.4%) had mutations at
PfMDR1 Y184F. Additionally, genotyped PfCRT at positions 72-76 (major predictors 
for chroquine resistance), found WT gene in 443 out of 444 samples (99.8%). In
conclusion, this study found mutations in K13-propeller gene and high prevalence 
of chloroquine susceptible P. falciparum in Southeast of Tanzania.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-60549-7 
PMCID: PMC7044163
PMID: 32103124 

