
1. Front Genet. 2020 Feb 21;10:1362. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01362. eCollection
2019.

Ookinete-Specific Genes and 18S SSU rRNA Evidenced in Plasmodium vivax Selection 
and Adaptation by Sympatric Vectors.

González-Cerón L(1), Rodríguez MH(2), Ovilla-Muñoz MT(3), Santillán-Valenzuela
F(1), Hernández-Ávila JE(4), Rodríguez MC(2), Martínez-Barnetche J(3),
Villarreal-Treviño C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Regional Center of Research in Public Health, National Institute of Public
Health, Ministry of Health, Tapachula, Mexico.
(2)Vector Borne Diseases, Center for Research on Infectious Diseases, National
Institute of Public Health, Ministry of Health, Cuernavaca, Mexico.
(3)Chronic Infections and Cancer, Center for Research on Infectious Diseases,
National Institute of Public Health, Ministry of Health, Cuernavaca, Mexico.
(4)Center of Information for Public Health Decisions, National Institute of
Public Health, Ministry of Health, Mexico City, Mexico.

In the southern Pacific coast of Chiapas, Mexico (SM), the two most abundant
vector species, Nyssorhynchus albimanus and Anopheles pseudopunctipennis, were
susceptible to different Plasmodium vivax Pvs25/28 haplotypes. To broaden our
understanding of the existing P. vivax in the area, genes encoding proteins
relevant for ookinete development and the 18S rRNA were studied. P. vivax
infectivity (percentage of infected mosquitoes and oocyst numbers) was evaluated 
by simultaneously feeding infected blood samples from patients to Ny. albimanus
and An. pseudopunctipennis female mosquitoes. Three infectivity patterns were
identified: one group of parasites were more infective to An. pseudopunctipennis 
than to Ny. albimanus, another group was more infective to Ny. albimanus, while a
third group infected both vectors similarly. In 29 parasite isolates, the
molecular variations of ookinete-specific genes and the 18S rRNA-type S were
analyzed. Using concatenated sequences, phylogenetic trees, and Structure
analysis, parasite clustering within SM isolates and between these and those from
other geographical origins were investigated. A ML phylogenetic tree resolved two
parasite lineages: PvSM-A and PvSM-B. They were associated to a different 18S
rRNA variant. PvSM-A parasites had 18S rRNA variant rV2 and correspond to
parasites causing high oocyst infection in Ny. albimanus. A new ML tree and
Structure analysis, both comprising global sequences, showed PvSM-A clustered
with Latin American parasites. Meanwhile, all isolates of PvSM-B had 18S rRNA
variant rV1 and remained as unique genetic cluster comprising two subgroups:
PvSM-Ba, producing high infection in An. pseudopunctipennis, and PvSM-Bb, causing
similar oocyst infection in both vector species. PvSM-A parasites were
genetically similar to parasites from South America. Meanwhile, PvSM-B were
exclusive to southern Mexico and share ancestry with Asian parasites. The results
suggest that these lineages evolved separately, likely by geographic and vector
restriction.

Copyright © 2020 González-Cerón, Rodríguez, Ovilla-Muñoz, Santillán-Valenzuela,
Hernández-Ávila, Rodríguez, Martínez- Barnetche and Villarreal-Treviño.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01362 
PMCID: PMC7047961
PMID: 32153625 

