
1. Phytochemistry. 2020 Jun;174:112338. doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2020.112338. Epub
2020 Mar 13.

Recent advances in inducing endophytic fungal specialized metabolites using small
molecule elicitors including epigenetic modifiers.

Toghueo RMK(1), Sahal D(2), Boyom FF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Antimicrobial and Biocontrol Agents Unit (AmBcAU), Laboratory for
Phytobiochemistry and Medicinal Plants Studies, Department of Biochemistry,
Faculty of Science, University of Yaoundé I, P.O. Box 812, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
Electronic address: toghueo.rufin@yahoo.fr.
(2)Malaria Drug Discovery Laboratory, International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi, 110067, India.
Electronic address: dsahal@gmail.com.
(3)Antimicrobial and Biocontrol Agents Unit (AmBcAU), Laboratory for
Phytobiochemistry and Medicinal Plants Studies, Department of Biochemistry,
Faculty of Science, University of Yaoundé I, P.O. Box 812, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
Electronic address: fabrice.boyom@fulbrightmail.org.

Today when the quest of new lead molecules to supply the development pipeline is 
driving the course of drug discovery, endophytic fungi with their outstanding
biosynthetic potential seem to be highly promising avenues for natural product
scientists. However, challenges such as the production of inadequate quantities
of compounds, the attenuation or loss of ability of endophytes to produce the
compound of interest when grown in culture and the inability of fungal endophytes
to express their full biosynthetic potential in laboratory conditions have been
the major constraints. These have led to the application of small chemical
elicitors that induce epigenetic changes in fungi to activate their silent gene
clusters optimizing the amount of metabolites of interest or inducing the
synthesis of hitherto undescribed compounds. In this respect small molecular
weight compounds which are known to function as inhibitors of histone deacetylase
(HDAC), DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) and proteasome have proven their efficacy in
enhancing or inducing the production of specialized metabolites by fungi.
Moreover, organic solvents, metals and plants extracts are also acknowledged for 
their ability to cause shifts in fungal metabolism. We highlight the successful
studies from the past two decades reporting the ability of structurally diverse
small molecular weight compounds to elicit the production of previously
undescribed metabolites from endophytic fungi grown in culture. This mini review 
argues in favor of chemical elicitation as an effective strategy to optimize the 
production of fungal metabolites and invigorate the pipeline of drug discovery
with new chemical entities.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2020.112338 
PMID: 32179305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no conflict of interest.

