
1. Parasitol Res. 2020 Jun;119(6):1753-1765. doi: 10.1007/s00436-020-06669-5. Epub
2020 May 4.

The multifaceted histone chaperone RbAp46/48 in Plasmodium falciparum: structural
insights, production, and characterization.

Kaushik M(1), Nehra A(1), Gakhar SK(1), Gill SS(1), Gill R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biotechnology, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, Haryana, 124
001, India.
(2)Centre for Biotechnology, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, Haryana, 124
001, India. ritu_gill@hotmail.com.

RbAp46/RBBP7 and RbAp48/RBBP4 are WD40-repeat histone chaperones and chromatin
adaptors that reside in multiple complexes involved in maintenance of chromatin
structure. RbAp48 is the essential subunit of the chromatin assembly factor-1
(CAF-1) complex, therefore also named as CAF-1C. A detailed in silico sequence
and structure analysis of homologs of RbAp46/48 in Plasmodium falciparum
(PF3D7_0110700 and PF3D7_1433300) exhibited conservation of characteristic
features in both the protein-seven-bladed WD40 Î²-propeller conformation and
different binding interfaces. A comparative structural analysis highlighted
species-specific features of the parasite, yeast, drosophila, and human
RbAp46/48. In the present study, we report cloning, expression, and
characterization of P. falciparum PF3D7_0110700, a putative RbAp46/48
(PfRbAp46/48). PfRbAp46/48 was cloned into pTEM11 vector in fusion with
6xHistidine tag and over-expressed in Escherichia coli B834 cells. The protein
was purified by Ni-NTA followed by gel permeation chromatography. The protein
expressed in all the three asexual blood stages and exhibited nuclear
localization. We showed direct interaction of the purified rPfRbAp46/48 with the 
histone H4. These findings further our understanding of RbAp46/48 proteins and
role of these proteins in the parasite biology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-020-06669-5 
PMID: 32363442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

