
1. Sci Rep. 2020 May 5;10(1):7534. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-64382-w.

In-vitro safety and off-target profile of the anti-parasitic
arylmethylaminosteroid 1o.

Blum L(1)(2), Gul S(3), Ulshöfer T(1), Henke M(1), Krieg R(4), Berneburg I(5),
Thomas D(2), Trautmann S(2), Kurz J(1), Geyer J(6), Geisslinger G(1)(2), Becker
K(5), Parnham MJ(1), Schiffmann S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME, Branch for
Translational Medicine and Pharmacology (TMP), Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60596,
Frankfurt/Main, Germany.
(2)pharmazentrum frankfurt/ZAFES, Department of Clinical Pharmacology,
Goethe-University Hospital Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590, Frankfurt/Main,
Germany.
(3)Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME -
ScreeningPort, Schnackenburgallee 114, 22525, Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Anatomy II, University Hospital Jena, Teichgraben 7, 07743,
Jena, Germany.
(5)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Interdisciplinary Research Center,
Justus-Liebig-University, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 26-32, 35392, Giessen, Germany.
(6)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
Justus-Liebig-University, Schubertstraße 81, 35392, Giessen, Germany.
(7)Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME, Branch for
Translational Medicine and Pharmacology (TMP), Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60596,
Frankfurt/Main, Germany. susanne.schiffmann@ime.fraunhofer.de.

Parasite-mediated diseases like malaria and schistosomiasis are growing health
problems worldwide and novel drug candidates are urgently needed. In this study, 
the in-vitro safety profile of steroid compound 1o (sc1o), effective against the 
parasites Plasmodium falciparum and Schistosoma mansoni with an IC50 value of
5 nM, was characterized. We assessed viability/proliferation, apoptosis and cell 
cycle tests to determine the cytotoxic profile of sc1o in cancer cells. The
mutagenic potential was determined with the AMES test. To identify off-target
effects we investigated whether sc1o interacts with safety-relevant molecules
such as cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes, phosphodiesterases (PDE), histone
deacteylases (HDAC) and human ether-a-go-go related gene (hERG). Furthermore, to 
predict the potential bioavailability of sc1o, its effect on Caco-2 cell barrier 
integrity, by measurement of the transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER),
was determined. Sc1o at 25 µM reduced cell viability, probably through cell-cycle
arrest, but did not induce apoptosis in cancer cells. No adverse off-target
effects nor mutagenic potential of sc1o were observed. Furthermore, sc1o did not 
disturb the integrity of the cell barrier, but exhibited low membrane
permeability, apparently due to cell adherence. In conclusion, sc1o up to 10 µM
showed a good in-vitro safety profile.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-64382-w 
PMCID: PMC7200784
PMID: 32371995 

