
1. Parasitol Res. 2020 Jul;119(7):2005-2023. doi: 10.1007/s00436-020-06691-7. Epub
2020 May 12.

Membrane-bound extracellular vesicles secreted by parasitic protozoa: cellular
structures involved in the communication between cells.

de Souza W(1)(2), Barrias ES(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Ultraestrutura Celular Hertha Meyer, Instituto de Biofísica
Carlos Chagas Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Centro de Ciências
da Saúde, Bloco G, Ilha do Fundão, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 21941-900, Brazil.
wsouza@biof.ufrj.br.
(2)Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia and Núcleo de Biologia Estrutural e
Bioimagens, CENABIO, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. wsouza@biof.ufrj.br.
(3)Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia and Núcleo de Biologia Estrutural e
Bioimagens, CENABIO, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Laboratorio de Metrologia Aplicada à Ciências da Vida, Diretoria de Metrologia
Aplicada à Ciências da Vida - Instituto Nacional de Metrologia, Qualidade e
Tecnologia (Inmetro), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

The focus of this review is a group of structures/organelles collectively known
as extracellular vesicles (EVs) that are secreted by most, if not all, cells,
varying from mammalian cells to protozoa and even bacteria. They vary in size:
some are small (100-200 nm) and others are larger (> 200 nm). In protozoa,
however, most of them are small or medium in size (200-400 nm). These include
vesicles from different origins. We briefly review the biogenesis of this
distinct group that includes (a) exosome, which originates from the
multivesicular bodies, an important component of the endocytic pathway; (b)
ectosome, formed from a budding process that takes place in the plasma membrane
of the cells; (c) vesicles released from the cell surface following a process of 
patching and capping of ligand/receptor complexes; (d) other processes where
tubules secreted by the parasite subsequently originate exosome-like structures. 
Here, special emphasis is given to EVs secreted by parasitic protozoa such as
Leishmania, Trypanosoma, Plasmodium, Toxoplasma, Cryptosporidium, Trichomonas,
and Giardia. Most of them have been characterized as exosomes that were isolated 
using several approaches and characterized by electron microscopy, proteomic
analysis, and RNA sequencing. The results obtained show clearly that they present
several proteins and different types of RNAs. From the functional point of view, 
it is now clear that the secreted exosomes can be incorporated by the parasite
itself as well as by mammalian cells with which they interact. As a consequence, 
there is interference both with the parasite (induction of differentiation,
changes in infectivity, etc.) and with the host cell. Therefore, the EVs
constitute a new system of transference of signals among cells. On the other
hand, there are suggestions that exosomes may constitute potential biotechnology 
tools and are important players of what has been designated as nanobiotechnology.
They may constitute an important delivery system for gene therapy and
molecular-displaying cell regulation capabilities when incorporated into other
cells and even by interfering with the exosomal membrane during its biogenesis,
targeting the vesicles via specific ligands to different cell types. These
vesicles may reach the bloodstream, overflow through intercellular junctions, and
even pass through the central nervous system blood barrier. There is evidence
that it is possible to interfere with the composition of the exosomes by
interfering with multivesicular body biogenesis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-020-06691-7 
PMID: 32394001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

