
1. Gene. 2020 Sep 5;754:144857. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.144857. Epub 2020 Jun 5.

Characterization of horizontally acquired ribotoxin encoding genes and their
transcripts in Aedes aegypti.

Lapadula WJ(1), Marcet PL(2), Taracena ML(3), Lenhart A(3), Juri Ayub M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Multidisciplinario de Investigaciones Biológicas de San Luis,
IMIBIO-SL-CONICET and Facultad de Química, Bioquímica y Farmacia, Universidad
Nacional de San Luis, Ejercito de Los Andes, 950, D5700HHW San Luis, Argentina.
(2)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Parasitic Diseases and
Malaria, Entomology Branch. 1600 Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA. Electronic
address: pvm3@cdc.gov.
(3)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Parasitic Diseases and
Malaria, Entomology Branch. 1600 Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA.
(4)Instituto Multidisciplinario de Investigaciones Biológicas de San Luis,
IMIBIO-SL-CONICET and Facultad de Química, Bioquímica y Farmacia, Universidad
Nacional de San Luis, Ejercito de Los Andes, 950, D5700HHW San Luis, Argentina.
Electronic address: mjuriayub@hotmail.com.

Ribosome Inactivating Proteins (RIPs) are RNA N-glycosidases that depurinate a
specific adenine residue in the conserved sarcin/ricin loop of the 28S rRNA. The 
occurrence of RIP genes has been described in a wide range of plant taxa, as well
as in several species of bacteria and fungi. A remarkable case is the presence of
these genes in metazoans belonging to the Culicinae subfamily. We reported that
these genes are derived from a single horizontal gene transfer event, most likely
from a bacterial donor species. Moreover, we have shown evidence that mosquito
RIP genes are evolving under purifying selection, suggesting that these toxins
have acquired a functional role in these organisms. In the present work, we
characterized the intra-specific sequence variability of Aedes aegypti RIP genes 
(RIPAe1, RIPAe2, and RIPAe3) and tested their expression at the mRNA level. Our
results show that RIPAe2 and RIPAe3 are transcribed and polyadenylated, and their
expression levels are modulated across the developmental stages. Varibility among
genes was observed, including the existence of null alleles for RIPAe1 and
RIPAe2, with variants showing partial deletions. These results further support
the existence of a physiological function for these foreign genes in mosquitoes. 
The possible nature of this functionality is discussed.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.144857 
PMID: 32512159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

