
1. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2020 Jul;165:108267. doi: 10.1016/j.diabres.2020.108267.
Epub 2020 Jun 10.

COVID19 in South Asians/Asian Indians: Heterogeneity of data and implications for
pathophysiology and research.

Gupta R(1), Misra A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Fortis CODC Hospital, New Delhi, India. Electronic address:
riteshgupta72@gmail.com.
(2)Fortis CODC Hospital, New Delhi, India; National Diabetes, Obesity and
Cholesterol Foundation, New Delhi, India; Diabetes Foundation (India), New Delhi,
India.

Despite a large population and limited health infrastructure, the incidence and
mortality of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) has been lower in South Asia
than many regions. The underlying reasons and mechanisms for this relative
protection are not established. However both genetic and environmental factors
might play a role. Polymorphisms in ACE2 gene, ACE gene and in genes for some of 
the host cell proteases could affect the viral entry and replication. There is
some evidence that HLA polymorphisms and several pathways involved in immune and 
inflammatory response could contribute to ethnic variation. Cross immunity
because of past exposure to viral infections as well as malaria is likely to
protect from the severe manifestations of disease. Role of BCG vaccination in
trained innate immunity is recognised and could be a protective factor against
COVID-19. There is limited evidence of the possibility of a less virulent viral
strain circulating in South Asia. There is evidence from different parts of the
world that temperature and humidity can influence viral survival as well as the
host immune response. Finally implementation of early containment measures by
some South Asian countries has also contributed to a less disease burden.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diabres.2020.108267 
PMID: 32533988  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

