
1. Planta Med. 2020 Aug;86(12):867-875. doi: 10.1055/a-1178-0852. Epub 2020 Jun 17.

Differential Effects of Components in Artemisia annua Extract on the Induction of
Drug-Metabolizing Enzyme Expression Mediated by Nuclear Receptors.

Zhang X(1), Meng R(1), Wang H(1), Xing J(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan, R. P. China.

Artemisia annua tea is a popular dosage form used to treat and prevent malaria in
some developing countries. However, repeated drinking leads to an obviously
decreased efficacy, which may be related to the induction of metabolizing enzymes
by artemisinin. In the present study, the ability of different components in
A. annua to activate the pregnane X receptor and constitutive androstane receptor
was evaluated by the dual luciferase reporter gene system. The changes in mRNA
and protein expression of CYP3A4 and CYP2B6 were determined by quantitative
real-time PCR and Western blotting. Results showed that in the pregnane X
receptor-mediated CYP3A4 reporter gene system, chrysosplenetin and arteannuin B
exhibited a weak induction effect on pregnane X receptor wt, while arteannuin A
had a strong induction effect on pregnane X receptor wt and pregnane X receptor
370 and a weak induction effect on pregnane X receptor 163. In the pregnane X
receptor-mediated CYP2B6 reporter gene system, arteannuin A had a moderate
induction effect on pregnane X receptor wt and pregnane X receptor 379, and a
weak induction effect on pregnane X receptor 403, while arteannuin B had a weak
induction effect on pregnane X receptor wt and pregnane X receptor 379.
Arteannuin A had a strong induction effect on constitutive androstane receptor 3 
in constitutive androstane receptor-mediated CYP3A4/2B6 reporter gene systems,
while arteannuin B showed a weak induction effect on constitutive androstane
receptor 3 in the constitutive androstane receptor-mediated CYP2B6 reporter gene 
system. The mRNA and protein expressions of CYP3A4 and CYP2B6 were increased when
the pregnane X receptor or constitutive androstane receptor was activated.
Various components present in A. annua differentially affect the activities of
pregnane X receptor isoforms and the constitutive androstane receptor, which
indicates the possibility of a drug-drug interaction. This partly explains the
decline in efficacy after repeated drinking of A. annua tea.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-1178-0852 
PMID: 32557519  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

