
1. Sci Adv. 2020 Jun 10;6(24):eaaz5057. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aaz5057. eCollection
2020 Jun.

Conditional expression of PfAP2-G for controlled massive sexual conversion in
Plasmodium falciparum.

Llorà-Batlle O(1), Michel-Todó L(1), Witmer K(2), Toda H(1), Fernández-Becerra
C(1)(3), Baum J(2), Cortés A(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)ISGlobal, Hospital Clinic-Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona 08036,
Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, UK.
(3)IGTP Institut d'Investigació Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona 08916, Catalonia,
Spain.
(4)ICREA, Barcelona 08010, Catalonia, Spain.

Malaria transmission requires that some asexual parasites convert into sexual
forms termed gametocytes. The initial stages of sexual development, including
sexually committed schizonts and sexual rings, remain poorly characterized,
mainly because they are morphologically identical to their asexual counterparts
and only a small subset of parasites undergo sexual development. Here, we
describe a system for controlled sexual conversion in the human malaria parasite 
Plasmodium falciparum, based on conditional expression of the PfAP2-G
transcription factor. Using this system, ~90 percent of the parasites converted
into sexual forms upon induction, enabling the characterization of committed and 
early sexual stages without further purification. We characterized sexually
committed schizonts and sexual rings at the transcriptomic and phenotypic levels,
which revealed down-regulation of genes involved in solute transport upon sexual 
commitment, among other findings. The new inducible lines will facilitate the
study of early sexual stages at additional levels, including multiomic
characterization and drug susceptibility assays.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0
(CC BY-NC).

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aaz5057 
PMCID: PMC7286680
PMID: 32577509 

