
1. Curr Opin Chem Biol. 2020 Aug;57:65-74. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2020.05.008. Epub
2020 Jun 29.

Targeting histone acetylation/deacetylation in parasites: an update (2017-2020).

Fioravanti R(1), Mautone N(1), Rovere A(1), Rotili D(2), Mai A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Technologies of Drugs, Sapienza University of
Rome, P. le A. Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Technologies of Drugs, Sapienza University of
Rome, P. le A. Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
dante.rotili@uniroma1.it.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Technologies of Drugs, Sapienza University of
Rome, P. le A. Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
antonello.mai@uniroma1.it.

Histone modifying enzymes have vital roles in the growth and survival of both
parasites and humans. Targeting the epigenome can be a new strategy for the
treatment of parasitic diseases. Compounds modulating histone
acetylation/deacetylation have recently been reported hampering Plasmodium,
Schistosoma, Leishmania, and Trypanosoma infections. Beside new histone
deacetylase inhibitors, PfGCN5 and bromodomain inhibitors have been recently
described to inhibit Plasmodium proliferation. Sm histone deacetylase 8 and
SmSIRT2, as well as Leishmania and Trypanosoma sirtuins (SIR2rps), seem to be the
most reliable targets to effectively fight the related protozoan infections. The 
selectivity toward parasite over mammalian cells is still an open question, and
significant optimization efforts of epidrugs are still required to improve
potency/selectivity and decrease toxicity. Recent reports on the alteration of
cellular signaling pathways provoked by parasite infection through changes in the
host acetylation/deacetylation status at gene promoters may suggest novel
therapeutic strategies to treat these diseases.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2020.05.008 
PMID: 32615359 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement Nothing declared.

