
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Jul 3;10(1):10977. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-67222-z.

Insights into the molecular diversity of Plasmodium vivax merozoite surface
protein-3γ (pvmsp3γ), a polymorphic member in the msp3 multi-gene family.

Kuamsab N(1)(2), Putaporntip C(3), Pattanawong U(1), Jongwutiwes S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology of Malaria and Opportunistic Parasites Research Unit,
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Inter-Department Program of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Graduate School,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Molecular Biology of Malaria and Opportunistic Parasites Research Unit,
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand. p.chaturong@gmail.com.

Plasmodium vivax merozoite surface protein 3 (PvMSP3) is encoded by a multi-gene 
family. Of these, PvMSP3α, PvMSP3β and PvMSP3γ, are considered to be vaccine
targets. Despite comprehensive analyses of PvMSP3α and PvMSP3β, little is known
about structural and sequence diversity in PvMSP3γ. Analysis of 118 complete
pvmsp3γ sequences from diverse endemic areas of Thailand and 9 reported sequences
has shown 86 distinct haplotypes. Based on variation in insert domains, pvmsp3γ
can be classified into 3 types, i.e. Belem, Salvador I and NR520. Imperfect
nucleotide repeats were found in six regions of the gene; none encoded tandem
amino acid repeats. Predicted coiled-coil heptad repeats were abundant in the
protein and displayed variation in length and location. Interspersed phase shifts
occurred in the heptad arrays that may have an impact on protein structure.
Polymorphism in pvmsp3γ seems to be generated by intragenic recombination and
driven by natural selection. Most P. vivax isolates in Thailand exhibit
population structure, suggesting limited gene flow across endemic areas.
Phylogenetic analysis has suggested that insert domains could have been
subsequently acquired during the evolution of pvmsp3γ. Sequence and structural
diversity of PvMSP3γ may complicate vaccine design due to alteration in predicted
immunogenic epitopes among variants.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-67222-z 
PMCID: PMC7335089
PMID: 32620822 

