
1. Mol Aspects Med. 2020 Jun;73:100851. doi: 10.1016/j.mam.2020.100851. Epub 2020
Jul 11.

Haptoglobin: From hemoglobin scavenging to human health.

di Masi A(1), De Simone G(1), Ciaccio C(2), D'Orso S(1), Coletta M(2), Ascenzi
P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sciences, Roma Tre University, Viale Guglielmo Marconi 446,
I-00146 Roma, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences and Translational Medicine, University of Roma
"Tor Vergata", Via Montpellier 1, I-00133, Roma, Italy; Interuniversity
Consortium for the Research on the Chemistry of Metals in Biological Systems, Via
Celso Ulpiani 27, I-70126, Bari, Italy.
(3)Interdepartmental Laboratory for Electron Microscopy, Roma Tre University, Via
della Vasca Navale 79, I-00146, Roma, Italy. Electronic address:
ascenzi@uniroma3.it.

Haptoglobin (Hp) belongs to the family of acute-phase plasma proteins and
represents the most important plasma detoxifier of hemoglobin (Hb). The basic Hp 
molecule is a tetrameric protein built by two α/β dimers. Each Hp α/β dimer is
encoded by a single gene and is synthesized as a single polypeptide. Following
post-translational protease-dependent cleavage of the Hp polypeptide, the α and β
chains are linked by disulfide bridge(s) to generate the mature Hp protein. As
human Hp gene is characterized by two common Hp1 and Hp2 alleles, three major
genotypes can result (i.e., Hp1-1, Hp2-1, and Hp2-2). Hp regulates Hb clearance
from circulation by the macrophage-specific receptor CD163, thus preventing
Hb-mediated severe consequences for health. Indeed, the antioxidant and Hb
binding properties of Hp as well as its ability to stimulate cells of the
monocyte/macrophage lineage and to modulate the helper T-cell type 1 and type 2
balance significantly associate with a variety of pathogenic disorders (e.g.,
infectious diseases, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and cancer). Alternative 
functions of the variants Hp1 and Hp2 have been reported, particularly in the
susceptibility and protection against infectious (e.g., pulmonary tuberculosis,
HIV, and malaria) and non-infectious (e.g., diabetes, cardiovascular diseases and
obesity) diseases. Both high and low levels of Hp are indicative of clinical
conditions: Hp plasma levels increase during infections, inflammation, and
various malignant diseases, and decrease during malnutrition, hemolysis, hepatic 
disease, allergic reactions, and seizure disorders. Of note, the Hp:Hb complexes 
display heme-based reactivity; in fact, they bind several ferrous and ferric
ligands, including O2, CO, and NO, and display (pseudo-)enzymatic properties
(e.g., NO and peroxynitrite detoxification). Here, genetic, biochemical,
biomedical, and biotechnological aspects of Hp are reviewed.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mam.2020.100851 
PMID: 32660714 

