
1. Adv Pharm Bull. 2020 Jul;10(3):464-471. doi: 10.34172/apb.2020.057. Epub 2020 May
11.

Transformation of Amorphadiene Synthase and Antisilencing P19 Genes into
Artemisia annua L. and its Effect on Antimalarial Artemisinin Production.

Elfahmi E(1)(2), Cahyani FM(1), Kristianti T(3), Suhandono S(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Bandung Institute of Technology, Bandung, Indonesia.
(2)Biosciences and Biotechnology Research Center, Bandung Institute of
Technology, Bandung, Indonesia.
(3)Institut Pendidikan Indonesia, Garut, West Java, Indonesia.
(4)School of Life Sciences and Technology, Bandung Institute of Technology,
Bandung, Indonesia.

Purpose: The low content of artemisinin related to the biosynthetic pathway is
influenced by the role of certain enzymes in the formation of artemisinin. The
regulation of genes involved in artemisinin biosynthesis through genetic
engineering is a choice to enhance the content. This research aims to transform
ads and p19 gene as an antisilencing into Artemisia annua and to see their
effects on artemisinin production. Methods: The presence of p19 and ads genes was
confirmed through polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products and sequencing
analysis. The plasmids, which contain ads and/or p19 genes, were transformed into
Agrobacterium tumefaciens, and then inserted into leaves and hairy roots of A.
annua by vacuum and syringe infiltration methods. The successful transformation
was checked through the GUS histochemical test and the PCR analysis. Artemisinin 
levels were measured using HPLC. Results: The percentages of the blue area on
leaves by using vacuum and syringe infiltration method and on hairy roots were up
to 98, 92.55%, and 99.00% respectively. The ads-p19 sample contained a higher
level of artemisinin (0.18%) compared to other samples. Transformed hairy root
with co-transformation of ads-p19 contained 0.095% artemisinin, where no
artemisinin was found in the control hairy root. The transformation of ads and
p19 genes into A. annua plant has been successfully done and could enhance the
artemisinin content on the transformed leaves with ads-p19 up to 2.57 folds
compared to the untransformed leaves, while for p19, cotransformed and ads were
up to 2.25, 1.29, and 1.14 folds respectively. Conclusion: Antisilencing p19 gene
could enhance the transformation efficiency of ads and artemisinin level in A.
annua.

Â© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.34172/apb.2020.057 
PMCID: PMC7335994
PMID: 32665907 

