
1. Blood. 2020 Sep 10;136(11):1225-1240. doi: 10.1182/blood.2019000944.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency.

Luzzatto L(1)(2), Ally M(1), Notaro R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology and Blood Transfusion, Muhimbili University of
Health and Allied Sciences, Dar es Salaam, United Republic of Tanzania.
(2)Department of Hematology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy; and.
(3)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics and Gene Transfer, Core Research Laboratory,
Institute for Cancer Research, Prevention and Clinical Network (ISPRO), Florence,
Italy.

Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is 1 of the commonest human
enzymopathies, caused by inherited mutations of the X-linked gene G6PD. G6PD
deficiency makes red cells highly vulnerable to oxidative damage, and therefore
susceptible to hemolysis. Over 200 G6PD mutations are known: approximately
one-half are polymorphic and therefore common in various populations. Some 500
million persons with any of these mutations are mostly asymptomatic throughout
their lifetime; however, any of them may develop acute and sometimes very severe 
hemolytic anemia when triggered by ingestion of fava beans, by any of a number of
drugs (for example, primaquine, rasburicase), or, more rarely, by infection.
Approximately one-half of the G6PD mutations are instead sporadic: rare patients 
with these mutations present with chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia. Almost
all G6PD mutations are missense mutations, causing amino acid replacements that
entail deficiency of G6PD enzyme activity: they compromise the stability of the
protein, the catalytic activity is decreased, or a combination of both mechanisms
occurs. Thus, genotype-phenotype correlations have been reasonably well clarified
in many cases. G6PD deficiency correlates remarkably, in its geographic
distribution, with past/present malaria endemicity: indeed, it is a unique
example of an X-linked human polymorphism balanced through protection of
heterozygotes from malaria mortality. Acute hemolytic anemia can be managed
effectively provided it is promptly diagnosed. Reliable diagnostic procedures are
available, with point-of-care tests becoming increasingly important where
primaquine and its recently introduced analog tafenoquine are required for the
elimination of malaria.

Â© 2020 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2019000944 
PMID: 32702756 

