
1. Genes (Basel). 2020 Aug 5;11(8). pii: E894. doi: 10.3390/genes11080894.

Lights and Shadows of TORCH Infection Proteomics.

Macedo-da-Silva J(1), Marinho CRF(2), Palmisano G(1), Rosa-Fernandes L(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Glycoproteomics Laboratory, Department of Parasitology, University of Sao
Paulo, Sao Paulo 05508-000, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Experimental Immunoparasitology, Department of Parasitology,
University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo 05508-000, Brazil.

Congenital abnormalities cause serious fetal consequences. The term TORCH is used
to designate the most common perinatal infections, where: (T) refers to
toxoplasmosis, (O) means "others" and includes syphilis, varicella-zoster,
parvovirus B19, zika virus (ZIKV), and malaria among others, (R) refers to
rubella, (C) relates to cytomegalovirus infection, and (H) to herpes simplex
virus infections. Among the main abnormalities identified in neonates exposed to 
congenital infections are central nervous system (CNS) damage, microcephaly,
hearing loss, and ophthalmological impairment, all requiring regular follow-up to
monitor its progression. Protein changes such as mutations, post-translational
modifications, abundance, structure, and function may indicate a pathological
condition before the onset of the first symptoms, allowing early diagnosis and
understanding of a particular disease or infection. The term "proteomics" is
defined as the science that studies the proteome, which consists of the total
protein content of a cell, tissue or organism in a given space and time,
including post-translational modifications (PTMs) and interactions between
proteins. Currently, quantitative bottom-up proteomic strategies allow rapid and 
high throughput characterization of complex biological mixtures. Investigating
proteome modulation during host-pathogen interaction helps in elucidating the
mechanisms of infection and in predicting disease progression. This "molecular
battle" between host and pathogen is a key to identify drug targets and
diagnostic markers. Here, we conducted a survey on proteomic techniques applied
to congenital diseases classified in the terminology "TORCH", including
toxoplasmosis, ZIKV, malaria, syphilis, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV),
herpes simplex virus (HSV) and human cytomegalovirus (HCVM). We have highlighted 
proteins and/or protein complexes actively involved in the infection. Most of the
proteomic studies reported have been performed in cell line models, and the
evaluation of tissues (brain, muscle, and placenta) and biofluids (plasma, serum 
and urine) in animal models is still underexplored. Moreover, there are a
plethora of studies focusing on the pathogen or the host without considering the 
triad mother-fetus-pathogen as a dynamic and interconnected system.

DOI: 10.3390/genes11080894 
PMCID: PMC7464470
PMID: 32764347 

