
1. Korean J Parasitol. 2020 Aug;58(4):431-443. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2020.58.4.431. Epub 
2020 Aug 25.

Echinostoma mekongi n. sp. (Digenea: Echinostomatidae) from Riparian People along
the Mekong River in Cambodia.

Cho J(1), Jung BK(1), Chang T(1), Sohn WM(2), Sinuon M(3), Chai JY(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Korea Association of Health Promotion, Seoul 
07649, Korea.
(2)Department of Parasitology and Tropical Medicine, and Institute of Health
Sciences, Gyeongsang National University College of Medicine, Jinju 52727, Korea.
(3)National Center for Parasitology, Entomology and Malaria Control, Phnom Penh, 
Cambodia.
(4)Department of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul 03080, Korea.

Echinostoma mekongi n. sp. (Digenea: Echinostomatidae) is described based on
adult flukes collected from humans residing along the Mekong River in Cambodia.
Total 256 flukes were collected from the diarrheic stool of 6 echinostome egg
positive villagers in Kratie and Takeo Province after praziquantel treatment and 
purging. Adults of the new species were 9.0-13.1 (av. 11.3) mm in length and
1.3-2.5 (1.9) mm in maximum width and characterized by having a head collar armed
with 37 collar spines (dorsal spines arranged in 2 alternative rows), including 5
end group spines. The eggs in feces and worm uterus were 98-132 (117) μm long and
62-90 (75) μm wide. These morphological features closely resembled those of
Echinostoma revolutum, E. miyagawai, and several other 37-collar-spined
Echinostoma species. However, sequencing of the nuclear ITS (ITS1-5.8S rRNA-ITS2)
and 2 mitochondrial genes, cox1 and &lt;/&gt;nad1, revealed unique features
distinct from E. revolutum and also from other 37-collar-spined Echinostoma group
available in GenBank (E. bolschewense, E. caproni, E. cinetorchis, E. deserticum,
E. miyagawai, E. nasincovae, E. novaezealandense, E. paraensei, E. paraulum, E.
robustum, E. trivolvis, and Echinostoma sp. IG). Thus, we assigned our flukes as 
a new species, E. mekongi. The new species revealed marked variation in the
morphology of testes (globular or lobulated), and smaller head collar, collar
spines, oral and ventral suckers, and cirrus sac compared to E. revolutum and E. 
miyagawai. Epidemiological studies regarding the geographical distribution and
its life history, including the source of human infections, remain to be
performed.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2020.58.4.431 
PMCID: PMC7462798
PMID: 32871637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

