
1. mBio. 2020 Sep 8;11(5). pii: e01354-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01354-20.

Live-Cell FRET Reveals that Malaria Nutrient Channel Proteins CLAG3 and RhopH2
Remain Associated throughout Their Tortuous Trafficking.

Ahmad M(1), Manzella-Lapeira J(2), Saggu G(1), Ito D(1), Brzostowski JA(2), Desai
SA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, USA
sdesai@niaid.nih.gov.

Malaria parasites increase their host erythrocyte's permeability to various
nutrients, fueling intracellular pathogen development and replication. The
plasmodial surface anion channel (PSAC) mediates this uptake and is linked to the
parasite-encoded RhopH complex, consisting of CLAG3, RhopH2, and RhopH3. While
interactions between these subunits are well established, it is not clear whether
they remain associated from their synthesis in developing merozoites through
erythrocyte invasion and trafficking to the host membrane. Here, we explored
protein-protein interactions between RhopH subunits using live-cell imaging and
FÃ¶rster resonance energy transfer (FRET) experiments. Using the green fluorescent
protein (GFP) derivatives mCerulean and mVenus, we generated single- and
double-tagged parasite lines for fluorescence measurements. While CLAG3-mCerulean
served as an efficient FRET donor for RhopH2-mVenus within rhoptry organelles,
mCerulean targeted to this organelle via a short signal sequence produced
negligible FRET. Upon merozoite egress and reinvasion, these tagged RhopH
subunits were deposited into the new host cell's parasitophorous vacuole; these
proteins were then exported and trafficked to the erythrocyte membrane, where
CLAG3 and RhopH2 remained fully associated. Fluorescence intensity measurements
identified stoichiometric increases in exported RhopH protein when erythrocytes
are infected with two parasites; whole-cell patch-clamp revealed a concomitant
increase in PSAC functional copy number and a dose effect for RhopH contribution 
to ion and nutrient permeability. These studies establish live-cell FRET imaging 
in human malaria parasites, reveal that RhopH subunits traffic to their host
membrane destination without dissociation, and suggest quantitative contribution 
to PSAC formation.IMPORTANCE Malaria parasites grow within circulating red blood 
cells and uptake nutrients through a pore on their host membrane. Here, we used
gene editing to tag CLAG3 and RhopH2, two proteins linked to the nutrient pore,
with fluorescent markers and tracked these proteins in living infected cells.
After their synthesis in mature parasites, imaging showed that both proteins are 
packaged into membrane-bound rhoptries. When parasites ruptured their host cells 
and invaded new red blood cells, these proteins were detected within a vacuole
around the parasite before they migrated and inserted in the surface membrane of 
the host cell. Using simultaneous labeling of CLAG3 and RhopH2, we determined
that these proteins interact tightly during migration and after surface membrane 
insertion. Red blood cells infected with two parasites had twice the protein at
their surface and a parallel increase in the number of nutrient pores. Our work
suggests that these proteins directly facilitate parasite nutrient uptake from
human plasma.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01354-20 
PMCID: PMC7482060
PMID: 32900800 

