
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2020 Sep 20;127:103470. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2020.103470.
[Epub ahead of print]

Gene editing reveals obligate and modulatory components of the CO2 receptor
complex in the malaria vector mosquito, Anopheles coluzzii.

Liu F(1), Ye Z(1), Baker A(1), Sun H(1), Zwiebel LJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, 465 21st Avenue
South, Nashville, TN, 37235, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, 465 21st Avenue
South, Nashville, TN, 37235, USA. Electronic address: l.zwiebel@vanderbilt.edu.

The sensitivity to volatile carbon dioxide (CO2) produced by humans and other
animals is a critical component in the host preference behaviors of the malaria
vector mosquito Anopheles coluzzii. The molecular receptors responsible for the
ability to sense CO2 are encoded by three putative gustatory receptor (Gr) genes 
(Gr22,23,24) which are expressed in a distinctive array of sensory neurons housed
in maxillary palp capitate peg sensilla of An. coluzzii. Despite the
identification of these components and subsequent studies, there is a paucity of 
understanding regarding the respective roles of these three GRs in the mosquito's
CO2 transduction process. To address this, we have used CRISPR/Cas9-based gene
editing technique combined with in vivo electrophysiological recordings to
directly examine the role of Gr22,23,24 in detecting CO2 in An. coluzzii. These
studies reveal that both Gr23 and Gr24 are absolutely required to maintain in
vivo CO2 sensitivity while, in contrast, Gr22 knock out mutants are still able to
respond to CO2 stimuli albeit with significantly weaker sensitivity. Our data
supports a model in which Gr22 plays a modulatory role to enhance the
functionality of Gr23/24 complexes that are responsible for CO2 sensitivity of
mosquitoes.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2020.103470 
PMID: 32966873 

