
1. Mol Ecol. 2020 Sep 24. doi: 10.1111/mec.15645. [Epub ahead of print]

A 6.5-kb intergenic structural variation enhances P450-mediated resistance to
pyrethroids in malaria vectors lowering bed net efficacy.

Mugenzi LMJ(1)(2)(3), Menze BD(1)(2), Tchouakui M(2), Wondji MJ(1)(2), Irving
H(1), Tchoupo M(2), Hearn J(1), Weedall GD(1)(4), Riveron JM(1)(2), Cho-Ngwa
F(3), Wondji CS(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool,
UK.
(2)Centre for Research in Infectious Diseases (CRID), Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science,
University of Buea, Buea, Cameroon.
(4)School of Natural Sciences and Psychology, Liverpool, John Moores University, 
Liverpool, UK.

Elucidating the complex evolutionary armory that mosquitoes deploy against
insecticides is crucial to maintain the effectiveness of insecticide-based
interventions. Here, we deciphered the role of a 6.5-kb structural variation (SV)
in driving cytochrome P450-mediated pyrethroid resistance in the malaria vector, 
Anopheles funestus. Whole-genome pooled sequencing detected an intergenic 6.5-kb 
SV between duplicated CYP6P9a/b P450s in pyrethroid-resistant mosquitoes through 
a translocation event. Promoter analysis revealed a 17.5-fold higher activity
(p < .0001) for the SV- carrying fragment than the SV- free one. Quantitative
real-time PCR expression profiling of CYP6P9a/b for each SV genotype supported
its role as an enhancer because SV+/SV+ homozygote mosquitoes had a significantly
greater expression for both genes than heterozygotes SV+/SV- (1.7- to 2-fold) and
homozygotes SV-/SV- (4-to 5-fold). Designing a PCR assay revealed a strong
association between this SV and pyrethroid resistance (SV+/SV+ vs. SV-/SV-; odds 
ratio [OR] = 2,079.4, p < .001). The 6.5-kb SV is present at high frequency in
southern Africa (80%-100%) but absent in East/Central/West Africa. Experimental
hut trials revealed that homozygote SV mosquitoes had a significantly greater
chance to survive exposure to pyrethroid-treated nets (OR 27.7; p < .0001) and to
blood feed than susceptible mosquitoes. Furthermore, mosquitoes
homozygote-resistant at the three loci (SV+/CYP6P9a_R/CYP6P9b_R) exhibited a
higher resistance level, leading to a far superior ability to survive exposure to
nets than those homozygotes susceptible at the three loci, revealing a strong
additive effect. This study highlights the important role of structural
variations in the development of insecticide resistance in malaria vectors and
their detrimental impact on the effectiveness of pyrethroid-based nets.

© 2020 The Authors. Molecular Ecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.15645 
PMID: 32974960 

