
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Sep 24;10(1):15614. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-72489-3.

Establishment of a stable transfection method in Babesia microti and
identification of a novel bidirectional promoter of Babesia microti.

Jaijyan DK(1), Govindasamy K(2), Singh J(1), Bhattacharya S(1), Singh AP(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Immunology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi, 10067,
India.
(2)MJKS Research LLC, Edison, NJ, USA. kavithasrini1@aol.com.
(3)National Institute of Immunology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi, 10067,
India. signhap@nii.ac.in.

Babesia microti, an emerging human pathogen, is primarily transmitted through a
bite of an infected tick and blood transfusions in human. Stable transfection
technique has been reported in many protozoan parasites over the past few years. 
However, in vivo transient and stable transfection method has not been
established for Babesia microti. Here, for the first time, we present a method of
transient as well as stable transfection of the Babesia microti (B. microti) in
the in vivo conditions. We have identified a novel promoter of B. microti. We
also demonstrated that Plasmodium berghei DHFR promoter is recognized and
functional in B. microti. We show that BM-CTQ41297 promoter control the
expression of two genes, which are present on either side and thus represents a
bi-functional promoter in B. microti. The predicted promoter activity values
using Promoter 2.0 program is higher for BM- CTQ41297 promoter than strong
promoters such as β-actin, ef-1β, and many other promoters. Furthermore, we
discovered a non-essential locus for the genetic manipulation of the parasite,
allowing us to stably integrate foreign genes; GFP, mCherry, into the B. microti.
The transfection using an electroporation method and genetic manipulation of B.
microti is now achievable and it is possible to obtain transfected viable
parasites under in vivo growing conditions. The growth curve analysis of
transfected and WT B. microti are similar indicating no defects in the transgenic
parasites. This study will enable other researchers in understanding the B.
microti biology, host modulation and diverse parasite developmental stages using 
reverse genetics and holds great potential to identify novel drug targets and
vaccine development.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-72489-3 
PMCID: PMC7515924
PMID: 32973208 

