
1. Front Immunol. 2020 Aug 26;11:1870. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01870. eCollection
2020.

Analysis of Co-inhibitory Receptor Expression in COVID-19 Infection Compared to
Acute Plasmodium falciparum Malaria: LAG-3 and TIM-3 Correlate With T Cell
Activation and Course of Disease.

Herrmann M(1)(2), Schulte S(1), Wildner NH(1), Wittner M(1)(2), Brehm TT(1)(2),
Ramharter M(1)(2)(3), Woost R(1)(2), Lohse AW(1)(2), Jacobs T(4), Schulze Zur
Wiesch J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Unit, I. Department of Medicine, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site
Hamburg-Lübeck-Borstel-Riems, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Tropical Medicine, Bernhard-Nocht-Institute for Tropical
Medicine (BNITM), Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Protozoa Immunology, Bernhard-Nocht-Institute for Tropical Medicine, Hamburg, 
Germany.

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) which is caused by the novel SARS-CoV-2 virus
is a severe flu-like illness which is associated with hyperinflammation and
immune dysfunction. The virus induces a strong T and B cell response but little
is known about the immune pathology of this viral infection. Acute Plasmodium
falciparum malaria also causes acute clinical illness and is characterized by
hyperinflammation due to the strong production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and 
a massive activation of T cells. In malaria, T cells express a variety of
co-inhibitory receptors which might be a consequence of their activation but also
might limit their overwhelming function. Thus, T cells are implicated in
protection as well as in pathology. The outcome of malaria is thought to be a
consequence of the balance between co-activation and co-inhibition of T cells.
Following the hypothesis that T cells in COVID-19 might have a similar, dual
function, we comprehensively characterized the differentiation (CCR7, CD45RO) and
activation status (HLA-DR, CD38, CD69, CD226), the co-expression of co-inhibitory
molecules (PD1, TIM-3, LAG-3, BTLA, TIGIT), as well as the expression pattern of 
the transcription factors T-bet and eomes of CD8+ and CD4+ T cells of PBMC of n =
20 SARS-CoV-2 patients compared to n = 10 P. falciparum infected patients and n =
13 healthy controls. Overall, acute COVID-19 and malaria infection resulted in a 
comparably elevated activation and altered differentiation status of the CD8+ and
CD4+ T cell populations. T effector cells of COVID-19 and malaria patients showed
higher frequencies of the inhibitory receptors T-cell immunoglobulin mucin-3
(TIM-3) and Lymphocyte-activation gene-3 (LAG-3) which was linked to increased
activation levels and an upregulation of the transcription factors T-bet and
eomes. COVID-19 patients with a more severe disease course showed higher levels
of LAG-3 and TIM-3 than patients with a mild disease course. During recovery, a
rapid normalization of these inhibitory receptors could be observed. In summary, 
comparing the expression of different co-inhibitory molecules in CD8+ and CD4+ T 
cells in COVID-19 vs. malaria, there is a transient increase of the expression of
certain inhibitory receptors like LAG-3 and TIM-3 in COVID-19 in the overall
context of acute immune activation.

Copyright © 2020 Herrmann, Schulte, Wildner, Wittner, Brehm, Ramharter, Woost,
Lohse, Jacobs and Schulze zur Wiesch.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01870 
PMCID: PMC7479337
PMID: 32983106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

