
1. PLoS One. 2020 Oct 12;15(10):e0236616. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0236616.
eCollection 2020.

The dimerisable Cre recombinase allows conditional genome editing in the mosquito
stages of Plasmodium berghei.

Fernandes P(1), Briquet S(1), Patarot D(1), Loubens M(1), Hoareau-Coudert B(2),
Silvie O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie et des Maladies Infectieuses, INSERM, CNRS, CIMI-Paris,
Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
(2)UMS PASS, Plateforme de Cytométrie de la Pitié-Salpêtrière (CyPS), Sorbonne
Université, Paris, France.

Asexual blood stages of the malaria parasite are readily amenable to genetic
modification via homologous recombination, allowing functional studies of
parasite genes that are not essential in this part of the life cycle. However,
conventional reverse genetics cannot be applied for the functional analysis of
genes that are essential during asexual blood-stage replication. Various
strategies have been developed for conditional mutagenesis of Plasmodium,
including recombinase-based gene deletion, regulatable promoters, and mRNA or
protein destabilization systems. Among these, the dimerisable Cre (DiCre)
recombinase system has emerged as a powerful approach for conditional gene
deletion in P. falciparum. In this system, the bacteriophage Cre is expressed in 
the form of two separate, enzymatically inactive polypeptides, each fused to a
different rapamycin-binding protein. Rapamycin-induced heterodimerization of the 
two components restores recombinase activity. We have implemented the DiCre
system in the rodent malaria parasite P. berghei, and show that rapamycin-induced
excision of floxed DNA sequences can be achieved with very high efficiency in
both mammalian and mosquito parasite stages. This tool can be used to investigate
the function of essential genes not only in asexual blood stages, but also in
other parts of the malaria parasite life cycle.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0236616 
PMID: 33044964 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

