
1. Mol Microbiol. 2020 Oct 14. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14624. [Epub ahead of print]

Extra-chromosomal DNA amplicons in antimalarial resistant Plasmodium falciparum.

McDaniels JM(1), Huckaby AC(1), Carter SA(1), Lingeman S(1), Francis A(1),
Congdon M(2), Santos W(2), Rathod PK(3), Guler JL(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia,
22903, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, 24061, USA.
(3)Departments of Chemistry and Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle 
Washington, 98195-1700, USA.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of
Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, 22903, USA.

Extra-chromosomal (ec) DNAs are genetic elements that exist separately from the
genome. Since ecDNA can carry beneficial genes, they are a powerful adaptive
mechanism in cancers and many pathogens. For the first time, we report ecDNA
contributing to antimalarial resistance in Plasmodium falciparum, the most
virulent human malaria parasite. Using pulse field gel electrophoresis combined
with PCR-based copy number analysis, we detected two ecDNA elements that differ
in migration and structure. Entrapment in the electrophoresis well and low
susceptibility to exonucleases revealed that the biologically relevant ecDNA
element is large and complex in structure. Using deep sequencing, we show that
ecDNA originates from the chromosome and expansion of an ecDNA-specific sequence 
may improve its segregation or expression. We speculate that ecDNA is maintained 
using established mechanisms due to shared characteristics with the mitochondrial
genome. Implications of ecDNA discovery in this organism are wide-reaching due to
the potential for new strategies to target resistance development.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14624 
PMID: 33053232 

