
1. PeerJ. 2020 Oct 2;8:e9940. doi: 10.7717/peerj.9940. eCollection 2020.

The relationship between protein domains and homopeptides in the Plasmodium
falciparum proteome.

Wang Y(1), Yang HJ(1), Harrison PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

The proteome of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum is notable for the
pervasive occurrence of homopeptides or low-complexity regions (i.e., regions
that are made from a small subset of amino-acid residue types). The most
prevalent of these are made from residues encoded by adenine/thymidine (AT)-rich 
codons, in particular asparagine. We examined homopeptide occurrences within
protein domains in P. falciparum. Homopeptide enrichments occur for hydrophobic
(e.g., valine), or small residues (alanine or glycine) in short spans (<5
residues), but these enrichments disappear for longer lengths. We observe that
short asparagine homopeptides (<10 residues long) have a dramatic relative
depletion inside protein domains, indicating some selective constraint to keep
them from forming. We surmise that this is possibly linked to co-translational
protein folding, although there are specific protein domains that are enriched in
longer asparagine homopeptides (≥10 residues) indicating a functional linkage for
specific poly-asparagine tracts. Top gene ontology functional category
enrichments for homopeptides associated with diverse protein domains include
"vesicle-mediated transport", and "DNA-directed 5'-3' RNA polymerase activity",
with various categories linked to "binding" evidencing significant homopeptide
depletions. Also, in general homopeptides are substantially enriched in the parts
of protein domains that are near/in IDRs. The implications of these findings are 
discussed.

© 2020 Wang et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.9940 
PMCID: PMC7534687
PMID: 33062426 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

