
1. Infect Immun. 1999 May;67(5):2277-83.

Altered immune response of interferon regulatory factor 1-deficient mice against 
Plasmodium berghei blood-stage malaria infection.

Tan RS(1), Feng C, Asano Y, Kara AU.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Parasitology Laboratory, Department of Biological Sciences, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 119260, Singapore.

Nitric oxide (NO) is a short-lived biological mediator which can be induced in
various cell types and is able to cause many metabolic changes in target cells.
Inhibition of tumor cell growth and antimicrobial activity has been attributed to
the stimulation of NO production by transcriptional upregulation of inducible
nitric oxide synthase. In the present study, we used mice devoid of functional
interferon regulatory factor 1 by targeted gene disruption (IRF-1(-/-)) to
investigate the role of NO in the host immune response against blood-stage
Plasmodium berghei ANKA infection. IRF-1(-/-) mice survived longer with a later
onset of and a lower peak parasitemia despite the inability to produce
appreciable levels of NO. The administration of exogenous interleukin-12 (IL-12) 
was able to prolong survival in the wild-type mice with an upregulation in the
expression of both gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) and NO. However, the
administration of IL-12 did not improve the survival of IRF-1(-/-) mice. These
studies indicate that while IL-12 is able to mediate protection via an IFN-gamma-
and NO-dependent pathway in the wild-type mice, such a protective mechanism may
not be functional in the IRF-1(-/-) mice. Our results suggest that NO may not be 
essential for host immunity to the parasite and that IRF-1(-/-) mice are able to 
induce an IFN-gamma- and NO-independent mechanism against P. berghei infection.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.67.5.2277-2283.1999 
PMCID: PMC115967
PMID: 10225884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

