
1. J Immunol. 2001 Feb 1;166(3):1945-50.

Host responses to Plasmodium yoelii hepatic stages: a paradigm in host-parasite
interaction.

Lau AO(1), Sacci JB Jr, Azad AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland, School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. laua@ucla.edu

The liver stage of malaria, caused by the genus Plasmodium, is clinically silent,
but immunologically significant. Ample evidence exists for an effective CD8(+) T 
cell response to this stage as well as the involvement of gammadeltaT cells and
NK1.1(int) cells in immunized animal models. In contrast, there is little
information concerning responses in a naive host. Here we report that several
host gene expressions in the liver, spleen, and kidney of BALB/c mice are altered
during the liver stage of Plasmodium yoelii infection. Really interesting new
gene 3 (Ring3), semaphorin subclass 4 member G, glutamylcysteine synthetase, and 
p45 NF erythroid 2 were all up-regulated 24 h after infection with P. yoelii.
Semaphorin subclass 4 member G expression was elevated in the kidney, whereas
Ring3 was elevated in both spleen and kidney. The expression of TNF-alpha
(TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma) were down-regulated in all three tissues tested except 
in infected spleen where IFN-gamma was elevated. P. yoelii-related host gene
changes were compared with those in Toxoplasma gondii-infected livers. Ring3
expression increased 5-fold over control values, whereas expression of the other 
transcripts remained unchanged. TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma expressions were
increased in the Toxoplasma-infected livers. The uniform increase of Ring3
expression in both Plasmodium- and Toxoplasma-infected livers suggests an innate 
immune response against parasitic infections, whereas the other gene expression
changes are consistent with Plasmodium parasite-specific responses. Taken
together, these changes suggest the immune responses to P. yoelii infection are
both parasite and organ specific.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.3.1945 
PMID: 11160243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

