
1. Immunol Lett. 2002 Aug 1;83(1):47-53.

Stromal cell derived factor 1 synthesis by spleen cells in rodent malaria, and
the effects of in vivo supplementation of SDF-1alpha and CXCR4 receptor blocker.

Garnica MR(1), Souto JT, Silva JS, de Andrade HF Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Depto. Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São
Paulo, Avenida Dr E.C. Aguiar, 04503-000 São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

The mechanisms of malaria parasite clearance in the host are not well understood,
but are ascribed to the intact spleen, the site for parasite clearance. The
infection induces a huge increase in spleen volume and cellularity. There is,
however, a lack of studies on the splenic production of chemokines, which are
small proteins that control homing and activation of immune cells and must be
crucial for organized tissue growth. We studied the spleen cell production of
SDF-1, a primordial chemokine of the CXCL12 class, through mRNA Reverse
transcriptase and polymerase chain reaction of both isoforms, alpha and beta, in 
lethal (Plasmodium berghei ANKA) and non-lethal recrudescent malaria (Plasmodium 
chabaudi CR) in BALB/c and C57BL/6 mouse strains. In non-lethal P. chabaudi
malaria in C57BL/6 mice, SDF-1alpha mRNA production clearly peaked before the
control of parasitemia, a fact not observed in the same mouse strain infected
with lethal P. berghei, when this production was lower and without peaks. The
infection of BALB/c mice infected with the same Plasmodium species led to a
similar evolution of parasitemia and also chemokine production, albeit at lower
levels. SDF-1beta synthesis was more constant and regular during both infections,
presenting some variation but usually occurring at all the experimental times.
Supplementation of lethal models with SDF-1alpha i.p., at the time when
endogenous stromal cell chemokine production peaked in non-lethal models, induced
a clear reduction in parasitemia, probably with prolonged host survival. Blocking
SDF-1 action by administration of T-140, a CXCR4 receptor blocker, caused an
increase in circulating parasites in the usually benign non-lethal P. chabaudi
malaria in C57BL/6 mice, mainly at recrudescence of parasitemia. These data
suggest that SDF-1alpha production in the spleen plays an important role in
rodent malaria, and its supplementation was found to partially correct defects in
the control of malaria in lethal models.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-2478(02)00067-6 
PMID: 12057854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

