
1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2003 Aug;60(8):1623-35.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha in the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria.

Gimenez F(1), Barraud de Lagerie S, Fernandez C, Pino P, Mazier D.

Author information: 
(1)UPRES 2706, Pharmacie Clinique, Faculté de Pharmacie, Université Paris XI, 5, 
rue Jean Baptiste Clément, 92296, Châtenay-Malabry, France.
francois.gimenez@nck.ap-hop-paris.fr

Physiologically in the brain, cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNalpha) are released by the immune system and can modulate neurological
responses. Conversely, the central nervous system (CNS) is also able to modulate 
cytokine production. In the case of CNS disorders, cytokine release may be
modified. Cerebral malaria (CM) is a complication of Plasmodium falciparum
infection in humans and is characterized by a reversible encephalopathy with
seizures and loss of consciousness. Central clinical signs are partly due to
sequestration of parasitized red blood cells in the brain microvasculature due to
interactions between parasite proteins and adhesion molecules. TNFalpha is
produced and released by host cells following exposure to various malarial
antigens. The increase of TNFalpha release is responsible for the overexpression 
of adhesion molecules. This article reviews the involvement of TNFalpha in
cerebral malaria and the relation with all the processes involved in this
pathology. It shows that (i). TNFalpha levels are increased in plasma and brain
but with no clear correlation between TNFalpha levels and occurrence and severity
of CM; (ii). TNFalpha is responsible for intercellular adhesion molecule-1
upregulation in CM, the relation being less clear for other adhesion molecules;
(iii). TNFalpha receptors are upregulated in CM, with TNF receptor 2 (TNFR2)
showing a higher upregulation than TNFR1 in vivo; (iv). in murine CM, low doses
of TNFalpha seem to protect from CM, whereas excess TNFalpha induces CM and
anti-TNFalpha therapies (antibodies, pentoxifylline) did not show any efficiency 
in protection from CM. Moreover, the involvement of lymphotoxin a, which shares
with TNFalpha the same receptors with similar affinity, appears to be an
interesting target for further investigation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-003-2347-x 
PMID: 14504653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

