
1. J Vet Med Sci. 2004 Apr;66(4):389-95.

Inhibitory effect of pyrimidine and purine nucleotides on the multiplication of
Babesia gibsoni: possible cause of low parasitemia and simultaneous
reticulocytosis in canine babesiosis.

Hossain MA(1), Yamato O, Yamasaki M, Maede Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Internal Medicine, Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences,
Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

The present study was conducted to determine the cause of low parasitemia and
simultaneous reticulocytosis in canine babesiosis. The parasitemia was
significantly decreased in in vitro cultures of Babesia gibsoni by the
pretreatment of host canine erythrocytes with lead acetate, which is a specific
inhibitor of pyrimidine 5'-nucleotidase subclass I (P5N-I). The serum from dogs
chronically infected with B. gibsoni did not decrease the activities of
hexokinase, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase or 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase
in canine reticulocytes, although it was previously reported that this serum had 
inhibitory effects on both the maturation of reticulocytes and the canine P5N-I
and purine-specific 5'-nucleotidase activities. Furthermore, the in vitro
multiplication of B. gibsoni was significantly inhibited by pyrimidine
nucleotides such as cytidine 5'-monophosphate (5'-CMP), which is preferentially
catalyzed by P5N-I and also inhibits the morphological maturation of canine
reticulocytes. Purine nucleotides such as inosine 5'-monophosphate (5'-IMP) also 
had an inhibitory effect on the multiplication of this parasite. These results
suggest that nucleotides such as 5'-CMP and 5'-IMP might accumulate in young
erythrocytes and/or serum in dogs infected with B. gibsoni as a result of the
decreased activity of erythrocyte 5'-nucleotidase, and the accumulation of these 
nucleotides might inhibit the multiplication of this parasite and simultaneously 
retard the maturation of reticulocytes. The results obtained from the in vitro
examinations in the present study may partially clarify the relationship between 
low parasitemia and simultaneous reticulocytosis in vivo in canine babesiosis.

DOI: 10.1292/jvms.66.389 
PMID: 15133268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

