
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2004 Oct;137(2):193-200.

Identification of a piroplasm protein of Theileria orientalis that binds to
bovine erythrocyte band 3.

Kim JY(1), Yokoyama N, Kumar S, Inoue N, Inaba M, Fujisaki K, Sugimoto C.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases, Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Inada-cho, Obihiro, Hokkaido 080-8555,
Japan.

Theileria orientalis infects cattle and causes various disease symptoms,
including anaemia and icterus. The erythrocytic stages are responsible for these 
symptoms but the molecular events involved in these stages have not yet been
fully elucidated. In this study, we identified a T. orientalis cDNA that encodes 
a polypeptide related to identity to the microneme-rhoptry protein of Theileria
parva. Analysis of its recombinant product (ToMRP) by indirect
fluorescent-antibody test revealed that it is specifically expressed at the early
erythrocytic stage after invasion. This expression disappears during the
intermediate stages of intra-erythrocytic development. Its expression then
reappears at the late stages after the parasite has divided by binary fission
into diad or tetrad forms and before these forms are released from the host
erythrocyte. In vitro erythrocyte binding assays showed that ToMRP associates
with the Triton X-insoluble fraction of erythrocytes membrane but not with intact
erythrocytes. Cosedimentation and Western blot analyses revealed that ToMRP binds
to band 3, a membrane component of bovine erythrocytes. These observations
suggest that ToMRP may be involved in the parasite's egress from and/or invasion 
into the host erythrocytes by interacting with a protein in the membrane skeleton
of the erythrocyte and thereby modifying the structure and function of the cell.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2004.05.012 
PMID: 15383289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

