
1. J Immunol. 2005 Jan 1;174(1):475-84.

Hemozoin induces macrophage chemokine expression through oxidative
stress-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

Jaramillo M(1), Godbout M, Olivier M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of McGill University Health Center, Center for the Study of
Host Resistance, Departments of Medicine, Microbiology, and Immunology, McGill
University, 3775 University Street, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3A 2B4.

Chemokine production has been associated with the immunopathology related to
malaria. Previous findings indicated that hemozoin (HZ), a parasite metabolite
released during schizogeny, might be an important source of these proinflammatory
mediators. In this study we investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying
HZ-inducible macrophage (Mphi) chemokine mRNA expression. We found that both
Plasmodium falciparum HZ and synthetic HZ increase mRNA levels of various
chemokine transcripts (MIP-1alpha/CCL3, MIP-1beta/CCL4, MIP-2/CXCL2, and
MCP-1/CCL2) in murine B10R Mphi. The cellular response to HZ involved ERK1/2
phosphorylation, NF-kappaB activation, reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, 
and ROS-dependent protein-tyrosine phosphatase down-regulation. Selective
inhibition of either IkappaBalpha or the ERK1/2 pathway abolished both NF-kappaB 
activation and chemokine up-regulation. Similarly, blockage of HZ-inducible Mphi 
ROS with superoxide dismutase suppressed chemokine induction, strongly reduced
NF-kappaB activation, and restored HZ-mediated Mphi protein-tyrosine phosphatase 
inactivation. In contrast, superoxide dismutase had no effect on EKR1/2
phosphorylation by HZ. Collectively, these data indicate that HZ triggers
ROS-dependent and -independent signals, leading to increased chemokine mRNA
expression in Mphi. Overall, our findings may help to better understand the
molecular mechanisms through which parasite components, such as HZ, modulate the 
immune response during malaria infection.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.174.1.475 
PMID: 15611273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

