
1. Parasite Immunol. 2005 Jun;27(6):205-12.

Deletion of LTbetaR augments male susceptibility to Plasmodium chabaudi.

Krücken J(1), Braun JV, Dkhil MA, Grunwald A, Wunderlich F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Parasitology and Biological and Medical Research Centre,
Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.

SUMMARY Disruption of the lymphotoxin beta receptor (LTbetaR) gene has been shown
to result in enhanced resistance of female mice to blood-stage Plasmodium
chabaudi malaria. Here, we investigate the effect of LTbetaR deletion on host
defence of males. In contrast to females, male LTbetaR(-/-) mice do not exhibit
any increase in resistance. Conversely, they are even more susceptible than
wild-type C57BL/6 mice, which becomes evident after lowering circulating levels
of testosterone by castration, which makes C57BL/6 males resistant, whereas
LTbetaR(-/-) remain susceptible. Gene-expression analysis using cDNA arrays
revealed no differences in immunological responses in spleen of malaria-resistant
female and malaria-susceptible castrated male LTbetaR(-/-) mice. In the liver,
however, expression levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor PAI1, chemokine
CXCL10, dual specificity phosphatase DUSP1, and hydroxysteroid-specific
sulfotransferases Sult2a1/2 were decreased 6- to 85-fold in susceptible castrated
male LTbetaR(-/-) mice in comparison to resistant female LTbetaR(-/-) mice at
maximal parasitaemia, as evidenced by Northern blot analyses. The present data
support our previous view that the liver is involved in the combat against
malarial blood stages and that down-regulation of the genes DUSP1 and Sult2a1/2
signals dysregulation of protective liver responses, thus possibly contributing
to male susceptibility of LTbetaR(-/-) mice.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3024.2005.00763.x 
PMID: 16048639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

