
1. Infect Immun. 2005 Oct;73(10):6390-8.

Massive destruction of malaria-parasitized red blood cells despite spleen
closure.

Krücken J(1), Mehnert LI, Dkhil MA, El-Khadragy M, Benten WP, Mossmann H,
Wunderlich F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Parasitology and Centre for Biological and Medical
Research, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.

It is currently accepted that malaria-parasitized red blood cells (pRBC) are
eliminated, like senescent erythrocytes, phagocytically by macrophages in the red
pulp of the spleen. Here, however, we show that self-healing Plasmodium chabaudi 
malaria activates spleen closure in C57BL/6 mice. Confocal laser scanning
microscopy revealed that spleen closing was manifested by elimination of entry
into the red pulp of 3-microm polystyrol particles, pRBC, and nonparasitized red 
blood cells but not of bovine serum albumin. This spleen closure did not reflect 
a reduction in the number of phagocytic cells, as shown by flow cytometry,
whereas marginal zone macrophages (MZM) were lost and red pulp macrophages
entered the white pulp. Splenic trapping of pBRC was strongly reduced in the
absence of MZM and marginal metallophilic macrophages (MMM), as it is in
noninfected mice with a disrupted lymphotoxin beta receptor (LTbetaR(-/-)), and
it was still significantly reduced when the number of MZM and MMM was diminished,
as in tumor necrosis factor alpha-deficient (TNF-alpha(-/-)) mice. Moreover, mice
deficient in TNF-alpha, tumor necrosis factor receptor I (TNFRI(-/-)), and
LTbetaR exhibited progressive impairment in malaria-induced spleen closing.
Treatment of C57BL/6 mice with TNF-alpha induced loss of MZM and spleen closing
by about 20%. Our data indicate that TNF/TNFRI signaling is involved in
regulating malaria-induced spleen closure, which is maximal during crisis, when
parasitemia declines more than 100-fold. Consequently, the vast majority of pRBC 
cannot be destroyed by the spleen during crisis, suggesting that the known
sophisticated sequestration system of Plasmodium parasites did not evolve to
avoid splenic clearance.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.73.10.6390-6398.2005 
PMCID: PMC1230986
PMID: 16177310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

