
1. J Infect Dis. 2006 May 15;193(10):1384-93. Epub 2006 Apr 7.

Suppression of prostaglandin E2 by malaria parasite products and antipyretics
promotes overproduction of tumor necrosis factor-alpha: association with the
pathogenesis of childhood malarial anemia.

Keller CC(1), Davenport GC, Dickman KR, Hittner JB, Kaplan SS, Weinberg JB,
Kremsner PG, Perkins DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, Graduate School of Public 
Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA, and Albert
Schweitzer Hospital, Lambaréné, Gabon.

Cytokines and effector molecules are important immunoregulatory molecules in
human malaria. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha limits malaria parasitemia but
also promotes pathogenesis at high concentrations, whereas prostaglandin E2
(PGE2) inhibits TNF-alpha production and is reduced in childhood malaria, at
least in part, through suppression of cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 following the
ingestion of Plasmodium falciparum hemozoin (pfHz; malarial pigment) by
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Although molecular interactions
between TNF-alpha and PGE2 are largely unexplored in human malaria, results
presented here show that pfHz-induced suppression of PBMC COX-2 gene products
induces overproduction of TNF-alpha. Moreover, addition of exogenous PGE2 to
pfHz-treated PBMCs dose-dependently decreased TNF-alpha production, whereas
experimental COX inhibitors and antipyretics used during human malaria generated 
increased TNF-alpha production. Healthy, malaria-exposed children had elevated
levels of circulating bicyclo-PGE2/TNF-alpha, compared with children with
malarial anemia (P<.01), with systemic bicyclo-PGE2 and TNF-alpha significantly
associated with hemoglobin concentrations (r=0.745; P<.01). The results of the
present study illustrate that pfHz-induced suppression of PGE2 promotes
overproduction of TNF-alpha, which is associated with enhanced malarial anemia.

DOI: 10.1086/503047 
PMID: 16619186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

