
1. Cancer Res. 2006 Jun 15;66(12):6105-10.

c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase/c-Jun signaling promotes survival and metastasis of B
lymphocytes transformed by Theileria.

Lizundia R(1), Chaussepied M, Huerre M, Werling D, Di Santo JP, Langsley G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, DÃ©partement de Maladies Infectieuses, Paris, France.

Theileria parasites infect and transform bovine lymphocytes resulting in tumors
with metastatic/invasive potential. Importantly, cellular transformation is
reversed upon drug-induced parasite death, and the infected lymphocyte dies of
apoptosis within 48 hours. Theileria-dependent transformation leads to the
constitutive activation of c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (both JNK1 and JNK2) and
permanent induction of activator protein-1. Inactivation of JNK (following
transfection of dominant-negative mutants, or treatment with a JNK-specific
inhibitor) leads to lymphocyte apoptosis, suggesting an antiapoptotic role for
JNK activation in Theileria-induced B cell transformation. Theileria-induced JNK 
activation also leads to constitutive c-Jun phosphorylation, and inhibition of
c-Jun and activator protein-1 transactivation following the expression of a
dominant-negative mutant of c-Jun sensitizes Theileria-transformed B cells to
apoptosis, but does not significantly affect their proliferation. Thus, JNK
activation and c-Jun induction have overlapping, but nonidentical antiapoptotic
roles in Theileria-induced B cell transformation. Increased sensitivity to
apoptosis may be related to the fact that the expression levels of antiapoptotic 
proteins such as Mcl-1 and c-IAP are reduced upon c-Jun inhibition. In addition, 
decreased c-Jun expression correlates with the impaired ability of transfected B 
cells to degrade synthetic matrix in vitro, and their injection into lymphoid
mice gives rise to significantly less and smaller tumors. Combined, these data
argue for a role for JNK and c-Jun induction in the survival and metastasis of
Theileria-transformed B cells. The similarity between Theileria-transformed B
cells with human B lymphomas argues that exploiting the reversible nature of
Theileria-induced transformation could throw light on the mechanisms underlying
human malignancies.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-3861 
PMID: 16778183  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

