
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2008 Aug 15;124(3-4):302-12. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2008.04.004. Epub 2008 Apr 16.

Bovine NK cells acquire cytotoxic activity and produce IFN-gamma after
stimulation by Mycobacterium bovis BCG- or Babesia bovis-exposed splenic
dendritic cells.

Bastos RG(1), Johnson WC, Mwangi W, Brown WC, Goff WL.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Disease Research Unit, USDA-ARS, Washington State University, 3003
ADBF, P.O. Box 646630, Pullman, WA 99164-6630, USA.

Early interactions of innate immune cell populations, such as dendritic cells
(DC) and natural killer (NK) cells, can affect the ability of the acquired immune
response to control infection of intracellular microorganisms. In this study, we 
investigated the activation of bovine NK cells by CD13(+) splenic DC stimulated
with either Mycobacterium bovis BCG or Babesia bovis merozoites. Splenic DC were 
used either immediately after selection (cytokine(-)) or after exposure to
GM-CSF, IL-4 and Flt3L for 72 h (cytokine(+)). Phenotypic analyses showed
up-regulation of MHCII, CD80 and CD86 on cytokine(+) DC when compared to
cytokine(-) DC. Purified NK cells (CD335(+)CD3(-)CD2(+/-)CD8alpha(+/-)) were
co-cultured with microbial-exposed cytokine(-) DC or cytokine(+) DC in either
transwell or cell-to-cell format and NK cell IFN-gamma production and
cytotoxicity were assessed. NK cell IFN-gamma production was dependent on
cell-to-cell contact. Microbial-stimulated cytokine(+) DC induced significantly
more IFN-gamma production from NK cells than cytokine(-) cells. In contrast,
cytotoxicity and perforin up-regulation were more pronounced in NK cells cultured
with cytokine(-) DC than cytokine(+) DC. Therefore, activation of bovine NK cells
by microbial-stimulated CD13(+) splenic DC is influenced by the maturation state 
of the DC suggesting different roles for the splenic DC during disease-induced
maturation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2008.04.004 
PMID: 18514329  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

