
1. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Aug 15;18(16):3136-44. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp240. Epub 2009 May
21.

A variant in the gene FUT9 is associated with susceptibility to placental malaria
infection.

Sikora M(1), Ferrer-Admetlla A, Laayouni H, Menendez C, Mayor A, Bardaji A,
Sigauque B, Mandomando I, Alonso PL, Bertranpetit J, Casals F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Biology (UPF-CSIC), CEXS-UPF-PRBB, Barcelona,
Catalonia, Spain.

Malaria in pregnancy forms a substantial part of the worldwide burden of malaria,
with an estimated annual death toll of up to 200 000 infants, as well as
increased maternal morbidity and mortality. Studies of genetic susceptibility to 
malaria have so far focused on infant malaria, with only a few studies
investigating the genetic basis of placental malaria, focusing only on a limited 
number of candidate genes. The aim of this study therefore was to identify novel 
host genetic factors involved in placental malaria infection. To this end we
carried out a nested case-control study on 180 Mozambican pregnant women with
placental malaria infection, and 180 controls within an intervention trial of
malaria prevention. We genotyped 880 SNPs in a set of 64 functionally related
genes involved in glycosylation and innate immunity. A single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) located in the gene FUT9, rs3811070, was significantly
associated with placental malaria infection (odds ratio = 2.31, permutation
P-value=0.028). Haplotypic analysis revealed a similarly strong association of a 
common haplotype of four SNPs including rs3811070. FUT9 codes for a
fucosyl-transferase that is catalyzing the last step in the biosynthesis of the
Lewis-x antigen, which forms part of the Lewis blood group-related antigens.
These results therefore suggest an involvement of this antigen in the
pathogenesis of placental malaria infection.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddp240 
PMID: 19460885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

