
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2009 Sep;9(5):908-11. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2009.06.010. Epub 
2009 Jun 18.

Genetic variation in neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) gene and
susceptibility to cerebral malaria in Indian adults.

Dhangadamajhi G(1), Mohapatra BN, Kar SK, Ranjit M.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Medical Research Centre, Indian Council of Medical Research,
Chandrasekharpur, Bhubaneswar 751023, Orissa, India.

The role of nitric oxide (NO) in the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria is
controversial. Of the three isoforms of nitric oxide synthases (NOS), though iNOS
expression is the major source of NO level in vivo, nNOS is the main isoform
constitutively expressed in the neural tissues. However, there has been no
investigation of the role of polymorphisms of the nNOS gene in the etiology of
cerebral malaria. We have analyzed two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 
nNOS gene (-84G-->A and 276C-->T), responsible for decreased basal
transcriptional activity, in 200 patients with mild Plasmodium falciparum malaria
and 170 patients with cerebral malaria. Our results showed a significant
association of AG genotype (OR=1.83, 95%CI=1.19-2.78, P=0.007) and AA genotype
(OR=3.86, 95%CI=1.42-10.5, P=0.007) of nNOS -84G-->A substitution with cerebral
malaria. Interestingly, when the nNOS variant genotypes were combined together
for analysis, a significantly increased risk of cerebral malaria was associated
with -84(AG+AA)/276(CT+TT) genotype (OR=2.59, 95%CI=1.46-4.60, P=0.0016) and
-84(AG+AA)/276(CC) genotype (OR=1.89, 95%CI=1.08-3.32, P=0.0334). The -84A seems 
to be a putative risk allele on the susceptibility to cerebral malaria and low
nitric oxide production might have contributed to the development of cerebral
malaria.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2009.06.010 
PMID: 19540363  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

