
1. Blood. 2009 Nov 5;114(19):4243-52. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-226415. Epub 2009
Aug 27.

Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes induce NF-kappaB regulated
inflammatory pathways in human cerebral endothelium.

Tripathi AK(1), Sha W, Shulaev V, Stins MF, Sullivan DJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns 
Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Cerebral malaria is a severe multifactorial condition associated with the
interaction of high numbers of infected erythrocytes to human brain endothelium
without invasion into the brain. The result is coma and seizures with death in
more than 20% of cases. Because the brain endothelium is at the interface of
these processes, we investigated the global gene responses of human brain
endothelium after the interaction with Plasmodium falciparum-infected
erythrocytes with either high- or low-binding phenotypes. The most significantly 
up-regulated transcripts were found in gene ontology groups comprising the immune
response, apoptosis and antiapoptosis, inflammatory response, cell-cell
signaling, and signal transduction and nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB)
activation cascade. The proinflammatory NF-kappaB pathway was central to the
regulation of the P falciparum-modulated endothelium transcriptome. The
proinflammatory molecules, for example, CCL20, CXCL1, CXCL2, IL-6, and IL-8, were
increased more than 100-fold, suggesting an important role of blood-brain barrier
(BBB) endothelium in the innate defense during P falciparum-infected erythrocyte 
(Pf-IRBC) sequestration. However, some of these diffusible molecules could have
reversible effects on brain tissue and thus on neurologic function. The
inflammatory pathways were validated by direct measurement of proteins in brain
endothelial supernatants. This study delineates the strong inflammatory component
of human brain endothelium contributing to cerebral malaria.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-226415 
PMCID: PMC2925626
PMID: 19713460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

