
1. Immunology. 2010 Feb;129(2):248-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03177.x. Epub
2009 Sep 9.

Changes in cell migration-related molecules expressed by thymic microenvironment 
during experimental Plasmodium berghei infection: consequences on thymocyte
development.

Gameiro J(1), Nagib PR, Andrade CF, Villa-Verde DM, Silva-Barbosa SD, Savino W,
Costa FT, Verinaud L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Cell Biology and Physiology, Institute of Biology,
State University of Campinas-UNICAMP, Campinas, SÃ£o Paulo, Brazil.

We previously showed alterations in the thymus during experimental infection with
Plasmodium berghei. Such alterations comprised histological changes, with loss of
cortical-medullary limits, and the intrathymic presence of parasites. As the
combination of chemokines, adhesion molecules and extracellular matrix (ECM) is
critical to appropriate thymocyte development, we analysed the thymic expression 
of ECM ligands and receptors, as well as chemokines and their respective
receptors during the experimental P. berghei infection. Increased expression of
ECM components was observed in thymi from infected mice. In contrast,
down-regulated surface expression of fibronectin and laminin receptors was
observed in thymocytes from these animals. Moreover, in thymi from infected mice 
there was increased CXCL12 and CXCR4, and a decreased expression of CCL25 and
CCR9. An altered thymocyte migration towards ECM elements and chemokines was seen
when the thymi from infected mice were analysed. Evaluation of ex vivo migration 
patterns of CD4/CD8-defined thymocyte subpopulations revealed that
double-negative (DN), and CD4(+) and CD8(+) single-positive (SP) cells from P.
berghei-infected mice have higher migratory responses compared with controls.
Interestingly, increased numbers of DN and SP subpopulations were found in the
spleens of infected mice. Overall, we show that the thymic atrophy observed in P.
berghei-infected mice is accompanied by thymic microenvironmental changes that
comprise altered expression of thymocyte migration-related molecules of the ECM
and chemokine protein families, which in turn can alter the thymocyte migration
pattern. These thymic disturbances may have consequences for the control of the
immune response against this protozoan.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03177.x 
PMCID: PMC2814466
PMID: 19824923  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

