
1. Vet Parasitol. 2010 Aug 4;171(3-4):207-15. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2010.03.038.
Epub 2010 Apr 2.

Generation of IFN-gamma-producing cells that recognize the major piroplasm
surface protein in Theileria orientalis-infected bovines.

Yamaguchi T(1), Yamanaka M, Ikehara S, Kida K, Kuboki N, Mizuno D, Yokoyama N,
Narimatsu H, Ikehara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Team of Research Center for Medical Glycoscience, National 
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Central 2, 1-1-1
Umezono, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8568, Japan.

Theileriosis is a tick-borne protozoan disease caused by Theileria species. The
Theileria species are classified into two groups depending on the cell type in
which they proliferate and the clinical symptoms. The first group consists of
lymphoproliferative Theileria species (T. parva and T. annulata), which mainly
proliferate in lymphocytes, causing uncontrolled lymphocyte proliferation. The
other group consists of a nonlymphoproliferative Theileria species (T.
orientalis, also known as T. sergenti) that proliferates in erythrocytes and
causes hemolytic anemia. Based on reports of generation of antigen-specific
CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells in lymphoproliferative theileriosis, we investigated
whether T cells specific to the T. orientalis antigen are present in the
nonlymphoproliferative form of the disease. In this study, we developed a new
assay based on an enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISpot) to detect interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma)- and interleukin-10 (IL-10)-secreting cells in a series of
cryogenically preserved bovine peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). We
first determined that IFN-gamma- and IL-10-secreting T cells were present in
PBMCs by stimulating them with phytohemagglutinin L (PHA-L=red kidney bean lectin
L, known as T cell stimulator), and then determined whether T.
orientalis-specific T cells are present in T. orientalis-infected bovines.
Peptides derived from T. orientalis major piroplasm surface protein (MPSP) were
used as a T. orientalis-specific stimulator in the ELISpot assay, and peptides
from glycoprotein B (gB) of the bovine herpes virus-1 (BHV-1) were used as a
BHV-1-specific stimulator as a control for monitoring the immune response.
Compared with results obtained using the BHV-1 (gB peptides)-specific IFN-gamma
ELISpot assay to assess BHV-1-immunized Holsteins, prominent T. orientalis MPSP
peptide-specific IFN-gamma and IL-10 positive spots were detected in T.
orientalis-infected Holsteins but weak positive responses were exhibited by T.
orientalis-infected Angus and Japanese Black cattle. As far as we are aware, this
is the first report to show direct evidence of the presence of T.
orientalis-specific T cells in T. orientalis-infected bovines using an
antigen-specific ELISpot assay system and that T. orientalis-specific, IFN-gamma-
and IL-10-producing T cells are produced in T. orientalis-infected Holsteins.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2010.03.038 
PMID: 20418019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

