
1. J Infect Dis. 2010 Jul 1;202(1):117-24. doi: 10.1086/653125.

Age-related susceptibility to severe malaria associated with galectin-2 in
highland Papuans.

Randall LM(1), Kenangalem E, Lampah DA, Tjitra E, Mwaikambo ED, Handojo T, Piera 
KA, Zhao ZZ, de Labastida Rivera F, Zhou Y, McSweeney KM, Le L, Amante FH, Haque 
A, Stanley AC, Woodberry T, Salwati E, Granger DL, Hobbs MR, Price RN, Weinberg
JB, Montgomery GW, Anstey NM, Engwerda CR.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Institute of Medical Research and Australian Centre for Vaccine
Development, and The University of Queensland, School of Population Health,
Herston, Queensland, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Age and host genetics are important determinants of malaria severity.
Lymphotoxin-alpha (LTalpha) has been associated with the development of cerebral 
malaria (CM) and other severe malaria (SM) syndromes. Mutations in genes
regulating LTalpha production contribute to other acute vascular diseases and may
contribute to malaria pathogenesis.
METHODS: We tested the association between rs7291467, a single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) in the LTalpha-related gene encoding galectin-2 (LGALS2),
disease severity, and function in a case-control study of ethnic Highland Papuan 
adults and children with SM (n = 380) and asymptomatic malaria-exposed controls
(n = 356) originating from a non-malaria-endemic region but residing in a lowland
malaria-endemic area of Papua, Indonesia.
RESULTS: The LGALS2 SNP showed a significant association with susceptibility to
SM (including CM), in children (odds ratio, 2.02 [95% confidence interval,
1.14-3.57]) but not in adults. In SM, the C allele at rs7291467 was associated
with enhanced galectin-2 transcript levels. In a separate group of Tanzanian
children originating from a malaria-endemic region, we found preservation of the 
major ancestral LGALS2 allele and no association with susceptibility to CM.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest differences in the inflammatory contribution to the 
development of SM between children and adults in the same population and
potential differences between individuals originating from malaria-endemic and
non-malaria-endemic areas.

DOI: 10.1086/653125 
PMCID: PMC2880661
PMID: 20500087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

