
1. Glia. 2010 Aug;58(10):1220-7. doi: 10.1002/glia.21002.

In vivo expression of neuroglobin in reactive astrocytes during neuropathology in
murine models of traumatic brain injury, cerebral malaria, and autoimmune
encephalitis.

DellaValle B(1), Hempel C, Kurtzhals JA, Penkowa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, Section of Neuroprotection, Panum
Institute, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. briandellavalle@gmail.com

Neuroglobin (Ngb) is proposed to be a neuron-specific, hypoxia-responsive,
neuroprotective protein. However, results are conflicting concerning both Ngb's
physiological and pathological significance. This study was designed to
investigate the in vivo localization and regulation of Ngb in different
neuropathological models representing traumatic injury, infectious, autoimmune,
and excitotoxic pathogeneses. We profiled Ngb immunohistochemistry in murine
models of traumatic brain injury, cerebral malaria, experimental autoimmune
encephalitis, and kainic acid (KA)-mediated epileptic seizures that, to our
knowledge, have not been studied in the context of Ngb. In control mice Ngb was
expressed exclusively in neurons. In all pathological models except KA, in
addition to neurons Ngb was present in reactive astrocytes. Ngb positive
astrocytes were found within regions associated with most severe pathology and
the astroglial scar. This is the first report of Ngb present in reactive
astroglia and in scar-forming astrocytes in response to different pathological
conditions relevant to human disease. In light of previously reported
cyto-protective properties of Ngb, further insight may result in therapeutic
ramifications.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/glia.21002 
PMID: 20544857  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

