
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2010 Nov;174(1):8-17. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2010.06.005. Epub 2010 Jun 9.

A schizont-derived protein, TpSCOP, is involved in the activation of NF-kappaB in
Theileria parva-infected lymphocytes.

Hayashida K(1), Hattori M, Nakao R, Tanaka Y, Kim JY, Inoue N, Nene V, Sugimoto
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Education and Collaboration, Research Center for Zoonosis
Control, Hokkaido University, Kita-20, Nishi-10, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido
001-0020, Japan.

Theileria parva is a tick-transmitted intracellular protozoan parasite that
causes East Coast fever, a fatal bovine lymphoproliferative disease. The
molecular mechanisms that underlie host cell transformation by T. parva schizonts
have been studied extensively, and it is known that the nuclear factor-kappa B
(NF-kappaB) is activated in schizont-infected cells, making T. parva-transformed 
cells resistant to apoptosis. However, the mechanism by which the parasite
triggers the activation of NF-kappaB remains enigmatic. In the present study, we 
biochemically characterized a novel protein, which we termed TpSCOP (T.
parvaschizont-derived cytoskeleton-binding protein), which is expressed in the
schizont stage of T. parva. TpSCOP was shown to interact with F-actin in vitro.
Expression of TpSCOP in a murine lymphocytic cell line resulted in the activation
of NF-kappaB signaling pathways, leading to apoptosis resistance. The activation 
of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), including extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), was also
detected. Furthermore, the introduction of TpSCOP into T. parva-infected cells
also enhanced the activation of NF-kappaB. This is the first report to
demonstrate that a parasite-derived molecule has the ability to activate the host
NF-kappaB pathway. Based on these results, TpSCOP likely plays an important role 
in apoptosis inhibition during Theileria infection.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2010.06.005 
PMID: 20540970  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

