
1. Blood. 2010 Nov 18;116(20):4328-37. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-03-272781. Epub 2010 
Aug 4.

Inhibition of erythropoiesis in malaria anemia: role of hemozoin and
hemozoin-generated 4-hydroxynonenal.

Skorokhod OA(1), Caione L, Marrocco T, Migliardi G, Barrera V, Arese P,
Piacibello W, Schwarzer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Biology, and Biochemistry, Laboratory of Cell Therapy,
University of Torino Medical School, Torino, Italy.

Severe malaria anemia is characterized by inhibited/altered erythropoiesis and
presence of hemozoin-(HZ)-laden bone-marrow macrophages. HZ mediates peroxidation
of unsaturated fatty acids and production of bioactive aldehydes such as
4-hydroxynonenal (HNE). HZ-laden human monocytes inhibited growth of cocultivated
human erythroid cells and produced HNE that diffused to adjacent cells generating
HNE-protein adducts. Cocultivation with HZ or treatment with low micromolar HNE
inhibited growth of erythroid cells interfering with cell cycle without
apoptosis. After HZ/HNE treatment, 2 critical proteins in cell-cycle regulation, 
p53 and p21, were increased and the retinoblastoma protein, central regulator of 
G‚ÇÅ-to-S-phase transition, was consequently hypophosphorylated, while GATA-1,
master transcription factor in erythropoiesis was reduced. The resultant
decreased expression of cyclin A and D2 retarded cell-cycle progression in
erythroid cells and the K562 cell line. As a second major effect, HZ and HNE
inhibited protein expression of crucial receptors (R): transferrinR1, stem cell
factorR, interleukin-3R, and erythropoietinR. The reduced receptor expression and
the impaired cell-cycle activity decreased the production of cells expressing
glycophorin-A and hemoglobin. Present data confirm the inhibitory role of HZ,
identify HNE as one HZ-generated inhibitory molecule and describe molecular
targets of HNE in erythroid progenitors possibly involved in erythropoiesis
inhibition in malaria anemia.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-03-272781 
PMID: 20686121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

