
1. J Immunol. 2010 Sep 15;185(6):3158-66. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902867. Epub 2010
Aug 13.

A complementary role for the tetraspanins CD37 and Tssc6 in cellular immunity.

Gartlan KH(1), Belz GT, Tarrant JM, Minigo G, Katsara M, Sheng KC, Sofi M, van
Spriel AB, Apostolopoulos V, Plebanski M, Robb L, Wright MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The cooperative nature of tetraspanin-tetraspanin interactions in membrane
organization suggests functional overlap is likely to be important in tetraspanin
biology. Previous functional studies of the tetraspanins CD37 and Tssc6 in the
immune system found that both CD37 and Tssc6 regulate T cell proliferative
responses in vitro. CD37(-/-) mice also displayed a hyper-stimulatory dendritic
cell phenotype and dysregulated humoral responses. In this study, we characterize
"double knockout" mice (CD37(-/-)Tssc6(-/-)) generated to investigate functional 
overlap between these tetraspanins. Strong evidence for a cooperative role for
these two proteins was identified in cellular immunity, where both in vitro T
cell proliferative responses and dendritic cell stimulation capacity are
significantly exaggerated in CD37(-/-)Tssc6(-/-) mice when compared with single
knockout counterparts. Despite these exaggerated cellular responses in vitro,
CD37(-/-)Tssc6(-/-) mice are not more susceptible to autoimmune induction.
However, in vivo responses to pathogens appear poor in CD37(-/-)Tssc6(-/-) mice, 
which showed a reduced ability to produce influenza-specific T cells and
displayed a rapid onset hyper-parasitemia when infected with Plasmodium yoelii.
Therefore, in the absence of both CD37 and Tssc6, immune function is further
altered when compared with CD37(-/-) or Tssc6(-/-) mice, demonstrating a
complementary role for these two molecules in cellular immunity.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902867 
PMID: 20709950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

