
1. Proteomics. 2010 Oct;10(19):3469-79. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201000269.

Analysis of changes in tyrosine and serine phosphorylation of red cell membrane
proteins induced by P. falciparum growth.

Pantaleo A(1), Ferru E, Carta F, Mannu F, Giribaldi G, Vono R, Lepedda AJ, Pippia
P, Turrini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Biology and Biochemistry, University of Turin, Turin, 
Italy. antonella.pantaleo@unito.it

Phosphorylation of erythrocyte membrane proteins has been previously documented
following infection and intracellular growth of the malarial parasite, Plasmodium
falciparum in red cells. Much of this data dealt with phosphorylation of serine
residues. In this study, we report detailed characterization of phosphorylation
of serine and tyrosine residues of red cell membrane proteins following infection
by P falciparum. Western blot analysis using anti-phosphotyrosine and
anti-phosphoserine antibodies following 2-DE in conjunction with double channel
laser-induced infrared fluorescence enabled accurate assessment of
phosphorylation changes. Tyrosine phosphorylation of band 3 represented the
earliest modification observed during parasite development. Band 3 tyrosine
phosphorylation observed at the ring stage appears to be under the control of Syk
kinase. Serine and tyrosine phosphorylation of additional cytoskeletal,
trans-membrane and membrane associated proteins was documented as intracellular
development of parasite progressed. Importantly, during late schizont stage of
parasite maturation, we observed widespread protein dephosphorylation. In vitro
treatments that caused distinct activation of red cell tyrosine and serine
kinases elicited phosphorylative patterns similar to what observed in parasitized
red blood cell, suggesting primary involvement of erythrocyte kinases.
Identification of tyrosine phosphorylations of band 3, band 4.2, catalase and
actin which have not been previously described in P. falciparum infected red
cells suggests new potential regulatory mechanisms that could modify the
functions of the host cell membrane.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201000269 
PMID: 20799346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

