
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2011 Apr;10(4):M110.001750. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M110.001750.
Epub 2010 Dec 13.

Large scale phosphoproteome profiles comprehensive features of mouse embryonic
stem cells.

Li QR(1), Xing XB, Chen TT, Li RX, Dai J, Sheng QH, Xin SM, Zhu LL, Jin Y, Pei G,
Kang JH, Li YX, Zeng R.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Systems Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200031, China.

Embryonic stem cells are pluripotent and capable of unlimited self-renewal.
Elucidation of the underlying molecular mechanism may contribute to the
advancement of cell-based regenerative medicine. In the present work, we
performed a large scale analysis of the phosphoproteome in mouse embryonic stem
(mES) cells. Using multiplex strategies, we detected 4581 proteins and 3970 high 
confidence distinct phosphosites in 1642 phosphoproteins. Notably, 22 prominent
phosphorylated stem cell marker proteins with 39 novel phosphosites were
identified for the first time by mass spectrometry, including phosphorylation
sites in NANOG (Ser-65) and RE1 silencing transcription factor (Ser-950 and
Thr-953). Quantitative profiles of NANOG peptides obtained during the
differentiation of mES cells revealed that the abundance of phosphopeptides and
non-phosphopeptides decreased with different trends. To our knowledge, this study
presents the largest global characterization of phosphorylation in mES cells.
Compared with a study of ultimately differentiated tissue cells, a bioinformatics
analysis of the phosphorylation data set revealed a consistent phosphorylation
motif in human and mouse ES cells. Moreover, investigations into phosphorylation 
conservation suggested that phosphoproteins were more conserved in the
undifferentiated ES cell state than in the ultimately differentiated tissue cell 
state. However, the opposite conclusion was drawn from this conservation
comparison with phosphosites. Overall, this work provides an overview of
phosphorylation in mES cells and is a valuable resource for the future
understanding of basic biology in mES cells.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M110.001750 
PMCID: PMC3069338
PMID: 21149613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

