
1. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 15;186(2):856-68. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002195. Epub 2010
Dec 13.

Alloimmune response results in expansion of autoreactive donor CD4+ T cells in
transplants that can mediate chronic graft-versus-host disease.

Zhao D(1), Young JS, Chen YH, Shen E, Yi T, Todorov I, Chu PG, Forman SJ, Zeng D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes Research, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope
National Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

Chronic graft-versus-host disease (cGVHD) is considered an autoimmune-like
disease mediated by donor CD4(+) T cells, but the origin of the autoreactive T
cells is still controversial. In this article, we report that the transplantation
of DBA/2 donor spleen cells into thymectomized MHC-matched allogeneic BALB/c
recipients induced autoimmune-like cGVHD, although not in control syngeneic DBA/2
recipients. The donor-type CD4(+) T cells from the former but not the latter
recipients induced autoimmune-like manifestations in secondary allogeneic BALB/c 
as well as syngeneic DBA/2 recipients. Transfer of donor-type CD4(+) T cells from
secondary DBA/2 recipients with disease into syngeneic donor-type or allogeneic
host-type tertiary recipients propagated autoimmune-like manifestations in both. 
Furthermore, TCR spectratyping revealed that the clonal expansion of the
autoreactive CD4(+) T cells in cGVHD recipients was initiated by an alloimmune
response. Finally, hybridoma CD4(+) T clones derived from DBA/2 recipients with
disease proliferated similarly in response to stimulation by syngeneic donor-type
or allogeneic host-type dendritic cells. These results demonstrate that the
autoimmune-like manifestations in cGVHD can be mediated by a population of donor 
CD4(+) T cells in transplants that simultaneously recognize Ags presented by both
donor and host APCs.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002195 
PMCID: PMC3891909
PMID: 21149609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

