
1. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 25;6(2):e17440. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017440.

Combinations of host biomarkers predict mortality among Ugandan children with
severe malaria: a retrospective case-control study.

Erdman LK(1), Dhabangi A, Musoke C, Conroy AL, Hawkes M, Higgins S, Rajwans N,
Wolofsky KT, Streiner DL, Liles WC, Cserti-Gazdewich CM, Kain KC.

Author information: 
(1)SA Rotman Laboratories, McLaughlin-Rotman Centre for Global Health, Toronto
General Hospital-University Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Severe malaria is a leading cause of childhood mortality in Africa.
However, at presentation, it is difficult to predict which children with severe
malaria are at greatest risk of death. Dysregulated host inflammatory responses
and endothelial activation play central roles in severe malaria pathogenesis. We 
hypothesized that biomarkers of these processes would accurately predict outcome 
among children with severe malaria.
METHODOLOGY/FINDINGS: Plasma was obtained from children with uncomplicated
malaria (n = 53), cerebral malaria (n = 44) and severe malarial anemia (n = 59)
at time of presentation to hospital in Kampala, Uganda. Levels of angiopoietin-2,
von Willebrand Factor (vWF), vWF propeptide, soluble P-selectin, soluble
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), soluble endoglin, soluble FMS-like
tyrosine kinase-1 (Flt-1), soluble Tie-2, C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, 10
kDa interferon gamma-induced protein (IP-10), and soluble triggering receptor
expressed on myeloid cells-1 (TREM-1) were determined by ELISA. Receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was used to assess predictive
accuracy of individual biomarkers. Six biomarkers (angiopoietin-2, soluble
ICAM-1, soluble Flt-1, procalcitonin, IP-10, soluble TREM-1) discriminated well
between children who survived severe malaria infection and those who subsequently
died (area under ROC curve>0.7). Combinational approaches were applied in an
attempt to improve accuracy. A biomarker score was developed based on
dichotomization and summation of the six biomarkers, resulting in 95.7% (95% CI: 
78.1-99.9) sensitivity and 88.8% (79.7-94.7) specificity for predicting death.
Similar predictive accuracy was achieved with models comprised of 3 biomarkers.
Classification tree analysis generated a 3-marker model with 100% sensitivity and
92.5% specificity (cross-validated misclassification rate: 15.4%, standard error 
4.9%).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified novel host biomarkers of pediatric severe and fatal
malaria (soluble TREM-1 and soluble Flt-1) and generated simple biomarker
combinations that accurately predicted death in an African pediatric population. 
While requiring validation in further studies, these results suggest the utility 
of combinatorial biomarker strategies as prognostic tests for severe malaria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017440 
PMCID: PMC3045453
PMID: 21364762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

