
1. Curr Opin Hematol. 2011 May;18(3):177-85. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e328345a4cf.

Endothelial activation and dysregulation in malaria: a potential target for novel
therapeutics.

Kim H(1), Higgins S, Liles WC, Kain KC.

Author information: 
(1)Sandra A. Rotman Laboratories, McLaughlin-Rotman Centre for Global Health,
University Health Network-Toronto General Hospital, University of Toronto,
Canada.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Despite parenteral artesunate therapy, the fatality rate of
cerebral malaria remains high. Adjunctive therapy targeting the underlying
pathophysiology of cerebral malaria may further improve the clinical outcome.
Endothelial activation and dysfunction is a central process in the pathogenesis
of cerebral malaria. An improved understanding of how endothelium is perturbed in
cerebral malaria may yield novel strategies to diagnose and intervene. Here, we
discuss recent findings on the key molecular mediators of endothelial
activation/dysregulation in cerebral malaria, and innovative endothelial-based
experimental approaches to improve detection and treatment.
RECENT FINDINGS: Biomarkers of endothelial activation [e.g., angiopoietin
(Ang)-1, Ang-2, and a soluble form of the Ang-receptor (soluble Tie-2)] have been
shown to be reliable predictors of malarial disease severity and mortality, and
may improve clinical triage and management. Moreover, they may represent novel
therapeutic targets to improve clinical outcome. Restoring bioavailable nitric
oxide by administration of inhaled nitric oxide or its substrate, L-arginine, may
rescue endothelial function, decrease Ang-2, and improve disease outcome in
cerebral malaria.
SUMMARY: Interventions targeting the Ang-Tie-2 axis to promote endothelial
quiescence, including agents to improve endothelial nitric oxide, represent
potential adjunctive therapies for cerebral malaria.

DOI: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e328345a4cf 
PMID: 21423010  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

