
1. Vet Parasitol. 2011 Aug 25;180(3-4):209-14. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2011.03.011.
Epub 2011 Mar 17.

Alterations of erythrocyte antioxidant mechanisms: antioxidant enzymes, lipid
peroxidation and serum trace elements associated with anemia in bovine tropical
theileriosis.

Razavi SM(1), Nazifi S, Bateni M, Rakhshandehroo E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, Shiraz University, 
Shiraz, Iran. mrazavi@shirazu.ac.ir

In order to investigate the alterations of erythrocyte protective antioxidant
mechanisms, lipid peroxidation and trace elements associated with anemia in
bovine tropical theileriosis, an infected group comprised of 50 crossbred
Holstein cattle, about 1-2 years old, naturally infected with Theileria annulata,
were divided into 4 subgroups according to their parasitemia rates (<1%, 1-3%,
3-5%, >5%) and also 10 healthy cattle as control were selected. Blood samples
were taken and hematological parameters, the activities of antioxidant enzymes
including superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GPX) and catalase
and serum concentrations of some antioxidant trace elements (copper, iron, zinc, 
manganese and selenium) were measured. As an index of lipid peroxidation, the
level of Malondialdehyde (MDA) was also determined. The results showed a
conspicuous decrease in the activities of SOD, GPX and catalase (P<0.01), and a
significant decrease in the serum concentrations of Cu, Zn, Mn and Se in cattle
with higher than 1% parasitemia (P<0.05) compared to the control. In addition,
remarkable elevations in the MDA level (P<0.01) and serum concentration of iron
(P<0.05) were observed in the infected animals. These findings pointed to the
occurrence of exacerbating oxidative injuries to erythrocytes during parasitemia.
Furthermore, it can be concluded that infection with T. annulata can interfere
with protective antioxidant mechanisms of RBCs against oxidative damages, which
promote the development of anemia.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2011.03.011 
PMID: 21481533  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

