
1. Malar J. 2011 Jun 9;10:160. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-160.

Reduced cardiac output in imported Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Herr J(1), Mehrfar P, Schmiedel S, Wichmann D, Brattig NW, Burchard GD, Cramer
JP.

Author information: 
(1)University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Section Tropical Medicine,
Bernhard-Nocht-Strasse 74, 20359 Hamburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Volume substitution remains subject of controversy in the light of
effusions and oedema potentially complicating this highly febrile disease.
Understanding the role of myocardial and circulatory function appears to be
essential for clinical management. In the present study, cardiac function and
cardiac proteins have been assessed and correlated with parasitological and
immunologic parameters in patients with imported Plasmodium falciparum malaria.
METHODS: In a prospective case-control study, 28 patients with uncomplicated and 
complicated P. falciparum malaria were included and findings were compared with
26 healthy controls. Cardiac function parameters were assessed by an innovative
non-invasive method based on the re-breathing technique. In addition, cardiac
enzymes and pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines were measured and assessed with 
respect to clinical symptoms and conditions of malaria.
RESULTS: Cardiac index (CI) as a measurement of cardiac output (CO) was 21% lower
in malaria patients than in healthy controls (2.7 l/min/m2 versus 3.4 l/min/m2; P
< 0.001). In contrast, systemic vascular resistance index (SVRI) was increased by
29% (32.6 mmHg⋅m2/(l/min) versus 23.2 mmHg⋅m2/(l/min); P < 0.001). This
correlated with increased cardiac proteins in patients versus controls: pro-BNP
139.3 pg/ml versus 60.4 pg/ml (P = 0.03), myoglobin 43.6 μg/l versus 27.8 μg/l (P
= < 0.001). All measured cytokines were significantly increased in patients with 
malaria. CI, SVRI as well as cytokine levels did not correlate with blood
parasite density.
CONCLUSIONS: The results support previous reports suggesting impaired cardiac
function contributing to clinical manifestations in P. falciparum malaria.
Findings may be relevant for fluid management and should be further explored in
endemic regions.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-160 
PMCID: PMC3130699
PMID: 21658247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

