
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 Sep;87(18):7339-43.

Growth of Plasmodium falciparum in human erythrocytes containing abnormal
membrane proteins.

Schulman S(1), Roth EF Jr, Cheng B, Rybicki AC, Sussman II, Wong M, Wang W,
Ranney HM, Nagel RL, Schwartz RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY.

To evaluate the role of erythrocyte (RBC) membrane proteins in the invasion and
maturation of Plasmodium falciparum, we have studied, in culture, abnormal RBCs
containing quantitative or qualitative membrane protein defects. These defects
included hereditary spherocytosis (HS) due to decreases in the content of
spectrin [HS(Sp+)], hereditary elliptocytosis (HE) due to protein 4.1 deficiency 
[HE(4.1(0))], HE due to a spectrin alpha I domain structural variant that results
in increased content of spectrin dimers [HE(Sp alpha I/65)], and band 3
structural variants. Parasite invasion, measured by the initial uptake of
[3H]hypoxanthine 18 hr after inoculation with merozoites, was normal in all of
the pathologic RBCs. In contrast, RBCs from six HS(Sp+) subjects showed marked
growth inhibition that became apparent after the first or second growth cycle.
Preincubation of HS(Sp+) RBCs in culture for 3 days did not alter these results. 
Normal parasite growth was observed in RBCs from one HS subject with normal
membrane spectrin content. The extent of decreased parasite growth in HS(Sp+)
RBCs closely correlated with the extent of RBC spectrin deficiency (r = 0.90).
Homogeneous subpopulations of dense HS RBCs exhibited decreased parasite growth
to the same extent as did HS whole blood. RBCs from four HE subjects showed
marked parasite growth inhibition, the extent of which correlated with the
content of spectrin dimers (r = 0.94). RBCs from two unrelated subjects with
structural variants of band 3 sustained normal parasite growth. Decreased growth 
in the pathologic RBCs was not the result of decreased ATP or glutathione levels 
or of increased RBC hemolysis. We conclude that abnormal parasite growth in these
RBCs is not the consequence of metabolic or secondary defects. Instead, we
suggest that a functionally and structurally normal host membrane is
indispensable for parasite growth and development.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.87.18.7339 
PMCID: PMC54739
PMID: 2205856  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

