
1. J Proteomics. 2012 Jun 6;75(10):3063-80. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2011.10.018. Epub
2011 Nov 7.

Serum proteome analysis of vivax malaria: An insight into the disease
pathogenesis and host immune response.

Ray S(1), Kamath KS, Srivastava R, Raghu D, Gollapalli K, Jain R, Gupta SV, Ray
S, Taur S, Dhali S, Gogtay N, Thatte U, Srikanth R, Patankar S, Srivastava S.

Author information: 
(1)Wadhwani Research Center for Biosciences and Bioengineering, Department of
Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Powai,
Mumbai 400076, India.

Vivax malaria is the most widely distributed human malaria resulting in 80-300
million clinical cases every year. It causes severe infection and mortality but
is generally regarded as a benign disease and has not been investigated in
detail. The present study aimed to perform human serum proteome analysis in a
malaria endemic area in India to identify potential serum biomarkers for vivax
malaria and understand host response. The proteomic analysis was performed on 16 
age and gender matched subjects (vivax patients and control) in duplicate.
Protein extraction protocols were optimized for large coverage of the serum
proteome and to obtain high-resolution data. Identification of 67 differentially 
expressed and statistically significant (Student's t-test; p<0.05) protein spots 
was established by MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry. Many of the identified
proteins such as apolipoprotein A and E, serum amyloid A and P, haptoglobin,
ceruloplasmin, and hemopexin are interesting from a diagnostic point of view and 
could further be studied as potential serum biomarkers. The differentially
expressed serum proteins in vivax malaria identified in this study were subjected
to functional pathway analysis using multiple software, including Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis (IPA), Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships
(PANTHER) and Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery
(DAVID) functional annotation tool for better understanding of the biological
context of the identified proteins, their involvement in various physiological
pathways and association with disease pathogenesis. Functional pathway analysis
of the differentially expressed proteins suggested the modulation of multiple
vital physiological pathways, including acute phase response signaling,
complement and coagulation cascades, hemostasis and vitamin D metabolism pathway 
due to this parasitic infection. This article is part of a Special Issue
entitled: Proteomics: The clinical link.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2011.10.018 
PMID: 22086083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

