
1. Malar J. 2012 Feb 3;11:33. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-33.

Cytoadherence and virulence - the case of Plasmodium knowlesi malaria.

Fatih FA(1), Siner A, Ahmed A, Woon LC, Craig AG, Singh B, Krishna S, Cox-Singh
J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infection and Immunity, St George's University of London, London
SW17 0RE, UK.

BACKGROUND: Cytoadherence of infected red blood cells to brain endothelium is
causally implicated in malarial coma, one of the severe manifestations of
falciparum malaria. Cytoadherence is mediated by specific binding of variant
parasite antigens, expressed on the surface of infected erythrocytes, to
endothelial receptors including, ICAM-1, VCAM and CD36. In fatal cases of severe 
falciparum malaria with coma, blood vessels in the brain are characteristically
congested with infected erythrocytes. Brain sections from a fatal case of
knowlesi malaria, but without coma, were similarly congested with infected
erythrocytes. The objective of this study was to determine the binding phenotype 
of Plasmodium knowlesi infected human erythrocytes to recombinant human ICAM-1,
VCAM and CD36.
METHODS: Five patients with PCR-confirmed P. knowlesi malaria were recruited into
the study with consent between April and August 2010. Pre-treatment venous blood 
was washed and cultured ex vivo to increase the proportion of schizont-infected
erythrocytes. Cultured blood was seeded into Petri dishes with triplicate areas
coated with ICAM-1, VCAM and CD36. Following incubation at 37°C for one hour the 
dishes were washed and the number of infected erythrocytes bound/mm2 to PBS
control areas and to recombinant human ICAM-1 VCAM and CD36 coated areas were
recorded. Each assay was performed in duplicate. Assay performance was monitored 
with the Plasmodium falciparum clone HB3.
RESULTS: Blood samples were cultured ex vivo for up to 14.5 h (mean 11.3 ± 1.9 h)
to increase the relative proportion of mature trophozoite and schizont-infected
red blood cells to at least 50% (mean 65.8 ± 17.51%). Three (60%) isolates bound 
significantly to ICAM-1 and VCAM, one (20%) isolate bound to VCAM and none of the
five bound significantly to CD36.
CONCLUSIONS: Plasmodium knowlesi infected erythrocytes from human subjects bind
in a specific but variable manner to the inducible endothelial receptors ICAM-1
and VCAM. Binding to the constitutively-expressed endothelial receptor CD36 was
not detected. Further work will be required to define the pathological
consequences of these interactions.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-33 
PMCID: PMC3330018
PMID: 22305466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

