
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e39858. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039858. Epub 2012 Jul 20.

Bacteria and protozoa differentially modulate the expression of Rab proteins.

Seixas E(1), Ramalho JS, Mota LJ, Barral DC, Seabra MC.

Author information: 
(1)CEDOC, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas (FCM), Universidade Nova de Lisboa,
Lisboa, Portugal.

Phagocytic cells represent an important line of innate defense against
microorganisms. Uptake of microorganisms by these cells involves the formation of
a phagosome that matures by fusing with endocytic compartments, resulting in
killing of the enclosed microbe. Small GTPases of the Rab family are key
regulators of vesicular trafficking in the endocytic pathway. Intracellular
pathogens can interfere with the function of these proteins in order to subvert
host immune responses. However, it is unknown if this subversion can be achieved 
through the modulation of Rab gene expression. We compared the expression level
of 23 distinct Rab GTPases in mouse macrophages after infection with the
protozoan Plasmodium berghei, and the bacteria Escherichia coli and Salmonella
enterica. We found that P. berghei induces an increase in the expression of a
different set of Rab genes than E. coli and S. enterica, which behaved similarly.
Strikingly, when one of the Rab proteins whose expression was increased by P.
berghei, namely Rab14, was silenced, we observed a significant increase in the
phagocytosis of P. berghei, whereas Rab14 overexpression led to a decrease in
phagocytosis. This suggests that the parasite might induce the increase of Rab14 
expression for its own advantage. Similarly, when Rab9a, whose expression was
increased by E. coli and S. enterica, was silenced, we observed an increase in
the phagocytosis of both bacterial species, whereas Rab9a overexpression caused a
reduction in phagocytosis. This further suggests that the modulation of Rab gene 
expression could represent a mechanism of immune evasion. Thus, our study
analyzes the modulation of Rab gene expression induced by bacteria and protozoa
and suggests that this modulation could be necessary for the success of microbial
infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039858 
PMCID: PMC3401185
PMID: 22911692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

