
1. Vet Parasitol. 2013 Feb 18;192(1-3):137-42. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2012.09.036.
Epub 2012 Oct 4.

Serum proteinogram, acute phase proteins and immunoglobulins in dogs
experimentally infected with Rangelia vitalii.

Paim FC(1), Da Silva AS, Paim CB, França RT, Costa MM, Duarte MM, da Silva CB,
Mazzanti CM, Monteiro SG, Lopes ST.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Clinical Analysis - LACVet, Universidade Federal de
Santa Maria, 97105-900 Santa Maria, RS, Brazil. franchimelo@gmail.com

The present study aimed to evaluate the serum proteinogram, acute phase proteins 
(APPs) and immunoglobulins (Igs) of dogs experimentally infected by Rangelia
vitalii in the acute phases of the disease. Banked serum samples collected on
days 0, 10 and 20 during a previously reported R. vitalii experimental infection 
were used to analyze the serum proteinogram, APPs (C-reactive protein - CRP and
alpha-1-acid glycoprotein - AGP) and Igs (IgM, IgG, IgA and IgE) in the current
study. Total protein and albumin level were significantly (P<0.05) decreased at
day 10 PI and 20 PI in infected sera compared to the control sera. Alpha-1
globulin (day 10 PI) and gamma globulin (day 20 PI) were increased (P<0.01) in
infected sera. Alpha-2 globulin (days 10 and 20 PI) and beta-2 globulin (day 10
PI) were decreased (P<0.05) in infected sera compared to control sera. Beta-1
globulin fraction did not differ statistically between sera. Serum CRP and AGP
concentrations were significantly increased (P<0.05) at days 10 and 20 PI in
infected sera. IgG was increased at days 10 (P<0.05) and 20 PI (P<0.01) in
infected sera. Furthermore, it was also observed an increase (P<0.01) in the
levels of IgM, IgA, and IgE in infected sera than control sera. We conclude that 
R. vitalii infection causes alterations in the proteinogram, and increases in the
levels of APPs and Igs. Further studies are essentials to define the causes of
these pathological changes in this disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2012.09.036 
PMID: 23116898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

