
1. Infect Immun. 2013 Apr;81(4):1287-94. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01175-12. Epub 2013 Feb 4.

Promoter polymorphisms in the ATP binding cassette transporter gene influence
production of cell-derived microparticles and are highly associated with
susceptibility to severe malaria in humans.

Sahu U(1), Mohapatra BN, Kar SK, Ranjit M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Regional Medical Research Centre, Bhubaneswar, 
Orissa, India.

Microparticle (MP) efflux is known to be mediated by the ABCA1 protein, and the
plasma level of these cell-derived MPs is elevated considerably during human
malarial infection. Therefore, two polymorphisms at positions -477 and -320 in
the promoter of the ABCA1 gene were genotyped and tested for association with the
plasma MP level in four groups of malaria patients segregated according to the
clinical severity, i.e., cerebral malaria (CM), multiorgan dysfunction (MOD),
noncerebral severe malaria, and uncomplicated malaria (UM). The TruCount
tube-based flow cytometric method was used for the exact quantification of
different cell-derived MPs in patients. Polymorphisms in the ABCA1 gene promoter 
were analyzed by use of the PCR/two-primer-pair method, followed by restriction
fragment length polymorphism, in 428 malaria patients. The level of circulating
plasma MPs was significantly higher in febrile patients with Plasmodium
falciparum infection, especially in CM patients compared to healthy individuals. 
The homozygous wild-type -477 and -320 genotype was observed to be significantly 
higher in patients with severe malaria. These patients also showed marked
increases in the plasma MP numbers compared to UM patients. We report here for
the first time an association of ABCA1 promoter polymorphisms with susceptibility
to severe malaria, especially to CM and MOD, indicating the protective effect of 
the mutant variant of the polymorphism. We hypothesize that the -477T and -320G
polymorphisms affect the downregulation of MP efflux and may be a predictor of
organ complication during P. falciparum malarial infections.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01175-12 
PMCID: PMC3639614
PMID: 23381994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

