
1. Ticks Tick Borne Dis. 2013 Jun;4(4):346-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2013.01.002.
Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Hepatic oxidative stress in Mongolian gerbils experimentally infected with
Babesia divergens.

Dkhil MA(1), Abdel-Baki AS, Al-Quraishy S, Abdel-Moneim AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia. mohameddkhil@yahoo.com

The present study aimed to investigate oxidative stress, DNA damage, and
histopathological alterations in hepatic tissues of Mongolian gerbils
experimentally infected with Babesia divergens. It was found that parasitaemia
reached approximately 77% at day 5 post-infection. The liver became dark-brown
and extremely friable, and hepatic sinusoids were dilated and contained
macrophages and parasite-containing erythrocytes. Infection also induced
inflammation and injury of the liver. This was illustrated by (1) an increase in 
inflammatory cellular infiltrations, (2) a decrease in total antioxidant
capacity, as indicated by lowered glutathione and catalase levels, (3) increased 
production of nitric oxide-derived products (nitrite/nitrate) and
malondialdehyde, and (4) increased lactic acid dehydrogenase activity and protein
carbonyl content in the liver. Infection also interfered with the normal cell
cycle of the hepatic tissue, as indicated by a significant increase in the
percentage of liver cells at G0/G1 from approximately 86.2% to 97.5% and in S
phases from 0.28% to 2.2%. Collectively, the present data suggest that B.
divergens infection could induce cell-cycle alteration following oxidative stress
and DNA damage in hepatic tissue. Further work is required to investigate the
mechanism by which this hepatic tissue damage takes place.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2013.01.002 
PMID: 23558234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

