
1. Cell Microbiol. 2013 Aug;15(8):1304-12. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12151. Epub 2013 May 13.

Identifying novel Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte invasion receptors using
systematic extracellular protein interaction screens.

Bartholdson SJ(1), Crosnier C, Bustamante LY, Rayner JC, Wright GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Surface Signalling Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, 
Cambridge, UK.

The invasion of host erythrocytes by the parasite Plasmodium falciparum initiates
the blood stage of infection responsible for the symptoms of malaria. Invasion
involves extracellular protein interactions between host erythrocyte receptors
and ligands on the merozoite, the invasive form of the parasite. Despite
significant research effort, many merozoite surface ligands have no known
erythrocyte binding partner, most likely due to the intractable biochemical
nature of membrane-tethered receptor proteins and their interactions. The few
receptor-ligand pairs that have been described have largely relied on sourcing
erythrocytes from patients with rare blood groups, a serendipitous approach that 
is unsatisfactory for systematically identifying novel receptors. We have
recently developed a scalable assay called AVEXIS (for AVidity-based
EXtracellular Interaction Screen), designed to circumvent the technical
difficulties associated with the identification of extracellular protein
interactions, and applied it to identify erythrocyte receptors for orphan P.
falciparum merozoite ligands. Using this approach, we have recently identified
Basigin (CD147) and Semaphorin-7A (CD108) as receptors for RH5 and MTRAP
respectively. In this essay, we review techniques used to identify Plasmodium
receptors and discuss how they could be applied in the future to identify novel
receptors both for Plasmodium parasites but also other pathogens.

Â© 2013 The Authors. Cellular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12151 
PMCID: PMC3798119
PMID: 23617720  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

