
1. Infect Immun. 2013 Aug;81(8):2686-96. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00237-13. Epub 2013 May
20.

Malaria modifies neonatal and early-life toll-like receptor cytokine responses.

Gbédandé K(1), Varani S, Ibitokou S, Houngbegnon P, Borgella S, Nouatin O,
Ezinmegnon S, Adeothy AL, Cottrell G, Massougbodji A, Moutairou K, Troye-Blomberg
M, Deloron P, Fievet N, Luty AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Etude et de Recherche sur le Paludisme Associé à la Grossesse et à
l'Enfance (CERPAGE), Faculté des Sciences de la Santé, Université
d'Abomey-Calavi, Cotonou, Benin.

Protection from infections in early life relies extensively on innate immunity,
but it is unknown whether and how maternal infections modulate infants' innate
immune responses, thereby altering susceptibility to infections. Plasmodium
falciparum causes pregnancy-associated malaria (PAM), and epidemiological studies
have shown that PAM enhances infants' susceptibility to infection with P.
falciparum. We investigated how PAM-mediated exposures in utero affect innate
immune responses and their relationship with infection in infancy. In a
prospective study of mothers and their babies in Benin, we investigated changes
in Toll-like receptor (TLR)-mediated cytokine responses related to P. falciparum 
infections. Whole-blood samples from 134 infants at birth and at 3, 6, and 12
months of age were stimulated with agonists specific for TLR3, TLR4, TLR7/8, and 
TLR9. TLR-mediated interleukin 6 (IL-6) and IL-10 production was robust at birth 
and then stabilized, whereas tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and gamma
interferon (IFN-γ) responses were weak at birth and then increased. In
multivariate analyses, maternal P. falciparum infections at delivery were
associated with significantly higher TLR3-mediated IL-6 and IL-10 responses in
the first 3 months of life (P < 0.05) and with significantly higher TLR3-,
TLR7/8-, and TLR9-mediated TNF-α responses between 6 and 12 months of age (P <
0.05). Prospective analyses showed that higher TLR3- and TLR7/8-mediated IL-10
responses at birth were associated with a significantly higher risk of P.
falciparum infection in infancy (P < 0.05). Neonatal and infant intracellular
TLR-mediated cytokine responses are conditioned by in utero exposure through PAM 
late in pregnancy. Enhanced TLR-mediated IL-10 responses at birth are associated 
with an increased risk of P. falciparum infection, suggesting a compromised
ability to combat infection in early life.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00237-13 
PMCID: PMC3719572
PMID: 23690399  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

