
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Dec;1832(12):2009-18. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.07.010. Epub 2013 Jul 18.

Glutathione peroxidase contributes with heme oxygenase-1 to redox balance in
mouse brain during the course of cerebral malaria.

Linares M(1), Marín-García P, Martínez-Chacón G, Pérez-Benavente S, Puyet A, Diez
A, Bautista JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular IV and Instituto de
Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Ciudad
Universitaria, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

Oxidative stress has been attributed both a key pathogenic and rescuing role in
cerebral malaria (CM). In a Plasmodium berghei ANKA murine model of CM, host
redox signaling and functioning were examined during the course of neurological
damage. Host antioxidant defenses were early altered at the transcriptional level
indicated by the gradually diminished expression of superoxide dismutase-1
(sod-1), sod-2, sod-3 and catalase genes. During severe disease, this led to the 
dysfunctional activity of superoxide dismutase and catalase enzymes in damaged
brain regions. Vitagene associated markers (heat shock protein 70 and
thioredoxin-1) also showed a decaying expression pattern that paralleled reduced 
expression of the transcription factors Parkinson disease 7, Forkhead box O 3 and
X-box binding protein 1 with a role in preserving brain redox status. However,
the oxidative stress markers reactive oxygen/nitrogen species were not
accumulated in the brains of CM mice and redox proteomics and
immunohistochemistry failed to detect quantitative or qualitative differences in 
protein carbonylation. Thus, the loss of antioxidant capacity was compensated for
in all cerebral regions by progressive upregulation of heme oxygenase-1, and in
specific regions by early glutathione peroxidase-1 induction. This study shows
for the first time a scenario of cooperative glutathione peroxidase and heme
oxygenase-1 upregulation to suppress superoxide dismutase, catalase, heat shock
protein-70 and thioredoxin-1 downregulation effects in experimental CM,
counteracting oxidative damage and maintaining redox equilibrium. Our findings
reconcile the apparent inconsistency between the lack of oxidative metabolite
build up and reported protective effect of antioxidant therapy against CM.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.07.010 
PMID: 23872112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

