
1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 2;8(10):e75675. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075675. eCollection
2013.

Human candidate polymorphisms in sympatric ethnic groups differing in malaria
susceptibility in Mali.

Maiga B(1), Dolo A, Tour√© O, Dara V, Tapily A, Campino S, Sepulveda N, Risley P, 
Silva N, Corran P, Rockett KA, Kwiatkowski D; MalariaGEN Consortium, Clark TG,
Troye-Blomberg M, Doumbo OK.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research and Training Center / Department of Epidemiology of Parasitic
Diseases / Faculty of Medicine, Pharmacy and Odonto - Stomatology, BP 1805,
Bamako, USTTB, Mali ; Department of Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren
Institute, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(7):e104358. Silva, Nipula [corrected to Silva, Nilupa].

Malaria still remains a major public health problem in Mali, although disease
susceptibility varies between ethnic groups, particularly between the Fulani and 
Dogon. These two sympatric groups share similar socio-cultural factors and
malaria transmission rates, but Fulani individuals tend to show significantly
higher spleen enlargement scores, lower parasite prevalence, and seem less
affected by the disease than their Dogon neighbours. We have used genetic
polymorphisms from malaria-associated genes to investigate associations with
various malaria metrics between the Fulanai and Dogon groups. Two cross sectional
surveys (transmission season 2006, dry season 2007) were performed. Healthy
volunteers from the both ethnic groups (n=939) were recruited in a rural setting.
In each survey, clinical (spleen enlargement, axillary temperature, weight) and
parasitological data (malaria parasite densities and species) were collected, as 
well as blood samples. One hundred and sixty six SNPs were genotyped and 5
immunoassays (AMA1, CSP, MSP1, MSP2, total IgE) were performed on the DNA and
serum samples respectively. The data confirm the reduced malaria susceptibility
in the Fulani, with a higher level of the protective O-blood group, and increased
circulating antibody levels to several malaria antigens (p<10(-15)). We
identified SNP allele frequency differences between the 2 ethnic groups in CD36, 
IL4, RTN3 and ADCY9. Moreover, polymorphisms in FCER1A, RAD50, TNF, SLC22A4, and 
IL13 genes were correlated with antibody production (p-value<0.003). Further work
is required to understand the mechanisms underpinning these genetic factors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075675 
PMCID: PMC3788813
PMID: 24098393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

