
1. Front Immunol. 2014 Jun 19;5:291. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00291. eCollection
2014.

Systemic and Cerebral Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Levels Increase in
Murine Cerebral Malaria along with Increased Calpain and Caspase Activity and Can
be Reduced by Erythropoietin Treatment.

Hempel C(1), Hoyer N(1), Kildemoes A(1), Jendresen CB(1), Kurtzhals JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of Clinical Microbiology,
Copenhagen University Hospital , Copenhagen , Denmark ; Department of
International Health, Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen ,
Copenhagen , Denmark.

The pathogenesis of cerebral malaria (CM) includes compromised microvascular
perfusion, increased inflammation, cytoadhesion, and endothelial activation.
These events cause blood-brain barrier disruption and neuropathology and
associations with the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling pathway
have been shown. We studied this pathway in mice infected with Plasmodium berghei
ANKA causing murine CM with or without the use of erythropoietin (EPO) as adjunct
therapy. ELISA and western blotting was used for quantification of VEGF and
relevant proteins in brain and plasma. CM increased levels of VEGF in brain and
plasma and decreased plasma levels of soluble VEGF receptor 2. EPO treatment
normalized VEGF receptor 2 levels and reduced brain VEGF levels.
Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1α was significantly upregulated whereas cerebral 
HIF-2α and EPO levels remained unchanged. Furthermore, we noticed increased
caspase-3 and calpain activity in terminally ill mice, as measured by
protease-specific cleavage of α-spectrin and p35. In conclusion, we detected
increased cerebral and systemic VEGF as well as HIF-1α, which in the brain were
reduced to normal in EPO-treated mice. Also caspase and calpain activity was
reduced markedly in EPO-treated mice.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00291 
PMCID: PMC4062992
PMID: 24995009 

