
1. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:483854. doi: 10.1155/2014/483854. Epub 2014 Jul 17.

The effect of Babesia divergens infection on the spleen of Mongolian gerbils.

Dkhil MA(1), Al-Quraishy S(2), Al-Khalifa MS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, P.O. Box
2455, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia ; Department of Zoology and Entomology, Faculty 
of Science, Helwan University, Cairo 11795, Egypt.
(2)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, P.O. Box
2455, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia.

Babesiosis is caused by intraerythrocytic protozoan parasites transmitted by
ticks and affects a wide range of domestic and wild animals and occasionally
humans. The current study aimed to investigate the effect of B. divergens
infected erythrocytes on spleen histopathology, cell cycle alteration, and the
presence of oxidative stress. Mongolian gerbils were challenged with
5 × 10(6)  Babesia divergens infected erythrocytes. Parasitemia reached
approximately 77% at day 5 postinfection. Infection also induced injury of the
spleen. This was evidenced with (i) increases in cellular damage of the spleen,
(ii) decrease in antioxidant capacity as indicated by decreased glutathione,
catalase, and superoxide dismutase levels, (iii) increased production of
malondialdehyde and nitric oxide derived products (nitrite/nitrate), and (iv)
increased lactic acid dehydrogenase activity and protein carbonyl content in the 
spleen. Infection interfered with normal cell cycle of the spleen cells at G0/G1,
S, and G2/M phases. On the basis of the above results it can be hypothesized that
B. divergens infected erythrocytes could alter the spleen histopathology and
cause cell cycle alteration and induce oxidative stress in splenic tissue.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/483854 
PMCID: PMC4124840
PMID: 25136591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

