
1. Eur J Microbiol Immunol (Bp). 2015 Mar;5(1):131-41. doi:
10.1556/EUJMI-D-14-00041. Epub 2015 Mar 26.

Chemokine levels and parasite- and allergen-specific antibody responses in
children and adults with severe or uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria.

Wangala B, Vovor A, Gantin RG, Agbeko YF, Lechner CJ, Huang X, Soboslay PT,
Köhler C.

Chemokine and antibody response profiles were investigated in children and adults
with severe or uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria; the aim was to reveal
which profiles are associated with severe disease, as often seen in nonimmune
children, or with mild and uncomplicated disease, as seen in semi-immune adults. 
Blood samples were obtained from children under 5 years of age as well as adults 
with falciparum malaria. Classification of malaria was performed according to
parasite densities and hemoglobin concentrations. Plasma levels of chemokines
(IL-8, IP-10, MCP-4, TARC, PARC, MIP-1δ, eotaxins) were quantified, and antibody 
responses (IgE, IgG1, and IgG4) to P. falciparum, Entamoeba histolytica-specific 
antigen, and mite allergen extracts were determined. In children with severe
malaria proinflammatory, IL-8, IP10, MIP-1δ, and LARC were at highly elevated
levels, suggesting an association with severe disease. In contrast, the Th2-type 
chemokines TARC, PARC, and eotaxin-2 attained in children the same levels as in
adults suggesting the evolution of immune regulatory components. In children with
severe malaria, an elevated IgG1 and IgE reactivity to mite allergens and
intestinal protozoan parasites was observed. In conclusion, exacerbated
proinflammatory chemokines together with IgE responses to mite allergens or E.
histolytica-specific antigen extract were observed in children with severe
falciparum malaria.

DOI: 10.1556/EUJMI-D-14-00041 
PMCID: PMC4397855
PMID: 25883801 

