
1. J S Afr Vet Assoc. 2015 Aug 13;86(1):E1-7. doi: 10.4102/jsava.v86i1.1297.

Serum canine pancreatic-specific lipase concentrations in dogs with naturally
occurring Babesia rossi infection.

Köster LS(1), Steiner JM, Suchodolski JS, Schoeman JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Companion Animal Clinical Studies, University of Pretoria,
Onderstepoort. lkoster@rossvet.edu.kn.

Babesia rossi is the cause of a highly virulent multisystemic disease with a
variable outcome, which is a reliable model of systemic inflammatory response
syndrome (SIRS). The objective of this study was to determine the concentration
of canine pancreatic-specific lipase (cPL) in a population of dogs with naturally
acquired B. rossi infection. In addition, the associations between serum cPL and 
death and SIRS status were examined. An observational study recruited 87 dogs
diagnosed with B. rossi infection and serum cPL concentrations were measured
daily until discharge or death. The median concentration of serum cPL was 124.0
µg/L (interquartile range: 51.0 µg/L - 475.5 µg/L) on admission (n = 87) and
145.5 µg/L (62.3 µg/L - 434.0 µg/L) on day two of hospitalisation (n = 40).
Twenty-four dogs (28%) had a serum cPL concentration within the diagnostic range 
for pancreatitis (&gt; 400 µg/L) at admission with 13 dogs (32.5%) presenting as 
such on the second day of hospitalisation. The median concentration of serum cPL 
in dogs with SIRS was 158 µg/L (interquartile range: 52.5 µg/L - 571.5 µg/L; n = 
53), which was significantly higher than in those without SIRS (75 µg/L; 50.3
µg/L - 131.8 µg/L; n = 32) (P = 0.018). This study demonstrated that an
unexpectedly high number of dogs diagnosed with naturally acquired canine
babesiosis had a serum cPL concentration within the diagnostic range for acute
pancreatitis and a significantly higher serum cPL concentration was found in dogs
that were classified as having SIRS.

DOI: 10.4102/jsava.v86i1.1297 
PMCID: PMC6138161
PMID: 26304138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

