
1. Cell Microbiol. 2016 Mar;18(3):413-23. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12521. Epub 2015 Oct 12.

Malaria-derived hemozoin exerts early modulatory effects on the phenotype and
maturation of human dendritic cells.

Bujila I(1), Schwarzer E(2), Skorokhod O(2), Weidner JM(1), Troye-Blomberg M(1), 
Östlund Farrants AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm
University, Svante Arrheniusväg 20C, Stockholm, 106 91, Sweden.
(2)Department of Oncology, University of Torino, Via Santena 5, Turin, 10126,
Italy.

Plasmodium falciparum (P. falciparum)-induced effects on the phenotype of human
dendritic cells (DC) could contribute to poor induction of long-lasting
protective immunity against malaria. DC ability to present antigens to naïve T
cells, thus initiating adaptive immune responses depends on complex switches in
chemokine receptors, production of soluble mediators and expression of molecules 
enabling antigen-presentation and maturation. To examine the cellular basis of
these processes in the context of malaria, we performed detailed analysis of
early events following exposure of human monocyte-derived DC to natural hemozoin 
(nHZ) and the synthetic analog of its heme core, β-hematin. DC exposed to either 
molecule produced high levels of the inflammatory chemokine MCP-1, showed
continuous high expression of the inflammatory chemokine receptor CCR5, no
upregulation of the lymphoid homing receptor CCR7 and no cytoskeletal actin
redistribution with loss of podosomes. DC partially matured as indicated by
increased expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II and CD86 
following nHZ and β-hematin exposure, however there was a lack in expression of
the maturation marker CD83 following nHZ but not β-hematin exposure. Overall our 
data demonstrate that exposure to nHZ partially impairs the capacity of DC to
mature, an effect in part differential to β-hematin.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12521 
PMID: 26348250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

