
1. mBio. 2016 Sep 13;7(5). pii: e01120-16. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01120-16.

Thrombin Cleavage of Plasmodium falciparum Erythrocyte Membrane Protein 1
Inhibits Cytoadherence.

Gillrie MR(1), Renaux B(2), Russell-Goldman E(3), Avril M(4), Brazier AJ(4),
Mihara K(2), Di Cera E(5), Milner DA Jr(3), Hollenberg MD(2), Smith JD(4), Ho
M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology and Department of Medicine,
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Center for Infectious Disease Research, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saint Louis University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada mho@ucalgary.ca.

Plasmodium falciparum malaria remains one of the most deadly infections
worldwide. The pathogenesis of the infection results from the sequestration of
infected erythrocytes (IRBC) in vital organs, including the brain, with resulting
impairment of blood flow, hypoxia, and lactic acidosis. Sequestration occurs
through the adhesion of IRBC to host receptors on microvascular endothelium by
Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1), a large family of 
variant surface antigens, each with up to seven extracellular domains that can
bind to multiple host receptors. Consequently, antiadhesive therapies directed at
single endothelial adhesion molecules may not be effective. In this study, we
demonstrated that the serine protease thrombin, which is pivotal in the
activation of the coagulation cascade, cleaved the major parasite adhesin on the 
surface of IRBC. As a result, adhesion under flow was dramatically reduced, and
already adherent IRBC were detached. Thrombin cleavage sites were mapped to the
Duffy binding-like δ1 (DBLδ1) domain and interdomains 1 and 2 in the PfEMP1 of
the parasite line IT4var19. Furthermore, we observed an inverse correlation
between the presence of thrombin and IRBC in cerebral malaria autopsies of
children. We investigated a modified (R67A) thrombin and thrombin inhibitor,
hirugen, both of which inhibit the binding of substrates to exosite I, thereby
reducing its proinflammatory properties. Both approaches reduced the barrier
dysfunction induced by thrombin without affecting its proteolytic activity on
PfEMP1, raising the possibility that thrombin cleavage of variant PfEMP1 may be
exploited as a broadly inhibitory antiadhesive therapy.IMPORTANCE: Plasmodium
falciparum malaria is the third leading cause of mortality due to a pathogen,
with 214 million people infected and 438,000 deaths annually. The adhesion of
Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes (IRBC) to microvascular endothelium
is a major pathological process in severe malaria. While the recent
implementation of artemisinin-based antimalarial therapy for severe malaria
improves patient survival by targeting all parasite stages, antiparasite drugs
alone may not immediately reverse pathophysiological processes in occluded
vessels. Here we show that thrombin, an enzyme intimately involved in the
clotting process, cleaves the main parasite adhesin expressed on the surface of
IRBC, thereby preventing and reversing the binding of IRBC to endothelial cells. 
This beneficial effect of thrombin can be achieved by modified thrombins that
cause significantly less clotting and vessel leakage while preserving the ability
to cleave the parasite protein. Our results provide the basis for using modified 
thrombins as adjunctive therapy in severe malaria.

Copyright © 2016 Gillrie et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01120-16 
PMCID: PMC5021802
PMID: 27624125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

