
1. mSphere. 2017 Jan 11;2(1). pii: e00348-16. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00348-16.
eCollection 2017 Jan-Feb.

Pathogenicity Determinants of the Human Malaria Parasite Plasmodium falciparum
Have Ancient Origins.

Brazier AJ(1), Avril M(1), Bernabeu M(1), Benjamin M(1), Smith JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Research, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Center for Infectious Disease Research, Seattle, Washington, USA; Department
of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Plasmodium falciparum, the most deadly of the human malaria parasites, is a
member of the Laverania subgenus that also infects African Great Apes. The
virulence of P. falciparum is related to cytoadhesion of infected erythrocytes in
microvasculature, but the origin of dangerous parasite adhesion traits is poorly 
understood. To investigate the evolutionary history of the P. falciparum
cytoadhesion pathogenicity determinant, we studied adhesion domains from the
chimpanzee malaria parasite P. reichenowi. We demonstrate that the P. reichenowi 
var gene repertoire encodes cysteine-rich interdomain region (CIDR) domains which
bind human CD36 and endothelial protein C receptor (EPCR) with the same levels of
affinity and at binding sites similar to those bound by P. falciparum. Moreover, 
P. reichenowi domains interfere with the protective function of the activated
protein C-EPCR pathway on endothelial cells, a presumptive virulence trait in
humans. These findings provide evidence for ancient evolutionary origins of two
key cytoadhesion properties of P. falciparum that contribute to human infection
and pathogenicity. IMPORTANCE Cytoadhesion of P. falciparum-infected erythrocytes
in the microcirculation is a major virulence determinant. P. falciparum is
descended from a subgenus of parasites that also infect chimpanzees and gorillas 
and exhibits strict host species specificity. Despite their high genetic
similarity to P. falciparum, it is unknown whether ape parasites encode adhesion 
properties similar to those of P. falciparum or are as virulent in their natural 
hosts. Consequently, it has been unclear when virulent adhesion traits arose in
P. falciparum and how long they have been present in the parasite population. It 
is also unknown whether cytoadhesive interactions pose a barrier to cross-species
transmission. We show that parasite domains from the chimpanzee malaria parasite 
P. reichenowi bind human receptors with specificity similar to that of
P. falciparum. Our findings suggest that parasite adhesion traits associated with
both mild and severe malaria have much earlier origins than previously
appreciated and have important implications for virulence evolution in a major
human pathogen.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00348-16 
PMCID: PMC5227068
PMID: 28101534 

