
1. Rev Elev Med Vet Pays Trop. 1993;46(1-2):65-9.

Babesia bovis-specific CD4+ T cell clones from immune cattle express either the
Th0 or Th1 profile of cytokines.

Brown WC(1), Zhao S, Woods VM, Dobbelaere DA, Rice-Ficht AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Texas A & M University, College
Station.

The central role of T cells in the immune response against hemoprotozoan
parasites, both as helper cells for T-dependent antibody production, and as
effector cells acting directly or indirectly on intracellular parasites through
the elaboration of cytokines, has prompted us to investigate the bovine cellular 
immune response against B. bovis antigens. T cell clones generated from four B.
bovis-immune cattle by in vitro stimulation with soluble or membrane associated
merozoite antigen were characterized for reactivity against various forms of
antigen and different geographical isolates of B. bovis and B. bigemina. The
clones were categorized into seven different groups based on differential
patterns of reactivity. This panel of T cell clones and additional clones
specific for either the 77 kDa merozoite apical complex associated protein (Bb-1)
or the 42 kDa major merozoite protein (MSA-1) were analyzed for cytokines.
Biological assays to measure IL-2/IL-4, IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha/TNF-beta and
Northern blot analysis to detect mRNA encoding bovine IL2, IL-4, IFN-gamma,
TNF-beta and TNF-alpha revealed the differential production of cytokines by
clones with different antigen specificities. Two Bb-1-specific T cell clones
produced the Th1 pattern of cytokines: IL-2, IFN-gamma, TNF-beta and TNF-alpha,
but not IL-4. Clones specific for the 42 kDa protein produced undetectable levels
of all cytokines, but expressed an unrestricted or Th0 pattern of cytokine mRNA: 
IL-2, IL-4, IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 7907805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

