
1. Infect Immun. 1993 Apr;61(4):1486-95.

Tick salivary gland extract and interleukin-2 stimulation enhance susceptibility 
of lymphocytes to infection by Theileria parva sporozoites.

Shaw MK(1), Tilney LG, McKeever DJ.

Author information: 
(1)International Laboratory for Research on Animal Diseases, Nairobi, Kenya.

Intracellular parasites show host cell specificity, and precise information on
the range of host cells is a prerequisite for the identification of host
molecules that account for the specificity and are involved in entry processes.
The sporozoite stage of the tick-borne protozoan parasite Theileria parva binds
to and enters bovine lymphocytes, but precise information on the susceptibility
of other cell types present at the tick attachment site is unavailable. We
quantitatively examined the susceptibility of cell types known to be present at
the tick attachment site by a previously established in vitro assay. Apart from
lymphocytes, sporozoites also bind to and enter macrophages and afferent lymph
veiled cells; they do not bind to or enter fibroblasts, granulocytes, or
erythrocytes. Sporozoites are not phagocytosed by the macrophages or veiled cells
but enter them as they do lymphocytes. Since the tick attachment site is a region
of cellular inflammation, we also examined the effects of agents known to be
present in this area on lymphocyte susceptibility. Short-term preincubation of
lymphocytes with tick salivary gland extract, with compounds that induce
lymphocyte proliferation, or with interleukin-2 (IL-2), a cytokine produced by
activated lymphocytes, increased host cell susceptibility by between 30 and 60%. 
The IL-2-induced increase in host cell susceptibility could be prevented by
treating the lymphocytes with the monoclonal antibody IL-A 111, which reacts with
the bovine IL-2 receptor alpha chain and inhibits IL-2-driven cell proliferation.
The changes induced by tick salivary gland extract and IL-2 occurred in less than
90 min. Similarly, peripheral blood mononuclear cells from an animal previously
immunized with a nonrelated antigen (trypanosome variant surface glycoprotein)
and stimulated in vitro with the same antigen showed increases in host cell
susceptibility of between 70 and 125%. In contrast, treatment of lymphocytes with
gamma interferon did not induce any increase in host cell susceptibility.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.61.4.1486-1495.1993 
PMCID: PMC281390
PMID: 8454354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

