
1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 1997 Nov;29(4 Suppl):133S-135S.

Parasite-mediated steps in immune response failure during primary Theileria
annulata infection.

Campbell JD(1), Nichani AK, Brown DJ, Howie SE, Spooner RL, Glass EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Tropical Veterinary Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Roslin,
Midlothian, Scotland, U.K.

"Exotic" European cattle are highly susceptible to T. annulata infection. In
immunised animals, several effective anti-parasite responses can be demonstrated,
such as anti-macroschizont cytotoxic T cells (CTL), and nitric oxide killing of
parasites. The failure of infected animals to mount an effective primary immune
response suggests that the presence of the parasite directly interferes with the 
development of immunity. When the activation pathways of CD4+ T cells in draining
lymph nodes were examined during the course of a primary infection it was found
that the development of this essential arm of the immune response was altered.
Instead of interacting with antigen presenting cells in the paracortex, the
majority of CD4+ T cells were rapidly activated by developing infected cells in
the medulla of the node. Activation of T cells by infected cells also drastically
alters the cytokines produced by the T cells. During effective immune responses, 
the principal cytokine involved appears to be IL-2, with only small, controlled
"bursts" of IFN gamma production. However, IL-2 responsiveness is only transient 
in animals undergoing primary infection, while IFNg production is greatly
elevated. IFN gamma does not appear to control parasitised cells, and may even
aid the growth of infected macrophages--large numbers of macrophages enter the
cell cycle during the peak period of IFN gamma production. Uncontrolled
parasite-induced IFN gamma production is also likely to account for the local
failure of antibody responses. Germinal centres in infected lymph nodes lose
normal morphology, with IFN gamma sensitive zones failing to develop. A third
strategy which the parasite uses to evade immune response destruction is through 
affecting CTL activity. CTL in infected draining lymph nodes lose expression of
the adhesion molecule CD2--a molecule is essential in adherence to target cells
for lysis. CD2- CTL are unable to lyse macroschizont infected cells.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02632953 
PMID: 9512760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

