
1. J Biol Chem. 2000 May 19;275(20):15157-65.

Structural and functional characterization of interaction between hepatitis B
virus X protein and the proteasome complex.

Zhang Z(1), Torii N, Furusaka A, Malayaman N, Hu Z, Liang TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Diseases Section, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) has a unique fourth open reading frame coding for a
16.5-kDa protein known as hepatitis B virus X protein (HBX). The importance of
HBX in the life cycle of HBV has been well established, but the underlying
molecular function of HBX remains controversial. We previously identified a
proteasome subunit PSMA7 that interacts specifically with HBX in the
Saccharomyces cerevisiae two-hybrid system. Here we demonstrate that PSMC1, an
ATPase-like subunit of the 19 S proteasome component, also interacts with HBX and
PSMA7. Analysis of the interacting domains among PSMA7, PSMC1, and HBX by
deletion and site-directed mutagenesis suggested a mutually competitive
structural relationship among these polypeptides. The competitive nature of these
interactions is further demonstrated using a modified yeast two-hybrid
dissociator system. The crucial HBX sequences involved in interaction with PSMA7 
and PSMC1 are important for its function as a transcriptional coactivator. HBX,
while functioning as a coactivator of AP-1 and acidic activator VP-16 in
mammalian cells, had no effect on the transactivation function of their
functional orthologs GCN4 and Gal4 in yeast. Overexpression of PSMC1 seemed to
suppress the expression of various reporters in mammalian cells; this effect,
however, was overcome by coexpression of HBX. In addition, HBX expression
inhibited the cellular turnover of c-Jun and ubiquitin-Arg-beta-galactosidase,
two well known substrates of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Thus, interaction 
of HBX with the proteasome complex in metazoan cells may underlie the functional 
basis of proteasome as a cellular target of HBX.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M910378199 
PMID: 10748218  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

