
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Nov;20(22):8526-35.

Latent membrane protein 2A of Epstein-Barr virus binds WW domain E3
protein-ubiquitin ligases that ubiquitinate B-cell tyrosine kinases.

Winberg G(1), Matskova L, Chen F, Plant P, Rotin D, Gish G, Ingham R, Ernberg I, 
Pawson T.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center (MTC), SE-171 77 
Stockholm, Sweden.

The latent membrane protein (LMP) 2A of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is implicated in
the maintenance of viral latency and appears to function in part by inhibiting
B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling. The N-terminal cytoplasmic region of LMP2A has
multiple tyrosine residues that upon phosphorylation bind the SH2 domains of the 
Syk tyrosine kinase and the Src family kinase Lyn. The LMP2A N-terminal region
also has two conserved PPPPY motifs. Here we show that the PPPPY motifs of LMP2A 
bind multiple WW domains of E3 protein-ubiquitin ligases of the Nedd4 family,
including AIP4 and KIAA0439, and demonstrate that AIP4 and KIAA0439 form
physiological complexes with LMP2A in EBV-positive B cells. In addition to a C2
domain and four WW domains, these proteins have a C-terminal Hect catalytic
domain implicated in the ubiquitination of target proteins. LMP2A enhances Lyn
and Syk ubiquitination in vivo in a fashion that depends on the activity of Nedd4
family members and correlates with destabilization of the Lyn tyrosine kinase.
These results suggest that LMP2A serves as a molecular scaffold to recruit both
B-cell tyrosine kinases and C2/WW/Hect domain E3 protein-ubiquitin ligases. This 
may promote Lyn and Syk ubiquitination in a fashion that contributes to a block
in B-cell signaling. LMP2A may potentiate a normal mechanism by which Nedd4
family E3 enzymes regulate B-cell signaling.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.20.22.8526-8535.2000 
PMCID: PMC102158
PMID: 11046148  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

