
1. J Virol. 2001 Jun;75(11):5343-51.

Hepatitis B virus large envelope protein interacts with gamma2-adaptin, a
clathrin adaptor-related protein.

Hartmann-Stühler C(1), Prange R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität
Mainz, D-55101 Mainz, Germany.

For the outcome of a hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, the viral L envelope
protein with its pre-S domain performs pivotal functions by mediating attachment 
of HBV to liver cells, envelopment of viral capsids, release of (sub)viral
particles, regulation of supercoiled DNA amplification, and transcriptional
transactivation. To assess its multiple functions and host-protein assistance
involved, we initiated a two-hybrid screen using the L-specific pre-S1 domain as 
bait. With this approach, we have identified gamma2-adaptin, a putative member of
the clathrin adaptor proteins responsible for protein sorting and trafficking, as
a specific binding partner of L protein. Evidence for a physical interaction
between L protein and gamma2-adaptin was also demonstrated by affinity
chromatography and coimmunoprecipitation, and the binding sites were mapped to
the L-specific pre-S1 domain and the gamma2-adaptin-specific ear domain. The
specificity of the interaction was further sustained by the failure of
gamma1-adaptin, a closely related gamma2-adaptin homologue, to associate with L
protein. Analysis of an L mutant protein indicates that the L-gamma2-adaptin
interaction strictly depends on the pre-S1 domain of transmembrane L protein
oriented to the cytosol and thus appears to occur in the cytosolic environment.
Interestingly, coexpression of the two interacting partners in transfected cells 
resulted in recruitment of gamma2-adaptin by L protein onto cis-Golgi-like
structures, strongly indicating that the association is physiologically relevant.
Together, the results suggest a role for gamma2-adaptin in L-mediated processes
of viral biogenesis and/or pathogenesis, such as facilitating and guiding HBV
assembly.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.11.5343-5351.2001 
PMCID: PMC114939
PMID: 11333915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

