
1. J Immunol. 2001 Jul 1;167(1):497-504.

Both E6 and E7 oncoproteins of human papillomavirus 16 inhibit IL-18-induced
IFN-gamma production in human peripheral blood mononuclear and NK cells.

Lee SJ(1), Cho YS, Cho MC, Shim JH, Lee KA, Ko KK, Choe YK, Park SN, Hoshino T,
Kim S, Dinarello CA, Yoon DY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Biology, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Taejon, Korea.

Cervical carcinoma is the predominant cancer among malignancies in women
throughout the world, and human papillomavirus (HPV) 16 is the most common agent 
linked to human cervical carcinoma. The present study was performed to
investigate the mechanisms of immune escape in HPV-induced cervical cancer cells.
The presence of HPV oncoproteins E6 and E7 in the extracellular fluids of
HPV-containing cervical cancer cell lines SiHa and CaSki was demonstrated by
ELISA. The effect of HPV 16 oncoproteins E6 and E7 on the production of IFN-gamma
by IL-18 was assessed. E6 and E7 proteins reduced IL-18-induced IFN-gamma
production in both primary PBMCs and the NK0 cell line. FACS analysis revealed
that the viral oncoproteins reduced the binding of IL-18 to its cellular surface 
receptors on NK0 cells, whereas there was no effect of oncoproteins on IL-1
binding to its surface IL-1 receptors on D10S, a subclone of the murine Th cell
D10.G4.1. In vitro pull-down assays also revealed that the viral oncoproteins and
IL-18 bound to IL-18R alpha-chain competitively. These results suggest that the
extracellular HPV 16 E6 and E7 proteins may inhibit IL-18-induced IFN-gamma
production locally in HPV lesions through inhibition of IL-18 binding to its
alpha-chain receptor. Down-modulation of IL-18-induced immune responses by HPV
oncoproteins may contribute to viral pathogenesis or carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.1.497 
PMID: 11418688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

