
1. J Virol. 2002 Feb;76(4):1825-38.

VP40, the matrix protein of Marburg virus, is associated with membranes of the
late endosomal compartment.

Kolesnikova L(1), Bugany H, Klenk HD, Becker S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Virologie der Philipps-Universität Marburg, D-35037 Marburg,
Germany.

Localization of VP40 in Marburg virus (MBGV)-infected cells was studied by using 
immunofluorescence and immunoelectron microscopic analysis. VP40 was detected in 
association with nucleocapsid structures, present in viral inclusions and at
sites of virus budding. Additionally, VP40 was identified in the foci of
virus-induced membrane proliferation and in intracellular membrane clusters which
had the appearance of multivesicular bodies (MVBs). VP40-containing MVBs were
free of nucleocapsids. When analyzed by immunogold labeling, the concentration of
VP40 in MVBs was six times higher than in nucleocapsid structures. Biochemical
studies showed that recombinant VP40 represented a peripheral membrane protein
that was stably associated with membranes by hydrophobic interaction. Recombinant
VP40 was also found in association with membranes of MVBs and in filopodia- or
lamellipodia-like protrusions at the cell surface. Antibodies against marker
proteins of various cellular compartments showed that VP40-positive membranes
contained Lamp-1 and the transferrin receptor, confirming that they belong to the
late endosomal compartment. VP40-positive membranes were also associated with
actin. Western blot analysis of purified MBGV structural proteins demonstrated
trace amounts of actin, Lamp-1, and Rab11 (markers of recycling endosomes), while
markers for other cellular compartments were absent. Our data indicate that MBGV 
VP40 was able to interact with membranes of late endosomes in the course of viral
infection. This capability was independent of other MBGV proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.4.1825-1838.2002 
PMCID: PMC135914
PMID: 11799178  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

