
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 3;278(1):591-607. Epub 2002 Oct 24.

Mechanisms for inhibition of hepatitis B virus gene expression and replication by
hepatitis C virus core protein.

Chen SY(1), Kao CF, Chen CM, Shih CM, Hsu MJ, Chao CH, Wang SH, You LR, Lee YH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Institute of Microbiology and Immunology,
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan 112, Republic of China.

We have demonstrated previously that the core protein of hepatitis C virus (HCV) 
exhibits suppression activity on gene expression and replication of hepatitis B
virus (HBV). Here we further elucidated the suppression mechanism of HCV core
protein. We demonstrated that HCV core protein retained the inhibitory effect on 
HBV gene expression and replication when expressed as part of the full length of 
HCV polyprotein. Based on the substitution mutational analysis, our results
suggested that mutation introduced into the bipartite nuclear localization signal
of the HCV core protein resulted in the cytoplasmic localization of core protein 
but did not affect its suppression ability on HBV gene expression. Mutational
studies also indicated that almost all dibasic residue mutations within the
N-terminal 101-amino acid segment of the HCV core protein (except
Arg(39)-Arg(40)) impaired the suppression activity on HBV replication but not HBV
gene expression. The integrity of Arg residues at positions 101, 113, 114, and
115 was found to be essential for both suppressive effects, whereas the Arg
residue at position 104 was important only in the suppression of HBV gene
expression. Moreover, our results indicated that the suppression on HBV gene
expression was mediated through the direct interaction of HCV core protein with
the trans-activator HBx protein, whereas the suppression of HBV replication
involved the complex formation between HBV polymerase (pol) and the HCV core
protein, resulting in the structural incompetence for the HBV pol to bind the
package signal and consequently abolished the formation of the HBV virion.
Altogether, this study suggests that these two suppression effects on HBV
elicited by the HCV core protein likely depend on different structural context
but not on nuclear localization of the core protein, and the two effects can be
decoupled as revealed by its differential targets (HBx or HBV pol) on these two
processes of the HBV life cycle.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M204241200 
PMID: 12401801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

