
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Oct 15;89(20):9372-6.

Cloning and chromosomal mapping of a human immunodeficiency virus 1 "TATA"
element modulatory factor.

Garcia JA(1), Ou SH, Wu F, Lusis AJ, Sparkes RS, Gaynor RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, Los
Angeles School of Medicine 90024.

A critical regulatory element in many promoters transcribed by RNA polymerase II 
is the "TATA" box, which is located 25-30 nucleotides upstream of the
transcription initiation site. TFIID is a biochemically defined HeLa cell nuclear
fraction containing a transcription factor activity that binds specifically to
the TATA box and is critical in determining both basal and regulated promoter
activity. Recently, the gene for a TATA-binding protein was cloned and found to
bind to various TATA elements and to substitute for TFIID in stimulating basal
gene expression in in vitro transcription systems. However, it is possible that
additional cellular factors can bind to the TATA element and influence the level 
of gene expression. By using lambda gt11 expression cloning with oligonucleotides
corresponding to the human immunodeficiency virus 1 TATA element, we report the
identification of a cellular protein with a calculated molecular mass of 123 kDa 
that we designate TATA element modulatory factor (TMF). TMF binds to the human
immunodeficiency virus 1 TATA element in gel-retardation assays and inhibits
activation of the viral long terminal repeat by the TATA-binding protein in in
vitro transcription assays. TMF contains leucine-zipper amino acid motifs and
exhibits homology in its DNA binding domain with the phage-encoded DNA binding
protein Ner. Chromosomal mapping localizes the TMF gene to human chromosome
3p12-p21, which is a site of frequent rearrangements in lung and renal
carcinomas. Thus, TMF is a transcription factor that likely regulates the
expression of both viral and cellular genes.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.89.20.9372 
PMCID: PMC50133
PMID: 1409643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

