
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 5;279(10):8547-57. Epub 2003 Dec 11.

Cathepsin S supports acid-independent infection by some reoviruses.

Golden JW(1), Bahe JA, Lucas WT, Nibert ML, Schiff LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
55455, USA.

In murine fibroblasts, efficient proteolysis of reovirus outer capsid protein
sigma3 during cell entry by virions requires the acid-dependent lysosomal
cysteine protease cathepsin L. The importance of cathepsin L for infection of
other cell types is unknown. Here we report that the acid-independent lysosomal
cysteine protease cathepsin S mediates outer capsid processing in macrophage-like
P388D cells. P388D cells supported infection by virions of strain Lang, but not
strain c43. Genetic studies revealed that this difference is determined by S4,
the viral gene segment that encodes sigma3. c43-derived subvirion particles that 
lack sigma3 replicated normally in P388D cells, suggesting that the difference in
infectivity of Lang and c43 virions is at the level of sigma3 processing.
Infection of P388D cells with Lang virions was inhibited by the broad spectrum
cysteine protease inhibitor trans-epoxysuccinyl-l-leucylamido-(4-guanidino)butane
but not by NH(4)Cl, which raises the endocytic pH and thereby inhibits
acid-dependent proteases such as cathepsins L and B. Outer capsid processing and 
infection of P388D cells with Lang virions were also inhibited by a cathepsin
S-specific inhibitor. Furthermore, in the presence of NH(4)Cl, cell lines
engineered to express cathepsin S supported infection by Lang, but not c43,
virions. Our results thus indicate that differences in susceptibility to
cathepsin S-mediated sigma3 processing are responsible for strain differences in 
reovirus infection of macrophage-like P388D cells and other cathepsin
S-expressing cells. Additionally, our data suggest that the acid dependence of
reovirus infections of most other cell types may reflect the low pH requirement
for the activities of most other lysosomal proteases rather, than some other
acid-dependent aspect of cell entry.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M309758200 
PMID: 14670972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

