
1. J Gen Virol. 2004 May;85(Pt 5):1319-1328. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.19610-0.

Characterization of human herpesvirus 6 variant B immediate-early 1 protein
modifications by small ubiquitin-related modifiers.

Gravel A(1), Dion V(1), Cloutier N(1), Gosselin J(2), Flamand L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Rheumatology and Immunology Research Center, Room
T1-49, CHUL Research Center and Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, 2705
Laurier Blvd, Sainte-Foy, Quebec, Canada G1V 4G2.
(2)Laboratory of Viral Immunology, Rheumatology and Immunology Research Center,
Room T1-49, CHUL Research Center and Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, 2705 
Laurier Blvd, Sainte-Foy, Quebec, Canada G1V 4G2.

The human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) immediate-early (IE) 1 protein undergoes
SUMOylation events during the infectious process. In the present work, we report 
that Lys-802 (K-802) of IE1 from HHV-6 variant B is the only target residue
capable of conjugation to SUMO-1/SMT3C/Sentrin-1, SUMO-2/SMT3A/Sentrin-3 or
SUMO-3/SMT3B/Sentrin-2 as determined by transfection and in vitro SUMOylation
experiments. PolySUMOylated forms of IE1 were also observed, suggesting that SUMO
branching occurs at the K-802 residue. Overexpression of SUMO-1, -2 and -3 led to
an overall increase in IE1 levels, irrespective of K-802. The SUMO residues could
be efficiently removed by incubating SUMOylated IE1 with SENP1, a recently
identified SUMO peptidase. SUMOylation-deficient mutants of IE1 co-localized with
nuclear promyelocytic leukaemia protein (PML) oncogenic domains (PODs) as
efficiently as WT IE1, indicating that POD targeting is independent of IE1
SUMOylation status. However, in contrast to infection, PODs did not aggregate in 
IE1B-transfected cells, suggesting that other viral proteins are involved in the 
process. Transactivation studies indicated that IE1, in combination with IE2,
could efficiently transactivate diverse promoters, independent of its SUMOylation
status. Overall, the results presented provide a detailed biochemical
characterization of post-translational modifications of the HHV-6 IE1 protein by 
SUMO peptides, contributing to our understanding of the complex interactions
between herpesviruses and the SUMO-conjugation pathway.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.19610-0 
PMID: 15105549  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

