
1. J Virol. 2004 Aug;78(16):8601-8.

Caspases mediate processing of the capsid precursor and cell release of human
astroviruses.

Méndez E(1), Salas-Ocampo E, Arias CF.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apartado 
Postal 510-3, Colonia Miraval, Cuernavaca, Morelos 62250, Mexico.
ernesto@ibt.unam.mx

In this work we have shown that astrovirus infection induces apoptosis of Caco-2 
cells, since fragmentation of cellular DNA, cleavage of cellular proteins which
are substrate of activated caspases, and a change in the mitochondrial
transmembrane potential occur upon virus infection. The human astrovirus Yuc8
polyprotein capsid precursor VP90 is initially processed to yield VP70, and we
have shown that this processing is trypsin independent and occurs intracellularly
through four cleavages at its carboxy-terminal region. We further showed that
VP90-VP70 processing is mediated by caspases, since it was blocked by the
pancaspase inhibitor benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Ala-Asp fluoromethylketone
(z-VAD-fmk), and it was promoted by the apoptosis inducer TNF-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL). Although the cell-associated virus produced in
the presence of these compounds was not affected, the release of infectious virus
to the cell supernatant was drastically reduced in the presence of z-VAD-fmk and 
increased by TRAIL, indicating that VP90-VP70 cleavage is important for the virus
particles to be released from the cell. This is the first report that describes
the induction and utilization of caspase activity by a virus to promote
processing of the capsid precursor and dissemination of the viral particles.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.16.8601-8608.2004 
PMCID: PMC479052
PMID: 15280469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

