
1. J Virol. 2005 Jan;79(1):245-56.

The Epstein-Barr virus replication protein BBLF2/3 provides an origin-tethering
function through interaction with the zinc finger DNA binding protein ZBRK1 and
the KAP-1 corepressor.

Liao G(1), Huang J, Fixman ED, Hayward SD.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Herpesviruses encode a set of core proteins essential for lytic replication of
their genomes. Three of these proteins form a tripartite helix-primase complex
that, in the case of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), consists of the helicase BBLF4,
the primase BSLF1, and the linker protein BBLF2/3. BBLF2/3 and its homologs in
the other herpesviruses remain relatively poorly characterized. To better
understand the contribution to replication made by BBLF2/3, a yeast two-hybrid
screen was performed with BBLF2/3 as the bait protein. This screen identified as 
interactors a number of cell replication-related proteins such as DNA polymerase 
beta and subunits of DNA polymerase delta along with the EBV-encoded DNase BGLF5.
The screen also identified the DNA binding zinc finger protein ZBRK1 and the
ZBRK1 corepressor KAP-1 as BBLF2/3 interactors. Interaction between BBLF2/3 and
ZBRK1 and KAP-1 was confirmed in coimmunoprecipitation assays. A binding site for
ZBRK1 in the EBV oriLyt enhancer was identified by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay. ZBRK1, KAP-1, and the ZBRK1 binding protein BRCA1 were shown by indirect
immunofluorescence to be present in replication compartments in lytically induced
D98-HR1 cells, and additionally, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays determined 
that these proteins associated with oriLyt DNA. Replication of an oriLyt plasmid 
and a variant oriLyt (DeltaZBRK1) plasmid was examined in lytically induced
D98-HR1 cells. Exogenous ZBRK1, KAP-1, or BRCA1 increased the efficiency of
oriLyt replication, while deletion of the ZBRK1 binding site impaired
replication. These experiments identify ZBRK1 as another cell protein that,
through BBLF2/3, provides a tethering point on oriLyt for the EBV replication
complex. The data also suggest that BBLF2/3 may serve as a contact interface for 
cell proteins involved in replication of EBV oriLyt.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.1.245-256.2005 
PMCID: PMC538732
PMID: 15596820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

