
1. Oncogene. 2005 Mar 10;24(11):1914-23.

Interaction of HTLV-1 Tax and methyl-CpG-binding domain 2 positively regulates
the gene expression from the hypermethylated LTR.

Ego T(1), Tanaka Y, Shimotohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
53 Kawara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Epigenetic regulation of gene expression is critical in the maintenance of
cellular homeostasis. Dysregulation of normal epigenetic transcription occurs in 
abnormal physiological conditions, such as those seen in cancer cells and cells
infected with parasites, making the mechanism underlying abnormal epigenetic
transcription of great interest. Gene expression of human T-cell leukemia virus
type 1 (HTLV-1) is regulated by a viral transcriptional stimulator, Tax. We
herein report a novel mechanism of transcription from the HTLV-1 long terminal
repeat (LTR) that is regulated by Tax. In this study, we determined that Tax is
able to activate transcription from the LTR, even when it was heavily methylated.
In addition, the methyl-CpG-binding domain 2 (MBD2) protein played an important
role in Tax-mediated transcriptional activation. We demonstrated the importance
of a physical interaction between Tax and MBD2 in enhancing the transcriptional
activity of Tax against the methylated LTR. Furthermore, we identified the
formation of a protein complex composed of MBD2 and Tax bound to the methylated
LTR. We propose a new model of epigenetic regulation by MBD2 acting in concert
with a virally encoded transactivator, Tax. Our observation provides insight into
the epigenetic regulation of gene expression and the diverse mechanisms of
transcriptional regulation using methylated promoters.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208394 
PMID: 15674330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

