
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 28;280(43):35844-58. Epub 2005 Aug 22.

Regulation of microfilament organization by Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpes
virus-cyclin.CDK6 phosphorylation of caldesmon.

Cuomo ME(1), Knebel A, Platt G, Morrice N, Cohen P, Mittnacht S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Centre for Cell and Molecular Biology, Chester Beatty
Laboratories, The Institute of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham Road, SW3 6JB London, 
United Kingdom.

Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpes virus (KSHV) encodes a D-like cyclin (K-cyclin) 
that is thought to contribute to the viral oncogenicity. K-cyclin activates
cellular cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) 4 and 6, generating enzymes with a
substrate selectivity deviant from CDK4 and CDK6 activated by D-type cyclins,
suggesting different biochemical and biological functions. Here we report the
identification of the actin- and calmodulin-binding protein caldesmon (CALD1) as 
a novel K-cyclin.CDK substrate, which is not phosphorylated by D.CDK. CALD1 plays
a central role in the regulation of microfilament organization, consequently
controlling cell shape, adhesion, cytokinesis and motility. K-cyclin.CDK6
specifically phosphorylates four Ser/Thr sites in the human CALD1 carboxyl
terminus, abolishing CALD1 binding to its effector protein, actin, and its
regulator protein, calmodulin. CALD1 is hyperphosphorylated in cells following
K-cyclin expression and in KSHV-transformed lymphoma cells. Moreover, expression 
of exogenous K-cyclin results in microfilament loss and changes in cell
morphology; both effects are reliant on CDK catalysis and can be reversed by the 
expression of a phosphorylation defective CALD1. Together, these data strongly
suggest that K-cyclin expression modulates the activity of caldesmon and through 
this the microfilament functions in cells. These results establish a novel link
between KSHV infection and the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M503877200 
PMID: 16115893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

