
1. J Virol. 2005 Sep;79(18):11685-92.

Simian virus 40 large T antigen's association with the CUL7 SCF complex
contributes to cellular transformation.

Kasper JS(1), Kuwabara H, Arai T, Ali SH, DeCaprio JA.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Department of Medical Oncology and Harvard
Medical School, Mayer Building 457, 44 Binney Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Simian virus 40 large T antigen (T Ag) is capable of immortalizing and
transforming rodent cells. The transforming activity of T Ag is due in large part
to perturbation of the tumor suppressor proteins p53 and the retinoblastoma (pRB)
family members. Inactivation of these tumor suppressors may not be sufficient for
T Ag-mediated cellular transformation. It has been shown that T Ag associates
with an SCF-like complex that contains a member of the cullin family of E3
ubiquitin ligases, CUL7, as well as SKP1, RBX1, and an F-box protein, FBXW8. We
identified T Ag residues 69 to 83 as required for T Ag binding to the CUL7
complex. We demonstrate that delta69-83 T Ag, while it lost its ability to
associate with CUL7, retained binding to p53 and pRB family members. In the
presence of CUL7, wild-type (WT) T Ag but not delta69-83 T Ag was able to induce 
proliferation of mouse embryo fibroblasts, an indication of cellular
transformation. In contrast, WT and delta69-83 T Ag enabled mouse embryo
fibroblasts to proliferate to similarly high densities in the absence of CUL7.
Our data suggest that, in addition to p53 and the pRB family members, T Ag serves
to bind to and inactivate the growth-suppressing properties of CUL7. In addition,
these results imply that, at least in the presence of T Ag, CUL7 may function as 
a tumor suppressor.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.18.11685-11692.2005 
PMCID: PMC1212609
PMID: 16140746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

