
1. PLoS Pathog. 2005 Sep;1(1):e7. Epub 2005 Sep 30.

Inhibition of MHC class I is a virulence factor in herpes simplex virus infection
of mice.

Orr MT(1), Edelmann KH, Vieira J, Corey L, Raulet DH, Wilson CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
United States of America.

Herpes simplex virus (HSV) has a number of genes devoted to immune evasion. One
such gene, ICP47, binds to the transporter associated with antigen presentation
(TAP) 1/2 thereby preventing transport of viral peptides into the endoplasmic
reticulum, loading of peptides onto nascent major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) class I molecules, and presentation of peptides to CD8 T cells. However,
ICP47 binds poorly to murine TAP1/2 and so inhibits antigen presentation by MHC
class I in mice much less efficiently than in humans, limiting the utility of
murine models to address the importance of MHC class I inhibition in HSV
immunopathogenesis. To address this limitation, we generated recombinant HSVs
that efficiently inhibit antigen presentation by murine MHC class I. These
recombinant viruses prevented cytotoxic T lymphocyte killing of infected cells in
vitro, replicated to higher titers in the central nervous system, and induced
paralysis more frequently than control HSV. This increase in virulence was due to
inhibition of antigen presentation to CD8 T cells, since these differences were
not evident in MHC class I-deficient mice or in mice in which CD8 T cells were
depleted. Inhibition of MHC class I by the recombinant viruses did not impair the
induction of the HSV-specific CD8 T-cell response, indicating that
cross-presentation is the principal mechanism by which HSV-specific CD8 T cells
are induced. This inhibition in turn facilitates greater viral entry,
replication, and/or survival in the central nervous system, leading to an
increased incidence of paralysis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0010007 
PMCID: PMC1238742
PMID: 16201019 

