
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Mar;26(5):1631-43.

The UL69 transactivator protein of human cytomegalovirus interacts with
DEXD/H-Box RNA helicase UAP56 to promote cytoplasmic accumulation of unspliced
RNA.

Lischka P(1), Toth Z, Thomas M, Mueller R, Stamminger T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische und Molekulare Virologie, Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Schlossgarten 4, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
thomas.stamminger@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de.

The UL69 gene product of human cytomegalovirus belongs to a family of regulatory 
proteins conserved among all herpesviruses that have in part been characterized
as posttranscriptional transactivators participating in the nuclear export of
RNA. Recent experiments suggested that pUL69 also acts as a posttranscriptional
activator since it was demonstrated that nucleocytoplasmic shuttling via a
CRM1-independent nuclear export signal is a prerequisite for its stimulatory
effect on gene expression. Based on these findings we initiated studies to
investigate the role of pUL69 in mRNA export and demonstrate that pUL69
efficiently promotes the cytoplasmic accumulation of unspliced RNA. Furthermore, 
we show that this pUL69 activity is linked to the cellular mRNA export machinery 
by direct protein interaction with the highly related DEXD/H-box RNA helicases
UAP56 and URH49. Particularly, we identified a 12-amino-acid domain within the N 
terminus of pUL69 which is required for binding to UAP56 and URH49, and we could 
demonstrate that UAP56 interaction and nucleocytoplasmic shuttling are both
prerequisites for pUL69-mediated mRNA export. Thus, we identified a novel
cellular target which provides a herpesviral regulatory protein with access to a 
conserved cellular transport system in order to promote nuclear export of
unspliced RNA.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.26.5.1631-1643.2006 
PMCID: PMC1430265
PMID: 16478985  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

