
1. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Jun;207(3):605-13.

Cooperativity between Rad51 and C/EBP family transcription factors modulates
basal and Tat-induced activation of the HIV-1 LTR in astrocytes.

Chipitsyna G(1), Sawaya BE, Khalili K, Amini S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Center for Neurovirology, Temple University School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA.

Transcription of the HIV-1 genome is a complex event that requires functional and
physical communication of cellular proteins that recognize the LTR sequence with 
viral proteins, most notably, Tat. Moreover, studies have revealed the ability of
Tat to induce transcription of a variety of cellular genes whose products can
affect the status of cells, thus contributing to the pathogenesis of AIDS.
Recently, we demonstrated that expression of Tat in astrocytes and other neural
cells leads to upregulation of Rad51, a major component of DNA repair via
homologous recombination. The unscheduled upregulation of Rad51, in turn, has an 
impact upon the extent of chromosomal abnormalities that are seen in
Tat-producing cells. Here, we asked whether an elevation in Rad51 levels
influences the extent of viral gene transcription in astrocytic cells. Our
results demonstrate that ectopic expression of Rad51 enhances the basal- and the 
Tat-induced transcription of the LTR promoter. This event requires cooperativity 
from the C/EBP family of transcription factors including C/EBPbeta and C/EBPbeta 
homologous protein (CHOP). Similar to Tat, we showed that Rad51 interacts with
C/EBPbeta and augments its interaction with the DNA motif spanning nucleotides
-120 to -94 of the LTR. Interestingly, Tat exhibited the capacity to augment the 
synergism between Rad51 and C/EBPbeta. Our results also demonstrate that the
level of activation of the LTR by CHOP and Tat, either alone or together, is
elevated in the presence of the SW1/SNF1 chromatin remodeling complex. These
observations unravel a new pathway for Tat activation of the LTR that includes
the positive feedback loop involving Rad51 and C/EBPbeta family proteins.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.20612 
PMID: 16511829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

