
1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 23;281(25):17259-65. Epub 2006 Apr 24.

A zinc-binding region in Vif binds Cul5 and determines cullin selection.

Mehle A(1), Thomas ER, Rajendran KS, Gabuzda D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) Vif overcomes the anti-viral activity of
APOBEC3G by targeting it for ubiquitination via a Cullin 5-ElonginB-ElonginC
(Cul5-EloBC) E3 ligase. Vif associates with Cul5-EloBC through a BC-box motif
that binds EloC, but the mechanism by which Vif selectively recruits Cul5 is
poorly understood. Here we report that a region of Vif (residues 100-142)
upstream of the BC-box binds selectively to Cul5 in the absence of EloC. This
region contains a zinc coordination site HX5CX17-18CX3-5H (HCCH), with His/Cys
residues at positions 108, 114, 133, and 139 coordinating one zinc ion. The HCCH 
zinc coordination site, which is conserved among primate lentivirus Vif proteins,
does not correspond to any known class of zinc-binding motif. Mutations of
His/Cys residues in the HCCH motif impair zinc coordination, Cul5 binding, and
APOBEC3G degradation. Mutations of conserved hydrophobic residues (Ile-120,
Ala-123, and Leu-124) located between the two Cys residues in the HCCH motif
disrupt binding of the zinc-coordinating region to Cul5 and inhibit APOBEC3G
degradation. The Vif binding site maps to the first cullin repeat in the N
terminus of Cul5. These data suggest that the zinc-binding region in Vif is a
novel cullin interaction domain that mediates selective binding to Cul5. We
propose that the HCCH zinc-binding motif facilitates Vif-Cul5 binding by playing 
a structural role in positioning hydrophobic residues for direct contact with
Cul5.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M602413200 
PMID: 16636053  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

