
1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 22;281(51):39728-39. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

The vaccinia virus protein F1L interacts with Bim and inhibits activation of the 
pro-apoptotic protein Bax.

Taylor JM(1), Quilty D, Banadyga L, Barry M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2S2, Canada.

Vaccinia virus, the prototypic member of the orthopoxvirus genus, encodes the
mitochondrial-localized protein F1L that functions to protect cells from
apoptotic death and inhibits cytochrome c release. We previously showed that F1L 
interacts with the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member Bak and inhibits activation 
of Bak following an apoptotic stimulus (Wasilenko, S. T., Banadyga, L., Bond, D.,
and Barry, M. (2005) J. Virol. 79, 14031-14043). In addition to Bak, the
pro-apoptotic protein Bax is also capable of initiating cytochrome c release
suggesting that vaccinia virus infection could also inhibit Bax activity. Here we
show that F1L inhibits the activity of the pro-apoptotic protein Bax by
inhibiting oligomerization and N-terminal activation of Bax. F1L expression also 
inhibited the subcellular redistribution of Bax to the mitochondria and the
insertion of Bax into the outer mitochondrial membrane. The ability of F1L to
inhibit Bax activation does not require Bak, because F1L expression inhibited
cytochrome c release and Bax activation in Bak-deficient cells. No interaction
between Bax and F1L was detected during infection, suggesting that F1L functions 
upstream of Bax activation. Notably, F1L was capable of interacting with the
BH3-only protein BimL as shown by co-immunoprecipitation, and F1L expression
inhibited apoptosis induced by BimL. These studies suggest that, in addition to
interacting with the pro-apoptotic protein Bak, F1L also functions to indirectly 
inhibit the activation of Bax, likely by interfering with the pro-apoptotic
activity of BH3-only proteins such as BimL.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M607465200 
PMID: 17074758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

