
1. J Virol. 2007 Feb;81(3):1379-89. Epub 2006 Nov 22.

E6AP-dependent degradation of DLG4/PSD95 by high-risk human papillomavirus type
18 E6 protein.

Handa K(1), Yugawa T, Narisawa-Saito M, Ohno S, Fujita M, Kiyono T.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji,
Chuo-ku, Tokyo, 104-0045, Japan.

In most cervical cancers, DNAs of high-risk mucosotropic human papillomaviruses
(HPVs), such as types 16 and 18, are maintained so as to express two viral
proteins, E6 and E7, suggesting that they play important roles in carcinogenesis.
The carboxy-terminal PDZ domain-binding motif of the E6 proteins is in fact
essential for transformation of rodent cells and induction of hyperplasia in
E6-transgenic mouse skin. To date, seven PDZ domain-containing proteins,
including DLG1/hDLG, which is a human homologue of the Drosophila discs large
tumor suppressor (Dlg), have been identified as targets of high-risk HPV E6
proteins. Here, we describe DLG4/PSD95, another human homologue of Dlg, as a
novel E6 target. DLG4 was found to be expressed in normal human cells, including 
cervical keratinocytes, but only to a limited extent in both HPV-positive and
HPV-negative cervical cancer cell lines. Expression of HPV18 E6 in HCK1T
decreased DLG4 levels more strongly than did HPV16 E6, the carboxy-terminal motif
of the proteins being critical for binding and degradation of DLG4 in vitro. DLG4
levels were restored by expression of either E6AP-specific short hairpin RNA or
bovine papillomavirus type 1 E2 in HeLa but not CaSki or SiHa cells, reflecting
downregulation of DLG4 mRNA as opposed to protein by an HPV-independent mechanism
in HPV16-positive cancer lines. The tumorigenicity of CaSki cells was strongly
inhibited by forced expression of DLG4, while growth in culture was not inhibited
at all. These results suggest that DLG4 may function as a tumor suppressor in the
development of HPV-associated cancers.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01712-06 
PMCID: PMC1797514
PMID: 17121805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

