
1. J Immunol. 2006 Dec 15;177(12):8658-66.

Human alpha- and beta-defensins block multiple steps in herpes simplex virus
infection.

Hazrati E(1), Galen B, Lu W, Wang W, Ouyang Y, Keller MJ, Lehrer RI, Herold BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 1 Gustave L. Levy
Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

This study examined the ability of nine human defensins (HD) to protect against
herpes simplex virus infection. Noncytotoxic concentrations of all six
alpha-defensins (HNP1-4, HD5, and HD6) and human beta-defensin (hBD) 3 inhibited 
HSV infection. Two other beta-defensins, hBD1 and 2, lacked this protective
activity. Synchronized assays revealed that HNP-4, HD6, and hBD3 acted primarily 
by preventing binding and entry, whereas HNP1-3 and HD5 also inhibited postentry 
events. Even when added several hours after entry, substantial reduction in viral
gene expression ensued. Human cervical epithelial cells incubated with HNP-1 or
HD5 accumulated the peptides intracellularly. Surface plasmon resonance studies
revealed that HNPs 1, 2, 3, and HD5 bound HSV glycoprotein B (gB) with high
affinity, but showed minimal binding to heparan sulfate, the receptor for
attachment. In contrast, HNP-4 and HD6 bound heparan sulfate, but not gB. HBD3
bound both gB and heparan sulfate, but hBD1 and hBD2 bound neither. Admixture of 
HD5 with hydroxyethylcellulose significantly protected mice from a viral
challenge lethal to controls receiving an inactive peptide or
hydroxyethylcellulose alone. These findings demonstrate that HDs act at multiple 
steps in the HSV life cycle and support the development of defensins or
defensin-like peptides as microbicides.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.12.8658 
PMID: 17142766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

