
1. Blood. 2007 May 1;109(9):3633-9. Epub 2007 Jan 5.

Inhibition of HIV-1 infection by viral chemokine U83A via high-affinity CCR5
interactions that block human chemokine-induced leukocyte chemotaxis and receptor
internalization.

Catusse J(1), Parry CM, Dewin DR, Gompels UA.

Author information: 
(1)Pathogen Molecular Biology Unit, Department of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, University of London,
Keppel Street, London, UK.

HIV-1 strains use C-C-chemokine receptor 5, CCR5, as a coreceptor for host
transmission. Human CCR5 chemokine ligands inhibit binding and infection, whereas
CCR5 mutations also inhibit infection by preventing surface expression, resulting
in delayed progression to AIDS. Here, we describe a human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6A) 
chemokine, U83A, which binds CCR5 with higher affinity than human chemokines,
displacing their binding and leading to inhibition of chemotaxis of human
leukocytes. Similarly, U83A inhibits infection by HIV-1 strains which use CCR5,
but not the CXCR4, coreceptor. Unlike human CCR5 chemokine ligands which induce
rapid CCR5 internalization mediated via clathrin, treatment with U83A prevents
internalization. A spliced truncated U83A isoform, U83A-N, also binds CCR5 albeit
with lower affinity, and this correlates with lower HIV-1 infection inhibition,
whereas further truncation abolishes binding and any inhibition. Confocal
microscopy confirms CCR5 internalization inhibition by U83A treatment, whereas
labeled transferrin uptake shows that endocytosis via clathrin is unaltered.
Previous results show that, although U83A-N is an antagonist, U83A is an agonist 
for CCR1, CCR4, CCR6, and CCR8 present on immune effector and antigen-presenting 
cells and here also shown for CCR5. Thus, U83A could act as a novel inhibitor of 
HIV-1 infection while also stimulating local immunity to the virus.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2006-08-042622 
PMID: 17209056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

