
1. PLoS Pathog. 2006 Oct;2(10):e107.

Quantitative membrane proteomics reveals new cellular targets of viral immune
modulators.

Bartee E(1), McCormack A, Fr√ºh K.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute, Oregon Health and Science University,
Beaverton, Oregon, United States of America.

Immunomodulators of pathogens frequently affect multiple cellular targets, thus
preventing recognition by different immune cells. For instance, the K5 modulator 
of immune recognition (MIR2) from Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus prevents 
activation of cytotoxic T cells, natural killer cells, and natural killer T cells
by downregulating major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules, the
MHC-like molecule CD1, the cell adhesion molecules ICAM-1 and PECAM, and the
co-stimulatory molecule B7.2. K5 belongs to a family of viral- and
cellular-membrane-spanning RING ubiquitin ligases. While a limited number of
transmembrane proteins have been shown to be targeted for degradation by this
family, it is unknown whether additional targets exist. We now describe a
quantitative proteomics approach to identify novel targets of this protein
family. Using stable isotope labeling by amino acids, we compared the proteome of
plasma, Golgi, and endoplasmic reticulum membranes in the presence and absence of
K5. Mass spectrometric protein identification revealed four proteins that were
consistently underrepresented in the plasma membrane of K5 expression cells: MHC 
I (as expected), bone marrow stromal antigen 2 (BST-2, CD316), activated
leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM, CD166) and Syntaxin-4. Downregulation of
each of these proteins was independently confirmed by immunoblotting with
specific antibodies. We further demonstrate that ALCAM is a bona fide target of
both K5 and the myxomavirus homolog M153R. Upon exiting the endoplasmic
reticulum, ALCAM is ubiquitinated in the presence of wild-type, but not
RING-deficient or acidic motif-deficient, K5, and is targeted for lysosomal
degradation via the multivesicular body pathway. Since ALCAM is the ligand for
CD6, a member of the immunological synapse of T cells, its removal by viral
immune modulators implies a role for CD6 in the recognition of pathogens by T
cells. The unbiased global proteome analysis therefore revealed novel
immunomodulatory functions of pathogen proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0020107 
PMCID: PMC1626102
PMID: 17238276  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

