
1. Cell Microbiol. 2007 Oct;9(10):2445-56. Epub 2007 May 21.

Lipoprotein lipase mediates hepatitis C virus (HCV) cell entry and inhibits HCV
infection.

Andréo U(1), Maillard P, Kalinina O, Walic M, Meurs E, Martinot M, Marcellin P,
Budkowska A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Hépacivirus Institut Pasteur, 25/28 Rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex
15, France.

The host-virus interactions leading to cell infection with hepatitis C virus
(HCV) are not fully understood. The tetraspanin CD-81 and human scavenger
receptor SR-BI/Cla1 are major receptors mediating virus cell entry. However, HCV 
in patients' sera is associated with lipoproteins and infectious potential of the
virus depends on lipoproteins associated to virus particles. We show here that
lipoprotein lipase (LPL), targeting triglyceride-rich lipoproteins (TRL) to the
liver, mediates binding and internalization of HCV to different types of cells,
acting as a bridge between virus-associated lipoproteins and cell surface heparan
sulfate proteoglycans (HSPG). The dimeric structure and catalytic activity of LPL
are required for LPL-mediated HCV uptake to cells. Unexpectedly, exogenous LPL
significantly inhibits HCVcc infection in vitro. This effect is prevented by
anti-LPL antibodies and by tetrahydrolipstatin (THL) a specific inhibitor of LPL 
enzymatic activity. In addition, we show that antibodies directed to
apolipoprotein B (ApoB)-containing lipoproteins efficiently inhibits HCVcc
infection. Our findings suggest that LPL mediates HCV cell entry by a mechanism
similar to hepatic clearance of TRL from the circulation, promoting a
non-productive virus uptake. These data provide new insight into mechanisms of
HCV cell entry and suggest that LPL could modulate HCV infectivity in vivo.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2007.00972.x 
PMID: 17517063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

