
1. J Virol. 2007 Oct;81(19):10792-803. Epub 2007 Jul 25.

Emerin is hyperphosphorylated and redistributed in herpes simplex virus type
1-infected cells in a manner dependent on both UL34 and US3.

Leach N(1), Bjerke SL, Christensen DK, Bouchard JM, Mou F, Park R, Baines J,
Haraguchi T, Roller RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Iowa, 3-432 Bowen Science
Building, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Cells infected with wild-type herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) show disruption
of the organization of the nuclear lamina that underlies the nuclear envelope.
This disruption is reflected in changes in the localization and phosphorylation
of lamin proteins. Here, we show that HSV-1 infection causes relocalization of
the LEM domain protein emerin. In cells infected with wild-type virus, emerin
becomes more mobile in the nuclear membrane, and in cells infected with viruses
that fail to express UL34 protein (pUL34) and US3 protein (pUS3), emerin no
longer colocalizes with lamins, suggesting that infection causes a loss of
connection between emerin and the lamina. Infection causes hyperphosphorylation
of emerin in a manner dependent upon both pUL34 and pUS3. Some emerin
hyperphosphorylation can be inhibited by the protein kinase Cdelta (PKCdelta)
inhibitor rottlerin. Emerin and pUL34 interact physically, as shown by pull-down 
and coimmunoprecipitation assays. Emerin expression is not, however, necessary
for infection, since virus growth is not impaired in cells derived from
emerin-null transgenic mice. The results suggest a model in which pUS3 and
PKCdelta that has been recruited by pUL34 hyperphosphorylate emerin, leading to
disruption of its connections with lamin proteins and contributing to the
disruption of the nuclear lamina. Changes in emerin localization, nuclear shape, 
and lamin organization characteristic of cells infected with wild-type HSV-1 also
occur in cells infected with recombinant virus that does not make viral capsids, 
suggesting that these changes occur independently of capsid envelopment.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00196-07 
PMCID: PMC2045475
PMID: 17652388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

