
1. DNA Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;26(10):753-61.

Novel interaction between HPV E6 and BARD1 (BRCA1-associated ring domain 1) and
its biologic roles.

Yim EK(1), Lee KH, Myeong J, Tong SY, Um SJ, Park JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Catholic University of Korea,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Human papillomaviruses (HPVs), which are associated with the majority of cervical
cancers, encode a transforming protein, E6, which interacts with the p53 tumor
suppressor protein. There is a wide effort focused on searching for the target of
the involvement of p53-independent HPV 16 E6-interacting proteins. We identified 
Breast Cancer 1 Gene (BRCA1)-associated ring domain protein 1 (BARD1) as a
binding partner of E6 and investigated its biological function in cervical cancer
cells. In vivo co-immunoprecipitation assay was performed to determine whether
E6-BARD1 interaction occurred. We then used a degradation assay to determine
whether E6-mediated inactivation of BARD1 transactivation function was associated
with BARD1 degradation. A mutation assay revealed the site of interaction of E6
with BARD1. The effect of BARD1 on p53 transcriptional activity was tested using 
BARD1 knockdown and overexpression systems. BARD1 was not degraded by E6, and,
instead, formed a physical complex with E6. Moreover, the mutations of the metal 
motif zinc-finger region decreased the ability of E6 to interact with BARD1.
Transient transfection of BARD1 increased the p53-mediated activation of
p21(WAF1) promoter despite the presence of E6. Additionally, the existence of
BARD1 inactivated the expression of E6 in cervical cancer cells. These findings
suggest that BARD1 may regulate the transcriptional activities of p53 as tumor
suppressors.

DOI: 10.1089/dna.2007.0588 
PMID: 17678435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

