
1. Biochemistry. 2007 Sep 4;46(35):9874-85. Epub 2007 Aug 15.

The K15 protein of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus recruits the endocytic
regulator intersectin 2 through a selective SH3 domain interaction.

Lim CS(1), Seet BT, Ingham RJ, Gish G, Matskova L, Winberg G, Ernberg I, Pawson
T.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario
M5G 1X5, Canada.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus, also known as human herpesvirus 8, is
closely associated with several cancers including Kaposi's sarcoma, primary
effusion lymphoma, and multicentric Castleman's disease. The rightmost end of the
KSHV genome encodes a protein, K15, with multiple membrane-spanning segments and 
an intracellular carboxy-terminal tail that contains several conserved motifs
with the potential to recruit interaction domains (i.e., SH2, SH3, TRAF) of host 
cell proteins. K15 has been implicated in downregulating B cell receptor (BCR)
signaling through its conserved motifs and may thereby play a role in maintaining
viral latency and/or preventing apoptosis of the infected B cells. However, K15's
mode of action is largely unknown. We have used mass spectrometry, domain and
peptide arrays, and surface plasmon resonance to identify binding partners for a 
conserved proline-rich sequence (PPLP) in the K15 cytoplasmic tail. We show that 
the PPLP motif selectively binds the SH3-C domain of an endocytic adaptor
protein, Intersectin 2 (ITSN2). This interaction can be observed both in vitro
and in cells, where K15 and ITSN2 colocalize to discrete compartments within the 
B cell. The ability of K15 to associate with ITSN2 suggests a new role for the
K15 viral protein in intracellular protein trafficking.

DOI: 10.1021/bi700357s 
PMID: 17696407  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

