
1. Int J Cancer. 2008 Jan 1;122(1):124-31.

Hepatitis C virus core protein induces spontaneous and persistent activation of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha in transgenic mice: implications
for HCV-associated hepatocarcinogenesis.

Tanaka N(1), Moriya K, Kiyosawa K, Koike K, Aoyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Regulation, Institute on Aging and Adaptation, Shinshu
University Graduate School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan.
naopi@hsp.md.shinshu-u.ac.jp

Persistent infection of hepatitis C virus (HCV) can lead to a high risk for
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). HCV core protein plays important roles in
HCV-related hepatocarcinogenesis, because mice carrying the core protein exhibit 
multicentric HCCs without hepatic inflammation and fibrosis. However, the precise
mechanism of hepatocarcinogenesis in these transgenic mice remains unclear. To
evaluate whether the core protein modulates hepatocyte proliferation and
apoptosis in vivo, we examined these parameters in 9- and 22-month-old transgenic
mice. Although the numbers of apoptotic hepatocytes and hepatic caspase 3
activities were similar between transgenic and nontransgenic mice, the numbers of
proliferating hepatocytes and the levels of numerous proteins such as cyclin D1, 
cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and c-Myc, were markedly increased in an age-dependent 
manner in the transgenic mice. This increase was correlated with the activation
of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha). In these
transgenic mice, spontaneous and persistent PPARalpha activation occurred
heterogeneously, which was different from that observed in mice treated with
clofibrate, a potent peroxisome proliferator. We further demonstrated that
stabilization of PPARalpha through a possible interaction with HCV core protein
and an increase in nonesterified fatty acids, which may serve as endogenous
PPARalpha ligands, in hepatocyte nuclei contributed to the core protein-specific 
PPARalpha activation. In conclusion, these results offer the first suggestion
that HCV core protein induces spontaneous, persistent, age-dependent and
heterogeneous activation of PPARalpha in transgenic mice, which may contribute to
the age-dependent and multicentric hepatocarcinogenesis mediated by the core
protein.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.23056 
PMID: 17764115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

