
1. J Virol. 2008 Feb;82(3):1107-17. Epub 2007 Nov 21.

Identification of host proteins associated with retroviral vector particles by
proteomic analysis of highly purified vector preparations.

Segura MM(1), Garnier A, Di Falco MR, Whissell G, Meneses-Acosta A, Arcand N,
Kamen A.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, NRC, 6100 Royalmount Avenue, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.

The Moloney murine leukemia virus (MMLV) belongs to the Retroviridae family of
enveloped viruses, which is known to acquire minute amounts of host cellular
proteins both on the surface and inside the virion. Despite the extensive use of 
retroviral vectors in experimental and clinical applications, the repertoire of
host proteins incorporated into MMLV vector particles remains unexplored. We
report here the identification of host proteins from highly purified retroviral
vector preparations obtained by rate-zonal ultracentrifugation. Viral proteins
were fractionated by one-dimensional sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis, in-gel tryptic digested, and subjected to liquid
chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry analysis. Immunogold electron microscopy 
studies confirmed the presence of several host membrane proteins exposed at the
vector surface. These studies led to the identification of 27 host proteins on
MMLV vector particles derived from 293 HEK cells, including 5 proteins previously
described as part of wild-type MMLV. Nineteen host proteins identified
corresponded to intracellular proteins. A total of eight host membrane proteins
were identified, including cell adhesion proteins integrin beta1 (fibronectin
receptor subunit beta) and HMFG-E8, tetraspanins CD81 and CD9, and late endosomal
markers CD63 and Lamp-2. Identification of membrane proteins on the retroviral
surface is particularly attractive, since they can serve as anchoring sites for
the insertion of tags for targeting or purification purposes. The implications of
our findings for retrovirus-mediated gene therapy are discussed.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01909-07 
PMCID: PMC2224463
PMID: 18032515  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

