
1. FEBS J. 2008 Jun;275(12):3123-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06468.x. Epub
2008 May 8.

Transcription factor human Skn-1a enhances replication of human papillomavirus
DNA through the direct binding to two sites near the viral replication origin.

Kukimoto I(1), Mori S, Sato H, Takeuchi T, Kanda T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pathogen Genomics, National Institute of Infectious Diseases,
1-23-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan. ikuki@nih.go.jp

Human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV16) DNA replication, which requires two viral
proteins E1 and E2, occurs only in the differentiating epithelium. Besides the
general factors necessary for cellular DNA synthesis, other unidentified cellular
factors are assumed to be involved in the regulation of HPV DNA replication. In
the present study, we found that the POU-domain transcription factor human
Skn-1a, which induces the terminal differentiation of keratinocytes and activates
the HPV16 late promoter, enhanced the transient replication of a plasmid
containing the HPV16 replication origin in HEK293 cells when co-transfected with 
a plasmid expressing E1 and E2. An electrophoretic mobility shift assay with a
bacterially expressed human Skn-1a or an extract of HeLa cells over-expressing
human Skn-1a revealed the presence of two human Skn-1a binding sites that are
distinct from the known three sites, near the replication origin. A chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis showed that human Skn-1a bound to these sites in
cells. Nucleotide substitutions in the sites abolished the binding of human
Skn-1a and the human Skn-1a-mediated replication enhancement. The data strongly
suggest that, through the binding to the two sites, human Skn-1a enhances HPV DNA
replication.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06468.x 
PMID: 18479461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

