
1. Retrovirology. 2008 Jun 10;5:47. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-5-47.

HuR interacts with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 reverse transcriptase, and
modulates reverse transcription in infected cells.

Lemay J(1), Maidou-Peindara P, Bader T, Ennifar E, Rain JC, Benarous R, Liu LX.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Universit√© Paris Descartes, CNRS (UMR8104), Paris, France.
julie.lemay@kispi.uzh.ch

Reverse transcription of the genetic material of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) is a critical step in the replication cycle of this virus. This
process, catalyzed by reverse transcriptase (RT), is well characterized at the
biochemical level. However, in infected cells, reverse transcription occurs in a 
multiprotein complex - the reverse transcription complex (RTC) - consisting of
viral genomic RNA associated with viral proteins (including RT) and, presumably, 
as yet uncharacterized cellular proteins. Very little is known about the cellular
proteins interacting with the RTC, and with reverse transcriptase in particular. 
We report here that HIV-1 reverse transcription is affected by the levels of a
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein - the RNA-binding protein HuR. A direct
protein-protein interaction between RT and HuR was observed in a yeast two-hybrid
screen and confirmed in vitro by homogenous time-resolved fluorescence (HTRF). We
mapped the domain interacting with HuR to the RNAse H domain of RT, and the
binding domain for RT to the C-terminus of HuR, partially overlapping the third
RRM RNA-binding domain of HuR. HuR silencing with specific siRNAs greatly
impaired early and late steps of reverse transcription, significantly inhibiting 
HIV-1 infection. Moreover, by mutagenesis and immunoprecipitation studies, we
could not detect the binding of HuR to the viral RNA. These results suggest that 
HuR may be involved in and may modulate the reverse transcription reaction of
HIV-1, by an as yet unknown mechanism involving a protein-protein interaction
with HIV-1 RT.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-5-47 
PMCID: PMC2441633
PMID: 18544151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

