
1. Virus Genes. 2008 Oct;37(2):231-40. doi: 10.1007/s11262-008-0259-4. Epub 2008 Jul
26.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 Tax induces an aberrant clustering of the
tumor suppressor Scribble through the PDZ domain-binding motif dependent and
independent interaction.

Okajima M(1), Takahashi M, Higuchi M, Ohsawa T, Yoshida S, Yoshida Y, Oie M,
Tanaka Y, Gejyo F, Fujii M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, 1-757 Asahimachi-Dori, Niigata, 951-8510, Japan.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is a causative agent of adult T-cell 
leukemia. HTLV-1 Tax1 transforming protein interacts with several PDZ
domain-containing proteins, and the interaction is associated with the
transforming activities of Tax1 as well as persistent HTLV-1 infection. In this
study, we show that Tax1 interacts with the tumor suppressor Scribble containing 
PDZ domains. Unlike other Tax1-interacting PDZ domain proteins, the PDZ
domain-binding motif (PBM) of Tax1 was not required for the interaction with
transiently expressed Scribble in 293T cells, but it was essential for the
interaction with endogenous Scribble. Endogenous Scribble in 293T cells was
primarily localized at the plasma membrane and colocalized with Tax1 but not
Tax1C lacking PBM, whereas transiently expressed Scribble was localized in the
cytoplasm and colocalized with Tax1C as well as Tax1, thus suggesting that Tax1
is recruited to the site of endogenous Scribble, such as the plasma membrane, in 
a PBM-dependent manner, and thereafter it interacts with Scribble in a
PBM-independent and PBM-dependent manner. Endogenous Scribble was diffusely
localized at the plasma membrane of HTLV-1-uninfected T-cell lines, whereas it
colocalized with Tax1 as small and large aggregate at the plasma membranes. These
results suggest that Tax1 through two binding sites induce aberrant clustering of
Scribble, thereby altering the functions in HTLV-1-infected cells, which may thus
play a role in persistent HTLV-1 infection and the pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-008-0259-4 
PMID: 18661220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

