
1. J Virol. 2008 Dec;82(24):12039-48. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01406-08. Epub 2008 Oct 1.

Overexpression of thiol/disulfide isomerases enhances membrane fusion directed by
the Newcastle disease virus fusion protein.

Jain S(1), McGinnes LW, Morrison TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, 55 Lake Avenue North, Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

Newcastle disease virus (NDV) fusion (F) protein directs membrane fusion, which
is required for virus entry and cell-cell fusion. We have previously shown that
free thiols are present in cell surface-expressed NDV F protein and that blocking
the production of free thiols by thiol-disulfide exchange inhibitors inhibited
the membrane fusion mediated by F protein (J Virol. 81:2328-2339, 2007).
Extending these observations, we evaluated the role of the overexpression of two 
disulfide bond isomerases, protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) and ERdj5, in
cell-cell fusion mediated by NDV glycoproteins. The overexpression of these
isomerases resulted in significantly increased membrane fusion, as measured by
syncytium formation and content mixing. The overexpression of these isomerases
enhanced the production of free thiols in F protein when expressed without
hemagglutination-neuraminidase (HN) protein but decreased free thiols in F
protein expressed with HN protein. By evaluating the binding of
conformation-sensitive antibodies, we found that the overexpression of these
isomerases favored a postfusion conformation of surface-expressed F protein in
the presence of HN protein. These results suggest that isomerases belonging to
the PDI family catalyze the production of free thiols in F protein, and free
thiols in F protein facilitate membrane fusion mediated by F protein.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01406-08 
PMCID: PMC2593343
PMID: 18829746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

