
1. J Virol. 2009 Feb;83(3):1483-91. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02057-08. Epub 2008 Nov 19.

The C-terminal domain of ERp29 mediates polyomavirus binding, unfolding, and
infection.

Rainey-Barger EK(1), Mkrtchian S, Tsai B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, 109 Zina Pitcher Place, Rm. 3043, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Penetration of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane by polyomavirus (PyV) is a
decisive step in virus entry. We showed previously that the ER-resident factor
ERp29 induces the local unfolding of PyV to initiate the ER membrane penetration 
process. ERp29 contains an N-terminal thioredoxin domain (NTD) that mediates its 
dimerization and a novel C-terminal all-helical domain (CTD) whose function is
unclear. The NTD-mediated dimerization of ERp29 is critical for its unfolding
activity; whether the CTD plays any role in PyV unfolding is unknown. We now show
that three hydrophobic residues within the last helix of the ERp29 CTD that were 
individually mutated to either lysine or alanine abolished ERp29's ability to
stimulate PyV unfolding and infection. This effect was not due to global
misfolding of the mutant proteins, as they dimerize and do not form aggregates or
display increased protease sensitivity. Moreover, the mutant proteins stimulated 
secretion of the secretory protein thyroglobulin with an efficiency similar to
that of wild-type ERp29. Using a cross-linking coimmunoprecipitation assay, we
found that the physical interaction of the ERp29 CTD mutants with PyV is
inefficient. Our data thus demonstrate that the ERp29 CTD plays a crucial role in
PyV unfolding and infection, likely by serving as part of a substrate-binding
domain.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02057-08 
PMCID: PMC2620899
PMID: 19019959  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

