
1. PLoS Pathog. 2008 Dec;4(12):e1000235. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000235. Epub
2008 Dec 12.

Structure of reovirus sigma1 in complex with its receptor junctional adhesion
molecule-A.

Kirchner E(1), Guglielmi KM, Strauss HM, Dermody TS, Stehle T.

Author information: 
(1)Interfaculty Institute for Biochemistry, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen,
Germany.

Viral attachment to specific host receptors is the first step in viral infection 
and serves an essential function in the selection of target cells. Mammalian
reoviruses are highly useful experimental models for studies of viral
pathogenesis and show promise as vectors for oncolytics and vaccines. Reoviruses 
engage cells by binding to carbohydrates and the immunoglobulin superfamily
member, junctional adhesion molecule-A (JAM-A). JAM-A exists at the cell surface 
as a homodimer formed by extensive contacts between its N-terminal
immunoglobulin-like domains. We report the crystal structure of reovirus
attachment protein sigma1 in complex with a soluble form of JAM-A. The sigma1
protein disrupts the JAM-A dimer, engaging a single JAM-A molecule via virtually 
the same interface that is used for JAM-A homodimerization. Thus, reovirus takes 
advantage of the adhesive nature of an immunoglobulin-superfamily receptor by
usurping the ligand-binding site of this molecule to attach to the cell surface. 
The dissociation constant (K(D)) of the interaction between sigma1 and JAM-A is
1,000-fold lower than that of the homophilic interaction between JAM-A molecules,
indicating that JAM-A strongly prefers sigma1 as a ligand. Analysis of reovirus
mutants engineered by plasmid-based reverse genetics revealed residues in sigma1 
required for binding to JAM-A and infectivity of cultured cells. These studies
define biophysical mechanisms of reovirus cell attachment and provide a platform 
for manipulating reovirus tropism to enhance vector targeting.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000235 
PMCID: PMC2588538
PMID: 19079583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

