
1. Virology. 2009 Apr 10;386(2):462-8. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.01.026. Epub 2009
Feb 20.

Interaction of human TNF and beta2-microglobulin with Tanapox virus-encoded TNF
inhibitor, TPV-2L.

Rahman MM(1), Jeng D, Singh R, Coughlin J, Essani K, McFadden G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, 1600 SW Archer Road, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Tanapox virus (TPV) encodes and expresses a secreted TNF-binding protein, TPV-2L 
or gp38, that displays inhibitory properties against TNF from diverse mammalian
species, including human, monkey, canine and rabbit. TPV-2L also has sequence
similarity with the MHC-class I heavy chain and interacts differently with human 
TNF as compared to the known cellular TNF receptors or any of the known
virus-encoded TNF receptor homologs derived from many poxviruses. In order to
determine the TNF binding region in TPV-2L, various TPV-2L C-terminal truncations
and internal deletions were created and the muteins were expressed using
recombinant baculovirus vectors. C-terminal deletions from TPV-2L resulted in
reduced binding affinity for human TNF and specific mutants of TNF that
discriminate between TNF-R1 and TNF-R2. However, deletion of C-terminal 42 amino 
acid residues totally abolished the binding of human TNF and its mutants. Removal
of any of the predicted internal domains resulted in a mutant TPV-2L protein
incapable of binding to human TNF. Deletion of C-terminal residues also affected 
the ability of TPV-2L to block TNF-induced cellular cytotoxicity. In addition to 
TNF, TPV-2L can also form complexes with human beta2-microglobulin to form a
novel macromolecular complex. In summary, the TPV-2L protein is a bona fide MHC-1
heavy chain family member that binds and inhibits human TNF in a fashion very
distinct from other known poxvirus-encoded TNF inhibitors, and also can form a
novel complex with the human MHC-1 light chain, beta2-microglobulin.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.01.026 
PMID: 19232662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

