
1. J Immunol. 2009 Jul 15;183(2):1229-37. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802145. Epub 2009
Jun 24.

Significance of N-terminal proteolysis of CCL14a to activity on the chemokine
receptors CCR1 and CCR5 and the human cytomegalovirus-encoded chemokine receptor 
US28.

Richter R(1), Casarosa P, Ständker L, Münch J, Springael JY, Nijmeijer S,
Forssmann WG, Vischer HF, Vakili J, Detheux M, Parmentier M, Leurs R, Smit MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Transfusion Medicine and Immune Hematology, Blood Donation
Service of the German Red Cross, Frankfurt, Germany. Rudorichter@gmx.de

The CC chemokine CCL14a is constitutively expressed in a large variety of tissues
and its inactive proform CCL14a(1-74) circulates in high concentrations in
plasma. CCL14a(1-74) is converted into CCL14a(9-74) by the proteases
urokinase-type plasminogen activator and plasmin and is a highly active agonist
for the chemokine receptors CCR1 and CCR5. In this study, a new CCL14a analog,
CCL14a(12-74), was isolated from blood filtrate. To elucidate the functional role
of the N terminus, a panel of N-terminally truncated CCL14a analogs were tested
on the receptors CCR1 to CCR5 and on the human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)-encoded
chemokine receptor US28. The rank order of binding affinity to these receptors
and of the activation of CCR1 and CCR5-mediated intracellular Ca(2+)
concentration mobilization is CCL14a(6-74)<(7-74)<(8-74)<<(9-74) =
(10-74)>>(11-74)>>(12-74). The almost identical affinities of CCL14a(7-74),
CCL14a(9-74), and CCL14a(10-74) for the US28 receptor and the inhibition of
US28-mediated HIV infection of 293T cells by all of the N-terminally truncated
CCL14a analogs support the promiscuous nature of the viral chemokine receptor
US28. In high concentrations, CCL14a(12-74) did reveal antagonistic activity on
intracellular Ca(2+) concentration mobilization in CCR1- and CCR5-transfected
cells, which suggests that truncation of Tyr(11) might be of significance for an 
efficient inactivation of CCL14a. A putative inactivation pathway of CCL14a(9-74)
to CCL14a(12-74) may involve the dipeptidase CD26/dipeptidyl peptidase IV
(DPPIV), which generates CCL14a(11-74), and the metalloprotease aminopeptidase N 
(CD13), which displays the capacity to generate CCL14a(12-74) from CCL14a(11-74).
Our results suggest that the activity of CCL14a might be regulated by stringent
proteolytic activation and inactivation steps.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802145 
PMID: 19553544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

