
1. J Virol. 2009 Sep;83(17):8596-603. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00744-09. Epub 2009 Jun 24.

gp340 promotes transcytosis of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in genital
tract-derived cell lines and primary endocervical tissue.

Stoddard E(1), Ni H, Cannon G, Zhou C, Kallenbach N, Malamud D, Weissman D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The human scavenger receptor gp340 has been identified as a binding protein for
the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) envelope that is expressed on the
cell surface of female genital tract epithelial cells. This interaction allows
such epithelial cells to efficiently transmit infective virus to susceptible
targets and maintain viral infectivity for several days. Within the context of
vaginal transmission, HIV must first traverse a normally protective mucosa
containing a cell barrier to reach the underlying T cells and dendritic cells,
which propagate and spread the infection. The mechanism by which HIV-1 can bypass
an otherwise healthy cellular barrier remains an important area of study. Here,
we demonstrate that genital tract-derived cell lines and primary human
endocervical tissue can support direct transcytosis of cell-free virus from the
apical to basolateral surfaces. Further, this transport of virus can be blocked
through the addition of antibodies or peptides that directly block the
interaction of gp340 with the HIV-1 envelope, if added prior to viral pulsing on 
the apical side of the cell or tissue barrier. Our data support a role for the
previously described heparan sulfate moieties in mediating this transcytosis but 
add gp340 as an important facilitator of HIV-1 transcytosis across genital tract 
tissue. This study demonstrates that HIV-1 actively traverses the protective
barriers of the human genital tract and presents a second mechanism whereby gp340
can promote heterosexual transmission.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00744-09 
PMCID: PMC2738159
PMID: 19553331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

