
1. Mol Ther. 2009 Oct;17(10):1683-91. doi: 10.1038/mt.2009.152. Epub 2009 Jul 14.

Influence of coagulation factor x on in vitro and in vivo gene delivery by
adenovirus (Ad) 5, Ad35, and chimeric Ad5/Ad35 vectors.

Greig JA(1), Buckley SM, Waddington SN, Parker AL, Bhella D, Pink R, Rahim AA,
Morita T, Nicklin SA, McVey JH, Baker AH.

Author information: 
(1)British Heart Foundation Glasgow Cardiovascular Research Centre, University of
Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8TA, UK.

Erratum in
    Mol Ther. 2009 Oct;17(10):1830.

The binding of coagulation factor X (FX) to the hexon of adenovirus (Ad) 5 is
pivotal for hepatocyte transduction. However, vectors based on Ad35, a subspecies
B Ad, are in development for cancer gene therapy, as Ad35 utilizes CD46 (which is
upregulated in many cancers) for transduction. We investigated whether
interaction of Ad35 with FX influenced vector tropism using Ad5, Ad35, and
Ad5/Ad35 chimeras: Ad5/fiber(f)35, Ad5/penton(p)35/f35, and Ad35/f5. Surface
plasmon resonance (SPR) revealed that Ad35 and Ad35/f5 bound FX with
approximately tenfold lower affinities than Ad5 hexon-containing viruses, and
electron cryomicroscopy (cryo-EM) demonstrated a direct Ad35 hexon:FX
interaction. The presence of physiological levels of FX significantly inhibited
transduction of vectors containing Ad35 fibers (Ad5/f35, Ad5/p35/f35, and Ad35)
in CD46-positive cells. Vectors were intravenously administered to CD46
transgenic mice in the presence and absence of FX-binding protein (X-bp),
resulting in reduced liver accumulation for all vectors. Moreover, Ad5/f35 and
Ad5/p35/f35 efficiently accumulated in the lung, whereas Ad5 demonstrated poor
lung targeting. Additionally, X-bp significantly reduced lung genome accumulation
for Ad5/f35 and Ad5/p35/f35, whereas Ad35 was significantly enhanced. In summary,
vectors based on the full Ad35 serotype will be useful vectors for selective gene
transfer via CD46 due to a weaker FX interaction compared to Ad5.

DOI: 10.1038/mt.2009.152 
PMCID: PMC2835023
PMID: 19603000  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

