
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Sep;37(17):5830-7. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp595. Epub 2009 Jul
27.

The PKR-binding domain of adenovirus VA RNAI exists as a mixture of two
functionally non-equivalent structures.

Wahid AM(1), Coventry VK, Conn GL.

Author information: 
(1)Manchester Interdisciplinary Biocentre, Faculty of Life Sciences, University
of Manchester, 131 Princess Street, Manchester, M1 7DN.

VA RNA(I) is a non-coding adenoviral transcript that counteracts the host cell
anti-viral defenses such as immune responses mediated via PKR. We investigated
potential alternate secondary structure conformations within the PKR-binding
domain of VA RNA(I) using site-directed mutagenesis, RNA UV-melting analysis and 
enzymatic RNA secondary structure probing. The latter data clearly indicated that
the wild-type VA RNA(I) apical stem can adopt two different conformations and
that it exists as a mixed population of these two structures. In contrast, in two
sequence variants we designed to eliminate one of the possible structures, while 
leaving the other intact, each formed a unique secondary structure. This
clarification of the apical stem pairing also suggests a small alteration to the 
apical stem-loop secondary structure. The relative ability of the two apical stem
conformations to bind PKR and inhibit kinase activity was measured by isothermal 
titration calorimetry and PKR autophosphorylation inhibition assay. We found that
the two sequence variants displayed markedly different activities, with one being
a significantly poorer binder and inhibitor of PKR. Whether the presence of the
VA RNA(I) conformation with reduced PKR inhibitory activity is directly
beneficial to the virus in the cell for some other function requires further
investigation.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkp595 
PMCID: PMC2761268
PMID: 19635730  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

