
1. J Virol. 2010 May;84(10):4946-59. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00060-10. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

The de novo methyltransferases DNMT3a and DNMT3b target the murine
gammaherpesvirus immediate-early gene 50 promoter during establishment of
latency.

Gray KS(1), Forrest JC, Speck SH.

Author information: 
(1)Emory Vaccine Center,Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia
30322, USA.

The role of epigenetic modifications in the regulation of gammaherpesvirus
latency has been a subject of active study for more than 20 years. DNA
methylation, associated with transcriptional silencing in mammalian genomes, has 
been shown to be an important mechanism in the transcriptional control of several
key gammaherpesvirus genes. In particular, DNA methylation of the functionally
conserved immediate-early replication and transcription activator (RTA) has been 
shown to regulate Epstein-Barr virus and Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus 
Rta expression. Here we demonstrate that the murine gammaherpesvirus (MHV68)
homolog, encoded by gene 50, is also subject to direct repression by DNA
methylation, both in vitro and in vivo. We observed that the treatment of
latently MHV68-infected B-cell lines with a methyltransferase inhibitor induced
virus reactivation. In addition, we show that the methylation of the recently
characterized distal gene 50 promoter represses activity in a murine macrophage
cell line. To evaluate the role of de novo methyltransferases (DNMTs) in the
establishment of these methylation marks, we infected mice in which conditional
DNMT3a and DNMT3b alleles were selectively deleted in B lymphocytes.
DNMT3a/DNMT3b-deficient B cells were phenotypically normal, displaying no obvious
compromise in cell surface marker expression or antibody production either in
na√Øve mice or in the context of nonviral and viral immunogens. However, mice
lacking functional DNMT3a and DNMT3b in B cells exhibited hallmarks of
deregulated MHV68 lytic replication, including increased splenomegaly and the
presence of infectious virus in the spleen at day 18 following infection. In
addition, total gene 50 transcript levels were elevated in the spleens of these
mice at day 18, which correlated with the hypomethylation of the distal gene 50
promoter. However, by day 42 postinfection, aberrant virus replication was
resolved, and we observed wild-type frequencies of viral genome-positive
splenocytes in mice lacking functional DNMT3a and DNMT3b in B lymphocytes. The
latter correlated with increased CpG methylation in the distal gene 50 promoter, 
which was restored to levels similar to those of littermate controls harboring
functional DNMT3a and DNMT3b alleles in B lymphocytes, suggesting the existence
of an alternative mechanism for the de novo methylation of the MHV68 genome.
Importantly, this DNMT3a/DNMT3b-independent methylation appeared to be targeted
specifically to the gene 50 promoter, as we observed that the promoters for MHV68
gene 72 (v-cyclin) and M11 (v-bcl2) remained hypomethylated at day 42
postinfection. Taken together, these data provide the first evidence of the
importance of DNA methylation in regulating gammaherpesvirus RTA/gene 50
transcription during virus infection in vivo and provide insight into the
hierarchy of host machinery required to establish this modification.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00060-10 
PMCID: PMC2863815
PMID: 20200245  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

