
1. J Virol. 2010 Jul;84(13):6720-32. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01983-09. Epub 2010 Apr 14.

Host factors associated with the Sindbis virus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase: role
for G3BP1 and G3BP2 in virus replication.

Cristea IM(1), Rozjabek H, Molloy KR, Karki S, White LL, Rice CM, Rout MP, Chait 
BT, MacDonald MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Lewis Thomas
Laboratory, Washington Road, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA.

Sindbis virus (SINV) is the prototype member of the Alphavirus genus, whose
members cause severe human diseases for which there is no specific treatment. To 
ascertain host factors important in the replication of the SINV RNA genome, we
generated a SINV expressing nsP4, the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, with an
in-frame 3xFlag epitope tag. Proteomic analysis of nsP4-containing complexes
isolated from cells infected with the tagged virus revealed 29 associated host
proteins. Of these, 10 proteins were associated only at a later time of infection
(12 h), 14 were associated both early and late, and five were isolated only at
the earlier time (6 h postinfection). These results demonstrate the dynamic
nature of the virus-host interaction that occurs over the course of infection and
suggest that different host proteins may be required for the multiple functions
carried out by nsP4. Two related proteins found in association with nsP4 at both 
times of infection, GTPase-activating protein (SH3 domain) binding protein 1
(G3BP1) and G3BP2 were also previously identified as associated with SINV nsP2
and nsP3. We demonstrate a likely overlapping role for these host factors in
limiting SINV replication events. The present study also identifies 10 host
factors associated with nsP4 6 h after infection that were not found to be
associated with nsP2 or nsP3. These factors are candidates for playing important 
roles in the RNA replication process. Identifying host factors essential for
replication should lead to new strategies to interrupt alphavirus replication.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01983-09 
PMCID: PMC2903289
PMID: 20392851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

