
1. J Virol. 2010 Aug;84(16):8111-23. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00459-10. Epub 2010 Jun 2.

Role of noncovalent SUMO binding by the human cytomegalovirus IE2 transactivator 
in lytic growth.

Kim ET(1), Kim YE, Huh YH, Ahn JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea.

The 86-kDa immediate-early 2 (IE2) protein of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a
promiscuous transactivator essential for viral gene expression. IE2 is covalently
modified by SUMO at two lysine residues (K175 and K180) and also interacts
noncovalently with SUMO. Although SUMOylation of IE2 has been shown to enhance
its transactivation activity, the role of SUMO binding is not clear. Here we
showed that SUMO binding by IE2 is necessary for its efficient transactivation
function and for viral growth. IE2 bound physically to SUMO-1 through a
SUMO-interacting motif (SIM). Mutations in SIM (mSIM) or in both SUMOylation
sites and SIM (KR/mSIM), significantly reduced IE2 transactivation effects on
viral early promoters. The replication of IE2 SIM mutant viruses (mSIM or
KR/mSIM) was severely depressed in normal human fibroblasts. Analysis of viral
growth curves revealed that the replication defect of the mSIM virus correlated
with low-level accumulation of SUMO-modified IE2 and of viral early and late
proteins. Importantly, both the formation of viral transcription domains and the 
association of IE2 with viral promoters in infected cells were significantly
reduced in IE2 SIM mutant virus infection. Furthermore, IE2 was found to interact
with the SUMO-modified form of TATA-binding protein (TBP)-associated factor 12
(TAF12), a component of the TFIID complex, in a SIM-dependent manner, and this
interaction enhanced the transactivation activity of IE2. Our data demonstrate
that the interaction of IE2 with SUMO-modified proteins plays an important role
for the progression of the HCMV lytic cycle, and they suggest a novel viral
mechanism utilizing the cellular SUMO system.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00459-10 
PMCID: PMC2916544
PMID: 20519406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

