
1. Blood. 2010 Sep 16;116(11):1876-84. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-09-243667. Epub 2010 
Jun 8.

Inhibition of lipid antigen presentation in dendritic cells by HIV-1 Vpu
interference with CD1d recycling from endosomal compartments.

Moll M(1), Andersson SK, Smed-SÃ¶rensen A, Sandberg JK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden. markus.moll@ki.se

Dendritic cells (DCs) play an important role in viral infections both as
initiators of immunity and as viral targets. Interaction between DCs and the
innate-like CD1d-restricted natural killer T (NKT) cells results in the mutual
activation of both cells and the subsequent initiation of cellular immune
responses. Here, we show that HIV-1 inhibits the surface expression of CD1d in
productively infected DCs and identify this as a novel activity of the HIV-1 vpu 
gene product. Interestingly, the viral protein U (Vpu) does not enhance
constitutive CD1d endocytosis or induce rapid CD1d degradation. Instead, the Vpu 
protein interacts with CD1d and suppresses its recycling from endosomal
compartments to the cell surface by retaining CD1d in early endosomes. This
interference with the CD1d antigen presentation pathway strongly inhibits the
ability of infected DCs to activate CD1d-restricted NKT cells. Given that the
interaction with CD1d-expressing DCs is central to the ability of NKT cells to
regulate immunity, these data suggest that interference with the CD1d antigen
presentation pathway represents an HIV-1 strategy to evade innate cellular immune
responses and imply a role for the innate-like CD1d-restricted NKT cells in the
host defense against HIV-1.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2009-09-243667 
PMCID: PMC3173986
PMID: 20530791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

