
1. J Gen Virol. 2010 Oct;91(Pt 10):2474-84. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.022681-0. Epub 2010
Jun 16.

Human cellular protein nucleoporin hNup98 interacts with influenza A virus
NS2/nuclear export protein and overexpression of its GLFG repeat domain can
inhibit virus propagation.

Chen J(1), Huang S, Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan 430071, PR China.

The non-structural protein NS2, also called nuclear export protein, of influenza 
A virus contains a leucine-rich nuclear-export signal that could guide viral
ribonucleoproteins to cross the nuclear pore complex (NPC) and complete
directional nucleocytoplasmic trafficking. In this study, human nucleoporin 98
(hNup98), an NPC protein, was identified as an NS2-binding protein by using yeast
two-hybrid screening of a human cDNA library. Interaction between NS2 and hNup98 
was confirmed in yeast and mammalian cells. Mapping tests further demonstrated
that aa 22-53 in the N-terminal region of NS2 and the
glycine-leucine-phenylalanine-glycine (GLFG) repeat domain (aa 1-511) of hNup98
are crucial for the interaction of these two proteins. Confocal microscopy showed
that hNup98 could specifically recruit NS2 to the nucleoli and that this process 
was inhibited by leptomycin B, a specific inhibitor of human chromosomal region
maintenance 1 protein. NS2 recruitment to the nucleoli was through the N-terminal
GLFG repeat domain of hNup98, but not through the C-terminal domain. Moreover,
influenza virus infection downregulated Nup98 levels significantly in 293T and
Madin-Darby canine kidney cells. Overexpression of the GLFG repeat domain of
hNup98 apparently inhibited virus propagation. Together, these findings reveal
the interaction between hNup98 and NS2. The GLFG repeat domain of hNup98 might
competitively inhibit the interaction between NS2 and endogenous hNup98,
consequently inhibiting virus propagation.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.022681-0 
PMID: 20554795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

