
1. J Virol. 2010 Sep;84(18):9505-15. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00678-10. Epub 2010 Jul 14.

Interaction of the papillomavirus E8--E2C protein with the cellular CHD6 protein 
contributes to transcriptional repression.

Fertey J(1), Ammermann I, Winkler M, St√∂ger R, Iftner T, Stubenrauch F.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Tuebingen, Institute for Medical Virology and Epidemiology
of Viral Diseases, Division of Experimental Virology, Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 6,
D-72076 Tuebingen, Germany.

Expression of the E6 and E7 oncogenes of high-risk human papillomaviruses (HPV)
is controlled by cellular transcription factors and by viral E2 and E8--E2C
proteins, which are both derived from the HPV E2 gene. Both proteins bind to and 
repress the HPV E6/E7 promoter. Promoter inhibition has been suggested to be due 
to binding site competition with cellular transcription factors and to
interactions of different cellular transcription modulators with the different
amino termini of E2 and E8--E2C. We have now identified the cellular chromodomain
helicase DNA binding domain 6 protein (CHD6) as a novel interactor with HPV31
E8--E2C by using yeast two-hybrid screening. Pull-down and coimmunoprecipitation 
assays indicate that CHD6 interacts with the HPV31 E8--E2C protein via the E2C
domain. This interaction is conserved, as it occurs also with the E8--E2C
proteins expressed by HPV16 and -18 and with the HPV31 E2 protein. Both RNA
knockdown experiments and mutational analyses of the E2C domain suggest that
binding of CHD6 to E8--E2C contributes to the transcriptional repression of the
HPV E6/E7 oncogene promoter. We provide evidence that CHD6 is also involved in
transcriptional repression but not activation by E2. Taken together our results
indicate that the E2C domain not only mediates specific DNA binding but also has 
an additional role in transcriptional repression by recruitment of the CHD6
protein. This suggests that repression of the E6/E7 promoter by E2 and E8--E2C
involves multiple interactions with host cell proteins through different protein 
domains.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00678-10 
PMCID: PMC2937640
PMID: 20631145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

