
1. J Virol. 2010 Oct;84(19):9709-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01050-10. Epub 2010 Jul 21.

Interwoven roles of cyclin D3 and cdk4 recruited by ICP0 and ICP4 in the
expression of herpes simplex virus genes.

Kalamvoki M(1), Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago, 910
East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Elsewhere this laboratory reported that (i) ICP0 interacts with cyclin D3 but not
D1 or D2. The 3 cyclins independently partially rescue DeltaICP0 mutants. (ii)
Interaction with cyclin D3 is required for the switch from nuclear to cytoplasmic
accumulation of ICP0. (iii) In infected cells cdk4 is activated whereas cdk2 is
not. Inhibition of cdk4 results in nuclear retention of ICP0. Overexpression of
cyclin D3 reverses the effect of the inhibitor. Here we report the following. (i)
cdk4 interacts with ICP0, ICP4, and possibly with ICP8. This interaction is
required to recruit cdk4 initially to ND10 and later to the viral replication
compartments. (ii) cdk4 inhibitor I reduced or delayed the transcription and
ultimately translation of mRNAs of ICP4, ICP27, or ICP8 and to a lesser extent
that of the ICP0 gene in wild-type virus-infected cells. (iii) Overexpression of 
cyclin D3 resulted in a more rapid transcription of these genes. In the presence 
of inhibitor, the rates of accumulation of the products of these genes resemble
those of wild-type virus in the absence of inhibitor. (iv) Overexpression of
cyclin D3 also results in mobilization of cdk6 in nuclei of infected cells. We
conclude that ICP0 encodes a function that enhances the recruitment of cyclin D3 
to ND10 structures to activate cdk4 and that ICP0 along with other viral proteins
recruits cdk4 to ND10 structures and ultimately to replication compartments for
enhanced expression of viral genes and viral DNA synthesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01050-10 
PMCID: PMC2937768
PMID: 20660182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

