
1. J Virol. 2010 Nov;84(22):12039-47. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00396-10. Epub 2010 Aug 18.

Histone deacetylases and the nuclear receptor corepressor regulate lytic-latent
switch gene 50 in murine gammaherpesvirus 68-infected macrophages.

Goodwin MM(1), Molleston JM, Canny S, Abou El Hassan M, Willert EK, Bremner R,
Virgin HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110-1093, USA.

Gammaherpesviruses are important oncogenic pathogens that transit between lytic
and latent life cycles. Silencing the lytic gene expression program enables the
establishment of latency and a lifelong chronic infection of the host. In murine 
gammaherpesvirus 68 (MHV68, Î³HV68), essential lytic switch gene 50 controls the
interchange between lytic and latent gene expression programs. However, negative 
regulators of gene 50 expression remain largely undefined. We report that the
MHV68 lytic cycle is silenced in infected macrophages but not fibroblasts and
that histone deacetylases (HDACs) mediate silencing. The HDAC inhibitor
trichostatin A (TSA) acts on the gene 50 promoter to induce lytic replication of 
MHV68. HDAC3, HDAC4, and the nuclear receptor corepressor (NCoR) are required for
efficient silencing of gene 50 expression. NCoR is critical for transcriptional
repression of cellular genes by unliganded nuclear receptors. Retinoic acid, a
known ligand for the NCoR complex, derepresses gene 50 expression and enhances
MHV68 lytic replication. Moreover, HDAC3, HDAC4, and NCoR act on the gene 50
promoter and are recruited to this promoter in a retinoic acid-responsive manner.
We provide the first example of NCoR-mediated, HDAC-dependent regulation of viral
gene expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00396-10 
PMCID: PMC2977890
PMID: 20719946  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

