
1. J Virol. 2010 Nov;84(22):11888-97. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01036-10. Epub 2010 Sep 15.

Bovine foamy virus transactivator BTas interacts with cellular RelB to enhance
viral transcription.

Wang J(1), Tan J, Guo H, Zhang Q, Jia R, Xu X, Geng Y, Qiao W.

Author information: 
(1)Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

Viruses are obligate intracellular parasites that depend on cellular machinery
for their efficient transcription and replication. In a previous study we
reported that bovine foamy virus (BFV) is able to activate the nuclear factor κB 
(NF-κB) pathway through the action of its transactivator BTas to enhance viral
transcription. However, the mechanism used by NF-κB to enhance BFV transcription 
remains elusive. To address this question, we employed a yeast two-hybrid assay
to screen for BTas-interacting proteins. We found that RelB, a member of NF-κB
protein family, interacts with BTas. We confirmed the putative RelB-BTas
interaction in vitro and in vivo and identified the protein regions responsible
for the RelB-BTas interaction. Using a luciferase reporter assay, we next showed 
that RelB enhances BFV transcription (BTas-induced long terminal repeat [LTR]
transactivation) and that this process requires both the localization of the
RelB-BTas interaction in the nucleus and the Rel homology domain of RelB. The
knockdown of the cellular endogenous RelB protein using small interfering RNA
(siRNA) significantly attenuated BTas-induced LTR transcription. The results of
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis showed that endogenous RelB binds
to the viral LTR in BFV-infected cells. Together, these results suggest that BFV 
engages the RelB protein as a cotransactivator of BTas to enhance viral
transcription. In addition, our findings indicate that BFV infection upregulates 
cellular RelB expression through BTas-induced NF-κB activation. Thus, this study 
demonstrates the existence of a positive-feedback circuit in which BFV utilizes
the host's NF-κB pathway through the RelB protein for efficient viral
transcription.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01036-10 
PMCID: PMC2977858
PMID: 20844054  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

