
1. J Virol. 2011 Feb;85(4):1528-40. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01709-10. Epub 2010 Nov 24.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus ORF57 interacts with cellular RNA export 
cofactors RBM15 and OTT3 to promote expression of viral ORF59.

Majerciak V(1), Uranishi H, Kruhlak M, Pilkington GR, Massimelli MJ, Bear J,
Pavlakis GN, Felber BK, Zheng ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Virus RNA Biology Section, HIV and AIDS Malignancy Branch, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
zhengt@exchange.nih.gov

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) encodes ORF57, which promotes the 
accumulation of specific KSHV mRNA targets, including ORF59 mRNA. We report that 
the cellular export NXF1 cofactors RBM15 and OTT3 participate in ORF57-enhanced
expression of KSHV ORF59. We also found that ectopic expression of RBM15 or OTT3 
augments ORF59 production in the absence of ORF57. While RBM15 promotes the
accumulation of ORF59 RNA predominantly in the nucleus compared to the levels in 
the cytoplasm, we found that ORF57 shifted the nucleocytoplasmic balance by
increasing ORF59 RNA accumulation in the cytoplasm more than in the nucleus. By
promoting the accumulation of cytoplasmic ORF59 RNA, ORF57 offsets the nuclear
RNA accumulation mediated by RBM15 by preventing nuclear ORF59 RNA from
hyperpolyadenylation. ORF57 interacts directly with the RBM15 C-terminal portion 
containing the SPOC domain to reduce RBM15 binding to ORF59 RNA. Although ORF57
homologs Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) EB2, herpes simplex virus (HSV) ICP27,
varicella-zoster virus (VZV) IE4/ORF4, and cytomegalovirus (CMV) UL69 also
interact with RBM15 and OTT3, EBV EB2, which also promotes ORF59 expression, does
not function like KSHV ORF57 to efficiently prevent RBM15-mediated nuclear
accumulation of ORF59 RNA and RBM15's association with polyadenylated RNAs.
Collectively, our data provide novel insight elucidating a molecular mechanism by
which ORF57 promotes the expression of viral intronless genes.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01709-10 
PMCID: PMC3028919
PMID: 21106733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

