
1. J Virol. 2011 Mar;85(5):2386-96. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01855-10. Epub 2010 Dec 15.

A PDI family network acts distinctly and coordinately with ERp29 to facilitate
polyomavirus infection.

Walczak CP(1), Tsai B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-to-cytosol membrane transport is a decisive infection 
step for the murine polyomavirus (Py). We previously determined that ERp29, a
protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) member, extrudes the Py VP1 C-terminal arm to
initiate ER membrane penetration. This reaction requires disruption of Py's
disulfide bonds. Here, we found that the PDI family members ERp57, PDI, and ERp72
facilitate virus infection. However, while all three proteins disrupt Py's
disulfide bonds in vitro, only ERp57 and PDI operate in concert with ERp29 to
unfold the VP1 C-terminal arm. An alkylated Py cannot stimulate infection,
implying a pivotal role of viral free cysteines during infection. Consistent with
this, we found that although PDI and ERp72 reduce Py, ERp57 principally
isomerizes the virus in vitro, a reaction that requires viral free cysteines. Our
mutagenesis study subsequently identified VP1 C11 and C15 as important for
infection, suggesting a role for these residues during isomerization. C11 and C15
also act together to stabilize interpentamer interactions for a subset of the
virus pentamers, likely because some of these residues form interpentamer
disulfide bonds. This study reveals how a PDI family functions coordinately and
distinctly to promote Py infection and pinpoints a role of viral cysteines in
this process.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01855-10 
PMCID: PMC3067762
PMID: 21159867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

