
1. J Virol. 2011 Mar;85(6):2859-68. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01628-10. Epub 2011 Jan 5.

Roscovitine inhibits EBNA1 serine 393 phosphorylation, nuclear localization,
transcription, and episome maintenance.

Kang MS(1), Lee EK, Soni V, Lewis TA, Koehler AN, Srinivasan V, Kieff E.

Author information: 
(1)Samsung Biomedical Research Institutes, Samsung Medical Center, 50 Irwon-dong,
Gangnam-gu, Seoul, South Korea 135-710. mkang@skku.edu

Latent Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection causes human lymphomas and carcinomas. 
EBV usually persists as an episome in malignant cells. EBV episome persistence,
replication, and gene expression are dependent on EBNA1 binding to multiple
cognate sites in oriP. To search for inhibitors of EBNA1- and oriP-dependent
episome maintenance or transcription, a library of 40,550 small molecules was
screened for compounds that inhibit EBNA1- and oriP-dependent transcription and
do not inhibit EBNA1- and oriP-independent transcription. This screening
identified roscovitine, a selective inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase 1
(CDK1), CDK2, CDK5, and CDK7. Based on motif predictions of EBNA1 serine 393 as a
CDK phosphorylation site and (486)RALL(489) and (580)KDLVM(584) as potential
cyclin binding domains, we hypothesized that cyclin binding to EBNA1 may enable
CDK1, -2, -5, or -7 to phosphorylate serine 393. We found that Escherichia
coli-expressed EBNA1 amino acids 387 to 641 were phosphorylated in vitro by
CDK1-, -2-, -5-, and -7/cyclin complexes and serine 393 phosphorylation was
roscovitine inhibited. Further, S393A mutation abrogated phosphorylation. S393A
mutant EBNA1 was deficient in supporting EBNA1- and oriP-dependent transcription 
and episome persistence, and roscovitine had little further effect on the
diminished S393A mutant EBNA1-mediated transcription or episome persistence.
Immunoprecipitated FLAG-EBNA1 was phosphorylated in vitro, and roscovitine
inhibited this phosphorylation. Moreover, roscovitine decreased nuclear EBNA1 and
often increased cytoplasmic EBNA1, whereas S393A mutant EBNA1 was localized
equally in the nucleus and cytoplasm and was unaffected by roscovitine treatment.
These data indicate that roscovitine effects are serine 393 specific and that
serine 393 is important in EBNA1- and oriPCp-dependent transcription and episome 
persistence.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01628-10 
PMCID: PMC3067954
PMID: 21209116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

