
1. J Virol. 2011 Sep;85(18):9495-505. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02620-10. Epub 2011 Jul 6.

Ribosomal protein S6 interacts with the latency-associated nuclear antigen of
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus.

Chen W(1), Dittmer DP.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, CB 7290, 715 Mary Ellen Jones
Bldg., Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7290, USA.

The latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA) is central to the maintenance of
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) and to the survival of
KSHV-carrying tumor cells. In an effort to identify interaction partners of LANA,
we purified authentic high-molecular-weight complexes of LANA by conventional
chromatography followed by immunoprecipitation from the BC-3 cell line. This is
the first analysis of LANA-interacting partners that is not based on forced
ectopic expression of LANA. Subsequent tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis 
identified many of the known LANA-interacting proteins. We confirmed LANA's
interactions with histones. Three classes of proteins survived our stringent
four-step purification procedure (size, heparin, anion, and immunoaffinity
chromatography): two heat shock proteins (Hsp70 and Hsp96 precursor), signal
recognition particle 72 (SRP72), and 10 different ribosomal proteins. These
proteins are likely involved in structural interactions within LANA
high-molecular-weight complexes. Here, we show that ribosomal protein S6 (RPS6)
interacts with LANA. This interaction is mediated by the N-terminal domain of
LANA and does not require DNA or RNA. Depletion of RPS6 from primary effusion
lymphoma (PEL) cells dramatically decreases the half-life of full-length LANA.
The fact that RPS6 has a well-established nuclear function beyond its role in
ribosome assembly suggests that RPS6 (and by extension other ribosomal proteins) 
contributes to the extraordinary stability of LANA.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02620-10 
PMCID: PMC3165752
PMID: 21734034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

