
1. J Proteome Res. 2011 Oct 7;10(10):4522-34. doi: 10.1021/pr200338d. Epub 2011 Aug 
24.

Identification of hnRNPH1, NF45, and C14orf166 as novel host interacting partners
of the mature hepatitis C virus core protein.

Lee JW(1), Liao PC, Young KC, Chang CL, Chen SS, Chang TT, Lai MD, Wang SW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Science, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University , Tainan 70401, Taiwan, Republic of China.

The hepatitis C virus core protein (HCVc) forms the viral nucleocapsid and is
involved in viral persistence and pathogenesis, possibly by interacting with host
factors to modulate viral replication and cellular functions. Here, we identified
36 cellular protein candidates by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE and LC-MS/MS-based
proteomics after affinity purification with HCVc174, a matured form of HCVc from 
HCV-1b genotype, tagged with biotin and calmodulin-binding peptide/protein A at
N- and C-termini, respectively. By pull-down and confocal imaging techniques, we 
confirmed that heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein H1 (hnRNPH1), nuclear
factor 45 (NF45), and C14orf166 are novel HCVc174-interacting host proteins,
known to participate in mRNA metabolism, gene regulation, and microtubule
organization, respectively. Unlike the other 2 proteins, NF45 interacted with
HCVc174 in an RNA-dependent manner. These 3 proteins colocalized with ectopic
HCVc-1b in both the cytoplasm and nucleus, which demonstrated their spatial
interaction with naturally translocated HCVc174 after HCVc biogenesis. Such
colocalization, however, shifted to the cytoplasm in cells with replicating virus
of 1b or 2a genotype, indicating that active viral replication confined these
interacting proteins in the cytoplasm. Collectively, our findings suggest that
spatial interactions of hnRNPH1, NF45, and C14orf166 with HCVc174 likely modulate
HCV or cellular functions during acute and chronic HCV infection.

DOI: 10.1021/pr200338d 
PMID: 21823664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

