
1. J Virol. 2011 Nov;85(21):11220-34. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05238-11. Epub 2011 Aug 10.

Human and rhesus APOBEC3D, APOBEC3F, APOBEC3G, and APOBEC3H demonstrate a
conserved capacity to restrict Vif-deficient HIV-1.

Hultquist JF(1), Lengyel JA, Refsland EW, LaRue RS, Lackey L, Brown WL, Harris
RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Institute for
Molecular Virology, Center for Genome Engineering, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Successful intracellular pathogens must evade or neutralize the innate immune
defenses of their host cells and render the cellular environment permissive for
replication. For example, to replicate efficiently in CD4(+) T lymphocytes, human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) encodes a protein called viral infectivity 
factor (Vif) that promotes pathogenesis by triggering the degradation of the
retrovirus restriction factor APOBEC3G. Other APOBEC3 proteins have been
implicated in HIV-1 restriction, but the relevant repertoire remains ambiguous.
Here we present the first comprehensive analysis of the complete, seven-member
human and rhesus APOBEC3 families in HIV-1 restriction. In addition to APOBEC3G, 
we find that three other human APOBEC3 proteins, APOBEC3D, APOBEC3F, and
APOBEC3H, are all potent HIV-1 restriction factors. These four proteins are
expressed in CD4(+) T lymphocytes, are packaged into and restrict Vif-deficient
HIV-1 when stably expressed in T cells, mutate proviral DNA, and are counteracted
by HIV-1 Vif. Furthermore, APOBEC3D, APOBEC3F, APOBEC3G, and APOBEC3H of the
rhesus macaque also are packaged into and restrict Vif-deficient HIV-1 when
stably expressed in T cells, and they are all neutralized by the simian
immunodeficiency virus Vif protein. On the other hand, neither human nor rhesus
APOBEC3A, APOBEC3B, nor APOBEC3C had a significant impact on HIV-1 replication.
These data strongly implicate a combination of four APOBEC3 proteins--APOBEC3D,
APOBEC3F, APOBEC3G, and APOBEC3H--in HIV-1 restriction.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.05238-11 
PMCID: PMC3194973
PMID: 21835787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

