
1. Nature. 2011 Aug 24;477(7364):340-3. doi: 10.1038/nature10348.

Ebola virus entry requires the cholesterol transporter Niemann-Pick C1.

Carette JE(1), Raaben M, Wong AC, Herbert AS, Obernosterer G, Mulherkar N, Kuehne
AI, Kranzusch PJ, Griffin AM, Ruthel G, Dal Cin P, Dye JM, Whelan SP, Chandran K,
Brummelkamp TR.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2011 Oct;10(10):731.

Infections by the Ebola and Marburg filoviruses cause a rapidly fatal
haemorrhagic fever in humans for which no approved antivirals are available.
Filovirus entry is mediated by the viral spike glycoprotein (GP), which attaches 
viral particles to the cell surface, delivers them to endosomes and catalyses
fusion between viral and endosomal membranes. Additional host factors in the
endosomal compartment are probably required for viral membrane fusion; however,
despite considerable efforts, these critical host factors have defied molecular
identification. Here we describe a genome-wide haploid genetic screen in human
cells to identify host factors required for Ebola virus entry. Our screen
uncovered 67 mutations disrupting all six members of the homotypic fusion and
vacuole protein-sorting (HOPS) multisubunit tethering complex, which is involved 
in the fusion of endosomes to lysosomes, and 39 independent mutations that
disrupt the endo/lysosomal cholesterol transporter protein Niemann-Pick C1
(NPC1). Cells defective for the HOPS complex or NPC1 function, including primary 
fibroblasts derived from human Niemann-Pick type C1 disease patients, are
resistant to infection by Ebola virus and Marburg virus, but remain fully
susceptible to a suite of unrelated viruses. We show that membrane fusion
mediated by filovirus glycoproteins and viral escape from the vesicular
compartment require the NPC1 protein, independent of its known function in
cholesterol transport. Our findings uncover unique features of the entry pathway 
used by filoviruses and indicate potential antiviral strategies to combat these
deadly agents.

DOI: 10.1038/nature10348 
PMCID: PMC3175325
PMID: 21866103  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

