
1. J Virol. 2011 Nov;85(22):11588-600. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00641-11. Epub 2011 Aug 31.

Molecular characterization of the host defense activity of the barrier to
autointegration factor against vaccinia virus.

Ibrahim N(1), Wicklund A, Wiebe MS.

Author information: 
(1)Nebraska Center for Virology, 4240 Fair Street, Lincoln, NE 68583, USA.

The barrier to autointegration factor (BAF) is an essential cellular protein with
functions in mitotic nuclear reassembly, retroviral preintegration complex
stability, and transcriptional regulation. Molecular properties of BAF include
the ability to bind double-stranded DNA in a sequence-independent manner,
homodimerize, and bind proteins containing a LEM domain. These capabilities allow
BAF to compact DNA and assemble higher-order nucleoprotein complexes, the nature 
of which is poorly understood. Recently, it was revealed that BAF also acts as a 
potent host defense against poxviral DNA replication in the cytoplasm. Here, we
extend these observations by examining the molecular mechanism through which BAF 
acts as a host defense against vaccinia virus replication and cytoplasmic DNA in 
general. Interestingly, BAF rapidly relocalizes to transfected DNA from a variety
of sources, demonstrating that BAF's activity as a host defense factor is not
limited to poxviral infection. BAF's relocalization to cytoplasmic foreign DNA is
highly dependent upon its DNA binding and dimerization properties but does not
appear to require its LEM domain binding activity. However, the LEM domain
protein emerin is recruited to cytoplasmic DNA in a BAF-dependent manner during
both transfection and vaccinia virus infection. Finally, we demonstrate that the 
DNA binding and dimerization capabilities of BAF are essential for its function
as an antipoxviral effector, while the presence of emerin is not required.
Together, these data provide further mechanistic insight into which of BAF's
molecular properties are employed by cells to impair the replication of
poxviruses or respond to foreign DNA in general.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00641-11 
PMCID: PMC3209281
PMID: 21880762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

