
1. J Virol. 2011 Dec;85(24):13010-8. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02651-10. Epub 2011 Oct 12.

Generation and comprehensive analysis of an influenza virus polymerase cellular
interaction network.

Tafforeau L(1), Chantier T, Pradezynski F, Pellet J, Mangeot PE, Vidalain PO,
Andre P, Rabourdin-Combe C, Lotteau V.

Author information: 
(1)RNA Metabolism, IBMM, ULB, rue Profs. Jeener & Brachet 12, 6041 Gosselies,
Belgium. lionel.tafforeau@ulb.ac.be

The influenza virus transcribes and replicates its genome inside the nucleus of
infected cells. Both activities are performed by the viral RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase that is composed of the three subunits PA, PB1, and PB2, and recent
studies have shown that it requires host cell factors to transcribe and replicate
the viral genome. To identify these cellular partners, we generated a
comprehensive physical interaction map between each polymerase subunit and the
host cellular proteome. A total of 109 human interactors were identified by yeast
two-hybrid screens, whereas 90 were retrieved by literature mining. We built the 
FluPol interactome network composed of the influenza virus polymerase (PA, PB1,
and PB2) and the nucleoprotein NP and 234 human proteins that are connected
through 279 viral-cellular protein interactions. Analysis of this interactome map
revealed enriched cellular functions associated with the influenza virus
polymerase, including host factors involved in RNA polymerase II-dependent
transcription and mRNA processing. We confirmed that eight influenza virus
polymerase-interacting proteins are required for virus replication and
transcriptional activity of the viral polymerase. These are involved in cellular 
transcription (C14orf166, COPS5, MNAT1, NMI, and POLR2A), translation (EIF3S6IP),
nuclear transport (NUP54), and DNA repair (FANCG). Conversely, we identified
PRKRA, which acts as an inhibitor of the viral polymerase transcriptional
activity and thus is required for the cellular antiviral response.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02651-10 
PMCID: PMC3233135
PMID: 21994455  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

