
1. J Virol. 2012 Jan;86(1):492-503. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05897-11. Epub 2011 Oct 19.

Herpes simplex virus requires poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase activity for efficient 
replication and induces extracellular signal-related kinase-dependent
phosphorylation and ICP0-dependent nuclear localization of tankyrase 1.

Li Z(1), Yamauchi Y, Kamakura M, Murayama T, Goshima F, Kimura H, Nishiyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya University,
Nagoya, Japan.

Tankyrase 1 is a poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) which localizes to multiple
subcellular sites, including telomeres and mitotic centrosomes.
Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of the nuclear mitotic apparatus (NuMA) protein by
tankyrase 1 during mitosis is essential for sister telomere resolution and
mitotic spindle pole formation. In interphase cells, tankyrase 1 resides in the
cytoplasm, and its role therein is not well understood. In this study, we found
that herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection induced extensive modification of
tankyrase 1 but not tankyrase 2. This modification was dependent on extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) activity triggered by HSV infection. Following
HSV-1 infection, tankyrase 1 was recruited to the nucleus. In the early phase of 
infection, tankyrase 1 colocalized with ICP0 and thereafter localized within the 
HSV replication compartment, which was blocked in cells infected with the HSV-1
ICP0-null mutant R7910. In the absence of infection, ICP0 interacted with
tankyrase 1 and efficiently promoted its nuclear localization. HSV did not
replicate efficiently in cells depleted of both tankyrases 1 and 2. Moreover,
XAV939, an inhibitor of tankyrase PARP activity, decreased viral titers to 2 to
5% of control values. We concluded that HSV targets tankyrase 1 in an ICP0- and
ERK-dependent manner to facilitate its replication.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.05897-11 
PMCID: PMC3255871
PMID: 22013039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

