
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Oct;7(10):e1002331. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002331. Epub
2011 Oct 27.

The SARS-coronavirus-host interactome: identification of cyclophilins as target
for pan-coronavirus inhibitors.

Pfefferle S(1), Schöpf J, Kögl M, Friedel CC, Müller MA, Carbajo-Lozoya J,
Stellberger T, von Dall'Armi E, Herzog P, Kallies S, Niemeyer D, Ditt V, Kuri T, 
Züst R, Pumpor K, Hilgenfeld R, Schwarz F, Zimmer R, Steffen I, Weber F, Thiel V,
Herrler G, Thiel HJ, Schwegmann-Wessels C, Pöhlmann S, Haas J, Drosten C, von
Brunn A.

Author information: 
(1)Bernhard-Nocht-Institute, Hamburg, Germany.

Coronaviruses (CoVs) are important human and animal pathogens that induce fatal
respiratory, gastrointestinal and neurological disease. The outbreak of the
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in 2002/2003 has demonstrated human
vulnerability to (Coronavirus) CoV epidemics. Neither vaccines nor therapeutics
are available against human and animal CoVs. Knowledge of host cell proteins that
take part in pivotal virus-host interactions could define broad-spectrum
antiviral targets. In this study, we used a systems biology approach employing a 
genome-wide yeast-two hybrid interaction screen to identify immunopilins (PPIA,
PPIB, PPIH, PPIG, FKBP1A, FKBP1B) as interaction partners of the CoV
non-structural protein 1 (Nsp1). These molecules modulate the Calcineurin/NFAT
pathway that plays an important role in immune cell activation. Overexpression of
NSP1 and infection with live SARS-CoV strongly increased signalling through the
Calcineurin/NFAT pathway and enhanced the induction of interleukin 2, compatible 
with late-stage immunopathogenicity and long-term cytokine dysregulation as
observed in severe SARS cases. Conversely, inhibition of cyclophilins by
cyclosporine A (CspA) blocked the replication of CoVs of all genera, including
SARS-CoV, human CoV-229E and -NL-63, feline CoV, as well as avian infectious
bronchitis virus. Non-immunosuppressive derivatives of CspA might serve as
broad-range CoV inhibitors applicable against emerging CoVs as well as ubiquitous
pathogens of humans and livestock.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002331 
PMCID: PMC3203193
PMID: 22046132  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

