
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Nov;7(11):e1002397. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002397. Epub
2011 Nov 17.

The splicing factor proline-glutamine rich (SFPQ/PSF) is involved in influenza
virus transcription.

Landeras-Bueno S(1), Jorba N, Pérez-Cidoncha M, Ortín J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, CSIC, Campus de Cantoblanco, Madrid, Spain.

The influenza A virus RNA polymerase is a heterotrimeric complex responsible for 
viral genome transcription and replication in the nucleus of infected cells. We
recently carried out a proteomic analysis of purified polymerase expressed in
human cells and identified a number of polymerase-associated cellular proteins.
Here we characterise the role of one such host factors, SFPQ/PSF, during virus
infection. Down-regulation of SFPQ/PSF by silencing with two independent siRNAs
reduced the virus yield by 2-5 log in low-multiplicity infections, while the
replication of unrelated viruses as VSV or Adenovirus was almost unaffected. As
the SFPQ/PSF protein is frequently associated to NonO/p54, we tested the
potential implication of the latter in influenza virus replication. However,
down-regulation of NonO/p54 by silencing with two independent siRNAs did not
affect virus yields. Down-regulation of SFPQ/PSF by siRNA silencing led to a
reduction and delay of influenza virus gene expression. Immunofluorescence
analyses showed a good correlation between SFPQ/PSF and NP levels in infected
cells. Analysis of virus RNA accumulation in silenced cells showed that
production of mRNA, cRNA and vRNA is reduced by more than 5-fold but splicing is 
not affected. Likewise, the accumulation of viral mRNA in cicloheximide-treated
cells was reduced by 3-fold. In contrast, down-regulation of SFPQ/PSF in a
recombinant virus replicon system indicated that, while the accumulation of viral
mRNA is reduced by 5-fold, vRNA levels are slightly increased. In vitro
transcription of recombinant RNPs generated in SFPQ/PSF-silenced cells indicated 
a 4-5-fold reduction in polyadenylation but no alteration in cap snatching. These
results indicate that SFPQ/PSF is a host factor essential for influenza virus
transcription that increases the efficiency of viral mRNA polyadenylation and
open the possibility to develop new antivirals targeting the accumulation of
primary transcripts, a very early step during infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002397 
PMCID: PMC3219729
PMID: 22114566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

