
1. J Virol. 2012 Mar;86(6):3167-79. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06583-11. Epub 2011 Dec 28.

Adenovirus E4orf3 targets transcriptional intermediary factor 1γ for
proteasome-dependent degradation during infection.

Forrester NA(1), Patel RN, Speiseder T, Groitl P, Sedgwick GG, Shimwell NJ, Seed 
RI, Catnaigh PÓ, McCabe CJ, Stewart GS, Dobner T, Grand RJ, Martin A, Turnell AS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Cancer Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham,
UnitedKingdom.

The ability of adenovirus early region proteins, E1B-55K and E4orf6, to usurp
control of cellular ubiquitin ligases and target proteins for
proteasome-dependent degradation during infection is well established. Here we
show that the E4 gene product, E4orf3 can, independently of E1B-55K and E4orf6,
target the transcriptional corepressor transcriptional intermediary factor 1γ
(TIF1γ) for proteasome-mediated degradation during infection. Initial mass
spectrometric studies identified TIF1 family members-TIF1α, TIF1β, and TIF1γ-as
E1B-55K-binding proteins in both transformed and infected cells, but analyses
revealed that, akin to TIF1α, TIF1γ is reorganized in an E4orf3-dependent manner 
to promyelocytic leukemia protein-containing nuclear tracks during infection. The
use of a number of different adenovirus early region mutants identified the
specific and sole requirement for E4orf3 in mediating TIF1γ degradation. Further 
analyses revealed that TIF1γ is targeted for degradation by a number of divergent
human adenoviruses, suggesting that the ability of E4orf3 to regulate TIF1γ
expression is evolutionarily conserved. We also determined that E4orf3 does not
utilize the Cullin-based ubiquitin ligases, CRL2 and CRL5, or the TIF1α ubiquitin
ligase in order to promote TIF1γ degradation. Further studies suggested that
TIF1γ possesses antiviral activity and limits adenovirus early and late gene
product expression during infection. Indeed, TIF1γ knockdown accelerates the
adenovirus-mediated degradation of MRE11, while TIF1γ overexpression delays the
adenovirus-mediated degradation of MRE11. Taken together, these studies have
identified novel adenovirus targets and have established a new role for the
E4orf3 protein during infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.06583-11 
PMCID: PMC3302322
PMID: 22205733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

