
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 31;109(5):E260-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1116776109. Epub 2012 Jan 9.

Systematic identification of interactions between host cell proteins and E7
oncoproteins from diverse human papillomaviruses.

White EA(1), Sowa ME, Tan MJ, Jeudy S, Hayes SD, Santha S, MÃ¼nger K, Harper JW,
Howley PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology and Cell Biology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

More than 120 human papillomaviruses (HPVs) have now been identified and have
been associated with a variety of clinical lesions. To understand the molecular
differences among these viruses that result in lesions with distinct pathologies,
we have begun a MS-based proteomic analysis of HPV-host cellular protein
interactions and have created the plasmid and cell line libraries required for
these studies. To validate our system, we have characterized the host cellular
proteins that bind to the E7 proteins expressed from 17 different HPV types.
These studies reveal a number of interactions, some of which are conserved across
HPV types and others that are unique to a single HPV species or HPV genus.
Binding of E7 to UBR4/p600 is conserved across all virus types, whereas the
cellular protein ENC1 binds specifically to the E7s from HPV18 and HPV45, both
members of genus alpha, species 7. We identify a specific interaction of HPV16 E7
with ZER1, a substrate specificity factor for a cullin 2 (CUL2)-RING ubiquitin
ligase, and show that ZER1 is required for the binding of HPV16 E7 to CUL2. We
further show that ZER1 is required for the destabilization of the retinoblastoma 
tumor suppressor RB1 in HPV16 E7-expressing cells and propose that a CUL2-ZER1
complex functions to target RB1 for degradation in HPV16 E7-expressing cells.
These studies refine the current understanding of HPV E7 functions and establish 
a platform for the rapid identification of virus-host interactions.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1116776109 
PMCID: PMC3277141
PMID: 22232672  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

