
1. J Virol. 2012 Mar;86(6):3121-34. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06390-11. Epub 2012 Jan 18.

Mapping of Chikungunya virus interactions with host proteins identified nsP2 as a
highly connected viral component.

Bouraï M(1), Lucas-Hourani M, Gad HH, Drosten C, Jacob Y, Tafforeau L, Cassonnet 
P, Jones LM, Judith D, Couderc T, Lecuit M, André P, Kümmerer BM, Lotteau V,
Desprès P, Tangy F, Vidalain PO.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génomique Virale et Vaccination, Institut Pasteur, CNRS URA 3015,
Paris, France.

Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is a mosquito-transmitted alphavirus that has been
responsible for an epidemic outbreak of unprecedented magnitude in recent years. 
Since then, significant efforts have been made to better understand the biology
of this virus, but we still have poor knowledge of CHIKV interactions with host
cell components at the molecular level. Here we describe the extensive use of
high-throughput yeast two-hybrid (HT-Y2H) assays to characterize interactions
between CHIKV and human proteins. A total of 22 high-confidence interactions,
which essentially involved the viral nonstructural protein nsP2, were identified 
and further validated in protein complementation assay (PCA). These results were 
integrated to a larger network obtained by extensive mining of the literature for
reports on alphavirus-host interactions. To investigate the role of cellular
proteins interacting with nsP2, gene silencing experiments were performed in
cells infected by a recombinant CHIKV expressing Renilla luciferase as a
reporter. Collected data showed that heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K
(hnRNP-K) and ubiquilin 4 (UBQLN4) participate in CHIKV replication in vitro. In 
addition, we showed that CHIKV nsP2 induces a cellular shutoff, as previously
reported for other Old World alphaviruses, and determined that among binding
partners identified by yeast two-hybrid methods, the tetratricopeptide repeat
protein 7B (TTC7B) plays a significant role in this activity. Altogether, this
report provides the first interaction map between CHIKV and human proteins and
describes new host cell proteins involved in the replication cycle of this virus.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.06390-11 
PMCID: PMC3302312
PMID: 22258240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

