
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jun;40(11):5065-77. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks165. Epub 2012
Feb 22.

Binding of the 5'-untranslated region of coronavirus RNA to zinc finger CCHC-type
and RNA-binding motif 1 enhances viral replication and transcription.

Tan YW(1), Hong W, Liu DX.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang
Drive, Singapore 637551, Singapore.

Coronaviruses RNA synthesis occurs in the cytoplasm and is regulated by host cell
proteins. In a screen based on a yeast three-hybrid system using the
5'-untranslated region (5'-UTR) of SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) RNA as bait
against a human cDNA library derived from HeLa cells, we found a positive
candidate cellular protein, zinc finger CCHC-type and RNA-binding motif 1
(MADP1), to be able to interact with this region of the SARS-CoV genome. This
interaction was subsequently confirmed in coronavirus infectious bronchitis virus
(IBV). The specificity of the interaction between MADP1 and the 5'-UTR of IBV was
investigated and confirmed by using an RNA pull-down assay. The RNA-binding
domain was mapped to the N-terminal region of MADP1 and the protein binding
sequence to stem-loop I of IBV 5'-UTR. MADP1 was found to be translocated to the 
cytoplasm and partially co-localized with the viral replicase/transcriptase
complexes (RTCs) in IBV-infected cells, deviating from its usual nuclear
localization in a normal cell using indirect immunofluorescence. Using small
interfering RNA (siRNA) against MADP1, defective viral RNA synthesis was observed
in the knockdown cells, therefore indicating the importance of the protein in
coronaviral RNA synthesis.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks165 
PMCID: PMC3367200
PMID: 22362731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

