
1. J Innate Immun. 2012;4(3):312-24. doi: 10.1159/000335670. Epub 2012 Mar 2.

L-ficolin binds to the glycoproteins hemagglutinin and neuraminidase and inhibits
influenza A virus infection both in vitro and in vivo.

Pan Q(1), Chen H, Wang F, Jeza VT, Hou W, Zhao Y, Xiang T, Zhu Y, Endo Y, Fujita 
T, Zhang XL.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Department of Immunology and Hubei Province,
Key Laboratory of Allergy and Immune-Related Diseases, Wuhan University School of
Medicine, Wuhan, PR China.

L-ficolin, one of the complement lectins found in human serum, is a novel pattern
recognition molecule that can specifically bind to microbial carbohydrates,
thereby activating the lectin complement pathway and mounting a protective innate
immune response. However, little is known about the role of L-ficolin during
viral infections in vivo. In the present study, we used a mouse model of
influenza A virus infection to demonstrate that the administration of exogenous
L-ficolin or ficolin A (FCNA - an L-ficolin-like molecule in the mouse) is
protective against the virus. Furthermore, FCNA-null mice have a greatly
increased susceptibility to infection with the influenza A virus. Moreover, we
found recombinant human L-ficolin inhibited influenza A virus entry into
Madin-Darby canine kidney cells. More importantly, L-ficolin can recognize and
bind hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) glycoproteins and different
subtypes of influenza A virus, and these interactions can be competitively
inhibited by N-acetyl-D-glucosamine. In addition, the binding of L-ficolin and
FCNA may lead to the activation of the lectin complement pathway. To our
knowledge, this is the first report demonstrating that L-ficolin can block
influenza virus infections both in vitro and in vivo using FCNA-knockout mice,
possibly by interacting with the carbohydrates of HA and NA. Therefore, these
data may provide new immunotherapeutic strategies based on the innate immune
molecule L-ficolin against the influenza A virus.

Copyright Â© 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000335670 
PMCID: PMC6741490
PMID: 22399010  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

