
1. J Virol. 2012 Jun;86(11):6323-33. doi: 10.1128/JVI.07210-11. Epub 2012 Mar 21.

Functional characterization of residues required for the herpes simplex virus 1
E3 ubiquitin ligase ICP0 to interact with the cellular E2 ubiquitin-conjugating
enzyme UBE2D1 (UbcH5a).

Vanni E(1), Gatherer D, Tong L, Everett RD, Boutell C.

Author information: 
(1)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow, Scotland, United
Kingdom.

The viral ubiquitin ligase ICP0 is required for efficient initiation of herpes
simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) lytic infection and productive reactivation of viral
genomes from latency. ICP0 has been shown to target a number of specific cellular
proteins for proteasome-dependent degradation during lytic infection, including
the promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) and its small ubiquitin-like modified
(SUMO) isoforms. We have shown previously that ICP0 can catalyze the formation of
unanchored polyubiquitin chains and mediate the ubiquitination of specific
substrate proteins in vitro in the presence of two E2 ubiquitin-conjugating
enzymes, namely, UBE2D1 (UbcH5a) and UBE2E1 (UbcH6), in a RING finger-dependent
manner. Using homology modeling in conjunction with site-directed mutagenesis, we
identify specific residues required for the interaction between the RING finger
domain of ICP0 and UBE2D1, and we report that point mutations at these residues
compromise the ability of ICP0 to induce the colocalization of conjugated
ubiquitin and the degradation of PML and its SUMO-modified isoforms. Furthermore,
we show that RING finger mutants that are unable to interact with UBE2D1 fail not
only to complement the plaque-forming defect of an ICP0-null mutant virus but
also to mediate the derepression of quiescent HSV-1 genomes in cell culture.
These data demonstrate that the ability of ICP0 to interact with cellular E2
ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes is fundamentally important for its biological
functions during HSV-1 infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.07210-11 
PMCID: PMC3372195
PMID: 22438555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

