
1. Mol Biol Evol. 2012 Oct;29(10):3161-8. Epub 2012 Apr 17.

Positive selection on the gene RNASEL: correlation between patterns of evolution 
and function.

Jin W(1), Wu DD, Zhang X, Irwin DM, Zhang YP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-resource, Yunnan
University, Kunming, China.

RNASEL is a 2-5A-dependent endoribonuclease that is a component of the
interferon-induced 2-5A system, which plays a crucial role in the antiviral and
apoptotic activities of interferons. In humans, many polymorphic sites within the
RNASEL gene have been associated with an increased risk of developing prostate
cancer. Here, we obtained coding sequences for the RNASEL gene from 11 primates
and found evidence that positive selection has operated on the C-terminal
endoribonuclease domain and the N-terminal ankyrin repeats domain of the protein,
domains that directly interact with virus (i.e., ankyrin repeats are responsible 
for receiving environmental signals, and the endoribonuclease catalyses the
destruction of the pathogenic viral RNA). To extend this finding, we studied
variation within this gene in modern human populations by resequencing alleles
from 144 individuals representing four separate populations. Interestingly, the
frequency of the 541D allele shows a negative association with the incidence rate
of prostate cancer in worldwide populations, and haplotypes containing the 541D
polymorphisms demonstrate signatures of positive selection. RNASEL variants
having the 541D haplotype likely have a greater ability to defend against
infections by viruses, thus the loss of this activity may be associated with the 
development of prostate cancer. We provide evidence that positive selection has
operated on the RNASEL gene, and its evolution is correlated with its function in
pathogen defense and cancer association.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/mss123 
PMID: 22513284  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

