
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(5):e1002680. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002680. Epub 2012 May
10.

KSHV PAN RNA associates with demethylases UTX and JMJD3 to activate lytic
replication through a physical interaction with the virus genome.

Rossetto CC(1), Pari G.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Nevada, Reno School
of Medicine, Reno, Nevada, United States of America.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is the cause of Kaposi's sarcoma
and body cavity lymphomas. KSHV lytic infection produces PAN RNA, a highly
abundant noncoding polyadenylated transcript that is retained in the nucleus. We 
recently demonstrated that PAN RNA interacts with several viral and cellular
factors and can disregulate the expression of genes that modulate immune
response. In an effort to define the role of PAN RNA in the context of the virus 
genome we generated a recombinant BACmid that deleted the PAN RNA locus. Because 
of the apparent duplication of the PAN RNA locus in BAC36, we generated BAC36CR, 
a recombinant BACmid that removes the duplicated region. BAC36CR was used as a
template to delete most of the PAN RNA locus to generate BAC36CRΔPAN. BAC36CRΔPAN
failed to produce supernatant virus and displayed a general decrease in mRNA
accumulation of representative immediate early, early and late genes. Most
strikingly, K-Rta expression was decreased in lytically induced
BAC36CRΔPAN-containing cell lines at early and late time points post induction.
Expression of PAN RNA in trans in BAC36CRΔPAN containing cells resulted in an
increase in K-Rta expression, however K-Rta over expression failed to rescue
BAC36CRΔPAN, suggesting that PAN RNA plays a wider role in virus replication. To 
investigate the role of PAN RNA in the activation of K-Rta expression, we
demonstrate that PAN RNA physically interacts with the ORF50 promoter. RNA
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays show that PAN RNA interacts with
demethylases JMJD3 and UTX, and the histone methyltransferase MLL2. Consistent
with the interaction with demethylases, expression of PAN RNA results in a
decrease of the repressive H3K27me3 mark at the ORF50 promoter. These data
support a model where PAN RNA is a multifunctional regulatory transcript that
controls KSHV gene expression by mediating the modification of chromatin by
targeting the KSHV repressed genome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002680 
PMCID: PMC3349751
PMID: 22589717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

