
1. J Virol. 2012 Dec;86(24):13174-86. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02172-12. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

Comprehensive analysis of host cellular interactions with human papillomavirus E6
proteins identifies new E6 binding partners and reflects viral diversity.

White EA(1), Kramer RE, Tan MJ, Hayes SD, Harper JW, Howley PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.

We have begun to define the human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated proteome for a 
subset of the more than 120 HPV types that have been identified to date. Our
approach uses a mass spectrometry-based platform for the systematic
identification of interactions between human papillomavirus and host cellular
proteins, and here we report a proteomic analysis of the E6 proteins from 16
different HPV types. The viruses included represent high-risk, low-risk, and
non-cancer-associated types from genus alpha as well as viruses from four
different species in genus beta. The E6 interaction data set consists of 153
cellular proteins, including several previously reported HPV E6 interactors such 
as p53, E6AP, MAML1, and p300/CBP and proteins containing PDZ domains. We report 
the genus-specific binding of E6s to either E6AP or MAML1, define the specific
HPV E6s that bind to p300, and demonstrate several new features of interactions
involving beta HPV E6s. In particular, we report that several beta HPV E6s bind
to proteins containing PDZ domains and that at least two beta HPV E6s bind to
p53. Finally, we report the newly discovered interaction of proteins of E6 of
beta genus, species 2, with the Ccr4-Not complex, the first report of a viral
protein binding to this complex. This data set represents a comprehensive survey 
of E6 binding partners that provides a resource for the HPV field and will allow 
continued studies on the diverse biology of the human papillomaviruses.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02172-12 
PMCID: PMC3503137
PMID: 23015706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

