
1. Oncogene. 2013 Sep 5;32(36):4222-30. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.450. Epub 2012 Oct 8.

HTLV-1 bZIP factor dysregulates the Wnt pathways to support proliferation and
migration of adult T-cell leukemia cells.

Ma G(1), Yasunaga J, Fan J, Yanagawa S, Matsuoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virus Control, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University,
Kyoto, Japan.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is the causative agent of adult
T-cell leukemia (ATL). HTLV-1 bZIP factor (HBZ), the viral gene transcribed from 
the antisense strand, is consistently expressed in ATL cells and promotes their
proliferation. In this study, we found that a Wnt pathway-related protein,
disheveled-associating protein with a high frequency of leucine residues (DAPLE),
interacts with both HTLV-1 Tax and HBZ. In the presence of DAPLE, Tax activated
canonical Wnt signaling. Conversely, HBZ markedly suppressed canonical Wnt
activation induced by either Tax/DAPLE or β-catenin. As a mechanism of
HBZ-mediated Wnt suppression, we found that HBZ targets lymphoid enhancer-binding
factor 1, one of the key transcription factors of the pathway, and impairs its
DNA-binding ability. We also observed that the canonical Wnt pathway was not
activated in HTLV-1-infected cells, whereas the representative of noncanonical
Wnt ligand, Wnt5a, which antagonizes canonical Wnt signaling, was overexpressed. 
HBZ was able to induce Wnt5a transcription by enhancing its promoter activity
through the TGF-β pathway. Importantly, knocking down of Wnt5a in ATL cells
repressed cellular proliferation and migration. Our results implicate novel roles
of HBZ in ATL leukemogenesis through dysregulation of both the canonical and
noncanonical Wnt pathways.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2012.450 
PMID: 23045287  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

