
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 6;109(45):18471-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1204668109. Epub 2012 Oct 22.

Hepatitis B virus X protein targets Bcl-2 proteins to increase intracellular
calcium, required for virus replication and cell death induction.

Geng X(1), Huang C, Qin Y, McCombs JE, Yuan Q, Harry BL, Palmer AE, Xia NS, Xue
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA.

Infection with the hepatitis B virus (HBV) promotes the development of hepatitis,
cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and is a leading cause of morbidity
and mortality worldwide. HBV X protein (HBx) is an important effector for HBV
pathogenesis, but its cellular targets and acting mechanisms remain elusive. We
show here that HBx interacts with the anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL
through a Bcl-2 homology 3 (BH3)-like motif in mammalian cells. Importantly,
mutations in the BH3-like motif that prevent HBx binding to Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL
abrogate cytosolic calcium elevation and cell death induced by HBx expression in 
hepatocytes and severely impair HBV viral replication, which can be substantially
rescued by restoring cytosolic calcium. These results suggest that HBx binding to
Bcl-2 family members and subsequent elevation of cytosolic calcium are important 
for HBV viral replication. Consistently, RNAi knockdown of Bcl-2 or Bcl-xL
results in reduced calcium elevation by HBx and decreased viral replication in
hepatocytes. Our results suggest that HBx targets Bcl-2 proteins through its
BH3-like motif to promote cytosolic calcium elevation, cell death, and viral
replication during HBV pathogenesis, which presents an excellent therapeutic
intervention point in treating patients with chronic HBV.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1204668109 
PMCID: PMC3494919
PMID: 23091012  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

