
1. J Virol. 2013 Jan;87(2):859-71. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01158-12. Epub 2012 Oct 31.

The herpes simplex virus 1 Us11 protein inhibits autophagy through its
interaction with the protein kinase PKR.

Lussignol M(1), Queval C, Bernet-Camard MF, Cotte-Laffitte J, Beau I, Codogno P, 
Esclatine A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR984, Université Paris Sud, Faculté de Pharmacie, Châtenay-Malabry,
France.

Autophagy is now known to be an essential component of host innate and adaptive
immunity. Several herpesviruses have developed various strategies to evade this
antiviral host defense. Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) blocks autophagy in
fibroblasts and in neurons, and the ICP34.5 protein is important for the
resistance of HSV-1 to autophagy because of its interaction with the autophagy
machinery protein Beclin 1. ICP34.5 also counteracts the shutoff of protein
synthesis mediated by the double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)-dependent protein kinase
PKR by inhibiting phosphorylation of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor
2α (eIF2α) in the PKR/eIF2α signaling pathway. Us11 is a late gene product of
HSV-1, which is also able to preclude the host shutoff by direct inhibition of
PKR. In the present study, we unveil a previously uncharacterized function of
Us11 by demonstrating its antiautophagic activity. We show that the expression of
Us11 is able to block autophagy and autophagosome formation in both HeLa cells
and fibroblasts. Furthermore, immediate-early expression of Us11 by an ICP34.5
deletion mutant virus is sufficient to render the cells resistant to PKR-induced 
and virus-induced autophagy. PKR expression and the PKR binding domain of Us11
are required for the antiautophagic activity of Us11. However, unlike ICP34.5,
Us11 did not interact with Beclin 1. We suggest that the inhibition of autophagy 
observed in cells infected with HSV-1 results from the activity of not only
ICP34.5 on Beclin 1 but also Us11 by direct interaction with PKR.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01158-12 
PMCID: PMC3554085
PMID: 23115300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

