
1. PLoS Biol. 2012;10(12):e1001448. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001448. Epub 2012 Dec
18.

Siglec-1 is a novel dendritic cell receptor that mediates HIV-1 trans-infection
through recognition of viral membrane gangliosides.

Izquierdo-Useros N(1), Lorizate M, Puertas MC, Rodriguez-Plata MT, Zangger N,
Erikson E, Pino M, Erkizia I, Glass B, Clotet B, Keppler OT, Telenti A,
Kräusslich HG, Martinez-Picado J.

Author information: 
(1)AIDS Research Institute IrsiCaixa, Institut d'Investigació en Ciències de la
Salut Germans Trias i Pujol, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Badalona, Spain. 
nizquierdo@irsicaixa.es

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2012;10(12):e1001454.

Dendritic cells (DCs) are essential antigen-presenting cells for the induction of
immunity against pathogens. However, HIV-1 spread is strongly enhanced in
clusters of DCs and CD4(+) T cells. Uninfected DCs capture HIV-1 and mediate
viral transfer to bystander CD4(+) T cells through a process termed
trans-infection. Initial studies identified the C-type lectin DC-SIGN as the
HIV-1 binding factor on DCs, which interacts with the viral envelope
glycoproteins. Upon DC maturation, however, DC-SIGN is down-regulated, while
HIV-1 capture and trans-infection is strongly enhanced via a
glycoprotein-independent capture pathway that recognizes sialyllactose-containing
membrane gangliosides. Here we show that the sialic acid-binding Ig-like lectin 1
(Siglec-1, CD169), which is highly expressed on mature DCs, specifically binds
HIV-1 and vesicles carrying sialyllactose. Furthermore, Siglec-1 is essential for
trans-infection by mature DCs. These findings identify Siglec-1 as a key factor
for HIV-1 spread via infectious DC/T-cell synapses, highlighting a novel
mechanism that mediates HIV-1 dissemination in activated tissues.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001448 
PMCID: PMC3525531
PMID: 23271952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and have the
following conflicts: A patent application based on this work has been filed
(EP11382392.6, 2011). The authors declare that no other competing financial
interests exist.

