
1. J Virol. 2013 Jun;87(11):6406-14. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00072-13. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

Differential recognition of Old World and New World arenavirus envelope
glycoproteins by subtilisin kexin isozyme 1 (SKI-1)/site 1 protease (S1P).

Burri DJ(1), da Palma JR, Seidah NG, Zanotti G, Cendron L, Pasquato A, Kunz S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, University Hospital Center and University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

The arenaviruses are an important family of emerging viruses that includes
several causative agents of severe hemorrhagic fevers in humans that represent
serious public health problems. A crucial step of the arenavirus life cycle is
maturation of the envelope glycoprotein precursor (GPC) by the cellular
subtilisin kexin isozyme 1 (SKI-1)/site 1 protease (S1P). Comparison of the
currently known sequences of arenavirus GPCs revealed the presence of a highly
conserved aromatic residue at position P7 relative to the SKI-1/S1P cleavage side
in Old World and clade C New World arenaviruses but not in New World viruses of
clades A and B or cellular substrates of SKI-1/S1P. Using a combination of
molecular modeling and structure-function analysis, we found that residue Y285 of
SKI-1/S1P, distal from the catalytic triad, is implicated in the molecular
recognition of the aromatic "signature residue" at P7 in the GPC of Old World
Lassa virus. Using a quantitative biochemical approach, we show that Y285 of
SKI-1/S1P is crucial for the efficient processing of peptides derived from Old
World and clade C New World arenavirus GPCs but not of those from clade A and B
New World arenavirus GPCs. The data suggest that during coevolution with their
mammalian hosts, GPCs of Old World and clade C New World viruses expanded the
molecular contacts with SKI-1/S1P beyond the classical four-amino-acid
recognition sequences and currently occupy an extended binding pocket.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00072-13 
PMCID: PMC3648084
PMID: 23536681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

