
1. J Virol. 2013 Jun;87(12):6794-803. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00448-13. Epub 2013 Apr 10.

Foot-and-mouth disease virus modulates cellular vimentin for virus survival.

Gladue DP(1), O'Donnell V, Baker-Branstetter R, Holinka LG, Pacheco JM, Fern√°ndez
Sainz I, Lu Z, Ambroggio X, Rodriguez L, Borca MV.

Author information: 
(1)Plum Island Animal Disease Center, ARS, USDA, Greenport, New York, USA.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2019 Jan 4;93(2):.

Foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV), the causative agent of foot-and-mouth
disease, is an Aphthovirus within the Picornaviridae family. During infection
with FMDV, several host cell membrane rearrangements occur to form sites of viral
replication. FMDV protein 2C is part of the replication complex and thought to
have multiple roles during virus replication. To better understand the role of 2C
in the process of virus replication, we have been using a yeast two-hybrid
approach to identify host proteins that interact with 2C. We recently reported
that cellular Beclin1 is a natural ligand of 2C and that it is involved in the
autophagy pathway, which was shown to be important for FMDV replication. Here, we
report that cellular vimentin is also a specific host binding partner for 2C. The
2C-vimentin interaction was further confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation and
immunofluorescence staining to occur in FMDV-infected cells. It was shown that
upon infection a vimentin structure forms around 2C and that this structure is
later resolved or disappears. Interestingly, overexpression of vimentin had no
effect on virus replication; however, overexpression of a truncated
dominant-negative form of vimentin resulted in a significant decrease in viral
yield. Acrylamide, which causes disruption of vimentin filaments, also inhibited 
viral yield. Alanine scanning mutagenesis was used to map the specific amino acid
residues in 2C critical for vimentin binding. Using reverse genetics, we
identified 2C residues that are necessary for virus growth, suggesting that the
interaction between FMDV 2C and cellular vimentin is essential for virus
replication.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00448-13 
PMCID: PMC3676138
PMID: 23576498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

