
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 14;288(24):17399-407. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.440362. Epub
2013 Apr 23.

Cleavage activation of human-adapted influenza virus subtypes by
kallikrein-related peptidases 5 and 12.

Hamilton BS(1), Whittaker GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

A critical step in the influenza virus replication cycle is the cleavage
activation of the HA precursor. Cleavage activation of influenza HA enables
fusion with the host endosome, allowing for release of the viral genome into the 
host cell. To date, studies have determined that HA activation is driven by
trypsin-like host cell proteases, as well as yet to be identified bacterial
proteases. Although the number of host proteases that can activate HA is growing,
there is still uncertainty regarding which secreted proteases are able to support
multicycle replication of influenza. In this study, we have determined that the
kallikrein-related peptidases 5 and 12 are secreted from the human respiratory
tract and have the ability to cleave and activate HA from the H1, H2, and H3
subtypes. Each peptidase appears to have a preference for particular influenza
subtypes, with kallikrein 5 cleaving the H1 and H3 subtypes most efficiently and 
kallikrein 12 cleaving the H1 and H2 subtypes most efficiently. Cleavage analysis
using HA cleavage site peptide mimics revealed that the amino acids neighboring
the arginine cleavage site affect cleavage efficiency. Additionally, the
thrombolytic zymogens plasminogen, urokinase, and plasma kallikrein have all been
shown to cleave and activate influenza but are found circulating mainly as
inactive precursors. Kallikrein 5 and kallikrein 12 were examined for their
ability to activate the thrombolytic zymogens, and both resulted in activation of
each zymogen, with kallikrein 12 being a more potent activator. Activation of the
thrombolytic zymogens may therefore allow for both direct and indirect activation
of the HA of human-adapted influenza viruses by kallikrein 5 and kallikrein 12.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.440362 
PMCID: PMC3682540
PMID: 23612974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

