
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(5):e1003361. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003361. Epub 2013 May
16.

Uracil DNA glycosylase counteracts APOBEC3G-induced hypermutation of hepatitis B 
viral genomes: excision repair of covalently closed circular DNA.

Kitamura K(1), Wang Z, Chowdhury S, Simadu M, Koura M, Muramatsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medical Science, Kanazawa, Japan.

The covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA) of the hepatitis B virus (HBV) plays 
an essential role in chronic hepatitis. The cellular repair system is proposed to
convert cytoplasmic nucleocapsid (NC) DNA (partially double-stranded DNA) into
cccDNA in the nucleus. Recently, antiviral cytidine deaminases, AID/APOBEC
proteins, were shown to generate uracil residues in the NC-DNA through
deamination, resulting in cytidine-to-uracil (C-to-U) hypermutation of the viral 
genome. We investigated whether uracil residues in hepadnavirus DNA were excised 
by uracil-DNA glycosylase (UNG), a host factor for base excision repair (BER).
When UNG activity was inhibited by the expression of the UNG inhibitory protein
(UGI), hypermutation of NC-DNA induced by either APOBEC3G or interferon treatment
was enhanced in a human hepatocyte cell line. To assess the effect of UNG on the 
cccDNA viral intermediate, we used the duck HBV (DHBV) replication model.
Sequence analyses of DHBV DNAs showed that cccDNA accumulated G-to-A or C-to-T
mutations in APOBEC3G-expressing cells, and this was extensively enhanced by UNG 
inhibition. The cccDNA hypermutation generated many premature stop codons in the 
P gene. UNG inhibition also enhanced the APOBEC3G-mediated suppression of viral
replication, including reduction of NC-DNA, pre-C mRNA, and secreted viral
particle-associated DNA in prolonged culture. Enhancement of APOBEC3G-mediated
suppression by UNG inhibition was not observed when the catalytic site of
APOBEC3G was mutated. Transfection experiments of recloned cccDNAs revealed that 
the combination of UNG inhibition and APOBEC3G expression reduced the replication
ability of cccDNA. Taken together, these data indicate that UNG excises uracil
residues from the viral genome during or after cccDNA formation in the nucleus
and imply that BER pathway activities decrease the antiviral effect of
APOBEC3-mediated hypermutation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003361 
PMCID: PMC3656096
PMID: 23696735  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

