
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(5):e1003345. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003345. Epub 2013 May
23.

Class A scavenger receptor 1 (MSR1) restricts hepatitis C virus replication by
mediating toll-like receptor 3 recognition of viral RNAs produced in neighboring 
cells.

Dansako H(1), Yamane D, Welsch C, McGivern DR, Hu F, Kato N, Lemon SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, and the Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America.

Persistent infections with hepatitis C virus (HCV) may result in life-threatening
liver disease, including cirrhosis and cancer, and impose an important burden on 
human health. Understanding how the virus is capable of achieving persistence in 
the majority of those infected is thus an important goal. Although HCV has
evolved multiple mechanisms to disrupt and block cellular signaling pathways
involved in the induction of interferon (IFN) responses, IFN-stimulated gene
(ISG) expression is typically prominent in the HCV-infected liver. Here, we show 
that Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) expressed within uninfected hepatocytes is
capable of sensing infection in adjacent cells, initiating a local antiviral
response that partially restricts HCV replication. We demonstrate that this is
dependent upon the expression of class A scavenger receptor type 1 (MSR1). MSR1
binds extracellular dsRNA, mediating its endocytosis and transport toward the
endosome where it is engaged by TLR3, thereby triggering IFN responses in both
infected and uninfected cells. RNAi-mediated knockdown of MSR1 expression blocks 
TLR3 sensing of HCV in infected hepatocyte cultures, leading to increased
cellular permissiveness to virus infection. Exogenous expression of Myc-MSR1
restores TLR3 signaling in MSR1-depleted cells with subsequent induction of an
antiviral state. A series of conserved basic residues within the carboxy-terminus
of the collagen superfamily domain of MSR1 are required for binding and transport
of dsRNA, and likely facilitate acidification-dependent release of dsRNA at the
site of TLR3 expression in the endosome. Our findings reveal MSR1 to be a
critical component of a TLR3-mediated pattern recognition receptor response that 
exerts an antiviral state in both infected and uninfected hepatocytes, thereby
limiting the impact of HCV proteins that disrupt IFN signaling in infected cells 
and restricting the spread of HCV within the liver.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003345 
PMCID: PMC3662657
PMID: 23717201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

