
1. J Immunol. 2013 Jul 15;191(2):660-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202933. Epub 2013 Jun
14.

Human bocavirus VP2 upregulates IFN-β pathway by inhibiting ring finger protein
125-mediated ubiquitination of retinoic acid-inducible gene-I.

Luo H(1), Zhang Z, Zheng Z, Ke X, Zhang X, Li Q, Liu Y, Bai B, Mao P, Hu Q, Wang 
H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan 430071, China.

Precise regulation of innate immunity is crucial for maintaining optimal immune
responses against infections. Whereas positive regulation of IFN signaling
elicits rapid type I IFNs, negative regulation is equally important in preventing
the production of superfluous IFNs that can be hazardous to the host. The
positive regulators of IFN pathway are known to be the main targets of viruses to
antagonize the innate immune system. Whether viruses target the negative
regulators of IFN pathway remains to be fully investigated. In this study, we
report that the structural protein VP2 of human Bocavirus modulates IFN pathway
by targeting the ring finger protein 125 (RNF125), a negative regulator of type I
IFN signaling, which conjugates Lys(48)-linked ubiquitination to retinoic
acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I) and subsequently leads to the proteasome-dependent 
degradation of RIG-I. VP2 not only upregulated Sendai virus (SeV)-induced IFNB
promoter activity, but also enhanced SeV-induced IFN-β production at both mRNA
and protein levels. In agreement, the level of Ser(396)-phosphorylated IFN
regulatory factor 3 stimulated by SeV was enhanced in the presence of VP2.
Furthermore, VP2 was demonstrated to physically interact with RNF125, resulting
in the reduction of RNF125-mediated ubiquitination and proteasome-dependent
degradation of RIG-I. Additional study indicated that endogenous RIG-I
degradation was decreased in VP2-expressing cells. Our study delineates a unique 
phenomenon for aberrant activation of IFN regulatory factor 3 pathway and may
represent a new mechanism underlying viral manipulation of the host immune
system.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202933 
PMID: 23772026  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

