
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013 Oct;12(10):2845-55. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.028688. Epub 
2013 Jul 1.

Exploration of binary virus-host interactions using an infectious protein
complementation assay.

Munier S(1), Rolland T, Diot C, Jacob Y, Naffakh N.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité de Génétique Moléculaire des Virus à ARN, Département 
de Virologie, F-75015 Paris, France;

A precise mapping of pathogen-host interactions is essential for comprehensive
understanding of the processes of infection and pathogenesis. The most frequently
used techniques for interactomics are the yeast two-hybrid binary methodologies, 
which do not recapitulate the pathogen life cycle, and the tandem affinity
purification mass spectrometry co-complex methodologies, which cannot distinguish
direct from indirect interactions. New technologies are thus needed to improve
the mapping of pathogen-host interactions. In the current study, we detected
binary interactions between influenza A virus polymerase and host proteins during
the course of an actual viral infection, using a new strategy based on
trans-complementation of the Gluc1 and Gluc2 fragments of Gaussia princeps
luciferase. Infectious recombinant influenza viruses that encode a Gluc1-tagged
polymerase subunit were engineered to infect cultured cells transiently
expressing a selected set of Gluc2-tagged cellular proteins involved in
nucleocytoplasmic trafficking pathways. A random set and a literature-curated set
of Gluc2-tagged cellular proteins were tested in parallel. Our assay allowed the 
sensitive and accurate recovery of previously described interactions, and it
revealed 30% of positive, novel viral-host protein-protein interactions within
the exploratory set. In addition to cellular proteins involved in the nuclear
import pathway, components of the nuclear pore complex such as NUP62 and mRNA
export factors such as NXF1, RMB15B, and DDX19B were identified for the first
time as interactors of the viral polymerase. Gene silencing experiments further
showed that NUP62 is required for efficient viral replication. Our findings give 
new insights regarding the subversion of host nucleocytoplasmic trafficking
pathways by influenza A viruses. They also demonstrate the potential of our
infectious protein complementation assay for high-throughput exploration of
influenza virus interactomics in infected cells. With more infectious reverse
genetics systems becoming available, this strategy should be widely applicable to
numerous pathogens.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M113.028688 
PMCID: PMC3790295
PMID: 23816991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

