
1. J Virol. 2013 Sep;87(18):10148-62. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01002-13. Epub 2013 Jul 10.

Contribution of myocyte enhancer factor 2 family transcription factors to BZLF1
expression in Epstein-Barr virus reactivation from latency.

Murata T(1), Narita Y, Sugimoto A, Kawashima D, Kanda T, Tsurumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Kanokoden,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan. tmurata@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Reactivation of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) from latency is dependent on expression 
of the viral transactivator BZLF1 protein, whose promoter (Zp) normally exhibits 
only low basal activity but is activated in response to chemical or biological
inducers. Using a reporter assay system, we screened for factors that can
activate Zp and isolated genes, including those encoding MEF2B, KLF4, and some
cellular b-Zip family transcription factors. After confirming their importance
and functional binding sites in reporter assays, we prepared recombinant EBV-BAC,
in which the binding sites were mutated. Interestingly, the MEF2 mutant virus
produced very low levels of BRLF1, another transactivator of EBV, in addition to 
BZLF1 in HEK293 cells. The virus failed to induce a subset of early genes, such
as that encoding BALF5, upon lytic induction, and accordingly, could not
replicate to produce progeny viruses in HEK293 cells, but this restriction could 
be completely lifted by exogenous supply of BRLF1, together with BZLF1. In B
cells, induction of BZLF1 by chemical inducers was inhibited by point mutations
in the ZII or the three SP1/KLF binding sites of EBV-BAC Zp, while leaky BZLF1
expression was less affected. Mutation of MEF2 sites severely impaired both
spontaneous and induced expression of not only BZLF1, but also BRLF1 in
comparison to wild-type or revertant virus cases. We also observed that MEF2
mutant EBV featured relatively high repressive histone methylation, such as
H3K27me3, but CpG DNA methylation levels were comparable around Zp and the BRLF1 
promoter (Rp). These findings shed light on BZLF1 expression and EBV reactivation
from latency.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01002-13 
PMCID: PMC3754021
PMID: 23843637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

