
1. J Virol. 2013 Nov;87(21):11416-25. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01488-13. Epub 2013 Aug 21.

The essential, nonredundant roles of RIG-I and MDA5 in detecting and controlling 
West Nile virus infection.

Errett JS(1), Suthar MS, McMillan A, Diamond MS, Gale M Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington, USA.

Virus recognition and response by the innate immune system are critical
components of host defense against infection. Activation of cell-intrinsic
immunity and optimal priming of adaptive immunity against West Nile virus (WNV), 
an emerging vector-borne virus, depend on recognition by RIG-I and MDA5, two
cytosolic pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) of the RIG-I-like receptor (RLR)
protein family that recognize viral RNA and activate defense programs that
suppress infection. We evaluated the individual functions of RIG-I and MDA5 both 
in vitro and in vivo in pathogen recognition and control of WNV. Lack of RIG-I or
MDA5 alone results in decreased innate immune signaling and virus control in
primary cells in vitro and increased mortality in mice. We also generated
RIG-I(-/-) Ã— MDA5(-/-) double-knockout mice and found that a lack of both RLRs
results in a complete absence of innate immune gene induction in target cells of 
WNV infection and a severe pathogenesis during infection in vivo, similar to
findings for animals lacking MAVS, the central adaptor molecule for RLR
signaling. We also found that RNA products from WNV-infected cells but not
incoming virion RNA display at least two distinct pathogen-associated molecular
patterns (PAMPs) containing 5' triphosphate and double-stranded RNA that are
temporally distributed and sensed by RIG-I and MDA5 during infection. Thus, RIG-I
and MDA5 are essential PRRs that recognize distinct PAMPs that accumulate during 
WNV replication. Collectively, these experiments highlight the necessity and
function of multiple related, cytoplasmic host sensors in orchestrating an
effective immune response against an acute viral infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01488-13 
PMCID: PMC3807316
PMID: 23966395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

