
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(12):e1003852. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003852. Epub 2013
Dec 26.

The CD8-derived chemokine XCL1/lymphotactin is a conformation-dependent,
broad-spectrum inhibitor of HIV-1.

Guzzo C(1), Fox J(2), Lin Y(1), Miao H(1), Cimbro R(1), Volkman BF(2), Fauci
AS(1), Lusso P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of
America.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin, United States of America.

CD8+ T cells play a key role in the in vivo control of HIV-1 replication via
their cytolytic activity as well as their ability to secrete non-lytic soluble
suppressive factors. Although the chemokines that naturally bind CCR5
(CCL3/MIP-1α, CCL4/MIP- 1β, CCL5/RANTES) are major components of the CD8-derived 
anti-HIV activity, evidence indicates the existence of additional, still
undefined, CD8-derived HIV-suppressive factors. Here, we report the
characterization of a novel anti-HIV chemokine, XCL1/lymphotactin, a member of
the C-chemokine family that is produced primarily by activated CD8+ T cells and
behaves as a metamorphic protein, interconverting between two structurally
distinct conformations (classic and alternative). We found that XCL1 inhibits a
broad spectrum of HIV-1 isolates, irrespective of their coreceptor-usage
phenotype. Experiments with stabilized variants of XCL1 demonstrated that HIV-1
inhibition requires access to the alternative, all-β conformation, which
interacts with proteoglycans but does not bind/activate the specific XCR1
receptor, while the classic XCL1 conformation is inactive. HIV-1 inhibition by
XCL1 was shown to occur at an early stage of infection, via blockade of viral
attachment and entry into host cells. Analogous to the recently described
anti-HIV effect of the CXC chemokine CXCL4/PF4, XCL1-mediated inhibition is
associated with direct interaction of the chemokine with the HIV-1 envelope.
These results may open new perspectives for understanding the mechanisms of HIV-1
control and reveal new molecular targets for the design of effective therapeutic 
and preventive strategies against HIV-1.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003852 
PMCID: PMC3873461
PMID: 24385911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

