
1. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 15;192(4):1671-80. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301077. Epub 2014
Jan 17.

Cleavage of the T cell protein tyrosine phosphatase by the hepatitis C virus
nonstructural 3/4A protease induces a Th1 to Th2 shift reversible by ribavirin
therapy.

Brenndörfer ED(1), Brass A, Karthe J, Ahlén G, Bode JG, Sällberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Microbiology, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm S-141 86, Sweden.

Ribavirin has proven to be a key component of hepatitis C therapies both
involving IFNs and new direct-acting antivirals. The hepatitis C virus-mediated
interference with intrahepatic immunity by cleavage of mitochondrial antiviral
signaling protein (MAVS) and T cell protein tyrosine phosphatase (TCPTP) suggests
an avenue for compounds that may counteract these effects. We therefore studied
the effects of ribavirin, with or without inhibition of the nonstructural
(NS)3/4A protease, on intrahepatic immunity. The intrahepatic immunity of
wild-type and NS3/4A-transgenic mice was determined by Western blot, ELISA, flow 
cytometry, and survival analysis. Various MAVS or TCPTP constructs were injected 
hydrodynamically to study their relevance. Ribavirin pretreatment was performed
in mice expressing a functional or inhibited NS3/4A protease to analyze its
effect on NS3/4A-mediated changes. Intrahepatic NS3/4A expression made mice
resistant to TNF-α-induced liver damage and caused an alteration of the
intrahepatic cytokine (IFN-γ and IL-10) and chemokine (CCL3, CCL17, CCL22, CXCL9,
and CXCL11) profiles toward an anti-inflammatory state. Consistent with this, the
number of intrahepatic Th1 cells and IFN-γ(+) T cells in NS3/4A-transgenic mice
decreased, whereas the amount of Th2 cells increased. These effects could be
reversed by injection of uncleavable TCPTP but not uncleavable MAVS and were
absent in a mouse expressing a nonfunctional NS3/4A protease. Importantly, the
NS3/4A-mediated effects were reversed by ribavirin treatment. Thus, cleavage of
TCPTP by NS3/4A induces a shift of the intrahepatic immune response toward a
nonantiviral Th2-dominated immunity. These effects are reversed by ribavirin,
supporting that ribavirin complements the effects of direct-acting antivirals as 
an immunomodulatory compound.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301077 
PMID: 24442435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

