
1. J Virol. 2014 Apr;88(8):4204-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03855-13. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-encoded LANA contributes to viral latent 
replication by activating phosphorylation of survivin.

Lu J(1), Jha HC, Verma SC, Sun Z, Banerjee S, Dzeng R, Robertson ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and the Tumor Virology Program of the Abramson
Cancer Center, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is a human gammaherpesvirus
casually linked to Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), multicentric Castleman's disease (MCD),
and primary effusion lymphoma (PEL). Previously, we showed that LANA encoded by
KSHV upregulates expression of survivin, a member of the inhibitor of apoptosis
(IAP) family. This leads to an increase in the rate of cell proliferation of
KSHV-infected B cells. LANA is required for tethering of the KSHV episome to the 
host chromosomes and efficiently segregates the viral genomes into dividing tumor
cells. Here we show that LANA interacts with Aurora kinase B (AK-B) and induces
phosphorylation of survivin at residue T34. Phosphorylation of survivin
specifically on residue T34 enhances the activity of p300 and inhibits the
activity of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC-1), which then leads to an increase in
acetylation of histone H3 on the viral genome. Phosphorylation of survivin
specifically on residue T34 upregulates the activities of histone
acetyltransferases and deacetylases, which then leads to an increase in viral
copy number in KSHV-infected B cells. This results in a boost of KSHV replication
in latently infected B-lymphoma cells. The studies showed that LANA can also
function to regulate viral replication prior to mitosis of the latently infected 
cells, suggesting that LANA possesses a novel role in regulating KSHV replication
in infected B cells.IMPORTANCE: This work represents a report of KSHV latent
protein LANA and its interactions with AK-B leading to induction of
phosphorylation of the oncoprotein survivin at residue T34. Phosphorylation of
survivin specifically on residue T34 upregulates the activities of histone
acetyltransferases and deacetylases. This leads to an increase in viral copy
number in KSHV-infected B cells. These studies support a role for LANA in
regulating KSHV replication through posttranslation modification in KSHV-infected
B cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03855-13 
PMCID: PMC3993767
PMID: 24478433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

