
1. J Virol. 2014 Jun;88(12):6793-804. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00045-14. Epub 2014 Apr 2.

Rab18 facilitates dengue virus infection by targeting fatty acid synthase to
sites of viral replication.

Tang WC(1), Lin RJ(2), Liao CL(3), Lin YL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of General Medicine, School of Medicine, College of Medicine,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan Department of Primary Care Medicine,
Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan Genomic 
Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan yll@ibms.sinica.edu.tw.

Positive-sense RNA viruses, such as dengue virus (DENV), hijack the intracellular
membrane machinery for their own replication. The Rab18 protein, a member of the 
Rab GTPase family, key regulators of membrane trafficking, is located on the
organelles involved in DENV infection, such as the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and
lipid droplets (LDs). In this study, we addressed the potential involvement of
Rab18 in DENV infection by using cells overexpressing the wild-type, GTP-bound
active form, or GDP-bound inactive form of Rab18 and cells with Rab18 knockdown. 
DENV replication, measured by viral protein, viral RNA, and viral progeny
production, as well as LD induction, was reduced in cells with inactive Rab18 and
in cells deprived of Rab18 expression, suggesting a positive role of Rab18 in the
DENV life cycle. Interestingly, the interaction of fatty acid synthase (FASN), a 
key lipogenic enzyme in lipid biosynthesis, with DENV NS3 protein relied on the
conversion of the GDP-bound to the GTP-bound form of Rab18. Furthermore, the
targeting of FASN to sites participating in DENV infection, such as the ER and
LDs, depends on functional Rab18. Thus, Rab18-mediated membrane trafficking of
FASN and NS3 facilitates DENV replication, probably by ensuring a sufficient and 
coordinated lipid supply for membrane proliferation and arrangement.IMPORTANCE:
Infection by dengue virus (DENV), an important mosquito-borne virus threatening
∼40% of the world's population, can cause mild dengue fever or severe dengue
hemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome. The pathogenesis mechanisms of
DENV-related diseases are not clear, but high viral replication is believed to be
a risk factor for the severe form of DENV infection. Thus, understanding the
detailed mechanism of DENV replication might help address this devastating virus.
Here, we found that Rab18, a small GTPase involved in vesicle trafficking and
located in the endoplasmic reticulum network and on the surfaces of lipid
droplets, positively regulates DENV replication. The functional machinery of
Rab18 is required to recruit the enzyme fatty acid synthase to sites of DENV
replication and to interact with DENV NS3 protein to promote fatty acid
biosynthesis. Thus, DENV usurps Rab18 to facilitate its own replication.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00045-14 
PMCID: PMC4054357
PMID: 24696471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

