
1. J Virol. 2014 Sep 1;88(17):9830-41. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01425-14. Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Enterovirus 71 3C inhibits cytokine expression through cleavage of the
TAK1/TAB1/TAB2/TAB3 complex.

Lei X(1), Han N(1), Xiao X(1), Jin Q(1), He B(2), Wang J(3).

Author information: 
(1)MOH Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens, Institute of Pathogen
Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
Illinois, Chicago, Illinois, USA tshuo@uic.edu wangjw28@163.com.
(3)MOH Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens, Institute of Pathogen
Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, People's Republic of China tshuo@uic.edu wangjw28@163.com.

Enterovirus 71 (EV71) causes hand, foot, and mouth disease in young children and 
infants. Severe infection with EV71 can lead to various neurological
complications or fatal diseases. However, the mechanism of EV71 pathogenesis is
poorly understood. Emerging evidence suggests that EV71 modulates type I
interferon (IFN) and cytokine responses. Here, we show that EV71 disables
components of the TAB2 complex through the 3C protein. When expressed in
mammalian cells, EV71 3C interacts with TAB2 and TAK1, which inhibits NF-κB
activation. Furthermore, 3C mediates cleavage of TAB2 and its partners, which
requires the protease activity. H40D or C147S substitution in the 3C active sites
abolishes its activity, whereas R84Q or V154S substitution in the RNA binding
domain has no effect. The 3C protein targets TAB2 at Q113-S114, TAK1 at
Q360-S361, TAB1 both at Q414-G415 and Q451-S452, and TAB3 at Q173-G174 and
Q343-G344. Importantly, overexpression of TAB2 inhibits EV71 replication, whereas
addition of cleaved fragments has no effect. Thus, an equilibrium between the
TAB2 complex and EV71 3C represents a control point of viral infection. These
results suggest that TAK1/TAB1/TAB2/TAB3 cleavage mediated by EV71 may be a
mechanism to interfere with inflammatory responses.IMPORTANCE: The TAK1 complex
plays a critical role in the activation of NF-κB and cytokine production.
However, little is known about its connection to enterovirus 71 (EV71). We
demonstrate that EV71 3C suppresses cytokine expression via cleavage of the TAK1 
complex proteins. EV71 3C interacts with TAB2 and TAK1. Furthermore,
overexpression of TAB2 inhibits EV71 replication, whereas addition of cleaved
fragment has no effect. These results suggest that the interplay of EV71 and the 
TAK1 complex influences the outcome of viral infection.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01425-14 
PMCID: PMC4136319
PMID: 24942571  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

