
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Nov 13;10(10):e1004518. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004518.
eCollection 2014 Oct.

Retromer regulates HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein trafficking and incorporation into
virions.

Groppelli E(1), Len AC(1), Granger LA(1), Jolly C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.

The envelope glycoprotein (Env) of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type-1
(HIV-1) is a critical determinant of viral infectivity, tropism and is the main
target for humoral immunity; however, little is known about the cellular
machinery that directs Env trafficking and its incorporation into nascent
virions. Here we identify the mammalian retromer complex as a novel and important
cellular factor regulating Env trafficking. Retromer mediates endosomal sorting
and is most closely associated with endosome-to-Golgi transport. Consistent with 
this function, inactivating retromer using RNAi targeting the cargo selective
trimer complex inhibited retrograde trafficking of endocytosed Env to the Golgi. 
Notably, in HIV-1 infected cells, inactivating retromer modulated plasma membrane
expression of Env, along with Env incorporation into virions and particle
infectivity. Mutagenesis studies coupled with coimmunoprecipitations revealed
that retromer-mediated trafficking requires the Env cytoplasmic tail that we show
binds directly to retromer components Vps35 and Vps26. Taken together these
results provide novel insight into regulation of HIV-1 Env trafficking and
infectious HIV-1 morphogenesis and show for the first time a role for retromer in
the late-steps of viral replication and assembly of a virus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004518 
PMCID: PMC4231165
PMID: 25393110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

