
1. J Virol. 2015 Jun;89(12):6481-93. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03156-14. Epub 2015 Apr 8.

Interaction between TIM-1 and NPC1 Is Important for Cellular Entry of Ebola
Virus.

Kuroda M(1), Fujikura D(2), Nanbo A(3), Marzi A(4), Noyori O(1), Kajihara M(1),
Maruyama J(1), Matsuno K(1), Miyamoto H(1), Yoshida R(1), Feldmann H(4), Takada
A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Global Epidemiology, Hokkaido University Research Center for
Zoonosis Control, Sapporo, Japan.
(2)Division of Infection and Immunity, Hokkaido University Research Center for
Zoonosis Control, Sapporo, Japan.
(3)Department of Cell Physiology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Virology, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton,
Montana, USA.
(5)Division of Global Epidemiology, Hokkaido University Research Center for
Zoonosis Control, Sapporo, Japan Global Institution for Collaborative Research
and Education, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan atakada@czc.hokudai.ac.jp.

Multiple host molecules are known to be involved in the cellular entry of
filoviruses, including Ebola virus (EBOV); T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain
1 (TIM-1) and Niemann-Pick C1 (NPC1) have been identified as attachment and
fusion receptors, respectively. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the 
entry process have not been fully understood. We found that TIM-1 and NPC1
colocalized and interacted in the intracellular vesicles where EBOV glycoprotein 
(GP)-mediated membrane fusion occurred. Interestingly, a TIM-1-specific
monoclonal antibody (MAb), M224/1, prevented GP-mediated membrane fusion and also
interfered with the binding of TIM-1 to NPC1, suggesting that the interaction
between TIM-1 and NPC1 is important for filovirus membrane fusion. Moreover, MAb 
M224/1 efficiently inhibited the cellular entry of viruses from all known
filovirus species. These data suggest a novel mechanism underlying filovirus
membrane fusion and provide a potential cellular target for antiviral compounds
that can be universally used against filovirus infections.IMPORTANCE:
Filoviruses, including Ebola and Marburg viruses, cause rapidly fatal diseases in
humans and nonhuman primates. There are currently no approved vaccines or
therapeutics for filovirus diseases. In general, the cellular entry step of
viruses is one of the key mechanisms to develop antiviral strategies. However,
the molecular mechanisms underlying the entry process of filoviruses have not
been fully understood. In this study, we demonstrate that TIM-1 and NPC1, which
serve as attachment and fusion receptors for filovirus entry, interact in the
intracellular vesicles where Ebola virus GP-mediated membrane fusion occurs and
that this interaction is important for filovirus infection. We found that
filovirus infection and GP-mediated membrane fusion in cultured cells were
remarkably suppressed by treatment with a TIM-1-specific monoclonal antibody that
interfered with the interaction between TIM-1 and NPC1. Our data provide new
insights for the development of antiviral compounds that can be universally used 
against filovirus infections.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03156-14 
PMCID: PMC4474285
PMID: 25855742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

