
1. J Virol. 1995 Aug;69(8):5103-12.

Interactions of thyroid hormone receptor with the human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) long terminal repeat and the HIV-1 Tat transactivator.

Desai-Yajnik V(1), Hadzic E, Modlinger P, Malhotra S, Gechlik G, Samuels HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, New York University Medical Center, New York 10016,
USA.

Thyroid hormone (T3) receptor (T3R) regulates the human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) long terminal repeat (LTR) by binding to and activating thyroid
hormone response elements (TREs) embedded within the viral NF-kappa B and Sp1
motifs. The TREs within the NF-kappa B sites are necessary for activation by T3
in the absence of Tat, while those in the Sp1 motifs function as TREs only when
Tat is expressed, suggesting that Tat and T3R interact in the cell.
Transactivation of the HIV-1 LTR by T3R alpha and several receptor mutants
revealed that the 50-amino-acid N-terminal A/B region of T3R alpha, known to
interact with the basal transcription factor TFIIB, is critical for activation of
both Tat-dependent and Tat-independent responsive sequences of the LTR. A single 
amino acid change in the highly conserved tau 1 region in the ligand-binding
domain of T3R alpha eliminates Tat-independent but not Tat-dependent activation
of the HIV-1 LTR by T3. Ro 5-3335
[7-chloro-5-(2-pyrryl)-3H-1,4-benzodiazepin-2(H)-one], which inhibits
Tat-mediated transactivation of HIV-1, also inhibits the functional interaction
between Tat and T3R alpha. Binding studies with glutathione-S-transferase fusion 
proteins and Western (immunoblot) analysis indicate that T3R alpha interacts with
Tat through amino acids within the DNA-binding domain of T3R alpha. Mutational
analysis revealed that amino acid residues in the basic and C-terminal regions of
Tat are required for the binding of Tat to T3R alpha, while the N terminus of Tat
is not required. These studies provide functional and physical evidence that
stimulation of the HIV-1 LTR by T3 involves an interaction between T3R alpha and 
Tat. Our results also suggest a model in which multiple domains of T3R alpha
interact with Tat and other factors to form transcriptionally important
complexes.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.69.8.5103-5112.1995 
PMCID: PMC189328
PMID: 7609079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

