
1. J Virol. 1995 Oct;69(10):6010-20.

Tyrosine 807 of the v-Fms oncogene product controls cell morphology and
association with p120RasGAP.

Trouliaris S(1), Smola U, Chang JH, Parsons SJ, Niemann H, Tamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Virologie, Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen, Germany.

Expression of the v-fms oncogene of feline sarcoma virus in fibroblasts causes
surface exposure of an activated receptor tyrosine kinase, v-Fms, that is
autophosphorylated at multiple sites within its cytoplasmic domain. Cellular
proteins interacting with this part of v-Fms modulate the mitogenic activity and 
morphology of the cells. We show here that the tyrosine residue in position 807
(Y-807) of the v-Fms molecule constitutes a major autophosphorylation site. The
replacement of this residue by phenylalanine (Y807F mutation) allowed us to
functionally dissect v-Fms-specific mitogenic and morphogenic cascades. Cells
expressing the mutant v-Fms molecule resembled wild-type (wt) v-Fms-transformed
(wt-v-Fms) cells in terms of [3H]thymidine uptake rates and activation of the
Ras/Raf-1 mitogenic cascade. Such cells showed, however, a flat morphology and
contained intact actin cables and fibronectin network. Our studies indicate that 
the v-Fms molecule controls cell morphology by a cascade that involves a direct
interaction with p120RasGAP and p190RhoGAP: (i) in contrast to wt v-Fms
molecules, the Y807F v-Fms protein failed to associate with and phosphorylate
p120RasGAP; (ii) tight complexes between p120RasGAP and p190RhoGAP as well as
detectable RhoGAP activity were present exclusively in wt-v-Fms cells; and (iii) 
p190RhoGAP was dispersed throughout the cytoplasm of wt-v-Fms cells, whereas its 
distribution was restricted to perinuclear regions of cells expressing the mutant
v-Fms gene.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.69.10.6010-6020.1995 
PMCID: PMC189497
PMID: 7666506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

