
1. J Virol. 1995 Jun;69(6):3420-32.

Protein domains involved in both in vivo and in vitro interactions between human 
T-cell leukemia virus type I tax and CREB.

Yin MJ(1), Paulssen EJ, Seeler JS, Gaynor RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas 75235-8594, USA.

Gene expression from the human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) long
terminal repeat (LTR) is mediated by three cis-acting regulatory elements known
as 21-bp repeats and the transactivator protein Tax. The 21-bp repeats can be
subdivided into three motifs known as A, B, and C, each of which is important for
maximal gene expression in response to Tax. The B motif contains nucleotide
sequences known as a cyclic AMP response element (CRE) or tax-response element
which binds members of the ATF/CREB family of transcription factors. Though
mutations of this element in the HTLV-I LTR eliminate tax activation, Tax will
not activate most other promoters containing these CRE sites. In this study, we
investigated the mechanism by which Tax activates gene expression in conjunction 
with members of the ATF/CREB family. We found that Tax enhanced the binding of
one member of the ATF/CREB family, CREB 1, to each of the three HTLV-I LTR 21-bp 
repeats but not another member designated CRE-BP1 or CREB2. Tax enhanced the
binding of CREB1 to nonpalindromic CRE binding sites such as those found in the
HTLV-I LTR, but Tax did not enhance the binding of CREB1 to palindromic CRE
binding sites such as found in the somatostatin promoter. This finding may help
explain the failure of Tax to activate promoters containing consensus CRE sites. 
These studies were extended by use of the mammalian two-hybrid system. Tax was
demonstrated to interact directly with CREB1 but not with other bZIP proteins,
including CREB2 and Jun. Site-directed mutagenesis of both Tax and CREB1
demonstrated that the amino terminus of Tax and both the basic and the leucine
zipper regions of CREB1 were required for direct interactions between these
proteins both in vivo and in vitro. This interaction occurred in vivo and thus
did not require the presence of the HTLV-I 21-bp repeats, as previously
suggested. These results define the domains required for interaction between Tax 
and CREB that are likely critical for the activation of HTLV-I gene expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.69.6.3420-3432.1995 
PMCID: PMC189054
PMID: 7745688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

