
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Oct;17(10):6029-39.

CA150, a nuclear protein associated with the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme, is
involved in Tat-activated human immunodeficiency virus type 1 transcription.

Suñé C(1), Hayashi T, Liu Y, Lane WS, Young RA, Garcia-Blanco MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cancer Biology, Levine Science Research Center, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Maximal human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) gene expression requires
specific cellular factors in addition to the virus-encoded trans-activator
protein Tat and the RNA element TAR. We developed a functional assay, based on
transcriptional activation in vitro, to identify these cellular factors. Here, we
describe the purification and molecular cloning of CA150, a nuclear protein that 
is associated with the human RNA polymerase II holoenzyme and is involved in
Tat-dependent HIV-1 transcriptional activation. The sequence of CA150 contains an
extensive glutamine- and alanine-rich repeat that is found in transcriptional
modulators such as GAL11 and SSN6 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Zeste in
Drosophila melanogaster. Immunodepletion of CA150 abolished Tat trans activation 
in vitro. Moreover, overexpression of a mutant CA150 protein specifically and
dramatically decreased Tat-mediated activation of the HIV-1 promoter in vivo,
strongly suggesting a role for CA150 in HIV-1 gene regulation.
Immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that both CA150 and Tat associate
with the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme. Furthermore, we found that functional Tat 
associates with the holoenzyme whereas activation-deficient Tat mutants do not.
Thus, we propose that Tat action is transduced via an RNA polymerase II
holoenzyme that contains CA150.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.17.10.6029 
PMCID: PMC232452
PMID: 9315662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

