
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 May;18(5):2835-44.

Interaction of tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor signaling
proteins with the latent membrane protein 1 PXQXT motif is essential for
induction of epidermal growth factor receptor expression.

Miller WE(1), Cheshire JL, Raab-Traub N.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina School of
Medicine, Chapel Hill 27599, USA.

The Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) oncoprotein causes
multiple cellular changes, including induction of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) expression and activation of the NF-kappaB transcription factor. 
LMP1 and the cellular protein CD40, which also induces EGFR expression, interact 
with the tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor (TRAF) proteins. The
LMP1 carboxy-terminal activation region 1 signaling domain interacts specifically
with the TRAFs and is essential for EGFR induction through a mechanism
independent of NF-kappaB alone. LMP1 and CD40 share a common TRAF binding motif, 
PXQXT. In this study, the PXQXT motifs in both LMP1 and CD40 were altered and
mutant proteins were analyzed for induction of EGFR expression. Replacement of
the T residue with A in CD40 completely blocked induction of the EGFR, while the 
same mutation in LMP1 did not affect EGFR induction. Replacement of both P and Q 
residues with A's in LMP1 reduced EGFR induction by >75%, while deletion of PXQXT
blocked EGFR induction. These results genetically link EGFR induction by LMP1 to 
the TRAF signaling pathway. Overexpression of TRAF2 potently activates NF-kappaB,
although TRAF2 did not induce expression of the EGFR either alone or in
combination with TRAF1 and TRAF3. In vivo analyses of the interaction of the
TRAFs with LMP1 variants mutated in the PXQXT domain indicate that high-level
induction of EGFR expression requires interaction with TRAF1, -2, and -3.
However, exogenous expression of TRAF3 decreased EGFR induction mediated by
either LMP1 or CD40. These data suggest that TRAF-mediated activation of EGFR
expression requires assembly of a complex containing the appropriate
stoichiometry of TRAF proteins clustered at the cell membrane with LMP1.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.18.5.2835 
PMCID: PMC110662
PMID: 9566902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

