
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Oct;18(10):5921-9.

Inhibition of PrKX, a novel protein kinase, and the cyclic AMP-dependent protein 
kinase PKA by the regulatory proteins of adeno-associated virus type 2.

Chiorini JA(1), Zimmermann B, Yang L, Smith RH, Ahearn A, Herberg F, Kotin RM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Adeno-associated virus encodes four nonstructural proteins, which are known as
Rep78, Rep68, Rep52, and Rep40. Expression of these nonstructural proteins
affects cell growth and gene expression through processes that have not yet been 
characterized. Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, we have demonstrated that a
stable interaction occurs between the viral proteins Rep78 and Rep52 and the
putative protein kinase PrKX, which is encoded on the X chromosome. The stability
and specificity of the Rep-PrKX interaction were confirmed by
coimmunoprecipitation of complexes assembled in vitro and in vivo. Overexpressed 
PrKX, which was purified from cos cells, was shown to phosphorylate a synthetic
protein kinase A (PKA) substrate. However, this activity was dramatically
inhibited by stoichiometric amounts of Rep52 and weakly inhibited with Rep68,
which lacks the carboxy-terminal sequence contained in Rep52. Similarly, a stable
interaction was observed with Rep78, which also contains the carboxy-terminal
sequence of Rep52. A stable interaction and inhibition were also observed between
Rep52 and the catalytic subunit of PKA. By using surface plasmon resonance and
kinetic studies, Kis of approximately 300 and 167 nM were calculated for Rep52
with PKA and with PrKX, respectively. Thus, Rep52 but not Rep68 can significantly
inhibit the trans- and autophosphorylation activities of these kinases. The
biological effects of Rep78-specific inhibition of PKA-responsive genes are
illustrated by the reduction of steady-state levels of cyclic
AMP-responsive-element-binding protein and cyclin A protein.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.18.10.5921 
PMCID: PMC109178
PMID: 9742109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

