
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Feb;19(2):1210-7.

The arginine-rich domains present in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Tat and 
Rev function as direct importin beta-dependent nuclear localization signals.

Truant R(1), Cullen BR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Genetics, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Protein nuclear import is generally mediated by basic nuclear localization
signals (NLSs) that serve as targets for the importin alpha (Imp alpha) NLS
receptor. Imp alpha is in turn bound by importin beta (Imp beta), which targets
the resultant protein complex to the nucleus. Here, we report that the
arginine-rich NLS sequences present in the human immunodeficiency virus type 1
regulatory proteins Tat and Rev fail to interact with Imp alpha and instead bind 
directly to Imp beta. Using in vitro nuclear import assays, we demonstrate that
Imp alpha is entirely dispensable for Tat and Rev nuclear import. In contrast,
Imp beta proved both sufficient and necessary, in that other beta-like import
factors, such as transportin, were unable to support Tat or Rev nuclear import.
Using in vitro competition assays, it was demonstrated that the target sites on
Imp beta for Imp alpha, Tat, and Rev binding either are identical or at least
overlap. The interaction of Tat and Rev with Imp beta is also similar to Imp
alpha binding in that it is inhibited by RanGTP but not RanGDP, a finding that
may in part explain why the interaction of the Rev nuclear RNA export factor with
target RNA species is efficient in the cell nucleus yet is released in the
cytoplasm. Together, these studies define a novel class of arginine-rich NLS
sequences that are direct targets for Imp beta and that therefore function
independently of Imp alpha.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.19.2.1210 
PMCID: PMC116050
PMID: 9891055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

