
1. Z Orthop Ihre Grenzgeb. 1999 Jan-Feb;137(1):61-6.

[Treatment modalities in infected knee alloarthroplasties].

[Article in German]

Jerosch J(1), Mersmann M, Fuchs S.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Allgemeine Orthopädie, Westfälische
Wilhelms-Universität Münster.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to present and to evaluate different
treatment options in the infected knee alloarthroplasty.
METHODS: We followed 47 infected knee alloarthroplasties with a mean follow-up of
62 months which were surgically treated by different techniques. There were 20
cases with early infection (< or = 12 months) and 27 cases with late infections
(> 12 months).
RESULTS: In 10 patients a two stage exchange of the implant were undertaken. In 6
of those 10 cases the infection could be successfully treated. 30 patients
underwent an arthrodesis, two of those after an unsuccessful exchange procedure. 
In this group only in two patients the infection was not managed successfully. 28
of the patients with an arthrodesis showed a good result of the fusion side. One 
case was only debrided and in 8 cases bony and soft tissue damage lead to
amputation. The HSS-score showed an excellent results in 5.3%, a good result in
21%, a fair result in 26.3% and a poor results in 47.4% of the cases. Comparable 
distribution was documented with the Hungerford-score. Patients with a stable and
painless fusion showed a comparable functional outcome to those patients with a
new replacement.
CONCLUSION: Revision of an infected knee implant is best managed by a two stage
procedure and can lead to a good functional result. Fusion is indicated in cases 
with bad bony and soft tissue situation. A solid arthrodesis gives a painfree and
stable extremity.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2008-1037038 
PMID: 10327564  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

