
1. J Immunol. 1999 Jul 1;163(1):466-75.

Skin homing (cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen-positive) CD8+ T cells
respond to superantigen and contribute to eosinophilia and IgE production in
atopic dermatitis.

Akdis M(1), Simon HU, Weigl L, Kreyden O, Blaser K, Akdis CA.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute of Allergy and Asthma Research (SIAF), Davos, Switzerland.
akdism@siaf.unizh.ch

In allergic inflammations of the skin, activation of CD4+ T cells was
demonstrated to play an important role; however, a minor role for CD8+ T cells is
implied. In the present study, we compared cutaneous lymphocyte-associated Ag
(CLA)-expressing CD4+ and CD8+ subsets, which were isolated from peripheral blood
and lesional skin biopsies in atopic dermatitis (AD) patients. We demonstrated
that CD8+CLA+ T cells proliferate in response to superantigen and are as potent
as CD4+CLA+ T cells in IgE induction and support of eosinophil survival. In
atopic skin inflammation, the existence of high numbers of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells 
was demonstrated by immunohistochemistry and by culturing T cells from skin
biopsies. In peripheral blood, both CD4+ and CD8+ subsets of CLA+CD45RO+ T cells 
were in an activated state in AD. The in vivo-activated CLA+ T cells of both
subsets spontaneously released an IL-5- and IL-13-dominated Th2 type cytokine
pattern. This was confirmed by intracytoplasmic cytokine staining immediately
after isolation of the cells from peripheral blood. In consequence, both CD4+ and
CD8+, CLA+ memory/effector T cells induced IgE production by B cells mainly by
IL-13, and enhanced eosinophil survival in vitro by delaying eosinophil
apoptosis, mainly by IL-5. These results indicate that in addition to the CD4+
subset, the CD8+CLA+ memory/effector T cells are capable of responding to
superantigenic stimulation and play an important role in the pathogenesis of AD.


PMID: 10384150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

