
1. Biochemistry. 1999 Jun 22;38(25):8045-55.

New strategy for the conformational analysis of carbohydrates based on NOE and
13C NMR coupling constants. Application to the flexible polysaccharide of
Streptococcus mitis J22.

Martin-Pastor M(1), Bush CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland-Baltimore
County, Baltimore 21250, USA.

For complex oligosaccharides, which are relatively rigid with modest excursions
from a single minimum energy conformation, it is straightforward to build
conformational models from NOE data. Other oligosaccharides are more flexible
with transitions between distinct minima separated by substantial energy
barriers. We show that modeling based on scalar coupling data is superior to
NOE-based modeling for the latter case. Long range 13C-13C and 13C-1H coupling
constants measured for the heptasaccharide repeating subunit of the cell wall
polysaccharide from Streptococcus mitis J22 are correlated with individual
glycosidic dihedral angles, effectively uncoupling the degrees of freedom of the 
oligosaccharide and allowing a search for combinations of dihedral angles which
are energetically reasonable, i.e., with no bad van der Waals contacts, and which
can be combined to satisfy all the measured J values. Allowed values of the
individual angles can then be combined to search for overall oligosaccharide
conformations which contribute to the ensemble. We show that while the
polysaccharide from S. mitis J22 is flexible, requiring multiple conformations,
most of the flexibility is localized to a few bonds and only a rather small
number of conformations is required to reproduce the experimental NOE and scalar 
coupling data.

DOI: 10.1021/bi9904205 
PMID: 10387049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

