
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Aug 15;27(16):3245-52.

A chicken embryo protein related to the mammalian DEAD box protein p68 is tightly
associated with the highly purified protein-RNA complex of 5-MeC-DNA glycosylase.

Jost JP(1), Schwarz S, Hess D, Angliker H, Fuller-Pace FV, Stahl H, Thiry S,
Siegmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher-Institute, PO Box 2543, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland.
jost@fmi.ch

We have shown previously that DNA demethylation by chick embryo 5-methylcytosine 
(5-MeC)-DNA glycosylase needs both protein and RNA. Amino acid sequences of nine 
peptides derived from a highly purified 5-MeC-DNA glycosylase complex were
identified by Nanoelectrospray ionisation mass spectrometry to be identical to
the mammalian nuclear DEAD box protein p68 RNA helicase. Antibodies directed
against human p68 helicase cross-reacted with the purified 5-MeC-DNA glycosylase 
complex and immunoprecipitated the glycosylase activity. A 2690 bp cDNA coding
for the chicken homologue of mammalian p68 was isolated and sequenced. Its
derived amino acid sequence is almost identical to the human p68 DEAD box protein
up to amino acid position 473 (from a total of 595). This sequence contains all
the essential conserved motifs from the DEAD box proteins which are the ATPase,
RNA unwinding and RNA binding motifs. The rest of the 122 amino acids in the
C-terminal region rather diverge from the human p68 RNA helicase sequence. The
recombinant chicken DEAD box protein expressed in Escherichia coli cross-reacts
with the same p68 antibodies as the purified chicken embryo 5-MeC-DNA glycosylase
complex. The recombinant protein has an RNA-dependent ATPase and an ATP-dependent
helicase activity. However, in the presence or absence of RNA the recombinant
protein had no 5-MeC-DNA glycosylase activity. In situ hybridisation of 5 day-old
chicken embryos with antisense probes of the chicken DEAD box protein shows a
high abundance of its transcripts in differentiating embryonic tissues.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/27.16.3245 
PMCID: PMC148556
PMID: 10454630  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

