
1. Rev Esp Enferm Dig. 1999 Jul;91(7):508-15.

[Are all H. pylori "bad"?].

[Article in Spanish]

Gisbert J(1), Pajares J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Aparato Digestivo, Departamento de Medicina, Hospital
Universitario de "La Princesa", Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, España.

The infection by Helicobacter pylori arises a question of great interest: should 
the infection be considered a disease in all cases? or, on the contrary, is the
microorganism harmful in only some circumstances? The response to these questions
is followed by therapeutic implications of great importance, as it is followed by
the decision of administering eradication therapy to every patient or only to
some individuals. In this article the arguments supporting each of the
aforementioned options are reviewed. Firstly, the aphorism recently stated <<The 
only good H. pylori is a dead H. pylori>> suggests that all microorganisms are
harmful and, therefore, generalized H. pylori eradication therapy should be
administered to all infected subjects. Among the arguments supporting this
attitude are the following: the H. pylori <<healthy>> carrier status does not
exist; a high risk of developing peptic ulcer exists in infected patients; H.
pylori positive patients are at risk of suffering gastric adenocarcinoma and
lymphoma; and, finally, the eradication of the microorganism would reduce the
potential reservoir of the infection. On the other hand, the expression <<not all
H. pylori strains are created equal: should all be eliminated?>> summarises a
more conservative position, that suggests the existence of <<bad>>, <<neutral, or
even <<good>> H. pylori, advising the eradication of the microorganism in only
some cases. Several arguments supporting this idea, and, therefore, against the
generalized use of eradication therapy, have been proposed: H. pylori has
colonized humans since immemorial time and, therefore, it can not be very harmful
to the human; the bacterium will induce peptic ulcer or gastric cancer in only a 
minority of infected subjects; the beneficial effect of eradication has been
definitively demonstrated in few entities as gastroduodenal ulcer and MALT
lymphoma; some strains could be beneficial to the human; generalized
administration of antibiotic therapy will cause problems; the H. pylori vaccine
represents a more rational alternative; and, finally, the incidence of H. pylori 
infection is spontaneously decreasing in some regions. In summary, there are
strong arguments supporting both of the strategies that are reviewed in the
present article, and, therefore, the dilemma <<good H. pylori, bad H. pylori>>
remains.


PMID: 10477369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

