
1. J Inorg Biochem. 2000 Jan 30;78(2):149-60.

Hydrogen abstraction from thiols by adenosyl radicals: chemical precedent for
thiyl radical formation, the first catalytic step in ribonucleoside triphosphate 
reductase from Lactobacillus leichmannii.

Sirovatka JM(1), Finke RG.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Department, Colorado State University, Ft. Collins 80523, USA.

Aqueous solutions of adenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl) were thermolyzed with excess
beta-mercaptoethanol under anaerobic conditions. The product studies reveal that 
approximately 90% Co-C bond homolysis occurs, to yield Co(II)cobalamin,
5'-deoxyadenosine, and the disulfide product from the combination of two
HOCH2CH2S* radicals, 2,2'-dithiodiethanol; there is also approximately 10% Co-C
bond heterolysis, yielding Co(III)cobalamin, adenine, and
2,3-dihydroxy-4-pentenal. The kinetic studies show there is a first-order
dependence on AdoCbl and zero-order dependence on thiol under the higher [RSH]
experimental conditions used, consistent with the rate-determining step at high
[RSH] being the generation of Ado*. The kinetic results require that, in
enzyme-free AdoCbl solution, adenosyl radical (Ado*) is formed as a discrete
intermediate which then abstracts H* from the added thiol. The activation
parameters for Co-C bond homolysis in the presence of thiol trap are the same
within experimental error as the activation parameters for Co-C bond homolysis
without trap, standard delta H(obs) = 29(2) kcal mol(-1) and standard delta
S(obs) = -1(5) e.u. The results, in comparison to the rate of Co-C bond homolysis
in ribonucleoside triphosphate reductase (RTPR), reveal that RTPR accelerates
Co-C bond cleavage in AdoCbl by approximately 10(10+/-1). The recent literature
evidence bearing on the exact mechanism of RTPR enzymic cleavage of the Co-C bond
of AdoCbl is briefly discussed, notably the fact that this mechanism is presently
controversial, but does involve at least coupled (and possibly concerted) Co-C
cleavage, -S-H cleavage, and C-H (Ado-H) formation steps.

DOI: 10.1016/s0162-0134(99)00224-x 
PMID: 10766338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

