
1. Mol Cells. 2000 Feb 29;10(1):54-60.

Diversity of the p70 killer cell inhibitory receptor (KIR3DL) family members in a
single individual.

Kwon D(1), Chwae YJ, Choi IH, Park JH, Kim SJ, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Institute for Immunology and Immunological
Diseases, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

NK cells and some T cells express members of a multigenic family of killer cell
inhibitory receptors (KIRs) including p70 KIR (KIR3DL) and p58 KIR (KIR2DL)
family that recognize polymorphic class I MHC molecules on target cells and
transmit an inhibitory signal to prevent killer cell-mediated cytoxicity. The
cDNA sequences of p70 KIR family members reported so far suggest that the p70 KIR
gene consists of a multigene complex and that each gene may exhibit certain
degrees of polymorphism. However, it is not clear how diverse the repertoire of
the p70 KIR family is, particularly in a single individual. To address this
question in more detail and to determine some indication as to the origin of the 
diversity, we cloned p70 KIR cDNAs from a single individual. We identified nine
new KIRs that are different from the previously reported ones. A comparison of
the amino acid sequences with published sequences of p70 KIRs showed that two
clones belonged to the KIR3DL1 family, five clones belonged to the KIR3DL2
family, one clone belonged to the KIR2DL4 family, and one clone appeared to be an
alternatively spliced form of p70 KIR. These results suggested that the
repertoire of p70 KIR family members in a single individual is highly diverse. It
is not clear how the diverse receptors are generated in a single individual, but 
a comparison of amino acid sequences of p70 KIR family members suggested that
some of them may be encoded by distinct genes or their alleles, while others may 
be generated by a recombination mechanism and/or an alternative splicing
mechanism at the maturation of the mRNA transcripts.

DOI: 10.1007/s10059-000-0054-0 
PMID: 10774747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

