
1. Artif Organs. 2000 May;24(5):323-8.

Novel online infusate-assisted dialysis system performs microbiologically safely.

Weber C(1), Groetsch W, Schlotter S, Mitteregger R, Falkenhagen D.

Author information: 
(1)Fresenius Medical Care, Bad Homburg, Germany.

Administration of adequate amounts of commercial infusion fluids renders modern
convective dialysis modalities, such as hemodiafiltration, labor-intensive and
costly. Preparation of infusate by cold sterilization of dialysis fluid, which is
abundantly available, and its immediate (online) use, in contrast, enables a
large volume fluid exchange in a cost-effective manner. Recent developments aimed
at more hygienic and user-friendly online systems with increased operational
flexibility. As a result the novel ONLINEplus system does not only provide online
prepared infusate for convective dialysis therapy, but also for priming and
rinsing of the extracorporeal blood circuit, for intradialytic bolus
administration, and for re-infusion of patients' blood as well. Production of
infusate from potentially impure dialysis fluid containing endotoxins and other
pyrogens raises severe concerns of affecting the patients' well-being. To assess 
its safety, the online system was challenged with microbially contaminated
dialysis fluid. Despite high levels of microbial counts (7.5 x 104 +/- 105
CFU/ml), endotoxin concentration (14.1 +/- 7.7 IU/ml and 9.265 +/- 3.000 IU/ml,
as measured turbidimetrically and chromogenically, respectively) and
cytokine-inducing activity (20,827 +/- 3,082 pg IL-1Ra/Mio WBC), we failed to
detect contaminants in the final infusate during a 5 week laboratory testing
period. In addition, infusate samples complied consistently with the European
Pharmacopeia test for sterility. The present online system is comprehensive,
operates user-friendly, and provides microbiologically safe infusate in large
quantities. In this way, both patients and dialysis staff will benefit from
improved dialysis therapy and reduced treatment-related labor burden,
respectively. Moreover, convective dialysis modalities will become less
expensive.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1525-1594.2000.06494.x 
PMID: 10848672  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

