
1. J Bacteriol. 2000 Sep;182(18):5076-81.

Recognition of overlapping nucleotides by AraC and the sigma subunit of RNA
polymerase.

Dhiman A(1), Schleif R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland
21218, USA.

The Escherichia coli promoter p(BAD), under the control of the AraC protein,
drives the expression of mRNA encoding the AraB, AraA, and AraD gene products of 
the arabinose operon. The binding site of AraC at p(BAD) overlaps the RNA
polymerase -35 recognition region by 4 bases, leaving 2 bases of the region not
contacted by AraC. This overlap raises the question of whether AraC substitutes
for the sigma subunit of RNA polymerase in recognition of the -35 region or
whether both AraC and sigma make important contacts with the DNA in the -35
region. If sigma does not contact DNA near the -35 region, p(BAD) activity should
be independent of the identity of the bases in the hexamer region that are not
contacted by AraC. We have examined this issue in the p(BAD) promoter and in a
second promoter where the AraC binding site overlaps the -35 region by only 2
bases. In both cases promoter activity is sensitive to changes in bases not
contacted by AraC, showing that despite the overlap, sigma does read DNA in the
-35 region. Since sigma and AraC are thus closely positioned at p(BAD), it is
possible that AraC and sigma contact one another during transcription initiation.
DNA migration retardation assays, however, showed that there exists only a slight
degree of DNA binding cooperativity between AraC and sigma, thus suggesting
either that the normal interactions between AraC and sigma are weak or that the
presence of the entire RNA polymerase is necessary for significant interaction.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.18.5076-5081.2000 
PMCID: PMC94654
PMID: 10960090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

