
1. Immunology. 2000 Oct;101(2):185-90.

Staphylococcal enterotoxin B induces potent cytotoxic activity by intraepithelial
lymphocytes.

Roberts AI(1), Blumberg RS, Christ AD, Brolin RE, Ebert EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New
Brunswick, NJ 08903, USA.

In food poisoning, Staphylococcus aureus secretes staphylococcal enterotoxin B
(SEB), a superantigen that causes intense T-cell proliferation and cytotoxicity. 
The effects of SEB on lytic activity by human intestinal intraepithelial
lymphocytes (IEL) were investigated. Jejunal IEL, from morbidly obese individuals
undergoing gastric bypass operations, were tested for SEB-induced cytotoxicity
against C1R B-lymphoblastoid cells, HT-29 adenocarcinoma cells, or
CD1d-transfected cells using the 51Cr-release assay. Fas and Fas ligand
expression were detected by immunofluorescence and flow cytometry and soluble
ligand by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). In the presence of SEB, IEL 
became potently cytotoxic against C1R cells and interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma)-precultured HT-29 cells, causing 55+/-10% and 31+/-6% lysis,
respectively, greater than that by phytohaemagglutinin (PHA)-, interleukin-2
(IL-2)-, or anti-T-cell receptor (TCR)-activated IEL. SEB-stimulated peripheral
blood (PB) CD8+ T cells lysed similar numbers of C1R cells but fewer HT-29 cells 
(53+/-13% and 8+/-5%, respectively). IEL killing of C1R cells involved
interaction of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II with TCR, CD2 with
CD58, and CD11a with CD54, and was perforin mediated. SEB-induced IEL lysis of
HT-29 cells, in contrast, was caused by an unknown target cell structure, not MHC
class II or CD1d, and resulted from a combination of perforin and Fas-mediated
events. The potent cytotoxic activities of IEL promoted by SEB utilize two
different mechanisms, depending on the surface receptors expressed by the target 
cells.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2567.2000.00088.x 
PMCID: PMC2327067
PMID: 11012771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

