
1. Gut. 2000 Nov;47(5):646-52.

Bifidobacterium strains from resident infant human gastrointestinal microflora
exert antimicrobial activity.

Liévin V(1), Peiffer I, Hudault S, Rochat F, Brassart D, Neeser JR, Servin AL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 510, UFR de
Pharmacie, Université Paris XI, 92296 Châtenay-Malabry, France.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The gastrointestinal microflora exerts a barrier effect
against enteropathogens. The aim of this study was to examine if bifidobacteria, 
a major species of the human colonic microflora, participates in the barrier
effect by developing antimicrobial activity against enterovirulent bacteria.
METHODS: Antibacterial activity was examined in vitro against a wide range of
Gram negative and Gram positive pathogens. Inhibition of Salmonella typhimurium
SL1334 cell association and cell invasion was investigated in vitro using Caco-2 
cells. Colonisation of the gastrointestinal tract in vivo by bifidobacteria was
examined in axenic C3/He/Oujco mice. Antimicrobial activity was examined in vivo 
in axenic C3/He/Oujco mice infected by the lethal S typhimurium C5 strain.
RESULTS: Fourteen human bifidobacterium strains isolated from infant stools were 
examined for antimicrobial activity. Two strains (CA1 and F9) expressed
antagonistic activity against pathogens in vitro, inhibited cell entry, and
killed intracellular S typhimurium SL1344 in Caco-2 cells. An antibacterial
component(s) produced by CA1 and F9 was found to be a lipophilic molecule(s) with
a molecular weight of less than 3500. In the axenic C3/He/Oujco mice, CA1 and F9 
strains colonised the intestinal tract and protected mice against S typhimurium
C5 lethal infection.
CONCLUSION: Several bifidobacterium strains from resident infant human
gastrointestinal microflora exert antimicrobial activity, suggesting that they
could participate in the "barrier effect" produced by the indigenous microflora.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.47.5.646 
PMCID: PMC1728100
PMID: 11034580  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

