
1. J Immunol. 2000 Nov 1;165(9):5192-201.

MHC class Ib-restricted CTL provide protection against primary and secondary
Listeria monocytogenes infection.

Seaman MS(1), Wang CR, Forman J.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Graduate Program and Center for Immunology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75235, USA.

Infection of B6 mice with the intracellular pathogen Listeria monocytogenes (LM) 
results in the activation of CD8(+) T cells that respond to Ag presented by both 
MHC class Ia and class Ib molecules. Enzyme-linked immunospot analysis reveals
that these CTL populations expand and contract at different times following a
primary sublethal LM infection. Between days 4 and 6 postinfection, class
Ib-restricted CTL exhibit a rapid proliferative response that is primarily H2-M3 
restricted. The peak response of class Ia-restricted CD8(+) T cells occurs a few 
days later, after the majority of bacteria have been cleared. Although class
Ia-restricted CTL exhibit a vigorous recall response to secondary LM infection,
we observe limited expansion of class Ib-restricted memory CTL, even in MHC class
Ia-deficient mice (B6.K(b-/-)D(b-/-)). Despite this lack of enhanced expansion in
vivo, class Ib-restricted memory CTL retain the ability to proliferate and expand
when provided with Ag in vitro. Furthermore, we demonstrate that in vivo
depletion of CD8(+) T cells in LM-immune B6.K(b-/-)D(b-/-) mice severely impairs 
memory protection. Together, these data demonstrate that class Ib-restricted CTL 
play an important role in clearing a primary LM infection and generate a memory
population capable of providing significant protection against subsequent
infection.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.165.9.5192 
PMID: 11046052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

