
1. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2000;90(3-4):330-6.

Isolation and characterization of a novel human gene, NIF3L1, and its mouse
ortholog, Nif3l1, highly conserved from bacteria to mammals.

Tascou S(1), Uedelhoven J, Dixkens C, Nayernia K, Engel W, Burfeind P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

We report the cloning and characterization of novel human and murine genes NIF3L1
and Nif3l1 which are strongly homologous to the yeast Ngg1-interacting factor 3
homolog. Mouse Nif3l1 and human NIF3L1 encode predicted proteins of 376 amino
acids and 377 amino acids, respectively. Northern blot analysis on RNA from
different postnatal murine tissues showed a ubiquitous expression pattern of
mouse Nif3l1 with a transcript of approximately 1.85 kb. RT-PCR analysis on
prenatal mouse RNA and embryonic stem cell RNA demonstrated expression of Nif3l1 
throughout embryonic development. Additionally, expression analysis on cell lines
revealed strong overexpression of Nif3l1 in the spermatogonia-derived cell line
GC-1 spg and in the teratocarcinoma cell line F9. The mouse gene was mapped to
chromosome 1, region C. Human NIF3L1 consists of seven exons spanning 14.5 kb of 
genomic DNA and is located on chromosome 2q33. A fusion protein consisting of the
GFP (green fluorescent protein) and the ORF of human NIF3L1 showed a localization
of the predicted protein in the cytoplasm. In the N-terminal and C-terminal
region, mouse Nif3l1 and human NIF3L1 are strongly homologous to proteins of
other species, e.g. the recently cloned Drosophila symbol=anon-35F/36F gene with 
41% amino acid identity and several proteins from yeast including the yeast
Ngg1-interacting factor 3 homolog with 46% amino acid identity, the hypothetical 
protein YGL221c and yeast Ngg1-interacting factor 3 (Nif3) with 37% amino acid
identity. Other proteins from lower organisms, e.g a conserved hypothetical
protein from Ureaplasma urealyticum or a hypothetical protein SCC30.09c from
Streptomyces coelicolor show approximately 25-30% amino acid identity in the two 
flanking regions of the protein. These similarities indicate a high degree of
conservation of mouse Nif3l1 and human NIF3L1 from bacteria to mammals.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000056799 
PMID: 11124544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

