
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2001 Jan;34(3):221-228.

Methanogen and bacterial diversity and distribution in deep gas hydrate sediments
from the Cascadia Margin as revealed by 16S rRNA molecular analysis.

Marchesi JR, Weightman AJ, Cragg BA, Parkes RJ, Fry JC.

The microbial community of a deep (to 234 m below the sea floor) sediment gas
hydrate deposit (Cascadia Margin Ocean Drilling Program Site 889/890, Leg 146)
was analysed for the first time by molecular genetic techniques. Both bacterial
and methanogen diversity were determined by phylogenetic analysis of ribosomal
DNA sequences. High molecular mass DNA, indicative of active bacteria, was
present in all of the samples. Ribosomal RNA genes were amplified from extracted 
DNA extracted from sediment using bacteria, and methanogen specific PCR primers, 
the latter designed in this study. Phylogenetic analysis of approximately 400
bacterial clones demonstrated that 96% were members of the Proteobacteria. These 
clones were affiliated with the alpha, beta and gamma subdivisions, with
Caulobacter (Zymomonas group), Ralstonia and Pseudomonas phylotypes
predominating. The methanogen clones were of low diversity and clustered in three
sub-groups. Two of these sub-groups (contained 96% of the 400 clones) were
closely related to Methanosarcina mazeii, while the third sub-group clustered in 
the Methanobacteriales. This analysis of a deep sediment gas hydrate environment 
shows a bacteria and methanogen community of limited diversity and confirms that 
the gas hydrate zone is biogeochemically active. These results are consistent
with the presence of bacterial populations capable of methanogenesis throughout
the core, and suggest that the methane hydrate at this site is at least partially
biogenic in origin.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2001.tb00773.x 
PMID: 11137602 

