
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2001 Jan;11(1):65-74.

The gill is a major organ for antibody secreting cell production following direct
immersion of sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax, L.) in a Photobacterium damselae
ssp. piscicida bacterin: an ontogenetic study.

dos Santos NM(1), Taverne-Thiele JJ, Barnes AC, van Muiswinkel WB, Ellis AE,
Rombout JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Porto, Portugal.

Extremely high numbers of antibody secreting cells (ASC) were observed in the
gills of sea bass fry immunised at three different age/sizes (initial weight of
0.1, 2 and 5 g) by direct immersion in a Photobacterium damselae spp. piscicida
bacterin. The relatively low ASC production in the head kidney and spleen
suggests that the systemic compartment was only slightly stimulated upon
immersion vaccination. There was no response of corresponding magnitude in the
gut as the one observed in the gills. A clear age effect was observed in the ASC 
response of the different groups, especially visible in the gills. Significantly 
higher numbers of specific ASC were observed in the gills of the two oldest
groups (initial weight of 2 and 5 g) compared with the youngest fish (initial
weight of 0.1 g), but the oldest groups were not significantly different from
each other. Additionally, a more rapid response was observed with the ageing of
the fish, with peak responses in all the organs at day 18, 16 and 8
post-immunisation in the smallest to largest fish, respectively. There was no
evidence that direct immersion exposure to P. damselae ssp. piscicida at the
earliest stages used in the present study (0.1 g) was tolerogenic. In the context
of present knowledge, this study strongly supports the importance of the route of
immunisation to locally stimulate ASC and the importance that the gills might
have in specific responses.

DOI: 10.1006/fsim.2000.0295 
PMID: 11271603  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

