
1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2001 Apr;293(4):165-70.

Non-M protein(s) on the cell wall and membrane of group A streptococci induce(s) 
IFN-gamma production by dermal CD4+ T cells in psoriasis.

Brown DW(1), Baker BS, Ovigne JM, Fischetti VA, Hardman C, Powles AV, Fry L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Imperial College of Science, Technology and
Medicine at St Mary's, Paddington, London, UK.

Recently we have demonstrated that a disease-specific subpopulation of CD4+ T
cells isolated from skin lesions of chronic plaque psoriasis produces
interferon-gamma in response to group A streptococcal (GAS) antigens. To
determine if these T cells recognize M or non-M protein, extracts from cell wall 
of type M6 GAS (M6W) and its isogenic M gene deletion mutant (M-W), M6 membrane
extract (M6M) and recombinant M6 protein (rM6) were used to stimulate
GAS-reactive T-cell lines from nine patients with chronic plaque psoriasis.
T-cell lines were incubated with or without streptococcal extracts for 18 h in
the presence of a transport inhibitor, stained for surface CD4 and intracellular 
cytokine expression, and analysed by flow cytometry. Variable numbers (0.2-34%)
of CD4+ T cells produced interferon-gamma, in all but one of the T-cell lines
tested, in response to M6W, M-W and M6M extracts. No significant difference
between the response to M6W and M-W extracts was detected. In addition, rM6
protein failed to increase CD4+/interferon-gamma+ T-cell numbers in seven of nine
T-cell lines compared to medium alone. For the group, there was a highly
significant correlation between the responses to the three extracts (M6W vs M-W, 
P = 0.0005; M6W vs M6M, P = 0.0003; M-W vs M6M, P = 0.0001). Low or minimal
numbers of interleukin-4- and interleukin-10-producing CD4+ T cells were
occasionally induced. These findings suggest that a subpopulation of CD4+ T cells
isolated from skin lesions of chronic plaque psoriasis patients produces
interferon-gamma in response to non-M protein(s) present on the cell wall and
membrane of GAS.

DOI: 10.1007/s004030100218 
PMID: 11380148  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

