
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2001 Oct;67(10):4874-9.

Physical and metabolic interactions of Pseudomonas sp. strain JA5-B45 and
Rhodococcus sp. strain F9-D79 during growth on crude oil and effect of a chemical
surfactant on them.

Van Hamme JD(1), Ward OP.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Biotechnology Laboratory, Department of Biology, University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada. jvanhamme@alumni.waterloo.ca

Methods to enhance crude oil biodegradation by mixed bacterial cultures, for
example, (bio)surfactant addition, are complicated by the diversity of microbial 
populations within a given culture. The physical and metabolic interactions
between Rhodococcus sp. strain F9-D79 and Pseudomonas sp. strain JA5-B45 were
examined during growth on Bow River crude oil. The effects of a nonionic chemical
surfactant, Igepal CO-630 (nonylphenol ethoxylate), also were evaluated. Strain
F9-D79 grew attached to the oil-water interface and produced a mycolic
acid-containing capsule. Crude oil emulsification and surface activity were
associated with the cellular fraction. Strain JA5-B45 grew in the aqueous phase
and was unable to emulsify oil, but cell-free supernatants mediated
kerosene-water emulsion formation. In coculture, stable emulsions were formed and
strain JA5-B45 had an affinity for the capsule produced by strain F9-D79. Igepal 
CO-630 inhibited F9-D79 cells from adhering to the interface, and cells grew
dispersed in the aqueous phase as 0.5-microm cocci rather than 2.5-microm rods.
The surfactant increased total petroleum hydrocarbon removal by strain JA5-B45
from 4 to 22% and included both saturated compounds and aromatics. In coculture, 
TPH removal increased from 13 to 40% following surfactant addition. The culture
pH normally increased from 7.0 to between 7.5 and 8.5, although addition of
Igepal CO-630 to F9-D79 cultures resulted in a drop to pH 5.5. We suggest a dual 
role for the nonylphenol ethoxylate surfactant in the coculture: (i) to improve
hydrocarbon uptake by strain JA5-B45 through emulsification and (ii) to prevent
strain F9-D79 from adhering to the oil-water interface, indirectly increasing
hydrocarbon availability. These varied effects on hydrocarbon biodegradation
could explain some of the known diversity of surfactant effects.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.67.10.4874-4879.2001 
PMCID: PMC93243
PMID: 11571196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

