
1. Vet Microbiol. 2002 Jan 23;84(3):231-41.

Examination of Escherichia coli from poultry for selected adhesin genes important
in disease caused by mammalian pathogenic E. coli.

Stordeur P(1), Marlier D, Blanco J, Oswald E, Biet F, Dho-Moulin M, Mainil J.

Author information: 
(1)Departement de Bactériologie et de Pathologie Bactérienne, Faculté de Médecine
Vétérinaire, Université de Liège, Campus du Sart Tilman, Bât B43a, B4000, Liège, 
Belgium. p.stordeur@student.ulg.ac.be

A collection of 1601 extraintestinal and intestinal Escherichia coli isolated
from chickens, turkeys and ducks, in Belgium, France and Spain, was hybridised
with gene probes specific for fimbrial and afimbrial adhesins (F17, F18, S
<Sfa/F1C>, Bfp, Afa, Cs31A, Intimin <Eae>, Aida-1) of intestinal, urinary and
invasive E. coli of mammals and with a probe specific for the P (Pap/Prs)
fimbrial adhesin of urinary and invasive E. coli of mammals and birds. Three
hundred and eighty-three strains (23.9%) were P-positive, 76 strains (4.8%) were 
Afa-positive, 75 strains (4.7%) were F17-positive, 67 strains (4.2%) were
S-positive, 23 (1.4%) were Intimin-positive, and all were F18-, Cs31A-, Aida1-
and Bfp-negative. The 75 F17-positive strains harboured different major subunit
A-encoding gene variants, but the f17Ac variant was the most frequent (52
strains, 69.3%) and seven strains (9.3%) were not typeable. The f17G gene variant
coding for the GII adhesin was the most frequent (56 strains, 75.0%), whereas the
f17GI gene variant was present in four strains (5%) and 15 strains (20.0%) were
not typeable. All Afa-positive strains harboured the afa-8 variant. The 23
Intimin-positive E. coli tested positive for the beta-variant (16 strains; 69.6%)
or for the gamma-variant (seven strains; 30.4%) of the eae gene. Chicken and
turkey E. coli were more frequently probe-positive (43.6 and 43.1%, respectively)
than duck E. coli (31.5%) and extraintestinal E. coli were also more frequently
probe-positive (48.4%) than intestinal strains (18.5%). Different combinations of
probe positive hybridisation results were observed in 72 of the 540
probe-positive E. coli (13.3%). The most frequent combinations were between
AfaE-8 and F17 probes (47 strains; 8.7%) and between P and S probes (13 strains; 
2.4%). Although f17- and afa-8-related DNA sequences can be plasmid-located in
mammalian E. coli, they were not in avian E. coli. Besides the P fimbrial
adhesins, F17 and S fimbrial and Afa-VIII and Intimin afimbrial adhesins may thus
represent colonisation factors of avian pathogenic E. coli.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1135(01)00464-3 
PMID: 11731175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

