
1. J Exp Med. 2001 Dec 17;194(12):1801-11.

Natural killer T cell activation protects mice against experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis.

Singh AK(1), Wilson MT, Hong S, Olivares-Villag√≥mez D, Du C, Stanic AK, Joyce S, 
Sriram S, Koezuka Y, Van Kaer L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232-0295, USA.

Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) serves as a prototypic model for 
T cell-mediated autoimmunity. V(alpha)14 natural killer T (NKT) cells are a
subset of T lymphocytes that recognize glycolipid antigens presented by the
nonpolymorphic major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I-like protein CD1d. 
Here, we show that activation of V(alpha)14 NKT cells by the glycosphingolipid
alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer) protects susceptible mice against EAE.
beta-GalCer, which binds CD1d but is not recognized by NKT cells, failed to
protect mice against EAE. Furthermore, alpha-GalCer was unable to protect CD1d
knockout (KO) mice against EAE, indicating the requirement for an intact CD1d
antigen presentation pathway. Protection of disease conferred by alpha-GalCer
correlated with its ability to suppress myelin antigen-specific Th1 responses
and/or to promote myelin antigen-specific Th2 cell responses. alpha-GalCer was
unable to protect IL-4 KO and IL-10 KO mice against EAE, indicating a critical
role for both of these cytokines. Because recognition of alpha-GalCer by NKT
cells is phylogenetically conserved, our findings have identified NKT cells as
novel target cells for treatment of inflammatory diseases of the central nervous 
system.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.194.12.1801 
PMCID: PMC2193577
PMID: 11748281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

