
1. J Immunol. 2002 Feb 1;168(3):1447-56.

CXCR2 is necessary for the development and persistence of chronic fungal asthma
in mice.

Schuh JM(1), Blease K, Hogaboam CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, 1301 Catherine
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0602, USA.

The role of CXCR during allergic airway and asthmatic diseases is yet to be fully
characterized. Therefore, the present study addressed the role of CXCR2 during
Aspergillus fumigatus-induced asthma. Mice deficient in CXCR2 (CXCR2-/-) and
wild-type counterparts (CXCR2+/+) were sensitized to A. fumigatus Ags and
challenged with A. fumigatus conidia, and the resulting allergic airway disease
was monitored for up to 37 days. At days 3 and 7 after conidia, CXCR2-/- mice
exhibited significantly greater methacholine-induced airway hyperreactivity than 
did CXCR2+/+ mice. In contrast, CXCR2-deficient mice exhibited significantly less
airway hyperresponsiveness than the wild-type control groups at days 14 and 37
after conidia. At all times after conidia, whole lung levels of IL-4, IL-5, and
eotaxin/CC chemokine ligand 11 were significantly lower in CXCR2-/- mice than in 
the wild-type controls. Eosinophil and T cell, but not neutrophil, recruitment
into the airways of A. fumigatus-sensitized CXCR2-/- mice was significantly
impaired compared with wild-type controls at all times after the conidia
challenge. Whole lung levels of IFN-gamma, inflammatory protein-10/CXC ligand
(CXCL) 10, and monokine induced by IFN-gamma (MIG)/CXCL9 were significantly
increased in CXCR2-/- mice compared with CXCR2+/+ mice at various times after
conidia. Interestingly, at day 3 after conidia, neutrophil recruitment and airway
hyperresponsiveness in CXCR2-/- mice was mediated by inflammatory
protein-10/CXCL10 and, to a lesser degree, MIG/CXCL9. Taken together, these data 
suggest that CXCR2 contributes to the persistence of asthmatic disease due to A. 
fumigatus.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.168.3.1447 
PMID: 11801688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

