
1. Leuk Res. 2002 Apr;26(4):329-33.

Mix-ups and mycoplasma: the enemies within.

Drexler HG, Uphoff CC, Dirks WG, MacLeod RA.

Human leukemia-lymphoma (LL) cell lines represent important tools for
experimental research. Among the various problems associated with cell lines, the
two most common concern contaminations: (1) cross-contamination with unrelated
cells and (2) contamination with microorganisms, in particular mycoplasma. The
bad news is that about one-third of the cell lines are either cross-contaminated 
or mycoplasma-infected or both. The good news is that there are means to
recognize and overcome these problems. In cases where, during attempts to
establish new LL cell lines, primary LL cultures are cross-contaminated with
continuous cell lines, intended new cell lines simply cannot be established
("early" cross-contamination). In cases of "late" cross-contamination of existing
LL cell lines where the intrusive cells have a growth advantage, the original
("uncontaminated") cell lines may still be available elsewhere. DNA
fingerprinting and cytogenetic analysis appear to be the most suitable approaches
to detect cross-contaminations and to authenticate LL cell lines. A different but
related aspect of "false" LL cell lines is the frequent misclassification of cell
lines whereby the actual cell type of the cell line does not correspond to the
purported model character of the cell line. Mycoplasma infection can have a
multitude of effects on the eukaryotic cells which, due to the variety of
infecting mycoplasma species and many other contributing parameters, cannot be
predicted, rendering resulting data questionable at best. Practical procedures
for the detection and elimination of mycoplasma contamination have been
developed. Diagnostic and preventive strategies in order to hem the alarming
increase in "false" and mycoplasma-positive LL cell lines are recommended.

DOI: 10.1016/s0145-2126(01)00136-9 
PMID: 11839374  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

