
1. Int J Hyg Environ Health. 2002 Feb;204(5-6):367-9.

Time courses of sensory irritations due to 2-butanone and ethyl benzene exposure:
influences of self-reported multiple chemical sensitivity (sMCS).

van Thriel C(1), Haumann K, Kiesswetter E, Blaszkewicz M, Seeber A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Occupational Physiology, University of Dortmund, Ardeystr. 67,
D-44139 Dortmund, Germany. thriel@ifado.de

The individually different effects of exposure to comparable levels of chemicals 
might be partly explained by dissimilar response sensitivity towards chemicals.
Multiple chemical sensitivity (MCS) might be the clinical endpoint of this
altered sensitivity. Concerning a subclinical range of chemical sensitivity,
'challenge studies' with people reporting chemical sensitivity are needed to
improve the knowledge about such differences. The chemical and general
environmental sensitivity questionnaire (CGES) is a standardized screening tool
for the selection of this group. In the present study 24 healthy male volunteers,
half of them classified as sMCS-subjects, were experimentally exposed to
2-butanone and ethyl benzene at different levels (TLV-level vs. odor threshold). 
The strength of self-reported sensory irritations (nasal and ocular) and symptoms
of bad smell were assessed, prior, during, and after the 4 hours of exposure. The
time courses of sensory irritations were affected by sMCS. Across all exposure
periods sMCS-subjects showed increasing symptom scores while control-subjects did
not. Symptoms of bad smell were affected by three exposure-related factors
(substance, level, duration) without any additional influence from the sMCS
factor. Starting from these results it could be concluded that the time-depending
influence of reported chemical sensitivity is most prominent for subjective data 
of sensory irritations.

DOI: 10.1078/1438-4639-00112 
PMID: 11885363  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

