
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 21;277(25):22670-6. Epub 2002 Apr 1.

Catalytic mechanism of S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase. Site-directed
mutagenesis of Asp-130, Lys-185, Asp-189, and Asn-190.

Takata Y(1), Yamada T, Huang Y, Komoto J, Gomi T, Ogawa H, Fujioka M, Takusagawa 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas
66045-7534, USA.

S-Adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase (AdoHcyase) catalyzes the hydrolysis of
S-adenosylhomocysteine to form adenosine and homocysteine. On the bases of
crystal structures of the wild type enzyme and the D244E mutated enzyme complexed
with 3'-keto-adenosine (D244E.Ado*), we have identified the important amino acid 
residues, Asp-130, Lys-185, Asp-189, and Asn-190, for the catalytic reaction and 
have proposed a catalytic mechanism (Komoto, J., Huang, Y., Gomi, T., Ogawa, H., 
Takata, Y., Fujioka, M., and Takusagawa, F. (2000) J. Biol. Chem. 275,
32147-32156). To confirm the proposed catalytic mechanism, we have made the
D130N, K185N, D189N, and N190S mutated enzymes and measured the catalytic
activities. The catalytic rates (k(cat)) of D130N, K185N, D189N, and N190S
mutated enzymes are reduced to 0.7%, 0.5%, 0.1%, and 0.5%, respectively, in
comparison with the wild type enzyme, indicating that Asp-130, Lys-185, Asp-189, 
and Asn-190 are involved in the catalytic reaction. K(m) values of the mutated
enzymes are increased significantly, except for the N190S mutation, suggesting
that Asp-130, Lys-185, and Asp-189 participate in the substrate binding. To
interpret the kinetic data, the oxidation states of the bound NAD molecules of
the wild type and mutated enzymes were measured during the catalytic reaction by 
monitoring the absorbance at 340 nm. The crystal structures of the WT and
D244E.Ado*, containing four subunits in the crystallographic asymmetric unit,
were re-refined to have the same subunit structures. A detailed catalytic
mechanism of AdoHcyase has been revealed based on the oxidation states of the
bound NAD and the re-refined crystal structures of WT and D244E.Ado*. Lys-185 and
Asp-130 abstract hydrogen atoms from 3'-OH and 4'-CH, respectively. Asp-189
removes a proton from Lys-185 and produces the neutral N zeta (-NH(2)), and
Asn-190 facilitates formation of the neutral Lys-185. His-54 and His-300 hold and
polarize a water molecule, which nucleophilically attacks the C5'- of
3'-keto-4',5'-dehydroadenosine to produce 3'-keto-Ado.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M201116200 
PMID: 11927587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

