
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 May 10;293(3):939-44.

CXCL8((3-73))K11R/G31P antagonizes ligand binding to the neutrophil CXCR1 and
CXCR2 receptors and cellular responses to CXCL8/IL-8.

Li F(1), Zhang X, Gordon JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, 52 Campus Dr., University of
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.

We recently reported that CXCL8((3-73))K11R is a high affinity agonist of
neutrophil activation and chemotactic responses. In this report we employed
CXCL8((3-73))K11R as a template to generate CXCL8/IL-8 analogues with antagonist 
activities, using site-directed mutagenesis to introduce conservative amino acid 
substitutions into the first turn within the molecule's beta-pleated sheet region
(G31P, P32G) and, in association with these, into the putative
receptor-recognition site (T12S, H13F, F17S). We then examined their impact on
the analogues' biological activities and found that a G31P substitution rendered 
CXCL8((3-73))K11R a high affinity antagonist of CXCL8/IL-8. The ranking (in the
order of decreasing CXCL8/IL-8 antagonist activities) of the CXCL8((3-73))K11R
analogues we generated was, G31P>T12S/G31P>H13F/G31P>T12S/H13F/G31P>>P32G
approximately T12S/P32G approximately H13F/P32G>T12S/H13F/P32G;
CXCL8((3-73))K11R/F17S did not inhibit CXCL8/IL-8-dependent responses.
CXCL8((3-73))K11R/G31P had no discernible agonist (beta-glucuronidase release,
chemotactic) activity, but at 12.5 ng/ml it bound to purified neutrophils more
avidly than did 1.25 microg/ml CXCL8/IL-8. Furthermore, CXCL8((3-73))K11R/G31P
competitively antagonized the binding of CXCR1- and CXCR2-specific antibodies to 
these receptors. Taken together, these data thus provide further impetus to the
study of the potential efficacy of CXCL8((3-73))K11R/G31P as a broad-spectrum
antagonist of the ELR-CXC chemokines in experimental and clinical settings.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

DOI: 10.1016/S0006-291X(02)00318-2 
PMID: 12051749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

