
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2002;93(1):149-56.

Usefulness of a TaqMan-based polymerase chain reaction assay for the detection of
the fish pathogen Flavobacterium psychrophilum.

del Cerro A(1), Mendoza MC, Guijarro JA.

Author information: 
(1)Area de Microbiología, Departamento de Biología Funcional, Facultad de
Medicina, Instituto Universitario de Biotecnología de Asturias, Universidad de
Oviedo, Spain.

AIMS: This study developed a new diagnostic method for the bacterium
Flavobacterium psychrophilum based on a TaqMan polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
assay.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Based on reported and newly designed PCR probes, a rapid
procedure, that requires no post-PCR processing, was developed for the detection 
of F. psychrophilum by measuring the fluorescence produced during PCR
amplification. Primers were designed to amplify a 971-bp fragment of the 16S rRNA
as the target. When different F. psychrophilum strains and other bacterial
species, that are taxonomically and ecologically related, were assayed the
fluorogenic test was 100% specific in identifying all of the F. psychrophilum
strains. The sensitivity of the assay was found to be 1.1 pg DNA and the assay
was linear over a range of 0.1 pg-11.2 ng. With pure cultures of F.
psychrophilum, the assay was linear over the range 0.4-4.7 x 104 cfu and was able
to detect 4.7 cfu per reaction. The analysis was reproducible using either
extracted DNA or pure culture. Results using artificially infected fish and
diseased fry from natural fish farm outbreaks showed that the assay was useful
for diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The data showed that the assay was as specific, sensitive,
reproducible and rapid but less toxic than the PCR assays described and so very
useful for the diagnosis of these micro-organisms.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This new approach permits a rapid, easy and
safe routine laboratory diagnosis of F. psychrophilum.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2672.2002.01661.x 
PMID: 12067384  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

