
1. Mol Microbiol. 2002 Aug;45(4):951-66.

Characterization of Cah, a calcium-binding and heat-extractable autotransporter
protein of enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli.

Torres AG(1), Perna NT, Burland V, Ruknudin A, Blattner FR, Kaper JB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vaccine Development, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

We have identified and characterized a protein of enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia 
coli (EHEC) serotype O157:H7 that shares homology with antigen 43 and AIDA-I of
E. coli. The gene encoding this protein consists of a 2850 bp open reading frame 
and was named cah for calcium binding antigen 43 homologue. The prototype EHEC
strain EDL933 possesses identical duplicate copies of cah (cah1 and cah2), which 
showed 100% identity at the nucleotide level. We showed that E. coli K-12
containing the recombinant cah gene produced two proteins, an approximately 80
kDa outer membrane protein and a 43.0 kDa heat-extractable protein. The Cah
protein contains a predicted 52-amino-acid extended signal sequence found in
several autotransporter proteins, and N-terminal sequencing data indicated that
the 43.0 kDa passenger protein was derived from cleavage of the signal sequence
from alanine at position 53. Phenotypes such as autoaggregation and change in
bacterial shape were observed when a recombinant plasmid containing the cah gene 
was introduced into a laboratory E. coli strain, and these phenotypes were
eliminated upon mutation of the cah gene. The passenger domain contains six
domains found in calcium-binding proteins, and the recombinant Cah passenger
protein bound 45Ca2+. In E. coli O157:H7, Cah is a heat-extractable protein, the 
expression of which is induced in minimal essential media and under divalent
ion-depleting conditions; it also participates in the formation of biofilms. Our 
results provide insight into the expression, secretion and preliminary features
of the calcium-binding Cah autotransporter protein of EHEC O157:H7.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2002.03094.x 
PMID: 12180916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

