
1. Evolution. 2002 Oct;56(10):1976-81.

Wolbachia interactions that determine Drosophila melanogaster survival.

Fry AJ(1), Rand DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Brown University, Providence, 
Rhode Island 02912, USA. Adam_Fry@Brown.edu

We have recently described a mutualistic symbiosis in which Wolbachia bacteria
were shown to improve the fitness of some Drosophila melanogaster stocks.
Wolbachia did not extend longevity in all Drosophila genotypes, even though 16s
rDNA sequences indicated that our Drosophila stocks were infected with the same
Wolbachia strain. Here, we use reciprocal hybrid crosses between two Drosophila
strains, one that lived longer with Wolbachia (Z53) and one that did not (Z2), to
investigate the inheritance of the survival phenotype and its dependence on the
host genotype, sex, and mating conditions. Wolbachia's positive effects were more
apparent in hybrid flies than in parental flies, ruling out exclusive maternal
inheritance or the dependence of the survival phenotype on Wolbachia strain
differences. The Wolbachia survival effects were more apparent in single-sex
cages, where courtship and mating were not permitted. In these cages, nearly all 
flies with Wolbachia lived longer than uninfected flies, even though strain Z2
showed no Wolbachia effect in mixed-sex mating cages. We used comparisons between
single- and mixed-sex cages to estimate the cost of reproduction for both sexes. 
Our data suggest that Wolbachia infection may increase the inferred cost of
reproduction, particularly in males. Wolbachia can even produce a positive
survival effect almost as large as the negative survival effect associated with
reproduction. We discuss the implications of our experiments for the study of
insect symbioses.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0014-3820.2002.tb00123.x 
PMID: 12449484  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

