
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2002 Dec;68(12):5956-64.

Construction and evaluation of plasmid vectors optimized for constitutive and
regulated gene expression in Burkholderia cepacia complex isolates.

Lefebre MD(1), Valvano MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Western Ontario, 
London, Canada N6A 5C1.

Genetic studies with Burkholderia cepacia complex isolates are hampered by the
limited availability of cloning vectors and by the inherent resistance of these
isolates to the most common antibiotics used for genetic selection. Also, some of
the promoters widely employed for gene expression in Escherichia coli are
inefficient in B. cepacia. In this study, we have utilized the backbone of the
vector pME6000, a derivative of the pBBR1 plasmid that was originally isolated
from Bordetella bronchiseptica, to construct a set of vectors useful for gene
expression in B. cepacia. These vectors contain either the constitutive promoter 
of the S7 ribosomal protein gene from Burkholderia sp. strain LB400 or the
arabinose-inducible P(BAD) promoter from E. coli. Promoter sequences were placed 
immediately upstream of multiple cloning sites in combination with the minimal
sequence of pME6000 required for plasmid maintenance and mobilization. The
functionality of both vectors was assessed by cloning the enhanced green
fluorescent protein gene (e-gfp) and determining the levels of enhanced green
fluorescent protein expression and fluorescence emission for a variety of
clinical and environmental isolates of the B. cepacia complex. We also
demonstrate that B. cepacia carrying these constructs can readily be detected
intracellularly by fluorescence microscopy following the infection of
Acanthamoeba polyphaga.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.68.12.5956-5964.2002 
PMCID: PMC134411
PMID: 12450816  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

