
1. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 2003 Feb;16(2):141-8.

Partial resistance of tomato to Phytophthora infestans is not dependent upon
ethylene, jasmonic acid, or salicylic acid signaling pathways.

Smart CD(1), Myers KL, Restrepo S, Martin GB, Fry WE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Cornell University, 334 Plant Science Building,
Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. cds14@cornell.edu

We compared tomato defense responses to Phytophthora infestans in highly
compatible and partially compatible interactions. The highly compatible phenotype
was achieved with a tomato-specialized isolate of P. infestans, whereas the
partially compatible phenotype was achieved with a nonspecialized isolate. As
expected, there was induction of the hypersensitive response (HR) earlier during 
the partially compatible interaction. However, contrary to our expectation,
pathogenesis-related (PR) gene expression was not stimulated sooner in the
partially compatible interaction. While the level of PR gene expression was quite
similar in the two interactions, the LeDES gene (which encodes an enzyme
necessary for the production of divinyl ethers) was expressed at a much higher
level in the partially compatible interaction at 48 h after inoculation. Host
reaction to the different pathogen genotypes was not altered (compared with wild 
type) in mutant tomatoes that were ethylene-insensitive (Never-ripe) or those
with reduced ability to accumulate jasmonic acid (def-1). Similarly, host
reaction was not altered in NahG transgenic tomatoes unable to accumulate
salicylic acid. These combined data indicate that partial resistance in tomato to
P. infestans is independent of ethylene, jasmonic acid, and salicylic acid
signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1094/MPMI.2003.16.2.141 
PMID: 12575748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

