
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Feb 18;100(4):1849-54. Epub 2003 Feb 7.

Defective presentation of the CD1d1-restricted natural Va14Ja18 NKT lymphocyte
antigen caused by beta-D-glucosylceramide synthase deficiency.

Stanic AK(1), De Silva AD, Park JJ, Sriram V, Ichikawa S, Hirabyashi Y, Hayakawa 
K, Van Kaer L, Brutkiewicz RR, Joyce S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Va14Ja18 natural T (NKT) cells play an immunoregulatory role, which is controlled
by a self glycolipid(s) presented by CD1d. Although the synthetic antigen
alpha-D-galactosylceramide (alpha-D-GalCer) stimulates all Va14Ja18 NKT cells,
alpha-anomeric D-glycosylceramides are currently unknown in mammals. We have used
beta-D-GalCer-deficient mice and beta-D-glucosylceramide
(beta-D-GlcCer)-deficient cells to define the chemical nature of a natural NKT
cell antigen. beta-D-GalCer-deficient mice exhibit normal NKT cell development
and function, and cells from these animals potently stimulate NKT hybridomas. In 
striking contrast, the same hybridomas fail to react to CD1d1 expressed by a
beta-D-GlcCer-deficient cell line. Importantly, human beta-D-GlcCer synthase cDNA
transfer, and hence the biosynthesis of beta-D-GlcCer, restores the recognition
of mutant cells expressing CD1d1 by the Va14Ja18 NKT hybridomas. Additionally,
suppression of beta-D-GlcCer synthesis inhibits antigen presentation to Va14Ja18 
NKT cells. The possibility that beta-D-GlcCer itself is the natural NKT cell
antigen was excluded because it was unable to activate NKT hybridomas in a
cell-free antigen-presentation assay. These findings suggest that beta-D-GlcCer
may play an important role in generating and/or loading a natural Va14Ja18 NKT
antigen.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0430327100 
PMCID: PMC149922
PMID: 12576547  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

