
1. J Immunol. 2003 Mar 15;170(6):3154-61.

Human NKT cells express granulysin and exhibit antimycobacterial activity.

Gansert JL(1), Kiessler V, Engele M, Wittke F, RÃ¶llinghoff M, Krensky AM,
Porcelli SA, Modlin RL, Stenger S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology and Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of California, Los Angeles, School of Medicine, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Human NKT cells are a unique subset of T cells that express an invariant V alpha 
24 TCR that recognizes the nonclassical Ag-presenting molecule CD1d. Activation
of NKT cells is greatly augmented by the marine sponge-derived glycolipid
alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha GalCer). Because human monocyte-derived cells
express CD1d and can harbor the intracellular pathogen Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, we asked whether the addition of alpha GalCer could be used to
induce effector functions of NKT cells against infected monocytes, macrophages,
and monocyte-derived dendritic cells. NKT cells secreted IFN-gamma, proliferated,
and exerted lytic activity in response to alpha GalCer-pulsed monocyte-derived
cells. Importantly, alpha GalCer-activated NKT cells restricted the growth of
intracellular M. tuberculosis in a CD1d-dependent manner. NKT cells that
exhibited antimycobacterial activity also expressed granulysin, an antimicrobial 
peptide shown to mediate an antimycobacterial activity through perturbation of
the mycobacterial surface. Degranulation of NKT cells resulted in depletion of
granulysin and abrogation of antimycobacterial activity. The detection of CD1d in
granulomas of tuberculosis patients supports the potential interaction of NKT
cells with CD1d-expressing cells at the site of disease activity. These studies
provide evidence that alpha Gal Cer-activated CD1d-restricted T cells can
participate in human host defense against M. tuberculosis infection.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.170.6.3154 
PMID: 12626573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

