
1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2003;39(2):138-43.

[Early diagnosis of genital Chlamydia trachomatis infection among adolescent
girls].

[Article in Lithuanian]

Baseviciene I(1), Labanauskas L, Vysniauskaite N.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Obstertics and Gynecology, Kaunas University of Medicine, Lithuania.

Genital Chlamydia trachomatis infection is the most frequently found sexually
transmitted disease among sexually active adolescent 15-19-year-old girls. In
general, infection caused by C. trachomatis tends to be less abrupt in onset,
clinical course is usually characterized as asymptomatic or with mild symptoms.
If is although the cause of moderate to severe complications (infertility, pelvic
inflammatory diseases) at a later age.OBJECTIVE: To study the prevalence of
chlamydia infection and the possibilities and of early detection among adolescent
girls.
METHODS: Four hundred eighty seven 15-19-year-old girls were questioned by
anonymous questionnaire. All 240 sexually active girls were advised to come for
the investigation to the Clinic of Pediatrics of Kaunas University of Medicine
Hospital. Fifty nine girls underwent inspection of the genitalia, had a speculum 
and bimanual pelvic examination, test of CT/NG DNA hybridisation for C.
trachomatis from vagina. Smears from urethra vagina and cervix were taken.
RESULTS: Test for C. trachomatis infection was positive in 11 (18%) by CT/NG DNA 
hibridisation from vagina. Detection of bad smelling discharge from vagina
together with nonspecific changes in vaginal and cervical mucosa, mount and
methylene blue prepared smears could reliably predict the diagnosis of C.
trachomatis infection.
CONCLUSION: We found high prevalence of C. trachomatis infection among adolescent
girls. Only clinical symptoms together with nospecifical test were reliable
predictors of the final diagnosis, enabling to start the early treatment.


PMID: 12626866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

