
1. J Immunol Methods. 2003 Apr 1;275(1-2):137-48.

Large-scale isolation of immature dendritic cells with features of Langerhans
cells by sorting CD34+ cord blood stem cells cultured in the presence of
TGF-beta1 for cutaneous leukocyte antigen (CLA).

Bartz H(1), Rothoeft T, Anhenn O, Bunse D, Schauer U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Philipps-University Marburg, Marburg,
Germany.

Epidermal Langerhans cells (LCs) are a subset of immature dendritic cells (DCs)
and play a key role in the initiation and regulation of T cell responses. Upon
antigenic stimulation, LCs differentiate into mature DCs undergoing profound
morphologic and functional changes. Studies of the biological details of this
conversion process have been hampered by difficulties in generating immature
dendritic cells of a defined lineage. We propose a new method of purifying
homogenous immature DCs in large numbers by sorting for CLA (Langerhans-like
cells) from cord-blood-derived haematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs).
Established protocols describe the generation of LCs from CD34(+) HPCs by sorting
for CD1a after 5 days of culture in the presence of GM-CSF and TNF-alpha.
However, the numbers of LCs obtained by this method remain within the low range. 
Furthermore, CD1a is also expressed on interstitial DCs. LCs but not interstitial
DCs express the cutaneous leukocyte antigen (CLA). The expression of CLA by cells
stimulated with TNF-alpha and GM-CSF peaks on day 10. This expression can be
raised further by stimulating the cells with TGF-beta1 and omitting TNF-alpha
from day 6 onwards. CLA(+) cells were isolated on day 10 by AutoMACS. Their LC
phenotype was established by the presence CD207. The immaturity of
Langerhans-like cells was shown by the lack of CD83 and CD208 expression as well 
as their lower ability to activate allogeneic naive T cells as compared to
maturing dendritic cells. However, CLA(+) cells cannot be termed Langerhans cells
as they do not express Birbeck granules. Compared to sorting for CD1a (on day 6),
sorting for CLA (on day 10) results in isolates of higher purity (80% vs. 50%)
and a yield eight times higher (4.9x10(6) vs. 6.5x10(5) cells) when using
identical numbers of input cells (5x10(5) cells). This novel method guarantees
large numbers of pure and functionally active immature dendritic cells.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-1759(03)00018-8 
PMID: 12667678  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

