
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 1;278(31):29278-87. Epub 2003 May 11.

Post-translational modifications of three members of the human MAP1LC3 family and
detection of a novel type of modification for MAP1LC3B.

He H(1), Dang Y, Dai F, Guo Z, Wu J, She X, Pei Y, Chen Y, Ling W, Wu C, Zhao S, 
Liu JO, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China.

The molecular machinery required for autophagy is highly conserved in all
eukaryotes as seen by the high degree of conservation of proteins involved in the
formation of the autophagosome membranes. Recently, both yeast Apg8p and its rat 
homologue Map1lc3 were identified as essential constituents of autophagosome
membrane as a processed form. In addition, both the yeast and human proteins
exist in two modified forms produced by a series of post-translational
modifications including a critical C-terminal cleavage after a conserved Gly
residue, and the smaller processed form is associated with the autophagosome
membranes. Herein, we report the identification and characterization of three
human orthologs of the rat Map1LC3, named MAP1LC3A, MAP1LC3B, and MAP1LC3C. We
show that the three isoforms of human MAP1LC3 exhibit distinct expression
patterns in different human tissues. Importantly, we found that the three
isoforms of MAP1LC3 differ in their post-translation modifications. Although
MAP1LC3A and MAP1LC3C are produced by the proteolytic cleavage after the
conserved C-terminal Gly residue, like their rat counterpart, MAP1LC3B does not
undergo C-terminal cleavage and exists in a single modified form. The essential
site for the distinct post-translation modification of MAP1LC3B is Lys-122 rather
than the conserved Gly-120. Subcellular localization by cell fractionation and
immunofluorescence revealed that three human isoforms are associated with
membranes involved in the autophagic pathway. These results revealed different
regulation of the three human isoforms of MAP1LC3 and implicate that the three
isoforms may have different physiological functions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M303800200 
PMID: 12740394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

