
1. Rev Med Interne. 2003 Jun;24(6):389-93.

[Disseminated and central nervous system Histoplasma capsulatum infection
mimicking neoplasm: difficulties in diagnosis, failure in management].

[Article in French]

Nicolas X(1), Granier H, Laborde JP, Talarmin F, Zagnoli F, Garin A, Le Flohic
AM, Moalic E, Quinio D, Klotz F.

Author information: 
(1)Service de m√©decine interne, HIA Clermont-Tonnerre, 29240 naval, Brest,
France. xfnicolas@hotmail.com <xfnicolas@hotmail.com>

INTRODUCTION: Infection with Histoplasma capsulatum (Hc) is a rare importing
disease in metropolitan France, the most often minor but sometimes letal in its
spread form.
EXEGESIS: A 58 years old French man, HIV seronegative, was admitted for an
alteration of its general condition, disorder and buccal ulcerations. He had a
prostate cancer history and came back in France after 17 years in Central Africa.
The imaging showed numerous cerebral nodes, a bilateral adrenal tumor, and
pulmonary calcifications. Histoplasmosis diagnosis has been done after
neurosurgical cerebral biopsy which displayed characteristic Hc. The sick man
died 4 months later with multivisceral failures, in spite of amphotericine B
treatment followed by oral then intraveinous itraconazole.
CONCLUSION: Even in an old tropical residence, ones can be able to conjure up a
deep exotic fungal infection, and most specifically Hc histoplasmosis, in front
of meaningful multivisceral lesions. Disseminated histoplasmosis (HD) with
neurological location is misleading, mimicking tuberculosis or cancer. In order
to obtain formal mycological evidence, ones have to make adapted biopsies.
Antifungal agents must take into account medicinal interaction. Therefore,
prognosis is bad, according to inoculum, immunodeficiency, age of disease and
diagnosis delay.

DOI: 10.1016/s0248-8663(03)00073-0 
PMID: 12814828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

