
1. Anesthesiology. 2003 Jul;99(1):81-9.

Protection with antibody to tumor necrosis factor differs with similarly lethal
Escherichia coli versus Staphylococcus aureus pneumonia in rats.

Karzai W(1), Cui X, Mehlhorn B, Straube E, Hartung T, Gerstenberger E, Banks SM, 
Natanson C, Reinhart K, Eichacker PQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, University Hospital,
Jena, Germany. w.karzai.ana@zentralkinik-bad-berka.de

BACKGROUND: Differing factors may alter the effects of antibody to tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) in infection and sepsis. The authors tested whether bacteria type or
treatment route alters antibody to TNF in a rat model of bacterial pneumonia.
METHODS: Rats (n = 231) received similarly lethal doses of either intratracheal
Escherichia coli or Staphylococcus aureus followed by treatment with either
intratracheal or intraperitoneal antibody to TNF or control serum. Animals
received antibiotics (cefotiam daily dose, 100 mg/kg) starting 4 h after
inoculation and were studied for up to 96 h.
RESULTS: Compared with S. aureus, E. coli increased serum TNF and interleukin-6
concentrations, lung lavage TNF concentrations, neutrophil counts, and
alveolar-to-arterial oxygen gradients and decreased circulating neutrophils and
lymphocytes (P > or = 0.05 for all). Compared with controls, with both bacteria, 
except for lung lavage TNF concentrations (which decreased with intratracheal but
not with intraperitoneal antibody to TNF), treatment route did not alter the
effects of antibody to TNF on any parameter (P = not significant for all).
Antibody to TNF reduced mortality rates (relative risk of death +/- SEM) with
both E. coli (-1.6 +/- 0.6; P = 0.006) and S. aureus (-0.5 +/- 0.04; P = 0.185), 
but these reductions were greater with E. coli than with S. aureus in a trend
approaching statistical significance (P = 0.09). Compared with controls,
similarly (P = not significant) with both bacteria, antibody to TNF decreased
lung lavage and tissue bacteria concentrations (both P < 0.05) and serum TNF
concentration (P < 0.09) and increased circulating neutrophils and lymphocytes
(both P < or = 0.01). Compared with S. aureus, with E. coli antibody to TNF
decreased alveolar-to-arterial oxygen gradients (P = 0.04) and increased serum
interleukin-6 concentrations (P = 0.003).
CONCLUSION: Antibody to TNF improved host defense and survival rates with both
lethal E. coli and S. aureus pneumonia, but protection was greater with E. coli, 
where TNF concentrations were higher than with S. aureus. The efficacy of
antiinflammatory agents in sepsis may be altered by bacteria type.

DOI: 10.1097/00000542-200307000-00016 
PMID: 12826846  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

