
1. J Invest Dermatol. 2003 Sep;121(3):517-21.

Epidermal Langerhans cells efficiently mediate CD1a-dependent presentation of
microbial lipid antigens to T cells.

Pe√±a-Cruz V(1), Ito S, Dascher CC, Brenner MB, Sugita M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Disease, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA, USA.

Langerhans cells are a critical component of skin immunity, capable of capturing 
protein antigens in the epidermis and presenting them to specific T cells in the 
context of major histocompatibility complex class II molecules. Recently, a major
histocompatibility complex independent pathway of lipid antigen presentation has 
been identified and is mediated by molecules of the CD1 family (CD1a, CD1b, CD1c,
and CD1d). Because Langerhans cells are professional antigen-presenting cells and
express CD1a molecules prominently, we hypothesized that Langerhans cells might
play a role in T cell responses directed against not only peptide antigens but
also lipid antigens. Here, we show that freshly isolated immature Langerhans
cells as well as mature Langerhans cells that have migrated from the epidermis
are efficient in presenting foreign microbial lipid antigens to specific T cells 
whereas dermal dendritic cells express much less CD1a molecules and function
inefficiently. Further, we found that Langerhans cells migrating from epidermal
sheets that were exposed to microbial lipid antigens expressed
lipid-antigen-loaded CD1a molecules on the cell surface, resulting in activation 
of specific T cells. These results underscore an outstanding ability of
Langerhans cells to mediate CD1a-dependent lipid antigen presentation. Thus,
Langerhans-cell-mediated skin immunity may involve T cell recognition of both
peptide and lipid antigens.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2003.12429.x 
PMID: 12925210  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

