
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 14;278(46):45358-67. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

The PIM-2 kinase phosphorylates BAD on serine 112 and reverses BAD-induced cell
death.

Yan B(1), Zemskova M, Holder S, Chin V, Kraft A, Koskinen PJ, Lilly M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology & Gene Therapy, the Department of Microbiology,
Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Loma Linda, California 92354, USA.

Hematopoietic growth factors mediate the survival and proliferation of
blood-forming cells, but the mechanisms through which these proteins produce
their effects are incompletely known. Recent studies have identified the pim
family of kinases as mediators of cytokine-dependent survival signals. Several
studies have identified substrates for the pim-1 kinase, but little is known
about the other family members, pim-2 and pim-3. We have investigated potential
functions for the pim-2 kinase in factor-dependent murine hematopoietic cells. We
find that pim-2 mRNA and protein expression are regulated by cytokines similarly 
to pim-1. Three PIM-2 protein isoforms are produced in cytokine-treated cells.
All three forms are active kinases, and the short (PIM-2(34 kDa)) form is the
most active at enhancing survival of FDCP1 cells after cytokine withdrawal. This 
pro-survival function involves inhibition of apoptosis and caspase activation.
Enforced expression of PIM-2(34 kDa) kinase does not appear to regulate
expression of BCL-2, BCL-xL, BIM, or BAX proteins. However, the kinase can
phosphorylate the pro-apoptotic protein BAD on serine 112, which accounts in part
for its ability to reverse Bad-induced cell death. Our results indicate that
pim-2 functions similarly to pim-1 as a pro-survival kinase and suggest that BAD 
is a legitimate PIM-2 substrate.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M307933200 
PMID: 12954615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

