
1. Scand J Immunol. 2003 Sep;58(3):335-41.

Selective response of dermal Th-1 cells to 20-50 kDa streptococcal cell-wall
proteins in chronic plaque psoriasis.

Baker BS(1), Ovigne JM, Fischetti VA, Powles A, Fry L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, St Mary's Campus, Imperial
College of Science, Technology & Medicine, London, UK. b.baker@imperial.ac.uk

We have recently described a dermal Th-1 subset in skin lesions of psoriasis
which recognizes cell-wall extract isolated from group A streptococci (GAS). As a
first step in the identification of the streptococcal proteins involved, dermal
T-cell lines (TCL) cultured from the lesional skin of 12 human leucocyte antigen 
(HLA)-typed psoriasis patients were stimulated with GAS cell-wall extract and 14 
fractions (MWt approximately 20-100 kDa) separated from the cell-wall extract by 
sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and
electroelution, stained for intracellular interferon-gamma(IFN-gamma) expression 
and analysed by flow cytometry. All the TCL responded to GAS cell-wall extract to
varying extents (3.5-27.6% IFN-gamma+). This response was consistently directed
against 20-50 kDa cell-wall fractions and inhibited by anti-HLA-DR antibody. TCL 
with higher responses to GAS cell-wall extract recognized a larger number of
fractions within this range than the lower responder TCL. No difference between
the level and pattern of response to the fractions was observed for TCL from
HLA-DR7+ (n = 6) and HLA-DR7- (n = 6) individuals. This preliminary study has
shown a selective response to lower MWt proteins expressed on GAS cell wall by
skin Th-1 cells in psoriasis. Further studies are required to identify the
proteins involved.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3083.2003.01309.x 
PMID: 12950680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

