
1. J Microbiol Methods. 2003 Oct;55(1):155-64.

Assessment of bacterial community structure in the deep sub-seafloor biosphere by
16S rDNA-based techniques: a cautionary tale.

Webster G(1), Newberry CJ, Fry JC, Weightman AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Main Building, Park Place, 
P.O. Box 915, CF10 3TL, S. Wales, Cardiff, UK.

Investigations into the deep marine environment have demonstrated the presence of
a significant microbial biomass buried deep within sediments on a global scale.
It is now believed that this deep biosphere plays a major role in the global
cycling of elements and contains a large reservoir of organic carbon. This paper 
reports the development of a DNA extraction protocol that addresses the
particular problems faced in applying molecular ecological techniques to samples 
containing very low biomass. Sediment samples were collected from different
geographical locations within the Pacific Ocean and include the Ocean Drilling
Program (ODP) Leg 190, Nankai Trough Accretionary Prism. Seven DNA extraction
protocols were tested and a commercially available DNA extraction kit with
modifications was shown to produce higher yields of polymerase chain reaction
(PCR)-amplifiable DNA than standard laboratory methods. Denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis of 16S rRNA gene diversity revealed that template
DNA from these extremely low biomass sediment samples was susceptible to PCR bias
and random amplification. We propose that it is essential to screen 16S rRNA gene
products for bacterial diversity by DGGE or other rapid fingerprinting methods,
prior to their use in establishing a representative clone library of deep
sub-seafloor bacteria. This represents a cautionary approach to analysis of
microbial diversity in such sub-seafloor ecosystems.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-7012(03)00140-4 
PMID: 14500007  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

