
1. Arch Microbiol. 2003 Nov;180(5):353-61. Epub 2003 Sep 19.

PduP is a coenzyme-a-acylating propionaldehyde dehydrogenase associated with the 
polyhedral bodies involved in B12-dependent 1,2-propanediol degradation by
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium LT2.

Leal NA(1), Havemann GD, Bobik TA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Florida, Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Building
981, Room 1220, Gainesville, Florida 32611, USA.

Salmonella enterica forms polyhedral bodies involved in coenzyme-B12-dependent
1,2-propanediol degradation. Prior studies showed that these bodies consist of a 
proteinaceous shell partly composed of the PduA protein, coenzyme-B12-dependent
diol dehydratase, and additional unidentified proteins. In this report, we show
that the PduP protein is a polyhedral-body-associated CoA-acylating aldehyde
dehydrogenase important for 1,2-propanediol degradation by S. enterica. A
PCR-based method was used to construct a precise nonpolar deletion of the gene
pduP. The resulting pduP deletion strain grew poorly on 1,2-propanediol minimal
medium and expressed 105-fold less propionaldehyde dehydrogenase activity (0.011 
micromol min(-1) mg(-1)) than did wild-type S. enterica grown under similar
conditions (1.15 micromol min(-1) mg(-1)). An Escherichia coli strain was
constructed for high-level production of His8-PduP, which was purified by
nickel-affinity chromatography and shown to have 15.2 micromol min(-1) mg(-1)
propionaldehyde dehydrogenase activity. Analysis of assay mixtures by
reverse-phase HPLC and mass spectrometry established that propionyl-CoA was the
product of the PduP reaction. For subcellular localization, purified His8-PduP
was used as antigen for the preparation of polyclonal antiserum. The antiserum
obtained was shown to have high specificity for the PduP protein and was used in 
immunogold electron microscopy studies, which indicated that PduP was associated 
with the polyhedral bodies involved in 1,2-propanediol degradation. Further
evidence for the localization of the PduP enzyme was obtained by showing that
propionaldehyde dehydrogenase activity co-purified with the polyhedral bodies.
The fact that both Ado-B12-dependent diol dehydratase and propionaldehyde
dehydrogenase are associated with the polyhedral bodies is consistent with the
proposal that these structures function to minimize propionaldehyde toxicity
during the growth of S. enterica on 1,2-propanediol.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-003-0601-0 
PMID: 14504694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

