
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2003 Aug 15;56(1):25-30.

Experimental vertical transmission of Piscirickettsia salmonis and in vitro study
of attachment and mode of entrance into the fish ovum.

Larenas JJ(1), Bartholomew J, Troncoso O, Fernández S, Ledezma H, Sandoval N,
Vera P, Contreras J, Smith P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Patología Animal, Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias,
Universidad de Chile, Casilla 2 Correo 15, Chile. jlarenas@uchile.cl

Piscirickettsia salmonis is a pathogenic bacterial agent causing septicaemic
disease in salmon. Since its isolation in Chile in 1989, P. salmonis has
continually produced high mortality rates in salmon farms. Little information
exists regarding the mechanisms of vertical transmission of this pathogen.
Experimental vertical transmission was established in the present study by
inoculation of male and female rainbow trout broodstock with P. salmonis. The
bacterium was subsequently detected using indirect immunofluorescence in milt and
coelomic fluid of the majority of inoculated broodstock (14/15). Bacteria were
detected in the fry when 1 or both parents were inoculated, although none of the 
infected fry presented signs of the disease. P. salmonis was also detected in
progeny obtained through fertilisation ova from non-inoculated females incubated 
in a medium containing a bacterial suspension, demonstrating transmission during 
the process of fertilisation. Ova infected in vitro were examined at sample
periods from 30 s to 60 min using scanning electron microscopy. This demonstrated
that the bacterium attaches to the ova by means of membrane extensions,
structures which we have called 'piscirickettsial attachment complex' (PAC) and
which would allow later penetration into the ovum.

DOI: 10.3354/dao056025 
PMID: 14524498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

