
1. J Immunol. 2003 Nov 1;171(9):4539-51.

Another view of T cell antigen recognition: cooperative engagement of glycolipid 
antigens by Va14Ja18 natural T(iNKT) cell receptor [corrected].

Stanic AK(1), Shashidharamurthy R, Bezbradica JS, Matsuki N, Yoshimura Y, Miyake 
S, Choi EY, Schell TD, Van Kaer L, Tevethia SS, Roopenian DC, Yamamura T, Joyce
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2004 Jan 1;172(1):717.

Va14Ja18 natural T (iNKT) cells rapidly elicit a robust effector response to
different glycolipid Ags, with distinct functional outcomes. Biochemical
parameters controlling iNKT cell function are partly defined. However, the impact
of iNKT cell receptor beta-chain repertoire and how alpha-galactosylceramide
(alpha-GalCer) analogues induce distinct functional responses have remained
elusive. Using altered glycolipid ligands, we discovered that the Vb repertoire
of iNKT cells impacts recognition and Ag avidity, and that stimulation with
suboptimal avidity Ag results in preferential expansion of high-affinity iNKT
cells. iNKT cell proliferation and cytokine secretion, which correlate with iNKT 
cell receptor down-regulation, are induced within narrow biochemical thresholds. 
Multimers of CD1d1-alphaGalCer- and alphaGalCer analogue-loaded complexes
demonstrate cooperative engagement of the Va14Ja18 iNKT cell receptor whose
structure and/or organization appear distinct from conventional alphabeta TCR.
Our findings demonstrate that iNKT cell functions are controlled by affinity
thresholds for glycolipid Ags and reveal a novel property of their Ag receptor
apparatus that may have an important role in iNKT cell activation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.171.9.4539 
PMID: 14568927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

