
1. Infect Immun. 2003 Nov;71(11):6320-8.

Autodisplay: efficacious surface exposure of antigenic UreA fragments from
Helicobacter pylori in Salmonella vaccine strains.

Rizos K(1), Lattemann CT, Bumann D, Meyer TF, Aebischer T.

Author information: 
(1)Creatogen AG, D-86156 Augsburg. Max-Planck-Institut f√ºr Infektionsbiologie,
Abteilung Molekulare Biologie, D-10117 Berlin, Germany.

Live attenuated Salmonella strains expressing antigens of pathogens are promising
oral vaccine candidates. There is growing evidence that the topology of
expression of the foreign antigens can have a dramatic impact on the
immunogenicity. We examined the potential of the AIDA-I (Escherichia coli adhesin
involved in diffuse adherence) autotransporter domain to display antigenic
fragments of the urease A subunit of Helicobacter pylori for the induction of a
protective immune response. In the murine H. pylori model, protection is mainly
mediated by CD4(+) T cells, and we therefore used the AIDA-I expression system to
successfully express both nearly full-length UreA and defined T-helper-cell
epitopes on the surface of an attenuated Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium 
vaccine strain. Surface exposure of the large UreA fragment or of one UreA T-cell
epitope mediated a significant reduction in the level of H. pylori in immunized
mice after challenge infection, whereas conventional cytoplasmic expression of
UreA in Salmonella had no effect. These results support the concept that surface 
display increases the immunogenicity of recombinant antigens expressed on oral
live vaccine carriers and further demonstrate the feasibility of immunizing
against H. pylori with Salmonella vaccine strains expressing CD4(+) T-cell
epitopes.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.71.11.6320-6328.2003 
PMCID: PMC219551
PMID: 14573651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

