
1. Biochemistry. 2003 Nov 4;42(43):12682-90.

Mutagenesis of the conserved active-site tyrosine changes a retaining sialidase
into an inverting sialidase.

Watson JN(1), Dookhun V, Borgford TJ, Bennet AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University,
8888 University Drive, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada V5A 1S6.

Mutagenesis of the conserved tyrosine (Y370) of the Micromonospora viridifaciens 
sialidase changes the mechanism of catalysis from retention of anomeric
configuration to an unprecedented inverting mechanism in which water efficiently 
functions as the nucleophile. Three mutants, Y370A, Y370D, and Y370G, were
produced recombinantly in Escherichia coli, and all are catalytically active
against the activated substrate 4-methylumbelliferyl alpha-D-N-acetylneuraminide.
The Y370D mutant was also shown to catalyze the hydrolysis of natural substrate
analogues such as 3'-sialyllactose. A comparison of the pH-rate profiles for the 
wild-type and the Y370D mutant sialidase reveals no major differences, although
with respect to the kinetic term k(cat)/K(m), an ionized form of the
aspartate-370 enzyme is catalytically compromised. For the wild-type enzyme, the 
value of the Brønsted parameter beta(lg) on k(cat) is 0.02 +/- 0.03, while for
the Y370D mutant sialidase beta(lg) = -0.55 +/- 0.03 for the substrates with bad 
leaving groups. Thus, for the wild-type enzyme, a nonchemical step(s) is
rate-limiting, but for the tyrosine mutant cleavage of the glycosidic C-O bond is
rate-determining. The Brønsted slopes derived for the kinetic parameter
k(cat)/K(m) display a similar trend (beta(lg) -0.30 +/- 0.04 and -0.74 +/- 0.04
for the wild-type and Y370D, respectively). These results reveal that the
tyrosine residue lowers the activation free energy for cleavage of
6'-sialyllactose, a natural substrate analogue, by more than 24.9 kJ mol(-1).
Evidence is presented that the mutant sialidases operate by a dissociative
mechanism, and the wild-type enzyme operates by a concerted mechanism.

DOI: 10.1021/bi035396g 
PMID: 14580216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

