
1. Vet Parasitol. 2003 Nov 3;117(1-2):117-22.

Concomitant exposure of rainbow trout fry to Gyrodactylus derjavini and
Flavobacterium psychrophilum: effects on infection and mortality of host.

Busch S(1), Dalsgaard I, Buchmann K.

Author information: 
(1)Fish Disease Laboratory, Danish Institute of Fisheries Research, Denmark.

Although rainbow trout fry mortality syndrome caused by the bacterium
Flavobacterium psychrophilum is widespread in fish farms it is difficult to
reproduce infection of rainbow trout in the laboratory using immersion exposure
with bacterial suspensions. It has therefore been speculated that ectoparasites
could act as enhancers of bacterial infections under natural conditions. In the
present study rainbow trout fry were exposed to infections with F. psychrophilum 
(immersion for 30 min or 10 h) alone, exposed to the ectoparasitic monogenean
Gyrodactylus derjavini alone or exposed to both pathogens in combination.
Infection levels and host mortality were subsequently monitored to elucidate if
the ectoparasitic monogeneans could enhance infection of fish with the bacterium.
Immersion of fish in bacterial suspensions alone did not result in infection.
Only one fish became infected with the bacterium and this fish belonged to the
combination exposure group. The parasite populations increased differently in the
various groups and it was found that host mortality was correlated to
gyrodactylid infection levels (r=0.94) but not to bacterial exposure. The results
emphasise the pathogenicity of the parasite G. derjavini, the relative resistance
of intact fish to direct exposure to F. psychrophilum but provide only a weak
indication of a possible enhancement of bacterial invasion due to ectoparasitic
infections. It cannot be excluded that higher parasite burdens and/or prolonged
immersion (more than 10 h) in bacterial suspensions may result in bacterial
invasion.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2003.07.018 
PMID: 14597284  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

