
1. J Clin Immunol. 2003 Sep;23(5):407-14.

Reduced IFN-gamma responses associated with HLA-DR15 presentation of
streptococcal cell wall proteins to dermal Th-1 cells in psoriasis.

Baker BS(1), Ovigne JM, Fischetti VA, Powles A, Fry L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College of Science,
Technology & Medicine, London, United Kingdom. b.baker@imperial.ac.uk

We have recently described a group A streptococcal (GAS)-reactive Th-1 subset
specifically present in skin lesions of chronic plaque psoriasis. To investigate 
MHC presentation of GAS cell wall proteins, dermal T cell lines (TCL) cultured
from the lesional skin of 39 HLA-typed psoriasis patients were stimulated with a 
cell wall extract, stained for intracellular IFN-gamma expression, and analyzed
by flow cytometry. TCL from a further seven psoriasis patients were also tested
with S. mutans extract. Eight TCL were tested in the presence of anti-Class II
antibodies or allogeneic antigen-presenting cells. The dermal T cell IFN-gamma
responses to the cell wall extract, which ranged from < 1 to 28%, were
significantly higher than that to S. mutans extract (p = 0.0052) and were
self-HLA-DR allele restricted. A significantly decreased response was observed in
TCL from DR15+ (n = 13) versus DR15- (n = 26) patients (p = 0.0377). In addition,
DR15+ patients had a later age of onset of disease and a decreased history of
sore throats. In contrast, TCL from HLA-DR7+ (n = 23) patients responded
similarly to those from individuals lacking the DR7 allele. However, DR7+
patients who coexpressed the MHC Class I antigen, Cw6 (n = 14) had a
significantly higher IFN-gamma response than Cw6-, DR7+ patients (n = 7; p =
0.0288) whose responses were also significantly lower than those of patients
expressing non-DR7 alleles (n = 16; p = 0.0302). This study has shown that
HLA-DR15 expression is associated with a reduced dermal Th-1 response to GAS cell
wall proteins in patients with psoriasis. It is proposed that HLA-DR allelic
variation may contribute to disease phenotype via effects on the immune response 
to group A streptococci.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1025377702283 
PMID: 14601649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

