
1. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2003;20(8):723-31.

Expression of CXCR1 and CXCR2 receptors in malignant melanoma with different
metastatic potential and their role in interleukin-8 (CXCL-8)-mediated modulation
of metastatic phenotype.

Varney ML(1), Li A, Dave BJ, Bucana CD, Johansson SL, Singh RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-7660, USA.

In the present study, we examined the autocrine/paracrine role of IL-8 in
melanoma growth and metastasis by analyzing the expression and functional
significance of IL-8 receptors, CXCR1 and CXCR2 in human malignant melanoma cells
with different metastatic potential. CXCR1 and CXCR2 mRNA and protein levels were
analyzed by reverse trannscriptase-based polymerase chain reaction,
immunohistochemistry, immunoprecipitation, flow cytometry and ligand binding
assay in melanoma cells in vitro and xenografted in nude mice. Melanoma cells
constitutively expressed CXCR1 and CXCR2 mRNA and protein. Highly metastatic
A375SM cells expressed higher levels of CXCR1 and CXCR2 mRNA and protein in vitro
and in vivo as compared to low metastatic A375P and non-metastatic SBC-2 melanoma
cells. Treatment of SBC-2 and A375P cells with exogenously added recombinant IL-8
significantly enhanced their proliferation and invasive potential. Further
neutralizing antibodies to CXCR1 and CXCR2 inhibited proliferation and invasive
potential of unstimulated and IL-8-stimulated A375P cells. In summary, the data
suggest that constitutive expression of CXCR1 and CXCR2 play an important role
regulating the IL-8-mediated metastatic phenotype in human malignant melanoma
cells.

DOI: 10.1023/b:clin.0000006814.48627.bd 
PMID: 14713106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

