
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 4;279(23):24372-86. Epub 2004 Mar 17.

On the mechanism and significance of ligand-induced internalization of human
neutrophil chemokine receptors CXCR1 and CXCR2.

Rose JJ(1), Foley JF, Murphy PM, Venkatesan S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, NIAID, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

It is well established that leukocyte chemotactic receptors, a subset of G
protein-coupled receptors, undergo endocytosis after stimulation by ligand.
However, the significance of this phenomenon to cell motility and other important
leukocyte functions induced by chemoattractants has not been clearly defined.
Here we show that in primary human neutrophils, the threshold levels of agonist
required for endocytosis of the chemotactic receptors CXCR1 and CXCR2 were
approximately 10-fold or higher than those needed for maximal chemotactic and
calcium flux responses. Moreover, when stimulated by agonists at concentrations
that are high enough for chemotaxis but too low for receptor endocytosis,
neutrophil CXCR1 and CXCR2 could be reactivated in response to repeated
application of the same agonist. Both receptors were excluded from Triton
X-100-insoluble lipid rafts, and at high agonist concentrations were rapidly
endocytosed by a clathrin/rab5/dynamin-dependent pathway. These data support the 
conclusion that neutrophil migration in response to CXCR1 or CXCR2 agonists is
not dependent on endocytosis of CXCR1 or CXCR2. Rather than being integral to the
process of cell migration, receptor endocytosis may be a terminal stop signal
when cells reach the focus of inflammation where the chemoattractant
concentrations are the highest.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M401364200 
PMID: 15028716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

