
1. J Immunol. 2004 May 1;172(9):5304-12.

CD1d1 displayed on cell size beads identifies and enriches an NK cell population 
negatively regulated by CD1d1.

Huang MM(1), Borszcz P, Sidobre S, Kronenberg M, Kane KP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

NK cells destroy microbe-infected cells while sparing healthy cells, and are
controlled, in part, by inhibitory receptors specific for class I Ag-presenting
molecules. CD1d1, a beta(2)-microglobulin-associated class I-like molecule, binds
glycolipids and stimulates NKT cells. We previously demonstrated that target cell
lysis by IL-2-activated mouse NK cells is inhibited by target cell expression of 
CD1d1, suggesting that IL-2-activated NK cells may express a CD1d1-specific
inhibitory receptor. We now report that a significant subset of mouse
IL-2-activated NK cells specifically binds cell size beads displaying either
naturally expressed or recombinant CD1d1. In contrast, although tetramers of
soluble recombinant CD1d1 loaded with alpha-galactosylceramide identify NKT
cells, binding of this reagent to resting or IL-2-activated NK cells was
undetectable, even with activated NK cells sorted with CD1d1 beads. Cytotoxicity 
by the CD1d1 bead-separated NK subset was strongly inhibited by CD1d1, compared
with the NK cell subset not bound to CD1d1 beads. An Ab that blocks NKT cell
recognition of CD1d1 also reverses CD1d1 inhibition of NK lysis, suggesting that 
TCRs of NKT cells and NK inhibitory receptor(s) may interact with a similar site 
on CD1d1. These results provide direct evidence for a physical interaction of NK 
cells with CD1d1, mediated by a functional, CD1d1-specific low-affinity
inhibitory NK receptor. Display of ligands on cell size beads to maximize
multivalent interaction may offer an alternative approach to examine NK cell
receptor-ligand interactions, particularly those of lower expression and/or lower
affinity/avidity that may go undetected using tetrameric reagents.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.172.9.5304 
PMID: 15100269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

