
1. Hepatology. 2004 May;39(5):1256-66.

Recently primed CD8+ T cells entering the liver induce hepatocytes to interact
with naïve CD8+ T cells in the mouse.

Dikopoulos N(1), Wegenka U, Kröger A, Hauser H, Schirmbeck R, Reimann J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ulm, Ulm,
Germany. nektarios.dikopoulos@medizin.uni-ulm.de

Large number of T cells traffic through the liver. In order to examine the
effects of such traffic on the phenotype of hepatocytes, we vaccinated mice using
DNA vaccines encoding antigens with MHC class I-binding epitopes. Small numbers
of activated CD8(+) T blasts (10(5)-10(6)/liver) changed the surface phenotype
and cytokine expression profile of hepatocytes (HCs). HCs upregulate surface
expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules and CD1d
but not MHC class II molecules Qa-1, CD80, CD86, CD54, or CD95; in addition, they
expressed/secreted interleukin (IL)-10 and IL-4 but not IL-1, IL-6, IL-13,
interferon (IFN)-gamma, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), IL-4, or IL-27 (i.e., they
acquire the HC* phenotype). HCs* (but not HCs) induced specific activation,
proliferation, and IFN-gamma, TNF, and IL-13 release of cocultured naïve CD8(+) T
cells. In contrast to the specific activation of naïve CD8(+) T cells by
dendritic cells (DCs), specific CD8(+) T cell activation by HC* was not
down-modulated by IFN-alphabeta. Only recently activated CD8(+) T blasts (but not
recently activated CD4(+) T blasts or activated cells of the innate immune
system, including natural killer T [NKT] cells) induced the HC* phenotype that is
prominent from day 10 to day 20 postvaccination (i.e., time points at which peak 
numbers of recently primed CD8(+) T blasts are found in the liver). In
conclusion, recently activated CD8(+) T blasts that enter the liver
postimmunization in small numbers can transiently modulate the phenotype of HC,
allowing them to activate naïve CD8(+) T cells with unrelated specificities.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.20173 
PMID: 15122754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

