
1. J Med Microbiol. 2004 Jun;53(Pt 6):519-525. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.45624-0.

Laboratory diagnosis of pertussis infections: the role of PCR and serology.

Fry NK(1), Tzivra O(1), Li YT(1), McNiff A(1), Doshi N(1), Maple PAC(1),
Crowcroft NS(1), Miller E(1), George RC(1), Harrison TG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Systemic Infection Laboratory1 and Special Projects
Laboratory2, Specialist and Reference Microbiology Division, Health Protection
Agency, 61 Colindale Avenue, London NW9 5HT, UK 3Health Protection Agency,
Immunization Division, Communicable Disease Surveillance Centre, 61 Colindale
Avenue, London NW9 5HT, UK.

This study reports on practical laboratory aspects of pertussis diagnosis. PCR
assays were applied to respiratory specimens obtained during a large study of
infants (less than 5 months old) admitted to paediatric intensive care units (n =
122), children (less than 15 years old) admitted to paediatric wards (n = 16) and
their household contacts (n = 320). Estimation of antibodies to pertussis toxin
and culture for Bordetella pertussis were attempted on specimens from the same
patients, where available, and the overall utility of the diagnostic PCR assays
was assessed by comparison to these results. A PCR assay for the human
mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase (HMCO) gene was used for quality control of the 
extracted samples and an internal process control (IPC) was included in each
sample to test for PCR inhibition. Four of 458 samples were considered unsuitable
(three HMCO negative, one IPC negative) and excluded from further analyses.
Positive PCR results were considered valid if they were either (i) positive for
both of two B. pertussis gene targets (pertussis toxin S1 promoter and the
insertion element IS481), i.e. consensus PCR positive, or (ii) repeatably
positive in only one assay. Using these criteria, 52 of 454 (11.5 %) samples were
considered as PCR positive for B. pertussis. Six of 356 samples were
culture-positive for B. pertussis, 1/88 infants, 3/14 children and 2/254
contacts, giving an overall isolation rate of 1.7 %. Using these data, PCR gave
an almost fivefold increase in diagnostic yield compared with culture (McNemar's 
test; P < 0.0001). Sera from 9/111 infants, 5/10 children and 14/210 contacts
were positive. Serology and PCR results showed a high level of agreement
(113/121) for infants and children. PCR demonstrated a significant improvement in
diagnostic yield over culture. Serological testing also resulted in a significant
increase in diagnostic yield compared to culture alone. PCR is a useful
technique, but validity of results must be assured by careful control. Rapid
diagnosis of B. pertussis infection particularly in infants by PCR, together with
serological assays, can enhance surveillance systems for pertussis in all age
groups.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.45624-0 
PMID: 15150332  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

