
1. Immunology. 2004 Jul;112(3):386-96.

Presentation of alpha-galactosylceramide by murine CD1d to natural killer T cells
is facilitated by plasma membrane glycolipid rafts.

Lang GA(1), Maltsev SD, Besra GS, Lang ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, 
NH 03756, USA.

CD1 molecules are non-polymorphic major histocompatibility complex class
I-related proteins that bind and present glycolipid antigens to T-cell antigen
receptors (TCR) expressed by alphabeta T cells or natural killer-like T cells
(NKT). Anti-metastatic properties of NKT cells reactive to the CD1d-binding
antigen alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer) are now being explored as a
contributor to tumour cell killing. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that 
presentation of alpha-GalCer by murine CD1d (mCD1d) to mCD1d-restricted NKT cells
was facilitated by plasma membrane glycolipid rafts. Confocal microscopy of
mCD1d-transfected A20 B cells (A20mCD1d) demonstrated that mCD1d was
raft-localized. This observation was confirmed by immunoblotting of raft
fractions isolated on sucrose density gradients. Raft disruption by the
cholesterol-binding agent nystatin, or short-chain ceramides, inhibited
presentation of low concentrations of alpha-GalCer to NKT cells. Inhibition of
antigen presentation was reversed by treatment of A20mCD1d cells with higher
alpha-GalCer concentrations, or removal of raft-disrupting agents. These data
indicate that partitioning of mCD1d into membrane rafts increases the capacity of
antigen-presenting cells to present limiting quantities of glycolipid antigens,
perhaps by stabilizing mCD1d/antigen structures on the plasma membrane and
optimizing TCR engagement on NKT cells.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2004.01896.x 
PMCID: PMC1782508
PMID: 15196206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

