
1. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2004;84(5):327-36.

Metabolism of 2-methyladenosine in Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Parker WB(1), Barrow EW, Allan PW, Shaddix SC, Long MC, Barrow WW, Bansal N,
Maddry JA.

Author information: 
(1)Southern Research Institute, 2000 Ninth Avenue South, Birmingham, AL 35205,
USA. parker@sri.org

2-Methyladenosine (methyl-Ado) has selective activity against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (M. tuberculosis). In an effort to better understand its mechanism
of action, we have characterized its metabolism in M. tuberculosis cells. The
primary intracellular metabolite of methyl-Ado was 2-methyl-adenylate
(methyl-AMP). Very little of the methyl-AMP was metabolized further. A M.
tuberculosis strain that was resistant to methyl-Ado did not express adenosine
kinase and did not convert methyl-Ado to methyl-AMP in intact cells. In contrast 
to these results, the primary intracellular metabolite of adenosine in M.
tuberculosis cells was ATP, which was readily incorporated into RNA. The rate of 
metabolism of methyl-Ado to methyl-AMP was similar to the rate of metabolism of
adenosine to ATP. Treatment of M. tuberculosis with methyl-Ado did not affect
intracellular ATP levels. Methyl-Ado and Ado were also cleaved to 2-methyladenine
and adenine, respectively, which accumulated in the medium outside the cells.
These studies suggested that methyl-AMP was the active metabolite responsible for
the cytotoxicity of this agent. Furthermore, because methyl-Ado was poorly
metabolized in human cells, these studies indicated that the selective activity
of methyl-Ado was due to its selective activation by M. tuberculosis. These
studies have identified two enzyme reactions (Ado kinase and Ado cleavage) in M. 
tuberculosis that could be exploited for the rational design of new and selective
anti-M. tuberculosis agents.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tube.2004.02.004 
PMID: 15207808  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

