
1. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2004 Jun;24(6):362-71.

Failure of CD1D-/- mice to elicit hypersensitive granulomas to mycobacterial cord
factor trehalose 6,6'-dimycolate.

Guidry TV(1), Olsen M, Kil KS, Hunter RL Jr, Geng YJ, Actor JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas-Houston Medical School, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA.

The present study defines pathologic differences in acute and hypersensitive
responses to Mycobacterium tuberculosis glycolipid trehalose-6,6'-dimycolate
(TDM, cord factor) in normal BALB/c mice and those deficient in group II CD1
molecule CD1d1. Mice immunized against TDM demonstrate hypersensitive responses, 
yet the mechanisms for TDM presentation remain elusive. Mice lacking CD1d
(CD1D(-/-)) demonstrate dysregulated granulomatous response to TDM, compared with
CD1D(+/-) heterozygous controls. Because CD1d-restricted T cells can regulate
macrophage immune functions at mucosal surfaces, we hypothesized that CD1D(-/-)
mice would show deficient TDM-induced hypersensitive pulmonary granulomatous
response in which T cells play a central role. Control CD1D(+/+) mice sensitized 
and subsequently challenged with TDM demonstrated aggressive inflammation defined
by monocytic lesions contained by CD3(+) lymphocytic cuffing. CD1D(-/-) mice
demonstrated distinctly different pathologies, with edema present concurrent with
extended, nonfocal mononuclear cell-based granulomatous reactions. Furthermore,
CD1D(-/-) mice did not demonstrate destructive lesions, and CD3(+) lymphocytes
were only loosely organized in proximity to reactive pathology. The
CD1d-deficient mice demonstrated rapid increases in proinflammatory mRNAs, with
significant differences in interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) compared to the wild-type
group. IFN-gamma, interleukin-6 (IL-6), and IL-12 proteins were significantly
elevated in the CD1D(-/-) group compared with wild-type mice (p < 0.05) 2 days
after TDM challenge. However, by 7 days postadministration, similar production
for all cytokines and proinflammatory molecules examined was present in both
groups of mice. These experiments provide evidence for a role for CD1d in
mediation of pathology during hypersensitive responses to the mycobacterial
glycolipid TDM.

DOI: 10.1089/107999004323142222 
PMID: 15212710  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

