
1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2004 Aug;24(2):105-10.

A view on antimicrobial resistance in developing countries and responsible risk
factors.

Byarugaba DK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Makerere University, P.O. Box 7062, Kampala, Uganda.
dkb@vetmed.mak.ac.ug

Antimicrobial resistance is one of the biggest challenges facing global public
health. Although antimicrobial drugs have saved many lives and eased the
suffering of many millions, poverty, ignorance, poor sanitation, hunger and
malnutrition, inadequate access to drugs, poor and inadequate health care
systems, civil conflicts and bad governance in developing countries have
tremendously limited the benefits of these drugs in controlling infectious
diseases. The development of resistance in the responsible pathogens has worsened
the situation often with very little resource to investigate and provide reliable
susceptibility data on which rational treatments can be based as well as means to
optimise the use of antimicrobial agents. The emergence of multi-drug-resistant
isolates in tuberculosis, acute respiratory infections and diarrhoea, often
referred to as diseases of poverty, has had its greatest toll in developing
countries. The epidemic of HIV/AIDS, with over 30 million cases in developing
countries, has greatly enlarged the population of immunocompromised patients. The
disease has left these patients at great risk of numerous infections and even
greater risks of acquiring highly resistant organisms during long periods of
hospitalisation. This review discusses antimicrobial resistance in developing
countries and the risk factors responsible.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2004.02.015 
PMID: 15288307  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

