
1. J Immunol. 2004 Sep 15;173(6):3693-706.

Quantitative and qualitative differences in the in vivo response of NKT cells to 
distinct alpha- and beta-anomeric glycolipids.

Parekh VV(1), Singh AK, Wilson MT, Olivares-Villag√≥mez D, Bezbradica JS, Inazawa 
H, Ehara H, Sakai T, Serizawa I, Wu L, Wang CR, Joyce S, Van Kaer L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

NKT cells represent a unique subset of immunoregulatory T cells that recognize
glycolipid Ags presented by the MHC class I-like molecule CD1d. Because of their 
immunoregulatory properties, NKT cells are attractive targets for the development
of immunotherapies. The prototypical NKT cell ligand alpha-galactosylceramide
(alpha-GalCer), originally isolated from a marine sponge, has potent
immunomodulatory activities in mice, demonstrating therapeutic efficacy against
metastatic tumors, infections, and autoimmune diseases, but also has a number of 
adverse side effects. In vivo administration of alpha-GalCer to mice results in
the rapid activation of NKT cells, which is characterized by cytokine secretion, 
surface receptor down-regulation, expansion, and secondary activation of a
variety of innate and adaptive immune system cells. In this study, we have
evaluated the in vivo immune response of mice to a set of structural analogues of
alpha-GalCer. Our results show that, contrary to current thinking, beta-anomeric 
GalCer can induce CD1d-dependent biological activities in mice, albeit at lower
potency than alpha-anomeric GalCer. In addition, we show that the response of NKT
cells to distinct GalCer differs not only quantitatively, but also qualitatively.
These findings indicate that NKT cells can fine-tune their immune responses to
distinct glycolipid Ags in vivo, a property that may be exploited for the
development of effective and safe NKT cell-based immunotherapies.

Copyright 2004 The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.173.6.3693 
PMID: 15356115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

