
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 19;279(47):49259-67. Epub 2004 Sep 13.

Arrestin regulates MAPK activation and prevents NADPH oxidase-dependent death of 
cells expressing CXCR2.

Zhao M(1), Wimmer A, Trieu K, Discipio RG, Schraufstatter IU.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Biology, La Jolla Institute for Molecular Medicine, San
Diego, California 92121, USA. mzhao@lijmm.org

Activation of CXCR2 IL-8 receptor leads to activation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) and rapid receptor endocytosis.
Co-immunoprecipitation and co-localization experiments showed that arrestin and
CXCR2 form complexes with components of the ERK1/2 cascade following ligand
stimulation. However, in contrast to the activation of the beta2-adrenergic
receptor, arrestin was not necessary for ERK1/2 phosphorylation or receptor
endocytosis. In contrast, beta-arrestin 1/2 double knockout cells showed greatly 
enhanced phosphorylation of ERK1/2, as well as phosphorylation of the stress
kinases p38 and c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase. The stimulation of stress
kinases in arrestin double knockout cells could be attenuated in the presence of 
diphenylene iodonium (DPI), an inhibitor of the NADPH oxidase, suggesting that
reactive oxidant species (ROS) participated in mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) activation. ROS could indeed be detected in IL-8-stimulated beta-arrestin 
1/2 knockout cells, and cytoplasmic Rac was translocated to the membrane
fraction, which is a prerequisite for oxidant formation. The oxidative burst
induced cell death within 6 h of IL-8 stimulation of these cells, which could be 
prevented in the presence of DPI. These results indicate a novel function for
arrestin, which is protection from an excessive oxidative burst, resulting from
the sustained stimulation of G-protein-coupled receptors that cause Rac
translocation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M405118200 
PMID: 15364949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

