
1. J Control Release. 2004 Sep 30;99(2):301-14.

HPMA copolymers containing doxorubicin bound by a proteolytically or
hydrolytically cleavable bond: comparison of biological properties in vitro.

Kovár M(1), Kovár L, Subr V, Etrych T, Ulbrich K, Mrkvan T, Loucká J, Ríhová B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Gnotobiology, Institute of Microbiology, Academy 
of Sciences ofthe Czech Republic, Vídenská 1083, 142 20 Prague 4 Krc, Czech
Republic. makovar@biomed.cas.cz

N-(2-Hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide (HPMA) copolymer carrier containing the
anticancer drug doxorubicin bound either by a proteolytically degradable bond
(non-targeted PK1 or targeted with alpha-CD71 mAb) or by a hydrolytically
degradable bond were synthesised and tested in vivo for various biological
properties. Mouse 38C13 B-cell lympoma was used as a well established and defined
cell line for this study. 38C13 cells are sensitive to free doxorubicin and IC50 
was very low, about 0.014 microM. PK1 showed a strongly decreased cytostatic
effect, IC50 being 12.6 microM. alpha-CD71 targeted conjugate, which can be
considered as an antibody-targeted form of PK1, had IC50 0.358 microM. HPMA
copolymer with doxorubicin bound via a hydrolytically sensitive bond (HYD
conjugate) showed a high cytostatic effect with IC50 about 0.052 microM. We
demonstrated that HYD conjugate inhibited DNA synthesis and induced
p21(Waf1/Cip1) protein expression (p21(Waf1/Cip1) is cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor which blocks cell cycle progression) as quickly as free doxorubicin,
whereas PK1 acted much more slowly. Similarly, apoptosis induction measured by
Annexin V binding and Caspase 3 activity was detected later after incubation of
cells with PK1 or alpha-CD71 targeted conjugate. Apoptosis was manifested by
elevation of bax and bad mRNA levels, which was much more rapid and intense in
the case of free doxorubicin and HYD conjugate. Expression of antiapoptotic genes
as well as cyclin-dependent kinases was surprisingly not affected.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2004.07.015 
PMID: 15380639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

