
1. Int Immunol. 2004 Nov;16(11):1675-83. Epub 2004 Oct 4.

Constitutive expression of CXCL2/MIP-2 is restricted to a Gr-1high, CD11b+,
CD62Lhigh subset of bone marrow derived granulocytes.

Matzer SP(1), Rödel F, Strieter RM, Röllinghoff M, Beuscher HU.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University of
Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.

CXCL2/macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-2 is an inducible murine chemokine
involved in attraction of polymorphonuclear granulocytes to sites of infection.
In comparison, its role as constitutive produced chemokine in mice is unclear.
The present study aimed to specify the cellular source of constitutively produced
CXCL2/MIP-2 and to examine its expression pattern in comparison to other
chemokines in peripheral lymphoid tissues as well as bone marrow (BM) of normal
mice. The results showed that constitutive expression of CXCL2/MIP-2 mRNA was
restricted to BM. As revealed by RT-PCR and FACS analysis, CXCL2/MIP-2 production
was restricted to a specialized subset of BM derived Gr-1(high) granulocytes.
This subset was characterized by surface expression of CD11b(+), CD62L(high) and 
CXCR2(+) and accounted for 4-6% of total BM cells. In vitro stimulation of BM
cells did not increase the number of CXCL2/MIP-2(+) granulocytes. Intracellular
CXCL2/MIP-2 was not strictly correlated to surface expression of its receptor, as
the majority of the CXCR2(+)/Gr-1(high) cells lacked CXCL2/MIP-2 staining. In
controls, CXCL1/KC expression was not detected in BM but was found in peripheral 
tissues in the absence of CXCL2/MIP-2. Together, our results show that
CXCL2/MIP-2 and CXCL1/KC are differentially expressed in a tissue specific manner
in normal mice and that CXCL2/MIP-2 is produced in a well-defined CD11b(+),
CD62L(high), Gr-1(high) subset of BM granulocytes, thereby providing a possible
explanation for the independent regulation of both chemokines.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxh169 
PMID: 15466452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

