
1. Theor Appl Genet. 2005 Feb;110(3):454-61. Epub 2004 Nov 26.

Inheritance of Fusarium head blight resistance in the soft red winter wheat
Ernie.

Liu S(1), Abate ZA, McKendry AL.

Author information: 
(1)Agriculture Agri-Food Canada, 2585 County Rd. 20, Harrow, ON, N0R 1G0, Canada.

Fusarium head blight (FHB), caused by Fusarium graminearum Schwabe
[telomorph:Gibberella zeae Schw. (Petch)], is an increasingly important disease
of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). Host-plant resistance is considered to be the
most economical means of control, but a lack of unique sources of resistance has 
hindered efforts to breed resistant varieties. The soft red winter wheat, Ernie, 
has moderately high FHB resistance and is widely used in U.S. breeding programs; 
however, the genetics of resistance have not been studied. The objectives of this
study were to estimate the genetic effects, gene numbers, and heritability for
traits related to FHB resistance in Ernie through generation means analyses and
variance analyses of 243 F3-derived F8 and F9 recombinant inbred lines (RILs).
Replicated experiments were grown in the greenhouse, inoculated with F.
graminearum, and evaluated for disease spread and the FHB index (FHBI). The
latter was calculated as the percentage of diseased spikelets in inoculated
spikes and is often referred to as type-II resistance. Gene action for both
disease spread and FHBI was primarily additive with partial dominance for low
disease. Broad-sense heritabilities for spread and FHBI were 78.2% and 78.3%,
respectively, while the narrow-sense heritabilities were 51.3% and 55.4%,
respectively. Line-mean heritabilities from analyses of variance of RILs were
0.70 and 0.87 for spread and FHBI, respectively. A minimum of four genes
conditioned both disease spread and FHBI. These results suggest that breeders
should be able to enhance FHB resistance by combining the resistance in Ernie
with other complementary additive sources of resistance.

DOI: 10.1007/s00122-004-1852-0 
PMID: 15712009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

