
1. SADJ. 2005 Feb;60(1):17-9.

Halitosis: a review.

Feller L(1), Blignaut E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology and Oral Medicine, Medunsa Oral Health Centre,
Faculty of Dentistry, University of Limpopo (Medunsa Campus).

Halitosis, or bad breath, is caused by mainly volatile sulfur compounds (VSC) as 
a result of bacterial breakdown of protein and can be quantitatively and
qualitatively measured in the expired oral breath. In eight to ninety percent of 
cases, halitosis originates in the mouth due to inadequate plaque control,
periodontal disease, dry mouth, faulty restorations, and in particular due to
excessive bacterial growth on the posterior third of the dorsal surface of the
tongue. In the remaining ten to twenty percent of cases, bad breath is caused by 
systemic disorders such as hepatic, pancreatic and nephritic insufficiencies,
trimethylaminuria, upper and lower respiratory tract infection, medication and
cases where gastric content may generate oral malodour. The methods of detecting 
or diagnosing halitosis are organoleptic or human sense of smell, sulfide
monitoring and gas chromatography. All of these methods have limitations and
disadvantages. A more accurate, analytical system which will be able to precisely
detect the volatile compounds in the expired air and correlate the results to a
specific cause is not yet available. Dental professionals require a good
knowledge on the subject of bad breath in order to feel secure about counseling
and managing patients suffering from this condition. The management of halitosis 
involves maintenance of plaque control, elimination of active periodontal disease
and cleaning the tongue on a routine basis. Oral rinsing with a mouthwash could
be indicated in some instances, as a temporary measure.


PMID: 15861957  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

