
1. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2005 Mar;100 Suppl 1:205-10. Epub 2005 Jun 14.

Good bug, bad bug: in the case of enteric inflammatory disease does the
epithelium decide?

McKay DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Intestinal Disease Research Programme, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario 
L8N 3Z5, Canada. mckayd@mcmaster.ca

Many studies demonstrate that intestinal inflammation is either initiated or
exaggerated by a component of the normal microbiota, most likely commensal
bacteria or products derived from these organisms. We review the nature of human 
inflammatory bowel disease, the evidence for the involvement of the normal
bacterial flora in these disorders and the relevance of maintaining the integrity
of the epithelial barrier. Moreover, we, and others, have shown abnormal
mitochondria structure in tissue resections from patients with inflammatory bowel
disease and tissues from rodents that demonstrated psychological stress-induced
increases in epithelial permeability. Thus, we also consider the possibility that
a defect in epithelial mitochondrial function would predispose an individual to
respond to their commensal bacteria flora--no longer considering them as a
beneficial passive inhabitant, but rather perceiving them as a threatening and
pro-inflammatory stimulus. In support of this postulate, we discuss our recent
findings from an in vitro model showing that the human colon-derived T84 cell
line exposed to the metabolic stressor, dinitrophenol, and the non-pathogenic,
non-invasive, Escherichia coli (strain HB101) display a loss of barrier function,
increased signal transduction and increased production of the chemokine,
interleukin 8.

DOI: 10.1590/s0074-02762005000900035 
PMID: 15962124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

