
1. Toxicol Sci. 2005 Sep;87(1):113-22. Epub 2005 Jun 23.

Induction of competing apoptotic and survival signaling pathways in the
macrophage by the ribotoxic trichothecene deoxynivalenol.

Zhou HR(1), Islam Z, Pestka JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing Michigan 48824-1224, USA.

Deoxynivalenol (DON) and other ribotoxic trichothecenes cause immune stimulation 
and suppression in leukocytes by upregulating gene expression and apoptosis,
respectively. The purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that MAPKs
mediate both apoptosis and survival in DON-exposed macrophages. At concentrations
which partially inhibit translation, DON induced phosphorylation of p38 and ERK
1/2 mitogen activated protein kinases within 15 min in RAW 264.7 macrophages and 
these effects lasted up to 3 h. DON-exposed cells exhibited marked caspase
3-dependent DNA fragmentation after 6 h which was suppressed and attenuated by
the p38 inhibitor SB203580 and ERK inhibitor PD98059, respectively. DON readily
induced the phosphorylation and activity of p53 and this was inhibitable by
SB203580. DON exposure evoked BAX translocation to mitochondria and corresponding
cytochrome C release but did not alter mitochondrial membrane potential. The p53 
inhibitor PFTalpha reduced both DON-induced phosphorylation of p53 and p53
binding activity. Moreover, both PFTalpha and p53 siRNA transfection suppressed
DON-induced caspase-3 activity and subsequent DNA fragmentation. Concurrent with 
p53 activation, DON activated two anti-apoptotic survival pathways as evidenced
by both ERK-dependent p90 Rsk and AKT activation. Taken together, the results
indicate that DON initiates competing apoptotic
(p38/p53/Bax/Mitochondria/Caspase-3) and survival (ERK/AKT/p90Rsk/Bad) pathways
in the macrophage.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfi234 
PMID: 15976193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

