
1. Angiogenesis. 2005;8(1):63-71.

Autocrine role of interleukin-8 in induction of endothelial cell proliferation,
survival, migration and MMP-2 production and angiogenesis.

Li A(1), Varney ML, Valasek J, Godfrey M, Dave BJ, Singh RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Nebraska Medical Center, 985845, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-7660, USA.

Interleukin-8 (IL-8/CXCL8), a paracrine angiogenic factor, modulates multiple
biologic functions in CXCR1 and CXCR2 expressing endothelial cells. Several
reports suggest that inflammation, infection, cellular stress and tumor presence 
regulate IL-8 production in endothelial cells. In the present study, we test the 
hypothesis that IL-8 regulates multiple biological effects in endothelial cells
in an autocrine manner. We examined the autocrine role of IL-8 in regulating
angiogenesis by using a neutralizing antibody to IL-8, CXCR1 or CXCR2 in human
vein umbilical endothelial cell (HUVEC) and human dermal microvascular
endothelial cell (HMEC). Neutralizing antibody to IL-8, CXCR1 or CXCR2 inhibited 
endothelial cell proliferation, and MMP-2 production as compared to cells
cultured with medium alone or control antibody. In addition, we observed that the
number of apoptotic cells was significantly higher in anti-IL-8, anti-CXCR1 and
anti-CXCR2 treated endothelial cells, which coincided with decreased
survival-associated gene expression. We observed reduced migration of endothelial
cells treated with anti-IL-8 and anti-CXCR2 antibody, but not anti-CXCR1 antibody
as compared to controls. Further, we observed an inhibition of capillary tube
formation and neovascularization following treatment with anti-IL-8, anti-CXCR1
and anti-CXCR2 antibodies. Together these data suggest that IL-8 functions as an 
important autocrine growth and angiogenic factor in regulating multiple
biological activities in endothelial cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s10456-005-5208-4 
PMID: 16132619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

