
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2005 Oct;71(10):6206-15.

Analysis of genes involved in arsenic resistance in Corynebacterium glutamicum
ATCC 13032.

Ordóñez E(1), Letek M, Valbuena N, Gil JA, Mateos LM.

Author information: 
(1)Area de Microbiología, Departamento de Ecología, Genética y Microbiología,
Universidad de León, 24071 León, Spain.

Corynebacterium glutamicum is able to grow in media containing up to 12 mM
arsenite and 500 mM arsenate and is one of the most arsenic-resistant
microorganisms described to date. Two operons (ars1 and ars2) involved in
arsenate and arsenite resistance have been identified in the complete genome
sequence of Corynebacterium glutamicum. The operons ars1 and ars2 are located
some distance from each other in the bacterial chromosome, but they are both
composed of genes encoding a regulatory protein (arsR), an arsenite permease
(arsB), and an arsenate reductase (arsC); operon ars1 contains an additional
arsenate reductase gene (arsC1') located immediately downstream from arsC1.
Additional arsenite permease and arsenate reductase genes (arsB3 and arsC4)
scattered on the chromosome were also identified. The involvement of ars operons 
in arsenic resistance in C. glutamicum was confirmed by gene disruption
experiments of the three arsenite permease genes present in its genome. Wild-type
and arsB3 insertional mutant C. glutamicum strains were able to grow with up to
12 mM arsenite, whereas arsB1 and arsB2 C. glutamicum insertional mutants were
resistant to 4 mM and 9 mM arsenite, respectively. The double arsB1-arsB2
insertional mutant was resistant to only 0.4 mM arsenite and 10 mM arsenate. Gene
amplification assays of operons ars1 and ars2 in C. glutamicum revealed that the 
recombinant strains containing the ars1 operon were resistant to up to 60 mM
arsenite, this being one of the highest levels of bacterial resistance to
arsenite so far described, whereas recombinant strains containing operon ars2
were resistant to only 20 mM arsenite. Northern blot and reverse
transcription-PCR analysis confirmed the presence of transcripts for all the ars 
genes, the expression of arsB3 and arsC4 being constitutive, and the expression
of arsR1, arsB1, arsC1, arsC1', arsR2, arsB2, and arsC2 being inducible by
arsenite.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.71.10.6206-6215.2005 
PMCID: PMC1266000
PMID: 16204540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

