
1. Cancer Res. 2005 Nov 15;65(22):10347-54.

Interleukin-8 differentially regulates migration of tumor-associated and normal
human brain endothelial cells.

Charalambous C(1), Pen LB, Su YS, Milan J, Chen TC, Hofman FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Southern
California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

Interleukin-8 (IL-8) is a chemokine involved in angiogenesis, a process vital to 
tumor growth. Previously, we showed that endothelial cells derived from human
tumor tissue have different functional and phenotypic properties compared with
normal endothelial cells. This study analyzes the role of IL-8 in regulating
angiogenesis of tumor-associated brain endothelial cells (TuBEC). Results show
that TuBECs have a higher baseline migration rate compared with normal brain
endothelial cells (BEC). TuBECs are unaffected when stimulated with IL-8 whereas 
BECs are activated. This lack of response of TuBECs to IL-8 is due to the
constitutive production of IL-8. Endogenously produced IL-8 activates TuBECs in
an autocrine manner as shown by IL-8 receptor inhibition. Blocking either CXCR1
or CXCR2 partially reduces TuBEC migration, whereas blocking both receptors
further reduces migration. Treatment with antibody against vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) shows that production of IL-8 by TuBECs is dependent on
VEGF. Transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1), shown to down-regulate IL-8
production in BECs, does not inhibit IL-8 production in TuBECs. In summary, these
studies show that TuBECs constitutively secrete IL-8 and autocrine activation by 
IL-8 is the result of VEGF stimulation. Furthermore, TuBECs do not respond to the
feedback inhibition normally induced by TGF-beta1. These data emphasize the
functional uniqueness of TuBECs. Understanding the functions and regulatory
processes of tumor-associated endothelial cells is critical for developing
appropriate antiangiogenic therapies.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-0949 
PMID: 16288024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

