
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2006 May;20(5):758-68. Epub 2005 Dec 2.

Fate of fluorescent microspheres in developing Ictalurus punctatus following
prolonged immersion.

Glenney GW(1), Petrie-Hanson L.

Author information: 
(1)U.S.D.A. National Center for Cool and Cold Water Aquaculture, 11861 Leetown
Road, Kearneysville, WV 25430, USA.

Particulate antigen uptake by the mucosa of developing channel catfish was
determined by immersing larvae and fry [2-day post-hatch (dph), 1-, 2-, 3-, 4-,
and 8-week post-hatch (wph)] to two forms of fluorescent microspheres (FMS): blue
FMS were carboxylated, and green FMS were coated via conjugation with a crude
extract of Edwardsiella ictaluri outer membrane protein (OMP). Phagocytosis,
destination, and clearance appeared similar for the two types of FMS used. In the
older age classes, primary uptake was observed in epithelial cells of the torso, 
fins, nares and to a lesser extent the gills. Fluorescent microspheres were less 
frequently observed within mononuclear phagocytes in the epidermis, dermis and
underlying connective tissue of the tissue mentioned above. Limited FMS
trafficking was observed from 4- to 24-h post-immersion (hpi). Significantly
higher numbers of FMS (blue and green)/mm(3) of tissue were observed in the
posterior kidney of the 4- and 8-wph age classes and in the anterior kidney and
spleen of the 8-wph age class when compared to younger age classes (p < 0.05).
Significantly higher FMS (blue and green)/mm(3) of tissue were observed in the
posterior kidney of 4- and 8-wph fish when compared to all other organs (p <
0.05). The present study indicates that FMS uptake increases with age in channel 
catfish. The younger age classes may possess an increased ability to exclude
particulate antigen, or lack the specific mechanisms that needed to take up
particulates in the form of FMS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2005.09.007 
PMID: 16326113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

