
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2006 Feb;69(6):607-14. Epub 2005 Dec 20.

Autodisplay: efficient bacterial surface display of recombinant proteins.

Jose J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bioanalytik, Institut f체r Pharmazeutische und Medizinische Chemie,
Heinrich-Heine-Universit채t, Universit채tsstr. 1, 40225 D체sseldorf, Germany.
joachim.jose@uni-duesseldorf.de

To display a protein or peptide with a distinct function at the surface of a
living bacterial cell is a challenging exercise with constantly increasing impact
in many areas of biochemistry and biotechnology. Among other systems in
Gram-negative bacteria, the Autodisplay system provides striking advantages when 
used to express a recombinant protein at the surface of Escherichia coli or
related bacteria. The Autodisplay system has been developed on the basis of and
by exploiting the natural secretion mechanism of the AIDA-I autotransporter
protein. It offers the expression of more than 10(5) recombinant molecules per
single cell, permits the multimerization of subunits expressed from monomeric
genes at the cell surface, and allows, after transport of an apoprotein to the
cell surface, the incorporation of an inorganic prosthetic group without
disturbing cell integrity or cell viability. Moreover, whole cells displaying
recombinant proteins by Autodisplay can be subjected to high-throughput screening
(HTS) methods such as ELISA or FACS, thus enabling the screening of surface
display libraries and providing access to directed evolution of the recombinant
protein displayed at the cell surface. In this review, the application of the
Autodisplay system for the surface display of enzymes, enzyme inhibitors,
epitopes, antigens, protein and peptide libraries is summarised and the
perspectives of the system are discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-005-0227-z 
PMID: 16369779  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

