
1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 14;281(15):9925-34. Epub 2006 Feb 8.

Cys-113 and Cys-422 form a high affinity metalloid binding site in the ArsA
ATPase.

Ruan X(1), Bhattacharjee H, Rosen BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Wayne State University,
School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

The arsRDABC operon of Escherichia coli plasmid R773 encodes the ArsAB extrusion 
pump for the trivalent metalloids As(III) and Sb(III). ArsA, the catalytic
subunit has two homologous halves, A1 and A2. Each half has a consensus signal
transduction domain that physically connects the nucleotide-binding domain to the
metalloid-binding domain. The relation between metalloid binding by ArsA and
transport through ArsB is unclear. In this study, direct metalloid binding to
ArsA was examined. The results show that ArsA binds a single Sb(III) with high
affinity only in the presence of Mg(2+)-nucleotide. Mutation of the codons for
Cys-113 and Cys-422 eliminated Sb(III) binding to purified ArsA. C113A/C422A ArsA
has basal ATPase activity similar to that of the wild type but lacks
metalloid-stimulated activity. Accumulation of metalloid was assayed in intact
cells, where reduced uptake results from active extrusion by the ArsAB pump.
Cells expressing the arsA(C113A/C422A)B genes had an intermediate level of
metalloid resistance and accumulation between those expressing only arsB alone
and those expressing wild type arsAB genes. The results indicate that, whereas
metalloid stimulation of ArsA activity enhances the ability of the pump to reduce
the intracellular concentration of metalloid, high affinity binding of metalloid 
by ArsA is not obligatory for transport or resistance. Yet, in mixed populations 
of cells bearing either arsAB or arsA(C113A/C422A)B growing in subtoxic
concentrations of arsenite, cells bearing wild type arsAB replaced cells with
mutant arsA(C113A/C422A)B in less than 1 week, showing that the metalloid binding
site confers an evolutionary advantage.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M600125200 
PMID: 16467301  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

