
1. J Immunol. 2006 Mar 15;176(6):3625-34.

Conserved and heterogeneous lipid antigen specificities of CD1d-restricted NKT
cell receptors.

Brigl M(1), van den Elzen P, Chen X, Meyers JH, Wu D, Wong CH, Reddington F,
Illarianov PA, Besra GS, Brenner MB, Gumperz JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin
Medical School, 1300 University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

CD1d-restricted NKT cells use structurally conserved TCRs and recognize both self
and foreign glycolipids, but the TCR features that determine these Ag
specificities remain unclear. We investigated the TCR structures and lipid Ag
recognition properties of five novel Valpha24-negative and 13 canonical
Valpha24-positive/Vbeta11-positive human NKT cell clones generated using
alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer)-loaded CD1d tetramers. The
Valpha24-negative clones expressed Vbeta11 paired with Valpha10, Valpha2, or
Valpha3. Strikingly, their Valpha-chains had highly conserved rearrangements to
Jalpha18, resulting in CDR3alpha loop sequences that are nearly identical to
those of canonical TCRs. Valpha24-positive and Valpha24-negative clones responded
similarly to alpha-GalCer and a closely related bacterial analog, suggesting that
conservation of the CDR3alpha loop is sufficient for recognition of alpha-GalCer 
despite CDR1alpha and CDR2alpha sequence variation. Unlike Valpha24-positive
clones, the Valpha24-negative clones responded poorly to a glucose-linked
glycolipid (alpha-glucosylceramide), which correlated with their lack of a
conserved CDR1alpha amino acid motif, suggesting that fine specificity for
alpha-linked glycosphingolipids is influenced by Valpha-encoded TCR regions.
Valpha24-negative clones showed no response to isoglobotrihexosylceramide,
indicating that recognition of this mammalian lipid is not required for selection
of Jalpha18-positive TCRs that can recognize alpha-GalCer. One
alpha-GalCer-reactive, Valpha24-positive clone differed from the others in
responding specifically to mammalian phospholipids, demonstrating that
semi-invariant NKT TCRs have a capacity for private Ag specificities that are
likely conferred by individual TCR beta-chain rearrangements. These results
highlight the variation in Ag recognition among CD1d-restricted TCRs and suggest 
that TCR alpha-chain elements contribute to alpha-linked glycosphingolipid
specificity, whereas TCR beta-chains can confer heterogeneous additional
reactivities.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.6.3625 
PMID: 16517731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

