
1. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 12;281(19):13672-13684. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M600029200. Epub
2006 Mar 16.

Involvement of a putative [Fe-S]-cluster-binding protein in the biogenesis of
quinohemoprotein amine dehydrogenase.

Ono K(1), Okajima T(2), Tani M(1), Kuroda S(1), Sun D(3), Davidson VL(3),
Tanizawa K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki,
Osaka 567-0047, Japan.
(2)Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki,
Osaka 567-0047, Japan. Electronic address: tokajima@sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson,
Mississippi 39216-4505.
(4)Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki,
Osaka 567-0047, Japan. Electronic address: tanizawa@sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp.

Quinohemoprotein amine dehydrogenase (QHNDH) of Paracoccus denitrificans contains
a peptidyl quinone cofactor, cysteine tryptophylquinone, as well as intrapeptidyl
thioether cross-links between Cys and Asp/Glu residues within the
smallestgamma-subunit of the alphabetagamma heterotrimeric protein. A putative
[Fe-S]-cluster-binding protein (ORF2 protein) encoded between the structural
genes for the alpha- and gamma-subunits of QHNDH in the n-butylamine-utilizing
operon likely belongs to a Radical SAM (S-Ado-Met) superfamily that includes many
proteins involved in vitamin biosynthesis and enzyme activation. In this study
the role of ORF2 protein in the biogenesis of QHNDH has been explored. Although
the wild-type strain of Paracoccus denitrificans produced an active, mature
enzyme upon induction with n-butylamine, a mutant strain in which the ORF2 gene
had been mostly deleted, neither grew in the n-butylamine medium nor showed QHNDH
activity. When the mutant strain was transformed with an expression plasmid for
the ORF2 protein, n-butylamine-dependent bacterial growth and QHNDH activity were
restored. Site-specific mutations in the putative [Fe-S]-cluster or SAM binding
motifs in the ORF2 protein failed to support bacterial growth. The alpha- and
beta-subunits were both detected in the periplasm of the mutant strain, whereas
the gamma-subunit polypeptide was accumulated in the cytoplasm and stained
negatively for redox-cycling quinone staining. Matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometric analysis revealed that the
gamma-subunit isolated from the mutant strain had not undergone posttranslational
modification. These results unequivocally show that the putative [Fe-S]-cluster- 
and SAM-binding ORF2 protein is necessary for the posttranslational processing of
gamma-subunit, most likely participating in the formation of the intrapeptidyl
thioether cross-links.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M600029200 
PMID: 16546999  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

