
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2007 Jan-Feb;22(1-2):57-67. Epub 2006 Mar 28.

Effects of administration of probiotic strains on GALT of larval gilthead
seabream: Immunohistochemical and ultrastructural studies.

Picchietti S(1), Mazzini M, Taddei AR, Renna R, Fausto AM, Mulero V, Carnevali O,
Cresci A, Abelli L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento Scienze Ambientali, Universit√† della Tuscia, 01100 Viterbo,
Italy.

Two bacterial strains Lactobacillus fructivorans (AS17B), isolated from adult
seabream (Sparus aurata L.) gut, and Lactobacillus plantarum (906), isolated from
human faeces, were administered contemporaneously during seabream development
using Brachionus plicatilis and/or Artemia salina and dry feed as vectors.
Experimental group A received the probiotic strains already via rotifers from day
5 post-hatch (ph), whereas treatment of group B began with Artemia feeding from
day 27 ph. Fish were sampled at day 28 ph (group A and control) and day 99 ph
(groups A, B and control) for electron microscopy, histology and
immunohistochemistry with the polyclonal antiserum ORa against homologous serum
Ig and the mAb G7 specific for seabream acidophilic granulocytes. In all groups, 
timing and pattern of differentiation of the digestive tract did not differ.
Furthermore, neither tissue damage nor manifest inflammation was provoked by
probiotic administration. At day 28 ph, the developing GALT already housed
mucosal leucocytes, including Ig(+) cells but no acidophilic granulocytes. No
differences were seen between experimental groups. At day 99 ph, the density of
Ig(+) cells (+51%) and acidophilic granulocytes (+284%) was significantly higher 
(p<0.05) in group A than in controls. Also group B had a higher density of Ig(+) 
cells (+17%) and acidophilic granulocytes (+130%) compared with controls,
although less pronounced. Light and electron microscopy observations detailed the
occurrence of heterogeneous populations of lymphocytes and granulocytes in the
developing intestinal mucosa, and highlighted the net expansion of G7(+)
acidophilic granulocytes (A +536%, B +292% vs. control) due to probiotic
administration. Evidence is provided that early feeding with
probiotic-supplemented diet increased the number of Ig(+) cells and acidophilic
granulocytes in seabream gut and that the effects were more pronounced when
administration started during gut metamorphosis. These results point to a
stimulatory effect of probiotics on the gut immune system that correlates with
improvement of fry survival.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2006.03.009 
PMID: 16730458  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

