
1. J Bacteriol. 2006 Jul;188(13):4841-50.

Polar localization of the autotransporter family of large bacterial virulence
proteins.

Jain S(1), van Ulsen P, Benz I, Schmidt MA, Fernandez R, Tommassen J, Goldberg
MB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital, 65 Landsdowne St., Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Autotransporters are an extensive family of large secreted virulence-associated
proteins of gram-negative bacteria. Secretion of such large proteins poses unique
challenges to bacteria. We demonstrate that autotransporters from a wide variety 
of rod-shaped pathogens, including IcsA and SepA of Shigella flexneri, AIDA-I of 
diffusely adherent Escherichia coli, and BrkA of Bordetella pertussis, are
localized to the bacterial pole. The restriction of autotransporters to the pole 
is dependent on the presence of a complete lipopolysaccharide (LPS), consistent
with known effects of LPS composition on membrane fluidity. Newly synthesized and
secreted BrkA is polar even in the presence of truncated LPS, and all
autotransporters examined are polar in the cytoplasm prior to secretion.
Together, these findings are consistent with autotransporter secretion occurring 
at the poles of rod-shaped gram-negative organisms. Moreover, NalP, an
autotransporter of spherically shaped Neisseria meningitidis contains the
molecular information to localize to the pole of Escherichia coli. In N.
meningitidis, NalP is secreted at distinct sites around the cell. These data are 
consistent with a model in which the secretion of large autotransporters occurs
via specific conserved pathways located at the poles of rod-shaped bacteria, with
profound implications for the underlying physiology of the bacterial cell and the
nature of bacterial pathogen-host interactions.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00326-06 
PMCID: PMC1483012
PMID: 16788193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

