
1. J Immunol. 2006 Jul 1;177(1):268-79.

CD44 differentially activates mouse NK T cells and conventional T cells.

Larkin J(1), Renukaradhya GJ, Sriram V, Du W, Gervay-Hague J, Brutkiewicz RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, and Walther Oncology Center, Walther Cancer Institute, Indianapolis, IN
46208, USA.

NK T (NKT) cells are an important component of the innate immune system and
recognize the MHC class I-like CD1d molecule. NKT cells possess significant
immunoregulatory activity due to their rapid secretion of large quantities of
pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines following CD1d-dependent stimulation.
Because the innate immune system is programmed to respond to a multitude of
diverse stimuli and must be able to quickly differentiate between pathogenic and 
endogenous signals, we hypothesized that, apart from stimulation via the TCR
(e.g., CD1d-dependent activation), there must be multiple activation pathways
that can be triggered through other cell surface receptors on NKT cells.
Therefore, we analyzed the ability of CD44, a structurally diverse cell surface
receptor expressed on most cells, to stimulate murine NKT cells, compared with
conventional T cells. Stimulation of CD44 through Ab cross-linking or binding to 
its natural ligands hyaluronan and osteopontin induced NKT cells to secrete
cytokines, up-regulate activation markers, undergo morphological changes, and
resist activation-induced cell death, whereas conventional T cells only exhibited
changes in morphology and protection from activation-induced cell death. This
CD44-specific stimulation of NKT cells correlated with their ability to bind
hyaluronan. Thus, fundamental differences in CD44 function between these
lymphocyte subsets suggest an important biological role for CD44 in the innate
immune response.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.1.268 
PMID: 16785522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

