
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2006 Sep;152(Pt 9):2689-2701. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.28941-0.

Plasmids from freshwater environments capable of IncQ retrotransfer are diverse
and include pQKH54, a new IncP-1 subgroup archetype.

Haines AS(1), Akhtar P(1), Stephens ER(1), Jones K(1), Thomas CM(1), Perkins
CD(2), Williams JR(2), Day MJ(2), Fry JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15
2TT, UK.
(2)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, PO Box 915, Cardiff CF1
3TL, UK.

Nine mercury-resistance plasmids isolated from river epilithon were assessed for 
their ability to retrotransfer the non-conjugative IncQ plasmid, R300B,
derivatives of which have commercial uses that may result in accidental or
deliberate release into the environment. Retrotransfer frequencies ranging from
2.1 x 10(-4) to 1.75 x 10(-5) were obtained for five of the nine plasmids--the
remaining plasmids showed low or undetectable retrotransfer ability. The majority
of the retrotransfer-proficient plasmids could not be classified by the tests
used. Classical incompatibility testing with RP4 identified pQKH6, pQKH54 and
pQM719 as IncP-1. Hybridization to replicon probes confirmed this for pQKH6 and
pQM719 and added pQKH33. PCR with primers designed to amplify trfA and korA
regions of IncP-1 plasmids did not identify any other plasmids. Plasmids pQKH6
and pQM719 but not pQKH54 produced similar SphI restriction profiles to the
IncP-1beta subgroup. The complete nucleotide sequence of pQKH54 was determined,
revealing it to have a complete IncP-1 backbone but belonging to a new distinct
subgroup which was designated IncP-1gamma. The results emphasize the ubiquity and
diversity of IncP-1 plasmids in the environment but demonstrate that plasmids of 
as yet unknown groups are also able to retrotransfer IncQ plasmids efficiently.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.28941-0 
PMID: 16946264  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

