
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2006 Oct;58(1):65-85.

Prokaryotic community composition and biogeochemical processes in deep
subseafloor sediments from the Peru Margin.

Webster G(1), Parkes RJ, Cragg BA, Newberry CJ, Weightman AJ, Fry JC.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3YE, UK.
websterg@cardiff.ac.uk

The community compositions of Bacteria and Archaea were investigated in deep,
sub-seafloor sediments from the highly productive Peru Margin (ODP Leg 201, sites
1228 and 1229, c. 25 km apart) down to nearly 200 m below the seafloor using
taxonomic (16S rRNA) and functional (mcrA and dsrA) gene markers. Bacterial and
archaeal groups identified from clone libraries of 16S rRNA gene sequences at
site 1229 agreed well with sequences amplified from bands excised from denaturing
gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) depth profiles, with the exception of the
Miscellaneous Crenarchaeotic Group (MCG). This suggested that the prokaryotic
community at site 1228, obtained from DGGE profiling alone, was reliable. Sites
were dominated by Bacteria in the Gammaproteobacteria, Chloroflexi (green
non-sulphur bacteria) and Archaea in the MCG and South African Gold Mine
Euryarchaeotic Group, although community composition changed with depth. The
candidate division JS1 was present throughout both sites but was not dominant.
The populations identified in the Peru Margin sediments consisted mainly of
prokaryotes found in other deep subsurface sediments, and were more similar to
communities from the Sea of Okhotsk (pelagic clays) than to those from the low
organic carbon Nankai Trough sediments. Despite broad similarities in the
prokaryotic community at the two sites, there were some differences, as well as
differences in activity and geochemistry. Methanogens (mcrA) within the
Methanosarcinales and Methanobacteriales were only found at site 1229 (4 depths
analysed), whereas sulphate-reducing prokaryotes (dsrA) were only found at site
1228 (one depth), and these terminal-oxidizing prokaryotes may represent an
active community component present at low abundance. This study clearly
demonstrates that the deep subsurface sediments of the Peru Margin have a large
diverse and metabolically active prokaryotic population.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2006.00147.x 
PMID: 16958909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

