
1. J Immunol. 2006 Sep 15;177(6):3763-70.

IL-12 instructs skin homing of human Th2 cells.

Biedermann T(1), Lametschwandtner G, Tangemann K, Kund J, Hinteregger S,
Carballido-Perrig N, Rot A, Schw√§rzler C, Carballido JM.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Vienna, Austria.

Distinct pattern of homing receptors determines the tissue preference for T cells
to exert their effector functions. This homing competence is mostly determined
early during T cell activation of naive T cells. In contrast, mechanisms
governing the acquisition of particular homing receptors by T cells of the memory
phenotype remain enigmatic. Th2 cell-mediated allergic diseases tend to flare
during infections despite that these infections prime APCs to produce the
prototypic Th1 cell-differentiating cytokine IL-12. In this study, we investigate
the effect of IL-12 on the regulation of cutaneous lymphocyte Ag (CLA) on
differentiated Th2 cells and consequences of this expression for allergic
inflammation. Upon activation with IL-12, CLA- Th2 cells rapidly up-regulated
IL-12Rbeta2 chain, alpha(1-3)-fucosyltransferase VII, and CLA molecules.
IL-12-mediated CLA expression on Th2 cells was functional because it mediated
rolling of these Th2 cells on E-selectin in vitro and migration into human skin
grafts in SCID mice. CLA induction occurred immediately after exposure to IL-12
and was independent of IFN-gamma expression. In accordance, the transcription
factor mediating IFN-gamma expression, T-bet, does not directly affect CLA
expression. However, CLA expression was further enhanced after IL-12 treatment of
T-bet+ -transfected Th2 cells in agreement with an increased IL-12 responsiveness
of these cells caused by T-bet. The finding that IL-12 conferred skin-homing
potential to already differentiated Th2 cells before inducing a switch in their
cytokine production profile may explain the observed exacerbation of allergic
skin diseases following bacterial infections.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.6.3763 
PMID: 16951337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

