
1. J Bacteriol. 2006 Dec;188(23):8213-21. Epub 2006 Sep 15.

Analysis of Pseudomonas aeruginosa conditional psl variants reveals roles for the
psl polysaccharide in adhesion and maintaining biofilm structure postattachment.

Ma L(1), Jackson KD, Landry RM, Parsek MR, Wozniak DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

The ability to form biofilms in the airways of people suffering from cystic
fibrosis is a critical element of Pseudomonas aeruginosa pathogenesis. The
15-gene psl operon encodes a putative polysaccharide that plays an important role
in biofilm initiation in nonmucoid P. aeruginosa strains. Biofilm initiation by a
P. aeruginosa PAO1 strain with disruption of pslA and pslB (DeltapslAB) was
severely compromised, indicating that psl has a role in cell-surface
interactions. In this study, we investigated the adherence properties of this
DeltapslAB mutant using biotic surfaces (epithelial cells and mucin-coated
surfaces) and abiotic surfaces. Our results showed that psl is required for
attachment to a variety of surfaces, independent of the carbon source. To study
the potential roles of Psl apart from attachment, we generated a psl-inducible P.
aeruginosa strain (Deltapsl/p(BAD)-psl) by replacing the psl promoter region with
araC-p(BAD), so that expression of psl could be controlled by addition of
arabinose. Analysis of biofilms formed by the Deltapsl/p(BAD)-psl strain
indicated that expression of the psl operon is required to maintain the biofilm
structure at steps postattachment. Overproduction of the Psl polysaccharide led
to enhanced cell-surface and intercellular adhesion of P. aeruginosa. This
translated into significant changes in the architecture of the biofilm. We
propose that Psl has an important role in P. aeruginosa adhesion, which is
critical for initiation and maintenance of the biofilm structure.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01202-06 
PMCID: PMC1698210
PMID: 16980452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

