
1. Infect Immun. 2006 Oct;74(10):5730-8.

Role of eosinophils and neutrophils in innate and adaptive protective immunity to
larval strongyloides stercoralis in mice.

Galioto AM(1), Hess JA, Nolan TJ, Schad GA, Lee JJ, Abraham D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Thomas Jefferson University, 233 S.
10th St., BLSB 530, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

The goal of this study was to determine the roles of eosinophils and neutrophils 
in innate and adaptive protective immunity to larval Strongyloides stercoralis in
mice. The experimental approach used was to treat mice with an anti-CCR3
monoclonal antibody to eliminate eosinophils or to use CXCR2-/- mice, which have 
a severe neutrophil recruitment defect, and then determine the effect of the
reduction or elimination of the particular cell type on larval killing. It was
determined that eosinophils killed the S. stercoralis larvae in na√Øve mice,
whereas these cells were not required for the accelerated killing of larvae in
immunized mice. Experiments using CXCR2-/- mice demonstrated that the reduction
in recruitment of neutrophils resulted in significantly reduced innate and
adaptive protective immunity. Protective antibody developed in the immunized
CXCR2-/- mice, thereby demonstrating that neutrophils were not required for the
induction of the adaptive protective immune response. Moreover, transfer of
neutrophil-enriched cell populations recovered from either wild-type or CXCR2-/- 
mice into diffusion chambers containing larvae demonstrated that larval killing
occurred with both cell populations when the diffusion chambers were implanted in
immunized wild-type mice. Thus, the defect in the CXCR2-/- mice was a defect in
the recruitment of the neutrophils and not a defect in the ability of these cells
to kill larvae. This study therefore demonstrated that both eosinophils and
neutrophils are required in the protective innate immune response, whereas only
neutrophils are necessary for the protective adaptive immune response to larval
S. stercoralis in mice.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01958-05 
PMCID: PMC1594891
PMID: 16988250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

