
1. Eur J Biochem. 1991 Mar 14;196(2):363-8.

Characterization of a murine beta 1-4 galactosyltransferase expressed in COS-1
cells.

Nakazawa K(1), Furukawa K, Kobata A, Narimatsu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

We inserted a full-length murine cDNA, which had been isolated from F9 embryonal 
carcinoma cells by using a bovine lactose synthetase A protein cDNA as a probe,
in a mammalian expression vector (pCMGT1) and expressed it in COS-1 cells to
characterize the pCMGT1-directed enzyme. The galactosyltransferase activity
toward asialo-agalacto-transferrin (AsAg-Tf) in the pCMGT1-transfected cells was 
approximately eightfold higher than that in mock- or non-transfected cells. In
contrast, no difference was observed in the specific activity of galactose
transfer between pCMGT1-transfected cells and mock- or non-transfected cells when
asialo-ovine submaxillary mucin were used as an acceptor. Since almost all
[3H]galactose incorporated into the AsAg-Tf was released by digestion with
streptococcal beta-galactosidase, most of the linkage created by this enzyme was 
in the Gal beta 1-4GlcNAc group. The acceptor specificity of the pCMGT1-directed 
enzyme was changed from N-acetylglucosamine to glucose by adding
alpha-lactalbumin in the reaction mixture. Alpha-Lactalbumin also partially
inhibited the galactose transfer to AsAg-Tf. The kinetic study revealed that the 
apparent Km values of the pCMGT1-directed enzyme for N-acetylglucosamine, AsAg-Tf
and UDP-Gal are 2 mM, 60 microM and 24 microM, respectively. These results
indicated that the murine cDNA isolated from F9 cells encodes an active enzyme
which catalyzes not only the lactose synthesis but also the transfer of galactose
to N-acetylglucosamine residues of Asn-linked sugar chains of glycoproteins in a 
beta 1-4 linkage.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1991.tb15825.x 
PMID: 1706663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

