
1. Infect Immun. 2007 Feb;75(2):613-20. Epub 2006 Nov 13.

Recruitment of macrophages and polymorphonuclear leukocytes in Lyme carditis.

Montgomery RR(1), Booth CJ, Wang X, Blaho VA, Malawista SE, Brown CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, 300 Cedar
St./TAC S413, New Haven, CT 06520-8031, USA. ruth.montgomery@yale.edu

Lyme arthritis, caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi, can be recurrent
or prolonged, whereas Lyme carditis is mostly nonrecurring. A prominent
difference between arthritis and carditis is the differential representation of
phagocytes in these lesions: polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) are more
prevalent in the joint, and macrophages predominate in the heart lesion. We have 
previously shown differential efficiency of B. burgdorferi clearance by PMN and
macrophages, and we now investigate whether these functional differences at the
cellular level may contribute to the observed differences in organ-specific
pathogenesis. When we infected mice lacking the neutrophil chemokine receptor
(CXCR2(-/-) mice) with spirochetes, we detected fewer PMN in joints and
less-severe arthritis. Here we have investigated the effects of the absence of
the macrophage chemokine receptor CCR2 on the development and resolution of Lyme 
carditis in resistant (C57BL/6J [B6]) and sensitive (C3H/HeJ [C3H]) strains of
mice. In B6 CCR2(-/-) mice, although inflammation in hearts is mild, we detected 
an increased burden of B. burgdorferi compared to that in wild-type (WT) mice,
suggesting reduced clearance in the absence of macrophages. In contrast, C3H
CCR2(-/-) mice have severe inflammation but a decreased B. burgdorferi burden
compared to that in WT C3H mice both at peak disease and during resolution.
Histopathologic examination of infected hearts revealed that infected C3H
CCR2(-/-) animals have an increased presence of PMN, suggesting compensatory
mechanisms of B. burgdorferi clearance in the hearts of infected C3H CCR2(-/-)
mice. The more efficient clearance of B. burgdorferi from hearts by CCR2(-/-)
versus WT C3H mice suggests a natural defect in the recruitment or function of
macrophages in C3H mice, which may contribute to the sensitivity of this strain
to B. burgdorferi infection.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00685-06 
PMCID: PMC1828503
PMID: 17101663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

