
1. Infect Immun. 2007 Feb;75(2):899-914. Epub 2006 Nov 27.

Gene expression pattern in human brain endothelial cells in response to Neisseria
meningitidis.

Schubert-Unkmeir A(1), Sokolova O, Panzner U, Eigenthaler M, Frosch M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hygiene and Microbiology, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg,
Germany. aunkmeir@hygiene.uni-wuerzburg.de

To extend our knowledge of target proteins in endothelial cells infected with the
meningitis-causing pathogen Neisseria meningitidis, we characterized the
interaction between the bacterial and human brain microvascular endothelial cell 
(HBMEC) monolayers. By use of human cDNA microarrays, transcriptional analysis
revealed distinct responses to 4 and 8 h of infection. We also addressed the
question of whether the major virulence factor of meningococci, i.e., the
capsule, influences the host cell response. Of the 1,493 (at 4 h postinfection)
and 1,246 (at 8 h postinfection) genes with altered expression upon bacterial
contact, about 49.4% and 45%, respectively, depended on capsule expression. In
particular, we identified an increase of expression for genes encoding proteins
involved in bacterial adhesion and invasion. High levels of apoptosis-related
gene (bad, bak, asp, and immediate-early response gene 1) expression could also
be detected in infected cells. Further analyses confirmed that HBMECs displayed
several hallmarks of apoptosis in response to N. meningitidis infection, namely, 
phosphatidylserine translocation and activation of caspase 3 and AMP-activated
protein kinase alpha. Moreover, several differentially regulated genes not
previously known to respond to meningococcal infection were identified. Of these,
genes encoding cell adhesion proteins (CD44, CD98, and CD99), genes involved in
downstream signaling of integrins (integrin-linked kinase, mitogen-activated
protein kinase kinase 1, and mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 10)
as well as negative regulators of these pathways (dual-specificity phosphatases
1, 5, and 14 and G protein pathway suppressor 2), and genes involved in
cytoskeleton reorganization (those encoding Arp2/3, p34-arc, actinin alpha 1,
vasodilatator-stimulated protein, and Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein) were the 
most prominent. This global transcriptional analysis creates a new platform for
further molecular and cellular analysis of the interaction between N.
meningitidis and target cells.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01508-06 
PMCID: PMC1828482
PMID: 17130252  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

