
1. Vet Microbiol. 2007 Mar 10;120(3-4):308-19. Epub 2006 Nov 30.

Contribution of AIDA-I to the pathogenicity of a porcine diarrheagenic
Escherichia coli and to intestinal colonization through biofilm formation in
pigs.

Ravi M(1), Ngeleka M, Kim SH, Gyles C, Berthiaume F, Mourez M, Middleton D, Simko
E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.

In order to evaluate the role of the AIDA-I of porcine diarrheagenic Escherichia 
coli strain PD20 serogroup O143 (AIDA-I(+), STb(+)), a mutant strain PD20M
(AIDA-I(-), STb(+)) was generated from strain PD20 by an allelic exchange
procedure. In addition, the full-length aidA gene was reintroduced into strain
PD20M to generate the complemented strain PD20C (pTaidA, AIDA-I(+), STb(+)). A
non-pathogenic E. coli strain PD71 was used as negative control. Each strain was 
inoculated to newborn pigs via stomach tube. Severity of diarrhea was evaluated
clinically and intestinal colonization was assessed by histology,
immunohistochemistry (IHC), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) including 
immunogold electron microscopy (IGEM). The adhesion pattern to HeLa cells,
bacterial auto-aggregation and biofilm formation were evaluated in vitro. Pigs
infected with strains PD20 or PD20C developed diarrhea 16 and 28h after
inoculation, respectively, in contrast to pigs infected with strains PD20M or
PD71. Histology, IHC, TEM and IGEM examinations showed heavy bacterial
colonization with biofilm formation in the large intestine, and marked in vivo
expression of AIDA-I protein in pigs infected with strains PD20 or PD20C in
contrast to pigs infected with strains PD20M or PD71. The in vitro assays showed 
marked diffuse adherence to HeLa cells, enhanced bacterial auto-aggregation and
significant biofilm formation (p<0.05) by the AIDA-I(+) strains, when compared to
AIDA-I(-) strains. These results demonstrate that expression of AIDA-I is
essential for intestinal colonization and in vitro bacterial autoaggregation and 
biofilm formation. Thus, AIDA-I may be considered a significant virulence
determinant in development of diarrhea caused by porcine diarrheagenic
AIDA-I(+)E. coli PD20 in piglets.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2006.10.035 
PMID: 17140750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

