
1. Infect Immun. 2007 Mar;75(3):1196-202. Epub 2007 Jan 8.

Interleukin-12 promotes gamma interferon-dependent neutrophil recruitment in the 
lung and improves protection against respiratory Streptococcus pneumoniae
infection.

Sun K(1), Salmon SL, Lotz SA, Metzger DW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology and Microbial Disease, MC-151, Albany Medical College,
47 New Scotland Avenue, Albany, NY 12208, USA.

The ability of exogenous interleukin-12 (IL-12) to elicit protective innate
immune responses against the extracellular pathogen Streptococcus pneumoniae was 
tested by infecting BALB/c mice intranasally (i.n.) with S. pneumoniae after i.n.
administration of IL-12. It was found that administration of IL-12 resulted in
lower bacterial burdens in the infected mice and significantly improved survival 
rates. All IL-12-treated mice contained higher levels of pulmonary gamma
interferon (IFN-gamma) after infection and significantly more neutrophils than
infected mice not treated with IL-12. IFN-gamma was found to be essential for
IL-12-induced resistance and for neutrophil influx into the lungs, and the
observed changes correlated with increased levels of the IL-8 homologue
keratinocyte-derived chemokine (KC). In addition, in vitro tumor necrosis factor 
alpha (TNF-alpha) production by alveolar macrophages stimulated with heat-killed 
pneumococci was enhanced by IFN-gamma, and TNF-alpha in turn could enhance
production of KC by lung cells. Finally, IL-12-induced protection was dependent
upon the presence of neutrophils and the KC receptor CXCR2. Taken together, the
results indicate that exogenous IL-12 can improve innate defense in the lung
against S. pneumoniae by inducing IFN-gamma production, which in turn enhances
chemokine expression, and promotes pulmonary neutrophil recruitment into the
infected lung. The findings show that IL-12 and IFN-gamma can mediate a
protective effect against respiratory infection caused by extracellular bacterial
pathogens.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01403-06 
PMCID: PMC1828591
PMID: 17210665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

