
1. J Immunol. 2007 Feb 1;178(3):1415-25.

Improved outcomes in NOD mice treated with a novel Th2 cytokine-biasing NKT cell 
activator.

Forestier C(1), Takaki T, Molano A, Im JS, Baine I, Jerud ES, Illarionov P,
Ndonye R, Howell AR, Santamaria P, Besra GS, Dilorenzo TP, Porcelli SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Activation of CD1d-restricted invariant NKT (iNKT) cells by
alpha-galactosylceramide (alphaGalCer) significantly suppresses development of
diabetes in NOD mice. The mechanisms of this protective effect are complex,
involving both Th1 and Th2 cytokines and a network of regulatory cells including 
tolerogenic dendritic cells. In the current study, we evaluated a newly described
synthetic alphaGalCer analog (C20:2) that elicits a Th2-biased cytokine response 
for its impact on disease progression and immunopathology in NOD mice. Treatment 
of NOD mice with alphaGalCer C20:2 significantly delayed and reduced the
incidence of diabetes. This was associated with significant suppression of the
late progression of insulitis, reduced infiltration of islets by autoreactive
CD8(+) T cells, and prevention of progressive disease-related changes in relative
proportions of different subsets of dendritic cells in the draining pancreatic
lymph nodes. Multiple favorable effects observed with alphaGalCer C20:2 were
significantly more pronounced than those seen in direct comparisons with a
closely related analog of alphaGalCer that stimulated a more mixed pattern of Th1
and Th2 cytokine secretion. Unlike a previously reported Th2-skewing murine iNKT 
cell agonist, the alphaGalCer C20:2 analog was strongly stimulatory for human
iNKT cells and thus warrants further examination as a potential immunomodulatory 
agent for human disease.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.178.3.1415 
PMID: 17237389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

