
1. J Bacteriol. 2007 May;189(9):3335-47. Epub 2007 Feb 16.

Transcriptional regulation of the CO2-concentrating mechanism in a euryhaline,
coastal marine cyanobacterium, Synechococcus sp. Strain PCC 7002: role of
NdhR/CcmR.

Woodger FJ(1), Bryant DA, Price GD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Plant Physiology Group, Research School of Biological Sciences,
Australian National University, P.O. Box 475, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia.

Cyanobacterial photosynthesis occurs in radically diverse habitats and utilizes
various forms of a CO(2)-concentrating mechanism (CCM) featuring multiple
inorganic carbon (C(i)) transporters. Cyanobacteria from dynamic environments can
transform CCM activity depending on C(i) availability, and yet the molecular
basis for this regulation is unclear, especially in coastal strains. LysR family 
transcription factors resembling the Calvin cycle regulator CbbR from
proteobacteria have been implicated in the expression of C(i) transporter genes
in freshwater cyanobacteria. Our survey of related factors revealed a group of
divergent CbbR-like sequences confined to freshwater and coastal or offshore
cyanobacteria. Inactivation of the single gene (termed ccmR) from this variable
cluster in the euryhaline (coastal) strain Synechococcus sp. strain PCC 7002 led 
to constitutive expression of a high-affinity CCM. Derepression of HCO(3)(-)
transporter gene transcription, including that of BicA, a recently discovered
HCO(3)(-) transporter (G. D. Price et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
101:18228-18233, 2004), was observed. A unique CcmR-regulated operon containing
bicA plus 9 open reading frames encoding likely Na(+)/H(+) antiporters from the
CPA1 and Mnh families was defined that is essential for maximal
HCO(3)(-)-dependent oxygen evolution. The promoter region required for
C(i)-regulated transcription of this operon was defined. We propose that CcmR
(and its associated regulon) represents a specialization for species inhabiting
environments subject to fluctuating C(i) concentrations.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01745-06 
PMCID: PMC1855907
PMID: 17307862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

