
1. J Immunol. 2007 Mar 1;178(5):2827-34.

IL-21 is produced by NKT cells and modulates NKT cell activation and cytokine
production.

Coquet JM(1), Kyparissoudis K, Pellicci DG, Besra G, Berzins SP, Smyth MJ,
Godfrey DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria 3010, Australia.

The common gamma-chain cytokine, IL-21, is produced by CD4(+) T cells and
mediates potent effects on a variety of immune cells including NK, T, and B
cells. NKT cells express the receptor for IL-21; however, the effect of this
cytokine on NKT cell function has not been studied. We show that IL-21 on its own
enhances survival of NKT cells in vitro, and IL-21 increases the proliferation of
NKT cells in combination with IL-2 or IL-15, and particularly with the
CD1d-restricted glycosphingolipid Ag alpha-galactosylceramide. Similar to its
effects on NK cells, IL-21 enhances NKT cell granular morphology, including
granzyme B expression, and some inhibitory NK receptors, including Ly49C/I and
CD94. IL-21 also enhanced NKT cell cytokine production in response to
anti-CD3/CD28 in vitro. Furthermore, NKT cells may be subject to autocrine
IL-21-mediated stimulation because they are potent producers of this cytokine
following in vitro stimulation via CD3 and CD28, particularly in conjunction with
IL-12 or following in vivo stimulation with alpha-galactosylceramide. Indeed, NKT
cells produced much higher levels of IL-21 than conventional CD4 T cells in this 
assay. This study demonstrates that NKT cells are potentially a major source of
IL-21, and that IL-21 may be an important factor in NKT cell-mediated immune
regulation, both in its effects on NK, T, and B cells, as well as direct effects 
on NKT cells themselves. The influence of IL-21 in NKT cell-dependent models of
tumor rejection, microbial clearance, autoimmunity, and allergy should be the
subject of future investigations.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.178.5.2827 
PMID: 17312126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

