
1. PLoS Pathog. 2007 Mar;3(3):e32.

Transport of Streptococcus pneumoniae capsular polysaccharide in MHC Class II
tubules.

Stephen TL(1), Fabri M, Groneck L, Röhn TA, Hafke H, Robinson N, Rietdorf J,
Schrama D, Becker JC, Plum G, Krönke M, Kropshofer H, Kalka-Moll WM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, Medical Center,
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Bacterial capsular polysaccharides are virulence factors and are considered T
cell-independent antigens. However, the capsular polysaccharide Sp1 from
Streptococcus pneumoniae serotype 1 has been shown to activate CD4(+) T cells in 
a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II-dependent manner. The mechanism
of carbohydrate presentation to CD4(+) T cells is unknown. We show in live murine
dendritic cells (DCs) that Sp1 translocates from lysosomal compartments to the
plasma membrane in MHCII-positive tubules. Sp1 cell surface presentation results 
in reduction of self-peptide presentation without alteration of the MHCII self
peptide repertoire. In DM-deficient mice, retrograde transport of Sp1/MHCII
complexes resulting in T cell-dependent immune responses to the polysaccharide in
vitro and in vivo is significantly reduced. The results demonstrate the capacity 
of a bacterial capsular polysaccharide antigen to use DC tubules as a vehicle for
its transport as an MHCII/saccharide complex to the cell surface for the
induction of T cell activation. Furthermore, retrograde transport requires the
functional role of DM in self peptide-carbohydrate exchange. These observations
open new opportunities for the design of vaccines against microbial encapsulated 
pathogens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0030032 
PMCID: PMC1828696
PMID: 17367207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

