
1. Environ Health Perspect. 2007 Feb;115(2):267-71. Epub 2006 Nov 28.

Outbreaks of short-incubation ocular and respiratory illness following exposure
to indoor swimming pools.

Bowen AB(1), Kile JC, Otto C, Kazerouni N, Austin C, Blount BC, Wong HN, Beach
MJ, Fry AM.

Author information: 
(1)Enteric Diseases Epidemiology Branch, National Center for Zoonotic,
Vector-borne and Enteric Disease, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, GA 30333 USA. abowen@cdc.gov

OBJECTIVES: Chlorination destroys pathogens in swimming pool water, but
by-products of chlorination can cause human illness. We investigated outbreaks of
ocular and respiratory symptoms associated with chlorinated indoor swimming pools
at two hotels.
MEASUREMENTS: We interviewed registered guests and companions who stayed at
hotels X and Y within 2 days of outbreak onset. We performed bivariate and
stratified analyses, calculated relative risks (RR), and conducted environmental 
investigations of indoor pool areas.
RESULTS: Of 77 guests at hotel X, 47 (61%) completed questionnaires. Among
persons exposed to the indoor pool area, 22 (71%) of 31 developed ocular symptoms
[RR = 24; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.5-370], and 14 (45%) developed
respiratory symptoms (RR = 6.8; 95% CI, 1.0-47) with a median duration of 10 hr
(0.25-24 hr). We interviewed 30 (39%) of 77 registered persons and 59
unregistered companions at hotel Y. Among persons exposed to the indoor pool
area, 41 (59%) of 69 developed ocular symptoms (RR = 24; 95% CI, 1.5-370), and 28
(41%) developed respiratory symptoms (RR = 17; 95% CI, 1.1-260) with a median
duration of 2.5 hr (2 min-14 days). Four persons sought medical care. During the 
outbreak, the hotel X's ventilation system malfunctioned. Appropriate water and
air samples were not available for laboratory analysis. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE
TO PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE: Indoor pool areas were associated with illness in these
outbreaks. A large proportion of bathers were affected; symptoms were consistent 
with chloramine exposure and were sometimes severe. Improved staff training, pool
maintenance, and pool area ventilation could prevent future outbreaks.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.9555 
PMCID: PMC1817713
PMID: 17384776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

