
1. J Immunol. 2007 Apr 15;178(8):5340-50.

Potential role for IL-7 in Fas-mediated T cell apoptosis during HIV infection.

Fluur C(1), De Milito A, Fry TJ, Vivar N, Eidsmo L, Atlas A, Federici C,
Matarrese P, Logozzi M, Rajnav√∂lgyi E, Mackall CL, Fais S, Chiodi F, Rethi B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.

IL-7 promotes survival of resting T lymphocytes and induces T cell proliferation 
in lymphopenic conditions. As elevated IL-7 levels occur in HIV-infected
individuals in addition to high Fas expression on T cells and increased
sensitivity to Fas-induced apoptosis, we analyzed whether IL-7 has a regulatory
role in Fas-mediated T cell apoptosis. We show that IL-7 up-regulates Fas
expression on naive and memory T cells through a mechanism that involves
translocation of Fas molecules from intracellular compartments to the cell
membrane. IL-7 induced the association of Fas with the cytoskeletal component
ezrin and a polarized Fas expression on the cell surface. The potential role of
IL-7 in Fas up-regulation in vivo was verified in IL-7-treated macaques and in
HIV-infected or chemotherapy treated patients by the correlation between serum
IL-7 levels and Fas expression on T cells. IL-7 treatment primed T cells for
Fas-induced apoptosis in vitro and serum IL-7 levels correlated with the
sensitivity of T cells to Fas-induced apoptosis in HIV-infected individuals. Our 
data suggest an important role for IL-7 in Fas-mediated regulation of T cell
homeostasis. Elevated IL-7 levels associated with lymphopenic conditions,
including HIV-infection, might participate in the increased sensitivity of T
cells for activation-induced apoptosis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.178.8.5340 
PMID: 17404319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

