
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2007 Mar 13;74(3):209-23.

Real-time PCR for quantification of viable Renibacterium salmoninarum in chum
salmon Oncorhynchus keta.

Suzuki K(1), Sakai DK.

Author information: 
(1)Eastern Hokkaido Inland Water Fisheries Section, The Hokkaido Fish Hatchery,
Notorominato 1-1, Abashiri, Hokkaido 093-0131, Japan.
suzukiku@fishexp.pref.hokkaido.jp

Quantification of msa gene mRNA of Renibacterium salmoninarum, the causative
agent of bacterial kidney disease (BKD), was investigated using reverse
transcription followed by real-time PCR assay on R. salmoninarum in culture, and 
in experimentally challenged chum salmon Oncorhynchus keta fry kidney tissues
(total of 70 samples) after intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection and bath infection. 
Correlations of msa gene mRNA concentrations with culturable cell concentrations 
(as colony forming units [CFU]), determined by drop-plate culture method on
selective kidney disease medium (SKDM) agar through a 12 wk incubation time, and 
msa gene DNA concentrations by real-time PCR assay were examined. Furthermore,
ovarian fluid samples from wild chum salmon adults with no clinical signs of
disease were collected from 8 rivers and from clinically infected kokanee 0.
nerka and masu salmon O. masou that were reared in 1 and 2 hatcheries,
respectively (total of 414 samples). All samples were examined by nested PCR
assay. Then, positive samples were examined by real-time PCR assays for mRNA and 
DNA; mRNA was detectable at 8 log units (5.0 x 101 to 5.0 x 10(9) copies p11(-1))
with high correlation (R2 = 0.999). The mRNA concentration correlated with CFU in
kidney tissue from fish infected by i.p. injection (R2 = 0.924), by bath
infection (R2 = 0.502) and in culture (R2 = 0.888). R. salmoninarum was detected 
and quantified by real-time PCR assay for mRNA in ovarian fluid samples in both
subclinically infected chum salmon adults and clinically infected kokanee and
masu salmon adults; detection rates ranged from 0 to 44.4% and concentrations
ranged from 9.7 x 10(2) to 5.6 x 10(5) copies pl(-1). These results indicate that
real-time PCR assay for the mRNA is a rapid, sensitive and reliable method to
detect and quantify the viability of R. salmoninarum in kidney and ovarian fluid 
samples of salmonid fishes with both clinical and subclinical infection of the
pathogen.

DOI: 10.3354/dao074209 
PMID: 17465306  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

