
1. J Agric Food Chem. 2007 May 30;55(11):4617-23. Epub 2007 May 2.

Differentiation of Enterobacter sakazakii from closely related Enterobacter and
Citrobacter species using fatty acid profiles.

Whittaker P(1), Keys CE, Brown EW, Fry FS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, College Park, Maryland 20740-3835, USA.
paul.whittaker@fda.hhs.gov

Capillary gas chromatography with flame ionization detection (GC-FID) was used to
determine the cellular fatty acid (CFA) profiles of 134 Enterobacter sakazakii
strains, and these were compared to the CFA profiles of other closely related
Enterobacter and Citrobacter species. For GC-FID analysis, whole cell fatty acid 
methyl esters (FAMEs) from cells cultured on brain heart infusion (BHI) agar at
37 degrees C for 24 h were obtained by saponification, methylation, and
extraction into hexane/methyl tert-butyl ether. A database for E. sakazakii was
prepared using fatty acid profiles from the 134 strains. Major fatty acids of E. 
sakazakii strains evaluated in this study were straight-chain 12:0, 14:0, and
16:0, unsaturated 18:1 omega7c, and 17:0 omegacyclo 7-8. Principal component
analysis (PCA) based on CFA profiles for E. sakazakii strains shows separation of
E. sakazakii subgroups A and B. The CFA profiles for E. sakazakii and
Enterobacter cloacae show that there are several fatty acids, 14:0, 17:0
omegacyclo 7-8, 18:1 omega7c, and summed 16:1 omega6c/16:1 omega7c, that differ
significantly between these two species. A PCA model based on CFA profiles for E.
sakazakii strains clearly shows separation of E. sakazakii from closely related
Enterobacter and Citrobacter species. Analysis of FAMEs from E. sakazakii strains
grown on BHI agar by a rapid GC-FID method can provide a sensitive procedure for 
the identification of this organism, and this analytical method provides a
confirmatory procedure for the differentiation of E. sakazakii strains from
closely related Enterobacter and Citrobacter species.

DOI: 10.1021/jf070193a 
PMID: 17472390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

