
1. Zentralbl Neurochir. 2007 Feb;68(1):14-8.

Antibiotic prophylaxis in cerebrospinal fluid shunting: reassessment of Cefotiam 
penetration into human CSF.

Knoop M(1), Sch√ºtze M, Piek J, Drewelow B, Mundkowski R.

Author information: 
(1)HELIOS Hospital, Neurosurgery, Bad Saarow, Germany.
michael.knoop@helios-kliniken.de

OBJECTS: Shunt infection is a major complication of shunt implantation. Numerous 
clinical studies give evidence that antibiotic prophylaxis is efficacious in
preventing infections after cerebrospinal fluid shunting. In CSF shunting,
antibiotics need to reach sufficient concentrations not only in the blood
shielding the operative field but also in tissues and the CSF compartment.
Cefotiam is widely used for prophylaxis in neurosurgery. Some clinical trials
report that this beta-lactam is able to penetrate considerably into the CSF.
However, these studies include disease patterns which are most likely to be
associated with a pathological permeability of the blood-brain barrier.
Therefore, this study was designed to investigate the extent of penetration of
Cefotiam into human CSF in patients without morphological disruption of the
blood-brain barrier.
METHODS: The penetration of Cefotiam into human CSF was investigated in 23
patients without morphological disruption of the blood-brain barrier undergoing
CSF shunt surgery. 2 g Cefotiam was administered prior to surgery as a short-term
infusion for a period of 15 min. Samples of blood and CSF were collected
intraoperatively. The concentrations of Cefotiam were determined by bioassay.
RESULTS: All patients (n=23) showed moderate to high plasma levels of Cefotiam
(range: 19.8-146.2 mg/L); the pharmacokinetic profiles in blood accorded well
with published data. In contrast to earlier studies, no Cefotiam was detected in 
CSF.
CONCLUSION: This study clearly demonstrates that Cefotiam does not penetrate
through an intact blood-brain barrier into human CSF. Although Cefotiam has been 
shown to be valuable for the perioperative prophylaxis of shunt infection, other 
antibiotics might be superior if they are capable of entering the CSF. Further
studies are required to address this assumption.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-968168 
PMID: 17487803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

