
1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 14;282(37):27334-27342. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M703290200. Epub
2007 Jun 26.

High resolution crystal structures of Mycobacterium tuberculosis adenosine
kinase: insights into the mechanism and specificity of this novel prokaryotic
enzyme.

Reddy MCM(1), Palaninathan SK(1), Shetty ND(1), Owen JL(1), Watson MD(1),
Sacchettini JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843.
(2)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843. Electronic address: sacchett@tamu.edu.

Adenosine kinase (ADK) catalyzes the phosphorylation of adenosine (Ado) to
adenosine monophosphate (AMP). It is part of the purine salvage pathway that has 
been identified only in eukaryotes, with the single exception of Mycobacterium
spp. Whereas it is not clear if Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) ADK is
essential, it has been shown that the enzyme can selectively phosphorylate
nucleoside analogs to produce products toxic to the cell. We have determined the 
crystal structure of Mtb ADK unliganded as well as ligand (Ado) bound at 1.5- and
1.9-A resolution, respectively. The structure of the binary complexes with the
inhibitor 2-fluoroadenosine (F-Ado) bound and with the adenosine
5'-(beta,gamma-methylene)triphosphate (AMP-PCP) (non-hydrolyzable ATP analog)
bound were also solved at 1.9-A resolution. These four structures indicate that
Mtb ADK is a dimer formed by an extended beta sheet. The active site of the
unliganded ADK is in an open conformation, and upon Ado binding a lid domain of
the protein undergoes a large conformation change to close the active site. In
the closed conformation, the lid forms direct interactions with the substrate and
residues of the active site. Interestingly, AMP-PCP binding alone was not
sufficient to produce the closed state of the enzyme. The binding mode of F-Ado
was characterized to illustrate the role of additional non-bonding interactions
in Mtb ADK compared with human ADK.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M703290200 
PMID: 17597075  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

