
1. J Immunol. 2007 Jul 15;179(2):1138-46.

NKT cells are critical to initiate an inflammatory response after Pseudomonas
aeruginosa ocular infection in susceptible mice.

Hazlett LD(1), Li Q, Liu J, McClellan S, Du W, Barrett RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Wayne State
University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. lhazlett@med.wayne.edu

CD4(+) T cells produce IFN-gamma contributing to corneal perforation in C57BL/6
(B6) mice after Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. To determine the role of NK and
NKT cells, infected corneas of B6 mice were dual immunolabeled. Initially, more
NKT than NK cells were detected, but as disease progressed, NK cells increased,
while NKT cells decreased. Therefore, B6 mice were depleted of NK/NKT cells with 
anti-asialo GM1 or anti-NK1.1 Ab. Either treatment accelerated time to
perforation, increased bacterial load and polymorphonuclear neutrophils, but
decreased IFN-gamma and IL-12p40 mRNA expression vs controls. Next, RAG-1
knockout (-/-; no T/NKT cells), B6.TCR Jalpha281(-/-) (NKT cell deficient),
alpha-galactosylceramide (alphaGalCer) (anergized NKT cells) injected and
IL-12p40(-/-) vs B6 controls were tested. IFN-gamma mRNA was undetectable in
RAG-1(-/-)- and alphaGalCer-treated mice at 5 h and was significantly reduced vs 
controls at 1 day postinfection. It also was reduced significantly in B6.TCR
Jalpha281(-/-), alphaGalCer-treated, and IL-12p40(-/-) (activated CD4(+) T cells 
also reduced) vs control mice at 5 days postinfection. In vitro studies tested
whether endotoxin (LPS) stimulated Langerhans cells and macrophages (Mphi; from
B6 mice) provided signals to activate NKT cells. LPS up-regulated mRNA expression
for IL-12p40, costimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86, NF-kappaB, and CD1d, and
addition of rIFN-gamma potentiated Mphi CD1d levels. Together, these data suggest
that Langerhans cell/Mphi recognition of microbial LPS regulates IL-12p40 (and
CD1d) driven IFN-gamma production by NKT cells, that IFN-gamma is required to
optimally activate NK cells to produce IFN-gamma, and that depletion of both
NKT/NK cells results in earlier corneal perforation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.179.2.1138 
PMID: 17617607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

