
1. J Immunol. 2007 Aug 1;179(3):1814-24.

The p47 GTPases Iigp2 and Irgb10 regulate innate immunity and inflammation to
murine Chlamydia psittaci infection.

Miyairi I(1), Tatireddigari VR, Mahdi OS, Rose LA, Belland RJ, Lu L, Williams RW,
Byrne GI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

C57BL/6J mice were 10(5)-fold more resistant to Chlamydia psittaci infection than
DBA/2J mice by LD(100) determinations. Linkage analysis using BXD recombinant
inbred strains revealed a single effector locus at a 1.5-Mbp region on chromosome
11 encoding a cluster of three p47 GTPases (Irgb10, Igtp, and Iigp2). Western
blots of infected tissue showed that Irgb10 was elevated in resistant mice and
one of the two possible Iigp2 protein isoforms was preferentially expressed in
susceptible mice. The BXD39 strain, susceptible at Irgb10 and resistant at Iigp2,
had an intermediate phenotype implicating the nonredundant role of these p47
GTPases. C57BL/6J and DBA/2J exhibited a difference in IFN-gamma-dependent
chlamydial control, which was reversible by Iigp2 small interfering RNA
knockdown. Microarrays of infected peritoneal lavage revealed >10-fold
up-regulation of neutrophil-recruiting chemokines in susceptible mice and
>100-fold increase in macrophage differentiation genes in resistant mice,
indicating that the susceptibility pattern involves the stimulation of different 
inflammatory cell-recruiting pathways. Massive neutrophil recruitment was seen in
susceptible mice by histology and flow cytometry, and neutrophil chemokine
receptor (CXCR2) knockout mice on a susceptible background survived a lethal
challenge, confirming that neutrophil recruitment was required for
susceptibility. Congenic Igtp knockout mice also susceptible at Irgb10 and Iigp2 
on a resistant background recruited neutrophils and succumbed to infection. We
conclude that Irgb10 and Iigp2 act together to confer differential susceptibility
against murine chlamydial infection. Data indicate that these p47 GTPases have
cell-autonomous effects that result in vastly different inflammatory
stimulations, leading to either recovery or death.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.179.3.1814 
PMID: 17641048  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

