
1. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol. 2007;13(1-3):55-64.

Identification of a ribosomal L10-like protein from Flavobacterium psychrophilum 
as a recombinant vaccine candidate for rainbow trout fry syndrome.

Crump EM(1), Burian J, Allen PD, Gale S, Kay WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria,
B.C., Canada.

The psychrophilic bacterium Flavobacterium psychrophilum is a rapidly emerging,
virulent pathogen of a variety of commercially important finfish species,
including salmonids. No vaccines against F. psychrophilum are currently
available, partly due to its recalcitrant growth in vitro. Consequently, we
explored the possibility of constructing recombinant vaccines in Escherichia coli
as a prophylactic biotechnological strategy to counter F. psychrophilum
infections. An immunoreactive clone from a F. psychrophilum expression library
was found to express a approximately 16 kDa protein antigen. A proteomics
approach was taken to identify the ORF encoding the approximately 16 kDa protein.
Tryptic fragments of the approximately 16 kDa protein were analyzed by MALDI-TOF 
mass spectrometry and compared to theoretical (in silico) tryptic fragments of
translated ORFs predicted within the cloned DNA. The target protein was
identified as a 166 amino acid protein (named 7-166) with homology to rplJ which 
encodes bacterial ribosomal protein L10. Whenhighly expressed in E. coli as an
N-terminal fusion protein, this chimera reacted with convalescent rainbow trout
serum. When adjuvanted and administered intraperitoneally to immature rainbow
trout a high level of protection (82% RPS) was afforded against virulent F.
psychrophilum challenge; thus establishing F. psychrophilumrplJ homologue 7-166
as a promising vaccine candidate for RTFS.

Copyright (c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000103597 
PMID: 17693713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

