
1. J Immunol. 2007 Sep 1;179(5):3065-74.

Polymorphisms in genes involved in innate immunity predispose toward mycetoma
susceptibility.

van de Sande WW(1), Fahal A, Verbrugh H, van Belkum A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Erasmus MC,
University Medical Centre Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
w.vandesande@erasmusmc.nl

Madurella mycetomatis is the main causative agent of mycetoma, a tumorous fungal 
infection characterized by the infiltration of large numbers of neutrophils at
the site of infection. In endemic areas the majority of inhabitants have Abs to
M. mycetomatis, although only a small proportion of individuals actually develop 
mycetomal disease. It therefore appears that neutrophils are unable to clear the 
infection in some individuals. To test this hypothesis, 11 single nucleotide
polymorphisms involved in neutrophil function were studied in a population of
Sudanese mycetoma patients vs geographically and ethnically matched controls.
Significant differences in allele distribution for IL-8 (CXCL8), its receptor
CXCR2, thrombospondin-4 (TSP-4), NO synthase 2 (NOS2), and complement receptor 1 
(CR1) were found. Further, the NOS2(Lambaréné) polymorphism was clearly
associated with lesion size. The genotypes obtained for CXCL8, its receptor
CXCR2, and TSP-4 all predisposed to a higher CXCL8 expression in patients, which 
was supported by the detection of significantly elevated levels of CXCL8 in
patient serum. The NOS2 genotype observed in healthy controls was correlated with
an increase in NOS2 expression and higher concentrations of nitrate and nitrite
in control serum. We present the first evidence of human genetic predisposition
toward susceptibility to mycetoma, a neglected infection of the poor.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.179.5.3065 
PMID: 17709521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

