
1. Vet Microbiol. 2008 Jan 25;126(4):345-55. Epub 2007 Jul 25.

Isolation and identification of AIDA-I receptors in porcine intestinal mucus.

Fang Y(1), Ngeleka M, Middleton DM, Simko E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, 52 Campus Drive, Saskatoon, SK, Canada S7N 5B4.

Porcine AIDA-I positive Escherichia coli causes diarrhea in neonatal piglets and 
AIDA-I adhesin is an important virulence factor involved in intestinal
colonization with biofilm formation. This biofilm consists of AIDA-I(+)E. coli
bacteria stratified within mucus layers covering the intestinal mucosa. Based on 
the intimate interaction between AIDA-I(+)E. coli and mucus within the intestinal
biofilm, we hypothesized that porcine intestinal mucus contains receptor(s) for
AIDA-I adhesin. Since porcine AIDA-I receptors have not been identified, we
employed affinity chromatography and in vitro adhesion assays to investigate
AIDA-I binding proteins in porcine intestinal mucus that might serve as receptors
for attachment of AIDA-I positive E. coli. We demonstrated that porcine mucus
contains 65 and 120kDa proteins (p65 and p120) that bind with high affinity to
purified AIDA-I adhesin and that AIDA-I positive E. coli binds to these proteins 
with higher affinity than do AIDA-I negative mutant. The identity of p65 was not 
determined based on LC-MS/MS data, whereas p120 was matched to two nuclear
proteins (namely, DNA damage binding protein and splicing factor 3b) and one
cytoplasmic protein, which is an IgG Fc binding protein. Based on similar amino
acid homology, molecular weight, structural similarity to mucin and reported
evidence of being secreted by goblet cells into the intestinal lumen, we think
that the IgG Fc binding protein is most likely candidate to serve as a potential 
receptor in intestinal mucus for AIDA-I adhesin.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2007.07.017 
PMID: 17764859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

