
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2007 Jul 16;76(3):205-14.

Spores of two fish microsporidia (Pseudoloma neurophilia and Glugea anomala) are 
highly resistant to chlorine.

Ferguson JA(1), Watral V, Schwindt AR, Kent ML.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Fish Disease Research, Department of Microbiology, 220 Nash Hall,
Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331-3404, USA.

Pseudoloma neurophilia (Microsporidia) is the most common pathogen found in
zebrafish Danio rerio research facilities. The parasite is associated with marked
emaciation. Zebrafish laboratories usually disinfect eggs to prevent transmission
of pathogens, typically with chlorine at 25 to 50 ppm for 10 min. The ability of 
chlorine to kill spores of P. neurophilia and 2 other microsporidia, Glugea
anomala and Encephalitozoon cuniculi, was evaluated using 2 viability stains.
SYTOX Green was used to visualize dead spores, and live spores were identified by
their ability to extrude polar tubes in Fungi-Fluor solution following UV
exposure. Results with both stains were similar at various chlorine
concentrations for P. neurophilia and G. anomala, but Fungi-Fluor was not useful 
for E. cuniculi, due to the much smaller spore size. Using the SYTOX stain, we
found that 5 ppm chlorine for 10 min causes 100% death in spores of E. cuniculi, 
which was similar to findings in other studies. In contrast, the spores of P.
neurophilia and G. anomala were much more resistant to chlorine, requiring >100
or 1500 ppm chlorine, respectively, to achieve >95% spore death. Repeating
chlorine exposures with spores of P. neurophilia using solutions adjusted to pH 7
increased the efficacy of 100 ppm chlorine, achieving >99% spore inactivation. We
corroborated our viability staining results with experimental exposures of
zebrafish fry, achieving heavy infections in fry at 5 to 7 d post-exposure in
fish fed spores treated at 50 ppm (pH 9). Some fish still became infected with
spores exposed to 100 ppm chlorine (pH 9.5). This study demonstrates that spores 
of certain fish microsporidia are highly resistant to chlorine, and indicates
that the egg disinfection protocols presently used by most zebrafish research
facilities will not prevent transmission of P. neurophilia to progeny.

DOI: 10.3354/dao076205 
PMID: 17803106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

