
1. J Bacteriol. 2007 Dec;189(24):9020-9. Epub 2007 Oct 12.

Functional organization of the autotransporter adhesin involved in diffuse
adherence.

Charbonneau ME(1), Mourez M.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Montréal, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, Saint-Hyacinthe,
Québec, Canada.

The Escherichia coli adhesin involved in diffuse adherence (AIDA-I) is a
multifunctional autotransporter protein that mediates bacterial aggregation and
biofilm formation, as well as adhesion and invasion of cultured epithelial cells.
To elucidate the structure-function relationships of AIDA-I, we performed
transposon-based linker scanning mutagenesis and constructed mutants with
site-directed deletions. Twenty-nine different mutants with insertions that did
not affect protein expression were obtained. Eleven mutants were deficient for
one or two but not all of the functions associated with the expression of AIDA-I.
Functional characterization of the transposon mutants and of an additional
deletion mutant suggested that the N-terminal third of mature AIDA-I is involved 
in binding of this protein to cultured epithelial cells. The purified product of 
the putative domain could bind to cultured epithelial cells, confirming the
importance of this region in adhesion. We also identified several different
mutants in which invasion and adhesion were changed to different extents and two 
mutants in which autoaggregation and biofilm formation were also affected
differently. These results suggest that although conceptually linked, adhesion
and invasion, as well as autoaggregation and biofilm formation, are phenomena
that may rely on distinct mechanisms when they are mediated by AIDA-I. This study
sheds new light on the workings of a protein belonging to an emerging family of
strikingly versatile virulence factors.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01238-07 
PMCID: PMC2168634
PMID: 17933890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

