
1. Oral Dis. 2007 Nov;13(6):581-5.

Halitosis and gastroesophageal reflux disease: a possible association.

Moshkowitz M(1), Horowitz N, Leshno M, Halpern Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, and Sackler 
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. moshkov7@zahav.net.il

OBJECTIVE: Previous reports have suggested that gastrointestinal (GI) diseases
may cause halitosis. The aim of this study was to evaluate the relationship
between upper GI conditions, especially gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD),
and halitosis.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: One hundred and thirty two consecutive patients complaining
of upper GI symptoms were included in the study. All the patients completed a
validated questionnaire that was designed to characterize and measure the
severity of their symptoms. The questionnaire also contained questions about
awareness and severity of oral bad breath. Following the filling of the
questionnaire, the patients were physically examined and subjected to an upper GI
endoscopy.
RESULTS: The final diagnosis among the 132 patients (M/F = 70/62, mean age 45.2
years, range 20-87 years) was GERD in 72 patients (55%), Functional dyspepsia in 
52 (39%), Peptic ulcer in seven patients (5%) and gastric cancer in one patient
(1%). Halitosis was significantly associated with the occurrence and severity of 
heartburn (P = 0.027), regurgitation (P = 0.002) sour taste (P < 0.001), belching
(P = 0.001) and burburigmus (P = 0.006). Halitosis was not associated with upper 
abdominal pain, bloating, early satiety and chest pain. In relation to the final 
diagnosis, halitosis was significantly associated only with GERD (P = 0.002) but 
not with functional dyspepsia (P = 0.855) and peptic ulcer disease (0.765). No
correlation was found between Helicobacter pylori infection status and halitosis 
occurrence and severity (analysis of variance F = 0.001, P = 0.977).
CONCLUSIONS: Halitosis is a frequent symptom of GERD and may be considered as an 
extra-esophageal manifestation of GERD. On the other hand, we did not find an
association between functional dyspepsia, peptic ulcer disease and H. pylori
infection with halitosis occurrence or severity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.2006.01341.x 
PMID: 17944676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

