
1. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Sep;21(3):229-31.

[Retrospective study of liver failure complicated with bacterium and fungous
infection].

[Article in Chinese]

Su HB(1), Wang HF, Lin F, Xu HM, Zhao H, Li L, Yan T, Mou JS, Li C.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of severe liver diseases, The 302 Hospital of the PLA, Beijing,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To study clinic character of liver failure complicated with bacterium 
and fungous infection.
METHODS: The patients with liver failure complicated with bacterial and fungous
infection who were treated in our hospital from January 1986 to June 2006 were
studied. All patients had clinical manifestation and positive of bacterium. The
data were statistical analysis.
RESULTS: 507 patients diagnosed with fungous infection were found from January
1986 to June 2006 in which 132 patients were diagnosed with bacterial and fungous
infection. There were 85 patients (64.39%) with chronic severe hepatitis and 40
patients (30.3%) with decompensation cirrhosis. Bacterial infection happened in
153 cases in which the rate of nosocomial infections was 54.90%. 204 bacterial
strains were separated in which 143 strains (70.10%) were gram-negative bacterium
and 61 (29.90%) strains were gram-positive bacterium. The main sites of bacterial
infection were abdominal cavity (122 cases) and lung (30 cases). Fungous
infection happened in 143 cases in which the rate of nosocomial infections was
86.71%. 155 fungous strains were separated in which 90 strains (58.06%) were
Candida albicans, 17 strains (10.97%) were Aspergillus fumigatus and 25 (16.13%) 
strains were non-Candida albicans. The main sites of fouguns infection were lung 
(94 cases) and mouth (53 cases). 84 patients (63.64%) were ineffective and died
after treatment.
CONCLUSION: The patients with decompensation cirrhosis and chronic severe liver
hepatitis were easy to be infected by bacterial and fungous. the rate of fungous 
nosocomial infections is higher than that of bacterium. The prognosis is bad in
patients who had secondary fungous infection.


PMID: 17971929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

