
1. Cell Cycle. 2007 Dec 1;6(23):2944-52. Epub 2007 Aug 30.

Phosphorylated LIM kinases colocalize with gamma-tubulin in centrosomes during
early stages of mitosis.

Chakrabarti R(1), Jones JL, Oelschlager DK, Tapia T, Tousson A, Grizzle WE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, University of Central
Florida, Orlando, Florida 32826, USA. rchak@mail.ucf.edu

LIM kinases (LIMK1 and LIMK2) are LIM domain containing serine/threonine kinases 
that modulate reorganization of actin cytoskeleton through inactivating
phosphorylation of cofilin. The Rho family of small GTPases regulates the
catalytic activity of LIMK1 and LIMK2 through activating phosphorylation by ROCK 
or by p21 kinase. Recent studies have suggested that LIMK1 could play a role in
modulation of cellular growth by alteration of the cell cycle in breast and
prostate tumor cells; however, the direct mitogenic effects of LIMK1 in these
tumor cells is yet to be elucidated. Via immunofluorescence, in this study, we
show that phosphorylated LIM kinases (pLIMK1/2) are colocalized with
gamma-tubulin in the centrosomes during the early mitotic phases of human breast 
and prostate cancer cells (MDA-MB-231 and DU145); apparent colocalization begins 
in the centrosomes in prophase. As shown by both bright field (MDA-MB-231) and
fluorescent immunohistochemistry (MDA-MB-231 and DU145), pLIMK1/2 does not
localize to centrosomes during interphase. By bright field immunohistochemistry, 
the largest area of the centrosome that is stained with pLIMK1/2 occurs at
anaphase. In early telophase, reduced staining of pLIMK1/2 at the spindle poles
and concomitant accumulation of pLIMK1/2 at the cleavage furrow begins to occur. 
In late telophase, loss of staining of pLIMK1/2 and of colocalization with
gamma-tubulin occurs at the poles and pLIMK1/2 became further concentrated at the
junction between the two daughter cells. Co-immunoprecipitation studies indicated
that gamma-tubulin associates with phosphorylated LIMK1 and LIMK2 but not with
dephosphorylated LIMK1 or LIMK2. The results suggest that activated LIMK1/2 may
associate with gamma-tubulin and play a role in mitotic spindle assembly.

DOI: 10.4161/cc.6.23.4957 
PMID: 18000399  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

