
1. Zentralbl Hyg Umweltmed. 1991 Dec;192(4):287-323.

[The hygienic situation of the central drinking water supply in the former East
Germany--an evaluation of the annual reports on water hygiene from 1984 to 1989].

[Article in German]

Schlosser FU(1), Schulze E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut f√ºr Wasser-, Boden- und Lufthygiene des Bundesgesundheitsamtes,
Forschungsstelle Bad Elster.

In the former GDR an annual report on the situation in the field of communal
hygiene had to be elaborated and submitted to the minister of public health. One 
part of this was the report on the hygienic situation in water supply, worked out
by the Reference Laboratory for Water Hygiene in Bad Elster. After the political 
changes in autumn 1989 it became possible to analyse these reports as a whole. In
this paper the reports from 1984 to 1989 are interpreted. The results of the
laboratory measurements and field controls by the State Sanitary Inspectorates
are shown in 17 graphics and compared to the bacteriological and chemical limits 
in drinking water standards. Special issue is drawn on the estimation of the
number of inhabitants concerned by reduced drinking-water quality or any
hazardous situations. The special problems of the different districts are
compared in some graphics. The hygienic safety of the central drinking-water
supply units is assessed basing on the results of the field controls by the State
Sanitary Inspectorate. The Sanitation of the central drinking-water supply
facilities in the new federal countries of the FRG is connected with the solution
of a variety of technological problems, particularly the improvement of the water
treatment techniques and the restoration of the pipe systems. The use of surface 
waters from extremely polluted rivers generates a high hygienic risk and requires
the sanitation of the rivers. The high number of existing protection zones in the
catchment areas for drinking-water is a valuable precondition to ensure the
hygienic safety of the drinking-water supply in the new federal countries.


PMID: 1801836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

