
1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2008 Feb 15;16(4):1890-902. Epub 2007 Nov 5.

5,5,6-Fused tricycles bearing imidazole and pyrazole 6-methylidene penems as
broad-spectrum inhibitors of beta-lactamases.

Venkatesan AM(1), Agarwal A, Abe T, Ushirogochi H, Ado M, Tsuyoshi T, Dos Santos 
O, Li Z, Francisco G, Lin YI, Petersen PJ, Yang Y, Weiss WJ, Shlaes DM, Mansour
TS.

Author information: 
(1)Wyeth Research, Chemical and Screening Sciences, 401 N. Middletown Road, Pearl
River, NY 10965, USA. venkata@wyeth.com

Beta-lactamases are serine- and metal-dependent hydrolases, produced by the
bacteria as defense against beta-lactam antibiotics. Commercially available
inhibitors such as clavulanic acid, sulbactam, and tazobactam, which are
currently used in the hospital settings, have reduced activity against newly
emerging beta-lactamases. Bacterial production of diverse beta-lactamases
including class-A, class-C, and ESBLs has motivated several research groups to
search for inhibitors with a broader spectrum of activity. Previously, several
novel 6-methylidene penems bearing, [5,5] [5,6] and [5,5,5] heterocycles have
been synthesized in our laboratory and were shown to be potent and broad-spectrum
beta-lactamase inhibitors. As a continuation of our previous work and in order to
extend the structure-activity relationships, in this paper, we describe herein
the synthesis and in vitro, in vivo activities of several novel 5,5,6-fused
tricyclic heterocycles attached to the 6-methylidene penem core. The compounds
presented in the current paper are potent and broad-spectrum inhibitors of the
TEM-1 and AmpC beta-lactamases. In combination with piperacillin, their in vitro 
activities showed enhanced susceptibility to class A- and C-resistant strains
studied in various bacteria. Some of the newly synthesized compounds such as
12a-c were shown to have in vivo activity in the acute lethal infection model
against TEM-1 producing organisms. The 5,5,6-fused heterocyclic ring cores such
as 21, 25, and 35 reported here are hitherto unknown in the literature.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2007.11.006 
PMID: 18061461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

