
1. Vet J. 2009 Apr;180(1):124-9. Epub 2008 Feb 20.

Analysis of the AIDA-I gene sequence and prevalence in Escherichia coli isolates 
from pigs with post-weaning diarrhoea and oedema disease.

Zhao L(1), Chen X, Xu X, Song G, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Infectious Disease Laboratory, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu
225009, PR China.

Three hundred and twenty-four strains of Escherichia coli isolated from weaned
pigs with diarrhoea or oedema disease in Eastern China were screened by multiplex
PCR for the presence of the gene encoding adhesin involved in diffuse adhesion I 
(AIDA-I). Two AIDA-I positive strains were subjected to analysis of the
nucleotide sequence of the complete orfA and orfB of the AIDA gene. The AIDA-I
positive E. coli isolates were also assessed for five fimbriae (F4, F5, F6, F18
and F41) by monoclonal antibodies and for toxin genes (STa, STb, LT, EAST1,
Stx2e) by PCR. Twenty-one (6.5%) of the isolates possessed AIDA-I genes. Of these
isolates, two carried AIDA-I genes as the only demonstrated virulence factors,
and the remaining isolates carried other virulence factor genes. Comparing the
AIDA-I sequence from porcine and human sources, a high homology of orfA both in
porcine E. coli and human E. coli was observed. However, each orfB of the two
porcine E. coli isolates was 3864 nucleotides long compared with 3861 for the E. 
coli 2787 orfB, and showed 96.5% homology to E. coli 2787. The data indicated (1)
that AIDA-I may be an occasional virulence factor in post-weaning diarrhoea and
oedema disease in pigs, (2) that it has the potential to transfer between porcine
and human E. coli, and (3) that there is a genetic diversity in orfB between
human and porcine E. coli.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2007.10.021 
PMID: 18077196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

