
1. Mol Immunol. 2008 Apr;45(8):2247-54. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2007.11.016. Epub 2008
Feb 21.

Adenosine, through the A1 receptor, inhibits vesicular MHC class I
cross-presentation by resting DC.

Chen L(1), Fredholm BB, Jondal M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska
Institute, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden. Liying.Chen@ki.se

Levels of the purine nucleoside adenosine (Ado) increase during conditions
related to hypoxia such as inflammation, tissue damage and cancer. Ado binds to a
set of G protein-linked receptors (A(1), A(2A), A(2B) and A(3)) which are widely 
and differentially expressed in tissues and regulate inflammatory and autoimmune 
responses. We have investigated the effect of the stable Ado analogue
2-Chloro-Adenosine (2-Cl-Ado) on vesicular MHC class I cross-presentation using
the exogenous protein ovalbumin (OVA) and cultured mouse dendritic cells (DC) at 
different stages of maturation and activation. 2-Cl-Ado was found to strongly
inhibit cross-presentation of OVA by resting DC (rDC) but had a much smaller
effect on immature and CpG-activated DC. The effect of Ado on rDC could be fully 
reversed by the Ado receptor antagonist CGS 15943 and by pertussis toxin
demonstrating that it was mediated by a Gi-linked Ado receptor. A(1) Ado receptor
mRNA was found to be upregulated in rDC and, by using rDC from A(1), A(2A) and
A(3) receptor knockout mice, this receptor was found to mediate most of the
suppression. 2-Cl-Ado did not influence the cellular uptake of OVA, the cytosolic
processing of the protein in rDC or the formation of intracellular MHC-I/peptide 
complexes in a LAMP1 positive vesicular compartment but inhibited the transport
of these to the cell surface. It is concluded that 2-Cl-Ado, by acting on A(1)
receptor, can suppress vesicular MHC class I cross-presentation in rDC.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2007.11.016 
PMID: 18178251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

