
1. J Indian Med Assoc. 2007 Jun;105(6):320, 322-3.

A serological study of cytomegalovirus infection in pregnant and non-pregnant
women at Gauhati Medical College and Hospital.

Sharma A(1), Rasul ES, Hazarika NK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Gauhati Medical College and Hospital, Guwahati.

Primary cytomegalovirus infection is the most common infection during pregnancy
that may have long-term neurodevelopmental sequelae in children born to these
mothers. It is also associated with many obstetric complications. So the aim of
this study was to determine the seroprevalence of cytomegalovirus infection in
local antenatal population with bad obstetric history and to see the effects, if 
any, of age, socio-economic status, presenting features and different gestational
periods. Seventy-five pregnant women with bad obstetric history were screened for
the presence of cytomegalovirus specific IgM and IgG antibodies by doing
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, out of which 17(22.66%) had evidence of
recurrent cytomegalovirus infection as demonstrated by the presence of
cytomegalovirus specific IgM antibodies. All were found to be positive for
cytomegalovirus specific IgG antibodies. This indicates that the presence of
cytomegalovirus specific IgM antibodies in this population is an evidence of
reactivation of a latent infection or re-infection with a different strain of
cytomegalovirus. Increased IgM seropositivity was found to be associated with
advancing age, poor, socio-economic status, third trimester of pregnancy and bad 
obstetric history like premature delivery, stillbirth, recurrent spontaneous
abortions, intra-uterine growth retardation. Out of 25 randomly selected
non-pregnant women of childbearing age, all showed presence of cytomegalovirus
specific IgG antibodies and none was found to be positive for primary or
recurrent cytomegalovirus infection.


PMID: 18232177  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

