
1. Cell Microbiol. 2008 Jun;10(6):1286-303. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01126.x.
Epub 2008 Jan 31.

The Delta fbpA mutant derived from Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv has an
enhanced susceptibility to intracellular antimicrobial oxidative mechanisms,
undergoes limited phagosome maturation and activates macrophages and dendritic
cells.

Katti MK(1), Dai G, Armitige LY, Rivera Marrero C, Daniel S, Singh CR, Lindsey
DR, Dhandayuthapani S, Hunter RL, Jagannath C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Texas Health
Sciences Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv (Mtb) excludes phagocyte oxidase (phox) and
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) while preventing lysosomal fusion in
macrophages (MPhis). The antigen 85A deficient (Delta fbpA) mutant of Mtb was
vaccinogenic in mice and the mechanisms of attenuation were compared with MPhis
infected with H37Rv and BCG. Delta fbpA contained reduced amounts of trehalose 6,
6, dimycolate and induced minimal levels of SOCS-1 in MPhis. Blockade of oxidants
enhanced the growth of Delta fbpA in MPhis that correlated with increased
colocalization with phox and iNOS. Green fluorescent protein-expressing strains
within MPhis or purified phagosomes were analysed for endosomal traffick with
immunofluorescence and Western blot. Delta fbpA phagosomes were enriched for
rab5, rab11, LAMP-1 and Hck suggesting enhanced fusion with early, recycling and 
late endosomes in MPhis compared with BCG or H37Rv. Delta fbpA phagosomes were
thus more mature than H37Rv or BCG although, they failed to acquire rab7 and CD63
preventing lysosomal fusion. Finally, Delta fbpA infected MPhis and dendritic
cells (DCs) showed an enhanced MHC-II and CD1d expression and primed immune T
cells to release more IFN-gamma compared with those infected with BCG and H37Rv. 
Delta fbpA was thus more immunogenic in MPhis and DCs because of an enhanced
susceptibility to oxidants and increased maturation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01126.x 
PMCID: PMC3668688
PMID: 18248626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

