
1. Oncogene. 2008 Jun 19;27(27):3856-64. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.5. Epub 2008 Feb 11.

Gli2 upregulates cFlip and renders basal cell carcinoma cells resistant to death 
ligand-mediated apoptosis.

Kump E(1), Ji J, Wernli M, HÃ¤usermann P, Erb P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Institute for Medical Microbiology, University of
Basel, Petersplatz, Basel, Switzerland.

Mutations in the Hedgehog signaling pathway is responsible for the formation of
various cancers, including some forms of basal cell carcinoma (BCC). Uncontrolled
Hedgehog signaling leads to overexpression of the zinc-finger Gli transcription
factors, among which Gli2 plays a central role. We found that high Gli2
expression induced the concomitant high expression of the caspase 8 inhibitor,
cFlip, and thereby counteracts death-ligand-mediated apoptosis. By investigating 
the cFlip promoter, Gli2 binding sites were identified and confirmed. Gli2 gene
silencing by RNA interference broke the apoptosis resistance via cFlip
downregulation. The direct functional connection between Gli2 and cFlip was not
only demonstrated in a keratinocytic cell line but also in BCC tissue. As cFlip
and Bcl-2 are highly expressed in BCCs, as a consequence of high Gli2 expression,
this may explain the marked resistance of the tumor to the extrinsic and
intrinsic apoptotic pathway. We could now demonstrate that Gli2 gene silencing in
BCC tissues made the tumor sensitive to TRAIL (tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand)-mediated cell death by downregulating cFlip. As Gli2
silencing does not only downregulate cFlip, but also Bcl-2, Gli2 could be a key
target for a novel therapeutic approach in tumors with dysregulated Hedgehog
signaling.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2008.5 
PMID: 18264131  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

