
1. Mol Immunol. 2008 May;45(9):2607-20. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2007.12.022. Epub 2008
Mar 4.

Molecular profiling reveals distinct functional attributes of CD1d-restricted
natural killer (NK) T cell subsets.

Rolf J(1), Berntman E, Stenström M, Smith EM, Månsson R, Stenstad H, Yamagata T, 
Agace W, Sigvardsson M, Cardell SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine, Göteborg 
University, 405 30 Göteborg, Sweden.

CD1d-restricted natural killer T (NKT) cells can have multiple effects on an
immune response, including the activation, regulation and attraction of innate
immune cells, and modulation of adaptive immunity. Recent studies reveal that
there are distinct subsets of NKT cells which selectively perform some of the
functions attributed to CD1d-restricted cells, but the mechanisms underlying
these functional differences have not been resolved. Our aim in this study was to
identify novel NKT cell associated traits that would provide important insight
into NKT cell activation and function. To this end, we have performed gene
expression profiling of two separate subsets of NKT cells, analyzing genes
differentially expressed in these cells compared to conventional CD4(+)NK1.1(-) T
cells. We identify different sets of genes over expressed in each of the two NKT 
cell types, as well as genes that are common to the two CD1d-restricted NKT cell 
populations analyzed. A large number of these genes are highly relevant for NKT
cell development, activation and function. Each NKT subtype displayed a unique
set of chemokine receptors, integrins and molecules related to effector function,
supporting the notion that distinct NKT cells can be selectively engaged and have
diverse functions in different types of immune reactions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2007.12.022 
PMID: 18304639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

