
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2008 Jun;46(6):1919-26. doi: 10.1128/JCM.02178-07. Epub 2008
Apr 2.

Evaluation of novel broad-range real-time PCR assay for rapid detection of human 
pathogenic fungi in various clinical specimens.

Vollmer T(1), Störmer M, Kleesiek K, Dreier J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Laboratoriums- und Transfusionsmedizin, Herz- und Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Universitätsklinik der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Georgstrasse
11, 32545 Bad Oeynhausen, Germany.

In the present study, a novel broad-range real-time PCR was developed for the
rapid detection of human pathogenic fungi. The assay targets a part of the 28S
large-subunit ribosomal RNA (rDNA) gene. We investigated its application for the 
most important human pathogenic fungal genera, including Aspergillus, Candida,
Cryptococcus, Mucor, Penicillium, Pichia, Microsporum, Trichophyton, and
Scopulariopsis. Species were identified in PCR-positive reactions by direct DNA
sequencing. A noncompetitive internal control was applied to prevent
false-negative results due to PCR inhibition. The minimum detection limit for the
PCR was determined to be one 28S rDNA copy per PCR, and the 95% detection limit
was calculated to 15 copies per PCR. To assess the clinical applicability of the 
PCR method, intensive-care patients with artificial respiration and patients with
infective endocarditis were investigated. For this purpose, 76 tracheal secretion
samples and 70 heart valve tissues were analyzed in parallel by real-time PCR and
cultivation. No discrepancies in results were observed between PCR analysis and
cultivation methods. Furthermore, the application of the PCR method was
investigated for other clinical specimens, including cervical swabs, nail and
horny skin scrapings, and serum, blood, and urine samples. The combination of a
broad-range real-time PCR and direct sequencing facilitates rapid screening for
fungal infection in various clinical specimens.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.02178-07 
PMCID: PMC2446849
PMID: 18385440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

