
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2008 Sep;105(3):761-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2008.03808.x.
Epub 2008 Apr 9.

Characterization of an Helicobacter pylori environmental strain.

Cellini L(1), Grande R, Di Campli E, Di Bartolomeo S, Di Giulio M, Traini T,
Trubiani O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University 'G. d'Annunzio', Chieti-Pescara,
Italy. l.cellini@unich.it

AIMS: To investigate the main genotypic virulence markers and the phenotypic
features of an environmental Helicobacter pylori strain, named MDC1.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The H. pylori MDC1 genotypic status was evaluated by PCR
amplification. The mosaicism in vacA alleles was expressed by the s1m1 allelic
combination, as found in strains which are strong vacuolating cytotoxin
producers; the number of cagA variable EPIYA motifs displayed P1P2P3P3 pattern
and the iceA1 was recorded between the iceA allelic types and the babA2 gene
found in strains causing more severe disease. The biofilm formation was evaluated
on a polystyrene surface in static conditions by scanning electron microscopy and
confocal scanning laser microscopy. Helicobacter pylori MDC1 displayed a dense
mature biofilm with cells in a coccoid morphology persistent in time in which the
expression of the luxS gene, related to the quorum-sensing signalling, was always
detected.
CONCLUSIONS: Helicobacter pylori MDC1 strain had the main virulence markers
closely related to gastric pathogenesis and displayed a well-structured biofilm
which allowed this bacterium to be more protected in the environment.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The persistence of the environmental
virulent H. pylori strain in a clustered state suggests a long-term survival of
this bacterial community outside of the host, enabling the bacterial transmission
with important clinical repercussions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2008.03808.x 
PMID: 18410343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

