
1. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2009 Jan;152(1):156-68. doi: 10.1007/s12010-008-8188-1. 
Epub 2008 Apr 22.

Biosurfactant production by Pseudomonas aeruginosa grown in residual soybean oil.

de Lima CJ(1), Ribeiro EJ, Sérvulo EF, Resende MM, Cardoso VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Federal University of Uberlândia,
UFU/Uberlândia, Campus Santa Mônica, Bloco 1K-Caixa Postal 593, Uberlândia
38400-902 MG, Brazil.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa PACL strain, isolated from oil-contaminated soil taken
from a lagoon, was used to investigate the efficiency and magnitude of
biosurfactant production, using different waste frying soybean oils, by submerged
fermentation in stirred tank reactors of 6 and 10 l capacities. A complete
factorial experimental design was used, with the goal of optimizing the aeration 
rate (0.5, 1.0, and 1.5 vvm) and agitation speed (300, 550, and 800 rpm).
Aeration was identified as the primary variable affecting the process, with a
maximum rhamnose concentration occurring at an aeration rate of 0.5 vvm. At
optimum levels, a maximum rhamnose concentration of 3.3 g/l, an emulsification
index of 100%, and a minimum surface tension of 26.0 dynes/cm were achieved.
Under these conditions, the biosurfactant production derived from using a mixture
of waste frying soybean oil (WFSO) as a carbon source was compared to production 
when non-used soybean oil (NUSO), or waste soybean oils used to fry specific
foods, were used. NUSO produced the highest level of rhamnolipids, although the
waste soybean oils also resulted in biosurfactant production of 75-90% of the
maximum value. Under ideal conditions, the kinetic behavior and the modeling of
the rhamnose production, nutrient consumption, and cellular growth were
established. The resulting model predicted data points that corresponded well to 
the empirical information.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-008-8188-1 
PMID: 18427741  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

