
1. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2008 Sep;150(3):289-303. doi: 10.1007/s12010-008-8153-z.
Epub 2008 Apr 25.

Characterization of surfactin produced by Bacillus subtilis isolate BS5.

Abdel-Mawgoud AM(1), Aboulwafa MM, Hassouna NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ain Shams
University, Cairo, Egypt. mmawgood@hotmail.com.

Physical and chromatographic characterization of the surfactin biosurfactant
produced by Bacillus subtilis isolate BS5 has been conducted to study its
potentiality for industrial application. The crude extract of test surfactin
appeared as off-white to buff flake-like amorphous residue with bad odor similar 
to sour pomegranate. Test surfactin showed solubility in aqueous solution at pH>5
with optimum solubility at pH 8-8.5. It was also soluble in organic solvents like
ethanol, acetone, methanol, butanol, chloroform, and dichloromethane. Surfactin
crystals appeared rectangular with blunt corners and were arranged perpendicular 
to each other making a plus sign. Extracted surfactin showed high surface
activity, as it could lower the surface tension of water from about 70 to 36 mN/m
at approximately 15.6 mg/l. Moreover, test surfactin exhibited excellent
stabilities at high temperatures (100 degrees C for up to 1 h at and autoclaving 
at 121 degrees C for 10 min), salinities (up to 6% NaCl), and over a wide range
of pH (5-13). Test surfactin in the cell-free supernatant or crude culture broth 
forms showed high emulsification indices against kerosene (62.5% and 59%,
respectively), diesel (62.5% and 66%, respectively), and motor oil (62% and 66%, 
respectively). These characters can effectively make test surfactin, in its crude
forms, a potential candidate for the use in bioremediation of
hydrocarbon-contaminated sites or in the petroleum industry. Chromatographic
characterization of test surfactin, using high-performance liquid chromatography 
technique, revealed that the extracted surfactin contained numerous isoforms, of 
which six were found in the standard surfactin preparation (Fluka). Additional
peaks appeared in the test surfactin and not in the standard one. These peaks may
correspond to new surfactin isoforms that may be present in the test surfactin
produced by B. subtilis isolate BS5.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-008-8153-z 
PMID: 18437297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

