
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2008 May;154(Pt 5):1464-1473. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.2007/012005-0.

Sulphur and nitrogen regulation of the protease-encoding ACP1 gene in the fungus 
Botrytis cinerea: correlation with a phospholipase D activity.

Rolland SG(1), Bruel CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Génomique fonctionnelle des champignons pathogènes des plantes, UMR5240
Microbiologie, Adaptation et Pathogénie, Université Lyon 1, CNRS, Bayer
CropScience, Université de Lyon, 14 Rue Pierre Baizet, 69263 Lyon Cedex 9,
France.

Sulphur and nitrogen catabolic repressions are regulations that have long been
recognized in fungi, but whose molecular bases remain largely elusive. This paper
shows that catabolic repression of a protease-encoding gene correlates with the
modulation of a phosphatidylethanolamine (PE)-specific phospholipase D (PLD)
activity in the pathogenic fungus Botrytis cinerea. Our results first demonstrate
that the ACP1 gene is subject to sulphur catabolic repression, with sulphate and 
cysteine inhibiting its expression. Sulphate and cysteine also cause a decrease
of the total cellular PLD activity and, reciprocally, the two PLD inhibitors
AEBSF [4-(2-aminoethyl)benzenesulphonyl fluoride] and curcumin negatively affect 
ACP1 expression in vivo. Cysteine moreover inhibits the PE-specific PLD activity 
in cell extracts. ACP1 is regulated by nitrogen, but here we show that this
regulation does not rely on the proximal AREA binding site in its promoter, and
that glutamine does not play a particular role in the process. A decrease in the 
total cellular PLD activity is also observed when the cells are fed ammonia, but 
this effect is smaller than that produced by sulphur. RNA-interference
experiments finally suggest that the enzyme responsible for the PE-specific PLD
activity is encoded by a gene that does not belong to the known HKD gene family
of PLDs.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.2007/012005-0 
PMID: 18451055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

