
1. Braz J Biol. 2008 Feb;68(1):173-7.

Characterization and experimental infection of Flexibacter maritimus (Wakabayashi
et al. 1986) in hatcheries of post-larvae of Litopenaeus vannamei Boone, 1931.

Mouriño JL(1), Vinatea L, Buglione-Neto C, Ramirez CT, Vieira FN, Pedrotti F,
Martins ML, Derner RB, Aguilar MA, Beltrame E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de camarões marinhos, Departamento de Aqüicultura, Universidade
Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, SC, 88062-601, Brazil.
mourino@lcm.ufsc.br

Comment in
    Braz J Biol. 2009 Feb;69(1):225-6.

A preliminary study to characterize filamentous bacteria, whose presence is
related to high mortality of Litopenaeus vannamei larvae cultured in Santa
Catarina State, Brazil, is reported. The extract of infected larvae was diluted
in different concentrations, cultured in marine agar (Difco, Marine Agar 2216)
and incubated at 30 degrees C for 48 hours. The biochemical characterization
included hydrolytic reactions of starch, gelatin and tyrosine, growth in TCBS
agar, growth in 0 and 37 per thousand salinity, pigment production in tyrosine
agar, production of H2S, nitrate reduction, congo red reaction, oxidase and
catalase. The isolated bacteria belong to the species Flexibacter maritimus,
Gram-negative bacilli of 0.4-0.5 microm width and 15 microm length. Experiments
were carried out on pathogenicity of F. maritimus in post-larvae of L. vannamei. 
Survival and symptoms in L. vannamei post-larvae 24 hours after inoculation with 
F. maritimus and its growth in marine agar were evaluated. Mortality was detected
around 92,5% as well as symptoms like melanized lesions in several parts of body,
discolouration of gills, bad formation of appendages and of the last abdominal
segment, low motility and feeding reduction. The experimental infection results
suggested that isolated bacteria of the genus Flexibacter are pathogenic to the
shrimp Litopenaeus vannamei post-larvae.

DOI: 10.1590/s1519-69842008000100025 
PMID: 18470394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

