
1. Microb Pathog. 2008 Aug;45(2):86-91. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2008.03.003. Epub
2008 Mar 29.

Correlation between virulence factors and in vitro biofilm formation by
Escherichia coli strains.

Naves P(1), del Prado G, Huelves L, Gracia M, Ruiz V, Blanco J, Dahbi G, Blanco
M, Ponte Mdel C, Soriano F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, Fundación
Jiménez Díaz-Capio, Madrid, Spain.

The ability of 15 Escherichia coli strains to form biofilms on polystirene plates
was studied. The strains were serotyped, and their phenotypic expression of
surface virulence factors (VFs), and antibiotic susceptibility was also
determined. Moreover, 30 VFs-associated genes were analysed, including 15
adhesins (papC, papG and its three alleles, sfa/focDE, sfaS, focG, afa/draBC,
iha, bmaE, gafD, nfaE, fimH, fimAvMT78, agn43, F9 fimbriae and type 3
fimbriae-encoding gene clusters), four toxins (hlyA, cnf1, sat and tsh), four
siderophore (iron, fyuA, iutA and iucD), five proctetins/invasion-encoding genes 
(kpsM II, kpsMT III, K1 kps variant- neuC, traT and ibeA), and the pathogenicity 
island malX and cvaC. Morphological appearance and thickness of biofilms of two
strong and three weak biofilm producers were also studied by confocal laser
scanning microscopy (CLSM). Seven strains were classified as strong biofilm
producers and the remaining eight strains were regarded as weak biofilm
producers. Mannose-resistant haemagglutination was the only phenotypically
expressed surface virulence factor more frequently found in the strong biofilm
group. Five virulence-associated genes were more common (p<0.05) in strong
biofilm producers: papC and papG alleles, sfa/focDE, focG, hlyA and cnf1. CLSM
images showed irregular biofilms with projections at the top mainly in strong
biofilm.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2008.03.003 
PMID: 18486439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

