
1. Cell Microbiol. 2008 Sep;10(9):1854-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01172.x.
Epub 2008 May 16.

Invasion of Cryptococcus neoformans into human brain microvascular endothelial
cells requires protein kinase C-alpha activation.

Jong A(1), Wu CH, Prasadarao NV, Kwon-Chung KJ, Chang YC, Ouyang Y, Shackleford
GM, Huang SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA 90027, USA. ajong@chla.usc.edu

Pathogenic fungus Cryptococcus neoformans has a predilection for the central
nervous system causing devastating meningoencephalitis. Traversal of C.
neoformans across the blood-brain barrier (BBB) is a crucial step in the
pathogenesis of C. neoformans. Our previous studies have shown that the CPS1 gene
is required for C. neoformans adherence to the surface protein CD44 of human
brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMEC), which constitute the BBB. In this 
report, we demonstrated that C. neoformans invasion of HBMEC was blocked in the
presence of G109203X, a protein kinase C (PKC) inhibitor, and by overexpression
of a dominant-negative form of PKCalpha in HBMEC. During C. neoformans infection,
phosphorylation of PKCalpha was induced and the PKC enzymatic activity was
detected in the HBMEC membrane fraction. Our results suggested that the PKCalpha 
isoform might play a crucial role during C. neoformans invasion.
Immunofluorescence microscopic images showed that induced phospho-PKCalpha
colocalized with beta-actin on the membrane of HBMEC. In addition, cytochalasin D
(an F-filament-disrupting agent) inhibited fungus invasion into HBMEC in a
dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, blockage of PKCalpha function attenuated
actin filament activity during C. neoformans invasion. These results suggest a
significant role of PKCalpha and downstream actin filament activity during the
fungal invasion into HBMEC.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01172.x 
PMCID: PMC2729555
PMID: 18489726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

