
1. Rev Esp Quimioter. 2008 Jun;21(2):123-6.

Isolation of the first metallo-beta-lactamase producing Klebsiella pneumoniae in 
Lebanon.

Daoud Z(1), Hobeika E, Choucair A, Rohban R.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Microbiology Laboratory, Saint George University Hospital, Faculty of
Health Sciences, University of Balamand, Beirut, Lebanon.
ziad.daoud@balamand.edu.lb

INTRODUCTION: A 58 year-old man was admitted to the Saint Joseph Hospital-Raymond
and Aida Najjar polyclinic in Beirut on July 17, 2007 to undergo surgery for a
moderately differentiated colonic adenocarcinoma (T3N0). Following several
discharges and re-admissions, an extended spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)
producing Escherichia coli susceptible to imipenem was isolated. The patient was 
put on imipenem and metronidazole. Three weeks later, imipenem (IMP) resistant
Klebsiella pneumoniae was isolated.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The antimicrobial susceptibility profile of the
imipenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae strain and related minimum inhibitory
concentrations of antibiotics were determined. Hydrolysis of IMP was evaluated
and production of metallo-beta-lactamase (MBL) was detected by a double
disk-synergy test, ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) inhibited the
imipenemase activity, whereas clavulanate and tazobactam did not, this suggesting
the production of a metallo-beta-lactamase. Isoelectric focusing analysis was
performed and indicated the presence of a cefotaximase (blaCTX-M-15). Polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) was used and detected the presence of blaIMP-1 and blaCTX-M 
genes.
CONCLUSIONS: During the last decade, many hospital outbreaks caused by
ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae spp. have been reported in Lebanon. To our
knowledge, this is the first report of a clinical isolate of K. pneumoniae
producing an MBL in Lebanon.


PMID: 18509771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

