
1. J Fish Dis. 2008 Oct;31(10):765-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2008.00950.x. Epub
2008 Aug 4.

Genetic diversity of Flavobacterium psychrophilum recovered from commercially
raised rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum), and spawning coho salmon, O.
kisutch (Walbaum).

Chen YC(1), Davis MA, Lapatra SE, Cain KD, Snekvik KR, Call DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA 99164-7040, USA.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the aetiological agent of rainbow trout fry
syndrome and bacterial cold water disease. This study examined the genetic
diversity of F. psychrophilum isolates retrieved from multiple epizootics at
rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss, rearing facilities and from spawning coho
salmon, O. kisutch. A total of 139 isolates were confirmed as F. psychrophilum by
PCR assay and were further typed using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE).
Multiple epizootics at three proximally located rainbow trout rearing facilities 
were numerically dominated by three PFGE profiles, which accounted for 76% of all
trout isolates. In coho salmon, 19 PFGE profiles were differentiated by PFGE and 
four numerically dominant PFGE profiles represented 56% of all coho salmon
isolates. PFGE analysis also indicated that the average similarity of
macrorestriction patterns of F. psychrophilum isolates was greater in rainbow
trout than in coho salmon (88% vs. 70%). Furthermore, it was not unusual to
isolate multiple PFGE profiles from a single coho salmon sample whereas only two 
PFGE profiles were shared between two sample dates separated by 1 month. It is
clear that the domestic rainbow trout aquaculture facilities studied here were
primarily affected by a complex of genetically related strains whereas spawning
coho salmon supported a much more genetically diverse collection of F.
psychrophilum.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2008.00950.x 
PMID: 18681900  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

