
1. Z Rheumatol. 1991 Mar-Apr;50(2):65-73.

[New pathogenetic aspects of ankylosing spondylitis].

[Article in German]

Schmidt KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Klinikum der Justus-Liebig-Universit√§t Giessen, Bad Nauheim.

Ankylosing spondylitis is one of the oldest diseases in humans; however, it is
still one of the most fascinating and mysterious in human pathology. The unusual 
combination of both fundamental pathological processes: inflammation and
ossification (which are mostly independent in respect to time and place) is
unique. Until 1973, ankylosing spondylitis did not attract much immunological
research. After the detection of an association between HLA B27 and the disease, 
clinical and immunological research was stimulated. It was supposed that HLA B27 
may be a pathogenic factor. Meanwhile, it has become well known that HLA B27
itself is not required for development of the disease; however, discovery of
immunological cross-reactivity between HLA B27 and some Klebsiella antigens
inspired pathogenic considerations. It is discussed that the structural
similarities between enteric bacteria and HLA B27 induce autoantibodies, or that 
HLA B27 plays a role in antigen recognition. Possibly, HLA B27 may also act as a 
receptor for infectious agents and their products. Fascinating, but controversely
discussed is the hypothesis that bacterial products modify the B27 molecule and, 
in this way, trigger the disease. All present theories about pathogenesis of
ankylosing spondylitis are unsatisfactory, because many important questions
cannot be answered. There are no explanations for the unusual affinity of
possible pathogenic immune reactions to the spine and other organs, the induction
of ossification, the merging of cartilage, or the development of sacroilitis.
Especially, we do not know the important bridge (if one exists) between
inflammation and ossification. The typical ossification of the spine is of
dramatic consequence for the patient in respect to function and
mobility.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 1872044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

