
1. Theor Appl Genet. 2008 Oct;117(6):997-1008. doi: 10.1007/s00122-008-0839-7. Epub 
2008 Aug 29.

Fine mapping of a strong QTL of field resistance against rice blast,
Pikahei-1(t), from upland rice Kahei, utilizing a novel resistance evaluation
system in the greenhouse.

Xu X(1), Chen H, Fujimura T, Kawasaki S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plant Sciences, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences,
Kannon-dai 2-1-2, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8602, Japan. bioxuxin@affrc.go.jp

Field resistances (FR) against rice blast are highly evaluated by breeders for
their durability, in contrast to the conspicuous but often less durable true
resistances. However, lack of efficient systems for evaluation of resistance has 
delayed their practical application. Kahei, an upland domestic cv., is known for 
its very high FR against rice blast. We fine-mapped its highest quantitative
trait loci (QTL), qBFR4-1, using residual heterozygosity of recombinant inbred
lines (RILs) and our semi-natural rice blast inoculation/evaluation system in the
greenhouse, with comparable accuracy to the true resistance genes. This system
enabled reproducible high-density infection, and consequently allowed
quantification of the resistance level in individual plants. The target region
was first narrowed down to about 1 Mb around at 32 Mb from the top of chromosome 
4 in the Nipponbare genome, with the upland evaluation system assessing the F7
generation of Koshihikari (lowland, FR: very weak) x Kahei (upland, FR: very
strong) RILs. Then, F9 plants (4,404)--siblings of hetero F8 plants at the
region--were inoculated with rice blast in a greenhouse using the novel
inoculation system, and individual resistance levels were diagnosed for fine QTL 
analysis and graphical genotyping. Thus, the resistance gene was fine-mapped
within 300 kb at 31.2-31.5 Mb on chromosome 4, and designated Pikahei-1(t). By
annotation analysis, seven resistance gene analog (RGA) ORFs of
nucleotide-binding-site and leucine-rich-repeat (NBS-LRR)-type were found in the 
center of the region as the most likely candidate counterparts of the resistance 
gene. This is similar in structure to the recently reported Pik cluster region,
suggesting that most of the other dominant QTLs of the FRs may have similar RGA
structures.

DOI: 10.1007/s00122-008-0839-7 
PMID: 18758744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

