
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2008 Sep;58(Pt 9):2122-5. doi: 10.1099/ijs.0.65767-0.

Oceaniserpentilla haliotis gen. nov., sp. nov., a marine bacterium isolated from 
haemolymph serum of blacklip abalone.

Schl√∂sser A(1), Lipski A, Schmalfuss J, Kugler F, Beckmann G.

Author information: 
(1)Labor L+S AG, Mangelsfeld 4, 97708 Bad Bocklet, Germany.
andreas.schloesser@labor-ls.de

An aerobic, Gram-negative bacterial isolate, strain DSM 19503(T), was isolated
from haemolymph serum of the blacklip abalone Haliotis rubra. Cells of strain DSM
19503(T) were vibrioid to spiral, motile and were able to pass through sterile
filters with a pore size of 0.2 microm, indicating the small width of the
bacterium. The isolate was psychrophilic, with the ability to grow at 2-8 degrees
C. Oxidase activity was present, whereas catalase activity was absent. The nearly
complete 16S rRNA gene sequence of strain DSM 19503(T) was obtained and
phylogenetic sequence analysis showed that it formed a distinct genus in the
family Oceanospirillaceae with highest sequence similarity of 92.9% to Oleispira 
antarctica RB-8(T). The cellular fatty acid composition was dependent on the
growth medium used for cultivation. During growth on seawater agar, the fatty
acid composition was most similar to that of Oleispira antarctica DSM 14852(T),
with mainly C(16:0) (90.3%). In contrast, Columbia blood agar/NaCl-grown cells
exhibited mainly C(10:0) 3-OH (11.8%), C(12:1)cis5 (8.2%), C(16:1)cis9 (29.6%),
C(16:0) (19.3%) and C(18:1)cis9 (13.1%) fatty acids. On the basis of phenotypic, 
chemotaxonomic and genotypic data, strain DSM 19503(T) is considered to represent
a novel species in a new genus for which the name Oceaniserpentilla haliotis gen.
nov., sp. nov. is proposed. The type strain of Oceaniserpentilla haliotis is DSM 
19503(T) (=LMG 24225(T)).

DOI: 10.1099/ijs.0.65767-0 
PMID: 18768616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

