
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 Dec;84(6):1462-71. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0108038. Epub 2008 Sep 4.

Bacterial infection alters the kinetics and function of iNKT cell responses.

Choi HJ(1), Xu H, Geng Y, Colmone A, Cho H, Wang CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

CD1d-restricted Valpha14 invariant NKT cells (iNKT) are innate-like,
immunoregulatory lymphocytes that play critical roles in autoimmunity, tumor
surveillance, and infectious disease. Although iNKT cells are activated during
microbial infection, the impacts of infection on the function of iNKT cells have 
not been fully characterized. Using a Listeria monocytogenes (LM) infection
model, we found that iNKT cells failed to expand after infection, resulting in
prolonged loss in the spleen, in contrast to the typical expansion and
contraction of conventional T cells. iNKT cells from LM-infected mice responded
more rapidly to secondary LM infection; however, they became functionally
hyporesponsive to antigenic challenge for at least 1 month. This
infection-induced hyporesponsiveness was also induced by Mycobacteria infection
and was more profound in LM-infected, thymectomized mice, suggesting that
infection-primed iNKT cells might have altered functionality. Interestingly,
activation with alpha-galactosylceramide-loaded dendritic cells was able to
overcome infection-induced hyporesponsiveness of iNKT cells, suggesting a role
for extrinsic factors in this functional deficit. Taken together, these findings 
suggest that infection affects iNKT cell responses quantitatively and
qualitatively. As humans are under constant microbial insult, predictions of iNKT
cell function based on na√Øve animal models may not accurately reflect iNKT cell
behavior in a clinical setting.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0108038 
PMCID: PMC2614593
PMID: 18772281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

