
1. Environ Microbiol. 2009 Jan;11(1):239-57. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2008.01759.x. 
Epub 2008 Sep 23.

Subsurface microbiology and biogeochemistry of a deep, cold-water carbonate mound
from the Porcupine Seabight (IODP Expedition 307).

Webster G(1), Blazejak A, Cragg BA, Schippers A, Sass H, Rinna J, Tang X, Mathes 
F, Ferdelman TG, Fry JC, Weightman AJ, Parkes RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Park Place, Cardiff, Wales,
UK.

The Porcupine Seabight Challenger Mound is the first carbonate mound to be
drilled (approximately 270 m) and analyzed in detail microbiologically and
biogeochemically. Two mound sites and a non-mound Reference site were analyzed
with a range of molecular techniques [catalyzed reporter deposition-fluorescence 
in situ hybridization (CARD-FISH), quantitative PCR (16S rRNA and functional
genes, dsrA and mcrA), and 16S rRNA gene PCR-DGGE] to assess prokaryotic
diversity, and this was compared with the distribution of total and culturable
cell counts, radiotracer activity measurements and geochemistry. There was a
significant and active prokaryotic community both within and beneath the
carbonate mound. Although total cell numbers at certain depths were lower than
the global average for other subseafloor sediments and prokaryotic activities
were relatively low (iron and sulfate reduction, acetate oxidation,
methanogenesis) they were significantly enhanced compared with the Reference
site. In addition, there was some stimulation of prokaryotic activity in the
deepest sediments (Miocene, > 10 Ma) including potential for anaerobic oxidation 
of methane activity below the mound base. Both Bacteria and Archaea were present,
with neither dominant, and these were related to sequences commonly found in
other subseafloor sediments. With an estimate of some 1600 mounds in the
Porcupine Basin alone, carbonate mounds may represent a significant prokaryotic
subseafloor habitat.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2008.01759.x 
PMCID: PMC3638347
PMID: 18826439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

