
1. Int J Med Microbiol. 2009 Apr;299(4):291-300. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2008.08.002.
Epub 2008 Oct 15.

Broad-range real-time PCR assay for the rapid identification of cell-line
contaminants and clinically important mollicute species.

Störmer M(1), Vollmer T, Henrich B, Kleesiek K, Dreier J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Laboratoriums- und Transfusionsmedizin, Herz- und Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Universitätsklinik der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Georgstrasse
11, D-32545 Bad Oeynhausen, Germany.

Polymerase chain reaction assays have become widely used methods of confirming
the presence of Mollicutes species in clinical samples and cell cultures. We have
developed a broad-range real-time PCR assay using the locked nucleic acid
technology to detect mollicute species causing human infection and cell line
contamination. Primers and probes specifically for the conserved regions of the
mycoplasmal tuf gene (encoding elongation factor Tu) were designed. Cell culture 
supernatants, clinical specimens (vaginal swabs, sputum, cryopreserved heart
valve tissues), and reference strains were tested for mollicute contamination as 
well as to exclude cross-reaction to human nucleic acids and other bacterial
species. Nucleic acids were extracted using magnetic separation technology. The
coamplification of the human beta2-microglobulin DNA served as an internal
control. The PCR assay was highly specific and obtained an analytical sensitivity
of one copy per microl sample. The 95% detection limit was calculated to 10
copies per microl sample for Mycoplasma pneumoniae and M. orale. No
false-positive results were observed due to cross-reaction of walled bacterial,
fungal, and human nucleic acids. To evaluate the PCR, we compared the results to 
two commercialized test systems. Moreover, in combination with a previously
developed broad-range RT-PCR assay for the detection of bacteria in blood
products, both mollicute and walled bacterial contamination can be detected
simultaneously using multiplex real-time RT-PCR.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2008.08.002 
PMID: 18926769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

