
1. Braz Oral Res. 2008 Jul-Sep;22(3):252-7.

Flavoring agents present in a dentifrice can modify volatile sulphur compounds
(VSCs) formation in morning bad breath.

Peruzzo DC(1), Salvador SL, Sallum AW, Nogueira-Filho Gda R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics and Periodontics, Piracicaba Dental School, State
University of Campinas, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil. daiaperuzzo@yahoo.com.br

This study aimed to evaluate the effects of a flavor-containing dentifrice on the
formation of volatile sulphur compounds (VSCs) in morning bad breath. A two-step,
blinded, crossover, randomized study was carried out in 50 dental students with a
healthy periodontium divided into two experimental groups: flavor-containing
dentifrice (test) and non-flavor-containing dentifrice (control). The volunteers 
received the designated dentifrice and a new toothbrush for a 3 X/day brushing
regimen for 2 periods of 30 days. A seven-day washout interval was used between
the periods. The assessed parameters were: plaque index (PI), gingival index
(GI), organoleptic breath scores (ORG), VSC levels (as measured by a portable
sulphide monitor) before (H1) and after (H2) cleaning of the tongue, tongue
coating (TC) wet weight and BANA test from TC samples. The intra-group analysis
showed a decrease in ORG, from 3 to 2, after 30 days for the test group (p <
0.05). The inter-group analysis showed lower values in ORG, H1 and H2 for the
test group (p < 0.05). There was no difference between the amount of TC between
groups and the presence of flavor also did not interfere in the BANA results
between groups (p > 0.05). These findings suggest that a flavor-containing
dentifrice seems to prevent VSCs formation in morning bad breath regardless of
the amount of TC in periodontally healthy subjects.

DOI: 10.1590/s1806-83242008000300011 
PMID: 18949312  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

