
1. Thorax. 2009 Apr;64(4):291-6. doi: 10.1136/thx.2008.096842. Epub 2008 Dec 3.

Mycobacterium xenopi pulmonary infections: a multicentric retrospective study of 
136 cases in north-east France.

Andréjak C(1), Lescure FX, Pukenyte E, Douadi Y, Yazdanpanah Y, Laurans G, Schmit
JL, Jounieaux V; Xenopi Group.

Collaborators: Bervar, Noulard, Hoen, Plesiat, Merrien, Lamarck, Lemaitre,
Merour, Chavanet, Kazmierczak, Bure, Canonne, Wallaert, Wallet, Martinet, May,
Dailloux, Deslee, Strady, Vallerand, De Champs de Saint Léger, Albertini, Dayen, 
Martin, Monteil, Pauli, Weitzenblum, Yazdanpanah, Dhennain.

Author information: 
(1)Pneumology Department, Teaching Hospital Amiens, Amiens, France.
claire_ski2002@yahoo.fr

BACKGROUND: Owing to its low incidence, the management of Mycobacterium xenopi
pulmonary infections is not clearly defined. A multicentre retrospective study
was performed to describe the features of the disease and to evaluate its
prognosis.
METHODS: All patients with M xenopi satisfying the 1997 ATS/IDSA criteria from 13
hospitals in north-east France (1983-2003) were included in the study. Clinical, 
radiological and bacteriological characteristics and data on the management and
outcome were collected.
RESULTS: 136 patients were included in the analysis, only 12 of whom presented
with no co-morbidity. Three types of the disease were identified: (1) a classical
cavitary form in patients with pre-existing pulmonary disease (n = 39, 31%); (2) 
a solitary nodular form in immunocompetent patients (n = 41, 33%) and (3) an
acute infiltrate form in immunosuppressed patients (n = 45, 36%). 56 patients did
not receive any treatment; the other 80 patients received first-line treatment
containing rifamycin (87.5%), ethambutol (75%), isoniazid (66.2%), clarithromycin
(30%) or fluoroquinolones (21%). After a follow-up of 36 months, 80 patients
(69.1%) had died; the median survival was 16 months (range 10-22). Two
independent prognostic factors were found: the acute infiltrate form was
associated with a bad prognosis (hazard ratio 2.6, p = 0.001) and
rifamycin-containing regimens provided protection (hazard ratio 0.325, p =
0.006). Clarithromycin-containing regimens did not improve the prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: In contrast to recent guidelines, this study showed three different 
types of the disease (cavitary, nodular or diffuse infiltrate forms) with a
different prognosis. In order to improve survival, all patients with M xenopi
infection should be treated with a rifamycin-containing regimen. The usefulness
of clarithromycin remains to be evaluated.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2008.096842 
PMID: 19052044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

