
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2009 Mar;75(6):1478-86. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01632-08. Epub
2009 Jan 9.

Longitudinal study of Salmonella dispersion and the role of environmental
contamination in commercial swine production systems.

Dorr PM(1), Tadesse DA, Zewde BM, Fry P, Thakur S, Gebreyes WA.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development, Merial Limited, Duluth, Georgia, USA.

This study investigated the roles of various environmental sources, such as
truck-washing systems, waste-processing lagoons, and other sources, as potential 
contributors to the exposure and dissemination of Salmonella in commercial swine 
production systems. Four cohorts of nursery age swine herds which originated from
distinct farm flows were selected. In addition, cross-sectional sampling of four 
truck wash stations selected based on the types of disinfectants and sources of
water used for sanitizing trucks were tested. Salmonella isolates were recovered 
from pigs (feces, cecal contents, and mesenteric lymph nodes) and environmental
sources (barn floor, lagoon, barn flush, trucks, and holding pens). Antimicrobial
susceptibility testing and genotyping were conducted using Kirby-Bauer disk
diffusion and amplified fragment length polymorphism, respectively. Salmonella
prevalence significantly increased with age from late nursery to slaughter for
all of the cohorts (P = 0.007). In two of three instances, all three pig holding 
pens (lairage) sampled at processing were Salmonella positive. The predominant
antibiotypes for all sources included ACSSuT (51.8%), SSuT (16.8%), T (6%), and
pansusceptible (7.4%). For the isolates obtained at the farms, the ACSSuT
phenotype was 5.6 times more likely to be found in the animals than in the
environment (95% confidence interval, 4.4 to 7.2 times). Serogroup B was the most
common serogroup (79%), followed by serogroup E (10.4%). Despite the fact that
the four production flows were independent, 1 of the 11 genotypic clusters
(cluster A1) was commonly detected in any type of sample regardless of its
origin. Five of the genotypic clusters (clusters A3, A4, A5, A6, and A7)
contained isolates that originated from trucks and lairage swabs and also from
cecal contents and/or mesenteric lymph nodes. More interestingly, genotypic
clusters A3, A4, and A6 (but not clusters A5 and A7) were not detected on the
farms. They originated from the trucks and lairage swabs and then were identified
from the cecal contents and/or mesenteric lymph nodes. These findings underscore 
the significance of various environmental factors, including inadequate
truck-washing systems, and emphasize the role of lairage contamination by
Salmonella that has food safety significance.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01632-08 
PMCID: PMC2655456
PMID: 19139233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

