
1. Niger Postgrad Med J. 2008 Dec;15(4):229-33.

Splenic enlargement and abdominal scarification in childhood malaria. Beliefs,
practices and their possible roles in management in Benin City, Nigeria.

Ibadin OM(1), Ofili AN, Airauhi LU, Ozolua EI, Umoru AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Benin, Benin City, Nigeria.

BACKGROUND: To achieve sustainable reduction in malaria burden in Africa,
cultural practices that foster increased malaria burden must be addressed. In Edo
state Nigeria, scarification/tattooing on the left hypochondrium presumably over 
an enlarged spleen arising mainly from malaria is widely practiced. This practice
is deleterious, diversionary and causes complications.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: This was a cross-sectional and descriptive study to evaluate
the beliefs and practice, regarding abdominal wall scarification in children and 
within the context of malaria control; It was carried out among experienced women
in child care selected from Egor Local Government Area of Edo State, Nigeria.
METHODS: Information relating to beliefs, knowledge and their practices including
possible socio-cultural/economic determinants were obtained with use of
questionnaire.
RESULTS: Of the 400 questionnaires administered 394 were responded to. The modal 
age bracket was 26 - 30 years (Range, 18 - 56 years) Respondents were mainly
Binis Esan and Ibos amongst others. About 27.0% of respondents considered the
spleen a "bag of worms". Other views included "collection of bad blood" 27.2% and
as a sickness of its own, 14.7%. Named causes of splenomegaly were fever, 59.6%
and evil spirit, 15.5%. Over 45.0% of respondents would consult the herbalists
for splenomegaly. Less educated (X2 = 40.0, p<0.005), women over 40 years of age 
(X2 = 13.5, p< 0.05) and Esan/Bini ethnic groups (X2 = 15.6, p <0.05) are more
prone to the practice. Reasons for widespread use included perceived
effectiveness, low cost and accessibility. Information on scarification was
obtained mainly from family members, 49.5%, neighbours, 25.1%; and
friends/colleagues, 16.7%
CONCLUSION/RECOMMENDATIONS: Practice of scarification is deep rooted and
widespread in the study location. It has potentials to negate efforts involved in
malaria control. Education including public enlightenment campaign should
effectively check the practice.


PMID: 19169339  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

