
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Mar 10;106(10):4018-23. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0900196106. Epub 2009 Feb 20.

Regulation of chemokine receptor by Toll-like receptor 2 is critical to
neutrophil migration and resistance to polymicrobial sepsis.

Alves-Filho JC(1), Freitas A, Souto FO, Spiller F, Paula-Neto H, Silva JS,
Gazzinelli RT, Teixeira MM, Ferreira SH, Cunha FQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University
of Säo Paulo, 14049-900 Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. jcafilho@usp.br

Patients with sepsis have a marked defect in neutrophil migration. Here we
identify a key role of Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) in the regulation of
neutrophil migration and resistance during polymicrobial sepsis. We found that
the expression of the chemokine receptor CXCR2 was dramatically down-regulated in
circulating neutrophils from WT mice with severe sepsis, which correlates with
reduced chemotaxis to CXCL2 in vitro and impaired migration into an infectious
focus in vivo. TLR2 deficiency prevented the down-regulation of CXCR2 and failure
of neutrophil migration. Moreover, TLR2(-/-) mice exhibited higher bacterial
clearance, lower serum inflammatory cytokines, and improved survival rate during 
severe sepsis compared with WT mice. In vitro, the TLR2 agonist lipoteichoic acid
(LTA) down-regulated CXCR2 expression and markedly inhibited the neutrophil
chemotaxis and actin polymerization induced by CXCL2. Moreover, neutrophils
activated ex vivo by LTA and adoptively transferred into naïve WT recipient mice 
displayed a significantly reduced competence to migrate toward
thioglycolate-induced peritonitis. Finally, LTA enhanced the expression of G
protein-coupled receptor kinases 2 (GRK2) in neutrophils; increased expression of
GRK2 was seen in blood neutrophils from WT mice, but not TLR2(-/-) mice, with
severe sepsis. Our findings identify an unexpected detrimental role of TLR2 in
polymicrobial sepsis and suggest that inhibition of TLR2 signaling may improve
survival from sepsis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0900196106 
PMCID: PMC2656197
PMID: 19234125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

