
1. J Immunol. 2009 Mar 1;182(5):3213-22. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0800551.

ELR-CXC chemokine receptor antagonism targets inflammatory responses at multiple 
levels.

Zhao X(1), Town JR, Li F, Zhang X, Cockcroft DW, Gordon JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, 
Canada.

The ELR-CXC chemokines play important roles in neutrophilic inflammation. We
report in this study that a fully human ELR-CXC chemokine antagonist that we have
generated, CXCL8((3-72))K11R/G31P (G31P), has potent anti-inflammatory effects
that arise through its actions at multiple levels. G31P inhibited CXCL8-induced
chemotactic responses and intracellular Ca(2+) flux in CXCR1-transfected HEK
cells and neutrophils, and responses of neutrophils to CXCR2-exclusive ligands.
G31P desensitized heterologous G protein-coupled receptors on neutrophils, 52-86%
reducing their Ca(2+) flux and chemotactic responses to leukotriene B(4), C5a,
and the bacterial tripeptide fMLP. G31P also 60-90% blocked neutrophil
chemotactic responses to mediators present in 10 of 12 sputum samples from cystic
fibrosis or bronchiectasis subjects with bacterial pneumonia. Moreover, whereas
A549 bronchial epithelial cells (which expressed CXCR1) secreted approximately
29,000 pg/ml CXCL8 in response to in vitro endotoxin challenge, G31P reduced this
response by up to 98%, presumably by interrupting an autocrine inflammatory loop.
The anti-inflammatory effects of G31P extended also to reversing the
antiapoptotic influence of ELR-CXC chemokines on neutrophils. That these effects 
were relevant in vivo was confirmed in a guinea pig model of airway endotoxemia, 
wherein the human form of G31P >95% blocked neutrophil infiltration into and
activation within the airways, as determined by airway levels of the neutrophil
primary, secondary, and tertiary granule markers myeloperoxidase, lactoferrin,
and matrix metalloproteinase-9, respectively, and the epithelial cell marker
matrix metalloproteinase-2. These data suggest that the beneficial effects of
ELR-CXC chemokine antagonism arise through effects that occur at multiple levels,
including epithelial cells, neutrophils, and alternate G protein-coupled
receptors.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0800551 
PMID: 19234219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

