
1. J Clin Invest. 2009 May;119(5):1241-50. doi: 10.1172/JCI36509. Epub 2009 Apr 6.

Cd1d-dependent regulation of bacterial colonization in the intestine of mice.

Nieuwenhuis EE(1), Matsumoto T, Lindenbergh D, Willemsen R, Kaser A,
Simons-Oosterhuis Y, Brugman S, Yamaguchi K, Ishikawa H, Aiba Y, Koga Y, Samsom
JN, Oshima K, Kikuchi M, Escher JC, Hattori M, Onderdonk AB, Blumberg RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. e.nieuwenhuis@erasmusmc.nl

The accumulation of certain species of bacteria in the intestine is involved in
both tissue homeostasis and immune-mediated pathologies. The host mechanisms
involved in controlling intestinal colonization with commensal bacteria are
poorly understood. We observed that under specific pathogen-free or germ-free
conditions, intragastric administration of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, E. coli,
Staphylococcus aureus, or Lactobacillus gasseri resulted in increased
colonization of the small intestine and bacterial translocation in mice lacking
Cd1d, an MHC class I-like molecule, compared with WT mice. In contrast,
activation of Cd1d-restricted T cells (NKT cells) with alpha-galactosylceramide
caused diminished intestinal colonization with the same bacterial strains. We
also found prominent differences in the composition of intestinal microbiota,
including increased adherent bacteria, in Cd1d-/- mice in comparison to WT mice
under specific pathogen-free conditions. Germ-free Cd1d-/- mice exhibited a
defect in Paneth cell granule ultrastructure and ability to degranulate after
bacterial colonization. In vitro, NKT cells were shown to induce the release of
lysozyme from intestinal crypts. Together, these data support a role for Cd1d in 
regulating intestinal colonization through mechanisms that include the control of
Paneth cell function.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI36509 
PMCID: PMC2673876
PMID: 19349688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

