
1. Tissue Antigens. 2009 Jun;73(6):535-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2009.01256.x.
Epub 2009 Apr 8.

Invariant natural killer T cells: innate-like T cells with potent
immunomodulatory activities.

Wu L(1), Gabriel CL, Parekh VV, Van Kaer L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232-2363, USA.

Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells are a subset of T lymphocytes that react 
with glycolipid antigens presented by the major histocompatibility complex class 
I-related glycoprotein CD1d. Although iNKT cells express an antigen-specific
receptor of the adaptive immune system, they behave more like cells of the innate
immune system. A hallmark of iNKT cells is their capacity to produce copious
amounts of immunoregulatory cytokines quickly after activation. The cytokines
produced by iNKT cells can influence the level of activation of many cell types
of the innate and adaptive immune systems as well as the quality of an adaptive
immune response. As such, iNKT cells have emerged as important regulators of
immune responses, playing a role in microbial immunity, autoimmunity, tumor
immunity, and a variety of inflammatory conditions. Although several endogenous
and exogenous glycolipid antigens of iNKT cells have been identified, how these
glycolipids orchestrate iNKT-cell functions remains poorly understood.
Nevertheless, iNKT cells hold substantial promise as targets for development of
vaccine adjuvants and immunotherapies. These properties of iNKT cells have been
investigated most extensively in mouse models of human disease using the marine
sponge-derived agent alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer) and related
iNKT-cell antigens. While these preclinical studies have raised enthusiasm for
developing iNKT-cell-based immunotherapies, they also showed potential health
risks associated with iNKT cell activation. Although alpha-GalCer treatment in
humans was shown to be safe in the short term, further studies are needed to
develop safe and effective iNKT-cell-based therapies.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2009.01256.x 
PMID: 19392798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

