
1. J Exp Med. 2009 May 11;206(5):1181-99. doi: 10.1084/jem.20082521. Epub 2009 May
4.

Neutropenia with impaired host defense against microbial infection in mice
lacking androgen receptor.

Chuang KH(1), Altuwaijri S, Li G, Lai JJ, Chu CY, Lai KP, Lin HY, Hsu JW, Keng P,
Wu MC, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Neutrophils, the major phagocytes that form the first line of cell-mediated
defense against microbial infection, are produced in the bone marrow and released
into the circulation in response to granulocyte-colony stimulating factor
(G-CSF). Here, we report that androgen receptor knockout (ARKO) mice are
neutropenic and susceptible to acute bacterial infection, whereas castration only
results in moderate neutrophil reduction in mice and humans. Androgen supplement 
can restore neutrophil counts via stabilizing AR in castrated mice, but not in
ARKO and testicular feminization mutant (Tfm) mice. Our results show that
deletion of the AR gene does not influence myeloid lineage commitment, but
significantly reduces the proliferative activity of neutrophil precursors and
retards neutrophil maturation. CXCR2-dependent migration is also decreased in
ARKO neutrophils as compared with wild-type controls. G-CSF is unable to delay
apoptosis in ARKO neutrophils, and ARKO mice show a poor granulopoietic response 
to exogenous G-CSF injection. In addition, AR can restore G-CSF-dependent
granulocytic differentiation upon transduction into ARKO progenitors. We further 
found that AR augments G-CSF signaling by activating extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and also by sustaining Stat3 activity via diminishing
the inhibitory binding of PIAS3 to Stat3. Collectively, our findings demonstrate 
an essential role for AR in granulopoiesis and host defense against microbial
infection.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20082521 
PMCID: PMC2715023
PMID: 19414555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

