
1. J Med Microbiol. 2009 Aug;58(Pt 8):1023-1029. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.009878-0. Epub
2009 Jun 15.

Role of PCR in the diagnosis of pertussis infection in infants: 5 years'
experience of provision of a same-day real-time PCR service in England and Wales 
from 2002 to 2007.

Fry NK(1), Duncan J(1), Wagner K(2), Tzivra O(1), Doshi N(1), Litt DJ(1),
Crowcroft N(2), Miller E(2), George RC(1), Harrison TG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Systemic Infection Laboratory, Health Protection Agency Centre
for Infections, 61 Colindale Avenue, London, UK.
(2)Immunisation, Hepatitis and Blood Safety Department, Health Protection Agency 
Centre for Infections, 61 Colindale Avenue, London, UK.

As part of an enhanced surveillance programme for pertussis in England and Wales,
a real-time PCR service for the detection of Bordetella pertussis was introduced 
for infants aged <or=6 months admitted to a paediatric intensive care unit or
paediatric ward with a respiratory illness compatible with pertussis. Two
real-time fluorescent resonance energy transfer hybridization probe LightCycler
(Roche Diagnostics) PCR assays were used. One (designed in-house) targeted the
pertussis toxin S1 promoter (ptxA-pr), and included an internal process control
to test for sample inhibition and reagent performance. The other (already
published) targeted the insertion element IS481. The analytical sensitivities of 
the assays were 100 and 10 fg per reaction for the ptxA-pr and IS481 PCRs,
respectively. The ptxA-pr assay was specific for B. pertussis, whilst the IS481
PCR also showed some cross-reactivity with Bordetella holmesii and the type
strain of Bordetella parapertussis. From April 2002 to March 2007, 848 samples
were received from 774 patients and DNA was extracted. Of 824 samples that were
suitable for testing, 183 (22.2 %) had evidence of Bordetella infection (18.9 %
ptxA-pr and IS481; 3.3 % IS481 only), 621 (75.4 %) were negative and 20 (2.4 %)
were inhibitory for the PCR. Within the targeted age group of <or=6 months, most 
patients (130/138) with evidence of Bordetella spp. by PCR were <or=3 months old.
The overall percentage increase in laboratory-confirmed cases due to PCR compared
with culture for the 5 year period described ranged from 9 to 26 % per year (mean
19 %). Real-time PCR is an invaluable tool both for enhanced epidemiological
surveillance and for the provision of a rapid diagnosis of pertussis where
results can affect patient and contact management.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.009878-0 
PMID: 19528165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

