
1. Biol Pharm Bull. 2009 Jul;32(7):1139-41.

Pharmacokinetics of ceftriaxione, a third-generation cephalosporin, in pediatric 
patients.

Fukumoto K(1), Aida S, Oishi T, Ueno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department Pharmaceutical Sciences, Niigata University of Pharmacy and Applied
Life Sciences.

We monitored the serum concentration of ceftriaxone (CTRX) in order to clarify
its pharmacokinetics in pediatric patients. Subjects were 21 patients undergoing 
CTRX therapy (50 mg/kg/d) for pneumonia from January to September 2007. To
determine the serum concentration of CTRX and to obtain other laboratory data,
blood samples were drawn just before and after drug administration. To clarify
the relationship between protein concentration and the protein binding ratio of
CTRX in vitro and in vivo, the effect of human albumin on the binding ratio was
investigated. Thereafter, the relationship between the protein binding ratio and 
the concentration of CTRX in pediatric patients was analyzed. There was no
significant correlation between age and the elimination half-life of CTRX.
Moreover, no significant differences were observed in the distribution volume and
the clearance between pediatric patients and adults. The binding ratios increased
with increased CTRX and albumin concentrations in both in vitro and in vivo
studies. It was suggested that the CTRX concentration just before administration 
(i.e., C(trough)) was sufficiently maintained above the mean inhibitory
concentration against Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae.
Therefore, CTRX administration once daily to pediatric patients with pneumonia
was shown to be bacteriologically and pharmacokinetically superior in terms of
efficacy.

DOI: 10.1248/bpb.32.1139 
PMID: 19571374  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

