
1. Int J Cancer. 2010 Jan 15;126(2):328-36. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24714.

Small interfering RNA-mediated CXCR1 or CXCR2 knock-down inhibits melanoma tumor 
growth and invasion.

Singh S(1), Sadanandam A, Varney ML, Nannuru KC, Singh RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, 68198-5900, USA.

CXCR1 and CXCR2 are receptors for CXCL-8 and are differentially expressed on
melanoma and endothelial cells. In this study, we determined the functional role 
of these receptors in melanoma progression. We stably knock-down the expression
of CXCR1 and/or CXCR2 in A375-SM (SM; high metastatic) human melanoma cells by
short-hairpin RNA transfection. Cell proliferation, migration, invasion, ERK
phosphorlyation and cytoskeletal rearrangements were carried out in vitro. In
vivo growth was evaluated using murine subcutaneous xenograft model. Our data
demonstrate that knock-down of CXCR1 and/or CXCR2 expression, inhibited melanoma 
cell proliferation, survival, migration and invasive potential in vitro.
Moreover, we also observed inhibition of ERK phosphorylation and cytoskeltal
rearrangement in SM-shCXCR1, SM-shCXCR2 and SM-shCXCR1/2 cells. Furthermore, when
SM-shCXCR1 or SM-shCXCR2 cells implanted in nude mice, tumor growth,
proliferation and microvessel density was significantly inhibited as compared to 
SM-control cells. In addition, we observed a significant increase in melanoma
cell apoptosis in SM-shCXCR1 and SM-shCXCR2 tumors compared to SM-control tumors.
Together, these data demonstrate that CXCR1 and CXCR2 expression play a critical 
role in human melanoma tumor progression and, functional blockade of CXCR1 and
CXCR2 could be potentially used for future therapeutic intervention in malignant 
melanoma.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.24714 
PMCID: PMC2794956
PMID: 19585580  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

