
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2009 Sep;75(18):5779-86. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00507-09. Epub 
2009 Jul 24.

Contributions of O island 48 to adherence of enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli
O157:H7 to epithelial cells in vitro and in ligated pig ileal loops.

Yin X(1), Wheatcroft R, Chambers JR, Liu B, Zhu J, Gyles CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, Ontario, Canada N1G2W1.

O island 48 (OI-48) of Escherichia coli consists of three functional gene
clusters that encode urease, tellurite resistance (Te(r)), and putative adhesins 
Iha and AIDA-1. The functions of these clusters in enterohemorrhagic E. coli
(EHEC) O157:H7 infection are unknown. Deletion mutants for these three regions
were constructed and evaluated for their ability to adhere to epithelial cells in
vitro and in ligated pig ileal loops. Deletion of the Te(r) gene cluster reduced 
the ability of the organism to adhere to and form large clusters on IPEC-J2 and
HEp-2 cells. Complementation of the mutation by introducing the wild-type ter
genes restored adherence and large-cluster formation. Tests in ligated pig ileal 
loops showed a decrease in colonization by the Te(r)-negative mutant, but the
difference was not significant compared to colonization by the wild type (26.4%
+/- 21.2% versus 40.1% +/- 19.1%; P = 0.168). The OI-48 aidA gene deletion had no
effect on adherence in vitro or in vivo. Deletion of the iha and ureC genes had
no effect on adherence in vitro but significantly reduced the colonization of
EHEC O157:H7 in the ligated pig intestine. These data suggest that Te(r), Iha,
and urease may contribute to EHEC O157:H7 pathogenesis by promoting adherence of 
the pathogen to the host intestinal epithelium.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00507-09 
PMCID: PMC2747874
PMID: 19633120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

