
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2002 May 1;40(2):113-22. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6941.2002.tb00943.x.

Similarity of microbial and meiofaunal community analyses for mapping ecological 
effects of heavy-metal contamination in soil.

Ellis RJ(1), Best JG, Fry JC, Morgan P, Neish B, Trett MW, Weightman AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, P.O. Box 915, Cardiff CF10 
3TL, UK. r.ellis@ic.ac.uk

The effect of long-term heavy-metal contamination on soil microbial and
meiofaunal communities was assessed with a view to determining whether analysis
of these communities could be used for ecological assessment of contaminated
sites. Thirty soil cores were taken from an industrial site formerly used for the
burning of waste from an explosives factory. The predominant contaminants in the 
soil were a range of heavy metals, including lead, copper and zinc. The numbers
of culturable bacteria (especially those grown on Pseudomonas selective media)
and the microbial community response to a suite of 95 carbon sources were
suppressed in samples with high heavy-metal contamination. This corresponded to a
reduction in the density and evenness of the nematode communities in the samples 
with high metal concentrations. Conversely the bacterial counts and responses to 
the 95 carbon sources were greater at sites with higher and more diverse
populations of nematodes. However, epifluorescence counts of bacteria and the
profiles of extracted fatty acids were not consistently altered by the
heavy-metal contamination. These results suggest that culturable bacteria are
effective indicators of pollution in soil, and reflect the perturbations seen in 
other components of the soil biota. Furthermore, this is the first study to show 
that both meiofaunal communities and microbial communities give similar
indications of the ecological impact of heavy-metal contamination in soil.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2002.tb00943.x 
PMID: 19709218 

