
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2004 Mar 1;47(3):359-70. doi: 10.1016/S0168-6496(03)00300-3.

Distribution and culturability of the uncultivated 'AGG58 cluster' of the
Bacteroidetes phylum in aquatic environments.

O'Sullivan LA(1), Fuller KE, Thomas EM, Turley CM, Fry JC, Weightman AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff University, UK.

Members of the Bacteroidetes phylum are abundant in aquatic habitats when
assessed by fluorescent in situ hybridisation and in some 16S rRNA gene
libraries. In this study 16S rRNA gene clone libraries were constructed with
bacterial primers that amplify Bacteroidetes sequences well (27F, 1492R) from
coastal seawater near Plymouth (UK) during a phytoplankton bloom. Most of the
clones (66%, 106/160) affiliated with the Bacteroidetes phylum, and of these 62% 
(66/106; or 41% 66/160 of the entire library) clustered with marine
bacterioplankton clones env.agg58, Arctic97A-17, CF17, CF96 and CF101. This
phylogenetic branch of Bacteroidetes was designated the 'AGG58 cluster', and its 
presence in various aquatic environments was investigated. Two pairs of
AGG58-specific 16S rRNA-gene-targeted polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers
were designed and successfully used to detect the cluster in DNA extracts from
three UK coastal seawater sites, and from freshwater River Taff epilithon. In
addition, 600 putative Bacteroidetes strains were isolated from these sites on
relatively high-nutrient agar media. AGG58 cluster specific probes were used to
screen the amplified 16S rRNA gene products from the isolates, but no members of 
the AGG58 cluster were discovered. The least specific probe hybridised with one
River Taff water isolate (RW262 NCIMB 13979) which formed a monophyletic group
with the genera Crocinitomix, Brumimicrobium and Cryomorpha of the family
Cryomorphaceae in the Bacteroidetes phylum. RW262 probably represents the first
isolate of a new genus within this family. This study provides new evidence that 
the uncultivated AGG58 group is abundant, globally distributed, and can be
rapidly detected with the new PCR primers described.

DOI: 10.1016/S0168-6496(03)00300-3 
PMID: 19712324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

