
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2009 Nov;16(7):862-75. doi:
10.1007/s11356-009-0232-3.

Establishment of a constructed wetland in extreme dryland.

Tencer Y(1), Idan G, Strom M, Nusinow U, Banet D, Cohen E, Schr√∂der P, Shelef O, 
Rachmilevitch S, Soares I, Gross A, Golan-Goldhirsh A.

Author information: 
(1)Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research, Albert Katz Department of Dryland
Biotechnologies, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Midreshet Ben-Gurion 84990, 
Israel

BACKGROUND, AIM, AND SCOPE: The project was set to construct an extensive wetland
in the southernmost region of Israel at Kibbutz Neot Smadar (30 degree 02'45" N
and 35 degree 01'19" E). The results of the first period of monitoring, summary, 
and perspectives are presented. The constructed wetland (CW) was built and the
subsequent monitoring performed in the framework of the Southern Arava
Sustainable Waste Management Plan, funded by the EU LIFE Fund. The specific aims 
were: (1) To end current sewage disposal and pollution of the ground, the
aquifer, and the dry river bed (wadi) paths by biologically treating the sewage
as part of the creation of a sustainable wetland ecosystem. (2) Serve as an
example of CW in the Negev highlands and the Arava Valley climates for
neighboring communities and as a test ground for plants and building methods
appropriate to hyper arid climate. (3) Serve as an educational resource and
tourist attraction for groups to learn about water reuse, recycling, local
wildlife and migrating birds, including serving the heart of a planned
Ecological-Educational Bird Park. This report is intended to allow others who are
planning similar systems in hyper arid climates to learn from our experience.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The project is located in an extreme arid desert with less
than 40 mm of rain annually and temperature ranges of -5 degree C to +42 degree
C. The site receives 165-185 m3 of municipal and agricultural wastes daily,
including cowshed and goat wastes and winery outflow.
RESULTS: The CW establishment at Neot Smadar was completed in October 2006. For 8
months, clean water flowed through the system while the plants were taking root. 
In June 2007, the wetland was connected to the oxidation pond and full operation 
began. Because of seepage and evaporation, during the first several months, the
water level was not high enough to allow free flow from one bed to the next. To
bed A, the water was pumped periodically from the oxidation pond (Fig. 1) and
from there flowed by gravitation through the rest of the system. The initial
results of the monitoring are promising. In nearly all measurements, the system
succeeded as expected to reduce levels of contaminants at least to the level
acceptable for irrigating fruit trees and often to the level of unlimited
irrigation. The introduction of the plants in the system and their physiological 
performance were evaluated and were found to correlate well to the quality of
water in the various beds.
DISCUSSION: It should be said at the outset that evaluation of the performance of
a CW system is a long-term process. Thus, the main aim of this report is to
present the problems, difficulties, preliminary results, and concepts concerned
with the first stage of establishment of CW in an extremely dry region.
CONCLUSIONS: The CW system was designed to dispose of municipal and agricultural 
wastes in a way that not merely reduces pollution, but adds to environmental
quality by creating accessible parkland for local residents and tourists. Several
factors affected the performance of the system at the initial stages of
operation: ecological balance between microbes and plants, big seasonal
variations, seepage and evaporation reduced the flow in the initial operation of 
the system. Despite the initial difficulties, the quality of water coming out the
system is acceptable for irrigation.
RECOMMENDATIONS AND PERSPECTIVES: The CW can function well under extreme dryland 
conditions. The oxidation pond was the major source of evaporation and bad odors.
Therefore, alternatives to the oxidation pond are needed. Cost effectiveness of
the system still has to be evaluated systematically.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-009-0232-3 
PMID: 19730911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

