
1. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Sep;5(9):e1000588. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000588. Epub 2009
Sep 25.

Bacillus anthracis lethal toxin disrupts TCR signaling in CD1d-restricted NKT
cells leading to functional anergy.

Joshi SK(1), Lang GA, Larabee JL, Devera TS, Aye LM, Shah HB, Ballard JD, Lang
ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2009 Oct;5(10) doi:
10.1371/annotation/cfc9c388-05fa-4b1c-8c5f-99835278a458.

Exogenous CD1d-binding glycolipid (alpha-Galactosylceramide, alpha-GC) stimulates
TCR signaling and activation of type-1 natural killer-like T (NKT) cells.
Activated NKT cells play a central role in the regulation of adaptive and
protective immune responses against pathogens and tumors. In the present study,
we tested the effect of Bacillus anthracis lethal toxin (LT) on NKT cells both in
vivo and in vitro. LT is a binary toxin known to suppress host immune responses
during anthrax disease and intoxicates cells by protective antigen (PA)-mediated 
intracellular delivery of lethal factor (LF), a potent metalloprotease. We
observed that NKT cells expressed anthrax toxin receptors (CMG-2 and TEM-8) and
bound more PA than other immune cell types. A sub-lethal dose of LT administered 
in vivo in C57BL/6 mice decreased expression of the activation receptor NKG2D by 
NKT cells but not by NK cells. The in vivo administration of LT led to decreased 
TCR-induced cytokine secretion but did not affect TCR expression. Further
analysis revealed LT-dependent inhibition of TCR-stimulated MAP kinase signaling 
in NKT cells attributable to LT cleavage of the MAP kinase kinase MEK-2. We
propose that Bacillus anthracis-derived LT causes a novel form of functional
anergy in NKT cells and therefore has potential for contributing to immune
evasion by the pathogen.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000588 
PMCID: PMC2742733
PMID: 19779559  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

