
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2010 Feb;85(6):1923-33. doi:
10.1007/s00253-009-2245-8. Epub 2009 Sep 30.

The Escherichia coli rhamnose promoter rhaP(BAD) is in Pseudomonas putida KT2440 
independent of Crp-cAMP activation.

Jeske M(1), Altenbuchner J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Industrielle Genetik, Universität Stuttgart, Allmandring 31,
70569, Stuttgart, Germany.

We developed an expression vector system based on the broad host range plasmid
pBBR1MCS2 with the Escherichia coli rhamnose-inducible expression system for
applications in Pseudomonas. For validation and comparison to E. coli, enhanced
green fluorescent protein (eGFP) was used as a reporter. For further
characterization, we also constructed plasmids containing different modifications
of the rhaP(BAD) promoter. Induction experiments after the successful transfer of
these plasmids into Pseudomonas putida KT2440 wild-type and different knockout
strains revealed significant differences. In Pseudomonas, we observed no
catabolite repression of the rhaP(BAD) promoter, and in contrast to E. coli, the 
binding of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) receptor protein (Crp)-cAMP to
this promoter is not necessary for induction as shown by deletion of the Crp
binding site. The crp(-) mutant of P. putida KT2440 lacked eGFP expression, but
this is likely due to problems in rhamnose uptake, since this defect was
complemented by the insertion of the L-rhamnose-specific transporter rhaT into
its genome via transposon mutagenesis. Other global regulators like Crc, PtsN,
and CyoB had no or minor effects on rhamnose-induced eGFP expression. Therefore, 
this expression system may also be generally useful for Pseudomonas and other
gamma-proteobacteria.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-009-2245-8 
PMID: 19789867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

