
1. Infect Immun. 2009 Dec;77(12):5572-82. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00831-09. Epub 2009 Oct
5.

Regulated delayed expression of rfaH in an attenuated Salmonella enterica serovar
typhimurium vaccine enhances immunogenicity of outer membrane proteins and a
heterologous antigen.

Kong Q(1), Liu Q, Roland KL, Curtiss R 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, The Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, PO Box 875401, Tempe, Arizona 85287-5401, USA.

RfaH is a transcriptional antiterminator that reduces the polarity of long
operons encoding secreted and surface-associated cell components of Salmonella
enterica serovar Typhimurium, including O antigen and lipopolysaccharide core
sugars. A DeltarfaH mutant strain is attenuated in mice (50% lethal dose
[LD(50)], >10(8) CFU). To examine the potential for using rfaH in conjunction
with other attenuating mutations, we designed a series of strains in which we
replaced the native rfaH promoter with the tightly regulated arabinose-dependent 
araC P(BAD) promoter so that rfaH expression was dependent on exogenously
supplied arabinose provided during in vitro growth. Following colonization of
host lymphoid tissues, where arabinose was not available, the P(BAD) promoter was
no longer active and rfaH was not expressed. In the absence of RfaH, O antigen
and core sugars were not synthesized. We constructed three mutant strains that
expressed different levels of RfaH by altering the ribosome-binding sequence and 
start codon. One mutation, DeltaP(rfaH178), was introduced into the attenuated
vaccine strain chi9241 (DeltapabA DeltapabB DeltaasdA) expressing the
pneumococcal surface protein PspA from an Asd(+) balanced-lethal plasmid. Mice
immunized with this strain and boosted 4 weeks later induced higher levels of
serum immunoglobulin G specific for PspA and for outer membrane proteins from
other enteric bacteria than either an isogenic DeltarfaH derivative or the
isogenic RfaH(+) parent. Eight weeks after primary oral immunization, mice were
challenged with 200 LD(50) of virulent Streptococcus pneumoniae WU2. Immunization
with DeltaP(rfaH178) mutant strains led to increased levels of protection
compared to that of the parent chi9241 and of a DeltarfaH derivative of chi9241.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00831-09 
PMCID: PMC2786485
PMID: 19805538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

