
1. Int J Cancer. 2010 Jun 1;126(11):2622-34. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24957.

Novel cancer vaccine based on genes of Salmonella pathogenicity island 2.

Xiong G(1), Husseiny MI, Song L, Erdreich-Epstein A, Shackleford GM, Seeger RC,
JÃ¤ckel D, Hensel M, Metelitsa LS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Southern California Keck School of Medicine and The Saban Research Institute of
Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Although tumors express potentially immunogenic tumor-associated antigens (TAAs),
cancer vaccines often fail because of inadequate antigen delivery and/or
insufficient activation of innate immunity. Engineering nonpathogenic bacterial
vectors to deliver TAAs of choice may provide an efficient way of presenting TAAs
in an immunogenic form. In this study, we used genes of Salmonella pathogenicity 
island 2 (SPI2) to construct a novel cancer vaccine in which a TAA, survivin, was
fused to SseF effector protein and placed under control of SsrB, the central
regulator of SPI2 gene expression. This construct uses the type III secretion
system (T3SS) of Salmonella and allows preferential delivery of tumor antigen
into the cytosol of antigen-presenting cells for optimal immunogenicity. In a
screen of a panel of attenuated strains of Salmonella, we found that a double
attenuated strain of Salmonella typhimurium, MvP728 (purD/htrA), was not toxic to
mice and effectively expressed and translocated survivin protein inside the
cytosol of murine macrophages. We also found that a ligand for CD1d-reactive
natural killer T (NKT) cells, alpha-glucuronosylceramide (GSL1), enhanced
MvP728-induced interleukin-12 production in human dendritic cells and that in
vivo coadministration of a NKT ligand with MvP728-Llo or MvP728-survivin enhanced
effector-memory cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) responses. Furthermore, combined use
of MvP728-survivin with GSL1 produced antitumor activity in mouse models of CT26 
colon carcinoma and orthotopic DBT glioblastoma. Therefore, the use of TAA
delivery via SPI-2-regulated T3SS of Salmonella and NKT ligands as adjuvants may 
provide a foundation for new cancer vaccines.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.24957 
PMCID: PMC2993175
PMID: 19824039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

