
1. J Immunol. 2009 Nov 15;183(10):6579-87. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901935. Epub 2009 
Oct 21.

The natural cytotoxicity receptor NKp46 is dispensable for IL-22-mediated innate 
intestinal immune defense against Citrobacter rodentium.

Satoh-Takayama N(1), Dumoutier L, Lesjean-Pottier S, Ribeiro VS, Mandelboim O,
Renauld JC, Vosshenrich CA, Di Santo JP.

Author information: 
(1)Cytokines and Lymphoid Development Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Natural cytotoxicity receptors (including NKp30, NKp44, and NKp46 in humans and
NKp46 in mice) are type I transmembrane proteins that signal NK cell activation
via ITAM-containing adapter proteins in response to stress- and pathogen-induced 
ligands. Although murine NKp46 expression (encoded by Ncr1) was thought to be
predominantly restricted to NK cells, the identification of distinct intestinal
NKp46(+) cell subsets that express the transcription factor Rorc and produce
IL-22 suggests a broader function for NKp46 that could involve intestinal
homeostasis and immune defense. Using mice carrying a GFP-modified Ncr1 allele,
we found normal numbers of gut CD3(-)GFP(+) cells with a similar cell surface
phenotype and subset distribution in the absence of Ncr1. Splenic and intestinal 
CD3(-)NKp46(+) cell subsets showed distinct patterns of cytokine secretion
(IFN-gamma, IL-22) following activation via NK1.1, NKp46, IL-12 plus IL-18, or
IL-23. However, IL-22 production was sharply restricted to intestinal
CD3(-)GFP(+) cells with the CD127(+)NK1.1(-) phenotype and could be induced in an
Ncr1-independent fashion. Because NKp46 ligands can trigger immune activation in 
the context of infectious pathogens, we assessed the response of wild-type and
Ncr-1-deficient Rag2(-/-) mice to the enteric pathogen Citrobacter rodentium. No 
differences in the survival or clinical score were observed in C.
rodentium-infected Rag2(-/-) mice lacking Ncr1, indicating that NKp46 plays a
redundant role in the differentiation of intestinal IL-22(+) cells that mediate
innate defense against this pathogen. Our results provide further evidence for
functional heterogeneity in intestinal NKp46(+) cells that contrast with splenic 
NK cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901935 
PMID: 19846871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

