
1. J Fish Dis. 2010 Mar 1;33(3):241-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2009.01117.x. Epub 
2009 Nov 12.

A comparative molecular study of the presence of "Candidatus arthromitus" in the 
digestive system of rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum), healthy and
affected with rainbow trout gastroenteritis.

Del-Pozo J(1), Turnbull J, Ferguson H, Crumlish M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of veterinary pathology, Easter Bush Veterinary Centre, Roslin,
Midlothian, UK. Jorge.del.pozo@ed.ac.uk

Observations were made using histopathological techniques in conjunction with a
nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) protocol for the specific detection of
"Candidatus arthromitus" on DNA extracted from wax-embedded tissues and fresh
digestive contents of rainbow trout. Samples positive for "Candidatus
arthromitus" DNA included fish with rainbow trout gastroenteritis (RTGE),
clinically normal cohabiting fish, and apparently healthy controls from RTGE
positive and RTGE negative sites. The results obtained from the PCR were
confirmed by nucleotide sequencing. "Candidatus arthromitus" DNA was found in
distal intestine as well as in sections of pyloric caeca, suggesting that both
these locations are appropriate for molecular detection of "Candidatus
arthromitus" DNA in trout. Furthermore, rainbow trout fry distal intestinal
samples from two different hatcheries where RTGE had not been reported were also 
positive. Differences in "Candidatus arthromitus" DNA detection between paraffin 
wax-embedded and fresh digestive content samples from the same fish suggested
that it may be predominantly epithelium-associated in healthy trout. Parallel
histopathological observations indicated that pyloric caeca are the preferred
site for visualizing segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB) in trout with RTGE. The
results of this study showed that the presence of SFB was not invariably
associated with clinical disease and that more information is required to
understand the role of these organisms.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2009.01117.x 
PMID: 19912454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

