
1. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2010 Feb;50(2):158-67. doi:
10.1111/j.1472-765X.2009.02772.x. Epub 2009 Nov 12.

Enhanced polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) production via the coexpressed phaCAB and vgb 
genes controlled by arabinose P promoter in Escherichia coli.

Horng YT(1), Chang KC, Chien CC, Wei YH, Sun YM, Soo PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Biotechnology, College of Medicine, Tzu 
Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan, R.O.C.

AIM: To develop an approach to enhance polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) production via
the coexpressed phaCAB and vgb genes controlled by arabinose P(BAD) promoter in
Escherichia coli.
METHOD AND RESULTS: The polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) synthesis operon, (phaCAB), 
from Ralstonia eutropha was overexpressed under the regulation of the arabinose
P(BAD) promoter in Escherichia coli, and the vgb gene encoding bacterial
haemoglobin from Vitreoscilla stercoraria (VHb) was further cloned at downstream 
of phaCAB to form an artificial operon. The cell dry weight (CDW), PHB content
and PHB concentration were enhanced around 1.23-, 1.57-, and 1.93-fold in the
engineered cell harbouring phaCAB-vgb (SY-2) upon 1% arabinose induction compared
with noninduction (0% arabinose). Furthermore, by using a recombinant strain
harbouring P(BAD) promoter-vgb along with native promoter-phaCAB construction,
the effect of vgb expression level on PHB biosynthesis was positive correlation.
CONCLUSIONS: The results exploit the possibility to improve the PHB production by
fusing the genes phaCAB-vgb from different species under the arabinose regulation
system in E. coli. It also demonstrates that increase in VHb level enhances the
PHB production.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: We were successful in providing a new
coexpressed system for PHB synthesis in E. coli. This coexpressed system could be
regulated by arabinose inducer, and is more stable and cheaper than other induced
systems (e.g. IPTG). Furthermore, it could be applied in many biotechnology or
fermentation processes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1472-765X.2009.02772.x 
PMID: 19943886  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

