
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2010 Oct;60(Pt 10):2478-2482. doi:
10.1099/ijs.0.019067-0. Epub 2009 Dec 4.

Lactobacillus florum sp. nov., a fructophilic species isolated from flowers.

Endo A(1), Futagawa-Endo Y(1), Sakamoto M(2), Kitahara M(2), Dicks LMT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch 7600,
South Africa.
(2)Microbe Division/Japan Collection of Microorganisms, RIKEN BioResource Center,
Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Three strains of fructophilic lactic acid bacteria were isolated from flowers in 
South Africa. The isolates formed a subcluster in the Lactobacillus buchneri
phylogenetic group, closely related to Lactobacillus fructivorans, Lactobacillus 
homohiochii, Lactobacillus lindneri and Lactobacillus sanfranciscensis according 
to phylogenetic analysis based on the 16S rRNA gene sequences. Levels of DNA-DNA 
relatedness indicated that the three strains belonged to the same taxon and
formed a genetically distinct group, well separated from their phylogenetic
relatives. The three strains produced acids from only two of the 49 carbohydrates
tested, i.e. D-glucose and D-fructose. D-Fructose was more rapidly fermented than
D-glucose. Good growth was recorded on d-fructose or D-glucose in the presence of
external electron acceptors. However, delayed growth was recorded on d-glucose
without electron acceptors. The novel strains produced lactic acid, ethanol and
acetic acid from D-glucose at a ratio of 1 : 0.8 : 0.2. These characteristics
were distinct from other species of the genus Lactobacillus. Based on the data
provided, the three isolates represent a fructophilic and novel species of the
genus Lactobacillus, for which the name Lactobacillus florum sp. nov. is
proposed. The type strain is F9-1(T) (=JCM 16035(T)=DSM 22689(T)=NRIC 0771(T)).

DOI: 10.1099/ijs.0.019067-0 
PMID: 19965998  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

