
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2010;612:505-17. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60761-362-6_32.

Isolation of NK cells and NK-like cells from the intestinal lamina propria.

Sanos SL(1), Diefenbach A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology & Hygiene, University of Freiburg Medical
Center, Freiburg, Germany.

Being exposed to food products, pathogens and harmless commensal bacteria, the
mucosal immune system faces a constant challenge. Therefore, maintenance of a
homeostatic balance is required to achieve tolerance to harmless bacteria and
their products and to induce potent immunity to infection with pathogenic
bacteria. Until recently, the literature on mucosal natural killer (NK) cells
residing in the intestinal lamina propria was scarce and phenotype and function
of gut mucosal NK cells did not receive much attention. Recently, data have
become available identifying two distinct subsets of mucosal NKp46(+) lymphocytes
based on the expression of the orphan transcription factor RORgammat. In many
ways, the RORgammat(-) subset resembled "classical" NK cells in that it was
developmentally dependent on IL-15 but not on RORgammat and displayed NK cell
function (e.g., cell-mediated cytotoxicity, IFN-gamma production). In contrast,
the RORgammat(+) subset developed independent of IL-15 but required RORgammat,
suggesting that this subset may be related to lymphoid tissue inducer (LTi)
cells. Interestingly, these RORgammat(+) NKp46(+) NK-LTi cells constitutively
produced large amounts of IL-22, a cytokine regulating antimicrobial protection
and regeneration of epithelial cells. In this chapter, we provide experimental
procedures to isolate "classical" NK cells from the intestinal lamina propria as 
well as the newly described lymphoid tissue inducer-like (LTi-like) cells
producing IL-22 and co-expressing NK cell receptors.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-60761-362-6_32 
PMID: 20033661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

