
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2010 Apr;156(Pt 4):1155-1166. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.032292-0. Epub 2010 Jan 7.

Modulation of transcription and characterization of the promoter organization of 
the autotransporter adhesin heptosyltransferase and the autotransporter adhesin
AIDA-I.

Benz I(1), van Alen T(1), Bolte J(1), Wörmann ME(1), Schmidt MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Infektiologie, Zentrum für Molekularbiologie der Entzündung
(ZMBE), Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, D-48149 Münster, Germany.

In Gram-negative bacteria, autotransporter proteins constitute the largest family
of secreted proteins, and exhibit many different functions. In recent years,
research has largely focused on mechanisms of autotransporter protein
translocation, where several alternative models are still being discussed. In
contrast, the biogenesis of only a few autotransporters has been studied and,
likewise, regulation of expression has received only very limited attention. The 
glycosylated autotransporter adhesin involved in diffuse adherence (AIDA)-I
system consists of the aah gene, encoding a specific autotransporter adhesin
heptosyltransferase (AAH), and the aidA gene, encoding the autotransporter
protein (AIDA-I). In this study, we investigated the promoter organization and
transcription of these two genes using reporter plasmids carrying lacZ
transcriptional fusions. The two genes, aah and aidA, are transcribed as a
bicistronic message. However, aidA is additionally transcribed from its own
promoter. There are two distinct start sites for each of the two genes.
Interestingly, transcription of both genes is enhanced in hns and rfaH mutant
backgrounds. Furthermore, we addressed the influence of environmental factors and
different genetic backgrounds of Escherichia coli K-12 strains on transcription
activity. We found that transcription varied considerably in different E. coli
K-12 laboratory strains and under different growth conditions.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.032292-0 
PMID: 20056708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

