
1. Mol Ecol. 2009 Nov;18(22):4523-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2009.04375.x.

Pathogens as potential selective agents in the wild.

Dionne M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service de la faune aquatique, Ministère des Ressources naturelles et de la
Faune du Québec, Quebec, Canada G1S 4X4. melanie.dionne@mrnf.gouv.qc.ca

Pathogens are considered a serious threat to which wild populations must adapt,
most particularly under conditions of rapid environmental change. One way host
adaptation has been studied is through genetic population structure at the major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC), a complex of adaptive genes involved in
pathogen resistance in vertebrates. However, while associations between specific 
pathogens and MHC alleles or diversity have been documented from laboratory
studies, the interaction between hosts and pathogens in the wild is more complex.
As such, identifying selective agents and understanding underlying
co-evolutionary mechanisms remains a major challenge. In this issue of Molecular 
Ecology, Evans & Neff (2009) characterized spatial and temporal variation in the 
bacterial parasite community infecting Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) 
fry from five populations in British Columbia, Canada. They used a 16S rDNA
sequencing-based approach to examine the prevalence of bacterial infection in
kidney and looked for associations with MHC class I and II genetic variability.
The authors found a high diversity of bacteria infecting fry, albeit at low
prevalence. It was reasoned that spatial variability in infection rate and
bacterial community phylogenetic similarity found across populations may
represent differential pathogen-mediated selection pressures. The study revealed 
some evidence of heterozygote advantage at MHC class II, but not class I, and
preliminary associations between specific MHC alleles and bacterial infections
were uncovered. This research adds an interesting perspective to the debate on
host-pathogen co-evolutionary mechanisms and emphasizes the importance of
considering the complexity of pathogen communities in studies of host local
adaptation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2009.04375.x 
PMID: 20078764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

