
1. Infect Immun. 2010 Mar;78(3):1304-13. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01122-09. Epub 2010 Jan
19.

Yersinia pestis with regulated delayed attenuation as a vaccine candidate to
induce protective immunity against plague.

Sun W(1), Roland KL, Kuang X, Branger CG, Curtiss R 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease and Vaccinology, The Biodesign Institute and
School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287, USA.

Two mutant strains of Yersinia pestis KIM5+, a Deltacrp mutant and a mutant with 
arabinose-dependent regulated delayed-shutoff crp expression (araC P(BAD) crp),
were constructed, characterized in vitro, and evaluated for virulence,
immunogenicity, and protective efficacy in mice. Both strains were highly
attenuated by the subcutaneous (s.c.) route. The 50% lethal doses (LD(50)s) of
the Deltacrp and araC P(BAD) crp mutants were approximately 1,000,000-fold and
10,000-fold higher than those of Y. pestis KIM5+, respectively, indicating that
both strains were highly attenuated. Mice vaccinated s.c. with 3.8 x 10(7) CFU of
the Deltacrp mutant developed high anti-Y. pestis and anti-LcrV serum IgG titers,
both with a strong Th2 bias, and induced protective immunity against subcutaneous
challenge with virulent Y. pestis (80% survival) but no protection against
pulmonary challenge. Mice vaccinated with 3.0 x 10(4) CFU of the araC P(BAD) crp 
mutant also developed high anti-Y. pestis and anti-LcrV serum IgG titers but with
a more balanced Th1/Th2 response. This strain induced complete protection against
s.c. challenge and partial protection (70% survival) against pulmonary challenge.
Our results demonstrate that arabinose-dependent regulated crp expression is an
effective strategy to attenuate Y. pestis while retaining strong immunogenicity, 
leading to protection against the pneumonic and bubonic forms of plague.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01122-09 
PMCID: PMC2825917
PMID: 20086087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

