
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2010 Mar;76(6):1789-95. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02350-09. Epub
2010 Jan 29.

Molecular indicators used in the development of predictive models for microbial
source tracking.

Ballest√© E(1), Bonjoch X, Belanche LA, Blanch AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Barcelona, Avda. Diagonal 645,
Barcelona, Spain.

A number of chemical, microbial, and eukaryotic indicators have been proposed as 
indicators of fecal pollution sources in water bodies. No single one of the
indicators tested to date has been able to determine the source of fecal
pollution in water. However, the combined use of different indicators has been
demonstrated to be the best way of defining predictive models suitable for
determining fecal pollution sources. Molecular methods are promising tools that
could complement standard microbiological water analysis. In this study, the
feasibility of some proposed molecular indicators for microbial source tracking
(MST) was compared (names of markers are in parentheses): host-specific
Bacteroidetes (HF134, HF183, CF128, and CF193), Bifidobacterium adolescentis
(ADO), Bifidobacterium dentium (DEN), the gene esp of Enterococcus faecium, and
host-specific mitochondrial DNA associated with humans, cattle, and pigs (Humito,
Bomito, and Pomito, respectively). None of the individual molecular markers
tested enabled 100% source identification. They should be combined with other
markers to raise sensitivity and specificity and increase the number of sources
that are identified. MST predictive models using only these molecular markers
were developed. The models were evaluated by considering the lowest number of
molecular indicators needed to obtain the highest rate of identification of fecal
sources. The combined use of three molecular markers (ADO, Bomito, and Pomito)
enabled correct identification of 75.7% of the samples, with differentiation
between human, swine, bovine, and poultry sources. Discrimination between human
and nonhuman fecal pollution was possible using two markers: ADO and Pomito
(84.6% correct identification). The percentage of correct identification
increased with the number of markers analyzed. The best predictive model for
distinguishing human from nonhuman fecal sources was based on 5 molecular markers
(HF134, ADO, DEN, Bomito, and Pomito) and provided 90.1% correct classification.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02350-09 
PMCID: PMC2838024
PMID: 20118380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

