
1. J Hosp Infect. 2010 Mar;74(3):266-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jhin.2009.10.010. Epub 2010 
Feb 12.

Four country healthcare-associated infection prevalence survey: pneumonia and
lower respiratory tract infections.

Humphreys H(1), Newcombe RG, Enstone J, Smyth ET, McIlvenny G, Davies E, Spencer 
R; Hospital Infection Society Steering Group.

Collaborators: Cunney R, Duerden B, Fitzpatrick F, Fraise A, Fry C, Greig M,
Howard A, Kiernan M, Perry C, Reilly J, Richards J, Ridgway G, Simmons M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland,
Education and Research Centre, Beaumont Hospital, PO Box 9063, Dublin 9, Ireland.
hhumphreys@rcsi.ie

In 2006, the Hospital Infection Society was funded by the respective health
services in England, Wales, Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland to
conduct a prevalence survey of healthcare-associated infection (HCAI). Here, we
report the prevalence of pneumonia and lower respiratory tract infection other
than pneumonia (LRTIOP) in these four countries. The prevalence of all HCAIs was 
7.59% (5743 out of 75 694). Nine hundred (15.7%) of these infections were
pneumonia, and 402 (7.0%) were LRTIOP. The prevalence of both infections was
higher for males than for females, and increased threefold from those aged <35 to
those aged >85 years (P<0.001). At the time of the survey or in the preceding
seven days, 23.7% and 18.2% of patients with pneumonia and LRTIOP, respectively, 
were mechanically ventilated compared to 5.2% of patients in the whole study
population. Meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) was the cause of
pneumonia and LRTIOP in 7.6% and 18.1% of patients, respectively (P<0.001). More 
patients with LRTIOP (4.2%) had concurrent diarrhoea due to Clostridium difficile
compared to patients with pneumonia (2.4%), but this did not reach statistical
significance. Other HCAIs were present in 137 (15.2%) of patients with pneumonia 
and 66 (16.4%) of those with LRTIOP. The results suggest that reducing
instrumentation, such as mechanical ventilation where possible, should help
reduce infection. The higher prevalence of MRSA as a cause of LRTIOP suggests a
lack of specificity in identifying the microbial cause and the association with
C. difficile emphasises the need for better use of antibiotics.

Copyright 2009 The Hospital Infection Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhin.2009.10.010 
PMID: 20153552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

