
1. Stem Cells Dev. 2010 Dec;19(12):1895-910. doi: 10.1089/scd.2009.0485. Epub 2010
Oct 12.

Functional module analysis reveals differential osteogenic and stemness
potentials in human mesenchymal stem cells from bone marrow and Wharton's jelly
of umbilical cord.

Hsieh JY(1), Fu YS, Chang SJ, Tsuang YH, Wang HW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) found in bone marrow (BM)-MSCs are an attractive
source for the regeneration of damaged tissues. Alternative postnatal, perinatal,
and fetal sources of MSCs are also under intensive investigation. MSCs from the
Wharton's jelly matrix of umbilical cord (WJ)-MSCs have higher pancreatic and
endothelial differentiation potentials than BM-MSCs, but the underlying
mechanisms are poorly understood. We compared the gene expression profiles,
enriched canonical pathways, and genetic networks of BM-MSCs and WJ-MSCs. WJ-MSCs
express more angiogenesis- and growth-related genes including epidermal growth
factor and FLT1, whereas BM-MSCs express more osteogenic genes such as RUNX2,
DLX5, and NPR3. The gene expression pattern of BM-MSCs is more similar to
osteoblasts than WJ-MSCs, suggesting a better osteogenic potential. In contrast, 
WJ-MSCs are more primitive because they share more common genes with embryonic
stem cells. BM-MSCs are more sensitive to environmental stimulations because
their molecular signatures altered more significantly in different culture
conditions. WJ-MSCs express genes enriched in vascular endothelial growth factor 
and PI3K-NFÎºB canonical pathways, whereas BM-MSCs express genes involved in
antigen presentation and chemokine/cytokine pathways. Drylab results could be
verified by wetlab experiments, in which BM-MSCs were more efficient in
osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation, whereas WJ-MSCs proliferated better.
WJ-MSCs thus constitute a promising option for angiogenesis, whereas BM-MSCs in
bone remodeling. Our results reveal systematically the underlying genes and
regulatory networks of 2 MSCs from unique ontological and anatomical origins, as 
well as the resulted phenotypes, thereby providing a better basis for cell-based 
therapy and the following mechanistic studies on MSC biology.

DOI: 10.1089/scd.2009.0485 
PMID: 20367285  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

