
1. Drug Metab Dispos. 2010 Aug;38(8):1261-6. doi: 10.1124/dmd.109.030866. Epub 2010 
Apr 26.

Relevance of nonsynonymous CYP2C8 polymorphisms to 13-cis retinoic acid and
paclitaxel hydroxylation.

Rowbotham SE(1), Boddy AV, Redfern CP, Veal GJ, Daly AK.

Author information: 
(1)Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University Medical School,
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.

CYP2C8 has a major role in the metabolism of the anticancer agents 13-cis
retinoic acid (13cisRA) and paclitaxel. There is evidence that polymorphisms in
the CYP2C8 gene contribute to observed interindividual differences in paclitaxel 
metabolism. However, no studies have been performed to determine the relevance of
CYP2C8 polymorphisms to 13cisRA metabolism. In the current study, the effect of
two common nonsynonymous CYP2C8 polymorphisms, CYP2C8*3 (R139K and K399R) and *4 
(I264M), on the metabolism of 13cisRA and paclitaxel was examined using an
Escherichia coli expression system with coexpression of human cytochrome P450
reductase. No statistically significant differences in the level of 13cisRA
4-hydroxylase activity were associated with either CYP2C8 allelic variant
compared with the wild-type CYP2C8.1 enzyme. Furthermore, no differences were
observed for the CYP2C8.3 or CYP2C8.4 enzymes with respect to paclitaxel
6alpha-hydroxylase kinetics compared with wild-type CYP2C8.1. However, when the
effects of the individual polymorphisms making up the CYP2C8*3 allele were
considered, a significantly lower level of paclitaxel 6alpha-hydroxylase activity
was associated with the K399R enzyme. A lower level of activity was also seen for
the R139K enzyme, although this difference was not significant. No differences
were observed with respect to 13cisRA 4-hydroxylase activity. We conclude that
common CYP2C8 polymorphisms are unlikely to explain reported interindividual
variation in 13cisRA or paclitaxel pharmacokinetics.

DOI: 10.1124/dmd.109.030866 
PMID: 20421446  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

