
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2010 Aug;156(Pt 8):2459-2469. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.039024-0. Epub 2010 May 6.

Autotransporters of Escherichia coli: a sequence-based characterization.

Wells TJ(1), Totsika M(1), Schembri MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infectious Disease Research, School of Chemistry and Molecular
Biosciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia.

Autotransporter (AT) proteins are found in all Escherichia coli pathotypes and
are often associated with virulence. In this study we took advantage of the large
number of available E. coli genome sequences to perform an in-depth bioinformatic
analysis of AT-encoding genes. Twenty-eight E. coli genome sequences were probed 
using an iterative approach, which revealed a total of 215 AT-encoding sequences 
that represented three major groups of distinct domain architecture: (i) serine
protease AT proteins, (ii) trimeric AT adhesins and (iii) AIDA-I-type AT
proteins. A number of subgroups were identified within each broad category, and
most subgroups contained at least one characterized AT protein; however, seven
subgroups contained no previously described proteins. The AIDA-I-type AT proteins
represented the largest and most diverse group, with up to 16 subgroups
identified from sequence-based comparisons. Nine of the AIDA-I-type AT protein
subgroups contained at least one protein that possessed functional properties
associated with aggregation and/or biofilm formation, suggesting a high degree of
redundancy for this phenotype. The Ag43, YfaL/EhaC, EhaB/UpaC and UpaG subgroups 
were found in nearly all E. coli strains. Among the remaining subgroups, there
was a tendency for AT proteins to be associated with individual E. coli
pathotypes, suggesting that they contribute to tissue tropism or symptoms
specific to different disease outcomes.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.039024-0 
PMID: 20447993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

