
1. Immunology. 2010 Aug;130(4):471-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2010.03293.x. Epub
2010 May 11.

Autoreactive natural killer T cells: promoting immune protection and immune
tolerance through varied interactions with myeloid antigen-presenting cells.

Hegde S(1), Fox L, Wang X, Gumperz JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells are innate T lymphocytes that are restricted by CD1d
antigen-presenting molecules and recognize lipids and glycolipids as antigens.
NKT cells have attracted attention for their potent immunoregulatory effects.
Like other types of regulatory lymphocytes, a high proportion of NKT cells appear
to be autoreactive to self antigens. Thus, as myeloid antigen-presenting cells
(APCs) such as monocytes, dendritic cells (DCs) and myeloid-derived suppressor
cells (MDSCs) constitutively express CD1d, NKT cells are able to interact with
these APCs not only during times of immune activation but also in immunologically
quiescent periods. The interactions of NKT cells with myeloid APCs can have
either pro-inflammatory or tolerizing outcomes, and a central question is how the
ensuing response is determined. Here we bring together published results from a
variety of model systems to highlight three critical factors that influence the
outcome of the NKT-APC interaction: (i) the strength of the antigenic signal
delivered to the NKT cell, as determined by antigen abundance and/or T-cell
receptor (TCR) affinity; (ii) the presence or absence of cytokines that
costimulate NKT cells [e.g. interleukin (IL)-12, IL-18 and interferon
(IFN)-alpha]; (iii) APC intrinsic factors such as differentiation state (e.g.
monocyte versus DC) and Toll-like receptor (TLR) stimulation. Together with
recent findings that demonstrate new links between NKT cell activation and
endogenous lipid metabolism, these results outline a picture in which the
functions of NKT cells are closely attuned to the existing biological context.
Thus, NKT cells may actively promote tolerance until a critical level of danger
signals arises, at which point they switch to activating pro-inflammatory immune 
responses.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2010.03293.x 
PMCID: PMC2913258
PMID: 20465577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

