
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2010 Jul;76(14):4633-9. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00545-10. Epub
2010 May 28.

Coupled arsenotrophy in a hot spring photosynthetic biofilm at Mono Lake,
California.

Hoeft SE(1), Kulp TR, Han S, Lanoil B, Oremland RS.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Geological Survey, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA.

Erratum in
    Appl Environ Microbiol. 2011 Aug;77(15):5570.

Red-pigmented biofilms grow on rock and cobble surfaces present in anoxic hot
springs located on Paoha Island in Mono Lake. The bacterial community was
dominated ( approximately 85% of 16S rRNA gene clones) by sequences from the
photosynthetic Ectothiorhodospira genus. Scraped biofilm materials incubated
under anoxic conditions rapidly oxidized As(III) to As(V) in the light via
anoxygenic photosynthesis but could also readily reduce As(V) to As(III) in the
dark at comparable rates. Back-labeling experiments with (73)As(V) demonstrated
that reduction to (73)As(III) also occurred in the light, thereby illustrating
the cooccurrence of these two anaerobic processes as an example of closely
coupled arsenotrophy. Oxic biofilms also oxidized As(III) to As(V). Biofilms
incubated with [(14)C]acetate oxidized the radiolabel to (14)CO(2) in the light
but not the dark, indicating a capacity for photoheterotrophy but not
chemoheterotrophy. Anoxic, dark-incubated samples demonstrated As(V) reduction
linked to additions of hydrogen or sulfide but not acetate. Chemoautotrophy
linked to As(V) as measured by dark fixation of [(14)C]bicarbonate into cell
material was stimulated by either H(2) or HS(-). Functional genes for the
arsenate respiratory reductase (arrA) and arsenic resistance (arsB) were detected
in sequenced amplicons of extracted DNA, with about half of the arrA sequences
closely related ( approximately 98% translated amino acid identity) to those from
the family Ectothiorhodospiraceae. Surprisingly, no authentic PCR products for
arsenite oxidase (aoxB) were obtained, despite observing aerobic arsenite
oxidation activity. Collectively, these results demonstrate close linkages of
these arsenic redox processes occurring within these biofilms.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00545-10 
PMCID: PMC2901740
PMID: 20511421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

