
1. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Jul 1;110(4):823-33. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22594.

Transcriptional regulation of bone sialoprotein gene by Porphyromonas gingivalis 
lipopolysaccharide.

Li X(1), Kato N, Mezawa M, Li Z, Wang Z, Yang L, Sasaki Y, Kaneko T, Takai H,
Yoshimura A, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba 271-8587, Japan.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is a major mediator of inflammatory response.
Periodontopathic bacterium Porphyromonas gingivalis LPS has quite different
character from Escherichia coli LPS. E. coli LPS is agonist for Toll-like
receptor 4 (TLR4), whereas P. gingivalis LPS worked as antagonist for TLR4. Bone 
sialoprotein (BSP) is an early marker of osteoblast differentiation. To
investigate the effects of P. gingivalis LPS on BSP transcription, we used rat
osteoblast-like ROS17/2.8 cells. BSP mRNA levels were decreased by 0.1 microg/ml 
and increased by 0.01 microg/ml P. gingivalis LPS at 12 h. Results of luciferase 
assays showed that 0.1 microg/ml decreased and 0.01 microg/ml P. gingivalis LPS
increased BSP transcription in -116 to +60 BSP construct. The effects of P.
gingivalis LPS were abrogated by double mutations in cAMP response element (CRE) 
and FGF2 response element (FRE). Tyrosine kinase inhibitor herbimycin A, ERK1/2
inhibitor and antioxidant N-acetylcystein inhibited effects of P. gingivalis LPS.
Protein kinase A inhibitor and PI3-kinase/Akt inhibitor only abolished the effect
of 0.01 microg/ml P. gingivalis LPS. Furthermore, 0.1 microg/ml LPS decreased the
CRE- and FRE-protein complexes formation, whereas 0.01 microg/ml P. gingivalis
LPS increased the nuclear protein binding to CRE and FRE. ChIP assays revealed
increased binding of CREB1, JunD, Fra2, Runx2, Dlx5, and Smad1 to a chromatin
fragment containing the CRE and FRE by 0.01 microg/ml P. gingivalis LPS. These
studies therefore indicated that 0.1 microg/ml suppressed, and 0.01 microg/ml P. 
gingivalis LPS increased BSP gene transcription mediated through CRE and FRE
elements in the rat BSP gene promoter.

J. Cell. Biochem. 110: 823-833, 2010. (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.22594 
PMID: 20564183  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

