
1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2010 Sep;302(7):495-8. doi: 10.1007/s00403-010-1065-0. Epub
2010 Jul 4.

Evidence for the presence of bacteria in the blood of psoriasis patients.

Munz OH(1), Sela S, Baker BS, Griffiths CE, Powles AV, Fry L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Sciences, The Volcani Institute, Beth Dagan, Israel.

Evidence exists that microorganisms, particularly in the throat and skin, play a 
role in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. The aim of this study was to investigate
whether evidence for the presence of bacteria, including Streptococcus pyogenes, 
can be demonstrated in the peripheral blood of patients with guttate and/or
chronic plaque psoriasis. Peripheral blood samples from 20 patients with
psoriasis, seven guttate, six chronic plaque and seven chronic plaque with
associated guttate flare and from 16 control subjects were studied for the
presence of bacteria by PCR using universal 16S ribosomal DNA primers and
specific primers for S. pyogenes. Sequence analysis of amplified 16S rRNA
sequences was used to determine taxonomic identity. Ribosomal bacterial DNA was
detected in the blood of all 20 patients with psoriasis, but in none of the
controls. Streptococci were detected in six of seven patients with guttate
psoriasis, but none had staphylococci. In contrast, staphylococci were identified
in 9 of 13 patients with chronic plaque psoriasis, whilst only 2 demonstrated
streptococci. In three psoriasis patients, species other than streptococci and
staphylococci were identified. These findings suggest that psoriasis is
associated with bacteraemia, with distinct taxonomic groups present in guttate
and chronic plaque psoriatic subtypes. The causes of the bacteraemia and its
implications in psoriasis have yet to be determined.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-010-1065-0 
PMID: 20607546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

