
1. Soc Sci Med. 2010 Sep;71(5):994-1001. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2010.06.014. Epub 
2010 Jun 25.

Hygiene and sanitation among ethnic minorities in Northern Vietnam: does
government promotion match community priorities?

Rheinl√§nder T(1), Samuelsen H, Dalsgaard A, Konradsen F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of International Health, Immunology and Microbiology, University of
Copenhagen, Oster Farigmagsgade 5A, Entrance P, 1353 Copenhagen K, Denmark.
thtr@sund.ku.dk

Improving sanitation and hygiene to prevent infectious diseases is of high
priority in developing countries. This study attempts to gain in-depth
understanding of hygiene and sanitation perceptions and practices among four
Ethnic Minority Groups (EMGs) in a rural area of northern Vietnam. It is based on
extensive participatory observations in 4 villages and 20 case households over a 
period of six months (May-October 2008). In addition, 10 key informants and 60
household-members were interviewed and 4 focus group discussions conducted. The
study found that among the four selected EMGs the cultural perceptions of hygiene
and sanitation which inform everyday hygiene practices did not differ
substantially and were similar to hygiene explanations found in the rural
majority population elsewhere in Vietnam. However, the difficult living
conditions, particularly in highland communities, reinforce a sense of
marginalization among the EMGs, which had great impact on how they perceive and
respond to government sanitation interventions. The enclosed latrines promoted by
authorities are met with reluctance by the EMGs due to cultural perceptions of
the body as permeable and therefore, vulnerable to 'dirty air' such as bad smells
from human faeces. In addition, the prioritization of specific sanitation
hardware solutions by the central government aimed at increasing coverage creates
expectations and dependency among the EMGs that hygiene 'comes from the outside
society', resulting in low levels of community initiated actions. Based on these 
findings, we suggest that future hygiene promotion strategies aim for a closer
match between community priorities and government hygiene policies, e.g. by
allowing for a larger diversity of low-cost sanitation solutions. Scaling up
participatory community-based hygiene promotion is also recommended to curb
dependency and spark initiatives in ethnic minority communities. Finally,
interventions should focus on hygiene "software"--promoting hygiene behaviour
changes known to effectively prevent hygiene related diseases.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2010.06.014 
PMID: 20619522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

