
1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 10;285(37):28777-86. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.131318. Epub
2010 Jul 8.

Characterization of C1q in teleosts: insight into the molecular and functional
evolution of C1q family and classical pathway.

Hu YL(1), Pan XM, Xiang LX, Shao JZ.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China.

C1qs are key components of the classical complement pathway. They have been well 
documented in human and mammals, but little is known about their molecular and
functional characteristics in fish. In the present study, full-length cDNAs of
c1qA, c1qB, and c1qC from zebrafish (Danio rerio) were cloned, revealing the
conservation of their chromosomal synteny and organization between zebrafish and 
other species. For functional analysis, the globular heads of C1qA (ghA), C1qB
(ghB), and C1qC (ghC) were expressed in Escherichia coli as soluble proteins.
Hemolytic inhibitory assays showed that hemolytic activity in carp serum can be
inhibited significantly by anti-C1qA, -C1qB, and -C1qC of zebrafish,
respectively, indicating that C1qA, C1qB, and C1qC are involved in the classical 
pathway and are conserved functionally from fish to human. Zebrafish C1qs also
could specifically bind to heat-aggregated zebrafish IgM, human IgG, and IgM. The
involvement of globular head modules in the C1q-dependent classical pathway
demonstrates the structural and functional conservation of these molecules in the
classical pathway and their IgM or IgG binding sites during evolution.
Phylogenetic analysis revealed that c1qA, c1qB, and c1qC may be formed by
duplications of a single copy of c1qB and that the C1q family is, evolutionarily,
closely related to the Emu family. This study improves current understanding of
the evolutionary history of the C1q family and C1q-mediated immunity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.131318 
PMCID: PMC2937905
PMID: 20615881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

