
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2010 Nov;29(5):753-8. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2010.07.007.
Epub 2010 Jul 17.

Vibrio aestuarianus zinc metalloprotease causes lethality in the Pacific oyster
Crassostrea gigas and impairs the host cellular immune defenses.

Labreuche Y(1), Le Roux F, Henry J, Zatylny C, Huvet A, Lambert C, Soudant P,
Mazel D, Nicolas JL.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 100 IFREMER Physiologie et Ecophysiologie des Mollusques Marins, Centre de
Brest, B.P. 70, 29280 Plouzan√©, France. yannick.labreuche@ifremer.fr

Extracellular products (ECPs) of the pathogenic Vibrio aestuarianus 01/32 were
previously reported to display lethality in Crassostrea gigas oysters and to
cause morphological changes and immunosuppression in oyster hemocytes. To
identify the source of this toxicity, biochemical and genetic approaches were
developed. ECP protease activity and lethality were shown to be significantly
reduced following incubation with metal chelators, suggesting the involvement of 
a zinc metalloprotease. An open reading frame of 1836 bp encoding a 611-aa
metalloprotease (designated Vam) was identified. The deduced protein sequence
showed high homology to other Vibrio metalloproteases reported to be involved in 
pathogenicity. To further confirm the role of this enzyme in ECP toxicity, a
plasmid carrying the vam gene under the control of an araC-P(BAD) expression
cassette was transferred to a Vibrio splendidus related strain, LMG20012(T),
previously characterized as non-pathogenic to oysters. Expression of Vam
conferred a toxic phenotype to LMG20012(T) ECPs in vivo and cytotoxicity to
oyster hemocytes in vitro. Collectively, these data suggest that the Vam
metalloprotease is a major contributor to the toxicity induced by V. aestuarianus
ECPs and is involved in the impairment of oyster hemocyte functions.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2010.07.007 
PMID: 20624467  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

