
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2010 Nov 15;138(1-2):25-33. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2010.06.011. Epub 2010 Jun 19.

Identification and expression profile of multiple genes in channel catfish fry 10
min after modified live Flavobacterium columnare vaccination.

Pridgeon JW(1), Klesius PH.

Author information: 
(1)Aquatic Animal Health Research Unit, USDA-ARS, 990 Wire Road, Auburn, AL
36832, USA. Julia.Pridgeon@ars.usda.gov

Using PCR-select subtractive cDNA hybridization technique, 32 expressed sequence 
tags (ESTs) were isolated from 96 clones of a channel catfish (Ictalurus
punctatus) fry subtractive library 10min post-vaccination with a modified live
Flavobacterium columnare vaccine. The transcription levels of the 32 ESTs in
response to F. columnare vaccination were then evaluated by quantitative PCR
(QPCR). Of the 32 ESTs, 28 were upregulated in at least one vaccinated fish. Of
the 28 upregulated ESTs, 12 were consistently induced at least 2-fold higher in
vaccinated fish compared to unvaccinated control fish. Of the 12 upregulated
genes, three (triglyceride lipase, PIKK family atypical protein kinase, and
CCR4-NOT transcription complex subunit 1) were consistently upregulated greater
than 3-fold. The 12 consistently upregulated genes also included CD59, polymerase
(RNA) I polypeptide C, pyrophosphatase (inorganic) 1, mannose-P-dolichol
utilization defect 1, nascent polypeptide-associated complex subunit alpha,
hemoglobin-beta, fetuin-B, glyoxalase domain containing 4, and putative histone
H3. The 28 upregulated ESTs represent genes with putative functions in the
following five major categories: (1) immune response (46%); (2) signal
transduction (21%); (3) transcriptional regulation (11%); (4) cell maintenance
(11%); and (5) unknown (11%).

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2010.06.011 
PMID: 20630605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

