
1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2010 Dec;42(8):1797-804. doi: 10.1007/s11250-010-9639-6.
Epub 2010 Jul 27.

Escherichia coli strains causing edema disease in northern Vietnam share an
identical verotoxin 2e.

Oanh TK(1), Nguyen VK, Do TN, Goddeeris BM, De Greve H.

Author information: 
(1)Bacteriology Section, National Center for Veterinary Diagnosis, 11/78 Lane
Giai Phong Street, Dong Da, Ha Noi, Vietnam. oanh32@hotmail.com

Edema disease (ED) is a common fatal disease in newly weaned piglets. To develop 
an effective control program for ED, we carried out a study to better understand 
the incidence and spread of the disease and the characteristics of the causative 
agent. In our study, 69 Escherichia coli strains, isolated from 92 piglets
showing clinical signs of ED from 13 provinces in northern Vietnam, were positive
for both the VT2e toxin and the F18 major fimbrial subunit gene fedA. Of these,
40 strains (58%) were positive for AIDA and 16 isolates carried one or more
enterotoxins. Forty-six (67%) of the 69 VT2e(+)/F18(+) E. coli isolates belonged 
to classical serotypes (O139:K82, O141: K85, O138:K81, and O149:K91) while the
remaining strains did not belong to the common serotypes in pig. Seropathotype
0139:K82(+)/VT2e(+)/F18(+)/AIDA(+) (21 isolates) was the most frequently detected
ED-causing E. coli strain. High prevalence of resistance was observed to the
common drugs of tetracycline, streptomycin, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole,
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, and spectinomycin. Multiple resistances were widely 
distributed with 84% of isolates resistant to five antibiotics. Sequence analysis
demonstrated that the VT2e toxin is identical among E. coli strains causing ED in
pig.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-010-9639-6 
PMID: 20661643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

