
1. Theor Appl Genet. 2010 Nov;121(8):1553-67. doi: 10.1007/s00122-010-1410-x. Epub
2010 Aug 6.

Quantitative resistance to late blight from Solanum berthaultii cosegregates with
R(Pi-ber): insights in stability through isolates and environment.

Rauscher G(1), Simko I, Mayton H, Bonierbale M, Smart CD, Gr√ºnwald NJ, Greenland 
A, Fry WE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and Plant-Microbe Biology, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY, USA.

Genetic resistance is a valuable tool in the fight against late blight of
potatoes but little is known about the stability and specificity of quantitative 
resistance including the effect of defeated major resistance genes. In the
present study we investigated the effect of different isolates of Phytophthora
infestans on the mode of action of R(Pi-ber), an R-gene originating from Solanum 
berthaultii. The experiments were conducted on progenies derived from two
reciprocal inter-specific backcrosses of Solanum tuberosum and S. berthaultii.
The plant-pathogen interaction was tested in diverse environments including
field, greenhouse and growth chamber conditions. The R(Pi-ber) gene provided
complete resistance against a US8 isolate of P. infestans in all trials. When
isolates compatible with R(Pi-ber) were used for inoculation, a smaller, but
significant resistance effect was consistently detected in the same map position 
as the R-gene. This indicates that this R-gene provides a residual resistance
effect, and/or that additional resistance loci are located in this genomic region
of chromosome X. Additional quantitative resistance loci (QRL) were identified in
the analyzed progenies. While some of the QRL (such as those near TG130 on
chromosome III) were effective against several isolates of the pathogen, others
were isolate specific. With a single exception, the S. berthaultii alleles were
associated with a decrease in disease severity. Resistance loci reported in the
present study co-locate with previously reported R-genes and QRL to P. infestans 
and other pathogens.

DOI: 10.1007/s00122-010-1410-x 
PMID: 20689906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

