
1. J Biosci Bioeng. 2010 Dec;110(6):646-52. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2010.07.008. Epub 
2010 Aug 8.

Validation study of 24 deepwell microtiterplates to screen libraries of strains
in metabolic engineering.

Waegeman H(1), Beauprez J, Maertens J, De Mey M, Demolder L, Foulquié-Moreno MR, 
Boon N, Charlier D, Soetaert W.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Expertise-Industrial Biotechnology and Biocatalysis, Department of
Biochemical and Microbial Technology, Ghent University, Coupure Links 653, B-9000
Ghent, Belgium. Hendrik.Waegeman@UGent.be

In this study we validated the use of 24 square deepwell microtiterplates to
screen large libraries of metabolically engineered strains by investigating the
optimization of succinate production. Wild type E. coli MG1655 and 11 derived
mutants were physiologically evaluated by growth in 24 deepwell MTPs and 2L
benchtop bioreactors. Growth parameters, product yields and byproduct formation
were determined for all mutants. The results show that similar average values and
standard deviations for these parameters were obtained. Especially a high
correlation was noticed for the acetate byproduct yield and the succinate
production rate. For these parameters there was no significant difference for 8
out of 12 strains between MTPs and 2L bioreactors. However a lower maximum growth
rate was observed in 2L reactors as opposed to 24 deepwell plates for 9 out of 12
mutants which could be linked to the higher amount of dead cells in the benchtop 
bioreactors (12% vs. 2% in MTPs). Finally, a cluster-based approach was used to
select good producer strains, i.e. strains with a high succinate yield and
succinate production rate. Bad, intermediate and good producer strains were
clustered in the same groups for MTPs and benchtop bioreactors for 11 out of the 
12 investigated strains.

Copyright © 2010 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2010.07.008 
PMID: 20696615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

