
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2010 Oct;48(10):3475-81. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00542-10. Epub 2010
Aug 11.

The Pan Genera Detection immunoassay: a novel point-of-issue method for detection
of bacterial contamination in platelet concentrates.

Vollmer T(1), Hinse D, Kleesiek K, Dreier J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Laboratoriums- und Transfusionsmedizin, Herz- und Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Universitätsklinik der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bad
Oeynhausen, Germany.

Bacterial contamination of platelet concentrates (PCs) still represents an
ongoing risk in transfusion-transmitted sepsis. Recently the Pan Genera Detection
(PGD) system was developed and FDA licensed for screening of bacterial
contamination of PCs directly prior to transfusion. The test principle is based
on the immunological detection of lipopolysaccharide (for Gram-negative bacteria)
or lipoteichoic acid (for Gram-positive bacteria). In the present study we
analyzed the applicability of this method with regard to detection limit,
practicability, implementation, and performance. PCs were spiked with
Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus subtilis, and five different Klebsiella
pneumoniae strains, as well as eight different Escherichia coli strains. The
presence of bacteria was assessed by the PGD immunoassay, and bacteria were
enumerated by plating cultures. Application of the PGD immunoassay showed that it
is a rapid test with a short hands-on time for sample processing and no demand
for special technical equipment and instrument operation. The lower detection
limits of the assay for Gram-positive bacteria showed a good agreement with the
manufacturer's specifications (8.2 × 10(3) to 5.5 × 10(4) CFU/ml). For some
strains of K. pneumoniae and E. coli, the PGD test showed analytical
sensitivities (>10(6) CFU/ml) that were divergent from the designated values (K. 
pneumoniae, 2.0 × 10(4) CFU/ml; E. coli, 2.8 × 10(4) CFU/ml). Result
interpretation is sometimes difficult due to very faint bands. In conclusion, our
study demonstrates that the PGD immunoassay is an easy-to-perform bedside test
for the detection of bacterial contamination in PCs. However, to date there are
some shortcomings in the interpretation of results and in the detection limits
for some strains of Gram-negative bacteria.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00542-10 
PMCID: PMC2953102
PMID: 20702673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

