
1. J Bacteriol. 2010 Oct;192(20):5515-25. doi: 10.1128/JB.00748-10. Epub 2010 Aug
20.

Deficiency in L-serine deaminase interferes with one-carbon metabolism and cell
wall synthesis in Escherichia coli K-12.

Zhang X(1), El-Hajj ZW, Newman E.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Concordia University, 1455 de Maisonneuve Ave., Montreal, 
Quebec H3G 1M8, Canada.

Escherichia coli K-12 provided with glucose and a mixture of amino acids depletes
L-serine more quickly than any other amino acid even in the presence of ammonium 
sulfate. A mutant without three 4Fe4S L-serine deaminases (SdaA, SdaB, and TdcG) 
of E. coli K-12 is unable to do this. The high level of L-serine that accumulates
when such a mutant is exposed to amino acid mixtures starves the cells for C(1)
units and interferes with cell wall synthesis. We suggest that at high
concentrations, L-serine decreases synthesis of UDP-N-acetylmuramate-L-alanine by
the murC-encoded ligase, weakening the cell wall and producing misshapen cells
and lysis. The inhibition by high L-serine is overcome in several ways: by a
large concentration of L-alanine, by overproducing MurC together with a low
concentration of L-alanine, and by overproducing FtsW, thus promoting septal
assembly and also by overexpression of the glycine cleavage operon.
S-Adenosylmethionine reduces lysis and allows an extensive increase in biomass
without improving cell division. This suggests that E. coli has a metabolic
trigger for cell division. Without that reaction, if no other inhibition occurs, 
other metabolic functions can continue and cells can elongate and replicate their
DNA, reaching at least 180 times their usual length, but cannot divide.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00748-10 
PMCID: PMC2950509
PMID: 20729359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

