
1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2010 Oct;311(2):176-84. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.02088.x. Epub 2010 Sep 10.

Growth-phase-dependent expression of the operon coding for the glycosylated
autotransporter adhesin AIDA-I of pathogenic Escherichia coli.

Berthiaume F(1), Leblond MF, Harel J, Mourez M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacterial Animal Diseases, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire,
Université de Montréal, Saint-Hyacinthe, QC, Canada.

The adhesin involved in diffuse adherence (AIDA-I) is an autotransporter found in
pathogenic strains of Escherichia coli causing diarrhea in humans and pigs. The
AIDA-I protein is glycosylated by a specific enzyme, the AIDA-associated
heptosyltransferase (Aah). The aah gene is immediately upstream of the aidA gene,
suggesting that they form an operon. However, the mechanisms of regulation of the
aah and aidA genes are unknown. Using a clinical E. coli isolate expressing
AIDA-I, we identified two putative promoters 149 and 128 nucleotides upstream of 
aah. Using qRT-PCR, we observed that aah and aidA are transcribed in a
growth-dependent fashion, mainly at the start of the stationary phase. Western
blotting confirmed that protein expression follows the same pattern. Using a
fusion to a reporter gene, we observed that the regulation of the isolated aah
promoter matched this transcription and expression pattern. Lastly, we found
glucose to be a repressor and nutrient starvation to be an inducer. Taken
together, our results suggest that, in the strain and the conditions we studied, 
aah-aidA is transcribed as a bicistronic message from a promoter upstream of aah,
with maximal expression under conditions of nutrient limitation such as high cell
density.

© 2010 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.02088.x 
PMID: 20831592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

