
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2011 Feb 15;139(2-4):141-7. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2010.09.008. Epub 2010 Oct 7.

CXCL8 attenuates chemoattractant-induced equine neutrophil migration.

Brooks AC(1), Rickards KJ, Cunningham FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Basic Sciences, Royal Veterinary College, Hawkshead
Lane, North Mymms, Hertfordshire, AL9 7TA, UK. abrooks@rvc.ac.uk

The chemokine, CXCL8, is a potent chemoattractant but it has also been shown to
attenuate the migratory response of human neutrophils to the bacterial peptide,
FMLP; this could lead to retention of cells in infected tissue and, potentially, 
to enhanced clearance of bacteria. This study has examined the effect of CXCL8 on
equine neutrophil migration and adherence in response to PAF and LTB(4),
chemoattractants that may play a role in non-infectious inflammatory conditions
of the horse associated with neutrophil recruitment to the target tissue. The
effects of CXCL8 on PAF- and LTB(4)-induced responses were determined using a
ChemoTx plate migration assay and by measuring adhesion to protein-coated
plastic. The CXCR1/2 antagonist, SB225002, was used to investigate whether the
observed effects were receptor mediated and the role of cAMP was examined by
measuring intracellular cAMP following exposure to agonists alone and in
combination and by establishing the effect of dibutyryl cAMP on neutrophil
migration. CXCL8, LTB(4) and PAF each induced migration and adhesion. Exposure of
neutrophils to a combination of CXCL8 and PAF reduced the magnitude of the
responses to that of unstimulated cells. In contrast, although the effect was
less than additive, the response to co-stimulation with CXCL8 and LTB(4) were not
nearly as pronounced. CXCL8 acted in a receptor mediated manner, the attenuation 
of PAF-induced responses being reversed by SB225002 at a concentration that
blocks CXCR2. CXCL8, PAF and LTB(4) alone increased intracellular cAMP. In
co-incubation studies, combination of CXCL8 with PAF led to an additive increase 
in cAMP whereas no increase above that obtained in response to LTB(4) alone was
seen. Dibutyryl cAMP significantly reduced neutrophil migration in response to
either CXCL8 or PAF alone. These results demonstrate that CXCL8, in addition to
being a potent chemoattractant and pro-adhesive molecule for equine neutrophils, 
is able to attenuate responses to PAF and, to a much lesser extent, LTB(4). This 
effect, which appears to be CXCR2-mediated and cAMP dependent, could lead in vivo
to trapping of cells at sites of inflammation resulting potentially in either
enhanced clearance of injurious stimuli or increased local tissue damage by
activated cells.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2010.09.008 
PMID: 21040981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

