
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2011 Feb;49(2):491-9. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01274-10. Epub 2010 Nov 
24.

Multilocus sequence analysis and rpoB sequencing of Mycobacterium abscessus
(sensu lato) strains.

Macheras E(1), Roux AL, Bastian S, Leão SC, Palaci M, Sivadon-Tardy V, Gutierrez 
C, Richter E, Rüsch-Gerdes S, Pfyffer G, Bodmer T, Cambau E, Gaillard JL, Heym B.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Microbiologie–Hygiène, Hôpital Ambroise Paré, Assistance Publique, 
Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Boulogne-Billancourt, France.

Mycobacterium abscessus, Mycobacterium bolletii, and Mycobacterium massiliense
(Mycobacterium abscessus sensu lato) are closely related species that currently
are identified by the sequencing of the rpoB gene. However, recent studies show
that rpoB sequencing alone is insufficient to discriminate between these species,
and some authors have questioned their current taxonomic classification. We
studied here a large collection of M. abscessus (sensu lato) strains by partial
rpoB sequencing (752 bp) and multilocus sequence analysis (MLSA). The final MLSA 
scheme developed was based on the partial sequences of eight housekeeping genes: 
argH, cya, glpK, gnd, murC, pgm, pta, and purH. The strains studied included the 
three type strains (M. abscessus CIP 104536(T), M. massiliense CIP 108297(T), and
M. bolletii CIP 108541(T)) and 120 isolates recovered between 1997 and 2007 in
France, Germany, Switzerland, and Brazil. The rpoB phylogenetic tree confirmed
the existence of three main clusters, each comprising the type strain of one
species. However, divergence values between the M. massiliense and M. bolletii
clusters all were below 3% and between the M. abscessus and M. massiliense
clusters were from 2.66 to 3.59%. The tree produced using the concatenated MLSA
gene sequences (4,071 bp) also showed three main clusters, each comprising the
type strain of one species. The M. abscessus cluster had a bootstrap value of
100% and was mostly compact. Bootstrap values for the M. massiliense and M.
bolletii branches were much lower (71 and 61%, respectively), with the M.
massiliense cluster having a fuzzy aspect. Mean (range) divergence values were
2.17% (1.13 to 2.58%) between the M. abscessus and M. massiliense clusters, 2.37%
(1.5 to 2.85%) between the M. abscessus and M. bolletii clusters, and 2.28% (0.86
to 2.68%) between the M. massiliense and M. bolletii clusters. Adding the rpoB
sequence to the MLSA-concatenated sequence (total sequence, 4,823 bp) had little 
effect on the clustering of strains. We found 10/120 (8.3%) isolates for which
the concatenated MLSA gene sequence and rpoB sequence were discordant (e.g., M.
massiliense MLSA sequence and M. abscessus rpoB sequence), suggesting the
intergroup lateral transfers of rpoB. In conclusion, our study strongly supports 
the recent proposal that M. abscessus, M. massiliense, and M. bolletii should
constitute a single species. Our findings also indicate that there has been a
horizontal transfer of rpoB sequences between these subgroups, precluding the use
of rpoB sequencing alone for the accurate identification of the two proposed M.
abscessus subspecies.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01274-10 
PMCID: PMC3043527
PMID: 21106786  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

