
1. Water Res. 2011 Jan;45(3):981-92. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2010.09.028. Epub 2010
Sep 29.

A combined approach for a better understanding of wastewater treatment plants
operation: statistical analysis of monitoring database and sludge
physico-chemical characterization.

Avella AC(1), Görner T, Yvon J, Chappe P, Guinot-Thomas P, de Donato P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Environnement et Minéralurgie, Nancy-Université, LEM UMR CNRS INPL
7569, 15 avenue du Charmois, 54500 Vandœuvre-les-Nancy, France.
catalina.avella@ensg.inpl-nancy.fr

Biological wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) are complex systems to assess. Many
parameters are recorded daily in WWTP to monitor and control the treatment
process, providing huge amounts of registered data. A combined approach of
extracting information from the WWTP databases by statistical methods and from
the sludge physico-chemical characterization was used here for a better
understanding of the WWTP operation. The monitored parameters were analysed by
multivariate statistical methods: Principal Components Analysis and multiple
partial linear regression. The WWTP operational conditions determine the sludge
characteristics. The bacterial activity of the sludge in terms of extra-cellular 
polymeric substances (EPS) production was assessed using size exclusion
chromatography and the internal structure of sludge flocs was observed by
confocal laser scanning microscopy. The diagnosis of three paper mill WWTP
enabled the identification of an important EPS production, the presence of the
nitrification process and the presence of PO(4)(3-) nutrient in WWTP-A. These
three main characteristics of WWTP-A were related with a systematically good
sludge settling. In WWTP-B and C with bad settling, the bacterial activity was
weak.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2010.09.028 
PMID: 21168182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

