
1. J Infect Dis. 2011 Feb 1;203(3):418-29. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiq051. Epub 2010 Dec
14.

Intradermal infections of mice by low numbers of african trypanosomes are
controlled by innate resistance but enhance susceptibility to reinfection.

Wei G(1), Bull H, Zhou X, Tabel H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, 
Canada.

Antibodies are required to control blood-stage forms of African trypanosomes in
humans and animals. Here, we report that intradermal infections by low numbers of
African trypanosomes are controlled by innate resistance but prime the adaptive
immune response to increase susceptibility to a subsequent challenge. Mice were
found 100 times more resistant to intradermal infections by Trypanosoma
congolense or Trypanosoma brucei than to intraperitoneal infections. B
cell-deficient and RAG2(-/-) mice are as resistant as wild-type mice to
intradermal infections, whereas inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)(-/-) mice 
and wild-type mice treated with antibody to tumor necrosis factor (TNF) Î± are
more susceptible. We conclude that primary intradermal infections with low
numbers of parasites are controlled by innate defense mediated by induced nitric 
oxide (NO). CD1d(-/-) and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II(-/-)
mice are more resistant than wild-type mice to primary intradermal infections.
Trypanosome-specific spleen cells, as shown by cytokine production, are primed as
early as 24 h after intradermal infection. Infecting mice intradermally with low 
numbers of parasites, or injecting them intradermally with a trypanosomal lysate,
makes mice more susceptible to an intradermal challenge. We suggest that
intradermal infections with low numbers of trypanosomes or injections with
trypanosomal lysates prime the adaptive immune system to suppress protective
immunity to an intradermal challenge.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiq051 
PMCID: PMC3071116
PMID: 21208931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

