
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2011 Mar;77(5):1593-600. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01717-10. Epub 
2011 Jan 7.

Identification of cold-temperature-regulated genes in Flavobacterium
psychrophilum.

Hesami S(1), Metcalf DS, Lumsden JS, Macinnes JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the etiological agent of bacterial coldwater
disease (BCWD) and rainbow trout fry syndrome (RTFS). It causes disease primarily
in fresh water-reared salmonids, but other fish species can also be affected. A
diverse array of clinical conditions is associated with BCWD, including tail rot 
(peduncle disease), necrotic myositis, and cephalic osteochondritis. Degradation 
of connective and muscular tissues by extracellular proteases is common to all of
these presentations. There are no effective vaccines to prevent BCWD or RTFS, and
antibiotics are often used to prevent and control disease. To identify virulence 
factors that might permit development of an efficacious vaccine, cDNA suppression
subtractive hybridization (SSH) was used to identify cold-regulated genes in a
virulent strain of F. psychrophilum. Genes predicted to encode a two-component
system sensor histidine kinase (LytS), an ATP-dependent RNA helicase, a multidrug
ABC transporter permease/ATPase, an outer membrane protein/protective antigen
OMA87, an M43 cytophagalysin zinc-dependent metalloprotease, a hypothetical
protein, and four housekeeping genes were upregulated at 8째C versus the level of 
expression at 20째C. Because no F. psychrophilum gene was known to be suitable as 
an internal standard in reverse transcription-quantitative real-time PCR
(RT-qPCR) experiments, the expression stability of nine commonly used reference
genes was evaluated at 8째C and 20째C. Expression of the 16S rRNA was equivalent at
both temperatures, and this gene was used in RT-qPCR experiments to verify the
SSH findings. With the exception of the ATCC 49513 strain, similar patterns of
gene expression were obtained with 11 other representative strains of F.
psychrophilum.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01717-10 
PMCID: PMC3067270
PMID: 21216906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

