
1. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 4;6(1):e15948. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015948.

CD4+ T cells modulate expansion and survival but not functional properties of
effector and memory CD8+ T cells induced by malaria sporozoites.

Overstreet MG(1), Chen YC, Cockburn IA, Tse SW, Zavala F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Malaria Research
Institute, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

CD4(+) helper T cells are critical orchestrators of immune responses to infection
and vaccination. During primary responses, na√Øve CD8(+) T cells may need "CD4
help" for optimal development of memory populations. The immunological factors
attributed to CD4 help depend on the context of immunization and vary depending
on the priming system. In response to immunization with radiation-attenuated
Plasmodium yoelii sporozoites, CD8(+) T cells in BALB/c mice fail to generate
large numbers of effector cells without help from CD4(+) T cells--a defect not
observed in most systems. Given this unique early dependence on CD4 help, we
evaluated the effects of CD4(+) cells on the development of functional properties
of CD8(+) T cells and on their ability to abolish infection. First, we determined
that this effect was not mediated by CD4(+) non-T cells and did not involve
CD1d-restricted NKT cells. We found that CD8(+) T cells induced by sporozoites
without CD4 help formed memory populations severely reduced in magnitude that
could not limit parasite development in the liver. The inability of these
"helpless" memory T cells to protect is not a result of defects in effector
function, as their capacity to produce cytokines and undergo cytotoxic
degranulation was indistinguishable from control memory T cells. These data
indicate that CD4(+) T help may not be necessary to develop the functional
attributes of CD8(+) T cells; however they are crucial to ensure the survival of 
effector and memory cells induced in primary responses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015948 
PMCID: PMC3014941
PMID: 21245909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

