
1. Microb Biotechnol. 2009 May;2(3):361-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-7915.2009.00097.x.
Epub 2009 Mar 9.

Biofilm formation and proteolytic activities of Pseudoalteromonas bacteria that
were isolated from fish farm sediments.

Iijima S(1), Washio K, Okahara R, Morikawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biosphere Science, Graduate School of Environmental Science,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0810, Japan.

In order to save natural resources and supply good fishes, it is important to
improve fish-farming techniques. The survival rate of fish fry appears to become 
higher when powders of foraminifer limestone are submerged at the bottom of
fish-farming fields, where bacterial biofilms often grow. The observations
suggest that forming biofilms can benefit to keep health status of breeding
fishes. We employed culture-based methods for the identification and
characterization of biofilm-forming bacteria and assessed the application of
their properties for fish farming. Fifteen bacterial strains were isolated from
the biofilm samples collected from fish farm sediments. The 16S rRNA gene
sequences indicated that these bacteria belonged to the genera, Pseudoalteromonas
(seven strains), Vibrio (seven strains) and Halomonas (one strain). It was found 
that Pseudoalteromonas strains generally formed robust biofilms in a laboratory
condition and produced extracellular proteases in a biofilm-dependent manner. The
results suggest that Pseudoalteromonas bacteria, living in the biofilm community,
contribute in part to remove excess proteineous matters from the sediment sludge 
of fish farms.

© 2009 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2009 Society for Applied Microbiology
and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1751-7915.2009.00097.x 
PMCID: PMC3815756
PMID: 21261930  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

