
1. Immunobiology. 2011 Jun;216(6):692-7. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2010.10.007. Epub 2010
Nov 4.

Commensal bacteria promote migration of mast cells into the intestine.

Kunii J(1), Takahashi K, Kasakura K, Tsuda M, Nakano K, Hosono A, Kaminogawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Food and Physiological Functions Laboratory, College of Bioresource Sciences, 
Nihon University, 1866 Kameino, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 252-0880, Japan.

Mast cells differentiate from hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow and
migrate via the circulation to peripheral tissues, where they play a pivotal role
in induction of both innate and adaptive immune responses. In this study, the
effect of intestinal commensal bacteria on the migration of mast cells into the
intestine was investigated. Histochemical analyses showed that germ-free (GF)
mice had lower mast cell densities in the small intestine than normal mice. It
was also shown that GF mice had lower mast cell proportion out of lamina propria 
leukocytes in the small intestine and higher mast cell percentages in the blood
than normal mice by flow cytometry. These results indicate that migration of mast
cells from the blood to the intestine is promoted by intestinal commensal
bacteria. In addition, MyD88⁻/⁻ mice had lower densities of intestinal mast cells
than CV mice, suggesting that the promotive effect of commensals is, at least in 
part, TLR-dependent. The ligands of CXC chemokine receptor 2 (CXCR2), which is
critical for homing of mast cells to the intestine, were expressed higher in
intestinal tissues and in intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) of normal mice than 
in those of GF or MyD88⁻/⁻ mice. Collectively, it is suggested that commensals
promote migration of mast cells into the intestine through the induction of CXCR2
ligands from IECs in a TLR-dependent manner.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2010.10.007 
PMID: 21281976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

