
1. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 28;6(2):e17424. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017424.

Differential gene expression and adherence of Escherichia coli O157:H7 in vitro
and in ligated pig intestines.

Yin X(1), Zhu J, Feng Y, Chambers JR, Gong J, Gyles CL.

Author information: 
(1)Guelph Food Research Center, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Guelph,
Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Escherichia coli O157:H7 strain 86-24 grown in MacConkey broth (MB)
shows almost no adherence to cultured epithelial cells but adheres well in pig
ligated intestines. This study investigated the mechanisms associated with the
difference between in-vitro and in-vivo adherence of the MB culture.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: It was found that decreased adherence in vitro by
bacteria grown in MB was mainly due to lactose, possibly implicating the
involvement of carbon catabolite repression (CCR). Expression of selected
virulence-related genes associated with adherence and CCR was then examined by
quantitative PCR. When bacteria were grown in MB and Brain Heart Infusion with
NaHCO(3) (BHIN) plus lactose, pH was reduced to 5.5-5.9 and there was a
significant decrease in expression of the locus of enterocyte effacement (LEE)
genes eae, tir, espD, grlA/R and ler, and an increase in cya (cAMP), and two
negative regulators of the LEE, gadE and hfq. Putative virulence genes stcE,
hlyA, ent and nleA were also decreased in vitro. Reversal of these changes was
noted for bacteria recovered from the intestine, where transcripts for qseF and
fis and putative virulence factors AidA(15), TerC and Ent/EspL2 were
significantly increased, and transcripts for AIDA(48), Iha, UreC, Efa1A, Efa1B,
ToxB, EhxA, StcE, NleA and NleB were expressed at high levels.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Presence of lactose resulted in decreased expression of
LEE genes and the failure of EHEC O157:H7 to adhere to epithelial cells in vitro 
but this repression was overcome in vivo. CCR and/or acidic pH may have played a 
role in repression of the LEE genes. Bacterial pathogens need to integrate their 
nutritional metabolism with expression of virulence genes but little is known of 
how this is done in E. coli O157:H7. This study indicates one aspect of the
subject that should be investigated further.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017424 
PMCID: PMC3046156
PMID: 21387009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

