
1. Int Immunol. 2011 Apr;23(4):251-60. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxq477. Epub 2011 Mar 12.

Reduction of CD1d expression in vivo minimally affects NKT-enhanced antibody
production but boosts B-cell memory.

Lang GA(1), Johnson AM, Devera TS, Joshi SK, Lang ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

The CD1d-binding glycolipid Î±-galactosylceramide exerts potent adjuvant effects
on T-dependent humoral immunity. The mechanism is driven by cognate interaction
between CD1d-expressing B cells and TCR-expressing type I CD1d-restricted NKT
cells. Thus, far positive effects of alpha-galactosylceramide have been observed 
on initial and sustained antibody titers as well as B-cell memory. Following
vaccination, each of these features is desirable, but good B-cell memory is of
paramount importance for long-lived immunity. We therefore tested the hypothesis 
that CD1d expression in vivo differentially affects initial antibody titers
versus B-cell memory responses. CD1d(+/+) and CD1d(+/-) mice were generated and
immunized with antigen plus CD1d ligand before analysis of cytokine expression,
CD40L expression, initial and longer term antibody responses and B-cell memory.
As compared with CD1d(+/+) controls, CD1d(+/-) mice had equivalent numbers of
total NKT cells, lower cytokine production, fewer CD40L-expressing NKT cells,
lower initial antibody responses, similar long-term antibody responses and higher
B-cell memory. Our data indicate that weak CD1d antigen presentation may
facilitate good B-cell memory without compromising antibody responses. This work 
may impact vaccine design since over-stimulation of NKT cells at the time of
vaccination may not lead to optimal B-cell memory.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxq477 
PMCID: PMC3066037
PMID: 21398691  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

