
1. Chembiochem. 2011 Jul 4;12(10):1589-94. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201000673. Epub 2011
Mar 11.

Approaches to enzyme and substrate design of the murine Dnmt3a DNA
methyltransferase.

Jurkowska RZ(1), Siddique AN, Jurkowski TP, Jeltsch A.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Laboratory, School of Engineering and Science, Jacobs University 
Bremen, Bremen, Germany.

Dnmt3a-C, the catalytic domain of the Dnmt3a DNA-(cytosine-C5)-methyltransferase,
is active in an isolated form but, like the full-length Dnmt3a, shows only weak
DNA methylation activity. To improve this activity by directed evolution, we set 
up a selection system in which Dnmt3a-C methylated its own expression plasmid in 
E. coli, and protected it from cleavage by methylation-sensitive restriction
enzymes. However, despite screening about 400 clones that were selected in three 
rounds from a random mutagenesis library of 60 000 clones, we were not able to
isolate a variant with improved activity, most likely because of a background of 
uncleaved plasmids and plasmids that had lost the restriction sites. To improve
the catalytic activity of Dnmt3a-C by optimization of the sequence of the DNA
substrate, we analyzed its flanking-sequence preference in detail by bisulfite
DNA-methylation analysis and sequencing of individual clones. Based on the
enrichment and depletion of certain bases in the positions flanking >1300
methylated CpG sites, we were able to define a sequence-preference profile for
Dnmt3a-C from the -6 to the +6 position of the flanking sequence. This revealed
preferences for T over a purine at position -2, A over G at -1, a pyrimidine at
+1, and A and T over G at +3. We designed one "good" substrate optimized for
methylation and one "bad" substrate designed not to be efficiently methylated,
and showed that the optimized substrate is methylated >20 times more rapidly at
its central CpG site. The optimized Dnmt3a-C substrate can be applied in
enzymatic high-throughput assays with Dnmt3a-C (e.g., for inhibitor screening),
because the increased activity provides an improved dynamic range and better
signal/noise ratio.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201000673 
PMID: 21400651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

