
1. Immunol Lett. 2011 Sep 30;139(1-2):33-41. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2011.04.012. Epub 
2011 May 5.

Critical role for invariant chain in CD1d-mediated selection and maturation of
Vα14-invariant NKT cells.

Sillé FC(1), Martin C, Jayaraman P, Rothchild A, Besra GS, Behar SM, Boes M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

The development and maturation of Vα14 invariant (i)NKT cells in mice requires
CD1d-mediated lipid antigen presentation in the thymus and the periphery.
Cortical thymocytes mediate positive selection, while professional APCs are
involved in thymic negative selection and in terminal maturation of iNKT cells in
the periphery. CD1d requires entry in the endosomal pathway to allow antigen
acquisition for assembly as lipid/CD1d complexes for display to iNKT cells. This 
process involves tyrosine-based sorting motifs in the CD1d cytoplasmic tail and
invariant chain (Ii) that CD1d associates with in the endoplasmic reticulum. The 
function of Ii in iNKT cell thymic development and peripheral maturation had not 
been fully understood. Using mice deficient in Ii and the Ii-processing enzyme
cathepsin S (catS), we addressed this question. Ii(-/-) mice but not catS(-/-)
mice developed significantly fewer iNKT cells in thymus, that were less mature as
measured by CD44 and NK1.1 expression. Ii(-/-) mice but not catS(-/-) mice
developed fewer Vβ7(+) cells in their iNKT TCR repertoire than WT counterparts,
indicative of a change in endogenous glycolipid antigen/CD1d-mediated iNKT cell
selection. Finally, using a Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection model in
macrophages, we show that iNKT developed in Ii(-/-) but not catS(-/-) mice have
defective effector function. Our data support a role for professional APCs
expressing Ii, but no role for catS in the thymic development and peripheral
terminal maturation of iNKT cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imlet.2011.04.012 
PMCID: PMC3146573
PMID: 21565221  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

