
1. J Neuroinflammation. 2011 May 11;8:46. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-46.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis-infected human monocytes down-regulate microglial
MMP-2 secretion in CNS tuberculosis via TNFα, NFκB, p38 and caspase 8 dependent
pathways.

Green JA(1), Dholakia S, Janczar K, Ong CW, Moores R, Fry J, Elkington PT,
Roncaroli F, Friedland JS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Infectious Diseases and Immunity and the Imperial College Wellcome 
Trust Centre for Clinical Tropical Medicine, Hammersmith Campus, Imperial College
London, London, W12 0NN, UK. justin.green@imperial.ac.uk

Tuberculosis (TB) of the central nervous system (CNS) is a deadly disease
characterized by extensive tissue destruction, driven by molecules such as Matrix
Metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) which targets CNS-specific substrates. In a
simplified cellular model of CNS TB, we demonstrated that conditioned medium from
Mycobacterium tuberculosis-infected primary human monocytes (CoMTb), but not
direct infection, unexpectedly down-regulates constitutive microglial MMP-2 gene 
expression and secretion by 72.8% at 24 hours, sustained up to 96 hours (P <
0.01), dependent upon TNF-α. In human CNS TB brain biopsies but not controls the 
p38 pathway was activated in microglia/macrophages. Inhibition of the p38 MAP
kinase pathway resulted in a 228% increase in MMP-2 secretion (P < 0.01). In
contrast ERK MAP kinase inhibition further decreased MMP-2 secretion by 76.6% (P 
< 0.05). Inhibition of the NFκB pathway resulted in 301% higher MMP-2 secretion
than CoMTb alone (P < 0.01). Caspase 8 restored MMP-2 secretion to basal levels. 
However, this caspase-dependent regulation of MMP-2 was independent of p38 and
NFκB pathways; p38 phosphorylation was increased and p50/p65 NFκB nuclear
trafficking unaffected by caspase 8 inhibition. In summary, suppression of
microglial MMP-2 secretion by M.tb-infected monocyte-dependent networks
paradoxically involves the pro-inflammatory mediators TNF-α, p38 MAP kinase and
NFκB in addition to a novel caspase 8-dependent pathway.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-46 
PMCID: PMC3113956
PMID: 21569377  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

