
1. Mol Microbiol. 2011 Aug;81(4):952-67. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2011.07741.x. Epub
2011 Jul 13.

ArsAB, a novel enzyme from Sporomusa ovata activates phenolic bases for
adenosylcobamide biosynthesis.

Chan CH(1), Escalante-Semerena JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin, 1550 Linden Drive,
Madison, WI 53706-1521, USA.

In the homoacetogenic bacterium Sporomusa ovata, phenol and p-cresol are
converted into α-ribotides, which are incorporated into biologically active
cobamides (Cbas) whose lower ligand bases do not form axial co-ordination bonds
with the cobalt ion of the corrin ring. Here we report the identity of two S.
ovata genes that encode an enzyme that transfers the phosphoribosyl group of
nicotinate mononucleotide (NaMN) to phenol or p-cresol, yielding α-O-glycosidic
ribotides. The alluded genes were named arsA and arsB (for alpha-ribotide
synthesis), arsA and arsB were isolated from a genomic DNA library of S. ovata. A
positive selection strategy using an Escherichia coli strain devoid of
NaMN:5,6-dimethylbenzimidazole (DMB) phosphoribosyltransferase (CobT) activity
was used to isolate a fragment of S. ovata DNA that contained arsA and arsB,
whose nucleotide sequences overlapped by 8 bp. SoArsAB was isolated to
homogeneity, shown to be functional as a heterodimer, and to have highest
activity at pH 9. SoArsAB also activated DMB to its α-N-glycosidic ribotide.
Previously characterized CobT-like enzymes activate DMB but do not activate
phenolics. NMR spectroscopy was used to confirm the incorporation of phenol into 
the cobamide, and mass spectrometry was used to identify SoArsAB reaction
products.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2011.07741.x 
PMCID: PMC3182833
PMID: 21696461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

