
1. Front Microbiol. 2011 Jan 24;2:1. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00001. eCollection
2011.

The Differential Effect of Toxoplasma Gondii Infection on the Stability of
BCL2-Family Members Involves Multiple Activities.

Carmen JC(1), Sinai AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of 
Kentucky College of Medicine Lexington, KY, USA.

The regulation of mitochondrial permeability, a key event in the initiation of
apoptosis is governed by the opposing actions of the pro- and anti-apoptotic
members of the BCL2-family of proteins. The BCL2-family can be classified further
based on the number of BCL-homology (BH) domains they encode. Pathogen mediated
modulation of BCL2-family members play a significant role in their ability to
affect the apoptotic pathways in the infected host cell. The protozoan parasite
Toxoplasma gondii establishes a profound blockade of apoptosis noted by a
requirement for host NFÎºB activity and correlating with the selective degradation
of pro-apoptotic BCL2-family members. In this study, we explore the potential
activities associated with the inherent stability of the anti-apoptotic BCL2 as
well as the selective degradation of the pro-apoptotic proteins BAX, BAD, and
BID. We find that multiple activities govern the relative stability of
BCL2-family members suggesting a complex and balanced network of
stability-enhancing and-destabilizing activities are perturbed by parasite
infection. The data leave open the possibility for both parasite induced host
activities as well as the direct consequence of parasite effectors in governing
the relative levels of BCL2-proteins in the course of infection.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00001 
PMCID: PMC3109420
PMID: 21716958 

