
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e21701. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021701. Epub 2011 Jun 30.

Analysis of the CD1 antigen presenting system in humanized SCID mice.

Lockridge JL(1), Chen X, Zhou Y, Rajesh D, Roenneburg DA, Hegde S, Gerdts S,
Cheng TY, Anderson RJ, Painter GF, Moody DB, Burlingham WJ, Gumperz JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of
America.

CD1 molecules are glycoproteins that present lipids and glycolipids for
recognition by T cells. CD1-dependent immune activation has been implicated in a 
wide range of immune responses, however, our understanding of the role of this
pathway in human disease remains limited because of species differences between
humans and other mammals: whereas humans express five different CD1 gene products
(CD1a, CD1b, CD1c, CD1d, and CD1e), muroid rodents express only one CD1 isoform
(CD1d). Here we report that immune deficient mice engrafted with human fetal
thymus, liver, and CD34(+) hematopoietic stem cells develop a functional human
CD1 compartment. CD1a, b, c, and d isoforms were highly expressed by human
thymocytes, and CD1a(+) cells with a dendritic morphology were present in the
thymic medulla. CD1(+) cells were also detected in spleen, liver, and lungs. APCs
from spleen and liver were capable of presenting bacterial glycolipids to human
CD1-restricted T cells. ELISpot analyses of splenocytes demonstrated the presence
of CD1-reactive IFN-γ producing cells. CD1d tetramer staining directly identified
human iNKT cells in spleen and liver samples from engrafted mice, and injection
of the glycolipid antigen α-GalCer resulted in rapid elevation of human IFN-γ and
IL-4 levels in the blood indicating that the human iNKT cells are biologically
active in vivo. Together, these results demonstrate that the human CD1 system is 
present and functionally competent in this humanized mouse model. Thus, this
system provides a new opportunity to study the role of CD1-related immune
activation in infections to human-specific pathogens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021701 
PMCID: PMC3128084
PMID: 21738769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

