
1. Mutagenesis. 2012 Jan;27(1):41-8. doi: 10.1093/mutage/ger054. Epub 2011 Aug 8.

Hydroxymethyl-substituted furans: mutagenicity in Salmonella typhimurium strains 
engineered for expression of various human and rodent sulphotransferases.

Glatt H(1), Schneider H, Murkovic M, Monien BH, Meinl W.

Author information: 
(1)German Institute of Human Nutrition (DIfE) Potsdam-Rehbrücke, Department of
Nutritional Toxicology, Arthur-Scheunert-Allee 114-116, 14558 Nuthetal, Germany. 
glatt@dife.de

5-Hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) and furfuryl alcohol (FFA) are present in numerous 
foodstuffs at high levels. FFA is also used for the production of polymers. Both 
compounds had demonstrated some evidence of carcinogenic activity in 2-year
bioassays. We tested these compounds and four congeners for mutagenicity in
Salmonella typhimurium TA100 and TA100-derived strains expressing human or rodent
sulphotransferases (SULTs). 5-Hydroxymethylfuroic acid, a metabolite of HMF, was 
not mutagenic in any strain. 3-Hydroxymethylfuran was weakly mutagenic in all
strains independently of SULT expression. HMF, 2,5-(bishydroxymethyl)furan
(metabolite of HMF), FFA and 5-methyl-FFA were inactive in TA100 but strongly
mutagenic when human SULT1C2 was expressed. This form has been detected in ovary,
kidney and foetal tissues. Human SULT1A1, SULT1A2 and SULT1A3 as well as murine
Sult1a1 and Sult1d1 also activated some hydroxymethyl-substituted furans to
varying degrees. Whereas chemically synthesised 5-sulphooxymethylfurfural was
mutagenic in TA100, furfuryl sulphate was bacteriotoxic, only leading to marginal
increases in the number of revertants. Furfuryl acetate, an uncharged ester of
FFA, used as fragrance and food flavouring, was clearly mutagenic. We determined 
half-life times of 120 min, 20 s and 10 h, respectively, for
5-sulphooxymethylfurfural, furfuryl sulphate and furfuryl acetate at 37°C in
water. It is likely that the short lifespan of furfuryl sulphate, together with
its charge, led to insufficient penetration of the bacteria when added
externally, although it was mutagenic when generated by appropriate SULTs from
FFA within the cell.

DOI: 10.1093/mutage/ger054 
PMID: 21825114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

