
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Nov;79(11):4588-99. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05641-11. Epub 2011 Aug
15.

Receptor-interacting protein 2 controls pulmonary host defense to Escherichia
coli infection via the regulation of interleukin-17A.

Balamayooran T(1), Batra S, Balamayooran G, Cai S, Kobayashi KS, Flavell RA,
Jeyaseelan S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Lung Biology, Department of Pathobiological Sciences and Center 
for Experimental Infectious Disease Research, Louisiana State University (LSU),
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 708031, USA.

Recognition of microbial patterns by host receptors is the first step in a
multistep sequence leading to neutrophil-dependent host resistance. Although the 
role of membrane-bound sensors in bacterial recognition has been examined in
detail, the importance of cytosolic sensors in the lungs is largely unexplored.
In this context, there is a major lack of understanding related to the downstream
signaling mediators, such as cells and/or molecules, during acute extracellular
Gram-negative bacterial pneumonia. In order to determine the role of NOD-like
receptors (NLRs), we used an experimental Escherichia coli infection model using 
mice deficient in the gene coding for the NLR adaptor, receptor-interacting
protein 2 (RIP2). RIP2(-/-) mice with E. coli infection displayed higher
bacterial burden and reduced neutrophil recruitment and tumor necrosis factor
alpha (TNF-α), interleukin-6 (IL-6), macrophage inflammatory protein 2 (MIP-2),
and CXCL5/LIX expression, along with attenuated histopathological changes in the 
lungs. Decreased IL-17A levels were observed, along with lower numbers of
IL-17A-producing T cells, in RIP2(-/-) mice after infection. RIP2(-/-) mice also 
show reduced IL-6 and IL-23 levels in the lungs, along with decreased activation 
of STAT3 after infection. Furthermore, activation of NF-κB and mitogen-activated 
protein kinases (MAPKs) and expression of intercellular adhesion molecule 1
(ICAM-1) and vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1) in the lungs of infected 
RIP2(-/-) mice were attenuated following infection. Although neutrophil
mobilization to the blood was impaired in RIP2(-/-) mice following infection, the
expression of CD62P, CD11a/18, CD11b, and CXCR2 on blood and lung neutrophils was
not altered between infected wild-type (WT) and RIP2(-/-) mice. Thus, RIP2
contributes to neutrophil-dependent host defense against an extracellular
Gram-negative pathogen via (i) IL-17A regulation and (ii) neutrophil mobilization
to the blood.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.05641-11 
PMCID: PMC3257916
PMID: 21844230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

