
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23817. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023817. Epub 2011 Aug 17.

Regulation of anthrax toxin-specific antibody titers by natural killer T
cell-derived IL-4 and IFNγ.

Devera TS(1), Joshi SK, Aye LM, Lang GA, Ballard JD, Lang ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America.

Activation of Natural Killer-like T cells (NKT) with the CD1d ligand α-GC leads
to enhanced production of anthrax toxin protective Ag (PA)-neutralizing Abs, yet 
the underlying mechanism for this adjuvant effect is not known. In the current
study we examined the role of Th1 and Th2 type responses in NKT-mediated
enhancement of antibody responses to PA. First, the contribution of IL-4 and IFNγ
to the production of PA-specific toxin-neutralizing Abs was examined. By
immunizing C57Bl/6 controls IL-4(-/-) mice and IFNγ(-/-) mice and performing
passive serum transfer experiments, it was observed that sera containing
PA-specific IgG1, IgG2b and IgG2c neutralized toxin in vitro and conferred
protection in vivo. Sera containing IgG2b and IgG2c neutralized toxin in vitro
but were not sufficient for protection in vivo. Sera containing IgG1 and IgG2b
neutralized toxin in vitro and conferred protection in vivo. IgG1 therefore
emerged as a good correlate of protection. Next, C57Bl/6 mice were immunized with
PA alone or PA plus a Th2-skewing α-GC derivative known as OCH. Neutralizing
PA-specific IgG1 responses were modestly enhanced by OCH in C57Bl/6 mice.
Conversely, IgG2b and IgG2c were considerably enhanced in PA/OCH-immunized
IL-4(-/-) mice but did not confer protection. Finally, bone marrow chimeras were 
generated such that NKT cells were unable to express IL-4 or IFNγ. NKT-derived
IL-4 was required for OCH-enhanced primary IgG1 responses but not recall
responses. NKT-derived IL-4 and IFNγ also influenced primary and recall IgG2b and
IgG2c titers. These data suggest targeted skewing of the Th2 response by α-GC
derivatives can be exploited to optimize anthrax vaccination.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023817 
PMCID: PMC3157475
PMID: 21858226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

