
1. Blood. 2011 Oct 6;118(14):3870-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-03-341941. Epub 2011
Aug 22.

Autoreactive CD1b-restricted T cells: a new innate-like T-cell population that
contributes to immunity against infection.

Li S(1), Choi HJ, Felio K, Wang CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northwestern University, Chicago,
IL, USA.

Group 1 CD1 (CD1a, -b, and -c) presents self and foreign lipid antigens to
multiple T-cell subsets in humans. However, in the absence of a suitable animal
model, the specific functions and developmental requirements of these T cells
remain unknown. To study group 1 CD1-restricted T cells in vivo, we generated
double transgenic mice (HJ1Tg/hCD1Tg) that express group 1 CD1 molecules in a
similar pattern to that observed in humans (hCD1Tg) as well as a TCR derived from
a CD1b-autoreactive T-cell line (HJ1Tg). Using this model, we found that similar 
to CD1d-restricted NKT cells, HJ1 T cells exhibit an activated phenotype
(CD44(hi)CD69(+)CD122(+)) and a subset of HJ1 T cells expresses NK1.1 and is
selected by CD1b-expressing hematopoietic cells. HJ1 T cells secrete
proinflammatory cytokines in response to stimulation with CD1b-expressing
dendritic cells derived from humans as well as hCD1Tg mice, suggesting that they 
recognize species conserved self-lipid antigen(s). Importantly, this basal
autoreactivity is enhanced by TLR-mediated signaling and HJ1 T cells can be
activated and confer protection against Listeria infection. Taken together, our
data indicate that CD1b-autoreactive T cells, unlike mycobacterial lipid
antigen-specific T cells, are innate-like T cells that may contribute to early
anti-microbial host defense.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2011-03-341941 
PMCID: PMC3193264
PMID: 21860021  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

