
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23913. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023913. Epub 2011 Aug 31.

Biological activity of CXCL8 forms generated by alternative cleavage of the
signal peptide or by aminopeptidase-mediated truncation.

Mortier A(1), Berghmans N, Ronsse I, Grauwen K, Stegen S, Van Damme J, Proost P.

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Department of Microbiology &
Immunology, Rega Institute, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Posttranslational modification of chemokines is one of the mechanisms
that regulate leukocyte migration during inflammation. Multiple natural
NH(2)-terminally truncated forms of the major human neutrophil attractant
interleukin-8 or CXCL8 have been identified. Although differential activity was
reported for some CXCL8 forms, no biological data are available for others.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Aminopeptidase-cleaved CXCL8(2-77) and
CXCL8(3-77), the product of alternative cleavage of the signal peptide
CXCL8(-2-77) and the previously studied forms containing 77 and 72 amino acids,
CXCL8(1-77) and CXCL8(6-77), were prepared by solid-phase peptide synthesis,
purified and folded into active proteins. No differences in binding and calcium
signaling potency were detected between CXCL8(1-77), CXCL8(-2-77), CXCL8(2-77)
and CXCL8(3-77) on cells transfected with one of the human CXCL8 receptors, i.e. 
CXCR1 and CXCR2. However, CXCL8(-2-77) was more potent compared to CXCL8(1-77),
CXCL8(2-77) and CXCL8(3-77) in signaling and in vitro chemotaxis of peripheral
blood-derived human neutrophils. Moreover, CXCL8(-2-77) was less efficiently
processed by plasmin into the more potent CXCL8(6-77). The truncated forms
CXCL8(2-77) and CXCL8(3-77) had higher affinity for heparin than CXCL8(1-77), a
property important for the presentation of CXCL8 on endothelial layers. Upon
intraperitoneal injection in mice, elongated, truncated and intact CXCL8 were
equally potent to recruit neutrophils to the peritoneal cavity.
CONCLUSIONS: In terms of their ability to induce neutrophil recruitment in vivo, 
the multiple CXCL8 forms may be divided in three groups. The first group includes
CXCL8 proteins consisting of 75 to 79 amino acids, cleaved by aminopeptidases,
with intermediate activity on neutrophils. The second group, generated through
proteolytic cleavage (e.g. by Ser proteases), contains 69 to 72 amino acid forms 
which are highly potent neutrophil attractants in vivo. A third category is
generated through the modification of the arginine in the NH(2)-terminal region
into citrulline by peptidylarginine deiminases and has weak potency to induce
neutrophil extravasation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023913 
PMCID: PMC3164136
PMID: 21904597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

