
1. Heredity (Edinb). 2012 Apr;108(4):403-9. doi: 10.1038/hdy.2011.87. Epub 2011 Sep 
21.

MHC-mediated spatial distribution in brown trout (Salmo trutta) fry.

O'Farrell B(1), Benzie JA, McGinnity P, Carlsson J, Eyto Ed, Dillane E, Graham C,
Coughlan J, Cross T.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Phylogeography, Department of Microbiology, Environmental Research
Institute, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.

Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I-linked microsatellite data and
parental assignment data for a group of wild brown trout (Salmo trutta L.)
provide evidence of closer spatial aggregation among fry sharing greater numbers 
of MHC class I alleles under natural conditions. This result confirms predictions
from laboratory experiments demonstrating a hierarchical preference for
association of fry sharing MHC alleles. Full-siblings emerge from the same nest
(redd), and a passive kin association pattern arising from limited dispersal from
the nest (redd effect) would predict that all such pairs would have a similar
distribution. However, this study demonstrates a strong, significant trend for
reduced distance between pairs of full-sibling fry sharing more MHC class I
alleles reflecting their closer aggregation (no alleles shared, 311.5 ±
(s.e.)21.03 m; one allele shared, 222.2 ± 14.49 m; two alleles shared, 124.9 ±
23.88 m; P<0.0001). A significant trend for closer aggregation among fry sharing 
more MHC class I alleles was also observed in fry pairs, which were known to have
different mothers and were otherwise unrelated (ML-r = 0) (no alleles: 457.6 ±
3.58 m; one allele (422.4 ± 3.86 m); two alleles (381.7 ± 10.72 m); P<0.0001).
These pairs are expected to have emerged from different redds and a passive
association would then be unlikely. These data suggest that sharing MHC class I
alleles has a role in maintaining kin association among full-siblings after
emergence. This study demonstrates a pattern consistent with MHC-mediated kin
association in the wild for the first time.

DOI: 10.1038/hdy.2011.87 
PMCID: PMC3313050
PMID: 21934705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

