
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2011 Dec;11(8):2034-42. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.09.012.
Epub 2011 Sep 21.

Differences in the genomic content of Bordetella pertussis isolates before and
after introduction of pertussis vaccines in four European countries.

Kallonen T(1), Gröndahl-Yli-Hannuksela K, Elomaa A, Lutyńska A, Fry NK, Mertsola 
J, He Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease Surveillance and Control, National Institute 
for Health and Welfare, Kiinamyllynkatu 13, 20520 Turku, Finland.

Resurgence of pertussis has been observed in many countries with high vaccination
coverage and clonal expansion of certain Bordetella pertussis strains has been
associated with recent epidemics in Europe. It is known that vaccinations have
selected strains which are different from those used for vaccine production.
However, little is known about the differences in genomic content of strains
circulating before the vaccination was introduced. In this study, we compared the
genomes of 39 vaccine strains and old clinical isolates (isolated 1941-1984)
collected from Finland (n = 5), Poland (n = 14), Serbia (n = 10) and the UK (n = 
10). The analysis included genotyping, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE)
and comparative genomic hybridisation (CGH). Compared to the strain Tohama I, the
European isolates analyzed have lost three major regions of difference (RD3, 5
and 29). However, difference in frequency of the absent RDs 3 (BP0910A-BP0934), 5
(BP1135-BP1141) or 29 (BP1225) was observed among isolates from the four
countries. Of the isolates with absent RD5, half had also a duplicated region in 
the genome. All four RDs (RD22 (BB0535-BB0541), 23 (BB0916-BB0921), 24
(BB1140-BB1158) and 26 (BB4880-BB4888)) absent in Tohama I were present in
majority of the tested isolates. Results obtained from PFGE analysis correlated
well with those of CGH. Recently a novel pertussis toxin promoter allele (ptxP3) 
was described. Isolates with ptxP3 have replaced resident ptxP1 isolates in the
countries where this was investigated. When the recent isolates, collected in
2000-2004, selected from the four countries were examined, the ptxP3 allele was
found in all countries except Poland. Our result indicates that at least three
clusters of B. pertussis circulated in Europe in pre- and early vaccine era and
their genomes were distinct from that of the reference strain Tohama I. Although 
progressive gene loss occurs in B. pertussis population with time, difference in 
frequency of the lost genes were observed among isolates from the four countries.
The observed differences in genomic content might be vaccine-driven.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.09.012 
PMID: 21964035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

