
1. Mol Membr Biol. 2011 Oct-Nov;28(7-8):462-72. doi: 10.3109/09687688.2011.624989.
Epub 2011 Oct 13.

Turnover and accessibility of a reentrant loop of the Na+-glutamate transporter
GltS are modulated by the central cytoplasmic loop.

Krupnik T(1), Sobczak-Elbourne I, Lolkema JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology 
Institute, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

GltS of Escherichia coli is a secondary transporter that catalyzes Na+-glutamate 
symport. The structural model of GltS shows two homologous domains with inverted 
membrane topology that are connected by a central loop that resides in the
cytoplasm. Each domain contains a reentrant loop structure. Accessibility of the 
Cys residues in two GltS mutants in which Pro351 and Asn356 in the reentrant loop
in the C-terminal domain were replaced by Cys is demonstrated to be sensitive to 
the catalytic state supporting a role for the reentrant loops in catalysis.
Saturating concentrations of the substrate L-glutamate protected both mutants
against inactivation by thiol reagents, while the presence of the co-ion Na+
stimulated the inactivation of both mutants. Insertion of the 10 kDa biotin
acceptor domain (BAD) of oxaloacetate decarboxylase of Klebsiella pneumoniae in
the central cytoplasmic loop blocked the access pathway from the periplasmic side
of the membrane to the cysteine residues in mutants P351C and N356C in the
reentrant loop. Kinetically, insertion of BAD increased the maximal rate of
uptake 2.7-fold while leaving the apparent affinity constants for L-glutamate and
Na+ unaltered. The data suggests that insertion of BAD in the central loop
results in conformational changes at the translocation site that lower the
activation energy of the translocation step without affecting the access pathway 
from the periplasmic side for substrate and co-ions. It is concluded that changes
in the central loop that connects the two domains may have a regulatory function 
on the activity of the transporter.

DOI: 10.3109/09687688.2011.624989 
PMID: 21995702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

