
1. Shock. 2012 Feb;37(2):145-51. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e31823f14a4.

Homology in systemic neutrophil response induced by human experimental
endotoxemia and by trauma.

Visser T(1), Pillay J, Pickkers P, Leenen LP, Koenderman L.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, University Medical Center Utrecht, the Netherlands.
T.Visser@umcutrecht.nl

The investigation of the trauma-induced innate immune responses is hampered by
the wide variability in patients, type of trauma, and environmental factors. To
circumvent this heterogeneity, we examined whether the systemic innate immune
response toward human experimental endotoxemia is similar to the response during 
systemic inflammatory response syndrome after trauma. We tested the hypothesis
that the innate immune response to pathogen-associated molecular pattern (e.g.,
lipopolysaccharides [LPSs]) and danger-associated molecular pattern (as induced
by injury) leads to a comparable in vivo activation of human neutrophils.
Escherichia coli LPS (2 ng/kg) was injected intravenously in nine healthy
volunteers to induce a controlled systemic inflammatory response. Indices of
systemic inflammation in this human inflammation model were compared with those
of 12 trauma patients with a mean injury severity score of 19. Blood samples were
withdrawn at 3 and 24 h after LPS-challenge or injury. Blood samples of nine
healthy volunteers were used as control. Receptor expression was measured as
readout for neutrophil activation by flow cytometry. Endotoxemia and injury
resulted in a comparable activation phenotype of circulating neutrophils. This
phenotype was characterized by downregulation of chemokine receptors CXCR1 and
CXCR2 and of FcÎ³ receptors II and III. A significant difference between both
conditions was seen in CD66b expression and for endotoxin resulted in an
increased CD66b expression, whereas injury did not. Neutrophil activation was
present 3 h after onset of inflammation, both during experimental endotoxemia as 
well as in trauma patients. Endotoxin and trauma appear to induce a similar
neutrophil activation phenotype.

DOI: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e31823f14a4 
PMID: 22089204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

