
1. Eur Respir J. 2012 Jun;39(6):1385-90. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00130011. Epub 2011
Nov 16.

CXCR1 and CXCR2 haplotypes synergistically modulate cystic fibrosis lung disease.

Kormann MS(1), Hector A, Marcos V, Mays LE, Kappler M, Illig T, Klopp N,
Zeilinger S, Carevic M, Rieber N, Eickmeier O, Zielen S, Gaggar A, Moepps B,
Griese M, Hartl D.

Author information: 
(1)Children's hospital and Interdisciplinary Center for Infectious Diseases,
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. michael.kormann@med.uni-tuebingen.de

Cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease severity is largely independent on the CF
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) genotype, indicating the contribution 
of genetic modifiers. The chemokine receptors CXCR1 and CXCR2 have been found to 
play essential roles in the pathogenesis of CF lung disease. Here, we determine
whether genetic variation of CXCR1 and CXCR2 influences CF lung disease severity.
Genomic DNA of CF patients in Germany (n = 442) was analysed for common
variations in CXCR1 and CXCR2 using a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
tagging approach. Associations of CXCR1 and CXCR2 SNPs and haplotypes with CF
lung disease severity, CXCR1 and CXCR2 expression, and neutrophil effector
functions were assessed. Four SNPs in CXCR1 and three in CXCR2 strongly
correlated with age-adjusted lung function in CF patients. SNPs comprising
haplotypes CXCR1_Ha and CXCR2_Ha were in high linkage disequilibrium and patients
heterozygous for the CXCR1-2 haplotype cluster (CXCR1-2_Ha) had lower lung
function compared with patients with homozygous wild-type alleles (forced
expiratory volume in 1 s ≤ 70% predicted, OR 7.24; p = 2.30 × 10(-5)). CF
patients carrying CXCR1-2_Ha showed decreased CXCR1 combined with increased CXCR2
mRNA and protein expression, and displayed disturbed antibacterial effector
functions. CXCR1 and CXCR2 genotypes modulate lung function and antibacterial
host defence in CF lung disease.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00130011 
PMID: 22088968  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

