
1. J Mol Model. 2012 Jun;18(6):2659-72. doi: 10.1007/s00894-011-1285-z. Epub 2011
Nov 19.

Homology modeling and docking analyses of M. leprae Mur ligases reveals the
common binding residues for structure based drug designing to eradicate leprosy.

Shanmugam A(1), Natarajan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, VMKV Engineering College, Vinayaka Missions
University, Salem, India.

Multi drug resistance capacity for Mycobacterium leprae (MDR-Mle) demands the
profound need for developing new anti-leprosy drugs. Since most of the drugs
target a single enzyme, mutation in the active site renders the antibiotic
ineffective. However, structural and mechanistic information on essential
bacterial enzymes in a pathway could lead to the development of antibiotics that 
targets multiple enzymes. Peptidoglycan is an important component of the cell
wall of M. leprae. The biosynthesis of bacterial peptidoglycan represents
important targets for the development of new antibacterial drugs. Biosynthesis of
peptidoglycan is a multi-step process that involves four key Mur ligase enzymes: 
MurC (EC:6.3.2.8), MurD (EC:6.3.2.9), MurE (EC:6.3.2.13) and MurF (EC:6.3.2.10). 
Hence in our work, we modeled the three-dimensional structure of the above Mur
ligases using homology modeling method and analyzed its common binding features. 
The residues playing an important role in the catalytic activity of each of the
Mur enzymes were predicted by docking these Mur ligases with their substrates and
ATP. The conserved sequence motifs significant for ATP binding were predicted as 
the probable residues for structure based drug designing. Overall, the study was 
successful in listing significant and common binding residues of Mur enzymes in
peptidoglycan pathway for multi targeted therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s00894-011-1285-z 
PMID: 22102165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

