
1. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2011 Nov;67(Pt 11):945-56. doi:
10.1107/S0907444911038777. Epub 2011 Oct 19.

Structures of Burkholderia thailandensis nucleoside kinase: implications for the 
catalytic mechanism and nucleoside selectivity.

Yasutake Y(1), Ota H, Hino E, Sakasegawa S, Tamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Bioproduction Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology (AIST), 2-17-2-1 Tsukisamu-Higashi, Sapporo 062-8517,
Japan.

The nucleoside kinase (NK) from the mesophilic Gram-negative bacterium
Burkholderia thailandensis (BthNK) is a member of the phosphofructokinase B
(Pfk-B) family and catalyzes the Mg(2+)- and ATP-dependent phosphorylation of a
broad range of nucleosides such as inosine (INO), adenosine (ADO) and mizoribine 
(MZR). BthNK is currently used in clinical practice to measure serum MZR levels. 
Here, crystal structures of BthNK in a ligand-free form and in complexes with
INO, INO-ADP, MZR-ADP and AMP-Mg(2+)-AMP are described. The typical homodimeric
architecture of Pfk-B enzymes was detected in three distinct conformational
states: an asymmetric dimer with one subunit in an open conformation and the
other in a closed conformation (the ligand-free form), a closed conformation (the
binary complex with INO) and a fully closed conformation (the other ternary and
quaternary complexes). The previously unreported fully closed structures suggest 
the possibility that Mg(2+) might directly interact with the β- and γ-phosphates 
of ATP to maintain neutralization of the negative charge throughout the reaction.
The nucleoside-complex structures also showed that the base moiety of the bound
nucleoside is partly exposed to the solvent, thereby enabling the recognition of 
a wide range of nucleoside bases. Gly170 is responsible for the solvent
accessibility of the base moiety and is assumed to be a key residue for the broad
nucleoside recognition of BthNK. Remarkably, the G170Q mutation increases the
specificity of BthNK for ADO. These findings provide insight into the
conformational dynamics, catalytic mechanism and nucleoside selectivity of BthNK 
and related enzymes.

© 2011 International Union of Crystallography. Printed in Singapore – all rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1107/S0907444911038777 
PMID: 22101821  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

