
1. Ann Hepatol. 2012 Jan-Feb;11(1):107-17.

Amoebic liver abscess production by Entamoeba dispar.

Dolabella SS(1), Serrano-Luna J, Navarro-García F, Cerritos R, Ximénez C,
Galván-Moroyoqui JM, Silva EF, Tsutsumi V, Shibayama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology, Laboratory of Parasitology, Federal University of
Sergipe, Aracaju, Sergipe, Brazil.

Although Entamoeba dispar displays a similar morphology to Entamoeba histolytica,
cellular and molecular studies have revealed significant differences between
these two amoebae, including the former being characterized as non-pathogenic and
the later as pathogenic. However, recent in vivo and in vitro experiments have
shown that E. dispar strains of different origin are capable of causing liver
damage and destroying cell culture lines in the presence of common intestinal
bacteria. These results suggested that E. dispar may present pathogenic behavior 
according to the specific E. dispar strain, culture and environmental conditions.
To investigate this possibility, we carried out in vivo and in vitro studies
using a xenic strain E. dispar (ICB-ADO) isolated from a symptomatic
non-dysenteric Brazilian patient. This strain was able to induce liver necrosis
in a hamster model that was more severe than that produced by E. histolytica. The
ICB-ADO isolate also caused significantly more destruction of cultured MDCK cells
and increased loss of transepithelial resistance than did the E. histolytica.
Xenic E. dispar exhibited high proteolytic activity, which was partially
inhibited by the addition of cysteine-protease inhibitors. Based on our
biochemical and molecular characterization of E. dispar (ICB-ADO) xenic culture
and its ability to produce liver abscesses, we conclude that this specific strain
can indeed produce tissue damage, distinct from the frequently used non-
pathogenic E. dispar SAW 760 strain.


PMID: 22166569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

