
1. J Oral Sci. 2011 Dec;53(4):509-16.

High concentration of sodium butyrate suppresses osteoblastic differentiation and
mineralized nodule formation in ROS17/2.8 cells.

Morozumi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Health Sciences, Nihon University School of Dentistry,
Tokyo, Japan. morotan@rio.odn.ne.jp

Periodontitis is a destructive disease that is likely the result of the
activities of different microbial complexes, including anaerobic Gram-negative
periodontopathic bacteria. Butyric acid (sodium butyrate; BA) is a major
metabolic by-product of anaerobic Gram-negative periodontopathic bacteria present
in subgingival plaque. This study was undertaken to examine the effect of BA on
the expression of osteogenesis-related transcription factors and mineralized
nodule formation in osteoblastic ROS17/2.8 cells. The cells were cultured with 0 
(control), 10(-5), 10(-4), or 10(-3) M BA for up to 7 days. The gene and protein 
expression levels of transcription factors such as Runx2, Osterix, Dlx5, Msx2,
and AJ18, as well as extracellular matrix proteins such as bone sialoprotein
(BSP) and osteocalcin, were examined using real-time PCR and Western blotting,
respectively. Mineralized nodule formation was detected by alizarin red staining.
The expression of Runx2, Osterix, Dlx5, and Msx2 decreased significantly in the
presence of 10(-3 )M BA compared to the control, whereas AJ18 expression
increased significantly. Mineralized nodule formation decreased markedly in the
presence of 10(-3) M BA. Alkaline phosphatase activity and the expression of bone
sialoprotein and osteocalcin decreased significantly in the presence of 10(-3) M 
BA compared to the control. These results suggest that 10(-3) M BA suppresses
osteoblastic differentiation and mineralized nodule formation in ROS17/2.8 cells.

DOI: 10.2334/josnusd.53.509 
PMID: 22167038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

