
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e27310. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027310. Epub 2011 Dec 14.

Reducing the effects of PCR amplification and sequencing artifacts on 16S
rRNA-based studies.

Schloss PD(1), Gevers D, Westcott SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, United States of America. pschloss@umich.edu

The advent of next generation sequencing has coincided with a growth in interest 
in using these approaches to better understand the role of the structure and
function of the microbial communities in human, animal, and environmental health.
Yet, use of next generation sequencing to perform 16S rRNA gene sequence surveys 
has resulted in considerable controversy surrounding the effects of sequencing
errors on downstream analyses. We analyzed 2.7Ã—10(6) reads distributed among 90
identical mock community samples, which were collections of genomic DNA from 21
different species with known 16S rRNA gene sequences; we observed an average
error rate of 0.0060. To improve this error rate, we evaluated numerous methods
of identifying bad sequence reads, identifying regions within reads of poor
quality, and correcting base calls and were able to reduce the overall error rate
to 0.0002. Implementation of the PyroNoise algorithm provided the best
combination of error rate, sequence length, and number of sequences. Perhaps more
problematic than sequencing errors was the presence of chimeras generated during 
PCR. Because we knew the true sequences within the mock community and the
chimeras they could form, we identified 8% of the raw sequence reads as chimeric.
After quality filtering the raw sequences and using the Uchime chimera detection 
program, the overall chimera rate decreased to 1%. The chimeras that could not be
detected were largely responsible for the identification of spurious operational 
taxonomic units (OTUs) and genus-level phylotypes. The number of spurious OTUs
and phylotypes increased with sequencing effort indicating that comparison of
communities should be made using an equal number of sequences. Finally, we
applied our improved quality-filtering pipeline to several benchmarking studies
and observed that even with our stringent data curation pipeline, biases in the
data generation pipeline and batch effects were observed that could potentially
confound the interpretation of microbial community data.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027310 
PMCID: PMC3237409
PMID: 22194782  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

