
1. Chir Narzadow Ruchu Ortop Pol. 2011 Jul-Aug;76(4):214-8.

[Septic complications after multilocal fractures and multiple traumatic injury].

[Article in Polish]

Okapa R(1), Rak S, Wenda J, Marczy≈Ñski W, Walczak P, Macias J.

Author information: 
(1)Kliniki Ortopedii, Samodzielny Publiczny Szpital Kliniczny im. Adama Grucy w
Otwocku. robert_okapa@tlen.pl

INTRODUCTION: The increase of the number of the multiple traumatic injuries is
related to social factors, such as: the development of industry, the change of
life style and the conditions of work, the manner and the speed of relocation and
the biological factors related with the elongation of life time. According to the
World Health Organization data the injuries are one of the main health problems
in the world.
AIM: The clinical analysis of multitrauma patients treated due to the septic
complications of the fractures.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The material consists of 34 multitrauma patients treated in
The Osteomyelitis and Septic Complications Unit in Prof. A. Gruca Orthopedic and 
Trauma Hospital in Otwock, Poland between 2005 and 2010. The cause of trauma, the
timing of arrival to our unit, the number of the days of treatment, the number
and the specificity of bone and internal injuries, the bacteriology of bone
infections and operative techniques and pharmacologic treatment were analyzed.
RESULTS: The causes of the injuries were: road accident (79%), fall from the
height (8.8%), others (12.2%). The first stay in our unit was 21 months after the
injury on average (1-129 months), the number of stays in the unit was 2,8 on
average (1-6), the length of stay was 25.7 days on average (4-108 days). In
analyzed group of 34 patients, we found: 12 opened fractures of single bone, 11
opened fractures of more than one bone, 22 closed fractures of single bone, 12
closed fracture of more than one bone. Central nervous system (55.9%), abdominal 
organs (35.3%) and thorax (29.4%) were the most common internal organs ocuppied
with the injury. Osteomyelitis was the most frequently diagnosed in femur (50%)
and tibia (41.2%). The main reasons of bone infection were: Methycylin-Sensitive 
Staphylococcus Aureus (35,3%), Methycylin-Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus
(17,3%), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (23,5%), Escherichia coli, Acinetobacter baumani,
Enterococcus faecalis. The following treatment was undertaken: the debridement of
septic bone, usually together with the removal of the hardware stabilization
(73,5%), the removal of the damaged or improperly fixed stabilization (44%), the 
conversion of the internal fixation into the external fixation(62%). All the
patients were taken intravenous antibiotics according to The Hospital Commission 
for Preventing of Infections, i.e. 2nd generation cephalosporin and gentamycin.
Culture directed antibiotics were started after receiving the bacteriology
results. The outcomes. The control of infection in 14 patients (41.3%), 18
patients (52.9%) still remain under the treatment, bad outcome (persistent
infection, amputation of a extremity) we had in 2 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Multiple traumatic injury and its immunologic consequences
predispose to systemic infections including bone infections. Posttraumatic
osteomyelitis is the indication to chronic treatment. Surgical management of the 
wound and external fixation of the fractures of the long bones according to the
control damage surgery is the most important in prevention of posttraumatic
osteomyelitis.


PMID: 22235645  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

