
1. Mol Microbiol. 2012 Mar;83(5):894-907. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.07973.x.
Epub 2012 Feb 5.

A structural motif is the recognition site for a new family of bacterial protein 
O-glycosyltransferases.

Charbonneau MÈ(1), Côté JP, Haurat MF, Reiz B, Crépin S, Berthiaume F, Dozois CM,
Feldman MF, Mourez M.

Author information: 
(1)Canada Research Chair on Bacterial Animal Diseases, Université de Montréal,
Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire St-Hyacinthe, 3200 Sicotte, St-Hyacinthe, Québec,
Canada.

Comment in
    Mol Microbiol. 2012 Mar;83(5):879-83.

The Escherichia coli Adhesin Involved in Diffuse Adherence (AIDA-I) is a
multifunctional protein that belongs to the family of monomeric autotransporters.
This adhesin can be glycosylated by the AIDA-associated heptosyltransferase
(Aah). Glycosylation appears to be restricted to the extracellular domain of
AIDA-I, which comprises imperfect repeats of a 19-amino-acid consensus sequence
and is predicted to form a β-helix. Here, we show that Aah homologues can be
found in many Gram-negative bacteria, including Citrobacter rodentium. We
demonstrated that an AIDA-like protein is glycosylated in this species by the Aah
homologue. We then investigated the substrate recognition mechanism of the
E. coli Aah heptosyltransferase. We found that a peptide corresponding to one
repeat of the 19-amino-acid consensus is sufficient for recognition and
glycosylation by Aah. Mutagenesis studies suggested that, unexpectedly, Aah
recognizes a structural motif typical of β-helices, but not a specific sequence. 
In agreement with this finding, we observed that the extracellular domain of the 
Bordetella pertussis pertactin, a β-helical polypeptide lacking the 19-amino-acid
consensus sequence, could be glycosylated by Aah. Overall, our findings suggest
that Aah represents the prototype of a new large family of bacterial protein
O-glycosyltransferases that modify various substrates recognized through a
structural motif.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.07973.x 
PMID: 22304382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

