
1. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Nov;227(11):3709-14. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24079.

Reduced adenosine release from the aged mammalian heart.

Fenton RA(1), Dobson JG Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655, USA.
richard.fenton@umassmed.edu

Adenosine (ADO) released in the heart results in enhanced coronary blood flow and
reduced catecholamine release and myocardial responsiveness to adrenergic
stimulation (anti-adrenergic action). ADO release from the adrenergic-stimulated 
aged heart is less than that from the young adult heart. Because adrenergic
signaling in the aged heart is impaired, this study was conducted to determine if
reduced ADO release from the aged heart results from this reduced adrenergic
responsiveness. Hearts of 3-4 months (young adult) and 21-22 months (aged)
Fischer-344 rats were perfused with ADO deamination and re-phosphorylation
inhibited. Coronary effluent ADO levels were determined. Cellular-free ADO levels
with and without sodium acetate (NaAc)-induced mitochondrial AMP synthesis were
assessed using formed S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) in L-homocysteine thiolactone 
(L-HC)-treated hearts. The activities of SAH-hydrolase were determined. Aged
heart ADO release was 61% less than from young hearts. NaAc augmented young heart
ADO release by 104%, while that of aged hearts remained unchanged. SAH synthesis 
was 51% and 56% lower in the aged heart in the absence and presence of NaAc,
respectively, despite an 89% greater SAH hydrolase activity found in the aged
hearts. Since synthesized AMP may be diverted to IMP and ultimately inosine by
AMP deaminase, inosine release was determined. Aged heart inosine levels in the
absence and presence of NaAc were 74% and 59% less than for the young hearts. It 
is concluded that a reduced mitochondrial AMP synthesis is in part responsible
for the attenuation in ADO release from the adrenergic-stimulated aged heart.

Copyright Â© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.24079 
PMCID: PMC3384761
PMID: 22378276  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

