
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(3):e1002601. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002601. Epub 2012 Mar
22.

Direct recognition of Fusobacterium nucleatum by the NK cell natural cytotoxicity
receptor NKp46 aggravates periodontal disease.

Chaushu S(1), Wilensky A, Gur C, Shapira L, Elboim M, Halftek G, Polak D, Achdout
H, Bachrach G, Mandelboim O.

Author information: 
(1)Hebrew University-Hadassah School of Dental Medicine, Jerusalem, Israel.

Periodontitis is a common human chronic inflammatory disease that results in the 
destruction of the tooth attachment apparatus and tooth loss. Although infections
with periopathogenic bacteria such as Porphyromonas gingivalis (P. gingivalis)
and Fusobacterium nucleatum (F. nucleatum) are essential for inducing
periodontitis, the nature and magnitude of the disease is determined by the
host's immune response. Here, we investigate the role played by the NK killer
receptor NKp46 (NCR1 in mice), in the pathogenesis of periodontitis. Using an
oral infection periodontitis model we demonstrate that following F. nucleatum
infection no alveolar bone loss is observed in mice deficient for NCR1
expression, whereas around 20% bone loss is observed in wild type mice and in
mice infected with P. gingivalis. By using subcutaneous chambers inoculated with 
F. nucleatum we demonstrate that immune cells, including NK cells, rapidly
accumulate in the chambers and that this leads to a fast and transient,
NCR1-dependant TNF-α secretion. We further show that both the mouse NCR1 and the 
human NKp46 bind directly to F. nucleatum and we demonstrate that this binding is
sensitive to heat, to proteinase K and to pronase treatments. Finally, we show in
vitro that the interaction of NK cells with F. nucleatum leads to an
NCR1-dependent secretion of TNF-α. Thus, the present study provides the first
evidence that NCR1 and NKp46 directly recognize a periodontal pathogen and that
this interaction influences the outcome of F. nucleatum-mediated periodontitis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002601 
PMCID: PMC3310798
PMID: 22457623  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

