
1. Toxicon. 2012 Sep 1;60(3):378-84. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2012.04.335. Epub 2012
Apr 17.

First report of (homo)anatoxin-a and dog neurotoxicosis after ingestion of
benthic cyanobacteria in The Netherlands.

Faassen EJ(1), Harkema L, Begeman L, Lurling M.

Author information: 
(1)Aquatic Ecology & Water Quality Management Group, Wageningen University, P.O. 
Box 47, 6700 DD Wageningen, The Netherlands. Els.Faassen@wur.nl

In April and May 2011, three dogs died and one dog became ill after swimming in
Lake IJmeer (The Netherlands). At the time, the lake was infested with the
benthic cyanobacterial species Phormidium. A Eurasian Coot (Fulica atra) and a
Black-headed Gull (Chroicocephalus ridibundus) also died near Lake IJmeer in the 
same period. One of the dogs and both birds were subjected to a pathological
investigation. Furthermore, the Phormidium mat; algal samples from the dikes;
contents of the animals' digestive systems and organ tissues were analysed for
the following cyanobacterial toxins: (homo)anatoxin-a;
(7-deoxy-)cylindrospermopsin; saxitoxins and gonyautoxins by LC-MS/MS. Samples
were also analysed for the nontoxic (homo)anatoxin-a metabolites
dihydro(homo)anatoxin-a and epoxy(homo)anatoxin-a. The dog necropsy results
indicated neurotoxicosis and its stomach contained Phormidium filaments.
Anatoxin-a was detected in the Phormidium mat (272 μg g⁻¹) dry weight, stdev 65, 
n=3) and in the dog's stomach contents (9.5 μg g⁻¹ dry weight, stdev 2.4, n=3).
Both samples also contained the anatoxin-a metabolite dihydroanatoxin-a, and a
trace of homoanatoxin-a was detected in the Phormidium mat. The birds were in bad
nutritive condition at the time of necropsy and their stomachs and intestines did
not contain any cyanobacterial material. Furthermore, no cyanobacterial toxins
were detected in their stomachs, intestines and organs and they both had lesions 
that are not associated with cyanobacterial intoxication. This is the first
report of anatoxin-a and homoanatoxin-a occurrence in The Netherlands, these
toxins have likely caused the deaths of three dogs. The birds probably died of
other causes. Dutch recreational waters are at this moment only screened for
pelagic cyanobacterial species, the current bathing water protocol therefore does
not protect humans and animals from negative effects of blooms of benthic
cyanobacteria.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2012.04.335 
PMID: 22534073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

