
1. Vet Microbiol. 2012 Dec 28;161(1-2):169-78. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.07.022.
Epub 2012 Jul 20.

Genetic diversity of Flavobacterium psychrophilum isolated from rainbow trout in 
France: predominance of a clonal complex.

Siekoula-Nguedia C(1), Blanc G, Duchaud E, Calvez S.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR1300 Biologie, Epidémiologie et Analyse de Risque en santé animale,
BP 40706, F-44307 Nantes, France.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the causative agent of "bacterial cold water
disease" and "rainbow trout fry syndrome" in salmonid farming worldwide. These
diseases, especially rainbow trout fry syndrome, are among the main hazards for
French aquaculture. In this study, a multilocus sequence typing approach (MLST)
was used to evaluate the genetic diversity of this bacterium. Seven housekeeping 
genes in a set of 66 isolates were investigated. They were recently collected
from rainbow trout during clinical episodes in French farms from the two main
geographical areas of production. A total of 5808 bp of sequence were analyzed
for each isolate and showed relatively low levels of gene (H=0.4313) and
nucleotide (π×100=0.31%) diversities. MLST identified 15 sequence types (STs), of
which 14 have never been described. eBURST analysis separated the 15 STs in one
clonal complex of 8 genetically related STs (with ST2 as founder) and 7
singletons. Genetic diversity was largely due to recombination, as demonstrated
by a pairwise homoplasy index (PHI=5.35×10(-9)) significantly different from zero
(p<0.05). The evolution of standardized association index (I(A)(S)) (all
isolates: 0.6088, p<0.05; single representative of STs: 0.4567, p<0.05; and
clusters of STs: 0.084, p>0.05), showed an epidemic structure of the population. 
These results emphasized the expansion of a limited number of dominant genetic
variants in French clinical F. psychrophilum isolates from a single host species,
with no geographic relationships.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.07.022 
PMID: 22871298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

