
1. Lab Invest. 2012 Oct;92(10):1461-71. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2012.104. Epub 2012
Aug 20.

Liver inflammation in a mouse model of Th1 hepatitis despite the absence of
invariant NKT cells or the Th1 chemokine receptors CXCR3 and CCR5.

Cripps JG(1), Celaj S, Burdick M, Strieter RM, Gorham JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

The specific mechanisms that mediate CD4(+) T-cell-mediated liver injury have not
been fully elucidated. CD4(+) invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells are
required for liver damage in some mouse models of hepatitis, while the chemokine 
receptors CXCR3 and CCR5 are considered dominant Th1 chemokine receptors involved
in Th1 trafficking in inflammatory conditions. BALB/c-Tgfb1(-/-) mice
spontaneously develop Th1 hepatitis. Here, we directly test the hypotheses that
iNKT cells or the Th1-cell chemokine receptors CXCR3 and CCR5 are required for
development of liver disease in Tgfb1(-/-) mice. Tgfb1(-/-) mouse livers
exhibited significant increases in iNKT cells and in ligands for CXCR3 or CCR5.
Tgfb1(-/-) mice were rendered deficient in iNKT cells, CXCR3, CCR5, or both CXCR3
and CCR5, by cross-breeding with appropriate knockout mice. Tgfb1(-/-) mice
developed severe liver injury, even in the absence of functional CD1d/iNKT cells,
CXCR3, CCR5, or both CXCR3 and CCR5. Liver CD4(+) T cells accumulated to high
numbers, and spleen CD4(+) T-cell numbers declined, regardless of the
functionality of the CXCR3/CCR5 response pathways. Similarly, dendritic cells and
macrophages accumulated in Tgfb1(-/-) livers even when CXCR3 and CCR5 were
knocked out. Th1-associated cytokines (IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-2) and chemokines (CXCL9,
CXCL10) were strongly overexpressed in Tgfb1(-/-) mice despite knockouts in CD1d,
CXCR3, or CCR5. These studies indicate that the cellular and biochemical basis
for CD4(+) T-cell-mediated injury in liver can be complex, with myriad pathways
potentially involved.

DOI: 10.1038/labinvest.2012.104 
PMCID: PMC3460069
PMID: 22906987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

