
1. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(8):e1002885. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002885. Epub 2012 Aug 
16.

Transgene induced co-suppression during vegetative growth in Cryptococcus
neoformans.

Wang X(1), Wang P, Sun S, Darwiche S, Idnurm A, Heitman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America.

Introduction of DNA sequences into the genome often results in homology-dependent
gene silencing in organisms as diverse as plants, fungi, flies, nematodes, and
mammals. We previously showed in Cryptococcus neoformans that a repeat transgene 
array can induce gene silencing at a high frequency during mating (∼50%), but at 
a much lower frequency during vegetative growth (∼0.2%). Here we report a robust 
asexual co-suppression phenomenon triggered by the introduction of a cpa1::ADE2
transgene. Multiple copies of the cpa1::ADE2 transgene were ectopically
integrated into the genome, leading to silencing of the endogenous CPA1 and CPA2 
genes encoding the cyclosporine A target protein cyclophilin A. Given that
CPA1-derived antisense siRNAs were detected in the silenced isolates, and that
RNAi components (Rdp1, Ago1, and Dcr2) are required for silencing, we hypothesize
that an RNAi pathway is involved, in which siRNAs function as trans factors to
silence both the CPA1 and the CPA2 genes. The silencing efficiency of the CPA1
and CPA2 genes is correlated with the transgene copy number and reached ∼90% in
the presence of >25 copies of the transgene. We term this transgene silencing
phenomenon asexual co-suppression to distinguish it from the related sex-induced 
silencing (SIS) process. We further show that replication protein A (RPA), a
single-stranded DNA binding complex, is required for transgene silencing,
suggesting that RPA might play a similar role in aberrant RNA production as
observed for quelling in Neurospora crassa. Interestingly, we also observed that 
silencing of the ADE2 gene occurred at a much lower frequency than the CPA1/2
genes even though it is present in the same transgene array, suggesting that
factors in addition to copy number influence silencing. Taken together, our
results illustrate that a transgene induced co-suppression process operates
during C. neoformans vegetative growth that shares mechanistic features with
quelling.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002885 
PMCID: PMC3420925
PMID: 22916030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

