
1. Pneumonol Alergol Pol. 2012;80(5):412-21.

[Impact of social risk factors on treatment outcome in patients with culture
positive pulmonary tuberculosis (CPPTB)].

[Article in Polish]

Siemion-Szcześniak I(1), Kuś J.

Author information: 
(1)I Klinika Chorób Płuc, Instytut Gruźlicy i Chorób Płuc, ul. Płocka 26, 01–138 
Warszawa. i.siemion@igichp.edu.pl

INTRODUCTION: The aim of the study was to evaluate the impact of social risk
factors on treatment outcome among culturepositive patients treated for active
pulmonary tuberculosis in three separate districts - Warsaw, Gdansk and Siedlce -
in years 1995 and 2000.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed medical records of patients who
were notified in 1995 and 2000 and were treated in hospitals and dispensaries.
Alcohol abuse and homelessness were recognized as risk factors associated with
tuberculosis and nonadherence to treatment. Treatment outcome was evaluated using
treatment indicators defined by the World Health Organisation: cured, treatment
completed, treatment defaulted, treatment failure and other results of treatment.
RESULTS: Seven hundred and eight patients with culture positive pulmonary
tuberculosis were included (373 in 1995 and 335 in 2000). There were 85 patients 
with risk factors in 1995 and 101 patients in 2000. 80 of participants in 1995
and 69 in 2000 abused alcohol, 5 and 32 were classified as homeless,
respectively. Among alcohol abusers treatment success rates according to the WHO 
definition (either bacteriologic cured or treatment completed) were 45.1% in 1995
and 53.6% in 2000. Among patients not abusing alcohol treatment success rates
were 63.8% and 54.1%, respectively. The differences were statistically
significant (p = 0.005 in 1995 and p = 0.0186 in 2000). In 1995 forty percent of 
homeless patients had succeeded treatment, while the rate of treatment success
among non-homeless was 60%. Because of small number included in homeless group
the difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.6532). In 2000 treatment 
success rate among homeless participants was 25% and among non-homeless - 57.1%, 
which was highly statistically significant (p = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Alcohol abuse and homelessness were associated with bad treatment
outcome among patients with pulmonary tuberculosis. Interventions to improve
treatment adherence in patients considered to be at risk for default are
necessary.


PMID: 22926902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

