
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;32(22):4561-71. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00651-12. Epub 2012 Sep 
10.

The loss of RGS protein-Gα(i2) interactions results in markedly impaired mouse
neutrophil trafficking to inflammatory sites.

Cho H(1), Kamenyeva O, Yung S, Gao JL, Hwang IY, Park C, Murphy PM, Neubig RR,
Kehrl JH.

Author information: 
(1)B-Cell Molecular Immunology Section, Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA. hcho@niaid.nih.gov

Neutrophils are first responders rapidly mobilized to inflammatory sites by a
tightly regulated, nonredundant hierarchy of chemoattractants. These
chemoattractants engage neutrophil cell surface receptors triggering
heterotrimeric G-protein Gα(i) subunits to exchange GDP for GTP. By limiting the 
duration that Gα(i) subunits remain GTP bound, RGS proteins modulate
chemoattractant receptor signaling. Here, we show that neutrophils with a genomic
knock in of a mutation that disables regulator of G-protein signaling
(RGS)-Gα(i2) interactions accumulate in the bone marrow and mobilize poorly to
inflammatory sites. These defects are attributable to enhanced sensitivity to
background signals, prolonged chemoattractant receptor signaling, and
inappropriate CXCR2 downregulation. Intravital imaging revealed a failure of the 
mutant neutrophils to accumulate at and stabilize sites of sterile inflammation. 
Furthermore, these mice could not control a nonlethal Staphylococcus aureus
infection. Neutrophil RGS proteins establish a threshold for Gα(i) activation,
helping to coordinate desensitization mechanisms. Their loss renders neutrophils 
functionally incompetent.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00651-12 
PMCID: PMC3486189
PMID: 22966200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

