
1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Dec;44(12):2223-32. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2012.09.005. Epub 2012 Sep 18.

The Escherichia coli adherence factor plasmid of enteropathogenic Escherichia
coli causes a global decrease in ubiquitylated host cell proteins by decreasing
ubiquitin E1 enzyme expression through host aspartyl proteases.

Lin AE(1), Guttman JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British
Columbia, Canada.

Ubiquitylation is a widespread post-translational global regulatory system that
is essential for the proper functioning of various cellular events. Recent
studies have shown that certain types of Escherichia coli can exploit specific
aspects of the ubiquitylation system to influence downstream targets. Despite
these findings, examination of the effects pathogenic E. coli have on the overall
host ubiquitylation system remain unexplored. To study the impact that pathogenic
E. coli have on the ubiquitylation levels of host proteins during infections, we 
analyzed the entire ubiquitylation system during enteropathogenic E. coli
infections of cultured cells. We found that these microbes caused a dramatic
decrease in ubiquitylated host proteins during these infections. This occurred
with a concomitant reduction in the expression of essential E1 activating enzymes
in the host, which are integral for the initiation of the ubiquitylation cascade.
Control of host E1 enzyme levels was dependent on the E. coli adherence factor
plasmid which acted on host aspartyl proteases within enteropathogenic E. coli.
Hijacking of the ubiquitylation system did not require the plasmid-encoded
regulator or bundle forming pilus expression, as enteropathogenic E. coli mutated
in those factors did not revert the ubiquitylation of host proteins or the
abundance of E1 enzyme proteins to uninfected levels. Our work shows that E. coli
have developed strategies to usurp post-translational systems by targeting
crucial enzymes. The ability of enteropathogenic E. coli to inactivate host
protein ubiquitylation could enable more efficient effector protein
functionality, providing increased bacterial control of host cells during
enteropathogenic E. coli pathogenesis.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2012.09.005 
PMID: 22999844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

