
1. Curr Top Membr. 2012;69:325-58. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394390-3.00012-4.

Pathways of arsenic uptake and efflux.

Yang HC(1), Fu HL, Lin YF, Rosen BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Sciences, Chang-Gung
University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

Arsenic is the most prevalent environmental toxic substance and ranks first on
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's Superfund List. Arsenic is a
carcinogen and a causative agent of numerous human diseases. Paradoxically
arsenic is used as a chemotherapeutic agent for treatment of acute promyelocytic 
leukemia. Inorganic arsenic has two biological important oxidation states: As(V) 
(arsenate) and As(III) (arsenite). Arsenic uptake is adventitious because the
arsenate and arsenite are chemically similar to required nutrients. Arsenate
resembles phosphate and is a competitive inhibitor of many phosphate-utilizing
enzymes. Arsenate is taken up by phosphate transport systems. In contrast, at
physiological pH, the form of arsenite is As(OH)(3), which resembles organic
molecules such as glycerol. Consequently, arsenite is taken into cells by
aquaglyceroporin channels. Arsenic efflux systems are found in nearly every
organism and evolved to rid cells of this toxic metalloid. These efflux systems
include members of the multidrug resistance protein family and the bacterial
exchangers Acr3 and ArsB. ArsB can also be a subunit of the ArsAB
As(III)-translocating ATPase, an ATP-driven efflux pump. The ArsD
metallochaperone binds cytosolic As(III) and transfers it to the ArsA subunit of 
the efflux pump. Knowledge of the pathways and transporters for arsenic uptake
and efflux is essential for understanding its toxicity and carcinogenicity and
for rational design of cancer chemotherapeutic drugs.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394390-3.00012-4 
PMCID: PMC4578627
PMID: 23046656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

