
1. J Clin Invest. 2012 Nov;122(11):3943-54. doi: 10.1172/JCI62267. Epub 2012 Oct 15.

Scavenger receptors target glycolipids for natural killer T cell activation.

Freigang S(1), Landais E, Zadorozhny V, Kain L, Yoshida K, Liu Y, Deng S,
Palinski W, Savage PB, Bendelac A, Teyton L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

NKT cells are innate-like T cells with powerful regulatory functions that are a
promising target for immunotherapy. The efficacy of glycolipids, such as the
prototypic NKT cell antagonist α-galactosylceramide (αGalCer), is currently being
evaluated in clinical trials, but little is known about factors that target lipid
antigens for CD1d presentation and NKT cell activation in vivo. Lipid uptake via 
the LDL receptor (LDLR) has been shown for digalactosylceramide; however, whether
this pathway contributes to CD1d presentation of other important NKT cell
agonists remains unclear. We therefore investigated receptor-mediated uptake
pathways for CD1d presentation using a panel of structurally diverse lipid
antigens. We found that uptake via scavenger receptors was essential for the CD1d
presentation of αGalCer and Sphingomonas glycolipids. Moreover, in vivo NKT cell 
responses, i.e., cytokine production, proliferation, and NKT cell help for
adaptive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, required the uptake of αGalCer via scavenger
receptor A. Importantly, our data indicate that structural characteristics of
glycolipids determine their receptor binding and direct individual lipids toward 
different uptake pathways. These results reveal an important contribution of
scavenger receptors in the selection of lipids for CD1d presentation and identify
structural motifs that may prove useful for therapeutic NKT cell vaccination.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI62267 
PMCID: PMC3484437
PMID: 23064364  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

