
1. Digestion. 2012;86(4):323-8. doi: 10.1159/000342393. Epub 2012 Nov 1.

Risk factors for resistance to proton pump inhibitor maintenance therapy for
reflux esophagitis in Japanese women over 60 years.

Watanabe A(1), Iwakiri R, Yamaguchi D, Higuchi T, Tsuruoka N, Miyahara K,
Akutagawa K, Sakata Y, Fujise T, Oda Y, Shimoda R, Sakata H, Fujimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, Saga Medical
School, Saga, Japan.

AIM: The aim of this study was to evaluate risk factors for proton pump inhibitor
(PPI) resistance in older Japanese female patients with reflux esophagitis
evaluated by physicians.
METHODS: The study included 462 Japanese female patients aged over 60 years with 
reflux esophagitis who received PPI maintenance therapy for more than 6 months.
RESULTS: The characteristics of all 462 patients were: age: 76.4 ± 7.6 years,
height: 147.2 ± 6.1 cm, weight: 49.9 ± 8.4 kg and body mass index: 24.0 ± 3.5.
The reflux esophagitis grades were A in 69.5%, B in 15.8%, C in 9.1% and D in
5.6%. Helicobacter pylori was positive in 60.6%. Regarding PPI maintenance
therapy for clinical symptoms evaluated by the attending physicians, 66.7% were
'good control', 26.8% were 'reasonable control' and 6.5% were 'bad control:
resistant'. PPI maintenance therapy was less effective in patients with more
severe reflux esophagitis of grades C and D (OR: 0.027; 95% CI: 0.010-0.077) and 
negative H. pylori infection status (OR: 4.470; 95% CI: 1.631-12.247). Lumbar
kyphosis and hiatus hernia were risk factors for severity grading of reflux
esophagitis.
CONCLUSIONS: PPI maintenance therapy evaluated by attending physicians indicated 
that reflux esophagitis severity and negative H. pylori status were risk factors 
for treatment resistance.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000342393 
PMID: 23128344  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

