
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2013 Feb;51(2):422-8. doi: 10.1128/JCM.02036-12. Epub 2012 Nov 
21.

Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis analysis of Bordetella pertussis isolates
circulating in Europe from 1998 to 2009.

Advani A(1), Hallander HO, Dalby T, Krogfelt KA, Guiso N, Njamkepo E, von KÃ¶nnig 
CH, Riffelmann M, Mooi FR, Sandven P, Lutynska A, Fry NK, Mertsola J, He Q.

Author information: 
(1)Swedish Institute for Communicable Disease Control, Solna, Sweden.

Between 1998 and 2009, Bordetella pertussis clinical isolates were collected
during three periods, i.e., 1998 to 2001 (n = 102), 2004 to 2005 (n = 154), and
2007 to 2009 (n = 140), from nine countries with distinct vaccination programs,
i.e., Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, The Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Sweden,
and the United Kingdom. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) analysis was
performed according to standardized recommendations for epidemiological typing of
B. pertussis. There were 81 different PFGE profiles, five of which (BpSR3, BpSR5,
BpSR10, BpSR11, and BpSR12) were observed in 61% of the 396 isolates and shown to
be predominant in almost all countries. The major profile, BpSR11, showed a
decreasing trend from 25% to 30% in 1998 to 2005 to 13% in 2007 to 2009, and
there were increases in BpSR3 and BpSR10 from 0% and 8% to 21% and 22%,
respectively. One difference between these profiles is that BpSR11 contains
isolates harboring the fim3-2 allele and BpSR3 and BpSR10 contain isolates
harboring the fim3-1 allele. The total proportion of the five predominant
profiles increased from 44% in 1998 to 2001 to 63% in 2004 to 2005 to 70% in 2007
to 2009. In conclusion, common PFGE profiles were identified in B. pertussis
populations circulating in European countries with different vaccination programs
and different vaccine coverages. These prevalent isolates contain the novel
pertussis toxin promoter ptxP3 allele. However, there is evidence for
diversifying selection between ptxP3 strains characterized by distinct PFGE
profiles. This work shows that, even within a relatively short time span of 10
years, successful isolates which spread through Europe and cause large shifts in 
B. pertussis populations may emerge.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.02036-12 
PMCID: PMC3553888
PMID: 23175253  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

