
1. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2013;25(8):1115-25. doi: 10.1071/RD12187.

Interplay between autophagy and apoptosis in the development of Danio rerio
follicles and the effects of a probiotic.

Gioacchini G(1), Dalla Valle L, Benato F, Fimia GM, Nardacci R, Ciccosanti F,
Piacentini M, Borini A, Carnevali O.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze della Vita e dell'Ambiente, Universit√† Politecnica
delle Marche, Via Brecce Bianche, 60131, Ancona, Italy.

The present study investigated autophagic processes in Danio rerio preovulatory
follicles (Stage III and IV). There were more autophagosomes, as revealed by
electron microscopy, in follicles from females fed the probiotic Lactobacillus
rhamnosus IMC 501. This was confirmed by increased expression of genes involved
in the autophagic process, namely ambra1, becn1, lc3 and uvrag. In addition,
preovulatory follicles from females fed the probiotic contained more
microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 isoform II (LC3-II) and less p62
protein. The increased autophagy in preovulatory follicles from females fed the
probiotic was concomitant with a decrease in the apoptotic process in the ovary, 
as evidenced by terminal deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase-mediated
dUTP-digoxigenin nick end-labelling analysis and confirmed by lower expression of
genes involved in apoptosis (i.e., p53, bax, apaf and cas3) and higher expression
as igfII and igf1r. The results of the present study provide preliminary evidence
of the involvement of autophagy during follicle development in the zebrafish
ovary. In addition, we have demonstrated for the first time that a functional
food, such as L. rhamnosus IMC 501, can modulate the balance between apoptosis
and autophagy that regulates ovary physiology in zebrafish by inhibiting
follicular apoptosis and improving follicular survival.

DOI: 10.1071/RD12187 
PMID: 23195281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

