
1. Hum Immunol. 2013 Apr;74(4):425-32. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2012.11.024. Epub 2012 
Dec 8.

HLA-G may predict the disease course in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis.

Rizzo R(1), Farina I, Bortolotti D, Galuppi E, Rotola A, Melchiorri L, Ciancio G,
Di Luca D, Govoni M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Section of Microbiology, University of
Ferrara, Via Luigi Borsari 46, 44121 Ferrara, Italy. rbr@unife.it

The current management of early rheumatoid arthritis (ERA) is to start an
intensive treatment as soon as possible. To avoid under/overtreatment, it is
important to identify reliable ERA evolution biomarkers. HLA-G molecules has been
associated with rheumatoid arthritis, suggesting a role in disease regulation.
HLA-G antigens are expressed as membrane bound and soluble isoforms (mHLA-G,
sHLA-G) that act as ligand for immune-inhibitory receptors (ILT2, ILT4, KIR2DL4).
Expression of HLA-G is influenced by a 14 bp insertion/deletion polymorphism in
exon 8 of the gene, where the deletion is associated with mRNA stability. We
analyzed 23 ERA patients during a 12 months follow-up disease treatment for
sHLA-G, IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-10 and TNF-alpha levels in plasma samples by ELISA,
mHLA-G and ILT2 expression on peripheral blood CD14 positive cells by flow
cytometry and typed HLA-G 14 bp deletion/insertion polymorphism by Real-Time PCR.
Disease status (DAS28), ultrasonography with power Doppler and laboratory data
were checked. Cytokine levels confirmed the anti-inflammatory effect of the
treatment. sHLA-G, mHLA-G and ILT2 expression inversely correlated with DAS28
disease scores. The frequency of 14 bp deletion allele increased in patients with
disease remission. Based on these results, HLA-G may be a candidate biomarker to 
evaluate early prognosis and disease activity in ERA patients.

Copyright Â© 2012 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humimm.2012.11.024 
PMID: 23228398  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

