
1. Med Res Rev. 2014 Jan;34(1):45-76. doi: 10.1002/med.21276. Epub 2012 Dec 13.

Raising the roof: the preferential pharmacological stimulation of Th1 and th2
responses mediated by NKT cells.

East JE(1), Kennedy AJ, Webb TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum 
Cancer Center, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
21201.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells serve as a bridge between the innate and adaptive
immune systems, and manipulating their effector functions can have therapeutic
significances in the treatment of autoimmunity, transplant biology, infectious
disease, and cancer. NKT cells are a subset of T cells that express cell-surface 
markers characteristic of both natural killer cells and T cells. These unique
immunologic cells have been demonstrated to serve as a link between the innate
and adaptive immune systems through their potent cytokine production following
the recognition of a range of lipid antigens, mediated through presentation of
the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I like CD1d molecule, in
addition to the NKT cell's cytotoxic capabilities upon activation. Although a
number of glycolipid antigens have been shown to complex with CD1d molecules,
most notably the marine sponge derived glycolipid alpha-galactosylceramide
(α-GalCer), there has been debate as to the identity of the endogenous activating
lipid presented to the T-cell receptor (TCR) via the CD1d molecule on
antigen-presenting cells (APCs). This review aims to survey the use of
pharmacological agents and subsequent structure-activity relationships (SAR) that
have given insight into the binding interaction of glycolipids with both the CD1d
molecules as well as the TCR and the subsequent immunologic response of NKT
cells. These studies not only elucidate basic binding interactions but also pave 
the way for future pharmacological modulation of NKT cell responses.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/med.21276 
PMCID: PMC4102678
PMID: 23239102  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

