
1. FEBS J. 2013 Mar;280(5):1308-19. doi: 10.1111/febs.12122. Epub 2013 Feb 6.

All-trans retinoic acid protects hepatocellular carcinoma cells against
serum-starvation-induced cell death by upregulating collagen 8A2.

Wang W(1), Xu G, Ding CL, Zhao LJ, Zhao P, Ren H, Qi ZT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Medical Biodefense,
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

As a therapeutic or chemopreventative agent for various cancers, all-trans
retinoic acid (atRA) has been reported to inhibit growth, induce apoptosis or
cause differentiation. It was found that atRA could protect hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) cells against cell death induced by serum starvation.
Furthermore, it was found that atRA could enhance cell adhesion, but had no
effect on the cell cycle and apoptosis. Using an Illumina Human HT-12 v4
expression microarray, 207 upregulated and 173 downregulated genes were
identified in HepG2 cells treated with atRA. The most upregulated genes are
cytochrome P450 family 26 subfamily A polypeptide 1 (CYP26A1), histidine triad
nucleotide binding protein 3 (HINT3), miR-1282 and cytochrome P450 family 26
subfamily B polypeptide 1 (CYP26B1), which showed more than fivefold greater
expression. Using Gene Ontology analysis, the greatest significance was found in 
extracellular-matrix-related molecular functions and the cellular component in
upregulated genes. The upregulation of collagen 8A2 (COL8A2) was further
confirmed using quantitative RT-PCR and western blotting. Knockdown of COL8A2
blocked enhancement in the early stage of cell adhesion by atRA treatment.
Re-expression of COL8A2 in COL8A2-knocked-down HCC cells reversed the effect of
small interfering RNA-COL8A2. In addition, COL8A2 could increase HCC cell
migration and invasion. Thus, COL8A2 was identified as the key protein involved
in the enhancement of cell adhesion of atRA under serum-free conditions. In
conclusion, atRA protects HCC cells against serum-starvation-induced cell death
by enhancing cell adhesion, and COL8A2 plays an important role in HCC cell
migration and invasion.

© 2013 The Authors Journal compilation © 2013 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.12122 
PMID: 23298258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

