
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e49339. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049339. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Activation of CD11b+ Kupffer cells/macrophages as a common cause for exacerbation
of TNF/Fas-ligand-dependent hepatitis in hypercholesterolemic mice.

Nakashima H(1), Ogawa Y, Shono S, Kinoshita M, Nakashima M, Sato A, Ikarashi M,
Seki S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, National Defense Medical College,
Tokorozawa, Saitama, Japan.

We have reported that the mouse hepatic injury induced by either
α-galactosylceramide (α-GalCer) or bacterial DNA motifs (CpG-ODN) is mediated by 
the TNF/NKT cell/Fas-ligand (FasL) pathway. In addition, F4/80(+) Kupffer cells
can be subclassified into CD68(+) subset with a phagocytosing capacity and
CD11b(+) subset with a TNF-producing capacity. CD11b(+) subset increase if mice
are fed high-fat and cholesterol diet (HFCD). The present study examined how a
HFCD affects the function of NKT cells and F4/80(+) CD11b(+) subset and these
hepatitis models. After the C57BL/6 mice received a HFCD, high-cholesterol diet
(HCD), high-fat diet (HFD) and control diet (CD) for four weeks, the HFCD mice
increased surface CD1d and intracellular TLR-9 expression by the CD11b(+)
population compared to CD mice. Hepatic injury induced either by α-GalCer or
CpG-ODN was more severe in HCD and HFCD mice compared to CD mice, which was in
proportion to the serum TNF levels. In addition, liver cholesterol levels but not
serum cholesterol levels nor liver triglyceride levels were involved in the
aggravation of hepatitis. The FasL expression of NKT cells induced by both
reagents was upregulated in HFCD mice. Furthermore, the liver mononuclear cells
and purified F4/80(+) CD11b(+) subset from HFCD mice stimulated with either
reagent in vitro produced a larger amount of TNF than did those from CD mice.
Intracellular TNF production in F4/80(+) CD11b(+) cells was confirmed. The
increased number of F4/80(+) CD11b(+) Kupffer cells/macrophages by HFCD and their
enhanced TNF production thus play a pivotal role in TNF/NKT cell/FasL dependent
hepatic injury.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049339 
PMCID: PMC3553091
PMID: 23372642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

