
1. Eur J Immunol. 2013 May;43(5):1322-32. doi: 10.1002/eji.201243077. Epub 2013 Mar 
22.

Inefficient antimicrobial functions of innate phagocytes render infant mice more 
susceptible to bacterial infection.

Zhang Q(1), Coveney AP, Yu S, Liu JH, Li Y, Blankson S, Redmond HP, Wang JH, Wang
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Affiliated Children's Hospital, Soochow
University, Suzhou, China.

Neonates and infants, due to the immaturity in their adaptive immunity, are
thought to depend largely on the innate immune system for protection against
bacterial infection. However, the innate immunity-mediated antimicrobial response
in neonates and infants is incompletely characterized. Here, we report that
infant mice were more susceptible to microbial sepsis than adult mice, with
significantly reduced bacterial clearance from the circulation and visceral
organs. Infant PMNs exhibited less constitutive expression of the chemokine
receptor CXCR2, and bacterial infection caused further reduction of PMN CXCR2 in 
infant mice compared with adult mice. This correlates with diminished in vitro
chemotaxis of infant PMNs toward the chemoattractant CXCL2 and impaired in vivo
recruitment of infant PMNs into the infectious site. Furthermore, consistent with
the reduced antimicrobial response in vivo, infant macrophages displayed an
impaired bactericidal activity with a defect in phagosome maturation after
ingestion of either gram-positive or gram-negative bacteria. Thus, infant mice
exhibit an increased vulnerability to microbial infection with delayed bacterial 
clearance, which is associated with the inefficiency in their innate
phagocyte-associated antimicrobial functions characterized by defects in PMN
recruitment and macrophage phagosome maturation during microbial sepsis.

Â© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201243077 
PMID: 23404483  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

