
1. Sci Total Environ. 2013 Mar 1;447:424-9. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.01.015.
Epub 2013 Feb 11.

Water quality assessment of a Central European River - does the Directive
2000/60/EC cover all the needs for a comprehensive classification?

Kittinger C(1), Marth E, Reinthaler FF, Zarfel G, Pichler-Semmelrock F, Mascher
W, Mascher G, Mascher F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hygiene, Microbiology and Environmental Medicine, Medical
University of Graz, Austria. clemens.kittinger@medunigraz.at

Over the last decades, European rivers have mostly shared the same fate. Until
the mid 1980s many of them were in rather bad shape. Nobody would have thought
about using the waters for recreation. However, continuous efforts over the last 
three decades have achieved success and today's water quality has changed to the 
better. This obvious change in water quality, which was proved by investigations 
done on the basis of the European Directive 2000/60/EC framework for Community
action in the field of water policy, made people consider using the rivers for
recreation or irrigation. In the present study a Central European River was
investigated from hygienic perspectives (faecal indicators), and its
toxicological status was examined - both of which are parameters which are not
included in the Directive 2000/60/EC. The pivotal question was whether these
parameters provide essential and additional information about the river's status 
and its quality. In general, the monthly values for all sampling points from the 
toxicological tests correlated with the determined physical and chemical statuses
according to the national water management plan. Once, however, the toxicological
values did increase significantly. This detection of a single toxicological burst
within a year of observation underlines the applicability of the tests as
screening methods for the detection of toxic substances. Moreover, our
microbiological investigations show high numbers of faecal indicators and
Salmonellae. These results are not consistent with the apparently good quality of
the river. Therefore faecal indicators, which are directly related to the
discharge of waste water, should be an integral part of the procedure of water
classification.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.01.015 
PMID: 23410864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

