
1. Cell Biol Int. 2013 May;37(5):464-70. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10055. Epub 2013 Feb 18.

A novel regulation of PSMA and PSA expression by Q640X AR in 22Rv1 and LNCaP
prostate cancer cells.

Ben Jemaa A(1), Sallami S, Céraline J, Oueslati R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Immunology and Microbiology Environmental and Carcinogenesis, Faculty 
of Sciences of Bizerte, University of Carthage, 7021 Zarzouna, Tunisia.

We have investigated the expression of prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) 
and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) transcripts in androgen-dependent (LNCaP) and
androgen-independent (22Rv1) prostate cancer cell lines. We also enquired whether
Q640X CTE-truncated androgen receptor (AR) has an impact on transcription of mRNA
for PSMA and PSA in transfected androgen-sensitive prostate cancer LNCaP cells.
Wild type LNCaP, 22Rv1 prostate cancer cells, prostate stromal cells (PrSC) and
LNCaP cells transfected with p-Q640X AR, p-WT AR or p-C3 empty plasmids were
studied. The expression of PSMA and PSA were detected by real-time PCR after
transfection for 4 and 7 days. Expression of mRNAs for PSA was sixfold greater
than PSMA in wild type LNCaP cells. In contrast, the wild type androgen
refractory 22Rv1 cell line reacted almost exactly the opposite way reverse to
LNCaP cells, since the transcription of mRNA for PSMA almost twofold greater than
PSA. Non-transfected human PrSC responded similarly to PSMA mRNA and PSA mRNA was
not detected in these cells. Q640X AR transfected LNCaP cells downregulated the
expression of PSMA and PSA genes after 7 days. Our results demonstrate that Q640X
mutated AR may have an important regulatory role in mediating the PSMA and PSA
genes expression during the progression of prostate cancer from
androgen-dependence to androgen-independence. Understanding their functional
properties and mechanisms by which ARs involved in regulation of PSMA and PSA
expression will allow the identification of new target therapies for the
treatment of hormone-resistant prostate cancer.

© 2013 International Federation for Cell Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/cbin.10055 
PMID: 23418075  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

