
1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 May;12(5):799-808. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0529. Epub
2013 Mar 6.

Targeting CXCR2 enhances chemotherapeutic response, inhibits mammary tumor
growth, angiogenesis, and lung metastasis.

Sharma B(1), Nawandar DM, Nannuru KC, Varney ML, Singh RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA.

Breast cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer deaths among females. Many
challenges exist in the current management of advanced stage breast cancer as
there are fewer recognized therapeutic strategies, often because of therapy
resistance. How breast cancer cells evade chemotherapy and the underlying
mechanism remains unclear. We and others have observed that malignant cells that 
survive initial chemo- and radiation therapy express higher levels of CXCR2
ligands, which may provide a survival benefit leading to therapy resistance. In
this report, we test the hypothesis that CXCR2-dependent signaling in malignant
cells may be critical for chemotherapy resistance and targeting this signaling
axis may enhance the antitumor and antimetastatic activity of chemotherapeutic
drugs and limit their toxicity. We used Cl66-wt, 4T1-wt, Cl66sh-CXCR2, and
4T1sh-CXCR2 cells expressing differential levels of the CXCR2 receptor to
evaluate the role of targeting CXCR2 on chemotherapeutic responses. Knockdown of 
CXCR2 enhances paclitaxel and doxorubicin-mediated toxicity at suboptimal doses. 
Moreover, we observed an increase in the expression of CXCL1, a CXCR2 ligand in
paclitaxel and doxorubicin-treated mammary tumor cells, which were inhibited
following CXCR2 knockdown. Knockdown of CXCR2 enhanced antitumor activity of
paclitaxel in an in vivo mammary tumor model. We observed significant inhibition 
of spontaneous lung metastases in animals bearing CXCR2 knockdown tumors and
treated with paclitaxel as compared with the control group. Our data suggest the 
novel role of CXCR2 and its ligands in maintaining chemotherapy resistance and
provide evidence that targeting CXCR2 signaling in an adjuvant setting will help 
circumvent chemotherapy resistance.

Â©2013 AACR

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0529 
PMCID: PMC3653628
PMID: 23468530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

