
1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2013 May;19(6):1330-8. doi: 10.1097/MIB.0b013e318280b1e3.

The functions of type I and type II natural killer T cells in inflammatory bowel 
diseases.

Liao CM(1), Zimmer MI, Wang CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

CD1d-restricted natural killer T (NKT) cells are a distinct subset of T cells
that rapidly produce an array of cytokines on activation and play a critical role
in regulating various immune responses. NKT cells are classified into 2 groups
based on differences in T-cell receptor usage. Type I NKT cells have an invariant
T-cell receptor α-chain and are readily detectable by α-galactosylceramide
(α-GalCer)-loaded CD1d tetramers. Type II NKT cells have a more diverse T-cell
receptor repertoire and cannot be directly identified. Both types of NKT cells
and multiple CD1d-expressing cell types are present in the intestine, and their
interactions are likely to be modulated by pathogenic and commensal microbes,
which in turn contribute to the intestinal immune responses in health and
disease. Indeed, in several animal models of inflammatory bowel disease, type I
NKT cells have been shown to make both protective and pathogenic contributions to
disease. In contrast, in patients with ulcerative colitis, and a mouse model in
which both CD1d expression and the frequency of type II NKT cells are increased, 
type II NKT cells seem to promote intestinal inflammation. In this review, we
summarize the present knowledge on the antigen recognition, activation, and
function of NKT cells with a particular focus on their role in inflammatory bowel
disease and discuss factors that may influence the functional outcome of NKT cell
responses in intestinal inflammation.

DOI: 10.1097/MIB.0b013e318280b1e3 
PMCID: PMC3694171
PMID: 23518808  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

