
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58894. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058894. Epub 2013 Mar 15.

The contribution of ArsB to arsenic resistance in Campylobacter jejuni.

Shen Z(1), Han J, Wang Y, Sahin O, Zhang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine, Iowa State
University, Ames, Iowa, USA.

Arsenic, a toxic metalloid, exists in the natural environment and its organic
form is approved for use as a feed additive for animal production. As a major
foodborne pathogen of animal origin, Campylobacter is exposed to arsenic
selection pressure in the food animal production environments. Previous studies
showed that Campylobacter isolates from poultry were highly resistant to arsenic 
compounds and a 4-gene operon (containing arsP, arsR, arsC, and acr3) was
associated with arsenic resistance in Campylobacter. However, this 4-gene operon 
is only present in some Campylobacter isolates and other arsenic resistance
mechanisms in C. jejuni have not been characterized. In this study, we determined
the role of several putative arsenic resistance genes including arsB, arsC2, and 
arsR3 in arsenic resistance in C. jejuni and found that arsB, but not the other
two genes, contributes to the resistance to arsenite and arsenate. Inactivation
of arsB in C. jejuni resulted in 8- and 4-fold reduction in the MICs of arsenite 
and arsenate, respectively, and complementation of the arsB mutant restored the
MIC of arsenite. Additionally, overexpression of arsB in C. jejuni 11168 resulted
in a 16-fold increase in the MIC of arsenite. PCR analysis of C. jejuni isolates 
from different animals hosts indicated that arsB and acr3 (the 4-gene operon) are
widely distributed in various C. jejuni strains, suggesting that Campylobacter
requires at least one of the two genes for adaptation to arsenic-containing
environments. These results identify ArsB as an alternative mechanism for arsenic
resistance in C. jejuni and provide new insights into the adaptive mechanisms of 
Campylobacter in animal food production environments.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058894 
PMCID: PMC3598800
PMID: 23554953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

