
1. J Exp Med. 2013 May 6;210(5):917-31.

Innate lymphoid cells sustain colon cancer through production of interleukin-22
in a mouse model.

Kirchberger S(1), Royston DJ, Boulard O, Thornton E, Franchini F, Szabady RL,
Harrison O, Powrie F.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Gastroenterology Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine,
Experimental Medicine Division, University of Oxford, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DU,
UK

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2013 Jul;12(7):504.

Patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) have an increased risk of colon
cancer. However, the immune cells and cytokines that mediate the transition from 
intestinal inflammation to cancer are poorly understood. We show that
bacteria-induced colon cancer is accompanied by differential accumulation of
IL-17(+)IL-22(+) colonic innate lymphoid cells (cILCs), which are phenotypically 
distinct from LTi and NK-22 cells, and that their depletion in mice with
dysplastic inflammation blocks the development of invasive colon cancer. Analysis
of the functional role of distinct Type 17 cytokines shows that although blockade
of IL-17 inhibits some parameters of intestinal inflammation, reduction in
dysplasia and colorectal cancer (CRC) requires neutralization of IL-22 indicating
a unique role for IL-22 in the maintenance of cancer in this model. Mechanistic
analyses showed that IL-22 selectively acts on epithelial cells to induce Stat3
phosphorylation and proliferation. Importantly, we could detect IL-22(+)CD3(+)
and IL-22(+)CD3(âˆ’) cells in human CRC. Our results describe a new activity of
IL-22 in the colon as a nonredundant mediator of the inflammatory cascade
required for perpetuation of CRC, highlighting the IL-22 axis as a novel
therapeutic target in colon cancer.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20122308 
PMCID: PMC3646494
PMID: 23589566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

