
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2013 Jul;79(13):4024-30. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00859-13. Epub 
2013 Apr 19.

A novel muconic acid biosynthesis approach by shunting tryptophan biosynthesis
via anthranilate.

Sun X(1), Lin Y, Huang Q, Yuan Q, Yan Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of
Chemical Technology, Beijing, China.

Muconic acid is the synthetic precursor of adipic acid, and the latter is an
important platform chemical that can be used for the production of nylon-6,6 and 
polyurethane. Currently, the production of adipic acid relies mainly on chemical 
processes utilizing petrochemicals, such as benzene, which are generally
considered environmentally unfriendly and nonrenewable, as starting materials.
Microbial synthesis from renewable carbon sources provides a promising
alternative under the circumstance of petroleum depletion and environment
deterioration. Here we devised a novel artificial pathway in Escherichia coli for
the biosynthesis of muconic acid, in which anthranilate, the first intermediate
in the tryptophan biosynthetic branch, was converted to catechol and muconic acid
by anthranilate 1,2-dioxygenase (ADO) and catechol 1,2-dioxygenase (CDO),
sequentially and respectively. First, screening for efficient ADO and CDO from
different microbial species enabled the production of gram-per-liter level
muconic acid from supplemented anthranilate in 5 h. To further achieve the
biosynthesis of muconic acid from simple carbon sources, anthranilate
overproducers were constructed by overexpressing the key enzymes in the shikimate
pathway and blocking tryptophan biosynthesis. In addition, we found that
introduction of a strengthened glutamine regeneration system by overexpressing
glutamine synthase significantly improved anthranilate production. Finally, the
engineered E. coli strain carrying the full pathway produced 389.96 Â± 12.46
mg/liter muconic acid from simple carbon sources in shake flask experiments, a
result which demonstrates scale-up potential for microbial production of muconic 
acid.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00859-13 
PMCID: PMC3697559
PMID: 23603682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

