
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2013 Oct;32(10):1285-9. doi:
10.1007/s10096-013-1874-0. Epub 2013 Apr 23.

Evaluation of PCR methods for the diagnosis of pertussis by the European
surveillance network for vaccine-preventable diseases (EUVAC.NET).

Dalby T(1), Fry NK, Krogfelt KA, Jensen JS, He Q; pertussis EQA participants.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infection Control, Statens Serum Institut,
Artillerivej 5, 2300, Copenhagen S, Denmark, tid@ssi.dk.

This study aimed to evaluate the performance of polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
methods used for the diagnosis of pertussis in laboratories within Europe in
2011. National reference laboratories in 25 European countries were contacted and
a total of 24 laboratories from 19 countries agreed to participate in the study. 
A panel of seven samples of DNA from Bordetella pertussis, Bordetella
parapertussis and Bordetella holmesii plus a negative control were distributed
and analysed according to the routine PCR methods in each laboratory. The study
took place in 2011. Nineteen laboratories used a real-time PCR approach, four
laboratories used block-based PCR and one laboratory used a combination of
methods. Six different combinations of amplification targets were used, and ten
laboratories tested only for the presence of B. pertussis DNA. All laboratories
(24/24) correctly identified a sample with high concentration of B. pertussis
DNA, while three misidentified the B. parapertussis DNA as B. pertussis and 15
misidentified the B. holmesii DNA as either B. pertussis or B. parapertussis.
There was a wide variation in the methods used for PCR-based diagnosis of
pertussis among the European laboratories. Several laboratories were not able to 
discriminate between DNA samples from different Bordetella species.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-013-1874-0 
PMID: 23609510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

