
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;1005:39-52. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-386-2_4.

Global protein quantification of mouse heart tissue based on the SILAC mouse.

Konzer A(1), Ruhs A, Braun T, Krüger M.

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Max-Planck-Institute for Heart and Lung
Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany.

Metabolic labeling of living organisms with stable isotopes has become a powerful
tool for global protein quantitation. The SILAC (stable isotope labeling with
amino acids in cell culture) approach is based on the incorporation of
nonradioactive-labeled isotopic forms of amino acids into cellular proteins. The 
effective SILAC labeling of immortalized cells and single-cell organisms (e.g.,
yeast and bacteria) was recently extended to more complex organisms, including
worms, flies, and even rodents. The administration of a (13)C6-lysine (heavy)
containing diet for one mouse generation leads to a complete exchange of the
natural (light) isotope (12)C6-lysine. SILAC-labeled organisms are mainly used as
a heavy "spike-in" standard into nonlabeled counterparts, and the combination
with high-performance mass spectrometers allows for global proteomic screening.
Here we used the fully labeled SILAC mice to identify proteins based on SILAC
pairs from isolated cardiomyocytes, and we analyzed β-parvin-deficient hearts.
Our approach confirmed the absence β-parvin and revealed simultaneously a clear
up regulation of α-parvin in heart tissue. In this protocol, we describe the
generation of a SILAC mouse colony and show two approaches to perform a
proteome-wide analysis of heart tissue. Thus, the SILAC mouse spike-in approach
is a readily available procedure and allows for a straightforward systematic
analysis of disease models and knockout mice.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-62703-386-2_4 
PMID: 23606247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

