
1. Microb Ecol. 2013 Oct;66(3):533-50. doi: 10.1007/s00248-013-0244-x.

Taxonomic profiling and metagenome analysis of a microbial community from a
habitat contaminated with industrial discharges.

Shah V(1), Zakrzewski M, Wibberg D, Eikmeyer F, Schlüter A, Madamwar D.

Author information: 
(1)Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales-CSIC, C/Serrano 115 bis., 28006, Madrid, 
Spain, ma.fernandez@mncn.csic.es.

Industrial units, manufacturing dyes, chemicals,solvents, and xenobiotic
compounds, produce liquid and solid wastes, which upon conventional treatment are
released in the nearby environment and thus are the major cause of pollution.
Soil collected from contaminated Kharicut Canalbank (N 22°57.878′; E
072°38.478′), Ahmeda bad, Gujarat,India was used for metagenomic DNA preparation 
to study the capabilities of intrinsic microbial community in dealing with
xenobiotics. Sequencing of metagenomic DNA on the Genome Sequencer FLX System
using titanium chemistry resulted in 409,782 reads accounting for 133,529,997
bases of sequence information. Taxonomic analyses and gene annotations were
carried out using the bioinformatics platform Sequence Analysis and Management
System for Metagenomic Datasets. Taxonomic profiling was carried out by three
different complementary approaches: (a) 16S rDNA, (b) environmental gene tags,
and (c) lowest common ancestor. The most abundant phylum and genus were found to 
be “Proteobacteria”and “Pseudomonas,” respectively. Metagenome reads were mapped 
on sequenced microbial genomes and the highest numbers of reads were allocated to
Pseudomonas stutzeri A1501. Assignment of obtained metagenome reads to Gene
Ontology terms, Clusters of Orthologous Groups of protein categories, protein
family numbers, and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes hits revealed genomic
potential of indigenous microbial community. In total, 157,024 reads corresponded
to 37,028 different KEGG hits, and amongst them, 11,574 reads corresponded to 131
different enzymes potentially involved in xenobiotic biodegradation. These
enzymes were mapped on biodegradation pathways of xenobiotics to elucidate their 
roles in possible catalytic reactions. Consequently, information obtained from
the present study will act as a baseline which, subsequently along with
other“-omic” studies, will help in designing future bioremediation strategies in 
effluent treatment plants and environmental cleanup projects.

DOI: 10.1007/s00248-013-0244-x 
PMID: 23728164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

