
1. J Immunol. 2013 Jul 15;191(2):572-82. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300299. Epub 2013
Jun 19.

The mechanism of splenic invariant NKT cell activation dictates localization in
vivo.

King IL(1), Amiel E, Tighe M, Mohrs K, Veerapen N, Besra G, Mohrs M, Leadbetter
EA.

Author information: 
(1)Trudeau Institute, Saranac Lake, NY 12983, USA.

Invariant NKT (iNKT) cells are glycolipid-specific innate lymphocytes emerging as
critical players in the immune response to diverse infections and disease. iNKT
cells are activated through cognate interactions with lipid-loaded APCs, by
Ag-independent cytokine-mediated signaling pathways, or a combination of both.
Although each of these modes of iNKT cell activation plays an important role in
directing the humoral and cell-mediated immune response, the spatio-temporal
nature of these interactions and the cellular requirements for activation are
largely undefined. Combining novel in situ confocal imaging of
Î±Galactosylceramide-loaded CD1d tetramer labeling to localize the endogenous iNKT
cell population with cytokine reporter mice, we reveal the choreography of early 
murine splenic iNKT cell activation across diverse settings of glycolipid
immunization and systemic infection with Streptococcus pneumoniae. We find that
iNKT cells consolidate in the marginal zone and require dendritic cells lining
the splenic marginal zone for activation following administration of cognate
glycolipids and during systemic infection but not following exogenous cytokine
administration. Although further establishing the importance of cognate iNKT cell
interactions with APCs, we also show that noncognate iNKT-dependent mechanisms
are sufficient to mediate effector outcomes, such as STAT signaling and dendritic
cell licensing throughout the splenic parenchyma. Collectively, these data
provide new insight into how iNKT cells may serve as a natural adjuvant in
facilitating adaptive immune responses, irrespective of their tissue
localization.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300299 
PMCID: PMC3710125
PMID: 23785119  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

