
1. Eur J Med Chem. 2013 Aug;66:32-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2013.05.013. Epub 2013
May 21.

Structure-activity relationships of new cyanothiophene inhibitors of the
essential peptidoglycan biosynthesis enzyme MurF.

Hrast M(1), Turk S, Sosič I, Knez D, Randall CP, Barreteau H, Contreras-Martel C,
Dessen A, O'Neill AJ, Mengin-Lecreulx D, Blanot D, Gobec S.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Ljubljana, Aškerčeva 7, 1000 Ljubljana,
Slovenia.

Peptidoglycan is an essential component of the bacterial cell wall, and enzymes
involved in its biosynthesis represent validated targets for antibacterial drug
discovery. MurF catalyzes the final intracellular peptidoglycan biosynthesis
step: the addition of D-Ala-D-Ala to the nucleotide precursor
UDP-MurNAc-L-Ala-γ-D-Glu-meso-DAP (or L-Lys). As MurF has no human counterpart,
it represents an attractive target for the development of new antibacterial
drugs. Using recently published cyanothiophene inhibitors of MurF from
Streptococcus pneumoniae as a starting point, we designed and synthesized a
series of structurally related derivatives and investigated their inhibition of
MurF enzymes from different bacterial species. Systematic structural
modifications of the parent compounds resulted in a series of nanomolar
inhibitors of MurF from S. pneumoniae and micromolar inhibitors of MurF from
Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus. Some of the inhibitors also show
antibacterial activity against S. pneumoniae R6. These findings, together with
two new co-crystal structures, represent an excellent starting point for further 
optimization toward effective novel antibacterials.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2013.05.013 
PMID: 23786712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

