
1. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2013 Sep;166(1):91-8. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2013.07.006. Epub 2013 Jul 20.

Molecular cloning and expression analysis of two β-defensin genes in the blunt
snout bream (Megalobrama amblycephala).

Liang T(1), Wang DD, Zhang GR, Wei KJ, Wang WM, Zou GW.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Animal Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture, College
of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, PR China.

β-Defensins are a group of cysteine-rich, cationic antimicrobial peptides that
play important roles in innate immune system against pathogenic microbes
invading. In this study, the part-length cDNA sequences of two β-defensin genes
(maΒD-1, maΒD-2) in blunt snout bream (Megalobrama amblycephala) were identified.
Homology analysis showed that the cDNA sequences of maΒD-1 and maΒD-2 had high
similarities to those in common carp and zebrafish. Real-time quantitative PCR
results exhibited that expression level of maΒD-1 in juvenile tissues was the
highest in skin, followed by blood and liver, whereas maΒD-2 was lowly expressed 
in liver, kidney, brain and foregut. In the early development period, fertilized 
eggs to 31-day post-hatching (dph) larvae, the expression levels of maΒD-1 were
higher at the stage from heart beat stage to 3 dph with the highest value at 1
dph, whereas maΒD-2 was expressed higher at fertilized eggs and late cleavage
stages. Following bacterial stimulation in vivo by Aeromonas sobria, maΒD-2
expressions were significantly up-regulated in liver, skin, gill, and foregut of 
juveniles, and maΒD-1 expressions were significantly up-regulated in liver and
skin. The results suggest that maΒD-1 and maΒD-2 may play important roles in
protecting blunt snout bream embryos, fry and juveniles from pathogenic microbe
invading.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpb.2013.07.006 
PMID: 23876385  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

