
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2013 Oct;17(2):432-8. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.07.008.
Epub 2013 Jul 25.

IL-33 promotes Staphylococcus aureus-infected wound healing in mice.

Yin H(1), Li X, Hu S, Liu T, Yuan B, Ni Q, Lan F, Luo X, Gu H, Zheng F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Guangdong Pharmaceutical
University, Guangzhou, China. huiyin0103@163.com

Interleukin (IL)-33, a newly identified member of IL-1 family of cytokines, plays
a crucial role in polarizing Th2-associated immune responses. Recently growing
evidence indicates that IL-33 also represents an important mediator of mucosal
healing and epithelial restoration. In this study, we investigated the effect of 
IL-33 on antimicrobial infection and wound healing using a Staphylococcus
aureus-infected incision model in mice. Our findings showed that the expression
of IL-33 mRNA and protein was promptly increased in cutaneous wound tissues when 
challenged by methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA). At the same time, exogenous
IL-33 administration profoundly inhibited MRSA colonization and accelerated
cutaneous wound repair. IL-33 upregulation promoted the proliferation of
neutrophils and CXCR2 expression, which is related to augmented neutrophil
trafficking into infectious sites for bactericidal effect. In addition, the
beneficial effect of IL-33 is also implicated in enhancement of collagen
deposition and the expression of extracellular matrix (ECM)-associated genes such
as fibronectin and collagen IIIa, which implies a potential effect of IL-33 on
matrix synthesis and reepithelialization during the wound repair process. All
together, these findings reveal that IL-33 plays an essential effect in
maintenance of cutaneous homeostasis and improvement of infectious wound healing.

Â© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.07.008 
PMID: 23892028  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

