
1. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2014 Feb;40(1):295-309. doi: 10.1007/s10695-013-9844-0.
Epub 2013 Aug 11.

Dietary probiotic supplementation (Shewanella putrefaciens Pdp11) modulates gut
microbiota and promotes growth and condition in Senegalese sole larviculture.

Lobo C(1), Moreno-Ventas X, Tapia-Paniagua S, Rodríguez C, Moriñigo MA, de La
Banda IG.

Author information: 
(1)Spanish Institute of Oceanography, Oceanographic Center of Santander,
Promontorio San Martín s/n. Apdo. 240, 39080, Santander, Spain,
carmen.lobo@st.ieo.es.

Probiotic supplementation in fish aquaculture has significantly increased in the 
last decade due to its beneficial effect on fish performance. Probiotic use at
early stages of fish development may contribute to better face metamorphosis and 
weaning stress. In the present work, we studied the influence of Shewanella
putrefaciens Pdp11 supplementation on growth, body composition and gut microbiota
in Senegalese sole (Solea senegalensis) during larval and weaning development. S.
putrefaciens Pdp11 was incorporated using Artemia as live vector (2.5 × 10⁷ cfu
mL⁻¹) and supplied to sole specimens in a co-feeding regime (10-86 DAH) by
triplicate. Probiotic addition promoted early metamorphosis and a significantly
higher growth in length at 24 DAH larvae. S. putrefaciens Pdp11 also modulated
gut microbiota and significantly increased protein content and DHA/EPA ratios in 
sole fry (90 DAH). This nutritional enhancement is considered especially
important after weaning, where significantly higher growth in length and weight
was observed in probiotic fish. Moreover, a less heterogeneous fish size in
length was detected since metamorphosis till the end of weaning, being of
interest for sole aquaculture production. After weaning, fish showed
significantly higher growth (length and weight) and less variable lengths in fish
when supplemented with probiotics. Both the enhancement of nutritional condition 
and the decrease in size variability associated with probiotic addition are
highly interesting for sole aquaculture production.

DOI: 10.1007/s10695-013-9844-0 
PMID: 23933744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

