
1. RNA. 2013 Oct;19(10):1355-62. doi: 10.1261/rna.039917.113. Epub 2013 Aug 14.

2'-Phosphate cyclase activity of RtcA: a potential rationale for the operon
organization of RtcA with an RNA repair ligase RtcB in Escherichia coli and other
bacterial taxa.

Das U, Shuman S.

RNA terminal phosphate cyclase catalyzes the ATP-dependent conversion of a
3'-phosphate RNA end to a 2',3'-cyclic phosphate via covalent
enzyme-(histidinyl-Nε)-AMP and RNA(3')pp(5')A intermediates. Here, we report that
Escherichia coli RtcA (and its human homolog Rtc1) are capable of cyclizing a
2'-phosphate RNA end in high yield. The rate of 2'-phosphate cyclization by RtcA 
is five orders of magnitude slower than 3'-phosphate cyclization, notwithstanding
that RtcA binds with similar affinity to RNA3'p and RNA2'p substrates. These
findings expand the functional repertoire of RNA cyclase and suggest that
phosphate geometry during adenylate transfer to RNA is a major factor in the
kinetics of cyclization. RtcA is coregulated in an operon with an RNA ligase,
RtcB, that splices RNA 5'-OH ends to either 3'-phosphate or 2',3'-cyclic
phosphate ends. Our results suggest that RtcA might serve an end healing function
in an RNA repair pathway, by converting RNA 2'-phosphates, which cannot be
spliced by RtcB, to 2',3'-cyclic phosphates that can be sealed. The rtcBA operon 
is controlled by the σ(54) coactivator RtcR encoded by an adjacent gene. This
operon arrangement is conserved in diverse bacterial taxa, many of which have
also incorporated the RNA-binding protein Ro (which is implicated in RNA quality 
control under stress conditions) as a coregulated component of the operon.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.039917.113 
PMCID: PMC3854526
PMID: 23945037  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

