
1. J Hosp Infect. 2013 Oct;85(2):134-40. doi: 10.1016/j.jhin.2013.05.012. Epub 2013 
Aug 17.

Bad design, bad practices, bad bugs: frustrations in controlling an outbreak of
Elizabethkingia meningoseptica in intensive care units.

Balm MN(1), Salmon S, Jureen R, Teo C, Mahdi R, Seetoh T, Teo JT, Lin RT, Fisher 
DA.

Author information: 
(1)Infection Control Team, National University Hospital, Singapore; Microbiology,
Department of Laboratory Medicine, National University Hospital, Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Elizabethkingia meningoseptica is a nosocomial-adapted Gram-negative 
bacillus intrinsically resistant to antibiotics commonly used in the intensive
care setting. An outbreak investigation commenced when five patients developed
E. meningoseptica infection in two intensive care units (ICUs).
METHODS: Analysis of laboratory data, case reviews, ICU workflows and extensive
environmental sampling were undertaken. Molecular typing was performed using
repetitive element palindromic polymerase chain reaction. Follow-up studies after
interventions included environmental monitoring and a survey of staff compliance 
with interventions.
FINDINGS: Laboratory data revealed increasing incidence of E. meningoseptica
colonization or infection in ICU patients compared with preceding years.
E. meningoseptica was cultured from 44% (35/79) of taps, but not from other
sources. Hand hygiene sinks were used for disposal of patient secretions and
rinsing re-usable patient care items. Sinks misused in this way were contaminated
more often than sinks that were not misused (odds ratio 4.38, 95% confidence
interval 1.68-11.39; P = 0.004). Molecular typing revealed that patient isolates 
had identical patterns to several isolates from hand hygiene taps. An urgent
education programme was instituted to change these practices. Taps were cleaned
systematically and aerators were changed. A temporary reduction in case numbers
was achieved. Recolonization of taps was demonstrated on follow-up environmental 
screening, and cases recurred after two months. A survey revealed that 77.3%
(163/213) of nursing staff still misused sinks due to time constraints or other
problems adhering to the interventions.
CONCLUSION: Introduction of non-sanctioned practices due to suboptimal unit
design may have unintentional consequences for ICU patients. Room design and
staff workflows must be optimized for patient safety as lapses in procedure can
inadvertently put patients at risk.

Copyright © 2013 The Healthcare Infection Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhin.2013.05.012 
PMID: 23958153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

