
1. Microbes Infect. 2013 Nov;15(13):928-38. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2013.08.006. Epub 
2013 Aug 31.

CD1d-restricted NKT cells modulate placental and uterine leukocyte populations
during chlamydial infection in mice.

Habbeddine M(1), Verbeke P, Delarbre C, Moutier R, Prieto S, Ojcius DM,
Kanellopoulos-Langevin C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Inflammation, Gestation and Autoimmunity, Jacques Monod
Institute, CNRS and University Paris-Diderot, 15 rue Hélène Brion, 75205 Paris
Cedex 13, France; Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy (CIML), Aix-Marseille 
University UM2, France; INSERM U1104 and CNRS UMR7280, Marseille, France.

Invariant CD1d-restricted natural killer T cells play an important
immunoregulatory role and can influence a broad spectrum of immunological
responses including against bacterial infections. They are present at the
fetal-maternal interface and although it has been reported that experimental
systemic iNKT cell activation can induce mouse abortion, their role during
pregnancy remain poorly understood. In the present work, using a physiological
Chlamydia muridarum infection model, we have shown that, in vaginally infected
pregnant mice, C. muridarum is cleared similarly in C57BL/6 wild type (WT) and
CD1d(-/-) mice. We have also shown that infected- as well as uninfected-CD1d(-/-)
mice have the same litter size as WT counterparts. Thus, CD1d-restricted cells
are required neither for the resolution of chlamydial infection of the
lower-genital tract, nor for the maintenance of reproductive capacity. However,
unexpected differences in T cell populations were observed in uninfected pregnant
females, as CD1d(-/-) placentas contained significantly higher percentages of
CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells than WT counterparts. However, infection triggered a
significant decrease in the percentages of CD4(+) T cells in CD1d(-/-) mice. In
infected WT pregnant mice, the numbers of uterine CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells,
monocytes and granulocytes were greatly increased, changes not observed in
infected CD1d(-/-) mice. An increase in the percentage of CD8(+) T cells seems
independent of CD1d-restricted cells as it occurred in both WT and CD1d(-/-)
mice. Thus, in the steady state, the lack of CD1d-restricted NKT cells affects
leukocyte populations only in the placenta. In Chlamydia-infected pregnant mice, 
the immune response against Chlamydia is dampened in the uterus. Our results
suggest that CD1d-restricted NKT cells play a role in the recruitment or
homeostasis of leukocyte populations at the maternal-fetal interface in the
presence or absence of Chlamydia infection.

Copyright © 2013 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2013.08.006 
PMCID: PMC4106417
PMID: 23999314  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

