
1. Vaccine. 2013 Oct 25;31(45):5276-80. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.08.052. Epub
2013 Sep 5.

New attenuated vaccine against columnaris disease in fish: choosing the right
parental strain is critical for vaccine efficacy.

Mohammed H(1), Olivares-Fuster O, LaFrentz S, Arias CR.

Author information: 
(1)Aquatic Microbiology Laboratory, School of Fisheries, Aquaculture and Aquatic 
Sciences, Auburn University, 203 Swingle Hall, Auburn, AL 36849, USA.

Flavobacterium columnare, the causative agent of columnaris disease, is a highly 
diverse species comprised by three genomovars. Genomovar II strains are more
virulent toward catfishes than genomovar I isolates. The objective of this study 
was to compare the vaccine efficacy of avirulent mutants derived from genomovars 
I and II using a rifampicin-resistance strategy. First, we compared the efficacy 
of 13 genomovar II mutants in channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus) fingerlings
and identified mutant 17-23 as the best vaccine candidate based on their relative
percent survival (RPS) against a highly virulent genomovar II strain (BGFS-27).
In the second experiment, we vaccinated zebrafish (Danio rerio) with two
genomovar II mutants (17-23 and 16-534) and FCRR (genomovar I mutant) followed by
exposure to BGFS-27 strain. RPS values were 28.4, 20.3 and 8.1% for 17-23,
16-534, and FCRR, respectively. For experiments 3 and 4, we tested both 17-23 and
FCRR in channel catfish fry and Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus). In both
experiments, vaccinated fish were divided in two groups and each challenged with 
either a genomovar I (ARS-1) or a II (BGFS-27) strain. Channel catfish fry
vaccinated with 17-23 and FCRR followed by challenge with BGFS-27 resulted in RPS
values of 37.0% and 4.4%. When fish were challenged with ARS-1, RPS values were
90.9% and 72.7% for fish vaccinated with 17-23 and FCRR, respectively. Nile
tilapia vaccinated with 17-23 and FCRR followed by challenged with BGFS-27 had
RPS values of 82.1% and 16.1%, respectively. When fish were challenged with
strain ARS-1, RPS values were 86.9% and 75.5%. Overall, our results demonstrated 
that vaccination with genomovar II mutant 17-23 confers better protection in
channel catfish and Nile tilapia than FCRR against columnaris disease caused by
genomovar II. Both mutants were equally protective against columnaris caused by
genomovar I showing that 17-23 mutant cross-protected against both genomovars.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.08.052 
PMID: 24012568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

