
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Mar;10(3):1226-33.

Arginine-specific repression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae: kinetic data on ARG1
and ARG3 mRNA transcription and stability support a transcriptional control
mechanism.

Crabeel M(1), Lavalle R, Glansdorff N.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium.

A specific repression mechanism regulates arginine biosynthesis in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae. The involvement of regulatory proteins displaying DNA-binding
features and the location of an operator region between the TATA box and the
transcription start of the structural gene ARG3 suggest that this mechanism
operates at the level of transcription. A posttranscriptional mechanism has,
however, been proposed to account for the conspicuous lack of proportionality
between ARG3 mRNA steady-state levels (as determined by Northern [RNA] assays; F.
Messenguy and E. Dubois, Mol. Gen. Genet. 189:148-156, 1983) and the cognate
enzyme activities. In this work, we have analyzed the time course of the
incorporation of radioactive precursors into ARG1 and ARG3 mRNAs and the kinetics
of their decay under different regulatory statuses. The results (expressed in
terms of relative mRNA levels, relative transcription rates, and mRNA half-lives)
give the picture expected from a purely transcriptional control. A similar
analysis of expression of the gene CPA1, for which a translational regulation by 
arginine has been clearly demonstrated (M. Werner, A. Feller, F. Messenguy, and
A. Pi√©rard, Cell 49:805-813, 1987), indicates that this gene is also partly
regulated at the transcriptional level by the ARGR repressor system. Moreover,
the half-life of CPA1 mRNA is reduced twofold in the presence of excess arginine;
we suggest that this could be inherent in the mechanism of translational
regulation of CPA1.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.10.3.1226-1233.1990 
PMCID: PMC361004
PMID: 2406564  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

