
1. BMC Biotechnol. 2013 Oct 29;13:92. doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-13-92.

Improving activity and enantioselectivity of lipase via immobilization on
macroporous resin for resolution of racemic 1- phenylethanol in non-aqueous
medium.

Li X, Huang S, Xu L, Yan Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education, College
of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan 430074, China. yanyunjun@hust.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Burkholderia cepacia lipase (BCL) has been proved to be capable of
resolution reactions. However, its free form usually exhibits low stability, bad 
resistance and no reusability, which restrict its further industrial
applications. Therefore, it is of great importance to improve the catalytic
performance of free lipase in non-aqueous medium.
RESULTS: In this work, macroporous resin NKA (MPR-NKA) was utilized as support
for lipase immobilization. Racemic transesterification of 1-phenylethanol with
vinyl acetate was chosen as model reaction. Compared with its free form, the
enzyme activity and enantioselectivity (ees) of the immobilized lipase have been 
significantly enhanced. The immobilized BCL exhibited a satisfactory
thermostability over a wide range of temperature (from 10 to 65Â°C) and an
excellent catalytic efficiency. After being used for more than 30 successive
batches, the immobilized lipase still kept most of its activity. In comparison
with other immobilized lipases, the immobilized BCL also exhibits better
catalytic efficiency, which indicates a significant potential in industrial
applications.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study have proved that MPR-NKA was an excellent
support for immobilization of lipase via the methods of N2 adsorption-desorption,
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and
Fourier transform-infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR). The improvement of enzyme
activity and ees for the immobilized lipase was closely correlated with the
alteration of its secondary structure. This information may contribute to a
better understanding of the mechanism of immobilization and enzymatic
biotransformation in non-aqueous medium.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6750-13-92 
PMCID: PMC4228463
PMID: 24168516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

