
1. Microb Ecol. 2014 Jan;67(1):129-44. doi: 10.1007/s00248-013-0313-1. Epub 2013 Nov
5.

Rapid impact of phenanthrene and arsenic on bacterial community structure and
activities in sand batches.

Cébron A(1), Arsène-Ploetze F, Bauda P, Bertin PN, Billard P, Carapito C, Devin
S, Goulhen-Chollet F, Poirel J, Leyval C.

Author information: 
(1)LIEC UMR7360, CNRS-Université de Lorraine, Faculté des Sciences et
Technologies, BP 70239, 54506, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy Cedex, France,
aurelie.cebron@univ-lorraine.fr.

The impact of both organic and inorganic pollution on the structure of soil
microbial communities is poorly documented. A short-time batch experiment
(6 days) was conducted to study the impact of both types of pollutants on the
taxonomic, metabolic and functional diversity of soil bacteria. For this purpose 
sand spiked with phenanthrene (500 mg kg(-1) sand) or arsenic (arsenite 0.66 mM
and arsenate 12.5 mM) was supplemented with artificial root exudates and was
inoculated with bacteria originated from an aged PAH and heavy-metal-polluted
soil. The bacterial community was characterised using bacterial strain isolation,
TTGE fingerprinting and proteomics. Without pollutant, or with phenanthrene or
arsenic, there were no significant differences in the abundance of bacteria and
the communities were dominated by Pseudomonas and Paenibacillus genera. However, 
at the concentrations used, both phenanthrene or arsenic were toxic as shown by
the decrease in mineralisation activities. Using community-level physiological
profiles (Biolog Ecoplates™) or differential proteomics, we observed that the
pollutants had an impact on the community physiology, in particular phenanthrene 
induced a general cellular stress response with changes in the central metabolism
and membrane protein synthesis. Real-time PCR quantification of functional genes 
and transcripts revealed that arsenic induced the transcription of functional
arsenic resistance and speciation genes (arsB, ACR3 and aioA), while no
transcription of PAH-degradation genes (PAH-dioxygenase and catechol-dioxygenase)
was detected with phenanthrene. Altogether, in our tested conditions, pollutants 
do not have a major effect on community abundance or taxonomic composition but
rather have an impact on metabolic and functional bacterial properties.

DOI: 10.1007/s00248-013-0313-1 
PMID: 24189653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

