
1. Immunol Res. 2013 Dec;57(1-3):12-22. doi: 10.1007/s12026-013-8448-1.

Autoimmune effector memory T cells: the bad and the good.

Devarajan P(1), Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Miami Miller School
of Medicine, RMSB 3035, 1600 NW 10th Ave, Miami, FL, 33136, USA.

Immunological memory is a hallmark of adaptive immunity, a defense mechanism
endowed to vertebrates during evolution. However, an autoimmune pathogenic role
of memory lymphocytes is also emerging with accumulating evidence, despite
reasonable skepticism on their existence in a chronic setting of autoimmune
damage. It is conceivable that autoimmune memory would be particularly harmful
since memory cells would constantly "remember" and attack the body's healthy
tissues. It is even more detrimental given the resistance of memory T cells to
immunomodulatory therapies. In this review, we focus on self-antigen-reactive
CD(+) effector memory T (TEM) cells, surveying the evidence for the role of the
T(EM) compartment in autoimmune pathogenesis. We will also discuss the role of
T(EM) cells in chronic and acute infectious disease settings and how they compare
to their counterparts in autoimmune diseases. With their long-lasting potency,
the autoimmune T(EM) cells could also play a critical role in anti-tumor
immunity, which may be largely based on their reactivity to self-antigens.
Therefore, although autoimmune T(EM) cells are "bad" due to their role in
relentless perpetration of tissue damage in autoimmune disease settings, they are
unlikely a by-product of industrial development along the modern surge of
autoimmune disease prevalence. Rather, they may be a product of evolution for
their "good" in clearing damaged host cells in chronic infections and malignant
cells in cancer settings.

DOI: 10.1007/s12026-013-8448-1 
PMCID: PMC4067599
PMID: 24203440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

