
1. EMBO Mol Med. 2014 Jan;6(1):27-42. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201303503. Epub 2013 Dec 15.

Microparticle alpha-2-macroglobulin enhances pro-resolving responses and promotes
survival in sepsis.

Dalli J(1), Norling LV, Montero-Melendez T, Federici Canova D, Lashin H, Pavlov
AM, Sukhorukov GB, Hinds CJ, Perretti M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biochemical Pharmacology The William Harvey Research Institute,
Barts and The London School of Medicine Queen Mary University of London, London, 
UK.

Comment in
    EMBO Mol Med. 2014 Jan;6(1):2-3.

Incorporation of locally produced signaling molecules into cell-derived vesicles 
may serve as an endogenous mediator delivery system. We recently reported that
levels alpha-2-macroglobulin (A2MG)-containing microparticles are elevated in
plasma from patients with sepsis. Herein, we investigated the immunomodulatory
actions of A2MG containing microparticles during sepsis. Administration of
A2MG-enriched (A2MG-E)-microparticles to mice with microbial sepsis protected
against hypothermia, reduced bacterial titers, elevated immunoresolvent lipid
mediator levels in inflammatory exudates and reduced systemic inflammation.
A2MG-E microparticles also enhanced survival in murine sepsis, an action lost in 
mice transfected with siRNA for LRP1, a putative A2MG receptor. In vitro, A2MG
was functionally transferred onto endothelial cell plasma membranes from
microparticles, augmenting neutrophil-endothelial adhesion. A2MG also modulated
human leukocyte responses: enhanced bacterial phagocytosis, reactive oxygen
species production, cathelicidin release, prevented endotoxin induced CXCR2
downregulation and preserved neutrophil chemotaxis in the presence of LPS. A
significant association was also found between elevated plasma levels of
A2MG-containing microparticles and survival in human sepsis patients. Taken
together, these results identify A2MG enrichment in microparticles as an
important host protective mechanism in sepsis.

DOI: 10.1002/emmm.201303503 
PMCID: PMC3936490
PMID: 24357647  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

