
1. Gut. 2014 Oct;63(10):1550-9. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2013-306253. Epub 2014 Jan 16.

CCL20/CCR6-mediated migration of regulatory T cells to the Helicobacter
pylori-infected human gastric mucosa.

Cook KW(1), Letley DP(1), Ingram RJ(1), Staples E(1), Skjoldmose H(1), Atherton
JC(1), Robinson K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nottingham Digestive Diseases Biomedical Research Unit, School of Medicine,
The University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

BACKGROUND: Helicobacter pylori-induced peptic ulceration is less likely to occur
in patients with a strong gastric anti-inflammatory regulatory T cell (Treg)
response. Migration of Tregs into the gastric mucosa is therefore important.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the homing receptors involved in directing Tregs to the
gastric mucosa, and investigate how H pylori stimulates the relevant chemokine
responses.
DESIGN: Gastric biopsy samples and peripheral blood were donated by 84 H
pylori-infected and 46 uninfected patients. Luminex assays quantified gastric
biopsy chemokine concentrations. Flow cytometry was used to characterise homing
receptors on CD4(+)CD25(hi) Tregs. H pylori wild-type and isogenic mutants were
used to investigate the signalling mechanisms behind CCL20 and IL-8 induction in 
gastric epithelial cell lines. Transwell assays were used to quantify Treg
migration towards chemokines in vitro.
RESULTS: CCL20, CXCL1-3 and IL-8 concentrations were significantly increased in
gastric biopsy samples from H pylori-infected patients. CCR6 (CCL20 receptor),
CXCR1 and CXCR2 (IL-8 and CXCL1-3 receptors) were expressed by a higher
proportion of peripheral blood Tregs in infected patients. Most gastric Tregs
expressed these receptors. H pylori induced CCL20 production by gastric
epithelial cells via cag pathogenicity island (cagPAI)-dependent NF-ÎºB
signalling. Foxp3(+), but not Foxp3(-), CD4 cells from infected mice migrated
towards recombinant CCL20 in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: As well as increasing Treg numbers, H pylori infection induces a
change in their characteristics. Expression of CCR6, CXCR1 and CXCR2 probably
enables their migration towards CCL20 and IL-8 in the infected gastric mucosa.
Such qualitative changes may also explain how H pylori protects against some
extragastric inflammatory disorders.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2013-306253 
PMCID: PMC4173663
PMID: 24436142  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

