
1. Bull Soc Pathol Exot. 2014 May;107(2):74-8. doi: 10.1007/s13149-014-0338-9. Epub 
2014 Feb 24.

[Evoluting form of cancrum oris, about 55 cases collected at the Academic
Hospital Yalgado Ouedraogo of Ouagadougou].

[Article in French]

Konsem T(1), Millogo M, Assouan C, Ouedraogo D.

Author information: 
(1)Service de stomatologie et chirurgie maxillo-faciale du CHU Yalgado Ouedraogo,
Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.

The cancrum oris is still an up to date disease in our environment. The death
rate and the after effects of this disease make all together the main interest of
this survey. In a retrospective survey carried out from January 2003 to December 
2012, we colligated 55 cases of progressive cancrum oris followed at the
stomatological and maxillofacial surgery at the Academic Hospital Yalgado
OUEDRAOGO. On the epidemiological level, we noticed an impact of 5.5 cases per
year. The average age of our patients was about 7.64 with a sex ratio of 1.03.
Most of the patients were from an underprivileged family (96.4%). On the clinical
level, we noticed that most of the patients consulted only after the gangrene had
fallen (89.1%) and were seriously affected (67.3%) with a bad oral and dental
hygiene (38.1%). The attacks were mainly jugal (25%) and labial (24.1%). The
cancrum oris was in most of the cases associated to broncho pneumonitis, malaria 
and to HIV infection (31.37%). For the medical treatment, we focused on
resuscitation, re nutrition, hydro electrolytic rebalancing and antibiotherapy.
The surgical treatment was essentially made on the affected areas, controlled
skinning and most often followed by sequestrectomy. 81.8% of the patients
recovered completely from the infection, 60% had after effect injuries. We
recorded a death rate of 14.5%. In order to overcome this disease we need both
national and international support.

DOI: 10.1007/s13149-014-0338-9 
PMID: 24566885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

