
1. J Dairy Sci. 2014 May;97(5):2633-45. doi: 10.3168/jds.2013-7738. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Multilocus sequence typing of Lactococcus lactis from naturally fermented milk
foods in ethnic minority areas of China.

Xu H(1), Sun Z(1), Liu W(1), Yu J(1), Song Y(1), Lv Q(1), Zhang J(1), Shao Y(1), 
Menghe B(1), Zhang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering, Ministry of Education, 
Inner Mongolia Agricultural University, Huhhot, Inner Mongolia 010018, P. R.
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering, Ministry of Education, 
Inner Mongolia Agricultural University, Huhhot, Inner Mongolia 010018, P. R.
China. Electronic address: hepingdd@vip.sina.com.

To determine the genetic diversity and phylogenetic relationships among
Lactococcus lactis isolates, 197 strains isolated from naturally homemade yogurt 
in 9 ethnic minority areas of 6 provinces of China were subjected to multilocus
sequence typing (MLST). The MLST analysis was performed using internal fragment
sequences of 12 housekeeping genes (carB, clpX, dnaA, groEL, murC, murE, pepN,
pepX, pyrG, recA, rpoB, and pheS). Six (dnaA) to 8 (murC) different alleles were 
detected for these genes, which ranged from 33.62 (clpX) to 41.95% (recA) GC
(guanine-cytosine) content. The nucleotide diversity (π) ranged from 0.00362
(murE) to 0.08439 (carB). Despite this limited allelic diversity, the allele
combinations of each strain revealed 72 different sequence types, which denoted
significant genotypic diversity. The dN/dS ratios (where dS is the number of
synonymous substitutions per synonymous site, and dN is the number of
nonsynonymous substitutions per nonsynonymous site) were lower than 1, suggesting
potential negative selection for these genes. The standardized index of
association of the alleles IA(S)=0.3038 supported the clonality of Lc. lactis,
but the presence of network structure revealed by the split decomposition
analysis of the concatenated sequence was strong evidence for intraspecies
recombination. Therefore, this suggests that recombination contributed to the
evolution of Lc. lactis. A minimum spanning tree analysis of the 197 isolates
identified 14 clonal complexes and 23 singletons. Phylogenetic trees were
constructed based on the sequence types, using the minimum evolution algorithm,
and on the concatenated sequence (6,192 bp), using the unweighted pair-group
method with arithmetic mean, and these trees indicated that the evolution of our 
Lc. lactis population was correlated with geographic origin. Taken together, our 
results demonstrated that MLST could provide a better understanding of Lc. lactis
genome evolution, as well as useful information for future studies on global Lc. 
lactis structure and genetic evolution, which will lay the foundation for
screening Lc. lactis as starter cultures in fermented dairy products.

Copyright © 2014 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2013-7738 
PMID: 24612812  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

