
1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 26;9(3):e93177. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093177. eCollection
2014.

F9 fimbriae of uropathogenic Escherichia coli are expressed at low temperature
and recognise Galβ1-3GlcNAc-containing glycans.

Wurpel DJ(1), Totsika M(1), Allsopp LP(1), Hartley-Tassell LE(2), Day CJ(2),
Peters KM(1), Sarkar S(1), Ulett GC(3), Yang J(4), Tiralongo J(2), Strugnell
RA(4), Jennings MP(2), Schembri MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, School of Chemistry and
Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(2)Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Queensland,
Australia.
(3)School of Medical Sciences, Centre for Medicine and Oral Health, Griffith
University, Southport, Queensland, Australia.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) is the leading causative agent of urinary
tract infections (UTI) in the developed world. Among the major virulence factors 
of UPEC, surface expressed adhesins mediate attachment and tissue tropism. UPEC
strains typically possess a range of adhesins, with type 1 fimbriae and P
fimbriae of the chaperone-usher class the best characterised. We previously
identified and characterised F9 as a new chaperone-usher fimbrial type that
mediates biofilm formation. However, the regulation and specific role of F9
fimbriae remained to be determined in the context of wild-type clinical UPEC
strains. In this study we have assessed the distribution and genetic context of
the f9 operon among diverse E. coli lineages and pathotypes and demonstrated that
f9 genes are significantly more conserved in a UPEC strain collection in
comparison to the well-defined E. coli reference (ECOR) collection. In the
prototypic UPEC strain CFT073, the global regulator protein H-NS was identified
as a transcriptional repressor of f9 gene expression at 37°C through its ability 
to bind directly to the f9 promoter region. F9 fimbriae expression was
demonstrated at 20°C, representing the first evidence of functional F9 fimbriae
expression by wild-type E. coli. Finally, glycan array analysis demonstrated that
F9 fimbriae recognise and bind to terminal Galβ1-3GlcNAc structures.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093177 
PMCID: PMC3966885
PMID: 24671091  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

