
1. Clin Sci (Lond). 2014 Sep;127(6):391-403. doi: 10.1042/CS20130769.

Human pleural B-cells regulate IFN-γ production by local T-cells and NK cells in 
a Mycobacterium tuberculosis-induced delayed hypersensitivity reaction.

Schierloh P(1), Landoni V(1), Balboa L(1), Musella RM(2), Castagnino J(2), Moraña
E(3), de Casado GC, Palmero D(2), Sasiain MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Inmunologia de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Medicina Experimental
(IMEX)-CONICET, Academia Nacional de Medicina, Pacheco de Melo 3081, 1425, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.
(2)†División de Neumonología, Hospital F.J Muñiz, Uspallata 2272, 1282, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.
(3)‡Instituto de Tisioneumonologia Dr R. F Vaccarezza, Universidad de Buenos
Aires, Av. Velez Sarfield 405, 1281, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

DTH (delayed type hypersensitivity) reactions are secondary cellular immune
responses that appear 24-72 h after antigen exposure. Tuberculous pleurisy is a
common manifestation of extrapulmonary TB (tuberculosis) and is considered a
human model of Th1-mediated DTH. In order to identify functional cross-talk among
cellular populations sited in this inflammatory microenvironment, we analysed
phenotypic and functional features of human B-cells isolated from the PF (pleural
fluid) of TB patients. Freshly isolated PF-B-cells displayed a lower expression
of CD20, CD1d and HLA-DR, and a higher expression of CD95, CD38, CD25, CXCR3 (CXC
chemokine receptor 3) and CXCR4 (CXC chemokine receptor 4) than their PB
(peripheral blood) counterparts, suggesting a non-classical in situ activation.
Although memory PF-T-cell frequencies were increased, the frequencies of memory
PF-B-cells were not. We demonstrated that, upon stimulation with γ-irradiated M. 
tuberculosis, mycobacterially secreted proteins or a lectin mitogen, PF-B-cells
had a strong activation and produced IL-10 by a mechanism that was dependent on
bystander activation of CD19(-) PF cells. Besides, within PF cells, B-cells
diminished in vitro M. tuberculosis-induced IFN (interferon)-γ production by
T-cells and NK (natural killer) cells in an IL-10-dependent manner. Finally, we
found that the lower the frequency of B-cells, the higher the ratio of
IFN-γ/IL-10 within PF. Thus our results suggest that B-cells can regulate a human
DTH reaction induced by M. tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1042/CS20130769 
PMID: 24689690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

