
1. Am J Pathol. 2014 Jun;184(6):1877-89. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.02.010. Epub
2014 Apr 13.

Neutrophil dependence of vascular remodeling after Mycoplasma infection of mouse 
airways.

Baluk P(1), Phillips K(2), Yao LC(2), Adams A(2), Nitschké M(2), McDonald DM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Anatomy, and the Helen Diller
Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco,
California. Electronic address: peter.baluk@ucsf.edu.
(2)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Anatomy, and the Helen Diller
Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco,
California.

Vascular remodeling is a feature of sustained inflammation in which capillaries
enlarge and acquire the phenotype of venules specialized for plasma leakage and
leukocyte recruitment. We sought to determine whether neutrophils are required
for vascular remodeling in the respiratory tract by using Mycoplasma pulmonis
infection as a model of sustained inflammation in mice. The time course of
vascular remodeling coincided with the influx of neutrophils during the first few
days after infection and peaked at day 5. Depletion of neutrophils with antibody 
RB6-8C5 or 1A8 reduced neutrophil influx and vascular remodeling after infection 
by about 90%. Similarly, vascular remodeling after infection was suppressed in
Cxcr2(-/-) mice, in which neutrophils adhered to the endothelium of venules but
did not extravasate into the tissue. Expression of the venular adhesion molecule 
P-selectin increased in endothelial cells from day 1 to day 3 after infection, as
did expression of the Cxcr2-receptor ligands Cxcl1 and Cxcl2. Tumor necrosis
factor α (TNFα) expression increased more than sixfold in the trachea of
wild-type and Cxcr2(-/-) mice, but intratracheal administration of TNFα did not
induce vascular remodeling similar to that seen in infection. We conclude that
neutrophil influx is required for remodeling of capillaries into venules in the
airways of mice with Mycoplasma infection and that TNFα signaling is necessary
but not sufficient for vascular remodeling.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.02.010 
PMCID: PMC4044721
PMID: 24726646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

