
1. mBio. 2014 Apr 22;5(2):e01074. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01074-14.

Global population structure and evolution of Bordetella pertussis and their
relationship with vaccination.

Bart MJ, Harris SR, Advani A, Arakawa Y, Bottero D, Bouchez V, Cassiday PK,
Chiang CS, Dalby T, Fry NK, Gaillard ME, van Gent M, Guiso N, Hallander HO,
Harvill ET, He Q, van der Heide HG, Heuvelman K, Hozbor DF, Kamachi K, Karataev
GI, Lan R, Luty≈Ñska A, Maharjan RP, Mertsola J, Miyamura T, Octavia S, Preston A,
Quail MA, Sintchenko V, Stefanelli P, Tondella ML, Tsang RS, Xu Y, Yao SM, Zhang 
S, Parkhill J, Mooi FR.

Bordetella pertussis causes pertussis, a respiratory disease that is most severe 
for infants. Vaccination was introduced in the 1950s, and in recent years, a
resurgence of disease was observed worldwide, with significant mortality in
infants. Possible causes for this include the switch from whole-cell vaccines
(WCVs) to less effective acellular vaccines (ACVs), waning immunity, and pathogen
adaptation. Pathogen adaptation is suggested by antigenic divergence between
vaccine strains and circulating strains and by the emergence of strains with
increased pertussis toxin production. We applied comparative genomics to a
worldwide collection of 343 B. pertussis strains isolated between 1920 and 2010. 
The global phylogeny showed two deep branches; the largest of these contained 98%
of all strains, and its expansion correlated temporally with the first
descriptions of pertussis outbreaks in Europe in the 16th century. We found
little evidence of recent geographical clustering of the strains within this
lineage, suggesting rapid strain flow between countries. We observed that changes
in genes encoding proteins implicated in protective immunity that are included in
ACVs occurred after the introduction of WCVs but before the switch to ACVs.
Furthermore, our analyses consistently suggested that virulence-associated genes 
and genes coding for surface-exposed proteins were involved in adaptation.
However, many of the putative adaptive loci identified have a physiological role,
and further studies of these loci may reveal less obvious ways in which B.
pertussis and the host interact. This work provides insight into ways in which
pathogens may adapt to vaccination and suggests ways to improve pertussis
vaccines. IMPORTANCE Whooping cough is mainly caused by Bordetella pertussis, and
current vaccines are targeted against this organism. Recently, there have been
increasing outbreaks of whooping cough, even where vaccine coverage is high.
Analysis of the genomes of 343 B. pertussis isolates from around the world over
the last 100 years suggests that the organism has emerged within the last 500
years, consistent with historical records. We show that global transmission of
new strains is very rapid and that the worldwide population of B. pertussis is
evolving in response to vaccine introduction, potentially enabling vaccine
escape.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01074-14 
PMCID: PMC3994516
PMID: 24757216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

