
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2014;21(14):8645-62. doi: 10.1007/s11356-014-2759-1. 
Epub 2014 Apr 26.

Studies on arsenic transforming groundwater bacteria and their role in arsenic
release from subsurface sediment.

Sarkar A(1), Kazy SK, Sar P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,
Kharagpur, 721302, India.

Ten different Gram-negative arsenic (As)-resistant and As-transforming bacteria
isolated from As-rich groundwater of West Bengal were characterized to assess
their role in As mobilization. 16S rRNA gene analysis confirmed the affiliation
of these bacteria to genera Achromobacter, Brevundimonas, Rhizobium,
Ochrobactrum, and Pseudoxanthomonas. Along with superior As-resistance and
As-transformation abilities, the isolates showed broad metabolic capacity in
terms of utilizing a variety of electron donors and acceptors (including As)
under aerobic and anaerobic conditions, respectively. Arsenic transformation
studies performed under various conditions indicated highly efficient As(3+)
oxidation or As(5+) reduction kinetics. Genes encoding As(3+) oxidase (aioA),
cytosolic As(5+) reductase (arsC), and As(3+) efflux pump (arsB and acr3) were
detected within the test isolates. Sequence analyses suggested that As
homeostasis genes (particularly arsC, arsB, and acr3) were acquired by most of
the bacteria through horizontal gene transfer. A strong correlation between As
resistance phenotype and the presence of As(3+) transporter genes was observed.
Microcosm study showed that bacterial strain having cytosolic As(5+) reductase
property could play important role in mobilizing As (as As(3+)) from subsurface
sediment.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-014-2759-1 
PMID: 24764001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

