
1. PLoS One. 2014 May 5;9(5):e96826. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096826. eCollection 
2014.

Genomic responses to arsenic in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803.

Sánchez-Riego AM(1), López-Maury L(1), Florencio FJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Bioquímica Vegetal y Fotosíntesis, Universidad de Sevilla-CSIC,
Sevilla, Spain.

Arsenic is a ubiquitous contaminant and a toxic metalloid which presents two main
redox states in nature: arsenite [As(III)] and arsenate [As(V)]. Arsenic
resistance in Synechocystis sp. strain PCC 6803 is mediated by the arsBHC operon 
and two additional arsenate reductases encoded by the arsI1 and arsI2 genes. Here
we describe the genome-wide responses to the presence of arsenate and arsenite in
wild type and mutants in the arsenic resistance system. Both forms of arsenic
produced similar responses in the wild type strain, including induction of
several stress related genes and repression of energy generation processes. These
responses were transient in the wild type strain but maintained in time in an
arsB mutant strain, which lacks the arsenite transporter. In contrast, the
responses observed in a strain lacking all arsenate reductases were somewhat
different and included lower induction of genes involved in metal homeostasis and
Fe-S cluster biogenesis, suggesting that these two processes are targeted by
arsenite in the wild type strain. Finally, analysis of the arsR mutant strain
revealed that ArsR seems to only control 5 genes in the genome. Furthermore, the 
arsR mutant strain exhibited hypersentivity to nickel, copper and cadmium and
this phenotype was suppressed by mutation in arsB but not in arsC gene suggesting
that overexpression of arsB is detrimental in the presence of these metals in the
media.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096826 
PMCID: PMC4010505
PMID: 24797411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

