
1. Arch Microbiol. 2014 Aug;196(8):575-88. doi: 10.1007/s00203-014-0996-9. Epub 2014
May 24.

Mutational analysis of the (p)ppGpp synthetase activity of the Rel enzyme of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Bag S(1), Das B, Dasgupta S, Bhadra RK.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases and Immunology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical
Biology, 4 Raja S. C. Mullick Road, Jadavpur, Kolkata, 700 032, India.

Rel(Mtb), a GTP pyrophosphokinase encoded by the Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb)
genome, catalyzes synthesis of (p)ppGpp from ATP and GDP(GTP) and its hydrolysis 
to GDP(GTP) and pyrophosphate to mediate stringent response, which helps bacteria
to survive during nutrient limitation. Like other members of Rel_Spo homologs,
Rel(Mtb) has four distinct domains: HD, Rel_Spo (RSD), TGS and ACT. The
N-terminal HD and RSD are responsible for (p)ppGpp hydrolysis and synthesis,
respectively. In this study, we have dissected the rel(Mtb) gene function and
determined the minimal region essential for (p)ppGpp synthetic activity. The
Rel(Mtb) and its truncated derivatives were expressed from an arabinose inducible
promoter (P(BAD)), and in vivo functional analyses were done in a (p)ppGpp null
Escherichia coli strain. Our results indicate that only 243 amino acids (188-430 
residues) containing fragment are sufficient for Rel(Mtb) (p)ppGpp synthetic
activity. The results were further confirmed by in vitro assays using purified
proteins. We further characterized the RSD of Rel(Mtb) by substituting several
conserved amino acids with structurally related residues and identified six such 
residues, which appeared to be critical for maintaining its catalytic activity.
Furthermore, we have also extended our analysis to an RSD encoding gene rv1366 of
Mtb, and experimental results indicated that the encoded protein Rv1366 is unable
to synthesize (p)ppGpp.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-014-0996-9 
PMID: 24859914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

