
1. Genetics. 2014 Aug;197(4):1111-22. doi: 10.1534/genetics.114.165308. Epub 2014
May 28.

The role of Dbf4-dependent protein kinase in DNA polymerase ζ-dependent
mutagenesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Brandão LN(1), Ferguson R(1), Santoro I(2), Jinks-Robertson S(3), Sclafani RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado
School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado 80045.
(2)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322.
(3)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322 Department of 
Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina 27710.

The yeast Dbf4-dependent kinase (DDK) (composed of Dbf4 and Cdc7 subunits) is an 
essential, conserved Ser/Thr protein kinase that regulates multiple processes in 
the cell, including DNA replication, recombination and induced mutagenesis. Only 
DDK substrates important for replication and recombination have been identified. 
Consequently, the mechanism by which DDK regulates mutagenesis is unknown. The
yeast mcm5-bob1 mutation that bypasses DDK's essential role in DNA replication
was used here to examine whether loss of DDK affects spontaneous as well as
induced mutagenesis. Using the sensitive lys2ΔA746 frameshift reversion assay, we
show DDK is required to generate "complex" spontaneous mutations, which are a
hallmark of the Polζ translesion synthesis DNA polymerase. DDK
co-immunoprecipitated with the Rev7 regulatory, but not with the Rev3 polymerase 
subunit of Polζ. Conversely, Rev7 bound mainly to the Cdc7 kinase subunit and not
to Dbf4. The Rev7 subunit of Polζ may be regulated by DDK phosphorylation as
immunoprecipitates of yeast Cdc7 and also recombinant Xenopus DDK phosphorylated 
GST-Rev7 in vitro. In addition to promoting Polζ-dependent mutagenesis, DDK was
also important for generating Polζ-independent large deletions that revert the
lys2ΔA746 allele. The decrease in large deletions observed in the absence of DDK 
likely results from an increase in the rate of replication fork restart after an 
encounter with spontaneous DNA damage. Finally, nonepistatic,
additive/synergistic UV sensitivity was observed in cdc7Δ pol32Δ and cdc7Δ
pol30-K127R,K164R double mutants, suggesting that DDK may regulate Rev7 protein
during postreplication "gap filling" rather than during "polymerase switching" by
ubiquitinated and sumoylated modified Pol30 (PCNA) and Pol32.

Copyright © 2014 by the Genetics Society of America.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.114.165308 
PMCID: PMC4125387
PMID: 24875188  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

