
1. Cell Rep. 2014 Jun 26;7(6):1809-14. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.05.011. Epub 2014 
May 29.

NK cell receptor NKp46 regulates graft-versus-host disease.

Ghadially H(1), Ohana M(2), Elboim M(1), Gazit R(1), Gur C(1), Nagler A(2),
Mandelboim O(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Lautenberg Center for General and Tumor Immunology, The Hebrew University 
Hadassah Medical School, IMRIC, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.
(2)Hematology Division, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer 52621, Israel.
(3)The Lautenberg Center for General and Tumor Immunology, The Hebrew University 
Hadassah Medical School, IMRIC, Jerusalem 91120, Israel. Electronic address:
oferm@ekmd.huji.ac.il.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is often the only curative
treatment for a wide variety of hematologic malignancies. Donor selection in
these diseases is crucial, given that transplanted cells can mediate not only the
desired graft-versus-leukemia effect but also graft-versus-host disease (GVHD).
Here, we demonstrate that in the absence of NKp46, a major killer receptor
expressed by human and mouse natural killer (NK) cells, GVHD is greatly
exacerbated, resulting in rapid mortality of the transplanted animals because of 
infection with commensal bacteria. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the
exacerbated GVHD is the result of an altered ability of immune cells to respond
to stimulation by immature dendritic cells. Because high and low expression of
NKp46 on NK cells is observed in different individuals, our data indicate that
choosing NKp46-high donors for the treatment of different hematologic
malignancies might lead to better tumor eradication while minimizing GVHD.

Copyright Â© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.05.011 
PMCID: PMC4074424
PMID: 24882008  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

