
1. Int J Cancer. 2015 Mar 1;136(5):1053-64. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29061. Epub 2014 Jul 7.

Bidirectional regulation between TMEFF2 and STAT3 may contribute to Helicobacter 
pylori-associated gastric carcinogenesis.

Sun TT(1), Tang JY, Du W, Zhao HJ, Zhao G, Yang SL, Chen HY, Hong J, Fang JY.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Oncogenes and Related Genes, Key Laboratory of
Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Ministry of Health, Renji Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Shanghai
Institute of Digestive Disease, Shanghai, 200001, China.

Erratum in
    Int J Cancer. 2016 Jan 1;138(1):E2.
    Int J Cancer. 2016 Nov 1;139(9):E13.

The transmembrane protein with epidermal growth factor and two follistatin motifs
2 (TMEFF2) is a single-pass transmembrane protein, and it is downregulated in
human gastric cancer and levels correlate with tumor progression and time of
survival. However, the mechanism of its dysregulation in gastric cancer is little
known. Here we investigate its regulatory mechanism and the bidirectional
regulation between TMEFF2 and STAT3 in gastric carcinogenesis. TMEFF2 expression 
was decreased after Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection in vivo and in
vitro. STAT3 directly binds to the promoter of TMEFF2 and regulates H.
pylori-induced TMEFF2 downregulation in normal gastric GES-1 cells and gastric
cancer AGS cells. Conversely, TMEFF2 may suppress the phosphorylation of STAT3
and TMEFF2-induced downregulation of STAT3 phosphorylation may depend on SHP-1. A
highly inverse correlation between the expression of TMEFF2 and pSTAT3 was also
revealed in gastric tissues. We now show the deregulation mechanism of TMEFF2 in 
gastric carcinogenesis and identify TMEFF2 as a new target gene of STAT3. The
phosphorylation of STAT3 may be negatively regulated by TMEFF2, and the
bidirectional regulation between TMEFF2 and STAT3 may contribute to H.
pylori-associated gastric carcinogenesis.

Â© 2014 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.29061 
PMID: 24996057  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

