
1. Nat Commun. 2014 Aug 5;5:4603. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5603.

DOCK8 regulates protective immunity by controlling the function and survival of
RORγt+ ILCs.

Singh AK(1), Eken A(1), Fry M(1), Bettelli E(2), Oukka M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunity and Immunotherapies, Seattle Children's Research
Institute, Seattle, Washington 98101, USA.
(2)Benaroya Research Institute, Immunology Program, Seattle, Washington 98101,
USA.
(3)1] Center for Immunity and Immunotherapies, Seattle Children's Research
Institute, Seattle, Washington 98101, USA [2] Department of Immunology,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98105, USA.

Retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor-γt-positive (RORγt(+)) innate
lymphoid cells (ILCs) produce interleukin (IL)-22 and IL-17, which are critical
for protective immunity against enteric pathogens. The molecular mechanism
underlying the development and survival of RORγt(+) ILCs is not thoroughly
understood. Here, we show that Dedicator of cytokinesis 8 (DOCK8), a scaffolding 
protein involved in cytoskeletal rearrangement and cell migration, is essential
for the protective immunity against Citrobacter rodentium. A comparative RNA
sequencing-based analysis reveals an impaired induction of antimicrobial peptides
in the colon of DOCK8-deficient mice, which correlates with high susceptibility
to infection and a very low number of IL-22-producing RORγt(+) ILCs in their GI
tract. Furthermore, DOCK8-deficient RORγt(+) ILCs are less responsive to IL-7
mediated signalling, more prone to apoptosis and produce less IL-22 due to a
defect in IL-23-mediated STAT3 phosphorylation. Our studies reveal an unsuspected
role of DOCK8 for the function, generation and survival of RORγt(+) ILCs.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5603 
PMCID: PMC4135384
PMID: 25091235  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

