
1. Biochem Soc Trans. 2014 Aug;42(4):917-21. doi: 10.1042/BST20140108.

About the dangers, costs and benefits of living an aerobic lifestyle.

Knoefler D(1), Leichert LI(1), Thamsen M(1), Cremers CM(1), Reichmann D(1), Gray 
MJ(1), Wholey WY(1), Jakob U.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, U.S.A.

The era in which ROS (reactive oxygen species) were simply the 'bad boys of
biology' is clearly over. High levels of ROS are still rightfully considered to
be toxic to many cellular processes and, as such, contribute to disease
conditions and cell death. However, the high toxicity of ROS is also extremely
beneficial, particularly as it is used to kill invading micro-organisms during
mammalian host defence. Moreover, a transient, often more localized, increase in 
ROS levels appears to play a major role in signal transduction processes and
positively affects cell growth, development and differentiation. At the heart of 
all these processes are redox-regulated proteins, which use oxidation-sensitive
cysteine residues to control their function and by extension the function of the 
pathways that they are part of. Our work has contributed to changing the view
about ROS through: (i) our characterization of Hsp33 (heat-shock protein 33), one
of the first redox-regulated proteins identified, whose function is specifically 
activated by ROS, (ii) the development of quantitative tools that reveal
extensive redox-sensitive processes in bacteria and eukaryotes, and (iii) the
discovery of a link between early exposure to oxidants and aging. Our future
research programme aims to generate an integrated and system-wide view of the
beneficial and deleterious effects of ROS with the central goal to develop more
effective antioxidant strategies and more powerful antimicrobial agents.

DOI: 10.1042/BST20140108 
PMCID: PMC4380189
PMID: 25109979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

