
1. Biochem Soc Trans. 2014 Aug;42(4):1052-5. doi: 10.1042/BST20140074.

Chemical biology tools to study pantetheinases of the vanin family.

Schalkwijk J(1), Jansen P(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Dermatology, Radboud University Medical Centre, PO Box 9101,
6500 HB, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

VNNs (vanins) are pantetheinases that hydrolyse pantetheine to pantothenic acid
and cysteamine. Studies with Vnn1-knockout mice have indicated a role of VNN-1 in
inflammation and stress responses. VNN-1 is highly expressed in liver and is
under transcriptional control of PPAR (peroxisome-proliferator-activated
receptor)-Î± and nutritional status, suggesting a role in energy metabolism.
Recently, the specific substrates and inhibitors of VNNs were obtained as tools
to study VNN biology and to investigate whether VNNs are potential drug targets. 
Oral administration of RR6, a pantothenone with nanomolar anti-VNN potency,
completely inhibited plasma VNN activity in rats and showed favourable
pharmacokinetics. Prolonged RR6 administration caused alterations of hepatic and 
plasma lipid concentrations upon fasting. VNN inhibitors were found to protect
pantothenamides (pantetheine analogues with antibiotic activity) against
breakdown by plasma VNN, thereby preserving their antibiotic activity.
Combination of pantothenamides with a VNN inhibitor showed a strong activity
against Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus pneumoniae when assayed in the
presence of 10% serum. Recent studies have reported plasma stable pantothenamides
that were active against the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. We conclude 
that VNN inhibitors and pantothenate derivatives that target enzymes in the CoA
(coenzyme A) biosynthetic pathway may have potential use as novel drugs in
infection, inflammation and metabolism.

DOI: 10.1042/BST20140074 
PMID: 25110001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

