
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Oct;82(10):4390-404. doi: 10.1128/IAI.02173-14. Epub 2014 Aug 
11.

LcrV delivered via type III secretion system of live attenuated Yersinia
pseudotuberculosis enhances immunogenicity against pneumonic plague.

Sun W(1), Sanapala S(2), Henderson JC(3), Sam S(2), Olinzock J(2), Trent MS(3),
Curtiss R 3rd(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease and Vaccinology, The Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA wei.sun.1@asu.edu.
(2)Center for Infectious Disease and Vaccinology, The Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA.
(3)The Department of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas, USA.
(4)Center for Infectious Disease and Vaccinology, The Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA School of Life Sciences, Arizona
State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA.

Here, we constructed a Yersinia pseudotuberculosis mutant strain with
arabinose-dependent regulated and delayed shutoff of crp expression (araC P(BAD) 
crp) and replacement of the msbB gene with the Escherichia coli msbB gene to
attenuate it. Then, we inserted the asd mutation into this construction to form
χ10057 [Δasd-206 ΔmsbB868::P(msbB) msbB(EC) ΔP(crp21)::TT araC P(BAD) crp] for
use with a balanced-lethal Asd-positive (Asd(+)) plasmid to facilitate antigen
synthesis. A hybrid protein composed of YopE (amino acids [aa]1 to 138) fused
with full-length LcrV (YopE(Nt138)-LcrV) was synthesized in χ10057 harboring an
Asd(+) plasmid (pYA5199, yopE(Nt138)-lcrV) and could be secreted through a type
III secretion system (T3SS) in vitro and in vivo. Animal studies indicated that
mice orally immunized with χ10057(pYA5199) developed titers of IgG response to
whole-cell lysates of Y. pestis (YpL) and subunit LcrV similar to those seen with
χ10057(pYA3332) (χ10057 plus an empty plasmid). However, only immunization of
mice with χ10057(pYA5199) resulted in a significant secretory IgA response to
LcrV. χ10057(pYA5199) induced a higher level of protection (80% survival) against
intranasal (i.n.) challenge with ~240 median lethal doses (LD50) (2.4 × 10(4)
CFU) of Y. pestis KIM6+(pCD1Ap) than χ10057(pYA3332) (40% survival). Splenocytes 
from mice vaccinated with χ10057(pYA5199) produced significant levels of gamma
interferon (IFN-γ), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), and interleukin-17
(IL-17) after restimulation with LcrV and YpL antigens. Our results suggest that 
it is possible to use an attenuated Y. pseudotuberculosis strain delivering the
LcrV antigen via the T3SS as a potential vaccine candidate against pneumonic
plague.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.02173-14 
PMCID: PMC4187879
PMID: 25114109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

