
1. J Invertebr Pathol. 2014 Oct;122:16-21. doi: 10.1016/j.jip.2014.07.005. Epub 2014
Aug 7.

A molecular tool for detection and tracking of a potential indigenous Beauveria
bassiana strain for managing emerald ash borer populations in Canada.

Johny S(1), Kyei-Poku G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Forestry Service, Great Lakes Forestry Centre, Natural Resources
Canada, 1219 Queen Street East, Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario P6A 2E5, Canada.
(2)Canadian Forestry Service, Great Lakes Forestry Centre, Natural Resources
Canada, 1219 Queen Street East, Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario P6A 2E5, Canada.
Electronic address: gkyeipok@NRCan.gc.ca.

Emerald ash borer is an invasive species from Asia. Beauveria bassiana strain
L49-1AA is being tested for the control of emerald ash borer in Canada, using an 
autocontamination trapping system. We have developed a simplified allele
discrimination polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay to screen B. bassiana
strain, L49-1AA from other Beauveria species by targeting the inter-strain
genetic differences in 5' end of EF1-α gene of the genus Beauveria. A single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) site, T→C was identified only in L49-1AA and was
used to develop a simplified allele discrimination polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) assay based on a modified allelic inhibition of displacement activity
(AIDA) approach for distinguishing B. bassiana L49-1AA from all background
Beauveria isolates. The SNP site was employed to design inner primers but with a 
deliberate mismatch introduced at the 3' antepenultimate from the mutation site
in order to maximize specificity and detection efficiency. Amplification was
specific to L49-1AA without cross-reaction with DNA from other Beauveria strains.
In addition, the designed primers were also tested against environmental samples 
in L49-1AA released plots and observed to be highly efficient in detecting and
discriminating the target strain, L49-1AA from both pure and crude DNA samples.
This new method can potentially allow for more discriminatory tracking and
monitoring of released L49-1AA in our autocontamination and dissemination
projects for managing EAB populations. Additionally, the modified-AIDA format has
potential as a tool for simultaneously identifying and differentiating closely
related Beauveria species, strains/isolates as well as general classification of 
other pathogens or organisms.

Crown Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jip.2014.07.005 
PMID: 25110340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

