
1. Autophagy. 2014 Oct 1;10(10):1844-57. doi: 10.4161/auto.29992. Epub 2014 Aug 11.

Correlative light and electron microscopy imaging of autophagy in a zebrafish
infection model.

Hosseini R(1), Lamers GE(1), Hodzic Z(1), Meijer AH(1), Schaaf MJ(1), Spaink
HP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology; Leiden University; Leiden, The Netherlands.

High-resolution imaging of autophagy has been used intensively in cell culture
studies, but so far it has been difficult to visualize this process in detail in 
whole animal models. In this study we present a versatile method for
high-resolution imaging of microbial infection in zebrafish larvae by injecting
pathogens into the tail fin. This allows visualization of autophagic compartments
by light and electron microscopy, which makes it possible to correlate images
acquired by the 2 techniques. Using this method we have studied the autophagy
response against Mycobacterium marinum infection. We show that mycobacteria
during the progress of infection are frequently associated with GFP-Lc3-positive 
vesicles, and that 2 types of GFP-Lc3-positive vesicles were observed. The
majority of these vesicles were approximately 1 Î¼m in size and in close vicinity 
of bacteria, and a smaller number of GFP-Lc3-positive vesicles was larger in size
and were observed to contain bacteria. Quantitative data showed that these larger
vesicles occurred significantly more in leukocytes than in other cell types, and 
that approximately 70% of these vesicles were positive for a lysosomal marker.
Using electron microscopy, it was found that approximately 5% of intracellular
bacteria were present in autophagic vacuoles and that the remaining intracellular
bacteria were present in phagosomes, lysosomes, free inside the cytoplasm or
occurred as large aggregates. Based on correlation of light and electron
microscopy images, it was shown that GFP-Lc3-positive vesicles displayed
autophagic morphology. This study provides a new approach for injection of
pathogens into the tail fin, which allows combined light and electron microscopy 
imaging in vivo and opens new research directions for studying autophagy process 
related to infectious diseases.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.29992 
PMCID: PMC4198367
PMID: 25126731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

