
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 Oct;40(2):648-58. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.08.018.
Epub 2014 Aug 19.

Characterization of serum amyloid A (SAA) in rainbow trout using a new monoclonal
antibody.

Kania PW(1), Chettri JK(2), Buchmann K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Aquatic Pathobiology, Department of Veterinary Disease Biology, 
University of Copenhagen, Stigbojlen 7, DK-1870 Frederiksberg, Denmark.
Electronic address: pwk@sund.ku.dk.
(2)Laboratory of Aquatic Pathobiology, Department of Veterinary Disease Biology, 
University of Copenhagen, Stigbojlen 7, DK-1870 Frederiksberg, Denmark.

Serum amyloid A (SAA) is an integral part of the innate immune response in
mammals and considered to be important during the acute phase response. The
present study was undertaken to elucidate the role of SAA protein in the innate
immune response of rainbow trout. A monoclonal antibody raised against a
recombinant peptide of rainbow trout SAA was characterized using Western blot,
dot blot, ELISA and immunohistochemistry. SAA association with high density
lipoprotein (HDL) complicated band identification in Western blot, but
delipidization of the SAA-HDL isolate highly increased the quality of reaction in
the western blot. Rainbow trout fry (87 days post hatch) infected with Yersinia
ruckeri showed a significant up-regulation of the SAA gene at 72 h post infection
with an increase until 96 h post infection. Non-significant up-regulations were
seen at earlier time points i.e. 4 and 24 h. The expression pattern of SAA
significantly correlated to the immunohistochemical analysis of the infected fry.
A weak staining was seen in liver tissue at 4 h post infection which increased in
intensity during the course of infection i.e. 24, 72 and 96 h post infection.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.08.018 
PMID: 25149592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

