
1. Curr Microbiol. 2015 Jan;70(1):75-84. doi: 10.1007/s00284-014-0684-7. Epub 2014
Sep 7.

Determination of cypermethrin degradation potential of soil bacteria along with
plant growth-promoting characteristics.

Akbar S(1), Sultan S, Kertesz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of the Punjab,
Lahore, Pakistan, shamsa.akbar@yahoo.com.

The pyrethroid insecticide cypermethrin is in extensive use since 1980s for
insect control. However, its toxicity toward aquatic animals and humans requires 
its complete removal from contaminated areas that can be done using indigenous
microbes through bioremediation. In this study, three bacterial strains isolated 
from agricultural soil and identified as Acinetobacter calcoaceticus MCm5,
Brevibacillus parabrevis FCm9, and Sphingomonas sp. RCm6 were found highly
efficient in degrading cypermethrin and other pyrethroids. These bacterial
strains were able to degrade more than 85 % of cypermethrin (100 mg L(-1)) within
10 days. Degradation kinetics of cypermethrin (200 mg kg(-1)) in soils inoculated
with isolates MCm5, FCm9, and RCm6 suggested time-dependent disappearance of
cypermethrin with rate constants of 0.0406, 0.0722, and 0.0483 d(-1) following
first-order rate kinetics. Enzyme assays for Carboxylesterase, 3-PBA dioxygenase,
Phenol hydroxylase, and Catechol-1,2 dioxygenase showed higher activities with
cypermethrin treated cell-free extracts compared to non-treated cell-free
extracts. Meanwhile, SDS-PAGE analysis showed upregulation of some bands in
cypermethrin-treated cells. This might suggest that cypermethrin degradation in
these strains involves inducible enzymes. Besides, the isolates displayed
substantial plant growth-promoting traits such as phosphate solubilization,
Indole acetic acid production, and ammonia production. Implying the efficient
biodegradation potential along with multiple biological properties, these
isolates can be valuable candidates for the development of bioremediation
strategies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-014-0684-7 
PMID: 25194282  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

