
1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 9;9(10):e110151. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110151.
eCollection 2014.

Genetic variants in genes of the inflammatory response in association with
infective endocarditis.

Weinstock M(1), Grimm I(1), Dreier J(1), Knabbe C(1), Vollmer T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Laboratoriums- und Transfusionsmedizin, Herz- und Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Universitätsklinikum der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bad
Oeynhausen, Germany.

AIMS: Inflammation in infective endocarditis (IE) is a complex network including 
interactions of inflammatory cytokines and other components of host response.
Certainly, any variation in this network could influence susceptibility or
disease progression of IE. In this study, 14 single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in
genes coding for interleukin-1β, interleukin-6, interleukin-10, toll-like
receptor-4, tumor necrosis factor-α, selectin E and intercellular adhesion
molecule-1 were analyzed for an association with susceptibility to IE and
correlated with disease-related laboratory parameters. Furthermore, the
occurrence of SNVs was examined to elucidate pathogen-dependent associations.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The distribution of SNVs was determined in IE-patients and
healthy blood donors by RFLP analysis. White blood cells (WBC) were counted using
flow cytometry, concentration of C-reactive protein and procalcitonin was
measured immunologically. Interleukin-6 c.471+870G>A genotypes differed
significantly between IE patients and controls. The frequency of the heterozygote
genotype GA was considerably higher in the patient group (68.9% vs. 43.8%,
Pc<0.0003). Interleukin-6 c.-237 minor allele frequency was increased in
patients, although not statistically significant. Additionally, we detected a
potential relation between interleukin-1β c.315C>T and IE. Pathogen-dependent
analysis showed no significantly associated subgroup in relation to IE
susceptibility, but gave hints towards alterations regarding Enterococcus-caused 
IE cases. Patients with genotype selectin-E c.-19 GT tend to have higher
preoperative WBC counts than patients with genotype GG. We further showed an
association between two interleukin-1β SNVs and laboratory biomarkers.
CONCLUSION: This study shows genetic predispositions for the establishment of IE.
Furthermore, correlation of SNVs with disease-related biomarkers suggests a role 
of genetic variants regarding the inflammatory response in IE.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110151 
PMCID: PMC4192365
PMID: 25299518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

