
1. Biochemistry. 1989 Apr 4;28(7):3057-63.

Characterization of the cytochrome c oxidase in isolated and purified plasma
membranes from the cyanobacterium Anacystis nidulans.

Peschek GA(1), Wastyn M, Trnka M, Molitor V, Fry IV, Packer L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physical Chemistry, University of Vienna, Austria.

Functionally intact plasma membranes were isolated from the cyanobacterium
(blue-green alga) Anacystis nidulans through French pressure cell extrusion of
lysozyme/EDTA-treated cells, separated from thylakoid membranes by discontinuous 
sucrose density gradient centrifugation, and purified by repeated
recentrifugation. Origin and identity of the chlorophyll-free plasma membrane
fraction were confirmed by labeling of intact cells with impermeant protein
markers, [35S]diazobenzenesulfonate and fluorescamine, prior to membrane
isolation. Rates of oxidation of reduced horse heart cytochrome c by purified
plasma and thylakoid membranes were 90 and 2 nmol min-1 (mg of protein)-1,
respectively. The cytochrome oxidase in isolated plasma membranes was identified 
as a copper-containing aa3-type enzyme from the properties of its redox-active
and EDTA-resistant Cu2+ ESR signal, the characteristic inhibition profile,
reduced minus oxidized difference spectra, carbon monoxide difference spectra,
photoaction and photodissociation spectra of the CO-inhibited enzyme, and
immunological cross-reaction of two subunits of the enzyme with antibodies
against subunits I and II, and the holoenzyme, of Paracoccus denitrificans
aa3-type cytochrome oxidase. The data presented are the first comprehensive
evidence for the occurrence of aa3-type cytochrome oxidase in the plasma membrane
of a cyanobacterium similar to the corresponding mitochondrial enzyme (EC
1.9.3.1).

DOI: 10.1021/bi00433a048 
PMID: 2545245  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

