
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 Dec;41(2):593-9.

Effect of size and temperature at vaccination on immunization and protection
conferred by a live attenuated Francisella noatunensis immersion vaccine in red
hybrid tilapia.

Soto E(1), Brown N, Gardenfors ZO, Yount S, Revan F, Francis S, Kearney MT, Camus
A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Conservation Medicine and Ecosystem Health, School of Veterinary
Medicine, Ross University, Main Island Road, West Farm, Saint Kitts and Nevis.
esoto@rossvet.edu.kn

Francisella noatunensis subsp. orientalis (Fno) is a pleomorphic, facultative
intracellular, Gram-negative, emerging bacterial pathogen of marine and fresh
water fish with worldwide distribution. In this study, the efficacy of an
attenuated Fno intracellular growth locus C (iglC) mutant was evaluated for use
as a live immersion vaccine, when administered to hybrid tilapia at two different
stages of growth (5 g fry and 10 g fingerlings) and at two temperatures (25 °C
and 30 °C). To determine vaccine efficacy, mortality, days to first death, and
Fno genome equivalents (GE) in the spleens of survivors, as well as serum and
mucus antibody levels, were evaluated after 30 d in fish challenged with a wild
type virulent strain. Both size and temperature at vaccination played an
important role in immunization and protection. Fry vaccinated at 25 °C were not
protected when compared to non-vaccinated fry at 25 °C (p = 0.870). In contrast, 
5 g fry vaccinated at 30 °C were significantly protected compared to
non-vaccinated fry at 30 °C (p = 0.038). Although lower mortalities occurred, 10 
g fingerlings vaccinated at 25 °C were not protected, compared to non-vaccinated 
fingerlings at 25 °C (p = 0.328), while, 10 g fingerlings vaccinated at 30 °C
were significantly protected, compared to non-vaccinated fingerlings at 30 °C (p 
= 0.038). Additionally, overall mortality of 5 g fish was significantly higher
than in 10 g fish. Mortality was also significantly higher in fish subjected to a
30 to 25 °C temperature change one week prior to challenge, than in fish
maintained at the same temperature during vaccination and challenge. This
information demonstrates that both temperature and size at vaccination are
important factors when implementing immunization prophylaxis in cultured tilapia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.10.009 
PMID: 25462454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

