
1. Prev Vet Med. 2015 Jan 1;118(1):22-7. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2014.11.011. Epub 
2014 Nov 20.

Microbiological detection of bacteria in animal products seized in baggage of
international air passengers to Brazil.

de Melo CB(1), de Sá ME(2), Sabino VM(3), de Fatima Boechat-Fernandes M(3),
Santiago MT(4), Schwingel FF(4), Freitas C(5), Magioli CA(6), Cabral-Pinto S(7), 
McManus C(8), Seixas L(8).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade de Brasília (UnB/FAV/DINO), Campus Darcy Ribeiro, ICC Sul, Asa
Norte, Brasília, DF 70910-900, Brazil. Electronic address: cristianomelo@unb.br.
(2)Universidade de Brasília (UnB/FAV/DINO), Campus Darcy Ribeiro, ICC Sul, Asa
Norte, Brasília, DF 70910-900, Brazil; International Agricultural Surveillance - 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food Supply (VIGIAGRO/MAPA), Brasília, DF,
Brazil.
(3)National Agricultural Laboratory - Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food
Supply (LANAGRO-MG/MAPA), Pedro Leopoldo, MG, Brazil.
(4)International Agricultural Surveillance - Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock
and Food Supply (VIGIAGRO/MAPA) - UVAGRO AIB-PJK (BSB), Brasília, DF, Brazil.
(5)International Agricultural Surveillance - Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock
and Food Supply (VIGIAGRO/MAPA) - SVA/Guarulhos Airport (GRU), São Paulo, SP,
Brazil.
(6)International Agricultural Surveillance - Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock
and Food Supply (VIGIAGRO/MAPA) - SVA/Galeão Airport (GIG), Rio de Janeiro, RJ,
Brazil.
(7)International Agricultural Surveillance - Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock
and Food Supply (VIGIAGRO/MAPA) - UVAGRO/Confins International Airport (CNF),
Belo Horizonte-Confins, Brazil.
(8)Universidade de Brasília (UnB/FAV/DINO), Campus Darcy Ribeiro, ICC Sul, Asa
Norte, Brasília, DF 70910-900, Brazil.

Airline travel favours the transmission of diseases, given the short time it
takes to travel long distances. In this study, animal products without health
certificates seized in international air passengers' baggage at Guarulhos (GRU)
and Galeão (GIG) airports in Brazil underwent a microbiological evaluation.
Analyses (1610) were carried out on 322 seizures to test for the presence of
total and thermotolerant coliforms, as well as Staphylococcus aureus counts and
the presence of Listeria monocytogenes and Salmonella. Most seizures analysed
showed coliform contamination and coliforms were present above acceptable limits 
in 83.4% (40/48) of the products that had some type of contamination. The second 
most prevalent microorganism found was L. monocytogenes in 22.9% (11/48) and S.
aureus was cultivated in 14.58% (7/48) of seizures. Among the items seized in the
present work, Salmonella was found in one seizure of pig sausage. Contamination
of animal products with microbiological pathogens of importance to public health 
and indicators of the bad quality of the food were shown in the present study.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2014.11.011 
PMID: 25466683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

