
1. Biochemistry. 2015 Feb 3;54(4):1006-15. doi: 10.1021/bi500847u. Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Efficient delivery of long-chain fatty aldehydes from the Nostoc punctiforme
acyl-acyl carrier protein reductase to its cognate aldehyde-deformylating
oxygenase.

Warui DM(1), Pandelia ME, Rajakovich LJ, Krebs C, Bollinger JM Jr, Booker SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and ‡Department of
Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University , University Park, Pennsylvania
16802, United States.

A two-step pathway consisting of an acyl-acyl carrier protein (ACP) reductase
(AAR) and an aldehyde-deformylating oxygenase (ADO) allows various cyanobacteria 
to convert long-chain fatty acids into hydrocarbons. AAR catalyzes the
two-electron, NADPH-dependent reduction of a fatty acid attached to ACP via a
thioester linkage to the corresponding fatty aldehyde, while ADO transforms the
fatty aldehyde to a Cn-1 hydrocarbon and C1-derived formate. Considering that
heptadec(a/e)ne is the most prevalent hydrocarbon produced by cyanobacterial
ADOs, the insolubility of its precursor, octadec(a/e)nal, poses a conundrum with 
respect to its acquisition by ADO. Herein, we report that AAR from the
cyanobacterium Nostoc punctiforme is activated almost 20-fold by potassium and
other monovalent cations of similar ionic radius, and that AAR and ADO form a
tight isolable complex with a Kd of 3 ± 0.3 μM. In addition, we show that when
the aldehyde substrate is supplied to ADO by AAR, efficient in vitro turnover is 
observed in the absence of solubilizing agents. Similarly to studies by Lin et
al. with AAR from Synechococcus elongatus [Lin et al. (2013) FEBS J. 280,
4773-4781], we show that catalysis by AAR proceeds via formation of a covalent
intermediate involving a cysteine residue that we have identified as Cys294.
Moreover, AAR specifically transfers the pro-R hydride of NADPH to the
Cys294-thioester intermediate to afford its aldehyde product. Our results suggest
that the interaction between AAR and ADO facilitates either direct transfer of
the aldehyde product of AAR to ADO or formation of the aldehyde product in a
microenvironment allowing for its efficient uptake by ADO.

DOI: 10.1021/bi500847u 
PMID: 25496470  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

