
1. Sante Publique. 2014 Sep-Oct;26(5):695-703.

[Health promotion and community-based approach to Buruli ulcer: results of a
psychosocial- and behavioural survey in two villages in Benin].

[Article in French]

Ndongo PY, Fond-Harmant L, Makoutod√© M, Deccache A.

INTRODUCTION: Buruli ulcer (BU) is an infectious disease caused by Mycobacterium 
ulcerans. Benin, one of the most severely affected countries, notified 365 cases 
in 2012. This article presents the results of a psychosocial and behavioural
survey conducted in the context of a health promotion (HP) project with community
participation. This paper describes the diagnosis, prevention, behaviours, as
well as perceptions and experiences related to BU.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted in two villages (Azonme, Houedota)
of Benin Atlantic department. From 15 May to 19 June 2011, a volunteer survey was
conducted with 15 former patients and 15 new patients, selected by purposive
sampling and 30 randomly selected healthy individuals. Encoding and data analysis
were performed with SPSS and Excel.
RESULTS: Respondents were aged 11 to 100 years with a mean age of 36.63 years and
55% were men. More than 96% of respondents were aware of BU (symptoms, mode of
transmission, prevention and treatment). % were familiar with the mode of
transmission, but were not aware of preventive measures. Twenty-none of the 30
patients or former patients were treated in hospital. The attributed and
perceived (including non-medical) causes of the disease were water (52), bacteria
(17), bad luck (5). 92% of respondents were satisfied with the services of health
professionals but proposed changes (46) concerning hospital accessibility and
cost of care.
DISCUSSION: These results show similarities and differences compared to those
reported in the literature on the subject. These surveys were the basis for
health promotion interventions with the participation of two communities.


PMID: 25490229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

