
1. J Aquat Anim Health. 2015 Mar;27(1):38-44. doi: 10.1080/08997659.2014.966212.

Colorimetric Method of Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification with the
Pre-Addition of Calcein for Detecting Flavobacterium columnare and its Assessment
in Tilapia Farms.

Suebsing R(1), Kampeera J, Sirithammajak S, Withyachumnarnkul B, Turner W,
Kiatpathomchai W.

Author information: 
(1)a Center of Excellence for Shrimp Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Faculty
of Science, Mahidol University , Rama VI Road, Bangkok 10400 , Thailand.

Flavobacterium columnare, the causative agent of columnaris disease in fish,
affects many economically important freshwater fish species. A colorimetric
method of loop-mediated isothermal amplification with the pre-addition of calcein
(LAMP-calcein) was developed and used to detect the presence of F. columnare in
farmed tilapia (Nile Tilapia Oreochromis niloticus and red tilapia [Nile Tilapia 
× Mozambique Tilapia O. mossambicus]) and rearing water. The detection method,
based on a change in color from orange to green, could be performed within 45 min
at 63°C. The method was highly specific, as it had no cross-detections with 14
other bacterial species, including other fish pathogens and two Flavobacterium
species. The method has a minimum detection limit of 2.2 × 10(2) F. columnare
CFU; thus, it is about 10 times more sensitive than conventional PCR. With this
method, F. columnare was detected in gonad, gill, and blood samples from
apparently healthy tilapia broodstock as well as in samples of fertilized eggs,
newly hatched fry, and rearing water. The bacteria isolated from the blood were
further characterized biochemically and found to be phenotypically identical to
F. columnare. The amplified products from the LAMP-calcein method had 97%
homology with the DNA sequence of F. columnare.

DOI: 10.1080/08997659.2014.966212 
PMID: 25584663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

