
1. Microb Ecol. 2015 Jul;70(1):154-67. doi: 10.1007/s00248-014-0558-3. Epub 2015 Jan
16.

16S rRNA and As-Related Functional Diversity: Contrasting Fingerprints in
Arsenic-Rich Sediments from an Acid Mine Drainage.

Fahy A(1), Giloteaux L, Bertin P, Le Paslier D, Médigue C, Weissenbach J, Duran
R, Lauga B.

Author information: 
(1)Équipe Environnement et Microbiologie, EEM, UMR 5254 (IPREM, CNRS), Université
de Pau et des Pays de l'Adour, IBEAS, BP 1155, 64013, Pau Cedex, France.

To gain an in-depth insight into the diversity and the distribution of genes
under the particular evolutionary pressure of an arsenic-rich acid mine drainage 
(AMD), the genes involved in bacterial arsenic detoxification (arsB, ACR3) and
arsenite oxidation (aioA) were investigated in sediment from Carnoulès (France), 
in parallel to the diversity and global distribution of the metabolically active 
bacteria. The metabolically active bacteria were affiliated mainly to AMD
specialists, i.e., organisms detected in or isolated from AMDs throughout the
world. They included mainly Acidobacteria and the non-affiliated "Candidatus
Fodinabacter communificans," as well as Thiomonas and Acidithiobacillus spp.,
Actinobacteria, and unclassified Gammaproteobacteria. The distribution range of
these organisms suggested that they show niche conservatism. Sixteen types of
deduced protein sequences of arsenite transporters (5 ArsB and 11 Acr3p) were
detected, whereas a single type of arsenite oxidase (AioA) was found. Our data
suggested that at Carnoulès, the aioA gene was more recent than those encoding
arsenite transporters and subjected to a different molecular evolution. In
contrast to the 16S ribosomal RNA (16S rRNA) genes associated with AMD
environments worldwide, the functional genes aioA, ACR3, and to a lesser extent
arsB, were either novel or specific to Carnoulès, raising the question as to
whether these functional genes are specific to high concentrations of arsenic,
AMD-specific, or site-specific.

DOI: 10.1007/s00248-014-0558-3 
PMID: 25592635  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

