
1. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2015 Mar;95(2):95-111. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2015.01.006.
Epub 2015 Jan 29.

Structural and functional features of enzymes of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
peptidoglycan biosynthesis as targets for drug development.

Moraes GL(1), Gomes GC(2), Monteiro de Sousa PR(1), Alves CN(1), Govender T(3),
Kruger HG(3), Maguire GE(3), Lamichhane G(4), Lameira J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Planejamento de Fármacos, Instituto de Ciências Exatas e
Naturais, Universidade Federal do Pará, CEP 66075-110 Belém, PA, Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Planejamento de Fármacos, Instituto de Ciências Exatas e
Naturais, Universidade Federal do Pará, CEP 66075-110 Belém, PA, Brazil;
Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal do Pará, CEP 66075-110
Belém, PA, Brazil.
(3)Catalysis and Peptide Research Unit, School of Health Sciences, University of 
KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa.
(4)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Taskforce to Study Resistance
Emergence & Antimicrobial Development Technology, 1503 E. Jefferson St,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.
(5)Laboratório de Planejamento de Fármacos, Instituto de Ciências Exatas e
Naturais, Universidade Federal do Pará, CEP 66075-110 Belém, PA, Brazil;
Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal do Pará, CEP 66075-110
Belém, PA, Brazil. Electronic address: lameira@ufpa.br.

Tuberculosis (TB) is the second leading cause of human mortality from infectious 
diseases worldwide. The WHO reported 1.3 million deaths and 8.6 million new cases
of TB in 2012. Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tuberculosis), the infectious
bacteria that causes TB, is encapsulated by a thick and robust cell wall. The
innermost segment of the cell wall is comprised of peptidoglycan, a layer that is
required for survival and growth of the pathogen. Enzymes that catalyse
biosynthesis of the peptidoglycan are essential and are therefore attractive
targets for discovery of novel antibiotics as humans lack similar enzymes making 
it possible to selectively target bacteria only. In this paper, we have reviewed 
the structures and functions of enzymes GlmS, GlmM, GlmU, MurA, MurB, MurC, MurD,
MurE and MurF from M. tuberculosis that are involved in peptidoglycan
biosynthesis. In addition, we report homology modelled 3D structures of those key
enzymes from M. tuberculosis of which the structures are still unknown. We
demonstrated that natural substrates can be successfully docked into the active
sites of the GlmS and GlmU respectively. It is therefore expected that the models
and the data provided herein will facilitate translational research to develop
new drugs to treat TB.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tube.2015.01.006 
PMCID: PMC4659487
PMID: 25701501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

