
1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 23;10(3):e0118735. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118735.
eCollection 2015.

Diversity, metabolic properties and arsenic mobilization potential of indigenous 
bacteria in arsenic contaminated groundwater of West Bengal, India.

Paul D(1), Kazy SK(2), Gupta AK(3), Pal T(4), Sar P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur,
721302, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, National Institute of Technology, Durgapur,
713209 India.
(3)Department of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur,
721302, India.
(4)Central Headquarters, Geological Survey of India, Kolkata, 700016, India.

Arsenic (As) mobilization in alluvial aquifers is caused by a complex interplay
of hydro-geo-microbiological activities. Nevertheless, diversity and
biogeochemical significance of indigenous bacteria in Bengal Delta Plain are not 
well documented. We have deciphered bacterial community compositions and
metabolic properties in As contaminated groundwater of West Bengal to define
their role in As mobilization. Groundwater samples showed characteristic high As,
low organic carbon and reducing property. Culture-independent and -dependent
analyses revealed presence of diverse, yet near consistent community composition 
mostly represented by genera Pseudomonas, Flavobacterium, Brevundimonas,
Polaromonas, Rhodococcus, Methyloversatilis and Methylotenera. Along with
As-resistance and -reductase activities, abilities to metabolize a wide range
carbon substrates including long chain and polyaromatic hydrocarbons and HCO3,
As3+ as electron donor and As5+/Fe3+ as terminal electron acceptor during
anaerobic growth were frequently observed within the cultivable bacteria. Genes
encoding cytosolic As5+ reductase (arsC) and As3+ efflux/transporter [arsB and
acr3(2)] were found to be more abundant than the dissimilatory As5+ reductase
gene arrA. The observed metabolic characteristics showed a good agreement with
the same derived from phylogenetic lineages of constituent populations. Selected 
bacterial strains incubated anaerobically over 300 days using natural orange sand
of Pleistocene aquifer showed release of soluble As mostly as As3+ along with
several other elements (Al, Fe, Mn, K, etc.). Together with the production of
oxalic acid within the biotic microcosms, change in sediment composition and
mineralogy indicated dissolution of orange sand coupled with As/Fe reduction.
Presence of arsC gene, As5+ reductase activity and oxalic acid production by the 
bacteria were found to be closely related to their ability to mobilize sediment
bound As. Overall observations suggest that indigenous bacteria in oligotrophic
groundwater possess adequate catabolic ability to mobilize As by a cascade of
reactions, mostly linked to bacterial necessity for essential nutrients and
detoxification.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118735 
PMCID: PMC4370401
PMID: 25799109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

