
1. Autophagy. 2015;11(2):344-54. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1023682.

Shiga toxins induce autophagic cell death in intestinal epithelial cells via the 
endoplasmic reticulum stress pathway.

Tang B(1), Li Q, Zhao XH, Wang HG, Li N, Fang Y, Wang K, Jia YP, Zhu P, Gu J, Li 
JX, Jiao YJ, Tong WD, Wang M, Zou QM, Zhu FC, Mao XH.

Author information: 
(1)a National Engineering Research Center for Immunobiological Products;
Department of Microbiology and Biochemical Pharmacy; College of Pharmacy; Third
Military Medical University ; Chongqing , China.

Shiga toxins (Stxs) are a family of cytotoxic proteins that lead to the
development of bloody diarrhea, hemolytic-uremic syndrome, and central nervous
system complications caused by bacteria such as S. dysenteriae, E. coli O157:H7
and E. coli O104:H4. Increasing evidence indicates that macroautophagy
(autophagy) is a key factor in the cell death induced by Stxs. However, the
associated mechanisms are not yet clear. This study showed that Stx2 induces
autophagic cell death in Caco-2 cells, a cultured line model of human
enterocytes. Inhibition of autophagy using pharmacological inhibitors, such as
3-methyladenine and bafilomycin A1, or silencing of the autophagy genes ATG12 or 
BECN1 decreased the Stx2-induced death in Caco-2 cells. Furthermore, there were
numerous instances of dilated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in the Stx2-treated
Caco-2 cells, and repression of ER stress due to the depletion of viable
candidates of DDIT3 and NUPR1. These processes led to Stx2-induced autophagy and 
cell death. Finally, the data showed that the pseudokinase TRIB3-mediated DDIT3
expression and AKT1 dephosphorylation upon ER stress were triggered by Stx2.
Thus, the data indicate that Stx2 causes autophagic cell death via the ER stress 
pathway in intestinal epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1023682 
PMCID: PMC4502731
PMID: 25831014  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

