
1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2015 Apr 2;8(2):151-75. doi: 10.3390/ph8020151.

Reactive oxygen species, apoptosis, antimicrobial peptides and human inflammatory
diseases.

Oyinloye BE(1)(2), Adenowo AF(3), Kappo AP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
tunji4reele@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, College of Sciences, Afe Babalola University, PMB 
5454, Ado-Ekiti 360001, Nigeria. tunji4reele@yahoo.com.
(3)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
afaatimah@yahoo.com.
(4)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
KappoA@unizulu.ac.za.

Excessive free radical generation, especially reactive oxygen species (ROS)
leading to oxidative stress in the biological system, has been implicated in the 
pathogenesis and pathological conditions associated with diverse human
inflammatory diseases (HIDs). Although inflammation which is considered
advantageous is a defensive mechanism in response to xenobiotics and foreign
pathogen; as a result of cellular damage arising from oxidative stress, if
uncontrolled, it may degenerate to chronic inflammation when the ROS levels
exceed the antioxidant capacity. Therefore, in the normal resolution of
inflammatory reactions, apoptosis is acknowledged to play a crucial role, while
on the other hand, dysregulation in the induction of apoptosis by enhanced ROS
production could also result in excessive apoptosis identified in the
pathogenesis of HIDs. Apparently, a careful balance must be maintained in this
complex environment. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) have been proposed in this
review as an excellent candidate capable of playing prominent roles in
maintaining this balance. Consequently, in novel drug design for the treatment
and management of HIDs, AMPs are promising candidates owing to their size and
multidimensional properties as well as their wide spectrum of activities and
indications of reduced rate of resistance.

DOI: 10.3390/ph8020151 
PMCID: PMC4491653
PMID: 25850012 

