
1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2015 Jun;47(5):927-32. doi: 10.1007/s11250-015-0810-y.
Epub 2015 Apr 12.

Assessment of raw milk quality and stakeholders' awareness on milk-borne health
risks in Arusha City and Meru District, Tanzania.

Ngasala JU(1), Nonga HE, Mtambo MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine and Public Health, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Sokoine University of Agriculture, P. O. Box 3021, Morogoro, Tanzania.

A cross-sectional study was conducted to assess the quality of raw milk and
stakeholders' awareness on milk-borne health risks and factors for poor milk
hygiene in Arusha City and Meru District, Tanzania between October and December
2012. A total of 105 smallholder dairy farmers, milk vendors and milk retailers
were interviewed, and milk samples were collected for physical, microbial and
antibiotic residue analysis using standard procedures. Questionnaire results
indicated high level of awareness (94 %) that drinking raw milk can predispose
consumers to milk-borne diseases; nevertheless, 65 % of respondents consumed raw 
milk. Physicochemical analyses showed some of the milk had sediments (20 %), bad 
smell (21 %) and had clotted on alcohol test (27 %). About 36 % of milk samples
had pH below 6.6, and 25 % had specific gravity below 1.028 g/ml. The mean total 
viable count (TVC) of milk from vendors is significantly (P < 0.05) higher than
that from retailers and smallholder dairy farmers. Generally, 65 % of milk
samples assessed had a higher TVC than the level recommended (2.0 × 10(5) cfu/ml)
by the East African Community (EAC) standards. Up to 91 % of the milk samples had
bacterial growth that included Eschericia coli (66 %), Staphylococcus aureus
(33 %), Corynebacterium (11 %) and Pseudomonas (10 %). All smallholder dairy
farmers were aware of drug residues, but majority (57 %) were unaware of human
health effects caused by veterinary drug residues in milk. Up to 97 % of
respondents reported to comply with drug withdrawal periods. This possibly led to
all milk samples analysed to be negative from detectable levels of antibiotic
residues. It is concluded that the level of awareness on milk quality is high,
although practices associated with milking and post-harvest handling predispose
milk to bacterial contamination which is a public health risk to milk consumers.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-015-0810-y 
PMID: 25863955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

