
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015 Jul;81(13):4253-62. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00377-15. Epub 
2015 Apr 17.

BadR and BadM Proteins Transcriptionally Regulate Two Operons Needed for
Anaerobic Benzoate Degradation by Rhodopseudomonas palustris.

Hirakawa H(1), Hirakawa Y(1), Greenberg EP(1), Harwood CS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
csh5@uw.edu.

The bacterium Rhodopseudomonas palustris grows with the aromatic acid benzoate
and the alicyclic acid cyclohexanecarboxylate (CHC) as sole carbon sources. The
enzymatic steps in an oxygen-independent pathway for CHC degradation have been
elucidated, but it was unknown how the CHC operon (badHI aliAB badK) encoding the
enzymes for CHC degradation was regulated. aliA and aliB encode enzymes for the
conversion of CHC to cyclohex-1-enecarboxyl-coenzyme A (CHene-CoA). At this
point, the pathway for CHC degradation merges with the pathway for anaerobic
benzoate degradation, as CHene-CoA is an intermediate in both degradation
pathways. Three enzymes, encoded by badK, badH, and badI, prepare and cleave the 
alicyclic ring of CHene-CoA to yield pimelyl-CoA. Here, we show that the MarR
transcription factor family member, BadR, represses transcription of the CHC
operon by binding near the transcription start site of badH.
2-Ketocyclohexane-1-carboxyl-CoA, an intermediate of CHC and benzoate
degradation, interacts with BadR to abrogate repression. We also present evidence
that the transcription factor BadM binds to the promoter of the badDEFGAB (Bad)
operon for the anaerobic conversion of benzoate to CHene-CoA to repress its
expression. Contrary to previous reports, BadR does not appear to control
expression of the Bad operon. These data enhance our view of the transcriptional 
regulation of anaerobic benzoate degradation by R. palustris.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00377-15 
PMCID: PMC4475878
PMID: 25888170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

