
1. Pharm Dev Technol. 2016 Aug;21(5):600-10. doi: 10.3109/10837450.2015.1035728.
Epub 2015 Apr 17.

Preparation and in vitro/in vivo evaluation of antimicrobial ocular in situ gels 
containing a disappearing preservative for topical treatment of bacterial
conjunctivitis.

Saher O(1), Ghorab DM(1), Mursi NM(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department Pharmaceutics and Industrial Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy ,
Cairo University , Cairo , Egypt.

The study aimed to formulate and evaluate levofloxacin hemihydrate ocular in situ
gels along with freshly prepared disappearing preservative reported to be safer
to human eyes. Formulae were prepared using thermosensitive (PF127 and PF68) or
ion-activated (Gelrite) polymers. They were evaluated for gelation temperature
(GT), capacity, content uniformity, pH, rheological behavior, in vitro drug
release with kinetic analysis. Best formulae were exposed to storage effect to
select the optimum formula that was subjected to different sterilization methods 
and in vivo evaluation. The prepared disappearing preservative (sodium perborate 
monohydrate) proved to be active oxidative preservative and compatible with our
formulae. F9 (24% PF127, 15% PF 68, 0.5% levofloxacin hemihydrate, and 0.0025%
sodium perborate monohydrate) showed prolonged drug release (12 h), acceptable
GT, viscosity, and pH. It remained stable over 3 months at two temperatures and
was best sterilized by filtration. It showed longer residence time (12 h) in
rabbits' eye fluids compared with the Levoxin® eye drops (4 h). This successful
attempt of using thermo-gelling system along with a disappearing type of
preservatives would allow the use of these systems to achieve sustained release
of antimicrobial drugs with minimum risk of eye damage improving patient
compliance and treatment efficacy.

DOI: 10.3109/10837450.2015.1035728 
PMID: 25886078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

