
1. Saudi Pharm J. 2015 Apr;23(2):107-14. doi: 10.1016/j.jsps.2013.07.001. Epub 2013 
Jul 18.

Role of Probiotics in health improvement, infection control and disease treatment
and management.

Amara AA(1), Shibl A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Protein Research Department, Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Research
Institute, Mubarak City for Scientific Research and Technology Applications,
Alexandria, Egypt ; Division of Microbiology, Pharmaceutics Department, College
of Pharmacy, KSU, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Division of Microbiology, Pharmaceutics Department, College of Pharmacy, KSU, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Research which concerns the usefulness of Probiotics show increasing interest
based on the rise of their publications, products and the awareness of the public
of their benefits. There is increasing interest concerning Probiotics from the
public, researchers, governmental organizations (such as the WHO/FAO) and
medicinal and food companies. Probiotics means "let good microbes work for you in
different fields get their benefits and take a rest". Such work will include,
food digestion, production of useful products to destroy the bad microbes,
complement the functions of the missed digestive enzymes (due to missed or
defective genes), and to maintain the digestive system's pH, and so on.
Probiotics will augment the efficiency of our biological fermentors, the
digestive system. Many authors have described the history and the progress of
Probiotics and their different applications. In this review, we will focus mainly
on three points, health improvement, infection control and disease management,
which could be eliminated by the use of different types of direct uses of
Probiotics or by the use of foods containing Probiotics.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsps.2013.07.001 
PMCID: PMC4421088
PMID: 25972729 

