
1. Infect Immun. 2015 Aug;83(8):3104-13. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00042-15. Epub 2015 May
26.

Neutrophils play an important role in protective immunity against Coxiella
burnetii infection.

Elliott A(1), Schoenlaub L(1), Freches D(1), Mitchell W(1), Zhang G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, Missouri, USA zhangguo@missouri.edu.

Coxiella burnetii is an obligate intracellular Gram-negative bacterium that
causes the zoonotic disease Q fever. Although Q fever is mainly transmitted by
aerosol infection, study of the immune responses in the lung following pulmonary 
C. burnetii infection is lacking. Neutrophils are considered the first immune
cell to migrate into the lung and play an important role in host defense against 
aerosol infection with microbial pathogens. However, the role of neutrophils in
the host defense against C. burnetii infection remains unclear. To determine the 
role of neutrophils in protective immunity against C. burnetii infection, the
RB6-8C5 antibody was used to deplete neutrophils in mice before intranasal
infection with C. burnetii. The results indicated that neutrophil-depleted mice
developed more severe disease than their wild-type counterparts, suggesting that 
neutrophils play an important role in host defense against C. burnetii pulmonary 
infection. We also found that neither CXC chemokine receptor 2 (CXCR2) nor
interleukin-17 (IL-17) receptor (IL-17R) deficiency changed the severity of
disease following intranasal C. burnetii challenge, suggesting that
keratinocyte-derived chemokine and IL-17 may not play essential roles in the
response to C. burnetii infection. However, significantly higher C. burnetii
genome copy numbers were detected in the lungs of IL-1R(-/-) mice at 14 days
postinfection. This indicates that IL-1 may be important for the clearance of C. 
burnetii from the lungs following intranasal infection. Our results also suggest 
that neutrophils are involved in protecting vaccinated mice from C. burnetii
challenge-induced disease. This is the first study to demonstrate an important
role for neutrophils in protective immunity against C. burnetii infection.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00042-15 
PMCID: PMC4496591
PMID: 26015476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

