
1. J Med Microbiol. 2015 Aug;64(8):916-926. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.000108.

Pathological and bacteriological characterization of neonatal porcine diarrhoea
of uncertain aetiology.

Larsson J(1), Aspán A(2), Lindberg R(3), Grandon R(3), Båverud V(2), Fall N(1),
Jacobson M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, 
SE-75007 Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Bacteriology, National Veterinary Institute, SE-75189 Uppsala,
Sweden.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Veterinary Public Health, Swedish
University of Agricultural Sciences, SE-75007 Uppsala, Sweden.

Neonatal porcine diarrhoea of uncertain aetiology has been reported from a number
of countries. This study investigated 50 diarrhoeic and 19 healthy piglets from
10 affected Swedish herds. The piglets were blood-sampled for analysis of serum
γ-globulin and necropsied, and the intestines were sampled for histopathology and
cultured for Escherichia coli, Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium difficile.
Escherichia coli isolates (n = 276) were examined by PCR for virulence genes
encoding LT, STa, STb, EAST1, VT2e, F4, F5, F6, F18, F41, AIDA-I, intimin, and
for the genes aaiC and aggR. Selected isolates were analysed for additional
virulence genes by a microarray and subjected to O-typing. Clostridium
perfringens isolates (n = 152) were examined by PCR for genes encoding major
toxins, enterotoxin and beta2-toxin. There was no difference in serum γ-globulin 
concentration between diarrhoeic and non-diarrhoeic piglets, and pathological
lesions in the intestines were generally mild. Porcine enterotoxigenic
Escherichia coli, a common cause of piglet diarrhoea, was only found in two
piglets. Further, the virulence gene profiling did not suggest involvement of
other diarrhoeogenic pathotypes of Escherichia coli. Growth of Clostridium
perfringens did not differ between diarrhoeic and non-diarrhoeic piglets. All
isolates were type A, all were negative for enterotoxin, and 151 of 152 isolates 
were beta2-toxin positive. In pigs ≥ 2  days old, moderate to profuse growth of
Clostridium difficile was more common in the controls. In conclusion, it was not 
possible to relate Escherichia coli, Clostridium perfringens type A and C or
Clostridium difficile to neonatal porcine diarrhoea in any of the investigated
herds.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.000108 
PMID: 26272503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

