
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2015 Sep 16;137(36):11695-709. doi: 10.1021/jacs.5b06345. Epub
2015 Sep 2.

Rapid Reduction of the Diferric-Peroxyhemiacetal Intermediate in
Aldehyde-Deformylating Oxygenase by a Cyanobacterial Ferredoxin: Evidence for a
Free-Radical Mechanism.

Rajakovich LJ(1), Nørgaard H(1), Warui DM(1), Chang WC(1), Li N(1), Booker SJ(1),
Krebs C(1), Bollinger JM Jr(1), Pandelia ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and ‡Department of Chemistry,
The Pennsylvania State University , University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, United
States.

Aldehyde-deformylating oxygenase (ADO) is a ferritin-like nonheme-diiron enzyme
that catalyzes the last step in a pathway through which fatty acids are converted
into hydrocarbons in cyanobacteria. ADO catalyzes conversion of a fatty aldehyde 
to the corresponding alk(a/e)ne and formate, consuming four electrons and one
molecule of O2 per turnover and incorporating one atom from O2 into the formate
coproduct. The source of the reducing equivalents in vivo has not been
definitively established, but a cyanobacterial [2Fe-2S] ferredoxin (PetF),
reduced by ferredoxin-NADP(+) reductase (FNR) using NADPH, has been implicated.
We show that both the diferric form of Nostoc punctiforme ADO and its (putative) 
diferric-peroxyhemiacetal intermediate are reduced much more rapidly by
Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 PetF than by the previously employed chemical
reductant, 1-methoxy-5-methylphenazinium methyl sulfate. The yield of formate and
alkane per reduced PetF approaches its theoretical upper limit when reduction of 
the intermediate is carried out in the presence of FNR. Reduction of the
intermediate by either system leads to accumulation of a substrate-derived
peroxyl radical as a result of off-pathway trapping of the C2-alkyl radical
intermediate by excess O2, which consequently diminishes the yield of the
hydrocarbon product. A sulfinyl radical located on residue Cys71 also accumulates
with short-chain aldehydes. The detection of these radicals under turnover
conditions provides the most direct evidence to date for a free-radical
mechanism. Additionally, our results expose an inefficiency of the enzyme in
processing its radical intermediate, presenting a target for optimization of
bioprocesses exploiting this hydrocarbon-production pathway.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.5b06345 
PMID: 26284355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

