
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Aug 14;21(30):9223-7. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i30.9223.

Esophageal intramural pseudodiverticulosis of the residual esophagus after
esophagectomy for esophageal cancer.

Takeshita N(1), Kanda N(1), Fukunaga T(1), Kimura M(1), Sugamoto Y(1), Tasaki
K(1), Uesato M(1), Sazuka T(1), Maruyama T(1), Aida N(1), Tamachi T(1), Hosokawa 
T(1), Asai Y(1), Matsubara H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nobuyoshi Takeshita, Naoki Kanda, Toru Fukunaga, Masayuki Kimura, Yuji
Sugamoto, Kentaro Tasaki, Tetsutaro Sazuka, Tetsuro Maruyama, Naohiro Aida,
Tomohide Tamachi, Takashi Hosokawa, Yo Asai, Department of Surgery, Numazu City
Hospital, Shizuoka 410-0302, Japan.

A 91-year-old man was referred to our hospital with intermittent dysphagia. He
had undergone esophagectomy for esophageal cancer (T3N2M0 Stage III) 11 years
earlier. Endoscopic examination revealed an anastomotic stricture; signs of
inflammation, including redness, erosion, edema, bleeding, friability, and
exudate with white plaques; and multiple depressions in the residual esophagus.
Radiographical examination revealed numerous fine, gastrografin-filled
projections and an anastomotic stricture. Biopsy specimens from the area of the
anastomotic stricture revealed inflammatory changes without signs of malignancy. 
Candida glabrata was detected with a culture test of the biopsy specimens. The
stricture was diagnosed as a benign stricture that was caused by esophageal
intramural pseudodiverticulosis. Accordingly, endoscopic balloon dilatation was
performed and anti-fungal therapy was started in the hospital. Seven weeks later,
endoscopic examination revealed improvement in the mucosal inflammation; only the
pseudodiverticulosis remained. Consequently, the patient was discharged. At the
latest follow-up, the patient was symptom-free and the pseudodiverticulosis
remained in the residual esophagus without any signs of stricture or
inflammation.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i30.9223 
PMCID: PMC4533055
PMID: 26290650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

