
1. Toxins (Basel). 2015 Sep 11;7(9):3637-56. doi: 10.3390/toxins7093637.

Quantitative Analysis of Staphylococcal Enterotoxins A and B in Food Matrices
Using Ultra High-Performance Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry
(UPLC-MS/MS).

Muratovic AZ(1), Hagström T(2), Rosén J(3), Granelli K(4), Hellenäs KE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Science Department, National Food Agency, Box 622, Uppsala SE-751 26, Sweden. 
aida.zuberovic.muratovic@slv.se.
(2)Science Department, National Food Agency, Box 622, Uppsala SE-751 26, Sweden. 
thomas.hagstrom2@gmail.com.
(3)Science Department, National Food Agency, Box 622, Uppsala SE-751 26, Sweden. 
johan.rosen@slv.se.
(4)Science Department, National Food Agency, Box 622, Uppsala SE-751 26, Sweden. 
kristina.granelli@slv.se.
(5)Science Department, National Food Agency, Box 622, Uppsala SE-751 26, Sweden. 
karl-erik.hellenas@slv.se.

A method that uses mass spectrometry (MS) for identification and quantification
of protein toxins, staphylococcal enterotoxins A and B (SEA and SEB), in milk and
shrimp is described. The analysis was performed using a tryptic peptide, from
each of the toxins, as the target analyte together with the corresponding
(13)C-labeled synthetic internal standard peptide. The performance of the method 
was evaluated by analyzing spiked samples in the quantification range 2.5-30 ng/g
(R² = 0.92-0.99). The limit of quantification (LOQ) in milk and the limit of
detection (LOD) in shrimp was 2.5 ng/g, for both SEA and SEB toxins. The in-house
reproducibility (RSD) was 8%-30% and 5%-41% at different concentrations for milk 
and shrimp, respectively. The method was compared to the ELISA method, used at
the EU-RL (France), for milk samples spiked with SEA at low levels, in the
quantification range of 2.5 to 5 ng/g. The comparison showed good coherence for
the two methods: 2.9 (MS)/1.8 (ELISA) and 3.6 (MS)/3.8 (ELISA) ng/g. The major
advantage of the developed method is that it allows direct confirmation of the
molecular identity and quantitative analysis of SEA and SEB at low nanogram
levels using a label and antibody free approach. Therefore, this method is an
important step in the development of alternatives to the immune-assay tests
currently used for staphylococcal enterotoxin analysis.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins7093637 
PMCID: PMC4591654
PMID: 26378579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

