
1. RNA. 2015 Nov;21(11):1866-72. doi: 10.1261/rna.052639.115. Epub 2015 Sep 18.

Coevolution of RtcB and Archease created a multiple-turnover RNA ligase.

Desai KK(1), Beltrame AL(1), Raines RT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

RtcB is a noncanonical RNA ligase that joins either 2',3'-cyclic phosphate or
3'-phosphate termini to 5'-hydroxyl termini. The genes encoding RtcB and Archease
constitute a tRNA splicing operon in many organisms. Archease is a cofactor of
RtcB that accelerates RNA ligation and alters the NTP specificity of the ligase
from Pyrococcus horikoshii. Yet, not all organisms that encode RtcB also encode
Archease. Here we sought to understand the differences between Archease-dependent
and Archease-independent RtcBs so as to illuminate the evolution of Archease and 
its function. We report on the Archease-dependent RtcB from Thermus thermophilus 
and the Archease-independent RtcB from Thermobifida fusca. We find that RtcB from
T. thermophilus can catalyze multiple turnovers only in the presence of Archease.
Remarkably, Archease from P. horikoshii can activate T. thermophilus RtcB,
despite low sequence identity between the Archeases from these two organisms. In 
contrast, RtcB from T. fusca is a single-turnover enzyme that is unable to be
converted into a multiple-turnover ligase by Archease from either P. horikoshii
or T. thermophilus. Thus, our data indicate that Archease likely evolved to
support multiple-turnover activity of RtcB and that coevolution of the two
proteins is necessary for a functional interaction.

Â© 2015 Desai et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the RNA
Society.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.052639.115 
PMCID: PMC4604427
PMID: 26385509  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

