
1. J Exp Med. 2015 Oct 19;212(11):1869-82. doi: 10.1084/jem.20151403. Epub 2015 Oct 
12.

Unique and redundant functions of NKp46+ ILC3s in models of intestinal
inflammation.

Song C(1), Lee JS(1), Gilfillan S(1), Robinette ML(1), Newberry RD(1),
Stappenbeck TS(1), Mack M(2), Cella M(3), Colonna M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology and Department of Medicine, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110.
(2)Department of Nephrology, University Hospital Regensburg, 93042 Regensburg,
Germany.
(3)Department of Pathology and Immunology and Department of Medicine, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110 mcolonna@pathology.wustl.edu
mcella@pathology.wustl.edu.

Group 3 ILCs (ILC3s) are innate sources of IL-22 and IL-17 and include lymphoid
tissue-inducer (LTi)-like and NKp46(+) subsets. Both depend on RORγt and aryl
hydrocarbon receptor, but NKp46(+)ILC3s also require Notch and T-bet for their
development and are transcriptionally distinct. The extent to which these subsets
have unique functions, especially in the context of T cell- and B cell-sufficient
mice, remains largely unclear. To investigate the specific function of
NKp46(+)ILC3s among other ILC3 subsets and T cells, we generated mice selectively
lacking NKp46(+)ILC3s or all ILC3s and crossed them to T cell-deficient mice,
thus maintaining B cells in all mice. In mice lacking T cells, NKp46(+)ILC3s were
sufficient to promote inflammatory monocyte accumulation in the anti-CD40 innate 
colitis model through marked production of GM-CSF. In T cell-competent mice, lack
of NKp46(+)ILCs had no impact on control of intestinal C. rodentium infection,
whereas lack of all ILC3s partially impaired bacterial control. Thus,
NKp46(+)ILC3s have a unique capacity to promote inflammation through
GM-CSF-induced accumulation of inflammatory monocytes, but are superseded by
LTi-like ILC3s and T cells in controlling intestinal bacterial infection.

© 2015 Song et al.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20151403 
PMCID: PMC4612098
PMID: 26458769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

