
1. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:314620. doi: 10.1155/2015/314620. Epub 2015 Oct 25.

Th17 Cell Plasticity and Functions in Cancer Immunity.

Guéry L(1), Hugues S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, University of Geneva Medical School,
1211 Geneva, Switzerland.

Th17 cells represent a particular subset of T helper lymphocytes characterized by
high production of IL-17 and other inflammatory cytokines. Th17 cells participate
in antimicrobial immunity at mucosal and epithelial barriers and particularly
fight against extracellular bacteria and fungi. While a role for Th17 cells in
promoting inflammation and autoimmune disorders has been extensively and
elegantly demonstrated, it is still controversial whether and how Th17 cells
influence tumor immunity. Although Th17 cells specifically accumulate in many
different types of tumors compared to healthy tissues, the outcome might however 
differ from a tumor type to another. Th17 cells were consequently associated with
both good and bad prognoses. The high plasticity of those cells toward cells
exhibiting either anti-inflammatory or in contrast pathogenic functions might
contribute to Th17 versatile functions in the tumor context. On one hand, Th17
cells promote tumor growth by inducing angiogenesis (via IL-17) and by exerting
themselves immunosuppressive functions. On the other hand, Th17 cells drive
antitumor immune responses by recruiting immune cells into tumors, activating
effector CD8(+) T cells, or even directly by converting toward Th1 phenotype and 
producing IFN-γ. In this review, we are discussing the impact of the tumor
microenvironment on Th17 cell plasticity and function and its implications in
cancer immunity.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/314620 
PMCID: PMC4637016
PMID: 26583099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

