
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2016 Feb;66(2):652-665. doi: 10.1099/ijsem.0.000770.
Epub 2015 Nov 17.

Parviterribacter kavangonensis gen. nov., sp. nov. and Parviterribacter
multiflagellatus sp. nov., novel members of Parviterribacteraceae fam. nov.
within the order Solirubrobacterales, and emended descriptions of the classes
Thermoleophilia and Rubrobacteria and their orders and families.

Foesel BU(1), Geppert A(1), Rohde M(2), Overmann J(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Ecology and Diversity Research, Leibniz Institut DSMZ 
- Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen, Braunschweig, Germany.
(2)Central Facility for Microscopy, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research,
Braunschweig, Germany.
(3)Technische Universität Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany.

Two Gram-type-positive, non-spore-forming bacteria, strains D16/0/H6T and
A22/0/F9_1T, were isolated from Namibian semiarid savannah soils. 16S rRNA gene
sequence analysis revealed 96.6 % identity between the two strains and placed
them within the order Solirubrobacterales of the class Thermoleophilia. The
closest phylogenetic relatives with validly published names were several strains 
of the genus Solirubrobacter and the species Conexibacter arvalis, with pairwise 
sequence similarities of ≤ 94.0 %. Cells of strain D16/0/H6T were ovoid to
rod-shaped, whereas strain A22/0/F9_1T formed regular rods. Cells of both strains
were motile and divided by binary fission. Colonies were pink and white to pale
yellowish/brownish, respectively. Strains D16/0/H6T and A22/0/F9_1T were aerobic,
chemoheterotrophic mesophiles with broad temperature (13-43 and 17-43 °C,
respectively) and pH (pH 4.5-8.5 and 5.0-9.5) ranges for growth. Complex
proteinaceous substrates and glucose were the preferred carbon and energy
sources. Strain A22/0/F9_1T also grew on various carboxylic acids. For both
strains, the peptidoglycan diamino acid was meso-2,6-diaminopimelic acid. The
major quinone was MK-8. As a minor compound, MK-7 occurred in strain D16/0/H6T;
strain A22/0F9_1T also contained MK-7, MK-7(H2) and MK-8(H2). Major fatty acids
of strain D16/0/H6T were 10-methyl C17 : 0, iso-C16 : 0 and C18 : 1ω9c. Strain
A22/0F9_1T contained C18 : 1ω9c, C17 : 1ω8c, C17 : 1ω6c and iso-C16 : 0 as major 
components. The DNA G+C contents of strains D16/0/H6T and A22/0/F9_1T were 72.8
and 74.0 mol%, respectively. Based on these characteristics, the two isolates are
assigned to novel species of the new genus Parviterribacter gen. nov., the type
species Parviterribacter kavangonensis sp. nov. (type strain D16/0/H6T = DSM
25205T = LMG 26950T) and a second species Parviterribacter multiflagellatus sp.
nov. (type strain A22/0/F9_1T = DSM 25204T = LMG 26949T). As the novel genus and 
species cannot be clearly assigned to an established family within the order
Solirubrobacterales, the novel family Parviterribacteraceae fam. nov. is
proposed. Emended descriptions of the classes Thermoleophilia and Rubrobacteria
and their orders and families are also provided.

DOI: 10.1099/ijsem.0.000770 
PMID: 26582010 

