
1. Microb Ecol. 2016 Apr;71(3):672-85. doi: 10.1007/s00248-015-0710-8. Epub 2015 Nov
24.

Diversity and Distribution of Arsenic-Related Genes Along a Pollution Gradient in
a River Affected by Acid Mine Drainage.

Desoeuvre A(1), Casiot C(1), Héry M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire HydroSciences Montpellier, HSM, UMR 5569 IRD, CNRS, Université
Montpellier, CC 57, 163 rue Auguste Broussonet, 34090, Montpellier, France.
(2)Laboratoire HydroSciences Montpellier, HSM, UMR 5569 IRD, CNRS, Université
Montpellier, CC 57, 163 rue Auguste Broussonet, 34090, Montpellier, France.
marina.hery@univ-montp2.fr.

Some microorganisms have the capacity to interact with arsenic through resistance
or metabolic processes. Their activities contribute to the fate of arsenic in
contaminated ecosystems. To investigate the genetic potential involved in these
interactions in a zone of confluence between a pristine river and an arsenic-rich
acid mine drainage, we explored the diversity of marker genes for arsenic
resistance (arsB, acr3.1, acr3.2), methylation (arsM), and respiration (arrA) in 
waters characterized by contrasted concentrations of metallic elements (including
arsenic) and pH. While arsB-carrying bacteria were representative of pristine
waters, Acr3 proteins may confer to generalist bacteria the capacity to cope with
an increase of contamination. arsM showed an unexpected wide distribution,
suggesting biomethylation may impact arsenic fate in contaminated aquatic
ecosystems. arrA gene survey suggested that only specialist microorganisms
(adapted to moderately or extremely contaminated environments) have the capacity 
to respire arsenate. Their distribution, modulated by water chemistry, attested
the specialist nature of the arsenate respirers. This is the first report of the 
impact of an acid mine drainage on the diversity and distribution of arsenic
(As)-related genes in river waters. The fate of arsenic in this ecosystem is
probably under the influence of the abundance and activity of specific microbial 
populations involved in different As biotransformations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00248-015-0710-8 
PMID: 26603631  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

