
1. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 10;10(12):e0144412. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144412.
eCollection 2015.

Organic Turkey Flocks: A Reservoir of Streptococcus gallolyticus subspecies
gallolyticus.

Schulz J(1), Dumke J(2), Hinse D(2), Dreier J(2), Habig C(1), Kemper N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Hygiene, Animal Welfare and Farm Animal Behaviour,
University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Foundation, Hannover, Germany.
(2)Institute for Laboratory and Transfusion Medicine, Ruhr University of Bochum, 
Bad Oeynhausen, Germany.

Streptococcus gallolyticus subspecies gallolyticus (S. gallolyticus) can colonise
the gastrointestinal tract of humans and animals and is known to cause similar
infections in both humans and animals. Data about the spread or prevalence in
farm animals are missing. In this study, Trypton Soya Agar was modified to a
selective medium enabling the isolation and quantification of S. gallolyticus
from faecal samples. The bacterium was observed in 82 out of 91 faecal samples
obtained from 18 different organic turkey flocks. The prevalence of shedding
birds was estimated by the number of positive fresh droppings and reached up to
100% on most farms. Furthermore, for the first time S. gallolyticus was
quantified in faeces from poultry flocks. The median of colony forming units
(CFU) per gramme faeces was 3.6 x 10(5) CFU/g. Typing of one isolate from each
positive faecal sample by multilocus sequence typing delivered 24 sequence types 
(STs). Most of the isolates belonged to the clonal complex CC58. The same STs of 
this complex were detected in up to six different flocks. Partly, these flocks
were located in various regions and stocked with varying breeding lines.
Regarding the biochemical profiles of the same STs from different farms, the
results did not contradict a spread of specific STs in the organic turkey
production. Moreover, checking the pubMLST database revealed that STs found in
this study were also found in other animal species and in humans. The high
detection rate and the number of S. gallolyticus in turkey faeces indicate that
this bacterium probably belongs to the common microbiota of the gastrointestinal 
tract of turkeys from organic flocks. Furthermore, the findings of this study
support the suggestion of a possible interspecies transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144412 
PMCID: PMC4675529
PMID: 26657757  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

