
1. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016 Feb;16(1):45-50. doi:
10.1097/ACI.0000000000000231.

Neutrophil recruitment by allergens contribute to allergic sensitization and
allergic inflammation.

Hosoki K(1), Itazawa T, Boldogh I, Sur S.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Internal Medicine, Division of Allergy and Immunology
bDepartment of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To discuss the presence and role of neutrophils in asthma and 
allergic diseases, and outline the importance of pollen and cat dander-induced
innate neutrophil recruitment in induction of allergic sensitization and allergic
inflammation.
RECENT FINDINGS: Uncontrolled asthma is associated with elevated numbers of
neutrophils, and levels of neutrophil-attracting chemokine IL-8 and IL-17 in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluids. These parameters negatively correlate with lung
function. Pollen allergens and cat dander recruit neutrophils to the airways in a
toll-like receptor 4, myeloid differentiation protein-2, and chemokine (C-X-C
motif) receptor (CXCR) 2-dependent manner. Repeated recruitment of activated
neutrophils by these allergens facilitates allergic sensitization and airway
inflammation. Inhibition of neutrophil recruitment with CXCR2 inhibitor,
disruption of toll-like receptor 4, or small interfering RNA against myeloid
differentiation protein-2 also inhibits allergic inflammation. The molecular
mechanisms by which innately recruited neutrophils contribute to shifting the
airway inflammatory response induced by allergens from neutrophilic to an
eosinophilic-allergic is an area of active research.
SUMMARY: Recent studies have revealed that neutrophil recruitment is important in
the development of allergic sensitization and inflammation. Inhibition of
neutrophils recruitment may be a strategy to control allergic inflammation.

DOI: 10.1097/ACI.0000000000000231 
PMCID: PMC4941617
PMID: 26694038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

