
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2016 Jan;92(1). pii: fiv162. doi: 10.1093/femsec/fiv162.
Epub 2015 Dec 23.

Microbial composition of biofilms associated with lithifying rubble of Acropora
palmata branches.

Beltrán Y(1), Cerqueda-García D(1), Taş N(2), Thomé PE(3), Iglesias-Prieto R(3), 
Falcón LI(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Ecología Bacteriana, Instituto de Ecología, UNAM, D.F., México 
04510, Mexico.
(2)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Ecology Department, Earth &
Environmental Sciences, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(3)Unidad Académica de Sistemas Arrecifales, Puerto Morelos, Instituto de
Ciencias del Mar y Limnología, UNAM. Ado. Post. 1152, Cancun, QR, México 77500,
Mexico.
(4)Laboratorio de Ecología Bacteriana, Instituto de Ecología, UNAM, D.F., México 
04510, Mexico falcon@ecologia.unam.mx.

Coral reefs are among the most productive ecosystems on the planet, but are
rapidly declining due to global-warming-mediated changes in the oceans.
Particularly for the Caribbean region, Acropora sp. stony corals have lost ∼80%
of their original coverage, resulting in vast extensions of dead coral rubble. We
analyzed the microbial composition of biofilms that colonize and lithify dead
Acropora palmata rubble in the Mexican Caribbean and identified the microbial
assemblages that can persist under scenarios of global change, including high
temperature and low pH. Lithifying biofilms have a mineral composition that
includes aragonite and magnesium calcite (16 mole% MgCO(3)) and calcite, while
the mineral phase corresponding to coral skeleton is basically aragonite.
Microbial composition of the lithifying biofilms are different in comparison to
surrounding biotopes, including a microbial mat, water column, sediments and live
A. palmata microbiome. Significant shifts in biofilm composition were detected in
samples incubated in mesocosms. The combined effect of low pH and increased
temperature showed a strong effect after two-week incubations for biofilm
composition. Findings suggest that lithifying biofilms could remain as a
secondary structure on reef rubble possibly impacting the functional role of
coral reefs.

© FEMS 2015. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/femsec/fiv162 
PMID: 26705570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

