
1. J Bacteriol. 2016 Mar 31;198(8):1196-206. doi: 10.1128/JB.01027-15. Print 2016
Apr.

Mutation of the murC and murB Genes Impairs Heterocyst Differentiation in
Anabaena sp. Strain PCC 7120.

Videau P(1), Rivers OS(1), Ushijima B(1), Oshiro RT(1), Kim MJ(1), Philmus B(2), 
Cozy LM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Illinois Wesleyan University, Bloomington, Illinois,
USA lcozy@iwu.edu.

To stabilize cellular integrity in the face of environmental perturbations, most 
bacteria, including cyanobacteria, synthesize and maintain a strong, flexible,
three-dimensional peptidoglycan lattice. Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 is a
filamentous cyanobacterium capable of differentiating morphologically distinct
nitrogen-fixing heterocyst cells in a periodic pattern. While heterocyst
development has been shown to require proper peptidoglycan remodeling, the role
of peptidoglycan synthesis has remained unclear. Here we report the
identification of two peptidoglycan synthesis genes, murC (alr5065) and murB
(alr5066), as required for heterocyst development. The murC and murB genes are
predicted to encode a UDP-N-acetylmuramate:L-alanine ligase and a
UDP-N-acetylenolpyruvoylglucosamine reductase, respectively, and we confirm
enzymatic function through complementation of Escherichia coli strains deficient 
for these enzymes. Cells depleted of either murC or murB expression failed to
differentiate heterocysts under normally inducing conditions and displayed
decreased filament integrity. To identify the stage(s) of development affected by
murC or murB depletion, the spatial distribution of expression of the patterning 
marker gene, patS, was examined. Whereas murB depletion did not affect the
pattern of patS expression, murC depletion led to aberrant expression of patS in 
all cells of the filament. Finally, expression of gfp controlled by the region of
DNA immediately upstream of murC was enriched in differentiating cells and was
repressed by the transcription factor NtcA. Collectively, the data in this work
provide evidence for a direct link between peptidoglycan synthesis and the
maintenance of a biological pattern in a multicellular organism.IMPORTANCE:
Multicellular organisms that differentiate specialized cells must regulate
morphological changes such that both cellular integrity and the dissemination of 
developmental signals are preserved. Here we show that the multicellular
bacterium Anabaena, which differentiates a periodic pattern of specialized
heterocyst cells, requires peptidoglycan synthesis by the murine ligase genes
murC (alr5065) and murB (alr5066) for maintenance of patterned gene expression,
filament integrity, and overall development. This work highlights the significant
influence that intracellular structure and intercellular connections can have on 
the execution of a developmental program.

Copyright Â© 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01027-15 
PMCID: PMC4859589
PMID: 26811320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

