
1. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2016 May;57(4):299-311. doi: 10.1002/em.22005. Epub 2016 Feb
29.

Use of genetically manipulated Salmonella typhimurium strains to evaluate the
role of human sulfotransferases in the bioactivation of nitro- and aminotoluenes.

Glatt H(1)(2), Sabbioni G(3), Monien BH(1)(2), Meinl W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Toxicology, German Institute of Human Nutrition
(DIfE) Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Arthur-Scheunert-Allee 114-116, Nuthetal, 14558,
Germany.
(2)Department of Food Safety, Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR),
Max-Dohrn-Strasse 8-10, Berlin, 10589, Germany.
(3)Institute of Environmental and Occupational Toxicology, Casella Postale 108,
Airolo, 6780, Switzerland.

Various nitro- and aminotoluenes demonstrated carcinogenic activity in rodent
studies, but were inactive or weakly active in conventional in vitro mutagenicity
assays. Standard in vitro tests do not take into account activation by certain
classes of enzymes. This is true in particular for sulfotransferases (SULTs).
These enzymes may convert aromatic hydroxylamines and benzylic alcohols, two
major classes of phase-I metabolites of nitro- and aminotoluenes, to reactive
esters. Here it is shown that expression of certain human SULTs in Salmonella
typhimurium TA1538 or TA100 strongly enhanced the mutagenicity of various
nitrotoluenes and nitro- and amino-substituted benzyl alcohols. Human SULT1A1,
SULT1A2, and SULT1C2 showed the strongest activation. The observation that some
nitrotoluenes as well as some aminobenzyl alcohols were activated by SULTs in the
absence of cytochromes P450 implies that mutagenic sulfuric esters were formed at
both the exocyclic nitrogen and the benzylic carbon, respectively. Nitroreductase
deficiency (using strain YG7131 instead of TA1538 for SULT1A1 expression) did not
affect the SULT-dependent mutagenicity of 1-hydroxymethylpyrene (containing no
nitro group), moderately enhanced that of 2-amino-4-nitrobenzyl alcohol, and
drastically attenuated the effects of nitrobenzyl alcohols without other
substituents. The last finding suggests that either activation occurred at the
hydroxylamino group formed by nitroreductase or the nitro group (having a strong 
-M effect) had to be reduced to an electron-donating substituent to enhance the
reactivity of the benzylic sulfuric esters. The results pointed to an important
role of SULTs in the genotoxicity of nitrotoluenes and alkylated anilines.
Activation occurs at nitrogen functions as well as benzylic positions.

Â© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/em.22005 
PMID: 26924705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

