
1. Water Res. 2016 May 1;94:208-214. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2016.02.049. Epub 2016
Feb 23.

Co-occurrence of integrase 1, antibiotic and heavy metal resistance genes in
municipal wastewater treatment plants.

Di Cesare A(1), Eckert EM(1), D'Urso S(1), Bertoni R(1), Gillan DC(2), Wattiez
R(2), Corno G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Ecology Group, National Research Council - Institute of Ecosystem
Study (CNR-ISE), Largo Tonolli 50, 28922, Verbania, Italy.
(2)Proteomics and Microbiology Lab, Mons University, 5 av du Champ de Mars,
B-7000, Mons, Belgium.
(3)Microbial Ecology Group, National Research Council - Institute of Ecosystem
Study (CNR-ISE), Largo Tonolli 50, 28922, Verbania, Italy. Electronic address:
g.corno@ise.cnr.it.

The impact of human activities on the spread and on the persistence of antibiotic
resistances in the environment is still far from being understood. The natural
background of resistances is influenced by human activities, and the wastewater
treatment plants (WWTPs) are among the main sources of the release of antibiotic 
resistance into the environment. The various treatments of WWTPs provide a number
of different environmental conditions potentially favoring the selection of
antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) and thereby their well-documented spread in
the environment. Although the distribution of different ARGs in WWTPs has been
deeply investigated, very little is known on the ecology and on the molecular
mechanisms underlying the selection of specific ARGs. This study investigates the
fate of diverse ARGs, heavy metal resistance genes (HMRGs) and of a mobile
element (the class I integron) in three WWTPs. Abundances of the different
genetic markers were correlated to each other and their relation to biotic and
abiotic factors (total organic carbon, total nitrogen, prokaryotic cell abundance
and its relative distribution in single cells and aggregates) influencing the
microbial communities in the different treatment phases in three WWTPs, were
investigated. Water samples were analyzed for the abundance of six ARGs (tetA,
sulII, blaTEM, blaCTXM,ermB, and qnrS), two HMRGs (czcA and arsB), and of the
class I integron (int1). The measured variables clustered in two well-defined
groups, the first including tetA, ermB, qnrS and the different biotic and abiotic
factors, and a second group around the genes sulII, czcA, arsB and int1.
Moreover, the dynamics of sulII, HMRGs, and int1 correlated strongly. Our results
suggest a potentially crucial role of HMRGs in the spread, mediated by mobile
elements, of some ARGs, i.e. sulII. The possibility of a relation between heavy
metal contamination and the spread of ARGs in WWTPs calls for further research to
clarify the mechanisms of co-selection and their ecology, in order to implement
the removal efficiency of the applied treatments.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2016.02.049 
PMID: 26945964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

