
1. J Infect Dis. 2016 Jul 1;214(1):151-60. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiw087. Epub 2016 Mar
6.

CXCR2 Mediates Brucella-Induced Arthritis in Interferon γ-Deficient Mice.

Lacey CA(1), Keleher LL(1), Mitchell WJ(2), Brown CR(2), Skyberg JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine
Laboratory for Infectious Disease Research, University of Missouri, Columbia.
(2)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine.

BACKGROUND: Brucella species are facultative intracellular gram-negative bacteria
that cause brucellosis, a common global zoonosis. Infection of the joints is the 
most common focal complication of brucellosis in humans. The purpose of this
study was to identify mediators of focal inflammation during brucellosis.
METHODS: Wild-type (WT) mice are naturally resistant to Brucella infection;
therefore, we infected anti-interferon γ (IFN-γ)-treated, or IFN-γ(-/-) mice with
Brucella to induce osteoarticular and musculoskeletal inflammation, as we
previously described. Mice were infected intraperitoneally with Brucella
melitensis, and the clinical course of disease, histopathologic changes, and
cytokine levels were compared among groups.
RESULTS: Rag1(-/-) mice (B- and T-cell deficient) and µMT(-/-) mice (B-cell
deficient) developed paw inflammation at a similar rate and severity as WT mice
following infection with B. melitensis and treatment with anti-IFN-γ. Joints from
B. melitensis-infected IFN-γ(-/-) mice had markedly increased levels of CCR2 and 
CXCR2 ligands. While anti-IFN-γ-treated CCR2(-/-) and WT mice behaved similarly, 
anti-IFN-γ-treated CXCR2(-/-) or IFN-γ(-/-)/CXCR2(-/-) mice had strikingly
reduced focal swelling relative to anti-IFN-γ-treated WT or IFN-γ(-/-) mice,
respectively. Additionally, neutrophil recruitment was dependent on CXCR2.
CONCLUSIONS: Adaptive immune cells and CCR2 are dispensable, while CXCR2 is
necessary for Brucella-induced focal neutrophil recruitment and inflammation.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiw087 
PMCID: PMC4907412
PMID: 26951819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

