
1. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2015;80:257-63. doi:
10.1101/sqb.2015.80.027615. Epub 2016 Mar 11.

Regulation of RORγt in Inflammatory Lymphoid Cell Differentiation.

Huang W(1), Littman DR(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine of the Skirball Institute, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016.
(2)The Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine of the Skirball Institute, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016 Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016.

T-helper 17 (Th17) cells differentiate from naïve CD4(+) T cells in response to
signals from commensal microbiota and produce cytokines critical for the
integrity of mucosal barriers. These cells also disseminate throughout the body, 
and are key participants in numerous inflammatory processes. A key challenge is
to elucidate the mechanisms that govern Th17 cell beneficial versus pathogenic
functions, characterized by different cytokine profiles. Mucosal Th17 cells
require the nuclear hormone receptor RORγt for their differentiation in draining 
lymph nodes. Cytokine expression is enabled in select tissues, to which these
cells migrate, by external cues, such as the serum amyloid A proteins produced in
response to commensal bacteria by epithelial cells in the small intestine.
Additional cell-intrinsic cues contributing to production of Th17 cytokines
during both homeostasis and inflammation include the RORγt-associated DEAD-box
RNA helicase DDX5 and long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) Rmrp. The helicase activity of 
DDX5 is required for Rmrp-mediated assembly of the complex and colocalization
with RORγt throughout the genome to regulate key Th17 genes. How these are
regulated in diverse microenvironments may provide insights for therapeutic
intervention in autoimmune disease.

Copyright © 2015 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1101/sqb.2015.80.027615 
PMCID: PMC7156073
PMID: 26968628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

