
1. Environ Monit Assess. 2016 May;188(5):263. doi: 10.1007/s10661-016-5261-z. Epub
2016 Apr 1.

Water Quality Index (WQI) of Jaguari and Atibaia Rivers in the region of
Paulínia, São Paulo, Brazil.

Ramos MA(1), de Oliveira ES(2), Pião AC(3), Leite DA(4), de Angelis Dde F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Institute of Biosciences,
Universidade Estadual Paulista Júlio de Mesquita Filho UNESP, Avenida 24A,
1515-Bela Vista, CEP 13506-900, Rio Claro, SP, Brazil. marciogr@rc.unesp.br.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Institute of Biosciences, UNESP/Rubião Junior,
Botucatu, SP, Brazil.
(3)Department of Statistics, Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Institute 
of Geosciences, UNESP, Rio Claro, SP, Brazil.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Institute of Biosciences,
Universidade Estadual Paulista Júlio de Mesquita Filho UNESP, Avenida 24A,
1515-Bela Vista, CEP 13506-900, Rio Claro, SP, Brazil.

Due to the concern with the quality of hydric resources, the monitoring is
essential to evaluate and identify the anthropogenic and environmental
interferences in a quantitative and qualitative level. In order to assist the
interpretation of the water status of hydric bodies, the gathering of analytical 
data often considers the Water Quality Index (WQI). This index transforms
technical information in description of the water quality status, highlighting
the effectiveness of its use and guiding the decision-making process when
necessary. The aim of this research is to assess the water quality of a region in
São Paulo State, Brazil, by means of the WQI of Jaguari and Atibaia Rivers. The
period of intense drought, which affected the Brazilian southeast in 2014, was
evaluated and compared to the mean values recorded from October 2009 to March
2015, correlating the values of Escherichia coli and the biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD). One hundred nine samples were collected, being 53 from dry seasons,
between October and March, and 56 from rainy seasons, between April and
September. The WQIs in Jaguari and Atibaia Rivers, during dry season, were of
42.2 (medium) and 36.7 (bad), respectively. The same pattern was registered for
the dry season, for both rivers, with indices values of 40.1 for Jaguari River
(medium) and 34.9 for Atibaia River (bad). This research presented the need of an
effective evaluation of the environmental quality and preservation by competent
organs for both rivers. Due to the detected conditions, special attention should 
be given to the Atibaia River.

DOI: 10.1007/s10661-016-5261-z 
PMID: 27037698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

