
1. PLoS One. 2016 Apr 12;11(4):e0152515. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152515.
eCollection 2016.

Comparative Genome Analysis Provides Insights into the Pathogenicity of
Flavobacterium psychrophilum.

Castillo D(1), Christiansen RH(1)(2), Dalsgaard I(2), Madsen L(2), Espejo R(3),
Middelboe M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Marine Biological Section, University of Copenhagen, Helsingør, Denmark.
(2)National Veterinary Institute, Technical University of Denmark, Frederiksberg,
Denmark.
(3)Centro Nacional de Genómica y Bioinformática and Instituto de Nutrición y
Tecnología de los Alimentos, Universidad de Chile, Macul, Santiago, Chile.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is a fish pathogen in salmonid aquaculture worldwide
that causes cold water disease (CWD) and rainbow trout fry syndrome (RTFS).
Comparative genome analyses of 11 F. psychrophilum isolates representing
temporally and geographically distant populations were used to describe the F.
psychrophilum pan-genome and to examine virulence factors, prophages, CRISPR
arrays, and genomic islands present in the genomes. Analysis of the genomic DNA
sequences were complemented with selected phenotypic characteristics of the
strains. The pan genome analysis showed that F. psychrophilum could hold at least
3373 genes, while the core genome contained 1743 genes. On average, 67 new genes 
were detected for every new genome added to the analysis, indicating that F.
psychrophilum possesses an open pan genome. The putative virulence factors were
equally distributed among isolates, independent of geographic location, year of
isolation and source of isolates. Only one prophage-related sequence was found
which corresponded to the previously described prophage 6H, and appeared in 5 out
of 11 isolates. CRISPR array analysis revealed two different loci with dissimilar
spacer content, which only matched one sequence in the database, the temperate
bacteriophage 6H. Genomic Islands (GIs) were identified in F. psychrophilum
isolates 950106-1/1 and CSF 259-93, associated with toxins and antibiotic
resistance. Finally, phenotypic characterization revealed a high degree of
similarity among the strains with respect to biofilm formation and secretion of
extracellular enzymes. Global scale dispersion of virulence factors in the
genomes and the abilities for biofilm formation, hemolytic activity and secretion
of extracellular enzymes among the strains suggested that F. psychrophilum
isolates have a similar mode of action on adhesion, colonization and destruction 
of fish tissues across large spatial and temporal scales of occurrence. Overall, 
the genomic characterization and phenotypic properties may provide new insights
to the mechanisms of pathogenicity in F. psychrophilum.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152515 
PMCID: PMC4829187
PMID: 27071075  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

