
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2016 Oct;126:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2016.05.005. Epub 2016
May 12.

Production and characterization of a biotinylated single-chain variable fragment 
antibody for detection of parathion-methyl.

Wang H(1), Zhao F(1), Han X(1), Yang Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Life Science, Key Laboratory for
Agriculture Microbiology, Shandong Agricultural University, Taian 271018, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology, College of Life Science, Key Laboratory for
Agriculture Microbiology, Shandong Agricultural University, Taian 271018, China. 
Electronic address: zhyouyang@sdau.edu.cn.

In this article, we reported the development of a biotinylated single-chain
variable fragment (scFv) antibody based indirect competitive enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (IC-ELISA) for parathion-methyl (PM) detection. Firstly, a
phage display library was generated using a pre-immunized BALB/C mouse against a 
specific hapten of PM. After four rounds of panning, the scFv gene fragments were
transferred into a secreted expression vector. Then, the scFv antibodies were
secreted expressed and screened by IC-ELISA against PM. The selected scFv
antibody was fused with a biotin acceptor domain (BAD) and inserted into
pET-28a(+) vector for high-level expression in Escherichia coli BL2 (DE3). After 
optimizing expression conditions, the scFv-BAD antibody was expressed as a
soluble protein and biotinylated in vitro by the E. coli biotin ligase (BirA).
Subsequently, the biotinylated scFv-BAD antibody was purified with a high yield
of 59.2 ± 3.7 mg/L of culture, and was characterized by SDS-PAGE and western
blotting. Finally, based on the biotinylated scFv-BAD, a sensitive IC-ELISA for
detection of PM was developed, and the 50% inhibition value (IC50) of PM was
determined as 14.5 ng/mL, with a limit of detection (LOD, IC10) of 0.9 ng/mL.
Cross-reactivity (CR) studies revealed that the scFv antibody showed desirable
specificity for PM.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2016.05.005 
PMID: 27181246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

