
1. Med Eng Phys. 2016 Sep;38(9):870-6. doi: 10.1016/j.medengphy.2016.04.027. Epub
2016 Jun 2.

The influence of foreign body surface area on the outcome of chronic
osteomyelitis.

Surdu-Bob CC(1), Coman C(2), Barbuceanu F(3), Turcu D(4), Bercaru N(5), Badulescu
M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Low Temperature Plasma Laboratory, National Institute for Lasers, Plasma and
Radiation Physics, Magurele, jud.Ilfov 077125, Romania. Electronic address:
cristina.surdubob@plasmacoatings.ro.
(2)Low Temperature Plasma Laboratory, National Institute for Lasers, Plasma and
Radiation Physics, Magurele, jud.Ilfov 077125, Romania; National Institute for
Microbiology and Immunology Cantacuzino, Laboratory Animal Facility, Bucharest
050096, Romania. Electronic address: comancristin@yahoo.com.
(3)Morphopathology Department, Institute for Diagnosis and Animal Health,
Bucharest 050557, Romania. Electronic address: Florica.BARBUCEANU@idah.ro.
(4)Veterinary Medicine Faculty, Spiru Haret University, Bucharest 032091,
Romania.
(5)Veterinary Medicine Faculty, Spiru Haret University, Bucharest 032091,
Romania. Electronic address: turcu_fmvspiru@yahoo.com.
(6)Low Temperature Plasma Laboratory, National Institute for Lasers, Plasma and
Radiation Physics, Magurele, jud.Ilfov 077125, Romania. Electronic address:
bad_mariuss@yahoo.com.

Reproducible animal models of osteomyelitis close to the clinical scenario are
difficult to obtain as the animals either die shortly after inoculation of
bacteria or the bone cures itself of infection. Additional materials used as
foreign bodies offer increased chances for localized infection due to bacterial
attachment and are closer to clinical pathology. Through in vivo experimentation 
we investigated here the influence of surface area of a series of foreign bodies 
on the final outcome of the animal model, in terms of reproducibility, survival
rate and time necessary for onset of chronic disease. Stainless steel Kirschner
wire segments, stainless steel balls and cotton meshes were employed for this
purpose. The clinical, microbiological, radiological and histological results
obtained were compared with the simple case where no foreign body was used. The
follow-up period was 57days. The cotton meshes, which had the highest surface
area, were observed to provide the best outcome, with the lowest disease onset
time interval (of 1week earlier than the others), the highest survival (of 90%)
and disease reproduction rate (90%). The only clinical pattern of the mesh group 
rabbits was short lived inflammation while the other rabbits presented also some 
other clinical signs such as rhinorrheas, abscesses, rush and/or dyspnea.
Moreover, this model is the most suitable for further treatment studies, as the
cotton meshes could be easily removed after disease onset, without any
intervention on the bone. This is important, as the treatment would address the
bacteria present within the bone parts (marrow, cortex, periosteum etc.) not
those forming the biofilm.

Copyright Â© 2016 IPEM. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medengphy.2016.04.027 
PMID: 27264239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

