
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2016 Aug;54(8):2135-48. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00432-16. Epub 2016
Jun 8.

Evaluation of an Optimal Epidemiological Typing Scheme for Legionella pneumophila
with Whole-Genome Sequence Data Using Validation Guidelines.

David S(1), Mentasti M(2), Tewolde R(2), Aslett M(3), Harris SR(3), Afshar B(4), 
Underwood A(2), Fry NK(2), Parkhill J(5), Harrison TG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge,
United Kingdom Public Health England, London, United Kingdom sd12@sanger.ac.uk
parkhill@sanger.ac.uk.
(2)Public Health England, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge,
United Kingdom.
(4)Public Health England, London, United Kingdom The European Programme for
Public Health Microbiology Training, European Centre for Disease Prevention and
Control, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge,
United Kingdom sd12@sanger.ac.uk parkhill@sanger.ac.uk.

Sequence-based typing (SBT), analogous to multilocus sequence typing (MLST), is
the current "gold standard" typing method for investigation of legionellosis
outbreaks caused by Legionella pneumophila However, as common sequence types
(STs) cause many infections, some investigations remain unresolved. In this
study, various whole-genome sequencing (WGS)-based methods were evaluated
according to published guidelines, including (i) a single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP)-based method, (ii) extended MLST using different numbers of genes, (iii)
determination of gene presence or absence, and (iv) a kmer-based method. L.
pneumophila serogroup 1 isolates (n = 106) from the standard "typing panel,"
previously used by the European Society for Clinical Microbiology Study Group on 
Legionella Infections (ESGLI), were tested together with another 229 isolates.
Over 98% of isolates were considered typeable using the SNP- and kmer-based
methods. Percentages of isolates with complete extended MLST profiles ranged from
99.1% (50 genes) to 86.8% (1,455 genes), while only 41.5% produced a full profile
with the gene presence/absence scheme. Replicates demonstrated that all methods
offer 100% reproducibility. Indices of discrimination range from 0.972 (ribosomal
MLST) to 0.999 (SNP based), and all values were higher than that achieved with
SBT (0.940). Epidemiological concordance is generally inversely related to
discriminatory power. We propose that an extended MLST scheme with ∼50 genes
provides optimal epidemiological concordance while substantially improving the
discrimination offered by SBT and can be used as part of a hierarchical typing
scheme that should maintain backwards compatibility and increase discrimination
where necessary. This analysis will be useful for the ESGLI to design a scheme
that has the potential to become the new gold standard typing method for L.
pneumophila.

Copyright © 2016 David et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00432-16 
PMCID: PMC4963484
PMID: 27280420  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

