
1. J Food Prot. 2016 Jul;79(7):1174-80. doi: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-15-352.

Effect of Grapefruit Seed Extract on Thermal Inactivation of Listeria
monocytogenes during Sous-Vide Processing of Two Marinated Mexican Meat Entrées.

Valenzuela-Melendres M(1), Peña-Ramos EA(2), Juneja VK(3), Camou JP(1),
Cumplido-Barbeitia G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación en Alimentación y Desarrollo, A.C., Laboratorio de
Ciencia y Tecnología de la Carne, Carretera a la Victoria, Hermosillo, Sonora,
México CP 83304, USA.
(2)Centro de Investigación en Alimentación y Desarrollo, A.C., Laboratorio de
Ciencia y Tecnología de la Carne, Carretera a la Victoria, Hermosillo, Sonora,
México CP 83304, USA. aida@ciad.mx.
(3)U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Eastern
Regional Research Center, 600 East Mermaid Lane, Wyndmoor, Pennsylvania 19308,
USA.

D- and z-values for Listeria monocytogenes were obtained for two Mexican meat
entrées: pork meat marinated in tomatillo (green tomato) sauce (PTS) and beef
marinated in a red chili sauce (BRCS), with addition of 0, 200, and 800 ppm of
grapefruit seed extract (GSE). Meat samples inoculated with L. monocytogenes were
packaged in sterile bags, immersed in a water bath, and held at 55, 57.5, 60, and
62.5°C for different periods of time. Depending upon the temperature, D-values at
0 ppm of GSE ranged from 26.19 to 2.03 min in BRCS and 26.41 to 0.8 min in PTS.
Adding 800 ppm of GSE to BRCS thermally treated at 55 and 62.5°C significantly
decreased inactivation time by 35%. A reduction in time of 25.9, 10.6, and 40.1% 
at 55, 57.5, and 60°C, respectively, was observed in PTS with 800 ppm of GSE. The
z-values of L. monocytogenes were not significantly affected by GSE addition;
average z-values were 7.25 and 5.09°C for BRCS and PTS, respectively. Estimated
thermal lethality for a 7-D log reduction of L. monocytogenes under
commercial-size sous-vide conditions at a reference temperature of 55°C was
reached at 78 and 71 min for BRCS without and with 800 ppm of GSE, respectively. 
For PTS, 7-D reduction was attained at 69 and 61 min without and with addition of
800 ppm of GSE, respectively. Supplementing both Mexican meat entrées (BRCS and
PTS) with 800 ppm of GSE rendered L. monocytogenes cells more sensitive to the
lethal effect of heat. The results of this study will assist the retail food
industry in designing acceptance limits on critical control points pertaining to 
cooking regimes to effectively eliminate L. monocytogenes in BRCS and PTS
sous-vide processed Mexican meat entrées.

DOI: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-15-352 
PMID: 27357037  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

