
1. Epidemiol Infect. 2016 Dec;144(16):3343-3353. doi: 10.1017/S095026881600128X.
Epub 2016 Aug 18.

Current epidemiology of tetanus in England, 2001-2014.

Collins S(1), Amirthalingam G(1), Beeching NJ(2), Chand MA(3), Godbole G(3),
Ramsay ME(1), Fry NK(4), White JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunisation, Hepatitis and Blood Safety Department (IHBSD),Public Health
England,London,UK.
(2)Tropical and Infectious Disease Unit,Royal Liverpool University
Hospital;Clinical Science Group,Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine;and
National Institute for Health Research Health Protection Research Unit in
Emerging and Zoonotic Infections,University of Liverpool,Liverpool,UK.
(3)Microbiology Services,Public Health England,London,UK.
(4)Respiratory and Vaccine Preventable Bacteria Reference Unit (RVPBRU),Public
Health England,London,UK.

Public Health England conducts enhanced national surveillance of tetanus, a
potentially life-threatening vaccine-preventable disease. A standardized
questionnaire was used to ascertain clinical and demographic details of
individuals reported with clinically suspected tetanus. The 96 cases identified
between 2001 and 2014 were analysed. The average annual incidence was
0·13/million (95% confidence interval 0·10-0·16) of which 50·0% were male. Where 
reported, 70·3% of injuries occurred in the home/garden (45/64). Overall, 40·3%
(31/77) cases were in people who inject drugs (PWID), including a cluster of 22
cases during 2003-2004. Where known (n = 68), only 8·8% were age-appropriately
immunized. The overall case-fatality rate was 11·0% (9/82). All
tetanus-associated deaths occurred in adults aged >45 years, none of whom were
fully immunized. Due to the success of the childhood immunization programme,
tetanus remains a rare disease in England with the majority of cases occurring in
older unimmunized or partially immunized adults. Minor injuries in the
home/garden were the most commonly reported likely sources of infection, although
cases in PWID increased during this period. It is essential that high routine
vaccine coverage is maintained and that susceptible individuals, particularly
older adults, are protected through vaccination and are offered timely
post-exposure management following a tetanus-prone wound.

DOI: 10.1017/S095026881600128X 
PMID: 27535200 

