
1. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2016 Nov;142(11):2239-47. doi:
10.1007/s00432-016-2220-6. Epub 2016 Aug 20.

Differential somatostatin and CXCR4 chemokine receptor expression in MALT-type
lymphoma of gastric and extragastric origin.

Stollberg S(1), Kämmerer D(2), Neubauer E(1), Schulz S(1), Simonitsch-Klupp I(3),
Kiesewetter B(4), Raderer M(4), Lupp A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Jena University Hospital, Friedrich 
Schiller University Jena, Drackendorfer Str. 1, 07747, Jena, Germany.
(2)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, Zentralklinik Bad Berka, Bad
Berka, Germany.
(3)Clinical Institute for Pathology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Jena University Hospital, Friedrich 
Schiller University Jena, Drackendorfer Str. 1, 07747, Jena, Germany.
Amelie.Lupp@med.uni-jena.de.

Erratum in
    J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2016 Dec 1;:.

PURPOSE: Whereas the different somatostatin receptor (SSTR) subtypes and the
chemokine receptor CXCR4 are known to be expressed in a wide variety of human
malignancies, comprehensive data are still lacking for MALT-type lymphomas.
METHODS: Overall, 55 cases of MALT-type lymphoma of both gastric and extragastric
origin were evaluated for the SSTR subtype and CXCR4 expression by means of
immunohistochemistry using novel monoclonal rabbit antibodies. The stainings were
rated by means of the immunoreactive score and correlated with clinical data.
RESULTS: While the CXCR4 was detected in 92 % of the cases investigated, the SSTR
subtypes were much less frequently present. The SSTR5 was expressed in about 50 %
of the cases, followed by the SSTR3, the SSTR2A, the SSTR4 and the SSTR1, which
were present in 35, 27, 18 or 2 %, respectively, of the tumors only. Gastric
lymphomas displayed a significantly higher SSTR3, SSTR4 and SSTR5 expression than
extragastric tumors. A correlation between CXCR4 and Ki-67 expression was seen in
gastric lymphomas, whereas primarily in extragastric tumors SSTR5 negativity was 
associated with poor patient outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: The CXCR4 may serve as a promising target for diagnostics and
therapy of MALT-type lymphomas, while the SSTRs appear not suitable in this
respect.

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-016-2220-6 
PMID: 27544389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

