
1. J Microbiol Methods. 2017 Jul;138:12-19. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2016.09.012. Epub
2016 Sep 19.

Rapid infectious disease identification by next-generation DNA sequencing.

Ellis JE(1), Missan DS(1), Shabilla M(1), Martinez D(1), Fry SE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Fry Laboratories, L.L.C., 15720 N. Greenway-Hayden Loop STE 3, Scottsdale, AZ 
85260, United States.
(2)Fry Laboratories, L.L.C., 15720 N. Greenway-Hayden Loop STE 3, Scottsdale, AZ 
85260, United States. Electronic address: medicaldirector@frylabs.com.

Currently, there is a critical need to rapidly identify infectious organisms in
clinical samples. Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) could surmount the
deficiencies of culture-based methods; however, there are no standardized,
automated programs to process NGS data. To address this deficiency, we developed 
the Rapid Infectious Disease Identification (RIDI™) system. The system requires
minimal guidance, which reduces operator errors. The system is compatible with
the three major NGS platforms. It automatically interfaces with the sequencing
system, detects their data format, configures the analysis type, applies
appropriate quality control, and analyzes the results. Sequence information is
characterized using both the NCBI database and RIDI™ specific databases. RIDI™
was designed to identify high probability sequence matches and more divergent
matches that could represent different or novel species. We challenged the system
using defined American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) reference standards of 27
species, both individually and in varying combinations. The system was able to
rapidly detect known organisms in <12h with multi-sample throughput. The system
accurately identifies 99.5% of the DNA sequence reads at the genus-level and
75.3% at the species-level in reference standards. It has a limit of detection of
146cells/ml in simulated clinical samples, and is also able to identify the
components of polymicrobial samples with 16.9% discrepancy at the genus-level and
31.2% at the species-level. Thus, the system's effectiveness may exceed current
methods, especially in situations where culture methods could produce false
negatives or where rapid results would influence patient outcomes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mimet.2016.09.012 
PMID: 27659739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

