
1. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Nov;14(5):4099-4108. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.5758. Epub 2016 Sep 
21.

Transcriptional profile of SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells transfected by
Toxoplasma rhoptry protein 16.

Fan W(1), Chang S(1), Shan X(1), Gao D(1), Zhang SQ(1), Zhang J(2), Jiang N(2),
Ma D(2), Mao Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology and Microbiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, P.R. China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, School of 
Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, P.R. China.

Toxoplasma rhoptry protein 16 (ROP16) is crucial in the host-pathogen interaction
by acting as a virulent factor during invasion. To improve understanding of the
molecular function underlying the effect of ROP16 on host cells, the present
study analyzed the transcriptional profile of genes in the ROP16‑transfected
SH‑SY5Y human neuroblastoma cell line. The transcriptional profile of the SH‑SY5Y
human neuroblastoma cell line overexpressing ROP16 were determined by microarray 
analysis in order to determine the host neural cell response to the virulent
factor. Functional analysis was performed using the Protein Analysis Through
Evolutionary Relationships classification system. The ToppGene Suite was used to 
select candidate genes from the differentially expressed genes. A protein‑protein
interaction network was constructed using Cytoscape software according to the
interaction associations determined using the Search Tool for the Retrieval of
Interacting Genes/Proteins. Reverse transcription‑quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (RT‑qPCR) analysis of the selected genes confirmed the results of the
microarray. The results showed that 383 genes were differentially expressed in
response to ROP16 transfection, of which 138 genes were upregulated and 245 genes
were downregulated. Functional analysis indicated that the differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) were involved in several biological processes, including
developmental process, biological regulation and apoptotic process. A total of 15
candidate genes from the DEGs were screened using the ToppGene Suite. No
significant differences in expression were observed between the RT‑qPCR data and 
the microarray data. Transfection with ROP16 resulted in alterations of several
biological processes, including nervous system development, apoptosis and
transcriptional regulation. Several genes, including CXCL12, BAI1, ZIC2, RBMX,
RASSF6, MAGE‑A6 and HOX, were identified as significant DEGs. Taken together,
these results may contribute to understanding the mechanisms underlying the
functions of ROP16 and provide scope for further investigation of the
pathogenesis of Toxoplasma gondii.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2016.5758 
PMCID: PMC5101894
PMID: 27666388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

