
1. Cell Host Microbe. 2016 Oct 12;20(4):482-492. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2016.08.013.
Epub 2016 Sep 22.

Inflammation-Induced Adhesin-Receptor Interaction Provides a Fitness Advantage to
Uropathogenic E. coli during Chronic Infection.

Conover MS(1), Ruer S(2), Taganna J(2), Kalas V(1), De Greve H(2), Pinkner JS(1),
Dodson KW(1), Remaut H(3), Hultgren SJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Center for Women's Infectious Disease
Research, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(2)Structural and Molecular Microbiology, Structural Biology Research Center,
VIB, Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium; Structural Biology Brussels, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Structural and Molecular Microbiology, Structural Biology Research Center,
VIB, Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium; Structural Biology Brussels, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address:
han.remaut@vib-vub.be.
(4)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Center for Women's Infectious Disease
Research, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
Electronic address: hultgren@wusm.wustl.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2016 Dec;13(12):692-693.

Uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC) is the dominant cause of urinary tract infections,
clinically described as cystitis. UPEC express CUP pili, which are extracellular 
fibers tipped with adhesins that bind mucosal surfaces of the urinary tract. Here
we identify the role of the F9/Yde/Fml pilus for UPEC persistence in the inflamed
urothelium. The Fml adhesin FmlH binds galactose β1-3 N-acetylgalactosamine found
in core-1 and -2 O-glycans. Deletion of fmlH had no effect on UPEC virulence in
an acute mouse model of cystitis. However, FmlH provided a fitness advantage
during chronic cystitis, which is manifested as persistent bacteriuria, high
bladder bacterial burdens, and chronic inflammation. In situ binding confirmed
that FmlH bound avidly to the inflamed, but not the naive bladder. In accordance 
with its pathogenic profile, vaccination with FmlH significantly protected mice
from chronic cystitis. Thus, UPEC employ separate CUP pili to adapt to the
rapidly changing niche during bladder infection.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2016.08.013 
PMCID: PMC5294914
PMID: 27667696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

