
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2017 Feb;67:57-65. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2016.10.014. Epub 2016
Nov 1.

The inflammatory chemokine Cxcl18b exerts neutrophil-specific chemotaxis via the 
promiscuous chemokine receptor Cxcr2 in zebrafish.

Torraca V(1), Otto NA(1), Tavakoli-Tameh A(1), Meijer AH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology, Leiden University, The Netherlands.
(2)Institute of Biology, Leiden University, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
a.h.meijer@biology.leidenuniv.nl.

Cxcl18b is a chemokine found in zebrafish and in other piscine and amphibian
species. Cxcl18b is a reliable inflammatory marker; however, its function is yet 
to be elucidated. Here, we found that Cxcl18b is chemotactic towards neutrophils,
similarly to Cxcl8a/Interleukin-8, the best characterised neutrophil
chemoattractant in humans and teleosts. Like Cxcl8a, Cxcl18b-dependent
recruitment required the chemokine receptor Cxcr2, while it was unaffected by
depletion of the other two neutrophil receptors cxcr1 and cxcr4b. To visualise
cxcl18b induction, we generated a Tg(cxcl18b:eGFP) reporter line. The transgene
is induced locally upon bacterial infection with the fish pathogen Mycobacterium 
marinum, but strikingly is not directly expressed by infected cells. Instead,
cxcl18b is induced by non-phagocytic uninfected cells that compose the stroma of 
the granulomas, typical inflammatory lesions formed upon mycobacterial
infections. Together, these results suggest that Cxcl18b might be an important
contributor to neutrophil chemotaxis in the inflammatory microenvironment and
indicate that the zebrafish model could be explored to further investigate
in vivo the biological relevance of different Cxcl8-like chemokine lineages.

Copyright Â© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2016.10.014 
PMID: 27815178  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

