
1. Cancers (Basel). 2016 Nov 29;8(12). pii: E107.

Ligand Activation of TAM Family Receptors-Implications for Tumor Biology and
Therapeutic Response.

Davra V(1), Kimani SG(2), Calianese D(3), Birge RB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Rutgers New
Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103, USA. davravr@gsbs.rutgers.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Rutgers New
Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103, USA. kimanisg@njms.rutgers.edu.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Rutgers New
Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103, USA. dcc139@gsbs.rutgers.edu.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Rutgers New
Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103, USA. birgera@njms.rutgers.edu.

The TAM family of receptors (i.e., Tyro3, Axl, and Mertk), and their ligands
Growth arrest specific factor 6 (Gas6) and Protein S (Pros1) contribute to
several oncogenic processes, such as cell survival, invasion, migration,
chemo-resistance, and metastasis, whereby expression often correlates with poor
clinical outcomes. In recent years, there has been great interest in the study of
TAM receptors in cancer, stemming both from their roles as oncogenic signaling
receptors, as well as their roles in tumor immunology. As a result, several
classes of TAM inhibitors that include small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors,
monoclonal antibodies, decoy receptors, as well as novel strategies to target TAM
ligands are being developed. This paper will review the biology of TAM receptors 
and their ligands with a focus on cancer, as well as evidence-based data for the 
continued pursuit of TAM/Gas6 inhibitors in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers8120107 
PMCID: PMC5187505
PMID: 27916840 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

