
1. J Dairy Sci. 2017 Feb;100(2):1388-1407. doi: 10.3168/jds.2016-11708. Epub 2016
Dec 9.

Antimicrobial treatment of clinical mastitis in the eastern United States: The
influence of dairy farmers' mastitis management and treatment behavior and
attitudes.

Kayitsinga J(1), Schewe RL(2), Contreras GA(3), Erskine RJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Julian Samora Research Institute, Michigan State University, East Lansing
48824. Electronic address: kayitsin@msu.edu.
(2)Department of Sociology, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244.
(3)Department of Large Animal Clinical Sciences, Michigan State University, East 
Lansing 48824.

To assess both the behaviors and social variables related to antimicrobial
therapy for clinical mastitis, we sent a survey to 1,700 dairy farms in Michigan,
Pennsylvania, and Florida in January and February 2013. The survey included
questions related to 7 major areas: sociodemographic and farm characteristics,
milking proficiency, milking systems, cow environment, infected cow monitoring
and treatment, farm labor, and attitudes toward mastitis and related
antimicrobial use. The overall response rate was 41% (21% in Florida, 39% in
Michigan, and 45% in Pennsylvania). Herd size ranged from 9 to 5,800 cows. Only a
small proportion of herds frequently or always cultured milk samples for
bacteriology from cows with a high somatic cell count (17%), cows with clinical
mastitis (18%), or bulk tank milk (13%). Likewise, only 56% of herds frequently
or always maintained records of all treated cows and 49% reviewed records before 
administering mastitis treatments. Multivariate analysis determined that use of
treatment records was associated with increased likelihood of frequent use for
both intramammary (IMA) and systemic (SYA) administration of antimicrobial drugs 
for therapy of clinical mastitis. As would be expected, use of natural (organic) 
therapies was associated with decreased use of IMA, as was the respondent being a
member of an Amish community. Lower levels of education and the use of bacterins 
to control Staphylococcus aureus mastitis were also associated with decreased
IMA, whereas increased use of IMA at dry off and the belief that "bad luck" plays
a role in mastitis problems were associated with increased IMA. Use of an
internal teat sealant, the respondent being the sole proprietor, being from
Michigan, use of conductivity to measure subclinical mastitis, the respondent
placing increasing importance on decreasing antibiotic residues in cull cows, and
having financial incentives for employees linked to somatic cell count were
associated with increased use of SYA for the treatment of clinical mastitis. Use 
of sand or mattresses for bedding were associated with decreased SYA. These
findings highlight the need to improve the acceptance of practices that are
consistent with prudent antimicrobial use for the treatment of clinical mastitis 
on dairy farms. Additionally, the willingness of dairy farmers to administer
antimicrobial drugs for the treatment of clinical mastitis is associated with
other mastitis-related practices and attitudes.

The Authors. Published by the Federation of Animal Science Societies and Elsevier
Inc. on behalf of the American Dairy Science AssociationÂ®. This is an open access
article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2016-11708 
PMID: 27939551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

