
1. J Fish Dis. 2017 Jul;40(7):929-939. doi: 10.1111/jfd.12574. Epub 2016 Dec 16.

An outbreak of Shewanella putrefaciens group in wild eels Anguilla anguilla L.
favoured by hypoxic aquatic environments.

Esteve C(1), Merchán R(1), Alcaide E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiología y Ecología, Universitat de València, Valencia,
Spain.

Microbiological analyses were conducted on wild eels from the L'Albufera Lake
(Spain). A total of 174 individuals were collected in two surveys (i.e. year 2008
and autumn-winter 2014) among those caught by local fishermen into the lagoon.
The prevalence of Shewanella putrefaciens group was 1.7% in 2008 and rose above
32% in 2014. It was due to an outbreak of shewanellosis that presented a
morbidity rate of 64%. S. putrefaciens group strains were isolated as pure
cultures from the sick eels that showed white ulcers surrounded by a reddish
inflammation, damage of the mouth, extensive skin discoloration, exophthalmia,
ascites and bad odour. The S. putrefaciens group was recovered from freshwater
samples taken at the L'Albufera system, along autumn-winter 2015. Its counts
significantly increased in freshwater parallel to hypoxia and temperature rising.
Shewanellae strains were identified as S. putrefaciens and S. xiamenensis by 16S 
rRNA gene sequencing. These isolates recovered from sick eels or freshwater were 
virulent for European eel by IP challenge (LD50 106  CFU g-1 body weight). They
also caused 30-38% cumulative mortality, in European eels challenged by a 2-h
bath (107  CFU mL-1 ). These results suggest that shewanellosis could be
transmitted through water highlighting the fact that hypoxic conditions increase 
this bacterium levels in water.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.12574 
PMID: 27982438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

