
1. J Innate Immun. 2017;9(3):318-329. doi: 10.1159/000453454. Epub 2016 Dec 24.

Mycobacteria Manipulate G-Protein-Coupled Receptors to Increase Mucosal Rac1
Expression in the Lungs.

Alaridah N(1), Lutay N, Tenland E, Rönnholm A, Hallgren O, Puthia M,
Westergren-Thorsson G, Godaly G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Laboratory Medicine, Department of MIG, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden.

Mycobacterium bovis bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) is currently the only approved 
vaccine against tuberculosis (TB). BCG mimics M. tuberculosis (Mtb) in its
persistence in the body and is used as a benchmark to compare new vaccine
candidates. BCG was originally designed for mucosal vaccination, but
comprehensive knowledge about its interaction with epithelium is currently
lacking. We used primary airway epithelial cells (AECs) and a murine model to
investigate the initial events of mucosal BCG interactions. Furthermore, we
analysed the impact of the G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), CXCR1 and CXCR2, 
in this process, as these receptors were previously shown to be important during 
TB infection. BCG infection of AECs induced GPCR-dependent Rac1 up-regulation,
resulting in actin redistribution. The altered distribution of the actin
cytoskeleton involved the MAPK signalling pathway. Blocking of the CXCR1 or CXCR2
prior to infection decreased Rac1 expression, and increased epithelial
transcriptional activity and epithelial cytokine production. BCG infection did
not result in epithelial cell death as measured by p53 phosphorylation and
annexin. This study demonstrated that BCG infection of AECs manipulated the GPCRs
to suppress epithelial signalling pathways. Future vaccine strategies could thus 
be improved by targeting GPCRs.

© 2016 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000453454 
PMCID: PMC5452286
PMID: 28013312  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

