
1. Sci Total Environ. 2017 Mar 1;581-582:756-765. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.01.005. Epub 2017 Jan 9.

Effects of plant-symbiotic relationships on the living soil microbial community
and microbial necromass in a long-term agro-ecosystem.

Schmidt J(1), Fester T(2), Schulz E(3), Michalzik B(4), Buscot F(5), Gutknecht
J(6).

Author information: 
(1)UFZ - Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research, Department of Soil Ecology,
Theodor-Lieser-Str. 4, D-06120 Halle, Germany. Electronic address:
jana.schmidt@ufz.de.
(2)UFZ - Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research, Department of Environmental
Microbiology, Permoserstr. 15, D-04318 Leipzig, Germany.
(3)UFZ - Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research, Department of Soil Ecology,
Theodor-Lieser-Str. 4, D-06120 Halle, Germany.
(4)Friedrich-Schiller-University of Jena, Institute of Geography, Löbdergraben
32, D-07743 Jena, Germany.
(5)UFZ - Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research, Department of Soil Ecology,
Theodor-Lieser-Str. 4, D-06120 Halle, Germany; German Centre of Integrative
Biodiversity Research (iDiv) Halle-Jena-Leipzig, Deutscher Platz 5e, D-04103
Leipzig, Germany.
(6)UFZ - Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research, Department of Soil Ecology,
Theodor-Lieser-Str. 4, D-06120 Halle, Germany; University of Minnesota, Twin
Cities, Department of Soil, Water, and Climate, 439 Borlaug Hall, 1991 Upper
Buford Circle, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA.

We examined the impact of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and rhizobia on the living
microbial community and microbial necromass under different long-term
fertilization treatments at the long-term Static Fertilization Experiment Bad
Lauchstädt (Germany). Phospholipid fatty acids (PLFA) and amino sugars plus
muramic acid, were used as biomarkers for soil microbial bio- and necromass,
respectively, and analyzed from six treatments imposed on two crop rotations,
varying only in the inclusion/non-inclusion of a legume. Treatments included: two
levels of only farmyard manure (FYM), only mineral fertilizer (NPK), the combined
application of both fertilizer types and a non-fertilized control. PLFA profiles 
differed clearly between the investigated crop rotations and were significantly
related to labile C, mineral N, and soil pH. This emphasizes the role of carbon, 
and of mycorrhizal and rhizobial symbioses, as driver for changes in the
microbial community composition due to effects on the living conditions in soil. 
We found some evidence that legume associated symbiosis with arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi and rhizobia act as a buffer, reducing the impact of varying
inputs of mineral nutrients on the decomposer community. While our results
support former findings that living microbial populations vary within short-term 
periods and are reflective of a given crop grown in a given year, soil necromass 
composition indicates longer term changes across the two crop rotation types,
mainly shaped by fertilizer related effects on the community composition and C
turnover. However, there was some evidence that specifically the presence of a
legume, affects the soil necromass composition not only over the whole crop
rotation but even in the short-term.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.01.005 
PMID: 28082056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

