
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Feb 1;7:41381. doi: 10.1038/srep41381.

Altered expression of miR-181a and miR-146a does not change the expression of
surface NCRs in human NK cells.

Rady M(1), Watzl C(2), Claus M(2), Khorshid O(3), Mahran L(4), Abou-Aisha K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Immunology Department, German University in Cairo (GUC), New 
Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Immunology Department, Leibniz Research Center for Working Environment and
Human Factors (IfADo), Dortmund, Germany.
(3)Medical Oncology Department, National Cancer Institute (NCI), Cairo, Egypt.
(4)Pharmacology and Toxicology Department, German University in Cairo (GUC), New 
Cairo, Egypt.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play an important role in regulating gene expression and
immune responses. Of interest, miR-181a and miR-146a are key players in
regulating immune responses and are among the most abundant miRNAs expressed in
NK cells. Bioinformatically, we predicted miR-181a to regulate the expression of 
the natural cytotoxicity receptor NCR2 by seeded interaction with the
3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR). Whereas, miR-146a expression was not
significantly different (P = 0.7361), miR-181a expression was, on average 10-fold
lower in NK cells from breast cancer patients compared to normal subjects;
P < 0.0001. Surface expression of NCR2 was detected in NK cells from breast
cancer patients (P = 0.0384). While cytokine receptor-induced NK cell activation 
triggered overexpression of miR-146a when stimulated with IL-2 (P = 0.0039),
IL-15 (P = 0.0078), and IL-12/IL-18 (P = 0.0072), expression of miR-181a was not 
affected. Overexpression or knockdown of miR-181a or miR-146a in primary cultured
human NK cells did not affect the level of expression of any of the three NCRs;
NCR1, NCR2 or NCR3 or NK cell cytotoxicity. Expression of miR-181a and miR-146a
did not correlate to the expression of the NCRs in NK cells from breast cancer
patients or cytokine-stimulated NK cells from healthy subjects.

DOI: 10.1038/srep41381 
PMCID: PMC5286401
PMID: 28145491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interests.

