
1. Curr Pharm Des. 2017;23(21):3164-3196. doi: 10.2174/1381612823666170214115048.

Mur Ligase Inhibitors as Anti-bacterials: A Comprehensive Review.

Sangshetti JN(1), Joshi SS(2), Patil RH(3), Moloney MG(4), Shinde DB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Y. B. Chavan College of Pharmacy, Dr Rafiq Zakaria Campus, Rauza Baugh,
Aurangabad-431001. India.
(2)Yash Institute of Pharmacy, South City, Waluj Road, Aurangabad-431133. India.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, SavitribaiPhule University Pune, Pune-411007.
India.
(4)Chemistry Research Laboratory, 12 Mansfield Road, Oxford, OX1 3TA. United
Kingdom.
(5)Shivaji University, Vidyanagar, Kolhapur-416004. India.

Exploring a new target for antibacterial drug discovery has gained much attention
because of the emergence of Multidrug Resistance (MDR) strains of bacteria. To
overcome this problem the development of novel antibacterial was considered as
highest priority task and was one of the biggest challenge since multiple factors
were involved. The bacterial peptidoglycan biosynthetic pathway has been well
documented in the last few years and has been found to be imperative source for
the development of novel antibacterial agents with high target specificity as
they are essential for bacterial survival and have no homologs in humans. We have
therefore reviewed the process of peptidoglycan biosynthesis which involves
various steps like formation of UDP-Nacetylglucosamine (GlcNAc),
UDP-N-acetylmuramic acid (MurNAc) and lipid intermediates (Lipid I and Lipid II) 
which are controlled by various enzymes like GlmS, GlmM, GlmU enzyme, followed by
Mur Ligases (MurAMurF) and finally by MraY and MurG respectively. These four
amide ligases MurC-MurF can be used as the source for the development of novel
multi-target antibacterial agents as they shared and conserved amino acid
regions, catalytic mechanisms and structural features. This review begins with
the need for novel antibacterial agents and challenges in their development even 
after the development of bacterial genomic studies. An overview of the
peptidoglycan monomer formation, as a source of disparity in this process is
presented, followed by detailed discussion of structural and functional aspects
of all Mur enzymes and different chemical classes of their inhibitors along with 
their SAR studies and inhibitory potential. This review finally emphasizes on
different patents and novel Mur inhibitors in the development phase.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1381612823666170214115048 
PMID: 28201974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

