
1. Braz J Microbiol. 2017 Jul - Sep;48(3):442-450. doi: 10.1016/j.bjm.2016.12.011.
Epub 2017 Feb 21.

Development of a novel compound microbial agent for degradation of kitchen waste.

Zhao K(1), Xu R(1), Zhang Y(1), Tang H(1), Zhou C(2), Cao A(2), Zhao G(3), Guo
H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Forestry University, College of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology,
Beijing, China.
(2)Chinese Academy of Sciences, Research Center for Eco-environmental Sciences,
State Key Laboratory of Urban and Regional Ecology, Beijing, China.
(3)Beijing Forestry University, College of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology,
Beijing, China. Electronic address: zhaogz@im.ac.cn.
(4)Beijing Forestry University, College of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology,
Beijing, China. Electronic address: guohuiya@126.com.

Large quantities of kitchen waste are produced in modern society and its disposal
poses serious environmental and social problems. The aim of this study was to
isolate degradative strains from kitchen waste and to develop a novel and
effective microbial agent. One hundred and four strains were isolated from
kitchen waste and the 84 dominant strains were used to inoculate protein-,
starch-, fat- and cellulose-containing media for detecting their degradability.
Twelve dominant strains of various species with high degradability (eight
bacteria, one actinomycetes and three fungi) were selected to develop a compound 
microbial agent "YH" and five strains of these species including H7
(Brevibacterium epidermidis), A3 (Paenibacillus polymyxa), E3 (Aspergillus
japonicus), F9 (Aspergillus versicolor) and A5 (Penicillium digitatum), were new 
for kitchen waste degradation. YH was compared with three commercial microbial
agents-"Tiangeng" (TG), "Yilezai" (YLZ) and Effective Microorganisms (EM), by
their effects on reduction, maturity and deodorization. The results showed that
YH exerted the greatest efficacy on mass loss which decreased about 65.87% after 
14 days. The agent inhibited NH3 and H2S emissions significantly during
composting process. The concentration of NH3 decreased from 7.1 to 3.2ppm and
that of H2S reduced from 0.7 to 0.2ppm. Moreover, E4/E6 (Extinction
value460nm/Extinction value665nm) of YH decreased from 2.51 to 1.31, which meant 
YH had an obvious maturity effect. These results highlighted the potential
application of YH in composting kitchen waste.

Copyright Â© 2017 Sociedade Brasileira de Microbiologia. Published by Elsevier
Editora Ltda. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bjm.2016.12.011 
PMCID: PMC5498451
PMID: 28279600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

