
1. J Environ Manage. 2017 Jul 1;196:161-167. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.03.003.
Epub 2017 Mar 9.

Development and validation of a bacteria-based index of biotic integrity for
assessing the ecological status of urban rivers: A case study of Qinhuai River
basin in Nanjing, China.

Li J(1), Li Y(2), Qian B(3), Niu L(1), Zhang W(1), Cai W(1), Wu H(1), Wang P(1), 
Wang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Integrated Regulation and Resource
Development on Shallow Lakes, College of Environment, Hohai University, Nanjing, 
210098, PR China.
(2)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Integrated Regulation and Resource
Development on Shallow Lakes, College of Environment, Hohai University, Nanjing, 
210098, PR China. Electronic address: envly@hhu.edu.cn.
(3)Hydrology Bureau of Changjiang Water Resources Commission, Wuhan, Hubei,
430010, PR China.

With the increasing human disturbance to urban rivers, the extinction and
biodiversity losses of some macroorganism species decreased the accuracy of
bioassessment. In this study, a novel index of biotic integrity based on bacteria
(Ba-IBI) was first developed for Qinhuai River in Nanjing city, China. Thirty-two
biofilm samples were collected along the river bank and the bacterial communities
were identified by high-throughput sequencing. By the range, responsive, and
redundancy tests, four core metrics were selected from the dataset of 78
candidate metrics, including Pielou's evenness index, proportion of
Paenibacillus, proportion of OTUs tolerant to organic pollution and proportion of
Nitrosomonas. The results showed that the Ba-IBI was able to effectively
discriminate different impaired site groups, and had a good correlation with the 
index of water quality (r = 0.79, p < 0.01) and the qualitative habitat
evaluation index (r = 0.51, p < 0.01). Moreover, the Ba-IBI was negatively
correlated with the number of population within a 1 km buffer (r = -0.71,
p < 0.01). Application of the index showed that most of the sites were in the
poor or bad class in the river. Our study revealed that the Ba-IBI is an
effective and reliable approach for assessing the ecological status of Qinhuai
River basin, which can complement the existing ecological assessment approaches
for urban rivers. Meanwhile, repeted surveys and field validations are still
needed to further improve the applicability of the index in future studies.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.03.003 
PMID: 28284134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

