
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2017 Aug;73:46-51. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2017.03.010. Epub 2017
Mar 14.

Early apoptosis of monocytes induced by Helicobacter pylori infection through
multiple pathways.

Zhang Y(1), Sun H(1), Zhao H(1), Chen X(1), Li J(1), Li B(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, 264003, 
China.
(2)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, 264003, 
China. Electronic address: liboqing@bzmc.edu.cn.

Only a small percentage of people infected with Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori)
will develop overt chronic gastric diseases. To understand the pathological
mechanism, the action of H. pylori on monocyte apoptosis was detected. H. pylori 
co-culturing with peripheral blood monocytes, THP-1 or U937 cells result in early
apoptosis at 6, 12, and 24 h after infection. The phosphorylated Bad and JNK were
increased, and Bcl-2 was declined at 6, 12, and 24 h in peripheral blood
monocytes after H. pylori infection. The phosphorylated Akt was augmented at 6
and 12 h post-infection. A slow apoptotic response was induced by H. pylori via
Bad and Bcl-2 regulators, activated caspase-8 and caspase-9, and JNK at 24 h in
THP-1 cells. Meanwhile, only Bad and JNK were involved in regulating U937 cells
apoptosis at 24 h after infection. These results supported a novel mechanism of
H. pylori escaping from monocytes by upregulation of early apoptosis and
inhibition of late apoptosis. The differences among the three cells may reveal
why H. pylori-derived disease occurs in relatively few people and provide a
pathological mechanism whereby a treatment for H. pylori-derived disease may be
developed.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2017.03.010 
PMID: 28302498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

