
1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2017 Jun;66(6):799-809. doi:
10.1007/s00262-017-1980-4. Epub 2017 Mar 17.

Lipoteichoic acids from Staphylococcus aureus stimulate proliferation of human
non-small-cell lung cancer cells in vitro.

Hattar K(1), Reinert CP(1), Sibelius U(1), GÃ¶kyildirim MY(1), Subtil FSB(2),
Wilhelm J(3), Eul B(1), Dahlem G(1), Grimminger F(1), Seeger W(3)(4), Grandel
U(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine IV/V, University of Giessen and Marburg Lung
Center (UGMLC), Klinikstrasse 33, Giessen, Germany.
(2)Department of Radiotherapy and Radiooncology, Philipps-University, Marburg,
Germany.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine II, University of Giessen and Marburg Lung
Center (UGMLC), Giessen, Germany.
(4)Max-Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine IV/V, University of Giessen and Marburg Lung
Center (UGMLC), Klinikstrasse 33, Giessen, Germany.
ulrich.grandel@innere.med.uni-giessen.de.
(6)Asklepios Klinik Lich, Lich, Germany.
ulrich.grandel@innere.med.uni-giessen.de.

Pulmonary infections are frequent complications in lung cancer and may worsen its
outcome and survival. Inflammatory mediators are suspected to promote tumor
growth in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Hence, bacterial pathogens may
affect lung cancer growth by activation of inflammatory signalling. Against this 
background, we investigated the effect of purified lipoteichoic acids (LTA) of
Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) on cellular proliferation and liberation of
interleukin (IL)-8 in the NSCLC cell lines A549 and H226. A549 as well as H226
cells constitutively expressed TLR-2 mRNA. Even in low concentrations, LTA
induced a prominent increase in cellular proliferation of A549 cells as
quantified by automatic cell counting. In parallel, metabolic activity of A549
cells was enhanced. The increase in proliferation was accompanied by an increase 
in IL-8 mRNA expression and a dose- and time-dependent release of IL-8. Cellular 
proliferation as well as the release of IL-8 was dependent on specific ligation
of TLR-2. Interestingly, targeting IL-8 by neutralizing antibodies completely
abolished the LTA-induced proliferation of A549 cells. The pro-proliferative
effect of LTA could also be reproduced in the squamous NSCLC cell line H226. In
summary, LTA of S. aureus induced proliferation of NSCLC cell lines of adeno- and
squamous cell carcinoma origin. Ligation of TLR-2 followed by auto- or paracrine 
signalling by endogenously synthesized IL-8 is centrally involved in LTA-induced 
tumor cell proliferation. Therefore, pulmonary infections may exert a direct
pro-proliferative effect on lung cancer growth.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-017-1980-4 
PMCID: PMC5445152
PMID: 28314957  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

