
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2017 May 31;83(12). pii: e00442-17. doi:
10.1128/AEM.00442-17. Print 2017 Jun 15.

Acid Evolution of Escherichia coli K-12 Eliminates Amino Acid Decarboxylases and 
Reregulates Catabolism.

He A(1), Penix SR(1), Basting PJ(1), Griffith JM(1), Creamer KE(1), Camperchioli 
D(1), Clark MW(1), Gonzales AS(1), Chávez Erazo JS(1), George NS(2), Bhagwat
AA(2), Slonczewski JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Kenyon College, Gambier, Ohio, USA.
(2)Environmental Microbiology and Food Safety Laboratory, Beltsville Agricultural
Research Center, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Beltsville, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Kenyon College, Gambier, Ohio, USA
slonczewski@kenyon.edu.

Acid-adapted strains of Escherichia coli K-12 W3110 were obtained by serial
culture in medium buffered at pH 4.6 (M. M. Harden, A. He, K. Creamer, M. W.
Clark, I. Hamdallah, K. A. Martinez, R. L. Kresslein, S. P. Bush, and J. L.
Slonczewski, Appl Environ Microbiol 81:1932-1941, 2015,
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.03494-14). Revised genomic analysis of these strains 
revealed insertion sequence (IS)-driven insertions and deletions that knocked out
regulators CadC (acid induction of lysine decarboxylase), GadX (acid induction of
glutamate decarboxylase), and FNR (anaerobic regulator). Each acid-evolved strain
showed loss of one or more amino acid decarboxylase systems, which normally help 
neutralize external acid (pH 5 to 6) and increase survival in extreme acid (pH
2). Strains from populations B11, H9, and F11 had an IS5 insertion or IS-mediated
deletion in cadC, while population B11 had a point mutation affecting the
arginine activator adiY The cadC and adiY mutants failed to neutralize acid in
the presence of exogenous lysine or arginine. In strain B11-1, reversion of an
rpoC (RNA polymerase) mutation partly restored arginine-dependent neutralization.
All eight strains showed deletion or downregulation of the Gad acid fitness
island. Strains with the Gad deletion lost the ability to produce GABA
(gamma-aminobutyric acid) and failed to survive extreme acid. Transcriptome
sequencing (RNA-seq) of strain B11-1 showed upregulated genes for catabolism of
diverse substrates but downregulated acid stress genes (the biofilm regulator
ariR, yhiM, and Gad). Other strains showed downregulation of H2 consumption
mediated by hydrogenases (hya and hyb) which release acid. Strains F9-2 and F9-3 
had a deletion of fnr and showed downregulation of FNR-dependent genes (dmsABC,
frdABCD, hybABO, nikABCDE, and nrfAC). Overall, strains that had evolved in
buffered acid showed loss or downregulation of systems that neutralize unbuffered
acid and showed altered regulation of catabolism.IMPORTANCE Experimental
evolution of an enteric bacterium under a narrow buffered range of acid pH leads 
to loss of genes that enhance fitness above or below the buffered pH range,
including loss of enzymes that may raise external pH in the absence of buffer.
Prominent modes of evolutionary change involve IS-mediated insertions and
deletions that knock out key regulators. Over generations of acid stress,
catabolism undergoes reregulation in ways that differ for each evolving strain.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00442-17 
PMCID: PMC5452808
PMID: 28389540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

