
1. J Food Prot. 2017 Jun;80(6):963-968. doi: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-16-546.

Multilocus Genetic Characterization of Lactobacillus fermentum Isolated from
Ready-to-Eat Canned Food.

Sulaiman IM(1), Jacobs E(1), Simpson S(1), Kerdahi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Southeast Regional Laboratory, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 60 Eighth
Street N.E., Atlanta, Georgia 30309, USA.

The primary mission of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration is to enforce the
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and regulate food, drug, and cosmetic products.
Thus, this agency monitors the presence of pathogenic microorganisms in these
products, including canned foods, as one of the regulatory action criteria and
also ensures that these products are safe for human consumption. This study was
carried out to investigate the effectiveness of pathogen control and integrity of
ready-to-eat canned food containing Black Bean Corn Poblano Salsa. A total of
nine unopened and recalled canned glass jars from the same lot were examined
initially by conventional microbiologic protocols that involved a two-step
enrichment, followed by streaking on selective agar plates, for the presence of
gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Of the eight subsamples examined for
each sample, all subsamples of one of the containers were found positive for the 
presence of slow-growing rod-shaped, gram-positive, facultative anaerobic
bacteria. The recovered isolates were subsequently sequenced at rRNA and gyrB
loci. Afterward, multilocus sequence typing (MLST) was performed characterizing
11 additional known MLST loci (clpX, dnaA, dnaK, groEL, murC, murE, pepX, pyrG,
recA, rpoB, and uvrC). Analyses of the nucleotide sequences of rRNA, gyrB, and 11
MLST loci confirmed these gram-positive bacteria recovered from canned food to be
Lactobacillus fermentum . Thus, the DNA sequencing of housekeeping MLST genes can
provide species identification of L. fermentum and can be used in the canned food
monitoring program of public health importance.

DOI: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-16-546 
PMID: 28467184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

