
1. Nutr Res. 2017 May;41:36-46. doi: 10.1016/j.nutres.2017.04.001. Epub 2017 Apr 18.

Secretion metabolites of probiotic yeast, Pichia kudriavzevii AS-12, induces
apoptosis pathways in human colorectal cancer cell lines.

Saber A(1), Alipour B(2), Faghfoori Z(3), Mousavi Jam A(4), Yari Khosroushahi
A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Center, Faculty of Nutrition, Tabriz University of
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran; Student Research Committee, Faculty of Nutrition,
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran; Department of Biochemistry
and Diet Therapy, Faculty of Nutrition, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences,
Tabriz, Iran.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Diet Therapy, Faculty of Nutrition, Tabriz
University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran; Nutrition Research Center, Faculty 
of Nutrition, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran. Electronic
address: alipourb@tbzmed.ac.ir.
(3)Semnan University of Medical Sciences, Semnan, Iran.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Diet Therapy, Faculty of Nutrition, Tabriz
University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran; Nutrition Research Center, Faculty 
of Nutrition, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(5)Drug Applied Research Center, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tabriz University of
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran; Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy,
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran. Electronic address:
Yarikhosroushahia@tbzmed.ac.ir.

There is a common agreement on the important role of the gastrointestinal
microbiota in the etiology of cancer. Benign probiotic yeast strains are able to 
ameliorate intestinal microbiota and regulate the host metabolism, physiology,
and immune system through anti-inflammatory, antiproliferative, and anticancer
effects. We hypothesized that Pichia kudriavzevii AS-12 secretion metabolites
possess anticancer activity on human colorectal cancer cells (HT-29, Caco-2) via 
inhibiting growth and inducing apoptosis. This study aimed to assess the
anticancer effect of P. kudriavzevii AS-12 secretion metabolites and the
underlying mechanisms. The cytotoxicity evaluations were performed via
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazole-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay;
4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole staining; and FACS-flow cytometry tests. Also, the 
effects of P. kudriavzevii AS-12 secretion metabolites on the expression level of
6 important genes (BAD, Bcl-2, Caspase-3, Caspase-8, Caspase-9 and Fas-R)
involved in the extrinsic and intrinsic apoptosis pathways were studied by
real-time polymerase chain reaction method. P. kudriavzevii AS-12 secretion
metabolites showed significant (P < .0001) cytotoxic effects on HT-29 cells
(57.5%) and Caco-2 (32.5%) compared to KDR/293 normal cells (25%). Moreover, the 
cytotoxic effects of examined yeast supernatant on HT-29 cells were comparable
with 5-fluorouracil, as a positive control (57.5% versus 62.2% respectively).
Flow cytometric results showed that the induction of apoptosis is the main
mechanism of the anticancer effects. Also, according to the reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction results, the expression level of proapoptotic genes
(BAD, Caspase-3, Caspase-8, Caspase-9, and Fas-R) in treated HT-29 and Caco-2
cells was higher than untreated and normal cells, whereas the antiapoptotic gene 
(Bcl-2) was downregulated. P. kudriavzevii AS-12 secretion metabolites exert its 
anticancer effects by inhibiting cell proliferation and inducing intrinsic and
extrinsic apoptosis in colon cancer cells.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nutres.2017.04.001 
PMID: 28477945  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

