
1. Lipids. 2017 Jun;52(6):549-558. doi: 10.1007/s11745-017-4257-y. Epub 2017 May 10.

Dietary PUFA Increase Apoptosis in Stomach of Patients with Dyspeptic Symptoms
and Infected with H. pylori.

Sharifi R(1), Nouri M(2), Eidi A(1), Noormohammadi Z(1), Dolatkhah H(3),
Shirmohammadi M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Laboratories Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, East-Azarbaijan, Iran.
nourimd@yahoo.com.
(3)Liver and Gastrointestinal Disease Research Center, Tabriz University of
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, East-Azarbaijan, Iran.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, East-Azarbaijan, Iran.

Drug-resistant strains of Helicobacter pylori and poor treatment response are the
main reasons for the failure in eradicating it in patients. Polyunsaturated fatty
acids (PUFA) have an inhibitory effect on bacterial growth. The aim of this study
was to investigate the effect of PUFA in combination with standard triple therapy
on apoptosis in H. pylori infected subjects with dyspeptic symptoms. This study
was a double-blind clinical trial in which 34 H. pylori infected subjects with
dyspeptic symptoms were randomly divided into two groups of 17 patients. The
control group received standard triple therapy (amoxicillin, clarithromycin and
omeprazole) and the experimental group received the standard therapy and PUFA for
two weeks. Gene expression levels of caspase-3, BCL-2 and Bad proteins were
studied with real-time PCR, while protein levels were quantified in frozen
sections and using immunohistochemistry. Compared with the control group, a
significant increase (p < 0.01) was observed in the expression of caspase-3 and
Bad genes and a significant reduction (p < 0.05) in the expression of Bcl-2 gene.
The protein level of active caspase-3 and Bad protein was significantly increased
and the level of Bcl-2 protein was significantly decreased (p < 0.05). The
results of this study show that oral administration of PUFA in combination with
the standard triple therapy increased apoptosis in H. pylori-infected patients
with dyspeptic symptoms. This increase in apoptosis may partly reduce drug
resistance in these patients. Our results suggest inclusion of a dietary PUFA
containing fatty acid supplement may improve treatment of patients that are
refractory to the standard triple therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s11745-017-4257-y 
PMID: 28493185  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

