
1. Connect Tissue Res. 1988;18(3):157-74.

Isolation of cDNA clones and genomic DNA clones of beta-subunit of chicken prolyl
4-hydroxylase.

Kao WW(1), Nakazawa M, Aida T, Everson WV, Kao CW, Seyer JM, Hughes SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Ohio 45267.

Prolyl 4-hydroxylase (EC 1.14.11.2) is a key enzyme in collagen biosynthesis. The
active enzyme is a tetramer composed of two pairs of non-identical subunits,
alpha and beta. Sheep antiserum directed against chicken proly 4-hydroxylase was 
initially used to screen two cDNA expression libraries. The cDNA was prepared
from chicken smooth muscle mRNA and cloned into the plasmids pUC8- and pUC9.
Antibodies identified twenty-five clones among the approximately 2 x 10(5) clones
in the libraries. Ten clones were isolated pure and used in the subsequent
analysis. Monospecific antibodies directed against beta subunit of the enzyme
were used in Western-blot analyses of extracts of bacteria carrying the cDNA
clones. The results indicated that the clone CPH 9-10B encodes a portion of
beta-subunit. The cDNA from CPH 9-10B was used to screen another cDNA library
prepared from mRNA from chicken skeletal muscle. Several overlapping clones were 
isolated. Together the cDNAs correspond to 2.4 kb which is the same as the
corresponding mRNA. Three regions of the amino acid sequence deduced from the
cDNA sequence matched with that of the NH2-terminus of beta-subunit and two CNBr 
peptides derived from beta-subunit. The cDNA of CPH 9-10B was also used to screen
a genomic DNA library constructed with lambda EMBL-3. Two overlapping genomic
clones lambda gCPH beta-22 and beta-50 were isolated and characterized by
restriction enzyme analysis. The results indicate that lambda gCPH beta-22
contains the portion of the beta-subunit gene that is transcribed into the 5'
portion of beta-subunit mRNA, whereas lambda gCPH beta-50 contains the 3'
portion.

DOI: 10.3109/03008208809016805 
PMID: 2851411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

