
1. Cell Death Dis. 2017 Jul 13;8(7):e2932. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2017.319.

An autocrine inflammatory forward-feedback loop after chemotherapy withdrawal
facilitates the repopulation of drug-resistant breast cancer cells.

Jia D(1)(2)(3), Li L(1)(2)(3), Andrew S(1)(2)(3), Allan D(1)(4), Li X(1)(5), Lee 
J(1), Ji G(2)(3), Yao Z(1)(2)(3)(6), Gadde S(1), Figeys D(1)(2)(3)(6), Wang
L(1)(2)(3)(4)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(2)China-Canada Centre of Research for Digestive Diseases, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada.
(3)Institute of Digestive Diseases, Longhua Hospital, Shanghai University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.
(5)Centre for Biologics Evaluation, Biologics and Genetic Therapies Directorate, 
Health Canada Sir Frederick G. Banting Research Centre, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada.

Stromal cells, infiltrating immune cells, paracrine factors and extracellular
matrix have been extensively studied in cancers. However, autocrine factors
produced by tumor cells and communications between autocrine factors and
intracellular signaling pathways in the development of drug resistance, cancer
stem-like cells (CSCs) and tumorigenesis have not been well investigated, and the
precise mechanism and tangible approaches remain elusive. Here we reveal a new
mechanism by which cytokines produced by breast cancer cells after chemotherapy
withdrawal activate both Wnt/β-catenin and NF-κB pathways, which in turn further 
promote breast cancer cells to produce and secrete cytokines, forming an
autocrine inflammatory forward-feedback loop to facilitate the enrichment of
drug-resistant breast cancer cells and/or CSCs. Such an unexpected autocrine
forward-feedback loop and CSC enrichment can be effectively blocked by inhibition
of Wnt/β-catenin and NF-κB signaling. It can also be diminished by
IL8-neutralizing antibody or blockade of IL8 receptors CXCR1/2 with reparixin.
Administration of reparixin after chemotherapy withdrawal effectively attenuates 
tumor masses in a human xenograft model and abolishes paclitaxel-enriched CSCs in
the secondary transplantation. These results are partially supported by the
latest clinical data set. Breast cancer patients treated with chemotherapeutic
drugs exhibited poor survival rate (66.7 vs 282.8 months, P=0.00071) and shorter 
disease-free survival time if their tumor samples expressed high level of IL8,
CXCR1, CXCR2 genes and Wnt target genes. Taken together, this study provides new 
insights into the communication between autocrine niches and signaling pathways
in the development of chemotherapy resistance and CSCs; it also offers a tangible
approach in breast cancer treatment.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2017.319 
PMCID: PMC5550865
PMID: 28703802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

