
1. J Immunol. 2017 Sep 1;199(5):1660-1671. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1700129. Epub 2017 
Jul 24.

CXCL1 and CXCL2 Regulate NLRP3 Inflammasome Activation via G-Protein-Coupled
Receptor CXCR2.

Boro M(1), Balaji KN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore 560012, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore 560012, India balaji@mcbl.iisc.ernet.in.

Inflammation is an extensively concerted process that confers protection to the
host encountering immune insult. The major inflammatory mediators include IL-1
family members, such as IL-1β, and the functional activation of such molecules is
arbitrated by their regulated cleavage brought about by components of a
multiprotein complex called inflammasome. In this context, NLR family pyrin
domain containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome activation often acts as a rate-limiting
step in regulating critical cell-fate decisions in various inflammatory
scenarios. In this study, we identify the G-protein-coupled receptor CXCR2
(recognizing chemokines CXCL1 and CXCL2) as another arm feeding into the
regulated activation of NLRP3 inflammasome in macrophages. We demonstrate that in
vivo blocking of CXCL1 and CXCL2 can significantly reduce the Mycobacterium
tuberculosis-induced bioactive IL-1β production. Further, CXCL1 could amplify the
inflammasome activation in in vivo mouse models of carrageenan-induced
inflammation in footpads and air pouches. The mechanistic insights revealed
CXCR2-driven protein kinase C μ-dependent integrin-linked kinase to be essential 
for CXCL1-mediated activation of NLRP3 inflammasome. Blocking the activity of
integrin-linked kinase or protein kinase C μ either by small interfering
RNA-mediated knockdown or pharmacological inhibitor compromised inflammasome
activation and subsequent production of bioactive IL-1β. Taken together, our
study demonstrates CXCR2-driven activation of NLRP3 inflammasome in macrophages
and indicates a potential host-directed therapeutic target to limit the damaging 
inflammation associated with overt production of proinflammatory IL-1β.

Copyright © 2017 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1700129 
PMID: 28739876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

