
1. Acta Biochim Pol. 2017;64(3):459-464. doi: 10.18388/abp.2017_1496. Epub 2017 Aug 
9.

Lactic acid bacteria stress response to preservation processes in the beverage
and juice industry.

Bucka-Kolendo J(1), Sokołowska B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fruit and Vegetable Products Technology, prof. Wacław Dąbrowski 
Institute of Agricultural and Food Biotechnology, Warsaw, Poland.

In this review we summarize stress factors that affect the lactic acid bacteria
(LAB) and cause different molecular stress responses. LAB belong to a group of
bacteria that is very widespread in food and beverages. They are present, and
desired, in fermented products like yogurts, cheese, vegetables, meat or wine. In
most of them, LAB are providing positive sensory and nutritive features. However,
as harmless and desired microbes in one product, LAB can cause spoilage and a bad
taste of others, especially in juices and beverages. LAB are resistant to many
stress factors which allows them to survive in harsh environments. The most
common stress factors they have to deal with are: heat, cold, acidity, NaCl and
high hydrostatic pressure (HHP). Their ability to survive depends on their skills
to cope with stress factors. Under stress conditions, LAB activate mechanisms
that allow them to adjust to the new conditions, which can influence their
viability and technological properties. This ability to adapt to different stress
conditions may come from the cross-protection systems they have, as resistance to
one factor may help them to deal with the other stress effectors. LAB are highly 
valuable for the food industry and that is why it is important to understand
their stress response mechanisms.

DOI: 10.18388/abp.2017_1496 
PMID: 28787467  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

