
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2017 Oct 24;61(11). pii: e01111-17. doi:
10.1128/AAC.01111-17. Print 2017 Nov.

When Good Bugs Go Bad: Epidemiology and Antimicrobial Resistance Profiles of
Corynebacterium striatum, an Emerging Multidrug-Resistant, Opportunistic
Pathogen.

McMullen AR(1), Anderson N(1), Wallace MA(1), Shupe A(1), Burnham CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University in St. Louis
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University in St. Louis
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA cburnham@path.wustl.edu.

Infections with Corynebacterium striatum have been described in the literature
over the last 2 decades, with the majority being bacteremia, central line
infections, and occasionally, endocarditis. In recent years, the frequency of C. 
striatum infections appears to be increasing; a factor likely contributing to
this is the increased ease and accuracy of the identification of Corynebacterium 
spp., including C. striatum, from clinical cultures. The objective of this study 
was to retrospectively characterize C. striatum isolates recovered from specimens
submitted as part of routine patient care at a 1,250-bed, tertiary-care academic 
medical center. Multiple strain types were recovered, as demonstrated by
repetitive-sequence-based PCR. Most of the strains of C. striatum characterized
were resistant to antimicrobials commonly used to treat Gram-positive organisms, 
such as penicillin, ceftriaxone, meropenem, clindamycin, and tetracycline. The
MIC50 for ceftaroline was >32 μg/ml. Although there are no interpretive criteria 
for susceptibility with telavancin, it appeared to have potent in vitro efficacy 
against this species, with MIC50 and MIC90 values of 0.064 and 0.125 μg/ml,
respectively. Finally, as previously reported in case studies, we demonstrated
rapid in vitro development of daptomycin resistance in 100% of the isolates
tested (n = 50), indicating that caution should be exhibited when using
daptomycin for the treatment of C. striatum infections. C. striatum is an
emerging, multidrug-resistant pathogen that can be associated with a variety of
infection types.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01111-17 
PMCID: PMC5655097
PMID: 28848008  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

