
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2017 Nov;70:228-239. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2017.08.029. Epub
2017 Sep 9.

Molecular characterization and expression analysis of the large yellow croaker
(Larimichthys crocea) chemokine receptors CXCR2, CXCR3, and CXCR4 after bacterial
and poly I:C challenge.

Liu X(1), Kang L(1), Liu W(1), Lou B(2), Wu C(1), Jiang L(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Engineering Research Center of Marine Facilities Aquaculture, College
of Marine Science, Zhejiang Ocean University, No. 1 Haida South Road, Dinghai
District, Zhoushan, Zhejiang Province, 316022, China.
(2)Marine Fishery Institute of Zhejiang Province, Key Laboratory of Mariculturre 
and Enhancement of Zhejiang Province, Zhoushan, Zhejiang Province, 316021, China.
(3)National Engineering Research Center of Marine Facilities Aquaculture, College
of Marine Science, Zhejiang Ocean University, No. 1 Haida South Road, Dinghai
District, Zhoushan, Zhejiang Province, 316022, China. Electronic address:
florencejiang@126.com.

The large yellow croaker (Larimichthys crocea) has a well-developed innate immune
system. We studied a component of this system, chemokine receptor CXCR family. In
this study, we report the full-length open reading frames, as well as the
identification and characterization of the chemokine receptor genes CXCR2
(LycCXCR2), CXCR3 (LycCXCR3), and CXCR4 (LycCXCR4) of large yellow croaker. We
report that LycCXCR3 and LycCXCR4 are evolving neutrally according to PAML
analyses. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis revealed that CXCR transcripts were
expressed in all examined tissues. The expression of chemokine receptors
LycCXCR2, LycCXCR3, and LycCXCR4 was elevated in the kidney, spleen, and
particularly the liver of the large yellow croaker after challenge with Vibrio
anguillarum and polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly I:C). These results suggest
that LycCXCR2, LycCXCR3, and LycCXCR4 may be important immune-related genes,
playing crucial roles in immune defence against bacterial infection.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2017.08.029 
PMID: 28870858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

