
1. Tierarztl Prax Ausg K Kleintiere Heimtiere. 2017 Oct 17;45(5):301-307. doi:
10.15654/TPK-170065. Epub 2017 Sep 13.

[Occurrence of Ehrlichia canis in dogs living in Germany and comparison of direct
and indirect diagnostic methods].

[Article in German]

Csokai J(1), Klas EM, Heusinger A, Müller E.

Author information: 
(1)Jacqueline Csokai, LABOKLIN - Labor für klinische Diagnostik GmbH & Co. KG,
Steubenstraße 4, 97688 Bad Kissingen, E-Mail: csokai@laboklin.de.

OBJECTIVE: To study the occurrence of Ehrlichia (E.) canis in dogs living in
Germany and evaluate the possibilities and limits of direct and indirect
diagnostic methods.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The first part of the study was a retrospective analysis of
routine samples, which had been examined for E. canis antibodies using an
indirect immunofluorescence antibody test (IFAT). The examination was part of a
laboratory profile for the detection of travel-related diseases (travel disease
profile) or was performed on an individual basis. In the second part, samples
which were examined within a travel disease profile, including E. canis
antibodies, were further evaluated for E. canis DNA by a polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). Medical histories were obtained of E. canis-positive dogs
(animals which were positive in IFAT and/or PCR) and for a part of the negative
animals.
RESULTS: For 2015, 11.8% of 12220 samples had antibodies for E. canis. Dogs,
which were examined with a travel disease profile, displayed antibodies in 5.6%
cases of 1172 animals (investigation period February to March 2016). Of the
E. canis-positive dogs (n = 67), 91% were positive with only the IFAT, 7.5% with 
the IFAT and PCR and 1.5% were only positive by PCR. Anamnesis showed that
particularly imported dogs without symptoms were controlled for travel diseases
during their first year in Germany.
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Although endemic E. canis infections play a
minor role in Germany, infections with this pathogen are still of importance in
this country, particularly because of the import of dogs. Therefore, a medical
history helps in early ehrlichiosis diagnosis and to start an adequate treatment.
Pathogen detection in imported E. canis-seropositive dogs, which often did not
display clinical symptoms in this study, was frequently negative in blood samples
by PCR. The diagnostic method should be chosen depending on the disease phase and
the underlying question (symptoms or preventive screening).

DOI: 10.15654/TPK-170065 
PMID: 28905983  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

