
1. Biochem J. 2017 Nov 9;474(22):3799-3815. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20170589.

Reduction potentials of protein disulfides and catalysis of glutathionylation and
deglutathionylation by glutaredoxin enzymes.

Ukuwela AA(1), Bush AI(2), Wedd AG(1), Xiao Z(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute,
The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.
(2)Melbourne Dementia Research Centre, Florey Institute of Neuroscience and
Mental Health, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.
(3)School of Chemistry and Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute,
The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia
z.xiao@florey.edu.au.

Glutaredoxins (Grxs) are a class of GSH (glutathione)-dependent thiol-disulfide
oxidoreductase enzymes. They use the cellular redox buffer GSSG (glutathione
disulfide)/GSH directly to catalyze these exchange reactions. Grxs feature
dithiol active sites and can shuttle rapidly between three oxidation states,
namely dithiol Grx(SH)2, mixed disulfide Grx(SH)(SSG) and oxidized disulfide
Grx(SS). Each is characterized by a distinct standard reduction potential
[Formula: see text] The [Formula: see text] values for the redox couple
Grx(SS)/Grx(SH)2 are available, but a recent estimate differs by over 100 mV from
the literature values. No estimates are available for [Formula: see text] for the
mixed disulfide couple Grx(SH)(SSG)/(Grx(SH)2 + GSH). This work determined both
[Formula: see text] and [Formula: see text] for two representative Grx enzymes,
Homo sapiens HsGrx1 and Escherichia coli EcGrx1. The empirical approaches were
verified rigorously to overcome the sensitivity of these redox-labile enzymes to 
experimental conditions. The classic method of acid 'quenching' was demonstrated 
to shift the thiol-disulfide redox equilibria. Both enzymes exhibit an [Formula: 
see text] (vs. SHE) at a pH of 7.0. Their [Formula: see text] values (-213 and
-230 mV for EcGrx1 and HsGrx1, respectively) are slightly less negative than that
([Formula: see text]) of the redox buffer GSSG/2GSH. Both [Formula: see text] and
[Formula: see text] vary with log [GSH], but the former more sensitively by a
factor of 2. This confers dual catalytic functions to a Grx enzyme as either an
oxidase at low [GSH] or as a reductase at high [GSH]. Consequently, these enzymes
can participate efficiently in either glutathionylation or deglutathionylation.
The catalysis is demonstrated to proceed via a monothiol ping-pong mechanism
relying on a single Cys residue only in the dithiol active site.

© 2017 The Author(s). Published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the
Biochemical Society.

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20170589 
PMID: 28963348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

