
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Sep 22;8:1126. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01126. eCollection
2017.

Neutrophils from Patients with Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Display Reduced
Chemotaxis to CXCR2 Ligands.

Cockx M(1), Gouwy M(1), Godding V(2), De Boeck K(3), Van Damme J(1), Boon M(3),
Struyf S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Rega Institute for Medical Research, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Unité de Pneumologie Pédiatrique et Mucoviscidose, Clinique Universitaire
Saint-Luc UCL Brussels, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Pediatric Pulmonology and Cystic Fibrosis Unit, Department of Pediatrics,
University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), cystic fibrosis (CF), and chronic obstructive
airway disease are characterized by neutrophilic inflammation in the lungs. In CF
and chronic obstructive airway disease, improper functioning of neutrophils has
been demonstrated. We hypothesized that the pulmonary damage in PCD might be
aggravated by abnormal functioning neutrophils either as a primary consequence of
the PCD mutation or secondary to chronic inflammation. We analyzed chemotactic
responses and chemoattractant receptor expression profiles of peripheral blood
neutrophils from 36 patients with PCD, 21 healthy children and 19 healthy adults.
We stimulated peripheral blood monocytes from patients and healthy controls and
measured CXCL8 and IL-1β production with ELISA. PCD neutrophils displayed reduced
migration toward CXCR2 ligands (CXCL5 and CXCL8) in the shape change,
microchamber and microslide chemotaxis assays, whereas leukotriene B4 and
complement component 5a chemotactic responses were not significantly different.
The reduced response to CXCL8 was observed in all subgroups of patients with PCD 
(displaying either normal ultrastructure, dynein abnormalities or central pair
deficiencies) and correlated with lung function. CXCR2 was downregulated in about
65% of the PCD patients, suggestive for additional mechanisms causing CXCR2
impairment. After treatment with the TLR ligands lipopolysaccharide and
peptidoglycan, PCD monocytes produced more CXCL8 and IL-1β compared to controls. 
Moreover, PCD monocytes also responded stronger to IL-1β stimulation in terms of 
CXCL8 production. In conclusion, we revealed a potential link between CXCR2 and
its ligand CXCL8 and the pathogenesis of PCD.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01126 
PMCID: PMC5614927
PMID: 29018439 

