
1. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2017 Oct;142(21):1609-1612. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-117929.
Epub 2017 Oct 18.

[Skin and Soft Tissue Infections Due to Corynebacterium ulcerans - Case Reports].

[Article in German; Abstract available in German from the publisher]

Jenssen C(1), Schwede I(2), Neumann V(3), Pietsch C(1), Handrick W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Krankenhaus Märkisch Oderland, Akademisches Lehrkrankenhaus der Medizinischen 
Hochschule Brandenburg "Theodor Fontane", Klinik für Innere Medizin, Strausberg.
(2)Institut für Medizinische Diagnostik Oderland, Frankfurt (Oder).
(3)Hautarzt-Praxis, Bad Saarow.

History and clinical findings We report on three patients suffering from skin and
soft tissue infections of the legs due to toxigenic Corynebacterium ulcerans
strains. In all three patients, there was a predisposition due to chronic
diseases. Three patients had domestic animals (cat, dog) in their households.
Investigations and diagnosis A mixed bacterial flora including Corynebacterium
ulcerans was found in wound swab samples. Diphtheric toxin was produced by the
Corynebacterium ulcerans strains in all three cases. Treatment and course In all 
three patients, successful handling of the skin and soft tissue infections was
possible by combining local treatment with antibiotics. Diphtheria antitoxin was 
not administered in any case. Conclusion Based on a review of the recent
literature pathogenesis, clinical symptoms and signs, diagnostics and therapy of 
skin and soft tissue infections due to Corynebacterium ulcerans are discussed.
Corynebacterium ulcerans should be considered as a potential cause of severe skin
and soft tissue infections. Occupational or domestic animal contacts should be
evaluated.

Publisher: Anamnese und klinische Befunde Es wird über drei Patienten mit Haut-
und Weichteilinfektionen der Unterschenkel durch Toxin-produzierende
Corynebacterium-ulcerans-Stämme berichtet. Alle drei Patienten hatten
prädisponierende chronische Erkrankungen und lebten mit Katzen bzw. einem Hund in
einem Haushalt. Untersuchungen und Diagnose Aus Wundabstrichen wurde jeweils eine
Mischflora einschließlich von Corynebacterium ulcerans angezüchtet. Die
Produktion von Diphtherietoxin war in allen drei Fällen nachweisbar. Therapie und
Verlauf Die Haut- und Weichteilinfektionen konnten bei allen drei Patienten durch
eine Kombination von Lokalmaßnahmen und Antibiotikatherapie beherrscht werden.
Diphtherie-Antitoxin kam nicht zum Einsatz. Folgerung Basierend auf einer
Literaturübersicht werden die wichtigsten Aspekte der Pathogenese, Klinik,
Diagnostik und Therapie dieser Infektionen diskutiert. Corynebacterium ulcerans
sollte als möglicher Erreger schwerer Haut-, Wund- und Weichgewebe-Infektionen in
diagnostische und therapeutische Überlegungen einbezogen und berufliche sowie
häusliche Tierkontakte erfragt werden.
© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-117929 
PMID: 29046006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.

