
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Oct 27;8:1395. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01395. eCollection
2017.

Genes Critical for Developing Periodontitis: Lessons from Mouse Models.

de Vries TJ(1), Andreotta S(1), Loos BG(1), Nicu EA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Academic Centre for Dentistry Amsterdam (ACTA), 
University of Amsterdam, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Opris Dent SRL, Sibiu, Sibiu, Romania.

Since the etiology of periodontitis in humans is not fully understood, genetic
mouse models may pinpoint indispensable genes for optimal immunological
protection of the periodontium against tissue destruction. This review describes 
the current knowledge of genes that are involved for a proper maintenance of a
healthy periodontium in mice. Null mutations of genes required for leukocyte
cell-cell recognition and extravasation (e.g., Icam-1, P-selectin,
Beta2-integrin/Cd18), for pathogen recognition and killing (e.g., Tlr2, Tlr4,
Lamp-2), immune modulatory molecules (e.g., Cxcr2, Ccr4, IL-10, Opg, IL1RA, Tnf-α
receptor, IL-17 receptor, Socs3, Foxo1), and proteolytic enzymes (e.g., Mmp8,
Plasmin) cause periodontitis, most likely due to an inefficient clearance of
bacteria and bacterial products. Several mechanisms resulting in periodontitis
can be recognized: (1) inefficient bacterial control by the polymorphonuclear
neutrophils (defective migration, killing), (2) inadequate antigen presentation
by dendritic cells, or (3) exaggerated production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. 
In all these cases, the local immune reaction is skewed toward a Th1/Th17 (and
insufficient activation of the Th2/Treg) with subsequent osteoclast activation.
Finally, genotypes are described that protect the mice from periodontitis: the
SCID mouse, and mice lacking Tlr2/Tlr4, the Ccr1/Ccr5, the Tnf-α receptor p55,
and Cathepsin K by attenuating the inflammatory reaction and the osteoclastogenic
response.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01395 
PMCID: PMC5663718
PMID: 29163477 

