
1. EBioMedicine. 2017 Dec;26:38-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.11.019. Epub 2017 Nov 
22.

Genetic- and Lifestyle-dependent Dental Caries Defined by the Acidic Proline-rich
Protein Genes PRH1 and PRH2.

Strömberg N(1), Esberg A(2), Sheng N(2), Mårell L(2), Löfgren-Burström A(2),
Danielsson K(2), Källestål C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Odontology/Cariology, Umeå University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden.
Electronic address: nicklas.stromberg@umu.se.
(2)Department of Odontology/Cariology, Umeå University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden.
(3)Department of Odontology/Cariology, Umeå University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden;
Department of Women's and Children's Health/International Maternal and Child
Health, Uppsala University, SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

Comment in
    EBioMedicine. 2018 Jan;27:9-10.

Dental caries is a chronic infectious disease that affects billions of people
with large individual differences in activity. We investigated whether PRH1 and
PRH2 polymorphisms in saliva acidic proline-rich protein (PRP) receptors for
indigenous bacteria match and predict individual differences in the development
of caries. PRH1 and PRH2 variation and adhesion of indigenous and cariogenic
(Streptococcus mutans) model bacteria were measured in 452 12-year-old Swedish
children along with traditional risk factors and related to caries at baseline
and after 5-years. The children grouped into low-to-moderate and high
susceptibility phenotypes for caries based on allelic PRH1, PRH2 variation. The
low-to-moderate susceptibility children (P1 and P4a-) experienced caries from
eating sugar or bad oral hygiene or infection by S. mutans. The high
susceptibility P4a (Db, PIF, PRP12) children had more caries despite receiving
extra prevention and irrespective of eating sugar or bad oral hygiene or S.
mutans-infection. They instead developed 3.9-fold more caries than P1 children
from plaque accumulation in general when treated with orthodontic multibrackets; 
and had basic PRP polymorphisms and low DMBT1-mediated S. mutans adhesion as
additional susceptibility traits. The present findings thus suggest genetic
autoimmune-like (P4a) and traditional life style (P1) caries, providing a
rationale for individualized oral care.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.11.019 
PMCID: PMC5832611
PMID: 29191562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

