
1. Genes Immun. 2019 Jan;20(1):56-68. doi: 10.1038/s41435-017-0010-z. Epub 2018 Jan 
24.

Choriodecidual leukocytes display a unique gene expression signature in
spontaneous labor at term.

Arenas-Hernandez M(1)(2), Gomez-Lopez N(3), Garcia-Flores V(4), Rangel-Escareño
C(5), Alvarez-Salas LM(4), Martinez-Acuña N(4), Vazquez-Perez JA(6), Vega-Sanchez
R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Nutrición y Bioprogramación, Instituto Nacional de
Perinatología Isidro Espinosa de los Reyes, Mexico City, MEX, Mexico.
(2)Departamento de Biomedicina Molecular, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios
Avanzados, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico City, MEX, Mexico.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology & Immunology and Microbiology, Wayne
State University School of Medicine, Perinatal Research Initiative in Support of 
the Perinatology Research Branch, Detroit, MI, USA. nardhy.gomez-lopez@wayne.edu.
(4)Departamento de Genética y Biología Molecular, Centro de Investigación y de
Estudios Avanzados, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico City, MEX, Mexico.
(5)Departamento de Genómica Computacional, Instituto Nacional de Medicina
Genómica, Mexico City, MEX, Mexico.
(6)Departamento de Micología y Virología, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades
Respiratorias, Mexico City, MEX, Mexico.
(7)Departamento de Nutrición y Bioprogramación, Instituto Nacional de
Perinatología Isidro Espinosa de los Reyes, Mexico City, MEX, Mexico.
r.vega@inper.mx.

Prior to and during the process of human labor, maternal circulating leukocytes
infiltrate the maternal-fetal interface (choriodecidua) and become activated
resembling choriodecidual leukocytes. Since, there is no evidence comparing
maternal circulating and choriodecidual leukocytes, herein, we characterized
their transcriptome and explored the biological processes enriched in
choriodecidual leukocytes. From women undergoing spontaneous term labor we
isolated circulating and choriodecidual leukocytes, performed microarray analysis
(n = 5) and qRT-PCR validation (n = 9) and interaction network analysis with
up-regulated genes. We found 270 genes up-regulated and only 17 genes
down-regulated in choriodecidual leukocytes compared to maternal circulating
leukocytes. The most up-regulated genes were CCL18, GPNMB, SEPP1, FN1, RNASE1,
SPP1, C1QC, and PLTP. The biological processes enriched in choriodecidual
leukocytes were cell migration and regulation of immune response, chemotaxis, and
humoral immune responses. Our results show striking differences between the
transcriptome of choriodecidual and maternal circulating leukocytes.
Choriodecidual leukocytes are enriched in immune mediators implicated in the
spontaneous process of labor at term.

DOI: 10.1038/s41435-017-0010-z 
PMCID: PMC6358585
PMID: 29362510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

