
1. PLoS One. 2018 Jan 25;13(1):e0191893. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0191893.
eCollection 2018.

Taxonomically-linked growth phenotypes during arsenic stress among arsenic
resistant bacteria isolated from soils overlying the Centralia coal seam fire.

Dunivin TK(1)(2), Miller J(3), Shade A(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, Michigan, United States of America.
(2)Environmental and Integrative Toxicological Sciences Doctoral Program,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, United States of America.
(3)Lyman Briggs College, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan,
United States of America.
(4)Program in Ecology, Evolutionary Biology and Behavior, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan, United States of America.

Arsenic (As), a toxic element, has impacted life since early Earth. Thus,
microorganisms have evolved many As resistance and tolerance mechanisms to
improve their survival outcomes given As exposure. We isolated As resistant
bacteria from Centralia, PA, the site of an underground coal seam fire that has
been burning since 1962. From a 57.4Â°C soil collected from a vent above the fire,
we isolated 25 unique aerobic As resistant bacterial strains spanning seven
genera. We examined their diversity, resistance gene content, transformation
abilities, inhibitory concentrations, and growth phenotypes. Although As
concentrations were low at the time of soil collection (2.58 ppm), isolates had
high minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of arsenate and arsenite (>300 mM
and 20 mM respectively), and most isolates were capable of arsenate reduction. We
screened isolates (PCR and sequencing) using 12 published primer sets for six As 
resistance genes (AsRGs). Genes encoding arsenate reductase (arsC) and arsenite
efflux pumps (arsB, ACR3(2)) were present, and phylogenetic incongruence between 
16S rRNA genes and AsRGs provided evidence for horizontal gene transfer. A
detailed investigation of differences in isolate growth phenotypes across As
concentrations (lag time to exponential growth, maximum growth rate, and maximum 
OD590) showed a relationship with taxonomy, providing information that could help
to predict an isolate's performance given As exposure in situ. Our results
suggest that microbiological management and remediation of environmental As could
be informed by taxonomically-linked As tolerance, potential for resistance gene
transferability, and the rare biosphere.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0191893 
PMCID: PMC5785013
PMID: 29370270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

