
1. Molecules. 2018 Apr 5;23(4). pii: E837. doi: 10.3390/molecules23040837.

Tannins from Acacia mearnsii De Wild. Bark: Tannin Determination and Biological
Activities.

Ogawa S(1), Yazaki Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Mimozax Co., Ltd., 4291-1, Miyauchi, Hatsukaichi-shi, Hiroshima 738-0034,
Japan. ogawa@mimozax.co.jp.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800,
Australia. yoshi.yazaki@monash.edu.

The bark of Acacia mearnsii De Wild. (black wattle) contains significant amounts 
of water-soluble components acalled "wattle tannin". Following the discovery of
its strong antioxidant activity, a wattle tannin dietary supplement has been
developed and as part of developing new dietary supplements, a literature search 
was conducted using the SciFinder data base for "Acacia species and their
biological activities". An analysis of the references found indicated that the
name of Acacia nilotica had been changed to Vachellia nilotica, even though the
name of the genus Acacia originated from its original name. This review briefly
describes why and how the name of A. nilotica changed. Tannin has been analyzed
using the Stiasny method when the tannin is used to make adhesives and the
hide-powder method is used when the tannin is to be used for leather tanning. A
simple UV method is also able to be used to estimate the values for both
adhesives and leather tanning applications. The tannin content in bark can also
be estimated using NIR and NMR. Tannin content estimations using pyrolysis/GC,
electrospray mass spectrometry and quantitative 31P-NMR analyses have also been
described. Tannins consists mostly of polyflavanoids and all the compounds
isolated have been updated. Antioxidant activities of the tannin relating to
anti-tumor properties, the viability of human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells and
also anti-hypertensive effects have been studied. The antioxidant activity of
proanthocyanidins was found to be higher than that of flavan-3-ol monomers. A
total of fourteen papers and two patents reported the antimicrobial activities of
wattle tannin. Bacteria were more susceptible to the tannins than the fungal
strains tested. Several bacteria were inhibited by the extract from A. mearnsii
bark. The growth inhibition mechanisms of E. coli were investigated. An
interaction between extracts from A. mearnsii bark and antibiotics has also been 
studied. The extracts from A. mearnsii bark inhibit the growth of cyanobacteria. 
Wattle tannin has the ability to inactivate Î±-amylase, lipase and glucosidase. In
vivo experiments on anti-obesity and anti-diabetes were also reported. Several
patents relating to these enzymes for anti-diabetes and anti-obesity are in the
literature. In addition, studies on Acacia bark extract regarding its antitermite
activities, inhibition of itching in atopic dermatitis and anti-inflammatory
effects have also been reported. The growth of bacteria was inhibited by the
extract from A. mearnsii bark, and typical intestinal bacteria such as E. coli,
K. pneumoniae, P. vulgaris and S. marcescenes was also inhibited in vitro by
extracts. Based on these results, the Acacia bark extract may inhibit not only
the growth of these typical intestinal bacteria but also the growth of other
types of intestinal bacteria such as Clostridium and Bacteroides, a so-called
"bad bacteria". If the tannin extract from A. mearnsii bark inhibits growth of
these "bad bacteria" in vivo evaluation, the extracts might be usable as a new
dietary supplement, which could control the human intestinal microbiome to keep
the body healthy.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules23040837 
PMCID: PMC6017853
PMID: 29621196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

