
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2018 Jun;77:350-363. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2018.04.018. Epub
2018 Apr 7.

Dietary administration of the probiotic Shewanella putrefaciens Pdp11 promotes
transcriptional changes of genes involved in growth and immunity in Solea
senegalensis larvae.

Jurado J(1), Villasanta-González A(1), Tapia-Paniagua ST(2), Balebona MC(2),
García de la Banda I(3), Moríñigo MÁ(2), Prieto-Álamo MJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Campus de Excelencia
Internacional Agroalimentario CeiA3, Universidad de Córdoba, Campus de Rabanales,
Edificio Severo Ochoa, E-14071 Córdoba, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Málaga,
29071, Málaga, Spain.
(3)Centro Oceanográfico de Santander, Instituto Español de Oceanografía,
Santander, Spain.
(4)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Campus de Excelencia
Internacional Agroalimentario CeiA3, Universidad de Córdoba, Campus de Rabanales,
Edificio Severo Ochoa, E-14071 Córdoba, Spain. Electronic address:
bb2pralm@uco.es.

Senegalese sole (Solea senegalensis) has been proposed as a high-potential
species for aquaculture diversification in Southern Europe. It has been
demonstrated that a proper feeding regimen during the first life stages
influences larval growth and survival, as well as fry and juvenile quality. The
bacterial strain Shewanella putrefaciens Pdp11 (SpPdp11) has shown very good
probiotic properties in Senegalese sole, but information is scarce about its
effect in the earliest stages of sole development. Thus, the aim of this study
was to investigate the effect of SpPdp11, bioencapsulated in live diet,
administered during metamorphosis (10-21 dph) or from the first exogenous feeding
of Senegalese sole (2-21 dph). To evaluate the persistence of the probiotic
effect, we sampled sole specimens from metamorphosis until the end of weaning
(from 23 to 73 dph). This study demonstrated that probiotic administration from
the first exogenous feeding produced beneficial effects on Senegalese sole larval
development, given that specimens fed this diet exhibited higher and less
dispersed weight, as well as increases in both total protein concentration and
alkaline phosphatase activity, and in non-specific immune response. Moreover,
real-time PCR documented changes in the expression of a set of genes involved in 
central metabolic functions including genes related to growth, genes coding for
proteases (including several digestive enzymes), and genes implicated in the
response to stress and in immunity. Overall, these results support the
application of SpPdp11 in the first life stages of S. senegalensis as an
effective tool with the clear potential to benefit sole aquaculture.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2018.04.018 
PMID: 29635066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

