
1. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg A. 1988 May;268(3):306-17.

Further differentiation of Enterobacteriaceae by means of siderophore-pattern
analysis.

Reissbrodt R(1), Rabsch W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut f√ºr Experimentelle Epidemiologie, Wernigerode, DDR.

By means of a combination of 5 siderophore bioassays using several indicator
strains, genera, species and subspecies of Enterobacteriaceae can be further
differentiated. Enterobactin, aerobactin and other siderophores produced can be
detected. Each strain shows specific pattern which we called siderophore-pattern.
It is easy to separate Morganella, Proteus, Providencia, Yersinia strains from
the genera Salmonella, Shigella, Escherichia coli, Enterobacter, Citrobacter,
Klebsiella, Serratia. Enterobacter agglomerans strains differ from other
Enterobacter species with respect to their siderophore pattern. In Salmonella
strains there are differences between the subspecies I and IV. Additionally the
most strains of Salmonella subspecies I from nosocomial infections produced
aerobactin, in the most cases determined by plasmids. Among Shigella strains
different siderophore pattern exist according to other epidemiological markers.
S. flexneri strains of serovar 6 produced contrary to the strains of other
serovars enterobactin. By means of the siderophore-pattern analysis E. coli
strains of serovars 01; 02; 018 can be further differentiated. E. coli 01:K1
strains containing the fimbrial antigen F11 produced aerobactin whereas the F9
strains did not. All Hafnia alvei strains produced a uniform siderophore pattern,
different from all other members of the enterobacteriaceae family. With this aim 
Hafnia alvei strains can be easily separated under practical conditions.

DOI: 10.1016/s0176-6724(88)80015-4 
PMID: 2970195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

