
1. Microb Pathog. 2018 Aug;121:131-138. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2018.05.029. Epub
2018 May 19.

Pathogen-dependent modulation of milk neutrophils competence, plasma inflammatory
cytokines and milk quality during intramammary infection of Sahiwal (Bos indicus)
cows.

Alhussien MN(1), Dang AK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lactation and Immuno-Physiology Laboratory, ICAR-National Dairy Research
Institute, Karnal 132001, Haryana, India. Electronic address:
mohannadalhussien@gmail.com.
(2)Lactation and Immuno-Physiology Laboratory, ICAR-National Dairy Research
Institute, Karnal 132001, Haryana, India. Electronic address:
rajadang@rediffmail.com.

The aim of the current study was to investigate the responses of milk neutrophils
and plasma inflammatory cytokines to various mastitis pathogens and subsequently 
on milk composition. Milk was collected from healthy (n = 10) and clinical
mastitis indigenous Sahiwal cows naturally infected either with gram-positive
bacteria mainly S. aureus (n = 10) and Strep. agalactiae (n = 10) or with
gram-negative bacteria, E. coli (n = 10). Phagocytic activity of milk neutrophils
decreased in all mastitis cows with the lowest values recorded during
gram-positive bacterial infections. Maximum plasma cortisol levels were observed 
in cows infected with gram-positive bacteria and were positively correlated with 
the milk neutrophils percentage and negatively correlated with the phagocytic
activity of neutrophils and expression of glucocorticoid receptor. The plasma
concentrations of IL-2 and IL-8 increased in all mastitis groups with maximum
values recorded during E. coli infections. Unlike gram-negative bacterial
infections, gram-positive bacterial infections evoked a minimal tumor necrosis
factor-α (TNF-α), and IL-6 response. Milk somatic cell counts, fat, protein, pH
and electrical conductivity increased in mastitis cows with the highest values
exhibited by Strep. agalactiae infection. The expression of chemokine receptors
(CXCR1, CXCR2), IL-8 and CD11b was maximum in mastitis neutrophils infected with 
E. coli. The expression of glucocorticoid receptor (GRα) decreased in all
mastitis groups with the lowest values were found in S. aureus infection. Among
the various mastitis pathogens, Strep. agalactiae showed maximum adverse effect
on milk quality. Attenuated neutrophils, TNF-α and IL-6 response in cows infected
by gram-positive bacteria may contribute to the establishment of chronic
mastitis.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2018.05.029 
PMID: 29787791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

