
1. Syst Appl Microbiol. 2018 Sep;41(5):494-505. doi: 10.1016/j.syapm.2018.04.006.
Epub 2018 May 24.

Bacterial diversity and community structure of the intestinal microbiome of
Channel Catfish (Ictalurus punctatus) during ontogenesis.

Burgos FA(1), Ray CL(2), Arias CR(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Fisheries, Aquaculture and Aquatic Sciences, 203 Swingle Hall,
Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36832, USA; Escuela Superior Politécnica del
Litoral, Facultad de Ingeniería Marítima, Ciencias Oceánicas, Biológicas y
Recursos Naturales, Campus Gustavo Galindo Km 30.5 Vía Perimetral, Guayaquil,
Ecuador.
(2)United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service,
Stuttgart National Aquaculture Research Center, Stuttgart, AR, 72160, USA.
(3)School of Fisheries, Aquaculture and Aquatic Sciences, 203 Swingle Hall,
Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36832, USA. Electronic address:
ariascr@auburn.edu.

The acquisition of gut microbes does not occur randomly and is highly dependent
on host factors, environmental cues, and self-assembly rules exerted by the
microbes themselves. The main objective of this project was to characterize how
the gut microbiome develops during the early life stages of Channel Catfish and
to identify i) which bacteria are the main constituents of the gut microbiome at 
different ontogenesis stages, and ii) at which time point(s) the gut microbiome
stabilizes. High-throughput Illumina Miseq DNA sequencing of the V4 domain of the
16S rRNA gene was used to assess the microbial community composition during the
life stages of Channel Catfish along with water and feed samples. Microbiomes
from fertilized eggs, sac fry, swim up fry, pre-fingerlings, and fingerlings were
all significantly distinct. OTUs analyses showed that the phylum Proteobacteria, 
Firmicutes, Fusobacteria and Cyanobacteria dominated the Channel Catfish gut
microbiome. During the early stages of ontogenesis, the fish microbiome was
dynamic and highly diverse, with significant shifts occurring between fertilized 
eggs to sac fry (6dph), and from sac fry to swim up fry (15dph). The gut
microbiome stabilized between the pre-fingerlings and fingerlings stage (≤90dph) 
with an observed reduction in species richness. Feed had a more significantly
contribution to the microbial colonization of the gut than water. We have
identified the period in which the gut microbiome changes rapidly from 15dph
until 21dph before stabilizing after 90dph.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.syapm.2018.04.006 
PMID: 29803608  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

