
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2018 Oct;87:98-108. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2018.05.023. Epub 2018
Jun 8.

The complement component 1 q (C1q) in Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus):
Functional characterization in host defense against bacterial infection and
effect on cytokine response in macrophages.

Chen M(1), Ding M(1), Li Y(1), Zhong X(1), Liu S(1), Guo Z(1), Yin X(1), Fu S(1),
Ye J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory for Health and Safe Aquaculture, Guangdong
Provincial Engineering Technology Research Center for Environmentally-Friendly
Aquaculture, College of Life Sciences, South China Normal University, Guangdong, 
510631, PR China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory for Health and Safe Aquaculture, Guangdong
Provincial Engineering Technology Research Center for Environmentally-Friendly
Aquaculture, College of Life Sciences, South China Normal University, Guangdong, 
510631, PR China. Electronic address: jmye@m.scnu.edu.cn.

Complement component 1q (C1q) is the initial protein of the classical complement 
pathway and plays an important role in immune response against bacterial
infection. In this study, the full-length of C1q subcomponent A, B and C chain
genes (C1qA, C1qB and C1qC) were identified and characterized from Nile tilapia
(Oreochromis niloticus). Molecular characterization of these three C1q
subcomponents (OnC1qs) harbored conserved amino acids through analyses of
multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree, which were homologous to other
teleost species. Expression analysis revealed that the OnC1qs were highly
expressed in liver. After the in vivo challenges of Streptococcus agalactiae and 
LPS, the mRNA expressions of OnC1qs were significantly up-regulated in liver.
Meanwhile, the concentration variation of OnC1qs at the protein level from
tilapia serum after challenge with S. agalactiae were measured by a
competitive-inhibition ELISA. In addition, the up-regulation expressions of
OnC1qs were also demonstrated in head kidney adherent leukocytes and the cell
culture medium in vitro stimulation with S. agalactiae, Aeromonas hydrophila and 
LPS, respectively. Moreover, the recombinant OnC1qs enhanced expression of
cytokines IL-6, IL-8 and IL-10 in head kidney adherent leukocytes, and were able 
to bind both heat-aggregated mouse IgG and IgM. Taken together, the results of
this study indicated that OnC1qs might be involved in host defense against
bacterial infection in Nile tilapia.

Copyright Â© 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2018.05.023 
PMID: 29890197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

