
1. ACS Synth Biol. 2018 Aug 17;7(8):1918-1928. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.8b00136. Epub 
2018 Jul 19.

An Engineered Constitutive Promoter Set with Broad Activity Range for Cupriavidus
necator H16.

Johnson AO(1), Gonzalez-Villanueva M(1), Tee KL(1), Wong TS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical & Biological Engineering and Advanced Biomanufacturing 
Centre , University of Sheffield , Sir Robert Hadfield Building, Mappin Street , 
Sheffield S1 3JD , United Kingdom.

Well-characterized promoters with variable strength form the foundation of
heterologous pathway optimization. It is also a key element that bolsters the
success of microbial engineering and facilitates the development of biological
tools like biosensors. In comparison to microbial hosts such as Escherichia coli 
and Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the promoter repertoire of Cupriavidus necator H16 
is highly limited. This limited number of characterized promoters poses a
significant challenge during the engineering of C. necator H16 for
biomanufacturing and biotechnological applications. In this article, we first
examined the architecture and genetic elements of the four most widely used
constitutive promoters of C. necator H16 (i.e., P phaC1, P rrsC, P j5, and P g25)
and established a narrow 6-fold difference in their promoter activities. Next,
using these four promoters as starting points and applying a range of genetic
modifications (including point mutation, length alteration, incorporation of
regulatory genetic element, promoter hybridization, and configuration
alteration), we created a library of 42 constitutive promoters, all of which are 
functional in C. necator H16. Although these promoters are also functional in E. 
coli, they show different promoter strength and hierarchical rank of promoter
activity. Subsequently, the activity of each promoter was individually
characterized, using l-arabinose-inducible P BAD promoter as a benchmark. This
study has extended the range of constitutive promoter activities to 137-fold,
with some promoter variants exceeding the l-arabinose-inducible range of P BAD
promoter. Not only has the work enhanced our flexibility in engineering C.
necator H16, it presented novel strategies in adjusting promoter activity in C.
necator H16 and highlighted similarities and differences in transcriptional
activity between this organism and E. coli.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.8b00136 
PMID: 29949349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

