
1. Ned Tijdschr Tandheelkd. 2018 Jul;125(7-8):384-387. doi:
10.5177/ntvt.2018.07/08.18160.

[A lung abscess caused by bad teeth].

[Article in Dutch; Abstract available in Dutch from the publisher]

van Brummelen SE, Melles D, van der Eerden M.

An odontogenic cause of a lung abscess is often overlooked. A 61-year-old man
presented at an emergency department with a productive cough and dyspnoea. He was
admitted to the pulmonary ward with a suspected odontogenic lung abscess. A
thorax CT scan confirmed the diagnosis 'lung abscess', following which an
oral-maxillofacial surgeon confirmed that the lung abscess probably had an
odontogenic cause. The patient made a full recovery following a 6-week course of 
antibiotics, and his teeth were remediated by means of full extraction and the
fabrication of immediate dentures. Poor oral hygiene can be a cause of a lung
abscess. A patient with a lung abscess can be treated successfully with
antibiotics. If, however, the odontogenic cause is not recognised the abscess can
recur.

Publisher: Een odontogene oorzaak van een longabces wordt regelmatig over het
hoofd gezien. Een 61-jarige man kwam met een productieve hoest en kortademigheid 
op een Spoedeisende Hulp. Vanwege een mogelijk odontogeen longabces werd hij
opgenomen op de afdeling Longziekten. Een CT-scan van de thorax bevestigde de
diagnose ‘longabces’, waarna een mka-chirurg een odonto­gene oorzaak van het
abces aannemelijk maakte. De patiënt herstelde volledig met een antibioticumkuur 
van 6 weken en zijn gebit werd gesaneerd door totaalextractie en vervaardiging
van immediaatprothese. Slechte mond­hygiëne kan een oorzaak zijn van een
longabces. Een patiënt met een long­abces kan succesvol worden behandeld met een 
antibioticumkuur. Als een odonto­gene oorzaak over het hoofd wordt gezien kan het
abces echter recidiveren.
DOI: 10.5177/ntvt.2018.07/08.18160 
PMID: 30015813  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

