
1. J Food Sci. 2018 Oct;83(10):2653-2661. doi: 10.1111/1750-3841.14346. Epub 2018
Sep 17.

Lactobacillus plantarum CQPC06 Activity Prevents Dextran Sulfate Sodium-Induced
Colitis by Regulating the IL-8 Pathway.

Zhang J(1)(2), Yi R(3), Qian Y(3), Sun P(3), Zhao X(1)(3), Yang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health,
Beijing Technology & Business Univ. (BTBU), Beijing, P.R. China.
(2)Environmental and Quality Inspection College, Chongqing Chemical Industry
Vocational College, Chongqing, 401220, P.R., China.
(3)Chongqing Collaborative Innovation Center for Functional Food, Chongqing Univ.
of Education, Chongqing, 400067, P.R., China.

Lactobacillus plantarum CQPC06 (LP-CQPC06) is a newly discovered lactic acid
bacterial strain. Here, the beneficial effects of this strain on C57BL/6J mice
with dextran sulfate sodium-induced colitis were investigated. LP-CQPC06 was more
resistant to gastric acid and bile salts than L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus
(LB). In the DSS-induced colitis mouse model, LP-CQPC06 treatment decreased the
colon weight/length ratio and increased the colon length as compared to untreated
mice with DSS-induced colitis. LP-CQPC06 also reduced the serum levels of
interleukin 8 (IL-8), IL-1, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and macrophage
inflammatory protein-1 alpha, as well as reducing levels of myeloperoxidase (MPO)
and nitric oxide (NO) in the colon tissues of mice with DSS-induced colitis. In
all cases, the effects of LP-CQPC06 were significantly stronger than those of LB.
Quantitative polymerase chain reactions and western blots indicated that
LP-CQPC06 increased the mRNA and protein expression levels of neuronal nitric
oxide synthase, endothelial nitric oxide synthase, and nuclear factor of kappa
light polypeptide gene enhancer in B-cells inhibitor alpha, while decreasing the 
expression levels of inducible nitric oxide synthase, nuclear factor kappa-beta, 
C-X-C motif chemokine receptor 1 (CXCR1), and CXCR2. Thus, L. plantarum CQPC06
had a good protective effect against colitis in a mouse model via the IL-8
pathway. Therefore, L. plantarum CQPC06 might have potential uses as a probiotic 
for colonic protection.PRACTICAL APPLICATION: In this study, a newly discovered
lactic acid bacteria was investigated. This bacterial strain had a good
prophylactic effect against colitis in a mouse model, and might have potential
utility as a probiotic.

© 2018 Institute of Food Technologists®.

DOI: 10.1111/1750-3841.14346 
PMID: 30221762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

