
1. Int J Oncol. 2018 Nov;53(5):2300-2308. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2018.4547. Epub 2018 Aug 
30.

Induction of apoptosis and G1 phase cell cycle arrest by Aster incisus in AGS
gastric adenocarcinoma cells.

Ngabire D(1), Seong YA(1), Patil MP(1), Niyonizigiye I(1), Seo YB(2), Kim GD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Natural Sciences, Pukyong National
University, Busan 45813, Republic of Korea.
(2)Institute of Marine Biotechnology, College of Natural Sciences, Pukyong
National University, Busan 45813, Republic of Korea.

In recent decades, various bioactive compounds from plants have been investigated
for their potential use in the treatment of diseases in humans. Aster incisus
extract (AIE) is the extract of a common plant that is mostly found in Asia. It
has traditionally been used for medicinal purposes in South Korea. In this study,
we evaluated the potential anticancer effects of a methanolic extract of
Aster incisus in a normal human cell line (HaCaT keratinocytes) and in
4 different types of human cancer cell lines (A549, lung cancer; Hep3B, liver
cancer; MDA‑MB‑231, breast cancer; and AGS, gastric cancer). The HaCaT, A549,
Hep3B, MDA‑MB‑231 and AGS cells were treated with various concentrations of AIE
and following treatment, cell survival was evaluated. Additional analyses, such
as WST-1 assay, western blot analysis, DAPI staining, flow cytometry,
immunofluorescence staining and wound healing assay were performed to elucidate
the mechanisms and pathways involved in the cell death induced by AIE. Treatment 
with AIE induced morphological changes and considerably reduced the viability of 
the both normal and cancer cell lines. Further analysis of the AGS gastric cancer
cells revealed that AIE led to the induction of apoptosis and a high accumulation
of cells in the G1 cell phase following treatment with AIE in a dose-dependent
manner. The results also revealed that AIE successfully suppressed the migration 
of the AIE-treated AGS cells. The results of western blot analysis indicated that
AIE increased the expression of pro-apoptotic proteins, particularly Bid, Bad,
Bak, cytochrome c, apoptosis inducing factor (AIF), cleaved caspase‑3, -8 and -9 
and cleaved poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). Additionally, AIE decreased the
expression of the anti-apoptotic proteins, Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL. On the whole, the
findings of this study demonstrate that AIE induces apoptosis through the
activation of the caspase‑dependent pathway mediated by the mitochondrial pathway
and by arresting the cell cycle in AGS cells.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2018.4547 
PMID: 30226597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

