
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2018 Sep 13;8:310. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00310.
eCollection 2018.

Multiple Quorum Quenching Enzymes Are Active in the Nosocomial Pathogen
Acinetobacter baumannii ATCC17978.

Mayer C(1), Muras A(1), Romero M(1), López M(2), Tomás M(2), Otero A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Biology-CIBUS,
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario A
Coruña-INIBIC, A Coruña Spain.

Acinetobacter baumannii presents a typical luxI/luxR quorum sensing (QS) system
(abaI/abaR) but the acyl-homoserine lactone (AHL) signal profile and factors
controlling the production of QS signals in this species have not been determined
yet. A very complex AHL profile was identified for A. baumannii ATCC17978 as well
as for A. nosocomialis M2, but only when cultivated under static conditions,
suggesting that surface or cell-to-cell contact is involved in the activation of 
the QS genes. The analysis of A. baumanni clinical isolates revealed a
strain-specific AHL profile that was also affected by nutrient availability. The 
concentration of OHC12-HSL, the major AHL found in A. baumannii ATCC17978, peaked
upon stationary-phase establishment and decreases steeply afterwards. Quorum
quenching (QQ) activity was found in the cell extracts of A. baumannii ATCC17978,
correlating with the disappearance of the AHLs from the culture media, indicating
that AHL concentration may be self-regulated in this pathogen. Since QQ activity 
was observed in strains in which AidA, a novel α/β-hydrolase recently identified 
in A. baumannii, is not present, we have searched for additional QQ enzymes in A.
baumannii ATCC17978. Seven putative AHL-lactonase sequences could be identified
in the genome and the QQ activity of 3 of them could be confirmed. At least six
of these lactonase sequences are also present in all clinical isolates as well as
in A. nosocomialis M2. Surface-associated motility and biofilm formation could be
blocked by the exogenous addition of the wide spectrum QQ enzyme Aii20J. The
differential regulation of the QQ enzymes in A. baumannii ATCC17978 and the full 
dependence of important virulence factors on the QS system provides a strong
evidence of the importance of the AHL-mediated QS/QQ network in this species.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00310 
PMCID: PMC6146095
PMID: 30271754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

