
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2019 Mar;92:43-49. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2018.10.008. Epub 2018
Oct 22.

The antibacterial activity and mechanism analysis of piscidin 5 like from
Larimichthys crocea.

Pan Y(1), Zheng LB(2), Mao Y(1), Wang J(1), Lin LS(3), Su YQ(1), Li Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Marine Environmental Science, Xiamen University,
361005, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Marine Environmental Science, Xiamen University,
361005, China. Electronic address: 183627046@qq.com.
(3)Third Institute of Oceanography, State Oceanic Administration, Xiamen, 361005,
China.
(4)Third Institute of Oceanography, State Oceanic Administration, Xiamen, 361005,
China. Electronic address: liyuan@tio.org.cn.

Chemical drugs, such as antibiotics, were still important materials to prevent
and cure diseases of aquatic organisms. However, antibiotics abuse do not only
make the effects little, but also cause other bad problems, such as bacterial
resistance and drug residues. Therefore, seeking the effective substitutes of
antibiotics was an approach needed to be explored. Antibacterial peptides (AMPs) 
attracted more and more attention in the recent years. The parasitism and
secondary bacterial invasion caused by ectroparasite Cryptocaryon irritans was a 
disaster to almost all host fish, including Larimichthys crocea. Reports
indicated many AMPs played a key role in the whole parasitic infection cycle.
Piscidin 5 like was a member of piscidin family. In the study, the antibacterial 
activity and mechanisms of piscidin 5 like from L.coreca (Lc-P5L) were detected. 
Liquid growth inhibition results showed recombinant Lc-P5L (rLc-P5L) had broad
antibacterial spectrum and strong bactericidal activity. The bactericidal
activity functioned in dose- and time-dependent manners. SEM (scanning electron
microscope) observed the relatively detailed bactericidal process, rLc-P5L
treatment resulted in a mass of bacteria piling together, appearing plenty of
strange filaments and covering on the bacteria. Besides, S.aureus overgrowed
plenty of granules, formed holes on the membrane of a few cells, and contents
poured out from the holes. At the same time, antibacterial mechanisms were
explored. After direct incubation with bacteria, western blot detected the
apparently positive signal of rLc-P5L on bacteria; secondly, the incubation first
with LPS (lipopolysaccharide) or LTA (lipoteichoic acid) significantly affect the
binding of rLc-P5L to bacteria again, which indicated rLc-P5L could bind to
bacteria through interaction with some PAMPs (pathogen-associated molecular
patterns). In addition, rLc-P5L could interact with bacterial genome DNA by dose-
and time-dependent means. In summary, rLc-P5L binded to bacteria surface through 
targeting to some PAMPs to damage membrane, and entered into cells to interact
with genome DNA to disturb normal metabolism when it reached to some certain time
and concentration thresholds, which were likely to be its pathway to exert
antibacterial activity.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2018.10.008 
PMID: 30359623  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

