
1. Innate Immun. 2019 Jan;25(1):3-12. doi: 10.1177/1753425918809860. Epub 2018 Nov
14.

Pyocyanin induces NK92 cell apoptosis via mitochondrial damage and elevated
intracellular Ca2.

Li T(1), Huang X(1), Yuan Z(1), Wang L(1), Chen M(1), Su F(1), Ling X(1), Piao
Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Science, Hangzhou Normal University, China.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa-derived pigment pyocyanin (PCN) has been proved to induce 
cell apoptosis mediated by the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which
has been studied mainly in epithelial cells and neutrophils. However, we
previously found that the PCN-producing strain PA14 induces cell apoptosis in
human NK cell line NK92 more effectively than in PCN-deficient strain PA14-phZ1/2
via a yet undetermined mechanism. In the current study, we found that PCN-induced
NK92 cell apoptosis occurs through mitochondrial damage despite inhibiting
intracellular ROS generation. Intracellular Ca2+ ([Ca2+]i) and Bcl-2 family
proteins act as important "priming signals" for apoptosis. PCN treatment
increased [Ca2+]i in NK92 cells more than twofold after 2 h stimulation, whereas 
the Ca2+-chelating agent ethylene glycol tetra-acetic acid (EGTA) inhibited
apoptosis. PCN triggered the activation of Bim, Bid, Bik, Bak, and phospho-Bad in
NK92 cells in a concentration-dependent manner, but these pro-apoptotic Bcl-2
family proteins were not inhibited by EGTA. In this study, we describe the
function of PCN in NK92 cells and identify mitochondrial damage as the mechanism 
underlying the apoptosis. [Ca2+]i and pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins are
novel targets for PCN-induced apoptosis. Clarification of the cytotoxic diversity
of PCN provides a new therapeutic target for defense from P. aeruginosa-induced
immune cell damage.

DOI: 10.1177/1753425918809860 
PMCID: PMC6830894
PMID: 30426809  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

