
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2019 Mar;86:25-34. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2018.11.027. Epub
2018 Nov 12.

Local regulation of immune genes in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) naturally
infected with Flavobacterium psychrophilum.

Muñoz-Atienza E(1), Távara C(2), Díaz-Rosales P(1), Llanco L(2), Serrano-Martínez
E(2), Tafalla C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Health Research Centre (CISA-INIA), 28130, Valdeolmos, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Veterinary Medicine and Zootechny Faculty, Universidad Peruana Cayetano
Heredia (UPCH), Lima, Peru.
(3)Animal Health Research Centre (CISA-INIA), 28130, Valdeolmos, Madrid, Spain.
Electronic address: tafalla@inia.es.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the etiological agent of bacterial cold water
disease (BCWD), also referred to as rainbow trout fry syndrome (RTFS), a disease 
with great economic impact in salmonid aquaculture. Despite this, to date, not
many studies have analyzed in depth how the immune system is regulated during the
course of the disease. In the current study, we have studied the transcription of
several immune genes related to T and B cell activity in the skin of rainbow
trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) naturally infected with F. psychrophilum in a farm
located in Lake Titicaca (Peru). The levels of expression of these genes were
tested and compared to those obtained in asymptomatic and apparently healthy
rainbow trout. In the case of symptomatic fish, skin samples containing
characteristic ulcerative lesions were taken, as well as skin samples with no
lesions. Our results pointed to a significant local up-regulation of IgD, CD4,
CD8, perforin and IFNγ within the ulcerative lesions. On the other hand, no
differences between the levels of expression of these genes were visible in the
spleen. To confirm these results, the distribution of IgD+ and CD3+ cells was
studied through immunohistochemical techniques in the ulcerative lesions. Our
results demonstrate a strong local response to F. psychrophilum in rainbow trout 
in which IgD and T cells seem to play a major role.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2018.11.027 
PMID: 30439501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

