
1. Nanomicro Lett. 2015;7(3):219-242. doi: 10.1007/s40820-015-0040-x. Epub 2015 Apr 
19.

Review on Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles: Antibacterial Activity and Toxicity
Mechanism.

Sirelkhatim A(1), Mahmud S(1), Seeni A(2), Kaus NHM(3), Ann LC(1), Bakhori
SKM(1), Hasan H(4), Mohamad D(5).

Author information: 
(1)1Nano-Optoelectronics Research and Technology Laboratory (N.O.R. Lab), School 
of Physics, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 11800 Minden, Pulau Pinang Malaysia.
(2)2Advanced Medical and Dental Institute, Cluster of Integrative Medicine,
Universiti Sains Malaysia, 13200 Bertam, Malaysia.
(3)3School of Chemical Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 11800 Minden, Pulau
Pinang Malaysia.
(4)4Department of Medical Microbiology, Parasitology and Immunology, School of
Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kubang Kerian, 16150 Kubang Kerian, 
Kelantan Malaysia.
(5)5School of Dental Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 16150 Kubang Kerian,
Kelantan Malaysia.

Antibacterial activity of zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnO-NPs) has received
significant interest worldwide particularly by the implementation of
nanotechnology to synthesize particles in the nanometer region. Many
microorganisms exist in the range from hundreds of nanometers to tens of
micrometers. ZnO-NPs exhibit attractive antibacterial properties due to increased
specific surface area as the reduced particle size leading to enhanced particle
surface reactivity. ZnO is a bio-safe material that possesses photo-oxidizing and
photocatalysis impacts on chemical and biological species. This review covered
ZnO-NPs antibacterial activity including testing methods, impact of UV
illumination, ZnO particle properties (size, concentration, morphology, and
defects), particle surface modification, and minimum inhibitory concentration.
Particular emphasize was given to bactericidal and bacteriostatic mechanisms with
focus on generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) including hydrogen peroxide 
(H2O2), OH- (hydroxyl radicals), and O2 -2 (peroxide). ROS has been a major
factor for several mechanisms including cell wall damage due to ZnO-localized
interaction, enhanced membrane permeability, internalization of NPs due to loss
of proton motive force and uptake of toxic dissolved zinc ions. These have led to
mitochondria weakness, intracellular outflow, and release in gene expression of
oxidative stress which caused eventual cell growth inhibition and cell death. In 
some cases, enhanced antibacterial activity can be attributed to surface defects 
on ZnO abrasive surface texture. One functional application of the ZnO
antibacterial bioactivity was discussed in food packaging industry where ZnO-NPs 
are used as an antibacterial agent toward foodborne diseases. Proper
incorporation of ZnO-NPs into packaging materials can cause interaction with
foodborne pathogens, thereby releasing NPs onto food surface where they come in
contact with bad bacteria and cause the bacterial death and/or inhibition.

DOI: 10.1007/s40820-015-0040-x 
PMCID: PMC6223899
PMID: 30464967 

