
1. J Immunol. 2019 Jan 1;202(1):218-227. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1800334. Epub 2018
Dec 3.

NLRP10 Affects the Stability of Abin-1 To Control Inflammatory Responses.

Mirza N(1), Sowa AS(1), Lautz K(2), Kufer TA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nutritional Medicine, University of Hohenheim, 70593 Stuttgart,
Germany; and.
(2)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University of
Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany.
(3)Institute of Nutritional Medicine, University of Hohenheim, 70593 Stuttgart,
Germany; and Thomas.kufer@uni-hohenheim.de.

NOD-like receptors (NLR) are critical regulators of innate immune signaling. The 
NLR family consists of 22 human proteins with a conserved structure containing a 
central oligomerization NACHT domain, an N-terminal interaction domain, and a
variable number of C-terminal leucine-rich repeats. Most NLR proteins function as
cytosolic pattern recognition receptors with activation of downstream
inflammasome signaling, NF-κB, or MAPK activation. Although NLRP10 is the only
NLR protein lacking the leucine rich repeats, it has been implicated in multiple 
immune pathways, including the regulation of inflammatory responses toward
Leishmania major and Shigella flexneri infection. In this study, we identify
Abin-1, a negative regulator of NF-κB, as an interaction partner of NLRP10 that
binds to the NACHT domain of NLRP10. Using S. flexneri as an infection model in
human epithelial cells, our work reveals a novel function of NLRP10 in
destabilizing Abin-1, resulting in enhanced proinflammatory signaling. Our data
give insight into the molecular mechanism underlying the function of NLRP10 in
innate immune responses.

Copyright © 2018 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1800334 
PMID: 30510071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

