
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2019 Mar;68:35-42. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.12.001. Epub
2018 Dec 3.

Differentiation between persistent infection/colonization and
re-infection/re-colonization of Mycobacterium abscessus isolated from patients in
Northeast Thailand.

Kham-Ngam I(1), Chetchotisakd P(2), Ananta P(3), Chaimanee P(4), Reechaipichitkul
W(2), Lulitanond V(1), Namwat W(1), Faksri K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, Thailand; Research and Diagnostic Center for Emerging Infectious Diseases, 
Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(2)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, 
Thailand.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, Thailand; Clinical Microbiology Unit, Srinagarind Hospital, Faculty of
Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(4)Clinical Microbiology Unit, Srinagarind Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Khon
Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, Thailand; Research and Diagnostic Center for Emerging Infectious Diseases, 
Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand. Electronic address:
kiatichai@kku.ac.th.

Mycobacterium abscessus can cause true infection or be present in the host as a
harmless colonist. The ability of M. abscessus to cause disease and develop drug 
resistance is known to have a genetic basis. We aimed to differentiate between
persistent infection and reinfection using multilocus sequence typing (MLST) and 
to study the genetic diversity of M. abscessus relative to multi-organ infection 
and drug resistance in Northeast Thailand. DNA was extracted from 62 M. abscessus
isolates (24 cases). The following genes were sequenced: argH, cya, glpK, gnd,
murC, pta, purH and rpoB. Drug susceptibility tests were performed using broth
microdilution. Subspecies classification and phylogeny were determined. Among the
24 cases (62 isolates), 19 cases (49 isolates) were of true NTM infection and 5
cases (13 isolates) examples of colonization. Two subspecies, M. abscessus subsp.
massiliense (12 cases, 32 isolates) and M. abscessus subsp. abscessus (12 cases, 
30 isolates) were identified. The major sequence type (ST) was ST227. Two clonal 
groups among patients were found; clonal cluster I (5 cases, 8 isolates) and
clonal cluster II (2 cases, 4 isolates) but no epidemiological link was apparent.
Reinfection (2 cases with different clones of M. abscessus strains; >9 SNPs
different) and persistent infection (14 cases with the same clone; <6 SNPs) were 
distinguished based on a phylogeny. Based on these SNP cutoff values, 3 cases of 
persistent colonization (same strain through time) and 2 cases of re-colonization
(different strains through time) were identified. M. abscessus subsp. abscessus
was significantly associated with clarithromycin resistance (p < .001) and
multi-organ infection (p = .03). Molecular epidemiology based on MLST can be used
to differentiate between reinfection vs persistent infection, persistent
colonization vs re-colonization. ST227 was the main epidemic strain in Northeast 
Thailand.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.12.001 
PMID: 30521865  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

