
1. Transplant Proc. 2018 Dec;50(10):4071-4074. doi:
10.1016/j.transproceed.2018.03.008. Epub 2018 Mar 10.

Recurrent Bacteremia After Heart Transplantation Due to Abandoned Lead Fragment
in an Anonymous Vein-A Case Report.

Burger H(1), Ziegelhoeffer T(2), Schoenburg M(1), Richter M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Kerckhoff Klinik, Bad Nauheim, Germany.
(2)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Kerckhoff Klinik, Bad Nauheim, Germany.
Electronic address: t.ziegelhoeffer@kerckhoff-klinik.de.

Heart transplantation (HTx) represents the "gold standard" in end-stage heart
failure therapy. Due to their severe heart failure and for prevention of sudden
cardiac death, the majority of patients presenting for HTx will have a history of
an implanted cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD). Usually, within the scope of HTx, 
all cardiac-implanted electronic device components are removed. In rare cases
these efforts fail and some material remains. The abandoned lead fragments can
cause serious complications. The case presented herein involves a patient with
recurrent bacteremia after successful HTx originating from an abandoned and
infected lead fragment. In 2016, a 64-year-old man received a donor heart
transplant due to end-stage heart failure. Unfortunately, during the procedure,
not all components of an ICD implanted in 2007 could be removed. An initially
event-free period was followed by recurrent fever attacks and staphylococcal
bacteremia was diagnosed. After an extensive search, the source of the bacteremia
was identified by positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT), and 
percutaneous extraction of the abandoned and infected ICD lead fragment was
scheduled. The fragment was extracted using a minimally invasive approach via
percutaneous femoral vein access. The patient was discharged 3 days later, with
no further complications. This case highlights the need for conscientious and
complete removal of foreign material in the HTx setting. Difficult-to-diagnose
sources of infection could be reliably identified by PET-CT. When required,
extraction of the foreign body should be done using a minimally invasive
approach.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2018.03.008 
PMID: 30577318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

