
1. ACS Synth Biol. 2019 Feb 15;8(2):332-345. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.8b00372. Epub
2019 Jan 25.

Metabolic Engineering Strategies Based on Secondary Messengers (p)ppGpp and
C-di-GMP To Increase Erythromycin Yield in Saccharopolyspora erythraea.

Xu Z(1)(2), You D(2), Tang LY(2), Zhou Y(2), Ye BC(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Engineering Biology and Health, Collaborative Innovation Center
of Yangtze River Delta Region Green Pharmaceuticals, College of Pharmaceutical
Sciences , Zhejiang University of Technology , Hangzhou 310014 , Zhejiang ,
China.
(2)Lab of Biosystems and Microanalysis, State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor
Engineering , East China University of Science and Technology , Shanghai 200237 ,
China.

Secondary messengers (such as (p)ppGpp and c-di-GMP) were proved to play
important roles in antibiotic biosynthesis in actinobacteria. In this study, we
found that transcription levels of erythromycin-biosynthetic ( ery) genes were
upregulated in nutrient limitation, which depended on (p)ppGpp in
Saccharopolyspora erythraea. Further study demonstrated that the expression of
ery genes and intracellular concentrations of (p)ppGpp showed synchronization
during culture process. The erythromycin yield was significantly improved (about 
200%) by increasing intracellular concentration of (p)ppGpp through introduction 
of C-terminally truncated (p)ppGpp synthetase RelA (1.43 kb of the N-terminal
segment) from Streptomyces coelicolor into S. erythraea strain NRRL2338 (named as
WT/pIB-P BAD- relA1-489). As the intracellular concentration of (p)ppGpp in an
industrial erythromycin-high-producing strain E3 was greatly higher (about 10- to
100-fold) than WT strain, the applications of the above-described strategy did
not work in E3 strain. Further research revealed that low concentration of
2-oxoglutarate in E3 strain exerted a "nitrogen-rich" pseudosignal, leading to
the downregulation of nitrogen metabolism genes, which limited the use of
nitrogen sources and thus the high intracellular (p)ppGpp concentration.
Furthermore, the secondary messenger, c-di-GMP, was proved to be able to activate
ery genes transcription by enhancing binding of BldD to promoters of ery genes.
Overexpressing the diguanylate cyclase CdgB from S. coelicolor in S. erythraea
increased the intracellular c-di-GMP concentration, and improved erythromycin
production. These findings demonstrated that increasing the concentration of
intracellular secondary messengers can activate ery genes transcription, and
provided new strategies for designing metabolic engineering based on secondary
messengers to improve antibiotics yield in actinobacteria.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.8b00372 
PMID: 30632732  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

