
1. Autophagy. 2019 May;15(5):796-812. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2019.1569297. Epub 2019 
Jan 24.

Macrophages target Salmonella by Lc3-associated phagocytosis in a systemic
infection model.

Masud S(1), Prajsnar TK(1), Torraca V(1), Lamers GEM(1), Benning M(1), Van Der
Vaart M(1), Meijer AH(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Biology Leiden , Leiden University , Leiden , The Netherlands.

Innate immune defense against intracellular pathogens, like Salmonella, relies
heavily on the autophagy machinery of the host. This response is studied
intensively in epithelial cells, the target of Salmonella during gastrointestinal
infections. However, little is known of the role that autophagy plays in
macrophages, the predominant carriers of this pathogen during systemic disease.
Here we utilize a zebrafish embryo model to study the interaction of S. enterica 
serovar Typhimurium with the macroautophagy/autophagy machinery of macrophages in
vivo. We show that phagocytosis of live but not heat-killed Salmonella triggers
recruitment of the autophagy marker GFP-Lc3 in a variety of patterns labeling
tight or spacious bacteria-containing compartments, also revealed by electron
microscopy. Neutrophils display similar GFP-Lc3 associations, but genetic
modulation of the neutrophil/macrophage balance and ablation experiments show
that macrophages are critical for the defense response. Deficiency of atg5
reduces GFP-Lc3 recruitment and impairs host resistance, in contrast to atg13
deficiency, indicating that Lc3-Salmonella association at this stage is
independent of the autophagy preinitiation complex and that macrophages target
Salmonella by Lc3-associated phagocytosis (LAP). In agreement, GFP-Lc3
recruitment and host resistance are impaired by deficiency of Rubcn/Rubicon,
known as a negative regulator of canonical autophagy and an inducer of LAP. We
also found strict dependency on NADPH oxidase, another essential factor for LAP. 
Both Rubcn and NADPH oxidase are required to activate a Salmonella biosensor for 
reactive oxygen species inside infected macrophages. These results identify LAP
as the major host protective autophagy-related pathway responsible for macrophage
defense against Salmonella during systemic infection. Abbreviations: ATG:
autophagy related gene; BECN1: Beclin 1; CFU: colony forming units; CYBA/P22PHOX:
cytochrome b-245, alpha chain; CYBB/NOX2: cytochrome b-245 beta chain; dpf: days 
post fertilization; EGFP: enhanced green fluorescent protein; GFP: green
fluorescent protein; hfp: hours post fertilization; hpi: hours post infection;
IRF8: interferon regulatory factor 8; Lcp1/L-plastin: lymphocyte cytosolic
protein 1; LAP: LC3-associated phagocytosis; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule-associated 
protein 1A/1B-light chain 3; mCherry: red fluorescent protein; mpeg1: macrophage 
expressed gene 1; mpx: myeloid specific peroxidase; NADPH oxidase: nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase; NCF4/P40PHOX: neutrophil cytosolic factor
4; NTR-mCherry: nitroreductase-mCherry fusion; PTU: phenylthiourea; PtdIns3K:
class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; PtdIns3P: phosphatidylinositol
3-phosphate; RB1CC1/FIP200: RB-1 inducible coiled coin 1; ROS: reactive oxygen
species; RT-PCR: reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction; RUBCN/RUBICON: 
RUN and cysteine rich domain containing BECN1-interacting protein; SCV:
Salmonella-containing vacuole; S. Typhimurium/S.T: Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium; TEM: transmission electron microscopy; Tg: transgenic; TSA: tyramide
signal amplification; ULK1/2: unc-51-like autophagy activating kinase 1/2; UVRAG:
UVRAG: UV radiation resistance associated; wt: wild type.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2019.1569297 
PMCID: PMC6526873
PMID: 30676840  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

