
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Feb 4;9(1):1360. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-38124-y.

Diverse hydrocarbon biosynthetic enzymes can substitute for olefin synthase in
the cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002.

Knoot CJ(1), Pakrasi HB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, 63130, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, 63130, USA.
pakrasi@wustl.edu.

Cyanobacteria are among only a few organisms that naturally synthesize long-chain
alkane and alkene hydrocarbons. Cyanobacteria use one of two pathways to
synthesize alka/enes, either acyl-ACP reductase (Aar) and aldehyde deformylating 
oxygenase (Ado) or olefin synthase (Ols). The genomes of cyanobacteria encode one
of these pathways but never both, suggesting a mutual exclusivity. We studied
hydrocarbon pathway compatibility using the model cyanobacterium Synechococcus
sp. PCC 7002 (S7002) by co-expressing Ado/Aar and Ols and by entirely replacing
Ols with three other types of hydrocarbon biosynthetic pathways. We find that
Ado/Aar and Ols can co-exist and that slower growth occurs only when Ado/Aar are 
overexpressed at 38 °C. Furthermore, Ado/Aar and the non-cyanobacterial enzymes
UndA and fatty acid photodecarboxylase are able to substitute for Ols in a
knockout strain and conditionally rescue slow growth. Production of hydrocarbons 
by UndA in S7002 required a rational mutation to increase substrate range.
Expression of the non-native enzymes in S7002 afforded unique hydrocarbon
profiles and alka/enes not naturally produced by cyanobacteria. This suggests
that the biosynthetic enzyme and the resulting types of hydrocarbons are not
critical to supporting growth. Exchanging or mixing hydrocarbon pathways could
enable production of novel types of CO2-derived hydrocarbons in cyanobacteria.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-38124-y 
PMCID: PMC6361979
PMID: 30718738  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

