
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2019 May;88:284-292. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2019.02.058. Epub
2019 Mar 5.

Molecular cloning, characterization and expression analysis of S- adenosyl-
L-homocysteine hydrolase (SAHH) during the pathogenic infection of Litopenaeus
vannamei by Vibrio alginolyticus.

Liang Q(1), Ou M(1), Ren Y(1), Yao Z(1), Hu R(1), Li J(1), Liu Y(1), Wang W(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, 510631, PR 
China; Key Laboratory of Ecology and Environmental Science in Guangdong Higher
Education, PR China; Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Subtropical Biodiversity and
Biomonitoring, PR China.
(2)College of Life Science, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, 510631, PR 
China; Key Laboratory of Ecology and Environmental Science in Guangdong Higher
Education, PR China; Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Subtropical Biodiversity and
Biomonitoring, PR China. Electronic address: wangwn@scnu.edu.cn.

SAHH is an enzyme, playing a significant role in the catalyzation of the
S-adenosyl homocysteine (SAH) into homocysteine (Hcy) and adenosine (Ado).
However, little is known information of the enzyme in crustaceans. In the present
study, SAHH cDNA was cloned from Litopenaeus vannamei (LvSAHH). The full length
of the LvSAHH was found, containing a 5' UTR of 119 bp, an ORF of 1236 bp and a
3' UTR of 549 bp. The LvSAHH gene encoded a polypeptide of 411 amino acids with
an estimated molecular mass of 45.55 kD and a predicted isoelectronic point (pI) 
of 5.63. Comparison of the deduced amino acid sequence showed that LvSAHH has
high identity (70 %-82%) with other known species. qRT-PCR analysis revealed that
LvSAHH mRNA was broadly expressed in all of the examined tissues, while the
highest expression level was observed in muscle, followed by the expression in
stomach, gill, pleopod, hepatopancreas, heart, eye and intestine. Subcellular
localization analysis revealed that LvSAHH was predominantly localized in the
cytoplasm and nucleus. LvSAHH mRNA expression levels in hepatopancreas and gill
were significantly up-regulated from 6 to 48 h after V. alginolyticus injection
and reached the highest level (15-fold and 8-fold, p < 0.01) at 24 h,
respectively. Additionally, the Toll-like receptors (TLR) and interleukins-16
(IL-16) were detected in hepatopancreas and gill of LvSAHH-knockdown SAHH.
LvRack1, LvToll1, LvToll2, LvToll3 and LvIL-16 transcripts were decreased
significantly in LvSAHH-knockdown shrimp at 24 h post V. alginolyticus
stimulation in hepatopancreas and gill. But LvToll3 was no significant difference
in gill. In summary, these results indicated that LvSAHH may play a regulatory
role in the invertebrate innate immune defense by regulating TLR and IL-16
expression.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2019.02.058 
PMID: 30849500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

