
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Mar 12;20(5). pii: E1237. doi: 10.3390/ijms20051237.

CXCR2: A Novel Mediator of Mammary Tumor Bone Metastasis.

Sharma B(1), Nannuru KC(2), Saxena S(3), Varney ML(4), Singh RK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Gilead Biosciences, Foster City, CA 94404, USA. bhanu.micro@gmail.com.
(2)Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc., Terrytown, NY 10591, USA. knannuru@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5845, USA. sugandha.saxena@unmc.edu.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
NE 68198-5845, USA. mvarney@unmc.edu.
(5)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5845, USA. rsingh@unmc.edu.

Most breast cancer patients die due to bone metastasis. Although metastasis
accounts for 5% of the breast cancer cases, it is responsible for most of the
deaths. Sometimes even before the detection of a primary tumor, most of the
patients have bone and lymph node metastasis. Moreover, at the time of death,
breast cancer patients have the bulk of the tumor burden in their bones. Therapy 
options are available for the treatment of primary tumors, but there are minimal 
options for treating breast cancer patients who have bone metastasis. C-X-C motif
chemokine receptor type 2 (CXCR2) receptor-mediated signaling has been shown to
play a critical role during bone-related inflammations and its ligands C-X-C
motif chemokine ligand 6 (CXCL6) and 8 (CXCL8) aid in the resorption of bone
during bone metastasis. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that CXCR2
contributes to mammary tumor-induced osteolysis and bone metastasis. In the
present study, we examined the role of both tumor cell-derived and host-derived
CXCR2 in influencing mammary tumor cell bone metastasis. For understanding the
role of tumor cell-derived CXCR2, we utilized Cl66 CXCR2 knockdown (Cl66-shCXCR2)
and Cl66-Control cells (Cl66-Control) and observed a significant decrease in
tumor growth and tumor-induced osteolysis in Cl66-shCXCR2 cells in comparison
with the Cl66-Control cells. Next, for understanding the role of host-derived
CXCR2, we utilized mice with genomic knockdown of CXCR2 (Cxcr2-/-) and injected
Cl66-Luciferase (Cl66-Luc) or 4T1-Luciferase (4T1-Luc) cells. We observed
decreased bone destruction and metastasis in the bone of Cxcr2-/- mice. Our data 
suggest the importance of both tumor cell- and host-derived CXCR2 signaling in
the bone metastasis of breast cancer cells.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20051237 
PMCID: PMC6429058
PMID: 30871004  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

