
1. Huan Jing Ke Xue. 2019 Mar 8;40(3):1270-1279. doi: 10.13227/j.hjkx.201808032.

[Assessment of Ecosystem Health of an Urban River Based on the Microbe Index of
Biotic Integrity (M-IBI)].

[Article in Chinese]

Su Y(1), Xu YX(1), An WH(1), Wang YL(1), He ZC(1), Lou YW(1), Shen AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Resources and Soil Fertilizer Research Institute, Zhejiang
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021, China.

The index of biotic integrity (IBI) has been widely used in river ecosystem
health assessment. However, few studies have reported the application of
microbial communities in ecosystem health assessment so far, especially for urban
rivers. In this study, the Illumina high-throughput sequencing technique was
applied to analyze the microbial community diversity and composition of five
urban rivers selected in Zhejiang Province. Canonical correlation analyses (CCA) 
and Spearman correlation analysis were used to evaluate the relationship between 
each taxonomic group and the water quality properties to select the most
sensitive taxonomic groups as candidate indexes. The functional metrics,
including the relative abundance of pathogenic bacteria, pollutant-degrading
bacteria, and nutrient cycling bacteria were also selected as candidate indexes. 
Based on the distribution range, discriminatory power, and Pearson's correlation 
analysis for candidate indexes, five metrics, including the Shannon-index, the
number of microbial phyla, the relative abundance of Verrucomicrobia, Chlorobi,
and Mycobacterium were selected to establish a biotic integrity index of microbes
(M-IBI) evaluation system. A ratio score system was used to get metrics into a
uniform score for all sampling points, and the results showed that among the
urban river samples studied, most of them (40.9%) were at "Great" level, 45.5%
were at "Good" level, 9.1% were at "Moderate" level, and 4.5% were at "Bad"
level. The index of M-IBI effectively discriminated the least, medium, and highly
impaired sampling points and provided a good match with the water quality
(R=0.753, P<0.01), indicating that the M-IBI has potential as an index to
evaluate the health of urban river ecosystems.

DOI: 10.13227/j.hjkx.201808032 
PMID: 31087974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

