
1. Sci Total Environ. 2019 Apr 1;659:841-850. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.12.316. 
Epub 2018 Dec 28.

Grazers superimpose humidity effect on stream biofilm resistance and resilience
to dry-rewet stress.

Oprei A(1), Zlatanović S(2), Mutz M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Freshwater Conservation, BTU-Cottbus Senftenberg, 15526 Bad
Saarow, Germany. Electronic address: opreiann@b-tu.de.
(2)Department of Freshwater Conservation, BTU-Cottbus Senftenberg, 15526 Bad
Saarow, Germany.

Temperate low order streams increasingly experience intermittency and drying due 
to climate change. In comparison to well-studied Mediterranean streams, drying
events in canopied temperate streams occur under higher ambient humidity which
probably affects the metabolic response to drying. Previous work on drying
sediments (in temperate streams) did not consider the interactions of trophic
levels. We hypothesized that preservation of sediment moisture due to high
humidity increases resistance to drying in temperate streambed biofilms and fast 
resilience of biofilm activity after flow resumption. We also expected the
presence of macroinvertebrate grazers to modulate the biofilm response to
dry-rewet stress. Following a two-level factorial design in 24 microcosms, we
tested the effect of drying intensity (moderate and intense) and grazer presence 
and absence (P. antipodarum) on the activity of biofilm colonizing shallow
hyporheic sediment. We measured the community respiration over a drying period of
27 days, a single rewetting event and a follow-up of three days. Grazer presence 
stimulated biofilm community respiration (CRmic) in the permanently wet control, 
but decreased biofilm resistance to desiccation (<0.2% of pre-disturbed
activity), regardless of drying intensity. In the absence of grazers, higher
atmospheric humidity in moderately drying microcosms resulted in maintaining a
film of adhesive water and low CRmic (29% of pre-disturbed respiration) until the
end of the drying period. After flow resumption, the CRmic increased within 8 h, 
achieving 79-83% of pre-disturbed respiration (no grazers) and 15-41% (with
grazers), respectively. Results show that short dry periods in temperate streams,
even under high humidity, impact the streambed biofilm community negatively. The 
complex response and strong effect of grazer presence indicates that experiments 
including interactions of trophic levels and settings mimicking environmental
factors during dry-rewet stress are needed.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.12.316 
PMID: 31096414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

