
1. Chemosphere. 2019 Sep;231:301-307. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.05.102. Epub
2019 May 16.

Acute β-tetrabromoethylcyclohexane (β-TBECH) treatment inhibits the electrical
activity of rat Purkinje neurons.

Stojak BL(1), van Ginkel RA(2), Ivanco TL(3), Tomy GT(4), Fry WM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada. Electronic address: mark.fry@umanitoba.ca.

Brominated flame-retardants are environmentally pervasive and persistent
synthetic chemicals, some of which have been demonstrated to disrupt
neuroendocrine signaling and electrical activity of neurons.
1,2-dibromo-4-(1,2-dibromoethyl)-cyclohexane (TBECH) lacks the toxicity of other 
classes of BFRs, however its safety is still questioned, as little is known of
its neurological effects. Therefore, we sought to determine if TBECH could
acutely alter the electrical activity of Purkinje neurons maintained in vitro.
Briefly, cerebella from gestational day 20 rats were dissociated and maintained
for up to three weeks in culture. Action potentials of Purkinje neurons were
detected by cell-attached patch clamp before, during, and after application of
β-TBECH. β-TBECH decreased action potential activity in a dose-dependent manner
with an apparent EC50 of 396 nM. β-TBECH did not significantly alter the
coefficient of variation, a measure of the regularity of firing, suggesting that 
the mechanism of β-TBECH's effects on firing frequency may be independent of
Purkinje neuron intracellular calcium handling. Because levels of β-TBECH in
exposed individuals may not approach the EC50, these data suggest that any
abnormal neurodevelopment or behavior linked with β-TBECH exposure may result
from endocrinological effects as opposed to direct disruption of electrical
activity.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.05.102 
PMID: 31129411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

