
1. Front Immunol. 2019 May 3;10:984. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00984. eCollection
2019.

Dual RNA-Seq Unveils Pseudomonas plecoglossicida htpG Gene Functions During
Host-Pathogen Interactions With Epinephelus coioides.

Huang L(1), Zhao L(1), Liu W(1), Xu X(1), Su Y(2), Qin Y(1), Yan Q(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture for the East China Sea, Fisheries
College, Jimei University, Ministry of Agriculture, Xiamen, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Large Yellow Croaker Breeding, Ningde, China.

Pseudomonas plecoglossicida is a temperature-dependent opportunistic pathogen
which is associated with a variety of diseases in fish. During the development of
"white nodules" disease, the expression of htpG in P. plecoglossicida was found
to be significantly up-regulated at its virulent temperature of 18Â°C. The
infection of htpG-RNAi strain resulted in the onset time delay, reduction in
mortality and infection symptoms in spleen of Epinephelus coioides, and affected 
the bacterial tissue colonization. In order to reveal the effect of htpG
silencing of P. plecoglossicida on the virulence regulation in P. plecoglossicida
and immune response in E. coioides, dual RNA-seq was performed and a
pathogen-host integration network was constructed. Our results showed that
infection induced the expression of host genes related to immune response, but
attenuated the expression of bacterial virulence genes. Novel integration was
found between host immune genes and bacterial virulence genes, while IL6, IL1R2, 
IL1B, and TLR5 played key roles in the network. Further analysis with GeneMANIA
indicated that flgD and rplF might play key roles during the htpG-dependent
virulence regulation, which was in accordance with the reduced biofilm
production, motility and virulence in htpG-RNAi strain. Meanwhile, IL6 and IL1B
were found to play key roles during the defense against P. plecoglossicida, while
CELA2, TRY, CPA1, CPA2, and CPB1 were important targets for P. plecoglossicida
attacking to the host.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00984 
PMCID: PMC6509204
PMID: 31130962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

