
1. PLoS One. 2019 Jun 14;14(6):e0218449. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0218449.
eCollection 2019.

Cordycepin kills Mycobacterium tuberculosis through hijacking the bacterial
adenosine kinase.

Huang F(1), Li W(1), Xu H(1), Qin H(1), He ZG(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Life Science 
and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.

Cordycepin is an efficient component of Cordyceps spp, a traditional Chinese
medicine widely used for healthcare in China, and has been recently acted as a
strong anticancer agent for clinic. However, whether and how it may play a role
in combating tuberculosis, caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, remains unknown.
Here we report that cordycepin can kill Mycobacterium by hijacking the bacterial 
adenosine kinase (AdoK), a purine salvage enzyme responsible for the
phosphorylation of adenosine (Ado) to adenosine monophosphate (AMP). We show that
cordycepin is a poor AdoK substrate but it competitively inhibits the catalytic
activity of AdoK for adenosine phosphorylation. Cordycepin does not affect the
activity of the human adenosine kinase (hAdoK), whereas hAdoK phosphorylates
cordycepin to produce a new monophosphate derivative. Co-use of cordycepin and
deoxycoformycin, an inhibitor of adenosine deaminase (ADD), more efficiently
kills M. bovis and M. tuberculosis. The add-deleted mycobacterium is more
sensitive to cordycepin. This study characterized cordycepin as a new
mycobactericidal compound and also uncovered a potential anti-mycobacterial
mechanism.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0218449 
PMCID: PMC6568415
PMID: 31199855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

