
1. Biochemistry. 2019 Jul 30;58(30):3314-3324. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.9b00277.
Epub 2019 Jul 15.

Complex Formation between Mur Enzymes from Streptococcus pneumoniae.

Miyachiro MM(1)(2), Granato D(1), Trindade DM(1), Ebel C(2), Paes Leme AF(1),
Dessen A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Brazilian Biosciences National Laboratory (LNBio), CNPEM , Campinas 13084-971 
, SÃ£o Paulo , Brazil.
(2)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CEA, Institut de Biologie Structurale (IBS) ,
F-38000 Grenoble , France.

Peptidoglycan is one of the major components of the bacterial cell wall, being
responsible for shape and stability. Due to its essential nature, its
biosynthetic pathway is the target for major antibiotics, and proteins involved
in its biosynthesis continue to be targeted for inhibitor studies. The
biosynthesis of its major building block, Lipid II, is initiated in the bacterial
cytoplasm with the sequential reactions catalyzed by Mur enzymes, which have been
suggested to form a multiprotein complex to facilitate shuttling of the building 
blocks toward the inner membrane. In this work, we purified MurC, MurD, MurE,
MurF, and MurG from the human pathogen Streptococcus pneumoniae and characterized
their interactions using chemical cross-linking, mass spectrometry, analytical
ultracentrifugation, and microscale thermophoresis. Mur ligases interact strongly
as binary complexes, with interaction regions mapping mostly to loop regions.
Interestingly, MurC, MurD, and MurE display 10-fold higher affinity for each
other than for MurF and MurG, suggesting that Mur ligases that catalyze the
initial reactions in the peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway could form a
subcomplex that could be important to facilitate Lipid II biosynthesis. The
interface between Mur proteins could represent a yet unexplored target for new
inhibitor studies that could lead to the development of novel antimicrobials.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.9b00277 
PMID: 31264408  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

