
1. Exp Dermatol. 2019 Sep;28(9):991-1001. doi: 10.1111/exd.14006. Epub 2019 Aug 19.

Seborrheic dermatitis-Looking beyond Malassezia.

Wikramanayake TC(1), Borda LJ(1), Miteva M(1), Paus R(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Phillip Frost Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, University 
of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.
(2)Centre for Dermatology Research, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(3)NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Manchester, UK.

Seborrhoeic Dermatitis (SD) is a very common chronic and/or relapsing
inflammatory skin disorder whose pathophysiology remains poorly understood. Yeast
of the genus Malassezia has long been regarded as a main predisposing factor,
even though causal relationship has not been firmly established. Additional
predisposing factors have been described, including sebaceous activity, host
immunity (especially HIV infection), epidermal barrier integrity, skin
microbiota, endocrine and neurologic factors, and environmental influences.
Genetic studies in humans and mouse models-with particularly interesting insights
from examining the Mpzl3 knockout mice and their SD-like skin phenotype, and
patients carrying a ZNF750 mutation-highlight defects in host immunity, epidermal
barrier and sebaceous activity. After synthesizing key evidence from the
literature, we propose that intrinsic host factors, such as changes in the amount
or composition of sebum and/or defective epidermal barrier, rather than
Malassezia, may form the basis of SD pathobiology. We argue that these intrinsic 
changes provide favourable conditions for the commensal Malassezia to
over-colonize and elicit host inflammatory response. Aberrant host immune
activity or failure to clear skin microbes may bypass the initial epidermal or
sebaceous abnormalities. We delineate specific future clinical investigations,
complemented by studies in suitable SD animal models, that dissect the roles of
different epidermal compartments and immune components as well as their crosstalk
and interactions with the skin microbiota during the process of SD. This research
perspective beyond the conventional Malassezia-centric view of SD pathogenesis is
expected to enable the development of better therapeutic interventions for the
management of recurrent SD.

Â© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.14006 
PMID: 31310695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

