
1. Sci Total Environ. 2019 Nov 15;691:885-895. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.07.051.
Epub 2019 Jul 4.

A simplified model to simulate bioaugmented anaerobic digestion of
lignocellulosic biomass: Biogas production efficiency related to microbiological 
data.

Ferraro A(1), Massini G(2), Mazzurco Miritana V(2), Signorini A(2), Race M(3),
Fabbricino M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil, Architectural and Environmental Engineering, University
of Naples "Federico II", Via Claudio 21, 80125 Naples, Italy. Electronic address:
alberto.ferraro3@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Energy Technologies, Italian National Agency for New
Technologies, Energy and Sustainable Economic Development (ENEA), Via
Anguillarese 301, 00123 Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, University of Cassino and
Southern Lazio, Via di Biasio 43, 03043 Cassino, Italy.
(4)Department of Civil, Architectural and Environmental Engineering, University
of Naples "Federico II", Via Claudio 21, 80125 Naples, Italy.

Mathematical model applications for the bioaugmented anaerobic digestion (BAD)
process seem to be lacking in the scientific literature, even more so when
related to microbiological data. The present study suggests a simplified
mathematical model to investigate and simulate the process kinetics of
bioaugmented anaerobic digestion (BAD) aimed at improving biogas production from 
wheat straw (WS). Bioaugmented conditions were obtained through a mixed inoculum 
of anaerobic ruminal fungi (ARF) and hydrogen-producing fermenting bacteria
(F210) added to a methanogenic inoculum. The investigation focused on two process
configurations characterized by a mono (I-BAD) and two-stage (II-BAD) process and
a conventional anaerobic digestion (AD) control test. Each configuration was used
on two operating scales (i.e., 120 ml and 12,000 ml reactor volume) to provide
different data sets for the calibration and validation of the mathematical model 
proposed. The model calibration step was used to determine the optimal values of 
selected parameters displaying higher significance for experimental result
predictability. The model calibration results highlighted a similar behavior for 
both BAD tests, which was further strengthened by a statistical analysis
supporting the observed correlation regardless of the BAD configuration involved.
The BAD configuration always enhanced the CH4 production (>70%) with a faster
kinetic in the II-BAD test. The microbiological results support the superior
performance of the II-BAD test, displaying higher Archaea fractions (up to 14.5% 
on day 23) with values more than double compared to I-BAD and triple compared to 
the AD test. Furthermore, the presence of Methanosarcina inside the Archaea guild
(6.4% and 4.5% at days 11 and 61, respectively) ensures a greater diversification
of the metabolic pathways and supports the strength of the process performance.
Cell density values are strongly in line with these results.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.07.051 
PMID: 31326812  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

