
1. Microb Pathog. 2019 Nov;136:103642. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103642. Epub 2019
Jul 19.

Characterization of the antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties of a
polysaccharide-based bioflocculant from Bacillus subtilis F9.

Giri SS(1), Ryu E(2), Park SC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Aquatic Biomedicine, College of Veterinary Medicine and Research
Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, South 
Korea. Electronic address: giribiotek@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratory of Aquatic Biomedicine, College of Veterinary Medicine and Research
Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, South 
Korea. Electronic address: luckyvet@naver.com.
(3)Laboratory of Aquatic Biomedicine, College of Veterinary Medicine and Research
Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, South 
Korea. Electronic address: parksec@snu.ac.kr.

Microbial flocculants are versatile class of novel biomacromolecules with
numerous potential industrial applications. This study sought to investigate the 
antimicrobial, antioxidant, and anti-inflammatory potential of a
polysaccharide-based bioflocculant (PBB) extracted from Bacillus subtilis F9. To 
achieve this, the antioxidant activity of different PBB concentrations(100 μg/mL 
̶ 1000 μg/mL) was first examined in vitro using 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl
(DPPH), hydroxyl radicals, and superoxide radical scavenging assays. Further, the
anti-inflammatory activity of PBB against lipopolysaccharide (LPS;
1 μg/mL)-induced inflammatory mediators released from headkidney (HK)-derived
macrophages of Labeo rohita was investigated. Our results revealed that the
capacities of 800 μg/mL of PBB to scavenge DPPH, hydroxyl radicals, and
superoxide radicals were 81.46 ± 1.37%, 66.34 ± 2.63%, and 78.03 ± 2.46%,
respectively, which were slightly higher that observed following treatment with
400 μg/mL of the positive control (ascorbic acid). Further, the radical
scavenging capacity of PBB was found to steadily increase with increasing
concentrations of PBB. Pre-treatment with PBB also inhibited nitric oxide
production in a dose-dependent manner. We next examined the effect of PBB on
proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, and IL-1β) and anti-inflammatory cytokines
(IL-10, TGF-β) via qRT-PCR and ELISA. We found that PBB markedly inhibited the
LPS-induced mRNA and protein expression levels of TNF-α and IL-1β, while it
significantly increased those of IL-10 and TGF-β. Further, PBB exhibited an
antibacterial activity against multiple food-borne pathogens with minimal
inhibitory concentration values in the range of 3 ̶ 11 mg/mL. Importantly, PBB
exhibited negligible cytotoxic effects against HK macrophages. Taken together
these results suggest that PBB may serve as a natural antioxidant for application
in functional therapies and may also be exploited for its anti-inflammatory
potential.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103642 
PMID: 31330263  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

