
1. Bull Soc Pathol Exot. 2019;112(2):71-78. doi: 10.3166/bspe-2019-0080.

[Clinical Features and Prognosis Factors of Spinal Tuberculosis in Northern
Tunisia: A Case Series of 60 Patients].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Saidane O(1), Sellami M(1), Cheikhrouhou S(2), Mahmoud I(1), Ben Tekaya A(1),
Tekaya R(1), Abdelmoula L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service de rhumatologie, faculté de médecine de Tunis, université de
Tunis-El-Manar, hôpital Charles-Nicolle, Tunisie.
(2)Laboratoire de parasitologie et mycologie, faculté de médecine de Tunis,
hôpital Charles-Nicolle, université de Tunis-El-Manar, Tunisie.

Spondylodiscitis is a common but potentially serious form of extra-pulmonary
tuberculosis. Very few descriptions are known from Tunisia. We have conducted a
retrospective study including 60 cases of spinal tuberculosis, performed over a
period of 20 years (1996-2016). The diagnosis was retained on bacteriological,
radiological and anatomopathologic evidence. Sixty cases including 31 women and
29 men of spinal tuberculosis were involved. The mean age was 54.4 ± 21.3 years. 
The delay from onset to diagnosis was 6 months (1-14). Lumbar region was the most
common infection site (68%). The magnetic resonance imaging has confirmed spinal 
infection in all cases. The percutaneous image guided spinal biopsy was
conclusive in 24/42 cases (57.1%). All patients were put under anti-tuberculosis 
treatment with total treatment duration of 14 months. Fourteen patients underwent
surgical act. The outcome was favorable in 42 cases (7%). Advanced age ≥ 65 years
(P = 0.026), radiological evidence of spinal cord compression (P = 0.033) or
abscess (P = 0.024), hyperleucocytosis higher than 11,500 elements/mm3 (0.031),
or fractures on bone imaging (P = 0.018) and vertebral deformity (P < 0.001) were
strongly linked to a bad outcome. Early diagnosis and treatment onset may ensure 
better outcomes and reduce neurological complications and vertebral deformity.

Publisher: La spondylodiscite est une forme fréquente et potentiellement grave de
tuberculose extrapulmonaire. Elle n'a été que peu décrite en Tunisie. Nous avons 
mené une étude rétrospective portant sur 60 cas de spondylodiscite tuberculeuse
(SPDT) colligés sur une période de 20 ans (1996–2016) dans un centre hospitalier 
universitaire au nord de la Tunisie. Le diagnostic a été retenu sur des preuves
bactériologiques, anatomopathologiques et radiologiques. Il s'agit de 31 femmes
et de 29 hommes âgés en moyenne de 54,4 ± 21,3 ans. Le délai moyen de diagnostic 
était de six mois (1–14 mois). L'étage lombaire était le plus touché (68 %).
L'imagerie par résonance magnétique était évocatrice du diagnostic dans tous les 
cas. La ponction-biopsie discovertébrale a permis de porter le diagnostic dans
24/42 cas (57,1 %), fondé sur des preuves histologiques. Tous les patients ont
reçu un traitement antituberculeux d'une durée moyenne de 14 mois, associé à un
geste interventionnel dans 14 cas. L'évolution était favorable dans 42 cas (70
%). Les facteurs de mauvais pronostic étaient l'âge avancé de plus de 65 ans
(p = 0,026), la présence de signes radiologiques de compression médullaire
(p = 0,033) ou d'abcès paravertébral (p = 0,024), l'hyperleucocytose initiale
supérieure ou égale à 11 500 éléments/mm3 (p = 0,031), la présence de fracture
vertébrale (p = 0,018) et d'une déformation vertébrale (p < 0,001). La SPDT est
une maladie insidieuse dont le diagnostic et le traitement précoces sont la clé
pour éviter les complications neurologiques et ostéoarticulaires.
DOI: 10.3166/bspe-2019-0080 
PMID: 31478620  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare

