
1. J Med Microbiol. 2019 Oct;68(10):1455-1465. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.001070. Epub 2019 
Sep 3.

Improved quadruplex real-time PCR assay for the diagnosis of diphtheria.

Badell E(1)(2), Guillot S(2), Tulliez M(2), Pascal M(2), Panunzi LG(2), Rose
S(3), Litt D(3), Fry NK(4)(3), Brisse S(2)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, National Reference Center for Corynebacteria of the
diphtheriae complex, Paris, France.
(2)Institut Pasteur, Biodiversity and Epidemiology of Bacterial Pathogens, Paris,
France.
(3)Respiratory and Vaccine Preventable Bacteria Reference Unit, National
Infection Service, Public Health England, London, UK.
(4)Immunisation and Countermeasures Division, National Infection Service, Public 
Health England, London, UK.

Introduction. Diphtheria is caused by toxigenic strains of Corynebacterium
diphtheriae, Corynebacterium ulcerans and Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis. For
diagnostic purposes, species identification and detection of toxigenic strains
(diphtheria toxin (tox)-positive strains) is typically performed using end-point 
PCR. A faster quadruplex real-time PCR (qPCR) was recently developed (De Zoysa et
al. J . Med . Microbiol. 2016;65(12):1521-1527).Aims. We aimed to improve the
quadruplex method by adding a 16S rRNA gene target as an internal processing
control, providing confirmation of the presence of bacterial DNA in the assays,
thus avoiding the possibility of false-negative reporting.Methodology. Universal 
16S rRNA gene primers and a probe were defined. The novel method was tested using
36 bacterial isolates and 17 clinical samples. Experimental robustness to
temperature and reagent concentration variations was assessed.Results. The method
allows detection of the tox gene and distinguishing C. diphtheriae (including the
newly described species Corynebacterium belfantii) from C. ulcerans and C.
pseudotuberculosis. Complete diagnostic specificity, sensitivity and experimental
robustness were demonstrated. The lower limit of detection for C. diphtheriae, C.
ulcerans and tox targets was 1.86 genome copies per 5 µl reaction volume. The
method was successfully used on two distinct qPCR technologies (LightCycler 480, 
Roche Diagnostics and Rotor-Gene Q, Qiagen) and in two laboratories (Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France and Public Health England - National Infection Service,
London, UK).Conclusion. This work describes validation of the improved qPCR
quadruplex method and supports its implementation for the biological diagnosis of
diphtheria.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.001070 
PMID: 31478826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

