
1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Aug 27;10:1928. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.01928. eCollection 
2019.

New Halonotius Species Provide Genomics-Based Insights Into Cobalamin Synthesis
in Haloarchaea.

Durán-Viseras A(1), Andrei AS(2), Ghai R(2), Sánchez-Porro C(1), Ventosa A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University
of Seville, Seville, Spain.
(2)Department of Aquatic Microbial Ecology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Biology
Centre of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, České Budějovice,
Czechia.

Hypersaline aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems display a cosmopolitan
distribution. These environments teem with microbes and harbor a plethora of
prokaryotic lineages that evaded ecological characterization due to the prior
inability to cultivate them or to access their genomic information. In order to
close the current knowledge gap, we performed two sampling and isolation
campaigns in the saline soils of the Odiel Saltmarshes and the salterns of Isla
Cristina (Huelva, Spain). From the isolated haloarchaeal strains subjected to
high-throughput phylogenetic screening, two were chosen (F15BT and F9-27T) for
physiological and genomic characterization due of their relatedness to the genus 
Halonotius. Comparative genomic analyses were carried out between the isolated
strains and the genomes of previously described species Halonotius pteroides CECT
7525T, Halonotius aquaticus F13-13T and environmentaly recovered
metagenome-assembled representatives of the genus Halonotius. The topology of the
phylogenomic tree showed agreement with the phylogenetic ones based on 16S rRNA
and rpoB' genes, and together with average amino acid and nucleotide identities
suggested the two strains as novel species within the genus. We propose the names
Halonotius terrestris sp. nov. (type strain F15BT = CECT 9688T = CCM 8954T) and
Halonotius roseus sp. nov. (type strain F9-27T = CECT 9745T = CCM 8956T) for
these strains. Comparative genomic analyses within the genus highlighted a
typical salt-in signature, characterized by acidic proteomes with low isoelectric
points, and indicated heterotrophic aerobic lifestyles. Genome-scale metabolic
reconstructions revealed that the newly proposed species encode all the necessary
enzymatic reactions involved in cobalamin (vitamin B12) biosynthesis. Based on
the worldwide distribution of the genus and its abundance in hypersaline habitats
we postulate that its members perform a critical function by being able to
provide "expensive" commodities (i.e., vitamin B12) to the halophilic microbial
communities at large.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.01928 
PMCID: PMC6719526
PMID: 31507553 

