
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2020 Feb;70(2):820-826. doi: 10.1099/ijsem.0.003832.

Saccharospirillum alexandrii sp. nov., isolated from the toxigenic marine
dinoflagellate Alexandrium catenella LZT09.

Yang Q(1), Jiang Z(1), Zhou X(1), Xie Z(2), Wang Y(1), Wang D(1), Feng L(1), Yang
G(1), Ge Y(3), Zhang X(4)(1).

Author information: 
(1)ABI Group, College of Marine Science and Technology, Zhejiang Ocean
University, Zhoushan 316021, PR China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Marine Environmental Science, College of the
Environment and Ecology, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, PR China.
(3)Institute of Innovation and Application, Zhejiang Ocean University, Zhoushan
316021, PR China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Health Risk Factors for Seafood of Zhejiang Province,
Zhoushan Municipal Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Zhoushan 316021, PR
China.

A Gram-stain-negative, strictly aerobic, non-motile and non-pigmented spirillum, 
designated strain LZ-5T, was isolated from cultures of the paralytic shellfish
poisoning (PSP) toxin-producing marine dinoflagellate Alexandrium catenella LZT09
collected from the Zhoushan sea area in the East China Sea during an algal bloom.
The isolate grew at 4-40 °C (optimum, 25-33 °C) and pH 5.0-9.0 (optimum, 7.5) in 
the presence of 0.5-10 % (w/v) NaCl (optimum, 4.0 %). Phylogenetic analysis based
on 16S rRNA gene sequences revealed that strain LZ-5T clearly belonged to the
genus Saccharospirillum of the family Saccharospirillaceae. Strain LZ-5T shared
highest 16S rRNA gene sequence similarity with Saccharospirillum impatiens
EL-105T (98.9 %), Saccharospirillum mangrovi HK-33T (97.2 %), Saccharospirillum
correiae CPA1T (96.8 %), Saccharospirillum salsuginis YIM-Y25T (96.8 %) and
Saccharospirillum aestuarii IMCC 4453T (95.1 %). The average nucleotide identity 
and in silico DNA-DNA hybridization between strain LZ-5T and the two most closely
related Saccharospirillum strains, S. impatiens EL-105T and S. mangrovi HK-33T,
were 82.2 and 19.3 %, and 72.2 and 13.2 %, respectively. The predominant
respiratory quinone of strain LZ-5T was Q-8, and the major fatty acids were
summed feature 8 (C18 : 1ω7c and/or C18 : 1ω6c), summed feature 3 (C16 : 1ω7c
and/or C16 : 1ω6c) and C16 : 0. The polar lipids of strain LZ-5T were
diphosphatidylglycerol (DPG), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), phosphatidylcholine 
(PC), glycolipid (GL), two unidentified glycophospholipids (GPLs), three
unidentified aminophospholipids (APLs) and two unidentified lipids. The genomic
DNA G+C content was 57.2 mol%. On the basis of this polyphasic characterization, 
strain LZ-5T represents a novel species of the genus Saccharospirillum, for which
the name Saccharospirillum alexandrii sp. nov. is proposed. The type strain is
LZ-5T (=KCTC 62460T=CCTCC AB2017232T).

DOI: 10.1099/ijsem.0.003832 
PMID: 31671052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

