
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2019 Dec;95:606-616. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2019.10.052. Epub
2019 Nov 1.

Oral administration of transgenic biosafe microorganism containing antimicrobial 
peptide enhances the survival of tilapia fry infected bacterial pathogen.

Lee BC(1), Hung CW(2), Lin CY(1), Shih CH(3), Tsai HJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Mackay Medical College, New Taipei City,
Taiwan, ROC.
(2)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(3)Department of Biosystems Engineering, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ,
USA.
(4)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Mackay Medical College, New Taipei City,
Taiwan, ROC. Electronic address: hjtsai@ntu.edu.tw.

To develop an alternative to conventional antibiotics used in the aquaculture and
livestock industries, we employed Bacillus subtilis, considered a biosafe
microorganism, to express the degradable antimicrobial peptide lactoferricin. An 
expression plasmid pP43-6LFBII-GFP, in which reporter GFP cDNA was fused
downstream of lactoferricin cDNA driven by an endogenous constitutive P43
promoter was electroporated into B. subtilis, followed by regeneration and
cultivation. The putative colonies harboring plasmids were primarily screened by 
PCR-amplification of lactoferricin cDNA. Four transformants which were stable
inheritance of plasmid containing lactoferricin cDNA included strains T1, T4, T7 
and T13. Based on Western blot and Southern blot analyses, we found that
transgenic strains T1 and T13 not only highly expressed exogenous recombinant
lactoferricin, but also exhibited more stable inheritance of plasmids with 931
and 647 copies per cell, respectively. In the antibacterial in vitro experiment, 
the bactericidal activity of each microliter of cell lysate from transgenic
strains T1 and T13 (5 × 108 CFU) for Escherichia coli was equivalent to 56 and
53 ng of Ampicillin dosage, respectively, while for Staphylococcus epidermidis,
the equivalency T1 and T13 was 154 and 130 ng of Ampicillin dosage, respectively.
Equivalencies of bacterial activity for Vibrio parahaemolyticus and Edwardsiella 
tarda followed suit. In the antibacterial in vivo experiment, we oral-in-tube fed
tilapia fry (Oreochromis mossambicus X O. niloticus) with cell lysate from
transgenic strain T1 and T13 individually. After 1-h of incubation, we immersed
these treated fish fry in a water tank containing E. tarda (5 × 1011 CFU) for a
5-hr bacterial challenge. After one month cultivation, an average survival rate
of 63 and 67% was observed after having fed the fish fry with transgenic strains 
T1 and T13, respectively. However, the average survival rate of fish fry fed with
B. subtilis WT strain and transgenic strain T19 without expressing recombinant
lactoferricin reached only 5 and 9%, respectively. These data indicate that the
survival of fish fry infected by the intestinal pathogen tested could be
significantly enhanced by feeding transgenic B. subtilis containing antibacterial
peptide. Therefore, we suggest that this strategy could be applied to both
aquaculture and livestock industries to (i) reduce the dependency on conventional
antibiotics during seasonal outbreaks and (ii) eliminate the problem of
antibiotic resistance.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2019.10.052 
PMID: 31682999  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

