
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2020 Apr 15;149:1331-1338. doi:
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.11.046. Epub 2019 Nov 9.

Efficient wound healing composite hydrogel using Egyptian Avena sativa L.
polysaccharide containing β-glucan.

El Hosary R(1), El-Mancy SMS(2), El Deeb KS(3), Eid HH(3), El Tantawy ME(4),
Shams MM(4), Samir R(4), Assar NH(5), Sleem AA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, National Organization for Drug Control & Research
(NODCAR), Giza, Egypt.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics and Industrial Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy,
October 6 University, Giza, Egypt. Electronic address: shereenelmancy@o6u.edu.eg.
(3)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo University, Cairo,
Egypt.
(4)Department of Medicinal Plants and Natural Products, NODCAR, Giza, Egypt.
(5)Department of Microbiology, NODCAR, Giza, Egypt.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, National Research Centre, Giza, Egypt.

The purpose of this study was to develop an efficient wound healing
PVA-biopolymer composite hydrogel using the polysaccharide derived from Egyptian 
Avena sativa L. The prepared polysaccharide showed high β-glucan content which
accelerates wound healing. The β-glucan content was 13.28% and GC analysis
revealed that glucose was the major sugar component (71.19%). Different
PVA-polysaccharide hydrogels combined with different polymers and loaded with
0.3% bacitracin zinc were developed using the freezing-thawing method. The used
polymers were; polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), Carbopol 940 (CP),
hydroxyethylcellulose (HEC), hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC), and sodium
carboxymethylcellulose (Na CMC). The prepared hydrogels were characterized by
determination of gel fraction, swelling ratio, mechanical and bioadhesive
properties. The results revealed that hydrogels prepared using anionic (NaCMC and
CP) and more hydrophilic (HEC) polymers showed better swelling ratio, bioadhesive
and mechanical characters compared with hydrogels prepared using cationic (PVP)
or less hydrophilic (HPMC) polymers. For two selected formulations containing HEC
(F7) and NaCMC (F9), disk diffusion method and In vitro microbial penetration
were performed for microbiological assessment. In addition, In vivo evaluation of
the anti-inflammatory and wound healing activity compared with conventional
products were performed on rats. The results showed higher anti-inflammatory
activity of F7 (21.4% edema reduction) compared with F9 (19.8% edema reduction). 
Similarly, F7 showed better healing (99% relative wound size reduction) than F9
(75%). The current study revealed the potential of using the prepared Egyptian
Avena sativa L. polysaccharide and HEC for development of an efficient wound
healing dressing with antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory activities.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.11.046 
PMID: 31712156  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
have declared no conflict of interest.

