
1. J Vasc Surg. 1988 Oct;8(4):428-33.

One-stage versus two-stage amputation for wet gangrene of the lower extremity: a 
randomized study.

Fisher DF Jr(1), Clagett GP, Fry RE, Humble TH, Fry WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas
75235-9031.

Although the two-stage amputation technique entails an additional operation,
several authors have advocated this approach to deal with wet gangrene because it
allows primary wound closure with a reduced chance of wound infection. To examine
this issue, 47 patients with necrotizing wet gangrene of the foot were randomized
prospectively to receive either a one-stage amputation (definitive below- or
above-knee amputation with delayed secondary skin closure in 3 to 5 days) or a
two-stage amputation (open ankle guillotine amputation followed by definitive,
closed below- or above-knee amputation). Antibiotic coverage was standardized
with clindamycin and gentamicin used in all patients. Preoperative blood cultures
and intraoperative foot cultures were obtained, as well as cultures from the deep
muscle and lymphatic area along the saphenous vein to determine the presence of
bacteria at the level of initial amputation. Twenty-four patients (11 diabetic
and 13 nondiabetic) were randomized to the one-stage procedure. Twenty-three
patients (14 diabetic and nine nondiabetic) were randomized to the two-stage
procedure. Five of 24 patients in the one-stage group (21%) had positive muscle
cultures vs 10 of 23 patients in the two-stage group (43%). Two of 24 patients in
the one-stage group (8%) had positive lymphatic cultures vs 7 of 23 patients in
the two-stage group (30%). Five of 24 patients in the one-stage group (21%) had
wound complications attributable to the amputation technique vs none of 23
patients in the two-stage group (p = 0.05).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 3172378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

