
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Jan 21;86(3). pii: e01888-19. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01888-19. Print 2020 Jan 21.

Anaerobic Degradation of Syringic Acid by an Adapted Strain of Rhodopseudomonas
palustris.

Oshlag JZ(1)(2), Ma Y(1), Morse K(1), Burger BT(1), Lemke RA(1), Karlen SD(1)(3),
Myers KS(1), Donohue TJ(1)(4), Noguera DR(5)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center, Wisconsin Energy Institute, University 
of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison Wisconsin, USA.
(2)Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin, USA.
(4)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin, USA.
(5)Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center, Wisconsin Energy Institute, University 
of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison Wisconsin, USA dnoguera@wisc.edu.

While lignin represents a major fraction of the carbon in plant biomass,
biological strategies to convert the components of this heterogeneous polymer
into products of industrial and biotechnological value are lacking. Syringic acid
(3,5-dimethoxy-4-hydroxybenzoic acid) is a by-product of lignin degradation,
appearing in lignocellulosic hydrolysates, deconstructed lignin streams, and
other agricultural products. Rhodopseudomonas palustris CGA009 is a known
degrader of phenolic compounds under photoheterotrophic conditions via the
benzoyl coenzyme A (CoA) degradation (BAD) pathway. However, R. palustris CGA009 
is reported to be unable to metabolize meta-methoxylated phenolics, such as
syringic acid. We isolated a strain of R. palustris (strain SA008.1.07), adapted 
from CGA009, which can grow on syringic acid under photoheterotrophic conditions,
utilizing it as a sole source of organic carbon and reducing power. An SA008.1.07
mutant with an inactive benzoyl-CoA reductase structural gene was able to grow on
syringic acid, demonstrating that the metabolism of this aromatic compound is not
through the BAD pathway. Comparative gene expression analyses of SA008.1.07
implicated the involvement of products of the vanARB operon (rpa3619, rpa3620,
rpa3621), which has been described as catalyzing aerobic aromatic ring
demethylation in other bacteria, in anaerobic syringic acid degradation. In
addition, experiments with a vanARB deletion mutant demonstrated the involvement 
of the vanARB operon in anaerobic syringic acid degradation. These observations
provide new insights into the anaerobic degradation of meta-methoxylated and
other aromatics by R. palustris IMPORTANCE Lignin is the most abundant aromatic
polymer on Earth and a resource that could eventually substitute for fossil fuels
as a source of aromatic compounds for industrial and biotechnological
applications. Engineering microorganisms for the production of aromatic-based
biochemicals requires detailed knowledge of the metabolic pathways for the
degradation of aromatics that are present in lignin. Our isolation and analysis
of a Rhodopseudomonas palustris strain capable of syringic acid degradation
reveal a previously unknown metabolic route for aromatic degradation in R.
palustris This study highlights several key features of this pathway and sets the
stage for a more complete understanding of the microbial metabolic repertoire
required to metabolize aromatic compounds from lignin and other renewable
sources.

Copyright Â© 2020 Oshlag et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01888-19 
PMCID: PMC6974649
PMID: 31732577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

