
1. Microb Cell. 2019 Sep 30;6(11):509-523. doi: 10.15698/mic2019.11.697.

Transcriptomic and chemogenomic analyses unveil the essential role of
Com2-regulon in response and tolerance of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to stress
induced by sulfur dioxide.

Lage P(1)(2), Sampaio-Marques B(3)(4), Ludovico P(3)(4), Mira NP(5),
Mendes-Ferreira A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Escola de Ciências da Vida e
Ambiente; Vila Real, Portugal.
(2)BioISI - Biosystems & Integrative Sciences Institute, Campo Grande, Lisboa,
Portugal.
(3)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Medicine,
University of Minho, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal.
(4)ICVS/3B's - PT Government Associate Laboratory, Braga/Guimarães, Portugal.
(5)Institute for Bioengineering and Biosciences, Instituto Superior Técnico,
Department of Bioengineering, University of Lisbon, Portugal.

Comment in
    Microb Cell. 2019 Nov 21;6(12):527-530.

During vinification Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells are frequently exposed to high
concentrations of sulfur dioxide (SO2) that is used to avoid overgrowth of
unwanted bacteria or fungi present in the must. Up to now the characterization of
the molecular mechanisms by which S. cerevisiae responds and tolerates SO2 was
focused on the role of the sulfite efflux pump Ssu1 and investigation on the
involvement of other players has been scarce, especially at a genome-wide level. 
In this work, we uncovered the essential role of the poorly characterized
transcription factor Com2 in tolerance and response of S. cerevisiae to stress
induced by SO2 at the enologically relevant pH of 3.5. Transcriptomic analysis
revealed that Com2 controls, directly or indirectly, the expression of more than 
80% of the genes activated by SO2, a percentage much higher than the one that
could be attributed to any other stress-responsive transcription factor.
Large-scale phenotyping of the yeast haploid mutant collection led to the
identification of 50 Com2-targets contributing to the protection against SO2
including all the genes that compose the sulfate reduction pathway (MET3, MET14, 
MET16, MET5, MET10) and the majority of the genes required for biosynthesis of
lysine (LYS2, LYS21, LYS20, LYS14, LYS4, LYS5, LYS1 and LYS9) or arginine
(ARG5,6, ARG4, ARG2, ARG3, ARG7, ARG8, ORT1 and CPA1). Other uncovered
determinants of resistance to SO2 (not under the control of Com2) included genes 
required for function and assembly of the vacuolar proton pump and enzymes of the
antioxidant defense, consistent with the observed cytosolic and mitochondrial
accumulation of reactive oxygen species in SO2-stressed yeast cells.

DOI: 10.15698/mic2019.11.697 
PMCID: PMC6859422
PMID: 31799324 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no
conflict of interest.

