
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Nov 29;10:2530. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02530. eCollection
2019.

Mucosal Immunity and the FOXO1 Transcription Factors.

Graves DT(1), Milovanova TN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States.

FOXO1 transcription factors affect a number of cell types that are important in
the host response. Cell types whose functions are modulated by FOXO1 include
keratinocytes in the skin and mucosal dermis, neutrophils and macrophages,
dendritic cells, Tregs and B-cells. FOXO1 is activated by bacterial or cytokine
stimulation. Its translocation to the nucleus and binding to promoter regions of 
genes that have FOXO response elements is stimulated by the MAP kinase pathway
and inhibited by the PI3 kinase/AKT pathway. Downstream gene targets of FOXO1
include pro-inflammatory signaling molecules (TLR2, TLR4, IL-1β, and TNF-α),
wound healing factors (TGF-β, VEGF, and CTGF) adhesion molecules (integrins-β1,
-β3, -β6, αvβ3, CD11b, CD18, and ICAM-1), chemokine receptors (CCR7 and CXCR2), B
cell regulators (APRIL and BLYS), T-regulatory modulators (Foxp3 and CTLA-4),
antioxidants (GPX-2 and cytoglobin), and DNA repair enzymes (GADD45α). Each of
the above cell types are found in oral mucosa and modulated by bacteria or an
inflammatory microenvironment. FOXO1 contributes to the regulation of these
cells, which collectively maintain and repair the epithelial barrier, formation
and activation of Tregs that are needed to resolve inflammation, mobilization,
infiltration, and activation of anti-bacterial defenses in neutrophils, and the
homing of dendritic cells to lymph nodes to induce T-cell and B-cell responses.
The goal of the manuscript is to review how the transcription factor, FOXO1,
contributes to the activation and regulation of key leukocytes needed to maintain
homeostasis and respond to bacterial challenge in oral mucosal tissues. Examples 
are given with an emphasis on lineage specific deletion of Foxo1 to explore the
impact of FOXO1 on cell behavior, inflammation and susceptibility to infection.

Copyright © 2019 Graves and Milovanova.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02530 
PMCID: PMC6896163
PMID: 31849924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

