
1. Chemosphere. 2020 Apr;245:125549. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.125549. Epub
2019 Dec 16.

Evolution and distribution of resistance genes and bacterial community in water
and biofilm of a simulated fish-duck integrated pond with stress.

Zhou M(1), Xu Y(2), Ouyang P(1), Ling J(1), Cai Q(1), Huang L(1), Zhou X(1),
Zheng L(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Guangdong University of
Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China.
(2)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Guangdong University of
Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China. Electronic address: hopeybxu@163.com.

Integrated fish-duck pond is a common circular farming model in South China,
besides, it is also hot-spot for the co-selection of antibiotic resistance genes 
(ARGs). The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of duck manure, As
and cefotaxime on the bacterial community, and the evolution and distribution of 
ARGs and metal(loid) resistance genes (MRGs) in water and biofilm. Five groups of
fish tanks included a control and four test groups. The experimental period
lasted for 100 days. Six ARGs (CIT, DHA, EBC, FOX, MOX, TEM), two MRGs (arsB,
arsC), and two integron genes (intI1, intI2) were tracked and detected in water
and biofilm. The results showed that duck manure brought ARGs and MRGs into fish 
tanks. Stress factors (cefotaxime, As) increased the relative abundance of
resistance genes, and this was positively correlated with stress concentrations. 
The biofilm was visible significantly at the end of stage 3, and the total
relative abundance of resistance genes in biofilm was higher than water from
stage 5 onwards. Evolution of AmpC β-lactamase resistance genes was more obvious 
than MRGs, especially for MOX, which increased by 3 orders of magnitude. The
abundance of Flavobacterium was higher in biofilm than in water. Moreover,
correlation analysis showed that both arsB and MOX were significantly correlated 
with intI1 (p < 0.05), which suggested a potentially dissemination risk of
resistance genes. This study provides a reference for health risk assessment in
integrated aquaculture environment contaminated with duck manure, antibiotics and
metalloids.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.125549 
PMID: 31869669  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that there are no conflicts of interest.

