
1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Dec 17;10:2865. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02865. eCollection 
2019.

Down-Regulation of Flagellar, Fimbriae, and Pili Proteins in Carbapenem-Resistant
Klebsiella pneumoniae (NDM-4) Clinical Isolates: A Novel Linkage to Drug
Resistance.

Sharma D(1), Garg A(2), Kumar M(2), Rashid F(3), Khan AU(1).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Biotechnology Unit, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh,
India.
(2)Department of Biophysics, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India.
(3)SCIEX Pvt. Ltd., Gurgaon, India.

The emergence and spread of carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae infections
have worsened the current situation worldwide, in which totally drug-resistant
strains (bad bugs) are becoming increasingly prominent. Bacterial biofilms enable
bacteria to tolerate higher doses of antibiotics and other stresses, which may
lead to the drug resistance. In the present study, we performed proteomics on the
carbapenem-resistant NDM-4-producing K. pneumoniae clinical isolate under
meropenem stress. Liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)
analysis revealed that 69 proteins were down-regulated (≤0.42-fold change) under 
meropenem exposure. Within the identified down-regulated proteome (69 proteins), 
we found a group of 13 proteins involved in flagellar, fimbriae, and pili
formation and their related functions. Further, systems biology approaches were
employed to reveal their networking pathways. We suggest that these
down-regulated proteins and their interactive partners cumulatively contribute to
the emergence of a biofilm-like state and the survival of bacteria under drug
pressure, which could reveal novel mechanisms or pathways involved in drug
resistance. These down-regulated proteins and their pathways might be used as
targets for the development of novel therapeutics against antimicrobial-resistant
(AMR) infections.

Copyright © 2019 Sharma, Garg, Kumar, Rashid and Khan.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02865 
PMCID: PMC6928051
PMID: 31921045 

