
1. Enzyme Microb Technol. 2020 Mar;134:109477. doi: 10.1016/j.enzmictec.2019.109477.
Epub 2019 Nov 19.

Autodisplay of alpha amylase from Bacillus megaterium in E. coli for the
bioconversion of starch into hydrogen, ethanol and succinic acid.

Gutiérrez-García AK(1), Alvarez-Guzmán CL(1), De Leon-Rodriguez A(2).

Author information: 
(1)División de Biología Molecular, Instituto Potosino de Investigación Científica
y Tecnológica, A.C. Camino a la Presa San José 2055, Col. Lomas 4ª Sección, C.P. 
78216, San Luis Potosí, México.
(2)División de Biología Molecular, Instituto Potosino de Investigación Científica
y Tecnológica, A.C. Camino a la Presa San José 2055, Col. Lomas 4ª Sección, C.P. 
78216, San Luis Potosí, México. Electronic address: aleonr@me.com.

In this work, the expression of an α-amylase from Bacillus megaterium on the cell
surface of Escherichia coli strains WDHA (Δ hycA and Δ ldhA) and WDHFP (Δ hycA, Δ
frdD and Δ pta) by the autodisplay adhesin involved in diffuse adherence (AIDA)
system was carried out with the purpose to confer the ability to E. coli strains 
to degrade starch and thus produce hydrogen, ethanol and succinic acid. For the
characterization of the biocatalyst, the effect of temperature (30-70 °C), pH
(3-6) and CaCl2 concentration (0-25 mM), as well as the thermostability of the
biocatalyst (55-80 °C) at several time intervals (15-60 min) were evaluated. The 
results showed that the biocatalyst had a maximum activity at 55 °C and pH 4.5.
Calcium was required for the activity as well for the thermal stability of the
biocatalyst. The calculated Vmax and Km values were 0.24 U/cm3 and 5.8 mg/cm3,
respectively. Furthermore, a set of anaerobic batch fermentations was carried out
using 10 g/dm3 of starch and 1 g/dm3 of glucose as carbon sources in 120 cm3
serological bottles, using WDHA and WDHFP strains harboring the pAIDA-amyA
plasmid. The hydrogen production for WDHA was 1056.06 cm3/dm3 and the succinic
acid yield was 0.68 g/gstarch, whereas WDHFP strain produced 1689.68 cm3/dm3 of
hydrogen and an ethanol yield of 0.28 g/gstarch. This work represents a promising
strategy to improve the exploitation of starchy biomass for the production of
biofuels (hydrogen and ethanol) or succinate without the need of a
pre-saccharification process.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.enzmictec.2019.109477 
PMID: 32044024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None

