
1. Chemosphere. 2020 Jun;248:126101. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.126101. Epub
2020 Feb 3.

Non-toxic and toxic Microcystis aeruginosa reduce the tolerance of Daphnia pulex 
to low calcium in different degrees: Based on the changes in the key life-history
traits.

Huang J(1), Li Y(1), Zhou Q(1), Sun Y(1), Zhang L(1), Gu L(1), Lyu K(1), Huang
Y(1), Chen Y(2), Yang Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Biodiversity and Biotechnology, School of
Biological Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, 1 Wenyuan Road, Nanjing, 210023, 
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Lake and Environment, Nanjing Institute of Geography
and Limnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 73 East Beijing Road, Nanjing,
210008, China.
(3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Biodiversity and Biotechnology, School of
Biological Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, 1 Wenyuan Road, Nanjing, 210023, 
China. Electronic address: yangzhou@njnu.edu.cn.

Calcium decline and cyanobacterial blooms pose a serious threat to the crustacean
zooplankton Daphnia, which has a high demand for calcium. In the present study,
we exposed two different clones of Daphnia pulex to different combinations of
calcium concentrations (0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 5.0, 10.0 mg L-1) and food types (100%
Chlorella; 80% Chlorella and 20% non-toxic Microcystis; 80% Chlorella and 20%
toxic Microcystis) for 16 days, recorded the key life-history traits, and then
used an exponential rise function to fit the traits. Results showed toxic
Microcystis and low calcium together negatively affected the survival,
development, and reproduction of Daphnia. The negative effect of non-toxic
Microcystis and low calcium only affected the development and reproduction. The
survival time and reproductive performance increased exponentially with
increasing calcium concentration and then approached an asymptotic maximum. Both 
non-toxic and toxic Microcystis reduced the asymptotic maximum of the
reproductive performance. The rising rate at which they reached the asymptotes
differed significantly among the three food types; i.e., the reproductive
performance of Daphnia was affected in a wider range of calcium concentrations
under bad food quality. The findings indicated that Microcystis impaired the
tolerance of Daphnia to low calcium, which may cause serious consequences in
freshwater ecosystems.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.126101 
PMID: 32045977  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no actual or potential conflict of interest.

