
1. Biomed Res Int. 2020 Jan 19;2020:1953242. doi: 10.1155/2020/1953242. eCollection 
2020.

miR-146b-5p Plays a Critical Role in the Regulation of Autophagy in ∆per Brucella
melitensis-Infected RAW264.7 Cells.

Hanwei J(1)(2), Nie X(1), Zhu H(1), Li B(1), Pang F(1), Yang X(1), Cao R(1), Yang
X(1), Zhu S(1), Peng D(1), Li Y(1), Li G(1), Zhang Z(1), Huang H(1), Xu K(1),
Zhao T(1), Cheng Y(1), Chen C(3), Du L(1), Wang F(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Hainan Key Lab of Tropical Animal Reproduction and Breeding and Epidemic
Disease Research, College of Animal Science and Technology, Hainan University,
Haikou, China.
(2)2 College of Animal Science, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.
(3)College of Animal Science and Technology, Shihezi University, Shihezi, China.

Brucella-caused brucellosis is one of the most widespread worldwide zoonoses.
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) of Brucella, which functions as pathogen-associated
molecular patterns (PAMPs), is an important virulence factor that elicits
protective antibodies. Per of B. melitensis is involved in the biosynthesis of
the O-side chain of LPS. Autophagy is a crucial element of the innate immune
response against intracellular pathogens including Brucella. In this study, we
observed that autophagy was inhibited in RAW264.7 cells infected with Brucella
melitensis ∆per. And, a high-throughput array-based screen and qRT-PCR validation
were performed to identify the differentially expressed miRNAs in RAW264.7 cells 
infected with B. melitensis M5-90 ∆per. The results suggested that
mmu-miR-146a-5p, mmu-miR-155-5p, mmu-miR-146b-5p, and mmu-miR-3473a were
upregulated and mmu-miR-30c-5p was downregulated. During B. melitensis M5-90 ∆per
infection, the increased expression of miR-146b-5p inhibited the autophagy
activation in RAW264.7 cells. Using a bioinformatics approach, Tbc1d14 was
predicted to be a potential target of miR-146b-5p. The results of a luciferase
reporter assay indicated that miR-146b-5p directly targeted the 3'-UTR of
Tbc1d14, and the interaction between miR-146b-5p and the 3'-UTR of Tbc1d14 was
sequence-specific. High-throughput RNA-Seq-based screening was performed to
identify differentially expressed genes in Tbc1d14-expressing RAW264.7 cells, and
these were validated by qRT-PCR. Among the differentially expressed genes, four
autophagy associated genes, IFNγ-inducible p47 GTPase 1 (IIGP1), nuclear receptor
binding protein 2 (Nrbp2), transformation related protein 53 inducible nuclear
protein 1 (Trp53inp1), and immunity-related GTPase family M member 1 (Irgm1),
were obtained. Our findings provide important insights into the functional
mechanism of LPS of B. melitensis.

Copyright © 2020 Jiao Hanwei et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/1953242 
PMCID: PMC6995328
PMID: 32051823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest regarding the publication of this article.

