
1. BMC Complement Med Ther. 2020 Mar 12;20(1):79. doi: 10.1186/s12906-020-2876-y.

Antibacterial activity of Centaurea pumilio L. root and aerial part extracts
against some multidrug resistant bacteria.

Naeim H(1)(2)(3), El-Hawiet A(4), Abdel Rahman RA(2), Hussein A(1), El Demellawy 
MA(3), Embaby AM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Graduate Studies and Research,
Alexandria University, 163 Horreya Avenue, Chatbye, P.O.Box 832, Alexandria,
Egypt.
(2)Pharmaceutical Bioproducts Research Department, Genetic Engineering &
Biotechnology Research Institute (GEBRI), City of Scientific Research and
Technological Applications (SRTA-City), New Borg El-Arab City, Alexandria, Egypt.
(3)Medical Biotechnology Department, GEBRI, SRTA-City, New Borg El-Arab City,
Alexandria, Egypt.
(4)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Alexandria University,
Alexandria, Egypt.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Graduate Studies and Research,
Alexandria University, 163 Horreya Avenue, Chatbye, P.O.Box 832, Alexandria,
Egypt. amira.embaby@alexu.edu.eg.

BACKGROUND: In the context of searching for potent, safe, natural antimicrobial
agents to combate the global antimicrobial resistance (AMR) phenomenon, the
current study evaluates for the first time ever, the broad-spectrum antimicrobial
activity of essential oil (EO) and extracts from the rare wild plant Centaurea
pumilio L.. It has tremendous ethnomedicinal values; its dried root is used as a 
fattening agent, a treatment for bad breath and diabetes, and screened for
schistosomicidal activity.
METHODS: C. pumilio EO was extracted by hydrodistillation using a Clevenger
apparatus. Chemical constituents of aerial part were extracted using a sequential
solvent/solvent procedure employing four solvents with increasing polarities in
the following order: petroleum ether, chloroform, ethyl acetate, and n-butanol.
The chemical constituents were identified by GC-MS. Fifty-two microbial strains
were used; twenty-six multidrug resistant (MDR), sixteen clinical, and ten
reference strains. The identification of the microbial strains was performed by
MALDI-TOF-MS. The antimicrobial activity of the EO and the aerial part and the
root extracts was assessed through disc diffusion assay. A minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC) of the EO and extracts was determined using the broth
micro-dilution method.
RESULTS: The growth of reference and clinical strains was inhibited by EO,
methanol, chloroform, and ethyl acetate aerial part extracts and chloroform root 
extract. The MDR strains growth, however, was inhibited only by EO and chloroform
aerial part extract. GC-MS identified for the first time eighteen constituents
from aerial part EO and chloroform extract each. EO showed antimicrobial activity
against the reference, clinical, and MDR strains with MIC values of 31.25-125,
31.25-125, and 62.50-250 μg/mL, respectively. Methanol aerial part extract
exhibited high antimicrobial activities with MIC values of 62.50-250 μg/mL
against reference and clinical strains. Chloroform root extract displayed strong 
antimicrobial activity against reference and clinical strains recording MIC
values of 62.50-250 μg/mL and 62.50-125 μg/mL, respectively. The chloroform
aerial part extract demonstrated potent antimicrobial activity against the
reference, clinical, and MDR strains with 31.25, 31.25, and 15.62 μg/mL MIC
values, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Present data unravel the C. pumilio pharmacological magnitude to
discover eco-friendly potent antimicrobial agents to fight AMR phenomenon.

DOI: 10.1186/s12906-020-2876-y 
PMCID: PMC7076891
PMID: 32164639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

