
1. Front Immunol. 2020 Feb 26;11:321. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00321. eCollection
2020.

Localization-Specific Expression of CCR1 and CCR5 by Mast Cell Progenitors.

Salomonsson M(1), Dahlin JS(1), Ungerstedt J(2), Hallgren J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, BMC, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Medicine, Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, and PO Hematology,
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

Mast cells are powerful immune cells found predominately in barrier tissues. They
play an important role in immune surveillance and act as effector cells in
allergic reactions. Mast cells develop from mast cell progenitors (MCp), which
migrate to the peripheral tissues via the blood circulation. Presumably, the
homing of MCp to the peripheral sites and localization is regulated by
chemotactic signals. Due to the scarce abundance of these cells, chemotactic
receptors have not been previously characterized on primary MCp. Here, mRNA
transcripts for CCR1 and CX3CR1 were identified in mouse bone marrow and lung MCp
in a gene expression screen of chemotactic receptors. However, surface expression
of CCR1 was only found in the bone marrow MCp. Flow cytometry-based screening
identified distinct surface expression of CCR5 by mouse peritoneal mast cells and
MCp, while surface expression of CXCR2-5, CX3CR1, CCR1-3, CCR6-7, and CCR9 was
not detected. Low surface expression of CCR5 was detected in mouse MCp in the
bone marrow, spleen, and lung. To translate the findings to human, blood and bone
marrow MCp from healthy donors were analyzed for possible CCR1 and CCR5
expression. Human MCp showed distinct surface expression of both CCR1 and CCR5.
The expression levels of these chemokine receptors were higher in human bone
marrow MCp than in the peripheral blood, suggesting that CCR1 and CCR5 may
mediate retention in the bone marrow. In conclusion, mouse and human MCp show
differential expression of CCR1 and CCR5 depending on their localization.

Copyright Â© 2020 Salomonsson, Dahlin, Ungerstedt and Hallgren.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00321 
PMCID: PMC7054384
PMID: 32174921  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

