
1. Sci Total Environ. 2020 Jul 1;724:137977. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.137977.
Epub 2020 Mar 16.

Characteristics and mechanisms of H2S production in anaerobic digestion of food
waste.

Tian G(1), Xi J(2), Yeung M(1), Ren G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Simulation and Pollution Control State Key Joint Laboratory,
School of Environment, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
(2)Environmental Simulation and Pollution Control State Key Joint Laboratory,
School of Environment, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China; State
Environmental Protection Key Laboratory of Microorganism Application and Risk
Control (SMARC), Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen
518055, China. Electronic address: xijinying@tsinghua.edu.cn.

The biogas produced in food waste anaerobic digestion (FWAD) contains H2S which
can lead to corrosion, bad smell and poisoning accident. To control H2S
pollution, the characteristics and mechanisms of H2S production in FWAD should be
known. In this study, a lab-scale FWAD batch test was applied for 20 days under
35 °C. The production potential and average concentration of H2S were
765 ± 163 g/t (TS) and 1065 ± 267 ppm, respectively. 76% of total H2S was
produced within 6 h on the first day of fermentation, acidification and gas
production were key reasons for high H2S production at this time. Compared to H2S
peak production time, that of methane was long (4 days) and after that of H2S.
Sulfides were found to be the dominant form of sulfur (accounting for 20-70% of
total sulfur) in the mixed fermentation liquor in fermentation batch. These
sulfides were from protein, which could be decomposed slowly to sulfide by
protein-using bacteria and methanogen at the time of methane production peak, and
sulfate, which could be converted to sulfide by Sulfate reducing bacteria (SRB)
during the first two days of fermentation. Protein would be the main contributor 
to sulfide/H2S for the continuous feeding FWAD system in long term operation, due
to its presence as the main form of sulfur in food waste.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.137977 
PMID: 32247972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

