
1. Semin Nucl Med. 2020 May;50(3):208-218. doi: 10.1053/j.semnuclmed.2020.02.016.
Epub 2020 Mar 13.

PET and SPECT Tracers for Myocardial Perfusion Imaging.

Klein R(1), Celiker-Guler E(2), Rotstein BH(3), deKemp RA(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Division of Cardiology, Ottawa, ON,
Canada; The Ottawa Hospital, Division of Nuclear Medicine, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(2)University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Division of Cardiology, Ottawa, ON,
Canada.
(3)University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Division of Cardiology, Ottawa, ON,
Canada; Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(4)University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Division of Cardiology, Ottawa, ON,
Canada. Electronic address: radekemp@ottawaheart.ca.

Coronary artery disease has been the leading cause of death since the 1960s,
which has motivated the research and development of myocardial perfusion imaging 
(MPI) agents for early diagnosis and to guide treatment. MPI with SPECT has been 
the clinical workhorse for MPI, but over the past two decades PET MPI is
experiencing growth due to enhanced image quality that results in superior
diagnostic accuracy over SPECT. Furthermore, dynamic PET imaging of the tracer
distribution process from time of tracer administration to tracer accumulation in
the myocardium has enabled routine quantification of myocardial blood flow (MBF) 
and myocardial flow reserve (MFR) in absolute units. MBF and MFR incrementally
improve diagnostic and prognostic accuracy over MPI alone. In some cases (eg,
rubidium PET imaging with pharmacologic stress) MPI, MBF, and MFR can be acquired
simultaneously without incremental cost, radiation exposure, or significant
processing time. Nuclear cardiology clinics have been looking to incorporate MBF 
quantification into clinical routine, but traditional SPECT and MPI tracers are
inadequate for this challenge. Cardiac dedicated SPECT scanners can also perform 
dynamic imaging and have stimulated research into MBF quantification using SPECT 
tracers. New perfusion tracers must be tailored for emerging clinical needs
(including MBF quantification), technical capabilities of imaging
instrumentation, market constraints, and supply chain feasibility. Because these 
conditions have been evolving, tracers previously considered inferior may be
reconsidered for future applications and some recently developed tracers may be
suboptimal. This article reviews current, clinically-available tracers and those 
under development showing greatest potential. It discusses for each tracer the
rationale for development, physiological mechanism of uptake by the myocardium,
published evaluation results and development state. Finally, it gauges the
suitability of each tracer for clinical application. The article demonstrates an 
acceleration in the pace of perfusion radiotracer development due to better
understanding of the relevant physiology, better chemistry tools and small animal
imaging. Consequently, bad tracers may fail faster and with less wasted
investment, and good tracers may translate more efficiently from bench to
bedside.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.semnuclmed.2020.02.016 
PMID: 32284107  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

