
1. Sci Total Environ. 2020 Aug 20;731:138693. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138693. 
Epub 2020 May 3.

Spread of resistance genes from duck manure to fish intestine in simulated
fish-duck pond and the promotion of cefotaxime and As.

Zhou M(1), Xu Y(2), Ouyang P(1), Ling J(1), Cai Q(1), Du Q(1), Zheng L(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Guangdong University of
Technology, Guangzhou 510006, PR China.
(2)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Guangdong University of
Technology, Guangzhou 510006, PR China. Electronic address: hopeybxu@163.com.

Integrated culture is a widespread culture mode in South China, in which
resistance genes (RGs) also spread in the circulation system with nutrients.
Accordingly, the aim of the present study was to investigate the spread of RGs in
a fish-duck pond and the RGs and bacterial community of fish intestines. Five
fish tanks, including a control tank and four experimental tanks (duck manure,
duck manure + cefotaxime, duck manure + As, and duck manure + cefotaxime + As),
were tested for 100 days. The results showed that duck manure increased both the 
diversity and relative abundance of RGs in fish intestines, and the addition of
stress factors (cefotaxime, As) increased the relative abundance of RGs by one to
two orders of magnitude. The stress-inducing effect of cefotaxime was greater
than that of As. Tetracycline resistance genes were more sensitive to stress
factors and were the predominant RGs in fish intestines. RGs in duck manure
preferentially spread from the water to biofilm and then to fish intestines,
whereas co-stress of cefotaxime and As obviously promoted the spread of RGs to
fish intestines. In comparison to the control tank, duck manure and stress
factors significantly changed the bacterial community of fish intestines.
Correlation analysis also revealed that arsB, MOX, tetA and sul1 were
significantly correlated with intI1 (P < 0.01), which hinted a potentially
dissemination risk of RGs in fish intestines. These findings provide a
theoretical basis for further investigating the dissemination of RGs in
integrated culture systems and for evaluating the ecological risk of antibiotic
and As use in aquaculture.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138693 
PMID: 32408202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

