
1. PLoS One. 2020 May 19;15(5):e0233345. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0233345.
eCollection 2020.

Communication training and the prescribing pattern of antibiotic prescription in 
primary health care.

Strumann C(1), Steinhaeuser J(1), Emcke T(2), SÃ¶nnichsen A(3), Goetz K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Family Medicine, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Luebeck,
Germany.
(2)Association of Statutory Health Insurance Physicians of the Federal State of
Schleswig-Holstein, Bad Segeberg, Germany.
(3)Department of General Practice and Family Medicine, Medical University of
Vienna, Center for Public Health, Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: The treatment of upper respiratory tract infections (URTIs) accounts 
for the majority of antibiotic prescriptions in primary care, although an
antibiotic therapy is rarely indicated. Non-clinical factors, such as time
pressure and the perceived patient expectations are considered to be reasons for 
prescribing antibiotics in cases where they are not indicated. The improper use
of antibiotics, however, can promote resistance and cause serious side effects.
The aim of the study was to clarify whether the antibiotic prescription rate for 
infections of the upper respiratory tract can be lowered by means of a short (2 x
2.25h) communication training based on the MAAS-Global-D for primary care
physicians.
METHODS: In total, 1554 primary care physicians were invited to participate in
the study. The control group was formed from observational data. To estimate
intervention effects we applied a combination of difference-in-difference (DiD)
and statistical matching based on entropy balancing. We estimated a corresponding
multi-level logistic regression model for the antibiotic prescribing decision of 
German primary care physicians for URTIs.
RESULTS: Univariate estimates detected an 11-percentage-point reduction of
prescriptions for the intervention group after the training. For the control
group, a reduction of 4.7% was detected. The difference between both groups in
the difference between the periods was -6.5% and statistically significant. The
estimated effects were nearly identical to the effects estimated for the
multi-level logistic regression model with applied matching. Furthermore, for the
treatment of young women, the impact of the training on the reduction of
antibiotic prescription was significantly stronger.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that communication skills, implemented through a
short communication training with the MAAS-Global-D-training, lead to a more
prudent prescribing behavior of antibiotics for URTIs. Thereby, the
MAAS-Global-D-training could not only avoid unnecessary side effects but could
also help reducing the emergence of drug resistant bacteria. As a consequence of 
our study we suggest that communication training based on the MAAS-Global-D
should be applied in the postgraduate training scheme of primary care physicians.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0233345 
PMCID: PMC7237035
PMID: 32428012  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CS, KG, TE and JS: the authors declare that they 
have no competing interests. I have read the journal's policy and the author AS
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: AS is an editor of the
German version of EbMG. The online access is provided free of charge to the study
PCPs by Verlagshaus der Aerzte, Vienna. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS
ONE policies on sharing data and materials.

