
1. J Colloid Interface Sci. 2020 Nov 1;579:50-60. doi: 10.1016/j.jcis.2020.06.055.
Epub 2020 Jun 15.

ZnO@ZnS nanorod-array coated titanium: Good to fibroblasts but bad to bacteria.

Luo Q(1), Cao H(2), Wang L(1), Ma X(3), Liu X(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Superfine
Microstructure, Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200050, China; Center of Materials Science and Optoelectronics
Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Superfine
Microstructure, Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200050, China; Materials Science, Otto Schott Institute of Materials
Research (OSIM), Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Jena D-07743, Germany.
Electronic address: hlc@mail.sic.ac.cn.
(3)State Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Superfine
Microstructure, Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200050, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Superfine
Microstructure, Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200050, China. Electronic address: xyliu@mail.sic.ac.cn.

Cell-selective toxic titanium is highly desired in clinical dental practice.
Herein, based on the in situ conversion of ZnO to ZnO@ZnS, nanorod-array
structured coatings with a controllable release features of zinc (Zn), has been
successfully fabricated by a two-step hydrothermal method to endow titanium
surface with cell-selectivity, i.e. boosting the functions (attachment and
migration) of human gingival fibroblasts (HGnFs) while acting against the
invasion of pathogenic bacteria. The improved functions of HGnFs over the ZnO@ZnS
nanorod-array were attributed to the material's optimized zinc release, which was
decreased from an order of 3.5 mg L-1 to about 0.3 mg L-1 (within the first
week). But more importantly, this concentration still had a high antibacterial
efficacy up to 100% (against both the S. aureus and E. coli, 107 CFU mL-1). This 
study demonstrated that a ZnO@ZnS nanorod-array coating could be a promising
strategy to endow titanium dental implants with improved soft tissue sealing and 
effectively reduce peri-implantitis.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcis.2020.06.055 
PMID: 32570030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

