
1. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2020 Aug;56:7-15. doi: 10.1016/j.mib.2020.05.006. Epub 2020 
Jun 27.

The gut, the bad and the harmless: Candida albicans as a commensal and
opportunistic pathogen in the intestine.

Kumamoto CA(1), Gresnigt MS(2), Hube B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University, Boston, MA
02111, USA.
(2)Department of Microbial Pathogenicity Mechanisms, Leibniz Institute for
Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans-Knoell-Institute,
Beutenbergstraße 11a, 07745 Jena, Germany; Junior Research Group Adaptive
Pathogenicity Strategies, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and
Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute, Beutenbergstraße 11a 07745, Jena,
Germany.
(3)Department of Microbial Pathogenicity Mechanisms, Leibniz Institute for
Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans-Knoell-Institute,
Beutenbergstraße 11a, 07745 Jena, Germany; Institute of Microbiology, Faculty of 
Biological Sciences, Friedrich Schiller University, 07743 Jena, Germany.
Electronic address: bernhard.hube@leibniz-hki.de.

Candida albicans is a regular member of the intestinal microbiota in the majority
of the human population. This underscores C. albicans' adaptation to life in the 
intestine without inducing competitive interactions with other microbes, or
immune responses detrimental to its survival. However, specific conditions such
as a dysbalanced microbiome, a suppression of the immune system, and an impaired 
intestinal barrier can predispose for invasive, mostly nosocomial, C. albicans
infections. Colonization of the intestine and translocation through the
intestinal barrier are fundamental aspects of the processes preceding
life-threatening systemic candidiasis. Insights into C. albicans' commensal
lifestyle and translocation can thus help us to understand how patients develop
candidiasis, and may provide leads for therapeutic strategies aimed at preventing
infection. In this review, we discuss the commensal lifestyle of C. albicans in
the intestine, the role of morphology for commensalism, the influence of diet,
and the interactions with bacteria of the microbiota.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mib.2020.05.006 
PMCID: PMC7744392
PMID: 32604030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

