
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2020 Jul;54(3):490-496. doi: 10.5578/mb.69438.

[Urogenital Myiasis Caused by Psychoda spp. in Female Patient with No Risk Factor
for Myiasis].

[Article in Turkish]

Esenkaya Ta≈übent F(1), Dik B(2), Kepenek Kurt E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Necmettin Erbakan University Meram Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical 
Microbiology, Konya, Turkey.
(2)Selcuk University Faculty of Veterinary, Department of Parasitology, Konya,
Turkey.
(3)Necmettin Erbakan University Meram Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Infectious Diseases and Clinical Microbiology, Konya, Turkey.

Myiasis is defined as follows; some flies lay their eggs and larvae on live
organs and tissues or on cavities of nose, eye, ear and etc of humans or animals 
and the larvae develop there and cause pathological disorders. One of the rare
types of myiasis is the urogenital myiasis. This condition has been associated
with covering urogenital area with clothes in almost all populations and
therefore, less chance for flies to reach this site and lay their eggs. Low
socio-cultural level and poor hygiene conditions are stated as the most important
risk factors of myiasis. On the other hand, toilets within the human living
spaces are ideal environments for fly larvae that are fed on bacteria as they
contain moisture and a microbial environment. It is stated that especially in
case of the presence of an underlying infection, flies are more prone to lay
their eggs or larvae on this area due to the bad smell. In this case report, a
patient with a moderate sociocultural level with no underlying chronic disease,
no open wound in the genital area and no urinary tract infection was presented. A
53-year-old female patient living with her family in an apartment flat in the
city center of Konya admitted to the outpatient clinic of infectious diseases
with the complaint of moving worms in her urine. The patient stated that she had 
seen maggots while urinating for two weeks and that she passed her urine into a
container to be sure that the maggots were coming from her urine, upon seeing the
maggots there she has admitted to the hospital. The Larvae were defined as the
fourth stage larvae of Psychoda spp. No open lesions or wounds were seen in
genitourinary area of the patient who had no complaints other than mild urinary
burning. Complete blood count test results of the patient were normal and there
was no growth in her urine culture. It was stated that other family members whom 
she lived with did not have similar complaints. The patient was diagnosed as
genitourinary myiasis caused byPsychoda spp. and informed about the relationship 
between hygiene and the disease. And urinary antiseptics were initiated as the
treatment for the patient. After the treatment, no larvae were seen in the urine 
of the patient. In conclusion, many regions are suitable for Psychoda type of
adult flies to live in our country due to the climate conditions. It is
considered that infestation may develop in patients with less risk factors in
terms of urogenital myiasis, that larvae may increase in number of patients who
are not treated or followed up and that the infestation may become chronic and
results in more serious clinical conditions. The necessary treatment and
follow-up must be performed in such cases and the patients should be educated
about the relationship between infestation and hygiene.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.69438 
PMID: 32755523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

