
1. F1000Res. 2020 Aug 6;9. pii: F1000 Faculty Rev-935. doi:
10.12688/f1000research.25607.1. eCollection 2020.

The third model of Bax/Bak activation: a Bcl-2 family feud finally resolved?

Luo X(1)(2), O'Neill KL(1), Huang K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, Fred & Pamela
Buffett Cancer Center, University of Alaska Medical Center, Omaha, ME,
68198-7696, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE, 68198-6805, USA.

Bax and Bak, two functionally similar, pro-apoptotic proteins of the Bcl-2
family, are known as the gateway to apoptosis because of their requisite roles as
effectors of mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP), a major step
during mitochondria-dependent apoptosis. The mechanism of how cells turn Bax/Bak 
from inert molecules into fully active and lethal effectors had long been the
focal point of a major debate centered around two competing, but not mutually
exclusive, models: direct activation and indirect activation. After intensive
research efforts for over two decades, it is now widely accepted that to initiate
apoptosis, some of the BH3-only proteins, a subclass of the Bcl-2 family,
directly engage Bax/Bak to trigger their conformational transformation and
activation. However, a series of recent discoveries, using previously unavailable
CRISPR-engineered cell systems, challenge the basic premise that undergirds the
consensus and provide evidence for a novel and surprisingly simple model of
Bax/Bak activation: the membrane (lipids)-mediated spontaneous model. This review
will discuss the evidence, rationale, significance, and implications of this new 
model.

Copyright: Â© 2020 Luo X et al.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.25607.1 
PMCID: PMC7411521
PMID: 32802314  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.No
competing interests were disclosed.No competing interests were
disclosed.Competing interests: Andreas Strasser is an employee of The Walter and 
Eliza Hall Institute. This Institute receives milestone payments and royalties
from the sale of venetoclax. Andreas Strasser also has a collaboration with
Servier for the development of MCXL01 inhibitors for cancer therapy.

