
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2020 Dec 1;164:3155-3162. doi:
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.08.162. Epub 2020 Aug 22.

Cyanobacterial aldehyde deformylating oxygenase: Structure, function, and
potential in biofuels production.

Basri RS(1), Rahman RNZRA(2), Kamarudin NHA(3), Ali MSM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Enzyme and Microbial Technology Research Centre, Faculty of Biotechnology and 
Biomolecular Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor,
Malaysia; Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biotechnology and Biomolecular
Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
Electronic address: syuhada.rosebasri@gmail.com.
(2)Enzyme and Microbial Technology Research Centre, Faculty of Biotechnology and 
Biomolecular Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor,
Malaysia; Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biotechnology and Biomolecular
Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
Electronic address: rnzaliha@upm.edu.my.
(3)Enzyme and Microbial Technology Research Centre, Faculty of Biotechnology and 
Biomolecular Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor,
Malaysia; Centre of Foundation Studies for Agricultural Science, Universiti Putra
Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia. Electronic address:
hafizah_kamar@upm.edu.my.
(4)Enzyme and Microbial Technology Research Centre, Faculty of Biotechnology and 
Biomolecular Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor,
Malaysia; Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biotechnology and Biomolecular
Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
Electronic address: mshukuri@upm.edu.my.

The conversion of aldehydes to valuable alkanes via cyanobacterial aldehyde
deformylating oxygenase is of great interest. The availability of fossil reserves
that keep on decreasing due to human exploitation is worrying, and even more
troubling is the combustion emission from the fuel, which contributes to the
environmental crisis and health issues. Hence, it is crucial to use a renewable
and eco-friendly alternative that yields compound with the closest features as
conventional petroleum-based fuel, and that can be used in biofuels production.
Cyanobacterial aldehyde deformylating oxygenase (ADO) is a metal-dependent enzyme
with an α-helical structure that contains di‑iron at the active site. The
substrate enters the active site of every ADO through a hydrophobic channel. This
enzyme exhibits catalytic activity toward converting Cn aldehyde to Cn-1 alkane
and formate as a co-product. These cyanobacterial enzymes are small and easy to
manipulate. Currently, ADOs are broadly studied and engineered for improving
their enzymatic activity and substrate specificity for better alkane production. 
This review provides a summary of recent progress in the study of the structure
and function of ADO, structural-based engineering of the enzyme, and highlight
its potential in producing biofuels.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.08.162 
PMID: 32841666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.

