
1. J Vis Exp. 2020 Sep 24;(163). doi: 10.3791/61761.

Use of Fimbrial Rod for F18ab Fimbriae+ STEC Colonization to Host Cells.

Zhou M(#)(1), Duan Q(#)(2), Yang Y(2), Zhu G(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University; Institute of Veterinary
Immunology & Engineering, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences;
zhoumingxu@outlook.com.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University; Jiangsu Co-innovation
Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and
Zoonoses.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University; Jiangsu Co-innovation
Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and
Zoonoses; yzgqzhu@yzu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Type 1 fimbriae are important virulence determinants of some Gram-negative
pathogens, which promote bacterial colonization. The fimbrial rod is primarily
composed of multiple copies of the major fimbrial subunit FimA. FimH adhesin,
however, is present as a fibrillar tip structure that drive bacteria binding to
host cellular mannose containing receptor. Here, we provide protocols to evaluate
and compare the function of type 1 fimbrial subunits in F18ab fimbriae+ Shiga
toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC). We found that both FimA and FimH are
required for bacterial adhesion, invasion, and biofilm formation. Deleting fimA
gene showed much more reduction in bacterial adhesion and invasion to porcine
intestinal columnar epithelial cells IPEC-J2, than that of fimH mutant. Biofilm
formation was significantly reduced in both mutants with an equal level. In
addition, qPCR demonstrated that either fimA or fimH deletion down-regulated the 
bacterial flagella and F18 fimbriae genes expression, while up-regulated adhesin 
was involved in diffuse adherence-I (AIDA-I) gene expression, suggesting the
co-regulation of cell surface-localized adhesins in F18ab fimbriae+ STEC.

DOI: 10.3791/61761 
PMID: 33044461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

