
1. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2021;22(1):60-73. doi: 10.2174/1389203721666201103085151.

Plant NHX Antiporters: From Function to Biotechnological Application, with Case
Study.

Karim R(1), Bouchra B(1), Fatima G(2), Abdelkarim FM(1), Laila S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Team of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Plant and Microbial Biotechnology,
Biodiversity and Environment Research Center, Faculty of Sciences, Mohammed V
University, Rabat, B.P. 1014 RP, Morocco.
(2)Plant Breeding Unit, National Institute for Agronomic Research, Regional
Center of Rabat, B.P. 6356-Rabat-Instituts, Morocco.

Salt stress is one of the major abiotic stresses that negatively affect crops
worldwide. Plants have evolved a series of mechanisms to cope with the
limitations imposed by salinity. Molecular mechanisms, including the upregulation
of cation transporters such as the Na+/H+ antiporters, are one of the processes
adopted by plants to survive in saline environments. NHX antiporters are involved
in salt tolerance, development, cell expansion, growth performance and disease
resistance of plants. They are integral membrane proteins belonging to the widely
distributed CPA1 sub-group of monovalent cation/H+ antiporters and provide an
important strategy for ionic homeostasis in plants under saline conditions. These
antiporters are known to regulate the exchange of sodium and hydrogen ions across
the membrane and are ubiquitous to all eukaryotic organisms. With the genomic
approach, previous studies reported that a large number of proteins encoding
Na+/H+ antiporter genes have been identified in many plant species and
successfully introduced into desired species to create transgenic crops with
enhanced tolerance to multiple stresses. In this review, we focus on plant
antiporters and all the aspects from their structure, classification, function to
their in silico analysis. On the other hand, we performed a genome-wide search to
identify the predicted NHX genes in Argania spinosa L. We highlighted for the
first time the presence of four putative NHX (AsNHX1-4) from the Argan tree
genome, whose phylogenetic analysis revealed their classification in one distinct
vacuolar cluster. The essential information of the four putative NHXs, such as
gene structure, subcellular localization and transmembrane domains was analyzed.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1389203721666201103085151 
PMID: 33143624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

