
1. Food Chem. 2021 Mar 1;339:128084. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2020.128084. Epub 2020 
Sep 14.

Application of phage-display developed antibody and antigen substitutes in
immunoassays for small molecule contaminants analysis: A mini-review.

Zhao F(1), Shi R(1), Liu R(1), Tian Y(2), Yang Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Life Science, Key Laboratory for
Agriculture Microbiology, Shandong Agricultural University, Taian 271018, China.
(2)College of Life Science, Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Academy 
of Medical Sciences, Taian 271016, China. Electronic address:
tianyuan2005hit@163.com.
(3)Department of Microbiology, College of Life Science, Key Laboratory for
Agriculture Microbiology, Shandong Agricultural University, Taian 271018, China. 
Electronic address: zhyouyang@sdau.edu.cn.

Toxic small molecule contaminants (SMCs) residues in food threaten human health. 
Immunoassays are popular and simple techniques for SMCs analysis. However,
immunoassays based on polyclonal antibodies, monoclonal antibodies and
chemosynthetic antigens have some defects, such as complicated preparation of
antibodies, risk of toxic haptens using for antigen chemosynthesis and so on.
Phage-display technique has been proven to be an attractive alternative approach 
to producing antibody and antigen substitutes of SMCs, and opened up new realms
for developing immunoassays of SMCs. These substitutes contain five types,
including anti-idiotypic recombinant antibody (AIdA), anti-immune complex peptide
(AIcP), anti-immune complex recombinant antibody (AIcA) and anti-SMC recombinant 
antibody (anti-SMC RAb). In this review, the principle of immunoassays based on
the five types of substitutes, as well as their application and advantages are
summarized and discussed.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2020.128084 
PMID: 33152875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

