
1. J Food Biochem. 2021 Jan;45(1):e13553. doi: 10.1111/jfbc.13553. Epub 2020 Nov 10.

The volatile flavor compounds of Shanghai smoked fish as a special delicacy.

Feng M(1)(2), Dai Z(1)(2), Yin Z(1)(2), Wang X(1)(2), Chen S(1)(2), Zhang
H(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Food Science and Technology, Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai,
China.
(2)Laboratory of Aquatic Products Quality & Safety Risk Assessment (Shanghai),
China Ministry of Agriculture, Shanghai, China.
(3)School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China.

In this work, the effects of substrates on volatile flavor compounds of Shanghai 
smoked fish (SSF) from grass carp was investigated by head space-solid-phase
microextraction-gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (HS-SPME-GC-MS) by changing 
the ratios of soy sauce (15%-25%) to white sugar (10%-20%) and replacing white
sugar with reducing sugar (glucose, fructose, and ribose). The results showed the
key volatile flavor compounds (ROAV ≥ 1) of SSF were 2,4-decadienal, p-xylene,
nonanal, and 1-octen-3-ol with the relative contents of 10.33, 1.14, 4.84, and
1.76%, respectively. Furthermore, the existence of soy sauce had an enhancing
role in the production of pyrazines, but no significant difference in white
sugar. The contents of isovaleraldehyde and benzeneacetaldehyde were increased
when white sugar was replaced with glucose, octanol, and 2-pentyl furan for
fructose, no obvious difference in ribose. Moreover, the optimal ratios of
soaking solutions were 20% soy sauce and 15% white sugar based on the scoring
method of sensory evaluation. This study will provide a theoretical basis for the
formation of volatile flavor compounds of SSF. PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS: Grass carp
usually grows in freshwater such as pond or lake, but bacteria with earthy smell 
are easily attached to plankton such as diatom and cyanobacteria leading to the
accumulation of bad odor substances through the food chain. Shanghai smoked fish 
(SSF) deeply loved by public is a traditional special dish with crispy crust and 
delicious taste. The attractive flavor of grass carp could be increased with the 
help of the Maillard reaction (MR) and seasonings. Therefore, the effect of the
MR on the volatile flavor compounds of SSF was investigated by HS-SPME-GC/MS in
this work. A detailed study on the volatile flavor compounds of Shanghai smoked
fish could not only enrich the theoretical knowledge of flavor chemistry of
freshwater fish, but have a profound contribution to the development of
freshwater fish processing techniques.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/jfbc.13553 
PMID: 33171537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

