
1. J Vasc Surg. 1986 Oct;4(4):345-50.

Cholelithiasis and aortic reconstruction: the problem of simultaneous surgical
therapy. Conclusions from a personal series.

Fry RE, Fry WJ.

From 1976 to 1983, 682 patients have undergone aortic reconstruction at Parkland 
Memorial Hospital and the Veterans Administration Hospital in Dallas, Texas.
Thirty-five patients (5.1%) had a biliary tract operation performed before,
during, or after their aortic procedure. Fourteen percent of patients had
bacteria in the bile and 11.4% needed common bile duct exploration. Twelve
patients had their aortic reconstruction first. Biliary pancreatitis developed
postoperatively in one patient. Two patients who had infected prostheses removed 
had acalculous cholecystitis after operation and one had jaundice and fever 3
years after operation, but no biliary disease was found. Twenty-one patients had 
the biliary procedure first. Four patients were operated on for suspected
aneurysm rupture an average of 18 months after operation. There was one true
rupture; this patient had no gallstones. One patient had acute aortic thrombosis 
10 days after emergency operation for acute cholecystitis. Only two patients
underwent combined operative procedures; both were patients with acute aortic
problems in whom chronic and subacute biliary disease was found. Eight operative 
deaths occurred, all in the patients undergoing aortic procedures. There were no 
ruptured aneurysms or acute biliary problems needing emergency operation in any
patient with cholelithiasis. On the basis of our experience, we believe that
concomitant cholecystectomy and aortic reconstructions rarely need to be
performed and then only in those patients in whom the risk of not treating both
biliary and aortic conditions is greater than the operative risks. In these
circumstances, cholecystostomy should be considered to decrease operative time
and the risk of graft contamination.


PMID: 3761476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

