
1. Eur J Biochem. 1980 Oct;111(2):347-55.

Pyridine nucleotide transhydrogenase from Azotobacter vinelandii. Improved
purification, physical properties and subunit arrangement in purified polymers.

Voordouw G, van der Vies SM, Eweg JK, Veeger C, van Breemen JF, van Bruggen EF.

1. Pyridine nucleotide transhydrogenase from Azotobacter vinelandii was purified 
with a scaled-up procedure. In a typical purification 500 ml cell-free extract
from 200 g cells is loaded on an Ado-2',5'-P2--Sepharose 4B affinity column (20
ml bed volume). After washing, the enzyme is desorbed with 2'AMP at neutral pH
and further purified by Sephadex G-200 gel chromatography. The enzyme (10--12 mg)
is obtained in 40--60% yield and is homogeneous as judged by polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis in the presence of sodium dodecyl sulphate. 2. The homogeneity of
the purified enzyme is also apparent from electron microscopy studies, where the 
enzyme appears as a polydisperse set of polymers without contaminating structures
and from fluorescence lifetime studies by the method of single-photon counting.
The flavin fluorescence appears to decay with a single lifetime tau = 2.5 ns. The
polymeric nature of transhydrogenase can be aptly demonstrated by density
gradient centrifugation in the presence of KBr. After centrifuging for 50 h at
160 000 X g and 10 degrees C the enzyme is concentrated in a narrow fluorescent
band with buoyant density rho b = 1.305 g cm-3. 3. The arrangement of subunits in
the transhydrogenase polymer has been derived from optical diffraction studies of
electron micrographs. The polymers are built up from a linear assembly of
tetramers. Four subunits are placed in a rhomb with sides of 13.5 mm and an angle
of 45 degrees (135 degrees) between the sides. A second tetramer is located
staggered on top of the first one. Since a variety of other studies have
indicated that the polymers dissociate into octamers under alkaline conditions
[Voordouw, G. et al. (1979 Eur. J. Biochem. 98,447--454] we conclude that this
smallest functional unit is build up from two tetramers.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1980.tb04948.x 
PMID: 7460901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

