
1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Sep 1;270(35):20543-9.

Carboxypeptidase A isoforms produced by distinct genes or alternative splicing in
brain and other extrapancreatic tissues.

Normant E(1), Gros C, Schwartz JC.

Author information: 
(1)Unit√© de Neurobiologie et de Pharmacologie de l'INSERM, Centre Paul Broca,
Paris, France.

The presence of carboxypeptidase A (EC 3.4.17.1; CPA) gene transcripts and
corresponding catalytic activity was investigated in brain and other
extradigestive rat tissues in which presence of the pancreatic enzyme had not
been reported so far. Transcripts of two known CPA genes, CPA1 and CPA2, were
identified in extremely low abundance in brain and several other extrapancreatic 
tissues using Northern blot and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) analysis. Whereas the CPA1 gene transcripts in brain, heart, stomach, or
colon had a size similar to that in pancreas (1.35 kilobases), the CPA2 gene
transcripts in brain, testis, or lung were of a smaller size (1.1 kilobases).
Northern blot analysis using various probes, RT-PCR, and 5'-rapid amplification
of cDNA 5'-end (5' RACE analysis) all indicated that this smaller size of the
brain transcript was attributable to production by alternative splicing of the
pro-mRNA. This process corresponds to deletion of the first four exons, leading
to a mRNA encoding a protein in which the signal peptide and activation peptide
of prepro-CPA2 are absent but the active site remains. The prediction that the
shorter CPA2 isoform, designated CPA2(S), should correspond to a cytoplasmic
metallopeptidase that does not require tryptic activation was verified by
characterization of the recombinant protein and comparing it with the native
CPA-like activity in brain. Both recombinant CPA2(S) generated in Escherichia
coli and a soluble protein from brain displayed similar sizes on Western blots
(32 kDa to be compared to 34 kDa for pancreatic CPA2). Recombinant CPA2(S) and a 
soluble CPA-like activity from brain displayed similar sensitivity to a series of
inhibitors, contrasting with that of the pancreatic enzyme. It is concluded that 
alternative splicing produces a truncated CPA2 with distinct subcellular
localization and modified catalytic activity. In spite of the presence of the
CPA1 mRNA, no corresponding CPA activity could be detected in brain extracts,
even after tryptic activation. This apparent discrepancy seems attributable to
the presence of an endogenous peptide inhibitor which remains to be identified.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.35.20543 
PMID: 7657630  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

