
1. Int J Cancer. 1995 Sep 4;62(5):552-8.

Detection and characterization of the prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA)
in tissue extracts and body fluids.

Troyer JK(1), Beckett ML, Wright GL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Eastern Virginia Medical School,
Norfolk 23501, USA.

The prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) glycoprotein is recognized by the
monoclonal antibody (MAb) 7E11-C5.3 as a predominant 100 kDa and minor 180 kDa
component in LNCaP cell line extracts and its expression has been shown by
immunohistochemistry to be highly restricted to prostate epithelium. The aim of
the present study was to utilize Western blot analysis to determine if PSMA could
be detected in human tissue extracts and body fluids and if so, which molecular
forms were present. PSMA was detected as 120 and 200 kDa bands in normal, benign 
and malignant prostate tissues and seminal plasma. Further analysis demonstrated 
that the larger molecular form of PSMA may be a dimer of the lower m.w. species. 
The PSMA glycoprotein was not detected in the majority of non-prostate tissue
extracts examined except for a low yet significant amount in normal salivary
gland, brain and small intestine, suggesting that PSMA may not be as
prostate-specific as originally thought. Since the prostate-specific antigen
(PSA) has been shown to be maximally shed into the serum in high-grade and
metastatic prostate carcinomas, it was surprising that PSMA could not be detected
in serum by Western blot analysis even in patients with actively progressive
metastatic disease. Second generation antibodies generated against different
epitopes may be required to determine if PSMA is shed into serum. Our results
support the hypothesis that PSMA is a novel prostate biomarker.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.2910620511 
PMID: 7665226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

