
1. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Sep 1;224(2):743-50.

Acyl carrier protein (ACP) import into chloroplasts. Covalent modification by a
stromal holoACP synthase is stimulated by exogenously added CoA and inhibited by 
adenosine 3',5'-bisphosphate.

Yang LM(1), Fernandez MD, Lamppa GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Chicago, IL
60637.

During the import of the precursor for the acyl carrier protein (ACP) into
chloroplasts, apoACP is converted to holoACP by the attachment of a
phosphopantetheine group transferred from coenzyme A (CoA) by a chloroplast
holoACP synthase [Fernandez, M. and Lamppa, G. (1990) Acyl carrier protein import
into chloroplasts does not require the phosphopantetheine: evidence for a
chloroplast holoACP synthase, Plant Cell 2, 195-206]. Here it is shown that
exogenous addition of CoA to intact chloroplasts in the import assay stimulates
the conversion of apoACP to holoACP. If adenosine 3',5'-bisphosphate
[Ado(3',5')P2], the byproduct of the transfer reaction, was also included the
extent of conversion was greatly reduced. CoA has its effect after ACP precursor 
(pre-ACP) import and proteolytic removal of the transit peptide, thus indicating 
that the chloroplast holoACP synthase resides in the stroma where fatty acid
synthase is found. When Ado(3',5')P2 was added alone to the import assay, it
inhibited the synthesis of holoACP. Inhibition of the conversion of apo- to
holoACP with Ado(3',5')P2 made it possible to examine whether the holoform of
preACP could be imported into chloroplasts. Pre-apoACP was synthesized in
Escherichia coli and shown to be competent for import in an ATP- and
temperature-dependent manner. A partially purified chloroplast holoACP synthase
converted 60-90% of the pre-apoACP to pre-holoACP. Pre-holoACP incubated with
chloroplasts in the presence of Ado(3',5')P2 yielded > 60% holoACP, whereas the
control reaction with pre-apoACP gave primarily apoACP. Hence the
phosphopantetheine prosthetic group of ACP does not block precursor movement
through the translocation apparatus of the chloroplast envelope.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1994.00743.x 
PMID: 7925393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

