
1. J Leukoc Biol. 1994 Aug;56(2):133-44.

Effect of the carbocyclic nucleoside analogue MDL 201,112 on inhibition of
interferon-gamma-induced priming of Lewis (LEW/N) rat macrophages for enhanced
respiratory burst and MHC class II Ia+ antigen expression.

Edwards CK 3rd(1), Watts LM, Parmely MJ, Linnik MD, Long RE, Borcherding DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Marion Merrell Dow Research Institute, Cincinnati,
Ohio.

The effects of the carbocyclic nucleoside MDL 201,112 and the purine nucleoside
adenosine on the interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)-induced priming of macrophages (m
phi s) for the respiratory burst and major histocompatibility class II (MHC class
II) Ia+ antigen expression were compared. Priming of purified, peritoneal m phi s
from Lewis (LEW/N) rats for 18 h with recombinant rat IFN-gamma (rRaIFN-gamma) in
the presence of either adenosine (100 microM) or MDL 201,112 (10 microM) resulted
in a fourfold decrease in superoxide anion (O2-) production after stimulation
with opsonized zymosan. Both agents were effective even when added 2 or 4 h after
rRaIFN-gamma treatment. Peritoneal m phi s from LEW/N rats stimulated with
LPS/rRaIFN-gamma were observed to secrete immunoreactive and bioactive TNF-alpha 
over 18 h in vitro and this cytokine could be dose-dependently inhibited by MDL
201,112. MDL 201,112 did not bind to classical A1 or A2 receptors on rat brain
homogenates. Physiological levels of adenosine deaminase, or treatment with the
nucleoside transport inhibitor dipyridamole, reversed the effects of adenosine;
however, these agents at physiological concentrations had little or no effect on 
the inhibition of O2- release mediated by MDL 201,112. Furthermore, incubation of
LEW/N m phi s for 18 h in vitro with rRaIFN-gamma resulted in significant
enhancement of MHC class II Ia+ antigen expression, and these levels could be
blocked by nearly 50% by either MDL 201,112 (10 microM) or adenosine (100
microM). MDL 201,112 and adenosine were also effective in decreasing m phi
opsonized zymosan-stimulated O2- levels and MHC class II Ia+ antigen expression
in vivo. The effects of MDL 201,112 on the down-regulation of heat-killed M.
tuberculosis-activated LEW/N m phi MHC class II Ia+ antigen expression in vitro
appear to be mediated by a novel pathway, because there was no rank order of
potency of ADO A1 or A2 agonist/antagonists (CCPA, NECA, XAC, or CPT) in our in
vitro system. In summary, our data provide compelling evidence that
immunoregulatory carbocyclic nucleoside analogues such as MDL 201,112 or
adenosine appear to regulate LEW/N rat m phi activation through novel molecular
mechanisms and may have important therapeutic implications for acute and chronic 
inflammatory diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/jlb.56.2.133 
PMID: 8071590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

