
1. Am J Vet Res. 1993 Jul;54(7):1064-8.

Association between the effacing (eae) gene and the Shiga-like toxin-encoding
genes in Escherichia coli isolates from cattle.

Mainil JG(1), Jacquemin ER, Kaeckenbeeck AE, Pohl PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Faculty of Veterinary Medecine, University of
Li√®ge, Sart-Tilman, Belgium.

Two hundred ninety-six Escherichia coli isolates from feces or intestines of
calves with diarrhea were hybridized with 7 gene probes. One probe (the eae
probe) was derived from the eae gene coding for a protein involved in the
effacement of the enterocyte microvilli by the group of bacteria called attaching
and effacing E coli (AEEC), and 2 probes were derived from genes coding for the
Shiga-like toxins (SLT) 1 and 2 produced by the verocytotoxic E coli (VTEC). The 
other 4 probes were derived from DNA sequences associated with the adhesive
properties of enteroadherent E coli (EAEC) to cultured cells (the EAF probe for
the localized adherence pattern, probes F1845 and AIDA-1 for the diffuse
adherence pattern, and the Agg probe for the aggregative adherence pattern).
Hybridization results for the eae probe were in agreement, for all but 1 of the 8
isolates, with previously published phenotypic results of microvilli effacement. 
The latter was previously reported as effacing the microvilli of calf
enterocytes, but was eae probe-negative. Two classes of isolates hybridized with 
the eae probe. Members of a first class (60 isolates) additionally produced a
positive signal with 1 or both of the SLT probes (VTEC-AEEC isolates). Isolates
hybridizing with the eae and the SLT1 probes were the most frequent: 56 isolates 
(ie, 93% of all VTEC-AEEC). Members of the second class (10 isolates) failed to
hybridize with either SLT probe (non-VTEC-AEEC isolates).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT
250 WORDS)


PMID: 8368600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

