
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jun;13(6):3567-76.

Interactions between SH2 domains and tyrosine-phosphorylated platelet-derived
growth factor beta-receptor sequences: analysis of kinetic parameters by a novel 
biosensor-based approach.

Panayotou G(1), Gish G, End P, Truong O, Gout I, Dhand R, Fry MJ, Hiles I, Pawson
T, Waterfield MD.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom.

The interaction between SH2 domains and phosphotyrosine-containing sequences was 
examined by real-time measurements of kinetic parameters. The SH2 domains of the 
p85 subunit of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase as well as of other signaling
molecules were expressed in bacteria as glutathione S-transferase fusion
proteins. Phosphotyrosine-containing peptides, corresponding to two
autophosphorylation sites on the human platelet-derived growth factor
beta-receptor that are responsible for phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase binding,
were synthesized and used as capturing molecules, immobilized on a biosensor
surface. The association and dissociation rate constants for binding to both
sites were determined for intact p85 and the recombinant SH2 domains. High
association rates were found to be coupled to very fast dissociation rates for
all interactions studied. A binding specificity was observed for the two SH2
domains of p85, with the N-terminal SH2 binding with high affinity to the Tyr-751
site but not to the Tyr-740 site, and the C-terminal SH2 interacting strongly
with both sites. This approach should be generally applicable to the study of the
specificity inherent in the assembly of signaling complexes by activated
protein-tyrosine kinase receptors.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.13.6.3567-3576.1993 
PMCID: PMC359826
PMID: 8388538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

