
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 1993 Mar;31 Suppl C:97-102.

Clinical efficacy of dirithromycin in pharyngitis and tonsillitis.

MÃ¼ller O(1), Wettich K.

Author information: 
(1)Lilly Deutschland GmbH, Bad Homburg, Germany.

A total of 193 patients with streptococcal pharyngitis/tonsillitis received 500
mg dirithromycin once daily and 196 patients 250 mg erythromycin four times daily
for ten days in a double-blind, parallel-group multicentre study. In the
dirithromycin treatment group, 97 (50.3%) patients completed the study and were
evaluated for efficacy analysis, and 99/196 (50.5%) erythromycin-treated were
evaluated for efficacy of treatment. Favourable clinical responses to treatment
(cure or improvement of symptoms) at the post-therapy visit (three to five days
after therapy completion) occurred in 89 (91.7%) dirithromycin- and 93 (93.9%)
erythromycin-treated patients. Bacteriological response was favourable (pathogen 
eliminated in 81 (83.5%) dirithromycin- and 87 (87.9%) erythromycin-treated
patients. At late post-therapy (three to five weeks after treatment) 82/89
(92.1%) dirithromycin- and 90/93 (96.8%) erythromycin-treated patients had a
favourable clinical response. Bacteriological response at late post-therapy was
favourable in 77 (86.5%) dirithromycin- and 85 (94.4%) erythromycin-treated
patients. No deaths occurred during or after treatment, and the serious events
experienced by three dirithromycin- and one erythromycin-treated patients were
unrelated to treatment. Five patients taking dirithromycin and seven taking
erythromycin discontinued treatment prematurely, mainly due to gastrointestinal
disturbances. Adverse events that occurred in 2% or more of patients in each
treatment group were mainly gastrointestinal (diarrhoea, abdominal pain, nausea
and vomiting); headache and rash were also reported. No significant differences
in clinical laboratory data were detected that were considered to be
drug-related.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/31.suppl_c.97 
PMID: 8478316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

