
1. FEBS Lett. 1996 Jan 2;378(1):69-73.

High-level expression of fully active human glutaredoxin (thioltransferase) in E.
coli and characterization of Cys7 to Ser mutant protein.

Padilla CA(1), Spyrou G, Holmgren A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Glutaredoxin (Grx) (12 kDa) is a hydrogen donor for ribonucleotide reductase and 
also a general GSH-disulfide reductase of importance for redox regulation. To
overexpress human glutaredoxin in Escherichia coli, a cDNA encoding human Grx was
modified and cloned into the vector pET-3d and expressed in E. coli BL21 (DE3) by
IPTG induction. High-level expression of Grx was verified by GSH-disulfide
oxidoreductase activity, SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting analysis. The recombinant
human Grx in its reduced form was purified to homogenity with 50% yield and
exhibited the same dehydroascorbate reductase and hydrogen donor activity for
ribonucleotide reductase (Km approximately 0.2 microM) as the human placenta
protein. Human Grx contains a total of 5 half-cystine residues including a
non-conserved Cys7 residue and is easily oxidized to form dimers during storage. 
A Grx mutant Cys7 to Ser was generated by site-directed mutagenesis and the
protein was purified to homogeneity. The mutant protein showed full activity and 
exhibited a much reduced tendency to form dimers compared with the wild type
protein. Peptide sequencing confirmed the mutation and removal of the N-terminal 
Met residue in both wild type and mutant proteins. Fluorescence spectra
demonstrated only tyrosine fluorescence in human Grx with a peak at 310 nm which 
increased 20% upon reduction and decreased by addition of GSSG demonstrating that
glutathione-containing disulfides are excellent substrates.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(95)01413-6 
PMID: 8549805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

