
1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Mar 8;271(10):5595-602.

CCAAT box enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBP-alpha) stimulates kappaB
element-mediated transcription in transfected cells.

Vietor I(1), Oliveira IC, Vilcek J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Kaplan Cancer Center, New York University
Medical Center, New York, New York 10016, USA.

A construct comprising three tandemly repeated copies of the kappaB element from 
the interleukin-8 gene linked to chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT)
(3xNF-kappaBCAT) was transcriptionally activated in normal human FS-4 fibroblasts
by co-transfection with expression vectors for NF-kappaB p50, p65, or p52.
Unexpectedly, a significant activation of 3xNF-kappaBCAT was also seen upon its
co-transfection with the expression vector for CCAAT box enhancer binding protein
alpha (C/EBP-alpha) (but not C/EBP-beta or C/EBP-delta). Stimulation by
C/EBP-alpha required some other factor(s) present in FS-4 cells because no
transcriptional activation of 3xNF-kappaBCAT was seen after co-transfection with 
C/EBP-alpha in F9 mouse embryonic carcinoma cells, known to be deficient in
several transcription factors. To determine whether transcriptional activation
was the result of interaction with one of the major NF-kappaB proteins, we
co-transfected C/EBP-alpha with NF-kappaB p50, p65, p50 + p65, or p52 into F9 or 
FS-4 cells. No cooperative interaction was seen; in fact, C/EBP- alpha reduced
p65-stimulated transcription, especially in F9 cells. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay with a kappaB probe revealed that the addition of recombinant
C/EBP-alpha protein to nuclear extracts from untreated FS-4 cells resulted in the
appearance of four bands. Only one of these bands was supershifted by antibody to
p50, whereas antibodies to p65 or other NF-kappaB proteins had no effect. Our
findings show that C/EBP-alpha may cause activation of some kappaB
element-containing genes lacking C/EBP binding sites.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.10.5595 
PMID: 8621420  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

