
1. Biochemistry. 1996 Feb 6;35(5):1423-31.

Structural studies of Escherichia coli UDP-N-acetylmuramate:L-alanine ligase.

Jin H(1), Emanuele JJ Jr, Fairman R, Robertson JG, Hail ME, Ho HT, Falk PJ,
Villafranca JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Macromolecular Structure and Analytical Research and Development, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Princeton, New Jersey
08543-4000, USA.

Uridine diphosphate N-acetylmuramate:L-alanine ligase (EC 6.3.2.8, UNAM:L-Ala
ligase or MurC gene product) adds the first amino acid to the sugar moiety of the
peptidoglycan precursor, catalyzing one of the essential steps in cell wall
biosynthesis for both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Here, we report
our studies on the secondary and quaternary structures of UNAM:L-Ala ligase from 
Escherichia coli. The molecular weight of the purified recombinant enzyme
determined by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry agreed well with the
molecular weight deduced from the DNA sequence. Through sedimentation equilibrium
analysis, we show that the enzyme exists in equilibrium between monomeric and
dimeric forms and that the dissociation constant of the dimer, Kd, was determined
to be 1.1 +/- 0.4 microM at 37 degrees C and 0.58 +/- 0.30 microM at 4 degrees C.
A very similar Kd value was also obtained at 37 degrees C by gel filtration
chromatography. The secondary structure of the enzyme was characterized by
circular dichroism spectroscopy. No change in the secondary structure was
observed between the monomeric and dimeric forms of the enzyme. The activity
assays at enzyme concentrations both below and above the determined Kd value lead
to the conclusion that the enzyme is active both as dimers and as monomers and
that the specific activity is independent of the oligomerization state.

DOI: 10.1021/bi952334k 
PMID: 8634272  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

