
1. Arch Oral Biol. 1996 May;41(5):439-44.

Lipopolysaccharides from Porphyromonas gingivalis, Prevotella intermedia and
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans promote osteoclastic differentiation in
vitro.

Ito HO(1), Shuto T, Takada H, Koga T, Aida Y, Hirata M, Koga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Kyushu University School of Dentistry,
Fukuoka, Japan. hitoded@mbox.nc.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Bacterial lipopolysaccharides possess bone-resorbing activity. Here,
lipopolysaccharides from three putative periodontopathic bacteria were examined
for effects on osteoclast-like cell formation of bone marrow cells from
lipopolysaccharide-responsive C3H-HeN and non-responsive C3H/HeJ mice. The bone
marrow cells were cultured with or without various doses of lipopolysaccharide in
the presence of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 and dexamethasone. These
lipopolysaccharide preparations significantly increased the number of
osteoclast-like cells formed in the culture of C3H/HeN marrow cells; the same as 
lipopolysaccharides from Escherichia coli and a synthetic lipid A with E.
coli-type structure (LA-15-PP), at doses from 0.1 to 1 microgram/ml. This
stimulating effect of each lipopolysaccharides was uniformly abrogated by the
addition of polymyxin B at 5 micrograms/ml. All the lipopolysaccharide and the
synthetic lipid A had no effect on osteoclast formation of the C3H/HeJ marrow
cells, whereas lipopolysaccharide from Porphyromonas gingivalis and Prevotella
intermedia showed significant mitogenic activity on C3H/HeJ spleen cells. It
seems likely that the activity of lipopolysaccharides to augment osteoclast-like 
cell formation in the bone marrow cell cultures is derived from a common
structure of the lipid A portion.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-9969(96)00002-7 
PMID: 8809306  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

