
1. Protein Sci. 1996 Dec;5(12):2566-74.

Kinetic and crystallographic studies of Escherichia coli
UDP-N-acetylmuramate:L-alanine ligase.

Emanuele JJ Jr(1), Jin H, Jacobson BL, Chang CY, Einspahr HM, Villafranca JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Macromolecular Structure, Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical
Research Institute, Princeton, New Jersey 08543-4000, USA.

Uridine diphosphate-N-acetylmuramate:L-alanine ligase (EC 6.3.2.8, UNAM:L-Ala
ligase or MurC gene product) catalyzes the ATP-dependent ligation of the first
amino acid to the sugar moiety of the peptidoglycan precursor. This is an
essential step in cell wall biosynthesis for both gram-positive and gram-negative
bacteria. Optimal assay conditions for initial velocity studies have been
established. Steady-state assays were carried out to determine the effect of
various parameters on enzyme activity. Factors studies included: cation
specificity, ionic strength, buffer composition and pH. At 37 degrees C and pH
8.0, kcat was equal to 980 +/- 40 min-1, while K(m) values for ATP, UNAM, and
L-alanine were, 130 +/- 10, 44 +/- 3, and 48 +/- 6 microM, respectively. Of the
metals tested only Mn, Mg, and Co were able to support activity. Sodium chloride,
potassium chloride, ammonium chloride, and ammonium sulfate had no effect on
activity up to 75 mM levels. The enzyme, in appropriate buffer, was stable enough
to be assayed over the pH range of 5.6 to 10.1. pH profiles of Vmax/K(m) for the 
three substrates and of Vmax were obtained. Crystallization experiments with the 
enzyme produced two crystal forms. One of these has been characterized by X-ray
diffraction as monoclinic, space group C2, with cell dimensions a = 189.6, b =
92.1, c = 75.2 A, beta = 105 degrees, and two 54 kDa molecules per asymmetric
unit. It was discovered that the enzyme will hydrolyze ATP in the absence of
L-alanine. This L-alanine independent activity is dependent upon the
concentrations of both ATP and UNAM; kcat for this activity is less than 4% of
the biosynthetic activity measured in the presence of saturating levels of
L-alanine. Numerous L-alanine analogs tested were shown to stimulate ATP
hydrolysis. A number of these L-alanine analogs produced novel products as
accessed by HPLC and mass spectral analysis. All of the L-alanine analogs tested 
as inhibitors were competitive versus L-alanine.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.5560051219 
PMCID: PMC2143315
PMID: 8976565  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

