
1. Protein Expr Purif. 1997 Aug;10(3):309-19.

High-level expression of soluble protein in Escherichia coli using a His6-tag and
maltose-binding-protein double-affinity fusion system.

Pryor KD(1), Leiting B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Merck Research Laboratories, Rahway, New Jersey
07065, USA.

Using the maltose-binding protein (MBP) fusion vector pMAL-c1 from C. V. Maina et
al. (1988, Gene 74, 365-373), we have constructed expression vectors which
contain a sequence encoding six consecutive histidine residues (His6-tag) at the 
3' end of the MBP-encoding malE gene which is followed by either a
thrombin-binding site (LVPRGS) or a factor Xa-binding site (IEGR). The benefits
of this approach include; (a) high expression levels of soluble MBP fusion
proteins (exceeding 2% of the total cellular protein), (b) high-quality
purification of proteins under various conditions (high salt, low salt,
denaturing, nondenaturing, etc.), and (c) two alternative protease cleavage sites
to test for the most efficient cleavage of each fusion protein. We also
constructed these MBP-His 6-tag expression vectors with alternative selection
markers (Ampr, Kanr) and alternative promoters (tac, T7). Using these constructs,
we expressed and purified several proteins of which we present two,
penicillin-binding protein PBP2a and UDP-N-acetylmuramate:L-alanine ligase
(MurC), and compare their expression level and purity with other expression
systems. We also discuss the use of minimal media with supplements versus rich
media and cell growth strategies to optimize the protein yield in general and for
isotope labeling.

DOI: 10.1006/prep.1997.0759 
PMID: 9268677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

