
1. Biodegradation. 1997;8(2):105-11.

Use of a luminescent bacterial biosensor for biomonitoring and characterization
of arsenic toxicity of chromated copper arsenate (CCA).

Cai J(1), DuBow MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.

An arsenic oxyanion-inducible Escherichia coli chromosomal operon (arsRBC) has
been previously identified. Construction of a luciferase transcriptional gene
fusion (arsB::luxAB) showed that ars operon expression, plus concomitant cell
luminescence, was inducible in a concentration-dependent manner by arsenic salts.
The present study was conducted to evaluate the potential of the arsB::luxAB
transcriptional gene fusion for use as a biosensor in monitoring the toxicity of 
arsenic compounds. Cultures from this gene fusion strain were exposed to
increasing concentrations of the wood preservative chromated copper arsenate
(CCA), as well as its constituents, sodium arsenate and chromated copper solution
(CC). Analysis of luciferase activity revealed that the arsB::luxAB gene fusion
was expressed in response to CCA and sodium arsenate, but not to the CC solution.
The detection limit of arsenic was found to be 0.01 microgram As/ml (10 parts per
billion, 10 ppb) and therefore well within the range of environmental concerns. A
greater induction of luminescence by arsenate was observed when cells were
limited for phosphate, as phosphate can act as a competitive inhibitor of
arsenate ions. Our results suggest that the E. coli arsB::luxAB fusion strain has
a promising future as a specific and sensitive biosensor for monitoring
bioavailable levels and toxicity of arsenic near sites where CCA-treated wood has
been used.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1008281028594 
PMID: 9342883  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

