
1. J Cell Sci. 1997 Nov;110 ( Pt 22):2845-53.

Intracellular Ca2+ signals in Dictyostelium chemotaxis are mediated exclusively
by Ca2+ influx.

Nebl T(1), Fisher PR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Microbiology, La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC, Australia.

We measured folate- and cAMP-induced changes in cytoplasmic free calcium
concentration ([Ca2+]i) using recombinant aequorin reconstituted in living
Dictyostelium cells with coelenterazine-h. The resulting semi-synthetic protein
displayed increased sensitivity to Ca2+ allowing accurate measurement of
chemoattractant-induced transients at low resting levels. Both folate- and
cAMP-induced Ca2+ responses were developmentally regulated, exhibited remarkably 
similar kinetics and were dependent on the relative rather than the absolute
magnitude of increases in attractant concentration. They began after a short
delay of 5-10 seconds, leading to a maximum increase in cytosolic calcium
concentration after approximately 25 seconds and a return to basal level within
approximately 60 seconds after stimulation. Responses elicited by the two
chemoattractants were dose-dependent and saturated between 4 and 20 microM. They 
depended on the presence of free extracellular calcium ions and were inhibited in
a concentration-dependent manner between 10(-4) and 10(-5) M. In accordance with 
45Ca2+-uptake measurements by Milne and Coukell (J. Cell Biol. (1991) 112,
103-110), both responses were also completely inhibited by 15 microM Ruthenium
Red, 15 microM carbonylcyanide m-chlorophenyl-hydrazone (CCCP) and 500 microM
gadolinium ions. Under conditions that prohibited influx of Ca2+ from the
extracellular medium there were no detectable changes in [Ca2+]i that could be
related to a separate release of the ion from intracellular stores. Together,
these results show that the Ca2+ signals involved in chemotaxis correlate
temporally with actin depolymerization (not polymerization) and are mediated by
Ca2+ influx, not IP3-mediated intracellular release.


PMID: 9427292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

