
1. Arch Dermatol Res. 1997 Nov;289(12):671-6.

Induction of cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen expression by group A
streptococcal antigens in psoriasis.

Baker BS(1), Garioch JJ, Hardman C, Powles A, Fry L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, St. Mary's Hospital, Paddington, London, UK.
b.baker@ic.ac.uk

The cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen (CLA) has been proposed as a homing
receptor for the selective migration of memory T cells into the skin. To
investigate the effect of group A streptococci (GAS) on the migration of T cells 
in psoriasis, CLA expression was assessed by double-staining for CD3 and the
HECA-452 epitope on peripheral blood T cells from 13 patients with psoriasis, 10 
patients with other inflammatory skin diseases and 12 normal controls before and 
after 7 days culture with a GAS sonicate, Candida albicans (control antigen) or
medium. In addition, CLA+, and CLA-, CD3+ CD45RO+ subsets were isolated from
individuals in each group and V beta 2 expression and proliferation to GAS
studied. Mean CLA expression by freshly isolated T cells was almost identical in 
the three groups. After culture with GAS, T cells from the psoriatic patients and
control showed a significant increase in mean percentage CLA+ expression compared
to medium (P < 0.002, P < 0.05, respectively). This induction was inhibited by
the addition of anti-IL-12 antibody. However, in psoriatic patients, but not in
controls, the GAS-induced increase was significantly greater than that of C.
albicans (P < 0.002) and was accompanied by a decrease in T cells positive for
the peripheral lymph node homing receptor, L-selectin (P < 0.05). The percentage 
of V beta 2+ T cells was markedly higher in the CLA+ than in the CLA- T-cell
subset in psoriatic patients (P < 0.01) and controls; both subsets proliferated
to GAS, in each group. These findings suggest a differential modulation of
specific tissue homing receptors on T cells by GAS in psoriasis.

DOI: 10.1007/s004030050260 
PMID: 9452887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

