
1. Rev Port Cardiol. 1997 Dec;16(12):967-74, 955.

[A review of infectious endocarditis due to Candida].

[Article in Portuguese]

Branco L(1), Pitta ML, Bernardes L, Galrinho A, Agapito AF, Ramos JM, Quininha J,
Figueiredo L, Bento R, Mata A.

Author information: 
(1)Servi√ßo de Cardiologia, Hospital de Santa Marta, Lisboa.

OBJECTIVE: As fungal endocarditis is a serious disease, frequently requiring
cardiac surgery, a review was made of the experience of our Departments in this
pathology.
DESIGN: A retrospective analysis of clinical, echocardiographic and surgical
data.
SETTING: Patients studied in a tertiary care Hospital with cardiac surgery
available.
PATIENTS: Between 1984 and 1994 there were ten cases of candida endocarditis in
nine patients, four male and five female, mean age--45 +/- 12 years (31-65).
INTERVENTIONS: The following parameters were analysed: clinical (predisposing
factors, clinical evolution, complications, therapy and mortality),
echocardiographic (presence of vegetations, abscesses, valvular regurgitations). 
Patients studied in other Centres and referred to our Department only for
examination (echocardiograms) were excluded from this analysis.
RESULTS: Eight cases in seven patients were prosthetic valve endocarditis and two
native valve endocarditis. No patient was drug addicted. Seven cases of
prosthetic valve endocarditis developed less than one year after surgery and
another had a gynecological fungal infection as the cause of the endocarditis.
Four patients had had previous endocarditis. There were four embolic events and
three developed heart failure. There were three perivalvular infections, six
valvular regurgitations and only one case with huge vegetations on
echocardiography. Nine patients were treated with amphotericin B, in five
fluocytosin was added and in four ketoconazol, which was replaced by flukonazol
in one patient. Therapy was continued for at least eight weeks. Six patients were
operated during the acute stage and one died. One patient was operated on late
after the infection. Three patients died during the active stage. In a follow up 
of 5.2 +/- 4.8 years (8 months to 8 years) there was one fatal candida
endocarditis relapse, one fatal candida sepsis, one non cardiac death, one
patient developed a periprosthetic leak and one had recurrent systemic
embolization. Abscesses/pseudoaneurysms were found in five out of seven patients 
submitted to surgery.
CONCLUSION: Candida infective endocarditis has a bad prognosis, specially in
those patients not operated early; it develops in patients with predisposing
factors, which in our series were a previous infective endocarditis (four
patients) and/or a prosthetic valve implantation less than one year before; it
has important morbidity with multiple embolic events, perivalvular involvement,
valvular regurgitation and heart failure.


PMID: 9522617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

