
1. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 1998 Jul;11(7):659-67.

Genetic characterization of RRS1, a recessive locus in Arabidopsis thaliana that 
confers resistance to the bacterial soilborne pathogen Ralstonia solanacearum.

Deslandes L(1), Pileur F, Liaubet L, Camut S, Can C, Williams K, Holub E, Beynon 
J, Arlat M, Marco Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Mol√©culaire des Relations Plantes-Microorganismes,
CNRS-INRA, Castanet-Tolosan, France.

The soilborne, vascular pathogen Ralstonia solanacearum, the causative agent of
bacterial wilt, was shown to infect a range of Arabidopsis thaliana accessions.
The pathogen was capable of infecting the Col-5 accession in an hrp-dependent
manner, following root inoculation. Elevated bacterial population levels were
found in leaves of Col-5, 4 to 5 days after root inoculation by the GMI1000
strain. Bacteria were found predominantly in the xylem vessels and spread
systematically throughout the plant. The Nd-1 accession of A. thaliana was
resistant to the GMI1000 strain of R. solanacearum. Bacterial concentrations
detected in leaves of Nd-1, inoculated with an hrp+ strain of R. solanacearum,
were only slightly higher than those detected in the susceptible accession,
Col-5, following inoculation with a strain whose hrp gene cluster was deleted.
Leaf inoculation of the GMI1000 strain on the resistant accession Nd-1 induced
the formation of lesions in the older leaves of the rosette whereas the same
strain of R. solanacearum provoked complete wilting of Col-5. Resistance to
strain GMI1000 of R. solanacearum segregated as a simply inherited recessive
trait in a genetic cross between Col-5 and Nd-1. F9 recombinant inbred lines
generated between these two accessions were used to map a locus, RRS1, that was
the major determinant of resistance between restriction fragment length
polymorphism markers mi83 and mi61 on chromosome V. This region of the A.
thaliana genome is known to contain many other pathogen recognition capabilities.

DOI: 10.1094/MPMI.1998.11.7.659 
PMID: 9650298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

