
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1998 Aug;64(8):2844-52.

Acyl transfer activity of an amidase from Rhodococcus sp. strain R312: formation 
of a wide range of hydroxamic acids.

Fournand D(1), Bigey F, Arnaud A.

Author information: 
(1)Ecole Nationale Supérieure Agronomique de Montpellier-Institut National de la 
Recherche Agronomique, UFR de Microbiologie Industrielle et Génétique des
Microorganismes, 34060 Montpellier cedex 01, France.

The enantioselective amidase from Rhodococcus sp. strain R312 was produced in
Escherichia coli and was purified in one chromatographic step. This enzyme was
shown to catalyze the acyl transfer reaction to hydroxylamine from a wide range
of amides. The optimum working pH values were 7 with neutral amides and 8 with
alpha-aminoamides. The reaction occurred according to a Ping Pong Bi Bi
mechanism. The kinetic constants demonstrated that the presence of a hydrophobic 
moiety in the carbon side chain considerably decreased the Km(amide) values
(e.g., Km(amide) = 0.1 mM for butyramide, isobutyramide, valeramide, pivalamide, 
hexanoamide, and benzamide). Moreover, very high turnover numbers (kcat) were
obtained with linear aliphatic amides (e.g., kcat = 333 s-1 with hexanoamide),
whereas branched-side-chain-, aromatic cycle- or heterocycle-containing amides
were sterically hindered. Carboxylic acids, alpha-amino acids, and methyl esters 
were not acyl donors or were very bad acyl donors. Only amides and hydroxamic
acids, both of which contained amide bonds, were determined to be efficient acyl 
donors. On the other hand, the highest affinities of the acyl-enzyme complexes
for hydroxylamine were obtained with short, polar or unsaturated amides as acyl
donors (e.g., KmNH2OH = 20, 25, and 5 mM for acetyl-, alanyl-, and
acryloyl-enzyme complexes, respectively). No acyl acceptors except water and
hydroxylamine were found. Finally, the purified amidase was shown to be
L-enantioselective towards alpha-hydroxy- and alpha-aminoamides.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.64.8.2844-2852.1998 
PMCID: PMC106781
PMID: 9687439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

