
1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 25;273(39):25516-26.

Characterization of the Escherichia coli RNA 3'-terminal phosphate cyclase and
its sigma54-regulated operon.

Genschik P(1), Drabikowski K, Filipowicz W.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher-Institut, P. O. Box 2543, 4002 Basel, Switzerland.

The RNA 3'-terminal phosphate cyclase catalyzes the ATP-dependent conversion of
the 3'-phosphate to the 2',3'-cyclic phosphodiester at the end of various RNA
substrates. Recent cloning of a cDNA encoding the human cyclase indicated that
genes encoding cyclase-like proteins are conserved among Eucarya, Bacteria, and
Archaea. The protein encoded by the Escherichia coli gene was overexpressed and
shown to have the RNA 3'-phosphate cyclase activity (Genschik, P., Billy, E.,
Swianiewicz, M., and Filipowicz, W. (1997) EMBO J. 16, 2955-2967). Analysis of
the requirements and substrate specificity of the E. coli protein, presented in
this work, demonstrates that properties of the bacterial and human enzymes are
similar. ATP is the best cofactor (Km = 20 microM), whereas GTP (Km = 100 microM)
and other nucleoside triphosphates (NTPs) act less efficiently. The enzyme
undergoes nucleotidylation in the presence of [alpha-32P]ATP and, to a lesser
extent, also in the presence of other NTPs. Comparison of 3'-phosphorylated
oligoribonucleotides and oligodeoxyribonucleotides of identical sequence
demonstrated that the latter are at least 300-fold poorer substrates for the
enzyme. The E. coli cyclase gene, named rtcA, forms part of an uncharacterized
operon containing two additional open reading frames (ORFs). The ORF positioned
immediately upstream, named rtcB, encodes a protein that is also highly conserved
between Eucarya, Bacteria, and Archaea. Another ORF, called rtcR, is positioned
upstream of the rtcA/rtcB unit and is transcribed in the opposite direction. It
encodes a protein having features of sigma54-dependent regulators. By
overexpressing the N-terminally truncated form of RtcR, we demonstrate that this 
regulator indeed controls expression of rtcA and rtcB in a sigma54-dependent
manner. Also consistent with the involvement of sigma54, the region upstream of
the transcription start site of the rtcA/rtcB mRNA contains the -12 and -24
elements, TTGCA and TGGCA, respectively, characteristic of sigma54-dependent
promoters. The cyclase gene is nonessential as demonstrated by knockout
experiments. Possible functions of the cyclase in RNA metabolism are discussed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.39.25516 
PMID: 9738023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

