
1. Jpn J Antibiot. 1998 Jun;51(6):413-31.

[Basic and clinical studies on tazobactam/piperacillin in pediatric field].

[Article in Japanese]

Motohiro T(1), Nagai K, Yamada T, Oki S, Yamada T, Yoshinaga Y, Tsumura N, Oda K,
Sakata Y, Kato H, Imai S, Morita J, Matsuo Y, Ikezawa S, Takahgashi K, Fukuda T, 
Yamashita Y, Aramaki M, Hayashi M, Yamakawa R, Ono-E, Tananari Y, Tsutsumi T,
Hoshuyama A, Aida K, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Kurume University.

A drug susceptibility test of the combination drug TAZ/PIPC, which consists of a 
newly developed beta-lactamase inhibitor, tazobactam (TAZ), and one of penicillin
antibiotics, piperacillin (PIPC), with combination ratio of 1:4 in potency, was
conducted with stock strains and clinical isolates. The clinical efficacy and
safety of its injection was also evaluated in children with a variety of
infectious diseases. The results were as follows: 1. In susceptibility test, 114 
strains from 4 species of stock strains were treated with 8 drugs, that is,
TAZ/PIPC, PIPC, penicillin G (PCG), ampicillin (ABPC), cefotiam (CTM), cefotaxime
(CTX), ceftazidime (CAZ), and sulbactam/cefoperazone (SBT/CPZ). Of three
clinically isolated species from patients, Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) was 
treated with TAZ/PIPC, PIPC, methicillin (DMPPC), CTM, CTX, and SBT/CPZ, and the 
others were treated with the same drugs except for DMPPC. The MICs were measured 
for these bacterial strains inoculated at the concentration of 10(6) CFU/ml. The 
MIC90 values of TAZ/PIPC against 45 strains of Streptococcus pyogenes (S.
pyogenes), one of the stock cultures of Gram-positive cocci, were 0.05
microgram/ml and similar to those of PIPC, CTM, CAZ, and SBT/CPZ. The MICs of
TAZ/PIPC for 28 strains of Streptococcus agalactiae (S. agalactiae) were 0.39
microgram/ml and similar to those of PIPC, CTM, CAZ, and SBT/CPZ. As for
Gram-negative bacilli, the MIC90 of TAZ/PIPC against 10 strains of Bordetella
pertussis (B. pertussis) were 0.10 microgram/ml and similar to those of PIPC. The
MIC90 of TAZ/PIPC against 31 strains of Haemophilus influenzae (H. influenzae)
were 0.05 microgram/ml and similar to those of PIPC, CTX, and SBT/CPZ. Regarding 
Gram-positive cocci isolated from patients received this combination drug, the
MIC90 of TAZ/PIPC against 2 strains of S. aureus, a non beta-lactamase producing 
strain and a low-beta-lactamase producing strain, were 0.78 microgram/ml and 3.1 
micrograms/ml, respectively; the former value was similar to those of PIPC,
DMPPC, CTM, and CTX, and the latter was similar to those of PIPC, DMPPC, CTX, and
SBT/CPZ. Of 4 strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae, 2 strains were inhibited at
0.05 microgram/ml, and the others at 1.56 micrograms/ml; both values were similar
to those of PIPC, SBT/CPZ. As for Gram-negative bacilli, 6 of 7 strains of H.
influenzae did not produce beta-lactamase and 1 strain was a high producer. The
MICs of TAZ/PIPC against beta-lactamase nonproducing strains were < or = 0.025
microgram/ml in 5 strains and 0.39 microgram/ml in 1 strain, and the values were 
similar to those of PIPC and SBT/CPZ. While the MIC of TAZ/PIPC against the high 
beta-lactamase producing strain was 0.78 microgram/ml; similar to that of SBT/CPZ
and smaller than that of PIPC. 2. The results of clinical effects on 7 diseases
in 33 cases were as follows: TAZ/PIPC was clinically judged "excellent" in 17
(51.5%); good in 14 (42.4%); fair in 2 (6.1%). No case with no response was seen 
in this study, and the total efficacy rate of "excellent" and "good" was 93.9%.
3. Bacteriological effects were evaluated in 17 strains of 4 species, and all of 
them were eradicated. 4. Adverse reactions were judged in 35, which consisted of 
33 in which the clinical effects were evaluated and 2 dropped from this study. Of
these cases, diarrhea was observed in 4 (11.4%). 5. Laboratory tests revealed an 
increase in platelets in 1 of 32 cases (3.1%), and eosinophilia in 2 of 29 cases 
(6.9%). Biochemical profile showed an increase in GPT alone and abnormal
increases in both GOT and GPT in 1 each out of 21 cases.


PMID: 9755831  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

