
1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 20;273(47):31510-8.

Structure-function analysis of G protein-coupled receptor kinase-5. Role of the
carboxyl terminus in kinase regulation.

Pronin AN(1), Carman CV, Benovic JL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology and Microbiology and
Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Cancer, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Many G protein-coupled receptors are phosphorylated and regulated by a distinct
family of G protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) that specifically target the 
activated form of the receptor. Recent studies have revealed that the GRKs are
also subject to post-translational regulation. For example, GRK5 activity is
strongly inhibited by protein kinase C phosphorylation and by Ca2+-calmodulin
binding. Ca2+-calmodulin binding also promotes GRK5 autophosphorylation, which
further contributes to kinase inhibition. In this study we identify two important
structural domains in GRK5, a phospholipid binding domain (residues 552-562) and 
an autoinhibitory domain (residues 563-590), that significantly contribute to
GRK5 localization and function. We demonstrate that the C-terminal region of GRK5
(residues 563-590) contains residues autophosphorylated in the presence of
calmodulin as well as the residues phosphorylated by protein kinase C. Deletion
of this domain increases the apparent affinity of GRK5 for receptor substrates
3-4-fold but has no effect on nonreceptor substrates. These findings define
residues 563-590 of GRK5 as an autoinhibitory domain with efficacy that is
regulated by phosphorylation. Another C-terminal domain in GRK5 that appears to
be functionally important is found between residues 552 and 562. Deletion of this
region significantly inhibits kinase phosphorylation of membrane-bound receptor
substrates but has no effect on soluble substrates. Additional studies reveal
that this domain is critical for GRK5 interaction with phospholipids and for the 
intracellular localization of the kinase. Interestingly, similar regions in GRK4 
and GRK6 appear to be palmitoylated (and involved in membrane interaction),
suggesting evolutionary conservation of the function of this domain.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.47.31510 
PMID: 9813065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

