
1. Scand J Infect Dis. 1998;30(4):371-6.

Risk factors for infection with Helicobacter pylori--a study of children in rural
Ethiopia.

Lindkvist P(1), Enquselassie F, Asrat D, Muhe L, Nilsson I, Giesecke J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Huddinge University Hospital, Sweden.

The public health impact of Helicobacter pylori (HP) infection is gradually
becoming obvious, the bacterium now being implicated as an aetiologic agent in a 
variety of gastric diseases. Transmission routes still remain unknown, although
single risk factors, such as domestic crowding (especially bed-sharing) in
childhood and low parental socioeconomic status, have been pointed out in studies
from developed countries. In an attempt to study the risk factors in a developing
country, we performed a case control study of 242 randomly selected children aged
2-4 y in Butajira rural area in Ethiopia. Blood samples were drawn and a
questionnaire administered. The total prevalence of IgG antibody to HP among the 
children in the region was 48% (116/242). Several risk factors such as: crowding,
water, animals, sanitation, etc. correlated strongly to seropositivity in a
univariate analysis. After controlling for possible confounding, independent
predictors of seropositivity were: living in town (OR = 2.15, p = 0.001),
increasing age (OR = 1.71, p = 0.060), and being a Muslim (OR = 1.54, p = 0.005).
It could not be excluded that a bad water supply in town could explain the
difference in seroprevalence between town and village. These results indicate
that, in developing countries, factors relating to community and religion might
be as important risk factors for infection with HP in children as characteristics
of the family or the home.

DOI: 10.1080/00365549850160666 
PMID: 9817517  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

