
1. J Med Microbiol. 1998 Aug;47(8):667-78.

An evaluation of intergenic rRNA gene sequence length polymorphism analysis for
the identification of Legionella species.

Fry NK(1), Harrison TG.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Systemic Infection Laboratory, PHLS Central Public Health
Laboratory, London.

There are currently more than 40 species of Legionella and the identification of 
most of these by standard methods is technically difficult. The aim of this study
was to assess the suitability of a previously published PCR-based method of
identifying Legionella spp. Intergenic 16S-23S rDNA spacer regions were amplified
with primers complementary to conserved regions of the rRNA genes. Following
electrophoretic separation of the products, data analyses were performed with the
Taxotron software package. Computer-assisted analysis (with an empirically
derived error tolerance of 3%) could differentiate only 26 of the 43 strains
(representing 43 species), with the remaining 17 species clustering into four
groups (group I, comprising 10 species; group II, three species; group III, two
species and group IV, two species). Analysis of well-characterised 'non-type'
strains of some Legionella spp. (e.g., from type culture collections) resulted in
patterns distinct from the corresponding type strain in most cases. Furthermore, 
recent isolates (identified by conventional methods) were identified by this PCR 
method to the presumed correct species (or species group) in only a minority of
cases. Well characterised strains and recent isolates of Legionella showed
heterogeneity within many species. This intra-species variation severely limits
the usefulness of the method for the identification of isolates. However, this
property may be useful for epidemiological typing within such species.

DOI: 10.1099/00222615-47-8-667 
PMID: 9877187  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

