
1. J Immunol. 1999 Jan 1;162(1):523-32.

Enhanced interaction of HLA-DM with HLA-DR in enlarged vacuoles of hereditary and
infectious lysosomal diseases.

Lem L(1), Riethof DA, Scidmore-Carlson M, Griffiths GM, Hackstadt T, Brodsky FM.

Author information: 
(1)The G. W. Hooper Foundation, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of California, San Francisco 94143, USA.

Following biosynthesis, class II MHC molecules are transported through a
lysosome-like compartment, where they acquire antigenic peptides for presentation
to T cells at the cell surface. This compartment is characterized by the presence
of HLA-DM, which catalyzes the peptide loading process. Here we report that the
morphology and function of the class II loading compartment is affected in
diseases with a phenotypic change in lysosome morphology. Swollen lysosomes are
observed in cells from patients with the hereditary immunodeficiency
Chediak-Higashi syndrome and in cells infected with Coxiella burnetii, the
rickettsial organism that causes Q fever. In both disease states, we observed
that HLA-DR and HLA-DM accumulate in enlarged intracellular compartments, which
label with the lysosomal marker LAMP-1. The distribution of class I MHC molecules
was not affected, localizing disease effects to the endocytic pathway. Thus,
cellular mechanisms controlling lysosome biogenesis also affect formation of the 
class II loading compartment. Analysis of cell surface class II molecules
revealed that their steady-state levels were not reduced on diseased cells.
However, in both disease states, enhanced interaction between HLA-DR and HLA-DM
was detected. In the Chediak-Higashi syndrome cells, this correlated with more
efficient removal of the CLIP peptide. These findings suggest a mechanism for
perturbation of Ag presentation by class II molecules and consequent immune
deficiencies in both diseases.


PMID: 9886429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

