
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1999 Feb;65(2):540-8.

Production of medium-chain-length poly(3-hydroxyalkanoates) from gluconate by
recombinant Escherichia coli.

Klinke S(1), Ren Q, Witholt B, Kessler B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich,
CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland.

It was shown recently that recombinant Escherichia coli, defective in the
beta-oxidation cycle and harboring a medium-chain-length (MCL)
poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate) (PHA) polymerase-encoding gene of Pseudomonas, is able
to produce MCL PHA from fatty acids but not from sugars or gluconate (S.
Langenbach, B. H. A. Rehm, and A. Steinbüchel, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 150:303-309,
1997; Q. Ren, Ph.D. thesis, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, 1997). In this
study, we report the formation of MCL PHA from gluconate by recombinant E. coli. 
By introduction of genes coding for an MCL PHA polymerase and the cytosolic
thioesterase I ('thioesterase I) into E. coli JMU193, we were able to engineer a 
pathway for the synthesis of MCL PHA from gluconate. We used two expression
systems, i.e., the bad promoter and alk promoter, for the 'thioesterase I- and
PHA polymerase-encoding genes, respectively, which enabled us to modulate their
expression independently over a range of inducer concentrations, which resulted
in a maximum MCL PHA accumulation of 2.3% of cell dry weight from gluconate. We
found that the amount of PHA and the 'thioesterase I activity are directly
correlated. Moreover, the polymer accumulated in the recombinant E. coli
consisted mainly of 3-hydroxyoctanoate monomers. On the basis of our data, we
propose an MCL PHA biosynthesis pathway scheme for recombinant E. coli JMU193,
harboring PHA polymerase and 'thioesterase I, when grown on gluconate, which
involves both de novo fatty acid synthesis and beta-oxidation.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.65.2.540-548.1999 
PMCID: PMC91059
PMID: 9925580  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

