
1. J Bacteriol. 1999 Nov;181(22):7014-20.

Characterization of the essential transport function of the AIDA-I
autotransporter and evidence supporting structural predictions.

Maurer J(1), Jose J, Meyer TF.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Infektionsbiologie, Max-Planck-Institut für Biologie, D-72076
Tübingen, Germany.

The current model for autodisplay suggests a mechanism that allows a passenger
protein to be translocated across the outer membrane by coordinate action of a
C-terminal beta-barrel and its preceding linking region. The passenger protein,
linker, and beta-barrel are together termed the autotransporter, while the linker
and beta-barrel are here referred to as the translocation unit (TU). We
characterized the minimal TU necessary for autodisplay with the
adhesin-involved-in-diffuse-adherence (AIDA-I) autotransporter. The assumed
beta-barrel structure at the C terminus of the AIDA-I autotransporter was studied
by constructing a set of seven AIDA-I-cholera toxin B subunit fusion proteins
containing various portions of AIDA-I. Surface exposure of the cholera toxin B
moiety was assessed by dot blot experiments and trypsin accessibility of the
chimeric proteins expressed in Escherichia coli JK321 or UT5600. Export of
cholera toxin B strictly depended on a complete predicted beta-barrel region. The
absolute necessity for export of a linking region and its influence on expression
as an integral part of the TU was also demonstrated. The different
electrophoretic mobilities of native and denatured chimeras indicated that the
proposed beta-barrel resides within the C-terminal 312 amino acids of AIDA-I.
Together these data provide evidence for the predicted beta-barrel structure and 
support our formerly proposed model of membrane topology of the AIDA-I
autotransporter.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.181.22.7014-7020.1999 
PMCID: PMC94176
PMID: 10559167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

