
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2000 Jan;119(1):99-106.

Circulating, Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific lymphocytes from PPD skin
test-negative patients with tuberculosis do not secrete interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) and lack the cutaneous lymphocyte antigen skin-selective homing
receptor.

Magnani ZI(1), Confetti C, Besozzi G, Codecasa LR, Panina-Bordignon P, Lang R,
Rossi GA, Pardi R, Burastero SE.

Author information: 
(1)San Raffaele Scientific Institute, the Institute Villa Marelli for Lung
Diseases, Milan, Italy.

Individuals with a negative intradermal reaction to tuberculin PPD have long been
described in the Mycobacterium tuberculosis exposed, immune-competent population.
Here, we studied PPD-specific blood T lymphocytes from these subjects for
phenotypic markers relevant to skin migration, including the expression of the
skin-selective homing receptor, the cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen
(CLA). Out of 82 patients with active tuberculosis we identified four subjects
who were repeatedly PPD skin test-negative. CD4 T lymphocytes specific to
mycobacterial antigens were derived from these individuals, which (i)
proliferated in vitro to M. tuberculosis antigens comparably to those from PPD+
patients; (ii) secreted comparable amounts of IL-2 but lower amounts of
IFN-gamma; (iii) were confined within the CLA-negative T cell subset. We conclude
that the negative tuberculin reaction in a small subset of patients exposed to
mycobacteria is associated with impaired production of IFN-gamma by circulating
PPD-specific T cells that are lacking CLA expression. On this basis in vitro
proliferation to PPD can discriminate bona fide non-responders from infected
patients with a deficit in the margination of M. tuberculosis-specific T
lymphocytes.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.2000.01128.x 
PMCID: PMC1905524
PMID: 10606970  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

