
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2000 Jul 15;58(3):213-21.

Sensitivity analysis in quantitative microbial risk assessment.

Zwieterin MH(1), van Gerwen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)CIRDC, Le Plessis Robinson, France. mzwieter@danone.com

The occurrence of foodborne disease remains a widespread problem in both the
developing and the developed world. A systematic and quantitative evaluation of
food safety is important to control the risk of foodborne diseases. World-wide,
many initiatives are being taken to develop quantitative risk analysis. However, 
the quantitative evaluation of food safety in all its aspects is very complex,
especially since in many cases specific parameter values are not available. Often
many variables have large statistical variability while the quantitative effect
of various phenomena is unknown. Therefore, sensitivity analysis can be a useful 
tool to determine the main risk-determining phenomena, as well as the aspects
that mainly determine the inaccuracy in the risk estimate. This paper presents
three stages of sensitivity analysis. First, deterministic analysis selects the
most relevant determinants for risk. Overlooking of exceptional, but relevant
cases is prevented by a second, worst-case analysis. This analysis finds relevant
process steps in worst-case situations, and shows the relevance of variations of 
factors for risk. The third, stochastic analysis, studies the effects of
variations of factors for the variability of risk estimates. Care must be taken
that the assumptions made as well as the results are clearly communicated.
Stochastic risk estimates are, like deterministic ones, just as good (or bad) as 
the available data, and the stochastic analysis must not be used to mask lack of 
information. Sensitivity analysis is a valuable tool in quantitative risk
assessment by determining critical aspects and effects of variations.

DOI: 10.1016/s0168-1605(00)00275-0 
PMID: 10939271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

