
1. Biochem Soc Trans. 2000;28(4):520-6.

Structure-function relationships in an anion-translocating ATPase.

Bhattacharjee H(1), Zhou T, Li J, Gatti DL, Walmsley AR, Rosen BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Wayne State University,
School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

The ArsAB ATPase is an efflux pump located in the inner membrane of Escherichia
coli. This transport ATPase confers resistance to arsenite and antimonite by
their extrusion from the cells. The pump is composed of two subunits, the
catalytic ArsA subunit and the membrane subunit ArsB. The complex is similar in
many ways to ATP-binding cassette ('ABC') transporters, which typically have two 
groups of six transmembrane-spanning helical segments and two nucleotide-binding 
domains (NBDs). The 45 kDa ArsB protein has 12 transmembrane-spanning segments.
ArsB contains the substrate translocation pathway and is capable of functioning
as an anion uniporter. The 63 kDa ArsA protein is a substrate-activated ATPase.
It has two homologous halves, A1 and A2, which are clearly the result of an
ancestral gene duplication and fusion. Each half has a consensus NBD. The
mechanism of allosteric activation of the ArsA ATPase has been elucidated by a
combination of molecular genetics and biochemical, structural and kinetic
analyses. Conformational changes produced by binding of substrates, activator
and/or products could be revealed by stopped-flow fluorescence measurements with 
single-tryptophan derivatives of ArsA. The results demonstrate that the
rate-limiting step in the overall reaction is a slow isomerization between two
conformations of the enzyme. Allosteric activation increases the rate of this
isomerization such that product release becomes rate-limiting, thus accelerating 
catalysis. ABC transporters, which exhibit similar substrate activation of ATPase
activity, can undergo similar conformational changes to overcome a rate-limiting 
step. Thus the ArsAB pump is a useful model for elucidating mechanistic aspects
of the ABC superfamily of transport ATPases.


PMID: 10961952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

