
1. J Bacteriol. 2000 Dec;182(24):7029-34.

Regulatable arabinose-inducible gene expression system with consistent control in
all cells of a culture.

Khlebnikov A(1), Risa O, Skaug T, Carrier TA, Keasling JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley,
California 94720-1462, USA.

The arabinose-inducible promoter P(BAD) is subject to all-or-none induction, in
which intermediate concentrations of arabinose give rise to subpopulations of
cells that are fully induced and uninduced. To construct a host-vector expression
system with regulatable control in a homogeneous population of cells, the araE
gene of Escherichia coli was cloned into an RSF1010-derived plasmid under control
of the isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside-inducible P(tac) and P(taclac)
promoters. This gene encodes the low-affinity, high-capacity arabinose transport 
protein and is controlled natively by an arabinose-inducible promoter. To detect 
the effect of arabinose-independent araE expression on population homogeneity and
cell-specific expression, the gfpuv gene was placed under control of the
arabinose-inducible araBAD promoter (P(BAD)) on the pMB1-derived plasmid pBAD24. 
The transporter and reporter plasmids were transformed into E. coli strains with 
native arabinose transport systems and strains deficient in one or both of the
arabinose transport systems (araE and/or araFGH). The effects of the arabinose
concentration and arabinose-independent transport control on population
homogeneity were investigated in these strains using flow cytometry. The araE,
and araE araFGH mutant strains harboring the transporter and reporter plasmids
were uniformly induced across the population at all inducer concentrations, and
the level of gene expression in individual cells varied with arabinose
concentration. In contrast, the parent strain, which expressed the native araE
and araFGH genes and harbored the transporter and reporter plasmids, exhibited
all-or-none behavior. This work demonstrates the importance of including a
transport gene that is controlled independently of the inducer to achieve
regulatable and consistent induction in all cells of the culture.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.24.7029-7034.2000 
PMCID: PMC94830
PMID: 11092865  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

