
1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2000 Nov 15;383(2):272-80.

Overexpression, purification, and characterization of S-adenosylhomocysteine
hydrolase from Leishmania donovani.

Yang X(1), Borchardt RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, The University of Kansas, Lawrence
66047, USA.

The gene encoding S-adenosylhomocysteine (AdoHcy) hydrolase in Leishmania
donovani was subcloned into an expression vector (pPROK-1) and expressed in
Escherichia coli. Recombinant L. donovani AdoHcy hydrolase was then purified from
cell-free extracts of E. coli using three chromatographic steps (DEAE-cellulose
chromatofocusing, Sephacryl S-300 gel filtration, and Q-Sepharose ion exchange). 
The purified recombinant L. donovani enzyme exists as a tetramer with a molecular
weight of approximately 48 kDa for each subunit. Unlike recombinant human AdoHcy 
hydrolase, the catalytic activity of the recombinant L. donovani enzyme was shown
to be dependent on the concentration of NAD+ in the incubation medium. The
dissociation constant (Kd) for NAD+ with the L. donovani enzyme was estimated to 
be 2.1 +/- 0.2 microM. The Km values for the natural substrates of the enzyme,
AdoHcy, Ado, and Hcy, were determined to be 21 +/- 3, 8 +/- 2, and 82 +/- 5
microM, respectively. Several nucleosides and carbocyclic nucleosides were tested
for their inhibitory effects on this parasitic enzyme, and the results suggested 
that L. donovani AdoHcy hydrolase has structural requirements for binding
inhibitors different than those of the human enzyme. Thus, it may be possible to 
eventually exploit these differences to design specific inhibitors of this
parasitic enzyme as potential antiparasitic agents.

DOI: 10.1006/abbi.2000.2087 
PMID: 11185563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

