
1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 15;276(24):20890-7. Epub 2001 Apr 3.

Characterization of glutathione amide reductase from Chromatium gracile.
Identification of a novel thiol peroxidase (Prx/Grx) fueled by glutathione amide 
redox cycling.

Vergauwen B(1), Pauwels F, Jacquemotte F, Meyer TE, Cusanovich MA, Bartsch RG,
Van Beeumen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Protein Biochemistry and Protein Engineering, Gent University,
9000 Gent, Belgium.

Among the Chromatiaceae, the glutathione derivative
gamma-l-glutamyl-l-cysteinylglycine amide, or glutathione amide, was reported to 
be present in facultative aerobic as well as in strictly anaerobic species. The
gene (garB) encoding the central enzyme in glutathione amide cycling, glutathione
amide reductase (GAR), has been isolated from Chromatium gracile, and its genomic
organization has been examined. The garB gene is immediately preceded by an open 
reading frame encoding a novel 27.5-kDa chimeric enzyme composed of one
N-terminal peroxiredoxin-like domain followed by a glutaredoxin-like C terminus. 
The 27.5-kDa enzyme was established in vitro to be a glutathione amide-dependent 
peroxidase, being the first example of a prokaryotic low molecular mass
thiol-dependent peroxidase. Amino acid sequence alignment of GAR with the
functionally homologous glutathione and trypanothione reductases emphasizes the
conservation of the catalytically important redox-active disulfide and of regions
involved in binding the FAD prosthetic group and the substrates glutathione amide
disulfide and NADH. By establishing Michaelis constants of 97 and 13.2 microm for
glutathione amide disulfide and NADH, respectively (in contrast to K(m) values of
6.9 mm for glutathione disulfide and 1.98 mm for NADPH), the exclusive substrate 
specificities of GAR have been documented. Specificity for the amidated disulfide
cofactor partly can be explained by the substitution of Arg-37, shown by x-ray
crystallographic data of the human glutathione reductase to hydrogen-bond one of 
the glutathione glycyl carboxylates, by the negatively charged Glu-21. On the
other hand, the preference for the unusual electron donor, to some extent, has to
rely on the substitution of the basic residues Arg-218, His-219, and Arg-224,
which have been shown to interact in the human enzyme with the NADPH 2'-phosphate
group, by Leu-197, Glu-198, and Phe-203. We suggest GAR to be the newest member
of the class I flavoprotein disulfide reductase family of oxidoreductases.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M102026200 
PMID: 11399772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

