
1. Gene. 2001 Jul 25;273(1):97-104.

The TGV transgenic vectors for single-copy gene expression from the Escherichia
coli chromosome.

Gumbiner-Russo LM(1), Lombardo MJ, Ponder RG, Rosenberg SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030-3411, USA.

Plasmid-based cloning and expression of genes in Escherichia coli can have
several problems: plasmid destabilization; toxicity of gene products; inability
to achieve complete repression of gene expression; non-physiological
overexpression of the cloned gene; titration of regulatory proteins; and the
requirement for antibiotic selection. We describe a simple system for cloning and
expression of genes in single copy in the E. coli chromosome, using a
non-antibiotic selection for transgene insertion. The transgene is inserted into 
a vector containing homology to the chromosomal region flanking the attachment
site for phage lambda. This vector is then linearized and introduced into a
recombination-proficient E. coli strain carrying a temperature-sensitive lambda
prophage. Selection for replacement of the prophage with the transgene is
performed at high temperature. Once in the chromosome, transgenes can be moved
into other lysogenic E. coli strains using standard phage-mediated transduction
techniques, selecting against a resident prophage. Additional vector constructs
provide an arabinose-inducible promoter (P(BAD)), P(BAD) plus a
translation-initiation sequence, and optional chloramphenicol-, tetracycline-, or
kanamycin-resistance cassettes. These Transgenic E. coli Vectors (TGV) allow
drug-free, single-copy expression of genes from the E. coli chromosome, and are
useful for genetic studies of gene function.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(01)00565-0 
PMID: 11483365  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

