
1. Infect Immun. 2001 Sep;69(9):5520-8.

Genotypic variation in the Bordetella pertussis virulence factors pertactin and
pertussis toxin in historical and recent clinical isolates in the United Kingdom.

Fry NK(1), Neal S, Harrison TG, Miller E, Matthews R, George RC.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Systemic Infection Laboratory, PHLS Central Public Health
Laboratory, London, United Kingdom. nfry@phls.org.uk

Erratum in
    Infect Immun 2001 Oct;69(10):6564.

The reemergence of pertussis has been reported in several countries despite high 
vaccination coverage. Studies in The Netherlands and Finland have investigated
polymorphism in the genes coding for two important virulence factors of
Bordetella pertussis, pertactin and pertussis toxin, and identified the emergence
and subsequent dominance in circulating strains of pertactin and toxin variants
not found in the whole-cell vaccine (WCV). The study described here investigated 
whether such variation had occurred in the United Kingdom, which presently has
low levels of pertussis. Sequence analysis of the genes for pertactin (prnA) and 
the pertussis toxin S1 subunit (ptxA) among isolates of B. pertussis from 285
United Kingdom patients, from 1920 to 1999, revealed three prnA variants,
prnA(1), prnA(2), and prnA(3), and two ptxA variants, ptxA(1) and ptxA(2),
showing differences in nucleic acid sequence. The proportion of pertactin gene
types not included in the United Kingdom WCV, i.e., prnA(2) and prnA(3), has
increased in recent years and was found in 21 of 86 (24%) strains from the 1980s 
and 56 of 105 (53%) strains from the 1990s. To date, the presence of these
nonvaccine prnA types has not been associated with a resurgence of pertussis in
the United Kingdom. The distribution of prnA and ptxA types in The Netherlands,
Finland, and the United Kingdom in the 1990s is distinct. The most striking
difference in the United Kingdom isolates is that all 105 of the most recent
circulating strains (from 1998 to 1999) are of a pertussis toxin type found in
the United Kingdom WCV, i.e., ptxA(1).

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.69.9.5520-5528.2001 
PMCID: PMC98665
PMID: 11500425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

