
1. Pediatrics. 2001 Oct;108(4):E60.

Haemophilus influenzae Type b disease among Amish children in Pennsylvania:
reasons for persistent disease.

Fry AM(1), Lurie P, Gidley M, Schmink S, Lingappa J, Fischer M, Rosenstein NE.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Diseases Branch, Division of Bacterial and Mycotic Diseases,
National Center for Infectious Diseases, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA. nar5@cdc.gov

OBJECTIVE: To identify reservoirs of Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib)
pharyngeal carriage and assess barriers to vaccination among 2 Amish communities 
in Pennsylvania.
METHODS: We investigated recent cases, performed community surveys for Hib
vaccination coverage and pharyngeal carriage, and administered a questionnaire
assessing vaccination knowledge and attitudes to 298 members of 2 Amish
communities (A and B) in Pennsylvania and, as a comparison group, 136 non-Amish
family members who participated in state immunization clinics. From December 1999
to February 2000, 8 cases of invasive Hib disease occurred among children who
were 5 years of age or younger in Pennsylvania. Six of the case-patients were
from Amish communities. None of the children had been vaccinated.
RESULTS: Among children who were 5 years of age or younger, Hib vaccine coverage 
was low in the 2 Amish communities: A (9 [28%] of 32) and B (3 [7%] of 41)
compared with the non-Amish group (19 [95%] of 20). Hib carriage prevalence was
higher in both Amish communities than in the non-Amish group (A: 3%; B: 8%;
non-Amish: 0%). More households in community B had 1 or more Hib carriers than in
community A (8 [28%] of 29 vs 3 [9%] of 32). Among Amish parents who did not
vaccinate their children, only 25% (13 of 51) identified either religious or
philosophical objections as a factor; 51% (26 of 51) reported that vaccinating
was not a priority compared with other activities of daily life. Seventy-three
percent (36 of 49) would vaccinate their children if vaccination were offered
locally.
CONCLUSIONS: Undervaccinated communities in the United States still exist and
allow circulation of Hib strains, resulting in disease among susceptible
children. Identification of undervaccinated populations, such as the Amish, and
targeted education and vaccination campaigns are essential to achieving
elimination of Hib disease.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.108.4.e60 
PMID: 11581468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

