
1. Tissue Antigens. 2001 Jul;58(1):19-23.

CD1 genotyping of patients with Mycobacterium malmoense pulmonary disease.

Jones DC(1), Gelder CM, Ahmad T, Campbell IA, Barnardo MC, Welsh KI, Marshall SE,
Bunce M.

Author information: 
(1)Transplantation Immunology, Oxford Transplant Centre, Churchill Hospital,
Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK.

Mycobacterium malmoense is an opportunistic mycobacterium that occasionally
causes disease in non-immunosuppressed individuals. As only a few individuals
exposed to these organisms actually develop clinical disease, it is possible
there is a genetic component to susceptibility. CD1 molecules are capable of
presenting antigens from more virulent mycobacteria to T cells; therefore, we
were interested in discovering whether recently described polymorphisms in CD1
molecules modulated susceptibility to M. malmoense pulmonary disease. The CD1
system comprises five genes (CD1A, -B, -C, -D, and -E) located on chromosome 1
(1q22-23). CD1 molecules are structurally and functionally related to major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules and are expressed on dedicated
antigen-presenting cells. The primary function of CD1 molecules is to present
lipid and glycolipid antigens to T cells. We have developed an allele-specific
polymerase chain reaction-sequence-specific primer (PCR-SSP) method of CD1
genotyping. Using this method, we compared the allele and haplotype frequencies
of CD1 in 49 HIV-negative patients with M. malmoense pulmonary disease with those
in 342 normal controls. The CD1A and CD1E alleles were nominally identified as
CD1A*01, CD1A*02, CD1E*01 and CD1E*02, and the control gene frequencies were
found to be 5%, 95%, 67% and 33%, respectively. No significant difference was
observed between the patient and control cohorts. Positive linkage disequilibrium
values of 0.73 were observed between CD1A*02 and CD1E*01 (P<0.0001; chi2 test),
and 0.94 between CD1A*01 and CD1E*02 (P<0.0001; chi2 test). Typing was also
performed for two previously described CD1D alleles (CD1D*01 and CD1D*02),
although only CD1D*01 was detected.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1399-0039.2001.580103.x 
PMID: 11580851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

