
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2001 Dec;147(Pt 12):3241-7.

Homogeneous expression of the P(BAD) promoter in Escherichia coli by constitutive
expression of the low-affinity high-capacity AraE transporter.

Khlebnikov A(1), Datsenko KA, Skaug T, Wanner BL, Keasling JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA
94720-1462, USA.

Genes placed under the control of the arabinose-inducible araBAD promoter
(P(BAD)) of Escherichia coli are expressed in an all-or-none fashion, in which
the percentage of induced cells in the population, rather than the degree of
induction in individual cells, varies with the concentration of arabinose in the 
culture medium. Previous work showed that all-or-none gene expression from P(BAD)
was due to the arabinose-dependent expression of the gene encoding the
low-affinity high-capacity transporter (araE), and that expression of
heterologous genes from P(BAD) in individual cells could be regulated by placing 
the araE gene under control of an arabinose-independent promoter. Based on these 
results, two expression systems were developed to allow regulatable control of
genes under control of P(BAD). In one system, the native araE promoter on the
chromosome was replaced by constitutive promoters of different strengths. In the 
second system, the araE gene under control of the same constitutive promoters was
placed on a medium-copy plasmid. Both systems allow regulatable expression of a
plasmid-borne P(BAD)-controlled heterologous gene and a homogeneous population of
cells over a wide range of arabinose concentrations. While the degree of
induction varied slightly with the strength of the constitutive promoter,
expression was affected most by the arabinose concentration.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-147-12-3241 
PMID: 11739756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

