
1. J Autoimmun. 2001 Dec;17(4):347-54.

Reactivities to the Sm autoantigenic complex and the synthetic SmD1-aa83-119
peptide in systemic lupus erythematosus and other autoimmune diseases.

Jaekel HP(1), Klopsch T, Benkenstein B, Grobe N, Baldauf A, Schoessler W, Werle
E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Laboratory Diagnostics, Microbiology and Transfusion Medicine,
Clinical Centre, Neubrandenburg, Germany. hpjaekel@gmx.de

The Sm antigenic complex is, besides dsDNA, the most important and specific
autoimmune target in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The population of
anti-Sm Ab elicited is very heterogeneous in terms of epitope specificity
resulting in a strong assay dependent detectability. Based on the description of 
a new autoantigenic target, the SmD1-aa83-119 peptide, we analysed 50 healthy
persons and 205 patients with different autoimmune and other disorders with
regard to their anti-Sm reactivities using different assays. The prevalence of
anti-SmD1 peptide Ab and anti-Sm Ab in SLE was 36.0 (40/111) and 9.9% (11/111),
respectively. The respective values obtained for non-SLE patients were 2.8
(4/144) and 5.3% (5/94). In SLE, anti-SmD1 peptide Ab are positively correlated
to disease activity, nephritis and anti-dsDNA Ab. The association between
reactivities of SLE samples in the traditional anti-Sm and the anti-SmD1 peptide 
ELISA was found to be 63.6%, contrasting markedly with the situation in non-SLE
patients (no double-positive sera). SLE samples with an anti-Sm response
restricted to the SmD1 peptide are completely negative in immunoblot, supporting 
the conformational nature of this epitope. Positive immunoblot reactions with the
SmD1 polypeptide are not inhabitable by the synthetic SmD1-aa83-119 peptide.
Comparing anti-Sm reactivities detected by ELISAs with those in immunoblot,
different patterns were observed, reflecting the heterogeneous autoimmune
response to this antigen. In conclusion, the anti-SmD1-aa83-119 peptide ELISA
substantially completes the panel of methods for autoantibody testing. As none of
the assays presently available covers the whole spectrum of epitope specificities
of anti-Sm Abs elicited in SLE, it does not replace traditional anti-Sm ELISAs.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jaut.2001.0545 
PMID: 11771960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

