
1. J Trauma. 2002 Mar;52(3):463-8.

Blood culturing practices in a trauma intensive care unit: does concurrent
antibiotic use make a difference?

Schermer CR(1), Sanchez DP, Qualls CR, Demarest GB, Albrecht RM, Fry DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center,
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131, USA. cschermer@salud.unm.edu

BACKGROUND: Febrile trauma patients have repeated blood cultures drawn during a
prolonged hospitalization. We examined the diagnostic yield of blood cultures in 
severely injured patients to determine whether concurrent antimicrobial therapy
or prophylactic administration of antibiotics affects blood culture growth. We
also determined how rapidly growth changed to determine whether total numbers of 
blood cultures could be decreased. The hypotheses of the study were that
concurrent antimicrobial administration affects blood culture yield, prophylactic
administration alters the culture result, and repetitive culturing is
unnecessary.
METHODS: A retrospective chart review of trauma patients with minimum Injury
Severity Score of 15 and minimum 5-day intensive care unit length of stay was
performed. The dates and results of blood cultures and antibiotic type and
administration dates were recorded. "Prophylactic" antibiotics were defined as
antibiotics administered on admission to the unit. Computer software was used to 
match the blood culture date to the period of antimicrobial administration.
Categorical data were compared using Fisher's exact test.
RESULTS: Two hundred fifty-eight patients met entry criteria, and 208 charts were
complete for review. One hundred twenty-nine patients had 347 sets of blood
cultures drawn. The positive blood culture rate was 10.8% in patients off
antibiotics, and 13.9% in patients on antibiotics (p = 0.68). All prophylactic
antibiotics included a beta-lactam. Only 18% of positive blood cultures in
patients receiving prophylactic antibiotics were sensitive to beta-lactams as
opposed to 59% sensitivity in those who did not receive prophylaxis (p = 0.03).
One hundred seventy-six sets of blood cultures were performed after an initial
positive culture. Only three patients with an initial positive culture had a
second positive culture with a different organism. The mean time to culturing a
new organism after initial growth was 19 days.
CONCLUSION: Concurrent antimicrobial administration does not alter blood culture 
yield. Prophylactic administration alters the type of organism cultured. Little
new information is gained from repetitive culturing.

DOI: 10.1097/00005373-200203000-00008 
PMID: 11901320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

