
1. Biochem J. 2002 Jun 15;364(Pt 3):617-23.

Two isoforms of Saccharomyces cerevisiae glutaredoxin 2 are expressed in vivo and
localize to different subcellular compartments.

Pedrajas JR(1), Porras P, Martínez-Galisteo E, Padilla CA, Miranda-Vizuete A,
Bárcena JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Experimental, Facultad de Ciencias Experimentales,
University of Jaén, 23071-Jaén, Spain.

Glutaredoxin (Grx)2 from Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a member of the two-cysteine
(dithiol) subfamily of Grxs involved in the defence against oxidative stress in
yeast. Recombinant yeast Grx2p, expressed in Escherichia coli, behaves as a
'classical' Grx that efficiently catalyses the reduction of hydroxyethyl
disulphide by GSH. Grx2p also catalyses the reduction of GSSG by dihydrolipoamide
with even higher efficiency. Western blot analysis of S. cerevisiae crude
extracts identifies two isoforms of Grx2p of 15.9 and 11.9 kDa respectively. The 
levels of these two isoforms reach a peak during the exponential phase of growth 
in normal yeast extract/peptone/dextrose ('YPD') medium, with the long form
predominating over the short one. From immunochemical analysis of subcellular
fractions, it is shown that both isoforms are present in mitochondria, but only
the short one is detected in the cytosolic fraction. On the other hand, only the 
long form is prominent in microsomes. Mitochondrial isoforms should represent the
processed and unprocessed products of an open reading frame (YDR513W), with a
putative start codon 99 bp upstream of the GRX2 start codon described thus far.
These results indicate that GRX2 contains two in-frame start codons, and that
translation from the first AUG results in a product that is targeted to
mitochondria. The cytosolic form would result either by initiation from the
second AUG, or by differential processing of one single translation product.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20020570 
PMCID: PMC1222607
PMID: 11958675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

