
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2002 Nov;90(1-2):65-77.

CXCL8((3-73))K11R/G31P antagonizes the neutrophil chemoattractants present in
pasteurellosis and mastitis lesions and abrogates neutrophil influx into
intradermal endotoxin challenge sites in vivo.

Li F(1), Zhang X, Mizzi C, Gordon JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, University of Saskatchewan, SK, S7N
5B4, Saskatoon, Canada.

The ELR(+) CXC chemokines are critical for protective neutrophil responses to
most bacterial infections, but nevertheless can contribute importantly to the
pathogenic effects of many inflammatory responses. We recently engineered a
series of high affinity CXCL8/IL-8 antagonists, one of which,
CXCL8((3-73))K11R/G31P, binds very strongly to neutrophils via the CXCR1 and
CXCR2. Herein we show in competitive 125I-ligand binding assays that bovine
CXCL8((3-73))K11R/G31P has an affinity for neutrophils that is 2-3 orders of
magnitude higher than that of CXCL8/IL-8. Furthermore, when used at approximately
0.5 nM, CXCL8((3-73))K11R/G31P inhibited by 50% the chemotactic responses of
neutrophils to 129 nM CXCL8/IL-8, but it also blocked chemotactic responses to
the alternate ELR-CXC chemokines CXCL1/GRO alpha and CXCL5/ENA-78. Furthermore,
CXCL8((3-73))K11R/G31P could inhibit by 93-97% the spectrum of neutrophil
chemotactic activities present within wash fluids from clinical bacterial
pneumonia or experimental endotoxin-induced mastitis lesions. Finally,
intramuscular or subcutaneous application of CXCL8((3-73))K11R/G31P (75 micro
g/kg) reduced by up to 97% neutrophil infiltration into intradermal endotoxin
challenge sites in cattle, and prevented their circulating neutrophils from
responding to CXCL8/IL-8 or ENA-78 in vitro. This data thus encourages further
investigation of the potential impact of this novel antagonist on ELR-CXC
chemokine-driven inflammatory disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-2427(02)00223-4 
PMID: 12406656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

