
1. Plant Physiol. 2003 Feb;131(2):419-29.

Comparative analyses of potato expressed sequence tag libraries.

Ronning CM(1), Stegalkina SS, Ascenzi RA, Bougri O, Hart AL, Utterbach TR,
Vanaken SE, Riedmuller SB, White JA, Cho J, Pertea GM, Lee Y, Karamycheva S,
Sultana R, Tsai J, Quackenbush J, Griffiths HM, Restrepo S, Smart CD, Fry WE, Van
Der Hoeven R, Tanksley S, Zhang P, Jin H, Yamamoto ML, Baker BJ, Buell CR.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute for Genomic Research, 9712 Medical Center Drive, Rockville,
Maryland 20850, USA.

The cultivated potato (Solanum tuberosum) shares similar biology with other
members of the Solanaceae, yet has features unique within the family, such as
modified stems (stolons) that develop into edible tubers. To better understand
potato biology, we have undertaken a survey of the potato transcriptome using
expressed sequence tags (ESTs) from diverse tissues. A total of 61,940 ESTs were 
generated from aerial tissues, below-ground tissues, and tissues challenged with 
the late-blight pathogen (Phytophthora infestans). Clustering and assembly of
these ESTs resulted in a total of 19,892 unique sequences with 8,741 tentative
consensus sequences and 11,151 singleton ESTs. We were able to identify a
putative function for 43.7% of these sequences. A number of sequences (48) were
expressed throughout the libraries sampled, representing constitutively expressed
sequences. Other sequences (13,068, 21%) were uniquely expressed and were
detected only in a single library. Using hierarchal and k means clustering of the
EST sequences, we were able to correlate changes in gene expression with major
physiological events in potato biology. Using pair-wise comparisons of
tuber-related tissues, we were able to associate genes with tuber initiation,
dormancy, and sprouting. We also were able to identify a number of characterized 
as well as novel sequences that were unique to the incompatible interaction of
late-blight pathogen, thereby providing a foundation for further understanding
the mechanism of resistance.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.013581 
PMCID: PMC166819
PMID: 12586867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

