
1. Leukemia. 2003 May;17(5):925-30.

Infectious complications in patients with acute promyelocytic leukaemia treated
with the AIDA regimen.

Girmenia C(1), Lo Coco F, Breccia M, Latagliata R, Spadea A, D'Andrea M, Gentile 
G, Micozzi A, Alimena G, Martino P, Mandelli F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Cellulari ed Ematologia, University La Sapienza,
Rome, Italy.

Infections represent a frequent complication of chemotherapy used for acute
myeloid leukaemia (AML) and are associated with important toxicity frequently
leading to treatment discontinuation. Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) is a
unique AML subset requiring tailored therapy including all-trans retinoic acid
and anthracycline-based chemotherapy. We analysed in this study the incidence and
type of infections complicating the clinical course of 89 consecutive APL
patients receiving the AIDA protocol at a single institution. A total of 179
febrile episodes were registered during induction and consolidation, 52% of which
were of unknown origin. Infections were clinically and microbiologically
documented in 10.6 and 37.4% of cases, respectively. Coagulase-negative
staphylococci represented the major cause of septicaemia (28%) and were more
frequently isolated during induction, whereas viridans group streptococci, the
second pathogen most frequently isolated from blood (27%), represented the
principal pathogen detected during consolidation and were significantly
associated with mucositis. Gram-negative bacteria accounted for 33.3% of all
blood isolates. Fungal infections were only occasionally observed. Bloodstream
infections in APL patients were compared with those documented in 271 consecutive
patients affected by other subtypes of AML. The incidence of total septicaemia
episodes, of staphylococcal bacteraemias and of fungaemias was significantly
higher in patients with other AMLs. Empirical antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone
plus amikacin was effective in 73% of APL cases, most of the remaining cases
being successfully managed by the addition of teicoplanin. One single death
apparently related to infectious complication was recorded. Overall, infections
led to antileukaemic treatment withdrawal in six patients, five of whom currently
remain in haematologic remission for 13-106 months. These results indicate that a
particular pattern of infections is observed in APL patients receiving ATRA plus 
anthracycline-based chemotherapy and that these appear to be effectively
counteracted by standard management.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.leu.2402899 
PMID: 12750707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

