
1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Dec 25;267(36):25768-75.

Construction of a chimeric ArsA-ArsB protein for overexpression of the
oxyanion-translocating ATPase.

Dou D(1), Owolabi JB, Dey S, Rosen BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wayne State University, School of Medicine,
Detroit, Michigan 48201.

Resistance to toxic oxyanions of arsenic and antimony in Escherichia coli is
conferred by the conjugative R-factor R773, which encodes an ATP-driven anion
extrusion pump. The ars operon is composed of three structural genes, arsA, arsB,
and arsC. Although transcribed as a single unit, the three genes are
differentially expressed as a result of translational differences, such that the 
ArsA and ArsC proteins are produced in high amounts relative to the amount of
ArsB protein made. Consequently, biochemical characterization of the ArsB
protein, which is an integral membrane protein containing the anion-conducting
pathway, has been limited, precluding studies of the mechanism of this oxyanion
pump. To overexpress the arsB gene, a series of changes were made. First, the
second codon, an infrequently used leucine codon, was changed to a more
frequently utilized codon. Second, a GC-rich stem-loop (delta G = -17 kcal/mol)
between the third and twelfth codons was destabilized by changing several of the 
bases of the base-paired region. Third, the re-engineered arsB gene was fused 3' 
in frame to the first 1458 base pairs of the arsA gene to encode a 914-residue
chimeric protein (486 residues of the ArsA protein plus 428 residues of the
mutated ArsB protein) containing the entire re-engineered ArsB sequence except
for the initiating methionine. The ArsA-ArsB chimera has been overexpressed at
approximately 15-20% of the total membrane proteins. Cells producing the chimeric
ArsA-ArsB protein with an arsA gene in trans excluded 73AsO2- from cells,
demonstrating that the chimera can function as a component of the
oxyanion-translocating ATPase.


PMID: 1281474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

