
1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Sep 25;267(27):19272-7.

Mutagenesis of the C-terminal nucleotide-binding site of an anion-translocating
ATPase.

Kaur P(1), Rosen BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, Michigan 48201.

An oxyanion-translocating ATPase encoded by a bacterial plasmid confers
resistance to antiomonials and arsenicals in Escherichia coli by extrusion of the
toxic oxyanions from the cytosol. The anion pump is composed of two polypeptides,
the ArsA and ArsB proteins. Purified ArsA protein is an oxyanion-stimulated
ATPase with two nucleotide-binding consensus sequences, one in the N-terminal
half and one in the C-terminal half of the protein. The ArsA protein can be
labeled with [alpha-32P]ATP by a UV-catalyzed reaction. Previously reported
mutations in the N-terminal site abolish photoadduct formation. Using
site-directed mutagenesis the glycine-rich region of the C-terminal putative
nucleotide-binding sequence was altered. Three C-terminal site mutant proteins
(GR337, KE340, KN340) were analyzed, as well as one additional N-terminal mutant 
protein (KE21). Strains bearing the mutated plasmids were arsenite sensitive to
varying degrees. The purified ArsA protein from mutant KE340 retained
approximately 20% of the wild type oxyanion-stimulated ATPase activity, while the
purified proteins from the other mutants were catalytically inactive. The KE21
mutation in the N-terminal nucleotide-binding site eliminated photoadduct
formation with [alpha-32P] ATP, while the purified proteins with mutations in the
C-terminal site retained the ability to form a photoadduct. Each mutant protein
was capable of forming a membrane-bound complex in arsB expressing strains. These
results suggest first that both sites are required for resistance and ATPase
activity, and second that the conserved lysyl residue in the glycine-rich loop of
the C-terminal nucleotide-binding site is not essential for catalytic activity.


PMID: 1388167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

