
1. J Bacteriol. 2003 Nov;185(22):6507-12.

Functional and biochemical analysis of Chlamydia trachomatis MurC, an enzyme
displaying UDP-N-acetylmuramate:amino acid ligase activity.

Hesse L(1), Bostock J, Dementin S, Blanot D, Mengin-Lecreulx D, Chopra I.

Author information: 
(1)Antimicrobial Research Centre and Division of Microbiology, School of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United
Kingdom.

Chlamydiae are unusual obligate intracellular bacteria that cause serious
infections in humans. Chlamydiae contain genes that appear to encode products
with peptidoglycan biosynthetic activity. The organisms are also susceptible to
antibiotics that inhibit peptidoglycan synthesis. However, chlamydiae do not
synthesize detectable peptidoglycan. The paradox created by these observations is
known as the chlamydial anomaly. The MurC enzyme of chlamydiae, which is
synthesized as a bifunctional MurC-Ddl product, is expected to possess
UDP-N-acetylmuramate (UDP-MurNAc):L-alanine ligase activity. In this paper we
demonstrate that the MurC domain of the Chlamydia trachomatis bifunctional
protein is functionally expressed in Escherichia coli, since it complements a
conditional lethal E. coli mutant possessing a temperature-sensitive lesion in
MurC. The recombinant MurC domain was overexpressed in and purified from E. coli.
It displayed in vitro ATP-dependent UDP-MurNAc:L-alanine ligase activity, with a 
pH optimum of 8.0 and dependence upon magnesium ions (optimum concentration, 20
mM). Its substrate specificity was studied with three amino acids (L-alanine,
L-serine, and glycine); comparable Vmax/Km values were obtained. Our results are 
consistent with the synthesis of a muramic acid-containing polymer in chlamydiae 
with UDP-MurNAc-pentapeptide as a precursor molecule. However, due to the lack of
specificity of MurC activity in vitro, it is not obvious which amino acid is
present in the first position of the pentapeptide.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.185.22.6507-6512.2003 
PMCID: PMC262092
PMID: 14594822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

