
1. Br J Nutr. 2003 Dec;90(6):1007-14.

Prebiotics affect nutrient digestibility but not faecal ammonia in dogs fed
increased dietary protein levels.

Hesta M(1), Roosen W, Janssens GP, Millet S, De Wilde R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent
University, Heidestraat 19, 9820 Merelbeke, Belgium. myriam.hesta@ugent.be

An increased protein content and less digestible protein sources in the diet can 
induce bad faecal odour. The present study investigated the effect of adding
prebiotics to dog diets enriched with animal-derived protein sources on apparent 
digestibilities and faecal ammonia concentration. In three subsequent periods
eight healthy beagle dogs were fed a commercial dog diet that was gradually
supplemented by up to 50 % with meat and bone meal (MBM), greaves meal (GM) or
poultry meal (PM) respectively. Afterwards, 3 % fructo-oligosaccharides or 3 %
isomalto-oligosaccharides were substituted for 3 % of the total diet.
Supplementation with animal-derived protein sources did not decrease the apparent
N digestibility significantly but oligosaccharides did. On the other hand the
bacterial N content (% DM) in the faeces was highest in the oligosaccharide
groups followed by the protein-supplemented groups and lowest in the control
groups. When the apparent N digestibility was corrected for bacterial N no
significant differences were noted anymore except for the GM group where the
corrected N digestibility was still lower after oligosaccharide supplementation. 
The amount of faecal ammonia was significantly increased by supplementing with
protein or oligosaccharides in the MBM and GM groups but not in the PM group.
When apparent N digestibility is interpreted, a correction for bacterial N should
be taken into account, especially when prebiotics are added to the diet.
Oligosaccharides did not reduce the faecal ammonia concentrations as expected.

DOI: 10.1079/bjn2003988 
PMID: 14641959  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

