
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jan 27;101(4):1022-6. Epub 2004 Jan 13.

Lipid-protein interactions: biosynthetic assembly of CD1 with lipids in the
endoplasmic reticulum is evolutionarily conserved.

Park JJ(1), Kang SJ, De Silva AD, Stanic AK, Casorati G, Hachey DL, Cresswell P, 
Joyce S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology and Immunology, Mass Spectrometry Research Center,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

The CD1 family consists of lipid antigen-presenting molecules, which include
group I CD1a, CD1b, and CD1c and group II CD1d proteins. Topologically, they
resemble the classical peptide antigen-presenting MHC molecules except that the
large, exclusively nonpolar and hydrophobic, antigen-binding groove of CD1 has
evolved to present cellular and pathogen-derived lipid antigens to specific T
lymphocytes. As an approach to understanding the biochemical basis of lipid
antigen presentation by CD1 molecules, we have characterized the natural ligands 
associated with mouse CD1d1 as well as human CD1b and CD1d molecules. We found
that both group I and II CD1 molecules assemble with cellular
phosphatidylinositol (PI), which contains heterogeneous fatty acyl chains.
Further, this assembly occurs within the endoplasmic reticulum. Because the
structures of the antigen-binding grooves of CD1a and CD1c closely resemble those
of CD1b and CD1d, we conclude that the assembly of CD1 molecules with PI in the
endoplasmic reticulum is evolutionarily conserved. These findings suggest that PI
plays a chaperone-like role in CD1 assembly, possibly to preserve the integrity
of the antigen-binding groove until CD1 binds antigenic lipids in the endocytic
pathway.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0307847100 
PMCID: PMC327144
PMID: 14722359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

