
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2004 Jul 5;60(1):31-9.

Impact of PCB on resistance to Flavobacterium psychrophilum after experimental
infection of rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss eggs by nanoinjection.

Ekman E(1), Akerman G, Balk L, Norrgren L.

Author information: 
(1)Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences (SLU), Department of Biomedical
Sciences and Veterinary Public Health, Division of Pathology, Pharmacology and
Toxicology, PO Box 7028, 750 07 Uppsala, Sweden. elisabet.ekman@bvf.slu.se

The effects of sublethal exposure of a commercial blend of polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCB), i.e. Clophen A50, on disease resistance to the aetiological
agent of rainbow trout fry syndrome, Flavobacterium psychrophilum, were
investigated. Newly fertilised rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss eggs were
nanoinjected with 2 doses of Clophen A50 (0.4 or 2 microg egg(-1)) and/or 100
colony forming units of F. psychrophilum. The mean cumulative mortality in
control groups, and groups exposed to the lower dose of Clophen A50 (0.4 microg
egg(-1)) was below 5.0%. The mean cumulative mortality in groups exposed to the
higher dose of Clophen A50 (2.0 microg egg(-1)) was 5.8%, which was not
significantly different from the control groups. In all groups infected with F.
psychrophilum, with or without exposure to Clophen A50, significantly higher
cumulative mortalities compared with control groups were recorded. No differences
in mortality were recorded between groups exposed to bacteria alone or bacteria
in combination with the higher dose of Clophen A50 (21.6 and 20.4%,
respectively). Decreased disease resistance was recorded in groups exposed to F. 
psychrophilum and the lower dose of Clophen A50, with a mean cumulative mortality
of 56.0%. These results could be due to non dose-dependent effects on the immune 
system, or toxic effects of PCB or their metabolites on the bacteria in groups
exposed to the higher dose of Clophen A50. The present study indicates that
maternal transfer of PCB might affect disease resistance to vertically
transmitted F. psychrophilum.

DOI: 10.3354/dao060031 
PMID: 15352522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

