
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2004 Oct;42(10):4487-93.

Tropheryma whipplei Infection of an acellular porcine heart valve bioprosthesis
in a patient who did not have intestinal Whipple's disease.

Dreier J(1), Szabados F, von Herbay A, Kröger T, Kleesiek K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Laboratoriums- und Transfusionsmedizin, Herz- und Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Universitätsklinik der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bad
Oeynhausen, Germany. jdreier@hdz-nrw.de

Rare cases of culture-negative infective endocarditis are caused by Tropheryma
whipplei, the uncommon bacterium of Whipple's disease. We evaluated an
80-year-old woman with valvular heart disease but without intestinal Whipple's
disease. The diagnosis of aortic valve xenograft culture-negative infection with 
T. whipplei was established by multiple molecular assays and by electron
microscopy. First, a PCR with broad-range primers identified the complete 16S
ribosomal DNA of T. whipplei in bioprosthesis tissue. Novel real-time reverse
transcription-PCR assays were developed to detect mRNAs encoding recently
identified proteins determined from the T. whipplei genome, specifically Whipplei
surface protein (TW113) and a DNA polymerase III subunit (TW727). The positive
detection of mRNAs indicated the presence of metabolically active bacteria and
suggested the viability of T. whipplei. The quantification of T. whipplei genome 
equivalents by real-time PCR indicated a high-density bacterial colonization of
the valve tissue. Additionally, an ultrastructural examination revealed numerous 
rod-shaped bacteria consistent in size with T. whipplei in the extracellular
collagen matrix of the bioprosthesis. We conclude that extracellular growth of T.
whipplei can occur in the microenvironment of biological prosthetic valve tissue 
and that T. whipplei endocarditis can occur in the absence of intestinal
Whipple's disease.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.42.10.4487-4493.2004 
PMCID: PMC522317
PMID: 15472298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

