
1. Curr Med Chem Anticancer Agents. 2004 Nov;4(6):535-42.

Role of the non-neuronal human cholinergic system in lung cancer and
mesothelioma: possibility of new therapeutic strategies.

Trombino S(1), Bisio A, Catassi A, Cesario A, Falugi C, Russo P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Genova, Italy.

Acetylcholine (Ach), one of the most important examples of a neurotransmitter,
represents a phylogenetically old molecule, widely distributed from bacteria to
humans. The finding that neuronal Ach receptors (nAChRs) are present in
non-neuronal cells raised some interesting issues related to their specific
activity. In humans, different studies have showed that many lung cancer cells
expressed nAchRs and that low concentrations of nicotine blocked the induction of
apoptosis in these cells. A recent study presents data that SCLC express a
cholinergic autocrine loop that can regulate cell growth. Such work demonstrates 
that SCLC cells have a cholinergic phenotype and that ACh exerts as an autocrine 
growth factor in human lung tumors. Recently it has been shown that human
malignant pleural mesothelioma express a cholinergic system, involved in cell
growth regulation. Hence, mesothelioma cell growth as well as normal mesothelial 
cells growth is modulated by the cholinergic system in which agonists (i.e.
nicotine) has a proliferative effect and antagonists (i.e. curare) has an
inhibitory effect. Furthermore apoptosis mechanisms in mesothelioma cells are
under the control of the cholinergic system (nicotine antiapoptotic via induction
of NF-kappaB complexes and phosphorilation of Bad at Serine(112), curare
proapoptotic via G(0)-G(1) arrest p21(waf-1)-dependent, but p53-independent). The
involvement of the non-neuronal cholinergic system in lung cancer and
mesothelioma appears reasonable and open up new therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.2174/1568011043352687 
PMID: 15579018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

