
1. Oral Dis. 2005;11 Suppl 1:14-23.

In vitro models for oral malodor.

Greenman J(1), Spencer P, McKenzie C, Saad S, Duffield J.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Applied Sciences, University of the West of England (UWE), Bristol,
UK. john.greenman@uwe.ac.uk

A model is a representation of some real phenomena and contains aspects or
elements of the real system to be modeled. The model reflects (or duplicates) the
type of behavior (or mechanisms) seen in the real system. The main characteristic
of any model is the mapping of elements or parameters found in the system being
studied (e.g. tongue dorsum biofilm in situ) on to the model being devised (e.g. 
laboratory perfusion biofilm). Such parameters include correct physico-chemical
(abiotic) conditions as well as biotic conditions that occur in both model and
reality. The main purpose of a model is to provide information that better
explains the processes observed or thought to occur in the real system. Such
models can be abstract (mental, conceptual, theoretical, mathematical or
computational) or 'physical', e.g. in the form of a real disaggregated in vitro
system or laboratory model. A wide range of different model systems have been
used in oral biofilm research. These will be briefly reviewed with special
emphasis on those models that have contributed most to knowledge in breath odor
research. The different model systems used in breath odor research are compared. 
Finally, the requirements for developing an overall 'bad breath model' from
considering the processes as a whole (real oral cavity, substrates in saliva,
biotransformation by tongue microflora, odor gases in the breath) and extending
this to the detection of malodor by the human nose will be outlined and
discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.2005.01082.x 
PMID: 15752092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

