
1. DNA Cell Biol. 2005 Mar;24(3):141-7.

COX-2 inhibitor, NS398, enhances Fas-mediated apoptosis via modulation of the
PTEN-Akt pathway in human gastric carcinoma cell lines.

Honjo S(1), Osaki M, Ardyanto TD, Hiramatsu T, Maeta N, Ito H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Organ Pathology, Department of Microbiology and Pathology, Faculty
of Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago, Tottori, Japan.

A variety of human cancer cells are resistant to Fas ligand and anti-Fas antibody
induced apoptosis. Previously, we reported that human gastric carcinoma cell
lines were resistant to the anti-Fas antibody, CH-11, without interferon-gamma
pretreatment in vitro. Cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 is known to be expressed in many
human malignancies, and is correlated with tumor progression and resistance to
apoptosis. This study examined whether NS398, a COX-2 inhibitor, inhibited cell
proliferation and increased Fas-mediated apoptosis in human gastric carcinoma
cell lines. Treatment of NS398 inhibited cell proliferation in MKN-45, which
expressed the highest level of COX-2 among seven human gastric carcinoma cell
lines, in a dose- and time-dependent manner, in contrast to less prominent
effects in KATO-III, which expresses no COX-2. Although the treatment of CH-11
induced apoptosis in both cells, the simultaneous treatment of NS398 and CH-11
remarkably induced apoptosis, as confirmed by Hoechst 33258 staining and the
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase- mediated dUTP-digoxigenin nick-end
labeling (TUNEL) method in MKN-45. Flow cytometric analysis also revealed the
increased pre-G1 fraction by the simultaneous treatment. The treatment of NS398
induced upregulation of Bad and PTEN, and downregulation of phosphorylated Akt
(Thr308). These findings suggest that COX-2 might inhibit Fas-mediated apoptosis 
in human gastric carcinoma cell lines, especially MKN-45, by modulating PTEN and 
Akt.

DOI: 10.1089/dna.2005.24.141 
PMID: 15767780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

