
1. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2004;21(7):571-9.

Constitutive expression of growth regulated oncogene (gro) in human colon
carcinoma cells with different metastatic potential and its role in regulating
their metastatic phenotype.

Li A(1), Varney ML, Singh RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, 985845 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-7660, USA.

The purpose of this study was to examine the expression and functional
significance of the growth-regulated oncogene (gro) family in human colon
carcinoma growth and metastasis. We examined constitutive expression of CXCL1
(gro-alpha), CXCL2 (gro-beta), CXCL3 (gro-gamma) and their receptor, CXCR2 in
human colon carcinoma cells with different metastatic potentials. Non-metastatic 
and low metastatic cells expressed lower levels of CXCL1 and CXCR2 mRNA and
protein as compared to high metastatic colon carcinoma cells. No difference in
CXCL2 and CXCL3 mRNA expression levels was observed. Colon carcinoma cells
expressing higher levels of CXCL1 exhibit increased proliferation and invasive
potential. Furthermore, exogenous addition of recombinant human CXCL1
significantly enhanced the proliferation and invasiveness of colon carcinoma
cells. Furthermore, treatment of KM12C cells with exogenous CXCL1 enhanced their 
invasiveness. Neutralizing antibody to CXCL1 in combination with antibody to
CXCR2 inhibited highly metastatic KM12L4 (high CXCL1 expressor) cell
proliferation. These data demonstrate that the constitutive expression of CXCL1
and its receptor CXCR2 is associated with metastatic potential and modulates
colon cancer cell proliferation and an invasive phenotype.

DOI: 10.1007/s10585-004-5458-3 
PMID: 15787094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

