
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2006 Apr;20(4):548-61. Epub 2005 Oct 10.

Influence of high-M alginate on the growth and survival of Atlantic cod (Gadus
morhua L.) and spotted wolffish (Anarhichas minor Olafsen) fry.

Vollstad D(1), Bøgwald J, Gåserød O, Dalmo RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Biotechnology, Norwegian College of Fishery Science,
University of Tromsø, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway.

Atlantic cod and spotted wolffish fry were fed high-M alginate containing feed
for 59 and 55 days, respectively. During this period the fry showed a higher
specific growth rate compared to controls. Uptake and distribution of alginate
was studied by inclusion of the (125)I-labelled molecule in the feed. The stomach
and intestine contained the highest amount while the kidney, liver and spleen
contained some, indicating that the alginate was taken up by the gut and
transported to internal organs. Cod fry fed 0.06% and 0.1% high-M alginate showed
a death rate of 51.4% and 53.3%, respectively. The lowest mortality, 48.1%, was
found in fry fed 0.01% high-M alginate. Controls showed a mortality rate of
49.0%. Differences were, however, not statistically significant. Challenge of the
immunostimulated fry (fed 0.02% and 0.06% alginate for 62 days) with atypical
Aeromonas salmonicida bacteria resulted in accumulated mortalities of 56% and
49%, respectively, 47 days after infection. The group that received 0.06%
alginate for a shorter period (47 days) and then control feed until challenged,
and the group that received alginate by bath reached a cumulative mortality of
59% and 60%, respectively. Lowest mortality (44%) was seen in the control group. 
Numerous microabscesses were found in both immunostimulated and control fish in
secondary lamellae of the gills, haematopoietic tissues of the kidneys, the
submucosa and mucosa of the intestine, the spleen, the liver and the myocardium
of the heart.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2005.07.004 
PMID: 16219475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

