
1. Mol Microbiol. 2006 Jan;59(2):651-63.

Cloning, functional expression and primary characterization of Vibrio
parahaemolyticus K+/H+ antiporter genes in Escherichia coli.

Radchenko MV(1), Waditee R, Oshimi S, Fukuhara M, Takabe T, Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Niigata University of Pharmacy and Applied Life
Sciences, Niigata 950-2081, Japan.

The regulation of internal Na(+) and K(+) concentrations is important for
bacterial cells, which, in the absence of Na(+) extrusion systems, cannot grow in
the presence of high external Na(+). Likewise, bacteria require K(+) uptake
systems when the external K(+) concentration becomes too low to support growth.
At present, we have little knowledge of K(+) toxicity and bacterial
outward-directed K(+) transport systems. We report here that high external
concentrations of K(+) at alkaline pH are toxic and that bacteria require K(+)
efflux and/or extrusion systems to avoid excessive K(+) accumulation. We have
identified the first example of a bacterial K(+)(specific)/H(+) antiporter,
Vp-NhaP2, from Vibrio parahaemolyticus. This protein, a member of the cation :
proton antiporter-1 (CPA1) family, was able to mediate K(+) extrusion from the
cell to provide tolerance to high concentrations of external KCl at alkaline pH. 
We also report the discovery of two V. parahaemolyticus Na(+)/H(+) antiporters,
Vp-NhaA and Vp-NhaB, which also exhibit a novel ion specificity toward K(+),
implying that they work as Na(+)(K(+))/H(+) exchangers. Furthermore, under
specific conditions, Escherichia coli was able to mediate K(+) extrusion against 
a K(+) chemical gradient, indicating that E. coli also possesses an unidentified 
K(+) extrusion system(s).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04966.x 
PMID: 16390457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

