
1. Acta Gastroenterol Latinoam. 2005;35(4):225-9.

Comparison of 13C- urea blood test to 13C-breath test and rapid urease test for
the diagnosis of Helicobacter pylori infection.

Fry LC(1), Curioso WH, Rickes S, Horton G, Hirschowitz BI, Mönkemüller K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Alabama,
Birmingham, USA.

At present, the available methods to diagnose active H. pylori infection are
endoscopy with biopsy for histology, culture, rapid urease tests, 13C or 14C urea
breath test, urine antibody and the stool antigen test. The aims of this study
were to simplify the 13C urea test by measuring 13C in blood rather than breath, 
and to evaluate the usefulness of the 13C urea blood test for the diagnosis of H.
pylori infection. Patients who underwent upper endoscopy for standard clinical
indications (e.g. dyspepsia, abdominal pain) were enrolled. A total of 161
patients (93F, 68M, mean age 47 +/- 14.2) were evaluated; 50 (31%) of them were
H. pylori positive, and 111(69%) were H. pylori negative. H. pylori infection was
diagnosed with a rapid urease test (CLO-test) and 13C urea breath test (UBT).
Performance characteristics for the 13C urea blood test for diagnosis and
evaluation of H. pylori eradication were calculated using UBT and CLO as gold
standards. The fifty H. pylori-positive patients were treated with triple
antibiotic therapy for two weeks. Four weeks after finishing antibiotic therapy
patients were retested with a commercial UBT and urea blood test. The 13C blood
test had sensitivities of 92 and 98% and specificities of 96 and 100% as compared
with urea breath test and CLO, respectively. We conclude that the 13C urea blood 
test is highly sensitive and specific for the initial diagnosis and control of
eradication of H. pylori infection.


PMID: 16496854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

