
1. J Immunol. 2006 Jun 15;176(12):7576-88.

A novel functional T cell hybridoma recognizes macrophage cell death induced by
bacteria: a possible role for innate lymphocytes in bacterial infection.

Kubota K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kitasato University School of Medicine,
Sagamihara, Japan. shinubo@soley

We have established a novel TCRalphabeta (TCRVbeta6)(+)CD4(-)CD8(-) T cell
hybridoma designated B6HO3. When the B6HO3 cells were cocultured with
bacterial-infected J774 macrophage-like cells, IFN-gamma production by B6HO3
cells was triggered through direct cell-cell contact with dying J774 cells
infected with Listeria monocytogenes (LM), Shigella flexneri, or Salmonella
typhimurium that expressed the type III secretion system, but not with intact
J774 cells infected with heat-killed LM, nonhemolytic lysteriolysin O-deficient
(Hly(-)) LM, plasmid-cured Shigella, or stationary-phase Salmonella. However, the
triggering of B6HO3 cells for IFN-gamma production involved neither dying
hepatoma cells infected with LM nor dying J774 cells caused by gliotoxin
treatment or freeze thawing. Cycloheximide and Abs to H-2K(d), H-2D(d), Ia(d),
CD1d, TCRVbeta6, and IL-12 did not inhibit the contact-dependent IFN-gamma
response, indicating that this IFN-gamma response did not require de novo protein
synthesis in bacterial-infected J774 cells and was TCR and IL-12 independent.
Thus, in an as yet undefined way, B6HO3 hybridoma recognizes a specialized form
of macrophage cell death resulting from bacterial infection and consequently
produces IFN-gamma. Moreover, contact-dependent interaction of minor subsets of
splenic alphabeta T cells, including NKT cells with dying LM-infected J774 and
bone marrow-derived macrophage (BMM) cells, proved to provide an
IFN-gamma-productive stimulus for these minor T cell populations, to which the
parental T cell of the B6HO3 hybridoma appeared to belong. Unexpectedly, subsets 
of gammadelta T and NK cells similarly responded to dying LM-infected macrophage 
cells. These results propose that innate lymphocytes may possess a recognition
system sensing macrophage cell "danger" resulting from bacterial infection.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.12.7576 
PMID: 16751404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

