
1. Immunology. 2006 Sep;119(1):116-25. Epub 2006 Jun 22.

The CD1d-binding glycolipid alpha-galactosylceramide enhances humoral immunity to
T-dependent and T-independent antigen in a CD1d-dependent manner.

Lang GA(1), Exley MA, Lang ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, 
NH 03766, USA.

Specific interaction of class II/peptide with the T-cell receptor (TCR) expressed
by class II-restricted CD4+ T helper (Th) cells is essential for in vivo
production of antibodies reactive with T-dependent antigen. In response to
stimulation with CD1d-binding glycolipid, Valpha14+ TCR-expressing,
CD1d-restricted natural killer T (NKT) cells may provide additional help for
antibody production. We tested the hypothesis that the CD1d-binding glycolipid
alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GC) enhances production of antibodies reactive
with T-dependent antigen in vivo. alpha-GC enhanced antibody production in vivo
in a CD1d-dependent manner in the presence of class II-restricted Th cells and
induced a limited antibody response in Th-deficient mice. alpha-GC also led to
alterations in isotype switch, selectively increasing production of
immunoglobulin G2b. Further analysis revealed that alpha-GC led to priming of
class II-restricted Th cells in vivo. Additionally, we observed that alpha-GC
enhanced production of antibodies reactive with T-independent antigen, showing
the effects of NKT cells on B cells independently of Th cells. Our data show that
NKT cells have multiple effects on the induction of a humoral immune response. We
propose that NKT cells could be exploited for the development of novel vaccines
where protective antibody is required.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2006.02413.x 
PMCID: PMC1782330
PMID: 16792697  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

