
1. Infect Immun. 1992 Jan;60(1):13-8.

Isolation and serologic characterization of AIDA-I, the adhesin mediating the
diffuse adherence phenotype of the diarrhea-associated Escherichia coli strain
2787 (O126:H27).

Benz I(1), Schmidt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie Heidelberg, Universität Heidelberg, Germany.

The adherence of diarrhea-associated Escherichia coli to the small-bowel mucosa
is an important step in the pathogenesis of diarrheal diseases. In tissue culture
systems, diarrhea-associated strains show three distinct patterns of adherence:
localized adherence, diffuse adherence (DA), and the recently described
aggregative adherence. To study the molecular basis of the DA phenotype, we
investigated the diarrhea-associated DA strain 2787 (O126:H27), isolated from a
case of infantile diarrhea. The DA phenotype is mediated by a 6.0-kb DNA fragment
derived from a 100-kb plasmid harbored by the wild-type strain. This fragment
codes for a 100-kDa protein which can be released from the bacterial cell into
the supernatant by mild heat treatment. Recombinant DA+ strains as well as the
isolated 100-kDa protein were used to engender specific antisera in rabbits. As
demonstrated by Western blotting (immunoblotting), the antibodies engendered by
the recombinant DA+ strain recognized a 100-kDa protein in the wild-type strain
2787 and in all recombinant strains showing DA. Immunogold electron microscopy
localized the 100-kDa protein to the bacterial cell surface. Serologically
related proteins of similar size were detected by Western blotting in other DA+
diarrhea-associated strains belonging to enteropathogenic E. coli serotypes. The 
100-kDa protein denoted AIDA-I (adhesin involved in diffuse adherence) binds in a
saturable fashion to HeLa cells. AIDA-I-specific immunoglobulin G
antibodies--and, to an even greater extent, Fab fragments derived
thereof--inhibited bacterial attachment to HeLa cells. This is direct evidence
that the 100-kDa protein is the adhesin mediating the DA phenotype of these
diarrhea-associated strains and is representative of a group of serologically
related proteins in other DA+ strains.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.60.1.13-18.1992 
PMCID: PMC257496
PMID: 1729177  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

