
1. J AOAC Int. 2007 Mar-Apr;90(2):465-9.

Evaluating the use of fatty acid profiles to identify Francisella tularensis.

Whittaker P(1), Day JB, Curtis SK, Fry FS.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Center for Food Safety and Applied
Nutrition, 5100 Paint Branch Pkwy, College Park, MD 20740-3835, USA.
paul.whittaker@fda.hhs.gov

Rapid capillary gas chromatography (GC) with flame-ionization detection was used 
to determine the cellular fatty acid profiles of Francisella tularensis. Two
subspecies of F. tularensis, the live vaccine strain (LVS) derived from
holarctica and a novicida strain Utah 112 (U112), were used to compare the
extracted fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs). A data set for the 2 subspecies was
prepared using fatty acid profiles of bacteria grown on 2 types of media,
Mueller-Hinton and cysteine heart agar supplemented with 5% rabbit blood (CHAB), 
and harvested at various time intervals (Day 1 through Day 4) with replicates
prepared on different days. A total of 204 samples were analyzed. The results
showed that these fatty acid quantitative profiles were unique for each of the
subspecies and could be used as a fingerprint for the organism. It was determined
by this rapid method that approximately 88% of the fatty acids in both the LVS
and U112 strains included 6 saturated fatty acids: 10:0, 12:0, 14:0, 16:0, 18:0, 
and 20:0; and 4 hydroxy fatty acids 10:0 2OH, 16:0 3OH, 17:0 3OH, and 18:0 3OH.
Data analysis and determination of clustering were performed by principal
component analysis (PCA) and soft independent modeling of class analogy (SIMCA). 
Both PCA and SIMCA showed clear separation of the LVS and U112 strain and would
be useful for prediction of unknowns. It was determined that the incubation time 
can be reduced from 48 to 24 h, and results are highly predictive for the
identification of F. tularensis. In summary, analysis of FAMEs from F. tularensis
subspecies LVS and U112 grown on CHAB or Mueller-Hinton media, and using a rapid 
GC method can provide a sensitive procedure for identification of these
organisms.


PMID: 17474518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

