
1. Poult Sci. 2007 Jul;86(7):1453-9.

The chicken genome: some good news and some bad news.

Dodgson JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University,
East Lansing 48824, USA. dodgson@msu.edu

The sequencing of the chicken genome has generated a wealth of good news for
poultry science. It allows the chicken to be a major player in 21st century
biology by providing an entr√©e into an arsenal of new technologies that can be
used to explore virtually any chicken phenotype of interest. The initial
technological onslaught has been described in this symposium. The wealth of data 
available now or soon to be available cannot be explained by simplistic models
and will force us to treat the inherent complexity of the chicken in ways that
are more realistic but at the same time more difficult to comprehend. Initial
single nucleotide polymorphism analyses suggest that broilers retain a remarkable
amount of the genetic diversity of predomesticated Jungle Fowl, whereas
commercial layer genomes display less diversity and broader linkage
disequilibrium. Thus, intensive commercial selection has not fixed a genome rich 
in wide selective sweeps, at least within the broiler population. Rather, a
complex assortment of combinations of ancient allelic diversity survives. Low
levels of linkage disequilibrium will make association analysis in broilers more 
difficult. The wider disequilibrium observed in layers should facilitate the
mapping of quantitative trait loci, and at the same time make it more difficult
to identify the causative nucleotide change(s). In addition, many quantitative
traits may be specific to the genetic background in which they arose and not
readily transferable to, or detectable in, other line backgrounds. Despite the
obstacles it presents, the genetic complexity of the chicken may also be viewed
as good news because it insures that long-term genetic progress will continue via
breeding using quantitative genetics, and it surely will keep poultry scientists 
busy for decades to come. It is now time to move from an emphasis on obtaining
"THE" chicken genome sequence to obtaining multiple sequences, especially of
foundation stocks, and a broader understanding of the full genetic and phenotypic
diversity of the domesticated chicken.

DOI: 10.1093/ps/86.7.1453 
PMID: 17575196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

