
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2007 Jul;153(Pt 7):2321-2331. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.2006/004648-0.

The role of F9 fimbriae of uropathogenic Escherichia coli in biofilm formation.

Ulett GC(1), Mabbett AN(1), Fung KC(1), Webb RI(2), Schembri MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Sciences, University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia.
(2)Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis, University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland 4072, Australia.

Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) is the primary cause of urinary tract
infection (UTI) in the developed world. The major factors associated with
virulence of UPEC are fimbrial adhesins, which mediate attachment to specific
receptors, enhance persistence and trigger innate host responses. UPEC produce a 
range of fimbrial adhesins, with type 1 and P fimbriae of the chaperone-usher
subclass being the best characterized. The prototype UPEC strain CFT073 contains 
ten gene clusters that contain genes characteristic of this class of fimbriae.
However, only five of these gene clusters have been characterized in detail. In
this study the F9 fimbrial gene cluster (c1931-c1936) from CFT073 has been
characterized. The F9 fimbriae-encoding genes were PCR amplified, cloned and
expressed in a K-12 background devoid of type 1 fimbriae. While F9 fimbrial
expression was not associated with any haemagglutination or cellular adherence
properties, a role in biofilm formation was observed. E. coli K-12 cells
expressing F9 fimbriae produced a dense and uniform biofilm in both microtitre
plate and continuous-flow biofilm model systems. In wild-type UPEC CFT073,
expression of the F9 major subunit-encoding gene was detected during exponential 
growth in M9 minimal medium. F9 expression could also be detected following
selection and enrichment for pellicle growth in a CFT073fim foc double mutant.
The F9 genes appear to be common in UPEC and other types of pathogenic E. coli.
However, their precise contribution to disease remains to be determined.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.2006/004648-0 
PMID: 17600076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

