
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2007 Jul;153(Pt 7):2168-2179. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.2007/007450-0.

Three putative cation/proton antiporters from the soda lake alkaliphile
Alkalimonas amylolytica N10 complement an alkali-sensitive Escherichia coli
mutant.

Wei Y(1), Liu J(1), Ma Y(2), Krulwich TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Systems Therapeutics, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(2)Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080,
People's Republic of China.

Attempts to identify members of the antiporter complement of the alkali- and
saline-adapted soda lake alkaliphile Alkalimonas amylolytica N10 have used
screens of DNA libraries in antiporter-deficient Escherichia coli KNabc. Earlier 
screens used Na(+) or Li(+) for selection but only identified one NhaD-type
antiporter whose properties were inconsistent with a robust role in pH
homeostasis. Here, new screens using elevated pH for selection identified three
other putative antiporter genes that conferred resistance to pH >or=8.5 as well
as Na(+) resistance. The three predicted gene products were in the calcium/cation
antiporter (CaCA), cation/proton antiporter-2 (CPA2) and cation/proton
antiporter-1 (CPA1) families of membrane transporters, and were designated
Aa-CaxA, Aa-KefB and Aa-NhaP respectively, reflecting homology within those
families. Aa-CaxA conferred the poorest Na(+) resistance and also conferred
modest Ca(2+) resistance. Aa-KefB and Aa-NhaP inhibited growth of a K(+)
uptake-deficient E. coli mutant (TK2420), suggesting that they catalysed K(+)
efflux. For Aa-NhaP, the reversibility of the growth inhibition by high K(+)
concentrations depended upon an organic nitrogen source, e.g. glutamine, rather
than ammonium. This suggests that as well as K(+) efflux is catalysed by Aa-NhaP.
Vesicles of E. coli KNabc expressing Aa-NhaP, which conferred the strongest
alkali resistance, exhibited K(+)/H(+) antiport activity in a pH range from 7.5
to 9.5, and with an apparent K(m) for K(+) of 0.5 mM at pH 8.0. The properties of
this antiporter are consistent with the possibility that this soda lake
alkaliphile uses K(+)( )/H(+) antiport as part of its alkaline pH homeostasis
mechanism and part of its capacity to reduce potentially toxic accumulation of
cytoplasmic K(+) or respectively, under conditions of high osmolarity or active
amino acid catabolism.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.2007/007450-0 
PMCID: PMC2538799
PMID: 17600061  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

