
1. J Immunol. 2008 Feb 1;180(3):1619-33.

An MHC class II restriction bias in CD4 T cell responses toward I-A is altered to
I-E in DM-deficient mice.

Menges PR(1), Jenks SA, Bikoff EK, Friedmann DR, Knowlden ZA, Sant AJ.

Author information: 
(1)David H. Smith Center for Vaccine Biology and Immunology, AaB Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

The MHC-encoded cofactor DM catalyzes endosomal loading of peptides onto MHC
class II molecules. Despite evidence from in vitro experiments that DM acts to
selectively edit the repertoire of class II:peptide complexes, the consequence of
DM expression in vivo, or a predictive pattern of DM activity in the specificity 
of CD4 T cell responses has remained unresolved. Therefore, to characterize DM
function in vivo we used wild-type (WT) or DM-deficient (DM(-/-)) mice of the
H-2(d) MHC haplotype and tested the hypothesis that DM promotes narrowing of the 
repertoire of class II:peptide complexes displayed by APC, leading to a
correspondingly selective CD4 T cell response. Surprisingly, our results
indicated that DM(-/-) mice do not exhibit a broadened CD4 T cell response
relative to WT mice, but rather shift their immunodominance pattern to new
peptides, a pattern associated with a change in class II isotype-restriction.
Specifically, we found that CD4 T cell responses in WT mice were primarily
restricted to the I-A class II molecule, whereas DM(-/-) mice recognize peptides 
in the context of I-E. The observed shift in isotype-restriction appeared to be
due in part to a modification in the peripheral CD4 T cell repertoire available
for peptide recognition.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.180.3.1619 
PMCID: PMC2981066
PMID: 18209058  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

