
1. Vet Res. 2008 May-Jun;39(3):38. doi: 10.1051/vetres:2008015. Epub 2008 Mar 4.

A homolog of the O157 urease-encoding O island 48 is present in porcine O149:H10 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli.

Parreira VR(1), Liao JH, Kim SH, Gyles CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario N1G 2W1,
Canada.

The relationship of the urease operon in the highly virulent O149 porcine
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) strain Ro8 to a genomic island (GI)
homologous to O island (OI) 48 of O157 enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) strain
EDL933 was investigated. Eighty-four of 84 O149:H10 strains were urease positive 
whereas 44 of 44 O149:H43 porcine ETEC strains were urease-negative. Seventeen of
17 O149:H10 strains that were tested possessed the OI-48 homolog whereas 24 of 24
O149:H43 strains lacked this OI. Transposon insertions in lipB or guaA genes in
strain Ro8 eliminated urease activity while insertions in the caiF gene increased
urease activity. When the O149 ure operon was cloned on a high copy number
plasmid, urease expression was increased approximately 11-fold in Ro8 and 83-fold
in O157 strain EDL933 compared with that in the wild type Ro8. The O149 urease
activity was expressed despite the presence of the same premature stop codon in
ureD that is present in ure+ O157:H7 strains that are urease-negative. The ure
operon in Ro8 consists of 4 893 nucleotides with 99% identity with the ure
operons in EHEC O157:H7 strains EDL933 and Sakai, and is part of a GI similar to 
GI-48 of strain EDL933. This OI, designated OI-48149 , is inserted in the serX
tRNA gene in strain Ro8 and contains genes for urease, tellurite resistance, iha 
and an AIDA-I-like adhesin. The presence of a homolog of the O157:H7 OI-48 in
highly virulent O149 porcine ETEC suggests that this OI may contribute to
establishment of the bacteria in the intestine.

DOI: 10.1051/vetres:2008015 
PMID: 18316019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

