
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2008 Jul;74(13):3935-42. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02710-07. Epub 
2008 Apr 25.

Loss of virulence genes in Escherichia coli populations during manure storage on 
a commercial swine farm.

Duriez P(1), Zhang Y, Lu Z, Scott A, Topp E.

Author information: 
(1)Southern Crop Protection and Food Research Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food
Canada, 1391 Sandford Street, London, Ontario, Canada N5V 4T3.

Confined livestock production farms typically store their wastes prior to land
application. Here, we employed three complementary approaches to evaluate changes
in the population structure and stability of virulence genes in Escherichia coli 
during manure storage on a commercial farm that housed healthy swine. Isolates
were genotyped by repetitive extragenic palindromic PCR using the BOXA1R primer
and evaluated for the presence of selected virulence genes by PCR. Isolates
obtained from the manure holding tank (n = 392) carried estB, fedA, stx(2e),
astA, paa, aida-I, and sepA at lower frequencies than isolates obtained from
fresh feces (n = 412). Fresh fecal material from the barn was added into
diffusion chambers and immersed in the manure holding tank for 7 weeks. The fecal
E. coli population was initially dominated by a single genotype, all isolates of 
which carried fedA and aida-I. After 7 weeks, a genotype that did not carry any
virulence genes dominated the surviving population. In a second experiment, 48
fecal isolates of E. coli that varied in their genotypes and virulence gene
complement were incubated in diffusion chambers in the manure holding tank for 3 
weeks. Over 95% of the inoculum population carried at least one virulence gene,
whereas after 3 weeks 90% of the recovered isolates carried no virulence genes.
Taken together, these results indicate that during commercial manure storage,
there was a significant reduction in the carriage of these virulence genes by E. 
coli. We propose that loss of virulence genes from enteric pathogens in the farm 
and in natural environments may, if generalized, contribute to the attenuation of
a public health risk from contamination with agricultural wastes.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02710-07 
PMCID: PMC2446522
PMID: 18441108  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

