
1. Infect Immun. 2008 Jul;76(7):3011-8. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01672-07. Epub 2008 May 5.

Expression of CD1d and ligand-induced cytokine production are tissue specific in 
mucosal epithelia of the human lower reproductive tract.

Kawana K(1), Matsumoto J, Miura S, Shen L, Kawana Y, Nagamatsu T, Yasugi T, Fujii
T, Yang H, Quayle AJ, Taketani Y, Schust DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Mucosal epithelia of the human lower reproductive tract (vagina, cervix, and
penile urethra) are exposed to sexually transmitted microbes, including Chlamydia
trachomatis. The in vivo susceptibility of each tissue type to infection with C. 
trachomatis is quite distinct. CD1d is expressed on the surface of
antigen-presenting cells, including mucosal epithelial cells, and interacts
specifically with invariant NKT cells. Invariant NKT cells play a role in both
innate and adaptive immune responses to microbes. Here we assessed CD1d
expression in normal reproductive tissues by using immunohistochemistry.
Immortalized epithelial cell lines from the human lower reproductive tract
(vagina, endocervix, and penile urethra) were examined for CD1d expression and
for ligand-induced cytokine production induced by CD1d cross-linking. CD1d
expression in normal tissue was strong in the vagina but weak in the endocervix
and penile urethra. Gamma interferon exposure induced CD1d transcription in all
of the cell types studied, with the strongest induction in vaginal cells. Flow
cytometry revealed cell surface expression of CD1d in vaginal and penile urethral
epithelial cells but not in endocervical cells. Ligation of surface-expressed
CD1d by monoclonal antibody cross-linking promoted interleukin-12 (IL-12) and
IL-15, but not IL-10, production in vaginal and penile urethral cells. No
induction was demonstrated in endocervical cells. CD1d-mediated cytokine
production in penile urethral cells was abrogated by C. trachomatis infection.
Basal deficiency in CD1d-mediated immune responsiveness may result in
susceptibility to sexually transmitted agents. Decreased CD1d-mediated signaling 
may help C. trachomatis evade detection by innate immune cells.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01672-07 
PMCID: PMC2446716
PMID: 18458073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

