
1. Circ Res. 2008 Aug 15;103(4):352-9. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000326772.76822.7a. Epub
2008 Jul 10.

Myeloperoxidase delays neutrophil apoptosis through CD11b/CD18 integrins and
prolongs inflammation.

El Kebir D(1), JÃ³zsef L, Pan W, Filep JG.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, University of Montreal, 5415
blvd de l'Assomption, Montreal, QC, Canada H1T 2M4.

Polymorphonuclear neutrophil granulocytes have a central role in innate immunity 
and their programmed cell death and removal are critical for efficient resolution
of acute inflammation. Myeloperoxidase (MPO), a heme protein abundantly expressed
in neutrophils, is generally associated with killing of bacteria and oxidative
tissue injury. Because MPO also binds to neutrophils, we investigated whether MPO
could affect the lifespan of neutrophils. Here, we report that MPO independent of
its catalytic activity through signaling via the adhesion molecule CD11b/CD18
rescued human neutrophils from constitutive apoptosis and prolonged their life
span. MPO evoked a transient concurrent activation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase and Akt, leading to phosphorylation of Bad at both Ser112
and Ser136, prevention of mitochondrial dysfunction, and subsequent activation of
caspase-3. Consistently, pharmacological inhibition of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase, Akt, or caspase-3 reversed the antiapoptosis action of
MPO. Acute increases in plasma MPO delayed murine neutrophil apoptosis assayed ex
vivo. In a mouse model of self-resolving inflammation, MPO also prolonged the
duration of carrageenan-induced acute lung injury, as evidenced by enhanced
alveolar permeability and accumulation of neutrophils parallel with suppression
of neutrophil apoptosis. Our results indicate that MPO functions as a survival
signal for neutrophils and thereby contribute to prolongation of inflammation.

DOI: 10.1161/01.RES.0000326772.76822.7a 
PMID: 18617697  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

