
1. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis. 2008 Jun;69(2):75-7.

Septic pulmonary embolism: three case reports.

SÃ¶zener ZC(1), Kayal A, Atasoy C, Kilickap M, Numanoglu N, Savas I.

Author information: 
(1)Ankara University, School of Medicine, Department of Chest Diseases, Ankara,
Turkey.

We present three cases of septic pulmonary embolism which occurred as a result of
three different causes. The first case, was a 23 year old woman suffering from
cough, sputum, hemopthisis and pleuritic chest pain. She had a right subclavian
port. On her thorax computed tomography (CT) scans there were widespread
bilateral, irregular parenchymal nodular infiltrates and some of them beginning
to cavitate. Meticilin resistant stafilococus aureus (MRSA) was isolated from the
blood culture and septic embolism was diagnosed. A month after antibiotic
theraphy her parenchymal nodules have considerably decreased in size. The second 
case was a 40 year old woman admitted to our hospital with the same complaints.
Her radiological findings were similar. Meticilin sensitive stafilococus aureus
(MSSA) was isolated from the blood cultures and antibiotic theraphy was
initiated. To investigate the etiology of the nodules due to septic embolism,
echocardiography was performed and infective endocarditis was diagnosed. After
the antibiotic theraphy and a tricuspid valve operation her parenchymal nodules
disappeared. The final case involved a 51 year old man suffering from fever,
fatigue, cough and pain in the left arm for one week. His general status was bad.
His radiological findings were also similar to the others. Staphillococcus aureus
was isolated from blood and wound culture. Following clinical and radiological
findings we thought it was a case of septic pulmonary embolism and antibiotic
theraphy was started. Despite the therapy we did not take fever response and he
died five days after antibiotic therapy. In conclusion, septic pulmonary embolism
should be considered in bilateral cavitary nodular infiltrates and must be
managed fast.

DOI: 10.4081/monaldi.2008.400 
PMID: 18837421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

