
1. Minerva Med. 2008 Oct;99(5):459-81.

The management of acute lower respiratory tract infection.

Lorente L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care, Hospital Universitario de Canarias, Santa Cruz de
Tenerife, Spain. lorentemartin@msn.com

Acute lower respiratory tract infection is associated with an increase of the
morbidity, mortality and assistance cost. This review focus on the diagnosis and 
treatment of acute lower respiratory tract infection. There is not a gold
standard in the microbiological diagnostic tests for the diagnosis of acute lower
respiratory tract infection; thus, the choice of strategy used to diagnose will
be dependent on consideration of local expertise and availability of personnel to
perform the procedure. I suggest obtain a lower respiratory tract secretion
sample by endotracheal aspirate for quantitative culture at the time of suspicion
of acute lower respiratory tract infection; and by protected specimen brush
and/or bronchoalveolar lavage in patients with a bad response to the initial
antimicrobials used. In relation to the treatment of acute lower respiratory
tract infection, I suggest the following approach: early onset of antimicrobial
agents, choice of antimicrobial agents according the local bacteriologic
patterns, combination therapy for the empiric treatment, de-escalation and
monotherapy for the definitive treatment in responsive patients and with
microorganism responsible documented, continuous infusion for betalactam
antibiotics and vancomycin, single dayle dosage for aminoglycosides,
administration of antimicrobials topically (inhaled or instilllated) in
unresponsive patients, antibiotic heterogeneity, short-course of 7-10 days of
antimicrobial therapy in patients with a good clinical response.


PMID: 18971912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

