
1. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2009 Apr;55(3):352-60. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2008.00520.x. Epub 2009 Jan 12.

Differential upregulation of chemokine receptors on CD56 NK cells and their
transmigration to the site of infection in tuberculous pleurisy.

Pokkali S(1), Das SD, Selvaraj A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Tuberculosis Research Centre ICMR, Chennai, India.

Chemokines and their receptors orchestrate leukocyte recruitment and confer
immunity during Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. The immunoregulatory and
cytotoxic activities of natural killer (NK) cells are essential at the site of
infection during tuberculous pleurisy. The frequency, subtypes, and expression of
phenotype markers and chemokine receptors on NK cells were assessed by flow
cytometry in tuberculous (TB) and nontuberculous (NTB) pleural fluid (PF).
Chemotaxis was also shown in response to chemokines. A significant decrease in
CD56(dim) with no change in CD56(bright) NK cells was observed, while a
significant increase in activation markers and Toll-like receptors (TLRs) was
observed on TB-PF CD56(bright) NK cells. Significantly increased expression of
chemokine receptors CCR1, CCR2 and CCR7 on CD56(bright) and CCR5 on CD56(dim) NK 
cells was observed in the TB group. Transmigration of TB-PF NK cells was
significantly high in response to IL-8, IP-10, MCP-1 and SLC. Transmigrated TB-NK
cells showed a significant increase in CXCR2, CCR2 and CCR7 expression. The study
suggests that CD56(bright) NK cells may recognize M. tuberculosis directly using 
TLRs, HLA-DR and express CD69 as an early activation marker. In addition, CC
chemokines induce activation signals in chemokine receptors mediating
differential NK cell migration to the site. Thus, NK cells act as first direct
sensors and effectors in mycobacterial infection.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2008.00520.x 
PMID: 19159432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

