
1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 May;1166:49-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04518.x.

Deciphering the relationships between Rickettsia conorii conorii and
Rhipicephalus sanguineus in the ecology and epidemiology of Mediterranean spotted
fever.

Parola P(1), Socolovschi C, Raoult D.

Author information: 
(1)Unit√© de Recherche en Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales Emergentes, UMR
CNRS-IRD 6236, WHO Collaborative Center for Rickettsial Diseases and Other
Arthropod-Borne Bacterial Diseases, Marseilles, France.
philippe.parola@univmed.fr

Mediterranean spotted fever is the most important tick-borne disease occurring in
Southern Europe and North Africa. The first case of this life-threatening
zoonosis was reported in 1910. In the 1930s, the role of the brown dog tick,
Rhipicephalus sanguineus, and the causative agent, Rickettsia conorii were
described. However, basic questions regarding the relationships between the
rickettsia and its tick vector are still unresolved, and the life cycle of R.
conorii is incompletely known. There is a lack of knowledge associated with the
role of Rh. sanguineus in the maintenance and transmission of R. conorii. The
infectious rate of Rh. sanguineus ticks with R. conorii has been found low every 
time it has been tested; usually lower that 1%. The deleterious impact of R.
conorii on ticks has been suggested in experimental models as a potential reason 
to explain a low prevalence in nature. The long-recognized phenomenon known as
reactivation has been suggested as a cause of negative effects--that is, the
change in temperature and physiology of the tick host induces the agent to emerge
from dormancy and attain infectivity with bad effects on ticks. However,
naturally infected colonies of ticks have been maintained in laboratory
conditions over several generations. We discuss here several aspects that have
been recently studied to better understand Rh. sanguineus-R. conorii
relationships, including comparison between the fitness of infected and
non-infected ticks in laboratory conditions and the role of external factors such
as temperature and starvation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04518.x 
PMID: 19538263  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

