
1. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2009 Aug;96(2):247-58. doi: 10.1007/s10482-009-9361-4.
Epub 2009 Jul 7.

From industrial sites to environmental applications with Cupriavidus
metallidurans.

Diels L(1), Van Roy S, Taghavi S, Van Houdt R.

Author information: 
(1)BU Separation and Conversion Technology, Flemish Institute for Technological
Research (VITO), Boeretang 200, 2400, Mol, Belgium. ludo.diels@vito.be

Cupriavidus metallidurans CH34 and related strains are adapted to metal
contaminated environments. A strong resistance to environmental stressors and
adaptation make it ideal strains for survival in decreasing biodiversity
conditions and for bioaugmentation purposes in environmental applications. The
soil bacterium C. metallidurans is able to grow chemolithoautotrophically on
hydrogen and carbon dioxide allowing a strong resilience under conditions lacking
organic matter. The biofilm growth on soil particles allows coping with
starvation or bad conditions of pH, temperature and pollutants. Its genomic
capacity of two megaplasmids encoding several heavy metal resistance operons
allowed growth in heavy metal contaminated habitats. In addition its specific
siderophores seem to play a role in heavy metal sequestration besides their role 
in the management of bioavailable iron. Efflux ATPases and RND systems pump the
metal cations to the membrane surface where polysaccharides serve as heavy metal 
binding and nucleation sites for crystallisation of metal carbonates. These
polysaccharides contribute also to flotation under specific conditions in a
soil-heavy metals-bacteria suspension mixture. An inoculated moving bed sand
filter was constructed to treat heavy metal contaminated water and to remove the 
metals in the form of biomass mixed with metal carbonates. A membrane based
contactor allowed to use the bacteria as well in a versatile wastewater treatment
system and to grow homogeneously formed heavy metal carbonates. Its behaviour
toward heavy metal binding and flotation was combined in a biometal sludge
reactor to extract and separate heavy metals from metal contaminated soils.
Finally its metal-induced heavy metal resistance allowed constructing whole cell 
heavy metal biosensors which, after contact with contaminated soil, waste,
solids, minerals and ashes, were induced in function of the bioavailable
concentration (Cd, Zn, Cu, Cr, Co, Ni, Tl, Pb and Hg) in the solids and allowed
to investigate the speciation of immobilization of those metals.

DOI: 10.1007/s10482-009-9361-4 
PMID: 19582590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

