
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2009 Oct;75(20):6496-503. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01669-09. Epub
2009 Aug 21.

Versatile dual-technology system for markerless allele replacement in
Burkholderia pseudomallei.

LÃ³pez CM(1), Rholl DA, Trunck LA, Schweizer HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, Colorado State
University, IDRC at Foothills Campus, Campus Delivery 2025, Fort Collins, CO
80523-2025, USA.

Burkholderia pseudomallei is the etiologic agent of melioidosis, a rare but
serious tropical disease. In the United States, genetic research with this select
agent bacterium is strictly regulated. Although several select agent compliant
methods have been developed for allelic replacement, all of them suffer from some
drawbacks, such as a need for specific host backgrounds or use of minimal media. 
Here we describe a versatile select agent compliant allele replacement system for
B. pseudomallei based on a mobilizable vector, pEXKm5, which contains (i) a
multiple cloning site within a lacZalpha gene for facile cloning of recombinant
DNA fragments, (ii) a constitutively expressed gusA indicator gene for visual
detection of merodiploid formation and resolution, and (iii) elements required
for resolution of merodiploids using either I-SceI homing endonuclease-stimulated
recombination or sacB-based counterselection. The homing endonuclease-based
allele replacement system is completed by pBADSce, which contains an
araC-P(BAD)-I-sceI expression cassette for arabinose-inducible I-SceI expression 
and a temperature-sensitive pRO1600 replicon for facile plasmid curing.
Complementing these systems is the improved Deltaasd Escherichia coli mobilizer
strain RHO3. This strain is susceptible to commonly used antibiotics and allows
nutritional counterselection on rich media because of its diaminopimelic acid
auxotrophy. The versatility of the I-SceI- and sacB-based methods afforded by
pEXKm5 in conjunction with E. coli RHO3 was demonstrated by isolation of diverse 
deletion mutants in several clinical, environmental, and laboratory B.
pseudomallei strains. Finally, sacB-based counterselection was employed to
isolate a defined chromosomal fabD(Ts) allele that causes synthesis of a
temperature-sensitive FabD, an essential fatty acid biosynthesis enzyme.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01669-09 
PMCID: PMC2765137
PMID: 19700544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

