
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2004 Jun 1;48(3):357-67. doi: 10.1016/j.femsec.2004.02.009.

Molecular monitoring of culturable bacteria from deep-sea sediment of the Nankai 
Trough, Leg 190 Ocean Drilling Program.

Toffin L(1), Webster G, Weightman AJ, Fry JC, Prieur D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Universitaire Européen de la Mer, CNRS UMR, Plouzané, France.
toffin@jamstec.go.jp

Culturable bacteria were detected in deep-sea sediment samples collected from the
Nankai Trough site 1173 (Ocean Drilling Program, ODP, Leg 190) at 4.15 m below
the seafloor with 4791 m of overlying water. In this deep ocean near surface
sediment, mainly fermentative heterotrophs, autotrophic acetogens and
sulfate-reducing bacteria were enriched by using two different non-selective
enrichment culture media. Culturable bacterial population shifts within the deep 
marine sediment enrichments were monitored by using denaturating gradient gel
electrophoresis (DGGE). DGGE analysis revealed a decrease in the number of 16S
rRNA gene fragments from high to low carbon concentrations, and from low to high 
dilution of inoculum, suggesting that fast-growing bacteria were numerically
dominant in enrichment culture samples. The dominant 16S rRNA fragments observed 
in DGGE gels were assigned to the Firmicutes, Proteobacteria (gamma and delta
subgroups) and Spirochaeta phyla. Continual sub-culture and purification resulted
in two isolates which were phylogenetically identified as members of the genera
Acetobacterium and Marinilactibacillus. Our results, which combine enrichment
culturing with DGGE analysis, indicated that enrichment cultures derived from
inoculum dilution and media with various concentrations of carbon could
facilitate the detection and isolation of a greater number of environmentally
relevant bacterial species than when using traditional enrichment techniques
alone.

DOI: 10.1016/j.femsec.2004.02.009 
PMID: 19712305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

