
1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2010 Jan;22(1):43-8. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e3283323538.

Clinical and immunological features of drug-induced and infection-induced
proteinase 3-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and
myeloperoxidase-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and vasculitis.

Csernok E(1), Lamprecht P, Gross WL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Lübeck, Department of Rheumatology, Vasculitis Center UKSH &
Clinical Center Bad Bramstedt, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538 Lübeck, Germany.
csernok@r-on-klinik.de

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Drugs and infections may induce antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies (ANCA) and vasculitic manifestations mimicking ANCA-associated
vasculitides (AAV) and mechanisms relevant in their pathogenesis. This review
summarizes the most recent findings in this field.
RECENT FINDINGS: Drug-induced and infection-induced proteinase 3 (PR3)-ANCA and
myeloperoxidase (MPO)-ANCA may be associated with a vasculitis clinically
resembling AAV. Mechanisms relevant for the break of tolerance and induction of
ANCA (e.g. danger signals, superantigens, neutrophil extracellular traps,
protease-activated receptor-2, IL-17 cells) may be shared to some extent between 
drug-induced and infection-induced ANCA-positive vasculitis and AAV, especially
with regard to the potential role of infection in Wegener's granulomatosis.
Differences in immunopathology, clinical presentation, and functional aspects of 
ANCA help to distinguish drug-induced and infection-induced ANCA-positive
vasculitis from AAV, and present new avenues for future research in this field.
SUMMARY: Medications and infections, which induce PR3-ANCA and MPO-ANCA, have to 
be considered in the differential diagnosis of primary AAV. Moreover, there is
clinical and experimental evidence for an association between certain drugs and
infections with ANCA-production. Analysis of ANCA-induction in such conditions
also sheds new light on our understanding of immune mechanisms relevant in the
break of tolerance and ANCA-production in AAV.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e3283323538 
PMID: 19770659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

