
1. J Bacteriol. 2009 Dec;191(23):7234-42. doi: 10.1128/JB.00923-09. Epub 2009 Sep
25.

Distribution and phylogeny of light-oxygen-voltage-blue-light-signaling proteins 
in the three kingdoms of life.

Krauss U(1), Minh BQ, Losi A, Gärtner W, Eggert T, von Haeseler A, Jaeger KE.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekulare Enzymtechnologie, Heinrich-Heine Universität
Düsseldorf, Forschungszentrum Jülich, Jülich, Germany. u.krauss@fz-juelich.de

Plants and fungi respond to environmental light stimuli via the action of
different photoreceptor modules. One such class, responding to the blue region of
light, is constituted by photoreceptors containing so-called light-oxygen-voltage
(LOV) domains as sensor modules. Four major LOV families are currently identified
in eukaryotes: (i) the plant phototropins, regulating various physiological
effects such as phototropism, chloroplast relocation, and stomatal opening; (ii) 
the aureochromes, mediating photomorphogenesis in photosynthetic stramenopile
algae; (iii) the plant circadian photoreceptors of the zeitlupe (ZTL)/adagio
(ADO)/flavin-binding Kelch repeat F-box protein 1 (FKF1) family; and (iv) the
fungal circadian photoreceptors white-collar 1 (WC-1). Blue-light-sensitive LOV
signaling modules are also widespread throughout the prokaryotic world, and
physiological responses mediated by bacterial LOV photoreceptors were recently
reported. Thus, the question arises as to the evolutionary relationship between
the pro- and eukaryotic LOV photoreceptor systems. We used Bayesian and
maximum-likelihood tree reconstruction methods to infer evolutionary scenarios
that might have led to the widespread appearance of LOV domains among the pro-
and eukaryotes. The phylogenetic study presented here suggests a bacterial origin
for the LOV domains of the four major eukaryotic LOV photoreceptor families,
whereas the LOV sensor domains were most likely recruited from the bacteria in
the course of plastid and mitochondrial endosymbiosis.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00923-09 
PMCID: PMC2786558
PMID: 19783626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

