
1. Mol Ecol. 2009 Nov;18(22):4716-29. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2009.04374.x. Epub
2009 Oct 8.

Major histocompatibility complex heterozygote advantage and widespread bacterial 
infections in populations of Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha).

Evans ML(1), Neff BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Western Ontario, 1151 Richmond St. N,
London, ON, N6A 5B7, Canada.

Despite growing evidence for parasite-mediated selection on the vertebrate major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC), little is known about variation in the
bacterial parasite community within and among host populations or its influence
on MHC evolution. In this study, we characterize variation in the parasitic
bacterial community associated with Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) fry
in five populations in British Columbia (BC), Canada across 2 years, and examine 
whether bacterial infections are a potential source of selection on the MHC. We
found an unprecedented diversity of bacteria infecting fry with a total of 55
unique bacteria identified. Bacterial infection rates varied from 9% to 29% among
populations and there was a significant isolation by distance relationship in
bacterial community phylogenetic similarity across the populations. Spatial
variation in the frequency of infections and in the phylogenetic similarity of
bacterial communities may result in differential parasite-mediated selection at
the MHC across populations. Across all populations, we found evidence of a
heterozygote advantage at the MHC class II, which may be a source of balancing
selection on this locus. Interestingly, a co-inertia analysis indicated only
susceptibility associations between a few of the MHC class I and II alleles and
specific bacterial parasites; there was no evidence that any of the alleles
provided resistance to the bacteria. Our results reveal a complex bacterial
community infecting populations of a fish and underscore the importance of
considering the role of multiple pathogens in the evolution of host adaptations.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2009.04374.x 
PMID: 19821902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

