
1. J Immunol. 2010 Feb 15;184(4):2107-15. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901208. Epub 2010
Jan 18.

A CD1d-dependent antagonist inhibits the activation of invariant NKT cells and
prevents development of allergen-induced airway hyperreactivity.

Lombardi V(1), Stock P, Singh AK, Kerzerho J, Yang W, Sullivan BA, Li X,
Shiratsuchi T, Hnatiuk NE, Howell AR, Yu KO, Porcelli SA, Tsuji M, Kronenberg M, 
Wilson SB, Akbari O.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

The prevalence of asthma continues to increase in westernized countries, and
optimal treatment remains a significant therapeutic challenge. Recently,
CD1d-restricted invariant NKT (iNKT) cells were found to play a critical role in 
the induction of airway hyperreactivity (AHR) in animal models and are associated
with asthma in humans. To test whether iNKT cell-targeted therapy could be used
to treat allergen-induced airway disease, mice were sensitized with OVA and
treated with di-palmitoyl-phosphatidyl-ethanolamine polyethylene glycol
(DPPE-PEG), a CD1d-binding lipid antagonist. A single dose of DPPE-PEG prevented 
the development of AHR and pulmonary infiltration of lymphocytes upon OVA
challenge, but had no effect on the development of OVA-specific Th2 responses. In
addition, DPPE-PEG completely prevented the development of AHR after
administration of alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer) intranasally.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that DPPE-PEG acts as antagonist to alpha-GalCer and 
competes with alpha-GalCer for binding to CD1d. Finally, we show that DPPE-PEG
completely inhibits the alpha-GalCer-induced phosphorylation of ERK tyrosine
kinase in iNKT cells, suggesting that DPPE-PEG specifically blocks TCR signaling 
and thus activation of iNKT cells. Because iNKT cells play a critical role in the
development of AHR, the inhibition of iNKT activation by DPPE-PEG suggests a
novel approach to treat iNKT cell-mediated diseases such as asthma.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901208 
PMCID: PMC2845715
PMID: 20083656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

