
1. Trials. 2010 Feb 12;11:14. doi: 10.1186/1745-6215-11-14.

Effects of a mouthwash with chlorine dioxide on oral malodor and salivary
bacteria: a randomized placebo-controlled 7-day trial.

Shinada K(1), Ueno M, Konishi C, Takehara S, Yokoyama S, Zaitsu T, Ohnuki M,
Wright FA, Kawaguchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Health Promotion, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Japan. shinada.ohp@tmd.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Previous research has shown the oxidizing properties and
microbiological efficacies of chlorine dioxide (ClO2). Its clinical efficacies on
oral malodor have been evaluated and reported only in short duration trials,
moreover, no clinical studies have investigated its microbiological efficacies on
periodontal and malodorous bacteria. Thus, the aim of this study was to assess
the inhibitory effects of a mouthwash containing ClO2 used for 7 days on morning 
oral malodor and on salivary periodontal and malodorous bacteria.
METHODS/DESIGN: A randomized, double blind, crossover, placebo-controlled trial
was conducted among 15 healthy male volunteers, who were divided into 2 groups.
Subjects were instructed to rinse with the experimental mouthwash containing ClO2
or the placebo mouthwash, without ClO2, twice per day for 7 days. After a one
week washout period, each group then used the opposite mouthwash for 7 days. At
baseline and after 7 days, oral malodor was evaluated with Organoleptic
measurement (OM), and analyzed the concentrations of hydrogen sulfide (H2S),
methyl mercaptan (CH3SH) and dimethyl sulfide ((CH3)2S), the main VSCs of human
oral malodor, were assessed by gas chromatography (GC). Clinical outcome
variables included plaque and gingival indices, and tongue coating index. The
samples of saliva were microbiologically investigated. Quantitative and
qualitative analyses were performed using the polymerase chain reaction-Invader
method.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: The baseline oral condition in healthy subjects in the 2 
groups did not differ significantly. After rinsing with the mouthwash containing 
ClO2 for 7 days, morning bad breath decreased as measured by the OM and reduced
the concentrations of H2S, CH3SH and (CH3)2S measured by GC, were found. Moreover
ClO2 mouthwash used over a 7-day period appeared effective in reducing plaque,
tongue coating accumulation and the counts of Fusobacterium nucleatum in saliva. 
Future research is needed to examine long-term effects, as well as effects on
periodontal diseases and plaque accumulation in a well-defined sample of
halitosis patients and broader population samples.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00748943.

DOI: 10.1186/1745-6215-11-14 
PMCID: PMC2831889
PMID: 20152022  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

