
1. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2010 Apr;23(2):276-86. doi:
10.1111/j.1755-148X.2010.00688.x. Epub 2010 Feb 19.

Reduced skin homing by functional Treg in vitiligo.

Klarquist J(1), Denman CJ, Hernandez C, Wainwright DA, Strickland FM, Overbeck A,
Mehrotra S, Nishimura MI, Le Poole IC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology/Oncology Institute,
Loyola University Chicago, IL, USA.

Erratum in
    Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2010 Jun;23(3):477. Wainwright, Derek J [corrected to 
Wainwright, Derek A].

In human vitiligo, cutaneous depigmentation involves cytotoxic activity of
autoreactive T cells. It was hypothesized that depigmentation can progress in the
absence of regulatory T cells (Treg). The percentage of Treg among skin
infiltrating T cells was evaluated by immunoenzymatic double staining for CD3 and
FoxP3, revealing drastically reduced numbers of Treg in non-lesional,
perilesional and lesional vitiligo skin. Assessment of the circulating Treg pool 
by FACS analysis of CD4, CD25, CD127 and FoxP3 expression, and mixed lymphocyte
reactions in presence and absence of sorted Treg revealed no systemic drop in the
abundance or activity of Treg in vitiligo patients. Expression of skin homing
receptors CCR4, CCR5, CCR8 and CLA was comparable among circulating vitiligo and 
control Treg. Treg from either source were equally capable of migrating towards
CCR4 ligand and skin homing chemokine CCL22, yet significantly reduced expression
of CCL22 in vitiligo skin observed by immunohistochemistry may explain failure of
circulating, functional Treg to home to the skin in vitiligo. The paucity of Treg
in vitiligo skin is likely crucial for perpetual anti-melanocyte reactivity in
progressive disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1755-148X.2010.00688.x 
PMCID: PMC3778930
PMID: 20175879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

