
1. Protein Sci. 2010 May;19(5):974-86. doi: 10.1002/pro.375.

Structural and functional analysis of the phosphoryl transfer reaction mediated
by the human small C-terminal domain phosphatase, Scp1.

Zhang M(1), Liu J, Kim Y, Dixon JE, Pfaff SL, Gill GN, Noel JP, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas, USA.

Human small C-terminal domain phosphatase 1 (Scp1) modulates the phosphorylation 
state of the C-terminal domain (CTD) of eukaryotic RNA polymerase II (RNAP II),
with preference for phosphorylated Ser5 in the tandem heptad repeats of the CTD. 
Additionally, Scp1 was identified as a conserved regulator of neuronal stem cell 
development. Scp1 is a member of haloacid dehalogenase (HAD) superfamily, whose
catalysis depends on a Mg(2+) ion and a DXDX(T/V) motif. The first Asp of the
motif is identified as the nucleophile that is subject to phosphorylation leading
to a phosphoryl-aspartate intermediate. This high-energy mixed anhydride
intermediate is subsequently hydrolyzed to regenerate the enzyme. In the present 
study, we successfully captured the phosphoryl-aspartate intermediate in the
crystal structure of a Scp1D206A mutant soaked with para-nitrophenyl phosphate
(pNPP), providing strong evidence for the proposed mechanism. Furthermore,
steady-state kinetic analysis of a variety of Scp1 mutants revealed the
importance of Asp206 in Mg(2+) coordination mediated by a water molecule.
Overall, we captured the snapshots of the phosphoryl transfer reaction at each
stage of Scp1-mediated catalysis. Through structural-based sequence alignment, we
show that the spatial position of the D206 side chain is strictly conserved
throughout HAD family. Our results strongly suggest that Asp206 and its
equivalent residues in other HAD family members play important structural and
possible mechanistic roles.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.375 
PMCID: PMC2868240
PMID: 20222012  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

