
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2010 May;72(2):179-97. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6941.2010.00848.x. Epub 2010 Feb 15.

Prokaryotic functional diversity in different biogeochemical depth zones in tidal
sediments of the Severn Estuary, UK, revealed by stable-isotope probing.

Webster G(1), Rinna J, Roussel EG, Fry JC, Weightman AJ, Parkes RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Wales, UK.

Stable isotope probing of prokaryotic DNA was used to determine active
prokaryotes using (13)C-labelled substrates (glucose, acetate, CO(2)) in sediment
slurries from different biogeochemical zones of the Severn Estuary, UK. Multiple,
low concentrations (5 x 100 microM) of (13)C-substrate additions and short-term
incubations (7 days) were used to minimize changes in the prokaryotic community, 
while achieving significant (13)C-incorporation. Analysis demonstrated clear
metabolic activity within all slurries, although neither the net sulphate removal
nor CH(4) production occurred in the anaerobic sulphate reduction and
methanogenesis zone slurries. Some similarities occurred in the prokaryotic
populations that developed in different sediment slurries, particularly in the
aerobic and dysaerobic zone slurries with (13)C-glucose, which were dominated by 
Gammaproteobacteria and Marine Group 1 Archaea, whereas both anaerobic sediment
slurries incubated with (13)C-acetate showed incorporation into
Epsilonproteobacteria and other bacteria, with the sulphate reduction zone slurry
also showing (13)C-acetate utilization by Miscellaneous Crenarchaeotic Group
Archaea. The lower potential energy methanogenesis zone slurries were the only
conditions where no (13)C-incorporation into Archaea occurred, despite Bacteria
being labelled; this was surprising because Archaea have been suggested to be
adapted to low-energy conditions. Overall, our results highlight that uncultured 
prokaryotes play important ecological roles in tidal sediments of the Severn
Estuary, providing new metabolic information for novel groups of Archaea and
suggesting broader metabolisms for largely uncultivated Bacteria.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2010.00848.x 
PMID: 20337706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

