
1. Cell Microbiol. 2010 Sep 1;12(9):1272-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2010.01467.x. 
Epub 2010 Mar 25.

The Legionella pneumophila F-box protein Lpp2082 (AnkB) modulates ubiquitination 
of the host protein parvin B and promotes intracellular replication.

Lomma M(1), Dervins-Ravault D, Rolando M, Nora T, Newton HJ, Sansom FM, Sahr T,
Gomez-Valero L, Jules M, Hartland EL, Buchrieser C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Biologie des Bactéries Intracellulaires, Departement Genomes
et Génétique, F-75015 Paris, France.

The environmental pathogen Legionella pneumophila encodes three proteins
containing F-box domains and additional protein-protein interaction domains,
reminiscent of eukaryotic SCF ubiquitin-protein ligases. Here we show that the
F-box proteins of L. pneumophila strain Paris are Dot/Icm effectors involved in
the accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins associated with the
Legionella-containing vacuole. Single, double and triple mutants of the F-box
protein encoding genes were impaired in infection of Acanthamoeba castellanii,
THP-1 macrophages and human lung epithelial cells. Lpp2082/AnkB was essential for
infection of the lungs of A/J mice in vivo, and bound Skp1, the interaction
partner of the SCF complex in mammalian cells, similar to AnkB from strain
AA100/130b. Using a yeast two-hybrid screen and co-immunoprecipitation analysis
we identified ParvB a protein present in focal adhesions and in lamellipodia, as 
a target. Immunofluorescence analysis confirmed that ectopically expressed
Lpp2082/AnkB colocalized with ParvB at the periphery of lamellipodia.
Unexpectedly, ubiquitination tests revealed that Lpp2082/AnkB diminishes
endogenous ubiquitination of ParvB. Based on these results we propose that L.
pneumophila modulates ubiquitination of ParvB by competing with eukaryotic E3
ligases for the specific protein-protein interaction site of ParvB, thereby
revealing a new mechanism by which L. pneumophila may employ translocated
effector proteins to promote bacterial survival.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2010.01467.x 
PMID: 20345489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

