
1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009 Nov;297(5):G999-G1008.

The angiogenic effect of probiotic Bacillus polyfermenticus on human intestinal
microvascular endothelial cells is mediated by IL-8.

Im E(1), Choi YJ, Kim CH, Fiocchi C, Pothoulakis C, Rhee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Center, Division of Digestive Diseases, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California, USA. eim@mednet.ucla.edu

Angiogenesis is required for wound healing and repair, but dysregulated
angiogenesis is involved in gastrointestinal inflammation. Bacillus
polyfermenticus (B.P.) is a probiotic bacterium clinically used for a variety of 
intestinal disorders in East Asia. Here we investigated the effect of B.P. on
angiogenesis of human intestinal microvascular endothelial cells (HIMECs) and
wound healing in intestinal mucosa. Exposure of HIMECs to the conditioned medium 
of B.P. cultures (B.P. CM) increased cell migration, permeability, and tube
formation. Production of the proangiogenic cytokine IL-8 was increased by B.P.
CM, and neutralizing antibodies against IL-8 or IL-8 receptor CXCR2 reduced tube 
formation as well as actin stress fiber formation. B.P. CM also increased
NF-kappaB activation, and inhibitors of NF-kappaB suppressed B.P. CM-induced tube
formation and IL-8 production. Furthermore, B.P. facilitated recovery of mice
from colitis as shown by increased body weight and reduced rectal bleeding and
histological severity. B.P. also increased angiogenesis and mouse IL-8 production
in the mucosal layer. Collectively, these results show that B.P. increases
angiogenesis of HIMECs in a NF-kappaB/IL-8/CXCR2-dependent manner. Moreover, B.P.
promotes angiogenesis in the mucosa during recovery of mice from colitis,
suggesting that this probiotic may be clinically used to facilitate intestinal
wound healing.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00204.2009 
PMCID: PMC2777460
PMID: 20501448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

