
1. Scand J Immunol. 2010 Jun;71(6):413-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2010.02395.x.

Identification of the amino acid sequence motif for conventional PKC-mediated
regulation of NKp46 surface expression.

Kim HR(1), Chwae YJ, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and BK21 Project for the School of Medical
Sciences, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

A number of surface receptors expressed on NK cells are related to the regulation
of NK cell activity and characterized by either inhibitory or activating
properties. Natural cytotoxicity receptors (NCR) are one major family of
activating receptors involved in NK cytotoxicity. The three family members of NCR
are NKp46, NKp44, and NKp30. The surface density of these receptors might vary
with the activation state of NK cells, and their density may directly correlate
with their natural cytotoxicity. In this study, we investigated the regulation of
NKp46 expression and determined the amino acid sequence motif for protein kinase 
C (PKC)-mediated regulation of its surface expression. We produced stable cell
lines expressing full-length NKp46 and investigated the change in expression
after PMA or IL-2 treatment using flow cytometry, RT-PCR, and immunoblotting
methods. Expression of NKp46 on Jurkat T-cell transfectants appeared to be
induced by PMA treatment until 8-h post-treatment and then gradually decreased
afterwards to levels that were less than those measured at pretreatment. Parallel
to surface expression of NKp46, total NKp46 protein expression also appeared to
fluctuate after PMA treatment, but the expression of mRNA transcripts was not
significantly affected. Experiments with mutant NKp46-expressing stable cell
lines demonstrated that Ser288 might be critical for the surface expression of
NKp46 and the PKC-mediated regulation of NKp46 expression. However, NKp46 surface
expression was not influenced by IL-2 in stable cell lines expressing wild-type
and mutant NKp46.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2010.02395.x 
PMID: 20500693  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

