
1. Isotopes Environ Health Stud. 2010 Dec;46(4):444-53. doi:
10.1080/10256016.2010.536230.

Experimental investigation of sulphur isotope partitioning during outgassing of
hydrogen sulphide from diluted aqueous solutions and seawater.

Baune C(1), Bottcher ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biogeochemistry, Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology,
Bremen, Germany.

The diffusion of hydrogen sulphide across the sediment-water interface and
subsequent liberation to the atmosphere may occur in iron-deficient coastal
marine environments with enhanced microbial activity in surface sediments and
corresponding accumulation of dissolved H2S in near-surface pore waters. The
involvement of analogue processes in periods of global mass extinctions during
Earth's history (e.g. at the Permian-Triassic boundary) is currently in
discussion [L.R. Kump, A. Pavlov, and M. Arthur,Massive Release of Hydrogen
Sulfide to the Surface Ocean and Atmosphere During Intervals of Oceanic Anoxia,
Geology 33, 397 (2005)]. The outgassing of H₂S is associated with a fractionation
of the stable sulphur isotopes, which has so far only been investigated
experimentally at selected acidic and neutral pH values, and no experiments with 
seawater had been carried out. In this communication, we report on sulphur
isotope fractionation that takes place during the experimental degassing of H₂S
from aqueous solution by an inert gas (N₂) at 21 °C. Experiments were conducted
in the pH range between 2.6 and 10.8, corresponding to the dominance fields of
dissolved hydrogen sulphide (H₂S(aq)), bisulphide (HS-(aq)), and mixtures of both
sulphide species. Overall isotope enrichment factors between -1.6 and +3.0‰ were 
observed, with the residual dissolved sulphide being enriched or depleted in ³⁴S 
compared to the liberated H₂S at low and high pH values, respectively. The
difference in the low and high pH isotope fractionation effects can be explained 
by isotope exchange between H₂S(aq) and HS-(aq) [B. Fry, H. Gest, and J.M. Hayes,
Sulfur Isotope Effects Associated with Protonation of HS- and Volatilization of
H₂S, Chem. Geol. (Isot. Geosci. Sec.) 58, 253 (1986); R. Geßler and K. von
Gehlen, Investigation of Sulfur Isotope Fractionation Between H2S Gas and Aqueous
Solutions, Fresenius J. Anal. Chem. 324, 130 (1986)] followed by the subsequent
transfer of H₂S(aq) to the gaseous phase. The assumption of pure physical
outgassing of H₂S(aq) at low pH values leads to an isotope enrichment factor of
-0.9 ± 0.4‰ (n = 14) which is caused by the combined differences in dehydration
and diffusion coefficients of H₂³²S(aq) and H₂³⁴S(aq). In the pH range of natural
surface and shallow pore waters, ³⁴S will be equal to or enriched in the gaseous 
phase compared to the aqueous solution, therefore creating no or a slight
enrichment of ³²S in the aqueous solution. Experiments in seawater solution
showed no significant influence of increased ionic strength and changed
corresponding aqueous speciation on sulphur isotope effects.

DOI: 10.1080/10256016.2010.536230 
PMID: 21154004  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

