
1. J Nutr. 2011 May;141(5):978-84. doi: 10.3945/jn.110.136440. Epub 2011 Mar 23.

Probiotic Lactobacillus casei Shirota supplementation does not modulate immunity 
in healthy men with reduced natural killer cell activity.

Seifert S(1), Bub A, Franz CM, Watzl B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biochemistry of Nutrition, Max Rubner-Institut,
Federal Research Institute of Nutrition and Food, Karlsruhe 76131, Germany.

Oral intake of probiotic bacteria may beneficially modulate functions of NK
cells. In healthy individuals, contradictory results exist as to whether NK cell 
functions can be modulated by probiotic bacteria. Therefore, the primary
objective of our randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial was to
determine the effects of the probiotic strain Lactobacillus casei Shirota (LcS)
on the activity of NK cells in healthy men who had been preselected for a reduced
lytic function of their NK cells. Study participants (n = 68) were supplemented
for 4 wk with a probiotic drink providing 1.95 Ã— 10(10) CFU LcS/d or with a
similar milk drink without probiotic additive. A run-in period of 2 wk preceded
the probiotic supplementation followed by a 2-wk follow-up phase without the
probiotic or control drink. Changes in the relative proportions of NK cells and
other leukocytes as well as multiple functional measurements were determined
longitudinally at baseline, after the 4-wk supplementation, and at the end of the
follow-up. The probiotic supplementation had no significant effect on NK cell
numbers and function or on phagocytosis, respiratory burst, or cytokine secretion
of peripheral blood mononuclear cells. In conclusion, 4 wk of supplementation
with LcS does not increase NK cell activity in healthy men with a reduced NK cell
lytic activity. However, other doses of LcS, time of intervention, or
differences, e.g. in the background diet, may result in a different outcome.

DOI: 10.3945/jn.110.136440 
PMID: 21430250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

