
1. Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Apr;89(2):130-7. doi: 10.1139/o10-149.

Insights into the biochemistry of the ubiquitous NhaP family of cation/H+
antiporters.

Resch CT(1), Winogrodzki JL, HÃ¤se CC, Dibrov P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.

Na+/H+ antiporters are integral membrane proteins that exchange Na+ for H+ across
the cytoplasmic or organellar membranes of virtually all living cells. They are
essential for control of cellular pH, volume homeostasis, and regulation of Na+
levels. Na+/H+ antiporters have become increasingly characterized and are now
becoming important drug targets. The recently identified NhaP family of Na+/H+
antiporters, from the CPA1 superfamily, contains proteins with a surprisingly
broad collective range of transported cations, exchanging protons for alkali
cations such as Na+, Li+, K+, or Rb+ as well as for Ca2+ and, possibly, NH4+.
Questions about ion selectivity and the physiological impact of each particular
NhaP antiporter are far from trivial. For example, Vc-NhaP2 from Vibrio cholerae 
has recently been shown to function in vivo as a specific K+/H+ antiporter while 
retaining the ability to exchange H+ for Na+ and bind (but not exchange with H+) 
Li+ in a competitive manner. These and other findings reviewed in this
communication make antiporters of the NhaP type attractive systems to study
intimate molecular mechanisms of cation exchange. In an evolutionary perspective,
the NhaP family seems to be a phylogenetic entity undergoing active divergent
evolution. In this minireview, to rationalize peculiarities of the cation
specificity in the NhaP family, the "size-exclusion principle" and the idea of
"ligand shading" are discussed.

DOI: 10.1139/o10-149 
PMID: 21455265  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

