
1. Microbes Environ. 2008;23(1):81-8.

Distribution and Population of Free-Living Cells Related to Endosymbiont A
Harbored in Oligobrachia mashikoi (a Siboglinid Polychaete) Inhabiting Tsukumo
Bay.

Aida M(1), Kanemori M, Kubota N, Matada M, Sasayama Y, Fukumori Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology,
Kanazawa University.

Beard worms (Siboglinidae, Polychaeta), which lack a mouth and a digestive tract,
harbor thioautotrophic or methanotrophic bacteria in special cells called
bacteriocytes. These endosymbionts have been considered to be trapped at a
specific larval stage from the environment. Although many species of beard worms 
have been discovered in various abyssal seas, Oligobrachia mashikoi inhabits
Tsukumo Bay which is only 25 m deep. At least seven types of endosymbionts
(endosymbiont A-G) have been distinguished in O. mashikoi. In this study, we
investigated the distribution pattern of free-living cells related to the major
endosymbiont (endosymbiont A) in Tsukumo Bay by quantitative PCR targeting the
16S rRNA gene. The endosymbiont A-related phylotype was detected in almost all
sediment samples collected from 23 points in Tsukumo Bay, ranging in copy number 
of the 16S rRNA gene from 2.22×10(4) to 1.42×10(6) copies per gram of
dry-sediment. Furthermore, the free-living cells made up less than 9% of the
total eubacterial population, suggesting that the O. mashikoi larvae precisely
select candidates for their endosymbiont from bacterial flora in the environment.
This is the first report on the ecological characterization of a free-living
bacterium related to the endosymbiont of the siboglinid polychaete, O. mashikoi.

DOI: 10.1264/jsme2.23.81 
PMID: 21558692 

