
1. Microb Pathog. 2011 Sep;51(3):121-32. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2011.04.010. Epub
2011 May 7.

Tn5AraOut mutagenesis for the identification of Yersinia pestis genes involved in
resistance towards cationic antimicrobial peptides.

Guo J(1), Nair MK, Galván EM, Liu SL, Schifferli DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing
100191, China. jitaoguo@bjmu.edu.cn

Bacterial pathogens display a variety of protection mechanisms against the
inhibitory and lethal effects of host cationic antimicrobial peptides (CAMPs). To
identify Yersinia pestis genes involved in CAMP resistance, libraries of DSY101
(KIM6 caf1 pla psa) minitransposon Tn5AraOut mutants were selected at 37°C for
resistance to the model CAMPs polymyxin B or protamine. This approach targeted
genes that needed to be repressed (null mutations) or induced (upstream P(BAD)
insertions) for the detection of CAMP resistance, and predictably for improved
pathogen fitness in mammalian hosts. Ten mutants demonstrated increased
resistance to polymyxin B or protamine, with the mapped mutations pointing
towards genes suspected to participate in modifying membrane components, genes
encoding transport proteins or enzymes, or the regulator of a ferrous iron uptake
system (feoC). Not all the mutants were resistant to both CAMPs used for
selection. None of the polymyxin B- and only some protamine-resistant mutants,
including the feoC mutant, showed increased resistance to rat bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid (rBALF) known to contain cathelicidin and β-defensin 1. Thus,
findings on bacterial resistance to polymyxin B or protamine don't always apply
to CAMPs of the mammalian innate immune system, such as the ones in rBALF.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2011.04.010 
PMCID: PMC3120914
PMID: 21575704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

