
1. J Bacteriol. 2011 Oct;193(20):5668-74. doi: 10.1128/JB.05394-11. Epub 2011 Aug 5.

Identification and characterization of two adenosine phosphorylase activities in 
Mycobacterium smegmatis.

Buckoreelall K(1), Wilson L, Parker WB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, 1530 Third Avenue South, Birmingham, Alabama 35294, USA.

Purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) is an important enzyme in purine metabolism
and cleaves purine nucleosides to their respective bases. Mycobacterial PNP is
specific for 6-oxopurines and cannot account for the adenosine (Ado) cleavage
activity that has been detected in M. tuberculosis and M. smegmatis cultures. In 
the current work, two Ado cleavage activities were identified from M. smegmatis
cell extracts. The first activity was biochemically determined to be a
phosphorylase that could reversibly catalyze adenosine + phosphate ↔ adenine +
alpha-D-ribose-1-phosphate. Our purification scheme led to a 30-fold purification
of this activity, with the removal of more than 99.9% of total protein. While Ado
was the preferred substrate, inosine and guanosine were also cleaved, with 43%
and 32% of the Ado activity, respectively. Our data suggest that M. smegmatis
expresses two PNPs: a previously described trimeric PNP that can cleave inosine
and guanosine only and a second, novel PNP (Ado-PNP) that can cleave Ado,
inosine, and guanosine. Ado-PNP had an apparent K(m) (K(m) ( app)) of 98 ± 6 μM
(with Ado) and a native molecular mass of 125 ± 7 kDa. The second Ado cleavage
activity was identified as 5'-methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) based on
its biochemical properties and mass spectrometry analysis. Our study marks the
first report of the existence of MTAP in any bacterium. Since human cells do not 
readily convert Ado to Ade, an understanding of the substrate preferences of
these enzymes could lead to the identification of Ado analogs that could be
selectively activated to toxic products in mycobacteria.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.05394-11 
PMCID: PMC3187226
PMID: 21821769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

