
1. Semin Cancer Biol. 2011 Oct;21(4):256-66. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2011.08.001.
Epub 2011 Aug 9.

The MYCN oncogene and differentiation in neuroblastoma.

Westermark UK(1), Wilhelm M, Frenzel A, Henriksson MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Childhood neuroblastoma exhibits a heterogeneous clinical behavior ranging from
low-risk tumors with the ability to spontaneously differentiate and regress, to
high-risk tumors causing the highest number of cancer related deaths in infants. 
Amplification of the MYCN oncogene is one of the few prediction markers for
adverse outcome. This gene encodes the MYCN transcriptional regulator
predominantly expressed in the developing peripheral neural crest. MYCN is vital 
for proliferation, migration and stem cell homeostasis while decreased levels are
associated with terminal neuronal differentiation. Interestingly, high-risk
tumors without MYCN amplification frequently display increased c-MYC expression
and/or activation of MYC signaling pathways. On the other hand, downregulation of
MYCN leads to decreased proliferation and differentiation, emphasizing the
importance of MYC signaling in neuroblastoma biology. Furthermore, expression of 
the neurotrophin receptor TrkA is associated with good prognosis, the ability to 
differentiate and spontaneous regression while expression of the related TrkB
receptor is correlated with bad prognosis and MYCN amplification. Here we discuss
the role of MYCN in neuroblastoma with a special focus on the contribution of
elevated MYCN signaling for an aggressive and undifferentiated phenotype as well 
as the potential of using MYCN as a therapeutic target.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2011.08.001 
PMID: 21849159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

