
1. Immunology. 2011 Oct;134(2):172-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2011.03477.x.

Differential modulating effect of natural killer (NK) T cells on interferon-γ
production and cytotoxic function of NK cells and its relationship with NK
subsets in Chlamydia muridarum infection.

Zhao L(1), Gao X, Peng Y, Joyee AG, Bai H, Wang S, Yang J, Zhao W, Yang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Shandong University School of Medicine,
Jinan, Shandong, China.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells are a newly identified T-cell population with
potential immunomodulatory functions. Several studies have shown modulating
effects of NKT cells activated by α-galactosylceramide, a model antigen, on NK
cell function. We here report a differential modulating effect of NKT cells on
the interferon-γ (IFN-γ) production and cytolytic function of NK cells in a
chlamydial infection model, using NKT-cell-deficient mice and antibody blocking
(anti-CD1d monoclonal antibody) approaches. Our results showed that both NKT and 
NK cells became activated and produced IFN-γ following Chlamydia muridarum
infection in vitro and in vivo. The NK cells in NKT-cell-deficient mice and
CD1d-blocked mice showed decreased CD69 expression, cellular expansion and IFN-γ 
production but surprisingly showed increased cytolytic activity (degranulation)
of immature and more mature NK cell subsets, suggesting an inhibitory role of NKT
cells on NK cell killing activity. The results suggest that NKT cells
preferentially promote IFN-γ production but are inhibitory for the cytotoxic
function of NK cells in this infection model. Furthermore, the differential
modulating effect of NKT cells on the IFN-γ production and cytotoxicity of NK
cells was observed in immature and mature NK cell subsets, although it was more
dramatic in the relatively mature CD11b(high)  CD27(high) NK cell subset. This
finding demonstrates the complexity of innate cell interactions in infection and 
the possible differential impact of NKT cells on the variable functional aspects 
of other cell(s) even in one infection setting.

© 2011 The Authors. Immunology © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2011.03477.x 
PMCID: PMC3194225
PMID: 21896012  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

