
1. Pak J Biol Sci. 2011 Jan 1;14(1):59-63.

Survey of microbial quality of drinking water in rural areas of Kashan-Iran in
second half of 2008.

Miranzadeh MB(1), Heidari M, Mesdaghinia AR, Younesian M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Engineering, School of Public Health,
Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Kashan, Iran.

The objective of the study is surveying microbial quality of drinking water in
Kashan rural areas and determining the rural population that using safe water in 
terms of microbial quality in second-half of 2008. In this cross-sectional study,
microbial quality of water in all rural areas was determined in 3 stages based on
3 parameters as Total Coliforms, Fecal Coliforms and Heterotrophic Plate Count
(HPC). The results of this study illustrates that 100.0, 47.71 and 92.99%
population in under coverage and non under coverage areas of Kashan Rural Water
and Wastewater Company (KRWWC) and all Kashan rural areas, respectively using
safe water in terms of Fecal Coliforms and 98.4, 21.2 and 88.00% population in
under coverage and non under coverage areas of KRWWC rural areas and all Kashan
rural areas, respectively using safe water in terms of Total Coliforms. There is 
also a meaningful difference in microbial quality between under coverage and
non-under coverage rural areas. The results of this study express that the fecal 
contamination in under coverage rural areas is excellent, but there is a bad
condition in non-under coverage areas. Generally, the microbial quality in all
Kashan rural areas is approximately equal to national microbial criteria. Its
been also illustrated that the role of KRWWC in supplying safe drinking water in 
terms of microbial quality for rural population is very important.

DOI: 10.3923/pjbs.2011.59.63 
PMID: 21913499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

