
1. Vox Sang. 2012 Jul;103(1):1-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1423-0410.2011.01572.x. Epub 2011
Dec 8.

Inter-laboratory comparison of different rapid methods for the detection of
bacterial contamination in platelet concentrates.

Vollmer T(1), Hinse D, Schottstedt V, Bux J, Tapernon K, Sibrowski W, Knabbe C,
Dreier J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Laboratoriums- und Transfusionsmedizin, Herz- und Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Universitätsklinik der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bad
Oeynhausen, Germany.

BACKGROUND:   Bacterial contamination of platelet concentrates still represents a
major risk in transfusion medicine, and a variety of screening methods have been 
available to improve the safety of PCs. In the present study, the analytical
quality of three different rapid screening methods (BactiFlow flow cytometry, Pan
Genera Detection Assay, 23S rRNA RT-PCR) was evaluated in an inter-laboratory
comparison in three different German blood services.
METHODS:   Samples were inoculated with different bacteria [Staphylococcus
aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Escherichia coli (two strains), Klebsiella
pneumoniae (two strains), Enterobacter aerogenes (one strain), Serratia
marcescens (one strain)] at different counts (4·5 × 10(3) -4·5 × 10(8)  CFU/ml)
alternating with negative samples in one transfusion facility. Samples were
blinded with a random order for each screening method, shipped to partners and
analysed immediately after receipt with different rapid screening methods.
RESULTS:   The inter-laboratory comparison revealed that the BactiFlow assay and 
23S rRNA RT-PCR-screening detected all samples correctly (positive: 12/12,
negative: 8/8). The Pan Genera Detection Assay test detected only four of the
positive samples. Four of the non-detected positive samples were below the
assay's detection limit. Another four inoculated samples with comparatively high 
bacteria counts were detected false negative (E. coli (two strains): 9·87 × 10(5)
and 2·10 × 10(7)  CFU/ml, respectively, K. pneumoniae: 4·79 × 10(6)  CFU/ml, S.
aureus: 6·03 × 10(5)  CFU/ml). All rapid screening methods revealed no
false-positive results.
CONCLUSIONS:   Both BactiFlow and 23S rRNA RT-PCR demonstrated a high sensitivity
to detecting bacterial contamination in PCs. The Pan Genera Detection Assay had
some shortcomings regarding sensitivity, especially for the detection of
Gram-negative strains.

© 2011 The Author(s). Vox Sanguinis © 2011 International Society of Blood
Transfusion.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1423-0410.2011.01572.x 
PMID: 22150778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

