
1. Biochemistry. 2012 Jan 31;51(4):879-87. doi: 10.1021/bi201768v. Epub 2012 Jan 17.

Essential role of the donor acyl carrier protein in stereoselective chain
translocation to a fully reducing module of the nanchangmycin polyketide
synthase.

Guo X(1), Liu T, Deng Z, Cane DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island
02912-9108, United States.

Incubation of recombinant module 2 of the polyether nanchangmycin synthase
(NANS), carrying an appended thioesterase domain, with the ACP-bound substrate
(2RS)-2-methyl-3-ketobutyryl-NANS_ACP1 (2-ACP1) and methylmalonyl-CoA in the
presence of NADPH gave diastereomerically pure
(2S,4R)-2,4-dimethyl-5-ketohexanoic acid (4a). These results contrast with the
previously reported weak discrimination by NANS module 2+TE between the
enantiomers of the corresponding N-acetylcysteamine-conjugated substrate analogue
(±)-2-methyl-3-ketobutyryl-SNAC (2-SNAC), which resulted in formation of a 5:3
mixture of 4a and its (2S,4S)-diastereomer 4b. Incubation of NANS module 2+TE
with 2-ACP1 in the absence of NADPH gave unreduced
3,5,6-trimethyl-4-hydroxypyrone (3) with a k(cat) of 4.4 ± 0.9 min⁻¹ and a
k(cat)/K(m) of 67 min⁻¹ mM⁻¹, corresponding to a ∼2300-fold increase compared to 
the k(cat)/K(m) for the diffusive substrate 2-SNAC. Covalent tethering of the
2-methyl-3-ketobutyryl thioester substrate to the NANS ACP1 domain derived from
the natural upstream PKS module of the nanchangmycin synthase significantly
enhanced both the stereospecificity and the kinetic efficiency of the sequential 
polyketide chain translocation and condensation reactions catalyzed by the
ketosynthase domain of NANS module 2.

DOI: 10.1021/bi201768v 
PMCID: PMC3273620
PMID: 22229794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

