
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Dec;7(12):e1002452. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002452. Epub
2011 Dec 29.

Inflammasome-dependent pyroptosis and IL-18 protect against Burkholderia
pseudomallei lung infection while IL-1β is deleterious.

Ceballos-Olvera I(1), Sahoo M, Miller MA, Del Barrio L, Re F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Biochemistry, University of
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee, United States of America.

Burkholderia pseudomallei is a Gram-negative bacterium that infects macrophages
and other cell types and causes melioidosis. The interaction of B. pseudomallei
with the inflammasome and the role of pyroptosis, IL-1β, and IL-18 during
melioidosis have not been investigated in detail. Here we show that the Nod-like 
receptors (NLR) NLRP3 and NLRC4 differentially regulate pyroptosis and production
of IL-1β and IL-18 and are critical for inflammasome-mediated resistance to
melioidosis. In vitro production of IL-1β by macrophages or dendritic cells
infected with B. pseudomallei was dependent on NLRC4 and NLRP3 while pyroptosis
required only NLRC4. Mice deficient in the inflammasome components ASC,
caspase-1, NLRC4, and NLRP3, were dramatically more susceptible to lung infection
with B. pseudomallei than WT mice. The heightened susceptibility of Nlrp3⁻/⁻ mice
was due to decreased production of IL-18 and IL-1β. In contrast, Nlrc4⁻/⁻ mice
produced IL-1β and IL-18 in higher amount than WT mice and their high
susceptibility was due to decreased pyroptosis and consequently higher bacterial 
burdens. Analyses of IL-18-deficient mice revealed that IL-18 is essential for
survival primarily because of its ability to induce IFNγ production. In contrast,
studies using IL-1RI-deficient mice or WT mice treated with either IL-1β or IL-1 
receptor agonist revealed that IL-1β has deleterious effects during melioidosis. 
The detrimental role of IL-1β appeared to be due, in part, to excessive
recruitment of neutrophils to the lung. Because neutrophils do not express NLRC4 
and therefore fail to undergo pyroptosis, they may be permissive to B.
pseudomallei intracellular growth. Administration of neutrophil-recruitment
inhibitors IL-1ra or the CXCR2 neutrophil chemokine receptor antagonist
antileukinate protected Nlrc4⁻/⁻ mice from lethal doses of B. pseudomallei and
decreased systemic dissemination of bacteria. Thus, the NLRP3 and NLRC4
inflammasomes have non-redundant protective roles in melioidosis: NLRC4 regulates
pyroptosis while NLRP3 regulates production of protective IL-18 and deleterious
IL-1β.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002452 
PMCID: PMC3248555
PMID: 22241982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

