
1. J Immunol. 2012 Mar 1;188(5):2254-65. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103049. Epub 2012
Feb 1.

Structural and functional characterization of a novel nonglycosidic type I NKT
agonist with immunomodulatory properties.

Kerzerho J(1), Yu ED, Barra CM, Alari-Pahissa E, Girardi E, Harrak Y, Lauzurica
P, Llebaria A, Zajonc DM, Akbari O, Castaño AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2012 Oct 15;189(8):4194. Alari-Pahisa, Elisenda [corrected to
Alari-Pahissa, Elisenda].

Activation of type I NKT (iNKT) cells by CD1d-presented agonists is a potent
immunotherapeutic tool. α-Galactosylceramide (α-GalCer) is the prototypic
agonist, but its excessive potency with simultaneous production of both pro- and 
anti-inflammatory cytokines hampers its potential therapeutic use. In search for 
novel agonists, we have analyzed the structure and function of HS44, a synthetic 
aminocyclitolic ceramide analog designed to avoid unrestrained iNKT cell
activation. HS44 is a weaker agonist compared with α-GalCer in vitro, although in
vivo it induces robust IFN-γ production, and highly reduced but still functional 
Th2 response. The characteristic cytokine storm produced upon α-GalCer activation
was not induced. Consequently, HS44 induced a very efficient iNKT cell-dependent 
antitumoral response in B16 animal model. In addition, intranasal administration 
showed the capacity to induce lung inflammation and airway hyperreactivity, a
cardinal asthma feature. Thus, HS44 is able to elicit functional Th1 or Th2
responses. Structural studies show that HS44 binds to CD1d with the same
conformation as α-GalCer. The TCR binds to HS44 similarly as α-GalCer, but forms 
less contacts, thus explaining its weaker TCR affinity and, consequently, its
weaker recognition by iNKT cells. The ability of this compound to activate an
efficient, but not massive, tailored functional immune response makes it an
attractive reagent for immune manipulation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103049 
PMCID: PMC3288653
PMID: 22301545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

