
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2012 Mar;93(6):2603-14. doi:
10.1007/s00253-012-3924-4. Epub 2012 Feb 12.

Ion mobility spectrometry for microbial volatile organic compounds: a new
identification tool for human pathogenic bacteria.

Jünger M(1), Vautz W, Kuhns M, Hofmann L, Ulbricht S, Baumbach JI, Quintel M,
Perl T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Emergency and Intensive Care Medicine,
University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
melanie.juenger@med.uni-goettingen.de

Presently, 2 to 4 days elapse between sampling at infection suspicion and result 
of microbial diagnostics. This delay for the identification of pathogens causes
quite often a late and/or inappropriate initiation of therapy for patients
suffering from infections. Bad outcome and high hospitalization costs are the
consequences of these currently existing limited pathogen identification
possibilities. For this reason, we aimed to apply the innovative method
multi-capillary column-ion mobility spectrometry (MCC-IMS) for a fast
identification of human pathogenic bacteria by determination of their
characteristic volatile metabolomes. We determined volatile organic compound
(VOC) patterns in headspace of 15 human pathogenic bacteria, which were grown for
24 h on Columbia blood agar plates. Besides MCC-IMS determination, we also used
thermal desorption-gas chromatography-mass spectrometry measurements to confirm
and evaluate obtained MCC-IMS data and if possible to assign volatile compounds
to unknown MCC-IMS signals. Up to 21 specific signals have been determined by
MCC-IMS for Proteus mirabilis possessing the most VOCs of all investigated
strains. Of particular importance is the result that all investigated strains
showed different VOC patterns by MCC-IMS using positive and negative ion mode for
every single strain. Thus, the discrimination of investigated bacteria is
possible by detection of their volatile organic compounds in the chosen
experimental setup with the fast and cost-effective method MCC-IMS. In a hospital
routine, this method could enable the identification of pathogens already after
24 h with the consequence that a specific therapy could be initiated
significantly earlier.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-012-3924-4 
PMCID: PMC3605498
PMID: 22327321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

