
1. J Fish Dis. 2012 Jul;35(7):505-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2012.01383.x. Epub
2012 Jun 6.

Peracetic acid is effective for controlling fungus on channel catfish eggs.

Straus DL(1), Meinelt T, Farmer BD, Mitchell AJ.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Harry K. Dupree
- Stuttgart National Aquaculture Research Center, Stuttgart, AR 72160, USA.
dave.straus@ars.usda.gov

Peracetic acid (PAA) is a relatively new compound suggested for use to treat
pathogens in aquaculture. It is approved for use in Europe, but not in the United
States. This study determined the effectiveness of PAA for fungus control on
channel catfish, Ictalurus punctatus (Rafinesque), eggs. The study consisted of
five PAA concentrations (2.5, 5, 10, 15 and 20mgL(-1) ) and an untreated control 
in a flow-through system. A single spawn was used for each replication (Nâ€ƒ=4).
Eggs were treated twice daily until the embryos developed eyes. When hatching was
complete for all viable eggs, fry were counted to determine the percent survival 
in each treatment. Fungal growth was severe in the untreated controls resulting
in 11% survival. Treatments of 2.5, 5 and 10mgL(-1) PAA were significantly
different from the controls (P<0.05). The highest percent survival of hatched fry
was with 5mgL(-1) PAA administered twice daily; the 2.5mgL(-1) PAA treatment had 
slightly less survival, but gives a higher margin of safety in case of treatment 
error. Very little fungus was present in treatments receiving 2.5mgL(-1) PAA or
higher, and concentrations of 15 and 20mgL(-1) PAA were toxic to the eggs. The
mean survivals in the 0, 2.5, 5, 10, 15 and 20mgL(-1) PAA treatments were 11%,
60%, 63%, 62%, 32% and 0%, respectively. Therefore, PAA may be a compound that
merits further investigations regarding its use in U.S. aquaculture.

Published 2012. This article is a US Government work and is in the public domain 
in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2012.01383.x 
PMID: 22671856  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

