
1. Vet Microbiol. 2013 Feb 22;162(1):127-35. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.08.015. Epub
2012 Aug 29.

Prevalence of Flavobacterium psychrophilum bacterial cells in farmed rainbow
trout: characterization of metallothionein A and interleukin1-β genes as markers 
overexpressed in spleen and kidney of diseased fish.

Orieux N(1), Douet DG, Le Hénaff M, Bourdineaud JP.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Bordeaux, CNRS UMR Environnements et Paléoenvironnements
Océaniques, Station Marine d'Arcachon, Place du Dr. Peyneau, F-33120 Arcachon
Cedex, France.

The aim of the present study was to assess the prevalence of the flavobacteria
within farmed trout and to quantify their bacterial burden. A total of 61 fish
were sampled from seven farms, and were distributed in two groups: (1) visibly
diseased fish suffering from the rainbow trout fry syndrome or the bacterial cold
water disease caused by the bacteria Flavobacterium psychrophilum and (2)
normally appearing fish. F. psychrophilum cells were titered by qPCR, targeting a
specific area of the 16S rRNA gene in skin, muscle, gills, liver, spleen and
kidney from all fish. The pathogen was detected in these organs whatever the
health status, with titers ranging from 10(4) to 6 × 10(7)bacteria/g of tissue in
normally appearing fish, thus showing they were bacterial carriers. Two organs
allowed differentiation between diseased and normally appearing fish: spleen and 
kidney, with titers ranging from 10(6) to 10(7)bacteria/g of tissue in normally
appearing fish vs 10(11) to 10(12)bacteria/g of tissue in diseased fish. No
relationship was found between immunoglobulin M-like titer in plasma and health
status. Gene expression analysis in fish organs revealed two genes that were
markers of the bacterial infection: mt-a and il-1β genes encoding the
metallothionein A and the interleukin1-β, respectively. These genes were both
over-expressed in gills, liver, spleen and kidney of diseased fish. Four genes
encoding immunity markers were down-regulated in spleen (a key organ implicated
in immunity) of diseased fish: tgf-β, cd8-α, mhc2-β and igt, suggesting a
weakened immune system in diseased fish.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.08.015 
PMID: 22989515  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

