
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Apr;97(7):3109-17. doi:
10.1007/s00253-012-4509-y. Epub 2012 Oct 26.

Fermentation of xylo-oligosaccharides by Bifidobacterium adolescentis DSMZ 18350:
kinetics, metabolism, and β-xylosidase activities.

Amaretti A(1), Bernardi T, Leonardi A, Raimondi S, Zanoni S, Rossi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, via Campi
183, 41100, Modena, Italy.

Xylo-oligosaccharides (XOS) are sugar oligomers of β-1,4-linked xylopyranosyl
moieties which exert bifidogenic effect and are increasingly used as prebiotics. 
The kinetics and the metabolism of Bifidobacterium adolescentis DSMZ 18350
growing on XOS and xylose were investigated. The growth rate was higher on XOS,
but greater biomass yield was attained on xylose. Unlike other prebiotics, XOS
oligomers were utilized simultaneously, regardless of their chain length.
Throughout XOS utilization, xylose concentration slightly increased, being not
neatly consumed and remaining unfermented. During growth on XOS, β-xylosidase
activity was present in the cytosol, but it occurred in the supernatant as well. 
A β-1,4-xylolytic enzyme was purified from the supernatant of XOS cultures. The
enzyme, a homotetramer of a 39-kDa single protein, was capable of complete XOS
hydrolysis and exhibited maximum activity at pH 6.0 and 55 °C. Based on the
molecular weight, the protein can be ascribable to the product of the gene
BAD_1527, the activity of which has been inferred as an endo-β-1,4-xylanase, but 
has not been characterized so far. This β-1,4-xylolytic enzyme, found to be
active in the cultural supernatant, gives a reason for the never explained
accumulation of the monosaccharides in the media of bifidobacterial cultures
growing on XOS, without excluding the major role of the intracellular hydrolysis 
of the imported oligomers.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-012-4509-y 
PMID: 23099913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

