
1. Oncogene. 2013 Oct;32(40):4845-53. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.482. Epub 2012 Oct 29.

DDX5 is a positive regulator of oncogenic NOTCH1 signaling in T cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Lin S(1), Tian L, Shen H, Gu Y, Li JL, Chen Z, Sun X, You MJ, Wu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Shands Cancer Center,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.

Notch signaling is a highly conserved cell-cell communication pathway regulating 
normal development and tissue homeostasis. Aberrant Notch signaling represents an
important oncogenic mechanism for T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), an
aggressive subset of the most common malignant childhood cancer ALL. Therefore,
understanding the molecular regulation of Notch signaling is critical to identify
new approaches to block aberrant Notch oncogenic activity. The family of three
MAML transcriptional coactivators is crucial for Notch signaling activation. The 
prototypic member MAML1 is the major coactivator that regulates Notch oncogenic
activities in leukemic cells. However, the molecular basis underlying MAML1
coactivator function that contributes to Notch signaling remains unclear. In this
study, we performed proteomic studies and identified DDX5, an ATP-dependent
DEAD-box RNA helicase, as a component of the MAML1 protein complex. DDX5
interacts with MAML1 in vitro and in vivo, and is associated with the endogenous 
NOTCH1 transcription activation complex in human T-ALL leukemic cells.
Lentivirus-mediated short-hairpin RNA knock-down of DDX5 resulted in decreased
expression of Notch target genes, reduced cell proliferation and increased
apoptosis in cultured human leukemic cells with constitutive activation of Notch 
signaling. Also, DDX5 depletion inhibited the growth of human leukemia xenograft 
in nude mice. Moreover, DDX5 is highly expressed in primary human T-ALL leukemic 
cells based on the analyses of Oncomine and GEO databases, and
Immunohistochemical staining. Our overall findings revealed a critical role of
DDX5 in promoting efficient Notch-mediated transcription in leukemic cells,
suggesting that DDX5 might be critical for NOTCH1-mediated T-ALL pathogenesis and
thus is a potential new target for modulating the Notch signaling in leukemia.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2012.482 
PMCID: PMC4616007
PMID: 23108395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

