
1. Inflammation. 2013 Jun;36(3):643-50. doi: 10.1007/s10753-012-9586-7.

The proinflammatory cytokine, IL-6, and its interference with bFGF signaling and 
PSMA in prostate cancer cells.

Ben Jemaa A(1), Sallami S, Ramarli D, Colombatti M, Oueslati R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Immunology and Microbiology Environmental and Carcinogenesis-IMEC,
Faculty of Sciences of Bizerte, University of Carthage, 7021 Bizerte, Zarzouna,
Tunisia.

The aim of the present work was to study the expression of the proinflammatory
cytokine, interleukin-6 (IL-6), mediated by bFGF signaling and its possible
crosstalk with prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) in LNCaP and PC3-PSMA
prostate cancer cell lines. PC3 cells stably transfected with PSMA gene were used
for restoring PSMA expression. LNCaP and PC3-PSMA cells were exposed to 10 ng/mL 
of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). IL-6 production was measured by ELISA
assay, and levels of PSMA expression were assessed by flow cytometry. AKT,
ERK1/2, and p38 phosphorylation were detected by Western blot. bFGF enhances IL-6
production in LNCaP and PC3-PSMA prostate cancer cells. The effect of bFGF on
stimulating IL-6 secretion was greater in LNCaP than in PC3-PSMA cells. In the
presence of bFGF, PSMA expression was activated after 4 days of treatment in
LNCaP and PC3-PSMA cells. This activation was not maintained after long term of
treatment in both metastatic cell lines. Solely MAPKs pathways (ERK1/2 and p38)
were activated after bFGF stimulation in both metastatic cell lines, whereas AKT 
did not show any activation. The interference of the proinflammatory cytokine,
IL-6, with bFGF signaling and PSMA, should be of high clinical relevance in the
treatment of metastatic prostate cancer. In developing novel therapeutic
modalities targeting IL-6, significant attention should be given to PSMA and its 
inactivation to fight against prostate cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s10753-012-9586-7 
PMID: 23250823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

