
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Feb 19;110(8):2963-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1300200110. Epub 2013 Feb 4.

Human CD1d knock-in mouse model demonstrates potent antitumor potential of human 
CD1d-restricted invariant natural killer T cells.

Wen X(1), Rao P, Carreño LJ, Kim S, Lawrenczyk A, Porcelli SA, Cresswell P, Yuan 
W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Despite a high degree of conservation, subtle but important differences exist
between the CD1d antigen presentation pathways of humans and mice. These
differences may account for the minimal success of natural killer T (NKT)
cell-based antitumor therapies in human clinical trials, which contrast strongly 
with the powerful antitumor effects in conventional mouse models. To develop an
accurate model for in vivo human CD1d (hCD1d) antigen presentation, we have
generated a hCD1d knock-in (hCD1d-KI) mouse. In these mice, hCD1d is expressed in
a native tissue distribution pattern and supports NKT cell development. Reduced
numbers of invariant NKT (iNKT) cells were observed, but at an abundance
comparable to that in most normal humans. These iNKT cells predominantly
expressed mouse Vβ8, the homolog of human Vβ11, and phenotypically resembled
human iNKT cells in their reduced expression of CD4. Importantly, iNKT cells in
hCD1d knock-in mice exert a potent antitumor function in a melanoma challenge
model. Our results show that replacement of mCD1d by hCD1d can select a
population of functional iNKT cells closely resembling human iNKT cells. These
hCD1d knock-in mice will allow more accurate in vivo modeling of human iNKT cell 
responses and will facilitate the preclinical assessment of iNKT cell-targeted
antitumor therapies.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1300200110 
PMCID: PMC3581944
PMID: 23382238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

