
1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2013 Aug;45(6):1399-405. doi: 10.1007/s11250-013-0377-4.
Epub 2013 Feb 17.

Virulence profiles of enterotoxigenic, shiga toxin and enteroaggregative
Escherichia coli in South African pigs.

Mohlatlole RP(1), Madoroba E, Muchadeyi FC, Chimonyo M, Kanengoni AT, Dzomba EF.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Genetics, School of Life Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal, 
Private Bag X01, Scottsville, 3209, Pietermaritzburg, South Africa.

Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) and shiga toxin E. coli (STEC) are
important causes of colibacillosis in piglets. Recently, enteroaggregative E.
coli heat-stable enterotoxin 1 (EAST-1) has been implicated in pig diarrhoea.
This study investigated the prevalence of enterotoxin [heat-labile toxins (LT),
heat-stable toxin a (STa), heat-stable toxin b (STb)], shiga toxins (Stx1, Stx2, 
Stx2e), enteroaggregative heat-stable E. coli (EAST-1), associated fimbriae (F4, 
F5, F6, F41, F18ab, F18ac) and non-fimbrial adhesins [adhesin involved in diffuse
adherence 1 (AIDA-1), attaching and effacing factor, porcine attaching- and
effacing-associated factor] in South African pigs. A total of 263 E. coli strains
were isolated from Landrace (n = 24), Large White (n = 126), Duroc (n = 28) and
indigenous (n = 85) breeds of piglets aged between 9 and 136 days. PCR was used
in the analysis. Virulent genes were detected in 40.3% of the isolates, of which 
18.6, 0.4 and 17.5% were classified as ETEC, STEC and enteroaggregative E. coli
(EAEC), respectively. Individual genes were found in the following proportions:
STb (19.01%), LT (0.4%), STa (3.4%), St2xe (1.1%) and EAST-1 (20.2%) toxins. None
of the tested fimbriae were detected in ETEC and STEC isolates. About one third
of the ETEC and STEC isolates was tested negative for both fimbrial and
non-fimbrial adhesins. Twenty-five pathotypes from ETEC-, EAEC- and STEC-positive
strains were identified. Pathotypes EAST-1 (30.2%), STb (13.2%) and STb/AIDA-1
(10.4%) were most prevalent. The study provided insight on possible causes of
colibacillosis in South African pigs.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-013-0377-4 
PMID: 23417826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

