
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2013 Aug;35(2):553-63. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.05.021.
Epub 2013 Jun 6.

Molecular cloning and expression analysis of liver-expressed antimicrobial
peptide 1 (LEAP-1) and LEAP-2 genes in the blunt snout bream (Megalobrama
amblycephala).

Liang T(1), Ji W, Zhang GR, Wei KJ, Feng K, Wang WM, Zou GW.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Animal Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture of
China, College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, PR
China.

Liver-expressed antimicrobial peptide 1 (LEAP-1) and LEAP-2 are widespread in
fish and extremely important components of the host innate immune system. In this
study, full-length cDNAs of LEAP-1 and LEAP-2 were cloned and sequenced from
blunt snout bream, Megalobrama amblycephala. The open reading frames (ORF) of
LEAP-1 and LEAP-2 genes encode putative peptides of 94 and 92 amino acids, which 
possess eight and four conserved cysteine residues, respectively. The homologous 
identities of deduced amino acid sequences show that the LEAP-1 and LEAP-2 of
blunt snout bream share considerable similarity with those of grass carp. The
mRNA expressions of LEAP-1 and LEAP-2 were detectable at different early
developmental stages of blunt snout bream and varied with embryonic and larval
growth. LEAP-1 and LEAP-2 were expressed in a wide range of adult tissues, with
the highest expression levels in the liver and midgut, respectively. Bacterial
challenge experiments showed that the levels of LEAP-1 and LEAP-2 mRNA expression
were up-regulated in the liver, spleen, gill and brain of juvenile blunt snout
bream. These results indicate that the LEAP-1 and LEAP-2 may play important roles
in early development of embryos and fry, and may contribute to the defense
against the pathogenic bacterial invasion. This study will further our
understanding of the function of LEAP-1 and LEAP-2 and the molecular mechanism of
innate immunity in teleosts.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.05.021 
PMID: 23748217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

