
1. Microb Cell Fact. 2013 Jun 24;12:60. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-12-60.

Knock-in/Knock-out (KIKO) vectors for rapid integration of large DNA sequences,
including whole metabolic pathways, onto the Escherichia coli chromosome at
well-characterised loci.

Sabri S(1), Steen JA, Bongers M, Nielsen LK, Vickers CE.

Author information: 
(1)Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Metabolic engineering projects often require integration of multiple 
genes in order to control the desired phenotype. However, this often requires
iterative rounds of engineering because many current insertion approaches are
limited by the size of the DNA that can be transferred onto the chromosome.
Consequently, construction of highly engineered strains is very time-consuming. A
lack of well-characterised insertion loci is also problematic.
RESULTS: A series of knock-in/knock-out (KIKO) vectors was constructed for
integration of large DNA sequences onto the E. coli chromosome at well-defined
loci. The KIKO plasmids target three nonessential genes/operons as insertion
sites: arsB (an arsenite transporter); lacZ (β-galactosidase); and rbsA-rbsR (a
ribose metabolism operon). Two homologous 'arms' target each insertion locus;
insertion is mediated by λ Red recombinase through these arms. Between the arms
is a multiple cloning site for the introduction of exogenous sequences and an
antibiotic resistance marker (either chloramphenicol or kanamycin) for selection 
of positive recombinants. The resistance marker can subsequently be removed by
flippase-mediated recombination. The insertion cassette is flanked by hairpin
loops to isolate it from the effects of external transcription at the integration
locus. To characterize each target locus, a xylanase reporter gene (xynA) was
integrated onto the chromosomes of E. coli strains W and K-12 using the KIKO
vectors. Expression levels varied between loci, with the arsB locus consistently 
showing the highest level of expression. To demonstrate the simultaneous use of
all three loci in one strain, xynA, green fluorescent protein (gfp) and a sucrose
catabolic operon (cscAKB) were introduced into lacZ, arsB and rbsAR respectively,
and shown to be functional.
CONCLUSIONS: The KIKO plasmids are a useful tool for efficient integration of
large DNA fragments (including multiple genes and pathways) into E. coli.
Chromosomal insertion provides stable expression without the need for continuous 
antibiotic selection. Three non-essential loci have been characterised as
insertion loci; combinatorial insertion at all three loci can be performed in one
strain. The largest insertion at a single site described here was 5.4 kb; we have
used this method in other studies to insert a total of 7.3 kb at one locus and
11.3 kb across two loci. These vectors are particularly useful for integration of
multigene cassettes for metabolic engineering applications.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-12-60 
PMCID: PMC3706339
PMID: 23799955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

