
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Oct;57(10):4761-8. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00863-13.
Epub 2013 Jul 15.

DNA microarray for genotyping antibiotic resistance determinants in Acinetobacter
baumannii clinical isolates.

Dally S(1), Lemuth K, Kaase M, Rupp S, Knabbe C, Weile J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Laboratory and Transfusion Medicine, Heart and Diabetes Center
NRW, University Hospital of the Ruhr-University Bochum, Bad Oeynhausen, Germany.

In recent decades, Acinetobacter baumannii has emerged as an organism of great
concern due to its ability to accumulate antibiotic resistance. In order to
improve the diagnosis of resistance determinants in A. baumannii in terms of lead
time and accuracy, we developed a microarray that can be used to detect 91 target
sequences associated with antibiotic resistance within 4 h from bacterial culture
to result. The array was validated with 60 multidrug-resistant strains of A.
baumannii in a blinded, prospective study. The results were compared to phenotype
results determined by the automated susceptibility testing system VITEK2.
Antibiotics considered were piperacillin-tazobactam, ceftazidime, imipenem,
meropenem, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, amikacin, gentamicin, tobramycin,
ciprofloxacin, and tigecycline. The average positive predictive value, negative
predictive value, sensitivity, and specificity were 98, 98, 99, and 94%,
respectively. For carbapenemase genes, the array results were compared to
singleplex PCR results provided by the German National Reference Center for
Gram-Negative Pathogens, and results were in complete concordance. The presented 
array is able to detect all relevant resistance determinants of A. baumannii in
parallel. The short handling time of 4 h from culture to result helps to provide 
fast results in order to initiate adequate anti-infective therapy for critically 
ill patients. Another application would be data acquisition for epidemiologic
surveillance.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00863-13 
PMCID: PMC3811405
PMID: 23856783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

