
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Oct 23;135(42):15801-12. doi: 10.1021/ja405047b. Epub 2013
Oct 9.

Substrate-triggered addition of dioxygen to the diferrous cofactor of
aldehyde-deformylating oxygenase to form a diferric-peroxide intermediate.

Pandelia ME(#)(1), Li N(#)(2), Nørgaard H(1), Warui DM(2), Rajakovich LJ(2),
Chang WC(1), Booker SJ(1)(2), Krebs C(1)(2), Bollinger JM Jr(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802.
(#)Contributed equally

Cyanobacterial aldehyde-deformylating oxygenases (ADOs) belong to the
ferritin-like diiron-carboxylate superfamily of dioxygen-activating proteins.
They catalyze conversion of saturated or monounsaturated C(n) fatty aldehydes to 
formate and the corresponding C(n-1) alkanes or alkenes, respectively. This
unusual, apparently redox-neutral transformation actually requires four electrons
per turnover to reduce the O2 cosubstrate to the oxidation state of water and
incorporates one O-atom from O2 into the formate coproduct. We show here that the
complex of the diiron(II/II) form of ADO from Nostoc punctiforme (Np) with an
aldehyde substrate reacts with O2 to form a colored intermediate with
spectroscopic properties suggestive of a Fe2(III/III) complex with a bound
peroxide. Its Mössbauer spectra reveal that the intermediate possesses an
antiferromagnetically (AF) coupled Fe2(III/III) center with resolved subsites.
The intermediate is long-lived in the absence of a reducing system, decaying
slowly (t(1/2) ~ 400 s at 5 °C) to produce a very modest yield of formate (<0.15 
enzyme equivalents), but reacts rapidly with the fully reduced form of
1-methoxy-5-methylphenazinium methylsulfate ((MeO)PMS) to yield product, albeit
at only ~50% of the maximum theoretical yield (owing to competition from one or
more unproductive pathway). The results represent the most definitive evidence to
date that ADO can use a diiron cofactor (rather than a homo- or heterodinuclear
cluster involving another transition metal) and provide support for a mechanism
involving attack on the carbonyl of the bound substrate by the reduced O2 moiety 
to form a Fe2(III/III)-peroxyhemiacetal complex, which undergoes reductive
O-O-bond cleavage, leading to C1-C2 radical fragmentation and formation of the
alk(a/e)ne and formate products.

DOI: 10.1021/ja405047b 
PMCID: PMC3869994
PMID: 23987523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

