
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Dec 3;110(49):E4753-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1310050110. Epub 2013 Nov 18.

Saposins modulate human invariant Natural Killer T cells self-reactivity and
facilitate lipid exchange with CD1d molecules during antigen presentation.

Salio M(1), Ghadbane H, Dushek O, Shepherd D, Cypen J, Gileadi U, Aichinger MC,
Napolitani G, Qi X, van der Merwe PA, Wojno J, Veerapen N, Cox LR, Besra GS, Yuan
W, Cresswell P, Cerundolo V.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Human Immunology Unit, Radcliffe Department of
Medicine, Medical Research Council Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DS, United Kingdom.

Lipid transfer proteins, such as molecules of the saposin family, facilitate
extraction of lipids from biological membranes for their loading onto CD1d
molecules. Although it has been shown that prosaposin-deficient mice fail to
positively select invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells, it remains unclear
whether saposins can facilitate loading of endogenous iNKT cell agonists in the
periphery during inflammatory responses. In addition, it is unclear whether
saposins, in addition to loading, also promote dissociation of lipids bound to
CD1d molecules. To address these questions, we used a combination of cellular
assays and demonstrated that saposins influence CD1d-restricted presentation to
human iNKT cells not only of exogenous lipids but also of endogenous ligands,
such as the self-glycosphingolipid Î²-glucopyranosylceramide, up-regulated by
antigen-presenting cells following bacterial infection. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that in human myeloid cells CD1d-loading of endogenous lipids after 
bacterial infection, but not at steady state, requires trafficking of CD1d
molecules through an endo-lysosomal compartment. Finally, using BIAcore assays we
demonstrated that lipid-loaded saposin B increases the off-rate of lipids bound
to CD1d molecules, providing important insights into the mechanisms by which it
acts as a "lipid editor," capable of fine-tuning loading and unloading of CD1d
molecules. These results have important implications in understanding how to
optimize lipid-loading onto antigen-presenting cells, to better harness iNKT
cells central role at the interface between innate and adaptive immunity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1310050110 
PMCID: PMC3856826
PMID: 24248359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

