
1. BMC Public Health. 2013 Dec 13;13:1172. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-13-1172.

Spoiled breast milk and bad water; local understandings of diarrhea causes and
prevention in rural Sierra Leone.

McMahon SA(1), George AS, Yumkella F, Diaz T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public
Health, 615 N, Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD, USA. smcmahon@jhsph.edu.

BACKGROUND: Globally, diarrhea remains a leading killer of young children. In
Sierra Leone, one in seven children die before their fifth birthday and diarrhea 
is a leading cause. Studies that emphasize the demand-side of health
interventions -- how caregivers understand causation and prevention of diarrhea
-- have been neglected in research and programming.
METHODS: We undertook applied qualitative research including 68 in-depth
interviews and 36 focus group discussions with mothers, fathers and older female 
caretakers to examine the causes and prevention of childhood diarrhea in villages
near and far from health facilities across four rural districts. Verbal consent
was obtained.
RESULTS: Respondents reported multiple, co-existing descriptions of causation
including: contaminated water and difficulties accessing clean water; exposure to
an unclean environment and poor food hygiene; contaminated breast milk due to
sexual intercourse, overheated breast milk or bodily maternal conditions such as 
menstruation or pregnancy; and dietary imbalances and curses. Respondents rarely 
discussed the role of open defecation or the importance of handwashing with soap 
in preventing diarrhea.
CONCLUSIONS: Categorizing behaviors as beneficial, harmful, non-existent or
benign enables tailored programmatic recommendations. For example, respondents
recognized the value of clean water and we correspondingly recommend
interventions that reinforce consumption of and access to clean water. Second,
respondents report denying "contaminated" breast milk to breastfeeding children. 
This is a harmful practice that merits attention. Third, the role of open
defecation and poor hygiene in causing diarrhea is less understood and warrants
introduction or clarification. Finally, the role of exposed feet or curses in
causing diarrhea is relatively benign and does not necessitate programmatic
attention. Further research supportive of communication and social mobilization
strategies building on these findings is required to ensure that improved
understanding regarding diarrhea causation translates into improved diarrhea
prevention.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2458-13-1172 
PMCID: PMC3878753
PMID: 24330586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

