
1. Vet J. 2014 Feb;199(2):286-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2013.11.019. Epub 2013 Dec 1.

Frequency of virulence factors in Escherichia coli isolated from suckling pigs
with diarrhoea in China.

Liu W(1), Yuan C(1), Meng X(1), Du Y(1), Gao R(1), Tang J(1), Shi D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150030, China.
(2)Department of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150030, China. Electronic
address: shidf@neau.edu.cn.

Escherichia coli-associated diarrhoea is an important disease adversely affecting
the pig industry. This study was conducted to investigate the frequency of
virulence factors expressed by E. coli strains isolated from suckling pigs with
diarrhoea in China. A total of 381 E. coli strains, obtained from 290 faecal
samples from pigs on 38 farms, were tested for fimbriae (K88, K99, 987P, F41,
F18, F17), non-fimbrial adhesins (AIDA-I, paa, CS31A, eae, saa), enterotoxin
(LT-I, LT-II, STa, STb, EAST1), Shiga toxin (Stx1, Stx2, Stx2e), pathogenicity
islands (HPI, LEE), α-haemolysin (hlyA), afa8 gene cluster (afaD, afaE) and sepA 
genes by PCR. Out of the 381 isolates, 206 carried at least one virulence gene.
Of the 206 virulence positive isolates, the virulence factor genes detected were 
EAST1 (n=120), irp2 (n=59), paa (n=50), STb (n=41), AIDA-I (n=34), LT-I (n=23),
ler (n=11), hlyA (n=9), K88 (n=8), eae (n=8), STa (n=7), sepA (n=6), F18 (n=5),
afaD (n=3), afaE (n=3), K99 (n=2) and Stx2e (n=1), with most isolates carrying
multiple virulence genes. These results demonstrate that relatively few isolates 
from the study population express K88, K99, LT-I or STa, but that EAST1 (58%),
irp2 (29%), AIDA-I (16.5%), paa (24%) and STb (20%) are frequent virulence
factors expressed by E. coli strains isolated from suckling pigs with diarrhoea
in China.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2013.11.019 
PMID: 24378293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

