
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 28;289(9):6225-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.508994. Epub 2014 
Jan 13.

Platelet-derived growth factor-C (PDGF-C) induces anti-apoptotic effects on
macrophages through Akt and Bad phosphorylation.

Son D(1), Na YR, Hwang ES, Seok SH.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and Institute of Endemic
Disease, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-799, Korea.

PDGF-C, which is abundant in the malignant breast tumor microenvironment, plays
an important role in cell growth and survival. Because tumor-associated
macrophages (TAMs) contribute to cancer malignancy, macrophage survival
mechanisms are an attractive area of research into controlling tumor progression.
In this study, we investigated PDGF-C-mediated signaling pathways involved in
anti-apoptotic effects in macrophages. We found that the human malignant breast
cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 produced high quantities of PDGF-C, whereas benign
MCF-7 cells did not. Recombinant PDGF-C induced PDGF receptor α chain
phosphorylation, followed by Akt and Bad phosphorylation in THP-1-derived
macrophages. MDA-MB-231 culture supernatants also activated macrophage PDGF-Rα.
PDGF-C prevented staurosporine-induced macrophage apoptosis by inhibiting the
activation of caspase-3, -7, -8, and -9 and cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase. Finally, TAMs isolated from the PDGF-C knockdown murine breast cancer
cell line 4T1 and PDGF-C knockdown MDA-MB-231-derived tumor mass showed higher
rates of apoptosis than the respective WT controls. Collectively, our results
suggest that tumor cell-derived PDGF-C enhances TAM survival, promoting tumor
malignancy.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.508994 
PMCID: PMC3937687
PMID: 24421315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

