
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Apr;42(6):3931-42. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1375. Epub 2014
Jan 16.

A tRNA splicing operon: Archease endows RtcB with dual GTP/ATP cofactor
specificity and accelerates RNA ligation.

Desai KK(1), Cheng CL, Bingman CA, Phillips GN Jr, Raines RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA, Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology and Department of
Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA and Department of Chemistry,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Archease is a 16-kDa protein that is conserved in all three domains of life. In
diverse bacteria and archaea, the genes encoding Archease and the tRNA ligase
RtcB are localized into an operon. Here we provide a rationale for this operon
organization by showing that Archease and RtcB from Pyrococcus horikoshii
function in tandem, with Archease altering the catalytic properties of the RNA
ligase. RtcB catalyzes the GTP and Mn(II)-dependent joining of either
2',3'-cyclic phosphate or 3'-phosphate termini to 5'-hydroxyl termini. We find
that catalytic concentrations of Archease are sufficient to activate RtcB, and
that Archease accelerates both the RNA 3'-P guanylylation and ligation steps. In 
addition, we show that Archease can alter the NTP specificity of RtcB such that
ATP, dGTP or ITP is used efficiently. Moreover, RtcB variants that have
inactivating substitutions in the guanine-binding pocket can be rescued by the
addition of Archease. We also present a 1.4 Ã…-resolution crystal structure of P. 
horikoshii Archease that reveals a metal-binding site consisting of conserved
carboxylates located at the protein tip. Substitution of the Archease
metal-binding residues drastically reduced Archease-dependent activation of RtcB.
Thus, evolution has sought to co-express archease and rtcB by creating a tRNA
splicing operon.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt1375 
PMCID: PMC3973293
PMID: 24435797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

