
1. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 15;192(4):1778-86. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300039. Epub 2014
Jan 17.

Conventional NK cells can produce IL-22 and promote host defense in Klebsiella
pneumoniae pneumonia.

Xu X(1), Weiss ID, Zhang HH, Singh SP, Wynn TA, Wilson MS, Farber JM.

Author information: 
(1)Inflammation Biology Section, Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892.

It was reported that host defense against pulmonary Klebsiella pneumoniae
infection requires IL-22, which was proposed to be of T cell origin. Supporting a
role for IL-22, we found that Il22(-/-) mice had decreased survival compared with
wild-type mice after intratracheal infection with K. pneumoniae. Surprisingly,
however, Rag2(-/-) mice did not differ from wild-type mice in survival or levels 
of IL-22 in the lungs postinfection with K. pneumoniae. In contrast, K.
pneumoniae-infected Rag2(-/-)Il2rg(-/-) mice failed to produce IL-22. These data 
suggested a possible role for NK cells or other innate lymphoid cells in host
defense and production of IL-22. Unlike NK cell-like innate lymphoid cells that
produce IL-22 and display a surface phenotype of NK1.1(-)NKp46(+)CCR6(+), lung NK
cells showed the conventional phenotype, NK1.1(+)NKp46(+)CCR6(-). Mice depleted
of NK cells using anti-asialo GM1 showed decreased survival and higher lung
bacterial counts, as well as increased dissemination of K. pneumoniae to blood
and liver, compared with control-treated mice. NK cell depletion also led to
decreased production of IL-22 in the lung. Within 1 d postinfection, although
there was no increase in the number of lung NK cells, a subset of lung NK cells
became competent to produce IL-22, and such cells were found in both wild-type
and Rag2(-/-) mice. Our data suggest that, during pulmonary infection of mice
with K. pneumoniae, conventional NK cells are required for optimal host defense, 
which includes the production of IL-22.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300039 
PMCID: PMC3995347
PMID: 24442439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

