
1. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2014 Feb;17:99-105. doi: 10.1016/j.mib.2013.12.004. Epub
2014 Jan 20.

Salmonella vaccines: lessons from the mouse model or bad teaching?

Strugnell RA(1), Scott TA(2), Wang N(2), Yang C(2), Peres N(2), Bedoui S(2), Kupz
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
VIC 3010, Australia. Electronic address: rastru@unimelb.edu.au.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
VIC 3010, Australia.

Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica includes several very important human
serovars including Typhi, Paratyphi, Typhimurium and Enteritidis. These bacteria 
cause a significant global burden of disease, typically classified into enteric
fever, gastroenteritis and, more recently, invasive non-typhoidal salmonellosis
(iNTS). Vaccines have been developed for one of these serovars, S. Typhi and the 
recent increase in iNTS cases has resulted in a push to develop new vaccines that
will inhibit disease by S. Typhimurium and S. Enteritidis, the most common iNTS
S. enterica serovars. The development of new human vaccines has been informed by 
studies in the murine model of typhoid fever based on S. Typhimurium infections
of very 'sensitive' (Nramp-1(S)) mice, which has some obvious deficiencies, not
the least that antibodies protect humans against S. Typhi infection but are only 
weakly protective in 'sensitive' mice infected with S. Typhimurium. S.
Typhimurium also lacks Vi, the target of protective antibodies in typhoid fever. 
Notwithstanding these deficiencies, the murine model has identified a very
complex series of innate and adaptive immune responses to infection that might be
exploited to develop new vaccines. Equally, advances in understanding the
pathogenesis of infection, through pathogenomics and more sophisticated animal
models will likely contribute to the development of novel immunogens.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mib.2013.12.004 
PMID: 24440968  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

