
1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 3;9(2):e88144. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088144. eCollection 
2014.

Recombinant plants provide a new approach to the production of bacterial
polysaccharide for vaccines.

Smith CM(1), Fry SC(2), Gough KC(3), Patel AJ(1), Glenn S(1), Goldrick M(4),
Roberts IS(4), Whitelam GC(5), Andrew PW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Leicester,
Leicester, Leicestershire, United Kingdom.
(2)The Edinburgh Cell Wall Group, Institute of Molecular Plant Sciences, School
of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(3)School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham, Sutton
Bonington Campus, Leicestershire, United Kingdom.
(4)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom.
(5)Department of Biology, University of Leicester, Leicester, Leicestershire,
United Kingdom.

Bacterial polysaccharides have numerous clinical or industrial uses. Recombinant 
plants could offer the possibility of producing bacterial polysaccharides on a
large scale and free of contaminating bacterial toxins and antigens. We
investigated the feasibility of this proposal by cloning and expressing the gene 
for the type 3 synthase (cps3S) of Streptococcus pneumoniae in Nicotinia tabacum,
using the pCambia2301 vector and Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated gene
transfer. In planta the recombinant synthase polymerised plant-derived
UDP-glucose and UDP-glucuronic acid to form type 3 polysaccharide. Expression of 
the cps3S gene was detected by RT-PCR and production of the pneumococcal
polysaccharide was detected in tobacco leaf extracts by double immunodiffusion,
Western blotting and high-voltage paper electrophoresis. Because it is used a
component of anti-pneumococcal vaccines, the immunogenicity of the plant-derived 
type 3 polysaccharide was tested. Mice immunised with extracts from recombinant
plants were protected from challenge with a lethal dose of pneumococci in a model
of pneumonia and the immunised mice had significantly elevated levels of serum
anti-pneumococcal polysaccharide antibodies. This study provides the proof of the
principle that bacterial polysaccharide can be successfully synthesised in plants
and that these recombinant polysaccharides could be used as vaccines to protect
against life-threatening infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088144 
PMCID: PMC3912152
PMID: 24498433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

