
1. Infect Immun. 2014 May;82(5):1959-67. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01511-14. Epub 2014 Feb
24.

Invasion of oral and aortic tissues by oral spirochete Treponema denticola in
ApoE(-/-) mice causally links periodontal disease and atherosclerosis.

Chukkapalli SS(1), Rivera MF, Velsko IM, Lee JY, Chen H, Zheng D, Bhattacharyya
I, Gangula PR, Lucas AR, Kesavalu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, College of Dentistry, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, USA.

Treponema denticola is a predominantly subgingival oral spirochete closely
associated with periodontal disease and has been detected in atherosclerosis.
This study was designed to evaluate causative links between periodontal disease
induced by chronic oral T. denticola infection and atherosclerosis in
hyperlipidemic ApoE(-/-) mice. ApoE(-/-) mice (n = 24) were orally infected with 
T. denticola ATCC 35404 and were euthanized after 12 and 24 weeks. T. denticola
genomic DNA was detected in oral plaque samples, indicating colonization of the
oral cavity. Infection elicited significantly (P = 0.0172) higher IgG antibody
levels and enhanced intrabony defects than sham infection. T. denticola-infected 
mice had higher levels of horizontal alveolar bone resorption than sham-infected 
mice and an associated significant increase in aortic plaque area (P â‰¤ 0.05).
Increased atherosclerotic plaque correlated with reduced serum nitric oxide (NO) 
levels and increased serum-oxidized low-density lipoprotein (LDL) levels compared
to those of sham-infected mice. T. denticola infection altered the expression of 
genes known to be involved in atherosclerotic development, including the
leukocyte/endothelial cell adhesion gene (Thbs4), the connective tissue growth
factor gene (Ctgf), and the selectin-E gene (Sele). Fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) revealed T. denticola clusters in both gingival and aortic
tissue of infected mice. This is the first study examining the potential
causative role of chronic T. denticola periodontal infection and vascular
atherosclerosis in vivo in hyperlipidemic ApoE(-/-) mice. T. denticola is closely
associated with periodontal disease and the rapid progression of atheroma in
ApoE(-/-) mice. These studies confirm a causal link for active oral T. denticola 
infection with both atheroma and periodontal disease.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01511-14 
PMCID: PMC3993427
PMID: 24566627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

