
1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 14;9(3):e92236. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092236. eCollection
2014.

Genomic evidence reveals the extreme diversity and wide distribution of the
arsenic-related genes in Burkholderiales.

Li X(1), Zhang L(1), Wang G(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Life Sciences
and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, P. R. China.

So far, numerous genes have been found to associate with various strategies to
resist and transform the toxic metalloid arsenic (here, we denote these genes as 
"arsenic-related genes"). However, our knowledge of the distribution,
redundancies and organization of these genes in bacteria is still limited. In
this study, we analyzed the 188 Burkholderiales genomes and found that 95%
genomes harbored arsenic-related genes, with an average of 6.6 genes per genome. 
The results indicated: a) compared to a low frequency of distribution for aio
(arsenite oxidase) (12 strains), arr (arsenate respiratory reductase) (1 strain) 
and arsM (arsenite methytransferase)-like genes (4 strains), the ars (arsenic
resistance system)-like genes were identified in 174 strains including 1,051
genes; b) 2/3 ars-like genes were clustered as ars operon and displayed a high
diversity of gene organizations (68 forms) which may suggest the rapid movement
and evolution for ars-like genes in bacterial genomes; c) the arsenite efflux
system was dominant with ACR3 form rather than ArsB in Burkholderiales; d) only a
few numbers of arsM and arrAB are found indicating neither As III biomethylation 
nor AsV respiration is the primary mechanism in Burkholderiales members; (e) the 
aio-like gene is mostly flanked with ars-like genes and phosphate transport
system, implying the close functional relatedness between arsenic and phosphorus 
metabolisms. On average, the number of arsenic-related genes per genome of
strains isolated from arsenic-rich environments is more than four times higher
than the strains from other environments. Compared with human, plant and animal
pathogens, the environmental strains possess a larger average number of
arsenic-related genes, which indicates that habitat is likely a key driver for
bacterial arsenic resistance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092236 
PMCID: PMC3954881
PMID: 24632831  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

