
1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 25;9(3):e92515. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092515. eCollection
2014.

Involvement of the TNF and FasL produced by CD11b Kupffer cells/macrophages in
CCl4-induced acute hepatic injury.

Sato A(1), Nakashima H(1), Nakashima M(1), Ikarashi M(1), Nishiyama K(2),
Kinoshita M(1), Seki S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, National Defense Medical College,
Namiki, Tokorozawa, Saitama, Japan.
(2)Department of Surgery 1, National Defense Medical College, Namiki, Tokorozawa,
Saitama, Japan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(11):e114065.

We previously reported that F4/80(+) Kupffer cells are subclassified into CD68(+)
Kupffer cells with phagocytic and ROS producing capacity, and CD11b(+) Kupffer
cells with cytokine-producing capacity. Carbon tetrachloride (CCl4)-induced
hepatic injury is a well-known chemical-induced hepatocyte injury. In the present
study, we investigated the immunological role of Kupffer cells/macrophages in
CCl4-induced hepatitis in mice. The immunohistochemical analysis of the liver and
the flow cytometry of the liver mononuclear cells showed that clodronate liposome
(c-lipo) treatment greatly decreased the spindle-shaped F4/80(+) or CD68(+)
cells, while the oval-shaped F4/80+ CD11b(+) cells increased. Notably, severe
hepatic injury induced by CCl4 was further aggravated by c-lipo-pretreatment. The
population of CD11b(+) Kupffer cells/macrophages dramatically increased 24 hour
(h) after CCl4 administration, especially in c-lipo-pretreated mice. The CD11b(+)
Kupffer cells expressed intracellular TNF and surface Fas-ligand (FasL).
Furthermore, anti-TNF Ab pretreatment (which decreased the FasL expression of
CD11b(+) Kupffer cells), anti-FasL Ab pretreatment or gld/gld mice attenuated the
liver injury induced by CCl4. CD1d-/- mouse and cell depletion experiments showed
that NKT cells and NK cells were not involved in the hepatic injury. The adoptive
transfer and cytotoxic assay against primary cultured hepatocytes confirmed the
role of CD11b(+) Kupffer cells in CCl4-induced hepatitis. Interestingly, the
serum MCP-1 level rapidly increased and peaked at six h after c-lipo
pretreatment, suggesting that the MCP-1 produced by c-lipo-phagocytized CD68(+)
Kupffer cells may recruit CD11b(+) macrophages from the periphery and bone
marrow. The CD11b(+) Kupffer cells producing TNF and FasL thus play a pivotal
role in CCl4-induced acute hepatic injury.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092515 
PMCID: PMC3965417
PMID: 24667392  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

