
1. Vaccine. 2014 Jun 30;32(31):3971-6. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.05.016. Epub 2014
May 14.

Tissue persistence and vaccine efficacy of tricarboxylic acid cycle and
one-carbon metabolism mutant strains of Edwardsiella ictaluri.

Dahal N(1), Abdelhamed H(1), Karsi A(2), Lawrence ML(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine Sciences,
Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS, USA.
(2)Department of Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine Sciences,
Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS, USA. Electronic address:
karsi@cvm.msstate.edu.
(3)Department of Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine Sciences,
Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS, USA. Electronic address:
lawrence@cvm.msstate.edu.

Edwardsiella ictaluri causes enteric septicemia in fish. Recently, we reported
construction of E. ictaluri mutants with single and double gene deletions in
tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) and one-carbon (C-1) metabolism. Here, we report
the tissue persistence, virulence, and vaccine efficacy of TCA cycle (EiΔsdhC,
EiΔfrdA, and EiΔmdh), C-1 metabolism (EiΔgcvP and EiΔglyA), and combination
mutants (EiΔfrdAΔsdhC, EiΔgcvPΔsdhC, EiΔmdhΔsdhC, and EiΔgcvPΔglyA) in channel
catfish. The tissue persistence study showed that EiΔsdhC, EiΔfrdA, EiΔfrdAΔsdhC,
and EiΔgcvPΔsdhC were able to invade catfish and persist until 11 days
post-infection. Vaccination of catfish fingerlings with all nine mutants provided
significant (P<0.05) protection against subsequent challenge with the virulent
parental strain. Vaccinated catfish fingerlings had 100% survival when
subsequently challenged by immersion with wild-type E. ictaluri except for
EiΔgcvPΔglyA and EiΔgcvP. Mutant EiΔgcvPΔsdhC was found to be very good at
protecting catfish fry, as evidenced by 10-fold higher survival compared to
non-vaccinated fish.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.05.016 
PMID: 24837777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

