
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 20;9(6):e100492. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100492.
eCollection 2014.

iTRAQ-based proteomics reveals novel members involved in pathogen challenge in
sea cucumber Apostichopus japonicus.

Zhang P(1), Li C(1), Zhang P(1), Jin C(1), Pan D(1), Bao Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of aquaculture, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang Province, P.R
China.
(2)Department of Aquatic Germplasm Resources, Zhejiang Wanli University, Ningbo, 
Zhejiang Province, P.R China.

Skin ulceration syndrome (SUS) is considered to be a major constraint for the
stable development of Apostichopus japonicus culture industries. In this study,
we investigated protein changes in the coelomocytes of A. japonicus challenged by
Vibrio splendidus using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification
(iTRAQ) over a 96 h time course. Consequently, 228 differentially expressed
proteins were identified in two iTRAQs. A comparison of the protein expression
profiles among different time points detected 125 proteins primarily involved in 
response to endogenous stimuli at 24 h. At 48 h, the number of differentially
expressed proteins decreased to 67, with their primary function being oxidation
reduction. At the end of pathogen infection, proteins responsive to amino acid
stimuli and some metabolic processes were classified as the predominant group.
Fifteen proteins were differentially expressed at all time points, among which
eight proteins related to pathologies in higher animals were shown to be
down-regulated after V. splendidus infection: paxillin, fascin-2, aggrecan,
ololfactomedin-1, nesprin-3, a disintegrin-like and metallopeptidase with
thrombospondin type 1 motif (Adamts7), C-type lectin domain family 4 (Clec4g) and
n-myc downstream regulated gene 1 (Ndrg1). To gain more insight into two
SUS-related miRNA (miR-31 and miR-2008) targets at the protein level, all 129
down-regulated proteins were further analyzed in combination with RNA-seq. Twelve
and eight proteins were identified as putative targets for miR-31 and miR-2008,
respectively, in which six proteins (5 for miR-31 and 1 for miR-2008) displayed
higher possibilities to be regulated at the level of translation. Overall, the
present work enhances our understanding of the process of V.
splendidus-challenged sea cucumber and provides a new method for screening miRNAs
targets at the translation level.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100492 
PMCID: PMC4065040
PMID: 24949634  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

