
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2014 Oct 17;9(10):2274-82. doi: 10.1021/cb500360c. Epub 2014 Aug
5.

Pyrazolopyrimidines establish MurC as a vulnerable target in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa and Escherichia coli.

Hameed P S(1), Manjrekar P, Chinnapattu M, Humnabadkar V, Shanbhag G, Kedari C,
Mudugal NV, Ambady A, de Jonge BL, Sadler C, Paul B, Sriram S, Kaur P, Guptha S, 
Raichurkar A, Fleming P, Eyermann CJ, McKinney DC, Sambandamurthy VK, Panda M,
Ravishankar S.

Author information: 
(1)Innovative Medicines, AstraZeneca India Pvt. Ltd., Bellary Road, Hebbal,
Bangalore 560024, India.

The bacterial peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway provides multiple targets for
antibacterials, as proven by the clinical success of Î²-lactam and glycopeptide
classes of antibiotics. The Mur ligases play an essential role in the
biosynthesis of the peptidoglycan building block, N-acetyl-muramic
acid-pentapeptide. MurC, the first of four Mur ligases, ligates l-alanine to
UDP-N-acetylmuramic acid, initiating the synthesis of pentapeptide precursor.
Therefore, inhibiting the MurC enzyme should result in bacterial cell death.
Herein, we report a novel class of pyrazolopyrimidines with subnanomolar potency 
against both Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa MurC enzymes, which
demonstrates a concomitant bactericidal activity against efflux-deficient
strains. Radio-labeled precursor incorporation showed these compounds selectively
inhibited peptidoglycan biosynthesis, and genetic studies confirmed the target of
pyrazolopyrimidines to be MurC. In the presence of permeability enhancers such as
colistin, pyrazolopyrimidines exhibited low micromolar MIC against the wild-type 
bacteria, thereby, indicating permeability and efflux as major challenges for
this chemical series. Our studies provide biochemical and genetic evidence to
support the essentiality of MurC and serve to validate the attractiveness of
target for antibacterial discovery.

DOI: 10.1021/cb500360c 
PMID: 25035921  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

