
1. FEBS J. 2015 Jan;282(1):74-88. doi: 10.1111/febs.13104. Epub 2014 Nov 4.

A natural heme-signature variant of CYP267A1 from Sorangium cellulosum So ce56
executes diverse ω-hydroxylation.

Khatri Y(1), Hannemann F, Girhard M, Kappl R, Hutter M, Urlacher VB, Bernhardt R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany.

A novel naturally occurring heme-signature variant of CYP267A1 from myxobacterium
Sorangium cellulosum So ce56 and its mutant L366F, the actual mimic of the
'conserved' heme-signature of cytochromes P450, were heterologously expressed in 
Escherichia coli in a soluble form and purified. The UV-visible characteristics
of both variants were highly similar. Although leucine replaced the phenylalanine
in the heme-signature domain of CYP267A1, EPR measurements of the ligand-free
wild-type CYP267A1 and the mutant L366F showed low-spin rhombic species
suggesting a conserved heme environment of the P450s. The need of primary redox
partners for the orphan P450 was sustained by the bovine redox system and a
class-I electron transfer path was provided during fatty acid hydroxylation.
CYP267A1 showed higher activity and produced more diverse ω-hydroxylated products
compared with L366F. In both enzymes the regioselectivity of the fatty acid
hydroxylation shifted towards the inner carbon atoms of the fatty acid chains
with increasing carbon chain lengths. Our docking results in a homology model of 
the protein showed that longer fatty acids need to be folded to fit into the
binding pocket. In the mutant L366F, the ω-1 and ω-2 positions which exhibit the 
largest electron density of the highest occupied molecular orbital are preferred.
It is speculated that the leucine heme-signature variant of P450 might have
evolved under selective evolutionary pressure, which confers an increased
advantage to generate a broader spectrum of related alcohols and carboxylic acids
required for the bacterial homeostasis or metabolism in a particular ecological
niche.

© 2014 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.13104 
PMID: 25302415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

