
1. Semin Immunol. 2014 Dec;26(6):552-8. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2014.09.004. Epub 2014
Oct 22.

Chemokines in tuberculosis: the good, the bad and the ugly.

Monin L(1), Khader SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Richard King Mellon 
Foundation Institute for Pediatric Research, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of
UPMC, 4401 Penn Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15224, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address: 
khader@wustl.edu.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) infects about one-third of the world's
population, with a majority of infected individuals exhibiting latent
asymptomatic infection, while 5-10% of infected individuals progress to active
pulmonary disease. Research in the past two decades has elucidated critical host 
immune mechanisms that mediate Mtb control. Among these, chemokines have been
associated with numerous key processes that lead to Mtb containment, from
recruitment of myeloid cells into the lung to activation of adaptive immunity,
formation of protective granulomas and vaccine recall responses. However,
imbalances in several key chemokine mediators can alter the delicate balance of
cytokines and cellular responses that promote mycobacterial containment, instead 
precipitating terminal tissue destruction and spread of Mtb infection. In this
review, we will describe recent insights in the involvement of chemokines in host
responses to Mtb infection and Mtb containment (the good), chemokines
contributing to inflammation during TB (the bad), and the role of chemokines in
driving cavitation and lung pathology (the ugly).

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smim.2014.09.004 
PMCID: PMC4314384
PMID: 25444549  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

