
1. Biomaterials. 2015 Jan;37:62-72. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.10.011. Epub
2014 Oct 28.

Design of self-assembling peptide hydrogelators amenable to bacterial expression.

Sonmez C(1), Nagy KJ(1), Schneider JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Center for Cancer Research, Frederick, MD 21701,
United States; University of Delaware, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, 
Newark, DE 19716, United States.
(2)National Cancer Institute, Center for Cancer Research, Frederick, MD 21701,
United States. Electronic address: Joel.Schneider@nih.gov.

Hydrogels formed from self-assembling peptides are finding use in tissue
engineering and drug delivery applications. Given the notorious difficulties
associated with producing self-assembling peptides by recombinant expression,
most are typically prepared by chemical synthesis. Herein, we report the design
of a family of self-assembling β-hairpin peptides amenable to efficient
production using an optimized bacterial expression system. Expressing peptides,
EX1, EX2 and EX3 contain identical eight-residue amphiphilic β-strands connected 
by varying turn sequences that are responsible for ensuring chain reversal and
the proper intramolecular folding and consequent self-assembly of the peptide
into a hydrogel network under physiological conditions. EX1 was initially used to
establish and optimize the bacterial expression system by which all the peptides 
could be eventually individually expressed. Expression clones were designed to
allow exploration of possible fusion partners and investigate both enzymatic and 
chemical cleavage as means to liberate the target peptide. A systematic analysis 
of possible expression systems followed by fermentation optimization lead to a
system in which all three peptides could be expressed as fusions with BAD-BH3,
the BH3 domain of the proapoptotic BAD (Bcl-2 Associated Death) Protein. CNBr
cleavage followed by purification afforded 50, 31, and 15 mg/L yields of pure
EX1, EX2 and EX3, respectively. CD spectroscopy, TEM, and rheological analysis
indicate that these peptides fold and assembled into well-defined fibrils that
constitute hydrogels having shear-thin/recovery properties.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.10.011 
PMCID: PMC4312208
PMID: 25453938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

