
1. J Environ Manage. 2015 Mar 15;151:160-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2014.12.045. Epub
2015 Jan 7.

Potential use of Pseudomonas koreensis AGB-1 in association with Miscanthus
sinensis to remediate heavy metal(loid)-contaminated mining site soil.

Babu AG(1), Shea PJ(2), Sudhakar D(1), Jung IB(1), Oh BT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology, Advanced Institute of Environment and Bioscience,
College of Environmental and Bioresource Sciences, Chonbuk National University,
Iksan 570-752, Republic of Korea.
(2)School of Natural Resources, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE
68583-0817, USA.
(3)Division of Biotechnology, Advanced Institute of Environment and Bioscience,
College of Environmental and Bioresource Sciences, Chonbuk National University,
Iksan 570-752, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: btoh@jbnu.ac.kr.

Endophytic bacteria have the potential to promote plant growth and heavy
metal(loid) (HM) removal from contaminated soil. Pseudomonas koreensis AGB-1,
isolated from roots of Miscanthus sinensis growing in mine-tailing soil,
exhibited high tolerance to HMs and plant growth promoting traits. Transmission
electron microscope (TEM) analysis revealed that AGB-1 sequestered HMs
extracellularly and their accumulation was visible as dark metal complexes on
bacterial surfaces and outside of the cells. DNA sequencing of HM resistance
marker genes indicated high homology to the appropriate regions of the arsB,
ACR3(1), aoxB, and bmtA determinants. Inoculating mining site soil with AGB-1
increased M. sinensis biomass by 54%, chlorophyll by 27%, and protein content by 
28%. High superoxide dismutase and catalase activities, and the lower
malondialdehyde content of plants growing in AGB-1-inoculated soil indicate
reduced oxidative stress. Metal(loid) concentrations in roots and shoots of
plants grown in inoculated soil were higher than those of the controls in pot
trials with mine tailing soil. Results suggest that AGB-1 can be used in
association with M. sinensis to promote phytostabilization and remediation of
HM-contaminated sites.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2014.12.045 
PMID: 25575343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

