
1. Infect Immun. 1989 May;57(5):1506-11.

Cloning and expression of an adhesin (AIDA-I) involved in diffuse adherence of
enteropathogenic Escherichia coli.

Benz I(1), Schmidt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie Heidelberg, Universität Heidelberg, Federal
Republic of Germany.

The adherence of enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) to the small bowel
mucosa is an important step in the pathogenesis of diarrheal diseases. It has
been shown that many EPEC strains adhere to HEp-2 and especially HeLa cells in
characteristic patterns termed localized adherence (LA) and diffuse adherence
(DA). A plasmid-derived DNA fragment encoding a factor specific for LA hybridized
only to EPEC strains expressing LA, which demonstrated that LA and DA are
mediated by two genetically distinct adhesins. EPEC strain 2787 (O127:H27),
isolated from a case of infantile diarrhea, exhibited three major properties: (i)
it showed DA to HeLa cells, (ii) it carried two large (ca. 100-kilobase [kb])
plasmids and one small plasmid of about 3 kb, and (iii) no fimbriae could be
detected by electron microscopy in organisms grown on agar plates or in liquid
cultures. Whole isolated plasmid DNA was partially digested with EcoRI and cloned
into the vector pBR322. One recombinant clone (pIB6) was found to exhibit the
same DA pattern on HeLa cells as did the parent strain. This clone contained an
11-kb DNA fragment derived from the largest of the three plasmids, as shown by
Southern hybridization. By deletion analysis, a 6.0-kb DNA fragment was shown to 
be sufficient for expression of the DA phenotype. This insert encoded the
production of a 100,000-dalton protein mediating adhesion to HeLa cells.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.57.5.1506-1511.1989 
PMCID: PMC313306
PMID: 2565291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

