
1. Cytokine. 2015 Sep;75(1):165-73. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.03.011. Epub 2015 Apr
14.

Involvement of smad2 and Erk/Akt cascade in TGF-β1-induced apoptosis in human
gingival epithelial cells.

Yoshimoto T(1), Fujita T(2), Kajiya M(1), Matsuda S(1), Ouhara K(1), Shiba H(1), 
Kurihara H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontal Medicine, Division of Applied Life Sciences,
Institute of Biomedical & Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3, Kasumi,
Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.
(2)Department of Periodontal Medicine, Division of Applied Life Sciences,
Institute of Biomedical & Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3, Kasumi,
Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan. Electronic address:
tfuji@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

Periodontitis is the most prevalent infectious disease caused by periodontopathic
bacteria and is also a chronic inflammatory disease. Gingival crevicular fluid
(GCF) is an inflammatory exudate that seeps into the gingival crevices or
periodontal pockets around teeth with inflamed gingiva, and contains various
materials including leukocytes and cytokines. Since gingival epithelial cells,
which form a barrier against bacterial challenges, are affected by GCF, cytokines
or other materials contained within GCF are engaged in the maintenance and
disruption of the epithelial barrier. Accordingly, its compositional pattern has 
been employed as a reliable objective index of local inflammation. Transforming
growth factor β1 (TGF-β1) levels in GCF were previously shown to be markedly
higher in patients with periodontitis than in healthy subject. However, it
currently remains unclear how TGF-β1 affects gingival epithelial cell growth or
apoptosis; therefore, elucidating the mechanism responsible may lead to a deeper 
understanding of pathogenic periodontitis. In the present study, the human
gingival epithelial cell line, OBA9 cells were stimulated with recombinant
TGF-β1. Apoptosis-related protein levels were determined by Western blotting.
Caspase-3/7 activity was measured with a Caspase-Glo assay kit. Surviving and
apoptotic cells were detected using an MTS assay and TUNEL staining,
respectively. TGF-βRI siRNA and smad2 siRNA were transfected into cells using the
lipofectamine RNAiMAX reagent. TGF-β1 elevated caspase-3 activity and the number 
of TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells in OBA9 cells. Furthermore, while the levels of
the pro-apoptotic proteins Bax, Bak, Bim, and Bad were increased in OBA9 cells
stimulated with TGF-β1, the TGF-β1 treatment also decreased the levels of
anti-apoptotic proteins such as Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL in a time-dependent manner.
Additionally, TGF-β1 up-regulated the protein levels of cleaved caspase-9. These 
results indicated that TGF-β1-induced apoptosis was involved in a
mitochondria-related intrinsic pathway. TGF-β1 phosphorylated smad2 in OBA9 cells
and this phosphorylation was clearly reduced by SB431542 (a TGF-β type I receptor
inhibitor). Consistent with this result, SB431542 or smad2 siRNA-induced
reductions in smad2 protein expression levels attenuated TGF-β1-induced
apoptosis. On the other hand, the ligation of TGF-β1 on its receptor also
stimulated the phosphorylation of Erk and Akt, which are smad2-independent
pathways. However, the inhibition of Erk/Akt signaling pathways by U0126, a
MEK-Erk inhibitor and LY294002, a PI3Kinase-Akt inhibitor, augmented
TGF-β1-induced apoptosis in OBA9 cells. Taken together, the results of present
study demonstrated that TGF-β1 activated both the smad2 and Erk/Akt cascades via 
its receptor on gingival epithelial cells, even though these two pathways have
opposite roles in cell death and survival, and the culmination of these signaling
events induced mitochondria-dependent apoptosis in gingival epithelial cells.
Based on the results of the present study, we herein proposed for the first time,
that TGF-β1 is a novel target cytokine for monitoring the progression of
periodontal disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.03.011 
PMID: 25882870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

