
1. Integr Comp Biol. 2015 Dec;55(6):972-85. doi: 10.1093/icb/icv006. Epub 2015 Apr
17.

The Good, the Bad, and the Unknown: Microbial Symbioses of the American
Alligator.

Keenan SW(1), Elsey RM(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Biology, Saint Louis University, Macelwane Hall, 3507 Laclede
Avenue, St Louis, MO 63103, USA; Department of Earth & Planetary Sciences,
University of Tennessee, 1412 Circle Drive, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA;
keenansw@slu.edu.
(2)Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries, Rockefeller Wildlife Refuge,
Grand Chenier, LA 70643, USA.

Vertebrates coexist with microorganisms in diverse symbiotic associations that
range from beneficial to detrimental to the host. Most research has aimed at
deciphering the nature of the composite microbial assemblage's genome, or
microbiome, from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and skin of mammals (i.e.,
humans). In mammals, the GI tract's microbiome aids digestion, enhances uptake of
nutrients, and prevents the establishment of pathogenic microorganisms. However, 
because the GI tract microbiome of the American alligator (Alligator
mississippiensis) is distinct from that of all other vertebrates studied to date,
being comprised of Fusobacteria in the lower GI tract with lesser abundances of
Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Bacteroidetes, the function of these assemblages 
is largely unknown. This review provides a synthesis of our current understanding
of the composition of alligators' microbiomes, highlights the potential role of
microbiome members in alligators' health (the good), and presents a brief summary
of microorganisms detrimental to alligators' health (the bad) including
Salmonella spp. and others. Microbial assemblages of the GI tract have co-evolved
with their vertebrate host over geologic time, which means that evolutionary
hypotheses can be tested using information about the microbiome. For reptiles and
amphibians, the number of taxa studied at present is limited, thereby restricting
evolutionary insights. Nevertheless, we present a compilation of our current
understanding of reptiles' and amphibians' microbiomes, and highlight future
avenues of research (the unknown). As in humans, composition of microbiome
assemblages provides a promising tool for assessing hosts' health or disease. By 
further exploring present-day associations between symbiotic microorganisms in
the microbiomes of reptiles and amphibians, we can better identify good
(beneficial) and bad (detrimental) microorganisms, and unravel the evolutionary
history of the acquisition of microbiomes by these poorly-studied vertebrates.

Â© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Integrative and Comparative Biology. All rights reserved. For permissions
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/icb/icv006 
PMID: 25888944  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

