
1. Future Microbiol. 2015;10(10):1669-82. doi: 10.2217/fmb.15.83. Epub 2015 Oct 6.

How Cryptococcus interacts with the blood-brain barrier.

Tseng HK(1)(2)(3), Huang TY(2), Wu AY(2), Chen HH(3), Liu CP(1)(2)(3), Jong A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, MacKay Medical College, No. 46, Sec. 3, Zhongzheng
Road, Sanzhi Distric, New Taipei City 25245, Taiwan.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, MacKay
Memorial Hospital, Taipei Branch, No. 92, Sec. 2, Zhongshan North Road, Taipei
City 10449, Taiwan.
(3)Microbiology Section, Department of Medical Research, MacKay Memorial
Hospital, Tamshui Branch, No. 45, Minsheng Road, Tamshui District, New Taipei
City 25160, Taiwan.
(4)Hematology-Oncology/BMT, Saban Research Institute, Children's Hospital Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90027, USA.

Cryptococcus demonstrates predilection for invasion of the brain, but the
mechanism by which Cryptococcus crosses the blood-brain barrier (BBB) to cause
brain invasion is largely unknown. In order for Cryptococcus to cross the BBB,
there must be a way to either cross human brain microvascular endothelial cells, 
which are the main constitute of the BBB, or go in between tight junctions.
Recent evidence of human brain microvascular endothelial cell responses to
transcellular brain invasions includes membrane rearrangements, intracellular
signaling pathways and cytoskeletal activations. Several Cryptococcal genes
related to the traversal of BBB have been identified, including CPS1, ITR1a,
ITR3c, PLB1, MPR1, FNX1 and RUB1. In addition, Cryptococcus neoformans-derived
microvesicles may contribute to cryptococcal brain invasion. Paracellularly,
Cryptococcus may traverse across BBB using either routes utilizing plasmin,
ammonia or macrophages in a Trojan horse mechanism.

DOI: 10.2217/fmb.15.83 
PMID: 26437710  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

