
1. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 5;5:16147. doi: 10.1038/srep16147.

Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG Lysate Increases Re-Epithelialization of Keratinocyte 
Scratch Assays by Promoting Migration.

Mohammedsaeed W(1), Cruickshank S(2), McBain AJ(3), O'Neill CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Inflammation and Repair, The University of Manchester, Manchester
UK.
(2)Faculty of Life Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester UK.
(3)Manchester Pharmacy School, The University of Manchester, Manchester UK.

A limited number of studies have investigated the potential of probiotics to
promote wound healing in the digestive tract. The aim of the current
investigation was to determine whether probiotic bacteria or their extracts could
be beneficial in cutaneous wound healing. A keratinocyte monolayer scratch assay 
was used to assess re-epithelialization; which comprises keratinocyte
proliferation and migration. Primary human keratinocyte monolayers were scratched
then exposed to lysates of Lactobacillus (L) rhamnosus GG, L. reuteri, L.
plantarum or L. fermentum. Re-epithelialization of treated monolayers was
compared to that of untreated controls. Lysates of L. rhamnosus GG and L. reuteri
significantly increased the rate of re-epithelialization, with L. rhamnosus GG
being the most efficacious. L. reuteri increased keratinocyte proliferation while
L. rhamnosus GG lysate significantly increased proliferation and migration.
Microarray analysis of L. rhamnosus GG treated scratches showed increased
expression of multiple genes including the chemokine CXCL2 and its receptor
CXCR2. These are involved in normal wound healing where they stimulate
keratinocyte proliferation and/or migration. Increased protein expression of both
CXCL2 and CXCR2 were confirmed by ELISA and immunoblotting. These data
demonstrate that L. rhamnosus GG lysate accelerates re-epithelialization of
keratinocyte scratch assays, potentially via chemokine receptor pairs that induce
keratinocyte migration.

DOI: 10.1038/srep16147 
PMCID: PMC4633615
PMID: 26537246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

