
1. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 15;6(40):42569-74. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5559.

NK cell expression of natural cytotoxicity receptors may determine relapse risk
in older AML patients undergoing immunotherapy for remission maintenance.

Martner A(1), Rydström A(1), Riise RE(1), Aurelius J(1)(2), Brune M(2), Foà R(3),
Hellstrand K(1), Thorén FB(1).

Author information: 
(1)TIMM Laboratory, Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg 405 30, Sweden.
(2)Department of Hematology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg 413 45, Sweden.
(3)Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and Hematology, Sapienza University of 
Rome, Rome 00161, Italy.

In a phase IV trial, eighty-four patients (age 18-79) with acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) in first complete remission (CR) received cycles of immunotherapy with
histamine dihydrochloride (HDC) and low-dose human recombinant interleukin-2
(IL-2) to prevent relapse in the post-consolidation phase. Aspects of natural
killer (NK) cell biology were analyzed before and during immunotherapy with focus
on outcome in older patients. In younger (<60 years old, n = 37) and older
patients (>60 years old, n = 47), treatment with HDC/IL-2 resulted in an
expansion of CD56(bright) and CD16+ NK cells in blood along with an increased NK 
cell expression of the natural cytotoxicity receptors (NCR) NKp30 and NKp46. In
older patients, a high expression of NKp30 or NKp46 on CD16+ NK cells before and 
during therapy predicted leukemia-free and overall survival. These results
suggest that NK cell functions determine relapse risk and survival in older AML
patients and point to biomarkers of efficacy in protocols for remission
maintenance.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.5559 
PMCID: PMC4767453
PMID: 26544512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

