
1. Med Mal Infect. 2016 May;46(3):123-30. doi: 10.1016/j.medmal.2016.01.005. Epub
2016 Feb 17.

Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of neurobrucellosis case patients in
Tunisia.

Oueslati I(1), Berriche A(2), Ammari L(1), Abdelmalek R(1), Kanoun F(1), Kilani
B(1), Tiouiri Benaissa H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service des maladies infectieuses, hôpital la Rabta, Tunis, Tunisie;
Université Tunis El Manar - faculté de médecine de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisie.
(2)Service des maladies infectieuses, hôpital la Rabta, Tunis, Tunisie;
Université Tunis El Manar - faculté de médecine de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisie.
Electronic address: aida.berricheg@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to identify epidemiological, clinical, therapeutic,
diagnostic, and outcome characteristics of neurobrucellosis case patients in
Tunisia.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted a retrospective and descriptive study over a
17-year period (January 1997-December 2013). We included all neurobrucellosis
patients hospitalized in the infectious disease department of La Rabta Hospital
of Tunis during the study period.
RESULTS: A total of 13 patients were included in the study: 9 men and 4 women.
Mean age was 31.6 years. Six patients presented with meningitis, three with
encephalitis, two with meningoencephalitis, and two with
meningo-myeloradiculitis. All patients had a lumbar puncture performed. Eleven
patients had an abnormal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (84.6%): lymphocytic
pleocytosis in seven patients, high level of CSF proteins in 11, and low level of
CSF glucose in seven. All patients had a positive Brucella serological test in
blood. A Brucella serological test was also performed in CSF and was positive for
10 patients (77%). A total of nine patients had a cerebral CT scan and/or MRI
performed and abnormalities were observed in six patients. Antibiotic therapy was
prescribed to all patients: a combination of rifampicin and co-trimoxazole (n=9) 
or doxycycline (n=4) for an average duration of eight months. Two patients also
received steroids. A positive outcome was observed in 10 patients. Three patients
were lost to follow up.
CONCLUSION: Brucellosis may be severe when neurological involvement occurs.
Brucellosis should be considered in the event of any neurological involvement
associated with suggestive epidemiological features.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medmal.2016.01.005 
PMID: 26897309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

