
1. Vet Parasitol. 2016 Jul 15;224:44-51. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2016.05.012. Epub
2016 May 11.

Vector-borne pathogens in dogs and red foxes from the federal state of
Brandenburg, Germany.

Liesner JM(1), Krücken J(1), Schaper R(2), Pachnicke S(3), Kohn B(4), Müller
E(5), Schulze C(6), von Samson-Himmelstjerna G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Parasitology and Tropical Veterinary Medicine, Freie Universität
Berlin, Robert-von-Ostertag Str. 7-13, 14163 Berlin, Germany.
(2)Bayer Animal Health GmbH, Alfred-Nobel-Str. 50, Monheim, 40789, Germany.
(3)Bayer Vital GmbH, Kaiser-Wilhelm-Allee 70, 51373 Leverkusen, Germany.
(4)Small Animal Clinic, Freie Universität Berlin, Oertzenweg 19, 14163 Berlin,
Germany.
(5)LABOKLIN GmbH & Co. KG, Steubenstr. 4, Bad Kissingen, 97688, Germany.
(6)Landeslabor Berlin-Brandenburg, Gerhard-Neumann-Str. 2, Frankfurt (Oder),
15236, Germany.
(7)Institute for Parasitology and Tropical Veterinary Medicine, Freie Universität
Berlin, Robert-von-Ostertag Str. 7-13, 14163 Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
gvsamson@fu-berlin.de.

Dirofilaria repens is endemic in eastern and southern European regions but was
recently found in Germany in dogs, mosquitoes and one human patient. Since some
of the positive dog and mosquito samples were collected in Brandenburg, it was
aimed to systematically assess the prevalence of D. repens and other canine
vector-borne pathogens in Brandenburg. Dog owners also received a questionnaire
and were asked to provide more information about the dogs including travel
history. In total, 1023 dog blood samples as well as 195 fox spleen and 179 fox
blood samples were collected. DNA was analysed by PCR for the presence of
filariae, piroplasms, anaplasmataceae and Rickettsia spp. Filariae were detected 
in six dogs (0.6%), two were positive for DNA from D. repens, two from
Dirofilaria immitis and two from Acanthocheilonema reconditum. One of the D.
repens positive dogs originated from an animal shelter in Brandenburg, but the
origin of the other one remained unknown. Interestingly, both D. repens ITS-1
sequences showed 100% identity to a D. repens sample obtained from a Japanese
woman that travelled in Europe and were 97% identical to a newly proposed species
Dirofilaria sp. 'hongkongensis' described from Hong Kong. However, identity to
other D. repens sequences from Thailand was considerably lower (81%). Identity of
12S rRNA and cytochrome oxidase I to D. repens samples from southern Europe was
99%. Due to the low number of Dirofilaria spp. positive dogs and since the origin
of these was unknown, endemic occurrence of Dirofilaria in Brandenburg could not 
be confirmed. Anaplasma phagocytophilum was found in 15 dogs (1.5%), Candidatus
Neoehrlichia mikurensis in three dogs (0.3%) and E. canis in one dog (0.1%),
which was co-infected with D. repens. Rickettsia spp. were detected in 8 dogs
(0.8%), seven were Rickettsia raoultii and one was Rickettsia felis. To the
author's knowledge, R. raoultii DNA was detected for the first time in dogs in
Germany in this study and Candidatus N. mikurensis for the second time. In spleen
samples of red foxes with 47.5% a high prevalence of piroplasms was found.
Sequencing of 11 samples identified 10 as Theileria annae. Despite the high
prevalence of this pathogen in its reservoir host, it was absent in dog samples. 
In one dog (0.1%), Babesia canis was detected but there was no further
information about the dog's origin. Evaluation of the questionnaire identified a 
high proportion of dogs (74.2%, n=233) which was not protected by
ectoparasiticides. Moreover, 21.2% (n=236) of the dogs originated from inland or 
abroad shelters, and therefore might potentially come from areas endemic for
dirofilariosis or babesiosis.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2016.05.012 
PMID: 27270389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

