
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jul 7;6:29284. doi: 10.1038/srep29284.

Caenorhabditis elegans employs innate and learned aversion in response to
bacterial toxic metabolites tambjamine and violacein.

Ballestriero F(1), Nappi J(1), Zampi G(2), Bazzicalupo P(2)(3), Di Schiavi
E(2)(3), Egan S(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological, Earth and Environmental Science and Centre for Marine
Bio-Innovation, University of New South Wales, Australia.
(2)Institute of Biosciences and BioResources, National Research Council, Naples, 
Italy.
(3)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, National Research Council, Naples,
Italy.

Bacteriovorus eukaryotes such as nematodes are one of the major natural predators
of bacteria. In their defense bacteria have evolved a number of strategies to
avoid predation, including the production of deterrent or toxic metabolites,
however little is known regarding the response of predators towards such
bacterial defenses. Here we use the nematode C. elegans as a model to study a
predators' behavioral response towards two toxic bacterial metabolites,
tambjamine YP1 and violacein. We found that C. elegans displays an innate
avoidance behavior towards tambjamine YP1, however requires previous exposure to 
violacein before learning to avoid this metabolite. The learned avoidance of
violacein is specific, reversible, is mediated via the nematode olfactory
apparatus (aversive olfactory learning) and is reduced in the absence of the
neurotransmitter serotonin. These multiple strategies to evade bacterial toxic
metabolites represent a valuable behavioral adaptation allowing bacteriovorus
predators to distinguish between good and bad food sources, thus contributing to 
the understanding of microbial predator-prey interactions.

DOI: 10.1038/srep29284 
PMCID: PMC4935850
PMID: 27384057  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

