
1. PLoS One. 2016 Oct 20;11(10):e0164543. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164543.
eCollection 2016.

Role of TEFFECTOR/MEMORY Cells, TBX21 Gene Expression and T-Cell Homing Receptor 
on Type 1 Reaction in Borderline Lepromatous Leprosy Patients.

Dos Santos LN(1), da Silva PH(1), Alvim IM(2), Nery JA(1), Lara FA(2), Sarno
EN(1), Esquenazi D(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Leprosy Laboratory, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Cellular Microbiology, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Oswaldo Cruz
Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratories, School of Medical Sciences, State
University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

In spite of hyporesponsivity to Mycobacterium leprae, borderline lepromatous (BL)
patients show clinical and immunological instability, and undergo frequent acute 
inflammatory episodes such as type 1 reaction (T1R), which may cause nerve
damages. This work focused on the participation of T cell subsets from blood and 
skin at T1R onset. We observed a significantly increased ex vivo frequency of
both effector and memory CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in T1R group. Besides, ex vivo
frequency of T cell homing receptor, the Cutaneous Leukocyte-associated Antigen
(CLA) was significantly increased in T cells from T1R patients. M. leprae induced
a higher frequency of CD4+ TEM and CD8+ TEF cells, as well as of CD8+/TEMRA
(terminally differentiated effector T cells) subset, which expressed high CD69+. 
The presence of IFN-γ‒producing-CD4+ TEF and naïve and effector CD8+ T
lymphocytes was significant in T1R. TBX21 expression was significantly higher in 
T1R, while BL showed increased GATA3 and FOXP3 expression. In T1R, TBX21
expression was strongly correlated with CD8+/IFN-γ‒ T cells frequency. The number
of double positive CD8+/CLA+ and CD45RA+/CLA+ cells was significantly higher in
skin lesions from T1R, in comparison with non-reactional BL group. The observed
increase of ex vivo T cells at T1R onset suggests intravascular activation at the
beginning of reactional episodes. The antigen-specific response in T1R group
confirmed the higher number of CD8+/CLA+ and CD45RA+/CLA+ cells in T1R lesions
suggests possible migration of these cells activated by M. leprae components
inside the vascular compartment to skin and participation in T1R physiopathology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164543 
PMCID: PMC5072666
PMID: 27764137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

