
1. Rev Alerg Mex. 2016 Oct-Dec;63(4):413-419.

[Immunological evaluation during treatment of a case of borderline lepromatous
leprosy].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Morfín-Maciel BM(1), Jiménez Martínez MC.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital San Angel Inn Chapultepec. Ciudad de México, México.
blancamorfin@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Leprosy is a chronic granulomatous infection that affects skin and
peripheral nerves. Its prevalence has declined, but is still observed mainly in
poor rural areas.
CASE REPORT: A male city dweller with photophobia and chronic dermatosis in the
face: nodular and erythematous lesions, pustules, keratitis and entropion,
partial eyebrows loss, and edema on eyelids, chin, and nose bridge. The rest of
the body had no lesion or lymphadenopathy. Biopsy revealed Langhans giant cell
proliferation in the superficial dermis without epidermal atrophy. BAAR staining 
for detection were positive, no Virschow cells were observed, and Fite-Franco
staining (leprosy-specific) was negative. Cutaneous tuberculosis was diagnosed.
Rifampicin/isoniazid/pyrazinamide and dialysate leukocyte extract were
prescribed. A month later, the swelling had decreased significantly. Polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) test was positive for Mycobacterium leprae. Flow cytometry
showed CD4 count normalization. Long-term treatment with rifampicin, clofazimine,
and dapsone was established.
CONCLUSIONS: The host's immune response determines the clinical features of the
disease: if response is bad there will be vacuolated macrophages filled with
bacilli (lepromatous leprosy). Clinical and histopathological findings help
typing.

Publisher: Antecedentes: La lepra es una infección granulomatosa crónica que
afecta piel y nervios periféricos. Aunque su prevalencia ha disminuido, se sigue 
observando principalmente en el medio rural pobre. Caso clínico: Hombre residente
de una ciudad, con fotofobia y dermatosis crónica en la cara: lesiones nodulares 
y eritematosas, pústulas, queratitis y entropión, pérdida parcial de las cejas y 
edema de párpados, barbilla y puente nasal. El resto del cuerpo sin lesiones ni
adenomegalias. La biopsia reveló proliferación de células gigantes de Langhans en
la dermis superficial, sin atrofia epidérmica. Las tinciones para búsqueda de
BAAR fueron positivas. No se observaron células de Virschow y la tinción de
Fite-Franco (específica de lepra) fue negativa. Se diagnosticó tuberculosis
cutánea. Se prescribió rifampicina-isoniazida-pirazinamida y extracto dializado
de leucocitos. Un mes después, la inflamación había disminuido de forma
importante. La reacción en cadena de la polimerasa fue positiva para
Mycobacterium leprae. Con la citometría de flujo de seguimiento se observó
normalización de la cuenta de CD4. Se estableció tratamiento a largo plazo con
rifampicina, clofazimina y dapsona. Conclusiones: La respuesta inmune del huésped
determina las características clínicas de la enfermedad: si la respuesta es mala 
habrá macrófagos vacuolados llenos de bacilos (lepromatosa). Los hallazgos
clínicos e histopatológicos ayudan a la tipificación.
DOI: 10.29262/ram.v63i4.170 
PMID: 27795222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

