
1. FEBS J. 2017 Jan;284(1):77-96. doi: 10.1111/febs.13953. Epub 2016 Nov 23.

Structural studies of protein arginine methyltransferase 2 reveal its
interactions with potential substrates and inhibitors.

Cura V(1), Marechal N(1), Troffer-Charlier N(1), Strub JM(2), van Haren MJ(3),
Martin NI(3), Cianférani S(2), Bonnefond L(1), Cavarelli J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Structural Biology, Institut de Génétique et de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), CNRS UMR7104, INSERM U596, Université
de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.
(2)BioOrganic Mass Spectrometry Laboratory (LSMBO), IPHC, UMR7178, Université de 
Strasbourg, France.
(3)Department of Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, Utrecht Institute for
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.

PRMT2 is the less-characterized member of the protein arginine methyltransferase 
family in terms of structure, activity, and cellular functions. PRMT2 is a
modular protein containing a catalytic Ado-Met-binding domain and unique Src
homology 3 domain that binds proteins with proline-rich motifs. PRMT2 is involved
in a variety of cellular processes and has diverse roles in transcriptional
regulation through different mechanisms depending on its binding partners. PRMT2 
has been demonstrated to have weak methyltransferase activity on a histone H4
substrate, but its optimal substrates have not yet been identified. To obtain
insights into the function and activity of PRMT2, we solve several crystal
structures of PRMT2 from two homologs (zebrafish and mouse) in complex with
either the methylation product S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine or other compounds
including the first synthetic PRMT2 inhibitor (Cp1) studied so far. We reveal
that the N-terminal-containing SH3 module is disordered in the full-length
crystal structures, and highlights idiosyncratic features of the PRMT2 active
site. We identify a new nonhistone protein substrate belonging to the
serine-/arginine-rich protein family which interacts with PRMT2 and we
characterize six methylation sites by mass spectrometry. To better understand
structural basis for Cp1 binding, we also solve the structure of the complex
PRMT4:Cp1. We compare the inhibitor-protein interactions occurring in the PRMT2
and PRMT4 complex crystal structures and show that this compound inhibits
efficiently PRMT2. These results are a first step toward a better understanding
of PRMT2 substrate recognition and may accelerate the development of
structure-based drug design of PRMT2 inhibitors.DATABASE: All coordinates and
structure factors have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank: zPRMT21-408 -SFG 
= 5g02; zPRMT273-408 -SAH = 5fub; mPRMT21-445 -SAH = 5ful; mPRMT21-445 -Cp1 =
5fwa, mCARM1130-487 -Cp1 = 5k8v.

© 2016 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.13953 
PMID: 27879050  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

