
1. Nat Commun. 2016 Nov 29;7:13296. doi: 10.1038/ncomms13296.

TruePrime is a novel method for whole-genome amplification from single cells
based on TthPrimPol.

Picher ÁJ(1), Budeus B(2), Wafzig O(2), Krüger C(2), García-Gómez S(3),
Martínez-Jiménez MI(3), Díaz-Talavera A(3), Weber D(2), Blanco L(3), Schneider
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)SYGNIS Biotech S.L.U., Parque Científico de Madrid, Cantoblanco, Madrid 28049,
Spain.
(2)SYGNIS Bioscience GmbH, Waldhofer Strasse 104, Heidelberg 69123, Germany.
(3)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM), Cantoblanco, Madrid
28049, Spain.

Sequencing of a single-cell genome requires DNA amplification, a process prone to
introducing bias and errors into the amplified genome. Here we introduce a novel 
multiple displacement amplification (MDA) method based on the unique DNA primase 
features of Thermus thermophilus (Tth) PrimPol. TthPrimPol displays a potent
primase activity preferring dNTPs as substrates unlike conventional primases. A
combination of TthPrimPol's unique ability to synthesize DNA primers with the
highly processive Phi29 DNA polymerase (Φ29DNApol) enables near-complete whole
genome amplification from single cells. This novel method demonstrates superior
breadth and evenness of genome coverage, high reproducibility, excellent
single-nucleotide variant (SNV) detection rates with low allelic dropout (ADO)
and low chimera formation as exemplified by sequencing HEK293 cells. Moreover,
copy number variant (CNV) calling yields superior results compared with random
primer-based MDA methods. The advantages of this method, which we named
TruePrime, promise to facilitate and improve single-cell genomic analysis.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13296 
PMCID: PMC5141293
PMID: 27897270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.J.P. and L.B. are inventors on patent
applications incorporating part of the reported findings. A.J.P., B.B., D.W.,
O.W., A.S. and C.K. are or were employees of SYGNIS Biotech SLU/SYGNIS Bioscience
GmbH & Co KG. L.B. owns shares of SYGNIS A.G. and is a paid advisor to the
company. TruePrime is a commercial product line available through SYGNIS or its
distributors. The remaining authors declare no competing financial interests.

