
1. J Med Microbiol. 2016 Dec;65(12):1521-1527. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.000382. Epub 2016 
Nov 1.

Development, validation and implementation of a quadruplex real-time PCR assay
for identification of potentially toxigenic corynebacteria.

De Zoysa A(1), Efstratiou A(1), Mann G(1), Harrison TG(1), Fry NK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Vaccine Preventable Bacteria Reference Unit, Public Health
England, Microbiology Reference Services, National Infection Service, London, UK.

Toxigenic corynebacteria are uncommon in the UK; however, laboratory confirmation
by the national reference laboratory can inform public health action according to
national guidelines. Standard phenotypic tests for identification and toxin
expression of isolates can take from ≥24 to ≥48 h from receipt. To decrease the
time to result, a real-time PCR (qPCR) assay was developed for confirmation of
both identification of Corynebacterium diphtheriae and Corynebacterium
ulcerans/Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis and detection of the diphtheria toxin
gene. Target genes were the RNA polymerase β-subunit-encoding gene (rpoB) and
A-subunit of the diphtheria toxin gene (tox). Green fluorescent protein DNA (gfp)
was used as an internal process control. qPCR results were obtained within 3 to 4
h after receipt of isolate. The assay was validated according to published
guidelines and demonstrated high diagnostic sensitivity (100 %), high specificity
(98-100 %) and positive and negative predictive values of 91 to 100 % and 100 %, 
respectively, compared to both block-based PCR and the Elek test, together with a
greatly reduced time from isolate receipt to reporting. Limitations of the qPCR
assay were the inability to distinguish between C. ulcerans and C.
pseudotuberculosis and that the presence of the toxin gene as demonstrated by
qPCR may not always predict toxin expression. Thus, confirmation of expression of
diphtheria toxin is always sought using the phenotypic Elek test. The new qPCR
assay was formally introduced as the front-line test for putative toxigenic
corynebacteria to inform public health action in England and Wales on 1 April
2014.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.000382 
PMID: 27902437  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

