
1. New Phytol. 2017 May;214(3):1245-1259. doi: 10.1111/nph.14442. Epub 2017 Jan 30.

The Arabidopsis Elongator complex is required for nonhost resistance against the 
bacterial pathogens Xanthomonas citri subsp. citri and Pseudomonas syringae pv.
phaseolicola NPS3121.

An C(1), Wang C(1), Mou Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, PO
Box 110700, Gainesville, FL, 32611, USA.

Although in recent years nonhost resistance has attracted considerable attention 
for its broad spectrum and durability, the genetic and mechanistic components of 
nonhost resistance have not been fully understood. We used molecular and
histochemical approaches including quantitative PCR, chromatin
immunoprecipitation, and 3,3'-diaminobenzidine and aniline blue staining. The
evolutionarily conserved histone acetyltransferase complex Elongator was
identified as a major component of nonhost resistance against Xanthomonas citri
subsp. citri (Xcc) and Pseudomonas syringae pv. phaseolicola (Psp) NPS3121.
Mutations in Elongator genes inhibit Xcc-, Psp NPS3121- and/or flg22-induced
defense responses including defense gene expression, callose deposition, and
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and salicylic acid (SA) accumulation. Mutations in 
Elongator also attenuate the ROS-SA amplification loop. We show that suppressed
ROS and SA accumulation in Elongator mutants is correlated with reduced
expression of the Arabidopsis respiratory burst oxidase homologue AtrbohD and the
SA biosynthesis gene ISOCHORISMATE SYNTHASE1 (ICS1). Furthermore, we found that
the Elongator subunit ELP2 is associated with the chromatin of AtrbohD and ICS1
and is required for maintaining basal histone H3 acetylation levels in these key 
defense genes. As both AtrbohD and ICS1 contribute to nonhost resistance against 
Xcc, our results reveal an epigenetic mechanism by which Elongator regulates
nonhost resistance in Arabidopsis.

© 2017 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2017 New Phytologist Trust.

DOI: 10.1111/nph.14442 
PMID: 28134437  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

