
1. Brain Behav Immun. 2017 May;62:24-29. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2017.01.022. Epub 2017
Feb 4.

Non-tumor cell IDO1 predominantly contributes to enzyme activity and response to 
CTLA-4/PD-L1 inhibition in mouse glioblastoma.

Zhai L(1), Ladomersky E(1), Dostal CR(2), Lauing KL(1), Swoap K(1), Billingham
LK(1), Gritsina G(1), Wu M(1), McCusker RH(3), Binder DC(4), Wainwright DA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
(2)Neuroscience Program, The University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, 
IL, USA.
(3)Department of Animal Sciences, The University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL, USA.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(5)Department of Neurological Surgery, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA; Department of Microbiology-Immunology,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA;
Department of Medicine-Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA; Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer 
Center of Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. Electronic address:
derekwainwright@northwestern.edu.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common malignant brain tumor in adults with a
median survival of 14.6months. A contributing factor to GBM aggressiveness is the
intratumoral expression of the potently immunosuppressive enzyme, indoleamine 2,3
dioxygenase 1 (IDO1). The enzymatic activity of IDO1 is associated with the
conversion of tryptophan into downstream kynurenine (Kyn), which has previously
been hypothesized to contribute toward the suppression of tumor immunity.
Utilizing the syngeneic, immunocompetent, intracranial GL261 cell GBM model, we
previously demonstrated that tumor cell, but not non-tumor cell IDO1, suppresses 
T cell-mediated brain tumor regression in mice. Paradoxically, we also showed
that the survival advantage mediated by immune checkpoint blockade is abrogated
by non-tumor cell IDO1 deficiency. Here, we have built on our past observations
and confirm the maladaptive role of tumor cell IDO1 in a novel mouse GBM model.
We also demonstrate that, non-tumor cells, rather than mouse GBM cells, are the
dominant contributor to IDO1-mediated enzyme activity. Finally, we show the novel
associations between maximally-effective immune-checkpoint blockade-mediated
survival, non-tumor cell IDO1 and intra-GBM Kyn levels. These data suggest for
the first time that, GBM cell-mediated immunosuppression is IDO1 enzyme
independent, while the survival benefits of immune checkpoint blockade require
non-tumor cell IDO1 enzyme activity. Given that current clinical inhibitors vary 
in their mechanism of action, in terms of targeting IDO1 enzyme activity versus
enzyme-independent effects, this work suggests that choosing an appropriate IDO1 
pharmacologic will maximize the effectiveness of future immune checkpoint
blockade approaches.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2017.01.022 
PMCID: PMC5514839
PMID: 28179106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

