
1. J Theor Biol. 2017 Sep 21;429:1-17. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2017.06.017. Epub 2017
Jun 20.

Identifying mechanisms driving formation of granuloma-associated fibrosis during 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection.

Warsinske HC(1), DiFazio RM(2), Linderman JJ(3), Flynn JL(2), Kirschner DE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, United States of America.
(3)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,
United States of America.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI, United States of America. Electronic address:
kirschne@umich.edu.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), the causative agent of tuberculosis (TB), is a 
pulmonary pathogen of major global concern. A key feature of Mtb infection in
primates is the formation of granulomas, dense cellular structures surrounding
infected lung tissue. These structures serve as the main site of host-pathogen
interaction in TB, and thus to effectively treat TB we must clarify mechanisms of
granuloma formation and their function in disease. Fibrotic granulomas are
associated with both good and bad disease outcomes. Fibrosis can serve to isolate
infected tissue from healthy tissue, but it can also cause difficulty breathing
as it leaves scars. Little is known about fibrosis in TB, and data from non-human
primates is just beginning to clarify the picture. This work focuses on
constructing a hybrid multi-scale model of fibrotic granuloma formation, in order
to identify mechanisms driving development of fibrosis in Mtb infected lungs. We 
combine dynamics of molecular, cellular, and tissue scale models from previously 
published studies to characterize the formation of two common sub-types of
fibrotic granulomas: peripherally fibrotic, with a cuff of collagen surrounding
granulomas, and centrally fibrotic, with collagen throughout granulomas.
Uncertainty and sensitivity analysis, along with large simulation sets, enable us
to identify mechanisms differentiating centrally versus peripherally fibrotic
granulomas. These findings suggest that heterogeneous cytokine environments exist
within granulomas and may be responsible for driving tissue scale morphologies.
Using this model we are primed to better understand the complex structure of
granulomas, a necessity for developing successful treatments for TB.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2017.06.017 
PMCID: PMC5576548
PMID: 28642013  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

