
1. Benef Microbes. 2017 Oct 13;8(5):705-716. doi: 10.3920/BM2016.0230. Epub 2017 Sep
8.

Galacto-oligosaccharides ameliorate dysbiotic Bifidobacteriaceae decline in
Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes.

Gonai M(1)(2), Shigehisa A(3), Kigawa I(1), Kurasaki K(1), Chonan O(3), Matsuki
T(3), Yoshida Y(3), Aida M(3), Hamano K(1), Terauchi Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Kantoh Rosai Hospital, 1-1
Kizukisumiyoshi, Nakahara, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 211-8510, Japan.
(2)3 Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Graduate School of Medicine,
Yokohama City University, 3-9 Fukuura, Kanazawa, Yokohama, Kanagawa 236-0004,
Japan.
(3)2 Yakult Central Institute, Yakult Honsha Co., Ltd., 5-11 Izumi, Kunitachi,
Tokyo 186-8650, Japan.

Gut microbiota affects the host's metabolism, and it is suggested that there are 
differences in gut microbiota composition between patients with type 2 diabetes
and healthy individuals. Additionally, dysbiosis may increase the concentration
of lipopolysaccharides (LPS), causing metabolic endotoxemia, which induces
impaired glucose tolerance. Several studies have reported relationships between
metabolic diseases and the gut microbiota; and prebiotics, such as
oligosaccharides, are commonly consumed to regulate gut microbiotas in healthy
individuals. Galacto-oligosaccharides (GOS) are a major prebiotic, which
specifically increase Bifidobacteriaceae abundance. Recent studies have reported 
that Bifidobacteriaceae improved metabolic endotoxemia or impaired glucose
tolerance. However, there are few studies reporting the effects of GOS on
patients with type 2 diabetes. In the current study, we compared clinical
parameters, faecal gut microbiota, their associated metabolic products and their 
components such as LPS, and LPS-binding protein (LBP) produced by the host,
between patients with diabetes and healthy controls. We then assessed the effects
of GOS on glycaemic control, and gut microbiotas and metabolites in patients with
type 2 diabetes in a double-blind controlled manner. LBP levels were
significantly higher in patients with diabetes than those of healthy subjects,
which was consistent with previous reports. The abundance of Bifidobacteriaceae
and the diversity of intestinal microbiota were significantly lower in patients
with diabetes than in healthy subjects. Interestingly, Bifidobacteriaceae was
markedly restored in patients with diabetes after consumption of GOS, whereas LBP
and glucose tolerance did not improve during this short-term trial period. In the
present study, we demonstrated that GOS can ameliorate dysbiosis in patients with
diabetes, and continuous intake of GOS may be a promising method for managing
type 2 diabetes.

DOI: 10.3920/BM2016.0230 
PMID: 28884590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

