
1. Indian J Microbiol. 2017 Sep;57(3):299-306. doi: 10.1007/s12088-017-0658-0. Epub 
2017 Jul 5.

Identification of Arsenic Resistance Genes from Marine Sediment Metagenome.

Chauhan NS(1)(2), Nain S(1)(3), Sharma R(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, Sukhdev Vihar, Mathura Road, Delhi, 110020 India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Present Address: Maharishi Dayanand University,
Rohtak, Haryana India.
(3)Academy of Scientific and Industrial Research (AcSIR), New Delhi, India.

A metagenomic library of sea sediment metagenome containing 245,000 recombinant
clones representing ~ 2.45 Gb of sea sediment microbial DNA was constructed. Two 
unique arsenic resistance clones, A7 and A12, were identified by selection on
sodium arsenite containing medium. Clone A7 showed a six-fold higher resistance
to arsenate [As(V)], a three-fold higher resistance to arsenite [As(III)] and
significantly increased resistance to antimony [Sb(III)], while clone A12 showed 
increased resistance only to sodium arsenite and not to the other two metalloids.
The clones harbored inserts of 8.848 Kb and 6.771 Kb, respectively. Both the
clones possess A + T rich nucleotide sequence with similarity to sequences from
marine psychrophilic bacteria. Sequence and transposon-mutagenesis based analysis
revealed the presence of a putative arsenate reductase (ArsC), a putative
arsenite efflux pump (ArsB/ACR) and a putative NADPH-dependent FMN reductase
(ArsH) in both the clones and also a putative transcriptional regulatory protein 
(ArsR) in pA7. The increased resistance of clone A7 to As(V), As(III) and Sb(III)
indicates functional expression of ArsC and ArsB proteins from pA7. The absence
of increased As(V) resistance in clone A12 may be due to the expression of a
possible inactive ArsC, as conserved Arg60 residue in this protein was replaced
by Glu60, while the absence of Sb(III) resistance may be due to the presence of
an ACR3p-type arsenite pump, which is known to lack antimony transport ability.

DOI: 10.1007/s12088-017-0658-0 
PMCID: PMC5574776
PMID: 28904414 

