
1. Chemosphere. 2018 Jan;191:729-737. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.10.044. Epub
2017 Oct 19.

Arsenic biotransformation potential of microbial arsH responses in the
biogeochemical cycling of arsenic-contaminated groundwater.

Chang JS(1), Yoon IH(2), Kim KW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biogeochemistry Laboratory, Biological & Genetic Resources Institute
(BGRI), Hannam University (Jeonmin Campus), 505 Inno-Biz Park, 1646
Yuseong-daero, Yeseong-gu, Daejeon, 34054, Republic of Korea.
(2)Decommissioning Technology Research Division, Korea Atomic Energy Research
Institute (KAERI), 111 Daedeok-daero, 989 Beon-gil, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 34057,
Republic of Korea.
(3)School of Earth Sciences and Environmental Engineering, Gwangju Institute of
Science and Technology (GIST), 261 Cheomdan-gwagiro, Buk-gu, Gwangju, 61005,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: kwkim@gist.ac.kr.

ArsH encodes an oxidoreductase, an NAD(P)H-dependent mononucleotide reductase,
with an unknown function, frequently within an ars operon, and is widely
distributed in bacteria. Novel arsenite-oxidizing bacteria have been isolated
from arsenic-contaminated groundwater and surface soil in Vietnam. We found that 
ArsH gene activity, with arsenite oxidase in the periplasm; it revealed arsenic
oxidation potential of the arsH system. Batch experiment results revealed
Citrobacter freundii strain VTan4 (DQ481466) and Pseudomonas putida strain VTw33 
(DQ481482) completely oxidized 1 mM of arsenite to arsenate within 30-50 h. High 
concentrations of arsenic were detected in groundwater and surrounding soil
obtained from Vinh Tru village in Ha Nam province (groundwater: 11.0 μg/L to
37.0 μg/L; and soil: 2.5 mg/kg, 390.1 mg/kg), respectively. An arsH gene encoding
an organoarsenical oxidase protein was observed in arsenite-oxidizing Citrobacter
freundii strain VTan4 (DQ481466), whereas arsB, arsH, and arsH were detected in
Pseudomonas putida strain VTw33 (DQ481482). arsH gene in bacteria was first
reported from Vietnam for resistance and arsenite oxidase. We proposed that
residues, Ser 43, Arg 45, Ser 48, and Tyr 49 are required for arsenic binding and
activation of arsH. The ars-mediated biotransformation strongly influenced
potential arsenite oxidase enzyme of the operon encoding a homogeneous arsH.
Results suggest that the further study of arsenite-oxidizing bacteria may lead to
a better understanding of arsenite oxidase responses, such as those of arsH, that
may be applied to control biochemical properties; for example, speciation,
detoxification, bioremediation, biotransformation, and mobilization of arsenic in
contaminated groundwater.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.10.044 
PMID: 29080535  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

