
1. PLoS One. 2017 Dec 7;12(12):e0189222. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189222.
eCollection 2017.

Genomic and phenotypic characteristics of Swedish C. jejuni water isolates.

Nilsson A(1), Johansson C(1), Skarp A(1), Kaden R(1), Engstrand L(2), Rautelin
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Clinical Microbiology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute, and 
Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden.

Campylobacter jejuni is the most common cause of bacterial gastroenteritis. Major
reservoirs are warm-blooded animals, poultry in particular, but Campylobacter can
also be transmitted via water. In this paper, we have taken a closer look at the 
biology and potential virulence of C. jejuni water isolates. Seven C. jejuni
isolates from incoming surface water at water plants in Sweden were characterized
with whole genome sequencing and phenotypical testing. Multi locus sequence
typing analysis revealed that these isolates belonged to groups known to include 
both common (ST48CC) and uncommon (ST1275CC, ST683, ST793 and ST8853) human
pathogens. Further genomic characterization revealed that these isolates had
potential for arsenic resistance (due to presence of arsB gene in all isolates), 
an anaerobic dimethyl sulfoxide oxidoreductase (in three isolates) and lacked the
MarR-type transcriptional regulator gene rrpB (in all but one isolate) earlier
shown to be involved in better survival under oxidative and aerobic stress. As
putative virulence factors were concerned, there were differences between the
water isolates in the presence of genes coding for cytolethal distending toxin
(cdtABC), Type VI secretion system and sialylated LOS, as well as in biofilm
formation. However, all isolates were motile and could adhere to and invade the
human HT-29 colon cancer cell line in vitro and induce IL-8 secretion suggesting 
potential to infect humans. This is, to the best of our knowledge, the first
study where C. jejuni water isolates have been characterized using whole genome
sequencing and phenotypical assays. We found differences and shared traits among 
the isolates but also potential to infect humans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189222 
PMCID: PMC5720728
PMID: 29216271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

