
1. J Biol Chem. 2018 Mar 30;293(13):4893-4900. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA117.001105. Epub
2018 Feb 6.

The bacterial pigment pyocyanin inhibits the NLRP3 inflammasome through
intracellular reactive oxygen and nitrogen species.

Virreira Winter S(1), Zychlinsky A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin,
Germany.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin,
Germany. Electronic address: zychlinsky@mpiib-berlin.mpg.de.

Inflammasomes are cytosolic complexes that mature and secrete the inflammatory
cytokines interleukin 1β (IL-1β) and IL-18 and induce pyroptosis. The NLRP3
(NACHT, LRR, and PYD domains-containing protein 3) inflammasome detects many
pathogen- and danger-associated molecular patterns, and reactive oxygen species
(ROS)/reactive nitrogen species (RNS) have been implicated in its activation. The
phenazine pyocyanin (PCN) is a virulence factor of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
generates superoxide in cells. Here we report that PCN inhibits IL-1β and IL-18
release and pyroptosis upon NLRP3 inflammasome activation in macrophages by
preventing speck formation and Caspase-1 maturation. Of note, PCN did not
regulate the AIM2 (absent in melanoma 2) or NLRC4 inflammasomes or tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) secretion. Imaging of the fluorescent glutathione redox potential
sensor Grx1-roGFP2 indicated that PCN provokes cytosolic and nuclear but not
mitochondrial redox changes. PCN-induced intracellular ROS/RNS inhibited the
NLRP3 inflammasome posttranslationally, and hydrogen peroxide or peroxynitrite
alone were sufficient to block its activation. We propose that cytosolic ROS/RNS 
inhibit the NLRP3 inflammasome and that PCN's anti-inflammatory activity may help
P. aeruginosa evade immune recognition.

© 2018 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA117.001105 
PMCID: PMC5880120
PMID: 29414783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest with the contents of this article.

