
1. J Exp Biol. 2018 Apr 12;221(Pt 8). pii: jeb174623. doi: 10.1242/jeb.174623.

Differences in stress and disease resilience related to emergence time for first 
feeding in farmed rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss).

Gesto M(1), Madsen L(2), Andersen NR(2), Jokumsen A(3).

Author information: 
(1)DTU Aqua, Section for Aquaculture, Technical University of Denmark, North Sea 
Science Park, 9850 Hirtshals, Denmark mges@aqua.dtu.dk.
(2)DTU Vet, Division of Diagnostics & Scientific Advice - Fish Diseases,
Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Lyngby, Denmark.
(3)DTU Aqua, Section for Aquaculture, Technical University of Denmark, North Sea 
Science Park, 9850 Hirtshals, Denmark.

Salmonid individuals show a relatively high variability in the time required to
abandon the gravel nest where they hatch, the so-called 'emergence time'.
Different behavioral and physiological traits have been shown to be associated
with emergence time in wild salmonids. In general, early- and late-emerging fish 
have traits resembling those of proactive and reactive stress coping styles,
respectively. Proactive fish are considered to be more resilient to stress and
probably to disease, so it was hypothesized that fish with different emergence
times have different abilities to resist repeated episodes of stress without
suffering deleterious effects on their welfare or health status. In this study,
rainbow trout eyed eggs were hatched and larvae were fractionated according to
their emergence time (early fraction: first 20% of fish to emerge; intermediate
fraction: mid 20%; late fraction: last 20%). When the fish were 4 months old,
they were exposed to a daily repeated stress protocol for 15 days. The next day, 
both naïve and repeatedly stressed fish were exposed to an acute stress
challenge. Different plasma (cortisol, glucose, lactate) as well as CNS
(serotonergic activity) stress markers were assessed to evaluate the stress
resilience of the different groups. Furthermore, an intraperitoneal infection
challenge with Flavobacterium psychrophilum was carried out to assess disease
resilience. Altogether, the results showed that fish from different fractions
displayed differences in activation of the hypothalamus-pituitary-inter-renal
axis, indicating a higher stress resilience in the fish with early emergence
times. However, those differences were not reflected in the ability of the
different fractions to grow and perform well in terms of growth, or in the
ability to overcome infection with bacteria, which was similar for all the
emergence fractions. This suggests that discriminating fish according to
emergence time would probably have little effect in improving the performance and
the welfare of farmed fish.

© 2018. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jeb.174623 
PMID: 29487157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no
competing or financial interests.

