
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2018 Aug;85:115-124. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2018.04.003. Epub 2018 
Apr 5.

Characterization of αβ and γδ T cell subsets expressing IL-17A in ruminants and
swine.

Elnaggar MM(1), Abdellrazeq GS(2), Dassanayake RP(3), Fry LM(4), Hulubei V(5),
Davis WC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, WA, USA; Department of Microbiology,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Alexandria University, Egypt. Electronic address:
mahmoud.elnaggar@wsu.edu.
(2)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, WA, USA; Department of Microbiology,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Alexandria University, Egypt.
(3)Ruminant Diseases and Immunology Research Unit, National Animal Disease
Center, United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service,
Ames, IA, USA.
(4)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, WA, USA; Animal Disease Research Unit,
Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture, Pullman, 
WA, USA.
(5)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, WA, USA.

As part of our ongoing program to expand immunological reagents available for
research in cattle, we developed a monoclonal antibody (mAb) to bovine
interleukin-17A (IL-17A), a multifunctional cytokine centrally involved in
regulating innate and adaptive immune responses. Initial comparative studies
demonstrated the mAb recognizes a conserved epitope expressed on orthologues of
IL-17A in sheep, goats and pigs. Comparative flow cytometric analyses of
lymphocyte subsets stimulated with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) and
ionomycin revealed differences in expression of IL-17A by CD4, CD8, and γδ T
cells across ruminants and swine species. Results in cattle showed the largest
proportion of IL-17A+ cells were CD4+ followed by γδ and CD8+ T cells. Further
analysis revealed the IL-17A+ γδ T cell subset was comprised of WC1.1+, WC1.2+,
and WC1- subsets. Analysis of the IL-17A+ CD8+ T cell subset revealed it was
comprised of αβ and γδ T cell subsets. Results in sheep and goats revealed IL-17A
is expressed mainly by CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, with little expression by γδ T
cells. Analysis of IL-17A+ CD8+ T cells showed the majority were CD8+ αβ in
sheep, whereas they were CD8+ γδ in goats. The majority of the sheep and goat
IL-17A+ γδ T cells were WC1+. Results obtained in swine showed expression of
IL-17A by CD4, CD8, and γδ T cell subsets were similar to results reported in
other studies. Comparison of expression of IL-17A with IFN-γ revealed subsets
co-expressed IL-17A and IFN-γ in cattle, sheep, and goats. The new mAb expands
opportunities for immunology research in ruminants and swine.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2018.04.003 
PMID: 29627456  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

