
1. BMC Microbiol. 2018 May 8;18(1):42. doi: 10.1186/s12866-018-1184-x.

Genetic diversity and characterization of arsenic-resistant endophytic bacteria
isolated from Pteris vittata, an arsenic hyperaccumulator.

Gu Y(1), Wang Y(2), Sun Y(2), Zhao K(2), Xiang Q(2), Yu X(2), Zhang X(2), Chen
Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Resource Science and Technology,
Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu, 611130, China. guyf@sicau.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Microbiology, College of Resource Science and Technology,
Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu, 611130, China.

BACKGROUND: Alleviating arsenic (As) contamination is a high-priority
environmental issue. Hyperaccumulator plants may harbor endophytic bacteria able 
to detoxify As. Therefore, we investigated the distribution, diversity, As (III) 
resistance levels, and resistance-related functional genes of arsenite-resistant 
bacterial endophytes in Pteris vittata L. growing in a lead-zinc mining area with
different As contamination levels.
RESULTS: A total of 116 arsenite-resistant bacteria were isolated from roots of
P. vittata with different As concentrations. Based on the 16S rRNA gene sequence 
analysis of representative isolates, the isolates belonged to Proteobacteria,
Actinobacteria, and Firmicutes. Major genera found were Agrobacterium,
Stenotrophomonas, Pseudomonas, Rhodococcus, and Bacillus. The most highly
arsenite-resistant bacteria (minimum inhibitory concentration > 45 mM) were
isolated from P. vittata with high As concentrations and belonged to the genera
Agrobacterium and Bacillus. The strains with high As tolerance also showed high
levels of indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) production and carried arsB/ACR3(2) genes.
The arsB and ACR3(2) were most likely horizontally transferred among the strains.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study suggest that P. vittata plants with high As
concentrations may select diverse arsenite-resistant bacteria; this diversity
might, at least partly, be a result of horizontal gene transfer. These diverse
endophytic bacteria are potential candidates to enhance phytoremediation
techniques.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-018-1184-x 
PMCID: PMC5941679
PMID: 29739310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

