
1. J Fish Dis. 2018 Sep;41(9):1395-1402. doi: 10.1111/jfd.12833. Epub 2018 Jun 11.

Influence of native catfish mucus on Flavobacterium columnare growth and
proteolytic activity.

Shoemaker CA(1), LaFrentz BR(1), Peatman E(2), Beck BH(1).

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Aquatic Animal 
Health Research Unit, Auburn, Alabama.
(2)School of Fisheries Aquaculture and Aquatic Sciences, Auburn University,
Auburn, Alabama.

Flavobacterium columnare causes columnaris disease of farmed and wild freshwater 
fish. Skin mucus is an important factor in early stages of columnaris
pathogenesis, albeit little studied. Our objectives were to (a) characterize the 
terminal glycosylation pattern (TGP) of catfish mucus, (b) determine the growth
of F. columnare in formulated water (FW)-containing channel catfish (Ictalurus
punctatus) or hybrid catfish (Ictalurus punctatus X Ictalurus furcatus) mucus and
(c) examine extracellular protease activity of two F. columnare isolates
differing in virulence. The TGP of catfish mucus by lectin binding was as
follows: alpha-D-mannose/alpha-D-glucose >N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosamine
>N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosamine/N-acetylneuraminic acid >N-acetyl-D-galactosamine
>alpha-D-galactose/N-acetyl-alpha-D-galactosamine
>beta-D-galactose = alpha-L-fucose. Virulence studies demonstrated isolate
AL-02-36 was highly virulent in channel catfish fry (0.1 g) with cumulative
mortality of 90%-100% versus 60% for isolate ALG-00-530 at equivalent doses
(~3 × 106  CFU/ml); a similar result was observed in larger (0.7 g) catfish. In
multiple experiments, F. columnare replicated (2-3 logs) and survived (28 days)
in formulated water-containing catfish mucus. Highly virulent isolate AL-02-36
possessed at least 2.5- to fivefold higher protease activity following growth in 
mucus than the less virulent ALG-00-530. Flavobacterium columnare utilized
catfish mucus as a nutrient source and mucus presence modulated extracellular
protease production.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.12833 
PMID: 29893005  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

