
1. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2018 Sep 5;158:280-287. doi: 10.1016/j.jpba.2018.06.013.
Epub 2018 Jun 8.

Quantification of nucleotides and their sugar conjugates in biological samples:
Purposes, instruments and applications.

Qin X(1), Wang X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai,
China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai,
China. Electronic address: xwang@bio.ecnu.edu.cn.

Nucleotides and their sugar conjugates are fundamental molecules in life,
participating in processes of DNA/RNA composition, cell wall build-up,
glycosylation reactions, and signal conduction. Therefore, the quantification of 
these compounds in biological samples significantly benefits the understanding of
their functions. However, nucleotides and nucleotide sugars are extremely
hydrophilic, causing bad retention and peak symmetry on regular C18
chromatographic columns. To solve this problem, ion-pair (IP) chromatography,
ion-exchange (IE) chromatography and hydrophilic interaction chromatography
(HILIC) were applied, of which differentiated mechanisms were utilized to
increase the retention of the analytes on the stationary phases. IP-HPLC and
HILIC were convenient for coupling with many kinds of detectors (ultraviolet, UV 
or mass spectrometry, MS). Combining these two kinds of techniques, the
advantages of better separation and retention were increased, while disadvantages
like irreversible adsorption by stationary phases were greatly decreased. Due to 
the high concentrations of nonvolatile buffer salts used, IE-HPLC was not
suitable for MS detectors. Protein precipitation and solid phase extraction were 
the common methods for sample treatment in the analysis of nucleotides and
nucleotide sugars. By carefully optimizing the LCUV or LCMS conditions, high
sensitivities could be achieved, and the methods could be applied to the analysis
of many kinds of biological samples (cells, tissues, plants, bacteria, etc.).
Developing new analyzing techniques may help the utilization of nucleotides and
nucleotide sugars in the diagnosis and therapy of diseases.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpba.2018.06.013 
PMID: 29902692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

