
1. J Thromb Haemost. 2018 Oct;16(10):2044-2049. doi: 10.1111/jth.14243. Epub 2018
Aug 16.

Factor XI promotes hemostasis in factor IX-deficient mice.

Mohammed BM(1)(2), Cheng Q(1), Matafonov A(1), Monroe DM(3), Meijers JCM(4)(5),
Gailani D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, Cairo University, Cairo, 
Egypt.
(3)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of North
Carolina-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Plasma Proteins, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Experimental Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Essentials Mice lacking factor IX (FIX) or factor XI (FXI) were tested in a
saphenous vein bleeding model. FIX-deficient mice displayed a hemostatic defect
and FXI-deficient mice were similar to wild type mice. Infusion of FXI or
over-expression of FXI in FIX-deficient mice improved hemostasis. FXI may affect 
the phenotype of FIX-deficiency (hemophilia B).SUMMARY: Background In humans,
deficiency of coagulation factor XI may be associated with a bleeding disorder,
but, until recently, FXI-deficient mice did not appear to have a hemostatic
abnormality. A recent study, however, indicated that FXI-deficient mice show a
moderate hemostatic defect in a saphenous vein bleeding (SVB) model. Objectives
To study the effect of FXI on bleeding in mice with normal levels of the FXI
substrate FIX and in mice lacking FIX (a murine model of hemophilia B). Methods
Wild-type mice and mice lacking either FIX (F9- ) or FXI (F11-/- ) were tested in
the SVB model. The plasma levels of FXI in F11-/- mice were manipulated by
infusion of FXI or its active form FXIa, or by overexpressing FXI by the use of
hydrodynamic tail vein injection. Results F9- mice showed a significant defect in
the SVB model, whereas F11-/- mice and wild-type mice were indistinguishable.
Intravenous infusion of FXI or FXIa into, or overexpression of FXI in, F9- mice
improved hemostasis in the SVB model. Overexpression of a FXI variant lacking a
FIX-binding site also improved hemostasis in F9- mice. Conclusions Although we
were unable to demonstrate a hemostatic defect in F11-/- mice in the SVB model,
our results support the premise that supraphysiological levels of FXI improve
hemostasis in F9- mice through FIX-independent pathways.

© 2018 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.14243 
PMCID: PMC6173617
PMID: 30007049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

