
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2018 Sep 14;38(19). pii: e00304-18. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00304-18.
Print 2018 Oct 1.

Ribosomal RACK1:Protein Kinase C βII Phosphorylates Eukaryotic Initiation Factor 
4G1 at S1093 To Modulate Cap-Dependent and -Independent Translation Initiation.

Dobrikov MI(1)(2), Dobrikova EY(1)(2), Gromeier M(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.
(2)Departments of Molecular Genetics and of Microbiology and Neurosurgery, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, USA grome001@mc.duke.edu.

Eukaryotic ribosomes contain the high-affinity protein kinase C βII (PKCβII)
scaffold, receptor for activated C kinase (RACK1), but its role in protein
synthesis control remains unclear. We found that RACK1:PKCβII phosphorylates
eukaryotic initiation factor 4G1 (eIF4G1) at S1093 and eIF3a at S1364. We showed 
that reversible eIF4G(S1093) phosphorylation is involved in a global protein
synthesis surge upon PKC-Raf-extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2)
activation and in induction of phorbol ester-responsive transcripts, such as
cyclooxygenase 2 (Cox-2) and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (p21Cip1), or in
5' 7-methylguanosine (m7G) cap-independent enterovirus translation. Comparison of
mRNA and protein levels revealed that eIF4G1 or RACK1 depletion blocked phorbol
ester-induced Cox-2 or p21Cip1 expression mostly at the translational level,
whereas PKCβ inhibition reduced them both at the translational and transcript
levels. Our findings reveal a physiological role for ribosomal RACK1 in providing
the molecular scaffold for PKCβII and its role in coordinating the translational 
response to PKC-Raf-ERK1/2 activation.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00304-18 
PMCID: PMC6146833
PMID: 30012863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

