
1. Environ Pollut. 2018 Oct;241:1182-1190. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2018.06.048. Epub
2018 Jun 19.

Metagenomics reveal triclosan-induced changes in the antibiotic resistome of
anaerobic digesters.

Fujimoto M(1), Carey DE(2), McNamara PJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil, Construction and Environmental Engineering, Marquette
University, Milwaukee, WI, USA; Soil and Water Sciences Department, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Civil, Construction and Environmental Engineering, Marquette
University, Milwaukee, WI, USA; Brown & Caldwell, Charlotte, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Civil, Construction and Environmental Engineering, Marquette
University, Milwaukee, WI, USA. Electronic address: patrick.mcnamara@mu.edu.

Triclosan (TCS) is a broad-spectrum antimicrobial used in a variety of consumer
products. While it was recently banned from hand soaps in the US, it is still a
key ingredient in a top-selling toothpaste. TCS is a hydrophobic micropollutant
that is recalcitrant under anaerobic digestion thereby resulting in high TCS
concentrations in biosolids. The objective of this study was to determine the
impact of TCS on the antibiotic resistome and potential cross-protection in
lab-scale anaerobic digesters using shotgun metagenomics. It was hypothesized
that metagenomics would reveal selection for antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs)
not previously found in pure culture studies or mixed-culture studies using
targeted qPCR. In this study, four different levels of TCS were continuously fed 
to triplicate lab-scale anaerobic digesters to assess the effect of TCS levels on
the antibiotic resistance gene profiles (resistome). Blasting metagenomic reads
against antibiotic/metal resistance gene database (BacMet) revealed that ARG
diversity and abundance changed along the TCS concentration gradient. While loss 
of bacterial diversity and digester function were observed in the digester
treated with the highest TCS concentration, FabV, which is a known TCS resistance
gene, increased in this extremely high TCS environment. The abundance of several 
other known ARG or metal resistance genes (MRGs), including corA and arsB, also
increased as the concentrations of TCS increased. Analysis of other functional
genes using SEED database revealed the increase of potentially key genes for
resistance including different types of transporters and transposons. These
results indicate that antimicrobials can alter the abundance of multiple
resistance genes in anaerobic digesters even when function (i.e. methane
production) is maintained. This study also suggests that enriched ARGs could be
released into environments with biosolids land application.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2018.06.048 
PMID: 30029328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

