
1. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2019 Sep;11(3):957-965. doi:
10.1007/s12602-018-9453-4.

Evaluation of the Impacts of Long-Term Enriched Artemia with Bacillus subtilis on
Growth Performance, Reproduction, Intestinal Microflora, and Resistance to
Aeromonas hydrophila of Ornamental Fish Poecilia latipinna.

Ahmadifard N(1), Rezaei Aminlooi V(2), Tukmechi A(3), Agh N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fisheries, Faculty of Natural Resources, Urmia University, P.O. 
Box: 46414-356, Urmia, West Azerbaijan, Iran. n.ahmadifard@urmia.ac.ir.
(2)Department of Fisheries, Faculty of Natural Resources, Urmia University, P.O. 
Box: 46414-356, Urmia, West Azerbaijan, Iran.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Urmia University, 
Urmia, West Azerbaijan, Iran.
(4)Department of Artemia, Urmia Lake Research Institute, Urmia University, Urmia,
West Azerbaijan, Iran.

The present study investigated the effect of enriched Artemia with Bacillus
subtilis on growth performance, reproductive factors, proximate composition,
intestinal microflora, and resistance to Aeromonas hydrophila of ornamental fish,
Poecilia latipinna. Using a completely randomized design, the experiment included
three groups. The first group was fed with commercial food without any probiotic.
The second group was fed with unenriched Artemia, and the last group consumed
long-time enriched Artemia with Bacillus subtilis. The bacteria B. subtilis with 
a density of 1 × 105 CFU mL-1 was added daily to Artemia culture medium. The
total microflora and Bacillus subtilis counts were significantly increased in
enriched Artemia compared to the unenriched group (P < 0.05). In fish fed groups,
growth factors did not show any significant difference (P > 0.05). The maximum
relative fecundity (28.65 ± 2.52 egg number g-1), fry production (62.93 ± 4.6
individual per female), and fry survival (70.97 ± 1.56%) obtained in the third
group were found to be significantly more than those in the first and the second 
groups. Moreover, intestinal bacterial count for Bacillus revealed that the
higher concentration of bacteria was significantly related to the third group
(6.24 ± 0.11 log CFU g-1) (P < 0.05). Maximum protein and fat contents were
observed in fish fed with Bacillus-enriched Artemia; however, no significant
difference was found between control and unenriched Artemia groups (P > 0.05).
The highest amount of ash was observed in fish fed with commercial food without
any probiotic (P < 0.05). At the end of the feeding period, each of the three
groups along with positive group (oxytetracycline 100 mg kg-1 of commercial food)
was exposed to A. hydrophila (BCCM5/LMG3770) bacteria intraperitoneally. Based on
the results, the lowest cumulative mortality was significantly found in group
three (68.75 ± 3.6%) and positive group (62.5 ± 7.0%) compared to control and
unenriched Artemia groups (P < 0.05). Hence, B. subtilis with a concentration of 
1 × 105 CFU mL-1 during the period of Artemia culturing can improve the
reproductive parameters, intestinal microflora, and resistance to pathogenic
bacteria of Poecilia latipinna.

DOI: 10.1007/s12602-018-9453-4 
PMID: 30097884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

