
1. Pflugers Arch. 2019 Feb;471(2):301-311. doi: 10.1007/s00424-018-2222-0. Epub 2018
Oct 22.

Role of CINC-1 and CXCR2 receptors on LPS-induced fever in rats.

Yamashiro LH(1)(2), de Souza GEP(1), de Melo Soares D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology, Department of Physic and Chemistry, Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Science, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA, USA.
(3)Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Rua Barão do Jeremoabo, 
no. 147, Ondina, Salvador, Bahia, 40170-115, Brazil. denisms@ufba.br.

The classic model of fever induction is based on the administration of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from Gram-negative bacteria in experimental animals.
LPS-induced fever results in the synthesis/release of many mediators that
assemble an LPS-fever cascade. We have previously demonstrated that
cytokine-induced neutrophil chemoattractant (CINC)-1, a Glu-Leu-Arg (ELR) +
chemokine, centrally administered to rats, induces fever and increases
prostaglandin E2 in the cerebrospinal fluid. We now attempt to investigate the
involvement of CINC-1 and its functional receptor CXCR2 on the fever induced by
exogenous and endogenous pyrogens in rats. We also investigated the effect of
reparixin, an allosteric inhibitor of CXCR1/CXCR2 receptors, on fever induced by 
either systemic administration of LPS or intracerebroventricular injection of
CINC-1, as well as TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, or ET-1, known mediators of febrile
response. Our results show increased CINC-1 mRNA expression in the liver,
hypothalamus, CSF, and plasma following LPS injection. Moreover, reparixin
administered right before CINC-1 or LPS abolished the fever induced by CINC-1 and
significantly reduced the response induced by LPS. In spite of these results,
reparixin does not modify the fever induced by IL-1β, TNF-α, and IL-6, but
significantly reduces ET-1-induced fever. Therefore, it is plausible to suggest
that CINC-1 might contribute to LPS-induced fever in rats by activating CXCR2
receptor on the CNS. Moreover, it can be hypothesized that CINC-1 is placed
upstream TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 among the prostaglandin-dependent fever-mediator 
cascade and amidst the prostaglandin-independent synthesis pathway of fever.

DOI: 10.1007/s00424-018-2222-0 
PMID: 30349936  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

