
1. Cell Signal. 2019 Feb;54:69-80. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2018.11.004. Epub 2018 Nov
19.

How do chemokines navigate neutrophils to the target site: Dissecting the
structural mechanisms and signaling pathways.

Rajarathnam K(1), Schnoor M(2), Richardson RM(3), Rajagopal S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, Sealy Center for Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. Electronic address:
krrajara@utmb.edu.
(2)Department for Molecular Biomedicine, Cinvestav-IPN, 07360 Mexico City,
Mexico.
(3)Julius L. Chambers Biomedical/Biotechnology Research Institute, North Carolina
Central University, Durham, NC 27707, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine (Cardiology), Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.

Chemokines play crucial roles in combating microbial infection and initiating
tissue repair by recruiting neutrophils in a timely and coordinated manner. In
humans, no less than seven chemokines (CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL3, CXCL5, CXCL6, CXCL7, 
and CXCL8) and two receptors (CXCR1 and CXCR2) mediate neutrophil functions but
in a context dependent manner. Neutrophil-activating chemokines reversibly exist 
as monomers and dimers, and their receptor binding triggers conformational
changes that are coupled to G-protein and β-arrestin signaling pathways.
G-protein signaling activates a variety of effectors including Ca2+ channels and 
phospholipase C. β-arrestin serves as a multifunctional adaptor and is coupled to
several signaling hubs including MAP kinase and tyrosine kinase pathways. Both
G-protein and β-arrestin signaling pathways play important non-overlapping roles 
in neutrophil trafficking and activation. Functional studies have established
many similarities but distinct differences for a given chemokine and between
chemokines at the level of monomer vs. dimer, CXCR1 vs. CXCR2 activation, and
G-protein vs. β-arrestin pathways. We propose that two forms of the ligand
binding two receptors and activating two signaling pathways enables fine-tuned
neutrophil function compared to a single form, a single receptor, or a single
pathway. We summarize the current knowledge on the molecular mechanisms by which 
chemokine monomers/dimers activate CXCR1/CXCR2 and how these interactions trigger
G-protein/β-arrestin-coupled signaling pathways. We also discuss current
challenges and knowledge gaps, and likely advances in the near future that will
lead to a better understanding of the relationship between the
chemokine-CXCR1/CXCR2-G-protein/β-arrestin axis and neutrophil function.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2018.11.004 
PMCID: PMC6664297
PMID: 30465827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

