
1. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2019 Mar;16(3):166-172. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2017.2418. Epub
2018 Nov 24.

Multidrug-Resistant Salmonella enterica Isolated from Food Animal and Foodstuff
May Also Be Less Susceptible to Heavy Metals.

Figueiredo R(1)(2)(3), Card RM(3), Nunez-Garcia J(3), Mendonça N(1)(2), da Silva 
GJ(1)(2), Anjum MF(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Coimbra ,
Coimbra, Portugal .
(2)2 Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Laboratory of Microbiology,
University of Coimbra , Coimbra, Portugal .
(3)3 Department of Bacteriology, Animal and Plant Health and Agency , Surrey,
United Kingdom .

Salmonella enterica is a foodborne pathogen showing increasing multidrug
resistance (MDR). We characterized the antimicrobial resistance (AMR) genotype
using microarrays in a panel of 105 nontyphoidal S. enterica isolated from food
animals and foodstuff. Nineteen isolates were chosen on the basis of their MDR
and virulence for determination of heavy metal susceptibilities and screened by
polymerase chain reaction for heavy metal resistance genes. Whole-genome
sequencing (WGS) was performed on three isolates carrying clinically important
AMR genes and the cdtB toxin gene to detect other heavy metal resistance
mechanisms, and conjugation assays were performed to evaluate transfer of
AMR/toxin genes with heavy metal resistance genes. AMR genotyping results showed 
isolates harbored between 1 and 12 mobile AMR genes, with 58% being classified as
MDR. The tested subset of isolates showed reduced susceptibility to zinc (78%),
copper (68%), silver (63%), arsenic (47%), and tellurite (26%); phenotypes that
could be attributed to zitB (n = 32%), pcoA/pcoD (n = 32%), tcrB (n = 16%), arsB 
(n = 16%), silA/silE (n = 42%), and terF (n = 26%) genes. WGS confirmed the
presence of other heavy metal resistance genes such as copA, cusA, and czcD.
Isolates often harbored multiple heavy metal resistance genes. Two strains (Sal25
and Sal368) were able to conjugate with Escherichia coli J53 at a relatively high
frequency (∼10-4 colony-forming units per recipient). Transformants selected in
the presence of copper harbored either an IncHI2 (J53/Sal25 transconjugant) or
IncF (J53/Sal368 transconjugant) plasmid with decreased susceptibilities to
tellurite, zinc, copper, cobalt, arsenic, lead, mercury, and silver. blaCTX-M-1
and mcr-1 genes were also transferred to one transconjugant, and tet(M) and
blaTEM-1 genes to the other. This work shows the presence of a diversity of AMR
genes in this zoonotic pathogen, and suggests that heavy metals may contribute to
selection of clinically important ones through the food chain, such as the
plasmid-mediated colistin resistance gene mcr-1.

DOI: 10.1089/fpd.2017.2418 
PMID: 30480469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

