
1. Int J Hyg Environ Health. 2019 Mar;222(2):315-318. doi:
10.1016/j.ijheh.2018.11.001. Epub 2018 Nov 27.

Probable reinfection with Legionella pneumophila - A case report.

Buchholz U(1), Reber F(2), Lehfeld AS(3), Brodhun B(4), Haas W(5), Schaefer B(6),
Stemmler F(7), Otto C(8), Gagell C(9), Lück C(10), Gamradt R(11), Heinig M(12),
Meisel C(13), Kölsch U(14), Eisenblätter M(15), Jahn HJ(16).

Author information: 
(1)Robert Koch Institute, Seestr. 10, Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
buchholzu@rki.de.
(2)Robert Koch Institute, Seestr. 10, Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
reberf@rki.de.
(3)Robert Koch Institute, Seestr. 10, Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
lehfelda@rki.de.
(4)Robert Koch Institute, Seestr. 10, Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
brodhunb@rki.de.
(5)Robert Koch Institute, Seestr. 10, Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
haasw@rki.de.
(6)German Environment Agency, Bad Elster, Germany. Electronic address:
benedikt.schaefer@uba.de.
(7)German Environment Agency, Bad Elster, Germany. Electronic address:
fabian.stemmler@uba.de.
(8)German Environment Agency, Bad Elster, Germany. Electronic address:
christina.otto@uba.de.
(9)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Medical Faculty "Carl Gustav
Carus", Technical University Dresden, Germany. Electronic address:
corinna.gagell@mailbox.tu-dresden.de.
(10)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Medical Faculty "Carl Gustav 
Carus", Technical University Dresden, Germany. Electronic address:
christian.lueck@mailbox.tu-dresden.de.
(11)Health Department of Neukölln, Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
ronny.gamradt@bezirksamt-neukoelln.de.
(12)Health Department of Neukölln, Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
maxi.heinig@bezirksamt-neukoelln.de.
(13)Labor Berlin, Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
christian.meisel@laborberlin.com.
(14)Labor Berlin, Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
uwe.koelsch@laborberlin.com.
(15)SynLab, Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: martin.eisenblaetter@synlab.com.
(16)Robert Koch Institute, Seestr. 10, Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
JahnH@rki.de.

In Germany community-acquired Legionnaires' disease is usually caused by the
species Legionella pneumophila. Recurrent cases of Legionnaires' disease are
rarely reported and are due either to a second infection (reinfection) or a
relapse of a previous case. We report a case of recurrent Legionnaires' disease
in an 86-year-old female patient infected with Legionella pneumophila serogroup
1, monoclonal antibody-subtype Knoxville, sequence type unknown. Between the two 
disease incidents the patient had completely recovered. Legionella pneumophila
was detected with the monoclonal antibody-subtype Knoxville, sequence type 182,
in the drinking water of the patient's apartment. Exposure to contaminated
drinking water was interrupted after the first incident exposure through the
application of point-of-use water filters. The filters were later removed due to 
low water pressure, and the second illness occurred thereafter. It is unclear if 
immunological predisposition has contributed to this case of probable reinfection
of Legionnaires' disease. Clinical, microbiological and epidemiological
information combined suggest this is a case of reinfection of Legionnaires'
disease. In cases of recurrent Legionnaires' disease complete collection of
patient and water samples is necessary to differentiate relapse from reinfection 
cases, to implicate the source of infection and to gain more evidence for the
role of immunological predisposition.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijheh.2018.11.001 
PMID: 30501994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

