
1. Infect Disord Drug Targets. 2019;19(4):337-349. doi:
10.2174/1871526519666181231153139.

PZQ Therapy: How Close are we in the Development of Effective Alternative
Anti-schistosomal Drugs?

Aruleba RT(1), Adekiya TA(1), Oyinloye BE(1)(2), Masamba P(1), Mbatha LS(1),
Pretorius A(3), Kappo AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Afe Babalola University, PMB 5454, Ado-Ekiti
360001, Nigeria.
(3)Bioinformatics Research Group (BRG), DST/Mintek Nanotechnology Innovation
Centre, Biolabels Node, Department of Biotechnology, University of the Western
Cape, Bellville 7535, South Africa.

Today schistosomiasis, caused mainly by the three major schistosome species (S.
mansoni, S. haematobium and S. japonicum), has for many decades and still
continues to be on a rapid and swift rise globally, claiming thousands of lives
every year and leaving 800 million people at the risk of infection. Due to the
high prevalence of this disease and the steady increase in the infection rates,
praziquantel (PZQ) remains the only effective drug against this acute disease
although it has no effect on the juvenile schistosome parasite. However, no
significant approaches have been made in recent years in the discovery of new or 
alternative drugs and unfortunately, resistance to this drug has been reported in
some parts of the world. Therefore, it is imperative to develop a new drug for
this debilitating disease. In this review, a brief history of past, present, and 
new promising anti-schistosomal drugs is presented.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1871526519666181231153139 
PMCID: PMC7046992
PMID: 30599112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

