
1. J Chromatogr A. 2019 Mar 15;1588:137-149. doi: 10.1016/j.chroma.2018.12.045. Epub
2018 Dec 21.

In-process quality control of wine by planar chromatography versus micro planar
chromatography.

Kirchert S(1), Kaiser RE(2), Morlock GE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Chair of Food Sciences, Institute of Nutritional Science, and
Interdisciplinary Research Center, Justus Liebig University Giessen,
Heinrich-Buff-Ring 26-32, 35392 Giessen, Germany.
(2)Institute for Chromatography, Dr.-Hugo-Bischoff-Str. 1a, Bad Dürkheim,
Germany.
(3)Chair of Food Sciences, Institute of Nutritional Science, and
Interdisciplinary Research Center, Justus Liebig University Giessen,
Heinrich-Buff-Ring 26-32, 35392 Giessen, Germany. Electronic address:
Gertrud.Morlock@uni-giessen.de.

High-performance thin-layer chromatography (HPTLC) methods were developed to
determine glycerol, gluconic acid, amino acids and sugars for in-process quality 
control of wine. Twenty wine samples (Pfalz region, Germany) were diluted with
methanol and used for quantitative analysis without any further sample
preparation. The developed amino acid method provided quantitative and
characteristic fingerprints of wine varieties. The amino acid assignments were
verified by HPTLC-MS. The developed gluconic acid method was primarily used to
control the threshold, indicating a Botrytis cinerea infection of grapes.
However, this method also enabled the detection of further organic acids like
malic, tartaric and citric acids. A glycerol method was developed for control of 
the grape must fermentation (spontaneous/regular) and for fraud detection
(glycerol adulteration). The HPTLC results of the sugar contents in the wine
samples were similar to those of the well-known Luff-Schoorl method. The combined
use of these developed HPTLC methods allowed the fermentation control (e.g.,
alcoholic and malolactic fermentation) and the monitoring of the grapes' overall 
health status. Without modification, the HPTLC methods for sugar and amino acid
analysis could be transferred to circular micro planar chromatography (μ-PLC),
showing its potential and benefits in terms of an inexpensive alternative for
wineries and distributors.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chroma.2018.12.045 
PMID: 30665743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

