
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2019 Mar 1;95(3). pii: fiz016. doi: 10.1093/femsec/fiz016.

The intestinal environment as an evolutionary adaptation to mouthbrooding in the 
Astatotilapia burtoni cichlid.

Faber-Hammond JJ(1), Coyle KP(2), Bacheller SK(1), Roberts CG(1), Mellies JL(1), 
Roberts RB(2), Renn SCP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Reed College, Portland, Oregon, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences and W. M. Keck Center for Behavioral
Biology, 3510 Thomas Hall, 112 Derieux Place, North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, NC, USA.

Many of the various parental care strategies displayed by animals are accompanied
by a significant reduction in food intake that imposes a substantial energy
trade-off. Mouthbrooding, as seen in several species of fish in which the parent 
holds the developing eggs and fry in the buccal cavity, represents an extreme
example of reduced food intake during parental investment and is accompanied by a
range of physiological adaptations. In this study we use 16S sequencing to
characterize the gut microbiota of female Astatotilapia burtoni cichlid fish
throughout the obligatory phase of self-induced starvation during the brooding
cycle in comparison to stage-matched females that have been denied food for the
same duration. In addition to a reduction of gut epithelial turnover, we find a
dramatic reduction in species diversity in brooding stages that recovers upon
release of fry and refeeding that is not seen in females that are simply starved.
Based on overall species diversity as well as differential abundance of specific 
bacterial taxa, we suggest that rather than reflecting a simple deprivation of
caloric intake, the gut microbiota is more strongly influenced by physiological
changes specific to mouthbrooding including the reduced epithelial turnover and
possible production of antimicrobial agents.

Â© FEMS 2019.

DOI: 10.1093/femsec/fiz016 
PMCID: PMC7137464
PMID: 30753545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

