
1. J Proteomics. 2019 May 30;200:102-110. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2019.04.003. Epub
2019 Apr 3.

Proteome profiling of carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae clinical isolate
(NDM-4): Exploring the mechanism of resistance and potential drug targets.

Sharma D(1), Garg A(2), Kumar M(2), Khan AU(3).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Biotechnology Unit, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh,
India.
(2)Department of Biophysics, University of Delhi South Campus, India.
(3)Interdisciplinary Biotechnology Unit, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh,
India. Electronic address: asad.k@rediffmail.com.

The emergence of carbapenem resistance has become a major problem worldwide. This
has made treatment of K. pneumoniae infections a difficult task. In this study,
we have explored the whole proteome of the carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella
pneumonia clinical isolate (NDM-4) under the meropenem stress. Proteomics
(LC-MS/MS) and bioinformatics approaches were employed to uncover the novel
mystery of the resistance over the existing mechanisms. Gene ontology, KEGG and
STRING were used for functional annotation, pathway enrichment and
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network respectively. LC-MS/MS analysis
revealed that 52 proteins were overexpressed (≥10 log folds) under meropenem
stress. These proteins belong to four major groups namely protein translational
machinery complex, DNA/RNA modifying enzymes or proteins, proteins involved in
carbapenems cleavage, modifications & transport and energy metabolism &
intermediary metabolism-related proteins. Among the total 52 proteins 38 {matched
to Klebsiella pneumonia subsp. pneumoniae (strain ATCC 700721/MGH 78578)} were
used for functional annotation, pathways enrichment and protein-protein
interaction. These were significantly enriched in the "intracellular" (14 of 38),
"cytoplasm" (12 of 38) and "ribosome" (10 of 38). We suggest that these 52 over
expressed proteins and their interactive proteins cumulatively contributed in
survival of bacteria and meropenem resistance through various mechanisms or
enriched pathways. These proteins targets and their pathways might be used for
development of novel therapeutics against the resistance; therefore, the
situation of the emergence of "bad-bugs" could be controlled.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2019.04.003 
PMID: 30953729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

