
1. Neurochem Res. 2019 Jul;44(7):1715-1725. doi: 10.1007/s11064-019-02802-8. Epub
2019 Apr 22.

Quercetin and Sodium Butyrate Synergistically Increase Apoptosis in Rat C6 and
Human T98G Glioblastoma Cells Through Inhibition of Autophagy.

Taylor MA(1), Khathayer F(1), Ray SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of South
Carolina School of Medicine, 6439 Garners Ferry Road, Columbia, SC, 29209, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of South
Carolina School of Medicine, 6439 Garners Ferry Road, Columbia, SC, 29209, USA.
swapan.ray@uscmed.sc.edu.

This study investigated the efficacy of quercetin (QCT) in combination with
sodium butyrate (NaB) in enhancing apoptosis in rat C6 and human T98G
glioblastoma cells though blockage of autophagy under nutrient-starvation. The
most synergistic doses of the drugs were determined to be 25 µM QCT and 1 mM NaB 
in both cell lines. After QCT and QCT + NaB treatments, autophagy quantification 
with acridine orange staining showed a drastic decrease in protective autophagy
in the cells under nutrient-starvation. Decrease in autophagy was correlated with
decreases in expression of Beclin-1 and LC3B II. Combination treatment increased 
the morphological signs of apoptosis including membrane blebbing, nuclear
fragmentation, and chromatin condensation. Annexin V staining was also performed 
for detection and quantification of increases in apoptosis. Western blotting
results showed that combination of QCT and NaB increased apoptosis by decreasing 
anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 and increasing pro-apoptotic Bax, decreasing survivin,
activating caspase-3, and degrading poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). This
study demonstrated the therapeutic potentials of a novel combination therapy in
inhibiting protective autophagy to enhance apoptosis in rat C6 and human T98G
glioblastoma cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s11064-019-02802-8 
PMID: 31011879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

