
1. Microb Cell Fact. 2019 May 23;18(1):90. doi: 10.1186/s12934-019-1139-4.

Enhancing surfactin production by using systematic CRISPRi repression to screen
amino acid biosynthesis genes in Bacillus subtilis.

Wang C(1), Cao Y(1), Wang Y(1), Sun L(2), Song H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Frontier Science Center for Synthetic Biology and Key Laboratory of Systems
Bioengineering (MOE), School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin
University, Tianjin, 300350, People's Republic of China.
(2)Petrochemical Research Institute, PetroChina Company Limited, Beijing, 102206,
China.
(3)Frontier Science Center for Synthetic Biology and Key Laboratory of Systems
Bioengineering (MOE), School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin
University, Tianjin, 300350, People's Republic of China. hsong@tju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Surfactin is a cyclic lipopeptide that is of great industrial use
owing to its extraordinary surfactant power and antimicrobial, antiviral, and
antitumor activities. Surfactin is synthesized by a condensation reaction in
microbes, which uses fatty acids and four kinds of amino acids (L-glutamate,
L-aspartate, L-leucine and L-valine) as precursors. Surfactin biosynthesis could 
be improved by increasing the supply of fatty acids; however, the effect of the
regulation of amino acid metabolism on surfactin production was not yet clear.
RESULTS: In this study, we aimed to improve surfactin production in B. subtilis
by repressing the genes on the branch metabolic pathways of amino acid
biosynthesis using CRISPRi technology. First, 20 genes were inhibited
individually, resulting in 2.5- to 627-fold decreases in transcriptional level as
determined by RT-qPCR. Among the 20 recombinant strains, 16 strains obtained
higher surfactin titres than that produced by the parent BS168NU-Sd strain (the
surfactin production of BS168NU-Sd with only dCas9 but no sgRNA expression was
0.17 g/L). In particular, the strains in which the yrpC, racE or murC genes were 
inhibited individually produced 0.54, 0.41, or 0.42 g/L surfactin, respectively. 
All three genes are related to the metabolism of L-glutamate, whose acylation is 
the first step in the surfactin condensation reaction. Furthermore, these three
genes were repressed in combination, and the strain with co-inhibition of yrpC
and racE produced 0.75 g/L surfactin, which was 4.69-fold higher than that of the
parent strain. In addition, the inhibition of bkdAA and bkdAB, which are related 
to the metabolism of L-leucine and L-valine, not only improved surfactin
production but also increased the proportion of the C14 isoform.
CONCLUSIONS: This study, to the best of our knowledge for the first time,
systematically probed the regulatory effect of increasing the supply of amino
acids on surfactin production. It provided an effective strategy and a new
perspective for systematic studies on surfactin and other amino acid-derived
chemicals.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-019-1139-4 
PMCID: PMC6533722
PMID: 31122258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

