
1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Jul 26;294(30):11536-11548. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.008246. Epub
2019 Jun 10.

Addition of formate dehydrogenase increases the production of renewable alkane
from an engineered metabolic pathway.

Jaroensuk J(1), Intasian P(1), Kiattisewee C(1), Munkajohnpon P(1)(2),
Chunthaboon P(2), Buttranon S(1), Trisrivirat D(2), Wongnate T(1), Maenpuen S(3),
Tinikul R(2), Chaiyen P(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomolecular Science and Engineering, Vidyasirimedhi Institute of
Science and Technology (VISTEC), Wangchan Valley, Rayong 21210, Thailand.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Center for Excellence in Protein and Enzyme
Technology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok 14000, Thailand.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Burapha University, Chonburi
20131, Thailand.
(4)School of Biomolecular Science and Engineering, Vidyasirimedhi Institute of
Science and Technology (VISTEC), Wangchan Valley, Rayong 21210, Thailand
pimchai.chaiyen@vistec.ac.th.

An engineered metabolic pathway consisting of reactions that convert fatty acids 
to aldehydes and eventually alkanes would provide a means to produce biofuels
from renewable energy sources. The enzyme aldehyde-deformylating oxygenase (ADO) 
catalyzes the conversion of aldehydes and oxygen to alkanes and formic acid and
uses oxygen and a cellular reductant such as ferredoxin (Fd) as co-substrates. In
this report, we aimed to increase ADO-mediated alkane production by converting an
unused by-product, formate, to a reductant that can be used by ADO. We achieved
this by including the gene (fdh), encoding formate dehydrogenase from
Xanthobacter sp. 91 (XaFDH), into a metabolic pathway expressed in Escherichia
coli Using this approach, we could increase bacterial alkane production,
resulting in a conversion yield of ∼50%, the highest yield reported to date.
Measuring intracellular nicotinamide concentrations, we found that E. coli cells 
harboring XaFDH have a significantly higher concentration of NADH and a higher
NADH/NAD+ ratio than E. coli cells lacking XaFDH. In vitro analysis disclosed
that ferredoxin (flavodoxin):NADP+ oxidoreductase could use NADH to reduce Fd and
thus facilitate ADO-mediated alkane production. As formic acid can decrease the
cellular pH, the addition of formate dehydrogenase could also maintain the
cellular pH in the neutral range, which is more suitable for alkane production.
We conclude that this simple, dual-pronged approach of increasing NAD(P)H and
removing extra formic acid is efficient for increasing the production of
renewable alkanes via synthetic biology-based approaches.

© 2019 Jaroensuk et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.008246 
PMCID: PMC6663878
PMID: 31182484  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

