
1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2019 Oct;38(10):e254-e259. doi:
10.1097/INF.0000000000002368.

Pneumococcal-related Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome in the United Kingdom: National
Surveillance, 2006-2016.

Makwana A(1), Sheppard C(1), Fry NK(1), Ladhani SN(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Public Health England, London, United Kingdom.
(2)St. George's Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: children <5 years of age since the introduction of the 7-valent
pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV7) in 2006 and its replacement with the
13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) in 2010 in the United Kingdom.
METHODS: Public Health England conducts enhanced national surveillance of
invasive pneumococcal disease in England. Confirmed invasive pneumococcal disease
cases diagnosed between September 1, 2006, and March 31, 2016, with hemolytic
uremic syndrome reported as a complication were included in the analysis.
RESULTS: There were 54 cases of pHUS during the surveillance period, with a
median age of 17 months. The incidence of pHUS was 0.25/100,000 during the PCV7
period and 0.08/100,000 during the PCV13 period (incidence rate ratio: 0.31; 95% 
confidence interval: 0.16-0.57; P < 0.0001). Twelve children (22%) had an
underlying comorbidity before disease onset. Overall, 31 (57%) presented with
lower respiratory tract infection, 14 (25%) with meningitis, 8 (15%) with
bacteremia and 1 (2%) with septic arthritis. An empyema was reported in 26/31
children (84%) with lower respiratory tract infection and cerebral abscess in
5/14 children (36%) with meningitis. The main responsible serotypes were 19A (n =
20), 3 (n = 6), 7F (n = 5) and 33F (n = 4). Eight children (15%) died, including 
6 with meningitis.
CONCLUSIONS: pHUS continues to be associated with significant morbidity and
mortality. The incidence of pHUS was significantly lower after PCV13 replaced
PCV7 in the childhood immunization program. Currently, most cases are due to
non-PCV13 serotypes.

DOI: 10.1097/INF.0000000000002368 
PMID: 31232894  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

