
1. J Biosci Bioeng. 2020 Jan;129(1):59-66. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2019.06.016. Epub
2019 Jul 17.

Identification and characterization of multifunctional cationic peptides from
enzymatic hydrolysates of soybean proteins.

Taniguchi M(1), Aida R(2), Saito K(2), Kikura T(2), Ochiai A(2), Saitoh E(3),
Tanaka T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials Science and Technology, Graduate School of Science and
Technology, Niigata University, Niigata 950-2181, Japan. Electronic address:
mtanig@eng.niigata-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Materials Science and Technology, Graduate School of Science and
Technology, Niigata University, Niigata 950-2181, Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Technology, Niigata Institute of Technology, Niigata
945-1195, Japan.

In this study, we used the commercial soybean protein hydrolysate Hinute-DC6 as a
novel starting material from which to purify and identify multifunctional
cationic peptides. After fractionation, Hinute-DC6 was separated into 20
fractions with varying isoelectric points (pI) by ampholyte-free isoelectric
focusing (autofocusing). Subsequently, we purified and identified the cationic
peptides from fractions 19 and 20, which had pI values greater than 12, using
reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography and matrix-assisted
laser/desorption ionization-time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Of the 83 cationic 
peptides identified, 14 had high pI values and net charges greater than +2, and
were chemically synthesized and assayed for various bioactivities, including
hemolytic, antimicrobial, lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-neutralizing, and angiogenic
activities. None of the 14 cationic peptides tested exhibited hemolytic activity 
toward mammalian red blood cells at concentrations up to 1000 μM. Five of the
cationic peptides exhibited antimicrobial activities against at least one of four
human-pathogenic microorganisms tested. In addition, in chromogenic
LPS-neutralizing assays using Limulus amebocyte lysates, the 50% effective
concentrations of these 14 peptides were between 0.069 and 5.2 μM. Tube-formation
assays in human umbilical vein endothelial cells showed that each of the 14
cationic peptides exhibited significant angiogenic activities at 10 μM, with
values similar to those of the positive control LL-37. Our results demonstrate
that the 14 identified cationic peptides have multiple functions with negligible 
hemolytic activity. These data indicate that the cationic peptides isolated from 
Hinute-DC6 and fractions containing these cationic peptides have the potential to
be used as multifunctional ingredients for healthcare applications.

Copyright © 2019 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2019.06.016 
PMID: 31324383  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

