
1. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2019 Dec;60(9):792-806. doi: 10.1002/em.22321. Epub 2019 Aug
16.

Bioactivation mechanisms of N-hydroxyaristolactams: Nitroreduction metabolites of
aristolochic acids.

Okuno Y(1)(2), Bonala R(3), Attaluri S(3), Johnson F(3)(4), Grollman AP(3)(5),
Sidorenko VS(3), Oda Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry and Biochemistry, National Institute of
Technology, Wakayama College, 77 Noshima, Nada, Gobo-shi, Wakayama, 644-0023,
Japan.
(2)Department of Material Science and Engineering, Material Science and
Engineering, Wakayama National College of Technology, Gobo-shi, Wakayama,
644-0023, Japan.
(3)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook,
New York, 11794, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York, 11794,
USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York, 11794, 
USA.
(6)Institute of Life and Environmental Sciences, Osaka Shin-Ai College, 6-2-28
Tsurumi, Tsurumi-ku, Osaka, 538-0053, Japan.

Aristolochic acids (AAs) are human nephrotoxins and carcinogens found in
concoctions of Aristolochia plants used in traditional medicinal practices
worldwide. Genotoxicity of AAs is associated with the formation of active species
catalyzed by metabolic enzymes, the full repertoire of which is unknown.
Recently, we provided evidence that sulfonation is important for bioactivation of
AAs. Here, we employ Salmonella typhimurium umu tester strains expressing human
N-acetyltransferases (NATs) and sulfotransferases (SULTs), to study the role of
conjugation reactions in the genotoxicities of N-hydroxyaristolactams (AL-I-NOH
and AL-II-NOH), metabolites of AA-I and AA-II. Both N-hydroxyaristolactams show
stronger genotoxic effects in umu strains expressing human NAT1 and NAT2, than in
the parent strain. Additionally, AL-I-NOH displays increased genotoxicity in
strains expressing human SULT1A1 and SULT1A2, whereas AL-II-NOH shows enhanced
genotoxicity in SULT1A1/2 and SULT1A3 strains. 2,6-Dichloro-4-nitrophenol, SULTs 
inhibitor, reduced umuC gene expression induced by N-hydroxyaristolactams in
SULT1A2 strain. N-hydroxyaristolactams are also mutagenic in parent strains,
suggesting that an additional mechanism(s) may contribute to their
genotoxicities. Accordingly, using putative SULT substrates and inhibitors, we
found that cytosols obtained from human kidney HK-2 cells activate
N-hydroxyaristolactams in aristolactam-DNA adducts with the limited involvement
of SULTs. Removal of low-molecular-weight reactants in the 3.5-10 kDa range
inhibits the formation of aristolactam-DNA by 500-fold, which could not be
prevented by the addition of cofactors for SULTs and NATs. In conclusion, our
results demonstrate that the genotoxicities of N-hydroxyaristolactams depend on
the cell type and involve not only sulfonation but also N,O-acetyltransfer and an
additional yet unknown mechanism(s). Environ. Mol. Mutagen. 2019. © 2019 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2019 The Authors. Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis published by Wiley
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of Environmental Mutagen Society.

DOI: 10.1002/em.22321 
PMCID: PMC6899766
PMID: 31374128  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

