
1. Chemosphere. 2020 Jan;239:124822. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.124822. Epub
2019 Sep 10.

ArsM-mediated arsenite volatilization is limited by efflux catalyzed by As efflux
transporters.

Yang P(1), Ke C(1), Zhao C(2), Kuang Q(1), Liu B(3), Xue X(4), Rensing C(5), Yang
S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering and Biotechnology, Huaqiao University, Xiamen,
361021, China.
(2)Department of Bioengineering and Biotechnology, Huaqiao University, Xiamen,
361021, China. Electronic address: chungui@hqu.edu.cn.
(3)Institute of Environmental Microbiology, College of Resources and Environment,
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, 350002, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Urban Environment and Health, Institute of Urban
Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 1799 Jimei Road, Xiamen, 361021, China.
(5)Institute of Environmental Microbiology, College of Resources and Environment,
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, 350002, China; Key Laboratory
of Urban Environment and Health, Institute of Urban Environment, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, 1799 Jimei Road, Xiamen, 361021, China. Electronic address:
rensing@fafu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Bioengineering and Biotechnology, Huaqiao University, Xiamen,
361021, China. Electronic address: yangsuping@hqu.edu.cn.

Arsenic (As) methylation is regarded as an efficient strategy for As
contamination remediation by As volatilization. However, most microorganisms
display low As volatilization efficiency, which is possibly linked to As efflux
transporters competing for cytoplasmic As(III) as a substrate. Here, we developed
two types of As biosensors in Escherichia coli to compare the As efflux rate of
three efflux transporters and to further investigate the correlation between As
efflux rates and As volatilization. The engineered As-sensitive E. coli AW3110
expressing arsBRP, acr3RP or arsBEC displayed a higher As resistance compared to 
the control. The fluorescence intensity was in a linear correlation in the range 
of 0-2.0 μmol/L of As(III). The intracellular As(III) concentration was
negatively related to As efflux activity of As efflux transporter, which was
consistent with the As resistance assays. Moreover, arsM derived from
R. palustris CGA009 was subsequently introduced to construct an E. coli AW3110
co-expressing arsB/acr3 and arsM, which exhibited higher As(III) resistance,
lower fluorescence intensity and intracellular As concentration compared to the
engineered E. coli AW3110 expressing only arsB/acr3. The As volatilization
efficiency was negatively related to As efflux activity of efflux transporters,
the recombinants without arsB/acr3 displayed the highest rate of As
volatilization. This study provided new insights into parameters affecting As
volatilization with As efflux being the main limiting factor for As methylation
and subsequent volatilization in many microorganisms.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.124822 
PMID: 31726527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

