
1. AMB Express. 2019 Nov 13;9(1):183. doi: 10.1186/s13568-019-0909-z.

Resazurin assay for assessment of antimicrobial properties of electrospun
nanofiber filtration membranes.

Travnickova E(1), Mikula P(1)(2), Oprsal J(3), Bohacova M(3), Kubac L(4), Kimmer 
D(5), Soukupova J(6), Bittner M(7).

Author information: 
(1)RECETOX Centre, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00,
Brno, Czechia.
(2)Department of Veterinary Public Health and Forensic Medicine, University of
Veterinary and Pharmaceutical Sciences Brno, Palackeho 1946/1, 612 42, Brno,
Czechia.
(3)SYNPO a. s., Pardubice, S. K. Neumanna 1316, 532 07, Pardubice, Czechia.
(4)Centre for Organic Chemistry Ltd., Rybitvi 296, 533 54, Rybitvi, Czechia.
(5)Centre of Polymer Systems, University Institute, Tomas Bata University, Trida 
Tomase Bati 5678, 760 01, Zlin, Czechia.
(6)Regional Center of Advanced Technologies and Materials, Department of Physical
Chemistry, Palacky University, Slechtitelu 27, 783 71, Olomouc, Czechia.
(7)RECETOX Centre, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00,
Brno, Czechia. michal.bittner@recetox.muni.cz.

We developed a simple and fast microplate assay for evaluation of the
antimicrobial activity of electrospun nanofiber filtration membranes or similar
porous materials for water treatment technologies. Resazurin (alamarBlue®) was
used as an indicator of the amount of viable experimental microorganisms
Gram-negative Escherichia coli, Gram-positive Enterococcus faecalis, and natural 
wastewater treatment plant effluent bacteria. A bacterial inoculum of
concentration 1-3 × 105 CFU mL-1 was pipetted onto the surface of assessed both
functionalized and respective control membranes and incubated in 12-well plates
for 4 h at 37 °C. Kinetics of resazurin metabolization, i.e. its reduction to
fluorescent resorufin, was evaluated fluorimetrically (λex520/λem590 nm). A
number of viable bacteria on the membranes expressed as CFU mL-1 was calculated
from the kinetic curves by using calibration curves that were constructed for
both experimental bacterial species. Antimicrobial activities of the membranes
were evaluated by either resazurin assay or modified ISO 20743 plate count assay.
Results of both assays showed the significant antimicrobial activity of membranes
functionalized with silver nanoparticles for both bacterial species and
wastewater treatment plant effluent bacteria as well (log CFU reduction compared 
to control membrane > 4), while membranes containing specific quaternary ammonium
salts were inefficient (log CFU reduction < 1). The suitability of resazurin
microplate assay for testing nanofiber filtration membranes and analogous
matrices has proven to be a faster and less demanding alternative to the
traditionally used approach providing comparable results.

DOI: 10.1186/s13568-019-0909-z 
PMCID: PMC6854189
PMID: 31720875 

