
1. Biochem J. 1988 Nov 15;256(1):295-8.

Haemoprotein terminal oxidases in the nematodes Nippostrongylus brasiliensis and 
Ascaridia galli.

Paget TA(1), Fry M, Lloyd D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University College, Wales, U.K.

1. Mitochondria isolated from the gut-dwelling nematodes Nippostrongylus
brasiliensis and Ascaridia galli (muscle and gut + reproductive tissue) were
examined for cytochromes, and it was observed that N. brasiliensis and A. galli
muscle tissue mitochondria contained a-, b- and c-type cytochromes, but their
stoichiometries were quite different (1:2:1.9 and 1:11.4:13.6 respectively); A.
galli gut + reproductive-tissue mitochondria, however, only contained b and c
cytochromes, in a ratio of 1:0.8. 2. CO difference spectra showed the presence of
CO-reacting b-type cytochrome(s) in all three types of mitochondria; the
fast-reacting species comprised 30, 44 and 39% of the total in N. brasiliensis,
A. galli muscle and A. galli gut + reproductive-tissue mitochondria respectively.
3. Cytochrome aa3 was observed in N. brasiliensis mitochondria and in those from 
A. galli muscle, but was below the level of detectability (less than 0.005
nmol/mg of protein) for A. galli gut + reproductive-tissue mitochondria. 4.
Photochemical action spectra for the reversal of CO inhibition of the endogenous 
respiration of whole worms (at 24 microM- and 40 microM-O2 respectively for N.
brasiliensis and A. galli) gave maxima at 598 and 542-543 nm, corresponding to
the alpha- and beta-absorption maxima of cytochrome aa3, and at 567 nm (b-type
cytochrome) for both worms. These results suggest that cytochrome aa3 is the
major functional oxidase in N. brasiliensis, whereas the CO-reacting b-type
cytochrome dominates in A. galli.

DOI: 10.1042/bj2560295 
PMCID: PMC1135402
PMID: 3223906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

