
1. PLoS Med. 2020 Oct 23;17(10):e1003326. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1003326.
eCollection 2020 Oct.

Effectiveness of the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine against
vaccine serotype pneumococcal pneumonia in adults: A case-control test-negative
design study.

Lawrence H(1)(2), Pick H(1), Baskaran V(1)(2)(3), Daniel P(4), Rodrigo C(1),
Ashton D(1), Edwards-Pritchard RC(5), Sheppard C(6), Eletu SD(6), Litt D(6), Fry 
NK(6)(7), Rose S(6), Trotter C(8), McKeever TM(2)(3), Lim WS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust,
Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Division of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(3)NIHR Nottingham Biomedical Research Centre, Queen's Medical Centre,
Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Hospitals of Derby and Burton
NHS Foundation Trust, Derby, United Kingdom.
(5)Division of Respiratory Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United
Kingdom.
(6)Respiratory and Vaccine Preventable Bacteria Reference Unit, Public Health
England-National Infection Service, Colindale, London, United Kingdom.
(7)Immunisation and Countermeasures Division, Public Health England
Colindale-National Infection Service, London, United Kingdom.
(8)Disease Dynamic Unit, Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Vaccination with the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine
(PPV23) is available in the United Kingdom to adults aged 65 years or older and
those in defined clinical risk groups. We evaluated the vaccine effectiveness
(VE) of PPV23 against vaccine-type pneumococcal pneumonia in a cohort of adults
hospitalised with community-acquired pneumonia (CAP).
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Using a case-control test-negative design, a secondary
analysis of data was conducted from a prospective cohort study of adults (aged
≥16 years) with CAP hospitalised at 2 university teaching hospitals in
Nottingham, England, from September 2013 to August 2018. The exposure of interest
was PPV23 vaccination at any time point prior to the index admission. A case was 
defined as PPV23 serotype-specific pneumococcal pneumonia and a control as
non-PPV23 serotype pneumococcal pneumonia or nonpneumococcal pneumonia.
Pneumococcal serotypes were identified from urine samples using a multiplex
immunoassay or from positive blood cultures. Multivariable logistic regression
was used to derive adjusted odds of case status between vaccinated and
unvaccinated individuals; VE estimates were calculated as (1 - odds ratio) ×
100%. Of 2,357 patients, there were 717 PPV23 cases (48% vaccinated) and 1,640
controls (54.5% vaccinated). The adjusted VE (aVE) estimate against PPV23
serotype disease was 24% (95% CI 5%-40%, p = 0.02). Estimates were similar in
analyses restricted to vaccine-eligible patients (n = 1,768, aVE 23%, 95% CI
1%-40%) and patients aged ≥65 years (n = 1,407, aVE 20%, 95% CI -5% to 40%), but 
not in patients aged ≥75 years (n = 905, aVE 5%, 95% CI -37% to 35%). The aVE
estimate in relation to PPV23/non-13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine
(PCV13) serotype pneumonia (n = 417 cases, 43.7% vaccinated) was 29% (95% CI
6%-46%). Key limitations of this study are that, due to high vaccination rates,
there was a lack of power to reject the null hypothesis of no vaccine effect, and
that the study was not large enough to allow robust subgroup analysis in the
older age groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In the setting of an established national childhood PCV13
vaccination programme, PPV23 vaccination of clinical at-risk patient groups and
adults aged ≥65 years provided moderate long-term protection against
hospitalisation with PPV23 serotype pneumonia. These findings suggest that PPV23 
vaccination may continue to have an important role in adult pneumococcal vaccine 
policy, including the possibility of revaccination of older adults.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1003326 
PMCID: PMC7584218
PMID: 33095759  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this manuscript have read the
journal's policy and have the following competing interests: WSL's institution
has received unrestricted investigator-initiated research funding from Pfizer for
a multicentre cohort study in which WSL is the Chief Investigator. WSL is a
member of the UK Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation. NKF declares:
The Public Health England - National Infection Service, Immunisation and
Countermeasures Division provides vaccine manufacturers with post-marketing
surveillance reports, which Marketing Authorisation Holders are required to
submit to the UK Licensing authority in compliance with their Risk Management
Strategy. A cost recovery charge is made for these reports. SDE is an employee of
Public Health England's National Infection Service in the Vaccine Preventable
Bacteria Section (VPBS). The VPBS conduct contract research for pharmaceutical
industries on behalf of Public Health England. No personal remuneration is
received. The Public Health England National Infection Service Immunisation and
Countermeasures Division has provided vaccine manufacturers with post-marketing
surveillance reports, which Marketing Authorisation Holders are required to
submit to the UK Licensing authority in compliance with their Risk Management
Strategy. A cost recovery charge is made for these reports. No other conflicts of
interest are declared.

