
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Nov 12;10(1):19644. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-76883-9.

The PDZ motif peptide of ZO-1 attenuates Pseudomonas aeruginosa LPS-induced
airway inflammation.

Lee TJ(1), Choi YH(2), Song KS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, College of Medicine, Yeungnam University, Nam-gu,
Daegu, Korea.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, College of Korean Medicine, Dong-Eui University,
Busan, Korea.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, Kosin University College of Medicine, 34
Amnam-dong, Seo-gu, Busan, 49267, Korea. kssong@kosin.ac.kr.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa is known to play a role in many human diseases. Therefore,
examining the negative control mechanisms of tight junction protein ZO-1 on the
exotoxin LPS of P. aeruginosa-induced diseases could be critical in the
development of novel therapeutics. We found that ZO-1 expression dramatically
decreased in inflammatory human lung tissues. Interestingly, PDZ1 deletion of the
PDZ domain in the ZO-1 protein dramatically decreased LPS-induced F-actin
formation and increased the expression of genes for pro-inflammatory cytokines,
but not PDZ2 and PDZ3 of the ZO-1 protein. We also found that the consensus PDZ
peptide (based on PDZ1) of ZO-1 down-regulates the expression of pro-inflammatory
cytokine genes and F-actin formation; in contrast, the GG24,25AA mutant PDZ
peptide cannot control these genes. LPS activates IL-8 secretion extracellularly 
in a time-dependent manner, while the secretion is inhibited by PDZ peptide.
Whereas increased IL-8 secretion by LPS activates the CXCR2 receptor,
overexpressed RGS12 negatively regulates LPS-induced CXCR2/IL-8 signaling. The
PDZ peptide also decreases LPS-induced inflammatory cell populations,
pro-inflammatory cytokine gene expression, and TEER in bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid and cultured alveolar macrophages. Collectively, we suggest that the PDZ
peptide may be a potential therapeutic for bacteria-induced respiratory diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-76883-9 
PMCID: PMC7665049
PMID: 33184397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

