
1. Biochem J. 1969 Nov;115(2):295-305.

Studies of newly synthesized ribosomal ribonucleic acid of Escherichia coli.

Fry M, Artman M.

1. RNA synthesized by Escherichia coli during one-hundredth of the generation
time contains two fractions distinguishable by hybridization with homologous DNA.
One fraction, approximately 30% of the newly synthesized RNA, did not compete
with ribosomal RNA, being apparently messenger RNA. The other fraction,
approximately 70% of the newly made RNA, hybridized as ribosomal RNA. These
values are comparable with previous estimates (McCarthy & Bolton, 1964; Pigott & 
Midgley, 1968). 2. Hybridization-competition experiments showed that the newly
made RNA associated with 70s ribosomes and larger ribosome aggregates was a
mixture of ribosomal RNA and messenger RNA, whereas that associated with nascent 
ribosomal subunits consisted exclusively of ribosomal RNA. This observation
provides means by which newly synthesized ribosomal RNA can be isolated free from
messenger RNA. 3. Newly made ribosomal RNA in nascent ribosomal subunits was
sensitive to shear under conditions where ribosomal RNA in mature ribosomes was
shear-resistant. Thus, when RNA was extracted from cells of E. coli disrupted by 
mechanical means, newly made ribosomal RNA appeared heterogeneous in size,
sedimenting as a broad peak extending from 8s to 16s. 4. Newly synthesized
ribosomal RNA in nascent ribosomal subunits was rapidly degraded in the presence 
of actinomycin D and during glucose starvation. 5. Newly synthesized ribosomal
RNA stimulated amino acid incorporation in a system synthesizing protein in vitro
to the same extent as the RNA which contained the messenger RNA fraction.

DOI: 10.1042/bj1150295 
PMCID: PMC1185102
PMID: 4907882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

