
1. J Cell Physiol. 1995 Nov;165(2):438-48.

Fibroblast growth factor receptors 1 and 2 are differentially regulated in murine
embryonal carcinoma cells and in response to fibroblast growth factor-4.

Ali J(1), Mansukhani A, Basilico C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York
10016, USA.

We have studied the expression of two of the receptors for fibroblast growth
factors, FGFR-1 and FGFR-2, in response to ligand binding and in embryonal
carcinoma (EC cells). Exposure of mouse fibroblasts to FGF-4 or FGF-2 results in 
a drastic downregulation of the mRNA levels for FGFR-2, while expression of
FGFR-1 mRNA appears unaffected. Furthermore, FGF-4 transformed cells display low 
levels of FGFR-2 mRNA and these levels are significantly increased by treatment
with anti FGF-4 neutralizing antibodies. In undifferentiated F9 EC cells, the
levels of FGFR-2 mRNA are very low and increase substantially upon induction of
differentiation. The levels of mRNA for FGFR-1 are again unaffected. To gain
information on the regulation of expression of the gene encoding FGFR-2 (bek) we 
have cloned the FGFR-2 promoter region and used it to drive the expression of
plasmids encoding the bacterial CAT enzyme. Transfection of these plasmids into
FGF treated and untreated cells did not produce significant variation in CAT
activity, suggesting that FGFR-2 downregulation in response to ligand binding
occurs mainly by a post-transcriptional mechanism. In contrast, plasmids
containing as little as 140 nt of the FGFR-2 promoter region were regulated in F9
cells, showing substantially higher expression in differentiated than in
undifferentiated cells. It appears therefore that FGFR-2 expression in
fibroblasts and EC cells is regulated by somewhat different mechanisms. In
contrast, FGFR-1 expression does not vary substantially under the conditions
shown to affect FGFR-2 expression. The implications of these findings are
discussed.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.1041650225 
PMID: 7593222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

