
1. J Dent Res. 1994 Jun;73(6):1168-72.

Cadaverine as a putative component of oral malodor.

Goldberg S(1), Kozlovsky A, Gordon D, Gelernter I, Sintov A, Rosenberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Maurice and Gabriela Goldschleger School of Dental Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Ramat-Aviv, Israel.

Whereas previous studies have shown correlations between volatile sulphur
compounds (VSC) and bad breath levels, it is probable that other compounds found 
in the oral cavity may contribute to oral malodor. In the present investigation, 
the possibility that diamines (cadaverine and putrescine) are associated with
oral malodor parameters was assessed. Saliva samples from 52 subjects were
analyzed for cadaverine and putrescine by HPLC. Oral malodor of whole mouth,
tongue, and saliva of the subjects was recorded by an experienced judge on a
continuous 10-cm scale; peak and steady-state VSC intraoral levels were measured 
by the Interscan 1170 sulphide monitor. Log-transformed VSC and diamine levels
were compared with odor judge measurements by Pearson analysis and stepwise
forward multiple regression. Putrescine scores were not significantly associated 
with odor judge parameters or with VSC levels (p > 0.1). However, highly
significant correlations (p < or = 0.003) were found between cadaverine levels
and all three odor judge assessments. In contrast, associations between
cadaverine and VSC measurements were non-significant. In an attempt to correlate 
odor judge results in terms of both VSC and diamines, we carried out stepwise
forward multiple regression. Results showed that VSC and cadaverine both factor
significantly in explaining each of the odor judge measurements, with multiple r 
values ranging from 0.545 (p = 0.0002) to 0.604 (p < 0.0001). The results suggest
that cadaverine levels are associated with oral malodor, and that this
association may be independent of VSC.

DOI: 10.1177/00220345940730060701 
PMID: 8046106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

