
1. J Bacteriol. 1997 Sep;179(17):5609-13.

Nitrogen GATA factors participate in transcriptional regulation of vacuolar
protease genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Coffman JA(1), Cooper TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Tennessee, Memphis
38163, USA.

The expression of most nitrogen catabolic genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae is
regulated at the level of transcription in response to the quality of nitrogen
source available. This regulation is accomplished through four GATA-family
transcription factors: two positively acting factors capable of transcriptional
activation (Gln3p and Gat1p) and two negatively acting factors capable of
down-regulating Gln3p- and/or Gat1p-dependent transcription (Dal80p and Deh1p).
Current understanding of nitrogen-responsive transcriptional regulation is the
result of extensive analysis of genes required for the catabolism of small
molecules, e.g., amino acids, allantoin, or ammonia. However, cells contain
another, equally important source of nitrogen, intracellular protein, which
undergoes rapid turnover during special circumstances such as entry into
stationary phase, and during sporulation. Here we show that the expression of
some (CPS1, PEP4, PRB1, and LAP4) but not all (PRC1) vacuolar protease genes is
nitrogen catabolite repression sensitive and is regulated by the GATA-family
proteins Gln3p, Gat1p, and Dal80p. These observations extend the global
participation of GATA-family transcription factors to include not only
well-studied genes associated with the catabolism of small nitrogenous compounds 
but also genes whose products are responsible for the turnover of intracellular
macromolecules. They also point to the usefulness of considering control of the
nitrogen-responsive GATA factors when studying the regulation of the protein
turnover machinery.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.179.17.5609-5613.1997 
PMCID: PMC179439
PMID: 9287023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

