
1. Microbiology (Reading). 1997 Nov;143 ( Pt 11):3481-3489. doi:
10.1099/00221287-143-11-3481.

Expression of Campylobacter hyoilei lipo-oligosaccharide (LOS) antigens in
Escherichia coli.

Korolik V(1), Fry BN(2), Alderton MR(1), van der Zeijst BAM(2), Coloe PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biology and Biotechnology, RMIT,GPO Box 2476V, Melbourne
3001,Australia.
(2)Department of Bacteriology, Institute of Infectious Diseases and Immunology,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Universiteit Utrecht,Yalelaan 1 3584 CL
Utrecht,The Netherlands.

Campylobacter spp. are well recognized as primary pathogens in animals and in
people. To isolate and define the genetic regions encoding major surface antigens
of Campylobacter hyoilei, genomic DNA of the type strain of the species,
RMIT-32A, was cloned into a cosmid vector, pLA2917, in Escherichia coli and the
resulting genomic library was screened using antiserum raised to the parent C.
hyoilei strain. Six cosmid clones were found to express a series of
immunoreactive bands in the 15-25 kDa range. These bands were proteinase
K-resistant and were found in the LPS fraction of the cells, suggesting that the 
recombinant cosmids expressed C. hyoilei lipo-oligosaccharide (LOS) antigen(s).
The minimum DNA insert size required for expression of C. hyoilei LOS antigen(s) 
in E. coli was 11.8 kb. This region was subcloned into the plasmid vector pBR322.
The partial sequencing of the 11.8 kb region showed that it contains two ORFs,
designated rfbF and rfbP, showing homology with the rfbF gene from Serratia
marcescens and the rfbP gene from Salmonella typhimurium. Both genes are involved
in LPS synthesis. The region also contained a sequence homologous to the rfaC
gene of E. coli and Sal. typhimurium which is involved in core oligosaccharide
synthesis.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-143-11-3481 
PMID: 9387226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

