
1. J Food Prot. 1998 Feb;61(2):192-5.

Changes in populations of Listeria monocytogenes inoculated on packaged fresh-cut
vegetables.

Farber JM(1), Wang SL, Cai Y, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Research Division, Banting Research Centre, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada. jeff-farber@inet.hwc.ca

A variety of wholesale and retail packaged vegetables and salads were inoculated 
with a mixture of strains of Listeria monocytogenes and incubated at 4 and 10
degrees C. Whole rutabagas, butternut squash, and onions, as well as packaged
Caesar salad, carrots, coleslaw mix, and stir-fry vegetables were purchased from 
local supermarkets in the Ottawa area. L. monocytogenes population levels
remained constant on all fresh-cut vegetables stored at 4 degrees C for 9 days,
except for carrots and butternut squash: counts of cell numbers declined on
carrots and increased on the butternut squash. Fresh-cut vegetables stored at 10 
degrees C, however, supported good growth of L. monocytogenes on all vegetables
tested, except for chopped carrots, where the population decreased approximately 
2 log units over a 9-day storage period. As in the situation with the produce
stored at 4 degrees C, butternut squash supported the highest rate of cell
growth. In addition, Caesar salad and coleslaw mix were kept at 25 degrees C for 
1 or 2 days before subsequent storage at 4 or 10 degrees C to stimulate extreme
temperature-abuse conditions. In Caesar salad stored at 4 degrees C, by day 6 an 
initial 24- and 48-h temperature abuse at 25 degrees C led to a 1.21- and
2.55-log-unit population increase, respectively, over the control. Similar
increases were observed on Caesar salads stored at 10 degrees C. Compared to
Caesar salad, coleslaw mix temperature-abused at 25 degrees C and then stored at 
4 degrees C supported slightly greater increases in the population of L.
monocytogenes, i.e., a 3.22- and 3.83-log-unit increase over the control for the 
1- and 2-day abused samples, respectively. Coleslaw mix samples
temperature-abused and then stored at 10 degrees, however, only showed log unit
increases of 1.75 and 1.94, respectively, compared to the controls. These results
point to the importance of strict temperature control to prevent or reduce the
growth of L. monocytogenes cells on fresh-cut vegetables.

DOI: 10.4315/0362-028x-61.2.192 
PMID: 9708280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

