
1. EMBO J. 1999 Jun 15;18(12):3334-47.

Activation of the erythropoietin receptor by the gp55-P viral envelope protein is
determined by a single amino acid in its transmembrane domain.

Constantinescu SN(1), Liu X, Beyer W, Fallon A, Shekar S, Henis YI, Smith SO,
Lodish HF.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge,
MA 02142, USA.

The spleen focus forming virus (SFFV) gp55-P envelope glycoprotein specifically
binds to and activates murine erythropoietin receptors (EpoRs) coexpressed in the
same cell, triggering proliferation of erythroid progenitors and inducing
erythroleukemia. Here we demonstrate specific interactions between the single
transmembrane domains of the two proteins that are essential for receptor
activation. The human EpoR is not activated by gp55-P but by mutation of a single
amino acid, L238, in its transmembrane sequence to its murine counterpart serine,
resulting in its ability to be activated. The converse mutation in the murine
EpoR (S238L) abolishes activation by gp55-P. Computational searches of
interactions between the membrane-spanning segments of murine EpoR and gp55-P
provide a possible explanation: the face of the EpoR transmembrane domain
containing S238 is predicted to interact specifically with gp55-P but not gp55-A,
a variant which is much less effective in activating the murine EpoR. Mutational 
studies on gp55-P M390, which is predicted to interact with S238, provide
additional support for this model. Mutation of M390 to isoleucine, the
corresponding residue in gp55-A, abolishes activation, but the gp55-P M390L
mutation is fully functional. gp55-P is thought to activate signaling by the EpoR
by inducing receptor oligomerization through interactions involving specific
transmembrane residues.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/18.12.3334 
PMCID: PMC1171414
PMID: 10369674  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

