
1. Virology. 1999 Jul 5;259(2):384-91.

Down-regulation of the INK4 family of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors by tax
protein of HTLV-1 through two distinct mechanisms.

Suzuki T(1), Narita T, Uchida-Toita M, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of Medical Science,
The University of Tokyo, Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 108-8639, Japan.

Tax oncoprotein of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) affects multiple
regulatory processes of infected cells through activation and repression of
specific transcription and also through modulation of functions of cell cycle
regulators. Previously, we found that Tax binds to p16ink4a, a member of the INK4
family of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, and counteracts its inhibitory
activity, resulting in cell cycle progression. In this study, we examined the
effects of Tax on other members of the INK4 family and found that Tax can bind to
p15ink4b similarly to p16ink4a, but not to p18ink4c and p19ink4d. Tax binding to 
p15ink4b inactivated its function and restored CDK4 kinase activity. Accordingly,
Tax-expressing cells became resistant to p15ink4b-mediated growth arrest induced 
by TGFbeta. On the other hand, expression of p18ink4c was transcriptionally
repressed by Tax through the E-box element of the promoter, which may contribute 
to the marked reduction of p18ink4c mRNA in HTLV-1-infected T-cells. These
observations indicate that Tax suppresses the inhibitory activities of INK4
family members through two independent mechanisms: functional inhibition of two
INK4 proteins and repression of expression of another INK4 protein. These effects
may play roles in HTLV-1-induced deregulation of the cell cycle, possibly
promoting cellular transformation.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1999.9760 
PMID: 10388662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

