
1. J Virol. 2000 Jan;74(2):812-6.

Identification of a second transforming function in bovine papillomavirus type 1 
E6 and the role of E6 interactions with paxillin, E6BP, and E6AP.

Das K(1), Bohl J, Vande Pol SB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

Papillomavirus E6 oncoproteins transform mammalian cells through interaction with
cellular proteins. Bovine papillomavirus type 1 E6 (BE6) interacts with three
previously described cellular targets: the E6AP E3 ubiquitin ligase, the
calcium-binding protein E6BP (also known as ERC-55), and paxillin, which is a
focal adhesion adapter protein. BE6 interacts strongly with each of these
proteins in vitro, binding to similar peptide sequences found in E6AP, E6BP, and 
paxillin. To determine which BE6 interactions are necessary for transformation by
BE6, we used a novel selection strategy for temperature-sensitive BE6 mutants in 
yeast that could discriminate in their interaction between E6AP, E6BP, and
paxillin. All BE6 mutants that retained transforming ability retained association
with paxillin, while some mutants that were transformation positive failed to
interact with E6AP or E6BP. This study demonstrates that oncogene mutants that
are temperature sensitive for transformation can be selected in yeast and that
the induction of anchorage-independent cell proliferation by BE6 does not require
strong association of BE6 with either E6AP or E6BP. Of particular interest is the
identification of a BE6 mutant that interacts strongly with the acidic charged
leucine motifs of E6AP, E6BP, and paxillin but is devoid of transformation
activity, thereby genetically identifying a second essential transformation
function in BE6 that is independent of interaction with acidic charged leucine
motifs.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.74.2.812-816.2000 
PMCID: PMC111601
PMID: 10623743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

