
1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 28;275(4):2654-60.

The nuclear receptor chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor
interacts with HIV-1 Tat and stimulates viral replication in human microglial
cells.

Rohr O(1), Schwartz C, Hery C, Aunis D, Tardieu M, Schaeffer E.

Author information: 
(1)Unit√© 338 INSERM, 5 rue Blaise Pascal, 67084 Strasbourg Cedex, France.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infects the central nervous system
and plays a direct role in the pathogenesis of AIDS dementia. However, the
molecular mechanisms underlying HIV-1 expression in the central nervous system
are poorly understood. We have recently reported that the nuclear receptor
chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor (COUP-TF), an orphan
member of the nuclear receptor superfamily, is an activator of HIV-1 gene
transcription. Here, our results show that COUP-TF stimulates HIV-1 transcription
in primary cultured human microglial cells, the primary target for HIV-1
infection in brain. Run-on assays indicated that COUP-TF acts on the initiation
step of transcription. Results from reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction and immunocytochemistry analysis further revealed the importance of this
factor by demonstrating that overexpression of COUP-TF leads to initiation of
viral replication in primary HIV-infected human microglia. In addition, COUP-TF
is able to physically interact and cooperate with the viral transactivator Tat.
The combination of COUP-TF and Tat leads to NF-kappaB- and Sp1-independent
enhanced transcriptional stimulation. In vitro binding studies showed that
COUP-TF interacts with Tat through amino acids within the N-terminal DNA-binding 
domain of COUP-TF. Amino acids 48-72 in the basic and C-terminal regions of Tat
are required for the binding of Tat to COUP-TF. These results suggest that
COUP-TF is an essential transcription factor involved in HIV-1 expression in
microglia and reveal a novel interplay of Tat and COUP-TF during regulation of
viral expression.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.4.2654 
PMID: 10644726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

