
1. Virology. 2000 Mar 15;268(2):452-60.

Phosphorylation of the RAP74 subunit of TFIIF correlates with Tat-activated
transcription of the HIV-1 long terminal repeat.

Zhou M(1), Kashanchi F, Jiang H, Ge H, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Virus Tumor Biology Section, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland,
20892, USA.

Transcription from the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) is regulated by the viral
transactivator Tat, which increases RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) processivity.
Previous reports have demonstrated that phosphorylation of the RNAP II
carboxy-terminal domain by TFIIH and P-TEFb is important for Tat transactivation.
Our present results demonstrate that phosphorylation of the RAP74 subunit of
TFIIF is also an important step in Tat transactivation. Interestingly, while the 
general transcription factor TFIIF is required for both basal and Tat-activated
transcription, phosphorylation of the RAP74 subunit occurs in the presence of Tat
and correlates with a high level of transcription activity. Using a biotinylated 
DNA template transcription assay, we provide evidence that RAP74 is
phosphorylated by TAF(II)250 during Tat-activated transcription. Depletion of
RAP74 from the HeLa nuclear extract inhibited HIV-1 LTR-driven basal
transcription and Tat transactivation. The addition of TFIIF, reconstituted from 
recombinant RAP30 and RAP74, to the depleted HeLa nuclear extract resulted in
restoration of Tat transactivation. Of importance, the exogenous RAP74 was
rapidly phosphorylated in the presence of Tat. These results suggest that RAP74
phosphorylation is one important step, of several, in the Tat transactivation
cascade.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1999.0177 
PMID: 10704353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

