
1. J Biomed Sci. 2000 Mar-Apr;7(2):160-8.

Hepatitis B virus core protein interacts with the C-terminal region of
actin-binding protein.

Huang CJ(1), Chen YH, Ting LP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Life Science, National
Yang-Ming University, Shih-Pai, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Hepatitis B viral core protein is present in the nucleus and cytoplasm of
infected hepatocytes. There is a strong correlation between the intrahepatic
distribution of core protein and the viral replication state and disease activity
in patients with chronic hepatitis. To understand the role of core protein in the
pathogenesis of HBV, we used a yeast two-hybrid system to search for cellular
proteins interacting with the carboxyl terminus of core protein, as this region
is involved in a number of important functions in the viral replication cycle
including RNA packaging and DNA synthesis. A cDNA encoding the extreme C-terminal
region of human actin-binding protein, ABP-276/278, was identified. This
interaction was further confirmed both in vitro and in vivo. In addition, the
extreme C-terminal region of ABP-276/278 interacted with the nearly full-length
HBV core protein. Since this region is present in both the core and the precore
proteins, it is likely that both core and precore proteins of HBV can interact
with the C-terminal region of ABP-276/278. The minimal region of ABP-276/278
which interacted with the HBV core protein was the C-terminal 199 amino acid
residues which correspond to part of the 23rd repeat, the entire 24th repeat and 
the intervening hinge II region in ABPs. The potential functional outcome of ABP 
interaction in HBV replication and its contribution to the pathological changes
seen in patients with chronic HBV infection are discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02256623 
PMID: 10754391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

