
1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 27;275(43):33962-8.

The PDZ protein TIP-1 interacts with the Rho effector rhotekin and is involved in
Rho signaling to the serum response element.

Reynaud C(1), Fabre S, Jalinot P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Unité Mixte de Recherche
5665, CNRS-Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 46, Allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon Cedex
07, France.

The human T-cell lymphotrophic virus, type 1 Tax protein can interact via its C
terminus with various proteins including a PDZ domain. In this work, one of them,
TIP-1, is characterized as a cytoplasmic 14-kDa protein mainly corresponding to
one PDZ domain. A two-hybrid screen performed with TIP-1 as bait showed that it
interacts with the human homologue of rhotekin that was previously identified in 
mice as a Rho effector. Both human and mouse rhotekins exhibit at their C termini
the sequence QSPV-COOH that matches the X(S/T)XV-COOH consensus known for
proteins recognizing PDZ domains. Mutation of the serine and valine residues to
alanine impairs interaction of rhotekin with TIP-1. Transient expression
experiments with a reporter construct including the c-Fos serum response element 
(SRE) showed that coexpression of TIP-1 with the constitutively active RhoA.V14
mutant and human rhotekin caused a strong activation of the SRE. A negative
mutant of Rho, RhoA.N19, was unable to cooperate with TIP-1 and rhotekin. The
positive effect of TIP-1 was also lost when the C terminus of rhotekin was
mutated. These data show that the complex of active Rho with its effector
rhotekin bound to TIP-1 produces in the cytoplasm a signal that triggers strong
activation of the SRE.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M000465200 
PMID: 10940294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

