
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Nov;20(21):8244-53.

Human scribble (Vartul) is targeted for ubiquitin-mediated degradation by the
high-risk papillomavirus E6 proteins and the E6AP ubiquitin-protein ligase.

Nakagawa S(1), Huibregtse JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, New Jersey 08855, USA.

The high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) E6 proteins stimulate the ubiquitination
and degradation of p53, dependent on the E6AP ubiquitin-protein ligase. Other
proteins have also been shown to be targeted for degradation by E6, including
hDlg, the human homolog of the Drosophila melanogaster Discs large (Dlg) tumor
suppressor. We show here that the human homolog of the Drosophila Scribble
(Vartul) (hScrib) tumor suppressor protein is also targeted for ubiquitination by
the E6-E6AP complex in vitro and that expression of E6 induces degradation of
hScrib in vivo. Characterization of the E6AP-E6-hScrib complex indicated that
hScrib binds directly to E6 and that the binding is mediated by the PDZ domains
of hScrib and a carboxyl-terminal epitope conserved among the high-risk HPV E6
proteins. Green fluorescent protein-hScrib was localized to the periphery of MDCK
cells, where it colocalized with ZO-1, a component of tight junctions. E6
expression resulted in loss of integrity of tight junctions, as measured by ZO-1 
localization, and this effect was dependent on the PDZ binding epitope of E6.
Thus, the high-risk HPV E6 proteins induce the degradation of the human homologs 
of two Drosophila PDZ domain-containing tumor suppressor proteins, hDlg and
hScrib, both of which are associated with cell junction complexes. The fact that 
Scrib/Vart and Dlg appear to cooperate in a pathway that controls Drosophila
epithelial cell growth suggests that the combined targeting of hScrib and hDlg is
an important component of the biologic activity of high-risk HPV E6 proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.20.21.8244-8253.2000 
PMCID: PMC86433
PMID: 11027293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

