
1. J Virol. 2000 Nov;74(21):9845-57.

Activation of transcription of the human cytomegalovirus early UL4 promoter by
the Ets transcription factor binding element.

Chen J(1), Stinski MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, Iowa 52242, USA.

The human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) early UL4 promoter has served as a useful model 
for studying the activation of early viral gene expression. Previous
transient-transfection experiments detected cis-acting elements (the NF-Y site
and site 2) upstream of the transcriptional start site (L. Huang and M. F.
Stinski, J. Virol. 69:7612-7621, 1995). The roles of two of these sites, the NF-Y
site and site 2, in the context of the viral genome were investigated further by 
comparing mRNA levels from the early UL4 promoter in human foreskin fibroblasts
infected by recombinant viruses with either wild-type or mutant cis-acting
elements. Steady-state mRNA levels from the UL4 promoter with a mutation in the
NF-Y site were comparable to that of wild type. A mutation in an Elk-1 site plus 
putative IE86 protein binding sites decreased the steady-state mRNA levels
compared to the wild type at early times after infection. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays and antibody supershifts detected the binding of cellular
transcription factor Elk-1 to site 2 DNA with infected nuclear extracts but not
with mock-infected nuclear extracts. The role of cellular transcription factors
activated by the mitogen activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase pathway in activating transcription from early viral promoters is
discussed.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.74.21.9845-9857.2000 
PMCID: PMC102021
PMID: 11024111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

