
1. FEBS Lett. 2000 Nov 17;485(1):47-52.

The chromosomal protein HMG-D binds to the TAR and RBE RNA of HIV-1.

Arimondo PB(1), Gelus N, Hamy F, Payet D, Travers A, Bailly C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et la Recherche Médicale, Lille, France.

The high mobility group protein HMG-D is known to bind preferentially to DNA of
irregular structures with little or no sequence specificity. Upon binding to DNA,
this HMG-box protein widens the minor groove of the double helix and induces a
significant bending of the helix. We show here that HMG-D can strongly bind to
double-stranded RNA. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays show that HMG-D100
interacts with the transactivation response region (TAR) RNA from HIV-1. Strong
interaction with a high affinity Rev protein binding element (RBE) RNA was also
characterized. Gel shift experiments performed with several TAR RNA constructs
lacking the lateral pyrimidine bulge or with modified apical loop regions
indicate that the protein does not recognize the single-strand domains of the RNA
but apparently interacts directly with the double-stranded stem regions. No
protein-RNA complexes could be detected when using single-stranded
oligoribonucleotides. HMG-D protein could bind to the wide minor groove of the
A-form TAR RNA. The comparison of the amino acid sequence of HMG-D with that of
known RNA binding proteins suggests that the interaction of the protein with a
double-stranded RNA implicates the basic region of HMG-D as well as its HMG-box
domain. From the in vitro data reported here, we propose a novel functional role 
for proteins of the HMG-1 family. The results suggest that architectural HMG
proteins can be recruited by double-stranded RNA for the development of HIV-1 in 
the host cell.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(00)02183-9 
PMID: 11086163  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

