
1. J Virol. 2001 Mar;75(5):2301-13.

GLI-2 modulates retroviral gene expression.

Smith MJ(1), Gitlin SD, Browning CM, Lane BR, Clark NM, Shah N, Rainier S,
Markovitz DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109-0640, USA.

GLI proteins are involved in the development of mice, humans, zebrafish,
Caenorhabditis elegans, Xenopus, and Drosophila. While these zinc
finger-containing proteins bind to TG-rich promoter elements and are known to
regulate gene expression in C. elegans and Drosophila, mechanistic understanding 
of how regulation is mediated through naturally occurring transcriptional
promoters is lacking. One isoform of human GLI-2 appears to be identical to a
factor previously called Tax helper protein (THP), thus named due to its ability 
to interact with a TG-rich element in the human T-lymphotropic virus type 1
(HTLV-1) enhancer thought to mediate transcriptional stimulation by the Tax
protein of HTLV-1. We now demonstrate that, working through its TG-rich binding
site and adjacent elements, GLI-2/THP actually suppresses gene expression driven 
by the HTLV-1 promoter. GLI-2/THP has no effect on the HTLV-2 promoter, activates
expression from the promoters of human immunodeficiency virus types 1 and (HIV-1 
and -2), and stimulates HIV-1 replication. Both effective suppression and
activation of gene expression and viral replication require the first of the five
zinc fingers, which is not necessary for DNA binding, to be intact. Thus, not
only can GLI-2/THP either activate or suppress gene expression, depending on the 
promoter, but the same domain (first zinc finger) mediates both effects. These
findings suggest a role for GLI-2 in retroviral gene regulation and shed further 
light on the mechanisms by which GLI proteins regulate naturally occurring
promoters.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.5.2301-2313.2001 
PMCID: PMC114813
PMID: 11160733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

