
1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2001 Feb 10;17(3):217-27.

HIV type 1 molecular clones able to use the Bonzo/STRL-33 coreceptor for virus
entry.

Zhang YJ(1), Zhang L, Ketas T, Korber BT, Moore JP.

Author information: 
(1)Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center, The Rockefeller University, New York, New 
York, USA.

We describe the cloning of env genes from the mother-infant HIV-1 isolate pair
P6-v3 and M6-v3. These viruses are unusual in that they can use the coreceptor
Bonzo/STRL33 as well as CCR5 and, in the case of M6, CXCR4, to enter transfected 
cell lines in vitro. The phenotype of the parental isolates is generally
reflected by the properties of the cloned env genes, when these are used in an
Env-complementation assay of virus entry. Chimeric viruses were also made that
contain the env genes of P6-v3 and M6-v3 inserted into the background of the
infectious molecular clone, HIV-1 NL4-3. Some of the chimeric viruses derived
from HIV1 P6-v3 were able to use Bonzo for entry into transfected cell lines,
albeit to a lesser extent than they could use CCR5. There are some indications
that one of these chimeric viruses, P6-v3-22-1, can use a coreceptor other than
CCR5, perhaps Bonzo, to enter mitogen-stimulated PBMC, although only weakly.
However, formal proof that this virus can use Bonzo in primary cells has not been
obtained. The P6-v3-22-1 chimeric virus was unable to infect CD4-negative,
placental cell lines, in the presence or absence of soluble CD4. Env sequence
analysis revealed several differences among viruses with different tropisms, most
notably a four amino acid deletion in the central region of the V3 loop that
distinguishes the R5 virus P6-v3-25-4 from the R5, Bonzo virus P6-v3-22-1.

DOI: 10.1089/088922201750063133 
PMID: 11177404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

