
1. Gene. 2001 Jan 24;263(1-2):131-40.

Cytoplasmic retention of HIV-1 regulatory protein Vpr by protein-protein
interaction with a novel human cytoplasmic protein VprBP.

Zhang S(1), Feng Y, Narayan O, Zhao LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, St. Louis University School of Medicine,
3681 Park Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Vpr is an HIV-1 auxiliary regulatory protein packaged in the virion. It has been 
shown to enhance the nuclear transport of the HIV-1 pre-integration complex,
activate transcription of cellular and viral promoters, and arrest the cell cycle
at the G2/M check-point. We previously identified a cellular protein of 180 kDa
(RIP) that interacted with HIV-1 Vpr specifically. We now rename this cellular
protein as Vpr-binding protein, or VprBP. In this report, we describe the cloning
of the VprBP cDNA that encodes 1507 aa residues and is identical to the
previously cloned cDNA KIAA0800. We demonstrate that Vpr specifically interacts
with recombinantly expressed VprBP in vitro as well as in vivo. Furthermore, Vpr 
interacts with the cellular endogenous VprBP in the context of the HIV-1 life
cycle. Mutational analysis of VprBP suggests that the Vpr binding domain is
located within the C-terminal half of VprBP, which has a Pro-rich domain and
several Phe-x-x-Phe repeats. Subcellular fractionation studies show that both the
endogenous VprBP and the adenovirus-expressed VprBP are distributed predominantly
in the cytoplasmic fraction. Consistent with previous reports, the
adenovirus-expressed Vpr is distributed in both the cytoplasmic and the nuclear
fractions. However, when VprBP and Vpr are expressed together, Vpr is found
almost exclusively in the cytoplasm. Expression of VprBP does not affect the
nuclear transport of the adenoviral nuclear protein, pTP. VprBP expressed in
insect cells also blocks the nuclear transport of a Vpr-GFP fusion protein, and
VprBP mutants incapable of interacting with Vpr fail to block Vpr-GFP nuclear
transport. We hypothesize that Vpr interaction with VprBP may cause changes in
the host cell cytoplasm that affect HIV-1 pathogenesis as well as HIV-1
replication.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(00)00583-7 
PMID: 11223251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

