
1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 29;276(26):24059-67. Epub 2001 Apr 16.

Transcription repression of human hepatitis B virus genes by negative regulatory 
element-binding protein/SON.

Sun CT(1), Lo WY, Wang IH, Lo YH, Shiou SR, Lai CK, Ting LP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Life Science, National
Yang-Ming University, Shih-Pai, Taipei 112, Taiwan, Republic of China.

A negative regulatory element (NRE) is located immediately upstream of the
upstream regulatory sequence of core promoter and second enhancer of human
hepatitis B virus (HBV). NRE represses the transcription activation function of
the upstream regulatory sequence of core promoter and the second enhancer. In
this study, we described the cloning and characterization of an NRE-binding
protein (NREBP) through expression cloning. NREBP cDNA is 8266 nucleotides in
size and encodes a protein of 2386 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of
262 kDa. Three previously described cDNAs, DBP-5, SONB, and SONA, are partial
sequence and/or alternatively spliced forms of NREBP. The genomic locus of the
NREBP/SON gene is composed of 13 exons and 12 introns. The endogenous NREBP
protein is localized in the nucleus of human hepatoma HuH-7 cells. Antibody
against NREBP protein can specifically block the NRE binding activity present in 
fractionated nuclear extracts in gel shifting assays, indicating that NREBP is
the endogenous nuclear protein that binds to NRE sequence. By polymerase chain
reaction-assisted binding site selection assay, we determined that the consensus 
sequence for NREBP binding is GA(G/T)AN(C/G)(A/G)CC. Overexpression of NREBP
enhances the repression of the HBV core promoter activity via NRE. Overexpression
of NREBP can also repress the transcription of HBV genes and the production of
HBV virions in a transient transfection system that mimics the viral infection in
vivo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M101330200 
PMID: 11306577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

