
1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 6;276(27):24946-58. Epub 2001 May 3.

Binding of double-stranded RNA to protein kinase PKR is required for dimerization
and promotes critical autophosphorylation events in the activation loop.

Zhang F(1), Romano PR, Nagamura-Inoue T, Tian B, Dever TE, Mathews MB, Ozato K,
Hinnebusch AG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation and Development, NICHHD, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Protein kinase PKR is activated by double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) and phosphorylates
translation initiation factor 2alpha to inhibit protein synthesis in
virus-infected mammalian cells. PKR contains two dsRNA binding motifs (DRBMs I
and II) required for activation by dsRNA. There is strong evidence that PKR
activation requires dimerization, but the role of dsRNA in dimer formation is
controversial. By making alanine substitutions predicted to remove increasing
numbers of side chain contacts between the DRBMs and dsRNA, we found that
dimerization of full-length PKR in yeast was impaired by the minimal combinations
of mutations required to impair dsRNA binding in vitro. Mutation of Ala-67 to Glu
in DRBM-I, reported to abolish dimerization without affecting dsRNA binding,
destroyed both activities in our assays. By contrast, deletion of a second
dimerization region that overlaps the kinase domain had no effect on PKR
dimerization in yeast. Human PKR contains at least 15 autophosphorylation sites, 
but only Thr-446 and Thr-451 in the activation loop were found here to be
critical for kinase activity in yeast. Using an antibody specific for
phosphorylated Thr-451, we showed that Thr-451 phosphorylation is stimulated by
dsRNA binding. Our results provide strong evidence that dsRNA binding is required
for dimerization of full-length PKR molecules in vivo, leading to
autophosphorylation in the activation loop and stimulation of the eIF2alpha
kinase function of PKR.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M102108200 
PMID: 11337501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

