
1. J Virol. 2001 Jun;75(12):5711-8.

PY motifs of Epstein-Barr virus LMP2A regulate protein stability and
phosphorylation of LMP2A-associated proteins.

Ikeda M(1), Ikeda A, Longnecker R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Medical School,
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Latent membrane protein 2A (LMP2A) is expressed in latent Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) infection. We have demonstrated that Nedd4 family ubiquitin-protein ligases
(E3s), AIP4, WWP2/AIP2, and Nedd4, bind specifically to two PY motifs present
within the LMP2A amino-terminal domain. In this study, LMP2A PY motif mutant
viruses were constructed to investigate the role of the LMP2A PY motifs. AIP4 was
found to specifically associate with the LMP2A PY motifs in EBV-transformed
lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs), extending our original observation to
EBV-infected cells. Mutation of both of the LMP2A PY motifs resulted in an
absence of binding of AIP4 to LMP2A, which resulted in an increase in the
expression of Lyn and the constitutive hyperphosphorylation of LMP2A and an
unknown 120-kDa protein. In addition, there was a modest increase in the
constitutive phosphorylation of Syk and an unidentified 60-kDa protein. These
results indicate that the PY motifs contained within LMP2A are important in
regulating phosphorylation in EBV-infected LCLs, likely through the regulation of
Lyn activity by specifically targeting the degradation of Lyn by ubiquination by 
Nedd4 family E3s. Despite differences between PY motif mutant LCLs and wild-type 
LCLs, the PY motif mutants still exhibited a block in B-cell receptor (BCR)
signal transduction as measured by the induction of tyrosine phosphorylation and 
BZLF1 expression following BCR activation. EBV-transformed LCLs with mutations in
the PY motifs were not different from wild-type LCLs in serum-dependent cell
growth. Protein stability of LMP1, which colocalizes with LMP2A, was not affected
by the LMP2A-associated E3s.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.12.5711-5718.2001 
PMCID: PMC114286
PMID: 11356981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

