
1. J Virol. 2001 Nov;75(22):11185-95.

Structural features of nectin-2 (HveB) required for herpes simplex virus entry.

Martinez WM(1), Spear PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Medical School,
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

One step in the process of herpes simplex virus (HSV) entry into cells is the
binding of viral glycoprotein D (gD) to a cellular receptor. Human nectin-2 (also
known as HveB and Prr2), a member of the immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily, serves 
as a gD receptor for the entry of HSV-2, variant forms of HSV-1 that have amino
acid substitutions at position 25 or 27 of gD (for example, HSV-1/Rid), and
porcine pseudorabies virus (PRV). The gD binding region of nectin-2 is believed
to be localized to the N-terminal variable-like (V) Ig domain. In order to
identify specific amino acid sequences in nectin-2 that are important for HSV
entry activity, chimeric molecules were constructed by exchange of sequences
between human nectin-2 and its mouse homolog, mouse nectin-2, which mediates
entry of PRV but not HSV-1 or HSV-2. The nectin-2 chimeric molecules were
expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells, which normally lack a gD receptor, and 
tested for cell surface expression and viral entry activity. As expected,
chimeric molecules containing the V domain of human nectin-2 exhibited HSV entry 
activity. Replacement of either of two small regions in the V domain of mouse
nectin-2 with amino acids from the equivalent positions in human nectin-2 (amino 
acids 75 to 81 or 89) transferred HSV-1/Rid entry activity to mouse nectin-2. The
resulting chimeras also exhibited enhanced HSV-2 entry activity and gained the
ability to mediate wild-type HSV-1 entry. Replacement of amino acid 89 of human
nectin-2 with the corresponding mouse amino acid (M89F) eliminated HSV entry
activity. These results identify two different amino acid sequences, predicted to
lie adjacent to the C' and C" beta-strands of the V domain, that are critical for
HSV entry activity. This region is homologous to the human immunodeficiency virus
binding region of CD4 and to the poliovirus binding region of CD155.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.22.11185-11195.2001 
PMCID: PMC114698
PMID: 11602758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

