
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 15;277(7):4918-24. Epub 2001 Nov 30.

Ku represses the HIV-1 transcription: identification of a putative Ku binding
site homologous to the mouse mammary tumor virus NRE1 sequence in the HIV-1 long 
terminal repeat.

Jeanson L(1), Mouscadet JF.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR8532, Institut Gustave-Roussy, PR2, 39 rue Camille Desmoulins, 94805
Villejuif, France.

Ku has been implicated in nuclear processes, including DNA break repair,
transcription, V(D)J recombination, and telomere maintenance. Its mode of action 
involves two distinct mechanisms: one in which a nonspecific binding occurs to
DNA ends and a second that involves a specific binding to negative regulatory
elements involved in transcription repression. Such elements were identified in
mouse mammary tumor virus and human T cell leukemia virus retroviruses. The
purpose of this study was to investigate a role for Ku in the regulation of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 transcription. First, HIV-1 LTR activity was
studied in CHO-K1 cells and in CH0-derived xrs-6 cells, which are devoid of Ku80.
LTR-driven expression of a reporter gene was significantly increased in xrs-6
cells. This enhancement was suppressed after re-expression of Ku80. Second,
transcription of HIV-1 was followed in U1 human cells that were depleted in Ku by
using a Ku80 antisense RNA. Ku depletion led to a increase of both HIV-1 mRNA
synthesis and viral production compared with the parent cells. These results
demonstrate that Ku acts as a transcriptional repressor of HIV-1 expression.
Finally, a putative Ku-specific binding site was identified within the negative
regulatory region of the HIV-1 long terminal repeat, which may account for this
repression of transcription.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110830200 
PMID: 11733502  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

