
1. J Virol. 2002 Jan;76(2):697-706.

Binding of FADD and caspase-8 to molluscum contagiosum virus MC159 v-FLIP is not 
sufficient for its antiapoptotic function.

Garvey TL(1), Bertin J, Siegel RM, Wang GH, Lenardo MJ, Cohen JI.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Virology Section, Laboratory of Clinical Investigation, Molecular
Development of the Immune System Section, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2006 Feb;80(3):1615.

Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV), a member of the human poxvirus family, encodes
the MC159 protein that inhibits Fas-, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-, and
TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligant (TRAIL)-induced apoptosis. We used
site-directed mutagenesis to change charged or hydrophobic amino acid residues to
alanines to identify regions of MC159 that are critical for protection from
apoptosis and for protein-protein interactions. Surprisingly, while MC159 is
thought to block apoptosis by binding to Fas-associated death domain (FADD) or
caspase-8, several mutants that lost apoptosis blocking activity still bound to
both FADD and caspase-8. Mutations in the predicted hydrophobic patch 1 and
alpha2 regions of both death effector domains (DEDs) within MC159 resulted in
loss of the ability to bind to FADD or caspase-8 and to block apoptosis. Amino
acid substitutions in the RXDL motif located in the alpha6 region of either DED
resulted in loss of protection from apoptosis induced by Fas, TNF, and TRAIL and 
abolished the ability of MC159 to block death effector filament formation. Thus, 
charged or hydrophobic amino acids in three regions of the MC159 DEDs
(hydrophobic patch 1, alpha2, and alpha6) are critical for the protein's ability 
to interact with cellular proteins and to block apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.2.697-706.2002 
PMCID: PMC136828
PMID: 11752160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

