
1. J Virol. 2002 Apr;76(8):3819-27.

Increased RNA editing and inhibition of hepatitis delta virus replication by
high-level expression of ADAR1 and ADAR2.

Jayan GC(1), Casey JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Virology and Immunology, Georgetown University Medical
Center, Rockville, Maryland 20850, USA.

Hepatitis delta virus (HDV) is a subviral human pathogen that uses specific RNA
editing activity of the host to produce two essential forms of the sole viral
protein, hepatitis delta antigen (HDAg). Editing at the amber/W site of HDV
antigenomic RNA leads to the production of the longer form (HDAg-L), which is
required for RNA packaging but which is a potent trans-dominant inhibitor of HDV 
RNA replication. Editing in infected cells is thought to be catalyzed by one or
more of the cellular enzymes known as adenosine deaminases that act on RNA
(ADARs). We examined the effects of increased ADAR1 and ADAR2 expression on HDV
RNA editing and replication in transfected Huh7 cells. We found that both ADARs
dramatically increased RNA editing, which was correlated with strong inhibition
of HDV RNA replication. While increased HDAg-L production was the primary
mechanism of inhibition, we observed at least two additional means by which ADARs
can suppress HDV replication. High-level expression of both ADAR1 and ADAR2 led
to extensive hyperediting at non-amber/W sites and subsequent production of HDAg 
variants that acted as trans-dominant inhibitors of HDV RNA replication.
Moreover, we also observed weak inhibition of HDV RNA replication by mutated
forms of ADARs defective for deaminase activity. Our results indicate that HDV
requires highly regulated and selective editing and that the level of ADAR
expression can play an important role: overexpression of ADARs inhibits HDV RNA
replication and compromises virus viability.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.8.3819-3827.2002 
PMCID: PMC136091
PMID: 11907222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

