
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 21;277(25):22297-303. Epub 2002 Apr 4.

A Functional interaction between the human papillomavirus 16
transcription/replication factor E2 and the DNA damage response protein TopBP1.

Boner W(1), Taylor ER, Tsirimonaki E, Yamane K, Campo MS, Morgan IM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Comparative Medicine, Department of Veterinary Pathology,
University of Glasgow, Garscube Estate, Bearsden Road, Glasgow G61 1QH, Scotland.

The human papillomavirus (HPV) transcription/replication factor E2 is essential
for the life cycle of HPVs. E2 protein binds to DNA target sequences in the viral
long control regions to regulate transcription of the viral genome. It also
enhances viral DNA replication by interacting with the viral replication factor
E1 and recruiting it to the origin of replication and may also play a more direct
role in replication. The cellular proteins with which E2 interacts to carry out
these functions are largely unknown. To identify these proteins a yeast
two-hybrid screen was carried out with the transcription/replication domain of
HPV16 E2. This screen identified several candidate interacting partners for E2
including TopBP1 (topoisomerase II beta-binding protein 1). TopBP1 has eight
BRCA1 carboxyl-terminal domains that are found in proteins regulating the DNA
damage response, transcription, and replication. Here we demonstrate that HPV16
E2 and TopBP1 interact in vitro and in vivo and that TopBP1 can enhance the
ability of E2 to activate transcription and replication. This is the first time
that TopBP1 has been shown to function as a transcriptional coactivator and that 
E2 interacts with TopBP1. Removal of the amino-terminal domain of TopBP1
abolishes coactivation of transcription and replication. This interaction may
have functional consequences upon the viral life cycle.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M202163200 
PMID: 11934899  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

