
1. J Virol. 2002 Jun;76(12):6197-204.

Cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor blocks apoptosis induced by
herpes simplex virus 1 mutants lacking glycoprotein D and is likely the target of
antiapoptotic activity of the glycoprotein.

Zhou G(1), Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Herpes simplex virus 1 mutants lacking the gene encoding glycoprotein D (gD) and 
the gD normally present in the envelope of the virus (gD(-/-) stocks) or mutants 
lacking the gD gene but containing trans-induced gD in their envelopes (gD(-/+)) 
cause apoptosis in human SK-N-SH cells. The gD(-/-) virions are taken up by
endocytosis and are degraded, whereas gD(-/+) viruses replicate but produce
gD(-/-) virus. Apoptosis is blocked by delivery of the gD gene in trans. Studies 
designed to test several hypotheses concerning the role of gD in apoptosis
revealed the following. (i) gD(-/-) and gD(-/+) stocks induce fragmentation of
cellular DNA in SK-N-SH, HEp-2, HeLa, and Vero cell lines. (ii) Chloroquine
blocks apoptosis induced by gD(-/-) stocks but not by gD(-/+) stocks. The drug
also rescues gD(-/-) from degradation. (iii) Cells transduced with
cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor (CI-MPR) block apoptosis induced 
by either gD(-/-) or gD(-/+) virus. (iv) Expression of sequences antisense to the
cloned CI-MPR gene induced apoptosis by themselves. Wild-type virus but not
gD(-/-) or gD(-/+) stocks of mutant virus blocked apoptosis induced by the
expression of CI-MPR antisense sequences. These results exclude the possibility
that to block apoptosis, gD must interact with its HveA receptor, a member of the
tumor necrosis factor alpha receptor family. Instead, the data suggest that gD
blocks the influx of lysosomal enzymes into the endosomal compartment by binding 
to CI-MPR. This conclusion is consistent with published reports that
phosphorylated gD interacts with CI-MPR.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.12.6197-6204.2002 
PMCID: PMC136186
PMID: 12021353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

