
1. J Virol. 2002 Aug;76(16):8124-37.

Identification of SRPK1 and SRPK2 as the major cellular protein kinases
phosphorylating hepatitis B virus core protein.

Daub H(1), Blencke S, Habenberger P, Kurtenbach A, Dennenmoser J, Wissing J,
Ullrich A, Cotten M.

Author information: 
(1)Axxima Pharmaceuticals AG, 82152 Martinsried, Germany. daub@axxima.com

Phosphorylation of hepatitis B virus (HBV) core protein has recently been shown
to be a prerequisite for pregenomic RNA encapsidation into viral capsids, but the
host cell kinases mediating this essential step of the HBV replication cycle have
not been identified. We detected two kinases of 95 and 115 kDa in HuH-7 total
cell lysates which interacted specifically with the HBV core protein and
phosphorylated its arginine-rich C-terminal domain. The 95-kDa kinase was
purified and characterized as SR protein-specific kinase 1 (SRPK1) by mass
spectrometry. Based on this finding, the 115-kDa kinase could be identified as
the related kinase SRPK2 by immunoblot analysis. In vitro, both SRPKs
phosphorylated HBV core protein on the same serine residues which are found to be
phosphorylated in vivo. Moreover, the major cellular HBV core kinase activity
detected in the total cell lysate showed biochemical properties identical to
those of SRPK1 and SRPK2, as examined by measuring binding to a panel of
chromatography media. We also clearly demonstrate that neither the
cyclin-dependent kinases Cdc2 and Cdk2 nor protein kinase C, previously
implicated in HBV core protein phosphorylation, can account for the HBV core
protein kinase activity. We conclude that both SRPK1 and SRPK2 are most likely
the cellular protein kinases mediating HBV core protein phosphorylation during
viral infection and therefore represent important host cell targets for
therapeutic intervention in HBV infection.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.16.8124-8137.2002 
PMCID: PMC155132
PMID: 12134018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

