
1. Cancer Res. 2002 Oct 1;62(19):5425-35.

Human kin17 protein directly interacts with the simian virus 40 large T antigen
and inhibits DNA replication.

Miccoli L(1), Biard DS, Créminon C, Angulo JF.

Author information: 
(1)CEA, Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique, Laboratoire de Génétique de la
Radiosensibilité, Direction des Sciences du Vivant, 92265 Fontenay-aux-Roses,
France. miccoli@dsvidf.cea.fr

Kin17 is an evolutionarily conserved DNA-binding protein, which forms
intranuclear foci in proliferating cells. Recent data have suggested that human
kin17 protein is associated with cell proliferation and unrepaired DNA lesions.
Herein, we show that human fibroblasts (MRC5-V2 and CHSV4) immortalized with SV40
overexpress endogenous kin17 protein, as compared with normal diploid human
fibroblasts. We observed that certain carcinoma cell lines also up-regulated
kin17 protein, suggesting that increased kin17 protein levels may be a
consequence of the immortalized phenotype. We report here that the endogenous
kin17 protein is located in nucleoplasmic foci and colocalizes with SV40 large T 
antigen. Purification of human kin17 protein allowed analysis of the physical
interaction with T antigen by several in vitro and in vivo assays. Large T
antigen and human kin17 protein are part of the same high molecular weight
multiprotein complex in human cells. Furthermore, human kin17 protein interacts
with T antigen bound to the SV40 DNA origin of replication. Strikingly, the
overexpression of human kin17 protein in vivo and the introduction of increased
amounts of human kin17 protein in an in vitro assay reduced T-antigen-dependent
DNA replication, suggesting that kin17 protein may be involved in the DNA
replication process in human cells.


PMID: 12359749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

