
1. J Virol. 2002 Nov;76(22):11596-604.

Protein interactions targeting the latency-associated nuclear antigen of Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus to cell chromosomes.

Krithivas A(1), Fujimuro M, Weidner M, Young DB, Hayward SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Maintenance of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) latent infection
depends on the viral episomes in the nucleus being distributed to daughter cells 
following cell division. The latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA) is
constitutively expressed in all KSHV-infected cells. LANA binds sequences in the 
terminal repeat regions of the KSHV genome and tethers the viral episomes to
chromosomes. To better understand the mechanism of chromosomal tethering, we
performed glutathione S-transferase (GST) affinity and yeast two-hybrid assays to
identify LANA-interacting proteins with known chromosomal association. Two of the
interactors were the methyl CpG binding protein MeCP2 and the 43-kDa protein DEK.
The interactions of MeCP2 and DEK with LANA were confirmed by
coimmunoprecipitation. The MeCP2-interacting domain was mapped to the previously 
described chromatin binding site in the N terminus of LANA, while the
DEK-interacting domain mapped to LANA amino acids 986 to 1043 in the C terminus. 
LANA was unable to associate with mouse chromosomes in chromosome spreads of
transfected NIH 3T3 cells. However, LANA was capable of targeting to mouse
chromosomes in the presence of human MeCP2 or DEK. The data indicate that LANA is
tethered to chromosomes through two independent chromatin binding domains that
interact with different protein partners.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.22.11596-11604.2002 
PMCID: PMC136775
PMID: 12388720  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

