
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 14;278(7):4566-71. Epub 2002 Nov 27.

Functional role of HIV-1 virion-associated uracil DNA glycosylase 2 in the
correction of G:U mispairs to G:C pairs.

Priet S(1), Navarro JM, Gros N, Querat G, Sire J.

Author information: 
(1)Pathogénie des Infections à Lentivirus, INSERM U372, 163 avenue de Luminy, BP 
178, 13276 Marseille Cedex 09, France.

Human monocytes/macrophages are target cells for HIV-1 infection. As other
non-dividing cells, they are characterized by low and imbalanced intracellular
dNTP pool levels and an excess of dUTP. The replication of HIV-1 in this cellular
context favors misincorporation of uracil residues into viral DNA because of the 
use of dUTP in place of dCTP. We have previously reported that the host uracil
DNA glycosylase enzyme UNG2 is packaged into HIV-1 viral particles via a specific
association with the integrase domain of the Gag-Pol precursor. In this study, we
investigated whether virion-associated UNG2 plays a role similar to that of its
cellular counterpart. We show that the L172A mutation of integrase impaired the
packaging of UNG2 into viral particles. Using a primer-template DNA substrate
containing G:U mispairs, we demonstrate that wild-type viral lysate has the
ability to repair G:U mismatched pairs to G:C matched pairs, in contrast to
UNG2-deficient viral lysate. Moreover, no correction of G:T mispairs by wild-type
HIV-1 viral lysate was observed, which argues for the specificity of the repair
process. We also show that UNG2 physically associates with the viral reverse
transcriptase enzyme. Altogether our data indicate for the first time that a
uracil repair pathway is specifically associated with HIV-1 viral particles.
However, the molecular mechanism of this process remains to be characterized
further.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M209311200 
PMID: 12458223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

