
1. EMBO J. 2003 May 1;22(9):2104-16.

Pro-apoptotic function of HBV X protein is mediated by interaction with c-FLIP
and enhancement of death-inducing signal.

Kim KH(1), Seong BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, College of Engineering and Bioproducts Research
Center, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Korea.

Erratum in
    EMBO J. 2003 Jun 16;22(12):3198.

Despite its implication in the progression of hepatitis B virus (HBV)-associated 
liver disease, the pro-apoptotic function of HBx protein remains poorly
understood. We show that the expression of HBx leads to hyperactivation of
caspase-8 and caspase-3 upon treatment with tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha) or anti-Fas antibody, and this activation is correlated with the
sensitivity to apoptosis. We demonstrate cytoplasmic co-localization and direct
interaction between HBx and the cellular FLICE inhibitory protein (c-FLIP), a key
regulator of the death-inducing signaling complex (DISC). Deletion analysis shows
that the death effector domain 1 (DED1) of c-FLIP is important for the observed
interaction. Overexpression of c-FLIP rescued the cells from HBx-mediated
apoptosis, with both the full-length HBV genome and HBx expression vectors.
Moreover, c-FLIP and caspase-8 inhibitor considerably protected cells from
HBx-mediated apoptosis. These data suggest that HBx abrogates the
apoptosis-inhibitory function of c-FLIP and renders the cell hypersensitive
towards the TNF-alpha apoptotic signal even below threshold concentration. This
provides a novel mechanism for deregulation of hepatic cell growth in HBV
patients and a new target for intervention in HBV-associated liver cancer and
disease.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/cdg210 
PMCID: PMC156082
PMID: 12727877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

