
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jul 8;100(14):8211-6. Epub 2003 Jun 23.

Human papillomavirus E6 and Myc proteins associate in vivo and bind to and
cooperatively activate the telomerase reverse transcriptase promoter.

Veldman T(1), Liu X, Yuan H, Schlegel R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Georgetown University Medical School, Washington, DC 
20007, USA.

The papillomavirus E6 protein binds and directs the ubiquitin-dependent
degradation of the p53 tumor suppressor protein. Independent of this
p53-degradative function, however, E6 induces cellular telomerase activity. This 
increase in enzyme activity reflects E6-enhanced transcription of the human
telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) catalytic subunit, but the molecular
basis for this transactivation is unknown. In the present study, we demonstrate
that E6/Myc interactions regulate hTERT gene expression. Mad protein, a specific 
antagonist of Myc, repressed E6-mediated transactivation of the hTERT promoter
and this repression was relieved by Myc overexpression. The proximal Myc/
Max-binding element (E-box) in the hTERT promoter was the major determinant of
both E6 and Myc responsiveness in keratinocytes. E6 did not alter Myc protein
expression or Myc/Max association, and the induction of hTERT by Myc/E6 was
independent of Myc phosphorylation at Thr-58/Ser-62 within the transactivation
domain. However, immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated that endogenous Myc
protein coprecipitated with E6 protein and chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses
demonstrated that both E6 and Myc proteins bound to a minimal 295-bp hTERT
promoter. Only the "high-risk" E6 proteins bound to the hTERT promoter,
consistent with their preferential ability to induce telomerase. The observation 
that E6 associates with Myc complexes and activates a Myc-responsive gene
identifies a mechanism by which this oncogene can modulate cell proliferation and
differentiation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1435900100 
PMCID: PMC166208
PMID: 12821782  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

