
1. J Virol. 2003 Jul;77(14):8048-60.

Novel PKCeta is required to activate replicative functions of the major
nonstructural protein NS1 of minute virus of mice.

Lachmann S(1), Rommeleare J, Nüesch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Tumour Virology Program, Department F010 and Institut National de la
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U375, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 242, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The multifunctional protein NS1 of minute virus of mice (MVMp) is
posttranslationally modified and at least in part regulated by phosphorylation.
The atypical lambda isoform of protein kinase C (PKClambda) phosphorylates
residues T435 and S473 in vitro and in vivo, leading directly to an activation of
NS1 helicase function, but it is insufficient to activate NS1 for rolling circle 
replication. The present study identifies an additional cellular protein kinase
phosphorylating and regulating NS1 activities. We show in vitro that the
recombinant novel PKCeta phosphorylates NS1 and in consequence is able to
activate the viral polypeptide in concert with PKClambda for rolling circle
replication. Moreover, this role of PKCeta was confirmed in vivo. We thereby
created stably transfected A9 mouse fibroblasts, a typical MVMp-permissive host
cell line with Flag-tagged constitutively active or inactive PKCeta mutants, in
order to alter the activity of the NS1 regulating kinase. Indeed, tryptic
phosphopeptide analyses of metabolically (32)P-labeled NS1 expressed in the
presence of a dominant-negative mutant, PKCetaDN, showed a lack of distinct NS1
phosphorylation events. This correlates with impaired synthesis of viral DNA
replication intermediates, as detected by Southern blotting at the level of the
whole cell population and by BrdU incorporation at the single-cell level.
Remarkably, MVM infection triggers an accumulation of endogenous PKCeta in the
nuclear periphery, suggesting that besides being a target for PKCeta, parvovirus 
infections may also affect the regulation of this NS1 regulating kinase.
Altogether, our results underline the tight interconnection between PKC-mediated 
signaling and the parvoviral life cycle.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.77.14.8048-8060.2003 
PMCID: PMC161934
PMID: 12829844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

