
1. J Cell Biol. 2003 Aug 4;162(3):443-55. Epub 2003 Jul 28.

Infectious HIV-1 assembles in late endosomes in primary macrophages.

Pelchen-Matthews A(1), Kramer B, Marsh M.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Unit, Medical Research (MRC) Laboratory for Molecular Cell
Biology, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

Although human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is generally thought to
assemble at the plasma membrane of infected cells, virions have been observed in 
intracellular compartments in macrophages. Here, we investigated virus assembly
in HIV-1-infected primary human monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM). Electron
microscopy of cryosections showed virus particles, identified by their morphology
and positive labeling with antibodies to the viral p17, p24, and envelope
proteins, in intracellular vacuoles. Immunolabeling demonstrated that these
compartments contained the late endosomal marker CD63, which was enriched on
vesicles within these structures and incorporated into the envelope of budding
virions. The virus-containing vacuoles were also labeled with antibodies against 
LAMP-1, CD81, and CD82, which were also incorporated into the viral envelope. To 
assess the cellular source of infectious viruses derived from MDM,
virus-containing media from infected cells were precipitated with specific
antibodies. Only antibodies against antigens found in late endosomes precipitated
infectious virus, whereas antibodies against proteins located primarily on the
cell surface did not. Our data indicate that most of the infectious HIV produced 
by primary macrophages is assembled on late endocytic membranes and acquires
antigens characteristic of this compartment. This notion has significant
implications for understanding the biology of HIV and its cell-cell transmission.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.200304008 
PMCID: PMC2172706
PMID: 12885763  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

