
1. J Virol. 2003 Sep;77(18):9758-68.

Identification of a novel cellular transcriptional repressor interacting with the
latent nuclear antigen of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus.

Pan HY(1), Zhang YJ, Wang XP, Deng JH, Zhou FC, Gao SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Virology Program, Children's Cancer Research Institute, The University
of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San
Antonio, TX 78229, USA.

The latent nuclear antigen (LNA) of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus
(KSHV) has an essential role in viral latent infection. LNA maintains the
stability of KSHV episomes and modulates the expression of cellular genes. A
novel cellular protein KLIP1 was identified to interact with LNA through yeast
two-hybrid screening, and confirmed by a glutathione S-transferase pull down
assay. Domain mapping showed that KLIP1 interacted with the N-terminal domain of 
LNA. Northern blot hybridization with a KLIP1 probe identified a major transcript
of 1.8 kb and a minor transcript of 2.8 kb. cDNA library screening and 5'-RACE
revealed that the major transcript encoded an open-reading-frame of 1,257 bp and 
had a 5'-untranslated region of 73 nucleotides. The major KLIP1 transcript was
ubiquitously present in different cell types examined. A KLIP1 synthetic peptide 
antibody detected a doublet of 58-kDa and 63-kDa proteins in a Western blot
assay. KLIP1 had two putative nuclear localization signals and showed punctate
nuclear localization when expressed as a GFP-fusion protein. KLIP1 interacted
with LNA in vivo, as demonstrated by coimmunoprecipitation using KSHV-infected
cells and colocalization when they were expressed as GFP- and DsRed-fusion
proteins, respectively. Consistent with its interaction with LNA, nuclear
localization, and possession of two leucine zipper motifs, KLIP1 behaved like a
transcriptional factor and repressed herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase (TK)
promoter activity in a mammalian one-hybrid assay. In addition, cotransfection
with LNA alleviated the transcriptional repression effect of KLIP1 on TK promoter
activity. These results suggest that KLIP1 is a new member of cellular
transcriptional repressors, and that LNA is involved in deregulating cellular
transcription process.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.77.18.9758-9768.2003 
PMCID: PMC224565
PMID: 12941884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

