
1. Virus Genes. 2003 Dec;27(3):237-47.

Latency-associated nuclear antigen of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus
interacts with human myeloid cell nuclear differentiation antigen induced by
interferon alpha.

Fukushi M(1), Higuchi M, Oie M, Tetsuka T, Kasolo F, Ichiyama K, Yamamoto N,
Katano H, Sata T, Fujii M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, 1-757, Asahimachi-Dori, Niigata, 951-8510, Japan.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV)/human herpes virus type 8 (HHV-8) 
is tightly linked to the development of Kaposi's sarcoma, primary effusion
lymphoma (PEL) and some cases of multicentric Castleman's disease.
Latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA) is one of a limited number of KSHV
genes consistently expressed in these diseases as well as in KSHV-infected cell
lines derived from PEL, and has been shown to play crucial role in persistence of
KSHV genomes in the infected cells. In this study, we explored the cellular
factors that interact with LANA using yeast two-hybrid screening, and isolated a 
part of gene encoding human myeloid cell nuclear differentiation antigen (MNDA). 
MNDA is a hematopoietic interferon-inducible nuclear proteins with a HIN-200
family member with conserved 200-amino acid repeats. Immunoprecipitation assay
revealed that LANA interacted with MNDA in a mammalian embryonic kidney cell
line. MNDA transcript was undetectable in three PEL cell lines by
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction, but it was induced by interferon
alpha (IFNalpha). Moreover, LANA and MNDA were co-localized in the nuclei of
MNDA-expressing PEL cells. Our results suggest that LANA interacts with MNDA in
KSHV-infected cells exposed to IFNalpha. Such interaction may modulate
IFN-mediated host defense activities.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1026391715071 
PMID: 14618084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

