
1. J Virol. 2003 Dec;77(24):13084-92.

Barrier-to-autointegration factor BAF binds p55 Gag and matrix and is a host
component of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 virions.

Mansharamani M(1), Graham DR, Monie D, Lee KK, Hildreth JE, Siliciano RF, Wilson 
KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Barrier-to-autointegration factor (BAF) is a conserved human chromatin protein
exploited by retroviruses. Previous investigators showed that BAF binds
double-stranded DNA nonspecifically and is a host component of preintegration
complexes (PICs) isolated from cells infected with human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) or Moloney murine leukemia virus. BAF protects PIC structure and
stimulates the integration of salt-stripped PICs into target DNA in vitro. PICs
are thought to acquire BAF from the cytoplasm during infection. However, we
identified two human tissues (of 16 tested) in which BAF mRNA was not detected:
thymus and peripheral blood leukocytes, which are enriched in CD4(+) T
lymphocytes and macrophage precursors, respectively. BAF protein was detected in 
activated but not resting CD4(+) T lymphocytes; thus, if BAF were essential for
PIC function, we hypothesized that virions might "bring their own BAF."
Supporting this model, BAF copurified with HIV-1 virions that were digested with 
subtilisin to remove microvesicle contaminants, and BAF was present in
approximately zero to three copies per virion. In three independent assays, BAF
bound directly to both p55 Gag (the structural precursor of HIV-1 virions) and
its cleaved product, matrix. Using lysates from cells overexpressing Gag,
endogenous BAF and Gag were coimmunoprecipitated by antibodies against Gag.
Purified recombinant BAF had low micromolar affinities (1.1 to 1.4 micro M) for
recombinant Gag and matrix. We conclude that BAF is present at low levels in
incoming virions, in addition to being acquired from the cytoplasm of newly
infected cells. We further conclude that BAF might contribute to the assembly or 
activity of HIV-1 PICs through direct binding to matrix, as well as DNA.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.77.24.13084-13092.2003 
PMCID: PMC296067
PMID: 14645565  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

