
1. Virology. 2003 Dec 5;317(1):155-64.

The human papillomavirus type 11 and 16 E6 proteins modulate the cell-cycle
regulator and transcription cofactor TRIP-Br1.

Gupta S(1), Takhar PP, Degenkolbe R, Koh CH, Zimmermann H, Yang CM, Guan Sim K,
Hsu SI, Bernard HU.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 30 Medical Drive, Singapore 117609.

The genital human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are a taxonomic group including HPV
types that preferentially cause genital and laryngeal warts ("low-risk types"),
such as HPV-6 and HPV-11, or cancer of the cervix and its precursor lesions
("high-risk types"), such as HPV-16. The transforming processes induced by these 
viruses depend on the proteins E5, E6, and E7. Among these oncoproteins, the E6
protein stands out because it supports a particularly large number of functions
and interactions with cellular proteins, some of which are specific for the
carcinogenic HPVs, while others are shared among low- and high-risk HPVs. Here we
report yeast two-hybrid screens with HPV-6 and -11 E6 proteins that identified
TRIP-Br1 as a novel cellular target. TRIP-Br1 was recently detected by two
research groups, which described two separate functions, namely that of a
transcriptional integrator of the E2F1/DP1/RB cell-cycle regulatory pathway (and 
then named TRIP-Br1), and that of an antagonist of the cyclin-dependent kinase
suppression of p16INK4a (and then named p34SEI-1). We observed that TRIP-Br1
interacts with low- and high-risk HPV E6 proteins in yeast, in vitro and in
mammalian cell cultures. Transcription activation of a complex consisting of
E2F1, DP1, and TRIP-Br1 was efficiently stimulated by both E6 proteins. TRIP-Br1 
has an LLG E6 interaction motif, which contributed to the binding of E6 proteins.
Apparently, E6 does not promote degradation of TRIP-Br1. Our observations imply
that the cell-cycle promoting transcription factor E2F1/DP1 is dually targeted by
HPV oncoproteins, namely (i) by interference of the E7 protein with repression by
RB, and (ii) by the transcriptional cofactor function of the E6 protein. Our data
reveal the natural context of the transcription activator function of E6, which
has been predicted without knowledge of the E2F1/DP1/TRIP-Br/E6 complex by
studying chimeric constructs, and add a function to the limited number of
transforming properties shared by low- and high-risk HPVs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2003.08.008 
PMID: 14675634  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

