
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 26;279(13):12232-41. Epub 2004 Jan 5.

The Hepatitis C virus NS5A protein activates a phosphoinositide
3-kinase-dependent survival signaling cascade.

Street A(1), Macdonald A, Crowder K, Harris M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Astbury Centre for Structural
Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Mount Preston Street, Leeds, West
Yorkshire LS2 9JT, United Kingdom.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) establishes a persistent infection, with up to 80% of
infected individuals proceeding to chronic hepatitis, which in many cases may
result in liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC); indeed HCV
infection is increasingly associated with the development of HCC. The long time
period (up to 30 years) between primary infection and the onset of HCC implies
that HCV is not directly oncogenic but in some way predisposes patients to
develop tumors, though the mechanism for this is unclear as yet. We report here
that NS5A binds directly to the Src homology 3 domain of the p85 regulatory
subunit of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), and this interaction is mediated by 
a novel (non-proline-rich) motif within NS5A. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis
revealed that NS5A bound native heterodimeric PI3K and enhanced the
phosphotransferase activity of the catalytic (p110) subunit both in vitro and in 
human cell lines harboring a subgenomic HCV replicon or expressing NS5A alone.
NS5A-mediated activation of PI3K resulted in increased phosphorylation and
activity of Akt/protein kinase B and concomitantly provided protection against
the induction of apoptosis in both replicon-harboring cells and cells stably
expressing NS5A alone. These data suggest that stimulation of PI3K by NS5A may
represent an indirect mechanism for development of HCC in HCV-infected patients
and further suggests potential therapeutic strategies to counteract the
occurrence of HCV-related HCC.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M312245200 
PMID: 14709551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

