
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 16;279(16):16111-20. Epub 2004 Feb 5.

PDX1, a cellular homeoprotein, binds to and regulates the activity of human
cytomegalovirus immediate early promoter.

Chao SH(1), Harada JN, Hyndman F, Gao X, Nelson CG, Chanda SK, Caldwell JS.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation, San Diego, California 
92121, USA.

Cellular homeoproteins have been shown to regulate the transcription of several
viruses, including herpes simplex viruses, human papillomaviruses, and mouse
mammary tumor viruses. Previous studies investigating the anti-viral mechanisms
of several cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors showed that the homeoproteins, pre 
B-cell leukemia transcription factor 1 (PBX1) and PBX-regulating protein-1
(PREP1), function as transcriptional activators of Moloney murine leukemia virus.
Here, we examined the involvement of cellular homeoproteins in regulating the
activity of the human cytomegalovirus immediate early (CMV IE) promoter. We
identified a 45-bp element located at position -593 to -549 upstream of the
transcription start site of the CMV IE gene, which contains multiple putative
homeoprotein binding motifs. Gel shift assays demonstrated the physical
association between a homeodomain protein, pancreatic-duodenal homeobox factor-1 
(PDX1) and the 45-bp cytomegalovirus (CMV) region. We further determined that
PDX1 represses the CMV IE promoter activity in 293 cells. Overexpression of PDX1 
resulted in a decrease in transcription of the CMV IE gene. Conversely, blocking 
PDX1 protein synthesis and mutating the PDX1 binding sites enhanced CMV
IE-dependent transcription. Collectively, our results represent the first work
demonstrating that a cellular homeoprotein, PDX1, may be a repressor involved in 
regulation of human CMV gene expression.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M312304200 
PMID: 14764605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

