
1. J Neurochem. 1992 Sep;59(3):874-80.

Cleavage of bovine brain microtubule-associated protein-2 by human
immunodeficiency virus proteinase.

Ainsztein AM(1), Purich DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville 32610-0245.

The high-molecular-weight dendritic cytoskeletal protein known as
microtubule-associated protein (MAP)-2 displays the capacity to stimulate tubulin
polymerization and to associate with microtubules. Serine proteases cleave MAP-2 
into a C-terminal M(r) 28,000-35,000 microtubule-binding fragment and a larger
N-terminal M(r) 240,000 projection-arm region. We now show that human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) proteinase also progressively degrades purified
MAP-2 in vitro. This proteolysis reaction is characterized by transient
accumulation of at least six intermediates, and most abundant of these is an M(r)
72,000 species that retains the ability to associate with taxol-stabilized
microtubules. Treatment of this M(r) 72,000 species with thrombin releases the
same M(r) 28,000 component as that derived from thrombin action on intact
high-molecular-weight MAP-2, indicating that the viral aspartoproteinase action
preferentially occurs further toward the N-terminus. The association of the M(r) 
72,000 component with microtubules can be disrupted by the presence of a 21-amino
acid peptide analogue of the second repeated sequence in the MAP-2
microtubule-binding region. We also studied HIV proteinase action on MAP-2 in the
presence of tubulin and other MAPs that recycle with tubulin, and contrary to
other published studies we found no effect of such treatment on microtubule
self-assembly behavior. Cleavage of isolated MAP-2 by the HIV enzyme at high salt
concentrations, followed by desalting and addition of tubulin, also resulted in
microtubule assembly, albeit with slightly reduced efficiency.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.1992.tb08325.x 
PMID: 1494913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

