
1. J Gen Virol. 2004 Mar;85(Pt 3):721-729. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.19691-0.

The hepatitis C virus NS5A protein binds to members of the Src family of tyrosine
kinases and regulates kinase activity.

Macdonald A(1), Crowder K(1), Street A(1), McCormick C(1), Harris M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology, School of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) non-structural NS5A protein has been shown to
associate with a variety of cellular signalling proteins. Of particular interest 
is the observation that a highly conserved C-terminal polyproline motif in NS5A
was able to interact with the Src-homology 3 (SH3) domains of the adaptor protein
Grb2. As it has previously been shown that specific polyproline motifs can
interact with a range of SH3 domains, we investigated whether NS5A was capable of
interacting with other SH3 domain-containing proteins. We show here that NS5A
interacts with the SH3 domains of members of the Src family of tyrosine kinases: 
a combination of in vitro binding assays and co-immunoprecipitation experiments
revealed an interaction between NS5A and Hck, Lck, Lyn and Fyn, but interestingly
not Src itself. Mutational analysis confirmed that the polyproline motif
responsible for binding to Grb2 also bound to the SH3 domains of Hck, Lck, Lyn
and Fyn. Furthermore, a previously unidentified polyproline motif, adjacent to
the first motif, was also able to mediate binding to the SH3 domain of Lyn. Using
transient transfections and Huh-7 cells harbouring a persistently replicating
subgenomic HCV replicon we demonstrate that NS5A bound to native Src-family
kinases in vivo and differentially modulated kinase activity, inhibiting Hck, Lck
and Lyn but activating Fyn. Lastly, we show that signalling pathways controlled
by Src-family kinases are modulated in replicon cells. We conclude that the
interactions between NS5A and Src-family kinases are physiologically relevant and
may play a role in either virus replication or pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.19691-0 
PMID: 14993658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

