
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 9;279(28):29308-19. Epub 2004 Mar 22.

The ORF3 protein of hepatitis E virus interacts with liver-specific
alpha1-microglobulin and its precursor alpha1-microglobulin/bikunin precursor
(AMBP) and expedites their export from the hepatocyte.

Tyagi S(1), Surjit M, Roy AK, Jameel S, Lal SK.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, 
P O Box 10504, Aruna Asaf Ali Rd., New Delhi 110067, India.

Hepatitis E virus (HEV), a plus-stranded RNA virus contains three open reading
frames. Of these, ORF1 encodes the viral nonstructural polyprotein; ORF2 encodes 
the major capsid protein and ORF3 codes for a phosphoprotein of undefined
function. Using the yeast two-hybrid system to screen a human cDNA liver library 
we have isolated, an N-terminal deleted protein, alpha(1) -microglobulin/bikunin 
precursor (AMBP) that specifically interacts with the ORF3 protein of HEV.
Independently cloned, full-length AMBP was obtained and tested positive for
interaction with ORF3 using a variety of in vivo and in vitro techniques. AMBP, a
liver-specific precursor protein codes for two different unrelated proteins
alpha(1)-microglobulin (alpha(1)m) and bikunin. alpha(1) m individually
interacted with ORF3. The above findings were validated by COS-1 cell
immunoprecipitation, His(6) pull-down experiments, and co-localization
experiments followed by fluorescence resonance energy transfer analysis. Human
liver cells showing co-localization of ORF3 with endogenously expressing alpha(1)
m showed a distinct disappearance of the protein from the Golgi compartment,
suggesting that ORF3 enhances the secretion of alpha(1)m out of the hepatocyte.
Using drugs to block the secretory pathway, we showed that alpha m was not
degraded in the presence of ORF3. Finally, (1)pulse labeling of alpha(1)m showed 
that its secretion was expedited out of the liver cell at faster rates in the
presence of the ORF3 protein. Hence, ORF3 has a direct biological role in
enhancing alpha(1)m export from the hepatocyte.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M402017200 
PMID: 15037615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

