
1. Virus Res. 2004 Jun 15;102(2):151-63.

The non-structural 3 (NS3) protein of dengue virus type 2 interacts with human
nuclear receptor binding protein and is associated with alterations in membrane
structure.

Chua JJ(1), Ng MM, Chow VT.

Author information: 
(1)Programme in Infectious Diseases, Department of Microbiology, Faculty of
Medicine, National University of Singapore, Kent Ridge, Singapore 117597,
Singapore.

Flaviviral infections produce a distinct array of virus-induced intracellular
membrane alterations that are associated with the flaviviral replication
machinery. Currently, it is still unknown which flaviviral protein(s) is/are
responsible for this induction. Using yeast two-hybrid and co-immunoprecipitation
analyses, we demonstrated that the NS3 protein of dengue virus type 2 interacted 
specifically with nuclear receptor binding protein (NRBP), a host cellular
protein that influences trafficking between the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and
Golgi, and that interacts with Rac3, a member of the Rho-GTPase family.
Co-expression of NS3 and NRBP in baby hamster kidney cells exhibited significant 
subcellular co-localization, and revealed the redistribution of NRBP from the
cytoplasm to the perinuclear region. Furthermore, a set of membrane structures
affiliated with the rough ER at the perinuclear region was induced in cells
transfected with NS3. These structures are reminiscent of the virus-induced
convoluted membranes previously observed in flavivirus-infected cells. This
interaction between dengue viral and host cell proteins as well as the formation 
of the NS3-induced membrane structures suggest that NS3 may subvert the role of
NRBP in ER-Golgi trafficking.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2004.01.025 
PMID: 15084397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

