
1. J Virol. 2004 Jul;78(13):6735-43.

Tax relieves transcriptional repression by promoting histone deacetylase 1
release from the human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 long terminal repeat.

Lu H(1), Pise-Masison CA, Linton R, Park HU, Schiltz RL, Sartorelli V, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Virus Tumor Biology Section, Basic Research Laboratory, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Expression of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is regulated by the
viral transcriptional activator Tax. Tax activates viral transcription through
interaction with the cellular transcription factor CREB and the coactivators
CBP/p300. In this study, we have analyzed the role of histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) on HTLV-1 gene expression from an integrated template. First we show that
trichostatin A, an HDAC inhibitor, enhances Tax expression in HTLV-1-transformed 
cells. Second, using a cell line containing a single-copy HTLV-1 long terminal
repeat, we demonstrate that overexpression of HDAC1 represses Tax
transactivation. Furthermore, a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay allowed us to
analyze the interaction of transcription factors, coactivators, and HDACs with
the basal and activated HTLV-1 promoter. We demonstrate that HDAC1 is associated 
with the inactive, but not the Tax-transactivated, HTLV-1 promoter. In vitro and 
in vivo glutathione S-transferase-Tax pull-down and coimmunoprecipitation
experiments demonstrated that there is a direct physical association between Tax 
and HDAC1. Importantly, biotinylated chromatin pull-down assays demonstrated that
Tax inhibits and/or dissociates the binding of HDAC1 to the HTLV-1 promoter. Our 
results provide evidence that Tax interacts directly with HDAC1 and regulates
binding of the repressor to the HTLV-1 promoter.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.13.6735-6743.2004 
PMCID: PMC421680
PMID: 15194748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

