
1. J Virol. 2004 Oct;78(19):10574-81.

Ring finger protein ZIN interacts with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Vif.

Feng F(1), Davis A, Lake JA, Carr J, Xia W, Burrell C, Li P.

Author information: 
(1)Australian Centre for Hepatitis and HIV Virology Research, Infectious Disease 
Laboratories, Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science, Frome Rd., Adelaide,
Australia 5000.

Virion infectivity factor (Vif) protein of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) is essential for the productive infection of primary human CD4 T
lymphocytes and macrophages. Vif overcomes the HIV-inhibitory effects of cellular
factor APOBEC3G, which has cytidine deaminase activity. We previously reported
the isolation of a Vif-interacting ring finger protein, Triad 3, from a human
leukocyte cDNA library, using the yeast two-hybrid system. The full-length
cellular protein homologue of Triad 3 has been recently identified as the zinc
finger protein inhibiting NF-kappaB (ZIN). Sequence analysis indicates that Triad
3 protein contains all four major ring-like motifs of ZIN. We report here that
ZIN binds to purified Vif in vitro and that Triad 3/ZIN interacts with HIV-1 Vif 
in transfected human 293T cells, as demonstrated by coimmunoprecipitation. To
test the biological relevance of this interaction, we produced infectious HIV-1
NL4.3 in the presence or absence of cotransfected ZIN. HIV-1 NL4.3 virus stocks
produced in the presence of exogenously expressed ZIN were twofold less
infectious in a single-cycle infectivity assay than virus produced in the absence
of exogenous ZIN. It was further shown that cells infected with HIV NL4.3 virus
stocks produced in the presence of exogenously expressed ZIN were impaired in
viral DNA synthesis by twofold. The impairment in viral reverse transcription and
the reduction in single-cycle viral infectivity were both shown to be dependent
on the presence of Vif in the virus producer cells. The possible mechanisms by
which ZIN interferes with the early events of HIV-1 replication are discussed.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.19.10574-10581.2004 
PMCID: PMC516435
PMID: 15367624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

