
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 26;279(48):50031-41. Epub 2004 Sep 13.

Protein kinase C-related kinase 2 regulates hepatitis C virus RNA polymerase
function by phosphorylation.

Kim SJ(1), Kim JH, Kim YG, Lim HS, Oh JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Korea.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS5B protein is the viral RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase required for replication of the HCV RNA genome. We have identified a
peptide that most closely resembles a short region of the protein kinase
C-related kinase 2 (PRK2) by screening of a random 12-mer peptide library
displayed on the surface of the M13 bacteriophage with NS5B proteins immobilized 
on microwell plates. Competitive phage enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with a
synthetic peptide showed that the phage clone displaying this peptide could bind 
HCV RNA polymerase with a high affinity. Coimmunoprecipitation and colocalization
studies demonstrated in vivo interaction of NS5B with PRK2. In vitro kinase
assays demonstrated that PRK2 specifically phosphorylates NS5B by interaction
with the N-terminal finger domain of NS5B (amino acids 1-187). Consistent with
the in vitro NS5B-phosphorylating activity of PRK2, we detected the
phosphorylated form of NS5B by metabolic cell labeling. Furthermore, HCV NS5B
immunoprecipitated from HCV subgenomic replicon cells was specifically recognized
by an antiphosphoserine antibody. Knock-down of the endogenous PRK2 expression
using a PRK2-specific small interfering RNA inhibited HCV RNA replication. In
contrast, PRK2 overexpression, which was accompanied by an increase of in the
level of its active form, dramatically enhanced HCV RNA replication. Altogether, 
our results indicate that HCV RNA replication is regulated by NS5B
phosphorylation by PRK2.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M408617200 
PMID: 15364941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

