
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Feb 22;102(8):2832-7. Epub 2005 Feb 2.

Positive selection of primate TRIM5alpha identifies a critical species-specific
retroviral restriction domain.

Sawyer SL(1), Wu LI, Emerman M, Malik HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA 98109, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Mar 1;102(9):3179-80.

Primate genomes encode a variety of innate immune strategies to defend themselves
against retroviruses. One of these, TRIM5alpha, can restrict diverse retroviruses
in a species-specific manner. Thus, whereas rhesus TRIM5alpha can strongly
restrict HIV-1, human TRIM5alpha only has weak HIV-1 restriction. The biology of 
TRIM5alpha restriction suggests that it is locked in an antagonistic conflict
with the proteins encoding the viral capsid. Such antagonistic interactions
frequently result in rapid amino acid replacements at the protein-protein
interface, as each genetic entity vies for evolutionary dominance. By analyzing
its evolutionary history, we find strong evidence for ancient positive selection 
in the primate TRIM5alpha gene. This selection is strikingly variable with some
of the strongest selection occurring in the human lineage. This history suggests 
that TRIM5alpha evolution has been driven by antagonistic interactions with a
wide variety of viruses and endogenous retroviruses that predate the origin of
primate lentiviruses. A 13-aa "patch" in the SPRY protein domain bears a dense
concentration of positively selected residues, potentially implicating it as an
antiviral interface. By using functional studies of chimeric TRIM5alpha genes, we
show that this patch is generally essential for retroviral restriction and is
responsible for most of the species-specific antiretroviral restriction activity.
Our study highlights the power of evolutionary analyses, in which positive
selection identifies not only the age of genetic conflict but also the
interaction interface where this conflict plays out.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0409853102 
PMCID: PMC549489
PMID: 15689398  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

