
1. J Gen Virol. 2005 May;86(Pt 5):1269-1277. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.80763-0.

Epstein-Barr virus EBNA3 proteins bind to the C8/alpha7 subunit of the 20S
proteasome and are degraded by 20S proteasomes in vitro, but are very stable in
latently infected B cells.

Touitou R(1), O'Nions J(1), Heaney J(1), Allday MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research,
Wright-Fleming Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, Norfolk
Place, London W2 1PG, UK.

A yeast two-hybrid screen using EBNA3C as bait revealed an interaction between
this Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded nuclear protein and the C8 (alpha7) subunit
of the human 20S proteasome. The interaction was confirmed by glutathione
S-transferase (GST) pull-down experiments and these also revealed that the
related proteins EBNA3A and EBNA3B can bind similarly to C8/alpha7. The
interaction between these viral proteins and GST-C8/alpha7 was shown to be
significantly more robust than the previously reported interaction between
C8/alpha7 and the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(WAF1/CIP1).
Co-immunoprecipitation of the EBNA3 proteins with C8/alpha7 was also demonstrated
after transfection of expression vectors into B cells. Consistent with this
ability to bind directly to an alpha-subunit of the 20S proteasome, EBNAs 3A, 3B 
and 3C were all degraded in vitro by purified 20S proteasomes. However,
surprisingly, no sign of proteasome-mediated turnover of these latent viral
proteins in EBV-immortalized B cells could be detected, even in the presence of
gamma interferon. In actively proliferating lymphoblastoid cell lines, EBNAs 3A, 
3B and 3C appear to be remarkably stable, with no evidence of either de novo
synthesis or proteasome-mediated degradation.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.80763-0 
PMID: 15831937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

