
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 12;280(32):29135-43. Epub 2005 Jun 13.

Varicella-zoster virus IE63 protein phosphorylation by roscovitine-sensitive
cyclin-dependent kinases modulates its cellular localization and activity.

Habran L(1), Bontems S, Di Valentin E, Sadzot-Delvaux C, Piette J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology and Immunology, Center for Biomedical Genoproteomics,
Institute of Pathology B23, University of Liège, B-4000, Liège, Belgium.

During the first stage of Varicella-Zoster virus (VZV) infection, IE63 (immediate
early 63 protein) is mostly expressed in the nucleus and also slightly in the
cytoplasm, and during latency, IE63 localizes in the cytoplasm quite exclusively.
Because phosphorylation is known to regulate various cellular mechanisms, we
investigated the impact of phosphorylation by roscovitine-sensitive
cyclin-dependent kinase (RSC) on the localization and functional properties of
IE63. We demonstrated first that IE63 was phosphorylated on Ser-224 in vitro by
CDK1 and CDK5 but not by CDK2, CDK7, or CDK9. Furthermore, by using roscovitine
and CDK1 inhibitor III (CiIII), we showed that CDK1 phosphorylated IE63 on
Ser-224 in vivo. By mutagenesis and the use of inhibitors, we demonstrated that
phosphorylation on Ser-224 was important for the correct localization of the
protein. Indeed, the substitution of these residues by alanine led to an
exclusive nuclear localization of the protein, whereas mutations into glutamic
acid did not modify its subcellular distribution. When transfected or
VZV-infected cells were treated with roscovitine or CiIII, an exclusive nuclear
localization of IE63 was also observed. By using a transfection assay, we also
showed that phosphorylation on Ser-224 and Thr-222 was essential for the
down-regulation of the basal activity of the VZV DNA polymerase gene promoter.
Similarly, roscovitine and CiIII impaired these properties of the wild-type form 
of IE63. These observations clearly demonstrated the importance of CDK1-mediated 
IE63 phosphorylation for a correct distribution of IE63 between both cellular
compartments and for its repressive activity toward the promoter tested.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M503312200 
PMID: 15955820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

