
1. J Virol. 2005 Aug;79(15):9651-64.

mRNA decay during herpes simplex virus (HSV) infections: protein-protein
interactions involving the HSV virion host shutoff protein and translation
factors eIF4H and eIF4A.

Feng P(1), Everly DN Jr, Read GS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri-Kansas City, 64110, USA.

During lytic infections, the virion host shutoff (Vhs) protein of herpes simplex 
virus accelerates the degradation of both host and viral mRNAs. In so doing, it
helps redirect the cell from host to viral protein synthesis and facilitates the 
sequential expression of different viral genes. Vhs interacts with the cellular
translation initiation factor eIF4H, and several point mutations that abolish its
mRNA degradative activity also abrogate its ability to bind eIF4H. In addition, a
complex containing bacterially expressed Vhs and a glutathione S-transferase
(GST)-eIF4H fusion protein has RNase activity. eIF4H shares a region of sequence 
homology with eIF4B, and it appears to be functionally similar in that both
stimulate the RNA helicase activity of eIF4A, a component of the mRNA cap-binding
complex eIF4F. We show that eIF4H interacts physically with eIF4A in the yeast
two-hybrid system and in GST pull-down assays and that the two proteins can be
coimmunoprecipitated from mammalian cells. Vhs also interacts with eIF4A in GST
pull-down and coimmunoprecipitation assays. Site-directed mutagenesis of Vhs and 
eIF4H revealed residues of each that are important for their mutual interaction, 
but not for their interaction with eIF4A. Thus, Vhs, eIF4H, and eIF4A comprise a 
group of proteins, each of which is able to interact directly with the other two.
Whether they interact simultaneously as a tripartite complex or sequentially is
unclear. The data suggest a mechanism for linking the degradation of an mRNA to
its translation and for targeting Vhs to mRNAs and to regions of translation
initiation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.15.9651-9664.2005 
PMCID: PMC1181552
PMID: 16014927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

