
1. Gynecol Oncol. 2005 Oct;99(1):142-52.

Protein profiling and identification of modulators regulated by human
papillomavirus 16 E7 oncogene in HaCaT keratinocytes by proteomics.

Lee KA(1), Kang JW, Shim JH, Kho CW, Park SG, Lee HG, Paik SG, Lim JS, Yoon DY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Biology, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Yuseong, P.O. Box 115, Daejeon 305-600, South Korea.

OBJECTIVES: Viral oncogenes E6 and E7 are selectively retained and expressed in
carcinoma cells infected with human papillomavirus type 16 and cooperated with
each other in immortalization and transformation of primary keratinocytes. This
study was performed to identify proteins to be bound or modulated by high risk
HPV E7 oncogene by using a proteomics.
METHODS: HaCaT normal keratinocyte was prepared to establish a stable cell line
expressing E7. The E7-affinity column was also prepared to obtain E7-interacting 
proteins. In order to search the target molecules modulated by E7 expression, we 
used 2-dimensional electrophoresis and matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization time of flight (MALDI/TOF) mass spectrometry. Pull down
assay was also performed in order to confirm the E7-interacting proteins.
RESULTS: We identified 28 spots that are modulated by E7 in HaCaT/E7 using
2-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) and MALDI/TOF mass spectrometry. Proteomics 
analyses showed that actin and leukocyte elastase inhibitor were down-regulated, 
whereas stress-induced phosphoprotein 1, CD2 binding protein 1, catalase,
T-complex protein 1, Ku70-binding protein, heat shock 60 kDa protein 1,
G1/S-specific cyclin E1 and peroxiredoxin 2 were up-regulated. Western blot
revealed that heat shock 60 kDa protein, catalase and peroxiredoxin 2 were also
up-regulated. Pull down assay also showed that leukocyte elastase inhibitor (LEI)
and Ku70-binding protein were bound to the E7 oncoprotein. By using E7-affinity
column and 2-DE/MALDI-TOF, 22 spots were found to interact with E7 recombinant
protein. MG11-like proteins, livin inhibitor-of-apoptosis, protein serine kinase 
c17, CD2 binding protein 1, cyclin E1, TATA box binding protein-associated factor
and uridine-cytidine kinase 2 were up-regulated by E7 oncogene and also bound to 
E7 oncoprotein.
CONCLUSIONS: It is presumed that E7 can influence cell status by modulating the
factors related to cell signaling, apoptosis and cell cycle regulation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2005.05.039 
PMID: 16038965  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

