
1. Oncogene. 2005 Nov 24;24(53):7830-8.

Activation of the protein kinase B pathway by the HPV-16 E7 oncoprotein occurs
through a mechanism involving interaction with PP2A.

Pim D(1), Massimi P, Dilworth SM, Banks L.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Area Science
Park, Padriciano-99, 34012 Trieste, Italy. pim@icgeb.org

Protein kinase B (PKB) or Akt is one of several second messenger kinases that are
activated by cell attachment and growth factor signaling, and that transmit
signals to the cell nucleus to inhibit apoptosis and thereby increase cell
survival during proliferation. Other viral proteins target this pathway by
increasing PKB/Akt phosphorylation, and this pathway has been implicated in the
transformation of human keratinocytes by HPV E6 and E7, together with activated
notch 1. Here, we examine how HPV E7 expression affects the phosphorylation of
PKB. We show that HPV-16 E7 increases the level of phosphorylation of PKB in
response to serum stimulation, by a mechanism independent of downregulation of
PTEN phosphatase, a known inhibitor of the PI3K (PI3 kinase) pathway. The use of 
specific antibodies shows that some proportion of PKB/Akt that is phosphorylated 
both on threonine 308 and serine 473 is maintained in the presence of E7 in a PI3
kinase-independent manner, and is activated for phosphorylation of BAD, a known
downstream target of PKB/Akt. Use of E7 mutants has ruled out both an inhibition 
of IGFBP-3, a known E7 target and PKB/Akt modulator, and the interaction of E7
with cellular pocket proteins, as being the mechanism for the PKB/Akt
stimulation. PKB binds PP2A and is a known substrate of PP2A. Here, we show that 
HPV E7 also binds to both the 35 kDa catalytic and 65 kDa structural subunits of 
PP2A, an interaction that sequesters these subunits and inhibits their
interaction with PKB, thereby maintaining PKB/Akt signaling by inhibiting its
dephosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208935 
PMID: 16044149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

