
1. Oncogene. 2006 Jan 19;25(3):448-62.

Hepatitis C virus core protein recruits nucleolar phosphoprotein B23 and
coactivator p300 to relieve the repression effect of transcriptional factor YY1
on B23 gene expression.

Mai RT(1), Yeh TS, Kao CF, Sun SK, Huang HH, Wu Lee YH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) core has a pleiotropic effect on various promoters. In
this study, we found that the expression of nucleolar phosphoprotein B23 was
enhanced in HCV core-expressing cells and, moreover, HCV core interacts directly 
with the C-terminal end of B23. Using sucrose gradient centrifugation analysis
and immunoprecipitation assays, HCV core was found in a large complex containing 
B23 and its interacting partner transcription factor YY1. Both B23 and HCV core
associated with YY1 in the central GA/GK-rich and C-terminal zinc finger domain. 
These physical interactions between core, B23, and YY1 led to ternary complex
formation that was bound to the YY1 response element. In a transient
cotransfection experiment, relief of the trans-suppression activity of YY1 on the
YY1-response element-driven reporter by core and B23 was found. This is also true
when examining the effects of these three constructs on the B23 promoter-driven
reporter. Additionally, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicated that a
transcriptional activation complex consisting of core, together with B23, p300,
and YY1, was recruited to the YY1 response element of B23 promoter, and this
probably occurred through complex formation between core and these three cellular
transcription regulators. This is different from the situation in the absence of 
core, where YY1 and histone deacetylase 1, but not B23 and p300, were associated 
on the YY1 element as the transcription repression complex. Together, our results
indicate that HCV core can recruit B23 and p300 to relieve the repression effect 
of YY1 on B23 promoter activity, a property that requires the intrinsic histone
acetyltransferase activity of p300. Thus, because these three core-associated
cellular transcription regulators have a multitude of cellular interacting
proteins and are involved in a versatility of cellular processes, the complex
formation described here may partially account for the pleiotropic effects of
core protein on gene expression and cellular function in HCV-infected cells.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209052 
PMID: 16170350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

