
1. PLoS Pathog. 2005 Sep;1(1):e4. Epub 2005 Sep 30.

Influenza virus PB1-F2 protein induces cell death through mitochondrial ANT3 and 
VDAC1.

Zamarin D(1), Garc√≠a-Sastre A, Xiao X, Wang R, Palese P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New
York, United States of America.

The influenza virus PB1-F2 is an 87-amino acid mitochondrial protein that
previously has been shown to induce cell death, although the mechanism of
apoptosis induction has remained unclear. In the process of characterizing its
mechanism of action we found that the viral PB1-F2 protein sensitizes cells to
apoptotic stimuli such as tumor necrosis factor alpha, as demonstrated by
increased cleavage of caspase 3 substrates in PB1-F2-expressing cells. Moreover, 
treatment of purified mouse liver mitochondria with recombinant PB1-F2 protein
resulted in cytochrome c release, loss of the mitochondrial membrane potential,
and enhancement of tBid-induced mitochondrial permeabilization, suggesting a
possible mechanism for the observed cellular sensitization to apoptosis. Using
glutathione-S-transferase pulldowns with subsequent mass spectrometric analysis, 
we identified the mitochondrial interactors of the PB1-F2 protein and showed that
the viral protein uniquely interacts with the inner mitochondrial membrane
adenine nucleotide translocator 3 and the outer mitochondrial membrane
voltage-dependent anion channel 1, both of which are implicated in the
mitochondrial permeability transition during apoptosis. Consistent with this
interaction, blockers of the permeability transition pore complex (PTPC)
inhibited PB1-F2-induced mitochondrial permeabilization. Based on our findings,
we propose a model whereby the proapoptotic PB1-F2 protein acts through the
mitochondrial PTPC and may play a role in the down-regulation of the host immune 
response to infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0010004 
PMCID: PMC1238739
PMID: 16201016 

