
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 9;280(49):40474-80. Epub 2005 Oct 7.

Functions of early (AP-2) and late (AIP1/ALIX) endocytic proteins in equine
infectious anemia virus budding.

Chen C(1), Vincent O, Jin J, Weisz OA, Montelaro RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

The proline-rich L domains of human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) and other
retroviruses interact with late endocytic proteins during virion assembly and
budding. In contrast, the YPDL L domain of equine infectious anemia virus (EIAV) 
is apparently unique in its reported ability to interact both with the mu2
subunit of the AP-2 adaptor protein complex and with ALG-2-interacting protein 1 
(AIP1/Alix) protein factors involved in early and late endosome formation,
respectively. To define further the mechanisms by which EIAV adapts vesicle
trafficking machinery to facilitate virion production, we have examined the
specificity of EIAV p9 binding to endocytic factors and the effects on virion
production of alterations in early and late endocytic protein expression. The
results of these studies demonstrated that (i) an approximately 300-residue
region of AIP1/Alix-(409-715) was sufficient for binding to the EIAV YPDL motif; 
(ii) overexpression of AIP1/Alix or AP-2 mu2 subunit specifically inhibited
YPDL-mediated EIAV budding; (iii) virion budding from a replication-competent
EIAV variant with its L domain replaced by the HIV PTAP sequence was inhibited by
wild type or mutant mu2 to a level similar to that observed when a
dominant-negative mutant of Tsg101 was expressed; and (iv) overexpression or
siRNA silencing of AIP1/Alix and AP-2 revealed additive suppression of
YPDL-mediated EIAV budding. Taken together, these results indicated that both
early and late endocytic proteins facilitate EIAV production mediated by either
YPDL or PTAP L domains, suggesting a comprehensive involvement of endocytic
factors in retroviral assembly and budding that can be accessed by distinct L
domain specificities.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M509317200 
PMID: 16215227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

