
1. J Virol. 2005 Nov;79(21):13618-29.

Brd2/RING3 interacts with a chromatin-binding domain in the Kaposi's
Sarcoma-associated herpesvirus latency-associated nuclear antigen 1 (LANA-1) that
is required for multiple functions of LANA-1.

Viejo-Borbolla A(1), Ottinger M, Brüning E, Bürger A, König R, Kati E, Sheldon
JA, Schulz TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, D-30625 
Hannover, Germany.

Latency-associated nuclear antigen 1 (LANA-1) of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus (KSHV) mediates the episomal replication of the KSHV genome, as well 
as transcriptional regulation, in latently infected cells. Interaction of LANA-1 
with cellular chromatin is required for both these functions. An N-terminal
heterochromatin-binding site in LANA-1 is essential for the replication and
maintenance of latent episomes, as well as transcriptional regulation. We have
recently described a C-terminal domain in LANA-1 that modulates the interaction
with cellular interphase chromatin or elements of the nuclear matrix. Here, we
used a series of LANA-1 deletion mutants to investigate the relationship between 
the different functions of LANA-1 and its interaction with the host
chromatin-binding protein Brd2/RING3. Our findings suggest that the C-terminal
chromatin-binding domain in LANA-1 is required for multiple LANA-1 functions,
including the ability to bind to and replicate viral episomal DNA, to modulate
transcription, and to interact with Brd2/RING3. Similar to the recently described
tethering of bovine papillomavirus E2 protein to host chromatin via Brd4/MCAP,
Brd2/RING3, another member of the Brd family of chromatin-binding proteins,
therefore interacts with a chromatin-binding region of another viral latent
nuclear protein and could play a role in its multiple functions.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.21.13618-13629.2005 
PMCID: PMC1262589
PMID: 16227282  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

