
1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 13;281(2):1215-23. Epub 2005 Oct 28.

Regulation of transactivation function of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor by the
Epstein-Barr virus-encoded EBNA-3 protein.

Kashuba EV(1), Gradin K, Isaguliants M, Szekely L, Poellinger L, Klein G,
Kazlauskas A.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.

EBNA-3 is one of the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded nuclear antigens that is
indispensable for immunoblastic transformation and sustained proliferation of
B-lymphocytes. The molecular mechanisms responsible for the function of EBNA-3
are poorly understood. We previously found that EBNA-3 interacts with an
immunophilin-like protein XAP2/ARA9/AIP, which in mammalian cells is known to
interact with the latent aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). AhR is a
ligand-inducible transcription factor that mediates cellular responses to
environmental pollutants, such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachloro-dibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). In
this study, we show that EBNA-3 interacts specifically with AhR. The stability of
this interaction is determined by the activation state of AhR and its association
with XAP2. We and others have demonstrated that XAP2 retains the nonactivated AhR
in the cell cytoplasm. However, in the presence of TCDD, the effect of XAP2 on
the intracellular localization of AhR was counter-acted by EBNA-3, resulting in
nuclear translocation of the AhR. In addition, EBNA-3 enhanced transactivation
function by the ligand-activated AhR in cells, as assessed by reporter gene
assays. Our data suggested that EBNA-3 plays a role in facilitating the
ligand-dependent AhR activation process. Following activation of the AhR, we also
observed that EBNA-3 counteracted the inhibitory effect of TCDD on the growth of 
EBV-carrying lymphoblasts. Taken together, our studies revealed a novel
interaction between EBV- and AhR-dependent cellular pathways that control cell
proliferation and survival.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M509036200 
PMID: 16257957  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

