
1. J Virol. 2005 Dec;79(23):14923-32.

Contribution of GADD45 family members to cell death suppression by cellular
Bcl-xL and cytomegalovirus vMIA.

Smith GB(1), Mocarski ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305-5124, USA.

Mammalian cells and viruses encode inhibitors of programmed cell death that
localize to mitochondria and suppress apoptosis initiated by a wide variety of
inducers. Mutagenesis was used to probe the role of a predicted alpha-helical
region within the hydrophobic antiapoptotic domain (AAD) of cytomegalovirus vMIA,
the UL37x1 gene product. This region was found to be essential for cell death
suppression activity. A screen for proteins that interacted with the AAD of
functional vMIA but that failed to interact with mutants identified growth arrest
and DNA damage 45 (GADD45alpha), a cell cycle regulatory protein activated by
genotoxic stress, as a candidate cellular binding partner. GADD45alpha
interaction required the AAD alpha-helical character that also dictated
GADD45alpha-mediated enhancement of death suppression. vMIA mutants that failed
to interact with GADD45alpha were completely nonfunctional in cell death
suppression, and any of the three GADD45 family members (GADD45alpha,
GADD45beta/MyD118, or GADD45gamma/OIG37/CR6/GRP17) was able to cooperate with
vMIA; however, none influenced cell death when introduced into cells alone.
GADD45alpha was found to increase vMIA protein levels comparably to treatment
with protease inhibitors MG132 and ALLN. Targeted short interfering RNA knockdown
of all three GADD45 family members maximally reduced vMIA activity, and this
reduction was abrogated by additional GADD45alpha. Interestingly, GADD45 family
members were also able to bind and enhance cell death suppression by Bcl-xL, a
member of the Bcl-2 family of cell death suppressors, suggesting a direct
cooperative link between apoptosis and the proteins that regulate the DNA damage 
response.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.23.14923-14932.2005 
PMCID: PMC1287561
PMID: 16282491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

