
1. J Virol. 2005 Dec;79(23):14708-18.

The neuronal host cell factor-binding protein Zhangfei inhibits herpes simplex
virus replication.

Akhova O(1), Bainbridge M, Misra V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, 52 Campus Drive, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5B4,
Canada.

During lytic infection in epithelial cells the expression of herpes simplex virus
type 1 (HSV-1) immediate-early (IE) genes is initiated by a multiprotein complex 
comprising the virion-associated protein VP16 and two cellular proteins, host
cellular factor (HCF) and Oct-1. Oct-1 directly recognizes TAATGARAT elements in 
promoters of IE genes. The role of HCF is not clear. HSV-1 also infects sensory
neurons innervating the site of productive infection and establishes a latent
infection in these cells. It is likely that some VP16 is retained by the HSV-1
nucleocapsid as it reaches the neuronal nucleus. Its activity must therefore be
suppressed for successful establishment of viral latency. Recently, we discovered
an HCF-binding cellular protein called Zhangfei. Zhangfei, in an HCF-dependent
manner, inhibits Luman/LZIP/CREB3, another cellular HCF-binding transcription
factor. Here we show that Zhangfei is selectively expressed in human neurons.
When delivered to cultured cells that do not normally express the protein,
Zhangfei inhibited the ability of VP16 to activate HSV-1 IE expression. The
inhibition was specific for HCF-dependent transcriptional activation by VP16,
since a Gal4-VP16 chimeric protein was inhibited only on a TAATGARAT-containing
promoter and not a on a Gal4-containing promoter. Zhangfei associated with VP16
and inhibited formation of the VP16-HCF-Oct-1 complex on TAATGARAT motifs.
Zhangfei also suppressed HSV-1-induced expression of several cellular genes
including topoisomerase IIalpha, suggesting that in addition to suppressing IE
expression Zhangfei may have an inhibitory effect on HSV-1 DNA replication and
late gene expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.23.14708-14718.2005 
PMCID: PMC1287584
PMID: 16282471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

