
1. J Immunol. 2006 Jan 1;176(1):544-56.

Identification and characterization of U83A viral chemokine, a broad and potent
beta-chemokine agonist for human CCRs with unique selectivity and inhibition by
spliced isoform.

Dewin DR(1), Catusse J, Gompels UA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, University of London, London, United Kingdom.

Leukotropic human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) establishes a persistent infection
associated with inflammatory diseases and encodes chemokines that could
chemoattract leukocytes for infection or inflammation. HHV-6 variant A encodes a 
distant chemokine homolog, U83A, and a polymorphism promoting a secreted form was
identified. U83A and three N-terminal modifications were expressed and purified, 
and activities were compared with a spliced truncated isoform, U83A-Npep. U83A
efficiently and potently induced calcium mobilization in cells expressing single 
human CCR1, CCR4, CCR6, or CCR8, with EC50 values <10 nM. U83A also induced
chemotaxis of Th2-like leukemic cells expressing CCR4 and CCR8. High-affinity
binding, 0.4 nM, was demonstrated to CCR1 and CCR5 on monocytic/macrophage cells,
and pretreatment with U83A or modified forms could block responses for endogenous
ligands. U83A-Npep acted only as antagonist, efficiently blocking binding of CCL3
to CCR1 or CCR5 on differentiated monocytic/macrophage leukemic cells.
Furthermore, CCL3 induction of calcium signaling via CCR1 and CCL1 induced
chemotaxis via CCR8 in primary human leukocytes was inhibited. Thus, this
blocking by the early expressed U83A-Npep could mediate immune evasion before
finishing the replicative cycle. However, late in infection, when full-length
U83A is made, chemoattraction of CCR1-, CCR4-, CCR5-, CCR6-, and CCR8-bearing
monocytic/macrophage, dendritic, and T lymphocyte cells can facilitate
dissemination via lytic and latent infection of these cells. This has further
implications for neuroinflammatory diseases such as multiple sclerosis, where
both cells bearing CCR1/CCR5 plus their ligands, as well as HHV-6A, have been
linked. Applications also discussed include novel vaccines/immunotherapeutics for
cancer and HIV as well as anti-inflammatories.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.1.544 
PMID: 16365449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

