
1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 17;281(11):7468-78. Epub 2006 Jan 6.

Modulation of the transforming growth factor-beta signal transduction pathway by 
hepatitis C virus nonstructural 5A protein.

Choi SH(1), Hwang SB.

Author information: 
(1)Ilsong Institute of Life Science, Hallym University, 1 Ockcheon-dong,
Chuncheon 200-702, Korea.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) is implicated in the pathogenesis of
liver disease. TGF-beta is involved both in liver regeneration and in the
fibrotic and cirrhotic transformation with hepatitis viral infection. Hepatitis C
virus (HCV) infection often leads to cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. HCV 
nonstructural 5A (NS5A) protein is a multifunctional protein that modulates
cytokine-mediated signal transduction pathways. To elucidate the molecular
mechanism of HCV pathogenesis, we examined the effect of NS5A protein on
TGF-beta-stimulated signaling cascades. We show that NS5A protein inhibited the
TGF-beta-mediated signaling pathway in hepatoma cell lines as determined by
reporter gene assay. To further investigate the role of NS5A, we examined the
protein/protein interaction between NS5A and TGF-beta signal transducers. Both in
vitro and in vivo binding data showed that NS5A protein directly interacted with 
TGF-beta receptor I (TbetaR-I) in hepatoma cell lines. This interaction was
mapped to amino acids 148-238 of NS5A. We also found that NS5A protein
co-localized with TbetaR-I in the cytoplasm of Huh7 cells and inhibited
TGF-beta-mediated nuclear translocation of Smad2. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that NS5A protein abrogated the phosphorylation of Smad2 and the
heterodimerization of Smad3 and Smad4. To further explore the relevance to viral 
infection, we examined the effect of the HCV subgenomic replicon on the TGF-beta 
signaling pathway. We show that the HCV subgenomic replicon also inhibited
TGF-beta-induced signaling cascades. These results indicate that HCV NS5A
modulates TGF-beta signaling through interaction with TbetaR-I and that NS5A may 
be an important risk factor in HCV-associated liver pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M512438200 
PMID: 16407286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

