
1. J Virol. 2006 Mar;80(6):3050-61.

A hydrophobic binding surface on the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Nef core
is critical for association with p21-activated kinase 2.

Agopian K(1), Wei BL, Garcia JV, Gabuzda D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Medical School, JFB 816, 44 Binney St., Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The interaction of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Nef with
p21-activated kinase 2 (Pak2) has been proposed to play an important role in
T-cell activation and disease progression during viral infection. However, the
mechanism by which Nef activates Pak2 is poorly understood. Mutations in most Nef
motifs previously reported to be required for Pak2 activation (G2, PxxP72, and
RR105) also affect other Nef functions, such as CD4 or major histocompatibility
complex class I (MHC-I) downregulation. To better understand Nef interactions
with Pak2, we performed mutational analysis of three primary HIV-1 Nef clones
that exhibited similar capacities for downregulation of CD4 and MHC-I but
variable abilities to associate with activated Pak2. Our results demonstrate that
Nef amino acids at positions 85, 89, 187, 188, and 191 (L, H, S, R, and F in the 
clade B consensus, respectively) are critical for Pak2 association. Mutation of
these Nef residues dramatically altered association with Pak2 without affecting
Nef expression levels or CD4 and MHC-I downregulation. Furthermore, compensation 
occurred at positions 89 and 191 when both amino acids were substituted. Since
residues 85, 89, 187, 188, and 191 cluster on the surface of the Nef core domain 
in a region distinct from the dimerization and SH3-binding domains, we propose
that these Nef residues form part of a unique binding surface specifically
involved in association with Pak2. This binding surface includes exposed and
recessed hydrophobic residues and may participate in an as-yet-unidentified
protein-protein interaction to facilitate Pak2 activation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.80.6.3050-3061.2006 
PMCID: PMC1395437
PMID: 16501114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

