
1. J Virol. 2006 Apr;80(8):4038-46.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 and 2 glycoprotein C prevents complement-mediated
neutralization induced by natural immunoglobulin M antibody.

Hook LM(1), Lubinski JM, Jiang M, Pangburn MK, Friedman HM.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Division, Department of Medicine, 502 Johnson Pavilion,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104-6073, USA.

Glycoprotein C (gC) of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) and type 2 (HSV-2)
binds complement component C3b and protects virus from complement-mediated
neutralization. Differences in complement interacting domains exist between gC of
HSV-1 (gC1) and HSV-2 (gC2), since the amino terminus of gC1 blocks complement C5
from binding to C3b, while gC2 fails to interfere with this activity. We
previously reported that neutralization of HSV-1 gC-null virus by HSV
antibody-negative human serum requires activation of C5 but not of downstream
components of the classical complement pathway. In this report, we evaluated
whether activation of C5 is sufficient to neutralize HSV-2 gC-null virus, or
whether formation of the membrane attack complex by C6 to C9 is required for
neutralization. We found that activation of the classical complement pathway up
to C5 was sufficient to neutralize HSV-2 gC-null virus by HSV antibody-negative
human serum. We evaluated the mechanisms by which complement activation occurred 
in seronegative human serum. Interestingly, natural immunoglobulin M antibodies
bound to virus, which triggered activation of C1q and the classical complement
pathway. HSV antibody-negative sera obtained from four individuals differed over 
an approximately 10-fold range in their potency for complement-mediated virus
neutralization. These findings indicate that humans differ in the ability of
their innate immune systems to neutralize HSV-1 or HSV-2 gC-null virus and that a
critical function of gC1 and gC2 is to prevent C5 activation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.80.8.4038-4046.2006 
PMCID: PMC1440426
PMID: 16571820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

