
1. J Virol. 2006 Jul;80(13):6669-77.

Human papillomavirus E7 oncoprotein dysregulates steroid receptor coactivator 1
localization and function.

Baldwin A(1), Huh KW, MÃ¼nger K.

Author information: 
(1)The Channing Laboratory, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Department of
Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 181 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA 02115, USA.

High-risk human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are present in virtually all cervical
carcinomas. However, the majority of women infected with high-risk HPVs do not
develop cervical cancer. Therefore, cofactors must contribute to the development 
and progression of cervical cancer. Although numerous studies have implicated
steroid hormones as cofactors in the initiation and progression of cervical
neoplasia, the molecular mechanisms by which they contribute to cervical
carcinogenesis are currently unknown. These observations led us to investigate a 
newly discovered association of the high-risk HPV type 16 (HPV16) E7 oncoprotein 
with steroid receptor coactivator 1 (SRC-1), an essential component of steroid
hormone signaling. HPV16 E7 has been previously reported to interact with p300
and p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF), members of some SRC-1 transcriptional
complexes. We demonstrate here that HPV16 E7 associates in vivo and in vitro with
SRC-1 independently of p300 and PCAF. Luciferase reporter constructs under the
control of either the interleukin-8 promoter or a promoter containing
multimerized synthetic estrogen response elements were used to determine the
effect of high- and low-risk HPV E7 expression on SRC-1-mediated transcription.
In addition, histone acetyltransferase (HAT) assays were performed to determine
the effect of HPV E7 on SRC-1-associated HAT activity. These experiments reveal
that HPV16 E7 expression down-regulates SRC-1-mediated transcription and
SRC-1-associated HAT activity. SRC-1 localization experiments show that SRC-1 is 
relocalized to the cytoplasm in the presence of high- and low-risk HPV E7
proteins. Our data suggest that HPV E7 proteins dysregulate hormone-dependent
gene expression by association with and relocalization of SRC-1. Dysregulation of
SRC-1 localization and function by HPV E7 may provide insight into the molecular 
mechanisms by which steroid hormones act as cofactors in the induction and
progression of cervical neoplasia.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02497-05 
PMCID: PMC1488981
PMID: 16775354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

