
1. J Virol. 2006 Aug;80(15):7714-28.

A poxvirus host range protein, CP77, binds to a cellular protein, HMG20A, and
regulates its dissociation from the vaccinia virus genome in CHO-K1 cells.

Hsiao JC(1), Chao CC, Young MJ, Chang YT, Cho EC, Chang W.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Nankang,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Vaccinia virus does not grow in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO-K1) cells in the
absence of a viral host range factor, cowpox protein CP77. In this study, CP77
was fused to the C terminus of green fluorescence protein (GFP-CP77) and a series
of nested deletion mutants of GFP-CP77 was constructed for insertion into a
vaccinia virus host range mutant, VV-hr, and expressed from a viral early
promoter. Deletion mapping analyses demonstrated that the N-terminal 352 amino
acids of CP77 were sufficient to support vaccinia virus growth in CHO-K1 cells,
whereas the C-terminal residues 353 to 668 were dispensable. In yeast two-hybrid 
analyses, CP77 bound to a cellular protein, HMG20A, and GST pulldown analyses
showed that residues 1 to 234 of CP77 were sufficient for this interaction. After
VV-hr virus infection of CHO-K1 cells, HMG20A was translocated from the nucleus
to viral factories and bound to the viral genome via the HMG box region. In
control VV-hr-infected CHO-K1 cells, binding of HMG20A to the viral genome
persisted from 2 to 8 h postinfection (h p.i.); in contrast, when CP77 was
expressed, the association of HMG20A with viral genome was transient, with little
HMG20A remaining bound at 8 h p.i. This indicates that dissociation of HMG20A
from viral factories correlates well with CP77 host range activity in CHO-K1
cells. Finally, in cells expressing a CP77 deletion protein (amino acids 277 to
668) or a DeltaANK5 mutant that did not support vaccinia virus growth and did not
contain the HMG20A binding site, HMG20A remained bound to viral DNA,
demonstrating that the binding of CP77 to HMG20A is essential for its host range 
function. In summary, our data revealed that a novel cellular protein, HMG20A,
the dissociation of which from viral DNA is regulated by CP77, providing the
first cellular target regulated by viral host range CP77 protein.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00207-06 
PMCID: PMC1563734
PMID: 16840350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

