
1. J Virol. 2006 Nov;80(21):10506-13. Epub 2006 Aug 23.

Interactions between c-Jun, nuclear factor 1, and JC virus promoter sequences:
implications for viral tropism.

Ravichandran V(1), Sabath BF, Jensen PN, Houff SA, Major EO.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Neuroscience, NINDS, NIH, 10 Center
Drive, Building 10, Room 3B14, MSC1296, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1296, USA.

The infectious cycle of the human polyomavirus JC (JCV) is ultimately regulated
in cellular nuclei at the level of viral protein expression and genomic
replication. Such activity is prompted by interactions between variant nucleotide
sequences within the JCV regulatory region (promoter) and cellular transcription 
factors that bind specific DNA consensus sites. In previous work we identified an
NF-1 class member, NF-1X, as a critical transcription factor affecting the JCV
cellular host range. Within variant JCV promoters, as well as other viral and
cellular promoters, adjacently located NF-1 and AP-1 consensus sites are often
found. The close proximity of these two binding sites suggests the opportunity
for interaction between NF-1 and AP-1 proteins. Here, by electrophoretic mobility
shift assays, we show temporal and dose-dependent interference by an AP-1 family 
member, c-Jun, upon NF-1 proteins binding an NF-1 consensus site derived from JCV
promoter sequence. Moreover, as demonstrated by protein-protein interaction
assays, we identify specific binding affinity independent of DNA binding between 
NF-1X and c-Jun. Finally, to compare the binding profiles of NF-1X and c-Jun on
JCV promoter sequence in parallel with in vivo detection of viral activity
levels, we developed an anchored transcriptional promoter (ATP) assay. With use
of extracts from JCV-infected cells transfected to overexpress either NF-1X or
c-Jun, ATP assays showed concurrent increases in NF-1X binding and viral protein 
expression. Conversely, increased c-Jun binding accompanied decreases in both
NF-1X binding and viral protein expression. Therefore, inhibition of NF-1X
binding by c-Jun appears to play a role in regulating levels of JCV activity.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01355-06 
PMCID: PMC1641797
PMID: 16928756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

