
1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 10;281(45):34525-36. Epub 2006 Sep 13.

Human hepatitis B viral e antigen interacts with cellular interleukin-1 receptor 
accessory protein and triggers interleukin-1 response.

Yang CY(1), Kuo TH, Ting LP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Life Science, National
Yang-Ming University, Pei-Tou, Taipei 11221, Taiwan.

Human hepatitis B virus (HBV) can cause acute and chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis,
and hepatocellular carcinoma. HBV e antigen (HBeAg), a secreted protein and not
required for viral replication, is thought to play an immunoregulatory role
during viral infection. However, the functional involvement of HBeAg in host
immune response has not been fully elucidated. We report in this study that HBeAg
can bind to interleukin-1 receptor accessory protein (IL-1RAcP). Interleukin-1
(IL-1) plays an important role in inflammation and regulation of immune response,
and membrane form of IL-1RAcP (mIL-1RAcP) is an essential component of trimeric
IL-1/IL-1 receptor/mIL-1RAcP complex. We show that glutathione S-transferase- or 
polyhistidine-tagged recombinant HBeAg can interact with endogenous mIL-1RAcP in 
vitro. Purified (His)6-HBeAg added in the culture medium can interact with
overexpressed FLAG-tagged mIL-1RAcP in vivo. Indirect immunofluorescence and
confocal microscopy show that HBeAg colocalizes with mIL-1RAcP on the cell
surface. Furthermore, HBeAg is able to induce the interaction of IL-1 receptor I 
(IL-1RI) with mIL-1RAcP and trigger the recruitment of adaptor protein myeloid
differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) to the IL-1RI/mIL-1RAcP complex. Assembly and
activation of IL-1RI/mIL-1RAcP signaling complex by HBeAg can activate downstream
NF-kappaB pathway through IkappaB degradation, induce NF-kappaB-dependent
luciferase expression, and induce the expression of IL-1-responsive genes.
Silencing of IL-1RAcP by small interfering RNA dramatically abolishes
HBeAg-mediated NF-kappaB activation. These results demonstrate that HBeAg can
trigger host IL-1 response by binding to mIL-1RAcP. The interaction of HBeAg with
mIL-1RAcP may play an important role in modulating host immune response in acute 
and chronic HBV infection.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M510981200 
PMID: 16973626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

