
1. J Virol. 2006 Dec;80(23):11520-7. Epub 2006 Sep 20.

A trans-Golgi network resident protein, golgin-97, accumulates in viral factories
and incorporates into virions during poxvirus infection.

Alzhanova D(1), Hruby DE.

Author information: 
(1)Oregon State University, Department of Microbiology, 220 Nash Hall, Corvallis,
OR 97331-3804, USA.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2007 Feb;81(3):1539.

Poxviruses are the only DNA viruses known to replicate and assemble in the
cytoplasm of infected cells. Poxvirus morphogenesis is a complicated process in
which four distinct infectious forms of the virus are produced: intracellular
mature virus, intracellular enveloped virus, cell-associated enveloped virus, and
extracellular enveloped virus. The source of primary membrane wrapping the
intracellular mature virus, the first infectious form, is still unknown. Although
the membrane was suggested to originate from the endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi
intermediate compartment, none of the marker proteins from this or any other cell
compartments has been found in the intracellular mature virus. Thus, it was
hypothesized that the membrane is either extensively modified by the virus or
synthesized de novo. In the work described here, we demonstrate that a host cell 
protein residing in the trans-Golgi network membrane, golgin-97, is transported
to the sites of virus replication and assembly and becomes incorporated into the 
virions during poxvirus infection. Inside the virion, golgin-97 is associated
with the insoluble core protein fraction. Being able to adopt a long rod-like
structure, the protein apparently extends through the virion envelope and
protrudes from its surface. Here we discuss the potential role and functions of
golgin-97 in poxvirus replication and propose two working models.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00287-06 
PMCID: PMC1642589
PMID: 16987983  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

