
1. J Virol. 2006 Dec;80(24):12271-82. Epub 2006 Sep 20.

Nuclear export of simian immunodeficiency virus Vpx protein.

Singhal PK(1), Rajendra Kumar P, Subba Rao MR, Mahalingam S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and
Diagnostics (CDFD), ECIL Road, Nacharam, Hyderabad 500 076, India.

Lentiviruses, human immunodeficiency viruses (HIVs), and simian immunodeficiency 
viruses (SIVs) are distinguished from oncoretroviruses by their ability to infect
nondividing cells such as macrophages. Retroviruses must gain access to the host 
cell nucleus for replication and propagation. HIV and SIV preintegration
complexes (PIC) enter nuclei after traversing the central aqueous channel of the 
limiting nuclear pore complex without membrane breakdown. Among the nucleophilic 
proteins, namely, matrix, integrase, Vpx, and Vpr, present in HIV type 2/SIV PIC,
Vpx is implicated in nuclear targeting and is also available for incorporation
into budding virions at the plasma membrane. The mechanisms of these two opposite
functions are not known. We demonstrate that Vpx is a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling
protein and contains two novel noncanonical nuclear import signals and a
leptomycin B-sensitive nuclear export signal. In addition, Vpx interacts with the
cellular tyrosine kinase Fyn through its C-terminal proline-rich motif.
Furthermore, our data indicate that Fyn kinase phosphorylates Vpx and regulates
its export from nucleus. Replacement of conserved tryptophan residues within
domain 41 to 63 and tyrosine residues at positions 66, 69, and 71 in Vpx impairs 
its nuclear export, virion incorporation, and SIV replication in macrophages.
Nuclear export is essential to ensure the availability of Vpx in the cytoplasm
for incorporation into virions, leading to efficient viral replication within
nondividing cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00563-06 
PMCID: PMC1676268
PMID: 16987982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

