
1. J Mol Biol. 2006 Dec 15;364(5):1034-47. Epub 2006 Oct 3.

Luman, a new partner of HIV-1 TMgp41, interferes with Tat-mediated transcription 
of the HIV-1 LTR.

Blot G(1), Lopez-Vergès S, Treand C, Kubat NJ, Delcroix-Genête D, Emiliani S,
Benarous R, Berlioz-Torrent C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Département Maladies Infectieuses, Paris F-75014, France.

In our search for new partners of the HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein (Env), we found
that the cytoplasmic domain of the TMgp41 (TMgp41 CD) subunit of HIV-1 Env
interacted with Luman, a transcription factor of the CREB/ATF family. Luman is
anchored in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane and subjected to activation by
regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP). The RIP process permits the release of
the activated amino-terminal fragment of Luman into the cytoplasm, and its import
into the nucleus. Here, we demonstrate that interaction between the TMgp41 CD and
Luman requires a region encompassing the b-Zip and TM domains of Luman and
decreases the stability of this factor. Moreover, we found that overexpression of
a constitutively active form of Luman in cells transfected with HXB2R HIV-1
provirus decreased the intracellular expression of Gag and Env and led to a
decrease in virion release. This negative effect of activated Luman on HIV-1
production was correlated to the inhibition of Tat transactivation of the HIV-1
LTR, which might be related to an interaction of activated Luman with Tat.
Altogether, these results show that Luman acts as a partner of two major HIV-1
proteins: the TMgp41 Env subunit and Tat. The interaction between the TMgp41
subunit of Env and Luman affects the stability of the full-length Luman protein, 
the precursor of the activated, nuclear form of Luman, which acts negatively on
Tat-mediated HIV-1 transactivation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.09.080 
PMID: 17054986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

