
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Apr;11(4):1988-95.

Control of protein phosphatase 2A by simian virus 40 small-t antigen.

Yang SI(1), Lickteig RL, Estes R, Rundell K, Walter G, Mumby MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235-9041.

Soluble, monomeric simian virus 40 (SV40) small-t antigen (small-t) was purified 
from bacteria and assayed for its ability to form complexes with protein
phosphatase 2A (PP2A) and to modify its catalytic activity. Different forms of
purified PP2A, composed of combinations of regulatory subunits (A and B) with a
common catalytic subunit (C), were used. The forms used included free A and C
subunits and AC and ABC complexes. Small-t associated with both the free A
subunit and the AC form of PP2A, resulting in a shift in mobility during
nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Small-t did not interact with
the free C subunit or the ABC form. These data demonstrate that the primary
interaction is between small-t and the A subunit and that the B subunit of PP2A
blocks interaction of small-t with the AC form. The effect of small-t on
phosphatase activity was determined by using several exogenous substrates,
including myosin light chains phosphorylated by myosin light-chain kinase, myelin
basic protein phosphorylated by microtubule-associated protein 2 kinase/ERK1, and
histone H1 phosphorylated by protein kinase C. With the exception of histone H1, 
small-t inhibited the dephosphorylation of these substrates by the AC complex.
With histone H1, a small stimulation of dephosphorylation by AC was observed.
Small-t had no effect on the activities of free C or the ABC complex. A maximum
of 50 to 75% inhibition was obtained, with half-maximal inhibition occurring at
10 to 20 nM small-t. The specific activity of the small-t/AC complex was similar 
to that of the ABC form of PP2A with myosin light chains or histone H1 as the
substrate. These results suggested that small-t and the B subunit have similar
qualitative and quantitative effects on PP2A enzyme activity. These data show
that SV40 small-antigen binds to purified PP2A in vitro, through interaction with
the A subunit, and that this interaction inhibits enzyme activity.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.11.4.1988 
PMCID: PMC359884
PMID: 1706474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

