
1. J Cell Sci. 1991 Dec;100 ( Pt 4):799-807.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 protease microinjected into cultured human
skin fibroblasts cleaves vimentin and affects cytoskeletal and nuclear
architecture.

Höner B(1), Shoeman RL, Traub P.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Zellbiologie, Ladenburg bei Heidelberg, Federal
Republic of Germany.

In human skin fibroblasts microinjected with purified human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 protease (HIV-1 PR), stress fibers were lost and alterations in
nuclear morphology and condensation of nuclear chromatin were observed.
Thereafter, the vimentin intermediate filament (IF) network collapsed. No effect 
was seen on the microtubules. While complicated by loss of affected cells from
the substratum, a minimum estimate of the proportion of cells demonstrating these
effects is 50%. Observation of single cells demonstrated that these effects were 
largely irreversible and were steps leading to the death of the HIV-1 PR-injected
cells. After microinjection of various dilutions of the HIV-1 PR, it was observed
that the changes in nuclear morphology and chromatin condensation were detectable
under conditions where little or no effect was observed on both stress fibers and
the IF network. Proteins of cells labelled with [35S]methionine and microinjected
with either HIV-1 PR or BSA were subjected to two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis. The major differences in the gel patterns were a diminution in
the amount of vimentin and the appearance of novel products comigrating with
cleavage products obtained after treatment of vimentin with HIV-1 PR in vitro.
Thus, the HIV-1 PR is capable not only of cleaving IF subunit proteins in vivo,
but also can catalyze alterations in other cellular structures.


PMID: 1726101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

