
1. J Virol. 2007 Apr;81(8):4264-71. Epub 2007 Feb 7.

The adenovirus E4 ORF3 protein binds and reorganizes the TRIM family member
transcriptional intermediary factor 1 alpha.

Yondola MA(1), Hearing P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, School of Medicine, Stony
Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.

One of the most interesting functions attributed to the adenovirus early region 4
open reading frame 3 (E4 ORF3) protein is its reorganization of promyelocytic
leukemia (PML) protein nuclear bodies. These normally punctate structures are
reorganized by E4 ORF3 into tracks that eventually surround viral replication
centers. PML rearrangement is an evolutionarily conserved function of E4 ORF3,
yet its cause and functional relevance remain mysteries. The E4 ORF3 protein
coimmunoprecipitates with the PML protein, yet E4 ORF3 still forms tracks in
cells that lack PML. The PML protein is a member of a larger protein family
termed tripartite motif (TRIM) proteins. TRIM proteins contain a tripartite
domain structure in proximity to their N termini that consists of a RING finger
domain, followed by one or two B box domains and a C-terminal coiled-coil domain 
(collectively termed the RBCC domain). The order and spacing of these domains are
evolutionarily conserved and thought to mediate protein-protein interactions and 
other functions. We implemented a proteomic approach to isolate cellular proteins
that bind to E4 ORF3. We identified a novel interaction between E4 ORF3 and
another TRIM family member, transcriptional intermediary factor 1 alpha
(TIF1alpha). TIF1alpha functions by recruiting coactivators and/or corepressors
to modulate transcription. The interaction between E4 ORF3 and TIF1alpha was
validated by coimmunoprecipitation and binding of recombinant proteins. Indirect 
immunofluorescence assays demonstrated that TIF1alpha is reorganized into track
structures that contain PML upon E4 ORF3 expression. The RBCC domain of TIF1alpha
is sufficient for E4 ORF3-induced rearrangement, and TIF1alpha reorganization is 
conserved across adenovirus serotypes.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02629-06 
PMCID: PMC1866117
PMID: 17287283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

