
1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Apr 20;282(16):12048-57. Epub 2007 Feb 21.

The Werner syndrome helicase is a cofactor for HIV-1 long terminal repeat
transactivation and retroviral replication.

Sharma A(1), Awasthi S, Harrod CK, Matlock EF, Khan S, Xu L, Chan S, Yang H,
Thammavaram CK, Rasor RA, Burns DK, Skiest DJ, Van Lint C, Girard AM, McGee M,
Monnat RJ Jr, Harrod R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, Department of Biological Sciences, Southern 
Methodist University, Dallas, Texas 75275-0376, USA.

The Werner syndrome helicase (WRN) participates in DNA replication, double strand
break repair, telomere maintenance, and p53 activation. Mutations of wrn cause
Werner syndrome (WS), an autosomal recessive premature aging disorder associated 
with cancer predisposition, atherosclerosis, and other aging related symptoms.
Here, we report that WRN is a novel cofactor for HIV-1 replication. Immortalized 
human WRN(-/-) WS fibroblasts, lacking a functional wrn gene, are impaired for
basal and Tat-activated HIV-1 transcription. Overexpression of wild-type WRN
transactivates the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) in the absence of Tat, and
WRN cooperates with Tat to promote high-level LTR transactivation. Ectopic WRN
induces HIV-1 p24(Gag) production and retroviral replication in HIV-1-infected
H9(HIV-1IIIB) lymphocytes. A dominant-negative helicase-minus mutant, WRN(K577M),
inhibits LTR transactivation and HIV-1 replication. Inhibition of endogenous WRN,
through co-expression of WRN(K577M), diminishes recruitment of p300/CREB-binding 
protein-associated factor (PCAF) and positive transcription elongation factor b
(P-TEFb) to Tat/transactivation response-RNA complexes, and immortalized WRN(-/-)
WS fibroblasts exhibit comparable defects in recruitment of PCAF and P-TEFb to
the HIV-1 LTR. Our results demonstrate that WRN is a novel cellular cofactor for 
HIV-1 replication and suggest that the WRN helicase participates in the
recruitment of PCAF/P-TEFb-containing transcription complexes. WRN may be a
plausible target for antiretroviral therapy.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M608104200 
PMID: 17317667  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

