
1. Virology. 2007 Sep 15;366(1):117-25. Epub 2007 May 18.

Cellular homeoproteins, SATB1 and CDP, bind to the unique region between the
human cytomegalovirus UL127 and major immediate-early genes.

Lee J(1), Klase Z, Gao X, Caldwell JS, Stinski MF, Kashanchi F, Chao SH.

Author information: 
(1)Expression Engineering Group, Bioprocessing Technology Institute, 20 Biopolis 
Way, #06-01 Centros, Singapore 138668, Singapore.

An AT-rich region of the human cytomegalovirus (CMV) genome between the UL127
open reading frame and the major immediate-early (MIE) enhancer is referred to as
the unique region (UR). It has been shown that the UR represses activation of
transcription from the UL127 promoter and functions as a boundary between the
divergent UL127 and MIE genes during human CMV infection [Angulo, A., Kerry, D., 
Huang, H., Borst, E.M., Razinsky, A., Wu, J., Hobom, U., Messerle, M., Ghazal,
P., 2000. Identification of a boundary domain adjacent to the potent human
cytomegalovirus enhancer that represses transcription of the divergent UL127
promoter. J. Virol. 74 (6), 2826-2839; Lundquist, C.A., Meier, J.L., Stinski,
M.F., 1999. A strong negative transcriptional regulatory region between the human
cytomegalovirus UL127 gene and the major immediate-early enhancer. J. Virol. 73
(11), 9039-9052]. A putative forkhead box-like (FOX-like) site, AAATCAATATT, was 
identified in the UR and found to play a key role in repression of the UL127
promoter in recombinant virus-infected cells [Lashmit, P.E., Lundquist, C.A.,
Meier, J.L., Stinski, M.F., 2004. Cellular repressor inhibits human
cytomegalovirus transcription from the UL127 promoter. J. Virol. 78 (10),
5113-5123]. However, the cellular factors which associate with the UR and
FOX-like region remain to be determined. We reported previously that
pancreatic-duodenal homeobox factor-1 (PDX1) bound to a 45-bp element located
within the UR [Chao, S.H., Harada, J.N., Hyndman, F., Gao, X., Nelson, C.G.,
Chanda, S.K., Caldwell, J.S., 2004. PDX1, a Cellular Homeoprotein, Binds to and
Regulates the Activity of Human Cytomegalovirus Immediate Early Promoter. J.
Biol. Chem. 279 (16), 16111-16120]. Here we demonstrate that two additional
cellular homeoproteins, special AT-rich sequence binding protein 1 (SATB1) and
CCAAT displacement protein (CDP), bind to the human CMV UR in vitro and in vivo. 
Furthermore, CDP is identified as a FOX-like binding protein and a repressor of
the UL127 promoter, while SATB1 has no effect on UL127 expression. Since CDP is
known as a transcription repressor and a nuclear matrix-associated region binding
protein, CDP may have a role in the regulation of human CMV transcription.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2007.04.024 
PMID: 17512569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

