
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jun 26;104(26):11032-7. Epub 2007 Jun 20.

Identification of a retroviral receptor used by an envelope protein derived by
peptide library screening.

Sarangi A(1), Bupp K, Roth MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 675 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854,
USA.

This study demonstrates the power of a genetic selection to identify a variant
virus that uses a new retroviral receptor protein. We screened a random peptide
library within the receptor-binding domain of a feline leukemia virus retroviral 
Envelope (FeLV Env) protein for productive infection of feline AH927 cells. One
variant, A5, obtained with altered tropic properties acquired the ability to use 
the solute carrier protein family 35 member F2 (SLC35F2) as a receptor. The
SLC35F2 protein is a presumed transporter of unknown function predicted to encode
8 to 10 transmembrane-spanning regions and is not homologous to any identified
retroviral receptor. Expression of the feline SLC35F2 cDNA in nonpermissive cells
renders the cells susceptible to infection by A5 virus, with remarkably high
titers in the range of 10(5) infectious units per ml. The human SLC35F2 ORF also 
functioned as the retroviral receptor, albeit at lower efficiency than the feline
homologue. The successful selection of a novel molecule, the SLC35F2
transporter/channel-type protein, as a receptor by the FeLV Env backbone suggests
that multipass transmembrane proteins may be particularly suited for use in
productive viral entry and fusion. The analysis of retroviral Env libraries
randomized in the receptor-binding domain offers a viable means to develop viral 
vectors targeted to specific cell types in the absence of known targeting
ligands.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0704182104 
PMCID: PMC1904118
PMID: 17581869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

