
1. Virus Genes. 2007 Dec;35(3):685-94. Epub 2007 Aug 4.

A Shope Fibroma virus PYRIN-only protein modulates the host immune response.

Dorfleutner A(1), Talbott SJ, Bryan NB, Funya KN, Rellick SL, Reed JC, Shi X,
Rojanasakul Y, Flynn DC, Stehlik C.

Author information: 
(1)Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center and Department of Microbiology, Immunology & 
Cell Biology, West Virginia University School of Medicine, 1826 MBRCC, 1 Medical 
Center Drive, Morgantown, WV 26506-9300, USA,

PYRIN domain (PYD) proteins have recently emerged as important signaling
molecules involved in the development of innate immunity to intracellular
pathogens through activation of inflammatory mediator pathways. ASC is the
central adaptor protein, which links pathogen recognition by PYD-containing
pathogen recognition receptors to the activation of downstream effectors,
including activation of Caspase-1 and NF-kappaB. The cellular PYD-only protein 1 
(cPOP1) can block the recruitment of ASC to activated PAN receptors and thereby
functions as an endogenous inhibitor of the PYD-mediated signal transduction
pathway. Here we describe the identification and characterization of a Shope
Fibroma homolog to cPOP1. Like cPOP1, a Shope Fibroma virus-encoded POP (vPOP),
co-localizes and directly associates with ASC and inhibits PYD-mediated signal
transduction. Poxviruses are known to encode immune evasive proteins to promote
host cell infection and suppression of the host immune response. Poxvirus-encoded
vPOPs represent a novel class of immune evasive proteins and impair the host
response by blocking Cryopyrin and ASC inflammasome-mediated activation of
pro-Caspase-1 and subsequent processing of pro-interleukin (IL)-1beta, and
expression of vPOPs causes activation of NF-kappaB.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-007-0141-9 
PMCID: PMC4257706
PMID: 17676277  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

