
1. J Virol. 2007 Oct;81(20):11304-21. Epub 2007 Aug 8.

The role of DNA-PKcs and artemis in opening viral DNA hairpin termini in various 
tissues in mice.

Inagaki K(1), Ma C, Storm TA, Kay MA, Nakai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics & Biochemistry, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, W1244 BSTWR, 200 Lothrop St., Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

A subset of cellular DNA hairpins at double-strand breaks is processed by
DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs)- and Artemis-associated
endonuclease. DNA hairpin termini of adeno-associated virus (AAV) are processed
by DNA repair machinery; however, how and what cellular factors are involved in
the process remain elusive. Here, we show that DNA-PKcs and Artemis open AAV
inverted terminal repeat (ITR) hairpin loops in a tissue-dependent manner. We
investigated recombinant AAV (rAAV) genome metabolism in various tissues of
DNA-PKcs- or Artemis-proficient or -deficient mice. In the absence of either
factor, ITR hairpin opening was impaired, resulting in accumulation of
double-stranded linear rAAV genomes capped with covalently closed hairpins at
termini. The 5' end of 3-base hairpin loops of the ITR was the primary target for
DNA-PKcs- and Artemis-mediated cleavage. In the muscle, heart, and kidney,
DNA-PKcs- and Artemis-dependent hairpin opening constituted a significant
pathway, while in the liver, undefined alternative pathways effectively processed
hairpins. In addition, our study revealed a Holliday junction resolvase-like
activity in the liver that cleaved T-shaped ITR hairpin shoulders by making nicks
at diametrically opposed sites. Thus, our approach furthers our understanding of 
not only rAAV biology but also fundamental DNA repair systems in various tissues 
of living animals.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01225-07 
PMCID: PMC2045570
PMID: 17686847  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

