
1. Cell Microbiol. 2007 Nov;9(11):2756-66. Epub 2007 Sep 14.

Interactions between the West Nile virus capsid protein and the host cell-encoded
phosphatase inhibitor, I2PP2A.

Hunt TA(1), Urbanowski MD, Kakani K, Law LM, Brinton MA, Hobman TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alberta, 5-14 Medical Sciences
Building, Edmonton, AB T6G 2H7, Canada.

The West Nile virus (WNV) capsid protein functions in virus assembly to package
genomic RNA into nucleocapsid structures. It is becoming clear, that in addition 
to their structural roles, capsid proteins of RNA viruses have non-structural
functions. For example, the WNV capsid protein has been implicated as a
pathogenic determinant. Presumably, many, if not all, of the non-structural
functions of this protein involve interactions with host cell-encoded proteins.
In the present study, we used affinity purification to isolate human proteins
that bind to the WNV capsid protein. One of the capsid binding proteins is
I(2)(PP2A), a previously characterized inhibitor of the serine/threonine
phosphatase PP2A. Mapping studies revealed that capsid binding site overlaps with
the region of I(2)(PP2A) that is required for inhibition of PP2A activity.
Moreover, expression of the WNV capsid protein resulted in significantly
increased PP2A activity and expected downstream events, such as inhibition of
AP1-dependent transcription. Infected cells treated with I(2)(PP2A)-specific
siRNAs produced less infectious virus than control siRNA-transfected cells, but
this difference was minimal. Together, our data indicate that interactions
between WNV capsid and I(2)(PP2A) result in increased PP2A activity. Given the
central role of this phosphatase in cellular physiology, capsid/I(2)(PP2A)
interactions may yet prove to be important for viral pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2007.01046.x 
PMID: 17868381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

