
1. J Virol. 2007 Dec;81(24):13469-77. Epub 2007 Oct 10.

Ebola virus VP24 proteins inhibit the interaction of NPI-1 subfamily karyopherin 
alpha proteins with activated STAT1.

Reid SP(1), Valmas C, Martinez O, Sanchez FM, Basler CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Box 1124, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 1
Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The Zaire ebolavirus protein VP24 was previously demonstrated to inhibit
alpha/beta interferon (IFN-alpha/beta)- and IFN-gamma-induced nuclear
accumulation of tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT1 (PY-STAT1) and to inhibit
IFN-alpha/beta- and IFN-gamma-induced gene expression. These properties
correlated with the ability of VP24 to interact with the nuclear localization
signal receptor for PY-STAT1, karyopherin alpha1. Here, VP24 is demonstrated to
interact not only with overexpressed but also with endogenous karyopherin alpha1.
Mutational analysis demonstrated that VP24 binds within the PY-STAT1 binding
region located in the C terminus of karyopherin alpha1. In addition, VP24 was
found to inhibit PY-STAT1 binding to both overexpressed and endogenous
karyopherin alpha1. We assessed the binding of both PY-STAT1 and the VP24
proteins from Zaire, mouse-adapted Zaire, and Reston Ebola viruses for
interaction with all six members of the human karyopherin alpha family. We found,
in contrast to previous studies, that PY-STAT1 can interact not only with
karyopherin alpha1 but also with karyopherins alpha5 and alpha6, which together
comprise the NPI-1 subfamily of karyopherin alphaS. Similarly, all three VP24s
bound and inhibited PY-STAT1 interaction with karyopherins alpha1, alpha5, and
alpha6. Consistent with their ability to inhibit the karyopherin-PY-STAT1
interaction, Zaire, mouse-adapted Zaire, and Reston Ebola virus VP24s displayed
similar capacities to inhibit IFN-beta-induced gene expression in human and mouse
cells. These findings suggest that VP24 inhibits interaction of PY-STAT1 with
karyopherins alpha1, alpha5, or alpha6 by binding within the PY-STAT1 binding
region of the karyopherins and that this function is conserved among the VP24
proteins of different Ebola virus species.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01097-07 
PMCID: PMC2168840
PMID: 17928350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

