
1. J Virol. 2008 Jan;82(2):987-98. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Vif functionally interacts with diverse
APOBEC3 cytidine deaminases and moves with them between cytoplasmic sites of mRNA
metabolism.

Marin M(1), Golem S, Rose KM, Kozak SL, Kabat D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, OR 97239-3098, USA.

Vif(IIIB), which has been a standard model for the viral infectivity factor of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), binds the cytidine deaminase
APOBEC3G (A3G) and induces its degradation, thereby precluding its lethal
incorporation into assembling virions. Additionally, Vif(IIIB) less efficiently
degrades A3F, another potent anti-HIV-1 cytidine deaminase. Although the APOBEC3 
paralogs A3A, A3B, and A3C have weaker anti-HIV-1 activities and are only
partially degraded by Vif(IIIB), we found that Vif(IIIB) induces their emigration
from the nucleus to the cytosol and thereby causes net increases in the cytosolic
concentrations and anti-HIV-1 activities of A3A and A3B. In contrast, some other 
Vifs, exemplified by Vif(HXB2) and Vif(ELI-1), much more efficiently degrade and 
thereby neutralize all APOBEC3s. Studies focused mainly on A3F imply that it
occurs associated with mRNA-PABP1 in translationally active polysomes and to a
lesser extent in mRNA processing bodies (P-bodies). A3F appears to stabilize the 
P-bodies with which it is associated. A correspondingly small proportion of
Vif(IIIB) also localizes in P-bodies in an A3F-dependent manner. Stress causes
A3A, A3B, A3C, and A3F to colocalize efficiently with Vif(IIIB) and mRNA-PABP1
complexes in stress granules in a manner that is prevented by cycloheximide, an
inhibitor of translational elongation. Coimmunoprecipitation studies suggest that
Vifs from different HIV-1 isolates associate with all tested APOBEC3s. Thus, Vifs
interact closely with structurally diverse APOBEC3s, with effects on their
subcellular localization, degradation rates, and antiviral activities. Cytosolic 
APOBEC3-Vif complexes are predominantly bound to mRNAs that dynamically move
between translationally active and storage or processing pools.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01078-07 
PMCID: PMC2224600
PMID: 17977970  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

