
1. J Virol. 2008 Jan;82(2):1021-33. Epub 2007 Nov 7.

Modulation of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infectivity through
incorporation of tetraspanin proteins.

Sato K(1), Aoki J, Misawa N, Daikoku E, Sano K, Tanaka Y, Koyanagi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Pathogenesis, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto
University, 53 Shogoinkawara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Accumulating evidence indicates that human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) 
acquires various cellular membrane proteins in the lipid bilayer of the viral
envelope membrane. Although some virion-incorporated cellular membrane proteins
are known to potently affect HIV-1 infectivity, the virological functions of most
virion-incorporated membrane proteins remain unclear. Among these host proteins, 
we found that CD63 was eliminated from the plasma membranes of HIV-1-producing T 
cells after activation, followed by a decrease in the amount of
virion-incorporated CD63, and in contrast, an increase in the infectivity of the 
released virions. On the other hand, we found that CD63 at the cell surface was
preferentially embedded on the membrane of released virions in an HIV-1 envelope 
protein (Env)-independent manner and that virion-incorporated CD63 had the
potential to inhibit HIV-1 Env-mediated infection in a strain-specific manner at 
the postattachment entry step(s). In addition, these behaviors were commonly
observed in other tetraspanin proteins, such as CD9, CD81, CD82, and CD231.
However, L6 protein, whose topology is similar to that of tetraspanins but which 
does not belong to the tetraspanin superfamily, did not have the potential to
prevent HIV-1 infection, despite its successful incorporation into the released
particles. Taken together, these results suggest that tetraspanin proteins have
the unique potential to modulate HIV-1 infectivity through incorporation into
released HIV-1 particles, and our findings may provide a clue to undiscovered
aspects of HIV-1 entry.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01044-07 
PMCID: PMC2224585
PMID: 17989173  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

