
1. J Virol. 2008 Feb;82(3):1271-83. Epub 2007 Nov 21.

Human papillomavirus E1 helicase interacts with the WD repeat protein p80 to
promote maintenance of the viral genome in keratinocytes.

Côté-Martin A(1), Moody C, Fradet-Turcotte A, D'Abramo CM, Lehoux M, Joubert S,
Poirier GG, Coulombe B, Laimins LA, Archambault J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal, 110 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Due to the limited coding capacity of their small genomes, human papillomaviruses
(HPV) rely extensively on host factors for the completion of their life cycles.
Accordingly, most HPV proteins, including the replicative helicase E1, engage in 
multiple protein interactions. The fact that conserved regions of E1 have not yet
been ascribed a function prompted us to use tandem affinity protein purification 
(TAP) coupled to mass spectrometry to identify novel targets of this helicase.
This method led to the discovery of a novel interaction between the N-terminal 40
amino acids of HPV type 11 (HPV11) E1 and the cellular WD repeat protein p80
(WDR48). We found that interaction with p80 is conserved among E1 proteins from
anogenital HPV but not among cutaneous or animal types. Colocalization studies
showed that E1 can redistribute p80 from the cytoplasm to the nucleus in a manner
that is dependent on the E1 nuclear localization signal. Three amino acid
substitutions in E1 proteins from HPV11 and -31 were identified that abrogate
binding to p80 and its relocalization to the nucleus. In HPV31 E1, these
substitutions reduced but did not completely abolish transient viral DNA
replication. HPV31 genomes encoding two of the mutant E1 proteins were not
maintained as episomes in immortalized primary keratinocytes, whereas one
encoding the third mutant protein was maintained at a very low copy number. These
findings suggest that the interaction of E1 with p80 is required for efficient
maintenance of the viral episome in undifferentiated keratinocytes.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01405-07 
PMCID: PMC2224424
PMID: 18032488  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

