
1. J Virol. 2008 Apr;82(7):3546-54. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02560-07. Epub 2008 Jan 23.

Stabilized binding of TBP to the TATA box of herpes simplex virus type 1 early
(tk) and late (gC) promoters by TFIIA and ICP4.

Zabierowski SE(1), Deluca NA.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Science Tower, Department of Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

We have recently shown that ICP4 has a differential requirement for the general
transcription factor TFIIA in vitro (S. Zabierowski and N. DeLuca, J. Virol.
78:6162-6170, 2004). TFIIA was dispensable for ICP4 activation of a late promoter
(gC) but was required for the efficient activation of an early promoter (tk). An 
intact INR element was required for proficient ICP4 activation of the late
promoter in the absence of TFIIA. Because TFIIA is known to stabilize the binding
of both TATA binding protein (TBP) and TFIID to the TATA box of core promoters
and ICP4 has been shown to interact with TFIID, we tested the ability of ICP4 to 
stabilize the binding of either TBP or TFIID to the TATA box of representative
early, late, and INR-mutated late promoters (tk, gC, and gC8, respectively).
Utilizing DNase I footprinting analysis, we found that ICP4 was able to
facilitate TFIIA stabilized binding of TBP to the TATA box of the early tk
promoter. Using mutant ICP4 proteins, the ability to stabilize the binding of TBP
to both the wild-type and the INR-mutated gC promoters was located in the
amino-terminal region of ICP4. When TFIID was substituted for TBP, ICP4 could
stabilize the binding of TFIID to the TATA box of the wild-type gC promoter.
ICP4, however, could not effectively stabilize TFIID binding to the TATA box of
the INR-mutated late promoter. The additional activities of TFIIA were required
to stabilize the binding of TFIID to the INR-mutated late promoter. Collectively,
these data suggest that TFIIA may be dispensable for ICP4 activation of the
wild-type late promoter because ICP4 can substitute for TFIIA's ability to
stabilize the binding of TFIID to the TATA box. In the absence of a functional
INR, ICP4 can no longer stabilize TFIID binding to the TATA box of the late
promoter and requires the additional activities of TFIIA. The stabilized binding 
of TFIID by TFIIA may in turn allow ICP4 to more efficiently activate
transcription from non-INR containing promoters.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02560-07 
PMCID: PMC2268492
PMID: 18216093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

