
1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 28;283(13):8173-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708920200. Epub 2008 
Jan 30.

HIV-1 Nef disrupts the podocyte actin cytoskeleton by interacting with diaphanous
interacting protein.

Lu TC(1), He JC, Wang ZH, Feng X, Fukumi-Tominaga T, Chen N, Xu J, Iyengar R,
Klotman PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029,
USA.

The ability of the human immunodeficiency virus, type 1 (HIV-1) protein Nef to
induce cytoskeleton changes in infected host cells is a key event in viral
replication. In renal podocytes, we found that Nef induced loss of stress fibers 
and increased lamellipodia, pathological changes leading to proteinuria in
HIV-associated nephropathy. These morphological changes were mediated by
Nef-induced Rac1 activation and RhoA inhibition. We identified a new interaction 
between Nef and diaphanous interacting protein (DIP), a recently described
regulator of Rho and Rac signaling. We found that the Src homology 3 binding
domain of DIP and the Nef PXXP motif were required for this interaction. Nef also
interacts with Vav2 in podocytes. DIP and Vav2 both interact directly with Nef in
a competitive manner. DIP interacts with p190RhoGAP, and intact DIP was required 
for Nef-induced phosphorylation of p190RhoGAP. DIP also interacts with Vav2, and 
although DIP enhanced baseline phosphorylation of Vav2, it was not required for
Nef-induced Vav2 activation. In Nef-infected podocytes, Src kinase induces
phosphorylation of DIP, p190RhoGAP, and Vav2, leading to RhoA inhibition and Rac1
activation. Inhibition of the Nef-induced signaling pathway by using a dominant
negative of either Src or DIP or siRNA for DIP or p190RhoAGAP restored RhoA
activity and stress fiber formation in Nef-infected podocytes, whereas siRNA for 
Vav2 reduced Rac1 activity and formation of lamellipodia. We conclude that in
HIV-infected podocytes, Nef, through the recruitment of DIP and p190RhoAGAP to
Nef-Src complex, activates p190RhoAGAP and down-regulates RhoA activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M708920200 
PMCID: PMC2276381
PMID: 18234668  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

