
1. PLoS Pathog. 2008 Feb 8;4(2):e22. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0040022.

Inhibition of IkappaB kinase by vaccinia virus virulence factor B14.

Chen RA(1), Ryzhakov G, Cooray S, Randow F, Smith GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, 
United Kingdom.

The IkappaB kinase (IKK) complex is a key regulator of signal transduction
pathways leading to the induction of NF-kappaB-dependent gene expression and
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. It therefore represents a major target 
for the development of anti-inflammatory therapeutic drugs and may be targeted by
pathogens seeking to diminish the host response to infection. Previously, the
vaccinia virus (VACV) strain Western Reserve B14 protein was characterised as an 
intracellular virulence factor that alters the inflammatory response to infection
by an unknown mechanism. Here we demonstrate that ectopic expression of B14
inhibited NF-kappaB activation in response to TNFalpha, IL-1beta, poly(I:C), and 
PMA. In cells infected with VACV lacking gene B14R (vDeltaB14) there was a higher
level of phosphorylated IkappaBalpha but a similar level of IkappaBalpha compared
to cells infected with control viruses expressing B14, suggesting B14 affects IKK
activity. Direct evidence for this was obtained by showing that B14 co-purified
and co-precipitated with the endogenous IKK complex from human and mouse cells
and inhibited IKK complex enzymatic activity. Notably, the interaction between
B14 and the IKK complex required IKKbeta but not IKKalpha, suggesting the
interaction occurs via IKKbeta. B14 inhibited NF-kappaB activation induced by
overexpression of IKKalpha, IKKbeta, and a constitutively active mutant of
IKKalpha, S176/180E, but did not inhibit a comparable mutant of IKKbeta,
S177/181E. This suggested that phosphorylation of these serine residues in the
activation loop of IKKbeta is targeted by B14, and this was confirmed using Ab
specific for phospho-IKKbeta.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0040022 
PMCID: PMC2233672
PMID: 18266467  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

