
1. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Mar;38(3):763-77. doi: 10.1002/eji.200737618.

Immunomodulation by herpesvirus U51A chemokine receptor via CCL5 and FOG-2
down-regulation plus XCR1 and CCR7 mimicry in human leukocytes.

Catusse J(1), Spinks J, Mattick C, Dyer A, Laing K, Fitzsimons C, Smit MJ,
Gompels UA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious & Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene &
Tropical Medicine, University of London, London, UK.

Human herpesvirus-6A (HHV-6A) betachemokine-receptor U51A binds inflammatory
modulators CCL2, CCL5, CCL11, CCL7, and CCL13. This unique specificity overlaps
that of human chemokine receptors CCR1, CCR2, CCR3, and CCR5. In model cell
lines, expression leads to CCL5 down-regulation with both constitutive and
inducible signaling. Here, immunomodulation pathways are investigated in human
leukocytes permissive for infection. Constitutive signaling was shown using
inositol phosphate assays and inducible calcium signaling by response to CCL2,
CCL5 and CCL11. Constitutive signaling targets were examined using an immune
response-related microarray and RT-PCR, showing down-regulation of CCL5 and
FOG-2, a hematopoietic transcriptional repressor. By RT-PCR and siRNA reversion, 
CCL5 and FOG-2 were shown down-regulated, during peak U51A expression post
infection. Two further active ligands, XCL1 and CCL19, were identified, making
U51A competitor to their human receptors, XCR1 and CCR7, on T lymphocytes, NK and
dendritic cells. Finally, U51A-expressing cell lines and infected ex vivo
leukocytes, showed migration towards chemokine-gradients, and chemokine
internalization. Consequently, U51A may affect virus dissemination or host
transmission by chemotaxis of infected cells to sites of chemokine secretion
specific for U51A (for example the lymph node or lung, by CCL19 or CCL11,
respectively) and evade immune-effector cells by chemokine diversion and
down-regulation, affecting virus spread and inflammatory pathology.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.200737618 
PMID: 18286574  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

