
1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Aug 1;283(31):21686-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M710298200. Epub 2008 
Jun 4.

Assembly with the Cul4A-DDB1DCAF1 ubiquitin ligase protects HIV-1 Vpr from
proteasomal degradation.

Le Rouzic E(1), Morel M, Ayinde D, Belaïdouni N, Letienne J, Transy C,
Margottin-Goguet F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, UMR 8104, bâtiment Gustave Roussy, 27 rue du faubourg Saint
Jacques, Paris, France.

Many viruses subvert the host ubiquitin-proteasome system to optimize their life 
cycle. We recently documented such a mechanism for the human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 Vpr protein, which promotes cell cycle arrest by recruiting the
DCAF1 adaptor of the Cul4A-DDB1 ubiquitin ligase, a finding now confirmed by
several groups. Here we examined the impact of Cul4A-DDB1(DCAF1) on Vpr
stability. We show that the Vpr(Q65R) mutant, which is defective in DCAF1
binding, undergoes proteasome-mediated degradation at a higher rate than
wild-type Vpr. DCAF1 overexpression stabilizes wild-type Vpr and leads to its
cytoplasmic accumulation, whereas it has no effect on the Vpr(Q65R) mutant.
Conversely, small interfering RNA-mediated silencing of DCAF1 decreases the
steady state amount of the viral protein. Stabilization by DCAF1, which is
conserved by Vpr species from human immunodeficiency virus type 2 and the SIVmac 
strain, results in increased G(2) arrest and requires the presence of DDB1,
indicating that it occurs through assembly of Vpr with a functional
Cul4A-DDB1(DCAF1) complex. Furthermore, in human immunodeficiency virus type
1-infected cells, the Vpr protein, issued from the incoming viral particle, is
destabilized under DCAF1 or DDB1 silencing. Together with our previous findings, 
our data suggest that Cul4A-DDB1(DCAF1) acts at a dual level by providing Vpr
with the equipment for the degradation of specific host proteins and by
counter-acting its proteasome targeting by another cellular E3 ubiquitin ligase. 
This protection mechanism may represent an efficient way to optimize the activity
of Vpr molecules that are delivered by the incoming virus before neosynthesis
takes place. Targeting the Vpr-DCAF1 interaction might therefore present
therapeutic interest.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M710298200 
PMID: 18524771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

