
1. Cell Death Differ. 2008 Oct;15(10):1564-71. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2008.83. Epub 2008
Jun 13.

Vaccinia virus anti-apoptotic F1L is a novel Bcl-2-like domain-swapped dimer that
binds a highly selective subset of BH3-containing death ligands.

Kvansakul M(1), Yang H, Fairlie WD, Czabotar PE, Fischer SF, Perugini MA, Huang
DC, Colman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Poyal Parade,
Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia.

Apoptosis is an important part of the host's defense mechanism for eliminating
invading pathogens. Some viruses express proteins homologous in sequence and
function to mammalian pro-survival Bcl-2 proteins. Anti-apoptotic F1L expressed
by vaccinia virus is essential for survival of infected cells, but it bears no
discernable sequence homology to proteins other than its immediate orthologues in
related pox viruses. Here we report that the crystal structure of F1L reveals a
Bcl-2-like fold with an unusual N-terminal extension. The protein forms a novel
domain-swapped dimer in which the alpha1 helix is the exchanged domain. Binding
studies reveal an atypical BH3-binding profile, with sub-micromolar affinity only
for the BH3 peptide of pro-apoptotic Bim and low micromolar affinity for the BH3 
peptides of Bak and Bax. This binding interaction is sensitive to F1L mutations
within the predicted canonical BH3-binding groove, suggesting parallels between
how vaccinia virus F1L and myxoma virus M11L bind BH3 domains. Structural
comparison of F1L with other Bcl-2 family members reveals a novel sequence
signature that redefines the BH4 domain as a structural motif present in both
pro- and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 members, including viral Bcl-2-like proteins.

DOI: 10.1038/cdd.2008.83 
PMID: 18551131  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

