
1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Aug 15;283(33):22417-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M710415200. Epub 2008
Jun 20.

Role of human beta-defensin-2 during tumor necrosis
factor-alpha/NF-kappaB-mediated innate antiviral response against human
respiratory syncytial virus.

Kota S(1), Sabbah A, Chang TH, Harnack R, Xiang Y, Meng X, Bose S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78229, USA.

Human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) constitutes a highly pathogenic virus
that infects lung epithelial cells to cause a wide spectrum of respiratory
diseases. Our recent studies have revealed the existence of an
interferon-alpha/beta-independent, innate antiviral response against RSV that was
dependent on activation of NF-kappaB. We demonstrated that NF-kappaB inducing
pro-inflammatory cytokines like tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) confers potent 
antiviral function against RSV in an NF-kappaB-dependent fashion, independent of 
interferon-alpha/beta. During our efforts to study this pathway, we identified
HBD2 (human beta-defensin-2), a soluble secreted cationic protein as an antiviral
factor induced during NF-kappaB-dependent innate antiviral activity in human lung
epithelial cells. Our results demonstrated that HBD2 is induced by TNF and RSV in
an NF-kappaB-dependent manner. Induction of HBD2 in infected cells was mediated
by the paracrine/autocrine action of TNF produced upon RSV infection. HBD2 plays 
a critical role during host defense, because purified HBD2 drastically inhibited 
RSV infection. We also show that the antiviral mechanism of HBD2 involves
blocking of viral cellular entry possibly because of
destabilization/disintegration of the viral envelope. The important role of HBD2 
in the innate response was also evident from loss of antiviral activity of TNF
upon HBD2 silencing by short interfering RNA. The in vivo physiological relevance
of HBD2 in host defense was apparent from induction of murine beta-defensin-4
(murine counterpart of HBD2) in lung tissues of RSV-infected mice. Thus, HBD2
functions as an antiviral molecule during NF-kappaB-dependent innate antiviral
immunity mediated by the autocrine/paracrine action of TNF.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M710415200 
PMCID: PMC2504899
PMID: 18567888  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

