
1. J Virol. 2008 Sep;82(17):8695-705. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00579-08. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Human papillomavirus type 16 E7 oncoprotein associates with E2F6.

McLaughlin-Drubin ME(1), Huh KW, MÃ¼nger K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Infectious Diseases Division, The Channing Laboratory,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

The papillomavirus life cycle is intimately coupled to the differentiation state 
of the infected epithelium. Since papillomaviruses lack most of the rate-limiting
enzymes required for genome synthesis, they need to uncouple keratinocyte
differentiation from cell cycle arrest and maintain or reestablish a
replication-competent state within terminally differentiated keratinocytes. The
human papillomavirus (HPV) E7 protein appears to be a major determinant for this 
activity and induces aberrant S-phase entry through the inactivation of the
retinoblastoma tumor suppressor and related pocket proteins. In addition, E7 can 
abrogate p21 and p27. Together, this leads to the activation of E2F1 to E2F5,
enhanced expression of E2F-responsive genes, and increased cdk2 activity. E2F6 is
a pRB-independent, noncanonical member of the E2F transcription factor family
that acts as a transcriptional repressor. E2F6 expression is activated in S phase
through an E2F-dependent mechanism and thus may provide a negative-feedback
mechanism that slows down S-phase progression and/or exit in response to the
activation of the other E2F transcription factors. Here, we show that low- and
high-risk HPV E7 proteins, as well as simian virus 40 T antigen and adenovirus
E1A, can associate with and inactivate the transcriptional repression activity of
E2F6, thereby subverting a critical cellular defense mechanism. This may result
in the extended S-phase competence of HPV-infected cells. E2F6 is a component of 
polycomb group complexes, which bind to silenced chromatin and are critical for
the maintenance of cell fate. We show that E7-expressing cells show decreased
staining for E2F6/polycomb complexes and that this is at least in part dependent 
on the association with E2F6.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00579-08 
PMCID: PMC2519642
PMID: 18579589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

