
1. PLoS Pathog. 2008 Jul 4;4(7):e1000096. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000096.

Vaccinia virus E3 protein prevents the antiviral action of ISG15.

Guerra S(1), Cáceres A, Knobeloch KP, Horak I, Esteban M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología
CSIC, Campus Universidad Autónoma, Madrid, Spain. sguerra@cnb.csic.es

The ubiquitin-like modifier ISG15 is one of the most predominant proteins induced
by type I interferons (IFN). In this study, murine embryo fibroblast (MEFs) and
mice lacking the gene were used to demonstrate a novel role of ISG15 as a host
defense molecule against vaccinia virus (VACV) infection. In MEFs, the growth of 
replication competent Western Reserve (WR) VACV strain was affected by the
absence of ISG15, but in addition, virus lacking E3 protein (VVDeltaE3L) that is 
unable to grow in ISG15+/+ cells replicated in ISG15-deficient cells. Inhibiting 
ISG15 with siRNA or promoting its expression in ISG15-/- cells with a lentivirus 
vector showed that VACV replication was controlled by ISG15. Immunoprecipitation 
analysis revealed that E3 binds ISG15 through its C-terminal domain. The VACV
antiviral action of ISG15 and its interaction with E3 are events independent of
PKR (double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase). In mice lacking ISG15,
infection with VVDeltaE3L caused significant disease and mortality, an effect not
observed in VVDeltaE3L-infected ISG15+/+ mice. Pathogenesis in ISG15-deficient
mice infected with VVDeltaE3L or with an E3L deletion mutant virus lacking the
C-terminal domain triggered an enhanced inflammatory response in the lungs
compared with ISG15+/+-infected mice. These findings showed an anti-VACV function
of ISG15, with the virus E3 protein suppressing the action of the ISG15 antiviral
factor.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000096 
PMCID: PMC2434199
PMID: 18604270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

