
1. J Virol. 2008 Oct;82(19):9647-56. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00914-08. Epub 2008 Jul 30.

Apolipoprotein c1 association with hepatitis C virus.

Meunier JC(1), Russell RS, Engle RE, Faulk KN, Purcell RH, Emerson SU.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Envelopes and Retrovirus Engineering, Human Virology Department, INSERM 
U758, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 46 allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon Cedex 07,
France. jean-christophe.meunier@ens-lyon.fr

Accumulating evidence suggests that cellular lipoprotein components are involved 
in hepatitis C virus (HCV) morphogenesis, but the precise contribution of these
components remains unclear. We investigated the involvement of apolipoprotein C1 
(ApoC1) in HCV infection in the HCV pseudotyped particle system (HCVpp), in the
recently developed cell culture infection model (HCVcc), and in authentic HCV
isolated from viremic chimpanzees. Viral genomes associated with HCVcc or
authentic HCV were efficiently immunoprecipitated by anti-ApoC1, demonstrating
that ApoC1 was a normal component of HCV. The infectivities of HCVpp that had
been mixed with ApoC1 and, more importantly, untreated HCVcc collected from
lysates or media of infected Huh7.5 cells were directly neutralized by
anti-ApoC1. Indeed, convalescent anti-HCV immunoglobulin G and anti-ApoC1 each
neutralized over 75% of infectious HCVcc particles, indicating that many, if not 
all, infectious particles were recognized by both antibodies. Moreover, peptides 
corresponding to the C-terminal region of ApoC1 blocked infectivity of both HCVpp
and HCVcc. Altogether, these results suggest that ApoC1 associates
intracellularly via its C-terminal region with surface components of virions
during viral morphogenesis and may play a major role in the replication cycle of 
HCV.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00914-08 
PMCID: PMC2546963
PMID: 18667498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

