
1. J Virol. 2008 Oct;82(20):10088-101. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01011-08. Epub 2008 Aug 6.

Different types of nsP3-containing protein complexes in Sindbis virus-infected
cells.

Gorchakov R(1), Garmashova N, Frolova E, Frolov I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
301 University Boulevard, Galveston, TX 77555-1019, USA.

Alphaviruses represent a serious public health threat and cause a wide variety of
diseases, ranging from severe encephalitis, which can result in death or
neurological sequelae, to mild infection, characterized by fever, skin rashes,
and arthritis. In the infected cells, alphaviruses express only four
nonstructural proteins, which function in the synthesis of virus-specific RNAs
and in modification of the intracellular environment. The results of our study
suggest that Sindbis virus (SINV) infection in BHK-21 cells leads to the
formation of at least two types of nsP3-containing complexes, one of which was
found in association with the plasma membrane and endosome-like vesicles, while
the second was coisolated with cell nuclei. The latter complexes could be
solubilized only with the cytoskeleton-destabilizing detergent. Besides viral
nsPs, in the mammalian cells, both complexes contained G3BP1 and G3BP2 (which
were found in different ratios), YBX1, and HSC70. Rasputin, an insect
cell-specific homolog of G3BP1, was found in the nsP3-containing complexes
isolated from mosquito cells, which was suggestive of a high conservation of the 
complexes in the cells of both vertebrate and invertebrate origin. The endosome- 
and plasma membrane-associated complexes contained a high concentration of
double-stranded RNAs (dsRNAs), which is indicative of their function in viral-RNA
synthesis. The dsRNA synthesis is likely to efficiently proceed on the plasma
membrane, and at least some of the protein-RNA complexes would then be
transported into the cytosol in association with the endosome-like vesicular
organelles. These findings provide new insight into the mechanism of SINV
replication and virus-host cell interactions.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01011-08 
PMCID: PMC2566286
PMID: 18684830  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

