
1. Proteomics. 2008 Nov;8(22):4782-90. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200800338.

Riboproteomic analysis of polypeptides interacting with the internal
ribosome-entry site element of foot-and-mouth disease viral RNA.

Pacheco A(1), Reigadas S, Martínez-Salas E.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Initiation of translation driven by internal ribosome entry site (IRES) elements 
depends upon the structural organization of this mRNA region. Besides translation
initiation factors (eIFs), auxiliary proteins can also affect IRES activity. With
the aim to identify proteins interacting with two unrelated IRESs present in the 
genome of foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) we have
used a proteomic approach. This procedure allowed the identification of 21
RNA-binding proteins interacting with discrete regions of the FMDV IRES, domains 
3 and 5, and 16 interacting with domain III of the HCV IRES. In support of the
binding specificity, the factors interacting with domain 3 differed from those
interacting with domain 5, and included three poly(rC)-binding protein (PCBP)
members, besides proliferation-associated 2G4 (PA2G4) and deleted-azoospermia 1
(DAZ1) protein. Around 71% of the identified factors associated with the FMDV
IRES differ from those interacting with the HCV IRES. The group of proteins
interacting with the FMDV or the HCV IRES includes eIF4B and 5 subunits of eIF3, 
respectively, known to interact with each of these RNAs, validating the results
of this approach. According to the function of the identified proteins, 55% are
involved in translation control, whereas 35% play a role in different aspects of 
RNA lifespan. Compilation of factors preferentially associated with FMDV or HCV
IRES provides a basis for examining the strategies used by IRESs to recruit the
translation machinery.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200800338 
PMID: 18937254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

