
1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 9;284(2):1097-105. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805905200. Epub 2008
Nov 14.

Control of TANK-binding kinase 1-mediated signaling by the gamma(1)34.5 protein
of herpes simplex virus 1.

Verpooten D(1), Ma Y, Hou S, Yan Z, He B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
Illinois, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) is a key component of Toll-like receptor-dependent
and -independent signaling pathways. In response to microbial components, TBK1
activates interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and cytokine expression. Here we 
show that TBK1 is a novel target of the gamma(1)34.5 protein, a virulence factor 
whose expression is regulated in a temporal fashion. Remarkably, the gamma(1)34.5
protein is required to inhibit IRF3 phosphorylation, nuclear translocation, and
the induction of antiviral genes in infected cells. When expressed in mammalian
cells, the gamma(1)34.5 protein forms complexes with TBK1 and disrupts the
interaction of TBK1 and IRF3, which prevents the induction of interferon and
interferon-stimulated gene promoters. Down-regulation of TBK1 requires the
amino-terminal domain. In addition, unlike wild type virus, a herpes simplex
virus mutant lacking gamma(1)34.5 replicates efficiently in TBK1(-/-) cells but
not in TBK1(+/+) cells. Addition of exogenous interferon restores the antiviral
activity in both TBK1(-/-) and TBK(+/+) cells. Hence, control of TBK1-mediated
cell signaling by the gamma(1)34.5 protein contributes to herpes simplex virus
infection. These results reveal that TBK1 plays a pivotal role in limiting
replication of a DNA virus.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M805905200 
PMCID: PMC2613634
PMID: 19010780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

