
1. Nature. 2009 Mar 26;458(7237):514-8. doi: 10.1038/nature07725. Epub 2009 Jan 21.

AIM2 recognizes cytosolic dsDNA and forms a caspase-1-activating inflammasome
with ASC.

Hornung V(1), Ablasser A, Charrel-Dennis M, Bauernfeind F, Horvath G, Caffrey DR,
Latz E, Fitzgerald KA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Department of Medicine,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA. 
veit.hornung@uni-bonn.de

The innate immune system senses nucleic acids by germline-encoded pattern
recognition receptors. RNA is sensed by Toll-like receptor members TLR3, TLR7 and
TLR8, or by the RNA helicases RIG-I (also known as DDX58) and MDA-5 (IFIH1).
Little is known about sensors for cytoplasmic DNA that trigger antiviral and/or
inflammatory responses. The best characterized of these responses involves
activation of the TANK-binding kinase (TBK1)-interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) signalling axis to trigger transcriptional induction of type I interferon 
genes. A second, less well-defined pathway leads to the activation of an
'inflammasome' that, via caspase-1, controls the catalytic cleavage of the
pro-forms of the cytokines IL1beta and IL18 (refs 6, 7). Using mouse and human
cells, here we identify the PYHIN (pyrin and HIN domain-containing protein)
family member absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2) as a receptor for cytosolic DNA, which 
regulates caspase-1. The HIN200 domain of AIM2 binds to DNA, whereas the pyrin
domain (but not that of the other PYHIN family members) associates with the
adaptor molecule ASC (apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a
caspase activation and recruitment domain) to activate both NF-kappaB and
caspase-1. Knockdown of Aim2 abrogates caspase-1 activation in response to
cytoplasmic double-stranded DNA and the double-stranded DNA vaccinia virus.
Collectively, these observations identify AIM2 as a new receptor for cytoplasmic 
DNA, which forms an inflammasome with the ligand and ASC to activate caspase-1.

DOI: 10.1038/nature07725 
PMCID: PMC2726264
PMID: 19158675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

