
1. J Immunol. 2009 Feb 15;182(4):2313-24. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803218.

Specific targeting of the EBV lytic phase protein BNLF2a to the transporter
associated with antigen processing results in impairment of HLA class
I-restricted antigen presentation.

Horst D(1), van Leeuwen D, Croft NP, Garstka MA, Hislop AD, Kremmer E, Rickinson 
AB, Wiertz EJ, Ressing ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Center of Infectious Diseases, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

EBV persists for life in the human host while facing vigorous antiviral responses
that are induced upon primary infection. This persistence supports the idea that 
herpesviruses have acquired dedicated functions to avoid immune elimination. The 
recently identified EBV gene product BNLF2a blocks TAP. As a result, reduced
amounts of peptides are transported by TAP from the cytoplasm into the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen for binding to newly synthesized HLA class I
molecules. Thus, BNLF2a perturbs detection by cytotoxic T cells. The 60-aa-long
BNLF2a protein prevents the binding of both peptides and ATP to TAP, yet further 
mechanistic insight is, to date, lacking. In this study, we report that EBV
BNLF2a represents a membrane-associated protein that colocalizes with its target 
TAP in subcellular compartments, primarily the ER. In cells devoid of TAP,
expression levels of BNLF2a protein are greatly diminished, while ER localization
of the remaining BNLF2a is retained. For interactions of BNLF2a with the HLA
class I peptide-loading complex, the presence of TAP2 is essential, whereas
tapasin is dispensible. Importantly, we now show that in B cells supporting EBV
lytic replication, the BNLF2a protein is expressed early in infection,
colocalizing and associating with the peptide-loading complex. These results
imply that, during productive EBV infection, BNLF2a contributes to TAP inhibition
and surface HLA class I down-regulation. In this way, EBV BNLF2a-mediated evasion
from HLA class I-restricted T cell immunity contributes to creating a window for 
undetected virus production.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803218 
PMID: 19201886  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

