
1. J Gen Virol. 2009 May;90(Pt 5):1246-1255. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.006007-0. Epub 2009 
Mar 4.

Prospero-related homeobox protein (Prox1) inhibits hepatitis B virus replication 
through repressing multiple cis regulatory elements.

Qin J(1), Zhai J(2)(1), Hong R(1), Shan S(1), Kong Y(1), Wen Y(3)(4), Wang Y(1), 
Liu J(3)(4), Xie Y(3)(4)(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes of Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200031, PR China.
(2)Graduate School of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, PR China.
(3)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, PR China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, Institute of Medical
Microbiology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, PR
China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) gene transcription is controlled by viral promoters and
enhancers, the activities of which are regulated by a number of cellular factors 
as well as virally encoded proteins. Negative regulation of HBV cis-element
activities by cellular factors has been reported less widely than their
activation. In this study, we report that nuclear factor Prospero-related
homeobox protein (Prox1) represses HBV antigen expression and genome replication 
in cultured hepatocytes. By using reporter-gene analysis, three of the four HBV
promoters, namely the enhancer II/core promoter (ENII/Cp), preS1 promoter (Sp1)
and enhancer I/X promoter, were identified as targets for Prox1-mediated
repression. Mechanistic analysis then revealed that, for ENII/Cp, Prox1 serves as
a corepressor of liver receptor homologue 1 (LRH-1) and downregulates
LRH-1-mediated activation of ENII/Cp, whereas for Sp1, Prox1 partially represses 
Sp1 activity by interacting directly with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1.
Identification of Prox1 as an HBV repressor will help in the understanding of
detailed interactions between viral cis elements and host cellular factors and
may also form the basis for new anti-HBV intervention therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.006007-0 
PMID: 19264593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

