
1. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Mar;5(3):e1000327. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000327. Epub 2009
Mar 6.

The SET complex acts as a barrier to autointegration of HIV-1.

Yan N(1), Cherepanov P, Daigle JE, Engelman A, Lieberman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Immune Disease Institute, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Retroviruses and retrotransposons are vulnerable to a suicidal pathway known as
autointegration, which occurs when the 3'-ends of the reverse transcript are
activated by integrase and then attack sites within the viral DNA. Retroelements 
have diverse strategies for suppressing autointegration, but how HIV-1 protects
itself from autointegration is not well-understood. Here we show that knocking
down any of the components of the SET complex, an endoplasmic
reticulum-associated complex that contains 3 DNases (the base excision repair
endonuclease APE1, 5'-3' exonuclease TREX1, and endonuclease NM23-H1), inhibits
HIV-1 and HIV-2/SIV, but not MLV or ASV, infection. Inhibition occurs at a step
in the viral life cycle after reverse transcription but before chromosomal
integration. Antibodies to SET complex proteins capture HIV-1 DNA in the
cytoplasm, suggesting a direct interaction between the SET complex and the HIV
preintegration complex. Cloning of HIV integration sites in cells with knocked
down SET complex components revealed an increase in autointegration, which was
verified using a novel semi-quantitative nested PCR assay to detect
autointegrants. When SET complex proteins are knocked down, autointegration
increases 2-3-fold and chromosomal integration correspondingly decreases
approximately 3-fold. Therefore, the SET complex facilitates HIV-1 infection by
preventing suicidal autointegration.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000327 
PMCID: PMC2644782
PMID: 19266025  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

