
1. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Mar;5(3):e1000332. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000332. Epub 2009
Mar 13.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus ORF45 interacts with kinesin-2
transporting viral capsid-tegument complexes along microtubules.

Sathish N(1), Zhu FX, Yuan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Open reading frame (ORF) 45 of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is 
a tegument protein. A genetic analysis with a null mutant suggested a possible
role for this protein in the events leading to viral egress. In this study, ORF45
was found to interact with KIF3A, a kinesin-2 motor protein that transports
cargoes along microtubules to cell periphery in a yeast two-hybrid screen. The
association was confirmed by both co-immunoprecipitation and immunoflorescence
approaches in primary effusion lymphoma cells following virus reactivation. ORF45
principally mediated the docking of entire viral capsid-tegument complexes onto
the cargo-binding domain of KIF3A. Microtubules served as the major highways for 
transportation of these complexes as evidenced by drastically reduced viral
titers upon treatment of cells with a microtubule depolymerizer, nocodazole.
Confocal microscopic images further revealed close association of viral particles
with microtubules. Inhibition of KIF3A-ORF45 interaction either by the use of a
headless dominant negative (DN) mutant of KIF3A or through shRNA-mediated
silencing of endogenous KIF3A expression noticeably decreased KSHV egress
reflecting as appreciable reductions in the release of extracellular virions.
Both these approaches, however, failed to impact HSV-1 egress, demonstrating the 
specificity of KIF3A in KSHV transportation. This study thus reports on
transportation of KSHV viral complexes on microtubules by KIF3A, a kinesin motor 
thus far not implicated in virus transportation. All these findings shed light on
the understudied but significant events in the KSHV life cycle, delineating a
crucial role of a KSHV tegument protein in cellular transport of viral particles.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000332 
PMCID: PMC2647735
PMID: 19282970  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

