
1. J Virol. 2009 Jul;83(13):6706-16. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02317-08. Epub 2009 Apr 15.

Identification of a feline leukemia virus variant that can use THTR1, FLVCR1, and
FLVCR2 for infection.

Shalev Z(1), Duffy SP, Adema KW, Prasad R, Hussain N, Willett BJ, Tailor CS.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 
1X8, Canada.

The pathogenic subgroup C feline leukemia virus (FeLV-C) arises in infected cats 
as a result of mutations in the envelope (Env) of the subgroup A FeLV (FeLV-A).
To better understand emergence of FeLV-C and potential FeLV intermediates that
may arise, we characterized FeLV Env sequences from the primary FY981 FeLV
isolate previously derived from an anemic cat. Here, we report the
characterization of the novel FY981 FeLV Env that is highly related to FeLV-A Env
but whose variable region A (VRA) receptor recognition sequence partially
resembles the VRA sequence from the prototypical FeLV-C/Sarma Env. Pseudotype
viruses bearing FY981 Env were capable of infecting feline, human, and guinea pig
cells, suggestive of a subgroup C phenotype, but also infected porcine ST-IOWA
cells that are normally resistant to FeLV-C and to FeLV-A. Analysis of the host
receptor used by FY981 suggests that FY981 can use both the FeLV-C receptor
FLVCR1 and the feline FeLV-A receptor THTR1 for infection. However, our results
suggest that FY981 infection of ST-IOWA cells is not mediated by the porcine
homologue of FLVCR1 and THTR1 but by an alternative receptor, which we have now
identified as the FLVCR1-related protein FLVCR2. Together, our results suggest
that FY981 FeLV uses FLVCR1, FLVCR2, and THTR1 as receptors. Our findings suggest
the possibility that pathogenic FeLV-C arises in FeLV-infected cats through
intermediates that are multitropic in their receptor use.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02317-08 
PMCID: PMC2698567
PMID: 19369334  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

