
1. J Gen Virol. 2009 Aug;90(Pt 8):2005-2014. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.011072-0. Epub 2009 
May 6.

SMAD proteins of oligodendroglial cells regulate transcription of JC virus early 
and late genes coordinately with the Tat protein of human immunodeficiency virus 
type 1.

Stettner MR(1), Nance JA(1), Wright CA(1), Kinoshita Y(2), Kim WK(1), Morgello
S(2), Rappaport J(3), Khalili K(3), Gordon J(3), Johnson EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Cell Biology, Eastern Virginia
Medical School, 700 West Olney Road, Norfolk, VA 23501, USA.
(2)Departments of Pathology and Neuroscience, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10029, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience and Center for Neurovirology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA.

JC virus (JCV) is the aetiological agent of progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy (PML), a fatal, demyelinating disease of the brain affecting 
people with AIDS. Although immunosuppression is involved in infection of the
brain by JCV, a direct influence of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
has also been established. The Tat protein of HIV-1 has been implicated in
activation of the cytokine transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta in
HIV-1-infected cells and in stimulating JCV gene transcription and DNA
replication in oligodendroglia, the primary central nervous system cell type
infected by JCV in PML. This study demonstrated that Tat can cooperate with SMAD 
proteins, the intracellular effectors of TGF-beta, at the JCV DNA control region 
(CR) to stimulate JCV gene transcription. Tat stimulated JCV early gene
transcription in KG-1 oligodendroglial cells when expressed via transfection or
added exogenously. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation, it was shown that
exogenous Tat enhanced binding of SMAD2, -3 and -4 and their binding partner
Fast1 to the JCV CR in living cells. When SMAD2, -3 and -4 were expressed
together, Tat, expressed from plasmid pTat, stimulated transcription from both
early and late gene promoters, with the early promoter exhibiting stimulation of 
>100-fold. Tat, SMAD4 and JCV large T-antigen were all visualized in
oligodendroglial cells at the border of an active PML lesion in the cerebral
frontal lobe. These results revealed a positive reinforcement system in which the
SMAD mediators of the TGF-beta system act cooperatively with Tat to stimulate JCV
gene transcription.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.011072-0 
PMCID: PMC2871392
PMID: 19420158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

