
1. J Virol. 2009 Aug;83(16):8173-81. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00686-09. Epub 2009 Jun 10.

The polycomb group protein Bmi1 binds to the herpes simplex virus 1 latent genome
and maintains repressive histone marks during latency.

Kwiatkowski DL(1), Thompson HW, Bloom DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics & Microbiology, University of Florida College
of Medicine, Gainesville, 32610-0266, USA.

The mechanism by which herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) establishes latency in
sensory neurons is largely unknown. Recent studies indicate that epigenetic
modifications of the chromatin associated with the latent genome may play a key
role in the transcriptional control of lytic genes during latency. In this study,
we found both constitutive and facultative types of heterochromatin to be present
on the latent HSV-1 genome. Deposition of the facultative marks trimethyl H3K27
and histone variant macroH2A varied at different sites on the genome, whereas the
constitutive marker trimethyl H3K9 did not. In addition, we show that in the
absence of the latency-associated transcript (LAT), the latent genome shows a
dramatic increase in trimethyl H3K27, suggesting that expression of the LAT
during latency may act to promote an appropriate heterochromatic state that
represses lytic genes but is still poised for reactivation. Due to the presence
of the mark trimethyl H3K27, we examined whether Polycomb group proteins, which
methylate H3K27, were present on the HSV-1 genome during latency. Our data
indicate that Bmi1, a member of the Polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1)
maintenance complex, associates with specific sites in the genome, with the
highest level of enrichment at the LAT enhancer. To our knowledge, these are the 
first data demonstrating that a virus can repress its gene transcription to enter
latency by exploiting the mechanism of Polycomb-mediated repression.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00686-09 
PMCID: PMC2715759
PMID: 19515780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

