
1. Nat Med. 2009 Jul;15(7):794-7. doi: 10.1038/nm.1961. Epub 2009 Jun 21.

Human P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 is a functional receptor for enterovirus
71.

Nishimura Y(1), Shimojima M, Tano Y, Miyamura T, Wakita T, Shimizu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology II, National Institute of Infectious Diseases,
Musashimurayama-shi, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2009 Jul;15(7):728-9.

Enterovirus 71 (EV71) is a major causative agent of hand, foot and mouth disease 
(HFMD), a common febrile disease occurring mainly in young children. Although
clinical manifestations of HFMD are usually mild and self limiting, a severe EV71
outbreak can lead to a diverse array of neurological diseases. Identification of 
the specific cellular receptors is crucial for elucidating the mechanism of early
virus-host interactions and the pathogenesis of enteroviruses. Here we identify
human P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1; CD162), a sialomucin membrane
protein expressed on leukocytes that has a major role in early stages of
inflammation, as a functional receptor for EV71 using an expression cloning
method by panning. The N-terminal region of PSGL-1 binds specifically to EV71.
Stable PSGL-1 expression allowed EV71 entry and replication, and development of
cytopathic effects in nonsusceptible mouse L929 cells. Five out of eight EV71
strains bound soluble PSGL-1 and used intact PSGL-1 as the primary receptor for
infection of Jurkat T cells. Three other EV71 strains did not use PSGL-1,
suggesting the presence of strain-specific replication of EV71 in leukocytes.
EV71 replicated in nonleukocyte cell lines in a PSGL-1-independent manner,
indicating the presence of alternative receptor(s) for EV71. The identification
of PSGL-1 as a receptor for EV71 sheds new light on a role for PSGL-1-positive
leukocytes in cell tropism and pathogenesis during the course of HFMD and other
EV71-mediated diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.1961 
PMID: 19543284  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

