
1. Oncogene. 2009 Oct 22;28(42):3723-34. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.230. Epub 2009 Aug
24.

Functional interaction of HTLV-1 tax protein with the POZ domain of the
transcriptional repressor BCL6.

Dean J(1), Hashimoto K, Tsuji T, Gautier V, Hall WW, Sheehy N.

Author information: 
(1)UCD Centre for Research in Infectious Diseases, School of Medicine and Medical
Science, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

The Tax protein encoded by human T-cell leukaemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) has a
pivotal role in T-cell transformation by deregulating cellular signalling
pathways. Using the yeast two-hybrid system to screen a human leukocyte cDNA
library, we identified BCL6 (B-cell lymphoma 6) as a cellular protein, which
interacts with Tax 1. The BCL6 gene encodes a sequence-specific transcriptional
repressor that contains a conserved N-terminal poxvirus and zinc finger (POZ)
repressor domain and a C-terminal Kruppel-like zinc finger DNA binding domain.
Using both in vivo and in vitro methods, we demonstrate that the POZ domain of
BCL6 is sufficient for its interaction with Tax 1. Using functional assays, we
demonstrate that Tax 1 enhanced the repressive activity of BCL6 and increased the
levels of apoptosis induced by BCL6 in osteosarcoma cells indicating that both
proteins cooperate in vivo to cause a physiological affect. Furthermore, BCL6
recruited Tax 1 into punctate nuclear structures, which suggests that Tax 1
colocalizes with BCL6 in repressor complexes in vivo. BCL6 expression
significantly downregulated both basal and Tax-induced nuclear factor-kappaB and 
long terminal repeat activation. This suggests that the expression of BCL6 in
HTLV infected cells may contribute to the silencing of viral gene expression and 
to the long clinical latency associated with HTLV infection.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2009.230 
PMID: 19701248  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

