
1. J Virol. 2009 Nov;83(21):11051-63. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00907-09. Epub 2009 Aug 26.

Involvement of SSRP1 in latent replication of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus.

Hu J(1), Liu E, Renne R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology and UF Shands Cancer Center,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610-0232, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (also named human herpesvirus 8) is a
gamma-herpesvirus that undergoes both lytic and latent infection. During latent
infection, two viral elements are required: latency-associated nuclear antigen
(LANA), which functions as an origin binding protein, and the latent origin,
which resides within the terminal repeats (TRs) of the viral genome. Previously, 
we identified two cis-elements within the TRs which are required for latent DNA
replication: two LANA binding sites (LBS1 and LBS2 [LBS1/2]) and a GC-rich
replication element (RE) upstream of LBS1/2. To further characterize the RE, we
constructed a 71-bp minimal replicon (MR) and performed a detailed mutational
analysis. Our data indicate that the first 8 nucleotides within the RE are
critical for replication. Moreover, both the position and the distance between
the RE and LBS1/2 can affect origin replication activity, suggesting that the RE 
may function as a loading pad for cellular proteins involved in replication.
Using biotinylated DNA fragments of wild-type or mutant MRs as probes, we
identified 30 proteins that preferentially bind to the origin. Among these
proteins, structure-specific recognition protein 1 (SSRP1), a subunit of the FACT
complex, and telomeric repeat binding factor 2 (TRF2) formed complexes with LANA 
at the MR region. Furthermore, the small interfering RNA-based knockdown of
SSRP1, but not the dominant-negative-based knockdown of TRF2, significantly
decreased the efficiency of LANA-dependent DNA replication. These results
indicate that SSRP1 is a novel cellular protein involved in LANA-dependent DNA
replication.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00907-09 
PMCID: PMC2772803
PMID: 19710137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

