
1. Placenta. 2009 Nov;30(11):994-1001. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2009.09.001. Epub
2009 Sep 30.

Human cytomegalovirus interacts with toll-like receptor 2 and CD14 on
syncytiotrophoblasts to stimulate expression of TNFalpha mRNA and apoptosis.

Chaudhuri S(1), Lowen B, Chan G, Davey A, Riddell M, Guilbert LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada T6G2S2.

Placentae from newborns with congenital human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection
often display shallow implantation, chronic villitis and disruptions of the
syncytiotrophoblast. Little is known about how HCMV infection induces
inflammation in the placenta and loss of the trophoblast. We propose that the
inflammation is initiated with innate defense responses of mature
syncytiotrophoblast (ST) to virus. Previously we have shown that ultraviolet
irradiation-inactivated (UV-) HCMV interacts with toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) on 
primary placental cytotrophoblasts (CT) differentiated into ST-like cells thereby
stimulating the release of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) and inducing
apoptosis of neighboring cells (Chan et al, J. Pathol. 210: 111, 2006). We now
determine whether known co-factors of the interaction of HCMV and TLR2 (TLR1 and 
CD14) bind to UV-HCMV to stimulate expression of TNFalpha and apoptosis in
ST-like cells but not CT. We show that CT both fail to express detectable TLR1
and express much less CD14 than ST and that ST express CD14 but not TLR1 both in 
vivo and in cultured cells. The interaction of UV-HCMV and HCMV with CD14 on the 
surface of ST-like cells increases TNFalpha expression and induces apoptosis in
the population. Antibody to CD14 also inhibits infectious HCMV induction of HCMV 
immediate early (HCMV IE) expressing ST-like cells. We conclude that primary
villous CT express low levels of CD14 and no TLR1 but that ST strongly expresses 
CD14 which acts upstream of TLR2 to collect even transcriptionally inactive virus
particles to stimulate TNFalpha expression and villous trophoblast damage.

DOI: 10.1016/j.placenta.2009.09.001 
PMID: 19796811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

