
1. J Virol. 2009 Dec;83(24):12854-70. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01164-09. Epub 2009 Oct 7.

Physical requirements and functional consequences of complex formation between
the cytomegalovirus IE1 protein and human STAT2.

Krauss S(1), Kaps J, Czech N, Paulus C, Nevels M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Regensburg,
Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, 93053 Regensburg, Germany.

Our previous work has shown that efficient evasion from type I interferon
responses by human cytomegalovirus (hCMV) requires expression of the 72-kDa
immediate-early 1 (IE1) protein. It has been suggested that IE1 inhibits
interferon signaling through intranuclear sequestration of the signal transducer 
and activator of transcription 2 (STAT2) protein. Here we show that physical
association and subnuclear colocalization of IE1 and STAT2 depend on short acidic
and serine/proline-rich low-complexity motifs in the carboxy-terminal region of
the 491-amino-acid viral polypeptide. These motifs compose an essential core
(amino acids 373 to 420) and an adjacent ancillary site (amino acids 421 to 445) 
for STAT2 interaction that are predicted to form part of a natively unstructured 
domain. The presence of presumably "disordered" carboxy-terminal domains enriched
in low-complexity motifs is evolutionarily highly conserved across all examined
mammalian IE1 orthologs, and the murine cytomegalovirus IE1 protein appears to
interact with STAT2 just like the human counterpart. A recombinant hCMV
specifically mutated in the IE1 core STAT2 binding site displays hypersensitivity
to alpha interferon, delayed early viral protein accumulation, and attenuated
growth in fibroblasts. However, replication of this mutant virus is specifically 
restored by knockdown of STAT2 expression. Interestingly, complex formation with 
STAT2 proved to be entirely separable from disruption of nuclear domain 10
(ND10), another key activity of IE1. Finally, our results demonstrate that IE1
counteracts the antiviral interferon response and promotes viral replication by
at least two distinct mechanisms, one depending on sequestration of STAT2 and the
other one likely involving ND10 interaction.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01164-09 
PMCID: PMC2786848
PMID: 19812155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

