
1. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 13;4(10):e7254. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007254.

Human papillomavirus-16 E7 interacts with glutathione S-transferase P1 and
enhances its role in cell survival.

Mileo AM(1), Abbruzzese C, Mattarocci S, Bellacchio E, Pisano P, Federico A,
Maresca V, Picardo M, Giorgi A, Maras B, Schinin√† ME, Paggi MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development of Therapeutic Programs, CRS, Regina Elena Cancer
Institute, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Human Papillomavirus (HPV)-16 is a paradigm for "high-risk" HPVs, the
causative agents of virtually all cervical carcinomas. HPV E6 and E7 viral genes 
are usually expressed in these tumors, suggesting key roles for their gene
products, the E6 and E7 oncoproteins, in inducing malignant transformation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: By protein-protein interaction analysis, using
mass spectrometry, we identified glutathione S-transferase P1-1 (GSTP1) as a
novel cellular partner of the HPV-16 E7 oncoprotein. Following mapping of the
region in the HPV-16 E7 sequence that is involved in the interaction, we
generated a three-dimensional molecular model of the complex between HPV-16 E7
and GSTP1, and used this to engineer a mutant molecule of HPV-16 E7 with strongly
reduced affinity for GSTP1.When expressed in HaCaT human keratinocytes, HPV-16 E7
modified the equilibrium between the oxidized and reduced forms of GSTP1, thereby
inhibiting JNK phosphorylation and its ability to induce apoptosis. Using
GSTP1-deficient MCF-7 cancer cells and siRNA interference targeting GSTP1 in
HaCaT keratinocytes expressing either wild-type or mutant HPV-16 E7, we uncovered
a pivotal role for GSTP1 in the pro-survival program elicited by its binding with
HPV-16 E7.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study provides further evidence of the
transforming abilities of this oncoprotein, setting the groundwork for devising
unique molecular tools that can both interfere with the interaction between
HPV-16 E7 and GSTP1 and minimize the survival of HPV-16 E7-expressing cancer
cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007254 
PMCID: PMC2758704
PMID: 19826491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

