
1. J Virol. 2010 Jan;84(1):426-36. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00725-09.

MKRN1 induces degradation of West Nile virus capsid protein by functioning as an 
E3 ligase.

Ko A(1), Lee EW, Yeh JY, Yang MR, Oh W, Moon JS, Song J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon
440-746, South Korea.

West Nile virus capsid protein (WNVCp) displays pathogenic toxicity via the
apoptotic pathway. However, a cellular mechanism protective against this toxic
effect has not been observed so far. Here, we identified Makorin ring finger
protein 1 (MKRN1) as a novel E3 ubiquitin ligase for WNVCp. The cytotoxic effects
of WNVCp as well as its expression levels were inhibited in U2OS cells that
stably expressed MKRN1. Immunoprecipitation analyses revealed an interaction
between MKRN1 and WNVCp. Domain analysis indicated that the C terminus of MKRN1
and the N terminus of WNVCp were required for the interaction. MKRN1 could induce
WNVCp ubiquitination and degradation in a proteasome-dependent manner.
Interestingly, the WNVCp mutant with amino acids 1 to 105 deleted WNVCp was
degraded by MKRN1, whereas the mutant with amino acids 1 to 90 deleted was not.
When three lysine sites at positions 101, 103, and 104 of WNVCp were replaced
with alanine, MKRN1-mediated ubiquitination and degradation of the mutant were
significantly inhibited, suggesting that these sites are required for the
ubiquitination. Finally, U2OS cell lines stably expressing MKRN1 were resistant
to cytotoxic effects of WNV. In contrast, cells depleted of MKRN1 were more
susceptible to WNVCp cytotoxicity. Confirming this, overexpression of MKRN1
significantly reduced, but depletion of MKRN1 increased, WNV proliferation in
293T cells. Taken together, our results suggest that MKRN1 can protect cells from
WNV by inducing WNVCp degradation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00725-09 
PMCID: PMC2798448
PMID: 19846531  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

