
1. Retrovirology. 2009 Oct 21;6:96. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-6-96.

Human APOBEC1 cytidine deaminase edits HBV DNA.

Gonzalez MC(1), Suspène R, Henry M, Guétard D, Wain-Hobson S, Vartanian JP.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Retrovirology Unit, Virology Department, Institut Pasteur, 28 rue du
Dr Roux 75724 Paris cedex 15, France. minerva.cervantes-gonzalez@pasteur.fr

Retroviruses, hepadnaviruses, and some other retroelements are vulnerable to
editing by single stranded DNA cytidine deaminases. Of the eleven human genes
encoding such enzymes, eight have demonstrable enzymatic activity. Six of seven
human APOBEC3 are able to hyperedit HBV DNA, frequently on both strands. Although
human APOBEC1 (hA1) is not generally expressed in normal liver, hA1 can edit
single stranded DNA in a variety of experimental assays. The possibility of
ectopic expression of hA1 in vivo cannot be ruled out and interestingly,
transgenic mice with A1 expressed under a liver specific promoter develop
hepatocellular carcinoma. The impact of hA1 on HBV in tissue culture is varied
with reports noting either reduced DNA synthesis or not, with cytidine
deamination taking a low profile. We sought to examine the hA1 editing activity
on replicating HBV. Using highly sensitive 3DPCR it was possible to show that hA1
edits the HBV minus DNA strand as efficiently as hA3G, considered the reference
deaminase for HIV and HBV. The dinucleotide specificity of editing was unique
among human cytidine deaminases providing a hallmark of use in a posteriori
analyses of in vivo edited genomes. Analysis of sequences derived from the serum 
of two chronic carriers, indicated that hA1 explained only a small fraction of
edited HBV genomes. By contrast, several human APOBEC3 deaminases were active
including hA3G.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-6-96 
PMCID: PMC2770521
PMID: 19843348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

