
1. Virol J. 2009 Oct 27;6:175. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-175.

The interaction of hepatitis A virus (HAV) with soluble forms of its cellular
receptor 1 (HAVCR1) share the physiological requirements of infectivity in cell
culture.

Silberstein E(1), Konduru K, Kaplan GG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Hepatitis and Related Emerging Agents, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, 8800 Rockville Pike,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. erica.silberstein@fda.hhs.gov

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis A virus (HAV), an atypical Picornaviridae that causes acute
hepatitis in humans, usurps the HAV cellular receptor 1 (HAVCR1) to infect cells.
HAVCR1 is a class 1 integral membrane glycoprotein that contains two
extracellular domains: a virus-binding immunoglobulin-like (IgV) domain and a
mucin-like domain that extends the IgV from the cell membrane. Soluble forms of
HAVCR1 bind, alter, and neutralize cell culture-adapted HAV, which is attenuated 
for humans. However, the requirements of the HAV-HAVCR1 interaction have not been
fully characterized, and it has not been determined whether HAVCR1 also serves as
a receptor for wild-type (wt) HAV. Here, we used HAV soluble receptor
neutralization and alteration assays to study the requirements of the HAV-HAVCR1 
interaction and to determine whether HAVCR1 is also a receptor for wt HAV.
RESULTS: Treatment of HAV with a soluble form of HAVCR1 that contained the IgV
and two-thirds of the mucin domain fused to the Fc fragment of human IgG1 (D1
muc-Fc), altered particles at 37 degrees C but left a residual level of unaltered
particles at 4 degrees C. The kinetics of neutralization of HAV by D1 muc-Fc was 
faster at 37 degrees C than at 4 degrees C. Alteration of HAV particles by D1
muc-Fc required Ca, which could not be replaced by Li, Na, Mg, Mn, or Zn.
Neutralization of HAV by D1 muc-Fc occurred at pH 5 to 8 but was more efficient
at pH 6 to 7. D1 muc-Fc neutralized wt HAV as determined by a cell culture system
that allows the growth of wt HAV.
CONCLUSION: The interaction of HAV with soluble forms of HAVCR1 shares the
temperature, Ca, and pH requirements for infectivity in cell culture and
therefore mimics the cell entry process of HAV. Since soluble forms of HAVCR1
also neutralized wt HAV, this receptor may play a significant role in
pathogenesis of HAV.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-175 
PMCID: PMC2775739
PMID: 19860892  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

