
1. J Virol. 2010 Feb;84(3):1355-65. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01641-09. Epub 2009 Nov 11.

Identification of the cellular prohibitin 1/prohibitin 2 heterodimer as an
interaction partner of the C-terminal cytoplasmic domain of the HIV-1
glycoprotein.

Emerson V(1), Holtkotte D, Pfeiffer T, Wang IH, Schn√∂lzer M, Kempf T, Bosch V.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungsschwerpunkt Infektion und Krebs, F020, Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum, Im Neuenheimer Feld 242, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2010 Dec;84(24):13071.

Our studies aim to elucidate the functions carried out by the very long, and in
its length highly conserved, C-terminal cytoplasmic domain (Env-CT) of the HIV-1 
glycoprotein. Mass spectrometric analysis of cellular proteins bound to a tagged 
version of the HIV Env-CT led to the identification of the prohibitin 1 and 2
proteins (Phb1 and Phb2). These ubiquitously expressed proteins, which exist as
stable heterodimers, have been shown to have multiple functions within cells and 
to localize to multiple cellular and extracellular compartments. The specificity 
of binding of the Phb1/Phb2 complex to the Env-CT was confirmed in various
manners, including coimmunoprecipitation with authentic provirally encoded,
full-length Env. Strong binding was dependent on Env residues 790 to 800 and
could be severely inhibited by the double mutation L799R/L800Q but not by
mutation of these amino acids individually. Analysis of the respective mutant
virions revealed that their different abilities to bind Phb1/Phb2 correlated with
their replicative properties. Thus, mutated virions with single mutations
[HIV-Env-(L799R) and HIV-Env-(L800Q)] replicated similarly to wild-type HIV, but 
HIV-Env-(L799R/L800Q) virions, which cannot bind Phb1/Phb2, exhibited a
cell-dependent replicative phenotype similar to that of HIV-Env-Tr712, lacking
the entire Env-CT domain. Thus, replicative spread was achieved, although
somewhat delayed, in "permissive" MT-4 cells but failed to occur in
"nonpermissive" H9 T cells. These results point to binding of the Phb1/Phb2
complex to the Env-CT as being of importance for replicative spread in
nonpermissive cells, possibly by modulating critical Phb-dependent cellular
process(es).

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01641-09 
PMCID: PMC2812343
PMID: 19906925  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

