
1. J Virol. 2010 Feb;84(4):2047-62. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01984-09. Epub 2009 Nov 25.

Cellular corepressor TLE2 inhibits replication-and-transcription-
activator-mediated transactivation and lytic reactivation of Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus.

He Z(1), Liu Y, Liang D, Wang Z, Robertson ES, Lan K.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Immunology, Institute Pasteur of
Shanghai, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 225 South Chongqing Road, Shanghai 200025, The People's Republic of
China.

Replication and transcription activator (RTA) encoded by open reading frame 50
(ORF50) of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is essential and
sufficient to initiate lytic reactivation. RTA activates its target genes through
direct binding with high affinity to its responsive elements or by interaction
with cellular factors, such as RBP-Jkappa, Ap-1, C/EBP-alpha, and Oct-1. In this 
study, we identified transducin-like enhancer of split 2 (TLE2) as a novel RTA
binding protein by using yeast two-hybrid screening of a human spleen cDNA
library. The interaction between TLE2 and RTA was confirmed by glutathione
S-transferase (GST) binding and coimmunoprecipitation assays. Immunofluorescence 
analysis showed that TLE2 and RTA were colocalized in the same nuclear
compartment in KSHV-infected cells. This interaction recruited TLE2 to RTA bound 
to its recognition sites on DNA and repressed RTA auto-activation and
transactivation activity. Moreover, TLE2 also inhibited the induction of lytic
replication and virion production driven by RTA. We further showed that the Q
(Gln-rich), SP (Ser-Pro-rich), and WDR (Trp-Asp repeat) domains of TLE2 and the
Pro-rich domain of RTA were essential for this interaction. RBP-Jkappa has been
shown previously to bind to the same Pro-rich domain of RTA, and this binding can
be subject to competition by TLE2. In addition, TLE2 can form a complex with RTA 
to access the cognate DNA sequence of the RTA-responsive element at different
promoters. Intriguingly, the transcription level of TLE2 could be upregulated by 
RTA during the lytic reactivation process. In conclusion, we identified a new RTA
binding protein, TLE2, and demonstrated that TLE2 inhibited replication and
transactivation mediated by RTA. This provides another potentially important
mechanism for maintenance of KSHV viral latency through interaction with a host
protein.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01984-09 
PMCID: PMC2812399
PMID: 19939918  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

