
1. J Virol. 2010 Mar;84(5):2318-30. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01097-09. Epub 2009 Dec 23.

The latency-associated nuclear antigen interacts with MeCP2 and nucleosomes
through separate domains.

Matsumura S(1), Persson LM, Wong L, Wilson AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and NYU Cancer Institute, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV)-infected cells express the
latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA) involved in the regulation of host and 
viral gene expression and maintenance of the KSHV latent episome. Performance of 
these diverse functions involves a 7-amino-acid chromatin-binding motif (CBM)
situated at the amino terminus of LANA that is capable of binding directly to
nucleosomes. LANA interacts with additional chromatin components, including
methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2). Here, we show that the carboxy-terminal
DNA-binding/dimerization domain of LANA provides the principal interaction with
MeCP2 but that this association is modulated by the CBM. Both domains are
required for LANA to colocalize with MeCP2 at chromocenters, regions of extensive
pericentric heterochromatin that can be imaged by fluorescence microscopy. Within
MeCP2, the methyl-CpG-binding domain (MBD) is the primary determinant for
chromatin localization and acts together with the adjacent repression domains
(the transcription repression domain [TRD] and the corepressor-interacting domain
[CRID]) to redirect LANA to chromocenters. MeCP2 facilitates repression by LANA
bound to the KSHV terminal repeats, a function that requires the MeCP2 C terminus
in addition to the MBD and CRID/TRD. LANA and MeCP2 can also cooperate to
stimulate transcription of the human E2F1 promoter, which lacks a LANA
DNA-binding sequence, but this function requires both the N and C termini of
LANA. The ability of LANA to establish multivalent interactions with histones and
chromatin-binding proteins such as MeCP2 would enable LANA to direct regulatory
complexes to specific chromosomal sites and thereby achieve stable reprogramming 
of cellular gene expression in latently infected cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01097-09 
PMCID: PMC2820923
PMID: 20032179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

