
1. FASEB J. 2010 May;24(5):1454-66. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-136564. Epub 2009 Dec 29.

The BRCA-1 binding protein BRAP2 is a novel, negative regulator of nuclear import
of viral proteins, dependent on phosphorylation flanking the nuclear localization
signal.

Fulcher AJ(1), Roth DM, Fatima S, Alvisi G, Jans DA.

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Signaling Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Monash University, Wellington Rd., Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia.

This study describes for the first time the ability of the novel BRCA1-binding
protein 2 (BRAP2) to inhibit the nuclear import of specific viral proteins
dependent on phosphorylation. Ectopic expression of BRAP2 in transfected African 
green monkey kidney COS-7 cells was found to significantly reduce nuclear
localization signal (NLS)-dependent nuclear accumulation of either simian virus
SV40 large-tumor antigen (T-ag) or human cytomegalovirus DNA polymerase
processivity factor ppUL44; this was also observed in HL-60 human promyelocytic
leukemia cells on induction of BRAP2 expression by vitamin D3 treatment. BRAP2
inhibition of nuclear accumulation was dependent on phosphorylation sites
flanking the respective NLSs, where substitution of the cyclin-dependent kinase
site T124 of T-ag with Ala or Asp prevented or enhanced BRAP2 inhibition of
nuclear import, respectively. Substitution of T427 within the NLS of ppUL44 gave 
similar results, whereas no effect of BRAP2 was observed on nuclear targeting of 
other viral proteins, such as herpes simplex virus-1 pUL30, which lacks a
phosphorylation site near its NLS, and the human immunodeficiency virus-1 Tat
protein. Pulldowns/AlphaScreen assays indicated direct, high-affinity binding of 
BRAP2(442-592) to T-ag(111-135), strictly dependent on negative charge at T124
and the NLS. All results are consistent with BRAP2 being a novel,
phosphorylation-regulated negative regulator of nuclear import, with potential as
an antiviral agent.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.09-136564 
PMID: 20040518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

