
1. J Virol. 2010 Mar;84(6):2687-96. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01917-09. Epub 2009 Dec 30.

The capsid proteins of Aleutian mink disease virus activate caspases and are
specifically cleaved during infection.

Cheng F(1), Chen AY, Best SM, Bloom ME, Pintel D, Qiu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics and Immunology, Mail Stop 3029,
3901 Rainbow Blvd., Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Aleutian mink disease virus (AMDV) is currently the only known member of the
genus Amdovirus in the family Parvoviridae. It is the etiological agent of
Aleutian disease of mink. We have previously shown that a small protein with a
molecular mass of approximately 26 kDa was present during AMDV infection and
following transfection of capsid expression constructs (J. Qiu, F. Cheng, L. R.
Burger, and D. Pintel, J. Virol. 80:654-662, 2006). In this study, we report that
the capsid proteins were specifically cleaved at aspartic acid residue 420 (D420)
during virus infection, resulting in the previously observed cleavage product.
Mutation of a single amino acid residue at D420 abolished the specific cleavage. 
Expression of the capsid proteins alone in Crandell feline kidney (CrFK) cells
reproduced the cleavage of the capsid proteins in virus infection. More
importantly, capsid protein expression alone induced active caspases, of which
caspase-10 was the most active. Active caspases, in turn, cleaved capsid proteins
in vivo. Our results also showed that active caspase-7 specifically cleaved
capsid proteins at D420 in vitro. These results suggest that viral capsid
proteins alone induce caspase activation, resulting in cleavage of capsid
proteins. We also provide evidence that AMDV mutants resistant to
caspase-mediated capsid cleavage increased virus production approximately 3- to
5-fold in CrFK cells compared to that produced from the parent virus AMDV-G at 37
degrees C but not at 31.8 degrees C. Collectively, our results indicate that
caspase activity plays multiple roles in AMDV infection and that cleavage of the 
capsid proteins might have a role in regulating persistent infection of AMDV.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01917-09 
PMCID: PMC2826067
PMID: 20042496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

