
1. J Virol. 2010 Mar;84(6):2787-97. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01052-09. Epub 2010 Jan 6.

The p38 signaling pathway upregulates expression of the Epstein-Barr virus LMP1
oncogene.

Johansson P(1), Jansson A, RÃ¼etschi U, Rymo L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy
at the University ofGothenburg, 413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded LMP1 oncogene has a role in transformation, 
proliferation, and metastasis of several EBV-associated tumors. Furthermore, LMP1
is critically involved in transformation and growth of EBV-immortalized B cells
in vitro. The oncogenic properties of LMP1 are attributed to its ability to
upregulate anti-apoptotic proteins and growth signals. The transcriptional
regulation of LMP1 is dependent on the context of cellular and viral proteins
present in the cell. Here, we investigated the effect of several signaling
pathways on the regulation of LMP1 expression. Inhibition of p38 signaling, using
p38-specific inhibitors SB203580 and SB202190, downregulated LMP1 in
estrogen-induced EREB2.5 cells. Similarly, p38 inhibition decreased trichostatin 
A-induced LMP1 expression in P3HR1 cells. Exogenous expression of p38 in
lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) led to an increase in LMP1 promoter activity in 
reporter assays, and this activation was mediated by the previously identified
CRE site in the promoter. Inhibition of p38 by SB203580 and p38-specific small
interfering RNA (siRNA) also led to a modest decrease in endogenous LMP1
expression in LCLs. Chromatin immunoprecipitation indicated decreased binding of 
CREB-ATF1 to the CRE site in the LMP1 promoter after inhibition of the p38
pathway in EREB2.5 cells. Taken together, our results suggest that an increase in
p38 activation upregulates LMP1 expression. Since p38 is activated in response to
stimuli such as stress or possibly primary infection, a transient upregulation of
LMP1 in response to p38 may allow the cells to escape apoptosis. Since the p38
pathway itself is activated by LMP1, our results also suggest the presence of an 
autoregulatory loop in LMP1 upregulation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01052-09 
PMCID: PMC2826061
PMID: 20053736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

