
1. J Virol. 2010 Apr;84(7):3162-77. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01776-09. Epub 2010 Jan 20.

Bicaudal D1-dependent trafficking of human cytomegalovirus tegument protein pp150
in virus-infected cells.

Indran SV(1), Ballestas ME, Britt WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pediatrics, Room 104, Children's Harbor Bldg., Children's Hospital,
1600 7th Ave. South, Birmingham, AL 35233, USA.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) virion assembly takes place in the nucleus and
cytoplasm of infected cells. The HCMV virion tegument protein pp150 (ppUL32) is
an essential protein of HCMV and has been suggested to play a role in the
cytoplasmic phase of HCMV assembly. To further define its role in viral assembly 
and to identify host cell proteins that interact with pp150 during viral
assembly, we utilized yeast two-hybrid analyses to detect an interaction between 
pp150 and Bicaudal D1 (BicD1), a protein thought to play a role in trafficking
within the secretory pathway. BicD1 is known to interact with the dynein motor
complex and the Rab6 GTPase. The interaction between pp150 and BicD1 was
confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation and fluorescence resonance energy transfer.
Depletion of BicD1 with short hairpin RNA (shRNA) caused decreased virus yield
and a defect in trafficking of pp150 to the cytoplasmic viral assembly
compartment (AC), without altering trafficking to the AC of another essential
tegument protein, pp28, or the viral glycoprotein complex gM/gN. The C terminus
of BicD1 has been previously shown to interact with the GTPase Rab6, suggesting a
potential role for Rab6-mediated vesicular trafficking in HCMV assembly. Finally,
overexpression of the N terminus of truncated BicD1 acts in a dominant-negative
manner and leads to disruption of the AC and a decrease in the assembly of
infectious virus. This phenotype was similar to that observed following
overexpression of dynamitin (p50) and provided additional evidence that
morphogenesis of the AC and virus assembly were dynein dependent.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01776-09 
PMCID: PMC2838089
PMID: 20089649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

