
1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 26;285(13):10053-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.044420. Epub
2010 Jan 28.

Regulation of microtubule dynamics through phosphorylation on stathmin by
Epstein-Barr virus kinase BGLF4.

Chen PW(1), Lin SJ, Tsai SC, Lin JH, Chen MR, Wang JT, Lee CP, Tsai CH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei 10051, Taiwan.

Stathmin is an important microtubule (MT)-destabilizing protein, and its activity
is differently attenuated by phosphorylation at one or more of its four
phosphorylatable serine residues (Ser-16, Ser-25, Ser-38, and Ser-63). This
phosphorylation of stathmin plays important roles in mitotic spindle formation.
We observed increasing levels of phosphorylated stathmin in Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-harboring lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) and nasopharyngeal carcinoma
(NPC) cell lines during the EBV lytic cycle. These suggest that EBV lytic
products may be involved in the regulation of stathmin phosphorylation. BGLF4 is 
an EBV-encoded kinase and has similar kinase activity to cdc2, an important
kinase that phosphorylates serine residues 25 and 38 of stathmin during mitosis. 
Using an siRNA approach, we demonstrated that BGLF4 contributes to the
phosphorylation of stathmin in EBV-harboring NPC. Moreover, we confirmed that
BGLF4 interacts with and phosphorylates stathmin using an in vitro kinase assay
and an in vivo two-dimensional electrophoresis assay. Interestingly, unlike cdc2,
BGLF4 was shown to phosphorylate non-proline directed serine residues of stathmin
(Ser-16) and it mediated phosphorylation of stathmin predominantly at serines 16,
25, and 38, indicating that BGLF4 can down-regulate the activity of stathmin.
Finally, we demonstrated that the pattern of MT organization was changed in
BGLF4-expressing cells, possibly through phosphorylation of stathmin. In
conclusion, we have shown that a viral Ser/Thr kinase can directly modulate the
activity of stathmin and this contributes to alteration of cellular MT dynamics
and then may modulate the associated cellular processes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.044420 
PMCID: PMC2843168
PMID: 20110360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

