
1. J Virol. 2010 May;84(10):5089-96. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02605-09. Epub 2010 Mar 10.

Novel type II transmembrane serine proteases, MSPL and TMPRSS13, Proteolytically 
activate membrane fusion activity of the hemagglutinin of highly pathogenic avian
influenza viruses and induce their multicycle replication.

Okumura Y(1), Takahashi E, Yano M, Ohuchi M, Daidoji T, Nakaya T, BÃ¶ttcher E,
Garten W, Klenk HD, Kido H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Enzyme Chemistry, Institute for Enzyme Research, The University of
Tokushima, Kuramoto-cho 3-18-15, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

Host cellular proteases induce influenza virus entry into cells by cleaving the
viral surface envelope glycoprotein hemagglutinin (HA). However, details on the
cellular proteases involved in this event are not fully available. We report here
that ubiquitous type II transmembrane serine proteases, MSPL and its splice
variant TMPRSS13, are novel candidates for proteases processing HA proteins of
highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses, apart from the previously
identified furin and proprotein convertases 5 and 6. HAs from all HPAI virus H5
and H7 strains have one of two cleavage site motifs, the R-X-K/R-R motif with R
at position P4 and the K-K/R-K/T-R motif with K at position P4. In studies of
synthetic 14-residue HPAI virus HA peptides with these cleavage site motifs,
furin preferentially cleaved only HA peptides with the R-K-K-R motif in the
presence of calcium and not peptides with the other motif, whereas MSPL and
TMPRSS13 cleaved both types of HA peptides (those with the R/K-K-K-R motif)
efficiently in the absence of calcium. Full-length recombinant HPAI virus HA with
the K-K-K-R cleavage motif exhibited poor susceptibility to cleavage in the
absence of MSPL or TMPRSS13 and the presence of furin in infected cells, but it
was converted to mature HA subunits in transfected cells expressing MSPL or
TMPRSS13, with membrane-fused giant-cell formation. This conversion and membrane 
fusion were suppressed by inhibitors of MSPL and TMPRSS13. Furthermore, infection
with and multiplication of genetically modified live HPAI virus
A/Crow/Kyoto/53/2004 (H5N1) with the K-K-K-R cleavage site motif were detected
only in MSPL- and TMPRSS13-expressing cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02605-09 
PMCID: PMC2863848
PMID: 20219906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

