
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 May 7;395(3):312-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.03.166. Epub 2010 Apr 1.

Characterization of the interaction of influenza virus NS1 with Akt.

Matsuda M(1), Suizu F, Hirata N, Miyazaki T, Obuse C, Noguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Biology, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Avian influenza viruses belong to the genus influenza A virus of the family
Orthomyxoviridae. The influenza virus consists of eight segmented minus stranded 
RNA that encode 11 known proteins. Among the 11 viral proteins, NS1
(non-structural protein 1, encoded on segment 8) has been implicated in the
regulation of several important intra-cellular functions. In this report, we
investigated the functional interaction of NS1 with serine threonine kinase Akt, 
a core intra-cellular survival regulator. In co-immunoprecipitation assays and
GST pull-down assays, NS1 directly interacted with Akt. The interaction was
mediated primarily through the Akt-PH (Pleckstrin Homology) domain and the
RNA-binding domain of NS1. NS1 preferentially interacted with phosphorylated Akt,
but not with non-phosphorylated Akt. Functionally, the NS1-Akt interaction
enhanced Akt activity both in the intra-cellular context and in in vitro Akt
kinase assays. Confocal microscopic analysis revealed that phosphorylated Akt
interacted with NS1 during the interphase of the cell cycle predominantly within 
the nucleus. Finally, mass spectrometric analysis demonstrated the position at
Thr215 of NS1 protein is primary phosphorylation target site through Akt
activation. The results together supported the functional importance of influenza
virus NS1 with Akt, a core intra-cellular survival regulator.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.03.166 
PMID: 20362551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

