
1. J Virol. 2010 Jul;84(13):6308-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00321-10. Epub 2010 Apr 21.

Productive infection and bICP0 early promoter activity of bovine herpesvirus 1
are stimulated by E2F1.

Workman A(1), Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences and Nebraska Center for
Virology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln Fair Street at East Campus Loop,
Lincoln, NE 68583-0905, USA.

Bovine herpesvirus 1 (BoHV-1) is an important viral pathogen of cattle. Like
other members of the subfamily Alphaherpesvirinae, BoHV-1 establishes latency in 
sensory neurons and has the potential to reactivate from latency. Dexamethasone
(DEX) treatment of latently infected calves or rabbits consistently leads to
reactivation from latency. The BoHV-1 transcript encoding the infected cell
protein 0 (bICP0) is consistently detected during reactivation from latency, in
part because the bICP0 early promoter is activated by DEX. During DEX-induced
reactivation from latency, cyclin expression is stimulated in infected sensory
neurons. Cyclin-dependent kinase activity phosphorylates Rb (retinoblastoma tumor
suppressor gene product) family proteins and consequently releases the E2F family
of transcription factors, suggesting that E2F family members stimulate productive
infection and/or reactivation from latency. In this study, we provide evidence
that repression of E2F1 by a specific small interfering RNA (siRNA) reduced
productive infection approximately 5-fold. E2F1 or E2F2 stimulated bICP0 early
promoter activity at least 100-fold in transient transfection assays. Two
E2F-responsive regions (ERR) were identified within the early promoter, with one 
adjacent to the TATA box (ERR1) and one approximately 600 bp upstream from the
TATA box (ERR2). Mobility shift assays suggested that E2F interacts with ERR1 and
ERR2. E2F1 protein levels were increased at late times after infection, which
correlated with enhanced binding to a consensus E2F binding site, ERR1, or ERR2. 
Collectively, these studies suggest that E2F1 stimulates productive infection and
bICP0 early promoter activity, in part because E2F family members interact with
ERR1 and ERR2.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00321-10 
PMCID: PMC2903271
PMID: 20410283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

