
1. J Virol. 2010 Aug;84(15):7459-72. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01875-09. Epub 2010 May 5.

Processing of lagging-strand intermediates in vitro by herpes simplex virus type 
1 DNA polymerase.

Zhu Y(1), Wu Z, Cardoso MC, Parris DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics, Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The processing of lagging-strand intermediates has not been demonstrated in vitro
for herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1). Human flap endonuclease-1 (Fen-1) was
examined for its ability to produce ligatable products with model lagging-strand 
intermediates in the presence of the wild-type or exonuclease-deficient (exo(-)) 
HSV-1 DNA polymerase (pol). Primer/templates were composed of a minicircle
single-stranded DNA template annealed to primers that contained 5' DNA flaps or
5' annealed DNA or RNA sequences. Gapped DNA primer/templates were extended but
not significantly strand displaced by the wild-type HSV-1 pol, although
significant strand displacement was observed with exo(-) HSV-1 pol. Nevertheless,
the incubation of primer/templates containing 5' flaps with either wild-type or
exo(-) HSV-1 pol and Fen-1 led to the efficient production of nicks that could be
sealed with DNA ligase I. Both polymerases stimulated the nick translation
activity of Fen-1 on DNA- or RNA-containing primer/templates, indicating that the
activities were coordinated. Further evidence for Fen-1 involvement in HSV-1 DNA 
synthesis is suggested by the ability of a transiently expressed green
fluorescent protein fusion with Fen-1 to accumulate in viral DNA replication
compartments in infected cells and by the ability of endogenous Fen-1 to
coimmunoprecipitate with an essential viral DNA replication protein in
HSV-1-infected cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01875-09 
PMCID: PMC2897638
PMID: 20444887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

