
1. J Virol. 2010 Sep;84(17):8691-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00813-10. Epub 2010 Jun 23.

Association of the influenza virus RNA polymerase subunit PB2 with the host
chaperonin CCT.

Fislov√° T(1), Thomas B, Graef KM, Fodor E.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.

The RNA polymerase of influenza A virus is a host range determinant and virulence
factor. In particular, the PB2 subunit of the RNA polymerase has been implicated 
as a crucial factor that affects cell tropism as well as virulence in animal
models. These findings suggest that host factors associating with the PB2 protein
may play an important role during viral replication. In order to identify host
factors that associate with the PB2 protein, we purified recombinant PB2 from
transiently transfected mammalian cells and identified copurifying host proteins 
by mass spectrometry. We found that the PB2 protein associates with the cytosolic
chaperonin containing TCP-1 (CCT), stress-induced phosphoprotein 1 (STIP1), FK506
binding protein 5 (FKBP5), alpha- and beta-tubulin, Hsp60, and mitochondrial
protein p32. Some of these binding partners associate with each other, suggesting
that PB2 might interact with these proteins in multimeric complexes. More
detailed analysis of the interaction of the PB2 protein with CCT revealed that
PB2 associates with CCT as a monomer and that the CCT binding site is located in 
a central region of the PB2 protein. PB2 proteins from various influenza virus
subtypes and origins can associate with CCT. Silencing of CCT resulted in reduced
viral replication and reduced PB2 protein and viral RNA accumulation in a
ribonucleoprotein reconstitution assay, suggesting an important function for CCT 
during the influenza virus life cycle. We propose that CCT might be acting as a
chaperone for PB2 to aid its folding and possibly its incorporation into the
trimeric RNA polymerase complex.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00813-10 
PMCID: PMC2919027
PMID: 20573828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

