
1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Jun 24;6(6):e1000965. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000965.

Human cytomegalovirus UL29/28 protein interacts with components of the NuRD
complex which promote accumulation of immediate-early RNA.

Terhune SS(1), Moorman NJ, Cristea IM, Savaryn JP, Cuevas-Bennett C, Rout MP,
Chait BT, Shenk T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, 
United States of America.

Histone deacetylation plays a pivotal role in regulating human cytomegalovirus
gene expression. In this report, we have identified candidate HDAC1-interacting
proteins in the context of infection by using a method for rapid immunoisolation 
of an epitope-tagged protein coupled with mass spectrometry. Putative interactors
included multiple human cytomegalovirus-coded proteins. In particular, the
interaction of pUL38 and pUL29/28 with HDAC1 was confirmed by reciprocal
immunoprecipitations. HDAC1 is present in numerous protein complexes, including
the HDAC1-containing nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase protein complex, NuRD.
pUL38 and pUL29/28 associated with the MTA2 component of NuRD, and shRNA-mediated
knockdown of the RBBP4 and CHD4 constituents of NuRD inhibited HCMV
immediate-early RNA and viral DNA accumulation; together this argues that
multiple components of the NuRD complex are needed for efficient HCMV
replication. Consistent with a positive acting role for the NuRD elements during 
viral replication, the growth of pUL29/28- or pUL38-deficient viruses could not
be rescued by treating infected cells with the deacetylase inhibitor,
trichostatin A. Transient expression of pUL29/28 enhanced activity of the HCMV
major immediate-early promoter in a reporter assay, regardless of pUL38
expression. Importantly, induction of the major immediate-early reporter activity
by pUL29/28 required functional NuRD components, consistent with the inhibition
of immediate-early RNA accumulation within infected cells after knockdown of
RBBP4 and CHD4. We propose that pUL29/28 modifies the NuRD complex to stimulate
the accumulation of immediate-early RNAs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000965 
PMCID: PMC2891856
PMID: 20585571  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

