
1. PLoS One. 2010 Jun 29;5(6):e11371. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011371.

HIV-1 replication through hHR23A-mediated interaction of Vpr with 26S proteasome.

Li G(1), Elder RT, Dubrovsky L, Liang D, Pushkarsky T, Chiu K, Fan T, Sire J,
Bukrinsky M, Zhao RY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Human Virology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

HIV-1 Vpr is a virion-associated protein. Its activities link to viral
pathogenesis and disease progression of HIV-infected patients. In vitro, Vpr
moderately activates HIV-1 replication in proliferating T cells, but it is
required for efficient viral infection and replication in vivo in non-dividing
cells such as macrophages. How exactly Vpr contributes to viral replication
remains elusive. We show here that Vpr stimulates HIV-1 replication at least in
part through its interaction with hHR23A, a protein that binds to 19S subunit of 
the 26S proteasome and shuttles ubiquitinated proteins to the proteasome for
degradation. The Vpr-proteasome interaction was initially discovered in fission
yeast, where Vpr was shown to associate with Mts4 and Mts2, two 19S-associated
proteins. The interaction of Vpr with the 19S subunit of the proteasome was
further confirmed in mammalian cells where Vpr associates with the mammalian
orthologues of fission yeast Mts4 and S5a. Consistently, depletion of hHR23A
interrupts interaction of Vpr with proteasome in mammalian cells. Furthermore,
Vpr promotes hHR23A-mediated protein-ubiquitination, and down-regulation of
hHR23A using RNAi significantly reduced viral replication in non-proliferating
MAGI-CCR5 cells and primary macrophages. These findings suggest that
Vpr-proteasome interaction might counteract certain host restriction factor(s) to
stimulate viral replication in non-dividing cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011371 
PMCID: PMC2894085
PMID: 20614012  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

