
1. J Virol. 2010 Oct;84(19):9677-84. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00978-10. Epub 2010 Jul 21.

Role of N-linked glycosylation of the 5-HT2A receptor in JC virus infection.

Maginnis MS(1), Haley SA, Gee GV, Atwood WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Brown
University, 70 Ship Street, Providence, RI 02903, USA.

JC virus (JCV) is a human polyomavirus and the causative agent of the fatal
demyelinating disease progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML). JCV
infection of host cells is dependent on interactions with cell surface asparagine
(N)-linked sialic acids and the serotonin 5-hydroxytryptamine(2A) receptor
(5-HT(2A)R). The 5-HT(2A)R contains five potential N-linked glycosylation sites
on the extracellular N terminus. Glycosylation of other serotonin receptors is
essential for expression, ligand binding, and receptor function. Also,
glycosylation of cellular receptors has been reported to be important for JCV
infection. Therefore, we hypothesized that the 5-HT(2A)R N-linked glycosylation
sites are required for JCV infection. Treatment of 5-HT(2A)R-expressing cells
with tunicamycin, an inhibitor of N-linked glycosylation, reduced JCV infection. 
Individual mutation of each of the five N-linked glycosylation sites did not
affect the capacity of 5-HT(2A)R to support JCV infection and did not alter the
cell surface expression of the receptor. However, mutation of all five N-linked
glycosylation sites simultaneously reduced the capacity of 5-HT(2A)R to support
infection and altered the cell surface expression. Similarly, tunicamycin
treatment reduced the cell surface expression of 5-HT(2A)R. Mutation of all five 
N-linked glycosylation sites or tunicamycin treatment of cells expressing
wild-type 5-HT(2A)R resulted in an altered electrophoretic mobility profile of
the receptor. Treatment of cells with PNGase F, to remove N-linked
oligosaccharides from the cell surface, did not affect JCV infection in
5-HT(2A)R-expressing cells. These data affirm the importance of 5-HT(2A)R as a
JCV receptor and demonstrate that the sialic acid component of the receptor is
not directly linked to 5-HT(2A)R.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00978-10 
PMCID: PMC2937807
PMID: 20660194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

