
1. J Virol. 2010 Oct;84(19):10102-12. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01208-10. Epub 2010 Jul 28.

Proteolytic products of the porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus
nsp2 replicase protein.

Han J(1), Rutherford MS, Faaberg KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, University of Minnesota,
Saint Paul, Minnesota 55108, USA.

The nsp2 replicase protein of porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus
(PRRSV) was recently demonstrated to be processed from its precursor by the PL2
protease at or near the G(1196)|G(1197) dipeptide in transfected CHO cells. Here 
the proteolytic cleavage of PRRSV nsp2 was further investigated in virally
infected MARC-145 cells by using two recombinant PRRSVs expressing epitope-tagged
nsp2. The data revealed that PRRSV nsp2 exists as different isoforms, termed
nsp2a, nsp2b, nsp2c, nsp2d, nsp2e, and nsp2f, during PRRSV infection. Moreover,
on the basis of deletion mutagenesis and antibody probing, these nsp2 species
appeared to share the same N terminus but to differ in their C termini. The
largest protein, nsp2a, corresponded to the nsp2 product identified in
transfected CHO cells. nsp2b and nsp2c were processed within or near the
transmembrane (TM) region, presumably at or near the conserved sites
G(981)|G(982) and G(828)|G(829)|G(830), respectively. The C termini for nsp2d,
-e, and -f were mapped within the nsp2 middle hypervariable region, but no
conserved cleavage sites could be definitively predicted. The larger nsp2 species
emerged almost simultaneously in the early stage of PRRSV infection. Pulse-chase 
analysis revealed that all six nsp2 species were relatively stable and had low
turnover rates. Deletion mutagenesis revealed that the smaller nsp2 species
(e.g., nsp2d, nsp2e, and nsp2f) were not essential for viral replication in cell 
culture. Lastly, we identified a cellular chaperone, named heat shock 70-kDa
protein 5 (HSPA5), that was strongly associated with nsp2, which may have
important implications for PRRSV replication. Overall, these findings indicate
that PRRSV nsp2 is increasingly emerging as a multifunctional protein and may
have a profound impact on PRRSV replication and viral pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01208-10 
PMCID: PMC2937792
PMID: 20668084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

