
1. Traffic. 2010 Nov;11(11):1401-14.

HIV-1 assembly differentially alters dynamics and partitioning of tetraspanins
and raft components.

Krementsov DN(1), Rassam P, Margeat E, Roy NH, Schneider-Schaulies J, Milhiet PE,
Thali M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Vermont,
Burlington, VT 05405, USA.

Partitioning of membrane proteins into various types of microdomains is crucial
for many cellular functions. Tetraspanin-enriched microdomains (TEMs) are a
unique type of protein-based microdomain, clearly distinct from membrane rafts,
and important for several cellular processes such as fusion, migration and
signaling. Paradoxically, HIV-1 assembly/egress occurs at TEMs, yet the viral
particles also incorporate raft lipids. Using different quantitative microscopy
approaches, we investigated the dynamic relationship between TEMs, membrane rafts
and HIV-1 exit sites, focusing mainly on the tetraspanin CD9. Our results show
that clustering of CD9 correlates with multimerization of the major viral
structural component, Gag, at the plasma membrane. CD9 exhibited confined
behavior and reduced lateral mobility at viral assembly sites, suggesting that
Gag locally traps tetraspanins. In contrast, the raft lipid GM1 and the
raft-associated protein CD55, while also recruited to assembly/budding sites,
were only transiently trapped in these membrane areas. CD9 recruitment and
confinement were found to be partially dependent on cholesterol, while those of
CD55 were completely dependent on cholesterol. Importantly, our findings support 
the emerging concept that cellular and viral components, instead of clustering at
preexisting microdomain platforms, direct the formation of distinct domains for
the execution of specific functions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2010.01111.x 
PMCID: PMC4073295
PMID: 20727121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

