
1. Biochemistry. 2010 Sep 28;49(38):8338-49. doi: 10.1021/bi100466q.

Mutation of the ATP cassette binding transporter A1 (ABCA1) C-terminus disrupts
HIV-1 Nef binding but does not block the Nef enhancement of ABCA1 protein
degradation.

Mujawar Z(1), Tamehiro N, Grant A, Sviridov D, Bukrinsky M, Fitzgerald ML.

Author information: 
(1)Lipid Metabolism Unit, Center for Computational and Integrative Biology,
Richard B. Simches Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, 185 Cambridge
Street, 7th Floor #7150, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

HIV-1 infection and antiretroviral therapy are associated with a dyslipidemia
marked by low levels of high-density lipoprotein and increased cardiovascular
disease, but it is unclear whether virion replication plays a causative role in
these changes. The HIV-1 Nef protein can impair ATP cassette binding transporter 
A1 (ABCA1) cholesterol efflux from macrophages, a potentially pro-atherosclerotic
effect. This viral inhibition of efflux was correlated with a direct interaction 
between ABCA1 and Nef. Here, we defined the ABCA1 domain required for the
Nef-ABCA1 protein-protein interaction and determined whether this interaction
mediates the ability of Nef to downregulate ABCA1. Nef expressed in HEK 293 cells
strongly inhibited ABCA1 efflux and protein levels but did not alter levels of
cMIR, another transmembrane protein. Analysis of a panel of ABCA1 C-terminal
mutants showed Nef binding required the ABCA1 C-terminal amino acids between
positions 2225 and 2231. However, the binding of Nef to ABCA1 was not required
for inhibition because the C-terminal ABCA1 mutants that did not bind Nef were
still downregulated by Nef. Given this discordance, the mechanism of
downregulation was investigated and was found to involve the acceleration of
ABCA1 protein degradation but did not to depend upon the ABCA1 PEST sequence,
which mediates the calpain proteolysis of ABCA1. Furthermore, it did not
associate with a Nef-dependent induction of signaling through the unfolded
protein response but was significantly dependent upon proteasomal function and
could act on an ABCA1 mutant that fails to exit the endoplasmic reticulum. In
summary, we show that Nef downregulates ABCA1 function by a post-translational
mechanism that stimulates ABCA1 degradation but does not require the ability of
Nef to bind ABCA1.

DOI: 10.1021/bi100466q 
PMCID: PMC2943568
PMID: 20731376  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

