
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Sep 7;107(36):15733-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1006559107. Epub 2010 Aug 23.

Assembly of Q{beta} viral RNA polymerase with host translational elongation
factors EF-Tu and -Ts.

Takeshita D(1), Tomita K.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology, Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Replication and transcription of viral RNA genomes rely on host-donated proteins.
Qbeta virus infects Escherichia coli and replicates and transcribes its own
genomic RNA by Qbeta replicase. Qbeta replicase requires the virus-encoded
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (beta-subunit), and the host-donated translational
elongation factors EF-Tu and -Ts, as active core subunits for its RNA
polymerization activity. Here, we present the crystal structure of the core Qbeta
replicase, comprising the beta-subunit, EF-Tu and -Ts. The beta-subunit has a
right-handed structure, and the EF-Tu:Ts binary complex maintains the structure
of the catalytic core crevasse of the beta-subunit through hydrophobic
interactions, between the finger and thumb domains of the beta-subunit and
domain-2 of EF-Tu and the coiled-coil motif of EF-Ts, respectively. These
hydrophobic interactions are required for the expression and assembly of the
Qbeta replicase complex. Thus, EF-Tu and -Ts have chaperone-like functions in the
maintenance of the structure of the active Qbeta replicase. Modeling of the
template RNA and the growing RNA in the catalytic site of the Qbeta replicase
structure also suggests that structural changes of the RNAs and EF-Tu:Ts should
accompany processive RNA polymerization and that EF-Tu:Ts in the Qbeta replicase 
could function to modulate the RNA folding and structure.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1006559107 
PMCID: PMC2936634
PMID: 20798060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

