
1. Mol Biosyst. 2010 Dec;6(12):2539-53. doi: 10.1039/c0mb00103a. Epub 2010 Oct 18.

Network based analysis of hepatitis C virus core and NS4B protein interactions.

Tripathi LP(1), Kataoka C, Taguwa S, Moriishi K, Mori Y, Matsuura Y, Mizuguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, 7-6-8 Asagi-Saito, Ibaraki-City, 
Osaka, 567-0085, Japan.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major cause of chronic liver disease worldwide. Here
we attempt to further our understanding of the biological context of protein
interactions in HCV pathogenesis, by investigating interactions between HCV
proteins Core and NS4B and human host proteins. Using the yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) 
membrane protein system, eleven human host proteins interacting with Core and 45 
interacting with NS4B were identified, most of which are novel. These
interactions were used to infer overall protein interaction maps linking the
viral proteins with components of the host cellular networks. Core and NS4B
proteins contribute to highly compact interaction networks that may enable the
virus to respond rapidly to host physiological responses to HCV infection.
Analysis of the interaction networks highlighted enriched biological pathways
likely influenced in HCV infection. Inspection of individual interactions offered
further insights into the possible mechanisms that permit HCV to evade the host
immune response and appropriate host metabolic machinery. Follow-up cellular
assays with cell lines infected with HCV genotype 1b and 2a strains validated
Core interacting proteins ENO1 and SLC25A5 and host protein PXN as novel
regulators of HCV replication and viral production. ENO1 siRNA knockdown was
found to inhibit HCV replication in both the HCV genotypes and viral RNA release 
in genotype 2a. PXN siRNA inhibition was observed to inhibit replication
specifically in genotype 1b but not in genotype 2a, while SLC25A5 siRNA
facilitated a minor increase in the viral RNA release in genotype 2a. Thus, our
analysis can provide potential targets for more effective anti-HCV therapeutic
intervention.

DOI: 10.1039/c0mb00103a 
PMID: 20953506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

