
1. J Immunol. 2010 Dec 1;185(11):6985-98. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000618. Epub 2010
Oct 25.

Hepatitis C virus inhibits DNA damage repair through reactive oxygen and nitrogen
species and by interfering with the ATM-NBS1/Mre11/Rad50 DNA repair pathway in
monocytes and hepatocytes.

Machida K(1), McNamara G, Cheng KT, Huang J, Wang CH, Comai L, Ou JH, Lai MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. kmachida@usc.edu

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is associated with the development of
hepatocellular carcinoma and putatively also non-Hodgkin's B cell lymphoma. In
this study, we demonstrated that PBMCs obtained from HCV-infected patients showed
frequent chromosomal aberrations and that HCV infection of B cells in vitro
induced enhanced chromosomal breaks and sister chromatid exchanges. HCV infection
hypersensitized cells to ionizing radiation and bleomycin and inhibited
nonhomologous end-joining repair. The viral core and nonstructural protein 3
proteins were shown to be responsible for the inhibition of DNA repair, mediated 
by NO and reactive oxygen species. Stable expression of core protein induced
frequent chromosome translocations in cultured cells and in transgenic mice. HCV 
core protein binds to the NBS1 protein and inhibits the formation of the
Mre11/NBS1/Rad50 complex, thereby affecting ATM activation and inhibiting DNA
binding of repair enzymes. Taken together, these data indicate that HCV infection
inhibits multiple DNA repair processes to potentiate chromosome instability in
both monocytes and hepatocytes. These effects may explain the oncogenicity and
immunological perturbation of HCV infection.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000618 
PMCID: PMC3101474
PMID: 20974981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

