
1. J Immunol. 2010 Dec 15;185(12):7605-13. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001503. Epub 2010 
Nov 8.

Noncytotoxic inhibition of cytomegalovirus replication through NK cell protease
granzyme M-mediated cleavage of viral phosphoprotein 71.

van Domselaar R(1), Philippen LE, Quadir R, Wiertz EJ, Kummer JA, Bovenschen N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Granzyme M (GrM) is highly expressed in cytotoxic granules of NK cells, which
provide the first line of defense against viral pathogens. GrM knockout mice show
increased susceptibility toward murine CMV infection. Although GrM is a potent
inducer of cell death, the mechanism by which GrM eliminates viruses remains
elusive. In this paper, we show that purified human GrM in combination with the
perforin-analog streptolysin O (SLO) strongly inhibited human CMV (HCMV)
replication in fibroblasts in the absence of host cell death. In a proteomic
approach, GrM was highly specific toward the HCMV proteome and most efficiently
cleaved phosphoprotein 71 (pp71), an HCMV tegument protein that is critical for
viral replication. Cleavage of pp71 occurred when viral lysates were incubated
with purified GrM, when intact cells expressing recombinant pp71 were challenged 
with living cytotoxic effector cells, and when HCMV-infected fibroblasts were
incubated with SLO and purified GrM. GrM directly cleaved pp71 after Leu(439),
which coincided with aberrant cellular localization of both pp71 cleavage
fragments as determined by confocal immunofluorescence. In a luciferase reporter 
assay, cleavage of pp71 after Leu(439) by GrM completely abolished the ability of
pp71 to transactivate the HCMV major immediate-early promoter, which is
indispensable for effective HCMV replication. Finally, GrM decreased
immediate-early 1 protein expression in HCMV-infected fibroblasts. These results 
indicate that the NK cell protease GrM mediates cell death-independent antiviral 
activity by direct cleavage of a viral substrate.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001503 
PMID: 21059895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

