
1. mBio. 2010 Nov 9;1(5). pii: e00268-10. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00268-10.

Head-to-tail intramolecular interaction of herpes simplex virus type 1 regulatory
protein ICP27 is important for its interaction with cellular mRNA export receptor
TAP/NXF1.

Hernandez FP(1), Sandri-Goldin RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine,
University of California, Irvine, California, USA.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) protein ICP27 has many important functions
during infection that are achieved through interactions with a number of cellular
proteins. In its role as a viral RNA export protein, ICP27 interacts with
TAP/NXF1, the cellular mRNA export receptor, and both the N and C termini of
ICP27 must be intact for this interaction to take place. Here we show by
bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) that ICP27 interacts directly
with TAP/NXF1 during infection, and this interaction failed to occur with an
ICP27 mutant bearing substitutions of serines for cysteines at positions 483 and 
488 in the C-terminal zinc finger. Recently, we showed that ICP27 undergoes a
head-to-tail intramolecular interaction, which could make the N- and C-terminal
regions accessible for binding to TAP/NXF1. To determine the importance of
intramolecular association of ICP27 to its interaction with TAP/NXF1, we
performed BiFC-based fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) by acceptor
photobleaching. BiFC-based FRET showed that the interaction between ICP27 and
TAP/NXF1 occurred in living cells upon head-to-tail intramolecular association of
ICP27, further establishing that TAP/NXF1 interacts with both the N and C termini
of ICP27.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00268-10 
PMCID: PMC2975367
PMID: 21060739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

