
1. J Virol. 2011 Feb;85(4):1429-38. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02108-10. Epub 2010 Dec 1.

Export of adenoviral late mRNA from the nucleus requires the Nxf1/Tap export
receptor.

Yatherajam G(1), Huang W, Flint SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
08854, USA.

One important function of the human adenovirus E1B 55-kDa protein is induction of
selective nuclear export of viral late mRNAs. This protein interacts with the
viral E4 Orf6 and four cellular proteins to form an infected-cell-specific E3
ubiquitin ligase. The assembly of this enzyme is required for efficient viral
late mRNA export, but neither the relevant substrates nor the cellular pathway
that exports viral late mRNAs has been identified. We therefore examined the
effects on viral late gene expression of inhibition of the synthesis or activity 
of the mRNA export receptor Nxf1, which was observed to colocalize with the E1B
55-kDa protein in infected cells. When production of Nxf1 was impaired by using
RNA interference, the efficiency of viral late mRNA export was reduced to a
corresponding degree. Furthermore, synthesis of a dominant-negative derivative of
Nxf1 during the late phase of infection interfered with production of a late
structural protein. These observations indicate that the Nxf1 pathway is
responsible for export of viral late mRNAs. As the infected-cell-specific E3
ubiquitin ligase targets its known substrates for proteasomal degradation, we
compared the concentrations of several components of this pathway (Nxf1, Thox1,
and Thoc4) in infected cells that did or did not contain this enzyme. Although
the concentration of a well-established substrate, Mre11, decreased significantly
in cells infected by adenovirus type 5 (Ad5), but not in those infected by the
E1B 55-kDa protein-null mutant Hr6, no E1B 55-kDa protein-dependent degradation
of the Nxf1 pathway proteins was observed.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02108-10 
PMCID: PMC3028892
PMID: 21123381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

