
1. J Virol. 2011 Mar;85(5):2247-53. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01796-10. Epub 2010 Dec 15.

Peroxiredoxin 1 is required for efficient transcription and replication of
measles virus.

Watanabe A(1), Yoneda M, Ikeda F, Sugai A, Sato H, Kai C.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Medical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1
Shirokanedai, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

Measles is a highly contagious human disease caused by the measles virus (MeV).
In this study, by proteomic analysis, we identified peroxiredoxin 1 (Prdx1) as a 
host factor that binds to the C-terminal region of the nucleoprotein (N; N(TAIL))
of MeV. Glutathione S-transferase (GST) pulldown experiments showed that the
Prdx1-binding site overlapped with the MeV phosphoprotein (P)-binding site on
N(TAIL) and that Prdx1 competed for the binding to N(TAIL) with the P protein,
which is a component of RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp). Furthermore, RNA
interference for Prdx1 resulted in a significant reduction in MeV growth in
HEK293-SLAM cells. A minigenome assay indicated that Prdx1 suppression affected
the viral RNA transcription and/or replication step. Relative quantification of
viral RNA by real-time PCR (RT-PCR) showed that Prdx1 suppression not only
reduced viral RNA transcription and replication but also enhanced polar
attenuation in viral mRNA transcription. Surface plasmon resonance analysis
showed that the binding affinity of Prdx1 to MeV-N was 40-fold lower than that of
MeV-P to MeV-N, which suggested that Prdx1 might be involved in the early stage
of MeV infection, when the expression level of Prdx1 was much higher than that of
MeV-P. Since Prdx1 was expressed abundantly and constitutively in various cells, 
the results in this study indicate that Prdx1 is one of the inherent host factors
implicated in MeV RNA synthesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01796-10 
PMCID: PMC3067793
PMID: 21159870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

