
1. J Virol. 2011 Mar;85(5):2079-88. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02279-10. Epub 2010 Dec 22.

EBNA3C attenuates the function of p53 through interaction with inhibitor of
growth family proteins 4 and 5.

Saha A(1), Bamidele A, Murakami M, Robertson ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Abramson Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded EBNA3C is one of the latent proteins essential
for the efficient transformation of human primary B lymphocytes into continuously
proliferating lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) in vitro through manipulation of a
number of major cellular pathways. Although it does not have direct DNA-binding
activity, EBNA3C plays a central role in the transcriptional modulation of a wide
range of both viral and cellular genes during latent infection. Recently, we
showed that EBNA3C can directly bind to the tumor suppressor protein p53 and
repress its functions, in part by blocking its transcriptional activity as well
as facilitating its degradation through stabilization of its negative regulator, 
Mdm2. In this study, we further showed that EBNA3C can negatively regulate
p53-mediated functions by interacting with its regulatory proteins, the inhibitor
of growth family proteins ING4 and ING5, shown to be frequently deregulated in
different cancers. Functional mapping revealed that both ING4 and ING5 bound to
N-terminal domain residues 129 to 200 of EBNA3C, which was previously
demonstrated to associate with p53 and is also essential for LCL growth. In
addition, we showed that a conserved domain of either ING4 or ING5 bound to both 
p53 and EBNA3C in a competitive manner, suggesting a potential role for EBNA3C
whereby the ING4 or -5/p53 pathway is modulated in EBV-infected cells.
Subsequently, we demonstrated that EBNA3C significantly suppresses both the ING4-
and ING5-mediated regulation of p53 transcriptional activity in a dose-dependent 
manner. A colony formation assay as well as an apoptosis assay showed that EBNA3C
nullified the negative regulatory effects on cell proliferation induced by
coupled expression of p53 in the presence of either ING4 or ING5 in Saos-2
(p53(-/-)) cells. This report demonstrates a possible role for the candidate
tumor suppressor ING genes in the biology of EBV-associated cancers.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02279-10 
PMCID: PMC3067769
PMID: 21177815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

