
1. J Virol. 2011 Apr;85(7):3120-7. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02004-10. Epub 2011 Jan 12.

Regulation of the human papillomavirus type 18 E6/E6AP ubiquitin ligase complex
by the HECT domain-containing protein EDD.

Tomaic V(1), Pim D, Thomas M, Massimi P, Myers MP, Banks L.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Padriciano 99,
I-34149 Trieste, Italy.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) E6 oncoproteins target many cellular proteins for
ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal degradation. In the case of p53, this is mediated 
principally by the E6AP ubiquitin ligase. Several studies have reported that E6
can target certain of its substrates in an apparently E6AP-independent fashion
and that several of these substrates vary in the degree to which they are
degraded by E6 at different stages of malignancy. To more fully understand the
regulation of the E6AP/E6 proteolytic targeting complex, we performed a mass
spectroscopic analysis of HPV type 18 (HPV-18) E6 protein complexes and
identified the HECT domain-containing ubiquitin ligase EDD as a new HPV-18 E6
binding partner. We show that EDD can interact independently with both E6 and
E6AP. Furthermore, EDD appears to regulate E6AP expression levels independently
of E6, and loss of EDD stimulates the proteolytic activity of the E6/E6AP
complex. Conversely, higher levels of EDD expression protect a number of
substrates from E6-induced degradation, partly as a consequence of lower levels
of E6 and E6AP expression. Intriguingly, reduction in EDD expression levels in
HPV-18-positive HeLa cells enhances cell resistance to apoptotic and growth
arrest stimuli. These studies suggest that changes in the levels of EDD
expression during different stages of the viral life cycle or during malignancy
could have a profound effect upon the ability of E6 to target various substrates 
for proteolytic degradation and thereby directly influence the development of
HPV-induced malignancy.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02004-10 
PMCID: PMC3067830
PMID: 21228227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

