
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 1;286(13):11814-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.210179. Epub 2011
Feb 4.

Characterization of the Interaction between hantavirus nucleocapsid protein (N)
and ribosomal protein S19 (RPS19).

Cheng E(1), Haque A, Rimmer MA, Hussein IT, Sheema S, Little A, Mir MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics, and Immunology, University of 
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66103, USA.

Hantaviruses, members of the Bunyaviridae family, are negative-stranded emerging 
RNA viruses and category A pathogens that cause serious illness when transmitted 
to humans through aerosolized excreta of infected rodent hosts. Hantaviruses have
evolved a novel translation initiation mechanism, operated by nucleocapsid
protein (N), which preferentially facilitates the translation of viral mRNAs. N
binds to the ribosomal protein S19 (RPS19), a structural component of the 40 S
ribosomal subunit. In addition, N also binds to both the viral mRNA 5' cap and a 
highly conserved triplet repeat sequence of the viral mRNA 5' UTR. The
simultaneous binding of N at both the terminal cap and the 5' UTR favors ribosome
loading on viral transcripts during translation initiation. We characterized the 
binding between N and RPS19 and demonstrate the role of the N-RPS19 interaction
in N-mediated translation initiation mechanism. We show that N specifically binds
to RPS19 with high affinity and a binding stoichiometry of 1:1. The N-RPS19
interaction is an enthalpy-driven process. RPS19 undergoes a conformational
change after binding to N. Using T7 RNA polymerase, we synthesized the hantavirus
S segment mRNA, which matches the transcript generated by the viral RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase in cells. We show that the N-RPS19 interaction plays a critical
role in the translation of this mRNA both in cells and rabbit reticulocyte
lysates. Our results demonstrate that the N-mediated translation initiation
mechanism, which lures the host translation machinery for the preferential
translation of viral transcripts, primarily depends on the N-RPS19 interaction.
We suggest that the N-RPS19 interaction is a novel target to shut down the
N-mediated translation strategy and hence virus replication in cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.210179 
PMCID: PMC3064232
PMID: 21296889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

