
1. J Virol. 2011 Jun;85(12):5733-44. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00385-11. Epub 2011 Mar 30.

Herpes simplex virus 1 ICP4 forms complexes with TFIID and mediator in
virus-infected cells.

Lester JT(1), DeLuca NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, 514 Bridgeside Point II, 450 Technology Dr., Pittsburgh, PA
15219, USA.

The infected cell polypeptide 4 (ICP4) of herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) is a
regulator of viral transcription that is required for productive infection. Since
viral genes are transcribed by cellular RNA polymerase II (RNA pol II), ICP4 must
interact with components of the pol II machinery to regulate viral gene
expression. It has been shown previously that ICP4 interacts with TATA
box-binding protein (TBP), TFIIB, and the TBP-associated factor 1 (TAF1) in
vitro. In this study, ICP4-containing complexes were isolated from infected cells
by tandem affinity purification (TAP). Forty-six proteins that copurified with
ICP4 were identified by mass spectrometry. Additional copurifying proteins were
identified by Western blot analysis. These included 11 components of TFIID and 4 
components of the Mediator complex. The significance of the ICP4-Mediator
interaction was further investigated using immunofluorescence and chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Mediator was found to colocalize with ICP4 starting at early
and continuing into late times of infection. In addition, Mediator was recruited 
to viral promoters in an ICP4-dependent manner. Taken together, the data suggest 
that ICP4 interacts with components of TFIID and Mediator in the context of viral
infection, and this may explain the broad transactivation properties of ICP4.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00385-11 
PMCID: PMC3126299
PMID: 21450820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

