
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 20;286(20):17722-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.184739. Epub
2011 Mar 29.

Host protein Ku70 binds and protects HIV-1 integrase from proteasomal degradation
and is required for HIV replication.

Zheng Y(1), Ao Z, Wang B, Jayappa KD, Yao X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Human Retrovirology, Department of Medical
Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3E
0J9, Canada.

HIV-1 integrase (IN) is a key viral enzymatic protein acting in several viral
replication steps, including integration. IN has been shown to be an unstable
protein degraded by the N-end rule pathway through the host ubiquitin-proteasome 
machinery. However, it is still not fully understood how this viral protein is
protected from the host ubiquitin-proteasome system within cells during HIV
replication. In the present study, we provide evidence that the host protein Ku70
interacts with HIV-1 IN and protects it from the Lys(48)-linked
polyubiquitination proteasomal pathway. Moreover, Ku70 is able to down-regulate
the overall protein polyubiquitination level within the host cells and to
specifically deubiquitinate IN through their interaction. Mutagenic studies
revealed that the C terminus of IN (residues 230-288) is required for IN binding 
to the N-terminal part of Ku70 (Ku70(1-430)), and their interaction is
independent of Ku70/80 heterodimerization. Finally, knockdown of Ku70 expression 
in both virus-producing and target CD4(+) T cells significantly disrupted HIV-1
replication and rendered two-long terminal repeat circles and integration
undetectable, indicating that Ku70 is required for both the early and the late
stages of the HIV-1 life cycle. Interestingly, Ku70 was incorporated into the
progeny virus in an IN-dependent way. We proposed that Ku70 may interact with IN 
during viral assembly and accompany HIV-1 IN upon entry into the new target
cells, acting to 1) protect IN from the host defense system and 2) assist IN
integration activity. Overall, this report provides another example of how HIV-1 
hijacks host cellular machinery to protect the virus itself and to facilitate its
replication.

Â© 2011 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.184739 
PMCID: PMC3093848
PMID: 21454661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

