
1. J Virol. 2011 Aug;85(15):7613-21. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00212-11. Epub 2011 Jun 1.

Impact of intra- and interspecies variation of occludin on its function as
coreceptor for authentic hepatitis C virus particles.

Ciesek S(1), Westhaus S, Wicht M, Wappler I, Henschen S, Sarrazin C, Hamdi N,
Abdelaziz AI, Strassburg CP, Wedemeyer H, Manns MP, Pietschmann T, von Hahn T.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Klinik f√ºr Gastroenterologie, Hepatologie
und Endokrinologie, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is characterized by a narrow host range and high
interindividual variability in the clinical course of infection. Both of these
traits are thought to be largely due to genetic variation between species and
between individual hosts. The tight junction component occludin (OCLN) is
essential for HCV entry into host cells, and the differences between human and
murine OCLN are thought to account in part for the inability of HCV to infect
mice and hence preclude their use as a convenient small-animal model. This study 
assesses the impact of genetic variation in OCLN on cell culture-grown HCV
(HCVcc) using a newly generated and characterized OCLN(low) subclone of the
Huh-7.5 cell line (Huh-7.5 subclone in which endogenous OCLN expression has been 
downregulated by a short hairpin RNA). We report the frequency of coding
nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms, i.e., polymorphisms resulting in
amino acid exchanges, present in the human population and determine their ability
to function as HCV (co)receptors. Moreover, we show that murine OCLN can sustain 
HCVcc entry, albeit with about 5-fold reduced efficiency compared to that of
human OCLN. This reduction in efficiency is due solely to two amino acid residues
previously identified by others using an HCV pseudoparticle approach. Finally, we
use the Huh-7.5/OCLN(low) cell line to show that HCV spread between neighboring
cells is strictly dependent on OCLN.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00212-11 
PMCID: PMC3147936
PMID: 21632765  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

