
1. J Virol. 2011 Sep;85(17):8569-81. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00496-11. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Comprehensive proteomic analysis of influenza virus polymerase complex reveals a 
novel association with mitochondrial proteins and RNA polymerase accessory
factors.

Bradel-Tretheway BG(1), Mattiacio JL, Krasnoselsky A, Stevenson C, Purdy D,
Dewhurst S, Katze MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

The trimeric RNA polymerase complex (3P, for PA-PB1-PB2) of influenza A virus
(IAV) is an important viral determinant of pathogenicity and host range
restriction. Specific interactions of the polymerase complex with host proteins
may be determining factors in both of these characteristics and play important
roles in the viral life cycle. To investigate this question, we performed a
comprehensive proteomic analysis of human host proteins associated with the
polymerase of the well-characterized H5N1 Vietnam/1203/04 isolate. We identified 
over 400 proteins by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS),
of which over 300 were found to bind to the PA subunit alone. The most intriguing
and novel finding was the large number of mitochondrial proteins (âˆ¼20%) that
associated with the PA subunit. These proteins mediate molecular transport across
the mitochondrial membrane or regulate membrane potential and may in concert with
the identified mitochondrion-associated apoptosis inducing factor (AIFM1) have
roles in the induction of apoptosis upon association with PA. Additionally, we
identified host factors that associated with the PA-PB1 (68 proteins) and/or the 
3P complex (34 proteins) including proteins that have roles in innate antiviral
signaling (e.g., ZAPS or HaxI) or are cellular RNA polymerase accessory factors
(e.g., polymerase I transcript release factor [PTRF] or Supt5H). IAV
strain-specific host factor binding to the polymerase was not observed in our
analysis. Overall, this study has shed light into the complex contributions of
the IAV polymerase to host cell pathogenicity and allows for direct
investigations into the biological significance of these newly described
interactions.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00496-11 
PMCID: PMC3165779
PMID: 21715506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

