
1. J Virol. 2011 Oct;85(20):10639-48. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05070-11. Epub 2011 Aug 17.

The avian influenza virus NS1 ESEV PDZ binding motif associates with Dlg1 and
Scribble to disrupt cellular tight junctions.

Golebiewski L(1), Liu H, Javier RT, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The influenza A virus NS1 protein contains a conserved 4-amino-acid-residue
PDZ-ligand binding motif (PBM) at the carboxyl terminus that can function as a
virulence determinant by targeting cellular PDZ proteins. The NS1 proteins from
avian and human viral isolates have consensus PBM sequences ESEV and RSKV,
respectively. Currently circulating highly pathogenic H5N1 viruses contain the
ESEV PBM which specifically associates with the PDZ proteins Scribble, Dlg1,
MAGI-1, MAGI-2, and MAGI-3. In this study, we found NS1 proteins from viral
isolates that contain the PBM sequence RSKV, KSEV, or EPEV are unable to
associate with these PDZ proteins. Other results showed that the ESEV PBM
mediates an indirect association with PDZ protein, Lin7C, via an interaction with
Dlg1. Infection with a virus that expresses a NS1 protein with the ESEV PBM
results in colocalization of NS1, Scribble, and Dlg1 within perinuclear puncta
and mislocalization of plasma membrane-associated Lin7C to the cytoplasm.
Infection of polarized MDCK cells with the ESEV virus additionally results in
functional disruption of the tight junction (TJ) as measured by altered
localization of TJ markers ZO-1 and Occludin, decreased transepithelial
electrical resistance, and increased fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-inulin
diffusion across the polarized cell monolayer. A similar effect on the TJ was
observed in MDCK cells depleted for either Scribble or Dlg1 by small interfering 
RNA (siRNA). These findings indicate that ESEV PBM-mediated binding of NS1 to
Scribble and Dlg1 functions to disrupt the cellular TJ and that this effect
likely contributes to the severe disease associated with highly pathogenic H5N1
influenza A viruses.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.05070-11 
PMCID: PMC3187509
PMID: 21849460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

