
1. mBio. 2011 Aug 16;2(4). pii: e00151-11. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00151-11. Print 2011.

Host- and strain-specific regulation of influenza virus polymerase activity by
interacting cellular proteins.

Bortz E(1), Westera L, Maamary J, Steel J, Albrecht RA, Manicassamy B, Chase G,
Martínez-Sobrido L, Schwemmle M, García-Sastre A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New
York, USA.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza A (HPAI) viruses of the H5N1 subtype have
recently emerged from avian zoonotic reservoirs to cause fatal human disease.
Adaptation of HPAI virus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (PB1, PB2, and PA proteins)
and nucleoprotein (NP) to interactions with mammalian host proteins is thought to
contribute to the efficiency of viral RNA synthesis and to disease severity.
While proteomics experiments have identified a number of human proteins that
associate with H1N1 polymerases and/or viral ribonucleoprotein (vRNP), how these 
host interactions might regulate influenza virus polymerase functions and host
adaptation has been largely unexplored. We took a functional genomics (RNA
interference [RNAi]) approach to assess the roles of a network of human proteins 
interacting with influenza virus polymerase proteins in viral polymerase activity
from prototype H1N1 and H5N1 viruses. A majority (18 of 31) of the cellular
proteins tested, including RNA-binding (DDX17, DDX5, NPM1, and hnRNPM), stress
(PARP1, DDB1, and Ku70/86), and intracellular transport proteins, were required
for efficient activity of both H1N1 and H5N1 polymerases. NXP2 and NF90
antagonized both polymerases, and six more RNA-associated proteins exhibited
strain-specific phenotypes. Remarkably, 12 proteins differentially regulated H5N1
polymerase according to PB2 genotype at mammalian-adaptive residue 627. Among
these, DEAD box RNA helicase DDX17/p72 facilitated efficient human-adapted (627K)
H5N1 virus mRNA and viral RNA (vRNA) synthesis in human cells. Likewise, the
chicken DDX17 homologue was required for efficient avian (627E) H5N1 infection in
chicken DF-1 fibroblasts, suggesting that this conserved virus-host interaction
contributes to PB2-dependent host species specificity of influenza virus and
ultimately to the outcome of human HPAI infections.IMPORTANCE: Highly pathogenic 
avian influenza A (HPAI) viruses have recently emerged from wild and domestic
birds to cause fatal human disease. In human patients, it is thought that
adaptation of the viral polymerase, a complex of viral proteins responsible for
viral gene expression and RNA genome replication, to interactions with mammalian 
rather than avian host proteins contributes to disease severity. In this study,
we used computational analysis and RNA interference (RNAi) experiments to
identify a biological network of human proteins that regulates an H5N1 HPAI virus
polymerase, in comparison to a mammalian H1N1 virus. Of 31 proteins tested, 18
(58%) were required for polymerase function in both HPAI and H1N1 viruses.
Remarkably, we also found proteins such as DDX17 that governed the HPAI virus
polymerase's adaptation to human cells. These virus-host interactions may thus
control pathogenicity of HPAI virus in humans and are promising therapeutic
targets for antiviral drugs in severe influenza infections.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00151-11 
PMCID: PMC3157893
PMID: 21846828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

