
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2011 Dec;10(12):M111.012187. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M111.012187.
Epub 2011 Sep 12.

A physical interaction network of dengue virus and human proteins.

Khadka S(1), Vangeloff AD, Zhang C, Siddavatam P, Heaton NS, Wang L, Sengupta R, 
Sahasrabudhe S, Randall G, Gribskov M, Kuhn RJ, Perera R, LaCount DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.

Dengue virus (DENV), an emerging mosquito-transmitted pathogen capable of causing
severe disease in humans, interacts with host cell factors to create a more
favorable environment for replication. However, few interactions between DENV and
human proteins have been reported to date. To identify DENV-human protein
interactions, we used high-throughput yeast two-hybrid assays to screen the 10
DENV proteins against a human liver activation domain library. From 45
DNA-binding domain clones containing either full-length viral genes or partially 
overlapping gene fragments, we identified 139 interactions between DENV and human
proteins, the vast majority of which are novel. These interactions involved 105
human proteins, including six previously implicated in DENV infection and 45
linked to the replication of other viruses. Human proteins with functions related
to the complement and coagulation cascade, the centrosome, and the cytoskeleton
were enriched among the DENV interaction partners. To determine if the cellular
proteins were required for DENV infection, we used small interfering RNAs to
inhibit their expression. Six of 12 proteins targeted (CALR, DDX3X, ERC1, GOLGA2,
TRIP11, and UBE2I) caused a significant decrease in the replication of a DENV
replicon. We further showed that calreticulin colocalized with viral dsRNA and
with the viral NS3 and NS5 proteins in DENV-infected cells, consistent with a
direct role for calreticulin in DENV replication. Human proteins that interacted 
with DENV had significantly higher average degree and betweenness than expected
by chance, which provides additional support for the hypothesis that viruses
preferentially target cellular proteins that occupy central position in the human
protein interaction network. This study provides a valuable starting point for
additional investigations into the roles of human proteins in DENV infection.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M111.012187 
PMCID: PMC3237087
PMID: 21911577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

