
1. J Virol. 2011 Nov;85(22):11732-41. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05357-11. Epub 2011 Sep 14.

Human cytomegalovirus primase UL70 specifically interacts with cellular factor
Snapin.

Shen A(1), Lei J, Yang E, Pei Y, Chen YC, Gong H, Xiao G, Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, Hubei 430072, China.

Genomic DNA synthesis is a universally conserved process for all herpesviruses,
including human cytomegalovirus (HCMV). HCMV UL70 is believed to encode the
primase of the DNA replication machinery, a function which requires localization 
in the nucleus, the site of viral DNA synthesis. No host factors that interact
with UL70 have been reported. In this study, we provide the first direct evidence
that UL70 specifically interacts with Snapin, a human protein that is
predominantly localized in the cytoplasm and is associated with cellular
vesicles. The interaction between UL70 and Snapin was identified in both the
two-hybrid screen in yeast and coimmunoprecipitation in human cells. The nuclear 
import of UL70 was decreased in cells overexpressing Snapin and increased in
cells in which the expression of Snapin was downregulated with anti-Snapin small 
interfering RNA (siRNA) molecules, respectively. Furthermore, viral DNA synthesis
and progeny production were decreased in cells overexpressing Snapin and
increased in the anti-Snapin siRNA-treated cells, respectively. In contrast, no
significant difference in the nuclear level of UL70, viral DNA synthesis, and
progeny production was found among the parental cells and cells that either
expressed a control empty vector or were treated with control siRNA molecules
that did not recognize any viral or cellular transcripts. Our results suggest
that Snapin may play a key role in regulating the cellular localization of UL70
in HCMV, leading to modulation of viral DNA synthesis and progeny production.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.05357-11 
PMCID: PMC3209297
PMID: 21917956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

