
1. J Virol. 2011 Dec;85(24):13322-32. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00174-11. Epub 2011 Sep 28.

The cellular protein lyric interacts with HIV-1 Gag.

Engeland CE(1), Oberwinkler H, Sch체mann M, Krause E, M체ller GA, Kr채usslich HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Virology, Universit채tsklinikum Heidelberg, 
Im Neuenheimer Feld 324, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Gag is the main structural protein
driving assembly and release of virions from infected cells. Gag alone is capable
of self-assembly in vitro, but host factors have been shown to play a role in
efficient viral replication and particle morphogenesis within the living cell. In
a series of affinity purification experiments, we identified the cellular protein
Lyric to be an HIV-1 Gag-interacting protein. Lyric was previously described to
be an HIV-inducible gene and is involved in various signaling pathways. Gag
interacts with endogenous Lyric via its matrix (MA) and nucleocapsid (NC)
domains. This interaction requires Gag multimerization and Lyric amino acids 101 
to 289. Endogenous Lyric is incorporated into HIV-1 virions and is cleaved by the
viral protease. Gag-Lyric interaction was also observed for murine leukemia virus
and equine infectious anemia virus, suggesting that it represents a conserved
feature among retroviruses. Expression of the Gag binding domain of Lyric
increased Gag expression levels and viral infectivity, whereas expression of a
Lyric mutant lacking the Gag binding site resulted in lower Gag expression and
decreased viral infectivity. The results of the current study identify Lyric to
be a cellular interaction partner of HIV-1 Gag and hint at a potential role in
regulating infectivity. Further experiments are needed to elucidate the precise
role of this interaction.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00174-11 
PMCID: PMC3233182
PMID: 21957284  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

