
1. J Virol. 2012 Jan;86(1):406-19. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05720-11. Epub 2011 Oct 19.

Secretion modification region-derived peptide disrupts HIV-1 Nef's interaction
with mortalin and blocks virus and Nef exosome release.

Shelton MN(1), Huang MB, Ali SA, Powell MD, Bond VC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry, and Immunology, Morehouse School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Nef is secreted from infected cells in exosomes and is found in abundance in the 
sera of HIV-infected individuals. Secreted exosomal Nef (exNef) induces apoptosis
in uninfected CD4‚Å∫ T cells and may be a key component of HIV pathogenesis. The
exosomal pathway has been implicated in HIV-1 virus release, suggesting a
possible link between these two viral processes. However, the underlying
mechanisms and cellular components of exNef secretion have not been elucidated.
We have previously described a Nef motif, the secretion modification region (SMR;
amino acids 66 to 70), that is required for exNef secretion. In silico modeling
data suggest that this motif can form a putative binding pocket. We hypothesized 
that the Nef SMR binds a cellular protein involved in protein trafficking and
that inhibition of this interaction would abrogate exNef secretion. By using
tandem mass spectrometry and coimmunoprecipitation with a novel SMR-based peptide
(SMRwt) that blocks exNef secretion and HIV-1 virus release, we identified
mortalin as an SMR-specific cellular protein. A second set of
coimmunoprecipitation experiments with full-length Nef confirmed that mortalin
interacts with Nef via Nef's SMR motif and that this interaction is disrupted by 
the SMRwt peptide. Overexpression and microRNA knockdown of mortalin revealed a
positive correlation between exNef secretion levels and mortalin protein
expression. Using antibody inhibition we demonstrated that the Nef/mortalin
interaction is necessary for exNef secretion. Taken together, this work
constitutes a significant step in understanding the underlying mechanism of exNef
secretion, identifies a novel host-pathogen interaction, and introduces an
HIV-derived peptide with antiviral properties.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.05720-11 
PMCID: PMC3255900
PMID: 22013042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

