
1. Virology. 2012 Jan 20;422(2):242-53. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2011.10.027. Epub 2011 
Nov 17.

The human papillomavirus type 16 E7 oncoprotein targets Myc-interacting
zinc-finger protein-1.

Morandell D(1), Kaiser A, Herold S, Rostek U, Lechner S, Mitterberger MC,
Jansen-Dürr P, Eilers M, Zwerschke W.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Metabolism and Differentiation Research Group, Institute for Biomedical
Aging Research of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Innsbruck, Austria.

We demonstrate that HPV-16 E7 forms a complex with Miz-1. UV-induced expression
of the CDK-inhibitor p21(Cip1) and subsequent cell cycle arrest depends upon
endogenous Miz-1 in HPV-negative C33A cervical cancer cells containing mutated
p53. Transient expression of E7 in C33A inhibits UV-induced expression of
p21(Cip1) and overcomes Miz-1-induced G1-phase arrest. The C-terminal
E7Δ79LEDLL83-mutant with reduced Miz-1-binding capacity was impaired in its
capability to repress p21(Cip1) expression; whereas the pRB-binding-deficient
E7C24G-mutant inhibited p21(Cip1) expression similar to wild-type E7. Using ChIP,
we demonstrate that endogenous E7 is bound to the endogenous p21(Cip1)
core-promoter in CaSki cells and RNAi-mediated knock down of Miz-1 abrogates
E7-binding to the p21(Cip1) promoter. Co-expression of E7 with Miz-1 inhibited
Miz-1-induced p21(Cip1) expression from the minimal-promoter via Miz-1
DNA-binding sites. Co-expression of E7Δ79LEDLL83 did not inhibit Miz-1-induced
p21(Cip1) expression. E7C24G retained E7-wild-type capability to inhibit
Miz-1-dependent transactivation. These findings suggest that HPV-16 E7 can
repress Miz-1-induced p21(Cip1) gene expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2011.10.027 
PMCID: PMC3268862
PMID: 22099967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

