
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Dec;7(12):e1002439. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002439. Epub
2011 Dec 8.

HIV-1 capsid-cyclophilin interactions determine nuclear import pathway,
integration targeting and replication efficiency.

Schaller T(1), Ocwieja KE, Rasaiyaah J, Price AJ, Brady TL, Roth SL, Hu√© S,
Fletcher AJ, Lee K, KewalRamani VN, Noursadeghi M, Jenner RG, James LC, Bushman
FD, Towers GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, University College London Medical Research
Council Centre for Medical Molecular Virology, London, United Kingdom.

Lentiviruses such as HIV-1 traverse nuclear pore complexes (NPC) and infect
terminally differentiated non-dividing cells, but how they do this is unclear.
The cytoplasmic NPC protein Nup358/RanBP2 was identified as an HIV-1 co-factor in
previous studies. Here we report that HIV-1 capsid (CA) binds directly to the
cyclophilin domain of Nup358/RanBP2. Fusion of the Nup358/RanBP2 cyclophilin
(Cyp) domain to the tripartite motif of TRIM5 created a novel inhibitor of HIV-1 
replication, consistent with an interaction in vivo. In contrast to CypA binding 
to HIV-1 CA, Nup358 binding is insensitive to inhibition with cyclosporine,
allowing contributions from CypA and Nup358 to be distinguished. Inhibition of
CypA reduced dependence on Nup358 and the nuclear basket protein Nup153,
suggesting that CypA regulates the choice of the nuclear import machinery that is
engaged by the virus. HIV-1 cyclophilin-binding mutants CA G89V and P90A favored 
integration in genomic regions with a higher density of transcription units and
associated features than wild type virus. Integration preference of wild type
virus in the presence of cyclosporine was similarly altered to regions of higher 
transcription density. In contrast, HIV-1 CA alterations in another patch on the 
capsid surface that render the virus less sensitive to Nup358 or TRN-SR2
depletion (CA N74D, N57A) resulted in integration in genomic regions sparse in
transcription units. Both groups of CA mutants are impaired in replication in
HeLa cells and human monocyte derived macrophages. Our findings link HIV-1
engagement of cyclophilins with both integration targeting and replication
efficiency and provide insight into the conservation of viral cyclophilin
recruitment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002439 
PMCID: PMC3234246
PMID: 22174692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

