
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Dec;7(12):e1002418. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002418. Epub
2011 Dec 8.

Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 3C stabilizes Gemin3 to block p53-mediated
apoptosis.

Cai Q(1), Guo Y, Xiao B, Banerjee S, Saha A, Lu J, Glisovic T, Robertson ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and the Tumor Virology Program, Abramson
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

The Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen 3C (EBNA3C), one of the essential latent
antigens for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-induced immortalization of primary human B 
lymphocytes in vitro, has been implicated in regulating cell proliferation and
anti-apoptosis via interaction with several cellular and viral factors. Gemin3
(also named DDX20 or DP103) is a member of DEAD RNA helicase family which
exhibits diverse cellular functions including DNA transcription, recombination
and repair, and RNA metabolism. Gemin3 was initially identified as a binding
partner to EBNA2 and EBNA3C. However, the mechanism by which EBNA3C regulates
Gemin3 function remains unclear. Here, we report that EBNA3C directly interacts
with Gemin3 through its C-terminal domains. This interaction results in increased
stability of Gemin3 and its accumulation in both B lymphoma cells and EBV
transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs). Moreover, EBNA3C promotes formation
of a complex with p53 and Gemin3 which blocks the DNA-binding affinity of p53.
Small hairpin RNA based knockdown of Gemin3 in B lymphoma or LCL cells remarkably
attenuates the ability of EBNA3C to inhibit the transcription activity of p53 on 
its downstream genes p21 and Bax, as well as apoptosis. These findings provide
the first evidence that Gemin3 may be a common target of oncogenic viruses for
driving cell proliferation and anti-apoptotic activities.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002418 
PMCID: PMC3234233
PMID: 22174681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

