
1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 24;287(9):6406-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.301622. Epub 2012 
Jan 4.

Molecular determinants of enterovirus 71 viral entry: cleft around GLN-172 on VP1
protein interacts with variable region on scavenge receptor B 2.

Chen P(1), Song Z, Qi Y, Feng X, Xu N, Sun Y, Wu X, Yao X, Mao Q, Li X, Dong W,
Wan X, Huang N, Shen X, Liang Z, Li W.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing 100730, China.

Enterovirus 71 (EV71) is one of the major pathogens that cause hand, foot, and
mouth disease outbreaks in young children in the Asia-Pacific region in recent
years. Human scavenger receptor class B 2 (SCARB2) is the main cellular receptor 
for EV71 on target cells. The requirements of the EV71-SCARB2 interaction have
not been fully characterized, and it has not been determined whether SCARB2
serves as an uncoating receptor for EV71. Here we compared the efficiency of the 
receptor from different species including human, horseshoe bat, mouse, and
hamster and demonstrated that the residues between 144 and 151 are critical for
SCARB2 binding to viral capsid protein VP1 of EV71 and seven residues from the
human receptor could convert murine SCARB2, an otherwise inefficient receptor, to
an efficient receptor for EV71 viral infection. We also identified that EV71
binds to SCARB2 via a canyon of VP1 around residue Gln-172. Soluble SCARB2 could 
convert the EV71 virions from 160 S to 135 S particles, indicating that SCARB2 is
an uncoating receptor of the virus. The uncoating efficiency of SCARB2
significantly increased in an acidic environment (pH 5.6). These studies
elucidated the viral capsid and receptor determinants of enterovirus 71 infection
and revealed a possible target for antiviral interventions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.301622 
PMCID: PMC3307280
PMID: 22219187  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

