
1. Nat Med. 2012 Jan 8;18(2):281-5. doi: 10.1038/nm.2581.

Identification of the Niemann-Pick C1-like 1 cholesterol absorption receptor as a
new hepatitis C virus entry factor.

Sainz B Jr(1), Barretto N, Martin DN, Hiraga N, Imamura M, Hussain S, Marsh KA,
Yu X, Chayama K, Alrefai WA, Uprichard SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois-Chicago, Chicago, Illinois,
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012 Mar;9(3):124.
    J Hepatol. 2012 Jul;57(1):215-7.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a leading cause of liver disease worldwide. With âˆ¼170 
million individuals infected and current interferon-based treatment having toxic 
side effects and marginal efficacy, more effective antivirals are crucially
needed. Although HCV protease inhibitors were just approved by the US Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), optimal HCV therapy, analogous to HIV therapy, will
probably require a combination of antivirals targeting multiple aspects of the
viral lifecycle. Viral entry represents a potential multifaceted target for
antiviral intervention; however, to date, FDA-approved inhibitors of HCV cell
entry are unavailable. Here we show that the cellular Niemann-Pick C1-like 1
(NPC1L1) cholesterol uptake receptor is an HCV entry factor amendable to
therapeutic intervention. Specifically, NPC1L1 expression is necessary for HCV
infection, as silencing or antibody-mediated blocking of NPC1L1 impairs cell
culture-derived HCV (HCVcc) infection initiation. In addition, the clinically
available FDA-approved NPC1L1 antagonist ezetimibe potently blocks HCV uptake in 
vitro via a virion cholesterol-dependent step before virion-cell membrane fusion.
Moreover, ezetimibe inhibits infection by all major HCV genotypes in vitro and in
vivo delays the establishment of HCV genotype 1b infection in mice with human
liver grafts. Thus, we have not only identified NPC1L1 as an HCV cell entry
factor but also discovered a new antiviral target and potential therapeutic
agent.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.2581 
PMCID: PMC3530957
PMID: 22231557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

