
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29410. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029410. Epub 2012 Jan 18.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 targets murine cytomegalovirus chromatin for
modification and associates with viral replication centers.

Abraham CG(1), Kulesza CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado, United States of America.

Regulation of viral transcription by chromatin structure has emerged as a
fundamental determinant in the establishment of lytic and latent herpesvirus
infections. The Polycomb group (PcG) of epigenetic repressors promotes
heterochromatin formation by trimethylating histone H3 on lysine-27 (H3K27me3)
and regulates development, stem cell renewal and differentiation and the cell
cycle. These cellular processes are tightly coupled to the molecular switch
between lytic and latent herpesvirus infections. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis, we observed enrichment of H3K27me3 at the major
immediate-early (MIE) locus of murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) very early following
infection of permissive fibroblasts. As lytic replication progressed, we observed
a loss of H3K27me3 enrichment concomitant with the appearance of H3K4me3.
However, late during infection, as viral replication centers are established, we 
observed a significant increase in PcG protein association with chromatin.
Additionally, in co-immunofluorescence assays using confocal microscopy, we
detected strong enrichments for PcG protein within the viral replication
compartment, suggesting an association between viral DNA synthesis machinery and 
PcG proteins. Together, our results suggest a novel, dynamic interaction between 
PcG epigenetic repressors and MCMV genomes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029410 
PMCID: PMC3261147
PMID: 22279536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

