
1. J Gen Virol. 2012 May;93(Pt 5):1065-1075. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.038752-0. Epub 2012 
Feb 1.

E2F1, ARID3A/Bright and Oct-2 factors bind to the Epstein-Barr virus C promoter, 
EBNA1 and oriP, participating in long-distance promoter-enhancer interactions.

Boreström C(1), Forsman A(1), Rüetschi U(1), Rymo L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Institute of
Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, University of Gothenburg, SE-41345 
Gothenburg, Sweden.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) C promoter (Cp) regulates several genes required for
B-cell proliferation in latent EBV infection. The family of repeats (FR) region
of the latent origin of plasmid replication (oriP) functions as an Epstein-Barr
nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA1)-dependent distant enhancer of Cp activity, and the
enhancer-promoter interaction is mediated by a higher-order multi-protein complex
containing several copies of EBNA1. Using DNA-affinity purification with a 170 bp
region of the Cp in combination with mass spectrometry, we identified the cell
cycle-regulatory protein E2F1, the E2F-binding protein ARID3A, and the
B-cell-specific transcription factor Oct-2 as components of this multi-protein
complex. Binding of the three factors to the FR region of oriP was determined by 
DNA-affinity and immunoblot analysis. Co-immunoprecipitation and proximity
ligation analysis revealed that the three factors, E2F1, ARID3A and Oct-2,
interact with each other as well as with EBNA1 in the nuclei of EBV-positive
cells. Using the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we showed that E2F1 and
Oct-2 interacted with the FR part of oriP and the Cp, but the ARID3A interaction 
was, however, only detected at the Cp. Our findings support the hypothesis that
EBNA1 initiates transcription at the Cp via interactions between multiple EBNA1
homodimers and cellular transcription factors in a large molecular machinery that
forms a dynamic interaction between Cp and FR.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.038752-0 
PMID: 22302879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

