
1. J Immunol. 2012 Mar 15;188(6):2769-77. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102106. Epub 2012
Feb 8.

The adaptor protein SLP-76 regulates HIV-1 release and cell-to-cell transmission 
in T cells.

Nagaraja T(1), Anand AR, Zhao H, Ganju RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ohio State University Medical Center, Columbus, OH
43210, USA.

HIV-1 infection in T cells is regulated by TCR activation. However, the cellular 
proteins of the TCR pathway that regulate HIV-1 infection are poorly
characterized. In this study, in HIV-1 infection, we observed a significant
reduction of HIV-1 virus production in Src homology 2 domain-containing leukocyte
protein of 76 kDa (SLP-76)-deficient Jurkat T cells compared with wild-type and
SLP-76-reconstituted Jurkat T cells. We further confirmed the role of SLP-76 in
HIV-1 infection by small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown in MT4 cells and
PBMCs. Structural-functional analysis revealed that the N-terminal domain of
SLP-76 was important for regulating HIV-1 infection. Further mechanistic studies 
revealed that lack of SLP-76 impaired virus release, but did not affect viral
entry, integration, and transcription. We also showed that SLP-76 plays a
critical role in cell-to-cell transmission of HIV-1. Signaling studies revealed
that SLP-76 associated with viral negative regulatory factor protein and multiple
signaling molecules during HIV-1 infection. Furthermore, SLP-76 facilitated the
association of negative regulatory factor and F-actin, suggesting that SLP-76
mediates the formation of a signaling complex that may regulate viral release via
cytoskeletal changes. Taken together, our studies demonstrate a novel role for
the adaptor molecule SLP-76 in regulating HIV-1 infection in T cells with the
potential to develop innovative strategies against HIV-1.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102106 
PMCID: PMC3908818
PMID: 22323535  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

