
1. J Virol. 2012 May;86(9):5314-29. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06303-11. Epub 2012 Feb 15.

Live-cell imaging reveals multiple interactions between Epstein-Barr virus
nuclear antigen 1 and cellular chromatin during interphase and mitosis.

Jourdan N(1), Jobart-Malfait A, Dos Reis G, Quignon F, Piolot T, Klein C, Tramier
M, Coppey-Moisan M, Marechal V.

Author information: 
(1)UPMC Université Paris 6, UMRS 872, Paris, France. nathalie.jourdan@upmc.fr

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) establishes a life-long latent infection in humans. In
proliferating latently infected cells, EBV genomes persist as multiple episomes
that undergo one DNA replication event per cell cycle and remain attached to the 
mitotic chromosomes. EBV nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA-1) binding to the episome and
cellular genome is essential to ensure proper episome replication and
segregation. However, the nature and regulation of EBNA-1 interaction with
chromatin has not been clearly elucidated. This activity has been suggested to
involve EBNA-1 binding to DNA, duplex RNA, and/or proteins. EBNA-1 binding
protein 2 (EBP2), a nucleolar protein, has been proposed to act as a docking
protein for EBNA-1 on mitotic chromosomes. However, there is no direct evidence
thus far for EBP2 being associated with EBNA-1 during mitosis. By combining video
microscopy and Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) microscopy, we
demonstrate here for the first time that EBNA-1 and EBP2 interact in the
nucleoplasm, as well as in the nucleoli during interphase. However, in strong
contrast to the current proposed model, we were unable to observe any interaction
between EBNA-1 and EBP2 on mitotic chromosomes. We also performed a yeast
double-hybrid screening, followed by a FRET analysis, that led us to identify
HMGB2 (high-mobility group box 2), a well-known chromatin component, as a new
partner for EBNA-1 on chromatin during interphase and mitosis. Although the
depletion of HMGB2 partly altered EBNA-1 association with chromatin in HeLa cells
during interphase and mitosis, it did not significantly impact the maintenance of
EBV episomes in Raji cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.06303-11 
PMCID: PMC3347338
PMID: 22345443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

