
1. J Virol. 2012 Jun;86(11):6286-302. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00205-12. Epub 2012 Mar 28.

A new human DSG2-transgenic mouse model for studying the tropism and pathology of
human adenoviruses.

Wang H(1), Beyer I, Persson J, Song H, Li Z, Richter M, Cao H, van Rensburg R,
Yao X, Hudkins K, Yumul R, Zhang XB, Yu M, Fender P, Hemminki A, Lieber A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA.

We have recently reported that a group of human adenoviruses (HAdVs) uses
desmoglein 2 (DSG2) as a receptor for infection. Among these are the widely
distributed serotypes HAdV-B3 and HAdV-B7, as well as a newly emerged strain
derived from HAdV-B14. These serotypes do not infect rodent cells and could not
up until now be studied in small-animal models. We therefore generated transgenic
mice containing the human DSG2 locus. These mice expressed human DSG2 (hDSG2) at 
a level and in a pattern similar to those found for humans and nonhuman primates.
As an initial application of hDSG2-transgenic mice, we used a green fluorescent
protein (GFP)-expressing HAdV-B3 vector (Ad3-GFP) and studied GFP transgene
expression by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR) and
immunohistochemistry subsequent to intranasal and intravenous virus application. 
After intranasal application, we found efficient transduction of bronchial and
alveolar epithelial cells in hDSG2-transgenic mice. Intravenous Ad3-GFP injection
into hDSG2-transgenic mice resulted in hDSG2-dependent transduction of epithelial
cells in the intestinal and colon mucosa. Our findings give an explanation for
clinical symptoms associated with infection by DSG2-interacting HAdVs and provide
a rationale for using Ad3-derived vectors in gene therapy.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00205-12 
PMCID: PMC3372198
PMID: 22457526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

