
1. J Virol. 2012 Jun;86(12):6491-502. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00496-12. Epub 2012 Apr 4.

Role for TBC1D20 and Rab1 in hepatitis C virus replication via interaction with
lipid droplet-bound nonstructural protein 5A.

Nevo-Yassaf I(1), Yaffe Y, Asher M, Ravid O, Eizenberg S, Henis YI, Nahmias Y,
Hirschberg K, Sklan EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel 
Aviv, Israel.

Replication and assembly of hepatitis C virus (HCV) depend on the host's
secretory and lipid-biosynthetic machinery. Viral replication occurs on
endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-derived modified membranes, while viral assembly is
thought to occur on lipid droplets (LDs). A physical association and coordination
between the viral replication and assembly complexes are prerequisites for
efficient viral production. Nonstructural protein 5A (NS5A), which localizes both
to the ER and LDs, is an ideal candidate for this function. Here, the interaction
of NS5A with host cell membranes and binding partners was characterized in living
cells. The binding of NS5A to LDs is apparently irreversible, both in
HCV-infected cells and when ectopically expressed. In HCV-infected cells, NS5A
fluorescence was observed around the LDs and in perinuclear structures that were 
incorporated into a highly immobile platform superimposed over the ER membrane.
Moreover, TBC1D20 and its cognate GTPase Rab1 are recruited by NS5A to LDs. The
NS5A-TBC1D20 interaction was shown to be essential for the viral life cycle. In
cells, expression of the Rab1 dominant negative (Rab1DN) GTPase mutant abolished 
steady-state LDs. In infected cells, Rab1DN induced the elimination of NS5A from 
viral replication sites. Our results demonstrate the significance of the
localization of NS5A to LDs and support a model whereby its interaction with
TBC1D20 and Rab1 affects lipid droplet metabolism to promote the viral life
cycle.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00496-12 
PMCID: PMC3393552
PMID: 22491470  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

