
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Aug;40(14):6834-49. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks319. Epub 2012
Apr 13.

Epstein-Barr virus protein EB2 stimulates cytoplasmic mRNA accumulation by
counteracting the deleterious effects of SRp20 on viral mRNAs.

Juillard F(1), Bazot Q, Mure F, Tafforeau L, Macri C, Rabourdin-Combe C, Lotteau 
V, Manet E, Gruffat H.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U758, Unité de Virologie Humaine, 69364 Lyon, France.

The Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) protein EB2 (also called Mta, SM and BMLF1), is an
essential nuclear protein produced during the replicative cycle of EBV. EB2 is
required for the efficient cytoplasmic accumulation of viral mRNAs derived from
intronless genes. EB2 is an RNA-binding protein whose expression has been shown
to influence RNA stability, splicing, nuclear export and translation. Using a
yeast two-hybrid screen, we have identified three SR proteins, SF2/ASF, 9G8 and
SRp20, as cellular partners of EB2. Then, by using siRNA to deplete cells of
specific SR proteins, we found that SRp20 plays an essential role in the
processing of several model mRNAs: the Renilla luciferase reporter mRNA, the
human β-globin cDNA transcript and two EBV late mRNAs. These four mRNAs were
previously found to be highly dependent on EB2 for their efficient cytoplasmic
accumulation. Here, we show that SRp20 depletion results in an increase in the
accumulation of these mRNAs, which correlates with an absence of additive effect 
of EB2, suggesting that EB2 functions by antagonizing SRp20. Moreover, by using
RNA-immunoprecipitation assays we found that EB2 enhances the association of
SRp20 with the β-globin transcript suggesting that EB2 acts by stabilizing
SRp20's labile interactions with the RNA.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks319 
PMCID: PMC3413128
PMID: 22505578  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

