
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 8;109(19):E1163-72. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1119592109. Epub 2012 Apr 16.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus interacts with EphrinA2 receptor to
amplify signaling essential for productive infection.

Chakraborty S(1), Veettil MV, Bottero V, Chandran B.

Author information: 
(1)H. M. Bligh Cancer Research Laboratories, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and 
Science, North Chicago, IL 60064, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), etiologically associated with
Kaposi's sarcoma, uses integrins (α3β1, αVβ3, and αVβ5) and associated signaling 
to enter human dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HMVEC-d), an in vivo
target of infection. KSHV infection activated c-Cbl, which induced the selective 
translocation of KSHV into lipid rafts (LRs) along with the α3β1, αVβ3, and xCT
receptors, but not αVβ5. LR-translocated receptors were monoubiquitinated,
leading to productive macropinocytic entry, whereas non-LR-associated αVβ5 was
polyubiquitinated, leading to clathrin-mediated entry that was targeted to
lysosomes. Because the molecule(s) that integrate signal pathways and productive 
KSHV macropinocytosis were unknown, we immunoprecipitated KSHV-infected LR
fractions with anti-α3β1 antibodies and analyzed them by mass spectrometry. The
tyrosine kinase EphrinA2 (EphA2), implicated in many cancers, was identified in
this analysis. EphA2 was activated by KSHV. EphA2 was also associated with KSHV
and integrins (α3β1 and αVβ3) in LRs early during infection. Preincubation of
virus with soluble EphA2, knockdown of EphA2 by shRNAs, or pretreatment of cells 
with anti-EphA2 monoclonal antibodies or tyrosine kinase inhibitor dasatinib
significantly reduced KSHV entry and gene expression. EphA2 associates with
c-Cbl-myosin IIA and augmented KSHV-induced Src and PI3-K signals in LRs, leading
to bleb formation and macropinocytosis of KSHV. EphA2 shRNA ablated
macropinocytosis-associated signaling events, virus internalization, and
productive nuclear trafficking of KSHV DNA. Taken together, these studies
demonstrate that the EphA2 receptor acts as a master assembly regulator of
KSHV-induced signal molecules and KSHV entry in endothelial cells and suggest
that the EphA2 receptor is an attractive target for controlling KSHV infection.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1119592109 
PMCID: PMC3358903
PMID: 22509030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

