
1. J Mol Biol. 2012 Jul 20;420(4-5):310-23. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.04.023. Epub
2012 Apr 26.

Transient structure and SH3 interaction sites in an intrinsically disordered
fragment of the hepatitis C virus protein NS5A.

Feuerstein S(1), Solyom Z, Aladag A, Favier A, Schwarten M, Hoffmann S, Willbold 
D, Brutscher B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Structurale, Université Grenoble 1, 41 rue Jules
Horowitz, 38027 Grenoble Cedex 1, France.

Understanding the molecular mechanisms involved in virus replication and particle
assembly is of primary fundamental and biomedical importance. Intrinsic
conformational disorder plays a prominent role in viral proteins and their
interaction with other viral and host cell proteins via transiently populated
structural elements. Here, we report on the results of an investigation of an
intrinsically disordered 188-residue fragment of the hepatitis C virus
non-structural protein 5A (NS5A), which contains a classical poly-proline Src
homology 3 (SH3) binding motif, using sensitivity- and resolution-optimized
multidimensional NMR methods, complemented by small-angle X-ray scattering data. 
Our study provides detailed atomic-resolution information on transient local and 
long-range structure, as well as fast time scale dynamics in this NS5A fragment. 
In addition, we could characterize two distinct interaction modes with the SH3
domain of Bin1 (bridging integrator protein 1), a pro-apoptotic tumor suppressor.
Despite being largely disordered, the protein contains three regions that
transiently adopt α-helical structures, partly stabilized by long-range tertiary 
interactions. Two of these transient α-helices form a noncanonical SH3-binding
motif, which allows low-affinity SH3 binding. Our results contribute to a better 
understanding of the role of the NS5A protein during hepatitis C virus infection.
The present work also highlights the power of NMR spectroscopy to characterize
multiple binding events including short-lived transient interactions between
globular and highly disordered proteins.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.04.023 
PMID: 22543239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

