
1. Oncol Rep. 2012 Jul;28(1):276-82. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1798. Epub 2012 May 4.

Hepatitis B virus X (HBX) protein upregulates β-catenin in a human hepatic cell
line by sequestering SIRT1 deacetylase.

Srisuttee R(1), Koh SS, Kim SJ, Malilas W, Boonying W, Cho IR, Jhun BH, Ito M,
Horio Y, Seto E, Oh S, Chung YH.

Author information: 
(1)WCU, Department of Cogno-Mechatronics Engineering, Pusan National University, 
Busan, Republic of Korea.

Hepatitis B virus X (HBX) protein has been reported to induce upregulation of
β-catenin, a known proto-oncogene, in p53-knockout and p53-mutant hepatic cell
lines both in a GSK-3β-dependent manner and via interaction with adenomatous
polyposis coli, which results in protection from β-catenin degradation. In this
study, we describe a novel mechanism for HBX-mediated upregulation of β-catenin. 
We observed that HBX interacts with SIRT1, a class III histone deacetylase.
Furthermore, the presence of HBX attenuated the interaction between SIRT1 and
β-catenin, leading to protection of β-catenin from the inhibitory action of
SIRT1. Reduction of SIRT1 with siRNA or suppression of SIRT1 activity with
nicotinamide upregulated β-catenin protein levels. In contrast, enhancement of
SIRT1 activity with resveratrol reduced β-catenin protein levels. Furthermore, in
Hep3B cells stably expressing HBX, overexpression of SIRT1 or treatment with
resveratrol enhanced sensitivity to doxorubicin-induced apoptosis, indicating
that upregulation of SIRT1 could be a therapeutic strategy for HBV-related
hepatocellular carcinoma. Based on these results, we propose that HBX upregulates
β-catenin by sequestering SIRT1, which leads to anticancer drug treatment
resistance.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2012.1798 
PMID: 22562294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

