
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 12;109(24):9587-92. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1204673109. Epub 2012 May 24.

Eukaryotic elongation factor 1 complex subunits are critical HIV-1 reverse
transcription cofactors.

Warren K(1), Wei T, Li D, Qin F, Warrilow D, Lin MH, Sivakumaran H, Apolloni A,
Abbott CM, Jones A, Anderson JL, Harrich D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Queensland Institute of Medical
Research, Herston, Queensland, 4029, Australia.

Cellular proteins have been implicated as important for HIV-1 reverse
transcription, but whether any are reverse transcription complex (RTC) cofactors 
or affect reverse transcription indirectly is unclear. Here we used protein
fractionation combined with an endogenous reverse transcription assay to identify
cellular proteins that stimulated late steps of reverse transcription in vitro.
We identified 25 cellular proteins in an active protein fraction, and here we
show that the eEF1A and eEF1G subunits of eukaryotic elongation factor 1 (eEF1)
are important components of the HIV-1 RTC. eEF1A and eEF1G were identified in
fractionated human T-cell lysates as reverse transcription cofactors, as their
removal ablated the ability of active protein fractions to stimulate late reverse
transcription in vitro. We observed that the p51 subunit of reverse transcriptase
and integrase, two subunits of the RTC, coimmunoprecipitated with eEF1A and
eEF1G. Moreover eEF1A and eEF1G associated with purified RTCs and colocalized
with reverse transcriptase following infection of cells. Reverse transcription in
cells was sharply down-regulated when eEF1A or eEF1G levels were reduced by siRNA
treatment as a result of reduced levels of RTCs in treated cells. The combined
evidence indicates that these eEF1 subunits are critical RTC stability cofactors 
required for efficient completion of reverse transcription. The identification of
eEF1 subunits as unique RTC components provides a basis for further
investigations of reverse transcription and trafficking of the RTC to the
nucleus.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1204673109 
PMCID: PMC3386134
PMID: 22628567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

