
1. J Virol. 2012 Aug;86(15):8097-106. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00588-12. Epub 2012 May 23.

Epstein-Barr virus BPLF1 deubiquitinates PCNA and attenuates polymerase η
recruitment to DNA damage sites.

Whitehurst CB(1), Vaziri C, Shackelford J, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

PCNA is monoubiquitinated in response to DNA damage and fork stalling and then
initiates recruitment of specialized polymerases in the DNA damage tolerance
pathway, translesion synthesis (TLS). Since PCNA is reported to associate with
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA during its replication, we investigated whether the 
EBV deubiquitinating (DUB) enzyme encoded by BPLF1 targets ubiquitinated PCNA and
disrupts TLS. An N-terminal BPLF1 fragment (a BPLF1 construct containing the
first 246 amino acids [BPLF1 1-246]) associated with PCNA and attenuated its
ubiquitination in response to fork-stalling agents UV and hydroxyurea in cultured
cells. Moreover, monoubiquitinated PCNA was deubiquitinated after incubation with
purified BPLF1 1-246 in vitro. BPLF1 1-246 dysregulated TLS by reducing
recruitment of the specialized repair polymerase polymerase η (Polη) to the
detergent-resistant chromatin compartment and virtually abolished localization of
Polη to nuclear repair foci, both hallmarks of TLS. Expression of BPLF1 1-246
decreased viability of UV-treated cells and led to cell death, presumably through
deubiquitination of PCNA and the inability to repair damaged DNA. Importantly,
deubiquitination of PCNA could be detected endogenously in EBV-infected cells in 
comparison with samples expressing short hairpin RNA (shRNA) against BPLF1.
Further, the specificity of the interaction between BPLF1 and PCNA was dependent 
upon a PCNA-interacting peptide (PIP) domain within the N-terminal region of
BPLF1. Both DUB activity and PIP sequence are conserved in the members of the
family Herpesviridae. Thus, deubiquitination of PCNA, normally deubiquitinated by
cellular USP1, by the viral DUB can disrupt repair of DNA damage by compromising 
recruitment of TLS polymerase to stalled replication forks. PCNA is the first
cellular target identified for BPLF1 and its deubiquitinating activity.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00588-12 
PMCID: PMC3421674
PMID: 22623772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

