
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Aug;32(15):3095-106. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00201-12. Epub 2012 May
29.

Identification and proteomic analysis of distinct UBE3A/E6AP protein complexes.

Martínez-Noël G(1), Galligan JT, Sowa ME, Arndt V, Overton TM, Harper JW, Howley 
PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.

The E6AP ubiquitin ligase catalyzes the high-risk human papillomaviruses'
E6-mediated ubiquitylation of p53, contributing to the neoplastic progression of 
cells infected by these viruses. Defects in the activity and the dosage of E6AP
are linked to Angelman syndrome and to autism spectrum disorders, respectively,
highlighting the need for precise control of the enzyme. With the exception of
HERC2, which modulates the ubiquitin ligase activity of E6AP, little is known
about the regulation or function of E6AP normally. Using a proteomic approach, we
have identified and validated several new E6AP-interacting proteins, including
HIF1AN, NEURL4, and mitogen-activated protein kinase 6 (MAPK6). E6AP exists as
part of several different protein complexes, including the proteasome and an
independent high-molecular-weight complex containing HERC2, NEURL4, and MAPK6. In
examining the functional consequence of its interaction with the proteasome, we
found that UBE3C (another proteasome-associated ubiquitin ligase), but not E6AP, 
contributes to proteasomal processivity in mammalian cells. We also found that E6
associates with the HERC2-containing high-molecular-weight complex through its
binding to E6AP. These proteomic studies reveal a level of complexity for E6AP
that has not been previously appreciated and identify a number of new cellular
proteins through which E6AP may be regulated or functioning.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00201-12 
PMCID: PMC3434508
PMID: 22645313  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

