
1. Biochem J. 2012 Aug 15;446(1):37-46. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120001.

The variable N-terminal region of DDX5 contains structural elements and
auto-inhibits its interaction with NS5B of hepatitis C virus.

Dutta S(1), Gupta G, Choi YW, Kotaka M, Fielding BC, Song J, Tan YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR (Agency for Science,
Technology and Research), Singapore 138673.

RNA helicases of the DEAD (Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp)-box family of proteins are involved
in many aspects of RNA metabolism from transcription to RNA decay, but most of
them have also been shown to be multifunctional. The DEAD-box helicase DDX5 of
host cells has been shown to interact with the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
(NS5B) of HCV (hepatitis C virus). In the present study, we report the presence
of two independent NS5B-binding sites in DDX5, one located at the N-terminus and 
another at the C-terminus. The N-terminal fragment of DDX5, which consists of the
first 305 amino acids and shall be referred as DDX5-N, was expressed and
crystallized. The crystal structure shows that domain 1 (residues 79-303) of DDX5
contains the typical features found in the structures of other DEAD-box
helicases. DDX5-N also contains the highly variable NTR (N-terminal region) of
unknown function and the crystal structure reveals structural elements in part of
the NTR, namely residues 52-78. This region forms an extensive loop and an
α-helix. From co-immunoprecipitation experiments, the NTR of DDX5-N was observed 
to auto-inhibit its interaction with NS5B. Interestingly, the α-helix in NTR is
essential for this auto-inhibition and seems to mediate the interaction between
the highly flexible 1-51 residues in NTR and the NS5B-binding site in DDX5-N.
Furthermore, NMR investigations reveal that there is a direct interaction between
DDX5 and NS5B in vitro.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20120001 
PMID: 22640416  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

