
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39565. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039565. Epub 2012 Jun 25.

Human immunodeficiency virus-1 uses the mannose-6-phosphate receptor to cross the
blood-brain barrier.

Dohgu S(1), Ryerse JS, Robinson SM, Banks WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Care and Health Sciences, Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan.

HIV-1 circulates both as free virus and within immune cells, with the level of
free virus being predictive of clinical course. Both forms of HIV-1 cross the
blood-brain barrier (BBB) and much progress has been made in understanding the
mechanisms by which infected immune cells cross the blood-brain barrier BBB. How 
HIV-1 as free virus crosses the BBB is less clear as brain endothelial cells are 
CD4 and galactosylceramide negative. Here, we found that HIV-1 can use the
mannose-6 phosphate receptor (M6PR) to cross the BBB. Brain perfusion studies
showed that HIV-1 crossed the BBB of all brain regions consistent with the
uniform distribution of M6PR. Ultrastructural studies showed HIV-1 crossed by a
transcytotic pathway consistent with transport by M6PR. An in vitro model of the 
BBB was used to show that transport of HIV-1 was inhibited by mannose, mannan,
and mannose-6 phosphate and that enzymatic removal of high mannose
oligosaccharide residues from HIV-1 reduced transport. Wheatgerm agglutinin and
protamine sulfate, substances known to greatly increase transcytosis of HIV-1
across the BBB in vivo, were shown to be active in the in vitro model and to act 
through a mannose-dependent mechanism. Transport was also cAMP and
calcium-dependent, the latter suggesting that the cation-dependent member of the 
M6PR family mediates HIV-1 transport across the BBB. We conclude that M6PR is an 
important receptor used by HIV-1 to cross the BBB.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039565 
PMCID: PMC3382565
PMID: 22761827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

