
1. Virus Res. 2012 Oct;169(1):54-62. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2012.07.001. Epub 2012 
Jul 10.

Two PDZ binding motifs within NS5 have roles in Tick-borne encephalitis virus
replication.

Melik W(1), Ellencrona K, Wigerius M, Hedström C, Elväng A, Johansson M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Södertörn University, S-141 89 Huddinge, Sweden.

The flavivirus genus includes important human neurotropic pathogens like
Tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) and West-Nile virus (WNV). Flavivirus
replication occurs at replication complexes, where the NS5 protein provides both 
RNA cap methyltransferase and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase activities. TBEVNS5
contains two PDZ binding motifs (PBMs) important for specific targeting of human 
PDZ proteins including Scribble, an association important for viral down
regulation of cellular defense systems and neurite outgrowth. To determine
whether the PBMs of TBEVNS5 affects virus replication we constructed a DNA based 
sub-genomic TBEV replicon expressing firefly luciferase. The PBMs within NS5 were
mutated individually and in concert and the replicons were assayed in cell
culture. Our results show that the replication rate was impaired in all mutants, 
which indicates that PDZ dependent host interactions influence TBEV replication. 
We also find that the C-terminal PBMs present in TBEVNS5 and WNVNS5 are targeting
various human PDZ domain proteins. TBEVNS5 has affinity to Zonula occludens-2
(ZO-2), GIAP C-terminus interacting protein (GIPC), calcium/calmodulin-dependent 
serine protein kinase (CASK), glutamate receptor interacting protein 2, (GRIP2)
and Interleukin 16 (IL-16). A different pattern was observed for WNVNS5 as it
associate with a broader repertoire of putative host PDZ proteins.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2012.07.001 
PMID: 22796133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

