
1. J Cell Biol. 2012 Aug 6;198(3):439-56. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201111012. Epub 2012 Jul 
30.

HIV-1 Gag co-opts a cellular complex containing DDX6, a helicase that facilitates
capsid assembly.

Reed JC(1), Molter B, Geary CD, McNevin J, McElrath J, Giri S, Klein KC, Lingappa
JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98102, USA.

To produce progeny virus, human immunodeficiency virus type I (HIV-1) Gag
assembles into capsids that package the viral genome and bud from the infected
cell. During assembly of immature capsids, Gag traffics through a pathway of
assembly intermediates (AIs) that contain the cellular adenosine triphosphatase
ABCE1 (ATP-binding cassette protein E1). In this paper, we showed by
coimmunoprecipitation and immunoelectron microscopy (IEM) that these
Gag-containing AIs also contain endogenous processing body (PB)-related proteins,
including AGO2 and the ribonucleic acid (RNA) helicase DDX6. Moreover, we found a
similar complex containing ABCE1 and PB proteins in uninfected cells.
Additionally, knockdown and rescue studies demonstrated that the RNA helicase
DDX6 acts enzymatically to facilitate capsid assembly independent of RNA
packaging. Using IEM, we localized the defect in DDX6-depleted cells to Gag
multimerization at the plasma membrane. We also confirmed that DDX6 depletion
reduces production of infectious HIV-1 from primary human T cells. Thus, we
propose that assembling HIV-1 co-opts a preexisting host complex containing
cellular facilitators such as DDX6, which the virus uses to catalyze capsid
assembly.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201111012 
PMCID: PMC3413349
PMID: 22851315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

