
1. Retrovirology. 2012 Aug 13;9:65. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-9-65.

Virus-producing cells determine the host protein profiles of HIV-1 virion cores.

Santos S(1), Obukhov Y, Nekhai S, Bukrinsky M, Iordanskiy S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Tropical Medicine, George
Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, 2300 I Street NW,
Ross Hall, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

BACKGROUND: Upon HIV entry into target cells, viral cores are released and
rearranged into reverse transcription complexes (RTCs), which support reverse
transcription and also protect and transport viral cDNA to the site of
integration. RTCs are composed of viral and cellular proteins that originate from
both target and producer cells, the latter entering the target cell within the
viral core. However, the proteome of HIV-1 viral cores in the context of the type
of producer cells has not yet been characterized.
RESULTS: We examined the proteomic profiles of the cores purified from HIV-1
NL4-3 virions assembled in Sup-T1 cells (T lymphocytes), PMA and vitamin D3
activated THP1 (model of macrophages, mMΦ), and non-activated THP1 cells (model
of monocytes, mMN) and assessed potential involvement of identified proteins in
the early stages of infection using gene ontology information and data from
genome-wide screens on proteins important for HIV-1 replication. We identified
202 cellular proteins incorporated in the viral cores (T cells: 125, mMΦ: 110,
mMN: 90) with the overlap between these sets limited to 42 proteins. The groups
of RNA binding (29), DNA binding (17), cytoskeleton (15), cytoskeleton regulation
(21), chaperone (18), vesicular trafficking-associated (12) and
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway-associated proteins (9) were most numerous. Cores of
the virions from SupT1 cells contained twice as many RNA binding proteins as
cores of THP1-derived virus, whereas cores of virions from mMΦ and mMN were
enriched in components of cytoskeleton and vesicular transport machinery, most
probably due to differences in virion assembly pathways between these cells.
Spectra of chaperones, cytoskeletal proteins and ubiquitin-proteasome pathway
components were similar between viral cores from different cell types, whereas
DNA-binding and especially RNA-binding proteins were highly diverse. Western blot
analysis showed that within the group of overlapping proteins, the level of
incorporation of some RNA binding (RHA and HELIC2) and DNA binding proteins (MCM5
and Ku80) in the viral cores from T cells was higher than in the cores from both 
mMΦ and mMN and did not correlate with the abundance of these proteins in virus
producing cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Profiles of host proteins packaged in the cores of HIV-1 virions
depend on the type of virus producing cell. The pool of proteins present in the
cores of all virions is likely to contain factors important for viral functions. 
Incorporation ratio of certain RNA- and DNA-binding proteins suggests their more 
efficient, non-random packaging into virions in T cells than in mMΦ and mMN.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-9-65 
PMCID: PMC3432596
PMID: 22889230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

