
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Sep 4;109(36):14580-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1206605109. Epub 2012 Aug 17.

HIV-1 matrix protein p17 promotes angiogenesis via chemokine receptors CXCR1 and 
CXCR2.

Caccuri F(1), Giagulli C, Bugatti A, Benetti A, Alessandri G, Ribatti D, Marsico 
S, Apostoli P, Slevin MA, Rusnati M, Guzman CA, Fiorentini S, Caruso A.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Microbiology, Department of Experimental and Applied Medicine,
Medical School, University of Brescia, 25123 Brescia, Italy.

Vascular diseases supported by aberrant angiogenesis have increased incidence in 
HIV-1-infected patients. Several data suggest that endothelium dysfunction relies
on action of HIV-1 proteins rather than on a direct effect of the virus itself.
The HIV-1 matrix protein p17 is known to deregulate the biological activity of
different immune cells. Recently, p17 was found to mimic IL-8 chemokine activity 
by binding to the IL-8 receptor CXCR1. Here we show that p17 binds with high
affinity to CXCR2, a CXCR1-related receptor, and promotes the formation of
capillary-like structures on human endothelial cells (ECs) by interacting with
both CXCR1 and CXCR2 expressed on the EC surface. ERK signaling via Akt was
defined as the pathway responsible for p17-induced tube formation. Ex vivo and in
vivo experimental models confirmed the provasculogenic activity of p17, which was
comparable to that induced by VEGF-A. The hypothesis of a major role for p17 in
HIV-1-induced aberrant angiogenesis is enforced by the finding that p17 is
detected, as a single protein, in blood vessels of HIV-1-patients and in
particular in the nucleus of ECs. Localization of p17 in the nucleus of ECs was
evidenced also in in vitro experiments, suggesting the internalization of
exogenous p17 in ECs by mechanisms of receptor-mediated endocytosis. Recognizing 
p17 interaction with CXCR1 and CXCR2 as the key event in sustaining EC aberrant
angiogenesis could help us to identify new treatment strategies in combating
AIDS-related vascular diseases.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1206605109 
PMCID: PMC3437870
PMID: 22904195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

