
1. J Hepatol. 2013 Jan;58(1):16-23. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2012.08.007. Epub 2012 Aug
15.

HCV NS5A and IRF9 compete for CypA binding.

Bobardt M(1), Hopkins S, Baugh J, Chatterji U, Hernandez F, Hiscott J, Sluder A, 
Lin K, Gallay PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology & Microbial Science, The Scripps Research Institute, 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Cyclophilin A (CypA) is vital for HCV replication. Cyp
inhibitors successfully decrease viral loads in HCV-infected patients. However,
their mechanisms of action remain unknown. Since interferon (IFN) can also
suppress HCV replication, we asked whether a link between CypA and the IFN
response exists.
METHODS: We used cellular and recombinant pulldown approaches to investigate the 
possibility of a specific association of CypA with host ligands.
RESULTS: We found for the first time that CypA binds to a major component of the 
IFN response - the IFN regulatory factor 9 (IRF9). IRF9 is the DNA-binding
component of the transcriptional IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3). CypA binds
directly to IRF9 via its peptidyl-prolyl isomerase (PPIase) pocket. Cyp
inhibitors such as cyclosporine A (CsA) or non-immunosuppressive derivates such
as alisporivir and SCY-635, prevent IRF9-CypA complex formation. CypA binds to
the C-terminal IRF-association-domain (IAD), but not to the DNA-binding or linker
domains of IRF9. Remarkably, CypA associates with the multimeric ISGF3 complex.
We also obtained evidence that CypA neutralization enhances IFN-induced
transcription. Interestingly, the hepatitis C virus (HCV) non-structural 5A
(NS5A) protein, which is known to modulate the IFN response, competes with IRF9
for CypA binding and can prevent the formation of IRF9-CypA complexes.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates for the first time that CypA binds
specifically to a component of the Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator
of transcription (JAK/STAT) pathway, IRF9. This study also reveals a novel
opportunity of HCV to modulate the IFN response via NS5A.

Copyright Â© 2012 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2012.08.007 
PMCID: PMC3527675
PMID: 22902549  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

