
1. J Virol. 2012 Nov;86(22):11977-90. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00432-12. Epub 2012 Aug 29.

Identification of RNA-protein interaction networks involved in the norovirus life
cycle.

Vashist S(1), Urena L, Chaudhry Y, Goodfellow I.

Author information: 
(1)Calicivirus Research Group, Section of Virology, Department of Medicine,
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.

Human noroviruses are one of the major causes of acute gastroenteritis in the
developed world, yet our understanding of their molecular mechanisms of genome
translation and replication lags behind that for many RNA viruses. Due to the
nonculturable nature of human noroviruses, many related members of the
Caliciviridae family of small RNA viruses are often used as model systems to
dissect the finer details of the norovirus life cycle. Murine norovirus (MNV) has
provided one such system with which to study the basic mechanisms of norovirus
translation and replication in cell culture. In this report we describe the use
of riboproteomics to identify host factors that interact with the extremities of 
the MNV genome. This network of RNA-protein interactions contains many
well-characterized host factors, including PTB, La, and DDX3, which have been
shown to play a role in the life cycle of other RNA viruses. By using RNA
coimmunoprecipitation, we confirmed that a number of the factors identified using
riboproteomics are associated with the viral RNA during virus replication in cell
culture. We further demonstrated that RNA inhibition-mediated knockdown of the
intracellular levels of a number of these factors inhibits or slows norovirus
replication in cell culture, allowing identification of new intracellular targets
for this important group of pathogens.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00432-12 
PMCID: PMC3486512
PMID: 22933270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

