
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012 Sep;8(9):e1002927. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002927. Epub 2012
Sep 27.

Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus K15 protein contributes to virus-induced
angiogenesis by recruiting PLCγ1 and activating NFAT1-dependent RCAN1 expression.

Bala K(1), Bosco R, Gramolelli S, Haas DA, Kati S, Pietrek M, Hävemeier A,
Yakushko Y, Singh VV, Dittrich-Breiholz O, Kracht M, Schulz TF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Kaposi's Sarcoma (KS), caused by Kaposi's Sarcoma Herpesvirus (KSHV), is a highly
vascularised angiogenic tumor of endothelial cells, characterized by latently
KSHV-infected spindle cells and a pronounced inflammatory infiltrate. Several
KSHV proteins, including LANA-1 (ORF73), vCyclin (ORF72), vGPCR (ORF74), vIL6
(ORF-K2), vCCL-1 (ORF-K6), vCCL-2 (ORF-K4) and K1 have been shown to exert
effects that can lead to the proliferation and atypical differentiation of
endothelial cells and/or the secretion of cytokines with angiogenic and
inflammatory properties (VEGF, bFGF, IL6, IL8, GROα, and TNFβ). To investigate a 
role of the KSHV K15 protein in KSHV-mediated angiogenesis, we carried out a
genome wide gene expression analysis on primary endothelial cells infected with
KSHV wildtype (KSHVwt) and a KSHV K15 deletion mutant (KSHVΔK15). We found
RCAN1/DSCR1 (Regulator of Calcineurin 1/Down Syndrome critical region 1), a
cellular gene involved in angiogenesis, to be differentially expressed in KSHVwt-
vs KSHVΔK15-infected cells. During physiological angiogenesis, expression of
RCAN1 in endothelial cells is regulated by VEGF (vascular endothelial growth
factor) through a pathway involving the activation of PLCγ1, Calcineurin and
NFAT1. We found that K15 directly recruits PLCγ1, and thereby activates
Calcineurin/NFAT1-dependent RCAN1 expression which results in the formation of
angiogenic tubes. Primary endothelial cells infected with KSHVwt form angiogenic 
tubes upon activation of the lytic replication cycle. This effect is abrogated
when K15 is deleted (KSHVΔK15) or silenced by an siRNA targeting the K15
expression. Our study establishes K15 as one of the KSHV proteins that contribute
to KSHV-induced angiogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002927 
PMCID: PMC3460623
PMID: 23028325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

