
1. Sci Signal. 2012 Oct 9;5(245):ra73. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2003212.

Interferon-induced SCYL2 limits release of HIV-1 by triggering PP2A-mediated
dephosphorylation of the viral protein Vpu.

Miyakawa K(1), Sawasaki T, Matsunaga S, Tokarev A, Quinn G, Kimura H, Nomaguchi
M, Adachi A, Yamamoto N, Guatelli J, Ryo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Yokohama City University School of Medicine,
Kanagawa 236-0004, Japan.

Human cells respond to infection by retroviruses through the actions of proteins 
that inhibit the spread of viruses to other cells. One example is bone marrow
stromal cell antigen 2 (BST2; also known as tetherin), which is an interferon
(IFN)-inducible protein that restricts the release of progeny virions from
infected cells. The HIV-1 accessory protein Vpu (viral protein U) causes
degradation of BST2, and phosphorylation of Vpu at residues Ser(52) and Ser(56)
is required for this function. We report that the host protein SCY1-like protein 
2 (SCYL2) mediates the dephosphorylation of Vpu, antagonizing Vpu function and
facilitating BST2-dependent restriction of HIV-1 release. SCYL2 reduced the
number of virus particles released from cells infected with wild-type HIV-1, but 
not a strain lacking vpu, in a BST2-dependent manner. SCYL2 stimulated the
dephosphorylation of Vpu on Ser(52) and Ser(56) by recruiting protein phosphatase
2A (PP2A) to Vpu. Conversely, depletion of SCYL2 resulted in enhanced
phosphorylation of Vpu and increased viral particle release. Moreover, SCYL2 was 
produced in response to type I IFN and contributed to IFN-mediated viral
restriction. Together, these results suggest that SCYL2 serves as a regulatory
factor for Vpu, reducing the extent of Vpu phosphorylation and consequently
enhancing BST2-mediated viral restriction.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.2003212 
PMID: 23047923  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

