
1. J Virol. 2013 Jan;87(1):110-23. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00939-12. Epub 2012 Oct 10.

Cellular protein HAX1 interacts with the influenza A virus PA polymerase subunit 
and impedes its nuclear translocation.

Hsu WB(1), Shih JL, Shih JR, Du JL, Teng SC, Huang LM, Wang WB.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Transcription and replication of the influenza A virus RNA genome occur in the
nucleus through the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase consisting of PB1, PB2,
and PA. Cellular factors that associate with the viral polymerase complex play
important roles in these processes. To look for cellular factors that could
associate with influenza A virus PA protein, we have carried out a yeast
two-hybrid screen using a HeLa cell cDNA library. We identified six cellular
proteins that may interact with PA. We focused our study on one of the new
PA-interacting proteins, HAX1, a protein with antiapoptotic function. By using
glutathione S-transferase pulldown and coimmunoprecipitation assays, we
demonstrate that HAX1 specifically interacts with PA in vitro and in vivo and
that HAX1 interacts with the nuclear localization signal domain of PA. Nuclear
accumulation of PA was increased in HAX1-knockdown cells, and this phenotype
could be reversed by reexpression of HAX1, indicating that HAX1 can impede
nuclear transport of PA. As a consequence, knockdown of HAX1 resulted in a
significant increase in virus yield and polymerase activity in a minigenome
assay, and this phenotype could be reversed by reexpression of HAX1, indicating
that HAX1 can inhibit influenza A virus propagation. Together, these results not 
only provide insight into the mechanism underlying nuclear transport of PA but
also identify an intrinsic host factor that restricts influenza A virus
infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00939-12 
PMCID: PMC3536397
PMID: 23055567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

