
1. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Jan;373(1-2):29-40. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1472-y. Epub
2012 Oct 13.

Human papillomavirus 18 E1^E4 protein interacts with cyclin A/CDK 2 through an
RXL motif.

Ding Q(1), Li L, Whyte P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, 1280 Main
Street West, Hamilton, ON L8S 4K1, Canada. qding@robarts.ca

The human papilloma virus E4 protein is highly expressed in late times of
infection. Evidence to date suggests that E4 is essential for amplification of
the viral genome and that it can influence cell cycle. Examination of the
sequences encoding the E4 proteins from several genotypes of human papillomavirus
revealed the presence of RXL-containing motifs reminiscent of the cyclin-binding 
motifs that have been identified in several cyclin-binding proteins. When
baculovirus-produced human cyclin E and cyclin A with cdk2 were incubated in
vitro with a GST-E4 fusion protein, both cyclin E and A stably interacted with
the GST-E4 protein containing the full E4 sequence from HPV18. The interaction
was not dependent on the presence of the kinase subunit but was dependent on the 
integrity of the RXL motif in E4. When incubated with cell extracts from the C33A
human cervical carcinoma cell line or when expressed in C33A cells, the GST-E4
protein formed interactions with cyclin A and cdk2 and kinase activity could be
demonstrated in the GST-E4 complex. In contrast to the baculovirus-produced
cyclin E, cellular cyclin E failed to detectably interact with GST-E4 suggesting 
that the HPV18 E4 sequences are capable of interacting only with cyclin A in
mammalian cells. These observations suggest that human papillomavirus E4 proteins
can interact with cyclin A/cdk2, which may contribute to viral manipulation of
the host cell cycle.

DOI: 10.1007/s11010-012-1472-y 
PMID: 23065011  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

