
1. J Med Virol. 2013 Jan;85(1):71-82. doi: 10.1002/jmv.23442. Epub 2012 Oct 23.

Hepatitis C virus NS2 protease inhibits host cell antiviral response by
inhibiting IKKε and TBK1 functions.

Kaukinen P(1), Sillanpää M, Nousiainen L, Melén K, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Unit, Department of Infectious Disease Surveillance and Control,
National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), Helsinki, Finland.
pasi.kaukinen@helsinki.fi

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) encodes for several proteins that can interfere with host
cell signaling and antiviral response. Previously, serine protease NS3/4A was
shown to block host cell interferon (IFN) production by proteolytic cleavage of
MAVS and TRIF, the adaptor molecules of the RIG-I and TLR3 signaling pathways,
respectively. This study shows that another HCV protease, NS2 can interfere
efficiently with cytokine gene expression. NS2 and its proteolytically inactive
mutant forms were able to inhibit type I and type III IFN, CCL5 and CXCL10 gene
promoters activated by Sendai virus infection. However, the CXCL8 gene promoter
was not inhibited by NS2. In addition, constitutively active RIG-I (ΔRIG-I),
MAVS, TRIF, IKKε, and TBK1-induced activation of IFN-β promoter was inhibited by 
NS2. Cotransfection experiments with IKKε or TBK1 together with interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and HCV expression constructs revealed that NS2 in a
dose-dependent manner inhibited IKKε and especially TBK1-induced IRF3
phosphorylation. GST pull-down experiments with GST-NS2 and in vitro-translated
and cell-expressed IKKε and TBK1 demonstrated direct physical interactions of the
kinases with NS2. Further evidence that the IKKε/TBK1 kinase complex is the
target for NS2 was obtained from the observation that the constitutively active
form of IRF3 (IRF3-5D) activated readily IFN-β promoter in the presence of NS2.
The present study identified HCV NS2 as a potent interferon antagonist, and
describes an explanation of how NS2 downregulates the major signaling pathways
involved in the development of host innate antiviral responses.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.23442 
PMID: 23096996  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

