
1. J Virol. 2013 Feb;87(3):1596-604. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02357-12. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

Nuclear export signal-interacting protein forms complexes with lamin A/C-Nups to 
mediate the CRM1-independent nuclear export of large hepatitis delta antigen.

Huang C(1), Jiang JY, Chang SC, Tsay YG, Chen MR, Chang MF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Taiwan University
College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

Nuclear export is an important process that not only regulates the functions of
cellular factors but also facilitates the assembly of viral nucleoprotein
complexes. Chromosome region maintenance 1 (CRM1) that mediates the transport of 
proteins bearing the classical leucine-rich nuclear export signal (NES) is the
best-characterized nuclear export receptor. Recently, several CRM1-independent
nuclear export pathways were also identified. The nuclear export of the large
form of hepatitis delta antigen (HDAg-L), a nucleocapsid protein of hepatitis
delta virus (HDV), which contains a CRM1-independent proline-rich NES, is
mediated by the host NES-interacting protein (NESI). The mechanism of the NESI
protein in mediating nuclear export is still unknown. In this study, NESI was
characterized as a highly glycosylated membrane protein. It interacted and
colocalized well in the nuclear envelope with lamin A/C and nucleoporins.
Importantly, HDAg-L could be coimmunoprecipitated with lamin A/C and
nucleoporins. In addition, binding of the cargo HDAg-L to the C terminus of NESI 
was detected for the wild-type protein but not for the nuclear export-defective
HDAg-L carrying a P205A mutation [HDAg-L(P205A)]. Knockdown of lamin A/C
effectively reduced the nuclear export of HDAg-L and the assembly of HDV. These
data indicate that by forming complexes with lamin A/C and nucleoporins, NESI
facilitates the CRM1-independent nuclear export of HDAg-L.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02357-12 
PMCID: PMC3554191
PMID: 23175358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

