
1. J Virol. 2013 Feb;87(3):1586-95. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02074-12. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

High-risk human papillomavirus E6 oncoproteins interact with 14-3-3ζ in a PDZ
binding motif-dependent manner.

Boon SS(1), Banks L.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Padriciano,
Trieste, Italy.

Cervical cancer develops through the combined activities of the human
papillomavirus (HPV) E6 and E7 oncoproteins. A defining characteristic of E6
oncoproteins derived from cancer-causing HPV types is the presence of a PDZ
binding motif (PBM) at the extreme carboxy terminus of the protein which is
absent from E6 proteins derived from the so-called low-risk HPV types. Within
this PBM is also a protein kinase A (PKA) phospho-acceptor site, which is thought
to negatively regulate the association of E6 with its PDZ domain-containing
substrates. We can now show that phosphorylation of E6 by PKA and/or AKT confers 
the ability to interact with 14-3-3ζ. The interaction is direct and specific for 
the high-risk HPV E6 oncoproteins, although there are significant differences in 
the efficiencies with which HPV-16, HPV-18, and HPV-31 E6 oncoproteins can
associate with 14-3-3ζ; this correlates directly with their respective
susceptibilities to phosphorylation by PKA and/or AKT. We demonstrate here that
the interaction between E6 and 14-3-3ζ also requires integrity of the E6 PBM, and
downregulation of 14-3-3ζ results in a marked reduction in the levels of HPV-18
E6 expression in HeLa cells. Using phospho-specific anti-E6 antibodies, we also
demonstrate significant levels of E6 phosphorylation in vivo. These studies
redefine the potential relevance of the E6 PBM in the development of cervical
cancer, suggesting that interaction with 14-3-3ζ, as well as the more
well-established interactions with PDZ domain-containing substrates, is likely to
be responsible for the biological activities attributed to this region of the
high-risk HPV E6 oncoproteins.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02074-12 
PMCID: PMC3554170
PMID: 23175360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

