
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 18;109(51):20901-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1217094110. Epub 2012 Dec 3.

Structural mechanism of Bax inhibition by cytomegalovirus protein vMIA.

Ma J(1), Edlich F, Bermejo GA, Norris KL, Youle RJ, Tjandra N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The human protein Bax sits at a critical regulatory junction of apoptosis, or
programmed cell death. Bax exists in equilibrium between cytosolic and
mitochondria-associated forms that shifts toward the latter when Bax is activated
by proapoptotic proteins. Activated Bax changes conformation, inserts into the
mitochondrial outer membrane (MOM), oligomerizes, and induces MOM
permeabilization, causing the release of cytochrome c, which effectively commits 
the cell to die. Because apoptosis is also a basic defense mechanism against
invading pathogens, many viruses have developed counteractive measures. Such is
the case of human cytomegalovirus, the replication of which hinges on vMIA (viral
mitochondria-localized inhibitor of apoptosis), a virus-encoded protein with a
unique, albeit poorly understood antiapoptotic activity by which it binds and
recruits Bax to mitochondria. Here we show, via the structure determination of
the complex between Bax and a peptide comprising vMIA's Bax-binding domain, that 
vMIA contacts Bax at a previously unknown regulatory site. Notably, using
full-length vMIA, the structure is independently confirmed by assays in human
cells that measure Bax subcellular localization and cytochrome c release. Mutants
that disrupt key intermolecular interactions disfavor vMIA's mitochondrial
recruitment of Bax, and increase cytochrome c release upon apoptosis induction.
In a more stringent test, an engineered binding interface that achieves
wild-type-like charge complementarity, although in a reversed fashion, recovers
wild-type behavior. The structure suggests that by stabilizing key elements in
Bax needed to unravel for its MOM insertion and oligomerization, vMIA prevents
these important steps in apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1217094110 
PMCID: PMC3529058
PMID: 23213219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

