
1. J Mol Biol. 2013 Feb 22;425(4):812-29. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.12.005. Epub 2012 
Dec 13.

Effect of mimetic CDK9 inhibitors on HIV-1-activated transcription.

Van Duyne R(1), Guendel I, Jaworski E, Sampey G, Klase Z, Chen H, Zeng C,
Kovalskyy D, El Kouni MH, Lepene B, Patanarut A, Nekhai S, Price DH, Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biodefense and Infectious Diseases, George Mason
University, Manassas, VA 20110, USA.

Potent anti-retroviral therapy has transformed HIV-1 infection into a chronic
manageable disease; however, drug resistance remains a common problem that limits
the effectiveness and clinical benefits of this type of treatment. The discovery 
of viral reservoirs in the body, in which HIV-1 may persist, has helped to
explain why therapeutic eradication of HIV-1 has proved so difficult. In the
current study, we utilized a combination of structure-based analysis of
cyclin/CDK complexes with our previously published Tat peptide derivatives. We
modeled the Tat peptide inhibitors with CDKs and found a particular pocket that
showed the most stable binding site (Cavity 1) using in silico analysis.
Furthermore, we were able to find peptide mimetics that bound to similar regions 
using in silico searches of a chemical library, followed by cell-based biological
assays. Using these methods, we obtained the first-generation mimetic drugs and
tested these compounds on HIV-1 long terminal repeat-activated transcription.
Using biological assays followed by similar in silico analysis to find
second-generation drugs resembling the original mimetic, we found the new targets
of Cavity 1 and Cavity 2 regions on CDK9. We examined the second-generation
mimetic against various viral isolates and observed a generalized suppression of 
most HIV-1 isolates. Finally, the drug inhibited viral replication in humanized
mouse models of Rag2(-/-)γc(-/-) with no toxicity to the animals at tested
concentrations. Our results suggest that it may be possible to model peptide
inhibitors into available crystal structures and further find drug mimetics using
in silico analysis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.12.005 
PMCID: PMC3595178
PMID: 23247501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

