
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 8;288(6):3858-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.439810. Epub 2012
Dec 20.

Role of Src homology domain binding in signaling complexes assembled by the murid
γ-herpesvirus M2 protein.

Pires de Miranda M(1), Lopes FB, McVey CE, Bustelo XR, Simas JP.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Lisboa, 1649-028 Lisboa, Portugal.

γ-Herpesviruses express proteins that modulate B lymphocyte signaling to achieve 
persistent latent infections. One such protein is the M2 latency-associated
protein encoded by the murid herpesvirus-4. M2 has two closely spaced tyrosine
residues, Tyr(120) and Tyr(129), which are phosphorylated by Src family tyrosine 
kinases. Here we used mass spectrometry to identify the binding partners of
tyrosine-phosphorylated M2. Each M2 phosphomotif is shown to bind directly and
selectively to SH2-containing signaling molecules. Specifically, Src family
kinases, NCK1 and Vav1, bound to the Tyr(P)(120) site, PLCγ2 and the SHP2
phosphatase bound to the Tyr(P)(129) motif, and the p85α subunit of PI3K
associated with either motif. Consistent with these data, we show that M2
coordinates the formation of multiprotein complexes with these proteins. The
effect of those interactions is functionally bivalent, because it can result in
either the phosphorylation of a subset of binding proteins (Vav1 and PLCγ2) or in
the inactivation of downstream targets (AKT). Finally, we show that translocation
to the plasma membrane and subsequent M2 tyrosine phosphorylation relies on the
integrity of a C-terminal proline-rich SH3 binding region of M2 and its
interaction with Src family kinases. Unlike other γ-herpesviruses, that encode
transmembrane proteins that mimic the activation of ITAMs, murid herpesvirus-4
perturbs B cell signaling using a cytoplasmic/membrane shuttling factor that
nucleates the assembly of signaling complexes using a bilayered mechanism of
phosphotyrosine and proline-rich anchoring motifs.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.439810 
PMCID: PMC3567640
PMID: 23258536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

