
1. Cell Microbiol. 2013 Feb;15(2):315-34. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12095. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

The microtubule motor protein KIF13A is involved in intracellular trafficking of 
the Lassa virus matrix protein Z.

Fehling SK(1), Noda T, Maisner A, Lamp B, Conzelmann KK, Kawaoka Y, Klenk HD,
Garten W, Strecker T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Philipps-University Marburg, Hans-Meerwein-Str. 2,
35043 Marburg, Germany.

The small matrix protein Z of arenaviruses has been identified as the main
driving force to promote viral particle production at the plasma membrane.
Although multiple functions of Z in the arenaviral life cycle have been
uncovered, the mechanism of intracellular transport of Z to the site of virus
budding is poorly understood and cellular motor proteins that mediate Z
trafficking remain to be identified. In the present study, we report that the Z
protein of the Old World arenavirus Lassa virus (LASV) interacts with the kinesin
family member 13A (KIF13A), a plus-end-directed microtubule-dependent motor
protein. Plasmid-driven overexpression of KIF13A results in relocalization of Z
to the cell periphery, while functional blockage of endogenous KIF13A by
overexpression of a dominant-negative mutant or KIF13A-specific siRNA causes a
perinuclearaccumulation and decreased production of both Z-induced virus-like
particles and infectious LASV. The interaction of KIF13A with Z proteins from
both Old and New World arenaviruses suggests a conserved intracellular transport 
mechanism. In contrast, the intracellular distribution of the matrix proteins of 
prototypic members of the paramyxo- and rhabdovirus family is independent of
KIF13A. In summary, our studies identify for the first time a molecular motor
protein as a critical mediator for intracellular microtubule-dependent transport 
of arenavirus matrix proteins.

Â© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12095 
PMID: 23279019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

