
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Feb 5;110(6):2246-51. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1221921110. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

RNA editing of hepatitis B virus transcripts by activation-induced cytidine
deaminase.

Liang G(1), Kitamura K, Wang Z, Liu G, Chowdhury S, Fu W, Koura M, Wakae K, Honjo
T, Muramatsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Genomic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) is essential for the somatic
hypermutation (SHM) and class-switch recombination (CSR) of Ig genes. The
mechanism by which AID triggers SHM and CSR has been explained by two distinct
models. In the DNA deamination model, AID converts cytidine bases in DNA into
uridine. The uridine is recognized by the DNA repair system, which produces DNA
strand breakages and point mutations. In the alternative model, RNA edited by AID
is responsible for triggering CSR and SHM. However, RNA deamination by AID has
not been demonstrated. Here we found that C-to-T and G-to-A mutations accumulated
in hepatitis B virus (HBV) nucleocapsid DNA when AID was expressed in
HBV-replicating hepatic cell lines. AID expression caused C-to-T mutations in the
nucleocapsid DNA of RNase H-defective HBV, which does not produce plus-strand
viral DNA. Furthermore, the RT-PCR products of nucleocapsid viral RNA from
AID-expressing cells exhibited significant C-to-T mutations, whereas viral RNAs
outside the nucleocapsid did not accumulate C-to-U mutations. Moreover, AID was
packaged within the nucleocapsid by forming a ribonucleoprotein complex with HBV 
RNA and the HBV polymerase protein. The encapsidation of the AID protein with
viral RNA and DNA provides an efficient environment for evaluating AID's RNA and 
DNA deamination activities. A bona fide RNA-editing enzyme, apolipoprotein B mRNA
editing catalytic polypeptide 1, induced a similar level of C-to-U mutations in
nucleocapsid RNA as AID. Taken together, the results indicate that AID can
deaminate the nucleocapsid RNA of HBV.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1221921110 
PMCID: PMC3568302
PMID: 23341589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

