
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Feb 5;110(6):E448-57. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1219702110. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

Uracil DNA glycosylase initiates degradation of HIV-1 cDNA containing
misincorporated dUTP and prevents viral integration.

Weil AF(1), Ghosh D, Zhou Y, Seiple L, McMahon MA, Spivak AM, Siliciano RF,
Stivers JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

HIV-1 reverse transcriptase discriminates poorly between dUTP and dTTP, and
accordingly, viral DNA products become heavily uracilated when viruses infect
host cells that contain high ratios of dUTP:dTTP. Uracilation of invading
retroviral DNA is thought to be an innate immunity barrier to retroviral
infection, but the mechanistic features of this immune pathway and the cellular
fate of uracilated retroviral DNA products is not known. Here we developed a
model system in which the cellular dUTP:dTTP ratio can be pharmacologically
increased to favor dUTP incorporation, allowing dissection of this innate
immunity pathway. When the virus-infected cells contained elevated dUTP levels,
reverse transcription was found to proceed unperturbed, but integration and viral
protein expression were largely blocked. Furthermore, successfully integrated
proviruses lacked detectable uracil, suggesting that only nonuracilated viral DNA
products were integration competent. Integration of the uracilated proviruses was
restored using an isogenic cell line that had no detectable human uracil DNA
glycosylase (hUNG2) activity, establishing that hUNG2 is a host restriction
factor in cells that contain high dUTP. Biochemical studies in primary cells
established that this immune pathway is not operative in CD4+ T cells, because
these cells have high dUTPase activity (low dUTP), and only modest levels of hUNG
activity. Although monocyte-derived macrophages have high dUTP levels, these
cells have low hUNG activity, which may diminish the effectiveness of this
restriction pathway. These findings establish the essential elements of this
pathway and reconcile diverse observations in the literature.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1219702110 
PMCID: PMC3568341
PMID: 23341616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

