
1. J Virol. 2013 Apr;87(8):4461-74. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01803-12. Epub 2013 Feb 6.

The transcription factors TBX2 and TBX3 interact with human papillomavirus 16
(HPV16) L2 and repress the long control region of HPVs.

Schneider MA(1), Scheffer KD, Bund T, Boukhallouk F, Lambert C, Cotarelo C,
Pflugfelder GO, Florin L, Spoden GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Hygiene, University Medical Center of Johannes 
Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

The minor capsid protein L2 of human papillomaviruses (HPVs) has multiple
functions during the viral life cycle. Although L2 is required for effective
invasion and morphogenesis, only a few cellular interaction partners are known so
far. Using yeast two-hybrid screening, we identified the transcription factor
TBX2 as a novel interaction partner of HPV type 16 (HPV16) L2.
Coimmunoprecipitations and immunofluorescence analyses confirmed the L2-TBX2
interaction and revealed that L2 also interacts with TBX3, another member of the 
T-box family. Transcription of the early genes during HPV infection is under the 
control of an upstream enhancer and early promoter region, the long control
region (LCR). In promoter-reporter gene assays, we observed that TBX2 and TBX3
repress transcription from the LCR and that this effect is enhanced by L2.
Repression of the HPV LCR by TBX2/3 seems to be a conserved mechanism, as it was 
also observed with the LCRs of different HPV types. Finally, interaction of TBX2 
with the LCR was detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation, and we found a strong
colocalization of L2 and TBX2 in HPV16-positive cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia (CIN) I-II tissue sections. These results suggest that TBX2/3 might
play a role in the regulation of HPV gene expression during the viral life cycle.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01803-12 
PMCID: PMC3624339
PMID: 23388722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

