
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Apr 1;41(6):3532-50. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt064. Epub 2013
Feb 8.

Control of human adenovirus type 5 gene expression by cellular Daxx/ATRX
chromatin-associated complexes.

Schreiner S(1), Bürck C, Glass M, Groitl P, Wimmer P, Kinkley S, Mund A, Everett 
RD, Dobner T.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, 20251
Hamburg, Germany.

Death domain-associated protein (Daxx) cooperates with X-linked α-thalassaemia
retardation syndrome protein (ATRX), a putative member of the sucrose
non-fermentable 2 family of ATP-dependent chromatin-remodelling proteins, acting 
as the core ATPase subunit in this complex, whereas Daxx is the targeting factor,
leading to histone deacetylase recruitment, H3.3 deposition and transcriptional
repression of cellular promoters. Despite recent findings on the fundamental
importance of chromatin modification in host-cell gene regulation, it remains
unclear whether adenovirus type 5 (Ad5) transcription is regulated by cellular
chromatin remodelling to allow efficient virus gene expression. Here, we focus on
the repressive role of the Daxx/ATRX complex during Ad5 replication, which
depends on intact protein-protein interaction, as negative regulation could be
relieved with a Daxx mutant that is unable to interact with ATRX. To ensure
efficient viral replication, Ad5 E1B-55K protein inhibits Daxx and targets ATRX
for proteasomal degradation in cooperation with early region 4 open reading frame
protein 6 and cellular components of a cullin-dependent E3-ubiquitin ligase. Our 
studies illustrate the importance and diversity of viral factors antagonizing
Daxx/ATRX-mediated repression of viral gene expression and shed new light on the 
modulation of cellular chromatin remodelling factors by Ad5. We show for the
first time that cellular Daxx/ATRX chromatin remodelling complexes play essential
roles in Ad gene expression and illustrate the importance of early viral proteins
to counteract cellular chromatin remodelling.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt064 
PMCID: PMC3616723
PMID: 23396441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

