
1. J Virol. 2013 May;87(10):5602-20. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02063-12. Epub 2013 Mar 6.

SUMOylation affects the interferon blocking activity of the influenza A
nonstructural protein NS1 without affecting its stability or cellular
localization.

Santos A(1), Pal S, Chac√≥n J, Meraz K, Gonzalez J, Prieto K, Rosas-Acosta G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Texas at El Paso, El
Paso, Texas, USA.

Our pioneering studies on the interplay between the small ubiquitin-like modifier
(SUMO) and influenza A virus identified the nonstructural protein NS1 as the
first known SUMO target of influenza virus and one of the most abundantly
SUMOylated influenza virus proteins. Here, we further characterize the role of
SUMOylation for the A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (PR8) NS1 protein, demonstrating that
NS1 is SUMOylated not only by SUMO1 but also by SUMO2/3 and mapping the main
SUMOylation sites in NS1 to residues K219 and K70. Furthermore, by using
SUMOylatable and non-SUMOylatable forms of NS1 and an NS1-specific artificial
SUMO ligase (ASL) that increases NS1 SUMOylation ~4-fold, we demonstrate that
SUMOylation does not affect the stability or cellular localization of PR8 NS1.
However, NS1's ability to be SUMOylated appears to affect virus multiplication,
as indicated by the delayed growth of a virus expressing the non-SUMOylatable
form of NS1 in the interferon (IFN)-competent MDCK cell line. Remarkably, while a
non-SUMOylatable form of NS1 exhibited a substantially diminished ability to
neutralize IFN production, increasing NS1 SUMOylation beyond its normal levels
also exerted a negative effect on its IFN-blocking function. This observation
indicates the existence of an optimal level of NS1 SUMOylation that allows NS1 to
achieve maximal activity and suggests that the limited amount of SUMOylation
normally observed for most SUMO targets may correspond to an optimal level that
maximizes the contribution of SUMOylation to protein function. Finally, protein
cross-linking data suggest that SUMOylation may affect NS1 function by regulating
the abundance of NS1 dimers and trimers in the cell.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02063-12 
PMCID: PMC3648185
PMID: 23468495  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

