
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e57514. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057514. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

Mapping the interactions of dengue virus NS1 protein with human liver proteins
using a yeast two-hybrid system: identification of C1q as an interacting partner.

Silva EM(1), Conde JN, Allonso D, Nogueira ML, Mohana-Borges R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Genômica Estrutural, Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas
Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil.

Dengue constitutes a global health concern. The clinical manifestation of this
disease varies from mild febrile illness to severe hemorrhage and/or fatal
hypovolemic shock. Flavivirus nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) is a secreted
glycoprotein that is displayed on the surface of infected cells but is absent in 
viral particles. NS1 accumulates at high levels in the plasma of dengue virus
(DENV)-infected patients, and previous reports highlight its involvement in
immune evasion, dengue severity, liver dysfunction and pathogenesis. In the
present study, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen to search for DENV2
NS1-interacting partners using a human liver cDNA library. We identified fifty
genes, including human complement component 1 (C1q), which was confirmed by
coimmunoprecipitation, ELISA and immunofluorescence assays, revealing for the
first time the direct binding of this protein to NS1. Furthermore, the majority
of the identified genes encode proteins that are secreted into the plasma of
patients, and most of these proteins are classified as acute-phase proteins
(APPs), such as plasminogen, haptoglobin, hemopexin, α-2-HS-glycoprotein, retinol
binding protein 4, transferrin, and C4. The results presented here confirm the
direct interaction of DENV NS1 with a key protein of the complement system and
suggest a role for this complement protein in the pathogenesis of DENV infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057514 
PMCID: PMC3597719
PMID: 23516407  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

