
1. Virology. 2013 May 25;440(1):8-18. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2013.02.008. Epub 2013
Mar 21.

Nup153 and Nup98 bind the HIV-1 core and contribute to the early steps of HIV-1
replication.

Di Nunzio F(1), Fricke T, Miccio A, Valle-Casuso JC, Perez P, Souque P, Rizzi E, 
Severgnini M, Mavilio F, Charneau P, Diaz-Griffero F.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Virology and Vaccinology unit, CNRS URA 3015, Department of
Virology, Institut Pasteur, 25-28 rue du Dr. Roux, 75015 Paris, France.
francesca.di-nunzio@pasteur.fr

The early steps of HIV-1 replication involve the entry of HIV-1 into the nucleus,
which is characterized by viral interactions with nuclear pore components. HIV-1 
developed an evolutionary strategy to usurp the nuclear pore machinery and
chromatin in order to integrate and efficiently express viral genes. In the
current work, we studied the role of nucleoporins 153 and 98 (Nup153 and Nup98)
in infection of human Jurkat lymphocytes by HIV-1. We showed that Nup153-depleted
cells exhibited a defect in nuclear import, while depletion of Nup 98 caused a
slight defect in HIV integration. To explore the biochemical viral determinants
for the requirement of Nup153 and Nup98 during HIV-1 infection, we tested the
ability of these nucleoporins to interact with HIV-1 cores. Our findings showed
that both nucleoporins bind HIV-1 cores suggesting that this interaction is
important for HIV-1 nuclear import and/or integration. Distribution analysis of
integration sites in Nup153-depleted cells revealed a reduced tendency of HIV-1
to integrate in intragenic sites, which in part could account for the large
infectivity defect observed in Nup153-depleted cells. Our work strongly supports 
a role for Nup153 in HIV-1 nuclear import and integration.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2013.02.008 
PMCID: PMC3860269
PMID: 23523133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

