
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 10;288(19):13718-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.343756. Epub
2013 Mar 25.

Structure- and modeling-based identification of the adenovirus E4orf4 binding
site in the protein phosphatase 2A B55α subunit.

Horowitz B(1), Sharf R, Avital-Shacham M, Pechkovsky A, Kleinberger T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel
Institute of Technology, Bat Galim, Haifa 31096, Israel.

BACKGROUND: The adenovirus E4orf4 protein must bind protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A)
for its functions.
RESULTS: The E4orf4 binding site in PP2A was mapped to the α1,α2 helices of the
B55α subunit.
CONCLUSION: The E4orf4 binding site in PP2A-B55α lies above the substrate binding
site and does not overlap it.
SIGNIFICANCE: A novel functional significance was assigned to the α1,α2 helices
of the PP2A-B55α subunit. The adenovirus E4orf4 protein regulates the progression
of viral infection and when expressed outside the context of the virus it induces
nonclassical, cancer cell-specific apoptosis. All E4orf4 functions known to date 
require an interaction between E4orf4 and protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), which is
mediated through PP2A regulatory B subunits. Specifically, an interaction with
the B55α subunit is required for induction of cell death by E4orf4. To gain a
better insight into the E4orf4-PP2A interaction, mapping of the E4orf4
interaction site in PP2A-B55α has been undertaken. To this end we used a
combination of bioinformatics analyses of PP2A-B55α and of E4orf4, which led to
the prediction of E4orf4 binding sites on the surface of PP2A-B55α. Mutation
analysis, immunoprecipitation, and GST pulldown assays based on the theoretical
predictions revealed that the E4orf4 binding site included the α1 and α2 helices 
described in the B55α structure and involved at least three residues located in
these helices facing each other. Loss of E4orf4 binding was accompanied by
reduced contribution of the B55α mutants to E4orf4-induced cell death. The
identified E4orf4 binding domain lies above the previously described substrate
binding site and does not overlap it, although its location could be consistent
with direct or indirect effects on substrate binding. This work assigns for the
first time a functional significance to the α1,α2 helices of B55α, and we suggest
that the binding site defined by these helices could also contribute to
interactions between PP2A and some of its cellular regulators.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.343756 
PMCID: PMC3650409
PMID: 23530045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

