
1. J Virol. 2013 Jun;87(12):6782-93. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00011-13. Epub 2013 Apr 10.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) latency-associated nuclear antigen
regulates the KSHV epigenome by association with the histone demethylase KDM3A.

Kim KY(1), Huerta SB, Izumiya C, Wang DH, Martinez A, Shevchenko B, Kung HJ,
Campbell M, Izumiya Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California, Davis, School of
Medicine, Sacramento, California, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) latent genomes are tethered to
host histones to form a minichromosome also known as an "episome." Histones,
which are core components of chromatin, are heavily modified by various
histone-targeting enzymes. Posttranslational modifications of histones
significantly influence accessibility of transcriptional factors and thus have
profound effects on gene expression. Recent studies showed that epigenetic marks 
on the KSHV episome are well organized, exemplified by the absence of histone H3 
lysine 9 (H3K9) methylation, a heterochromatic histone mark, from immediate early
and latent gene promoters in naturally infected cells. The present study revealed
a mechanistic insight into KSHV epigenome regulation via a complex consisting of 
LANA and the H3K9me1/2 histone demethylase JMJD1A/KDM3A. This complex was
isolated from HeLa cell nuclear extracts stably expressing LANA and was verified 
by coimmunoprecipitation analyses and with purified proteins. LANA recruitment
sites on the KSHV genome inversely correlated with H3K9me2 histone marks in
naturally infected cells, and methylation of H3K9 significantly inhibited LANA
binding to the histone H3 tail. Chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with KSHV
tiling arrays identified the recruitment sites of the complex, while depletion of
LANA expression or overexpression of a KDM3A binding-deficient mutant decreased
KDM3A recruitment to the KSHV genome. Finally, ablation of KDM3A expression from 
latently KSHV-infected cells significantly inhibited KSHV gene expression,
leading to decreased KSHV replication during reactivation. Taken together, our
results suggest that LANA may play a role in regulation of epigenetic marks on
the KSHV genome, which is in part through association with the histone
demethylase KDM3A.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00011-13 
PMCID: PMC3676133
PMID: 23576503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

