
1. J Virol. 2013 Jun;87(12):6866-75. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03475-12. Epub 2013 Apr 10.

Syndecan-1 serves as the major receptor for attachment of hepatitis C virus to
the surfaces of hepatocytes.

Shi Q(1), Jiang J, Luo G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Kentucky College of Medicine, Lexington, Kentucky, USA.

Our recent studies demonstrated that apolipoprotein E mediates cell attachment of
hepatitis C virus (HCV) through interactions with the cell surface heparan
sulfate (HS). HS is known to covalently attach to core proteins to form heparan
sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) on the cell surface. The HSPG core proteins include
the membrane-spanning syndecans (SDCs), the lycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked
glypicans (GPCs), the basement membrane proteoglycan perlecan (HSPG2), and agrin.
In the present study, we have profiled each of the HSPG core proteins in HCV
attachment. Substantial evidence derived from our studies demonstrates that SDC1 
is the major receptor protein for HCV attachment. The knockdown of SDC1
expression by small interfering RNA (siRNA)-induced gene silence resulted in a
significant reduction of HCV attachment to Huh-7.5 cells and stem
cell-differentiated human hepatocytes. The silence of SDC2 expression also caused
a modest decrease of HCV attachment. In contrast, the siRNA-mediated knockdown of
other SDCs, GPCs, HSPG2, and agrin had no effect on HCV attachment. More
importantly, ectopic expression of SDC1 was able to completely restore HCV
attachment to Huh-7.5 cells in which the endogenous SDC1 expression was silenced 
by specific siRNAs. Interestingly, mouse SDC1 is also fully functional in
mediating HCV attachment when expressed in the SDC1-deficient cells, consistent
with recent reports that mouse hepatocytes are also susceptible to HCV infection 
when expressing other key HCV receptors. Collectively, our findings demonstrate
that SDC1 serves as the major receptor protein for HCV attachment to cells,
providing another potential target for discovery and development of antiviral
drugs against HCV.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03475-12 
PMCID: PMC3676102
PMID: 23576506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

