
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 21;110(21):8690-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1300703110. Epub 2013 Apr 22.

Allosteric integrase inhibitor potency is determined through the inhibition of
HIV-1 particle maturation.

Jurado KA(1), Wang H, Slaughter A, Feng L, Kessl JJ, Koh Y, Wang W,
Ballandras-Colas A, Patel PA, Fuchs JR, Kvaratskhelia M, Engelman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 21;110(21):8327-8.

Integration is essential for HIV-1 replication, and the viral integrase (IN)
protein is an important therapeutic target. Allosteric IN inhibitors (ALLINIs)
that engage the IN dimer interface at the binding site for the host protein lens 
epithelium-derived growth factor (LEDGF)/transcriptional coactivator p75 are an
emerging class of small molecule antagonists. Consistent with the inhibition of a
multivalent drug target, ALLINIs display steep antiviral dose-response curves ex 
vivo. ALLINIs multimerize IN protein and concordantly block its assembly with
viral DNA in vitro, indicating that the disruption of two integration-associated 
functions, IN catalysis and the IN-LEDGF/p75 interaction, determines the
multimode mechanism of ALLINI action. We now demonstrate that ALLINI potency is
unexpectedly accounted for during the late phase of HIV-1 replication. The
compounds promote virion IN multimerization and, reminiscent of class II IN
mutations, block the formation of the electron-dense viral core and inhibit
reverse transcription and integration in subsequently infected target cells.
Mature virions are recalcitrant to ALLINI treatment, and compound potency during 
virus production is independent of the level of LEDGF/p75 expression. We conclude
that cooperative multimerization of IN by ALLINIs together with the inability for
LEDGF/p75 to effectively engage the virus during its egress from cells
underscores the multimodal mechanism of ALLINI action. Our results highlight the 
versatile nature of allosteric inhibitors to primarily inhibit viral replication 
at a step that is distinct from the catalytic requirement for the target enzyme. 
The vulnerability of IN to small molecules during the late phase of HIV-1
replication unveils a pharmacological Achilles' heel for exploitation in clinical
ALLINI development.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1300703110 
PMCID: PMC3666754
PMID: 23610442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

