
1. J Virol. 2013 Jul;87(13):7435-44. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00070-13. Epub 2013 Apr 24.

The four and a half LIM family members are novel interactants of the human T-cell
leukemia virus type 1 Tax oncoprotein.

McCabe Á(1), Hashimoto K, Hall WW, Sheehy N.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research in Infectious Diseases, School of Medicine and Medical
Science, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is the etiologic agent of adult
T-cell leukemia (ATL). The viral regulatory protein Tax1 plays a pivotal role in 
T-cell transformation and ATL development. Previous studies in our laboratory,
using the yeast 2-hybrid approach to screen a T-cell library for Tax1-interacting
partners, identified the cellular Four and a Half Lim domain protein 3 (FHL3) as 
a possible Tax1-interacting candidate. FHL3 is a member of the FHL family of
proteins, which function as transcriptional coactivators and cytoskeleton
regulators and have a role in cancer progression and development. The aim of this
study was to investigate the physical and functional interaction between Tax1 and
members of the FHL family of proteins. We show that Tax1 and FHL3 interact both
in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, both FHL1 and -2 also interact with Tax1. We
have demonstrated that FHL3 enhances Tax1-mediated activation of the viral long
terminal repeat (LTR) without affecting basal activity and that FHL1 to -3
regulate NF-κB activation by Tax1 in a cell-specific manner. In addition, we have
found that the interaction between Tax1 and FHL1 to -3 affects the localization
of these proteins, leading to their redistribution in cells. Tax1 also affected
FHL3 cytoskeleton function by increasing FHL3-mediated cell spreading. Overall,
our results suggest that the interaction between Tax1 and the FHL family alters
both the transactivating activity and the subcellular localization of Tax1 and
provide new insights into molecular mechanisms that underlie the oncogenic nature
of this HTLV-1 protein.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00070-13 
PMCID: PMC3700305
PMID: 23616667  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

