
1. J Virol. 2013 Jul;87(14):7977-91. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03540-12. Epub 2013 May 15.

Molecular determinants of hepatitis B and D virus entry restriction in mouse
sodium taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide.

Yan H(1), Peng B, He W, Zhong G, Qi Y, Ren B, Gao Z, Jing Z, Song M, Xu G, Sui J,
Li W.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing, China.

Human hepatitis B virus (HBV) and its satellite virus, hepatitis D virus (HDV),
primarily infect humans, chimpanzees, or tree shrews (Tupaia belangeri). Viral
infections in other species are known to be mainly restricted at the entry level 
since viral replication can be achieved in the cells by transfection of the viral
genome. Sodium taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide (NTCP) is a functional
receptor for HBV and HDV, and amino acids 157 to 165 of NTCP are critical for
viral entry and likely limit viral infection of macaques. However, the molecular 
determinants for viral entry restriction in mouse NTCP (mNTCP) remain unclear. In
this study, mNTCP was found to be unable to support either HBV or HDV infection, 
although it can bind to pre-S1 of HBV L protein and is functional in transporting
substrate taurocholate; comprehensive swapping and point mutations of human NTCP 
(hNTCP) and mNTCP revealed molecular determinants restricting mNTCP for viral
entry of HBV and HDV. Remarkably, when mNTCP residues 84 to 87 were substituted
by human counterparts, mNTCP can effectively support viral infections. In
addition, a number of cell lines, regardless of their species or tissue origin,
supported HDV infection when transfected with hNTCP or mNTCP with residues 84 to 
87 replaced by human counterparts, highlighting the central role of NTCP for
viral infections mediated by HBV envelope proteins. These studies advance our
understanding of NTCP-mediated viral entry of HBV and HDV and have important
implications for developing the mouse model for their infections.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03540-12 
PMCID: PMC3700185
PMID: 23678176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

