
1. J Proteome Res. 2013 Jun 7;12(6):2537-51. doi: 10.1021/pr3011217. Epub 2013 May
17.

Understanding the biological context of NS5A-host interactions in HCV infection: 
a network-based approach.

Tripathi LP(1), Kambara H, Chen YA, Nishimura Y, Moriishi K, Okamoto T, Morita E,
Abe T, Mori Y, Matsuura Y, Mizuguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, 7-6-8 Saito Asagi, Ibaraki, Osaka
567-0085, Japan.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major cause of chronic liver disease. HCV NS5A
protein plays an important role in HCV infection through its interactions with
other HCV proteins and host factors. In an attempt to further our understanding
of the biological context of protein interactions between NS5A and host factors
in HCV pathogenesis, we generated an extensive physical interaction map between
NS5A and cellular factors. By combining a yeast two-hybrid assay with
comprehensive literature mining, we built the NS5A interactome composed of 132
human proteins that interact with NS5A. These interactions were integrated into a
high-confidence human protein interactome (HPI) with the help of the TargetMine
data warehouse system to infer an overall protein interaction map linking NS5A
with the components of the host cellular networks. The NS5A-host interactions
that were integrated with the HPI were shown to participate in compact and
well-connected cellular networks. Functional analysis of the NS5A "infection"
network using TargetMine highlighted cellular pathways associated with immune
system, cellular signaling, cell adhesion, cellular growth and death among
others, which were significantly targeted by NS5A-host interactions. In addition,
cellular assays with in vitro HCV cell culture systems identified two
ER-localized host proteins RTN1 and RTN3 as novel regulators of HCV propagation. 
Our analysis builds upon the present understanding of the role of NS5A protein in
HCV pathogenesis and provides potential targets for more effective anti-HCV
therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.1021/pr3011217 
PMID: 23682656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

