
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jun 4;110(23):9505-10. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1307527110. Epub 2013 May 20.

Ultrastructural analysis of hepatitis C virus particles.

Catanese MT(1), Uryu K, Kopp M, Edwards TJ, Andrus L, Rice WJ, Silvestry M, Kuhn 
RJ, Rice CM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Study of Hepatitis C, Laboratory of Virology and Infectious
Disease, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major cause of chronic liver disease, with an
estimated 170 million people infected worldwide. Low yields, poor stability, and 
inefficient binding to conventional EM grids have posed significant challenges to
the purification and structural analysis of HCV. In this report, we generated an 
infectious HCV genome with an affinity tag fused to the E2 envelope glycoprotein.
Using affinity grids, previously described to isolate proteins and macromolecular
complexes for single-particle EM, we were able to purify enveloped particles
directly from cell culture media. This approach allowed for rapid in situ
purification of virions and increased particle density that were instrumental for
cryo-EM and cryoelectron tomography (cryo-ET). Moreover, it enabled
ultrastructural analysis of virions produced by primary human hepatocytes. HCV
appears to be the most structurally irregular member of the Flaviviridae family. 
Particles are spherical, with spike-like projections, and heterogeneous in size
ranging from 40 to 100 nm in diameter. Exosomes, although isolated from
unfractionated culture media, were absent in highly infectious, purified virus
preparations. Cryo-ET studies provided low-resolution 3D structural information
of highly infectious virions. In addition to apolipoprotein (apo)E, HCV particles
also incorporate apoB and apoA-I. In general, host apolipoproteins were more
readily accessible to antibody labeling than HCV glycoproteins, suggesting either
lower abundance or masking by host proteins.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1307527110 
PMCID: PMC3677472
PMID: 23690609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

