
1. Oncogene. 2014 May 1;33(18):2317-28. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.181. Epub 2013 May 27.

HTLV-1 HBZ positively regulates the mTOR signaling pathway via inhibition of
GADD34 activity in the cytoplasm.

Mukai R(1), Ohshima T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Engineering, Tokushima Bunri University, Sanuki, Kagawa, Japan.
(2)1] Faculty of Engineering, Tokushima Bunri University, Sanuki, Kagawa, Japan
[2] Faculty of Pharmaceutical Science at Kagawa Campus, Tokushima Bunri
University, Sanuki, Kagawa, Japan.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type-1 (HTLV-1) infection causes adult T-cell
leukemia (ATL). Modulation of the transcriptional control of cellular genes by
HTLV-1 is thought to be associated with the development of ATL. The viral protein
HTLV-1 basic leucine-zipper factor (HBZ) has been shown to dysregulate the
activity of cellular transcription factors. Here, we demonstrate that HBZ is
exported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, where it activates the mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway through an association with growth
arrest and DNA damage gene 34 (GADD34). The N-terminal region of HBZ interacts
with the C-terminal region of GADD34. HBZ contains a functional nuclear export
signal (NES) sequence within its N-terminal region and it is exported from the
nucleus via the CRM1-dependent pathway. Nuclear export of HBZ is essential for
its interaction with GADD34 and increased phosphorylation of S6 kinase, which is 
an established downstream target of the mTOR pathway. Starvation-induced
autophagy is significantly suppressed by the overexpression of HBZ. These
findings indicate that HBZ is actively exported to the cytoplasm, where it
dysregulates the function of cellular factors.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2013.181 
PMID: 23708656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

