
1. J Virol. 2013 Aug;87(16):9208-16. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01210-13. Epub 2013 Jun 12.

The measles virus hemagglutinin β-propeller head β4-β5 hydrophobic groove governs
functional interactions with nectin-4 and CD46 but not those with the signaling
lymphocytic activation molecule.

Mateo M(1), Navaratnarajah CK, Syed S, Cattaneo R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Wild-type measles virus (MV) strains use the signaling lymphocytic activation
molecule (SLAM; CD150) and the adherens junction protein nectin-4 (poliovirus
receptor-like 4 [PVRL4]) as receptors. Vaccine MV strains have adapted to use
ubiquitous membrane cofactor protein (MCP; CD46) in addition. Recently solved
cocrystal structures of the MV attachment protein (hemagglutinin [H]) with each
receptor indicate that all three bind close to a hydrophobic groove located
between blades 4 and 5 (β4-β5 groove) of the H protein β-propeller head. We used 
this structural information to focus our analysis of the functional footprints of
the three receptors on vaccine MV H. We mutagenized this protein and tested the
ability of individual mutants to support cell fusion through each receptor. The
results highlighted a strong overlap between the functional footprints of
nectin-4 and CD46 but not those of SLAM. A soluble form of nectin-4 abolished
vaccine MV entry in nectin-4- and CD46-expressing cells but only reduced entry
through SLAM. Analyses of the binding kinetics of an H mutant with the three
receptors revealed that a single substitution in the β4-β5 groove drastically
reduced nectin-4 and CD46 binding while minimally altering SLAM binding. We also 
generated recombinant viruses and analyzed their infections in cells expressing
individual receptors. Introduction of a single substitution into the hydrophobic 
pocket affected entry through both nectin-4 and CD46 but not through SLAM. Thus, 
while nectin-4 and CD46 interact functionally with the H protein β4-β5
hydrophobic groove, SLAM merely covers it. This has implications for vaccine and 
antiviral strategies.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01210-13 
PMCID: PMC3754078
PMID: 23760251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

