
1. J Virol. 2013 Sep;87(17):9610-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01070-13. Epub 2013 Jun 26.

Coagulation factor binding orientation and dimerization may influence infectivity
of adenovirus-coagulation factor complexes.

Irons EE(1), Flatt JW, Doronin K, Fox TL, Acchione M, Stewart PL, Shayakhmetov
DM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Adenoviruses (Ads) are promising vectors for therapeutic interventions in humans.
When injected into the bloodstream, Ad vectors can bind several vitamin
K-dependent blood coagulation factors, which contributes to virus sequestration
in the liver by facilitating transduction of hepatocytes. Although both
coagulation factors FVII and FX bind the hexon protein of human Ad serotype 5
(HAdv5) with a very high affinity, only FX appears to play a role in mediating
Ad-hepatocyte transduction in vivo. To understand the discrepancy between
efficacy of FVII binding to hexon and its apparently poor capacity for supporting
virus cell entry, we analyzed the HAdv5-FVII complex by using high-resolution
cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) followed by molecular dynamic flexible fitting
(MDFF) simulations. The results indicate that although hexon amino acids T423,
E424, and T425, identified earlier as critical for FX binding, are also involved 
in mediating binding of FVII, the FVII GLA domain sits within the surface-exposed
hexon trimer depression in a different orientation from that found for FX.
Furthermore, we found that when bound to hexon, two proximal FVII molecules
interact via their serine protease (SP) domains and bury potential heparan
sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) receptor binding residues within the dimer interface.
In contrast, earlier cryo-EM studies of the Ad-FX interaction showed no evidence 
of dimer formation. Dimerization of FVII bound to Ad may be a contributing
mechanistic factor for the differential infectivity of Ad-FX and Ad-FVII
complexes, despite high-affinity binding of both these coagulation factors to the
virus.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01070-13 
PMCID: PMC3754089
PMID: 23804638  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

