
1. J Virol. 2013 Sep;87(17):9431-40. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01317-13. Epub 2013 Jun 26.

Glycoproteins gE and gI are required for efficient KIF1A-dependent anterograde
axonal transport of alphaherpesvirus particles in neurons.

Kratchmarov R(1), Kramer T, Greco TM, Taylor MP, Ch'ng TH, Cristea IM, Enquist
LW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, 
USA.

Alphaherpesviruses, including pseudorabies virus (PRV), spread directionally
within the nervous systems of their mammalian hosts. Three viral membrane
proteins are required for efficient anterograde-directed spread of infection in
neurons, including Us9 and a heterodimer composed of the glycoproteins gE and gI.
We previously demonstrated that the kinesin-3 motor KIF1A mediates
anterograde-directed transport of viral particles in axons of cultured peripheral
nervous system (PNS) neurons. The PRV Us9 protein copurifies with KIF1A,
recruiting the motor to transport vesicles, but at least one unidentified
additional viral protein is necessary for this interaction. Here we show that
gE/gI are required for efficient anterograde transport of viral particles in
axons by mediating the interaction between Us9 and KIF1A. In the absence of
gE/gI, viral particles containing green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged Us9 are 
assembled in the cell body but are not sorted efficiently into axons.
Importantly, we found that gE/gI are necessary for efficient copurification of
KIF1A with Us9, especially at early times after infection. We also constructed a 
PRV recombinant that expresses a functional gE-GFP fusion protein and used
affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry to identify gE-interacting
proteins. Several viral and host proteins were found to associate with gE-GFP.
Importantly, both gI and Us9, but not KIF1A, copurified with gE-GFP. We propose
that gE/gI are required for efficient KIF1A-mediated anterograde transport of
viral particles because they indirectly facilitate or stabilize the interaction
between Us9 and KIF1A.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01317-13 
PMCID: PMC3754139
PMID: 23804637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

