
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(6):e1003460. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003460. Epub 2013 Jun
27.

Cellular RNA binding proteins NS1-BP and hnRNP K regulate influenza A virus RNA
splicing.

Tsai PL(1), Chiou NT, Kuss S, Garc√≠a-Sastre A, Lynch KW, Fontoura BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, United States of America.

Influenza A virus is a major human pathogen with a genome comprised of eight
single-strand, negative-sense, RNA segments. Two viral RNA segments, NS1 and M,
undergo alternative splicing and yield several proteins including NS1, NS2, M1
and M2 proteins. However, the mechanisms or players involved in splicing of these
viral RNA segments have not been fully studied. Here, by investigating the
interacting partners and function of the cellular protein NS1-binding protein
(NS1-BP), we revealed novel players in the splicing of the M1 segment. Using a
proteomics approach, we identified a complex of RNA binding proteins containing
NS1-BP and heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs), among which are
hnRNPs involved in host pre-mRNA splicing. We found that low levels of NS1-BP
specifically impaired proper alternative splicing of the viral M1 mRNA segment to
yield the M2 mRNA without affecting splicing of mRNA3, M4, or the NS mRNA
segments. Further biochemical analysis by formaldehyde and UV cross-linking
demonstrated that NS1-BP did not interact directly with viral M1 mRNA but its
interacting partners, hnRNPs A1, K, L, and M, directly bound M1 mRNA. Among these
hnRNPs, we identified hnRNP K as a major mediator of M1 mRNA splicing. The M1
mRNA segment generates the matrix protein M1 and the M2 ion channel, which are
essential proteins involved in viral trafficking, release into the cytoplasm, and
budding. Thus, reduction of NS1-BP and/or hnRNP K levels altered M2/M1 mRNA and
protein ratios, decreasing M2 levels and inhibiting virus replication. Thus,
NS1-BP-hnRNPK complex is a key mediator of influenza A virus gene expression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003460 
PMCID: PMC3694860
PMID: 23825951  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

