
1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 9;8(7):e68736. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068736. Print 2013.

Hepatitis C virus non-structural protein 3 interacts with cytosolic
5'(3')-deoxyribonucleotidase and partially inhibits its activity.

Fang CP(1), Li ZC, Yang CH, Cheng JC, Yeh YJ, Sun TH, Li HC, Juang YL, Lo SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Biotechnology, Tzu Chi University,
Hualien, Taiwan.

Infection with hepatitis C virus (HCV) is etiologically involved in liver
cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma and B-cell lymphomas. It has been
demonstrated previously that HCV non-structural protein 3 (NS3) is involved in
cell transformation. In this study, a yeast two-hybrid screening experiment was
conducted to identify cellular proteins interacting with HCV NS3 protein.
Cytosolic 5'(3')-deoxyribonucleotidase (cdN, dNT-1) was found to interact with
HCV NS3 protein. Binding domains of HCV NS3 and cellular cdN proteins were also
determined using the yeast two-hybrid system. Interactions between HCV NS3 and
cdN proteins were further demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation and confocal
analysis in cultured cells. The cellular cdN activity was partially repressed by 
NS3 protein in both the transiently-transfected and the stably-transfected
systems. Furthermore, HCV partially repressed the cdN activity while had no
effect on its protein expression in the systems of HCV sub-genomic replicons and 
infectious HCV virions. Deoxyribonucleotidases are present in most mammalian
cells and involve in the regulation of intracellular deoxyribonucleotides pools
by substrate cycles. Control of DNA precursor concentration is essential for the 
maintenance of genetic stability. Reduction of cdN activity would result in the
imbalance of DNA precursor concentrations. Thus, our results suggested that HCV
partially reduced the cdN activity via its NS3 protein and this may in turn cause
diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068736 
PMCID: PMC3706368
PMID: 23874742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

