
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(8):e1003513. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003513. Epub 2013 Aug
1.

Rab18 binds to hepatitis C virus NS5A and promotes interaction between sites of
viral replication and lipid droplets.

Salloum S(1), Wang H, Ferguson C, Parton RG, Tai AW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a single-stranded RNA virus that replicates on
endoplasmic reticulum-derived membranes. HCV particle assembly is dependent on
the association of core protein with cellular lipid droplets (LDs). However, it
remains uncertain whether HCV assembly occurs at the LD membrane itself or at
closely associated ER membranes. Furthermore, it is not known how the HCV
replication complex and progeny genomes physically associate with the presumed
sites of virion assembly at or near LDs. Using an unbiased proteomic strategy, we
have found that Rab18 interacts with the HCV nonstructural protein NS5A. Rab18
associates with LDs and is believed to promote physical interaction between LDs
and ER membranes. Active (GTP-bound) forms of Rab18 bind more strongly to NS5A
than a constitutively GDP-bound mutant. NS5A colocalizes with Rab18-positive LDs 
in HCV-infected cells, and Rab18 appears to promote the physical association of
NS5A and other replicase components with LDs. Modulation of Rab18 affects genome 
replication and possibly also the production of infectious virions. Our results
support a model in which specific interactions between viral and cellular
proteins may promote the physical interaction between membranous HCV replication 
foci and lipid droplets.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003513 
PMCID: PMC3731246
PMID: 23935497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

