
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Aug;9(8):e1003568. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003568. Epub 2013
Aug 15.

The viral KSHV chemokine vMIP-II inhibits the migration of Naive and activated
human NK cells by antagonizing two distinct chemokine receptors.

Yamin R(1), Kaynan NS, Glasner A, Vitenshtein A, Tsukerman P, Bauman Y, Ophir Y, 
Elias S, Bar-On Y, Gur C, Mandelboim O.

Author information: 
(1)The Lautenberg Center for General and Tumor Immunology, The BioMedical
Research Institute Israel Canada,Faculty of Medicine (IMRIC), The Hebrew
University Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel.

Natural killer (NK) cells are innate immune cells able to rapidly kill
virus-infected and tumor cells. Two NK cell populations are found in the blood;
the majority (90%) expresses the CD16 receptor and also express the CD56 protein 
in intermediate levels (CD56(Dim) CD16(Pos)) while the remaining 10% are CD16
negative and express CD56 in high levels (CD56(Bright) CD16(Neg)). NK cells also 
reside in some tissues and traffic to various infected organs through the usage
of different chemokines and chemokine receptors. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus (KSHV) is a human virus that has developed numerous sophisticated and
versatile strategies to escape the attack of immune cells such as NK cells. Here,
we investigate whether the KSHV derived cytokine (vIL-6) and chemokines (vMIP-I, 
vMIP-II, vMIP-III) affect NK cell activity. Using transwell migration assays,
KSHV infected cells, as well as fusion and recombinant proteins, we show that out
of the four cytokine/chemokines encoded by KSHV, vMIP-II is the only one that
binds to the majority of NK cells, affecting their migration. We demonstrate that
vMIP-II binds to two different receptors, CX3CR1 and CCR5, expressed by naïve
CD56(Dim) CD16(Pos) NK cells and activated NK cells, respectively. Furthermore,
we show that the binding of vMIP-II to CX3CR1 and CCR5 blocks the binding of the 
natural ligands of these receptors, Fractalkine (Fck) and RANTES, respectively.
Finally, we show that vMIP-II inhibits the migration of naïve and activated NK
cells towards Fck and RANTES. Thus, we present here a novel mechanism in which
KSHV uses a unique protein that antagonizes the activity of two distinct
chemokine receptors to inhibit the migration of naïve and activated NK cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003568 
PMCID: PMC3744409
PMID: 23966863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

