
1. J Virol. 2013 Nov;87(21):11562-78. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01568-13. Epub 2013 Aug 21.

Human cytomegalovirus UL76 elicits novel aggresome formation via interaction with
S5a of the ubiquitin proteasome system.

Lin SR(1), Jiang MJ, Wang HH, Hu CH, Hsu MS, Hsi E, Duh CY, Wang SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, Republic of China.

HCMV UL76 is a member of a conserved Herpesviridae protein family (Herpes_UL24)
that is involved in viral production, latency, and reactivation. UL76 presents as
globular aggresomes in the nuclei of transiently transfected cells. Bioinformatic
analyses predict that UL76 has a propensity for aggregation and targets cellular 
proteins implicated in protein folding and ubiquitin-proteasome systems (UPS).
Furthermore, fluorescence recovery after photobleaching experiments suggests that
UL76 reduces protein mobility in the aggresome, which indicates that UL76 elicits
the aggregation of misfolded proteins. Moreover, in the absence of other viral
proteins, UL76 interacts with S5a, which is a major receptor of polyubiquitinated
proteins for UPS proteolysis via its conserved region and the von Willebrand
factor type A (VWA) domain of S5a. We demonstrate that UL76 sequesters
polyubiquitinated proteins and S5a to nuclear aggresomes in biological proximity.
After knockdown of endogenous S5a by RNA interference techniques, the UL76 level 
was only minimally affected in transiently expressing cells. However, a
significant reduction in the number of cells containing UL76 nuclear aggresomes
was observed, which suggests that S5a may play a key role in aggresome formation.
Moreover, we show that UL76 interacts with S5a in the late phase of viral
infection and that knockdown of S5a hinders the development of both the
replication compartment and the aggresome. In this study, we demonstrate that
UL76 induces a novel nuclear aggresome, likely by subverting S5a of the UPS.
Given that UL76 belongs to a conserved family, this underlying mechanism may be
shared by all members of the Herpesviridae.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01568-13 
PMCID: PMC3807320
PMID: 23966401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

