
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(8):e1003589. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003589. Epub 2013 Aug
29.

Signal peptidase complex subunit 1 participates in the assembly of hepatitis C
virus through an interaction with E2 and NS2.

Suzuki R(1), Matsuda M, Watashi K, Aizaki H, Matsuura Y, Wakita T, Suzuki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology II, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo,
Japan. ryosuke@nih.go.jp

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) nonstructural protein 2 (NS2) is a hydrophobic,
transmembrane protein that is required not only for NS2-NS3 cleavage, but also
for infectious virus production. To identify cellular factors that interact with 
NS2 and are important for HCV propagation, we screened a human liver cDNA library
by split-ubiquitin membrane yeast two-hybrid assay using full-length NS2 as a
bait, and identified signal peptidase complex subunit 1 (SPCS1), which is a
component of the microsomal signal peptidase complex. Silencing of endogenous
SPCS1 resulted in markedly reduced production of infectious HCV, whereas neither 
processing of structural proteins, cell entry, RNA replication, nor release of
virus from the cells was impaired. Propagation of Japanese encephalitis virus was
not affected by knockdown of SPCS1, suggesting that SPCS1 does not widely
modulate the viral lifecycles of the Flaviviridae family. SPCS1 was found to
interact with both NS2 and E2. A complex of NS2, E2, and SPCS1 was formed in
cells as demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation assays. Knockdown of SPCS1
impaired interaction of NS2 with E2. Our findings suggest that SPCS1 plays a key 
role in the formation of the membrane-associated NS2-E2 complex via its
interaction with NS2 and E2, which leads to a coordinating interaction between
the structural and non-structural proteins and facilitates the early step of
assembly of infectious particles.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003589 
PMCID: PMC3757040
PMID: 24009510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

