
1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 8;8(10):e77320. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077320. eCollection
2013.

HIV-1 Vpr induces the degradation of ZIP and sZIP, adaptors of the NuRD chromatin
remodeling complex, by hijacking DCAF1/VprBP.

Maudet C(1), Sourisce A, Dragin L, Lahouassa H, Rain JC, Bouaziz S, Ramirez BC,
Margottin-Goguet F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Sante et de la recherche Medicale Inserm
U1016, Institut Cochin, Paris, France ; CNRS UMR8104, Paris, France ; University 
Paris Descartes, Paris, France ; Institute for Molecular Infection Biology,
University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.

The Vpr protein from type 1 and type 2 Human Immunodeficiency Viruses (HIV-1 and 
HIV-2) is thought to inactivate several host proteins through the hijacking of
the DCAF1 adaptor of the Cul4A ubiquitin ligase. Here, we identified two
transcriptional regulators, ZIP and sZIP, as Vpr-binding proteins degraded in the
presence of Vpr. ZIP and sZIP have been shown to act through the recruitment of
the NuRD chromatin remodeling complex. Strikingly, chromatin is the only cellular
fraction where Vpr is present together with Cul4A ubiquitin ligase subunits.
Components of the NuRD complex and exogenous ZIP and sZIP were also associated
with this fraction. Several lines of evidence indicate that Vpr induces ZIP and
sZIP degradation by hijacking DCAF1: (i) Vpr induced a drastic decrease of
exogenously expressed ZIP and sZIP in a dose-dependent manner, (ii) this decrease
relied on the proteasome activity, (iii) ZIP or sZIP degradation was impaired in 
the presence of a DCAF1-binding deficient Vpr mutant or when DCAF1 expression was
silenced. Vpr-mediated ZIP and sZIP degradation did not correlate with the
growth-related Vpr activities, namely G2 arrest and G2 arrest-independent
cytotoxicity. Nonetheless, infection with HIV-1 viruses expressing Vpr led to the
degradation of the two proteins. Altogether our results highlight the existence
of two host transcription factors inactivated by Vpr. The role of Vpr-mediated
ZIP and sZIP degradation in the HIV-1 replication cycle remains to be deciphered.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077320 
PMCID: PMC3792905
PMID: 24116224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

