
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(10):e1003640. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003640. Epub 2013
Oct 17.

A structural basis for BRD2/4-mediated host chromatin interaction and oligomer
assembly of Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus and murine gammaherpesvirus
LANA proteins.

Hellert J(1), Weidner-Glunde M, Krausze J, Richter U, Adler H, Fedorov R, Pietrek
M, Rückert J, Ritter C, Schulz TF, Lührs T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research,
Braunschweig, Germany.

Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) establishes a lifelong latent
infection and causes several malignancies in humans. Murine herpesvirus 68
(MHV-68) is a related γ2-herpesvirus frequently used as a model to study the
biology of γ-herpesviruses in vivo. The KSHV latency-associated nuclear antigen
(kLANA) and the MHV68 mLANA (orf73) protein are required for latent viral
replication and persistence. Latent episomal KSHV genomes and kLANA form nuclear 
microdomains, termed 'LANA speckles', which also contain cellular chromatin
proteins, including BRD2 and BRD4, members of the BRD/BET family of chromatin
modulators. We solved the X-ray crystal structure of the C-terminal DNA binding
domains (CTD) of kLANA and MHV-68 mLANA. While these structures share the overall
fold with the EBNA1 protein of Epstein-Barr virus, they differ substantially in
their surface characteristics. Opposite to the DNA binding site, both kLANA and
mLANA CTD contain a characteristic lysine-rich positively charged surface patch, 
which appears to be a unique feature of γ2-herpesviral LANA proteins.
Importantly, kLANA and mLANA CTD dimers undergo higher order oligomerization.
Using NMR spectroscopy we identified a specific binding site for the ET domains
of BRD2/4 on kLANA. Functional studies employing multiple kLANA mutants indicate 
that the oligomerization of native kLANA CTD dimers, the characteristic basic
patch and the ET binding site on the kLANA surface are required for the formation
of kLANA 'nuclear speckles' and latent replication. Similarly, the basic patch on
mLANA contributes to the establishment of MHV-68 latency in spleen cells in vivo.
In summary, our data provide a structural basis for the formation of higher order
LANA oligomers, which is required for nuclear speckle formation, latent
replication and viral persistence.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003640 
PMCID: PMC3798688
PMID: 24146614  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

