
1. Cancer Res. 2014 Jan 1;74(1):188-200. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0436. Epub
2013 Oct 31.

HTLV-1 bZIP factor suppresses apoptosis by attenuating the function of FoxO3a and
altering its localization.

Tanaka-Nakanishi A(1), Yasunaga J, Takai K, Matsuoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliation: Laboratory of Virus Control, Institute for Virus
Research, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

As the infectious agent causing human adult T-cell leukemia (ATL), the human
T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) virus spreads in vivo primarily by
cell-to-cell transmission. However, the factors that determine its transmission
efficiency are not fully understood. The viral genome encodes the HTLV-1 bZIP
factor (HBZ), which is expressed in all ATL cases and is known to promote T-cell 
proliferation. In this study, we investigated the hypothesis that HBZ also
influences the survival of T cells. Through analyzing the transcriptional profile
of HBZ-expressing cells, we learned that HBZ suppressed transcription of the
proapoptotic gene Bim (Bcl2l11) and that HBZ-expressing cells were resistant to
activation-induced apoptosis. Mechanistic investigations into how HBZ suppresses 
Bim expression revealed that HBZ perturbs the localization and function of
FoxO3a, a critical transcriptional activator of the genes encoding Bim and also
Fas ligand (FasL). By interacting with FoxO3a, HBZ not only attenuated DNA
binding by FoxO3a but also sequestered the inactive form of FoxO3a in the
nucleus. In a similar manner, HBZ also inhibited FasL transcription induced by
T-cell activation. Further study of ATL cells identified other Bim perturbations 
by HBZ, including at the level of epigenetic alteration, histone modification in 
the promoter region of the Bim gene. Collectively, our results indicated that HBZ
impairs transcription of the Bim and FasL genes by disrupting FoxO3a function,
broadening understanding of how HBZ acts to promote proliferation of
HTLV-1-infected T cells by blocking their apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0436 
PMID: 24177179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

