
1. Cell Rep. 2013 Nov 27;5(4):886-94. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.09.040. Epub 2013
Oct 31.

The BET family of proteins targets moloney murine leukemia virus integration near
transcription start sites.

De Rijck J(1), de Kogel C, Demeulemeester J, Vets S, El Ashkar S, Malani N,
Bushman FD, Landuyt B, Husson SJ, Busschots K, Gijsbers R, Debyser Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Virology and Gene Therapy, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium.

A hallmark of retroviral replication is integration of the viral genome into host
cell DNA. This characteristic makes retrovirus-based vectors attractive delivery 
vehicles for gene therapy. However, adverse events in gene therapeutic trials,
caused by activation of proto-oncogenes due to murine leukemia virus
(MLV)-derived vector integration, hamper their application. Here, we show that
bromodomain and extraterminal (BET) proteins (BRD2, BRD3, and BRD4) and MLV
integrase specifically interact and colocalize within the nucleus of the cell.
Inhibition of the BET proteins' chromatin interaction via specific bromodomain
inhibitors blocks MLV virus replication at the integration step. MLV integration 
site distribution parallels the chromatin binding profile of BET proteins, and
expression of an artificial fusion protein of the BET integrase binding domain
with the chromatin interaction domain of the lentiviral targeting factor
LEDGF/p75 retargets MLV integration away from transcription start sites and into 
the body of actively transcribed genes, conforming to the HIV integration
pattern. Together, these data validate BET proteins as MLV integration targeting 
factors.

Copyright Â© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.09.040 
PMCID: PMC4197836
PMID: 24183673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

