
1. Arch Virol. 2014 May;159(5):979-91. doi: 10.1007/s00705-013-1912-3. Epub 2013 Nov
13.

The membrane on the surface of hepatitis E virus particles is derived from the
intracellular membrane and contains trans-Golgi network protein 2.

Nagashima S(1), Takahashi M, Jirintai S, Tanggis, Kobayashi T, Nishizawa T,
Okamoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Department of Infection and Immunity, Jichi Medical
University School of Medicine, 3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, 329-0498,
Japan.

Our previous studies demonstrated that hepatitis E virus (HEV) requires the
multivesicular body (MVB) pathway to release virus particles, suggesting that HEV
utilizes the cellular ESCRT machinery in the cytoplasm, not at the cell surface, 
to be released from infected cells. In this study, we generated a murine
monoclonal antibody (mAb) against the membrane-associated HEV particles to
examine whether the membrane is derived from intracellular vesicles or the cell
surface. An established mAb, TA1708, was found to capture the membrane-associated
HEV particles, but not the membrane-dissociated particles or fecal HEV, in an
immunocapture RT-PCR assay. Furthermore, digitonin treatment confirmed that the
membrane on the surface of cell-culture-generated HEV particles was a lipid
membrane. Double immunofluorescence staining revealed that mAb TA1708
specifically recognizes trans-Golgi network protein 2 (TGOLN2), an intracellular 
antigen derived from the trans-Golgi network. Supporting these findings, HEV
particles with lipid membranes and ORF3 proteins on their surface were found
abundantly in the lysates of HEV-infected cells. These results indicate that HEV 
forms membrane-associated particles in the cytoplasm, most likely by budding into
intracellular vesicles, and that the released HEV particles with a lipid membrane
retain the antigenicity of TGOLN2 on their surface.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-013-1912-3 
PMID: 24221250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

