
1. Cell Host Microbe. 2013 Nov 13;14(5):522-34. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2013.10.010.

The intracellular cargo receptor ERGIC-53 is required for the production of
infectious arenavirus, coronavirus, and filovirus particles.

Klaus JP(1), Eisenhauer P, Russo J, Mason AB, Do D, King B, Taatjes D,
Cornillez-Ty C, Boyson JE, Thali M, Zheng C, Liao L, Yates JR 3rd, Zhang B,
Ballif BA, Botten JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Immunobiology, University of Vermont,
Burlington, VT 05405, USA; Cellular, Molecular and Biomedical Sciences Graduate
Program, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Host Microbe. 2013 Nov 13;14(5):485-7.

Arenaviruses and hantaviruses cause severe human disease. Little is known
regarding host proteins required for their propagation. We identified human
proteins that interact with the glycoproteins (GPs) of a prototypic arenavirus
and hantavirus and show that the lectin endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-Golgi
intermediate compartment 53 kDa protein (ERGIC-53), a cargo receptor required for
glycoprotein trafficking within the early exocytic pathway, associates with
arenavirus, hantavirus, coronavirus, orthomyxovirus, and filovirus GPs. ERGIC-53 
binds to arenavirus GPs through a lectin-independent mechanism, traffics to
arenavirus budding sites, and is incorporated into virions. ERGIC-53 is required 
for arenavirus, coronavirus, and filovirus propagation; in its absence,
GP-containing virus particles form but are noninfectious, due in part to their
inability to attach to host cells. Thus, we have identified a class of
pathogen-derived ERGIC-53 ligands, a lectin-independent basis for their
association with ERGIC-53, and a role for ERGIC-53 in the propagation of several 
highly pathogenic RNA virus families.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2013.10.010 
PMCID: PMC3999090
PMID: 24237698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

