
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(11):e1003776. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003776. Epub 2013
Nov 21.

The Neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn) enhances human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) transcytosis across epithelial cells.

Gupta S(1), Gach JS, Becerra JC, Phan TB, Pudney J, Moldoveanu Z, Joseph SB,
Landucci G, Supnet MJ, Ping LH, Corti D, Moldt B, Hel Z, Lanzavecchia A, Ruprecht
RM, Burton DR, Mestecky J, Anderson DJ, Forthal DN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
California, Irvine School of Medicine, Irvine, California, United States of
America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2013 Nov;9(11).
doi:10.1371/annotation/31430955-703b-484a-96eb-e180f917d683.

The mechanisms by which human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) crosses
mucosal surfaces to establish infection are unknown. Acidic genital secretions of
HIV-1-infected women contain HIV-1 likely coated by antibody. We found that the
combination of acidic pH and Env-specific IgG, including that from cervicovaginal
and seminal fluids of HIV-1-infected individuals, augmented transcytosis across
epithelial cells as much as 20-fold compared with Env-specific IgG at neutral pH 
or non-specific IgG at either pH. Enhanced transcytosis was observed with
clinical HIV-1 isolates, including transmitted/founder strains, and was
eliminated in Fc neonatal receptor (FcRn)-knockdown epithelial cells.
Non-neutralizing antibodies allowed similar or less transcytosis than
neutralizing antibodies. However, the ratio of total:infectious virus was higher 
for neutralizing antibodies, indicating that they allowed transcytosis while
blocking infectivity of transcytosed virus. Immunocytochemistry revealed abundant
FcRn expression in columnar epithelia lining the human endocervix and penile
urethra. Acidity and Env-specific IgG enhance transcytosis of virus across
epithelial cells via FcRn and could facilitate translocation of virus to
susceptible target cells following sexual exposure.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003776 
PMCID: PMC3836734
PMID: 24278022  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

