
1. J Virol. 2014 Mar;88(6):3309-19. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03824-13. Epub 2014 Jan 3.

Core binding factor beta plays a critical role by facilitating the assembly of
the Vif-cullin 5 E3 ubiquitin ligase.

Fribourgh JL(1), Nguyen HC, Wolfe LS, Dewitt DC, Zhang W, Yu XF, Rhoades E, Xiong
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New
Haven, Connecticut, USA.

The HIV-1 virion infectivity factor (Vif) targets the cellular cytidine
deaminases APOBEC3G (A3G) and APOBEC3F (A3F) for degradation via the host
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Vif recruits a cellular E3 ubiquitin ligase to
polyubiquitinate A3G/F. The activity of Vif critically depends on the cellular
core binding factor beta (CBFβ). In this study, we investigated the Vif-CBFβ
interaction and the role of CBFβ in the E3 ligase assembly. Vif-CBFβ interaction 
requires an extensive region of Vif spanning most of its amino terminus and zinc 
finger region, and cullin 5 (Cul5) binding enhances the stability of the Vif-CBFβ
interaction. Our results further demonstrate that CBFβ plays a critical role in
facilitating Cul5 binding to the Vif/elongin B/elongin C complex. Vif, with or
without bound substrate, is unable to bind Cul5 in the absence of CBFβ. These
studies support the notion that CBFβ serves as a molecular chaperone to
facilitate Vif-E3 ligase assembly.IMPORTANCE: The host antiviral restriction
factors A3G/F inhibit viral replication. The HIV-1 protein Vif targets A3G/F for 
degradation. This immune evasion activity of Vif is dependent on the cellular
factor CBFβ. Multiple regions of Vif are known to be important for Vif function, 
but the mechanisms are unclear. The studies described here provide important
information about the Vif-CBFβ interaction interface and the function of CBFβ in 
E3 ligase assembly. In particular, our comprehensive Vif-CBFβ interface mapping
results help to delineate the role of various Vif regions, determining if they
are important for binding CBFβ or A3G/F. Furthermore, our studies reveal an
important potential mechanism of CBFβ that has not been shown before. Our results
suggest that CBFβ may serve as a molecular chaperone to enable Vif to adopt an
appropriate conformation for interaction with the Cul5-based E3 ligase. This
study advances our understanding of how CBFβ facilitates the Vif-mediated
degradation of APOBEC3 proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03824-13 
PMCID: PMC3957930
PMID: 24390320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

