
1. Eur J Cell Biol. 2013 Dec;92(12):374-82. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2013.12.003. Epub
2013 Dec 31.

TIP47 is associated with the hepatitis C virus and its interaction with Rab9 is
required for release of viral particles.

Ploen D(1), Hafirassou ML(2), Himmelsbach K(1), Schille SA(1), Biniossek ML(3),
Baumert TF(4), Schuster C(2), Hildt E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Paul-Ehrlich-Institut, Dept. of Virology, Langen, Germany.
(2)Inserm, U1110, Strasbourg, France; Université de Strasbourg, France.
(3)University of Freiburg, Inst. for Molecular Medicine and Cell Research,
Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Inserm, U1110, Strasbourg, France; Université de Strasbourg, France; Pôle
hépato-digestif des Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, France.
(5)Paul-Ehrlich-Institut, Dept. of Virology, Langen, Germany; Deutsches Zentrum
für Infektionsforschung (DZIF), Germany. Electronic address:
eberhard.hildt@pei.de.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) morphogenesis and release are closely linked to lipid
metabolism. It has been described recently by our group that TIP47 plays an
essential role for the targeting of the NS5A-complexed RNA genome from the
replicon complex to the lipid droplet. Moreover, apolipoprotein (apo) E was found
to be associated with the viral particle. In light of the fact, that TIP47
harbors an apoE like domain and has a high affinity to lipoproteins, the
interaction of TIP47 with the viral particle and the potential relevance for the 
release of the viral particle were investigated. Coimmunoprecipitations and
electron microscopy analysis using immunogold labeling revealed that TIP47 binds 
to the viral particle and stays associated with the released HCV particle.
Silencing of the TIP47 binding partner Rab9 by lentiviral transduction abolishes 
the viral replication. However, destruction of TIP47-Rab9 interactions by
deletion/mutation of the Rab9 binding does not abolish the genome replication
domain but prevents the release of HCV particles. The binding of these TIP47
mutants to the viral particle is not affected by destruction of the Rab9 binding 
domain. Moreover, we found that these TIP47 mutants lacking the binding site for 
Rab9 misdirect the de novo synthesized viral particles to the
autophagosomal/lysosomal compartment where the particles are degraded. From this 
we conclude that the Rab9-complexed TIP47 plays an essential role for the proper 
release of hepatitis C viral particles.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2013.12.003 
PMID: 24480419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

