
1. Retrovirology. 2014 Feb 13;11:18. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-11-18.

Human protein Staufen-2 promotes HIV-1 proliferation by positively regulating RNA
export activity of viral protein Rev.

Banerjee A, Benjamin R, Balakrishnan K, Ghosh P, Banerjee S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad, 
Gachibowli, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh 500046, India. sbsl@uohyd.ernet.in.

BACKGROUND: The export of intron containing viral RNAs from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm is an essential step in the life cycle of Human Immunodeficiency
Virus-1 (HIV-1). As the eukaryotic system does not permit the transport of intron
containing RNA out of the nucleus, HIV-1 makes a regulatory protein, Rev, that
mediates the transportation of unspliced and partially spliced viral mRNA from
the nucleus to the cytoplasm, thereby playing a decisive role in the generation
of new infectious virus particles. Therefore, the host factors modulating the RNA
export activity of Rev can be major determinants of virus production in an
infected cell.
RESULTS: In this study, human Staufen-2 (hStau-2) was identified as a host factor
interacting with HIV-1 Rev through affinity chromatography followed by MALDI
analyses. Our experiments involving transient expressions, siRNA mediated
knockdowns and infection assays conclusively established that hStau-2 is a
positive regulator of HIV-1 pathogenesis. We demonstrated that Rev-hStau-2
interactions positively regulated the RNA export activity of Rev and promoted
progeny virus synthesis. The Rev-hStau-2 interaction was independent of RNA
despite both being RNA binding proteins. hStau-2 mutant, with mutations at
Q314R-A318F-K319E, deficient of binding Rev, failed to promote hStau-2 dependent 
Rev activity and viral production, validating the essentiality of this
protein-protein interaction. The expression of this positive regulator was
elevated upon HIV-1 infection in both human T-lymphocyte and astrocyte cell
lines.
CONCLUSIONS: With this study, we establish that human Staufen-2, a host factor
which is up-regulated upon HIV-1 infection, interacts with HIV-1 Rev, thereby
promoting its RNA export activity and progeny virus formation. Altogether, our
study provides new insights into the emerging role of the Staufen family of mRNA 
transporters in host-pathogen interaction and supports the notion that
obliterating interactions between viral and host proteins that positively
regulate HIV-1 proliferation can significantly contribute to anti-retroviral
treatments.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-11-18 
PMCID: PMC4016256
PMID: 24520823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

