
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Feb 18;111(7):2722-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1317454111. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Leukocyte immunoglobulin-like receptor B1 is critical for antibody-dependent
dengue.

Chan KR(1), Ong EZ, Tan HC, Zhang SL, Zhang Q, Tang KF, Kaliaperumal N, Lim AP,
Hibberd ML, Chan SH, Connolly JE, Krishnan MN, Lok SM, Hanson BJ, Lin CN, Ooi EE.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School,
Singapore 169857.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Feb 18;111(7):2404-5.

Viruses must evade the host innate defenses for replication and dengue is no
exception. During secondary infection with a heterologous dengue virus (DENV)
serotype, DENV is opsonized with sub- or nonneutralizing antibodies that enhance 
infection of monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells via the Fc-gamma
receptor (FcγR), a process termed antibody-dependent enhancement of DENV
infection. However, this enhancement of DENV infection is curious as
cross-linking of activating FcγRs signals an early antiviral response by inducing
the type-I IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs). Entry through activating FcγR would thus 
place DENV in an intracellular environment unfavorable for enhanced replication. 
Here we demonstrate that, to escape this antiviral response, antibody-opsonized
DENV coligates leukocyte Ig-like receptor-B1 (LILRB1) to inhibit FcγR signaling
for ISG expression. This immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motif-bearing
receptor recruits Src homology phosphatase-1 to dephosphorylate spleen tyrosine
kinase (Syk). As Syk is a key intermediate of FcγR signaling, LILRB1 coligation
resulted in reduced ISG expression for enhanced DENV replication. Our findings
suggest a unique mechanism for DENV to evade an early antiviral response for
enhanced infection.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1317454111 
PMCID: PMC3932915
PMID: 24550301  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

