
1. J Virol. 2014 Jun;88(12):6611-22. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03736-13. Epub 2014 Apr 2.

The stress granule component TIA-1 binds tick-borne encephalitis virus RNA and is
recruited to perinuclear sites of viral replication to inhibit viral translation.

Albornoz A(1), Carletti T(2), Corazza G(1), Marcello A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, International Center for Genetic Engineering
and Biotechnology (ICGEB), Trieste, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, International Center for Genetic Engineering
and Biotechnology (ICGEB), Trieste, Italy Institute for Maternal and Child
Health-IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, International Center for Genetic Engineering
and Biotechnology (ICGEB), Trieste, Italy marcello@icgeb.org.

Flaviviruses are a major cause of disease in humans and animals worldwide.
Tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) is the most important arthropod-borne
flavivirus endemic in Europe and is the etiological agent of tick-borne
encephalitis, a potentially fatal infection of the central nervous system.
However, the contributions of host proteins during TBEV infection are poorly
understood. In this work, we investigate the cellular protein TIA-1 and its
cognate factor TIAR, which are stress-induced RNA-binding proteins involved in
the repression of initiation of translation of cellular mRNAs and in the
formation of stress granules. We show that TIA-1 and TIAR interact with viral RNA
in TBEV-infected cells. During TBEV infection, cytoplasmic TIA-1 and TIAR are
recruited at sites of viral replication with concomitant depletion from stress
granules. This effect is specific, since G3BP1, another component of these
cytoplasmic structures, remains localized to stress granules. Moreover, heat
shock induction of stress granules containing TIA-1, but not G3BP1, is inhibited 
in TBEV-infected cells. Infection of cells depleted of TIA-1 or TIAR by small
interfering RNA (siRNA) or TIA-1(-/-) mouse fibroblasts, leads to a significant
increase in TBEV extracellular infectivity. Interestingly, TIAR(-/-) fibroblasts 
show the opposite effect on TBEV infection, and this phenotype appears to be
related to an excess of TIA-1 in these cells. Taking advantage of a
TBE-luciferase replicon system, we also observed increased luciferase activity in
TIA-1(-/-) mouse fibroblasts at early time points, consistent with TIA-1-mediated
inhibition at the level of the first round of viral translation. These results
indicate that, in response to TBEV infection, TIA-1 is recruited to sites of
virus replication to bind TBEV RNA and modulate viral translation independently
of stress granule (SG) formation.IMPORTANCE: This study (i) extends previous work
that showed TIA-1/TIAR recruitment at sites of flavivirus replication, (ii)
demonstrates that TIAR behaves like TIA-1 as an inhibitor of viral replication
using an RNA interference (RNAi) approach in human cells that contradicts the
previous hypothesis based on mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) knockouts only,
(iii) demonstrates that tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) is capable of
inducing bona fide G3BP1/eIF3/eIF4B-positive stress granules, (iv) demonstrates a
differential phenotype of stress response proteins following viral infection, and
(v) implicates TIA-1 in viral translation and as a modulator of TBEV replication.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03736-13 
PMCID: PMC4054376
PMID: 24696465  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

