
1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1989 Jul;64(2):195-204.

Binding of androgen-receptor complexes to alpha 2u-globulin genes and to the long
terminal repeat of mouse mammary tumor virus.

Van Dijck P(1), Winderickx J, Heyns W, Verhoeven G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Experimental Medicine and Endocrinology, Onderwijs en
Navorsing, Catholic University of Leuven, Belgium.

The binding of androgen-receptor complexes to fragments derived from two alpha
2u-globulin genes (RAP 01 and RAO 01) was studied using a DNA-cellulose
competition assay. Rat prostate cytosol labelled with [3H]mibolerone was used as 
a source of the androgen receptor. Two controls were included in these studies:
the long terminal repeat (LTR) of mouse mammary tumor virus which has previously 
been shown to act as an androgen response element and a fragment of the C3 gene
of prostatic binding protein which has been demonstrated to bind
androgen-receptor complexes. Our experiments indicate that androgen-receptor
complexes bind specifically and with comparable affinity to the C3 gene fragment,
the LTR and a fragment of RAP 01 located in the 5'-upstream region (bp -642 up to
-584). No specific interaction was observed with fragments derived from RAO 01.
The region of RAP 01 which binds androgen-receptor complexes has previously been 
shown to interact with glucocorticoid receptors and contains a 17 bp sequence
homologous with the consensus sequence for glucocorticoid-receptor binding. A
mutation in this sequence in RAO 01 may be responsible for the loss of
glucocorticoid and androgen-receptor binding. It is concluded that at least one
member of the alpha 2u-globulin gene family interacts directly with
androgen-receptor complexes with an affinity comparable to that observed for
other androgen-dependent genes. The binding is observed in a region displaying
also affinity for the glucocorticoid receptor.

DOI: 10.1016/0303-7207(89)90146-9 
PMID: 2477291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

