
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 May 20;111(20):E2110-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1322118111. Epub 2014 May 5.

NLRX1 prevents mitochondrial induced apoptosis and enhances macrophage antiviral 
immunity by interacting with influenza virus PB1-F2 protein.

Jaworska J(1), Coulombe F(1), Downey J(1), Tzelepis F(1), Shalaby K(1), Tattoli
I(2), Berube J(1), Rousseau S(1), Martin JG(1), Girardin SE(2), McCullers JA(3), 
Divangahi M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Department 
of Pathology, McGill University Health Centre, McGill International TB Centre,
Meakins-Christie Laboratories, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada H2X 2P2;
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 1A8;
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Tennessee Health Sciences Center,
Memphis, TN 38103; andDepartment of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105-2794.
(4)Department of Medicine, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Department 
of Pathology, McGill University Health Centre, McGill International TB Centre,
Meakins-Christie Laboratories, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada H2X 2P2;
maziar.divangahi@mcgill.ca.

To subvert host immunity, influenza A virus (IAV) induces early apoptosis in
innate immune cells by disrupting mitochondria membrane potential via its
polymerase basic protein 1-frame 2 (PB1-F2) accessory protein. Whether immune
cells have mechanisms to counteract PB1-F2-mediated apoptosis is currently
unknown. Herein, we define that the host mitochondrial protein nucleotide-binding
oligomerization domain-like receptor (NLR)X1 binds to viral protein PB1-F2,
preventing IAV-induced macrophage apoptosis and promoting both macrophage
survival and type I IFN signaling. We initially observed that Nlrx1-deficient
mice infected with IAV exhibited increased pulmonary viral replication, as well
as enhanced inflammatory-associated pulmonary dysfunction and morbidity. Analysis
of the lungs of IAV-infected mice revealed markedly enhanced leukocyte
recruitment but impaired production of type I IFN in Nlrx1(-/-) mice. Impaired
type I IFN production and enhanced viral replication was recapitulated in
Nlrx1(-/-) macrophages and was associated with increased mitochondrial mediated
apoptosis. Through gain- and loss-of-function strategies for protein interaction,
we identified that NLRX1 directly bound PB1-F2 in the mitochondria of
macrophages. Using a recombinant virus lacking PB1-F2, we confirmed that deletion
of PB1-F2 abrogated NLRX1-dependent macrophage type I IFN production and
apoptosis. Thus, our results demonstrate that NLRX1 acts as a mitochondrial
sentinel protecting macrophages from PB1-F2-induced apoptosis and preserving
their antiviral function. We further propose that NLRX1 is critical for
macrophage immunity against IAV infection by sensing the extent of viral
replication and maintaining a protective balance between antiviral immunity and
excessive inflammation within the lungs.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1322118111 
PMCID: PMC4034189
PMID: 24799673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

