
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 5;9(6):e99176. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099176. eCollection 
2014.

Interactome profile of the host cellular proteins and the nonstructural protein 2
of porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus.

Wang L(1), Zhou L(1), Zhang H(1), Li Y(1), Ge X(1), Guo X(1), Yu K(2), Yang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology and Zoonosis of Ministry of Agriculture,
College of Veterinary Medicine and State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology,
China Agricultural University, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology and Zoonosis of Ministry of Agriculture,
College of Veterinary Medicine and State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology,
China Agricultural University, Beijing, People's Republic of China; The Ministry 
of Agriculture of the People's Republic of China, Beijing, People's Republic of
China.

The nonstructural protein 2 (NSP2) is considered to be one of crucial viral
proteins in the replication and pathogenesis of porcine reproductive and
respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV). In the present study, the host cellular
proteins that interact with the NSP2 of PRRSV were immunoprecipitated with
anti-Myc antibody from the MARC-145 cells infected by a recombinant PRRSV with
3xMyc tag insertion in its NSP2-coding region, and then 285 cellular proteins
interacting with NSP2 were identified by LC-MS/MS. The Gene Ontology and enriched
KEGG Pathway bioinformatics analyses indicated that the identified proteins could
be assigned to different subcellular locations and functional classes. Functional
analysis of the interactome profile highlighted cellular pathways associated with
infectious disease, translation, immune system, nervous system and signal
transduction. Two interested cellular proteins-BCL2-associated athanogene 6
(BAG6) and apoptosis-inducing factor 1 (AIF1) which may involve in transporting
of NSP2 to Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or PRRSV-driven apoptosis were validated by
Western blot. The interactome data between PRRSV NSP2 and cellular proteins
contribute to the understanding of the roles of NSP2 in the replication and
pathogenesis of PRRSV, and also provide novel cellular target proteins for
elucidating the associated molecular mechanisms of the interaction of host
cellular proteins with viral proteins in regulating the viral replication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099176 
PMCID: PMC4047090
PMID: 24901321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

