
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jun 12;10(6):e1004164. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004164.
eCollection 2014 Jun.

Recruitment of RED-SMU1 complex by Influenza A Virus RNA polymerase to control
Viral mRNA splicing.

Fournier G(1), Chiang C(1), Munier S(1), Tomoiu A(1), Demeret C(1), Vidalain
PO(2), Jacob Y(1), Naffakh N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité de Génétique Moléculaire des Virus à ARN, Département 
de Virologie, Paris, France; CNRS, UMR 3569, Paris, France; Université Paris
Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Unité de Génétique Moléculaire des Virus à ARN,
Paris, France.
(2)CNRS, UMR 3569, Paris, France; Institut Pasteur, Unité de Génomique Virale et 
Vaccination, Département de Virologie, Paris, France.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jul;10(7):e1004317.

Influenza A viruses are major pathogens in humans and in animals, whose genome
consists of eight single-stranded RNA segments of negative polarity. Viral mRNAs 
are synthesized by the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase in the nucleus of
infected cells, in close association with the cellular transcriptional machinery.
Two proteins essential for viral multiplication, the exportin NS2/NEP and the ion
channel protein M2, are produced by splicing of the NS1 and M1 mRNAs,
respectively. Here we identify two human spliceosomal factors, RED and SMU1, that
control the expression of NS2/NEP and are required for efficient viral
multiplication. We provide several lines of evidence that in infected cells, the 
hetero-trimeric viral polymerase recruits a complex formed by RED and SMU1
through interaction with its PB2 and PB1 subunits. We demonstrate that the
splicing of the NS1 viral mRNA is specifically affected in cells depleted of RED 
or SMU1, leading to a decreased production of the spliced mRNA species NS2, and
to a reduced NS2/NS1 protein ratio. In agreement with the exportin function of
NS2, these defects impair the transport of newly synthesized viral
ribonucleoproteins from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, and strongly reduce the
production of infectious influenza virions. Overall, our results unravel a new
mechanism of viral subversion of the cellular splicing machinery, by establishing
that the human splicing factors RED and SMU1 act jointly as key regulators of
influenza virus gene expression. In addition, our data point to a central role of
the viral RNA polymerase in coupling transcription and alternative splicing of
the viral mRNAs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004164 
PMCID: PMC4055741
PMID: 24945353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

