
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Aug 7;10(8):e1004302. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004302.
eCollection 2014 Aug.

The murine gammaherpesvirus immediate-early Rta synergizes with IRF4, targeting
expression of the viral M1 superantigen to plasma cells.

O'Flaherty BM(1), Soni T(1), Wakeman BS(1), Speck SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America; Emory Vaccine Center, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.

MHV68 is a murine gammaherpesvirus that infects laboratory mice and thus provides
a tractable small animal model for characterizing critical aspects of
gammaherpesvirus pathogenesis. Having evolved with their natural host,
herpesviruses encode numerous gene products that are involved in modulating host 
immune responses to facilitate the establishment and maintenance of lifelong
chronic infection. One such protein, MHV68 M1, is a secreted protein that has no 
known homologs, but has been shown to play a critical role in controlling virus
reactivation from latently infected macrophages. We have previous demonstrated
that M1 drives the activation and expansion of VÎ²4+ CD8+ T cells, which are
thought to be involved in controlling MHV68 reactivation through the secretion of
interferon gamma. The mechanism of action and regulation of M1 expression are
poorly understood. To gain insights into the function of M1, we set out to
evaluate the site of expression and transcriptional regulation of the M1 gene.
Here, using a recombinant virus expressing a fluorescent protein driven by the M1
gene promoter, we identify plasma cells as the major cell type expressing M1 at
the peak of infection in the spleen. In addition, we show that M1 gene
transcription is regulated by both the essential viral immediate-early
transcriptional activator Rta and cellular interferon regulatory factor 4 (IRF4),
which together potently synergize to drive M1 gene expression. Finally, we show
that IRF4, a cellular transcription factor essential for plasma cell
differentiation, can directly interact with Rta. The latter observation raises
the possibility that the interaction of Rta and IRF4 may be involved in
regulating a number of viral and cellular genes during MHV68 reactivation linked 
to plasma cell differentiation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004302 
PMCID: PMC4125235
PMID: 25101696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

