
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Aug 26;111(34):12516-21. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1405889111. Epub 2014 Aug 11.

Receptor usage and cell entry of bat coronavirus HKU4 provide insight into
bat-to-human transmission of MERS coronavirus.

Yang Y(1), Du L(2), Liu C(1), Wang L(2), Ma C(2), Tang J(2), Baric RS(3), Jiang
S(4), Li F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis, MN 55455;
(2)Lindsley F. Kimball Research Institute, New York Blood Center, New York, NY
10065;
(3)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
27559; and.
(4)Lindsley F. Kimball Research Institute, New York Blood Center, New York, NY
10065; Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology of Ministries of Education
and Health, Shanghai Medical College and Institute of Medical Microbiology, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200032, China lifang@umn.edu sjiang@nybloodcenter.org.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis, MN 55455; lifang@umn.edu sjiang@nybloodcenter.org.

Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) currently spreads in
humans and causes âˆ¼ 36% fatality in infected patients. Believed to have
originated from bats, MERS-CoV is genetically related to bat coronaviruses HKU4
and HKU5. To understand how bat coronaviruses transmit to humans, we investigated
the receptor usage and cell entry activity of the virus-surface spike proteins of
HKU4 and HKU5. We found that dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4), the receptor for
MERS-CoV, is also the receptor for HKU4, but not HKU5. Despite sharing a common
receptor, MERS-CoV and HKU4 spikes demonstrated functional differences. First,
whereas MERS-CoV prefers human DPP4 over bat DPP4 as its receptor, HKU4 shows the
opposite trend. Second, in the absence of exogenous proteases, both MERS-CoV and 
HKU4 spikes mediate pseudovirus entry into bat cells, whereas only MERS-CoV
spike, but not HKU4 spike, mediates pseudovirus entry into human cells. Thus,
MERS-CoV, but not HKU4, has adapted to use human DPP4 and human cellular
proteases for efficient human cell entry, contributing to the enhanced
pathogenesis of MERS-CoV in humans. These results establish DPP4 as a functional 
receptor for HKU4 and host cellular proteases as a host range determinant for
HKU4. They also suggest that DPP4-recognizing bat coronaviruses threaten human
health because of their spikes' capability to adapt to human cells for
cross-species transmissions.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1405889111 
PMCID: PMC4151778
PMID: 25114257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

