
1. J Virol. 2014 Nov;88(22):13469-81. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02538-14. Epub 2014 Sep 10.

Adenovirus E1A targets the DREF nuclear factor to regulate virus gene expression,
DNA replication, and growth.

Radko S(1), Koleva M(1), James KM(2), Jung R(1), Mymryk JS(3), Pelka P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Western University, London, ON,
Canada.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Western University, London, ON,
Canada Department of Oncology, Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada
peter.pelka@umanitoba.ca.

The adenovirus E1A gene is the first gene expressed upon viral infection. E1A
remodels the cellular environment to maximize permissivity for viral replication.
E1A is also the major transactivator of viral early gene expression and a
coregulator of a large number of cellular genes. E1A carries out its functions
predominantly by binding to cellular regulatory proteins and altering their
activities. The unstructured nature of E1A enables it to bind to a large variety 
of cellular proteins and form new molecular complexes with novel functions. The C
terminus of E1A is the least-characterized region of the protein, with few known 
binding partners. Here we report the identification of cellular factor DREF
(ZBED1) as a novel and direct binding partner of E1A. Our studies identify a dual
role for DREF in the viral life cycle. DREF contributes to activation of gene
expression from all viral promoters early in infection. Unexpectedly, it also
functions as a growth restriction factor for adenovirus as knockdown of DREF
enhances virus growth and increases viral genome copy number late in the
infection. We also identify DREF as a component of viral replication centers. E1A
affects the subcellular distribution of DREF within PML bodies and enhances DREF 
SUMOylation. Our findings identify DREF as a novel E1A C terminus binding partner
and provide evidence supporting a role for DREF in viral replication.IMPORTANCE: 
This work identifies the putative transcription factor DREF as a new target of
the E1A oncoproteins of human adenovirus. DREF was found to primarily localize
with PML nuclear bodies in uninfected cells and to relocalize into virus
replication centers during infection. DREF was also found to be SUMOylated, and
this was enhanced in the presence of E1A. Knockdown of DREF reduced the levels of
viral transcripts detected at 20 h, but not at 40 h, postinfection, increased
overall virus yield, and enhanced viral DNA replication. DREF was also found to
localize to viral promoters during infection together with E1A. These results
suggest that DREF contributes to activation of viral gene expression. However,
like several other PML-associated proteins, DREF also appears to function as a
growth restriction factor for adenovirus infection.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02538-14 
PMCID: PMC4249066
PMID: 25210186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

