
1. J Virol. 2015 Jan;89(1):220-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02635-14. Epub 2014 Oct 15.

Identification of TRIM27 as a novel degradation target of herpes simplex virus 1 
ICP0.

Conwell SE(1), White AE(2), Harper JW(2), Knipe DM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA david_knipe@hms.harvard.edu.

The herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) immediate early protein ICP0 performs many
functions during infection, including transactivation of viral gene expression,
suppression of innate immune responses, and modification and eviction of histones
from viral chromatin. Although these functions of ICP0 have been characterized,
the detailed mechanisms underlying ICP0's complex role during infection warrant
further investigation. We thus undertook an unbiased proteomic approach to
identifying viral and cellular proteins that interact with ICP0 in the infected
cell. Cellular candidates resulting from our analysis included the
ubiquitin-specific protease USP7, the transcriptional repressor TRIM27, DNA
repair proteins NBN and MRE11A, regulators of apoptosis, including BIRC6, and the
proteasome. We also identified two HSV-1 early proteins involved in nucleotide
metabolism, UL39 and UL50, as novel candidate interactors of ICP0. Because TRIM27
was the most statistically significant cellular candidate, we investigated the
relationship between TRIM27 and ICP0. We observed rapid, ICP0-dependent loss of
TRIM27 during HSV-1 infection. TRIM27 protein levels were restored by disrupting 
the RING domain of ICP0 or by inhibiting the proteasome, arguing that TRIM27 is a
novel degradation target of ICP0. A mutant ICP0 lacking E3 ligase activity
interacted with endogenous TRIM27 during infection as demonstrated by reciprocal 
coimmunoprecipitation and supported by immunofluorescence data. Surprisingly,
ICP0-null mutant virus yields decreased upon TRIM27 depletion, arguing that
TRIM27 has a positive effect on infection despite being targeted for degradation.
These results illustrate a complex interaction between TRIM27 and viral infection
with potential positive or negative effects of TRIM27 on HSV under different
infection conditions.IMPORTANCE: During productive infection, a virus must
simultaneously redirect multiple cellular pathways to replicate itself while
evading detection by the host's defenses. To orchestrate such complex regulation,
viruses, including herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1), rely on multifunctional
proteins such as the E3 ubiquitin ligase ICP0. This protein regulates various
cellular pathways concurrently by targeting a diverse set of cellular factors for
degradation. While some of these targets have been previously identified and
characterized, we undertook a proteomic screen to identify additional targets of 
this activity to further characterize ICP0's role during infection. We describe a
set of candidate interacting proteins of ICP0 identified through this approach
and our characterization of the most statistically significant result, the
cellular transcriptional repressor TRIM27. We present TRIM27 as a novel
degradation target of ICP0 and describe the relationship of these two proteins
during infection.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02635-14 
PMCID: PMC4301158
PMID: 25320289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

