
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Nov 6;10(11):e1004503. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004503.
eCollection 2014 Nov.

IFI16 restricts HSV-1 replication by accumulating on the hsv-1 genome, repressing
HSV-1 gene expression, and directly or indirectly modulating histone
modifications.

Johnson KE(1), Bottero V(1), Flaherty S(1), Dutta S(1), Singh VV(1), Chandran
B(1).

Author information: 
(1)H.M. Bligh Cancer Research Laboratories, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and 
Science, North Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2018 Jun 6;14(6):e1007113.

Interferon-γ inducible factor 16 (IFI16) is a multifunctional nuclear protein
involved in transcriptional regulation, induction of interferon-β (IFN-β), and
activation of the inflammasome response. It interacts with the sugar-phosphate
backbone of dsDNA and modulates viral and cellular transcription through largely 
undetermined mechanisms. IFI16 is a restriction factor for human cytomegalovirus 
(HCMV) and herpes simplex virus (HSV-1), though the mechanisms of HSV-1
restriction are not yet understood. Here, we show that IFI16 has a profound
effect on HSV-1 replication in human foreskin fibroblasts, osteosarcoma cells,
and breast epithelial cancer cells. IFI16 knockdown increased HSV-1 yield 6-fold 
and IFI16 overexpression reduced viral yield by over 5-fold. Importantly, HSV-1
gene expression, including the immediate early proteins, ICP0 and ICP4, the early
proteins, ICP8 and TK, and the late proteins gB and Us11, was reduced in the
presence of IFI16. Depletion of the inflammasome adaptor protein, ASC, or the
IFN-inducing transcription factor, IRF-3, did not affect viral yield. ChIP
studies demonstrated the presence of IFI16 bound to HSV-1 promoters in
osteosarcoma (U2OS) cells and fibroblasts. Using CRISPR gene editing technology, 
we generated U2OS cells with permanent deletion of IFI16 protein expression. ChIP
analysis of these cells and wild-type (wt) U2OS demonstrated increased
association of RNA polymerase II, TATA binding protein (TBP) and Oct1
transcription factors with viral promoters in the absence of IFI16 at different
times post infection. Although IFI16 did not alter the total histone occupancy at
viral or cellular promoters, its absence promoted markers of active chromatin and
decreased those of repressive chromatin with viral and cellular gene promoters.
Collectively, these studies for the first time demonstrate that IFI16 prevents
association of important transcriptional activators with wt HSV-1 promoters and
suggest potential mechanisms of IFI16 restriction of wt HSV-1 replication and a
direct or indirect role for IFI16 in histone modification.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004503 
PMCID: PMC4223080
PMID: 25375629  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

