
1. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Mar;45(3):758-72. doi: 10.1002/eji.201344412. Epub 2014 Dec
23.

NLRC5 interacts with RIG-I to induce a robust antiviral response against
influenza virus infection.

Ranjan P(1), Singh N, Kumar A, Neerincx A, Kremmer E, Cao W, Davis WG, Katz JM,
Gangappa S, Lin R, Kufer TA, Sambhara S.

Author information: 
(1)Influenza Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.

The NLR protein, NLRC5 is an important regulator of MHC class I gene expression, 
however, the role of NLRC5 in other innate immune responses is less well defined.
In the present study, we report that NLRC5 binds RIG-I and that this interaction 
is critical for robust antiviral responses against influenza virus.
Overexpression of NLRC5 in the human lung epithelial cell line, A549, and normal 
human bronchial epithelial cells resulted in impaired replication of influenza
virus A/Puerto Rico/8/34 virus (PR8) and enhanced IFN-β expression. Influenza
virus leads to induction of IFN-β that drives RIG-I and NLRC5 expression in host 
cells. Our results suggest that NLRC5 extends and stabilizes influenza virus
induced RIG-I expression and delays expression of the viral inhibitor protein
NS1. We show that NS1 binds to NLRC5 to suppress its function. Interaction domain
mapping revealed that NLRC5 interacts with RIG-I via its N-terminal death domain 
and that NLRC5 enhanced antiviral activity in an leucine-rich repeat domain
independent manner. Taken together, our findings identify a novel role for NLRC5 
in RIG-I-mediated antiviral host responses against influenza virus infection,
distinguished from the role of NLRC5 in MHC class I gene regulation.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201344412 
PMID: 25404059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

