
1. Protein Sci. 2015 Feb;24(2):221-35. doi: 10.1002/pro.2608. Epub 2014 Dec 31.

Intrinsic disorder mediates hepatitis C virus core-host cell protein
interactions.

Dolan PT(1), Roth AP, Xue B, Sun R, Dunker AK, Uversky VN, LaCount DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, Indiana, 47907.

Viral proteins bind to numerous cellular and viral proteins throughout the
infection cycle. However, the mechanisms by which viral proteins interact with
such large numbers of factors remain unknown. Cellular proteins that interact
with multiple, distinct partners often do so through short sequences known as
molecular recognition features (MoRFs) embedded within intrinsically disordered
regions (IDRs). In this study, we report the first evidence that MoRFs in viral
proteins play a similar role in targeting the host cell. Using a combination of
evolutionary modeling, protein-protein interaction analyses and forward genetic
screening, we systematically investigated two computationally predicted MoRFs
within the N-terminal IDR of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) Core protein. Sequence
analysis of the MoRFs showed their conservation across all HCV genotypes and the 
canine and equine Hepaciviruses. Phylogenetic modeling indicated that the Core
MoRFs are under stronger purifying selection than the surrounding sequence,
suggesting that these modules have a biological function. Using the yeast
two-hybrid assay, we identified three cellular binding partners for each HCV Core
MoRF, including two previously characterized cellular targets of HCV Core (DDX3X 
and NPM1). Random and site-directed mutagenesis demonstrated that the predicted
MoRF regions were required for binding to the cellular proteins, but that
different residues within each MoRF were critical for binding to different
partners. This study demonstrated that viruses may use intrinsic disorder to
target multiple cellular proteins with the same amino acid sequence and provides 
a framework for characterizing the binding partners of other disordered regions
in viral and cellular proteomes.

Â© 2014 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.2608 
PMCID: PMC4315660
PMID: 25424537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

