
1. Virology. 2015 Oct;484:113-26. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.05.017. Epub 2015 Jun
16.

Dengue virus NS1 protein interacts with the ribosomal protein RPL18: this
interaction is required for viral translation and replication in Huh-7 cells.

Cervantes-Salazar M(1), Angel-Ambrocio AH(1), Soto-Acosta R(1), Bautista-Carbajal
P(1), Hurtado-Monzon AM(1), Alcaraz-Estrada SL(2), Ludert JE(1), Del Angel RM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectomics and Molecular Pathogenesis, Center for Research and 
Advanced Studies (CINVESTAV-IPN), Mexico DF, Mexico.
(2)National Medical Center November 20, (ISSSTE), Mexico DF, Mexico.
(3)Department of Infectomics and Molecular Pathogenesis, Center for Research and 
Advanced Studies (CINVESTAV-IPN), Mexico DF, Mexico. Electronic address:
rmangel@cinvestav.mx.

Given dengue virus (DENV) genome austerity, it uses cellular molecules and
structures for virion entry, translation and replication of the genome. NS1 is a 
multifunctional protein key to viral replication and pathogenesis. Identification
of cellular proteins that interact with NS1 may help in further understanding the
functions of NS1. In this paper we isolated a total of 64 proteins from DENV
infected human hepatic cells (Huh-7) that interact with NS1 by affinity
chromatography and immunoprecipitation assays. The subcellular location and
expression levels during infection of the ribosomal proteins RPS3a, RPL7, RPL18, 
RPL18a plus GAPDH were determined. None of these proteins changed their
expression levels during infection; however, RPL-18 was redistributed to the
perinuclear region after 48hpi. Silencing of the RPL-18 does not affect cell
translation efficiency or viability, but it reduces significantly viral
translation, replication and viral yield, suggesting that the RPL-18 is required 
during DENV replicative cycle.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.05.017 
PMID: 26092250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

