
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Sep 12;92(19):8586-90.

Simian virus 40 late gene expression is regulated by members of the
steroid/thyroid hormone receptor superfamily.

Zuo F(1), Mertz JE.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison 53706-1599, USA.

Transcription of the late genes of simian virus 40 (SV40) is repressed during the
early phase of the lytic cycle of infection of binding of cellular factors,
called IBP-s, to the SV40 late promoter; repression is relieved after the onset
of viral DNA replication by titration of these repressors. Preliminary data
indicated that one of the major components of IBP-s was human estrogen-related
receptor 1 (hERR1). We show here that several members of the steroid/thyroid
hormone receptor superfamily, including testis receptor 2, thyroid receptor alpha
1 in combination with retinoid X receptor alpha, chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter transcription factors 1 and 2 (COUP-TF1 and COUP-TF2), as well as hERR1,
possess the properties of IBP-s. These receptors bind specifically to hormone
receptor binding sites present in the SV40 major late promoter. Recombinant
COUP-TF1 specifically represses transcription from the SV40 major late promoter
in a cell-free transcription system. Expression of COUP-TF1, COUP-TF2, or hERR1
in monkey cells results in repression of the SV40 late promoter, but not the
early promoter, in the absence of the virally encoded large tumor antigen.
Overexpression of COUP-TF1 leads to a delay in the early-to-late switch in SV40
gene expression during the lytic cycle of infection. Thus, members of this
superfamily can play major direct roles in regulating expression of SV40.
Possibly, natural or synthetic ligands to these receptors can serve as antiviral 
drugs. Our findings also provide the basis for the development of assays to
screen for the ligands to testis receptor 2 and hERR1.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.92.19.8586 
PMCID: PMC41011
PMID: 7567979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

