
1. J Virol. 1995 Jun;69(6):3584-96.

Cloning and characterization of a novel cellular protein, TDP-43, that binds to
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 TAR DNA sequence motifs.

Ou SH(1), Wu F, Harrich D, García-Martínez LF, Gaynor RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas 75235, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) gene expression is modulated by both 
viral and cellular factors. A regulatory element in the HIV-1 long terminal
repeat known as TAR, which extends from nucleotides -18 to +80, is critical for
the activation of gene expression by the transactivator protein, Tat. RNA
transcribed from TAR forms a stable stem-loop structure which serves as the
binding site for both Tat and cellular factors. Although TAR RNA is critical for 
Tat activation, the role that TAR DNA plays in regulating HIV-1 gene expression
is not clear. Several studies have demonstrated that TAR DNA can bind cellular
proteins, such as UBP-1/LBP-1, which repress HIV-1 gene expression and other
factors which are involved in the generation of short, nonprocessive transcripts.
In an attempt to characterize additional cellular factors that bind to TAR DNA, a
lambda gt11 expression cloning strategy involving the use of a portion of TAR DNA
extending from -18 to +28 to probe a HeLa cDNA library was used. We identified a 
cDNA, designated TAR DNA-binding protein (TDP-43), which encodes a cellular
factor of 43 kDa that binds specifically to pyrimidine-rich motifs in TAR.
Antibody to TDP-43 was used in gel retardation assays to demonstrate that
endogenous TDP-43, present in HeLa nuclear extract, also bound to TAR DNA.
Although TDP-43 bound strongly to double-stranded TAR DNA via its
ribonucleoprotein protein-binding motifs, it did not bind to TAR RNA extending
from +1 to +80. To determine the function of TDP-43 in regulating HIV-1 gene
expression, in vitro transcription analysis was performed. TDP-43 repressed in
vitro transcription from the HIV-1 long terminal repeat in both the presence and 
absence of Tat, but it did not repress transcription from other promoters such as
the adenovirus major late promoter. In addition, transfection of a vector which
expressed TDP-43 resulted in the repression of gene expression from an HIV-1
provirus. These results indicate that TDP-43 is capable of modulating both in
vitro and in vivo HIV-1 gene expression by either altering or blocking the
assembly of transcription complexes that are capable of responding to Tat.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.69.6.3584-3596.1995 
PMCID: PMC189073
PMID: 7745706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

