
1. J Virol. 1994 Nov;68(11):6848-62.

Mutually exclusive interaction of the adenovirus E4-6/7 protein and the
retinoblastoma gene product with internal domains of E2F-1 and DP-1.

O'Connor RJ(1), Hearing P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, State University of New
York, Stony Brook 11794.

The binding of E2F to the adenovirus (Ad) E2a promoter is stimulated by the Ad
E4-6/7 protein. E2F DNA binding activity is composed of a heterodimer of related 
but distinct proteins of the E2F-1 and DP-1 families. The E4-6/7 protein induces 
the cooperative and stable binding of E2F to an inverted repeat binding site in
the E2a promoter apparently by providing a dimerization interface to two adjacent
E2F heterodimers. The product of the retinoblastoma gene product (Rb) represses
the transcriptional activity of E2F by direct protein-protein interaction. In
this report, we have examined the regions of E2F-1 and DP-1 that are required for
the induction of cooperative E2F binding to the E2a promoter by the E4-6/7
protein. Our results demonstrate that an internal segment of E2F-1, that is
conserved among members of the E2F family, is required for functional interaction
with the E4-6/7 product. Consistent with this observation, other members of the
E2F family (E2F-2 and E2F-3) productively interact with E4-6/7. DP-1 also is
necessary for stable interaction with E4-6/7 and an internal segment of DP-1 is
required that is positioned in a location similar to that of the conserved E2F-1 
domain. Interestingly, the binding of E4-6/7 and the binding of Rb to E2F are
mutually exclusive, and our results show that the same internal segments of E2F-1
and DP-1 that are required for E4-6/7 binding are also required for stable
interaction with Rb. These results suggest that the Ad E4-6/7 protein mimics Rb
in part for the protein interaction requirements for E2F binding, although with
different functional consequences. While Rb binding represses E2F activity, the
E4-6/7 protein stimulates transactivation of the Ad E2a promoter.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.68.11.6848-6862.1994 
PMCID: PMC237120
PMID: 7933066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

