
1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 1993 Oct;9(10):1017-23.

ETS family proteins activate transcription from HIV-1 long terminal repeat.

Seth A(1), Hodge DR, Thompson DM, Robinson L, Panayiotakis A, Watson DK, Papas
TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

ets is a multigene family and its members share a common ETS DNA-binding domain. 
ETS proteins activate transcription via binding to a purine-rich GGAA core
sequence located in promoters/enhancers of various genes, including several that 
are transcriptionally active in T cells. The ETS1, ETS2, and ERBG/Hu-FLI-1 gene
expression pattern also suggests a role for these genes in cells of hematopoietic
lineage. The HIV-1 LTR core enhancer contains two 10-base pair direct repeat
sequences (left and right) that are required for regulation of HIV-1 mRNA
expression by host transcription factors, including NF kappa B. Two ETS-binding
sites are present in the core enhancer of all the HIV-1 isolates reported so far.
In our studies, we utilized HIV-1 HXB2 and HIV-1 Z2Z6 core enhancers because the 
Z2Z6 strain has a single point mutation flanking the right ETS-binding site. We
demonstrate that the ETS1, ETS2, and ERGB/Hu-FLI-1 proteins can trans-activate
transcription from both the HXB2 and Z2Z6 core enhancer when linked to a reporter
(cat) gene. In addition, we show that the DNA binding and trans-activation with
the Z2Z6 core enhancer is at least 40-fold higher than that observed with the
HXB2 core enhancer. Further, we provide evidence that the marked increase in
binding and trans-activation with Z2Z6 core enhancer sequences is due to the
substitution of a flanking T residue in HXB2 TGGAA) by a C residue in Z2Z6
(CGGAA) isolate, thus generating an optimal ETS-binding core (CGGAA) sequence.

DOI: 10.1089/aid.1993.9.1017 
PMID: 8280476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

