
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Oct 1;24(19):3771-7.

Viral transactivators E1A and VP16 interact with a large complex that is
associated with CTD kinase activity and contains CDK8.

Gold MO(1), Tassan JP, Nigg EA, Rice AP, Herrmann CH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Virology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030,
USA.

Previously, we showed that the viral transactivator proteins E1A and VP16
specifically interact with a cellular CTD kinase activity in vitro. We now report
that E1A and VP16 complexes contain human CDK8, a newly identified member of the 
cyclin-dependent kinase family that has been shown to be a component of the RNA
polymerase II (RNAP II) holoenzyme complex. The presence of CDK8 in the E1A- and 
VP16-containing complexes is specific for a functional activation domain of these
viral transactivators, strongly suggesting that this association is relevant for 
the transactivation function of E1A and VP16. We show that CDK8 is associated
with CTD kinase activity and that CDK8 co-fractionates with E1A- and
VP16-associated CTD kinase activity over several chromatography columns.
Therefore, CDK8 is likely responsible for the E1A- and VP16-associated CTD kinase
activity. Gel filtration chromatography indicates that the E1A- and
VP16-associated CTD kinase activity has a molecular size of approximately 1.5 MDa
and contains cyclin C and the human homolog of SRB7 in addition to CDK8. This
implies that E1A and VP16 associate with the RNAP II holoenyzme. We also looked
at the transcriptional activity of CDK8 and found that CDK8 can function as a
transcriptional activator when fused to the DNA binding domain of GAL4.
Surprisingly, the ability of GAL4-CDK8 to activate transcription in this assay
was not dependent on the kinase activity of CDK8, since a kinase-deficient mutant
of CDK8 stimulated transcription nearly as well as wild-type GAL4-CDK8. This
suggests that CDK8 may play a role in transcription that is distinct from its
ability to function as a CTD kinase.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/24.19.3771 
PMCID: PMC146177
PMID: 8871557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

