
1. Cancer Res. 1996 Nov 15;56(22):5299-304.

The adeno-associated virus Rep78 major regulatory/transformation suppressor
protein binds cellular Sp1 in vitro and evidence of a biological effect.

Hermonat PL(1), Santin AD, Batchu RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock 72205, USA.

Adeno-associated virus (AAV) Rep78 is a multifunctional protein that is required 
for AAV transcriptional activity, AAV DNA replication, and possibly for
site-specific integration of AAV into human chromosome 19. Rep78 is also able to 
inhibit a variety of heterologous promoters, including those of c-H-ras, human
papillomavirus types 16 and 18, and HIV type 1. However, Rep78 is unable to
significantly affect murine osteosarcomavirus (MSV). It was noticed that
promoters that are inhibited possess binding motifs for the cellular
transcription factor Sp1, whereas the MSV long terminal repeat promoter did not. 
These data stimulated the hypothesis that Rep78 may recognize and interact with
cellular Sp1. Here, we demonstrate that Rep78 is able to interact with Sp1 in
vitro as analyzed by West(far)-Western, electrophoretic mobility shift
assay-supershift, and coimmunoprecipitation analyses. Furthermore, in support of 
an in vivo biological effect from this interaction, Rep78 is demonstrated to
inhibit a synthetic, Sp1-dependent promoter. Further still, the insertion of Sp1 
DNA binding motifs into the Rep78-resistant MSV long terminal repeat results in a
promoter that has increased sensitivity to inhibition by Rep78. Finally, it is
demonstrated that the Sp1-Rep78 interaction requires the amino half of Rep78. The
interaction of Rep78 with Sp1, along with possible downstream effects on the
transcription initiation process of RNA polymerase II, may partially explain the 
rather broad-based antitumor abilities of AAV.


PMID: 8912872  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

