
1. Nature. 1996 Nov 28;384(6607):375-8.

Enhanced processivity of RNA polymerase II triggered by Tat-induced
phosphorylation of its carboxy-terminal domain.

Parada CA(1), Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
New York 10021, USA.

The protein Tat is encoded by the HIV-1 genome and is essential for viral
replication because of its activation of viral transcription. Tat enhances the
ability of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) to move long distances down the DNA through
a poorly understood mechanism that involves its binding the to the 5' end of the 
nascent HIV-1 transcript. It has been suggested that the stimulation of
transcript elongation by conventional DNA-binding activators may involve
phosphorylation of the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of Pol II by the
transcription factor TFIIH through the associated CAK kinase. Here we show that
Tat-enhanced HIV-1 transcription in vitro requires both TFIIH and the CTD of Pol 
II. In addition, Tat, through its activation domain, both interacts with a
functional TFIIH-containing complex and stimulates phosphorylation of a
CTD-containing substrate by the TFIIH kinase. Under conditions that jointly
restrict transcriptional elongation and TFIIH-mediated CTD phosphorylation, Tat
stimulates both these activities. Furthermore, RNA synthesis is required for Tat 
to stimulate phosphorylation of the CTD when it is part of an initiation complex,
as expected from Tat's interaction with viral transcripts. Thus, stimulation of
Pol II elongation by Tat may involve direct effects on TFIIH-mediated CTD
phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1038/384375a0 
PMID: 8934526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

