
1. J Virol. 1997 Feb;71(2):1019-24.

Interaction of herpes simplex virus 1 alpha regulatory protein ICP0 with
elongation factor 1delta: ICP0 affects translational machinery.

Kawaguchi Y(1), Bruni R, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Illinois 60637, USA.

The herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1)-infected cell protein 0 (ICP0) is a
promiscuous transactivator, and by necessity, its functions must be mediated
through cellular gene products. In an attempt to identify cellular factors
interacting with ICP0, we used the carboxyl-terminal domain of ICP0 as "bait" in 
the yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) two-hybrid system. Our results were as
follows: (i) All 43 cDNAs in positive yeast colonies were found to encode the
same translation factor, elongation factor delta-1 (EF-1delta). (ii) Purified
chimeric protein consisting of glutathione S-transferase (GST) fused to EF-1delta
specifically formed complexes with ICP0 contained in HSV-1-infected cell lysate. 
(iii) Fractionation of infected HEp-2 cells and immunofluorescence studies
revealed that ICP0 was localized both in the nucleus and in the cytoplasm. In
primary human foreskin fibroblasts, ICP0 was localized predominantly in the
cytoplasm throughout HSV-1 infection even early in infection. (iv) Addition of
the chimeric protein GST-carboxyl-terminal domain of ICP0 to the rabbit
reticulocyte lysate in vitro translation system resulted in a dose-dependent
decrease in protein synthesis. In contrast, GST alone or GST fused to the
amino-terminal domain of ICP0 had no effect on the in vitro translation system.
(v) The predominant forms of EF-1delta on electrophoresis in denaturing gels have
apparent Mrs of 38,000 and 40,000. The higher-Mr form is a minor species in
mock-infected cells, whereas in human fibroblasts and Vero cells infected with
HSV-1, this isoform becomes dominant. These results indicate that ICP0 is present
and may have a significant role in the cytoplasm of infected cells, possibly by
altering the efficiency of translation of viral mRNAs.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.71.2.1019-1024.1997 
PMCID: PMC191152
PMID: 8995621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

