
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Feb;17(2):873-86.

Constitutive activation of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear antigen 1 gene
transcription by IRF1 and IRF2 during restricted EBV latency.

Schaefer BC(1), Paulson E, Strominger JL, Speck SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor Virology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) EBNA1 gene promoter active in the type I program of 
restricted viral latency was recently identified and shown to reside in the viral
BamHI Q fragment. This promoter, Qp, is active in a wide variety of cell lines
and has an architecture reminiscent of eukaryotic housekeeping gene promoters (B.
C. Schaefer, J. L. Strominger, and S. H. Speck, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
92:10565-10569, 1995; B. C. Schaefer, J. L. Strominger, and S. H. Speck, Mol.
Cell. Biol. 17:364-377, 1997). Here we demonstrate by deletion analysis that the 
important cis-acting elements regulating Qp are clustered in a relatively small
region (ca. 80 bp) surrounding the site of transcription initiation. Immediately 
upstream of the site of initiation is a region which is protected from DNase I
digestion by crude nuclear extracts. Electrophoretic mobility shift analyses
(EMSA) employing probes spanning this region demonstrated the presence of two
major protein complexes. Deletion analysis of Qp demonstrated that at least one
of these complexes plays an important role in Qp activity. Evidence that
interferon response factor 2 (IRF2) is a major constituent of the most prominent 
EMSA complex and that IRF1 may be a minor component of this complex is presented.
Transfections into IRF1-/-, IRF2-/-, and IRF1,2-/- fibroblasts demonstrated that 
absence of both IRF1 and IRF2 reduced Qp activity to approximately the same
extent as mutation of the IRF-binding site in Qp, strongly implicating IRF2, and 
perhaps IRF1, in the regulation of Qp activity. Notably, transcription from Qp
was not inducible by either alpha or gamma interferon in EBV-negative B cells but
rather was shown to be constitutively activated by IRF1 and IRF2. This
observation suggests that IRF1 and IRF2 have a previously unrecognized role as
constitutive activators of specific genes. Additionally, data presented indicate 
that a protein complex containing the nonhistone architectural protein HMG-I(Y)
binds to the region identified as the major transcription initiation site for Qp.
This observation raises the possibility that HMG-I(Y)-induced DNA bending plays a
role in the initiation of transcription from Qp.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.17.2.873 
PMCID: PMC231814
PMID: 9001242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

