
1. FEBS Lett. 1997 Apr 7;406(1-2):205-10.

Comparative processing of bovine leukemia virus envelope glycoprotein gp72 by
subtilisin/kexin-like mammalian convertases.

Zarkik S(1), Decroly E, Wattiez R, Seidah NG, Burny A, Ruysschaert JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Physique des Macromolécules aux Interfaces (LCPMI)
CP206/2, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.

Intracellular proteolytic processing of bovine leukemia virus (BLV) envelope
glycoprotein precursor (gp72) at the C-terminal end of the RVRR268 / site is an
essential step for virus infectivity. Subtilisin/kexin-like convertases cleave
proproteins at preferred RX(K/R)R / sites, including those commonly found in
viral envelope glycoprotein precursors. We first demonstrated that gp72 is
processed into gp51/gp30 in both CV1 cells and the furin-deficient LoVo cells,
leading us to compare the ability of mammalian convertases to cleave BLV gp72 in 
vitro. In contrast to the inability of the neuroendocrine PC1 to cleave gp72, the
convertases furin, PACE4, PC5-A and PC5-B, which process constitutively secreted 
precursors, can effectively cleave gp72 into gp51/gp30. N-terminal sequence
analysis of the convertase-generated gp30 demonstrated that cleavage occurs at
the in vivo-utilized RVRR / SPV site. Such furin-, PACE4- and PC5-mediated
processing was completely inhibited by the alpha1-antitrypsin variant alpha1-PDX.
Mutagenesis of the gp72 cleavage site into RVRG-TPV resulted in complete
abrogation of gp72 processing by endogenous CV-1 cells and by convertases in
vitro. Since our in vitro data suggest a redundancy in the ability of the
convertases to cleave gp72, RT-PCR analysis was used to define the convertases
expressed in B-lymphocytes, representing one of the major targets of BLV
infection. Our data revealed that only furin and the newly discovered PC7 mRNAs
are expressed in Raji, B-Jab and LG2 cell lines.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(97)00275-5 
PMID: 9109419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

