
1. Biol Signals. 1997 May-Jun;6(3):166-74.

Interaction of eukaryotic initiation factor 5A with the human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 Rev response element RNA and U6 snRNA requires deoxyhypusine or
hypusine modification.

Liu YP(1), Nemeroff M, Yan YP, Chen KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Rutgers-State University of New Jersey 08855-0939,
USA.

Hypusine formation on the eukaryotic initiation factor 5A (eIF-5A) precursor
represents a unique posttranslational modification that is ubiquitously present
in eukaryotic cells and archaebacteria. Specific inhibition of deoxyhypusine
synthase leads to growth arrest and cell death. The precise cellular function of 
eIF-5A and the physiological significance of hypusine modification are not clear.
Although the methionyl-puromycin synthesis has been suggested to be the
functional assay for eIF-5A activity in vitro, the role of eIF-5A in protein
synthesis has not been established. Recent studies have suggested that eIF-5A may
be the cellular target of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Rev and human T
cell leukemia virus type 1 Rex proteins. Motif analysis suggested that eIF-5A
resembles a bimodular RNA-binding protein in that it contains a stretch of basic 
amino acids clustered at the N-terminal region and a leucine-rich stretch at the 
C-terminal region. Using Rev target RNA, RRE, as a model, we tested the
hypothesis that eIF-5A may be an RNA-binding protein. We found that both
deoxyhypusine and hypusine-containing eIF-5A can bind to the 252-nt RRE RNA, as
determined by a gel mobility shift assay. In contrast, the unmodified eIF-5A
precursor cannot. Deoxyhypusine-containing eIF-5A, but not its precursor, could
also cause supershift of the Rev stem-loop IIB RRE complex. Preliminary studies
also indicated that eIF-5A can bind to RNA such as U6 snRNA and that
deoxyhypusine modification appears to be required for the binding. The ability of
eIF-5A to directly interact with RNA suggests that deoxyhypusine formation of
eIF-5A may be related to its role in RNA processing and protein synthesis. Our
study also suggests the possibility of using a gel mobility shift assay for
eIF-5A-RNA binding as a functional assay for deoxyhypusine and hypusine
formation.

DOI: 10.1159/000109123 
PMID: 9285100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

