
1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 9;273(2):720-8.

Necdin, a postmitotic neuron-specific growth suppressor, interacts with viral
transforming proteins and cellular transcription factor E2F1.

Taniura H(1), Taniguchi N, Hara M, Yoshikawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Regulation of Macromolecular Functions, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, Yamadaoka 3-2, Suita, Osaka 565, Japan.

Necdin is a nuclear protein expressed in virtually all postmitotic neurons, and
ectopic expression of this protein strongly suppresses the proliferation of
NIH3T3 cells. Simian virus 40 large T antigen targets both p53 and the
retinoblastoma protein (Rb) for cellular transformation. By analogy with the
interactions of the large T antigen with these nuclear growth suppressors, we
examined the ability of necdin to bind to the large T antigen. Necdin was
co-immunoprecipitated with the large T antigen from the nuclear extract of necdin
cDNA-transfected COS-1 cells. Yeast two-hybrid and in vitro binding analyses
revealed that necdin bound to an amino-terminal region of the large T antigen,
which encompasses the Rb-binding domain. Moreover, necdin bound to adenovirus
E1A, another viral oncoprotein that forms a specific complex with Rb. We then
examined the ability of necdin to bind to the transcription factor E2F1, a
cellular Rb-binding factor involved in cell-cycle progression. Intriguingly,
necdin, like Rb, bound to a carboxyl-terminal domain of E2F1, and repressed
E2F-dependent transactivation in vivo. In addition, necdin suppressed the colony 
formation of Rb-deficient SAOS-2 osteosarcoma cells. These results suggest that
necdin is a postmitotic neuron-specific growth suppressor that is functionally
similar to Rb.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.2.720 
PMID: 9422723  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

