
1. Eur J Immunol. 1998 May;28(5):1689-700.

ChemR23, a putative chemoattractant receptor, is expressed in monocyte-derived
dendritic cells and macrophages and is a coreceptor for SIV and some primary
HIV-1 strains.

Samson M(1), Edinger AL, Stordeur P, Rucker J, Verhasselt V, Sharron M, Govaerts 
C, Mollereau C, Vassart G, Doms RW, Parmentier M.

Author information: 
(1)IRIBHN, Universit√© libre de Bruxelles, Belgium.

Leukocyte chemoattractants act through a rapidly growing subfamily of G
protein-coupled receptors. We report the cloning of a novel human gene encoding
an orphan receptor (ChemR23) related to the C3a, C5a and formyl Met-Leu-Phe
receptors, and more distantly to the subfamilies of chemokine receptors. ChemR23 
transcripts were found to be abundant in monocyte-derived dendritic cells and
macrophages, treated or not with LPS. Low expression could also be detected by
reverse transcription-PCR in CD4+ T lymphocytes. The gene encoding ChemR23 was
assigned by radiation hybrid mapping to the q21.2-21.3 region of human chromosome
12, outside the gene clusters identified so far for chemoattractant receptors.
Given the increasing number of chemoattractant receptors used by HIV-1, HIV-2 and
SIV as coreceptors, ChemR23 was tested in fusion assays for potential coreceptor 
activity by a range of viral strains. None of the tested HIV-2 strains made use
of ChemR23 as a coreceptor, but several SIV strains (SIVmac316, SIVmac239,
SIVmacl7E-Fr and SIVsm62A), as well as a primary HIV-1 strain (92UG024-2) used it
efficiently. ChemR23 therefore appears as a coreceptor for immunodeficiency
viruses that does not belong to the chemokine receptor family. It is also a
putative chemoattractant receptor relatively specific for antigen-presenting
cells, and it could play an important role in the recruitment or trafficking of
these cell populations. Future work will be required to identify the ligand(s) of
this new G protein-coupled receptor and to define its precise role in the
physiology of dendritic cells and macrophages.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(199805)28:05<1689::AID-IMMU1689>3.0.CO;2-I 
PMID: 9603476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

