
1. J Virol. 1998 Nov;72(11):8525-31.

Herpes simplex virus 1 regulatory protein ICP22 interacts with a new cell
cycle-regulated factor and accumulates in a cell cycle-dependent fashion in
infected cells.

Bruni R(1), Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The herpes simplex virus 1 infected cell protein 22 (ICP22), the product of the
alpha22 gene, is a nucleotidylylated and phosphorylated nuclear protein with
properties of a transcriptional factor required for the expression of a subset of
viral genes. Here, we report the following. (i) ICP22 interacts with a previously
unknown cellular factor designated p78 in the yeast two-hybrid system. The p78
cDNA encodes a polypeptide with a distribution of leucines reminiscent of a
leucine zipper. (ii) In uninfected and infected cells, antibody to p78 reacts
with two major bands with an apparent Mr of 78,000 and two minor bands with
apparent Mrs of 62, 000 and 55,000. (ii) p78 also interacts with ICP22 in vitro. 
(iii) In uninfected cells, p78 was dispersed largely in the nucleoplasm in HeLa
cells and in the nucleoplasm and cytoplasm in HEp-2 cells. After infection, p78
formed large dense bodies which did not colocalize with the viral regulatory
protein ICP0. (iv) Accumulation of p78 was cell cycle dependent, being highest
very early in S phase. (v) The accumulation of ICP22 in synchronized cells was
highest in early S phase, in contrast to the accumulation of another protein,
ICP27, which was relatively independent of the cell cycle. (vi) In the course of 
the cell cycle, ICP22 was transiently modified in an aberrant fashion, and this
modification coincided with expression of p78. The results suggest that ICP22
interacts with and may be stabilized by cell cycle-dependent proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.72.11.8525-8531.1998 
PMCID: PMC110262
PMID: 9765390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

