
1. Intervirology. 1998;41(2-3):80-90.

Interaction of human papillomavirus 8 regulatory proteins E2, E6 and E7 with
components of the TFIID complex.

Enzenauer C(1), Mengus G, Lavigne A, Davidson I, Pfister H, May M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Virologie der Universität zu Köln, Germany.

Human papillomavirus 8 (HPV8) is one of the oncogenic HPV types specifically
associated with skin cancers of epidermodysplasia verruciformis patients. The
early gene products of this virus exert functions in transformation (E2, E6, E7),
replication (E1, E2) and in the control of viral transcription (E2, E7). Many
viral and cellular transactivators of transcription have been shown to interact
selectively and directly with a number of TATA-box-binding protein
(TBP)-associated factors (TAFIIs), which then play a role as coactivators. Using 
glutathione-S-transferase (GST) pull-down experiments, we tested in vitro
interactions between GST-HPV8-E1, -E2, -E6 and -E7 and 7 in-vitro-translated
TAFIIs in the human (h) system (hTAFII18, hTAFII20, hTAFII28, hTAFII30, hTAFII55,
hTAFII100, hTAFIIDeltaN135) or TBP. We could show that GST-HPV8-E2 interacts
directly at least with hTAFII55 and TBP. Deletion analysis indicated that a
domain overlapping with the C-terminal moiety of HPV8-E2 is required for binding 
to TBP, whereas determinants for interactions with hTAFII55 are in the central
and C-terminal part of the E2 protein. In similar binding studies, GST-HPV8-E6
interacted with hTAFII28, hTAFIIDeltaN135 and TBP, and more weakly with hTAFII20,
whereas GST- HPV8-E7 bound to hTAFII20, hTAFII28, hTAFII55, hTAFIIDeltaN135 and
TBP. Deletion analysis revealed that the C-terminal part of HPV8-E7 is required
for the interaction with these hTAFIIs. In contrast, no interactions were
observed between GST-HPV8-E1 and in-vitro-translated hTAFIIs.

DOI: 10.1159/000024918 
PMID: 9820841  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

