
1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 15;274(3):1635-45.

HEED, the product of the human homolog of the murine eed gene, binds to the
matrix protein of HIV-1.

Peytavi R(1), Hong SS, Gay B, d'Angeac AD, Selig L, Bénichou S, Benarous R,
Boulanger P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire and Pathogénèse Virale, CNRS UMR-5812,
Faculté de Médecine, 2, Boulevard Henri IV, 34060 Montpellier, France.

heed, the human homolog of mouse eed and Drosophila esc, two members of the
trithorax (trx) and Polycomb group (Pc-G) of genes, was isolated by screening an 
activated lymphocyte cDNA library versus the immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) MA protein used as a bait in a two-hybrid system in yeast. The human EED 
protein (HEED) had 99. 5% identity with the mouse EED protein and contained seven
WD repeats. Two heed gene transcripts were identified, with a putative
407-nucleotide-long intron, giving rise to two HEED protein isoforms of 535 and
494 residues in length, respectively. The shorter HEED isoform, originated from
the unspliced message, lacked the seventh WD repeat. HEED was found to bind to MA
protein in vitro, as efficiently as in vivo in yeast cells. Site-directed
mutagenesis and phage biopanning suggested that the interaction between HEED and 
MA involved the N-terminal region of the MA protein, including the first
polybasic signal, in a MA conformation-dependent manner. In the HEED protein,
however, two discrete linear MA-binding motifs were identified within residues
388-403, overlapping the origin of the fifth WD repeat. Deletion of the
C-terminal 41 residues of HEED, spanning the seventh WD repeat, as in the
494-residue HEED protein, was detrimental to HEED-MA interaction in vivo,
suggesting the existence of another C-terminal binding site and/or a
conformational role of the HEED C-terminal domain in the MA-HEED interaction. MA 
and HEED proteins co-localized within the nucleus of co-transfected human cells
and of recombinant baculovirus co-infected insect cells. This and the failure of 
HEED to bind to uncleaved GAG precursor suggested a role of HEED at the early
stages of virus infection, rather than late in the virus life cycle.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.3.1635 
PMID: 9880543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

