
1. Clin Cancer Res. 1999 Feb;5(2):383-93.

In vivo localization of [(111)In]-DTPA-D-Phe1-octreotide to human ovarian tumor
xenografts induced to express the somatostatin receptor subtype 2 using an
adenoviral vector.

Rogers BE(1), McLean SF, Kirkman RL, Della Manna D, Bright SJ, Olsen CC, Myracle 
AD, Mayo MS, Curiel DT, Buchsbaum DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 35294, 
USA.

Adenoviral vectors, encoding genes for cell surface antigens or receptors, have
been used to induce their high level expression on tumor cells in vitro and in
vivo. These induced antigens and receptors can then be targeted with radiolabeled
antibodies or peptides for potential radiotherapeutic applications. The purpose
of this study was to determine a dosing schema of an adenoviral vector encoding
the human somatostatin receptor subtype 2 (AdCMVhSSTr2) for achieving the highest
tumor localization of [(111)In]-DTPA-D-Phe1-octreotide, which binds to this
receptor, in a human ovarian cancer model as a prelude to future therapy studies.
AdCMVhSSTr2 was produced and used to induce hSSTr2 on A427 human nonsmall cell
lung cancer cells and on SKOV3.ipl human ovarian cancer cells in vitro, as
demonstrated by competitive binding assays using [125I]-Tyr1-somatostatin and
[(111)In]-DTPA-D-Phe1-octreotide. Mice bearing i.p. SKOV3.ip1 tumors administered
1 x 10(9) plaque-forming units of AdCMVhSSTr2 i.p. 5 days after tumor cell
inoculation, followed by an i.p. injection of [(111)In]-DTPA-D-Phe1-octreotide 2 
days later, showed a range of 15.3-60.4% median injected dose/gram (ID/g) in
tumor at 4 h after injection compared with 3.5% ID/g when
[125I]-Tyr1-somatostatin was administered and 0.3% ID/g when the negative control
peptide [125I]-mIP-bombesin was administered. Mice administered a control
adenoviral vector encoding the gastrin-releasing peptide receptor did not have
tumor localization of [(111)In]-DTPA-D-Phe1-octreotide (<1.6% ID/g),
demonstrating specificity of [(111)In]-DTPA-D-Phe1-octreotide for the AdCMVhSSTr2
induced tumor cells. In another set of experiments, the tumor localization of
[(111)In]-DTPA-D-Phe1-octreotide was not different 1, 2, or 4 days after
AdCMVhSSTr2 injection (31.8, 37.7, and 40.7% ID/g, respectively; P = 0.88),
indicating that multiple injections of radiolabeled peptide can be administered
with equivalent uptake over a 4-day period. [(111)In]-DTPA-D-Phe1-octreotide
tumor localization in animals administered AdCMVhSSTr2 on consecutive days or 2
days apart was 22.4% ID/g and 53.2% ID/g, respectively (P = 0.009) when
[(111)In]-DTPA-D-Phe1-octreotide was given 1 day after the second AdCMVhSSTr2
injection. There was no difference in [(111)In]-DTPA-D-Phe1-octreotide
localization after a single AdCMVhSSTr2 injection (40.7% ID/g) or two injections 
of AdCMVhSSTr2 given 1 (45.9% ID/g) or 2 (53.2% ID/g) days apart, where
[(111)In]-DTPA-D-Phe1-octreotide was given in each case 4 days after the first
AdCMVhSSTr2 injection (P = 0.65). Therefore, two AdCMVhSSTr2 injections did not
increase [(111)In]-DTPA-D-Phe1-octreotide tumor localization compared with one
injection, which eliminates concerns about an immune response to a second dose of
AdCMVhSSTr2. This will be the basis for a therapeutic protocol with multiple
administrations of an octreotide analogue labeled with a therapeutic
radioisotope.


PMID: 10037188  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

