
1. Gastroenterol Hepatol. 1999 Mar;22(3):122-6.

[The effect of iron depletion on the response to interferon treatment in patients
with chronic hepatitis C. Pilot study].

[Article in Spanish]

Ortiz V(1), Olaso V, López Viedma B, Córdoba J, Molina JM, Lainez B, Pastor M,
Berenguer J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Medicina Digestiva, Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia.

It has been reported that increase in serum ferritin levels and/or in hepatic
iron content is associated with a poor response to interferon treatment in
patients with chronic hepatitis C (CH-C).AIM: To determinate whether iron
depletion by phlebotomy (PB) increases the response to interferon therapy in
chronic hepatitis C.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We have evaluated 12 patients with CH-C (genotype 1b = 11, 
1a = 1), increased ALT levels, positive serum VHC-RNA and increased serum
ferritin levels (> 220 ng/ml), including 8 previously non responders to
interferon therapy and 4 naive subjects. Phlebotomies were performed weekly (mean
number per patient: 6, range: 5-12) until serum ferritin levels were < 100 ng/ml,
followed by interferon treatment (3MU thrice weekly for 3-12 months depending on 
the response).
RESULTS: Multiple regression analysis showed that serum ferritin levels were not 
related to serum ALT levels (p = 0.18) or viral load (p = 0.06). Serum ALT levels
decreased significantly post-PB (58 U/l, range: 35-141 U/l) as compared to
pretreatment levels (164 U/l, range: 51-216 U/l, p < 0.006) and normalized in two
subjects. HCV-RNA was positive in one of the latter and negative in the other.
Eleven of the twelve patients did not respond to interferon after three months of
therapy (increased serum ALT levels in 10 subjects and positive HCV RNA in 11).
One additional patient, who had not been treated previously with interferon and
had low pretreatment viral load, had a sustained response after 12 months of
interferon therapy. Viral load did not decreased either with PB or following
interferon treatment. By contrast, serum ferritin levels did not increase with
interferon treatment or during the 6 month follow-up period.
CONCLUSIONS: Decreasing serum ferritin levels by phlebotomies does not increase
HCV erradication rate after interferon treatment. Sustained response to
interferon therapy is an infrequent event and is more dependent on viral factors 
(viral load and genotype).


PMID: 10228321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

