
1. J Wildl Dis. 1999 Apr;35(2):311-8.

Relationships of deer mouse movement, vegetative structure, and prevalence of
infection with Sin Nombre virus.

Root JJ(1), Calisher CH, Beaty BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins 80523, USA.

The effects of vegetative structure on movement of deer mice (Peromyscus
maniculatus) were examined in two distinct vegetation associations, one near
Hesperus and the other near Molina in western Colorado (USA) from June-October
1994 to October 1998. We monitored movement by live-trapping small mammals within
Gambel's oak/mixed-grass (Hesperus) and sage brush/juniper (Molina) vegetation
types. Vegetative structure differed between the sites with Molina having more
cover provided by shrubs and Hesperus having more cover provided by forbs. Adult 
male deer mice moved greater distances at Hesperus than at Molina. Sub-adult
males tended to move greater distances than did adult females. Relative
abundances of deer mice tended to differ by season, but the average relative
abundance of deer mice was greater at Molina. Long-term prevalence of infection
with SNV was greater at Hesperus and was greatest in adult males at Hesperus
(36.1%). Adult males at Molina exhibited a prevalence of infection with SNV of
25.0%. Infection with SNV was highly associated with scars or wounds for adult
male, adult female, and juvenile male deer mice at Hesperus, but only for adult
female deer mice at Molina. The presence of scars or wounds tended to be
associated with greater age, but male deer mice at Hesperus were more likely to
have wounds than female deer mice of the same age class. A similar pattern,
excluding juveniles, was observed at Molina. Intraspecific interactions and
environmentally elicited long-distance movements of deer mice may play a role in 
prevalence of infection with SNV in these animals.

DOI: 10.7589/0090-3558-35.2.311 
PMID: 10231758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

