
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Jun 1;27(11):2241-7.

Interaction of influenza virus NS1 protein and the human homologue of Staufen in 
vivo and in vitro.

Falcón AM(1), Fortes P, Marión RM, Beloso A, Ortín J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CSIC), Campus de Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, 
Spain.

A screening for human proteins capable of interacting with influenza virus NS1
has been carried out using the two-hybrid genetic trap in yeast. A cDNA
corresponding to the human homologue of Drosophila melanogaster Staufen protein
(hStaufen) was isolated that fulfilled all genetic controls of the two-hybrid
protocol. Using a hStaufen cDNA isolated from a lambda human library, the
interaction of hStaufen and NS1 proteins was characterised in vivo and in vitro. 
Co-transfection of NS1 cDNA and a partial cDNA of hStaufen led to the
relocalisation of recombinant hStaufen protein from its normal accumulation site 
in the cytoplasm to the nuclear location of NS1 protein. NS1 and hStaufen
proteins could be co-immunoprecipitated from extracts of co-transfected cells and
from mixtures of extracts containing either protein, as well as from extracts of 
influenza virus-infected cells. Furthermore, both proteins co-localised in the
ribosomal and polysomal fractions of influenza virus-infected cells. The
interaction was also detected in pull-down experiments using a resin containing
purified hStaufen and NS1 protein translated in vitro. Deletion mapping of the
NS1 gene indicated that a mutant protein containing the N-terminal 81 amino acids
is unable to interact with hStaufen, in spite of retaining full RNA-binding
capacity. These results are discussed in relation to the possible mechanisms of
action of hStaufen and its relevance for influenza virus infection.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/27.11.2241 
PMCID: PMC148787
PMID: 10325410  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

