
1. Biochemistry. 1999 Jun 29;38(26):8458-68.

Divalent cations stimulate preferential recognition of a viral DNA end by HIV-1
integrase.

Yi J(1), Asante-Appiah E, Skalka AM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Research, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

In the presence of a divalent metal cofactor (Mg2+ or Mn2+), retroviral-encoded
integrase (IN) catalyzes two distinct reactions: site-specific cleavage of two
nucleotides from both 3' ends of viral DNA, and sequence-independent joining of
the recessed viral ends to staggered phosphates in a target DNA. Here we
investigate human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) IN-DNA interactions using
surface plasmon resonance. The results show that IN forms tight complexes both
with duplex oligonucleotides that represent the viral DNA ends and with duplex
oligonucleotides with an unrelated sequence that represent a target DNA
substrate. The IN-DNA complexes are stable in 4.0 M NaCl, or 50% (v/v) methanol, 
but they are not resistant to low concentrations of SDS, indicating that their
stability is highly dependent on structural features of the protein. Divalent
metal cofactors exert two distinct effects on the IN-DNA interaction. Mn2+
inhibits IN binding to a model target DNA with the apparent Kd increasing
approximately 3-fold in the presence of this cation. On the other hand, Mn2+ (or 
Mg2+) stimulates the binding of IN to a model viral DNA end, decreasing the
apparent Kd of this IN-viral DNA complex approximately 6-fold. Such
metal-mediated stimulation of the binding of IN to the viral DNA is totally
abolished by substitution of the subterminal conserved CA/GT bp with a GT/CA bp, 
and is greatly diminished when the viral DNA end is recessed or "pre-processed." 
IN binds to a viral duplex oligonucleotide whose end was extended with nonviral
sequences with kinetics similar to the nonviral model target DNA. This suggests
that IN can distinguish the integrated DNA product from the viral donor DNA in
the presence of divalent metal ion. Thus, our results show that preferential
recognition of viral DNA by HIV-1 IN is achieved only in the presence of metal
cofactor, and requires a free, wild-type viral DNA end.

DOI: 10.1021/bi982870n 
PMID: 10387092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

