
1. Exp Hematol. 1999 Jul;27(7):1160-7.

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor mobilized peripheral blood stem cells enter
into G1 of the cell cycle and express higher levels of amphotropic retrovirus
receptor mRNA.

Horwitz ME(1), Malech HL, Anderson SM, Girard LJ, Bodine DM, Orlic D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Host Defenses, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. mhorwitz@nig.gov

We compared the cell cycle status and expression of mRNA for the amphotropic
retroviral receptor in hematopoietic stem cells isolated from bone marrow and
cytokine mobilized peripheral blood. CD34+ cells from six normal volunteers were 
enriched by immune selection from steady-state bone marrow and granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) mobilized peripheral blood (10 microg/kg/day
for 5 days). Cell cycle status of the phenotypically primitive CD34+CD38-
hematopoietic stem cell population was analyzed using a four-color flow cytometry
technique that distinguished the G0, G1, and S/IG2/M phases of the cell cycle.
Semiquantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction was performed to
measure mRNA expression of the amphotropic retroviral receptor. Peripheral blood 
hematopoietic stem cells had 2.6-fold more cells in the G1 phase of the cell
cycle compared to steady-state bone marrow. Furthermore, lineage CD34+CD38- cells
from G-CSF mobilized peripheral blood had a fourfold higher level of amphotropic 
retrovirus receptor mRNA. In conclusion, we found that CD34+ CD38- hematopoietic 
stem cells isolated from G-CSF mobilized peripheral blood differ from those
isolated from steady-state bone marrow in that a significant proportion have
entered the G1 phase of the cell cycle and express higher levels of amphotropic
receptor mRNA. These biologic properties are consistent with the reported rapid
recovery of hematopoietic function following transplantation with peripheral
blood hematopoietic stem cells and make these cells a preferred target for
retroviral-based gene transfer.

DOI: 10.1016/s0301-472x(99)00049-1 
PMID: 10390191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

