
1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1999 Aug 20;154(1-2):21-7.

A canonical nerve growth factor-induced gene-B response element appears not to be
involved in the cyclic adenosine monophosphate-dependent expression of
differentiation in thyrocytes.

Pichon B(1), Vassart G, Christophe D.

Author information: 
(1)I.R.I.B.H.N., Faculté de Médecine, U.L.B., Bruxelles, Belgium.

The expression of transcriptionally active nerve growth factor-induced gene-B
(NGFI-B) is rapidly induced in thyroid follicular cells in response to cAMP
stimulation. As the transcription of thyrocyte-specific genes is controlled by
the cAMP cascade, we have investigated a possible involvement of NGFI-B in this
control. Recombinant adenoviruses driving the expression of either the intact
NGFI-B protein or a truncated form of it that lacks the capacity to transactivate
a NBRE-dependent promoter, were used to infect dog thyrocytes maintained in
primary culture. Northern blot analysis of total RNA from infected cells revealed
that the expression of NGFI-B was not sufficient to induce a significant
accumulation of specific transcripts (thyroglobulin, thyroperoxidase,
sodium-iodide symporter) in unstimulated thyrocytes. The overproduction of the
transcriptionally inactive form of NGFI-B in thyrocytes maintained in the
presence of forskolin after infection did not impair the accumulation of the
thyroid-specific transcripts. These data show that NGFI-B does not control the
expression of differentiation in thyrocytes by acting through a canonical NBRE.
As a consequence, we must consider that either the expression of NGFI-B in
cAMP-stimulated thyrocytes is not critically linked to the expression of
differentiation or that NGFI-B is implicated in a regulatory mechanism which
differs from its known action at the level of a NBRE.

DOI: 10.1016/s0303-7207(99)00104-5 
PMID: 10509796  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

