
1. Mod Pathol. 1999 Nov;12(11):1062-71.

p16INK4A is regularly expressed in Hodgkin's disease: comparison with
retinoblastoma, p53 and MDM2 protein status, and the presence of Epstein-Barr
virus.

Guenova M(1), Rassidakis GZ, Gorgoulis VG, Angelopoulou MK, Siakantaris MR,
Kanavaros P, Pangalis GA, Kittas C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology, National Center of Hematology and Transfusiology,
Sofia, Bulgaria.

In order to understand better the possible role of cell-cycle regulating
molecules in the pathogenesis of Hodgkin's disease (HD), the immunohistochemical 
distribution pattern of p16INK4A was investigated and compared with pRb, p53, and
MDM2 protein status in 44 HD cases. Our findings were correlated to the presence 
of Epstein-Barr virus as detected by RNA in situ hybridization and
clinicopathological parameters. p16INK4A protein immunoreactivity was found in
all 44 cases with a proportion of Hodgkin-Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells ranging from
30 to 90%. In 93% of the cases studied, pRb was detected in HRS, whereas all
cases showed overexpression of p53. Almost all specimens (98%) were MDM2-positive
as evaluated by 1B10 and/or IF2 monoclonal antibodies. EBER 1/2-transcripts were 
detected in 31.8% (14 of 44) of the examined samples. A significant correlation
was observed between immunoreactivity of p16INK4A and MDM2 and the number of HRS 
cells (P = .0012 and P = .018, respectively). In a subgroup of cases, with
p16INK4A expression in more than 50% of HRS cells, the percentage of pRb-positive
neoplastic cells was inversely related to that of p16-positive ones (P = .007).
No clinicopathological parameters or clinical prognostic indicators, including
duration of response to therapy, were statistically related to the expression
levels of any of the four proteins investigated or the presence of Epstein-Barr
virus. Our findings suggest that p16 and pRb are regularly expressed and that
their pathway in cell-cycle machinery seems to be intact in HD. However, further 
investigation is needed to shed light on the involvement of cell-cycle molecules 
in Hodgkin's lymphomagenesis and longer patient follow-up is required for
conclusive prognostic correlation.


PMID: 10574604  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

