
1. J Virol. 2000 Jan;74(1):295-304.

Activation of a cell entry pathway common to type C mammalian retroviruses by
soluble envelope fragments.

Lavillette D(1), Ruggieri A, Russell SJ, Cosset FL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Vectorologie Rétrovirale et Thérapie Génique, Unité de
Virologie Humaine, INSERM U412, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon, France.

Mutations that negatively or positively affect the fusion properties of murine
leukemia viruses (MLVs) have been found within all subdomains of their SU
(surface) and TM (transmembrane) envelope units. Yet, the interrelations between 
these different regions of the envelope complex during the cell entry process are
still elusive. Deletion of the histidine residue of the conserved PHQV motif at
the amino terminus of the amphotropic or the ecotropic MLV SU resulted in the
AdelH or the MOdelH fusion-defective mutant envelope, respectively. These delH
mutant envelopes are incorporated on retroviral particles at normal densities and
normally mediate virion binding to cells expressing the retroviral receptors.
However, both their cell-cell and virus-cell fusogenicities were fully prevented 
at an early postbinding stage. We show here that the fusion defect of AdelH or
MOdelH envelopes was also almost completely reverted by providing either soluble 
SU or a polypeptide encompassing the receptor-binding domain (RBD) to the target 
cells, provided that the integrity of the amino-terminal end of either
polypeptide was preserved. Restoration of delH envelope fusogenicity was caused
by activation of the target cells via specific interaction of the latter
polypeptides with the retrovirus receptor rather than by their association with
the delH envelope complexes. Moreover crossactivation of the target cells,
leading to fusion activation of AdelH or MOdelH envelopes, was achieved by
polypeptides containing various type C mammalian retrovirus RBDs, irrespective of
the type of entry-defective glycoprotein that was used for infection. Our results
indicate that although they recognize different receptors for binding to the cell
surface, type C mammalian retroviruses use a common entry pathway which is
activated by a conserved feature of their envelope glycoproteins.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.74.1.295-304.2000 
PMCID: PMC111539
PMID: 10590117  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

