
1. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2000 Jan;27(1):51-8.

Immunohistochemical localization of cytokines and cell adhesion molecules in
maxillary sinus mucosa in chronic sinusitis.

Nonoyama T(1), Harada T, Shinogi J, Yoshimura E, Sakakura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Mie University School of Medicine, Tsu,
Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Chronic sinusitis is a common disease characterized by persistent
inflammation of the nasal and paranasal sinus mucosa. Accumulating evidence
supports the importance of proinflammatory cytokines and endothelial cell
adhesion molecule (CAM) expression as an initiating process in tissue
inflammation. This study was conducted to investigate the localization of major
cytokines and CAMs in the maxillary sinus mucosa from patients with chronic
sinusitis and from normal subjects.
METHODS: Maxillary sinus mucosal specimens from patients with chronic sinusitis
(n = 10) and from normal subjects (n = 6) were immunostained with specific
antibodies directed against the cytokines (IL-1alpha, IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-8 and
TNF-alpha) and the CAMs (intercellular adhesion molecule-1, ICAM-1 and vascular
CAM-1, VCAM-1).
RESULTS: The number of immunoreactive cells for IL-1alpha, IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-8, 
and TNF-alpha was increased significantly in patients with chronic sinusitis
compared with normal controls. Immunoreactivity for ICAM-1 was also increased
significantly in patients with chronic sinusitis compared with normal controls,
whereas VCAM-1 is only minimally expressed or is absent in both groups.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that bacterial and/or viral infection may
induce functional and morphologic changes in the maxillary sinus mucosa in
chronic sinusitis through enhanced generation of specific cytokines in
conjunction with CAMs.

DOI: 10.1016/s0385-8146(99)00042-5 
PMID: 10648069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

