
1. J Immunol Methods. 2000 Apr 21;238(1-2):107-17.

Intracellular staining for TNF and IFN-gamma detects different frequencies of
antigen-specific CD8(+) T cells.

Badovinac VP(1), Harty JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in
Immunology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

CD8(+) T lymphocytes are important mediators of adaptive immunity against certain
viral, protozoan and bacterial pathogens. Activated CD8(+) T cells are able to
induce cytolysis of infected cells (perforin and CD95-CD95L mediated pathways)
and also elaborate cytokines, including IFN-gamma and TNF after appropriate MHC
class I-peptide recognition. New technologies for the detection of
antigen-specific CD8(+) T cells, including tetrameric MHC class I-peptide
complexes, intracellular IFN-gamma staining and IFN-gamma ELISPOT analysis have
revised our understanding of the magnitude of the CD8(+) T cell response to
infection. Here, using intracellular cytokine staining, we compare detection of
IFN-gamma and TNF in the analysis of pathogen-specific CD8(+) T cell lines and
CD8(+) T cells after primary viral infection (LCMV) or secondary bacterial
infection (Listeria monocytogenes). Under multiple conditions and with multiple
epitopes, we find that staining for intracellular IFN-gamma consistently detects 
a higher frequency of antigen-specific CD8(+) T cells than detection of
intracellular TNF. However, (a) intracellular staining for TNF can be used to
detect antigen-specific CD8(+) T cell responses and (b) intracellular staining
for cytokines is a useful approach for in vitro characterization of
antigen-specific CD8(+) T cell lines.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-1759(00)00153-8 
PMID: 10758241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

