
1. J Neurovirol. 2000 Apr;6(2):106-20.

Studies on the pathology, especially brain hemorrhage and angioendotheliomas,
induced by two new mos-containing viruses.

Lim KY(1), Ryan EA, Wong PK, Yuen PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, Science Park-Research Division, The University
of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville, Texas, TX 78957, USA.

Recombinant virus 7 (R7), a spontaneous deletion mutant of SV7, which is itself a
molecular clone of Moloney murine sarcoma virus 124 (MoMuSV 124), induces brain
lesions and tumors of the subcutaneous tissue and spleen in all infected mice. In
contrast, SV7 only induces tumors of the spleen and subcutaneous tissues. One of 
the genetic differences between R7 and SV7 is that R7 encodes a Gag-Mos protein
whereas SV7 encodes an Env-Mos protein. To investigate whether the novel R7
gag-mos oncogene is required for brain lesion induction, two viruses (SV7d1 and
SVM1) were constructed in which the R7 gag-mos sequences and the adjacent 53 bp
of the 5' noncoding sequence were replaced by either the SV7 or
myeloproliferative sarcoma virus (MPSV) env-mos oncogenes, respectively. Like R7,
SV7d1 and SVM1 induced brain lesions and tumors in the spleen and subcutaneous
tissues. A prominent component of R7-, SV7d1-, and SVM1-induced tumors of the
brain, subcutaneous tissues, and spleen was the presence of abnormally enlarged
cells with eccentric nuclei lining vessels, scattered singly or in small
clusters. Their size, localization to the luminal surface of distended vessels,
and binding to Bandeiraea simplicifolia (BS-1) lectin, an endothelial cell (EC)
marker, suggest that they are most likely transformed ECs. Our findings therefore
indicate that the induction of brain lesions is not limited to the expression of 
the R7 Gag-Mos protein. However, our findings also indicate that expression of
the different forms of the Mos protein results in differences in the relative
abundance of ECs in brain angioendotheliomas and subcutaneous and spleen tumors
induced by these viruses.

DOI: 10.3109/13550280009013154 
PMID: 10822324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

