
1. Int J Cancer. 2000 Jul 15;87(2):186-94.

p185(neu) protein is required for tumor and anchorage-independent growth, not for
cell proliferation of transgenic mammary carcinoma.

Nanni P(1), Pupa SM, Nicoletti G, De Giovanni C, Landuzzi L, Rossi I, Astolfi A, 
Ricci C, De Vecchi R, Invernizzi AM, Di Carlo E, Musiani P, Forni G, Menard S,
Lollini PL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Research, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
nanni@cancer.unibo.it

Transgenic FVB-NeuN mice (N202) bearing the rat neu protooncogene driven by the
mouse mammary tumor virus promoter/enhancer develop focal mammary carcinomas
overexpressing the neu-encoded p185(neu) protein. In vitro expression of
p185(neu) among mammary carcinoma cultures was heterogeneous, and we could
establish some cell lines and clones displaying a complete loss of p185(neu)
expression, along with others with very high p185(neu) protein level. Upon in
vivo injection, p185(neu)-positive cells gave rise to fast-growing tumors with a 
short latency, while p185(neu)-negative cells required a very long latency time, 
and the resulting tumors were invariably p185(neu)-positive. The lower growth
ability of p185(neu)-negative cells in vivo was also confirmed in athymic nude
mice. In vitro, analysis of anchorage-independent growth in soft agar revealed
colony formation from p185(neu)-positive but not p185(neu)-negative cells. The
direct involvement of p185(neu) in clonogenicity was demonstrated by the
inhibition of p185(neu)-positive colony growth in soft agar in the presence of an
anti-p185(neu) monoclonal antibody. By contrast, a higher level of
anchorage-dependent clonogenic growth and proliferation was observed in
p185(neu)-negative cells as compared to p185(neu)-positive cells, thus explaining
the relative ease with which p185(neu)-negative cell lines and clones were
established in vitro. Together, the results indicate that p185(neu) expression
can lead to tumor formation and metastasis through the modification of intrinsic 
properties of cells related to anchorage-independent growth ability rather than
to proliferation or host-dependent mechanisms.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.


PMID: 10861472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

