
1. J Gen Virol. 2000 Aug;81(Pt 8):1995-2004. doi: 10.1099/0022-1317-81-8-1995.

Contribution of bovine papillomavirus type 1 E1 protein residue 48 to replication
function.

McShan GD(1), Wilson VG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Texas A&M University System
Health Science Center, College Station, TX 77843-1114, USA1.

The E1 protein of bovine papillomavirus type 1 (BPV-1) is the origin recognition 
protein and is essential for the initiation of viral DNA replication. We reported
previously that there is a conserved motif between residues 25 and 60 of all
papillomavirus E1 proteins that resembles a casein kinase II (CKII)
phosphorylation site. The corresponding serine in BPV-1, serine-48, is an
efficient substrate for CKII in vitro. To examine the functional role of this
potential phosphorylation site, three amino acid substitutions were constructed
at serine-48. Conversion of serine-48 to a glycine (S48G) resulted in a BPV-1
genome that was unable to replicate and had reduced transformation capacity. The 
S48G E1 protein also failed to support replication of a BPV-1 origin-containing
plasmid when expressed from a heterologous vector rather than the viral genome,
indicating a direct replication defect. In contrast, conversion of serine-48 to
acidic residues (S48D or S48E), which mimic the charge and structure of
phosphoserine, maintained the wild-type replication phenotype. These mutational
results are consistent with a replication requirement for a negative charge at
serine-48, presumably supplied by in vivo phosphorylation. The mechanistic basis 
for the negative charge requirement was examined by testing several activities of
the S48G mutant E1 protein in vivo using yeast one- and two-hybrid systems. No
gross defect was observed for stability, origin binding or interaction with E2 or
for E1-E1 interaction, although subtle defects in these activities would not
likely be detected. Overall, the results suggest that important phosphoregulatory
control of E1 replication function is mediated through the N-terminal region of
this protein.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-81-8-1995 
PMID: 10900038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

