
1. J Wildl Dis. 2000 Jul;36(3):423-35.

Histologic, neurologic, and immunologic effects of methylmercury in captive great
egrets.

Spalding MG(1), Frederick PC, McGill HC, Bouton SN, Richey LJ, Schumacher IM,
Blackmore CG, Harrison J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville 32611, USA. rosie@nersp.nerdc.ufl.edu

Captive great egret (Ardea albus) nestlings were maintained as controls or were
dosed with methylmercury chloride at low (0.5), and high doses (5 mg/kg, wet
weight) in fish. Low dosed birds were given methylmercury at concentrations
comparable to current exposure of wild birds in the Everglades (Florida, USA).
When compared with controls, low dosed birds had lower packed cell volumes, dingy
feathers, increased lymphocytic cuffing in a skin test, increased bone marrow
cellularity, decreased bursal wall thickness, decreased thymic lobule size, fewer
lymphoid aggregates in lung, increased perivascular edema in lung, and decreased 
phagocytized carbon in lung. High dosed birds became severely ataxic and had
severe hematologic, neurologic, and histologic changes. The most severe lesions
were in immune and nervous system tissues. By comparing responses in captive and 
wild birds, we found that sublethal effects of mercury were detected at lower
levels in captive than in wild birds, probably due to the reduced sources of
variation characteristic of the highly controlled laboratory study. Conversely,
thresholds for more severe changes (death, disease) occurred at lower
concentrations in wild birds than in captive birds, probably because wild birds
were exposed to multiple stressors. Thus caution should be used in applying
lowest observed effect levels between captive and wild studies.

DOI: 10.7589/0090-3558-36.3.423 
PMID: 10941726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

