
1. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 2001 Jan;8(1):161-5.

Seroepidemiology of human group C rotavirus in Japan based on a blocking
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.

Kuzuya M(1), Fujii R, Hamano M, Ohata R, Ogura H, Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Okayama Prefectural Institute for Environmental
Science and Public Health, Okayama 701-0298, Japan.
mitsutaka_kuzuya@pref.okayama.jp

A novel blocking enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (BL-ELISA) was developed for
detection of antibodies to human group C rotavirus (CHRV). The specificity of the
BL-ELISA was confirmed by using animal sera hyperimmunized to group A and group C
rotaviruses and paired sera from five patients with acute CHRV gastroenteritis.
Furthermore, there was concordance between the BL-ELISA and a neutralization
assay for CHRV in 226 (95%) of 238 samples. By using the BL-ELISA, we determined 
the seroprevalence of CHRV in 704 serum samples obtained from nine different age 
groups of inhabitants of Okayama Prefecture, Japan, in 1992, 1994, and 1996. As a
result, 211 sera (30%) were found to be positive for CHRV antibodies. The
seroprevalence gradually increased with age and reached 52.7% in the oldest
individuals. A further analysis of the youngest age group suggested that CHRVs
predominantly prevail in persons older than 3 years of age in Japan. When
comparing the three sampling years, a larger percentage of antibody-positive sera
was detected in 1994 than in either 1992 or 1996 in individuals between 6 and 15 
years of age, reflecting the occurrence of a CHRV outbreak among children during 
the winter of 1992 to 1993 that was previously documented. These results indicate
that CHRV infections may occur more frequently in spite of the relatively low
detection rate of the virus.

DOI: 10.1128/CDLI.8.1.161-165.2001 
PMCID: PMC96026
PMID: 11139211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

