
1. Anal Quant Cytol Histol. 2001 Apr;23(2):101-8.

Confocal image characterization of human papillomavirus DNA sequences revealed
with Eu in HeLa cell nuclei stained with Hoechst 33342.

Kahn E(1), Lizard G, Frouin F, Souchier C, Bernengo JC, Siitari H, Cuenod CA,
Clément O, Frija G, Gambert P, Todd-Pokropek A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U494, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire Pitié-Salpêtrière, 91 boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75634
Paris, France. kahn@imed.jussieu.fr

OBJECTIVE: To visualize and localize specific viral DNA sequences revealed with
Eu by fluorescence in situ hybridization, confocal laser scanning microscopy
(CLSM) and factor analysis of biomedical image sequences (FAMIS).
STUDY DESIGN: Human papillomavirus DNA (HPV-DNA) was identified in HeLa cells
with biotinylated DNA probes recognizing HPV-DNA types 16/18. DNA-DNA hybrids
were revealed by a three-step immunohistochemical amplification procedure
involving an antibiotin mouse monoclonal antibody, a biotinylated goat antimouse 
polyclonal antibody and streptavidin-Eu. Cell nuclei were counterstained with
Hoechst 33342. Image sequences were obtained using a CLSM that made possible
ultraviolet excitation. The location of fluorescent signals inside cellular
preparations was determined by FAMIS and selection of filters at emission. Image 
sequences were summarized into a reduced number of images, or factor images, and 
curves, or factors. Factors estimate spectral or temporal patterns and depth
emission profiles. Factor images correspond to spatial distributions of the
different factors.
RESULTS: We distinguished between Eu corresponding to HPV-DNA hybridization
signals and nuclear staining by taking into account differences in their spectral
and temporal patterns and (using their decay rates).
CONCLUSION: FAMIS, together with CLSM and Eu, made possible the detection and
characterization of viral papillomavirus DNA sequences in HeLa cells.


PMID: 11332075  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

