
1. J Virol. 2001 Oct;75(19):9435-45.

Cross-linking of the fingers subdomain of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
reverse transcriptase to template-primer.

Peletskaya EN(1), Boyer PL, Kogon AA, Clark P, Kroth H, Sayer JM, Jerina DM,
Hughes SH.

Author information: 
(1)ABL-Basic Research Program, National Cancer Institute at Frederick, National
Institutes of Health, Frederick, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

Cross-linking experiments were performed with human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) reverse transcriptase (RT) mutants with unique cysteine residues at
several positions (positions 65, 67, 70, and 74) in the fingers subdomain of the 
p66 subunit. Two approaches were used--photoaffinity cross-linking and disulfide 
chemical cross-linking (using an oligonucleotide that contained an N(2)-modified 
dG with a reactive thiol group). In the former case, cross-linking can occur to
any nucleotide in either DNA strand, and in the latter case, a specific
cross-link is produced between the template and the enzyme. Neither the
introduction of the unique cysteine residues into the fingers nor the
modification of these residues with photocross-linking reagents caused a
significant decrease in the enzymatic activities of RT. We were able to use this 
model system to investigate interactions between specific points on the fingers
domain of RT and double-stranded DNA (dsDNA). Photoaffinity cross-linking of the 
template to the modified RTs with Cys residues in positions 65, 67, 70, and 74 of
the fingers domain of the p66 subunit was relatively efficient. Azide-modified
Cys residues produced 10 to 25% cross-linking, whereas diazirine modified
residues produced 5 to 8% cross-linking. Disulfide cross-linking yields were up
to 90%. All of the modified RTs preferentially photocross-linked to the 5'
extended template strand of the dsDNA template-primer substrate. The preferred
sites of interactions were on the extended template, 5 to 7 bases beyond the
polymerase active site. HIV-1 RT is quite flexible. There are conformational
changes associated with substrate binding. Cross-linking was used to detect
intramolecular movements associated with binding of the incoming deoxynucleoside 
triphosphate (dNTP). Binding an incoming dNTP at the polymerase active site
decreases the efficiency of cross-linking, but causes only modest changes in the 
preferred positions of cross-linking. This suggests that the interactions between
the fingers of p66 and the extended template involve the "open" configuration of 
the enzyme with the fingers away from the active site rather than the closed
configuration with the fingers in direct contact with the incoming dNTP. This
experimental approach can be used to measure distances between any site on the
surface of the protein and an interacting molecule.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.19.9435-9445.2001 
PMCID: PMC114511
PMID: 11533206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

