
1. J Med Virol. 2002 Jan;66(1):49-55.

High prevalence of hepatitis E antibodies among Danish prisoners and drug users.

Christensen PB(1), Engle RE, Jacobsen SE, Krarup HB, Georgsen J, Purcell RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology, Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark. peer.christensen@dadlnet.dk

Injecting drug users and prisoners have high prevalences of antibodies to
hepatitis A-C. The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of
antibodies to hepatitis E virus (anti-HEV) in two Danish high-risk populations
and correlate anti-HEV with risk factors for transmission. Three hundred thirty
male prisoners and 137 patients at a drug treatment center were tested for
anti-HEV with an in-house enzyme-linked immunoassay (EIA) utilizing antigens
derived from open reading frame 2 (ORF2). This was compared with a commercial
test with antigens derived from ORF2 and ORF3 (Abbott HEV EIA). In addition the
samples were tested for antibodies against hepatitis A-C viruses, human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 1 and 2, human T lymphotropic virus (HTLV) I and II 
and herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV2). The participants were interviewed about
risk factors for transmission. The anti-HEV prevalence was 16.9% (95% CI 14-21)
for the in-house assay compared to 4.1% (95% CI 2.5-6.3) with the commercial
assay. The correlation between the two assays was low (87% overall agreement;
kappa value 0.32). One sample was strongly anti-HEV IgM positive, suggesting
recent HEV infection inside Denmark. The presence of anti-HEV was associated
significantly with anti-HAV among prisoners and increased with age in both
groups. In contrast, associations were not found with injecting drug use or
sexual risk factors. With the commercial assay an increased prevalence of
anti-HEV was found among participants who had spent more than 5 years outside
Northern Europe. In conclusion, anti-HEV was highly prevalent among Danish
prisoners and drug users but not related to risk factors for blood-borne or
sexual transmission.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.2110 
PMID: 11748658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

