
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Mar 19;99(6):3406-11.

Cross-clade inhibition of HIV-1 replication and cytopathology by using RNase
P-associated external guide sequences.

Kraus G(1), Geffin R, Spruill G, Young AK, Seivright R, Cardona D, Burzawa J,
Hnatyszyn HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Miami, 1550 NW 10th Avenue (R-138), 
Miami, FL 33136, USA.

RNase P complexes have been proposed as a novel RNA-based gene interference
strategy to inhibit gene expression in human malignancies and infectious
diseases. This approach is based on the sequence-specific design of an external
guide sequence (EGS) RNA molecule that can specifically hybridize to almost any
complementary target mRNA and facilitate its cleavage by the RNase P enzyme
component. We designed a truncated RNase P-associated EGS molecule to
specifically recognize the U5 region of HIV-1 mRNA and mediate cleavage of
hybridized mRNA by the RNase P enzyme. Genes encoding for this U5-EGS (560)
molecule, as well as a U5 EGS (560D) antisense control, were cloned into
retroviral plasmids and transferred into a CD4(+) T cell line. Transfected cells 
were exposed to increasing concentrations of HIV-1 clinical isolates from clades 
A, B, C, and F. Heterogeneous cultures of CD4(+) T cells expressing the U5 EGS
(560) molecule were observed to maintain CD4 levels, were devoid of
cytopathology, and did not produce HIV p24 gag antigen through 30 days after
exposure to all HIV-1 clades at a multiplicity of infection of 0.01. Identical
cells expressing the U5 EGS (560D) antisense control molecule underwent a loss of
CD4 expression, produced elevated levels of HIV-1, and formed large syncytia
similar to untreated cells. When the viral inoculum was increased at the time of 
exposure (multiplicity of infection = 0.05), the inhibitory effect of the U5 EGS 
(560) molecule was overwhelmed, but viral-mediated cytopathology and particle
production were delayed compared with control cell populations. Viral replication
and cytopathology associated with infection of multiple HIV-1 clades can be
effectively inhibited in CD4(+) cells expressing the RNase P-associated U5 EGS
(560) molecule.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.052651199 
PMCID: PMC122536
PMID: 11904403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

