
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2002 Feb;8(2):80-4.

Hepatitis C in HIV-infected patients--therapeutic approach.

Fern√°ndez I(1), Rubio R, Lumbreras C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, HIV Unit, Department of
Internal Medicine, and Unit of Infectious Diseases, Hospital 12 de Octubre,
Madrid, Spain.

The use of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has extended the lifespan
of patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). As the prognosis of
HIV infection has improved, liver disease associated with hepatitis C virus (HCV)
has become clinically significant in patients with HIV, liver failure being a
frequent cause of death in this population. HIV infection may accelerate the
course of liver disease in patients co-infected with HCV, so infection with HCV
should be treated like any other opportunistic disease in these patients.
Nowadays, combination therapy with interferon-alpha and ribavirin is the standard
treatment for chronic hepatitis C in HIV-negative patients. Preliminary results
of combination therapy in HIV/HCV co-infected patients have been promising,
showing a sustained response rate in 40% of these patients. Patients with higher 
CD4 counts and lower HCV/HIV viral load and those infected with HCV genotype 3a
have a better response to therapy. Potential drug interactions between HAART
therapy and interferon and ribavirin treatment emphasize the importance of
initiating treatment of HCV infection in HIV-positive individuals as soon as
possible and ideally before the need for anti-HIV therapy. Recent case reports
have suggested that liver transplantation might be an appropriate procedure in
HIV patients with undetectable HIV viral load, high CD4 counts and HCV advanced
liver disease. However, the limited amount of available information and the
complexities of drug interactions between HAART therapy and immunosuppressive
drugs oblige us to be prudent within considering such a procedure.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1198-743x.2001.00395.x 
PMID: 11952720  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

