
1. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2002 Jun;4(3):391-403.

L-carnitine reduces lymphocyte apoptosis and oxidant stress in HIV-1-infected
subjects treated with zidovudine and didanosine.

Moretti S(1), Famularo G, Marcellini S, Boschini A, Santini G, Trinchieri V,
Lucci L, Alesse E, De Simone C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of L'Aquila, Rome, Italy.

Apoptosis is critical to the progression of human immunodeficiency virus-1
(HIV-1) infection. It appears reasonable that antiretroviral therapies may not
achieve a full control of the infection in the absence of an impact on apoptosis.
We assigned 20 asymptomatic HIV-infected subjects with advanced immunodeficiency 
to receive either zidovudine (AZT), and didanosine (DDI) or the same regimen plus
L-carnitine, a known antiapoptotic drug, for 7 months. Immunologic and virologic 
parameters were measured at baseline and after 15, 60, 120, and 210 days of
treatment. We assessed on each time point the following: (a) the frequency of
peripheral blood apoptotic CD4 and CD8 lymphocytes, CD4 and CD8 cells with
disrupted mitochondrial membrane potential, and CD4 and CD8 cells undergoing
oxidant stress; (b) the expression of the molecular markers of apoptosis Fas and 
caspase-1; and (c) the expression of p35/cdk-5 regulatory subunit that is
involved in regulating cell survival and apoptosis. Absolute CD4 and CD8 counts
and plasma viremia were also measured. Apoptotic CD4 and CD8 cells, lymphocytes
with disrupted mitochondrial membrane potential, and lymphocytes undergoing
oxidant stress were greatly reduced in subjects treated with AZT and DDI plus
L-carnitine compared with those who did not receive L-carnitine. Fas and
caspase-1 were down-expressed and p35 over-expressed in lymphocytes from patients
of the L-carnitine group. No difference was found in CD4 and CD8 counts and
viremia between the groups. No toxicity of L-carnitine was recognized. The
addition of L-carnitine is safe and allows apoptosis and oxidant stress to be
greatly reduced in lymphocytes from subjects treated with AZT and DDI.

DOI: 10.1089/15230860260196191 
PMID: 12215207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

