
1. J Med Virol. 2002 Nov;68(3):445-51.

Isolation of vaccine-derived type 1 polioviruses displaying similar properties to
virulent wild strain Mahoney from sewage in Japan.

Horie H(1), Yoshida H, Matsuura K, Miyazawa M, Wakabayashi K, Nomoto A, Hashizume
S.

Author information: 
(1)Japan Poliomyelitis Research Institute, Higashimurayama-shi, Tokyo, Japan.

Type 1, 2, and 3 vaccine-derived polioviruses were isolated from a sewage
disposal plant located downstream of the Oyabe River in Toyama Prefecture, Japan,
between October 1993 and September 1995. Neurovirulence was analyzed in 13 type 1
vaccine-derived strains, using mutant analysis by polymerase chain reaction and
restriction enzyme cleavage (MAPREC). Nine strains (69%) were estimated to have
marked neurovirulence. Some of the neutralizing antigenic sites, temperature
sensitivity, and plaque-forming ability of two virulent vaccine-derived
poliovirus strains were similar to Mahoney strain. The neutralizing activity of
human sera obtained after oral poliomyelitis vaccine (OPV) administration against
one of the virulent vaccine-derived polioviruses was examined. Although all human
sera showed sufficient neutralizing activity for the prevention of poliomyelitis 
by vaccine-derived poliovirus strains, a lower titer than that against Sabin type
1 strain was observed. Vaccination against virulent vaccine-derived poliovirus
will be effective. However, the environmental presence of viruses that have
properties similar to those Mahoney strain is a threat. The introduction of
inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV), and well-maintained herd immunity, together
with reinforced environmental surveillance is important for the final phase of
the polio eradication program by the World Health Organization (WHO).

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.10224 
PMID: 12226835  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

