
1. J Viral Hepat. 2002 Sep;9(5):370-6.

Interferon retreatment reduces or delays the incidence of hepatocellular
carcinoma in patients with chronic hepatitis C.

Hino K(1), Kitase A, Satoh Y, Fujiwara D, Yamaguchi Y, Korenaga M, Shingai Y,
Konishi T, Yamashita S, Uchida K, Mori K, Hanada H, Kodama T, Nukui K, Okita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Yamaguchi University, School of
Medicine, Ube, Japan. k.hino@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp

Inhibition of hepatocarcinogenesis is a crucial issue in treating chronic
hepatitis C patients, especially those who do not respond completely to
interferon therapy. Interferon has been reported to reduce the incidence of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) not only in sustained virological responders but
also in transient biochemical responders. However, the incidence of HCC increases
in 5 years or more after interferon therapy in transient biochemical responders. 
The aim of this study is to assess whether interferon retreatment reduces the
incidence of HCC in chronic hepatitis C patients in whom hepatitis C virus was
not eradicated during initial interferon therapy. We enrolled 309 patients who
were not sustained virological responders after initial interferon treatment
consisting of a total dose of more than 250 megaunits of interferon and were
followed for more than 2 years after treatment. Ninety-nine patients received
interferon retreatment and 210 did not. Two courses of interferon therapy were
administered in 84, three courses in 14 and five courses in one. The incidence of
HCC was compared between patients with retreatment and those without. In the
clinical characteristics, retreated patients were younger and followed up for a
longer time period. The cumulative incidence of HCC was significantly lower in
retreated patients. In multivariate analysis, patients' age (P=0.018) and the
number of courses of interferon therapy (P=0.022) were independently associated
with HCC incidence. These results suggest that interferon retreatment reduces or 
delays the incidence of HCC in chronic hepatitis C patients who did not
completely respond to initial therapy.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2893.2002.00366.x 
PMID: 12225332  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

