
1. J Aust Popul Assoc. 1994 May;11(1):9-19.

New challenges for demography.

Caldwell JC.

PIP: Summary information was provided on the priorities and contribution of
demography to research on anthropological demography, AIDS, and the health
transition. These topics have recently been included within the scientific
committees of the International Union for the Scientific Study of Population
(IUSSP). Demographic analysis has changed since the advent of global surveys such
as the Knowledge, Attitude, and Prevalence Surveys, the World Fertility Surveys, 
the Contraceptive Prevalence Surveys, and the Demographic and Health Surveys.
These large surveys were successful in revealing, despite country differences,
actual trends. The determinants of behavior were not as easily measured. In 1982 
IUSSP established the first working group on micro or anthropological demography.
The merging of fields meant attention to participant observation and other
anthropological field methods and knowledge of the literature about societies.
The large surveys were limited to easily quantifiable questions needing follow-up
with micro-surveys specific to cultures and topics. Research was conducted with
only partial hypotheses. Provisional theories were thus formed. Demographic
attention to the AIDS epidemic commanded attention because of the very high rates
in Africa (i.e., over 30% of adults in some urban areas). The spread in
Sub-Saharan Africa was through heterosexual transmission, and initial research
had to develop methods suitable to examining sexual networking in the African
context. Public announcements about the questions in the AIDS surveys were not
made; single households were interviewed discreetly so as not to draw public
attention. Only one household per area was chosen over an intense concentration
of interviewing in one area. The interviewer had to convey trustworthiness,
confidentiality, scientific interest, and non-judgmental attitudes: a difficult
undertaking. Identification of partners was required for understanding sexual
networks, but most respondents, particularly sex workers, could not provide this 
information. Longitudinal studies and HIV testing are needed. Health transition
research has focused on maternal-child relations. Parental education has been
identified as a key factor in health change, but how it operated to bring about
change was less well known. New IUSSP research areas include committees on gender
and environmental issues.
DOI: 10.1007/BF03029422 
PMID: 12288190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

