
1. Int J STD AIDS. 2002 Dec;13 Suppl 2:38-41.

Vaccine candidates in STD.

Fletcher MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Affairs Department, Aventis Pasteur, 2, avenue Pont Pasteur, F-69367
Lyon Cedex 07, France. FletchM@wyeth.com

Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) are caused by organisms that infect the
mucosal surfaces of the genitourinary tract. In spite of its public health
importance, current STD vaccine research lags behind work against pathogens that 
target another mucosal region, the respiratory tract. In the latter case,
live-attenuated viral vaccines, killed whole-cell bacterial vaccines,
subunit/protein bacterial vaccines, and bacterial polysaccharide vaccines have
been enormously successful. To move STD vaccine research forward, complex issues 
must be resolved. Those include selection of an appropriate antigen (e.g.
scientific feasibility and intellectual property rights), the manufacture of the 
vaccine (e.g. delivery systems, formulation processes, and production steps), and
the appropriate public health approach (e.g. medical indications and marketing
aspects). Particular scientific problems have delayed STD vaccine development,
like incomplete attenuation (human herpes simplex virus type 2), accentuated
immunopathology (Chlamydia trachomatis), poor immunogenicity (Treponema
pallidum), and broad antigenic heterogeneity (Neisseria gonorrhoeae).
Nevertheless, efforts continue with the use of protein antigens: for example, the
haemolysin toxoid of Haemophilus ducreyi; the major outer membrane protein(s) of 
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis; the glycoprotein D of human herpes simplex
virus type 2; and the proteins E6 and E7 of human papilloma virus. It may be
predicted that eventual STD vaccines (administered either for prophylaxis or for 
therapy) will use approaches that include (1) live-attenuated viruses, (2)
subunit proteins or inactivated whole organisms given with mucosal adjuvants or
with cellular immune response adjuvants, and (3) DNA plasmids expressing the
vaccine antigen.

DOI: 10.1258/095646202762226155 
PMID: 12537725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

