
1. Clin Chem. 2003 Feb;49(2):275-80.

Detection of anti-human T-lymphotropic virus type I antibody in whole blood by a 
novel counting immunoassay.

Yamaguchi K(1), Yonemura Y, Okabe H, Takahama Y, Nagai S, Yamaguchi H, Hirai K.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Transfusion Service, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, 1-1-1
Honjo, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan. kyama@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Assays to screen for and confirm the presence of the antibody for
human T-lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) are currently performed with serum or 
plasma. We developed and evaluated a new counting immunoassay (CIA) for the
detection of HTLV-I antibody in whole blood, using recombinant and synthetic
peptide antigens.
METHODS: We assessed the CIA for detection of HTLV-I antibody in whole blood and 
plasma. The CIA is an immunity-measuring method that combines latex agglutination
with particle-counting technology. The numbers of agglutinated latex particles,
single latex particles, and blood cells in a sample are measured based on
differences in particle size between latex particles and blood cells.
RESULTS: The CIA and ELISA methods were in agreement for all 24 plasma samples
tested, including those from 6 patients with HTLV-I-associated diseases, 6 HTLV-I
carriers, and 12 HTLV-I antibody-negative individuals. The concordance between
the ELISA (plasma) and the CIA (whole blood) for samples from 24 patients was
100%. The concordance between a particle agglutination method (plasma) and the
CIA (plasma or whole blood) for 1065 patients was 99.5%. The concordance between 
results obtained for 1065 pairs of plasma and whole blood samples with the CIA
method was 100%. HTLV-I antibody in whole blood was stable for 3 days after blood
collection. With this CIA method, results were available within 15 min.
CONCLUSIONS: The CIA method can be used in screening for HTLV-I. The use of whole
blood rather than serum or plasma reduces the sample volume and number of blood
collections required, as well as assay time.

DOI: 10.1373/49.2.275 
PMID: 12560351  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

