
1. Clin Cancer Res. 2003 Feb;9(2):693-702.

Phase II clinical trial of intralesional administration of the oncolytic
adenovirus ONYX-015 in patients with hepatobiliary tumors with correlative p53
studies.

Makower D(1), Rozenblit A, Kaufman H, Edelman M, Lane ME, Zwiebel J, Haynes H,
Wadler S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Weill Medical College
of Cornell University, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Apr 1;11(7):2781-2; author reply 2782.

PURPOSE: ONYX-015 is a genetically modified adenovirus with a deletion of the E1B
early gene and is therefore designed to replicate preferentially in p53-mutated
cells. A Phase II trial of intralesional ONYX-015 was conducted in patients with 
hepatobiliary tumors to determine the safety and efficacy of such a treatment.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: All patients had biopsy-proven, measurable tumors of the
liver, gall bladder, or bile ducts that were beyond the scope of surgical
resection. Patients received intralesional injections of ONYX-015 at either 6 x
10(9) or 1 x 10(10) plaque-forming units/lesion up to a total dose of 3 x 10(10) 
plaque-forming units, and i.p. injections were allowed in patients with malignant
ascites. The status of p53 was assessed by immunohistochemistry or Affymetrix
GeneChip microarray analysis. Studies were conducted for viral shedding and for
the presence of antiadenoviral antibodies before and after the injection of
ONYX-015. Patients were assessed for response and toxicity.
RESULTS: Twenty patients were enrolled, and 19 patients were eligible. Half of
the patients had primary bile duct carcinomas. Serious toxicities (> grade 2)
were uncommon and included hepatic toxicity (three patients), anemia (one
patient), infection (one patient), and cardiac toxicity (one patient, atrial
fibrillation). Sixteen patients were evaluable for response. Among these
evaluable patients, 1 of 16 (6.3%) had a partial response, 1 of 16 (6.3%) had
prolonged disease stabilization (49 weeks), and 8 of 16 (50%) had a >50%
reduction in tumor markers. Of the 19 eligible patients, 18 (94.7%) had specimens
available for p53 analysis. Fifteen of these 18 patients (83.3%) had evidence of 
p53 mutation by one or both methods, although the methods correlated poorly.
Viral shedding was confined to bile (two of two patients) and ascites (four of
four patients). Pretreatment adenoviral antibodies were present in 14 of 14
patients and increased by 33.2% after ONYX-015 treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Intralesional treatment with ONYX-015 in patients with hepatobiliary
tumors is safe and well tolerated, and some patients had evidence of an
anticancer effect. The high incidence of p53 mutations in these tumors makes this
a logical population in which to test this therapy but precludes definitive
evaluation about the necessity of a p53 mutation for ONYX-015 clinical activity.


PMID: 12576437  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

