
1. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2002 Summer;2(2):87-95.

Investigation of the southern limits of Murray Valley encephalitis activity in
Western Australia during the 2000 wet season.

Broom AK(1), Lindsay MD, Harrington SA, Smith DW.

Author information: 
(1)Arbovirus Surveillance and Research Laboratory, Department of Microbiology,
University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia.
abroom@cyllene.uwa.edu.au

Western Australia experienced its worst-ever outbreak of the mosquito-borne
Murray Valley encephalitis (MVE) virus during the 2000 wet season.
Highest-on-record rainfall throughout much of the state during the 2000 wet
season gave rise to extensive mosquito breeding and increased MVE virus
transmission, resulting in nine cases of encephalitis. Activity of MVE virus in
Western Australia is monitored by detecting MVE virus-specific antibodies in
serum from sentinel chickens, located at towns and communities throughout the
north of the state. However, during 2000, all 28 flocks of chickens seroconverted
to MVE virus, including a flock located >600 km further south than MVE virus
activity had ever previously been recorded. Furthermore, the majority of the nine
cases of encephalitis occurred outside the enzootic Kimberley region. We
therefore undertook a major serosurvey of domestic chicken flocks both south and 
east of the previously defined regions of virus activity. The results suggest
that MVE virus activity extended as far south as the Midwest and northern
Goldfields during 2000. A new southern limit of activity of MVE virus is
therefore proposed. The results have implications for managing outbreaks of MVE
virus in Western Australia and have enabled us to locate additional sentinel
flocks as part of the MVE surveillance program for future years.

DOI: 10.1089/153036602321131887 
PMID: 12653302  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

