
1. Transfus Clin Biol. 2003 Jun;10(3):109-12.

[Natural killer lymphocyte activation in response to stress].

[Article in French]

Toubert A(1), Dulphy N, Tieng V, Tamouza R, Charron D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'immunologie et d'histocompatibilité, centre G, Inserm U. 396,
université Paris VII, institut universitaire d'hématologie, Hayem, hôpital
Saint-Louis, Paris, France. toubert@histo.chu-stlouis.fr

Function of T and natural killer (NK) lymphocytes is tightly controlled by the
balance of activating and inhibitory signals. NK receptors belong to different
families: KIRs ("Killer cell Immunoglobulin-like Receptor") and ILTs
("Immunoglobulin-like Transcript"), mainly inhibitory which binds to HLA class I 
alleles; C-type lectin NK receptors such as CD94/NKG2A which is inhibitory and
binds to HLA-E; NCR ("Natural Cytotoxicity Receptors") which directly activate NK
cells. These include molecules NKp30, NKp44, NKp46 et NKG2D. Cellular stress
(viral and bacterial infections, tumours) may modulate NK function by different
mechanisms: decrease in HLA class I molecules expression resulting in the lack of
engagement of the inhibitory receptors and ultimately NK cell activation;
modulation of CD94/NKG2A inhibitory function through expression of peptides
presented by HLA-E as for instance from heat shock proteins; NK activation
through NCR expression. Among these, NKG2D is an activating receptor expressed by
NK cells and subsets of alphabeta and gammadelta and T cells. Major NKG2D ligands
in humans are MIC ("MHC class I related") molecules which are stress-inducible
during a viral (CMV) or bacterial infection (M. tuberculosis, E. coli). They may 
also be expressed by tumors. Therefore, they could play a role in activating NK
and/or T lymphocyte responses in these conditions.

DOI: 10.1016/s1246-7820(03)00041-7 
PMID: 12798842  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

