
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2003 Jun 1;33(2):125-33.

Incomplete CD4 T cell recovery in HIV-1 infection after 12 months of highly
active antiretroviral therapy is associated with ongoing increased CD4 T cell
activation and turnover.

Anthony KB(1), Yoder C, Metcalf JA, DerSimonian R, Orenstein JM, Stevens RA,
Falloon J, Polis MA, Lane HC, Sereti I.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Molecular Retrovirology Section, Laboratory of Immunoregulation, 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases/NIH, 10 Center Drive,
Building 10, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

To evaluate the relationship between T cell turnover, immune activation, and CD4 
recovery in HIV infection, 32 antiretroviral-naive HIV-1-infected patients were
studied before and after initiation of highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART). Elevated CD4 and CD8 T cell turnover (measured by Ki67) in HIV infection
decreased with HAART in blood and lymphoid tissue. Increased peripheral CD4 T
cell turnover was strongly associated with immune activation even after viral
suppression to less than 50 copies/mL (R = 0.8; p <.001). Increased CD4 T cell
turnover correlated strongly with CD4 cell counts both before (R = -0.6; p <.001)
and after (R = -0.4; p =.05) HAART. In patients with baseline CD4 cell counts of 
less than 350/microL, decreases in CD4 T cell turnover with HAART significantly
correlated with increases in CD4 cell counts. In addition, persistently elevated 
levels of CD4 T cell turnover after HAART were associated with incomplete CD4 T
cell recovery despite HIV RNA levels of less than 50 copies/mL. These data
suggest that immune activation is central to CD4 cell depletion in HIV infection 
and immune reconstitution with HAART.

DOI: 10.1097/00126334-200306010-00002 
PMID: 12794543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

