
1. Hum Gene Ther. 2003 May 20;14(8):789-802.

Antibody-mediated targeting of replication-competent retroviral vectors.

Tai CK(1), Logg CR, Park JM, Anderson WF, Press MF, Kasahara N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetic Medicine, Department of Pathology, University of
Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Replication-competent murine leukemia virus (MLV) vectors can be engineered to
achieve high efficiency gene transfer to solid tumors in vivo and
tumor-restricted replication, however their safety can be further enhanced by
redirecting tropism of the virus envelope. We have therefore tested the targeting
capability and replicative stability of ecotropic and amphotropic
replication-competent retrovirus (RCR) vectors containing two tandem repeats from
the immunoglobulin G-binding domain of Staphylococcal protein A inserted into the
proline-rich "hinge" region of the envelope, which enables modular use of
antibodies of various specificities for vector targeting. The modified envelopes 
were efficiently expressed and incorporated into virions, were capable of
capturing monoclonal anti-HER2 antibodies, and mediated efficient binding of the 
virus-antibody complex to HER2-positive target cells. While infectivity was
markedly reduced by pseudotyping with targeted envelopes alone, coexpression of
wild-type envelope rescued efficient cellular entry. Both ecotropic and
amphotropic RCR vector/anti-HER2 antibody complexes achieved significant
enhancement of transduction on murine target cells overexpressing HER2, which
could be competed by preincubation with excess free antibodies. Interestingly,
HER2-expressing human breast cancer cells did not show enhancement of
transduction despite efficient antibody-mediated cell surface binding, suggesting
that target cell-specific parameters markedly affect the efficiency of
post-binding entry processes. Serial replication of targeted vectors resulted in 
selection of Z domain deletion variants, but reduction of the overall size of the
vector genome enhanced its stability. Application of antibody-mediated targeting 
to the initial localization of replication-competent virus vectors to tumor sites
will thus require optimized target selection and vector design.

DOI: 10.1089/104303403765255174 
PMID: 12804141  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

