
1. Hum Gene Ther. 2003 Jul 1;14(10):959-70.

Construction of a cytomegalovirus-based amplicon: a vector with a unique transfer
capacity.

Borst EM(1), Messerle M.

Author information: 
(1)Virus Cell Interaction Group, Medical Faculty, University of Halle-Wittenberg,
06120 Halle (Saale), Germany.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) has a number of interesting properties that qualifies it as
a vector for gene transfer. Especially appealing is the ability of the CMV genome
to persist in hematopoietic progenitor cells and the packaging capacity of the
viral capsid that accommodates a DNA genome of 230 kbp. In order to exploit the
packaging capacity of the CMV capsid we investigated whether the principles of an
amplicon vector can be applied to CMV. Amplicons are herpesviral vectors, which
contain only the cis-active sequences required for replication and packaging of
the vector genome. For construction of a CMV amplicon the sequences comprising
the lytic origin of replication (orilyt) and the cleavage packaging recognition
sites (pac) of human CMV were cloned onto a plasmid. A gene encoding the green
fluorescent protein was used as a model transgene. The amplicon plasmid
replicated in the presence of a CMV helper virus and was packaged into CMV
particles, with replication and packaging being dependent on the presence of the 
orilyt and pac sequences. The packaged amplicon could be transferred to recipient
cells and reisolated from the transduced cells. Analysis of the DNA isolated from
CMV capsids revealed that the CMV amplicon was packaged as a concatemer with a
size of approximately 210 kbp. The CMV amplicon vector has the potential to
transfer therapeutic genes with a size of more than 200 kbp and thus provides a
unique transfer capacity among viral vectors.

DOI: 10.1089/104303403766682223 
PMID: 12869214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

