
1. J Neurovirol. 2003 Oct;9(5):539-50.

Human herpesvirus type 6 indirectly enhances oligodendrocyte cell death.

Kong H(1), Baerbig Q, Duncan L, Shepel N, Mayne M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Canada.

Accumulating evidence suggests that human herpesvirus type 6 (HHV-6) plays a
pathogenic role in diseases of the central nervous system including multiple
sclerosis (MS). Recent studies have indicated that HHV-6 DNA is detected with
high frequency in MS lesions compared to normal-appearing white matter,
implicating a role for HHV-6 in MS pathogenesis. It appears that T cells, which
infiltrate into the brain in MS patients, and resident oligodendrocytes harbor
HHV-6 virus in MS lesions. Because T cells infected with HHV-6 have elevated
proinflammatory gene expression, we hypothesized that HHV-6 could be indirectly
cytotoxic to glial cells, including oligodendrocytes. Supernatants from SupT1
cells infected with HHV-6 variant A (GS or U1102) or variant B (Z29)
significantly reduced MO3.1 cell proliferation by 75% +/- 10%, 78% +/- 8% or 51% 
+/- 9%, respectively. HHV-6 viral supernatants (GS or U1102 or Z29) significantly
increased MO3.1 or primary human oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) cell
death, whereas primary human fetal astrocytes were not affected. Removal of HHV-6
virions or proteins by trypsin treatment from culture supernatants did not
reverse the loss in oligodendrocyte proliferation or viability. Supernatants from
HHV-6 GS or U1102 cultures were significantly more cytotoxic to MO3.1 cells or
OPCs compared to supernatants from T cells infected with Z29. Dying
oligodendrocytes did not have an apoptotic-like phenotype and toxicity was not
inhibited by general inhibitor of apoptosis, ZVAD. Further, oligodendrocytes had 
minimal caspase-3 activation even in the presence of staurosporine, suggesting
that cell death followed caspase-independent pathways. These results indicate
that HHV-6 is indirectly cytotoxic to oligodendrocytes and that cell death is
driven primarily by caspase-independent pathways.

DOI: 10.1080/13550280390241241 
PMID: 13129768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

