
1. Obstet Gynecol. 1992 Nov;80(5):797-800.

Invasive cervical cancer following cryotherapy for cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia or human papillomavirus infection.

Schmidt C(1), Pretorius RG, Bonin M, Hanson L, Semrad N, Watring W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Southern California Permanente
Medical Group, San Diego.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the following: 1) the causes for the failure of cervical 
cryotherapy to prevent cervical cancer, and 2) whether cervical cryotherapy is
associated with the development of cervical adenocarcinoma rather than squamous
carcinoma.
METHODS: We reviewed the medical charts of 327 women with cervical cancer. One
hundred forty-seven for whom pertinent history was missing were contacted by
telephone or at clinic visits. History obtained verbally was confirmed by outside
medical records. Cervical biopsies (N = 16) and endocervical curettages (ECCs) (N
= 15) performed before cryotherapy and biopsies at the diagnosis of cancer (N =
21) were reviewed.
RESULTS: Twenty-one women with cervical cancer had a history of cryotherapy for
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) or human papillomavirus infection (HPV).
The interval between cryotherapy and cancer was more than 2 years in 19 and more 
than 5 years in ten. Several categories of pre-treatment errors were identified. 
Evaluation before cryotherapy was appropriate in only nine cases. Interpretive
errors were noted in three of 16 cervical biopsies and ten of 15 ECCs. After
cryotherapy, 12% of women had appropriate follow-up. Of the invasive cancers that
developed, 24% in the cryotherapy group and 21% in the non-cryotherapy group were
adenocarcinomas.
CONCLUSIONS: Careful evaluation before cryotherapy, accurate pathology reports,
and consistent long-term follow-up are necessary if cryotherapy is to be used to 
treat CIN or HPV. We found no evidence that cryotherapy is associated with the
development of cervical adenocarcinoma.


PMID: 1328976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

