
1. J Clin Microbiol. 1992 Oct;30(10):2644-52.

Characterization of full-length and polymerase chain reaction-derived
partial-length Gottfried and OSU gene 4 probes for serotypic differentiation of
porcine rotaviruses.

Rosen BI(1), Parwani AV, Gorziglia M, Larralde G, Saif LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Food Animal Health Research Program, Ohio State University, Wooster 44691.

To determine the VP4 (P type) specificity of porcine rotaviruses, full- and
partial-length gene 4 probes were produced from cloned Gottfried and OSU porcine 
rotavirus genomic segment 4 cDNAs. The gene 4 segments from the prototype
Gottfried (VP7 serotype 4) and OSU (VP7 serotype 5) porcine rotavirus strains
were selected for study because of their distinct P types and the occurrence of
rotaviruses with similar serotypes among swine. Partial-length gene 4 cDNAs were 
produced and amplified by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and encompassed
portions of the variable region (nucleotides 211 to 612) of VP8 encoded by
genomic segment 4. The hybridization stringency conditions necessary for optimal 
probe specificity and sensitivity were determined by dot or Northern (RNA) blot
hybridizations against a diverse group of human and animal rotaviruses of
heterologous group A serotypes and against representative group B and C porcine
rotaviruses. The PCR-derived gene 4 probes were more specific than the
full-length gene 4 probes but demonstrated equivalent sensitivity. The Gottfried 
PCR-derived probe hybridized with Gottfried, SB2, SB3, and SB5 G serotype 4
porcine rotaviruses. The OSU PCR-derived probe hybridized with OSU, EE, A580, and
SB-1A porcine rotaviruses and equine H1 rotavirus. Results of the hybridization
reactions of the PCR-derived gene 4 probes with selected porcine rotavirus
strains agreed with previous serological or genetic analyses, indicating their
suitability as diagnostic reagents.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.30.10.2644-2652.1992 
PMCID: PMC270492
PMID: 1328281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

