
1. Int Immunol. 1992 Feb;4(2):283-94.

Antibodies of HIV-1 positive subjects and experimentally immunized primates and
rodents bind to sequence divergent regions of the third variable domain (V3) of
gp120.

Boudet F(1), Girard M, Theze J, Zouali M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Immunogénétique Cellulaire, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Several motifs have been found to be the target of the neutralizing antibody
response to HIV, the human immunodeficiency virus. One of the well characterized 
motifs maps to a loop within the third hypervariable region (V3) of the exterior 
envelope glycoprotein gp120 at amino acid positions 308-331 and is referred to as
the principal neutralizing determinant (PND). The sequence of this V3 loop raises
the question of the immunogenicity and the degree of diversity of the antibody
response to the PND. We show here that this neutralization-related motif is
highly immunogenic in HIV-positive subjects and in experimentally immunized
primates and rodents submitted to various anti-HIV immunization regimens. In
probing the diversity of the antibody response to PNDs corresponding to 11 HIV
sequence-divergent isolates in serum samples of 101 HIV-positive individuals we
found that human antibodies exhibit binding affinity to up to nine PND synthetic 
peptides. This antibody binding was in all cases tested inhibitable by the
homologous PND synthetic peptide. We additionally demonstrate that this antibody 
cross-reactivity towards sequence-divergent PNDs is detectable in the sera of
mice and chimpanzees experimentally immunized against a single HIV-1 isolate.
Finally, we noticed that there is a hierarchy of reactivity among the various
PNDs wherein the synthetic peptide corresponding to the MN isolate was generally 
the most prominently recognized by antibodies of human, non-human primate, and
rodent origins. Based on these findings and on features of the sequences analyzed
we suggest that, despite its overall sequence variability, the PND encompasses
conserved amino acid positions or epitopes that are the targets of antibodies
recognizing sequence-divergent isolates. We also propose that the high positive
charge density of the most frequently recognized PNDs and the high antigenicity
value of some of their residues are critical to the broad immunoreactivity of
this neutralization-related motif.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/4.2.283 
PMID: 1377948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

