
1. Int Rev Immunol. 2004 Jan-Apr;23(1-2):199-220.

Neutralizing innate host defenses to control viral translation in HSV-1 infected 
cells.

Mohr I(1).

Author information: 
(1)New York University School of Medicine, Department of Microbiology, MSB 214,
New York, New York 10016, USA. ian.mohr@med.nyu.edu

Lytic replication of many viruses activates an innate host response designed to
prevent the completion of the viral lifecycle, thus impeding the spread of the
infection. One branch of the host's complex reaction functions to incapacitate
the cellular translational machinery on which the synthesis of viral polypeptides
completely depends. This is achieved through the activation of specific protein
kinases that phosphorylate eIF2 on its alpha subunit and inactivate this critical
translation initiation factor. However, as continued synthesis of viral proteins 
is required to assemble the viral progeny necessary to transmit the infection to 
neighboring cells, viruses have developed a variety of strategies to counter this
cellular response. Genetic and biochemical studies with herpes simplex virus type
1 (HSV-1) have revealed that the virus produces at least two discrete products at
different times during its replicative program that act to prevent the
accumulation of phosphorylated eIF2alpha. The gamma(1)34.5 gene product is
expressed first, encoding a regulatory subunit that binds the cellular protein
phosphatase 1alpha and regenerates pools of active eIF2 by removing the
inhibitory phosphate from the alpha subunit. The second function, encoded by the 
product of the Us11 gene, specifies a double-stranded RNA-binding protein that
prevents activation of PKR, a cellular eIF2alpha kinase. Together, both proteins 
cooperate to overcome the antiviral response of the host and properly regulate
translation in HSV-1-infected cells.

DOI: 10.1080/08830180490265600 
PMID: 14690861  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

