
1. J Soc Biol. 2003;197(3):205-10.

[Cellular lipid dynamics].

[Article in French]

Baumann N(1), Colsch B, Lefèvre M, Portoukalian J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de neurochimie INSERM U 495, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, 75651
Paris. baumann@ccr.jussieu.fr

During the past years, the notion of microdomains at the surface of cellular
membranes has been developed. These are constituted by lipid rafts which involve 
sphingoglycolipids and cholesterol. To these rafts are associated proteins which 
have a lipid anchor or are transmembrane proteins. These lipid rafts target
specific proteins at the plasma membrane surface and can remain associated with
them. They are present in surface receptors and endocytosis occurs upon binding
of the specific ligands. Thus these rafts participate to major aspects of
cellular dynamics. These rafts are complex structures, insoluble in non-ionic
detergents. According to the detergent used, many types of rafts can be isolated.
Any alteration of cholesterol, sphingoglycolipids, or abnormalities of the
proteins themselves, can lead to abnormal targeting at the membrane surface. It
is possible that specific sphingoglycolipids are necessary to target specific
proteins at the membrane surface. This may explain the complexity of the
sphingoglycolipid molecules, both in relation to their oligosaccharide and to
their ceramide structures. There is both a cellular and a tissue specificity of
these constituents. Complex sphingoglycolipids are involved in cellular
differentiation, cellular polarization, and modified in relation to cancer. Virus
and bacteria can be linked to the sphingoglycolipids of these microdomains and
alter cellular signaling and function. Sphingoglycolipids are involved in
autoimmune diseases as antibody targets and in neurolipidoses which are genetic
diseases involving their catabolism. The dynamics of the lipid rafts, in relation
to cholesterol, can be altered in Niemann-Pick's disease type C and in
Alzheimer's disease. Thus these microdomains are involved in many aspects related
to normal and pathological cellular dynamics.


PMID: 14708341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

