
1. BMC Womens Health. 2004 May 27;4(1):3.

Prevalence of Chlamydia trachomatis infection among women in a Middle Eastern
community.

Ghazal-Aswad S(1), Badrinath P, Osman N, Abdul-Khaliq S, Mc Ilvenny S, Sidky I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, P,O, Box 17666, Al-Ain, United Arab
Emirates. saad.ghazal_aswad@uaeu.ac.ae

BACKGROUND: Common vaginal infections that manifest in women are usually easily
diagnosed. However, Chlamydia infection is often asymptomatic, leading to
infertility before it is detected. If it occurs in pregnancy, it could lead to
significant neonatal morbidity. It may also play a role with other viral
infections for e.g. Human Papilloma Virus in the development of cervical cancer. 
The objective of this study was to determine the prevalence of Chlamydia
infection in women undergoing screening for cervical abnormalities as a part of a
research project in primary and secondary care institutions in the United Arab
Emirates. METHODS: In this cross sectional study married women attending primary 
and secondary care participating in a large nationwide cervical abnormalities
screening survey were offered Chlamydia testing using a commercially available
test kit. This kit uses a rapid immunoassay for the direct detection of Chlamydia
trachomatis antigen in endocervical swab specimens. As this study was performed
in a traditional Islamic country, unmarried women were excluded from testing, as 
the management of any positive cases would create legal and social problems. All 
married women consenting to take part in the study were included irrespective of 
age. RESULTS: Of 1039 women approached over a period of eight months 919 (88.5%) 
agreed to participate. The number of women in the 16 to 19 years was small
(0.01%) and 30% were aged over 40 years. The prevalence of Chlamydia infection in
this study was 2.6% (95% confidence interval 1.2-3.3%), which was marginally
higher in women screened in secondary care (p = 0.05). CONCLUSION: This is one of
the few reports on the prevalence of Chlamydia infection in women from the Middle
East. Due to cultural and social constraints this study excluded a large
proportion of women aged less than 19 years of age. Hence no direct comparisons
on prevalence could be made with studies from the West, which all included
younger women at high risk of Chlamydia. However this study emphasizes the
importance of cultural factors while interpreting results of studies from
different cultures and communities.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6874-4-3 
PMCID: PMC434520
PMID: 15163348 

