
1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 Jan;288(1):G159-67. Epub 2004 Aug
5.

Vectorial transport of bile salts across MDCK cells expressing both rat
Na+-taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide and rat bile salt export pump.

Mita S(1), Suzuki H, Akita H, Stieger B, Meier PJ, Hofmann AF, Sugiyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Bile salts are predominantly taken up by hepatocytes via the basolateral
Na(+)-taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide (NTCP/SLC10A1) and secreted into
the bile by the bile salt export pump (BSEP/ABCB11). In the present study, we
transfected rat Ntcp and rat Bsep into polarized Madin-Darby canine kidney cells 
and characterized the transport properties of these cells for eight bile salts.
Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated that Ntcp was expressed at the
basolateral domains, whereas Bsep was expressed at the apical domains.
Basal-to-apical transport of taurocholate across the monolayer expressing only
Ntcp and that coexpressing Ntcp/Bsep was observed, whereas the flux across the
monolayer of control and Bsep-expressing cells was symmetrical. Basal-to-apical
transport of taurocholate across Ntcp/Bsep-coexpressing monolayers was
significantly higher than that across monolayers expressing only Ntcp. Kinetic
analysis of this vectorial transport of taurocholate gave an apparent K(m) value 
of 13.9 +/- 4.7 microM for cells expressing Ntcp alone, which is comparable with 
22.2 +/- 4.5 microM for cells expressing both Ntcp and Bsep and V(max) values of 
15.8 +/- 4.2 and 60.8 +/- 9.0 pmol.min(-1).mg protein(-1) for Ntcp alone and Ntcp
and Bsep-coexpressing cells, respectively. Transcellular transport of cholate,
glycocholate, taurochenodeoxycholate, chenodeoxycholate, glycochenodeoxycholate, 
tauroursodeoxycholate, ursodeoxycholate, and glycoursodeoxycholate, but not that 
of lithocholate was also observed across the double transfectant. This
double-expressing system can be used as a model to clarify vectorial transport of
bile salts across hepatocytes under physiological conditions.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00360.2003 
PMID: 15297262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

