
1. J Virol. 1992 Apr;66(4):2226-31.

Ar+ plasma-induced damage to DNA in bacteriophage lambda: implications for the
arrangement of DNA in the phage head.

Mendelson EC(1), Newcomb WW, Brown JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center,
Charlottesville 22908.

Bacteriophage lambda was bombarded with low-energy Ar+ ions with the goal of
determining whether particular regions of the DNA genome are found preferentially
in the outer portion of the packaged DNA mass. The strategy was to fragment the
DNA selectively near the surface of the virus by exposing intact phage to Ar+
ions energetic enough to break covalent chemical bonds in DNA but not energetic
enough to penetrate deeply beneath the viral capsid shell. Broken DNA was then
isolated, and its genomic origin was identified by Southern hybridization to
mapped restriction fragments of lambda DNA. Analysis of such Southern blots
revealed that all regions of the lambda genome were represented among the small
DNA fragments generated during all times of Ar+ bombardment examined. Depending
on the duration of exposure, however, particular regions of the genome were found
to be enriched in the small-fragment population. After short periods of exposure,
sequences from the leftmost 10% and from the right half of the standard genetic
map were enriched in the broken-DNA fraction. Among sequences in the right half
of the genome, the enrichment was progressively more pronounced beginning in the 
middle of the genetic map and proceeding toward the right end. In phage bombarded
for longer periods of time, rightward sequences were preferentially depleted in
the small-fragment population. In contrast, when Ar+ bombardment was carried out 
with free lambda DNA rather than intact phage, small DNA fragments arose
uniformly from all regions of the genome at all times of exposure examined. The
results indicate that in the intact phage, DNA sequences from the right half and 
from the very leftmost regions of the genome have a tendency to lie closer to the
capsid than does the remainder of the genome. Since DNA is packaged into the
prohead beginning at the left end, our results suggest that packaging occurs in
such a way that newly entering DNA tends to be disposed externally to that
packaged at earlier times.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.66.4.2226-2231.1992 
PMCID: PMC289015
PMID: 1532213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

