
1. J Virol. 2004 Nov;78(21):11926-38.

Activation of transcription factor Nrf-2 and its downstream targets in response
to moloney murine leukemia virus ts1-induced thiol depletion and oxidative stress
in astrocytes.

Qiang W(1), Cahill JM, Liu J, Kuang X, Liu N, Scofield VL, Voorhees JR, Reid AJ, 
Yan M, Lynn WS, Wong PK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas, M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Science Park-Research
Division, P.O. Box 389, Smithville, TX 78957, USA.

The neuroimmunodegenerative syndrome that develops in mice infected with ts1, a
mutant of Moloney murine leukemia virus, resembles human AIDS. Both ts1 and human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 infect astrocytes, microglia, and oligodendrocytes 
but do not infect neurons. Oxidative stress has been implicated in the
neuropathology of AIDS dementia and other neurodegenerative diseases. We report
here that ts1 infection of astrocytes (both transformed C1 cells and primary
cultures) also induces thiol (i.e., glutathione and cysteine) depletion and
reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation, events occurring in parallel with
viral envelope precursor gPr80(env) accumulation and upregulated expression of
endoplasmic reticulum chaperones GRP78 and GRP94. Furthermore, ts1-infected
astrocytes mobilize their thiol redox defenses by upregulating levels of the
Nrf-2 transcription factor, as well its targets, the xCT cystine/glutamate
antiporter, gamma-glutamylcysteine ligase, and glutathione peroxidase. Depleting 
intracellular thiols by treating uninfected astrocytes with buthionine
sulfoximine (BSO), a glutathione synthesis inhibitor, or by culturing in
cystine-deficient medium, also induces ROS accumulation, activates Nrf-2, and
upregulates Nrf-2 target gene expression in these astrocytes. Overexpression of
Nrf-2 in astrocytes specifically increases expression of the above thiol
synthesis-related proteins. Further treatment with BSO or N-acetylcysteine in
transfected cells modulates this expression. Thiol depletion also accelerates
cell death, while thiol supplementation promotes survival of ts1-infected cells. 
Together, our results indicate that ts1 infection of astrocytes, along with
ts1-induced gPr80(env) accumulation, endoplasmic reticulum stress, thiol
depletion, and oxidative stress, accelerates cell death; in response to the thiol
depletion and oxidative stress, astrocytes activate their Nrf-2-mediated thiol
antioxidant defenses, promoting cell survival.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.21.11926-11938.2004 
PMCID: PMC523278
PMID: 15479833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

