
1. J Virol. 2004 Nov;78(21):11664-77.

Human cytomegalovirus DNA replication requires transcriptional activation via an 
IE2- and UL84-responsive bidirectional promoter element within oriLyt.

Xu Y(1), Cei SA, Rodriguez Huete A, Colletti KS, Pari GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell and Molecular Biology Program, University 
of Nevada-Reno, Howard Bldg., Reno, NV 89557, USA.

Amplification of the human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) lytic origin (oriLyt) in human 
fibroblasts is dependent upon six core replication proteins and UL84, IE2, and
UL36-38. Using a telomerase-immortalized human fibroblast cell line (T-HFs),
oriLyt-dependent DNA replication no longer required the gene products of UL36-38.
To determine the role of IE2 in DNA replication in human fibroblasts, we examined
potential IE2-binding sites within HCMV oriLyt. We now show that a strong
bidirectional promoter (oriLyt(PM)) (nucleotides 91754 to 92030) is located in
the previously identified core region of the origin and is required for efficient
amplification of oriLyt. It was determined that a 14-bp novel DNA motif (oriLyt
promoter activation element), which was initially identified as a binding element
for the immediate-early protein IE2, was essential for oriLyt(PM) activity. In
Vero cells the oriLyt(PM) was constitutively active and strongly repressed by
IE2, but it was reactivated by UL84. In contrast, transfection of the oriLyt(PM) 
into human fibroblasts resulted in a very low basal level of promoter activity
that was dramatically up-regulated upon infection with HCMV. Cotransfection
assays demonstrated that the transfection of UL84 along with IE2 transactivated
the oriLyt(PM) in human fibroblasts. Further activation was observed upon
cotransfection of the set of plasmids expressing the entire replication complex. 
Efficient oriLyt amplification in the absence of IE2 in human fibroblasts was
observed by replacing the oriLyt(PM) with the simian virus 40 early promoter.
Under these conditions, however, UL84 was still required for amplification of
oriLyt. These results suggest that the mechanism of initiation of HCMV lytic
replication in part involves transcriptional activation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.21.11664-11677.2004 
PMCID: PMC523242
PMID: 15479808  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

