
1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Apr 15;267(11):7224-39.

Substrate specificity of Saccharomyces cerevisiae myristoyl-CoA: protein
N-myristoyltransferase. Analysis of fatty acid analogs containing carbonyl
groups, nitrogen heteroatoms, and nitrogen heterocycles in an in vitro enzyme
assay and subsequent identification of inhibitors of human immunodeficiency virus
I replication.

Devadas B(1), Lu T, Katoh A, Kishore NS, Wade AC, Mehta PP, Rudnick DA, Bryant
ML, Adams SP, Li Q, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Monsanto Company, St. Louis, Missouri 63198.

Covalent attachment of myristic acid (C14:0) to the amino-terminal glycine
residue of a variety of eukaryotic cellular and viral proteins can have a
profound influence on their biological properties. The enzyme that catalyzes this
modification, myristoyl-CoA-protein N-myristoyltransferase (NMT), has been
identified as a potential target for antiviral and antifungal therapy. Its
reaction mechanism is ordered Bi Bi with myristoyl-CoA binding occurring before
binding of peptide and CoA release preceding release of myristoylpeptide.
Perturbations in the binding of its acyl-CoA substrate would therefore be
expected to have an important influence on catalysis. We have synthesized 56
analogs of myristic acid (C14:0) to further characterize the acyl-CoA binding
site of Saccharomyces cerevisiae NMT. The activity of fatty acid analogs was
assessed using a coupled in vitro assay system that employed the reportedly
nonspecific Pseudomonas acyl-CoA synthetase, purified S. cerevisiae NMT, and
octapeptide substrates derived from residues 2-9 of the catalytic subunit of
cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase and the Pr55gag polyprotein precursor of
human immunodeficiency virus I (HIV-I). Analysis of ketocarbonyl-, ester-, and
amide-containing myristic acid analogs (the latter in two isomeric arrangements, 
the acylamino acid (-CO-NH-) and the amide (-NH-CO)) indicated that the enzyme's 
binding site is able to accommodate a dipolar protrusion from C4 through C13.
This includes the region of the acyl chain occurring near C5-C6 (numbered from
carboxyl) that appears to be bound in a bent conformation of 140-150 degrees. The
activities of NMT's acyl-CoA substrates decrease with increasing polarity. This
relationship was particularly apparent from an analysis of a series of analogs in
which the hydrocarbon chain was terminated by (i) an azido group or (ii) one of
three nitrogen heterocycles (imidazole, triazole, and tetrazole) alkylated at
either nitrogen or carbon. This inverse relationship between polarity and
activity was confirmed after comparison of the activities of the closely related 
ester- or amide-containing tetradecanoyl-CoA derivatives. Members from all of the
analog series were surveyed to determine whether they could inhibit replication
of human immunodeficiency virus I (HIV-I), a retrovirus that depends upon
N-myristoylation of its Pr55gag for propagation. 12-Azidododecanoic acid was the 
most active analog tested, producing a 60-90% inhibition of viral production in
both acutely and chronically infected T-lymphocyte cell lines at a concentration 
of 10-50 microM without associated cellular toxicity.


PMID: 1559967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

