
1. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2004 Dec;191(6):1971-8.

Uptake of hepatitis B virus into choriocarcinoma cells in the presence of
proinflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor-alpha.

Wang XP(1), Li FJ, Xu DZ, Yan YP, Men K, Zhang JX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Faculty of Preventive Medicine, Fourth Military
Medical University, No. 17, Changle West Road, Xi'an, 710032,China.
xueping127@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to establish an in vitro experimental model 
that mimics the interaction of hepatitis B virus (HBV) and the trophoblastic
barrier.
STUDY DESIGN: The barrier was represented by choriocarcinoma cell line, JAR
cells, which were incubated with HBV in the presence or absence of tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). At 12-hour intervals after a 24-hour incubation, the
infection efficiency was examined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay of culture
supernatants, immunohistochemistry of cell slides, Western blotting of cell
lysates, polymerase chain reaction amplification for viral DNA of infected cells,
and transmission electron microscopy for HBsAg particles in infected cells.
RESULTS: In the absence of TNF-alpha, many JAR cell colonies showed a negative or
punctate positive pattern after incubation with HBV. But when JAR cells were
pretreated with TNF-alpha before cocultured with HBV, the infection was greatly
enhanced, whereas the differences observed between the various time points in the
second series of experiments did not reach a statistically significant level.
CONCLUSION: JAR cells can support HBV infection in the presence of TNF-alpha. Our
in vitro system provides key basis on further study reflecting mechanism of in
vivo HBV intrauterine infection and transfer.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2004.06.038 
PMID: 15592279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

