
1. Comput Biol Chem. 2005 Feb;29(1):25-35.

Relative importance of secondary structure and solvent accessibility to the
stability of protein mutants. A case study with amino acid properties and
energetics on T4 and human lysozymes.

Saraboji K(1), Gromiha MM, Ponnuswamy MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Crystallography and Biophysics, University of Madras, Guindy
Campus, Chennai 600025, India.

Understanding the factors influencing the stability of protein mutants is an
important task in molecular and computational biology. In this work, we have
approached this problem by examining the relative importance of secondary
structure and solvent accessibility of the mutant residue for
understanding/predicting the stability of protein mutants. We have used
hydrophobic, electrostatic and hydrogen bond free energy terms and nine unique
physicochemical, energetic and conformational properties of amino acids in the
present study and these parameters have been related with changes in thermal
stability (DeltaTm) of all the single mutants of lysozymes based on single and
multiple correlation coefficients. As expected the properties reflecting
hydrophobicity and hydrophobic free energy play a major role to distinguish
stabilizing and destabilizing mutants. The hydrophobic free energy due to carbon 
and nitrogen atoms distinguish the stability of coil and strand mutations to the 
accuracy of 100 and 90%, respectively. In agreement with previous results, the
subgroup classification based on secondary structure and the information about
its location in the structure yielded good relationship with the experimental
DeltaTm. We revealed that the secondary structure information is equally or more 
important than solvent accessibility for understanding the stability of protein
mutants. The comparison of amino acid properties with free-energy terms indicate 
that the energetic contribution explains the mutant stability better in coil
region whereas the amino acid properties do better in strand region. Further, the
combination of free energies with amino acid properties increased the correlation
significantly. The present study demonstrates the importance of classifying the
mutants based on secondary structure to the stability of proteins upon mutations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2004.12.002 
PMID: 15680583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

