
1. J Virol. 2005 Apr;79(7):3903-19.

Heterogeneity of a fluorescent tegument component in single pseudorabies virus
virions and enveloped axonal assemblies.

del Rio T(1), Ch'ng TH, Flood EA, Gross SP, Enquist LW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ
08544-1014, USA.

The molecular mechanisms responsible for long-distance, directional spread of
alphaherpesvirus infections via axons of infected neurons are poorly understood. 
We describe the use of red and green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusions to capsid 
and tegument components, respectively, to visualize purified, single
extracellular virions and axonal assemblies after pseudorabies virus (PRV)
infection of cultured neurons. We observed heterogeneity in GFP fluorescence when
GFP was fused to the tegument component VP22 in both single extracellular virions
and discrete puncta in infected axons. This heterogeneity was observed in the
presence or absence of a capsid structure detected by a fusion of monomeric red
fluorescent protein to VP26. The similarity of the heterogeneous distribution of 
these fluorescent protein fusions in both purified virions and in axons suggested
that tegument-capsid assembly and axonal targeting of viral components are
linked. One possibility was that the assembly of extracellular and axonal
particles containing the dually fluorescent fusion proteins occurred by the same 
process in the cell body. We tested this hypothesis by treating infected cultured
neurons with brefeldin A, a potent inhibitor of herpesvirus maturation and
secretion. Brefeldin A treatment disrupted the neuronal secretory pathway,
affected fluorescent capsid and tegument transport in the cell body, and blocked 
subsequent entry into axons of capsid and tegument proteins. Electron microscopy 
demonstrated that in the absence of brefeldin A treatment, enveloped capsids
entered axons, but in the presence of the inhibitor, unenveloped capsids
accumulated in the cell body. These results support an assembly process in which 
PRV capsids acquire a membrane in the cell body prior to axonal entry and
subsequent transport.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.7.3903-3919.2005 
PMCID: PMC1061572
PMID: 15767393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

