
1. Blood. 2005 Aug 1;106(3):1048-53. Epub 2005 Apr 19.

Preferential selection of human T-cell leukemia virus type I provirus integration
sites in leukemic versus carrier states.

Doi K(1), Wu X, Taniguchi Y, Yasunaga J, Satou Y, Okayama A, Nosaka K, Matsuoka
M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virus Immunology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) is a causative agent of neoplastic
disease, adult T-cell leukemia (ATL). Although the encoding viral proteins play
an important role in oncogenesis, the role of the HTLV-I proviral integration
site remains unsolved. We determined the integration sites of HTLV-I proviruses
in ATL cells and HTLV-I-infected cells in asymptomatic carriers. In carrier and
ATL cells, HTLV-I provirus was integrated into the transcriptional unit at
frequencies of 26.8% (15/56) and 33.9% (20/59), respectively, which were
equivalent to the frequency calculated based on random integration (33.2%). In
addition, HTLV-I provirus was prone to integration near the transcriptional start
sites in leukemic cells (P = .006), and the transcriptional direction of the
provirus was in accordance with that of integrated cellular genes in 70% of
cases. More importantly, the integration sites in the carrier cells favored the
alphoid repetitive sequences (11/56; 20%) whereas in leukemic cells they
disfavored these sequences (2/59; 3.4%). Taken together, during natural course
from carrier to onset of ATL, HTLV-I-infected cells with integration sites
favorable for viral gene transcription are susceptible to malignant
transformation due to increased viral gene expression.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2004-11-4350 
PMID: 15840694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

