
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 24;280(25):23615-21. Epub 2005 Apr 22.

N-linked keratan sulfate in the aggrecan interglobular domain potentiates
aggrecanase activity.

Poon CJ(1), Plaas AH, Keene DR, McQuillan DJ, Last K, Fosang AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne and Murdoch Childrens
Research Institute, Arthritis Research Group, Royal Children's Hospital,
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.

Keratan sulfate is thought to influence the cleavage of aggrecan by
metalloenzymes. We have therefore produced a recombinant substrate, substituted
with keratan sulfate, suitable for the study of aggrecanolysis in vitro.
Recombinant human G1-G2 was produced in primary bovine keratocytes using a
vaccinia virus expression system. Following purification and digestion with
specific hydrolases, fluorophore-assisted carbohydrate electrophoresis was used
to confirm the presence of the monosulfated Gal-GlcNAc6S and GlcNAc6s-Gal
disaccharides and the disulfated Gal6S-GlcNAc6S disaccharides of keratan sulfate.
Negligible amounts of fucose or sialic acid were detected, and the level of
unsulfated disaccharides was minimal. Treatment with keratanases reduced the size
of the recombinant G1-G2 by approximately 5 kDa on SDS-PAGE. Treatment with
N-glycosidase F also reduced the size of G1-G2 by approximately 5 kDa and
substantially reduced G1-G2 immunoreactivity with monoclonal antibody 5-D-4,
indicating that keratan sulfate on the recombinant protein is N-linked. Cleavage 
of G1-G2 by aggrecanase was markedly reduced when keratan sulfate chains were
removed by treatment with keratanase, keratanase II, endo-beta-galactosidase, or 
N-glycosidase F. These results indicate that modification of oligosaccharides in 
the aggrecan interglobular domain with keratan sulfate, most likely at asparagine
residue 368, potentiates aggrecanase activity in this part of the core protein.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M412145200 
PMID: 15849197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

