
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2005 May;43(5):2173-80.

Effect of prophylactic valacyclovir on the presence of human herpesvirus DNA in
saliva of healthy individuals after dental treatment.

Miller CS(1), Avdiushko SA, Kryscio RJ, Danaher RJ, Jacob RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology & MOlecular Genetics, University of
Kentucky College of Medicine and College of Dentistry, Lexington, KY, USA.
cmiller@uky.edu

Human herpesviruses (HHVs) are ubiquitous pathogens that intermittently
reactivate from latency. Transmission is believed to be facilitated by their
frequent appearance in saliva. This study sought to understand the factors that
influence the appearance of these viruses in saliva by examining the prevalence, 
pattern, and quantity of all eight HHVs in saliva of immunocompetent adults with 
a history of recurrent oral herpes simplex virus (HSV) infections following
dental treatment and antiviral therapy. Valacyclovir or matched placebo was given
(2 g twice on the day of treatment and 1 g twice the following day) to 125
patients in a randomized, double-blind controlled trial. Saliva, collected on the
day of dental treatment and 3 and 7 days later, was analyzed using real-time
quantitative PCR. At all visits, HHVs coinfected saliva. Over the course of the
week, the DNAs of HHV-6 and HHV-7 were detected significantly more often (97% to 
99% of patients) than Epstein-Barr virus (EBV; 64.8%), HSV-1 (13.0%), HHV-8
(3.2%), cytomegalovirus (2.4%), HSV-2 (0%), and varicella-zoster virus (0%),
irrespective of drug treatment (P < 0.002). Mean genome copy numbers were highest
for HSV-1 and HHV-6. Dental treatment did not influence asymptomatic viral
shedding patterns. However, valacyclovir treatment resulted in significantly
fewer patients shedding EBV at both postoperative visits compared with placebo (P
< 0.008). These results suggest that HHVs are simultaneously present in the
saliva of healthy adults at levels that could facilitate transmission, and
valacyclovir therapy decreases the prevalence of EBV in saliva but has little
effect on HHV-6 and HHV-7.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.43.5.2173-2180.2005 
PMCID: PMC1153765
PMID: 15872238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

