
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2005 May;43(5):2133-40.

Evaluation of the COBAS Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) TaqMan analyte-specific reagent
assay and comparison to the COBAS Amplicor HCV Monitor V2.0 and Versant HCV bDNA 
3.0 assays.

Konnick EQ(1), Williams SM, Ashwood ER, Hillyard DR.

Author information: 
(1)ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, 500 Chipeta Way, Salt 
Lake City, UT 84108, USA. KonnicE@ARUPLab.com

Performance characteristics of the COBAS hepatitis C virus (HCV) TaqMan
analyte-specific reagent (TM-ASR) assay using the QIAGEN BioRobot 9604 for RNA
extraction were evaluated and compared to the COBAS Amplicor HCV Monitor V2.0
(Amplicor) and Versant HCV bDNA 3.0 (Versant) assays using clinical samples.
Calibration of TM-ASR using Armored RNA allowed determination of the distribution
of HCV RNA in clinical samples, using 22,399 clinical samples. Limit of
detection, linearity, and inter- and intraassay assay precision were determined
for the TM-ASR assay using multiple clinical specimen panels across multiple
determinations. Genotype specificity for the TM-ASR assay was determined using
samples with different HCV RNA genotypes evaluated and compared against
predetermined results. Contamination control of the TM-ASR assay was evaluated
using pools of HCV RNA-positive and -negative samples tested in a checkerboard
pattern over 12 runs of 96 samples. Correlation of the TM-ASR, Amplicor, and
Versant assays was determined using 100 paired clinical samples and Deming
regression analysis. The TM-ASR performed well with respect to linearity,
precision, and contamination control. The correlation between TM-ASR and the
Amplicor and Versant assays was poor, with large differences between assay
results for individual samples. Calibration of the TM-ASR assay with Armored RNA 
allowed for a wide dynamic range and description of the distribution of HCV RNA
in clinical samples.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.43.5.2133-2140.2005 
PMCID: PMC1153797
PMID: 15872232  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

