
1. Trop Med Int Health. 2005 Aug;10(8):743-7.

No evidence of prolonged enterovirus excretion in HIV-seropositive patients.

Gouandjika-Vasilache I(1), Akoua-Koffi C, Begaud E, Dosseh A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur de Bangui, Bangui, Central African Republic.
ionela512@yahoo.fr

Mutations frequently occur in oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) strains upon
replication in the human intestine. These strains occasionally revert to being
neurovirulent. The more prolonged the excretion of OPV, the higher the risk of
reversion. OPV strains can be secreted for several months in humans presenting
humoral immune system deficiencies. The duration of excretion of OPV strains or
other enteroviruses in individuals infected with the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) is unknown. We investigated whether HIV infection, which is very prevalent 
in the Central African Republic, causes prolonged excretion of enteroviruses and,
in particular, of OPV strains in adults. We studied 28 HIV-infected adults living
with children who were immunized with OPV during national immunization days
(NIDs). Blood samples were collected to confirm HIV status and to evaluate
immunodeficiency before the NIDs. Stool samples for enterovirus isolation were
also collected before the NIDs, between the two rounds of immunization and 2, 4
and 6 months after the second round of immunization. No poliovirus was isolated
from any stool sample. Eight enteroviruses were isolated from eight adults
(maximum one strain per patient). Enteroviruses were not more frequently isolated
from severely immunodeficient patients. Thus, HIV-infected adults do not appear
to be at high risk of infection with OPV strains and the excretion of
enteroviruses (and thus of polioviruses) does not seem to be prolonged in
HIV-infected adults.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3156.2005.01454.x 
PMID: 16045460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

