
1. Prev Vet Med. 2005 Dec 12;72(3-4):263-80. Epub 2005 Sep 26.

Risk factors for outbreaks of infectious salmon anemia in farmed Atlantic salmon,
Salmo salar.

McClure CA(1), Hammell KL, Dohoo IR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Aquatic Health Sciences, Atlantic Veterinary College, University of
Prince Edward Island, 550 University Avenue, Charlottetown, PEI, Canada C1A 4P3.

Infectious salmon anemia (ISA) is a viral disease occurring in farmed Atlantic
salmon (Salmo salar) that is characterized by lethargy, anorexia, anemia and
death. To control the disease in New Brunswick, Canada, 7.5 million fish from
outbreak cages have been destroyed since 1997. Despite changes made by farmers,
2002 was the worst year ever for ISA losses in the region. We evaluated the
associations between potential risk factors and ISA outbreaks in the
Atlantic-salmon sites in New Brunswick. This was a multilevel study in which the 
site-level design was a retrospective cohort study while the cage-level design
was a modified case-cohort study. The questionnaire was divided into site-level
questions, cage-level questions and hatchery information. The important factors
identified by this study can be categorized as environmental, farmer controlled
or industry controlled according to the capacity to change or eliminate them.
Environmental risk factors such as increasing the depth of the net (if nets were 
<or=9 m, odds ratio (OR)=3.34) and decreasing the depth of water underneath the
net (if depth of water underneath the net >3m, OR=3.34) are for the most part
dictated by site location. Wild pollock (Pollachius virens) in the cage reflects 
the number of wild pollock that live in the site location. If there were >or=1000
pollock in the cage, the odds of disease in the cage increased 4.43-fold. Risk
factors that are under farm control include increasing the number of times that
the salmon are treated for sea lice (OR=3.31 if lice treatments are <or=2 times),
transferring small smolts into seawater (OR=2.40 if smolts weighed >99 g) and
improving on the adaptation of smolts to seawater to reduce post-transfer
mortalities (OR=4.52 if there was at least one cage with post-transfer
mortalities >5%). The industry-controlled factors need to be addressed by the
industry as a whole. Organizing boat travel to minimize the time and frequency of
boats travelling to or by sites currently is being reviewed. This will be
extremely important because the OR=9.43 if processing boats travel within 1 km of
the site and the OR=4.03 if the site has dry feed delivered by the feed company. 
Because the hazard ratio increased stepwise from 1 if the nearest neighbor with
ISA was >or=5 km up to 5.5 if the nearest site with ISA was within 0.5 km,
increasing the distance between sites might be necessary for effective control.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2005.07.010 
PMID: 16188335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

