
1. J Biomed Sci. 2005 Oct;12(5):689-700. Epub 2005 Nov 9.

Characterization of HPV-16 E6 DNA vaccines employing intracellular targeting and 
intercellular spreading strategies.

Peng S(1), Trimble C, Ji H, He L, Tsai YC, Macaes B, Hung CF, Wu TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) E6 and E7 are consistently expressed and are
responsible for the malignant transformation of HPV-associated lesions. Thus, E6 
and E7 represent ideal targets for therapeutic HPV vaccine development. We have
previously used the gene gun approach to test several intracellular targeting and
intercellular spreading strategies targeting HPV-16 E7. These strategies include 
the use of the sorting signal of lysosome-associated membrane protein (LAMP-1),
Mycobacterium tuberculosis heat shock protein 70 (HSP70), calreticulin (CRT) and 
herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) VP22 proteins. All of these strategies have
been shown to be capable of enhancing E7-DNA vaccine potency. In the current
study, we have characterized DNA vaccines employing these intracellular targeting
or intercellular spreading strategies targeting HPV-16 E6 for their ability to
generate E6-specific CD8+ T cell immune responses and antitumor effects against
an E6-expressing tumor cell line, TC-1, in C57BL/6 mice. We found that all the
intracellular targeting strategies (CRT, LAMP-1, HSP70) as well as the
intercellular spreading strategy (VP22) were able to enhance E6 DNA vaccine
potency, although the orientation of HSP70 linked to E6 antigen in the E6 DNA
vaccine appears to be important for the HSP70 strategy to work. The enhanced
E6-specific CD8+ T cell immune response in vaccinated mice also translated into
potent antitumor effects against TC-1 tumor cells. Our data indicate that all of 
the intracellular targeting and intercellular spreading strategies that have been
shown to enhance E7 DNA vaccine potency were also able to enhance E6 DNA vaccine 
potency.

DOI: 10.1007/s11373-005-9012-3 
PMID: 16200349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

