
1. Paediatr Drugs. 2005;7(6):353-63.

Leukotriene receptor antagonists in children with cystic fibrosis lung disease : 
anti-inflammatory and clinical effects.

Schmitt-GrohÃ© S(1), Zielen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
s.schmitt.grohe@uni-bonn.de

Cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease is characterized by chronic endobronchial
infection resulting in progressive pulmonary destruction; this is a major cause
of mortality and morbidity. Neutrophils are the primary effector cells
responsible for the progressive deterioration of lung function.
Peptido-leukotriene B4 antagonists, new anti-inflammatory agents that block the
neutrophil-dominated inflammation, could have had the potential for long-term
use. A trial on the pharmacokinetics of amelubant administered orally as a single
dose of up to 75 mg in pediatric patients with CF and 300 mg in adults, and as a 
repeated dose of 75 mg and 150 mg, respectively, once daily for 15 days provided 
evidence that amelubant metabolism in adult and pediatric patients with CF is
similar to that in healthy adults. In another study using the same dosage
regimen, amelubant appeared to be safe and well tolerated. Safety measures
included physical examination, vital signs, spirometry, oximetry, ECG, and
clinical laboratory testing. However, a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, multinational, phase II trial (Boehringer Ingelheim 543.45)
was conducted to investigate the clinical efficacy of 24 weeks of treatment with 
amelubant in patients with CF with mild-to-moderate lung disease. Two doses of
amelubant (75 and 150 mg) were tested in adult patients (> or = 18 years) and one
dose of amelubant (75mg) was tested in pediatric (6-17 years) patients. The trial
was terminated early due to a statistically significant increase in the risk of
pulmonary-related, serious adverse events in adults receiving amelubant.
Cysteinyl leukotrienes, eosinophilic inflammation, and viral infections also
contribute to progressive pulmonary destruction in CF. Cysteinyl leukotrienes are
potential targets for cysteinyl leukotriene receptor antagonist use. A study on
the pharmacokinetics of montelukast in children with CF provided evidence that
the dose of montelukast and the administration interval does not need to be
modified if the goal is to mimic the serum concentrations used to treat asthma.
In a randomized, double-blind, crossover, placebo-controlled study, 16 children
with mild CF (median age 9.5 years; vital capacity [VC] >70%) were treated with
montelukast (5 to < or =14 years; 5 mg; >14 years; 10 mg) or placebo as a
once-daily tablet for 21 days. There was a significant (p < or = 0.02) reduction 
in serum eosinophil cationic protein levels and eosinophils (p < or = 0.027) with
montelukast. However, neither lung function tests (VC, forced expiratory volume
in 1 second [FEV1], maximum expiratory flow at 25% of forced VC), nor clinical
symptom scores changed significantly. In another study, 26 patients aged 6-18
years with moderate CF (VC between 40% and 69% predicted) received montelukast or
placebo for 8 weeks in a 20-week, randomized, double-blind, crossover,
placebo-controlled trial. After treatment with montelukast there was a
significant improvement in FEV1, peak expiratory flow, and forced expiratory flow
between 25% and 75%, and a significant decrease in cough and wheezing scale
scores (p < 0.001 for all). Montelukast treatment decreased serum and sputum
levels of eosinophil cationic protein and interleukin-8 (IL-8), decreased sputum 
levels of myeloperoxidase, and increased serum and sputum levels of IL-10 (p <
0.001 for all) compared with placebo. To date, clinical experience and research
data on the anti-inflammatory effects of leukotriene receptor antagonists in CF
are limited. Multicenter trials with longer observation periods and greater
patient numbers are needed to prove the hypothesis that leukotriene receptor
antagonists have the potential to ameliorate CF lung disease with long term use.

DOI: 10.2165/00148581-200507060-00004 
PMID: 16356023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

