
1. Minerva Gastroenterol Dietol. 2003 Sep;49(3):187-94.

Intra-familial spread of acute hepatitis B virus infection.

Ivanovski LJ(1), Dimitriev D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Hepatitis, Clinic for Infectious Diseases, Sts Cyril and
Methodius University, Skopje, Macedonia. ljubomiri@zim.org.mk

AIM: The prevalence and incidence rates of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection in
our general population, have been assessed as in countries with intermediate
endemicity. The geographical variation in the prevalence rate of HBV infection is
also known. The aim of this study was to estimate the incidence rate of HBV
infection among family contacts of patients suffering from acute hepatitis B and 
to determine the need for immunoprophylaxis i.e. prevalence rate of HBV markers.
METHODS: In the prospective study 757 acute hepatitis B cases and their families 
were included. In 118 families all members were tested for HBV markers at the
time of verification of HBV infection in the index case and subsequently 4 times 
bimonthly. Serum samples were tested for ALT/AST, and HBsAg, antiHBc IgM, anti
HBs (Behring, Abbott).
RESULTS: Among 1877 family contacts of 757 index cases within a surveillance
period of 1 year, 163 cases of icteric acute hepatitis B have been registered.
The prevalence of HBV markers and anicteric infection were determined among 286
family contacts of 118 index cases as a representative sample for intra-familial 
transmission of infection. The families with other risk factors such as
drug-addiction, haemodialysis, transfusion and others, were excluded. In these
families we found 56 (19.58%) carriers of HBV markers and 58 (20.27%) cases of
acute hepatitis B were verified, 33 (56.89%) unicteric and 25 (43.10%) icteric.
When wives were taken as index cases, we found that they transmitted the
infection to their husbands in 44.73% of cases vice versa 9.67%. In our study
44.56% of secondary cases were children when their mothers were suffering from
acute hepatitis B.
CONCLUSIONS: According to socio-economic, ethnic and cultural characteristics of 
the familial way of living in Macedonia, we noticed that acute HBV infection can 
be transmitted within members of one family. Only a small proportion of family
members, as carriers of HBV markers are considered resistant to infection. Most
family members are non-resistant and immunization i.e. vaccination is seen as a
very reasonable action.


PMID: 16484957 

