
1. Int J Cancer. 2006 Aug 1;119(3):608-14.

Noninvasive diagnosis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma: nasopharyngeal brushings
reveal high Epstein-Barr virus DNA load and carcinoma-specific viral BARF1 mRNA.

Stevens SJ(1), Verkuijlen SA, Hariwiyanto B, Harijadi, Paramita DK, Fachiroh J,
Adham M, Tan IB, Haryana SM, Middeldorp JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vrije Universiteit Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, and Dr. Cipto Mangunkusumo Hospital, Jakarta, Indonesia.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is the most prevalent ENT-tumour in Indonesia. We 
investigated the primary diagnostic value of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA load
and mRNA detection in noninvasive nasopharyngeal (NP) brushings, obtained
prospectively from consecutive Indonesian ENT-patients with suspected NPC (N=106)
and controls. A subsequent routine NP biopsy was taken for pathological
examination and EBER-RISH, yielding 85 confirmed NPC and 21 non-NPC tumour
patients. EBV DNA and human DNA load were quantified by real-time PCR. NP
brushings from NPC patients contained extremely high EBV DNA loads compared to
the 88 non-NPC controls (p<0.0001). Using mean EBV DNA load in controls plus 3 SD
as cut-off value, specificity, sensitivity, positive and negative predictive
values were 98, 90, 97 and 91%, respectively. Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen 1
(EBNA1) and the carcinoma-specific BARF1 mRNA were detected by nucleic acid
sequence based amplification and found in 86 and 74% of NP brushings, confirming 
NPC tumour cell presence. EBV RNA positivity was even higher in fresh samples
stored at -80 degrees C until RNA expression analyses (88% for both EBNA1 and
BARF1). EBV RNA-negative NP brushings from proven NPC cases had the lowest EBV
DNA loads, indicating erroneous sampling. No EBV mRNA was detected in NP
brushings from healthy donors and non-NPC patients. In conclusion, EBV DNA load
measurement combined with detection of BARF1 mRNA in simple NP brushings allows
noninvasive NPC diagnosis. It reflects carcinoma-specific EBV involvement at the 
anatomical site of tumour development and reduces the need for invasive biopsies.
This procedure may be useful for confirmatory diagnosis in large serological NPC 
screening programs and has potential as prognostic tool.

Copyright (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.21914 
PMID: 16572427  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

