
1. J Mol Biol. 2006 Jul 28;360(5):1081-93. Epub 2006 May 19.

Structural tolerance versus functional intolerance to mutation of hydrophobic
core residues surrounding cavities in a parvovirus capsid.

Carreira A(1), Mateu MG.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" (CSIC-UAM), Universidad Autónoma
de Madrid, Cantoblanco 28049 Madrid, Spain.

The structural and functional relevance of amino acid residues surrounding
cavities within the hydrophobic core of the protein subunits that form the capsid
of parvoviruses has been investigated. Several of the evolutionarily conserved,
hydrophobic residues that delimit these cavities in the capsid of the minute
virus of mice were replaced by other hydrophobic residues that would affect the
size and/or shape of the cavity. When four or more methylene-sized groups were
introduced, or six or more groups removed, capsid assembly was drastically
impaired. In contrast, the introduction or removal of up to three groups had no
significant effect on capsid assembly or thermostability. However, many of these 
mutations affected a capsid conformational transition needed for viral
infectivity. Replacement of some polar residues around the largest cavity showed 
that capsid assembly requires a carboxylate buried within this cavity, but both
aspartate and glutamate are structurally accepted. Again, only the aspartate
allowed the production of infectious viruses, because of a specific role in
encapsidation of the viral genome. These observations provide evidence of a
remarkable structural tolerance to mutation of the hydrophobic core of the
protein subunits in a viral capsid, and of an involvement of core residues and
internal cavities in capsid functions needed for infectivity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.05.013 
PMID: 16814321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

