
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1990 Feb;34(2):206-9.

5-azacytidine and 5-azadeoxycytidine inhibit human immunodeficiency virus type 1 
replication in vitro.

Bouchard J(1), Walker MC, Leclerc JM, Lapointe N, Beaulieu R, Thibodeau L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique-Santé, Université du Québec,
Pointe-Claire, Canada.

Chemotherapeutic agents which affect the integration, stability, or inducibility 
of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) provirus would have considerable value 
in treating acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Two nucleoside analogs of
cytosine, 5-azacytidine and 5-azadeoxycytidine, which seem to have such value
because of their capabilities to affect both the stability and the methylation
patterns of the nucleic acids into which they are incorporated, were tested for
their ability to inhibit the replication of HIV type 1 (HIV-1) in human CEM T
cells in vitro. 5-Azadeoxycytidine (1 microM) completely inhibited HIV
replication in CEM cells, by the criteria of reduced viral antigen expression and
decreased supernatant reverse transcriptase activity, with little toxicity for
the treated cells. 5-azacytidine (1 microM) also inhibited HIV replication, but
less effectively. When added 2 or more h after CEM cells were infected with
HIV-1, both 5-azacytosine derivatives were less effective than they were when
added at the time of infection. Even 2 h of exposure to 5-azadeoxycytidine was
sufficient for inhibition of HIV replication. Although long exposure to either
analog at concentrations of 1 microM would result in pronounced cellular
cytotoxicity, the the fact that short exposures to the same dose of drug inhibit 
HIV replication but are not toxic for the cells implies that cellular toxicity
itself is not an important mechanism of the antiviral action of the analogs.

DOI: 10.1128/aac.34.2.206 
PMCID: PMC171557
PMID: 1691617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

