
1. J Immunol. 2006 Sep 1;177(5):3266-72.

Type 1 IFN deficiency in the absence of normal splenic architecture during
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection.

Louten J(1), van Rooijen N, Biron CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Brown University,
Providence, RI 02912, USA.

The innate immune system uses different mechanisms to respond to infectious
pathogens. Experiments evaluating the requirements for a type 1 IFN
(IFN-alphabeta) response to lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) resulted in
the surprising discovery that mice deficient in B and T cell development, i.e.,
RAG-deficient and SCID, had profoundly reduced levels of IFN-alphabeta in serum
and spleen, despite high viral replication. In addition to lacking an adaptive
immune system, these strains exhibit aberrant splenic architecture, and the
defect in type 1 IFN production was also observed in mice lacking normal splenic 
marginal zone (MZ) organization due to genetic deficiencies in B cell development
or in cytokine functions required for development of the MZ, i.e., muMT,
lymphotoxin-alpha, and TNFR1. Interestingly, the IFN-alphabeta reduction was not 
observed after murine CMV infection. Depletion of phagocytic cells from normally 
developed spleens by treatment with clodronate-containing liposomes demonstrated 
that these populations were required for the type 1 IFN response to LCMV, but not
to murine CMV, and for control of viral replication. Complete repopulation of the
MZ was necessary to restore normal IFN-alphabeta production. In contrast, control
of LCMV replication correlated with the return of CD11c+ cells. Taken together,
these results demonstrate the complexity and sophistication of the splenic MZ in 
sensing and responding to particular pathogens and reveal the importance of organ
architecture in the production of type 1 IFN.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.5.3266 
PMID: 16920967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

