
1. J Med Virol. 1990 Jul;31(3):200-8.

Association of antibodies blocking HIV-1 gp 160-sCD4 attachment with virus
neutralizing activity in human sera.

Back NK(1), Thiriart C, Delers A, Ramautarsing C, Bruck C, Goudsmit J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Sera, from HIV-1 and HIV-2 seropositive individuals, were tested for the presence
of antibodies able to inhibit the binding (BI) of HIV-IIIB gp 160 (produced in
mammalian cells using a vaccinia expression system) to the extracellular portion 
of the CD4 receptor. A competition enzyme immunoassay (EIA) with soluble CD4
(sCD4) was used. BI antibodies were highly prevalent among HIV-1 seropositives
but not in HIV-2 infected individuals. Attempts to localize the binding site for 
these BI antibodies on the primary sequence of gp 120 by using synthetic peptides
encompassing the putative CD4 binding site on gp 120 (aa 397-439) were not
successful. This study did not reveal a significant correlation between the
presence of BI antibodies and disease evolution. BI antibody titres correlated
less well with anti-gp 160 titres (r = 0.51, P less than or equal to 0.011) than 
with neutralizing antibody (NA) titres using either the isolates HIV-SF2 (SF2) (r
= 0.77, P less than or equal to 0.000) and HIV-MN (MN) (r = 0.61, P less than or 
equal to 0.002) or the isolate HIV-IIIB (HX10) (r = 0.89, P less than or equal to
0.000) of which the gp 160 for the assays was derived. An HIV-IIIB neutralizing
serum, elicited in a rabbit by immunization with a 17-mer synthetic peptide
derived from the third variable domain (V3) of gp 120, did bind gp 160 without
inhibiting the subsequent attachment of sCD4 to gp 160.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250
WORDS)

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.1890310306 
PMID: 1697332  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

