
1. IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. 2006 Oct;10(4):705-13.

Database to dynamically aid probe design for virus identification.

Lin FM(1), Huang HD, Chang YC, Tsou AP, Chan PL, Wu LC, Tsai MF, Horng JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Central
University, Jhongli City, Taiwan, ROC. meta@db.csie.ncu.edu.tw

Viral infection poses a major problem for public health, horticulture, and animal
husbandry, possibly causing severe health crises and economic losses. Viral
infections can be identified by the specific detection of viral sequences in many
ways. The microarray approach not only tolerates sequence variations of newly
evolved virus strains, but can also simultaneously diagnose many viral sequences.
Many chips have so far been designed for clinical use. Most are designed for
special purposes, such as typing enterovirus infection, and compare fewer than 30
different viral sequences. None considers primer design, increasing the
likelihood of cross hybridization to similar sequences from other viruses. To
prevent this possibility, this work establishes a platform and database that
provides users with specific probes of all known viral genome sequences to
facilitate the design of diagnostic chips. This work develops a system for
designing probes online. A user can select any number of different viruses and
set the experimental conditions such as melting temperature and length of probe. 
The system then returns the optimal sequences from the database. We have also
developed a heuristic algorithm to calculate the probe correctness and show the
correctness of the algorithm. (The system that supports probe design for
identifying viruses has been published on our web page
http://bioinfo.csie.ncu.edu.tw/.)

DOI: 10.1109/titb.2006.874202 
PMID: 17044404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

