
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2007 Jan;45(1):121-6. Epub 2006 Nov 8.

Association of putative enteroaggregative Escherichia coli virulence genes and
biofilm production in isolates from travelers to developing countries.

Mohamed JA(1), Huang DB, Jiang ZD, DuPont HL, Nataro JP, Belkind-Gerson J,
Okhuysen PC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Texas Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Enteroaggregative Escherichia coli (EAEC) is an emerging enteric pathogen that
causes acute and chronic diarrhea among children, human immunodeficiency
virus-infected patients, and travelers to developing regions of the world. The
pathogenesis of EAEC strains involves the production of biofilm. In this study,
we determined the association between presence of putative EAEC virulence genes
and biofilm formation in 57 EAEC isolates (as defined by HEp-2 adherence) from
travelers with diarrhea and in 18 EAEC isolates from travelers without diarrhea. 
Twelve nondiarrheagenic E. coli isolates from healthy travelers were used as
controls. Biofilm formation was measured by using a microtiter plate assay with
the crystal violet staining method, and the presence of the putative EAEC
virulence genes aap, aatA, aggR, astA, irp2, pet, set1A, and shf was determined
by PCR. EAEC isolates were more likely to produce biofilm than nondiarrheagenic
E. coli isolates (P = 0.027), and the production of biofilm was associated with
the virulence genes aggR, set1A, aatA, and irp2, which were found in 16 (40%), 17
(43%), 10 (25%), and 27 (68%) of the biofilm producers versus only 4 (11%), 6
(6%), 2 (6%), and 15 (43%) in non-biofilm producers (P = 0.008 for aggR, P =
0.0004 for set1A, P = 0.029 for aatA, and P = 0.04 for irp2). Although the
proportion of EAEC isolates producing biofilm in patients with diarrhea (51%) was
similar to that in patients without diarrhea (61%), biofilm production was
related to the carriage of aggR (P = 0.015), set1A (P = 0.001), and aatA (P =
0.025). Since aggR is a master regulator of EAEC, the presence of aap (P =
0.004), astA (P = 0.001), irp2 (P = 0.0006), pet (P = 0.002), and set1A (P =
0.014) in an aggR versus an aggR-lacking background was investigated and was also
found to be associated with biofilm production. This study suggests that biofilm 
formation is a common phenomenon among EAEC isolates derived from travelers with 
or without diarrhea and that multiple genes associated with biofilm formation are
regulated by aggR.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01128-06 
PMCID: PMC1828990
PMID: 17093030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

