
1. Brain Behav Immun. 2007 Mar;21(3):311-22. Epub 2006 Nov 13.

Interferon type I receptor-deficient mice have altered disease symptoms in
response to influenza virus.

Traynor TR(1), Majde JA, Bohnet SG, Krueger JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Comparative Anatomy, Pharmacology and Physiology,
Washington State University, P.O. Box 646520, Pullman, WA 99164-6520, USA.

The role of type I interferons (IFNs) in mediation of acute viral symptoms
(fever, somnolence, anorexia, etc.) is unknown. To determine the role of type I
IFN in selected symptom development, body temperature and sleep responses to a
marginally lethal dose of X-31 influenza virus were examined in mice with a
targeted mutation of the IFN receptor type I (IFN-RI knockouts) and compared to
wild-type 129 SvEv control mice. Mice were monitored for 48 h to determine
baseline temperature and sleep profiles prior to infection, and then for 9 days
following infection. Hypothermic responses to virus were perceptible beginning at
64 h post-infection (PI) and were more marked in KO mice until 108 h, when
hypothermia became more exaggerated in wild-type controls. Temperatures of
wild-type mice continued to decline through day 9 while temperatures in IFN-RI KO
mice stabilized. Time spent in non-rapid eye movement sleep (NREMS) increased in 
KO mice when hypothermia was marked and then returned to baseline levels, while
NREMS continued to increase in wild-type mice through day 9. Other sleep
parameters [time spent in rapid eye movement sleep (REMS), relative NREMS EEG
slow wave activity, NREMS EEG power density] were all reduced in wild-type mice
compared to KOs from days 3 to 8 while REMS low frequency EEG power density
increased in wild-type relative to KOs. In conclusion, our results indicate that 
the presence of functional type I IFN slightly ameliorates disease symptoms early
in the X-31 infection while exacerbating disease symptoms later in the infection.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2006.09.007 
PMCID: PMC1820588
PMID: 17098395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

