
1. J Med Virol. 2007 Jan;79(1):1-7.

Progression towards AIDS leads to increased Torque teno virus and Torque teno
minivirus titers in tissues of HIV infected individuals.

Thom K(1), Petrik J.

Author information: 
(1)Transfusion Transmitted Infection Group, Scottish National Blood Transfusion
Service and University of Edinburgh, Royal Dick Vet School, Summerhall,
Edinburgh, UK.

Torque teno virus (TTV) and Torque teno minivirus (TTMV) are highly prevalent in 
the general population and although no disease has been associated with these
viruses yet, co-infections with other pathological viruses are frequent. Both
viruses are extremely heterogeneous, especially for DNA viruses, and the role of 
the immune system in controlling the infections has yet to be established. In
this study the TTV/TTMV viral loads in HIV positive tissues have been
investigated for the first time. The titers of both TTV and TTMV were compared in
the bone marrow and spleen tissues from three groups: HIV negative individuals,
HIV positive individuals and HIV positive individuals who had progressed to AIDS,
leading to immunosuppression. Limiting dilution PCR using primers situated in the
UTR region of the genome were used to semi-quantitate the virus, and TTV and TTMV
were differentiated using melting curve analysis of the PCR product. The AIDS
group had significantly higher titers compared with both the HIV positive and
negative groups for both bone marrow (AIDS vs. HIV positive P = 0.006, AIDS vs.
HIV negative P < 0.001) and spleen (AIDS vs. HIV positive P = 0.022, AIDS vs. HIV
negative P < 0.001). Analysis of TTV/TTMV titer with CD4 T lymphocyte count
showed a significant inverse correlation however neither HCV co-infection or type
of Anellovirus infection (single TTV or TTMV, or mixed TTV/TTMV) showed any
significant correlation with virus titer. The results show a link between
deterioration of the immune system and increased the viral loads in studied
tissues.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.20756 
PMID: 17133553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

