
1. J Virol. 2007 Mar;81(5):2187-95. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

Pseudotyped single-cycle simian immunodeficiency viruses expressing gamma
interferon augment T-cell priming responses in vitro.

Peng Y(1), Lin FC, Verardi PH, Jones LA, McChesney MB, Yilma TD.

Author information: 
(1)International Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Tropical Disease Agents,
University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

To increase the safety and efficacy of human immunodeficiency virus vaccines,
several groups have conducted studies using the macaque model with single-cycle
replicating simian immunodeficiency viruses (SIVs). However, these constructs had
poor or diminished efficacy compared to live attenuated vaccines. We previously
showed that immunization of macaques with live attenuated SIV with a deletion in 
the nef gene and expressing gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) results in significantly
enhanced safety and efficacy. To further enhance safety, we constructed and
characterized single-cycle SIVs, pseudotyped with the glycoprotein of vesicular
stomatitis virus, expressing different levels of macaque IFN-gamma. Expression of
IFN-gamma did not alter the infectivity or antigenicity of pseudotyped SIV. The
transduction of dendritic cells (DCs) by IFN-gamma-expressing particles resulted 
in the up-regulation of costimulatory and major histocompatibility complex
molecules. Furthermore, T cells primed with DCs transduced by SIV particles
expressing high levels of IFN-gamma and then stimulated with SIV induced
significantly higher numbers of spot-forming cells in an enzyme-linked immunospot
assay than did T cells primed with DCs transduced with SIV particles lacking the 
cytokine. In conclusion, we demonstrated that the transduction of DCs in vitro
with pseudotyped single-cycle SIVs expressing IFN-gamma increased DC activation
and augmented T-cell priming activity.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01879-06 
PMCID: PMC1865962
PMID: 17166912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

