
1. Arch Virol. 1991;120(1-2):1-17.

Modified-live infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus vaccine expressing monomer 
and dimer forms of foot-and-mouth disease capsid protein epitopes on surface of
hybrid virus particles.

Kit S(1), Kit M, DiMarchi RD, Little SP, Gale C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemical Virology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.

Modified-live, attenuated infectious bovine rhinotracheitis (IBR) hybrid virus
vaccines have been constructed by inserting in the major IBRV glycoprotein gIII
gene chemically synthesized deoxyribonucleotide sequences encoding the bovine
growth hormone signal sequence and monomeric or dimeric forms of the foot and
mouth disease virus (FMDV) VP 1 epitope sequences. The foreign DNA sequences were
inserted at the N-terminal end of the IBRV gIII coding sequence and were driven
by the IBRV gIII promoter. The sequences encoding the first 38 and the first 21
amino acids of the IBRV gIII were deleted from the hybrid viruses containing
inserts of the monomeric and dimeric FMDV epitope sequences, respectively, to
avoid redundant signal sequences. Plaque immunoassay experiments with guinea pig 
and bovine anti-FMDV peptide antisera, and with anti-IBRV gIII monoclonal
antibodies demonstrated that IBRV-FMDV fusion proteins were expressed in
virus-infected MDBK cells. Immunoelectron microscopy analyses demonstrated that
the IBRV-FMDV fusion proteins were expressed as repeated structures on the
surface of virus particles. Experiments showed that the recombinant IBRV-FMDV
viruses protected cattle from IBRV (Cooper) challenge and induced anti-FMDV
peptide antibodies, thereby demonstrating that the FMDV epitopes were expressed
in vivo.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01310945 
PMID: 1718244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

