
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2007 Feb;147(2):241-8.

Hepatitis C virus productive infection in mononuclear cells from patients with
cryoglobulinaemia.

Sansonno D(1), Tucci FA, Lauletta G, De Re V, Montrone M, Troiani L, Sansonno L, 
Dammacco F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Oncology, University of Bari
Medical School, Bari, Italy. d.sansonno@dimo.uniba.it

The relationship between the occurrence of cryoglobulins and hepatitis C virus
(HCV) productive infection in peripheral blood and bone marrow-derived
lymphocytes was explored. HCV minus strand RNA, the viral replicative
intermediate, was searched for by a polyA(+) tract strand-specific Tth-based
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in lymphoid cells of 46 
patients with acute and chronic infection. The HCV minus strand was demonstrated 
in RNA extracted from six (13%) and five (11%) peripheral blood and bone
marrow-derived lymphocytes, respectively. The HCV replicating form in lymphoid
cells was associated strictly with mixed cryoglobulinaemia (MCG), in that it was 
found in six of 13 (46%) MCG patients, including two with B cell non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma (NHL). No traces of HCV-negative strand RNA were found in four patients 
with acute hepatitis C, in 15 with chronic active hepatitis without extrahepatic 
disorders, in seven with monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance, and 
in seven with B-NHL without MCG. These results emphasize the direct role of the
virus in the pathogenesis of MCG and support the contention that HCV is not
specifically lymphotropic, its entry and replication in lymphoid cells being
determined largely by selective interactions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2006.03272.x 
PMCID: PMC1810461
PMID: 17223964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

