
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2007 Feb 15;44(4):506-12. Epub 2007 Jan 8.

A waterborne outbreak of gastroenteritis with multiple etiologies among resort
island visitors and residents: Ohio, 2004.

O'Reilly CE(1), Bowen AB, Perez NE, Sarisky JP, Shepherd CA, Miller MD, Hubbard
BC, Herring M, Buchanan SD, Fitzgerald CC, Hill V, Arrowood MJ, Xiao LX, Hoekstra
RM, Mintz ED, Lynch MF; Outbreak Working Group.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemic Intelligence Service, Office of Workforce and Career Development,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA.
coreilly@cdc.gov

Comment in
    Clin Infect Dis. 2007 Sep 1;45(5):666-7; author reply 667.

BACKGROUND: The implementation of treated municipal water systems in the 20th
century led to a dramatic decrease in waterborne disease in the United States.
However, communities with deficient water systems still experience waterborne
outbreaks. In August 2004, we investigated an outbreak of gastroenteritis on
South Bass Island, Ohio, an island of 900 residents that is visited by >500,000
persons each year.
METHODS: To identify the source of illness, we conducted a case-control study and
an environmental investigation. A case was defined as diarrhea in a person who
traveled to the island during the period from May 1 through 30 September 2004 and
became ill within 2 weeks after the visit. Healthy travel companions served as
matched control subjects. We also performed an environmental assessment and
extensive testing of island water sources.
RESULTS: Among the 1450 persons reporting illness, Campylobacter jejuni,
norovirus, Giardia intestinalis, and Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium
were identified in 16, 9, 3, and 1 persons, respectively. We interviewed 100 case
patients and 117 matched control subjects. Case patients were more likely to
drink water on the island than control subjects (68% vs. 35%; matched odds ratio,
4.3; 95% confidence interval, 2.2-9.3). Sampling of ground water wells indicated 
contamination with multiple fecal microbes, including Escherichia coli, C.
jejuni, Salmonella species, and Giardia species. Irregularities in sewage
disposal practices that could have contaminated the underground aquifer were
noted.
CONCLUSIONS: The combined epidemiological and environmental investigation
indicated that sewage-contaminated ground water was the likely source of this
large outbreak. Long-term changes to the island's water supply and sewage
management infrastructure are needed.

DOI: 10.1086/511043 
PMID: 17243052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

