
1. Int J Exp Pathol. 2007 Feb;88(1):63-73.

Characterization of Minaçu virus (Reoviridae: Orbivirus) and pathological changes
in experimentally infected newborn mice.

Martins LC(1), Diniz JA, Silva EV, Barros VL, Monteiro HA, Azevedo RS, Quaresma
JA, Vasconcelos PF.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Arbovirologia e Febres Hemorrágicas, Instituto Evandro Chagas,
Ministério da Saúde, Belém, Brazil.

Minaçu virus was isolated from Ochlerotatus scapularis (Diptera: Culicidae) in
Minaçu, Goiás State, Brazil, in 1996. In attempting characterization of virus
serological (hemagluttination inhibition, HI; indirect immunofluorescence assay, 
IFA), physicochemical [test for deoxycholate acid (DCA) sensitivity;
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE)] tests and ultrastructural studies were
made. Virus was also assayed in suckling mice after intracerebral inoculation of 
0.02 ml and in VERO and C6/36 cells with 0.1 ml of viral suspension containing
10(5) LD50/ml. Inoculated and control systems were observed daily. Every 24 h,
one control and two inoculated animals were killed for tissue testing, including 
histopathological changes by haematoxylin and eosin (HE)-stained sections, which 
were semi-quantified. Research into viral antigen in the tissues of mice [central
nervous system (CNS), liver, heart, lungs, spleen and kidneys] was carried out by
the immunohistochemical technique using the peroxidase system. The virus only
replicated in VERO cells, with antigen positive by IFA. Positive complement
fixation tests were only obtained using antiserum of Minaçu virus. Minaçu virus
is DCA resistant; haemagglutinating activity was negative. By electronic
microscopy non-enveloped virus particles were 75 nm in diameter. PAGE analysis
showed Minaçu virus genome profile with 10 RNA segments. Infected, non-killed
animals died 7 days after inoculation. Tissue lesions were observed in all
organs, except the lungs. Intense lesions were observed in the CNS and the heart,
where neurone and cardiocyte necroses, respectively, were noted. The liver,
spleen and kidneys had moderate tissue changes. Viral antigens were more abundant
in the CNS and the heart, and absent in the lungs. In conclusion, Minaçu virus
belongs to the family Reoviridae, genus Orbivirus.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2613.2006.00516.x 
PMCID: PMC2517288
PMID: 17244340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

