
1. J Eval Clin Pract. 2007 Feb;13(1):16-20.

Does a Cesarean section delivery always cost more than a vaginal delivery?

Kazandjian VA(1), Chaulk CP, Ogunbo S, Wicker K.

Author information: 
(1)LogicQual Research Institute, Elkridge, MD 21075, USA.
vkazandjian@mhaonline.org

There is evidence that average total charges per episode of child birth depend on
maternal plus child length of stay, neonatal intensive care unit (NICU)
utilization, maternal race and mode of delivery. In particular, when maternal and
child records are linked, this study suggests that when adjusted for maternal
characteristics, the cost of vaginal deliveries followed by NICU utilization may 
be higher than the cost of Cesarean sections and NICU utilization.OBJECTIVE:
Cesarean section, one of the most frequently performed surgical procedures on
women, is rising globally and in the USA. Much of the current Cesarean section
literature focuses on reporting geographic and hospital-specific variations, but 
little has been published about the clinical and demographic characteristics of
the patients, and even less about the economic consequences of a Cesarean section
delivery compared with a vaginal delivery [e.g. the total hospital charges and
length of neonatal intensive care unit-NICU-stay] of a birth episode. To examine 
these relationships further, three urban Baltimore hospitals volunteered in 2004 
to participate in a retrospective chart review that linked mother and child
hospital records.
METHODS: 1172 mother-child records were randomly selected and data regarding
maternal co-morbidities, age, infant weight along with transfer to neonatal
intensive care units, and economic data were extracted from the mother and child 
charts.
CONCLUSION: Average total charges for vaginal deliveries [maternal plus total
baby charges that includes NICU utilization (X=$17 624.38)] may be higher than
average total charges for Cesarean sections [maternal plus total baby charges
that includes NICU utilization (X=$13 805.47)]. Specifically, maternal
race--being African American--was indirectly associated with overall charges
through its association with mode of delivery and NICU utilization patterns. The 
presence of maternal co-morbidities--Herpes Simplex Virus, hypertension and
diabetes--most probably influenced babies' hospital stay charges as well as NICU 
charges when transferred to NICU following both vaginal and Cesarean section
deliveries. Thus, prenatal care targeting co-morbidities management may reduce
the odds of a newborn's transfer to NICU thus avoiding greater lengths of stay,
medical care and charges. Recommendations for obstetrical practices as well as
health care policy on their charges should not assume that Cesarean section
deliveries are always costlier than vaginal deliveries.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2753.2006.00690.x 
PMID: 17286718  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

