
1. J Viral Hepat. 2007 Mar;14(3):161-8.

Clinical significance of pre-S mutations in patients with genotype C hepatitis B 
virus infection.

Choi MS(1), Kim DY, Lee DH, Lee JH, Koh KC, Paik SW, Rhee JC, Yoo BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Digestive Disease Research Center, Samsung Medical 
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

We investigated the overall and site-specific prevalence of pre-S mutations and
its clinical significance in patients with genotype C hepatitis B virus (HBV)
infection. Three hundred subjects were included: 50 asymptomatic carriers (AC),
87 chronic hepatitis (CH), 91 liver cirrhosis (LC) and 72 hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Pre-S mutations were determined by nucleotide sequence analysis.
Possible correlations between pre-S mutations and clinical/virological parameters
were examined. Pre-S mutations were detected in 82 cases (27.3%); it was more
frequently found in HCC (43.1%) and LC (35.2%) group than in the CH (20.7%) and
AC (2.0%) group. Pre-S2 deletion was the most commonly found mutation (10.7%),
followed by pre-S2 start codon mutation (9.7%), pre-S1-S2 deletion (3.0%) and
both pre-S2 deletion and start codon mutation (2.7%). Pre-S2 deletion and pre-S2 
start codon mutation were more frequently detected in advanced diseases (LC and
HCC). Pre-S mutations were associated with older age and higher rates of positive
HBV DNA (>/=0.5 pg/mL). Advanced disease and positive HBV DNA were shown to be
independent predictors of pre-S mutations by logistic regression analysis. These 
findings suggest that pre-S mutations, especially pre-S2 deletions and pre-S2
start codon mutations, are common in patients with genotype C HBV infection and
are associated with advanced liver disease and active viral replication.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2006.00784.x 
PMID: 17305881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

