
1. J Chemother. 2007 Aug;19(4):423-7.

Clinical and pathological characteristics and response to combination therapy of 
genotype 4 chronic hepatitis C patients: experience from a spanish center.

Trapero-Marugan M(1), Moreno-Monteagudo JA, Garcia-Buey L, Borque MJ, Medina J,
Garcia-Sanchez A, Moreno-Otero R.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology and Hepatology Department, Hospital Universitario de La
Princesa, Autonomous University of Madrid, Spain. mtraperomarugan@hotmail.com

This observational study evaluated the characteristics of genotype 4 chronic
hepatitis C (CHC) patients and their response to combination therapy in Spain.
383 patients with CHC, 44 with genotype 4-HCV infection, were investigated.
Nineteen genotype 4-HCV infected patients received IFNalpha-2b (3 MU three times 
weekly) plus ribavirin (1-1.2 g/day) and ten received Peg-IFNalpha-2b (1.5
microg/kg/week) plus ribavirin (1-1.2 g/day) for 12 months. A sustained
virological response (SVR) was evaluated. Genotype 4-HCV was detected in 11.5% of
patients, and was significantly associated with a higher proportion of infection 
through intravenous drug use (46% vs 11%; p<0.001), a higher alcohol intake (35% 
vs. 7%; p<0.001), higher proportion of anti-HBc positivity (41% vs. 22%; p<0.05),
lower ALT (87+/-50 vs. 139+/-142 IU/L; p<0.001) and AST (53+/-30 vs. 85+/-126
IU/L; p<0.001) levels, lower viremia (4.1 +/- 7.7 (x 10(5)) vs . 7.3 +/- 9.8 IU(x
10(5) )/mL) p<0.05) and less fibrosis (stage 3-4 in 21% vs. 32%; p<0.06). Sixteen
(55%) out of the 29 patients treated with combination therapy achieved a
sustained virological response (SVR) while 10 (36%) were non-responders and 3 (9%
relapsed. In conclusion, the lower stage of fibrosis, lower viremia and higher
SVR rate than genotype 1 suggest a less aggressive pattern of diseased caused by 
this genotype.

DOI: 10.1179/joc.2007.19.4.423 
PMID: 17855187  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

