
1. Neuropathology. 2007 Aug;27(4):396-402.

CNK/T-cell brain lymphoma associated with Epstein-Barr virus in a patient with
AIDS.

Cobo F(1), Talavera P, Busquier H, Concha A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Tumor Bank, Infectious Pathology Unit, Hospital
Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Avda Fuerzas Armadas, 2,18014 Granada, Spain.
fernando.cobo.sspa@juntadeandalucia.es

We report a case of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, with exclusive
cerebral localization in a patient with AIDS. The patient presented with
neurological alterations, fever and convulsions, so the initial presumptive
diagnosis was an opportunistic brain infection. MRI showed a left parietal
necrotic lesion and a stereotactic brain biopsy was performed for pathological,
microbiological and molecular studies. Histological sections showed an
angiocentric and angiodestructive growth pattern and the immunophenotype of this 
tumor was CD56+, CD45+, CD3+ (cytoplasmic), Granzyme B+ and Perforin+. All the
microbiological studies such as bacterial, fungi, micobacteria, Toxoplasma gondii
and Cryptococcus determination were negatives. A PCR study with primer specific
for EBV viral genome of Bam-Hi-w system was positive. Also, a rearrangement study
showed T-cell gene rearrangement with monoclonal appearance. A diagnosis of
extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma was made and the patient died a few days later.
This case represents a very rare example of NK/T-cell lymphoma of the brain in a 
patient with AIDS. The diagnosis of this kind of lymphomas requires a
multimodality approach correlating clinical, morphological, immunophenotypic and 
molecular data.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2007.00784.x 
PMID: 17899696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

