
1. J Virol. 2007 Dec;81(24):13385-91. Epub 2007 Oct 10.

A novel zinc-binding domain is essential for formation of the functional Junín
virus envelope glycoprotein complex.

York J(1), Nunberg JH.

Author information: 
(1)Montana Biotechnology Center, The University of Montana, Science Complex, Room
221, Missoula, MT 59812, USA.

The envelope glycoprotein of the Junín arenavirus (GP-C) mediates entry into
target cells through a pH-dependent membrane fusion mechanism. Unlike other class
I viral fusion proteins, the mature GP-C complex retains a cleaved, 58-amino-acid
signal peptide (SSP) as an essential subunit, required both for trafficking of
GP-C to the cell surface and for the activation of membrane fusion. SSP has been 
shown to associate noncovalently in GP-C via the cytoplasmic domain (CTD) of the 
transmembrane fusion subunit G2. In this report we investigate the molecular
basis for this intersubunit interaction. We identify an invariant series of six
cysteine and histidine residues in the CTD of G2 that is essential for
incorporation of SSP in the GP-C complex. Moreover, we show that a CTD peptide
fragment containing His-447, His-449, and Cys-455 specifically binds Zn(2+) at
subnanomolar concentrations. Together, these results suggest a zinc finger-like
domain structure in the CTD of G2. We propose that the remaining residues in the 
series (His-459, Cys-467, and Cys-469) form an intersubunit zinc-binding center
that incorporates Cys-57 of SSP. This unusual motif may act to retain SSP in the 
GP-C complex and position the ectodomain loop of SSP for its role in modulating
membrane fusion activity. The unique tripartite organization of GP-C could
provide novel molecular targets for therapeutic intervention in arenaviral
disease.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01785-07 
PMCID: PMC2168868
PMID: 17928348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

