
1. J Pediatr (Rio J). 2007 Sep-Oct;83(5):422-8.

Surveillance of eight respiratory viruses in clinical samples of pediatric
patients in southeast Brazil.

Thomazelli LM(1), Vieira S, Leal AL, Sousa TS, Oliveira DB, Golono MA, Gillio AE,
Stwien KE, Erdman DD, Durigon EL.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade de São Paulo (USP), Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, São Paulo, 
SP, Brazil. lucmt@usp.br

Comment in
    J Pediatr (Rio J). 2007 Sep-Oct;83(5):391-4.
    J Pediatr (Rio J). 2008 Jan-Feb;84(1):95; author reply 95-6.

OBJECTIVE: Detection of the eight most common respiratory viruses: human
respiratory syncytial virus (HRSV), influenza virus A and B (IA and IB),
parainfluenza viruses 1, 2 and 3 (HPIV1, 2 and 3), adenovirus (Ad) and human
metapneumovirus (HMPV), in order to establish the etiology of acute respiratory
infections (ARIs) and the epidemiology of these viruses in young children seen at
Hospital Universitário, Universidade de São Paulo, in São Paulo, Brazil, during
2003.
METHODS: The epidemiological surveillance was conducted in all children younger
than 5 years hospitalized at the Hospital for lower respiratory tract infections 
(LRTI) from January 1, 2003 to December 30, 2003. Nasal and throat samples were
scanned for respiratory viruses by polymerase chain reaction and detected by the 
GeneScan assay.
RESULTS: Of 336 samples collected from 336 patients, 187 (55.6%) were positive
for at least one of the respiratory viruses studied. Of all the children, HRSV
was identified in 24.1%, HMPV in 17.8%, HPIV3 in 8.3%, Ad in 6.8%, IA in 5%,
HPIV1 in 0.6%, but no virus could be detected in 44.1%. Dual virus infections
were detected in 7.1% of all samples (12.8% of positive samples). HPIV2 and IB
were not detected in the present study.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms that children younger than 5 years and
particularly younger than 1 year have a high hospitalization rate due to HRSV,
HMPV, HPIV, influenza and adenovirus. We were able to determine the etiology and 
epidemiology of most ARIs and trace the seasonal profile of the commonest
respiratory viruses among young children.

DOI: 10.2223/JPED.1694 
PMID: 17940688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

