
1. Blood. 2008 Feb 1;111(3):1387-95. Epub 2007 Nov 13.

Multicentric Castleman disease is associated with polyfunctional effector memory 
HHV-8-specific CD8+ T cells.

Guihot A(1), Oksenhendler E, Galicier L, Marcelin AG, Papagno L, Bedin AS,
Agbalika F, Dupin N, Cadranel J, Autran B, Carcelain G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie Cellulaire, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale, Université Pierre et Marie Curie Paris 6, Paris, France.

Multicentric Castleman disease (MCD) is a devastating human herpesvirus 8
(HHV-8)-related lymphoproliferative disorder that occurs in immunocompromised
persons. To determine the role of immune responses in MCD, we studied the
frequency, antigenic repertoire, differentiation, and functional profile of
HHV-8-specific CD8(+) T cells in MCD patients and in human immunodeficiency
virus-coinfected asymptomatic HHV-8 carriers (AC). Screening CD8(+) T-cell
responses with ELISpot interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) assays using 56 peptides on 6
latent and lytic HHV-8 proteins showed that MCD and AC patients had responses of 
similar magnitude and antigenic repertoire and identified a new 10-mer human
leukocyte antigen B7 CD8 epitope in K15. Intracellular IFN-gamma staining showed 
significantly more CD45RA(-)CCR7(-)CD27(-) CD8(+)IFN-gamma(+) cells (late
phenotype) and significantly fewer CCR7(-)CD27(+)CD45RA(-) cells (early and
intermediate phenotype) in MCD than in AC patients. This phenotypic shift was not
found for Epstein-Barr virus-specific CD8(+) T cells tested as controls. HHV-8
viral loads were negatively correlated with early and intermediate effector
memory cells. HHV-8-specific T cells were polyfunctional (secretion of IFN-gamma,
tumor necrosis factor-alpha, macrophage inflammatory protein-1beta, and/or
CD107a) in both MCD and AC patients. In conclusion, MCD is not associated with a 
lack of HHV-8-specific CD8(+) T cells or limitation of their functional profile. 
Their differentiation increases with HHV-8 viral load. These results offer new
insight into the pathophysiology of MCD.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2007-03-080648 
PMID: 18000163  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

