
1. Anal Biochem. 2008 Feb 1;373(1):1-8. Epub 2007 Nov 4.

A time-resolved, internally quenched fluorescence assay to characterize
inhibition of hepatitis C virus nonstructural protein 3-4A protease at low enzyme
concentrations.

Mao SS(1), DiMuzio J, McHale C, Burlein C, Olsen D, Carroll SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Antiviral Research, Merck Research Laboratories, WP 26A-3000,
West Point, PA 19486, USA.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) nonstructural protein 3 (NS3) with its cofactor NS4A 
is a pivotal enzyme for the replication of HCV. Inhibition of NS3-4A protease
activity has been validated as an antiviral target in clinical studies of
inhibitors of the enzyme. We have developed a sensitive time-resolved
fluorescence (TRF) assay capable of detecting very low NS3-4A concentrations. A
depsipeptide substrate is used that contains a europium-cryptate moiety and an
efficient quenching group, QSY-7. The TRF assay is at least 30-fold more
sensitive than a fluorescence energy transfer (FRET) assay and allows evaluation 
of NS3 protease inhibitors in reactions catalyzed by low enzyme concentrations
(30 pM). Use of low enzyme concentrations allows for accurate measurement of
inhibition by compounds with subnanomolar inhibition constants. The inhibitory
potency of the potent protease inhibitor, BILN-2061, is significantly greater
than previously reported. The ability to accurately determine inhibitory potency 
in reactions with low picomolar concentrations of NS3-4A is crucially important
to allow valid comparisons between potent inhibitors. Studies of the interaction 
of NS3 with its NS4A cofactor at low enzyme concentration also reveal that the
protease activity is salt dependent. This salt dependence of the enzyme activity 
is not present when high enzyme concentrations are used in the FRET assay.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2007.10.041 
PMID: 18022380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

