
1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008 Mar 1;227(2):196-206. Epub 2007 Nov 1.

Ligand-dependent interactions of the Ah receptor with coactivators in a mammalian
two-hybrid assay.

Zhang S(1), Rowlands C, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843, USA.

2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is a high affinity ligand for the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). In this study, we investigated structure-dependent
differences in activation of the AhR by a series of halogenated aromatic
hydrocarbons. TCDD, 1,2,3,7,8-pentachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (PeCDD),
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran (TCDF), 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran
(PeCDF), and 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB126) induced CYP1A1-dependent
activities in HEK293 human embryonic kidney, Panc1 pancreatic cancer, and
Hepa1c1c7 mouse hepatoma cell lines. There was a structure-dependent difference
in the efficacy of TCDF and PCB126 in HEK293 and Panc1 cells since induced CYP1A1
mRNA levels were lower than observed for the other congeners. A mammalian
two-hybrid assay in cells transfected with GAL4-coactivator and AhR-VP16 chimeras
was used to investigate structure-dependent interactions of these chimeras in
Panc1, HEK293, and Hepa1c1c7 cells. The reporter construct pGAL4-luc contains
five tandem GAL4 response elements linked to the luciferase gene and the
GAL4-coactivator chimeras express several coactivators including steroid receptor
coactivator 1 (SRC-1), SRC-2 and SRC-3, the mediator coactivator TRAP220,
coactivator associated arginine methyl transferase 1 (CARM-1), and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 (PGC-1). Results of the
mammalian two-hybrid studies clearly demonstrate that activation of pGAL4-luc in 
cells transfected with VP-AhR and GAL4-coactivator chimeras is dependent on the
structure of the HAH congener, cell context, and coactivator, suggesting that the
prototypical HAH congeners used in this study exhibit selective AhR modulator
activity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2007.10.019 
PMCID: PMC2288743
PMID: 18048071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

