
1. Mol Microbiol. 2008 Mar;67(5):1094-107. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06109.x.
Epub 2008 Jan 22.

Efficient point mutagenesis in mycobacteria using single-stranded DNA
recombineering: characterization of antimycobacterial drug targets.

van Kessel JC(1), Hatfull GF.

Author information: 
(1)Pittsburgh Bacteriophage Institute and Department of Biological Sciences, 376 
Crawford Hall, 4249 Fifth Ave, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260,
USA.

Construction of genetically isogenic strains of mycobacteria is complicated by
poor recombination rates and the lack of generalized transducing phages for
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. We report here a powerful method for introducing
single point mutations into mycobacterial genomes using oligonucleotide-derived
single-stranded DNA recombineering and mycobacteriophage-encoded proteins. Phage 
Che9c gp61-mediated recombination is sufficiently efficient that single base
changes can be introduced without requirement for direct selection, with isogenic
mutant strains identified simply by PCR. Efficient recombination requires only
short (50 nucleotide) oligonucleotides, but there is an unusually strong strand
bias and an oligonucleotide targeting lagging strand DNA synthesis can recombine 
more than 10,000-fold efficiently than its complementary oligonucleotide. This
ssDNA recombineering provides a simple assay for comparing the activities of
related phage recombinases, and we find that both Escherichia coli RecET and
phage lambda Red recombination proteins function inefficiently in mycobacteria,
illustrating the utility of developing recombineering in new bacterial systems
using host-specific bacteriophage recombinases. ssDNA mycobacterial
recombineering provides a simple approach to characterizing antimycobacterial
drug targets, and we have constructed and characterized single point mutations
that confer resistance to isoniazid, rifampicin, ofloxacin and streptomycin.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06109.x 
PMID: 18221264  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

