
1. Protein Pept Lett. 2008;15(2):119-30.

Large-scale purification of human BACE expressed in mammalian cells and removal
of the prosegment with HIV-1 protease to improve crystal diffraction.

Emmons TL(1), Shuck ME, Babcock MS, Holloway JS, Leone JW, Durbin JD, Paddock DJ,
Prince DB, Heinrikson RL, Fischer HD, Bienkowski MJ, Benson TE, Tomasselli AG.

Author information: 
(1)Global Research and Development, St. Louis Laboratories, Pfizer Inc.,
Chesterfield, MO 63017, USA.

BACE, or beta-secretase, is an attractive target in the treatment of Alzheimer's 
Disease because of its involvement in the generation of amyloid beta peptides.
BACE is a type I transmembrane aspartyl protease composed of pre-, pro-,
catalytic, transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains. For the present study, the
coding sequence was truncated just before the transmembrane domain and the
resulting construct was extended with the C-terminal addition of a (His)(6) and
expressed in several mammalian host cells. The enzyme expressed in CHO cells had 
the best crystallographic behavior and was purified in large quantities in a
three step procedure. The purified BACE was comprised of two forms, namely the
full length proBACE construct beginning with Thr(1), and a derivative missing the
first 24 amino acids beginning with E(25). These BACE precursors co-crystallized 
in the presence of inhibitors yielding structures to 3.2 A resolution. HIV-1
protease treatment of this mixture resulted in complete cleavage of the
F(39)-V(40) bond, leaving the V(40)EM...ES(432) (His)(6) derivative that was
purified yielding an enzyme that was no more active than untreated BACE but
co-crystallized with inhibitors producing well shaped, bipyramidal co-crystals
diffracting to 2.6 A resolution.

DOI: 10.2174/092986608783489599 
PMID: 18289104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

