
1. Cancer. 2008 Oct 1;113(7 Suppl):1980-93. doi: 10.1002/cncr.23704.

Human papillomavirus infection and the primary and secondary prevention of
cervical cancer.

Lowy DR(1), Solomon D, Hildesheim A, Schiller JT, Schiffman M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
lowyd@mail.nih.gov

A wealth of evidence has led to the conclusion that virtually all cases of
cervical cancer are attributable to persistent infection by a subset of human
papillomavirus (HPV) types, especially HPV type 16 (HPV-16) and HPV-18. These HPV
types also cause a proportion of other cancers, including vulvar, vaginal, anal, 
penile, and oropharyngeal cancers. Although cervical cancer screening, primarily 
with the Papanicolaou (Pap) smear, has reduced the incidence of this cancer in
industrialized countries, cervical cancer remains the second most common cause of
death from cancer in women worldwide, because the developing world has lacked the
resources for widespread, high-quality screening. In addition to advances in Pap 
smear technology, the identification of HPV as the etiologic agent has produced 2
recent advances that may have a major impact on approaches to reduce the
incidence of this disease. The first is the development of a preventive vaccine, 
the current versions of which appear to prevent close to 100% of persistent
genital infection and disease caused by HPV-16 and HPV-18; future
second-generation vaccines may be able to protect against oncogenic infections by
a broader array of HPV types. The second is the incorporation of HPV testing into
screening programs. In women aged >30 years, HPV testing can identify high-grade 
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia earlier than Pap smears with acceptable rates 
of specificity. These results, together with the high sensitivity of HPV testing,
suggest that such testing could permit increased intervals for screening. An
inexpensive HPV test in development, if successful, may be incorporated as part
of an economically viable 'screen-and-treat' approach in the developing world.
The manner in which vaccination and screening programs are integrated will need
to be considered carefully so that they are efficient in reducing the overall
incidence of cervical cancer.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.23704 
PMCID: PMC6263938
PMID: 18798536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

