
1. J Virol. 2009 Feb;83(4):1969-80. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02041-08. Epub 2008 Dec 3.

Deletion of nonstructural proteins NS1 and NS2 from pneumonia virus of mice
attenuates viral replication and reduces pulmonary cytokine expression and
disease.

Buchholz UJ(1), Ward JM, Lamirande EW, Heinze B, Krempl CD, Collins PL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. ubuchholz@niaid.nih.gov

Pneumonia virus of mice (PVM) strain 15 causes fatal pneumonia in mice and
provides a convenient model for human respiratory syncytial virus pathogenesis
and immunobiology. We prepared PVM mutants lacking the genes for nonstructural
proteins NS1 and/or NS2. In Vero cells, which lack type I interferon (IFN),
deletion of these proteins had no effect on the efficiency of virus growth. In
IFN-competent mouse embryo fibroblasts, wild-type (wt) PVM and the DeltaNS1 virus
grew efficiently and strongly inhibited the IFN response, whereas virus lacking
NS2 was highly attenuated and induced high levels of IFN and IFN-inducible genes.
In BALB/c mice, intranasal infection with wt PVM caused overt disease that began 
on day 6 and was lethal by day 9 postinoculation. In comparison, DeltaNS1 induced
transient, reduced disease, and DeltaNS2 and DeltaNS12 caused no disease. Thus,
NS1 and NS2 are virulence factors, with NS2 being a major antagonist of the type 
I IFN system. The pulmonary titers of wt PVM and DeltaNS1 were high on day 3 and 
increased further by day 6; in addition, expression of IFN and representative
proinflammatory cytokines/chemokines and T lymphocyte-related cytokines was
undetectable on day 3 but increased dramatically by day 6 coincident with the
onset of disease. The titers of DeltaNS2 and DeltaNS12 were somewhat lower on day
3 and decreased further by day 6; in addition, these viruses induced a more
circumscribed set of cytokines/chemokines (IFN, interleukin-6 [IL-6], and CXCL10)
that were detected on day 3 and had largely subsided by day 6. Lung
immunohistology revealed abundant PVM-positive pneumocytes and bronchial and
bronchiolar epithelial cells in wt PVM- and DeltaNS1-infected mice on day 6
compared to few PVM-positive foci with DeltaNS2 and DeltaNS12. These results
indicate that severe PVM disease is associated with high, poorly controlled virus
replication driving the expression of high levels of pulmonary IFN and a broad
array of cytokines/chemokines. In contrast, in the absence of NS2, there was an
early, transient innate response involving moderate levels of IFN, IL-6, and
CXCL10 that restricted virus replication and prevented disease.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02041-08 
PMCID: PMC2643780
PMID: 19052095  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

