
1. Mol Plant Pathol. 2009 Jan;10(1):51-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1364-3703.2008.00507.x.

Nuclear magnetic resonance characterization of metabolite disorder in orange
trees caused by citrus sudden death disease.

Prestes RA(1), Colnago LA, Forato LA, Carrilho E, Bassanezi RB, Wulff NA.

Author information: 
(1)Embrapa Instrumentação Agropecuária, Rua XV de Novembro, 1452, CEP
13560-970-São Carlos, São Paulo, Brazil.

Citrus sudden death (CSD) is a new disease of sweet orange and mandarin trees
grafted on Rangpur lime and Citrus volkameriana rootstocks. It was first seen in 
Brazil in 1999, and has since been detected in more than four million trees. The 
CSD causal agent is unknown and the current hypothesis involves a virus similar
to Citrus tristeza virus or a new virus named Citrus sudden death-associated
virus. CSD symptoms include generalized foliar discoloration, defoliation and
root death, and, in most cases, it can cause tree death. One of the unique
characteristics of CSD disease is the presence of a yellow stain in the rootstock
bark near the bud union. This region also undergoes profound anatomical changes. 
In this study, we analyse the metabolic disorder caused by CSD in the bark of
sweet orange grafted on Rangpur lime by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy and imaging. The imaging results show the presence of a large amount
of non-functional phloem in the rootstock bark of affected plants. The
spectroscopic analysis shows a high content of triacylglyceride and sucrose,
which may be related to phloem blockage close to the bud union. We also propose
that, without knowing the causal CSD agent, the determination of oil content in
rootstock bark by low-resolution NMR can be used as a complementary method for
CSD diagnosis, screening about 300 samples per hour.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1364-3703.2008.00507.x 
PMCID: PMC6640341
PMID: 19161352  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

