
1. G Ital Nefrol. 2009 Jan-Feb;26(1):90-3.

[A case of Kaposi's sarcoma in the rapamycin era].

[Article in Italian]

Gemelli A(1), Paciolla A, Oliosi F, Basso A, Moscardin R, Tineo MC, Romano P,
Alaibac M, Aversa S, Furian L, D'Angelo A, Bonfante L.

Author information: 
(1)Clinica Nefrologica, Dipartimento di Scienza Mediche e Chirurgiche,
Universita' degli Studi di Padova, Padova, Italy.

We report a case of Kaposi's sarcoma in a patient who received a double kidney
transplant in 2005. Immunosuppression was induced with rapamycin and
antilymphocyte serum while maintenance therapy consisted of rapamycin,
corticosteroids and mycophenolic acid. The patient developed delayed graft
function but no rejection. In November 2006 and March 2007 two graft biopsies
were taken because of a significant rise in serum creatinine; they revealed
chronic allograft nephropathy and polyomavirus infection. Meanwhile a skin biopsy
of the leg was performed to determine the nature of a discolored lesion. The
morphohistological diagnosis was Kaposi's sarcoma. For this reason rapamycin was 
stopped and steroid treatment gradually reduced. Specific therapy with
doxorubicin was started; radiological and endoscopic examination excluded
disseminated disease while serological tests were positive for antibodies to
HHV-8, a virus known to cause Kaposi's sarcoma. Unfortunately, withdrawal of
antirejection therapy caused loss of the graft, so the patient had to start
dialysis. In this report we stress the possible development of malignancy in
transplanted patients who are given rapamycin. Rapamycin is known to be an
antirejection drug and to have antineoplastic activity; the major risk of
malignancy is probably related to immunosuppression rather than the type of drugs
used to obtain it.


PMID: 19255968  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

