
1. Curr Opin HIV AIDS. 2008 Sep;3(5):548-53. doi: 10.1097/COH.0b013e32830ab9dd.

Microbicides: chemistry, structure, and strategy.

Zydowsky TM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Population Council, HIV/AIDS Program, New York, New York 10065-6307, USA.
tzydowsky@popcouncil.org

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To highlight promising areas of research and preview future
generations of microbicides, this review will focus on reports that described new
cellular or viral targets, drug substances, or strategies that are specifically
intended for topical microbicides. Those reports that dealt with the design,
discovery, and synthesis of anti-HIV agents for use in oral or parenteral
formulations, while important for the microbicide field, are beyond the scope of 
this review.
RECENT FINDINGS: Drug substances intended for topical microbicides are becoming
increasingly target specific and, structurally, more complex. New production
methods might reduce the cost of microbicides that contain these complex
molecules. Genetically engineered probiotic vaginal bacteria express an even
wider range of antiviral compounds, perhaps resulting in uninterrupted, coitally 
independent protection. Combination microbicides that contain two or more drug
substances frequently act synergistically. The discovery of new cellular targets 
such as syndecan-3 might lead to more effective microbicides.
SUMMARY: Future generations of microbicides will likely contain one or more
complex or highly specific drug substances, resulting in safer and more effective
products. Since compliance issues continue to confound HIV and herpes simplex
virus trials, efforts to bring practical, coitally independent microbicides to
developing countries will become a top priority.

DOI: 10.1097/COH.0b013e32830ab9dd 
PMID: 19373020 

