
1. Hepatogastroenterology. 2009 Jan-Feb;56(89):205-7.

Intra portal donor specific antigen transfusion might prevent re-infection of
hepatitis C virus after living related liver transplantation in hepatitis C
hepatic cirrhosis.

Sato Y(1), Oya H, Yamamoto S, Kobayashi T, Watanabe T, Kokai H, Yamagiwa S,
Hatakeyama K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Digestive and General Surgery, Niigata University Graduate School 
of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Niigata, Japan.
kanishok@med.niigata-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Re-infection of hepatitis C virus (HCV) is very important for
prognosis after liver transplantation of HCV cirrhosis. In the mechanism of
re-infection of HCV, the peri-transplant immunity including the immunosuppression
must be very important for getting the solution of prevention of its infection.
(please rewrite this phrase). In this study, we investigated the influences of
intraportal DST for HCV-reinfection after living related liver transplantation
(LRLT).
METHODOLOGY: The 12 patients, who underwent LRLT for the end-stage HCV liver
cirrhosis from 1999 to 2007 in our hospital, were estimated about the influence
of intraportal DST for re-infection of HCV. The nine persons of all patients had 
received the intraportal DST after LRLT.
RESULTS: These nine patients could be steroid withdrawn within 2 months. The
seven persons of all patients that received intraportal DST were treated with
perioperative IFN therapy. Two patients had preoperative interferon-beta therapy.
The one patient could obtain SVR. The other patient dropped out for the
complications. The four patients had interferon-beta therapy in the acute
hepatitis phase. Two patients had it in the chronic hepatitis phase. The one
patient mentioned before, had preoperative IFN-beta and dropped out. HCV of the
one patients without interferon therapy disappeared spontaneously from 3 months. 
The HCV disappeared in the 6 patients (66.7%) of all nine patients with
intraportal DST after LRLT. The five of six patients were SVR. The patient who
got preoperative IFN-beta revealed the macrochimerism of donor type CD56+T cell
in the graft liver one month after LRLT. The immunological analysis about the
patient, who got a spontaneous disappearance of HCV two months after LRLT,
demonstrated that CD56+T cells strongly developed the both FasL and TRAIL
expressions.
CONCLUSION: In this study, the clinical and immunological findings suggested that
intraportal DST might affect for the clearance of HCV by the both host immunity
and IFN-ribavirin therapy.


PMID: 19453058  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

