
1. RNA. 2009 Sep;15(9):1740-52. doi: 10.1261/rna.1680809. Epub 2009 Jul 15.

A long-range RNA-RNA interaction between the 5' and 3' ends of the HCV genome.

Romero-López C(1), Berzal-Herranz A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular, Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina
López-Neyra, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Armilla, 18100
Granada, Spain.

The RNA genome of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) contains multiple conserved
structural cis domains that direct protein synthesis, replication, and
infectivity. The untranslatable regions (UTRs) play essential roles in the HCV
cycle. Uncapped viral RNAs are translated via an internal ribosome entry site
(IRES) located at the 5' UTR, which acts as a scaffold for recruiting multiple
protein factors. Replication of the viral genome is initiated at the 3' UTR.
Bioinformatics methods have identified other structural RNA elements thought to
be involved in the HCV cycle. The 5BSL3.2 motif, which is embedded in a cruciform
structure at the 3' end of the NS5B coding sequence, contributes to the
three-dimensional folding of the entire 3' end of the genome. It is essential in 
the initiation of replication. This paper reports the identification of a novel, 
strand-specific, long-range RNA-RNA interaction between the 5' and 3' ends of the
genome, which involves 5BSL3.2 and IRES motifs. Mutants harboring substitutions
in the apical loop of domain IIId or in the internal loop of 5BSL3.2 disrupt the 
complex, indicating these regions are essential in initiating the kissing
interaction. No complex was formed when the UTRs of the related foot and mouth
disease virus were used in binding assays, suggesting this interaction is
specific for HCV sequences. The present data firmly suggest the existence of a
higher-order structure that may mediate a protein-independent circularization of 
the HCV genome. The 5'-3' end bridge may have a role in viral translation
modulation and in the switch from protein synthesis to RNA replication.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.1680809 
PMCID: PMC2743058
PMID: 19605533  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

