
1. Avian Dis. 2009 Jun;53(2):321-6.

The diagnosis of very virulent infectious bursal disease in California pullets.

Stoute ST(1), Jackwood DJ, Sommer-Wagner SE, Cooper GL, Anderson ML, Woolcock PR,
Bickford AA, Sentíes-Cué CG, Charlton BR.

Author information: 
(1)California Animal Health and Food Safety Laboratory System, Turlock Branch,
University of California, Davis, 1550 N. Soderquist Road, Turlock, CA 95381, USA.
sstoute@cahfs.ucdavis.edu

This report documents the occurrence of a very virulent infectious bursal disease
virus (vvIBDV) in Northern California commercial brown pullets. Diagnosis was
made from multiple accessions from two neighboring and epidemiologically related 
ranches submitted to the California Animal Health and Food Safety (CAHFS)
laboratory. Pullets, 11 and 14 wk of age from ranch A (rA) and ranch B (rB)
respectively, were submitted from infectious bursal disease virus vaccinated
flocks experiencing a drastic increase in mortality. The December 2008 outbreak
resulted in 26% and 34% mortality on rA and rB respectively. Gross and histologic
lesions characteristic of acute vvIBDV were observed. Gross lesions included
edematous bursas, hemorrhages at the junction of the proventriculus and gizzard
as well as hemorrhages on skeletal muscles. Microscopic lesions included severe
lymphoid necrosis and inflammation in edematous bursas, lymphoid necrosis in
thymus, spleen, Peyer's patches and cecal tonsils. Diagnosis of vvIBDV was
confirmed by molecular characterization of the IBDV from bursas as well as viral 
pathogenicity in specific-pathogen-free birds. RT-PCR and nucleotide sequencing
of the hypervariable region of the VP2 (vVP2) gene segment of the IBDV genome was
performed on rA, rB and embryo passaged rA virions.The amino acids compatible
with vvIBDV isolates: 222(Ala), 242(Ile), 256(Ile), 294(Ile) and 299(Ser) were
reported from both ranches. In addition, nucleotide sequencing of a fragment of
the VP1 gene demonstrated the viruses have the segment B genotype associated with
highly pathogenic vvIBDV. Inocula of 10(5.5) 50% egg infective dose of vvIBDV
virus from rA and rB were introduced orally into two groups (g1 and g2
respectively) of 4 wk 2-day-old SPF leghorns. At 4 days postinoculation, there
was 100% (22/22) morbidity in g1 and g2; 91% (20/22) mortality in g1; 100%
(22/22) mortality for g2; 0% (0/20) morbidity and 0% (0/ 20) mortality was
reported in the control group. This is the first occurrence of vvIBDV reported
from birds in the United States.

DOI: 10.1637/8684-030909-Case.1 
PMID: 19630244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

