
1. J Virol Methods. 2009 Dec;162(1-2):88-90. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2009.07.020.
Epub 2009 Aug 3.

Evaluation of the Cepheid respiratory syncytial virus and influenza virus A/B
real-time PCR analyte specific reagent.

Sails AD(1), Saunders D, Airs S, Roberts D, Eltringham G, Magee JG.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency Newcastle Laboratory, Institute of Pathology,
Newcastle General Hospital, Westgate Road, Newcastle upon Tyne NE4 6BE, UK.
andrew.sails@hpa.org.uk

Two rapid real-time RT-PCR assays, specific for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
and influenza A and B, were evaluated for the detection of these viruses in
clinical respiratory samples. The RSV assay was applied to 100 samples and the
Influenza A and B assay applied to 96 samples all of which had been tested
previously by an "in-house" multiplex real-time PCR assay. Forty-three samples
were negative for RSV by both methods and 56 samples were positive by both
methods. One sample was negative by the new RSV assay although it was positive
for RSV A by the "in-house" test. Thirty-nine samples were negative for influenza
virus by both methods and 55 samples were positive by both assays. Two samples
were negative by the new influenza assay however they were positive by the
"in-house" influenza assay. The new assays did not cross react with samples
containing other viruses including parainfluenza 1, 2, and 4; human
metapnuemovirus; coronavirus 229E, NL63, OC43; rhinovirus; adenovirus; bocavirus 
and had a specificity of 100% and a sensitivity of 98.2% for RSV and 96.5% for
influenza respectively. The results of this study demonstrate that the new assays
are specific and sensitive for the detection of RSV and influenza viruses in
clinical samples.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2009.07.020 
PMCID: PMC7119759
PMID: 19651159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

