
1. Biosystems. 2010 Jan;99(1):70-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2009.09.001. Epub 2009
Sep 12.

Reproducibility and usability of chronic virus infection model using agent-based 
simulation; comparing with a mathematical model.

Itakura J(1), Kurosaki M, Itakura Y, Maekawa S, Asahina Y, Izumi N, Enomoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Musashino Red Cross Hospital,
1-26-1 Kyonan-cho, Musashino-shi, Tokyo 180-8610, Japan.
jitakura@musashino.jrc.or.jp

We created agent-based models that visually simulate conditions of chronic viral 
infections using two software. The results from two models were consistent, when 
they have same parameters during the actual simulation. The simulation results
comprise a transient phase and an equilibrium phase, and unlike the mathematical 
model, virus count transit smoothly to the equilibrium phase without overshooting
which correlates with actual biology in vivo of certain viruses. We investigated 
the effects caused by varying all the parameters included in concept; increasing 
virus lifespan, uninfected cell lifespan, uninfected cell regeneration rate,
virus production count from infected cells, and infection rate had positive
effects to the virus count during the equilibrium period, whereas increasing the 
latent period, the lifespan-shortening ratio for infected cells, and the cell
cycle speed had negative effects. Virus count at the start did not influence the 
equilibrium conditions, but it influenced the infection development rate. The
space size had no intrinsic effect on the equilibrium period, but virus count
maximized when the virus moving speed was twice the space size. These agent-based
simulation models reproducibly provide a visual representation of the disease,
and enable a simulation that encompasses parameters those are difficult to
account for in a mathematical model.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2009.09.001 
PMID: 19751799  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

