
1. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2009 Dec;16(12):1738-49. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00280-09. Epub
2009 Oct 14.

Natural killer cell dysfunction during acute infection with foot-and-mouth
disease virus.

Toka FN(1), Nfon C, Dawson H, Golde WT.

Author information: 
(1)Plum Island Animal Disease Center, Agricultural Research Service, USDA,
Greenport, New York 11944, USA.

Natural killer (NK) cells provide one of the initial barriers of cellular host
defense against pathogens, in particular intracellular pathogens. The role of
these cells in foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) infection is unknown.
Previously, we characterized the phenotype and function of NK cells from swine
(F. N. Toka et al., J. Interferon Cytokine Res. 29:179-192, 2009). In the present
study, we report the analysis of NK cells isolated from animals infected with
FMDV and tested ex vivo and show that NK-dependent cytotoxic activity against
tumor cells as targets was impaired. More relevantly to this infection, the
killing of target cells infected with FMDV also was inhibited. Further, the
proportion of NK cells capable of producing gamma interferon and storing perforin
was reduced. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells isolated from infected animals
are not productively infected, but virus exposure in vivo resulted in the
significant induction of NKp30 and Toll-like receptor 3 expression and the
moderate activation of SOCS3 and interleukin-15 receptor mRNA. However, there was
little alteration of mRNA expression from a number of other receptor genes in
these cells, including SH2D1B and NKG2A (inhibitory) as well as NKp80, NKp46, and
NKG2D (activating). These data indicate that this virus infection influences the 
ability of NK cells to recognize and eliminate FMDV-infected cells. In addition, 
a reduction in NK cell cytotoxicity coincided with the increase in virus titers, 
indicating the virus blocking of NK cell-associated innate responses, albeit
temporarily. These effects likely culminate in brief but effective viral immune
evasion, allowing the virus to replicate and disseminate within the host.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00280-09 
PMCID: PMC2786395
PMID: 19828769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

