
1. Hum Gene Ther. 2010 May;21(5):543-53. doi: 10.1089/hum.2009.167.

Fate of recombinant adeno-associated viral vector genomes during DNA
double-strand break-induced gene targeting in human cells.

Gellhaus K(1), Cornu TI, Heilbronn R, Cathomen T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Charit√© Medical School, Campus Benjamin Franklin,
D-12203 Berlin, Germany.

Recombinant vectors based on adeno-associated virus (rAAV) are promising tools to
specifically alter complex genomes through homologous recombination (HR)-based
gene targeting. In a therapeutic setting, an AAV donor vector will recombine with
a mutant target locus in order to correct the mutation directly in the genome.
The low frequency of HR in mammalian cells can be significantly improved by
insertion of a DNA double-strand break (DSB) into the target locus through
expression of a site-specific endonuclease. Here, we have scrutinized the fate of
rAAV vector genomes during DSB-induced gene targeting and assessed the targeting 
frequency and the targeting ratio as a risk-benefit indicator. In various human
cell lines carrying a mutated enhanced green fluorescent protein locus with a
recognition site for the homing endonuclease I-SceI, rAAV-transduced cells were
assayed by flow cytometry and by quantitative allele-specific polymerase chain
reaction to assess HR and unspecific integration events. Under optimal conditions
gene-targeting frequencies of 65% and targeting ratios of 2:1 were achieved, that
is, more gene correction than unspecific integrations. The gene-targeting
frequency was highly dependent on rAAV vector design, the cell line, and on the
presence of a DSB in the target locus. Although expression of I-SceI led to a
significant increase in gene targeting, it did not augment unspecific
integration. In conclusion, our results reveal the side effects associated with
rAAV-mediated gene targeting, but also its great potential for precise genome
engineering in a therapeutic context.

DOI: 10.1089/hum.2009.167 
PMID: 20021219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

