
1. J Med Virol. 2010 Feb;82(2):197-205. doi: 10.1002/jmv.21625.

Sustained low-dose growth hormone therapy optimizes bioactive insulin-like growth
factor-I level and may enhance CD4 T-cell number in HIV infection.

Andersen O(1), Hansen BR, Troensegaard W, Flyvbjerg A, Madsbad S, Ã˜rskov H,
Nielsen JO, Iversen J, Haugaard SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital, Hvidovre,
Hvidovre, Copenhagen, Denmark. ove.andersen.privat@gmail.com

High-dose recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) (2-6 mg/day) regimes may
facilitate T-cell restoration in patients infected with human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) on highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). However, high-dose
rhGH regimens increase insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) to
supra-physiological levels associated with severe side effects. The present study
investigated whether lower doses of rhGH may improve T-cell restoration in
patients infected with HIV following an expedient response of total and bioactive
(i.e., free) IGF-I. A previous 16-week pilot-study included six HIV-infected
patients on stable HAART to receive rhGH 0.7 mg/day, which increased total
(+117%, P < 0.01) and free (+155%, P < 0.01) IGF-I levels. The study was extended
to examine whether continuous use of low-dose rhGH (0.7 mg/day until week 60; 0.4
mg/day from week 60 to week 140) would maintain expedient IGF-I levels and
improve CD4 T-cell response. Total and free IGF-I increased at week 36 (+97%, P <
0.01 and +125%, P < 0.01, respectively) and week 60 (+77%, P = 0.01 and +125%, P 
< 0.01) compared to baseline levels (161 +/- 15 and 0.75 +/- 0.11 microg/L). CD4 
T-cell number increased at week 36 (+15%, P < 0.05) and week 60 (+31%, P = 0.01) 
compared to baseline levels (456 +/- 55 cells/microL). Following rhGH dose
reduction, total IGF-I and CD4 T-cell number remained increased at week 88 (+44%,
P = 0.01 and +33%, P < 0.01) and week 140 (+46%, P = 0.07 and +36%, P = 0.02)
compared to baseline levels. These data support the notion that low-dose rhGH
regimens may increase expediently total and bioactive IGF-I and improve T-cell
restoration in patients infected with HIV on HAART.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.21625 
PMID: 20029798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

