
1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2010 May-Jun;88(4):461-7. doi: 10.1038/icb.2009.110. Epub 2010
Jan 12.

Antiviral protection following immunization correlates with humoral but not
cell-mediated immunity.

Panchanathan V(1), Chaudhri G, Karupiah G.

Author information: 
(1)Infection and Immunity Group, Program in Immunology, John Curtin School of
Medical Research, Australian National University, Australian Capital Territory,
Australia.

Smallpox was a deadly disease when it was rife yet despite its eradication more
than 30 years ago, the possibility of accidental or intentional release has
driven research in search of better definitions of correlates of protective
immunity. Mousepox, a disease caused by ectromelia virus (ECTV), is arguably one 
of the best surrogate small animal models for smallpox. Correlates of protection 
in mousepox are well defined during primary infection, whereas those in a
secondary infection, which have definite relevance to vaccination strategies, are
less well understood. We previously established that neutralizing antibody (Ab), 
which is generated far more rapidly during a secondary infection compared with a 
primary infection, has a key role during a secondary virus challenge. In this
study, we show that the route of immunization or the use of homologous or
heterologous virus vaccines for immunization does not influence the ability of
mice to control high-dose virulent ECTV challenge or to mount a substantial
secondary neutralizing Ab response. In contrast, the recall cytotoxic T
lymphocyte (CTL) responses generated under these regimes of immunization were
varied and did not correlate with virus control. Furthermore, unlike the recall
Ab response that was generated rapidly, the kinetics of the secondary antiviral
CTL response was no different to a primary infection and peaked only at day 8
post-challenge. This finding further underscores the importance of Ab in
conferring protection during secondary poxvirus infection. This information could
potentially prove useful in the design of safer and more efficacious vaccines
against poxviruses or other diseases using poxvirus vectors.

DOI: 10.1038/icb.2009.110 
PMID: 20066003  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

