
1. Virus Res. 2010 Jul;151(1):60-5. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2010.03.019. Epub 2010
Apr 8.

Challenge and polymorphism analysis of the novel A (H1N1) influenza virus to
normal animals.

Bao L(1), Xu L, Zhan L, Deng W, Zhu H, Gao H, Sun H, Ma C, Lv Q, Li F, Chen H,
Zhang L, Qin C.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Human Diseases Comparative Medicine, Ministry of Health,
Institute of Laboratory Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
(CAMS) & Comparative Medicine Centre, Peking Union Medical Collage (PUMC), Pan
Jia Yuan Nan Li No. 5, Chao Yang District, Beijing 100021, China.

The novel influenza A (H1N1) virus that emerged from April 2009 in Mexico has
spread rapidly to many countries and initiated a human pandemic. It is important 
to determine whether the virus has existed in, or will spread to, normal
household animals, and whether A (H1N1)-like viruses derived from the animal is
able to proliferate in cell lines derived from human. In this current paper,
familiar animals, including pigs, chickens, ducks, cats, dogs, rats, mice, and
Brandt's voles were challenged with the novel influenza A (H1N1) virus, and
genetic variations of the viral genome were analyzed after three passages in the 
susceptible animals. To further determine the virulence of these animals derived 
influenza A (H1N1)-like viruses, viral replication dynamic curves were monitored 
after inoculation in MDCK cells and human A549 cells. Our results indicated that 
pigs, BALB/c mice, and Brandt's voles, but not chickens, ducks, cats, dogs, and
rats, could be infected by the novel influenza A (H1N1) virus. Genome sequence
alignment results showed that there was one genetic variation (G408T) in the HA
gene of Brandt's vole derived virus and another one (C194A) in the NA gene of
BALB/c mice derived virus, and the virulence of these two viruses in MDCK and
A549 cells was significantly lower than the virus originally derived from human
beings.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2010.03.019 
PMID: 20381552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

