
1. Poult Sci. 2010 Jun;89(6):1115-21. doi: 10.3382/ps.2009-00556.

The effects of control measures on the economic burden associated with epidemics 
of avian influenza in Italy.

Sartore S(1), Bonfanti L, Lorenzetto M, Cecchinato M, Marangon S.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie, Viale dell'Universit√†,
10, 35020 Legnaro (PD), Italy. ssartore@izsvenezie.it

In 1999, Italy experienced a devastating epidemic of high-pathogenicity avian
influenza (HPAI) caused by an H7N1 virus subtype. After this epidemic, a
ministerial decree was passed to implement control measures for low-pathogenicity
avian influenza (LPAI) due to H5 and H7 subtypes. We investigated whether these
control measures have decreased the public expenditure associated with epidemics 
of LPAI and HPAI by comparing the direct and consequential losses of the 1999
epidemic to the losses associated with successive epidemics. The estimated total 
economic burden of the epidemics was about euro650 million (euro217 million in
direct losses and euro433 million in consequential losses). The 1999 epidemic
accounted for most of these losses (euro507 million: euro112 million in direct
losses and euro395 million in consequential losses), whereas the total economic
burden for the 5 successive LPAI was euro143 million (euro105 million in direct
losses and euro38 million in consequential losses). These results demonstrate
that the implementation of a coordinated set of disease-control measures, which
included both emergency and prophylactic vaccination, was able to reduce the
overall costs associated with avian influenza epidemics. The results also show
that the application of adequate LPAI control measures may limit the risk of
emergence of an HPAI virus in an area with a high poultry density, allowing the
complete disruption of the poultry market and its huge associated costs to be
avoided.

DOI: 10.3382/ps.2009-00556 
PMID: 20460656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

