
1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2010 Sep 1;18(17):6512-25. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2010.06.101. Epub 
2010 Jul 3.

Discovery of achiral inhibitors of the hepatitis C virus NS3 protease based on
2(1H)-pyrazinones.

Ortqvist P(1), Gising J, Ehrenberg AE, Vema A, Borg A, Karlén A, Larhed M,
Danielson UH, Sandström A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Organic Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Uppsala
University, BMC, Box 574, SE-751 23 Uppsala, Sweden.

Herein, the design, synthesis and inhibitory potency of a series of novel
hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS3 protease inhibitors are presented. These inhibitors
are based on a 2(1H)-pyrazinone P3 scaffold in combination with either a P2
phenylglycine or a glycine, and they were evaluated on the wild type as well as
on two resistant variants of the enzyme, A156T and D168V. Molecular modelling
suggested that the aromatic side-chain of the P2 phenylglycine occupies the same 
space as the substituent in position 6 on the pyrazinone core. The versatile
synthetic route applied for the pyrazinone synthesis made a switch between the
two positions easily feasible, resulting in phenyl- or benzyl substituted
pyrazinones and leaving glycine as the P2 residue. Of several P1-P1' residues
evaluated, an aromatic P1-P1' scaffold was found superior in combination with the
new P3-P2 building block. As a result, an entirely new type of achiral and
rigidified inhibitors was discovered, with the best of the novel inhibitors
having fourfold improved potency compared to the corresponding tripeptide lead.
We consider these achiral inhibitors highly suitable as starting points for
further optimization.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2010.06.101 
PMID: 20673728  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

