
1. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Aug;48(8):571-4.

[Characteristics of severely and critically ill children with 2009 influenza A
(H1N1) virus infection].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu ZW(1), Deng JK, Zheng YJ, He YX, Yang WG, Wei JR, Zhang JS, Li BN, Li XN, Song
P, Yu ZZ, Zhao H, Wang L, Ma YJ, Tang ZZ, Liu XL, Li YZ, Li CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Shenzhen Children's Hospital, Zunyi
Medical College, Shenzhen 518026, China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the clinical characteristics of severely and critically ill
children with 2009 influenza A (H1N1) infection.
METHOD: Clinical data of 150 cases with 2009 influenza A (H1N1) virus infection
confirmed with the use of a real-time polymerase-chain-reaction assay on
nasopharyngeal swab specimens were analyzed.
RESULT: Among 150 severely and critically ill children with 2009 influenza A
(H1N1) virus infection, 103 were male, 47 were female; the median age was 5
years, 81(55%) were 5 years of age or older; 21 (14%) had underlying chronic
diseases. The most common presenting symptoms were fever (95%), cough (89%),
vomiting (23%), wheezing (19%), abdominal pain (16%), lethargy (7%), seizures
(6%), myalgia (6%), and diarrhea (6%). The common laboratory abnormalities were
increased or decreased white blood cells counts (40%), elevated of CRP (33%), LDH
(29%), CK (25%) and AST (19%). Clinical complications included pneumonia (65%),
encephalopathy (12%), myocarditis (5%), encephalitis (1%) and myositis (1%). All 
patients had received antibiotics before admission or on admission; 73% of
patients had received oseltamivir treatment, 23% of patients had received
corticosteroids; 32 (21%) were admitted to an ICU, 13 patients were intubated and
mechanically ventilated. Fourteen patients with dyspnea who were irresponsive to 
the treatment experienced bronchoalveolar lavage with flexible bronchoscopy, and 
the branching bronchial casts were removed in 5 patients. Totally 145 (97%)
patients were discharged, five (3%) died, three previously healthy patients died 
from severe encephalopathy, one patient died from ARDS, one previously healthy
patient died from secondary fungal meningitis.
CONCLUSION: Severely and critically ill children with 2009 influenza A (H1N1)
virus infection may occur mainly in older children without underlying chronic
disease. The clinical spectrum and laboratory abnormality of the patients can
have a wide range. Neurologic complications may be common and severe
encephalopathy can lead to death in previously healthy children. Early use of
bronchoalveolar lavage with flexible bronchoscopy may reduce death associated
with pulmonary complications.


PMID: 21055298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

