
1. Neurochem Int. 2011 Feb;58(2):234-42. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2010.12.009. Epub
2010 Dec 16.

TNF-α and IL-1β mediate Japanese encephalitis virus-induced RANTES gene
expression in astrocytes.

Chen CJ(1), Ou YC, Chang CY, Pan HC, Liao SL, Raung SL, Chen SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Education and Research, Taichung Veterans General Hospital,
Taichung 407, Taiwan. cjchen@vghtc.gov.tw

Infection with Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) causes neuroinfection and
neuroinflammation characterized by profound neuronal destruction/dysfunction,
concomitant microgliosis/astrogliosis, and production of various molecules that
initiate the recruitment of immune cells to the sites of infection. Previously,
we reported that glial cells expressed RANTES (regulated upon activation, normal 
T cell expressed and secreted) with chemotactic activity in response to JEV
infection. In this study, we further demonstrated that JEV-infected microglia had
an additional activity in regulating RANTES production. Both astrocytes and
microglia responded to JEV infection by releasing RANTES through a process likely
related to viral replication. Independent of infectious virus, supernatants of
JEV-infected microglia, but not JEV-infected astrocytes, caused additional RANTES
production from astrocytes. Antibody neutralization studies suggested the
potential involvement of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) and interleukin-1
beta (IL-1β) in mediating additional RANTES production. Treatment of astrocyte
cultures with TNF-α and IL-1β caused activation of several signaling molecules
and transcription factors crucial to RANTES gene expression, including reactive
oxygen species, extracellular signal-regulated kinase, NF-κB, and NF-IL6,
increased RANTES gene promoter activity, and provoked RANTES production. As with 
RANTES, neutralization of bioactive TNF-α and IL-1β caused an attenuation of
chemotactic activity from supernatants of mixed glia containing astrocytes and
microglia during the course of JEV infection. In conclusion, TNF-α and IL-1β
produced by JEV-infected microglia might trigger another mechanism which induces 
a secondary wave of RANTES gene expression by activating astrocytes. The released
RANTES from glial cells might play a role in the recruitment of immune cells
during JEV infection.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuint.2010.12.009 
PMID: 21167894  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

