
1. HIV Clin Trials. 2010 Nov-Dec;11(6):351-8. doi: 10.1310/hct1106-351.

The relationship of CCR5 antagonists to CD4+ T-cell gain: a meta-regression of
recent clinical trials in treatment-experienced HIV-infected patients.

Wilkin TJ(1), Ribaudo HR, Tenorio AR, Gulick RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Weill-Cornell Medical College, New York, New 
York 10011, USA. tiw2001@med.cornell.edu

PURPOSE: Lower CD4+ T-cell counts are related to increased morbidity and
mortality despite virologic suppression. CCR5 antagonists are associated with
robust CD4+ T-cell responses. We examined the relationship of CCR5 antagonists to
CD4+ T-cell gains.
DESIGN: Meta-regression of recent phase 2-3 trials evaluating new antiretroviral 
agents in treatment-experienced subjects.
METHODS: We analyzed the relationship of CCR5 antagonists to CD4+ T-cell count
increase 24 weeks after initiating the new regimen using a linear model with
generalized estimating equations controlling for differing rates of virologic
suppression. Each treatment group was treated as a data point weighted by sample 
size.
RESULTS: We included 46 treatment groups from 17 trials (11 groups from 5 trials 
used CCR5 antagonists). Controlling for average baseline HIV-1 RNA and proportion
of subjects achieving HIV-1 RNA <50 copies/mL, use of a CCR5 antagonist was
associated with an additional significant CD4+ T-cell gain of +30/Î¼L (95% CI,
19-42) at 24 weeks compared to treatment groups not using a CCR5 antagonist.
CONCLUSIONS: Use of a CCR5 antagonist was associated with an enhanced CD4+ T-cell
count response independent of virologic suppression. This observation supports
further evaluation of CCR5 antagonists in patients with discordant immunologic
and virologic responses to ART.

DOI: 10.1310/hct1106-351 
PMCID: PMC3086540
PMID: 21239363  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

