
1. BMC Med. 2011 Jan 17;9:6. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-9-6.

Expenditures for the care of HIV-infected patients in rural areas in China's
antiretroviral therapy programs.

Zhou F(1), Kominski GF, Qian HZ, Wang J, Duan S, Guo Z, Zhao X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathogen Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Science, Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing, PR China. maple23@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: The Chinese government has provided health services to those infected
by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) under the acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS) care policy since 2003. Detailed research on the actual
expenditures and costs for providing care to patients with AIDS is needed for
future financial planning of AIDS health care services and possible reform of
HIV/AIDS-related policy. The purpose of the current study was to determine the
actual expenditures and factors influencing costs for untreated AIDS patients in 
a rural area of China after initiating highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART) under the national Free Care Program (China CARES).
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was conducted in Yunnan and Shanxi
Provinces, where HAART and all medical care are provided free to HIV-positive
patients. Health expenditures and costs in the first treatment year were
collected from medical records and prescriptions at local hospitals between
January and June 2007. Multivariate linear regression was used to determine the
factors associated with the actual expenditures in the first antiretroviral (ARV)
treatment year.
RESULTS: Five ARV regimens are commonly used in China CARES: zidovudine (AZT) +
lamivudine (3TC) + nevirapine (NVP), stavudine (D4T) + 3TC + efavirenz (EFV), D4T
+ 3TC + NVP, didanosine (DDI) + 3TC + NVP and combivir + EFV. The mean annual
expenditure per person for ARV medications was US$2,242 (US$1 = 7 Chinese Yuan
(CNY)) among 276 participants. The total costs for treating all adverse drug
events (ADEs) and opportunistic infections (OIs) were US$29,703 and US$23,031,
respectively. The expenses for treatment of peripheral neuritis and
cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections were the highest among those patients with ADEs 
and OIs, respectively. On the basis of multivariate linear regression, CD4 cell
counts (100-199 cells/μL versus <100 cells/μL, P = 0.02; and ≥200 cells/μL versus
<100 cells/μL, P < 0.004), residence in Mangshi County (P < 0.0001), ADEs (P =
0.04) and OIs (P = 0.02) were significantly associated with total expenditures in
the first ARV treatment year.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to determine the actual costs of HIV
treatment in rural areas of China. Costs for ARV drugs represented the major
portion of HIV medical expenditures. Initiating HAART in patients with higher CD4
cell count levels is likely to reduce treatment expenses for ADEs and OIs in
patients with AIDS.

DOI: 10.1186/1741-7015-9-6 
PMCID: PMC3025874
PMID: 21241494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

