
1. Bull Soc Pathol Exot. 2011 Aug;104(3):205-8. doi: 10.1007/s13149-011-0160-6. Epub
2011 Jun 3.

[HTLV and "donating" milk].

[Article in French]

Rigourd V(1), Meyer V, Kieffer F, Aubry S, Magny JF.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de puériculture et de périnatalogie, Paris, France.
ipp.rigourd@free.fr

In France, the screening for human T-cell leukemia/ lymphoma virus type 1 and 2
(HTLV-1 and HTLV-2) during the donation of human milk has been carried out from
1992 with the application of the circular DGS 24 November 1992. The screening for
antibodies against these viruses is regulated and done systematically during
every donation of milk. Breast feeding being the main mode of transmission of the
HTLV-1, the last ministerial decree of 25 August 2010 has made the screening test
compulsory for the anonymous donation and for the personalized donation (of a
mother for her own child) from all women including those affected by the
infection. The milk delivered by milk banks is pasteurized (62.5 °C for 30
minutes) before freezing at -18 °C, which inactivates the pathogens. This double 
means of prevention of the transmission of the HTLV-1 paradoxically seems
disproportionate in the absence of any precautionary measure in the case of
direct breast-feeding and the use of mother's raw milk. Indeed, in most neonatal 
intensive care units in maternity hospitals, unpasteurized milk is administered
to the neonates without any systematic preliminary testing of the serological
HTLV-1 status of the mother. An increased sensitization of the community of the
obstetricians, midwives and neonatologists by the Association of the Milk Banks
of France (ADLF) and the Société de pathologie exotique could address the issue
of screening for HTLV-1 in "donated" milk and breast-feeding.

DOI: 10.1007/s13149-011-0160-6 
PMID: 21638200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

