
1. J R Soc Interface. 2012 Jan 7;9(66):89-101. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2011.0223. Epub
2011 Jun 1.

Agricultural intensification, priming for persistence and the emergence of Nipah 
virus: a lethal bat-borne zoonosis.

Pulliam JR(1), Epstein JH, Dushoff J, Rahman SA, Bunning M, Jamaluddin AA, Hyatt 
AD, Field HE, Dobson AP, Daszak P; Henipavirus Ecology Research Group (HERG).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.

Emerging zoonoses threaten global health, yet the processes by which they emerge 
are complex and poorly understood. Nipah virus (NiV) is an important threat owing
to its broad host and geographical range, high case fatality, potential for
human-to-human transmission and lack of effective prevention or therapies. Here, 
we investigate the origin of the first identified outbreak of NiV encephalitis in
Malaysia and Singapore. We analyse data on livestock production from the index
site (a commercial pig farm in Malaysia) prior to and during the outbreak, on
Malaysian agricultural production, and from surveys of NiV's wildlife reservoir
(flying foxes). Our analyses suggest that repeated introduction of NiV from
wildlife changed infection dynamics in pigs. Initial viral introduction produced 
an explosive epizootic that drove itself to extinction but primed the population 
for enzootic persistence upon reintroduction of the virus. The resultant
within-farm persistence permitted regional spread and increased the number of
human infections. This study refutes an earlier hypothesis that anomalous El Ni√±o
Southern Oscillation-related climatic conditions drove emergence and suggests
that priming for persistence drove the emergence of a novel zoonotic pathogen.
Thus, we provide empirical evidence for a causative mechanism previously proposed
as a precursor to widespread infection with H5N1 avian influenza and other
emerging pathogens.

DOI: 10.1098/rsif.2011.0223 
PMCID: PMC3223631
PMID: 21632614  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

