
1. Biomaterials. 2011 Dec;32(36):9766-75. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.08.089.
Epub 2011 Sep 15.

Suicide gene therapy using reducible poly (oligo-D-arginine) for the treatment of
spinal cord tumors.

Won YW(1), Kim KM, An SS, Lee M, Ha Y, Kim YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, College of Engineering, Hanyang University,
Seoul 133-791, Republic of Korea.

Suicide gene therapy based on a combination of herpes simplex virus-thymidine
kinase (HSV-tk) and ganciclovir (GCV) has obstacles to achieving a success in
clinical use for the treatment of cancer due to inadequate thymidine kinase (TK) 
expression. The primary concern for improving anticancer efficacy of the suicide 
gene therapy is to develop an appropriate carrier that highly expresses TK in
vivo. Despite great advances in the development of non-viral vectors, none has
been used in cancer suicide gene therapy, not even in experimental challenge.
Reducible poly (oligo-D-arginine) (rPOA), one of the effective non-viral carriers
working in vivo, was chosen to deliver HSV-tk to spinal cord tumors which are
appropriate targets for suicide gene therapy. Since the system exerts toxicity
only in dividing cells, cells in the central nervous system, which are
non-proliferative, are not sensitive to the toxic metabolites. In the present
study, we demonstrated that the locomotor function of the model rat was
maintained through the tumor suppression resulting from the tumor-selective
suicide activity by co-administration of rPOA/HSV-tk and GCV. Thus, rPOA plays a 
crucial role in suicide gene therapy for cancer, and an rPOA/HSV-tk and GCV
system could help promote in vivo trials of suicide gene therapy.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.08.089 
PMID: 21924768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

