
1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1990 Jun;22(6 Pt 2):1210-7.

Langerhans cells in HIV-1 infection.

Stingl G(1), Rappersberger K, Tschachler E, Gartner S, Groh V, Mann DL, Wolff K, 
Popovic M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology I, University of Vienna Medical School, Austria.

The skin-specific immune surveillance system protects against invading
microorganisms and transformed cells expressing tumor-specific neoantigens. This 
system includes antigen-presenting Langerhans cells, dermal and epidermal T
lymphocytes, cytokine-producing keratinocytes, and draining peripheral lymph
nodes. In patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1), this
surveillance system appears to be compromised, as evidenced by a reduction in the
epidermal Langerhans cell population. Because human epidermal Langerhans cell
express surface-bound CD4 antigens, HLA-DR antigens, and Fc-IgG receptors, all of
which are involved in HIV-1 binding to, or entry into, the target cell, the
reduction in Langerhans cells in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS) or AIDS-related complex (ARC) may be a direct consequence of HIV-1
infection and subsequent injury to Langerhans cells. Detailed ultrastructural
studies have confirmed moderate to severe morphologic damage in some Langerhans
cells of such patients and the presence of HIV-1-like particles on Langerhans
cell surface membranes and in the extracellular spaces. The biologic consequences
of Langerhans cell infection by HIV-1 could be either impaired antigen
presentation function of viable Langerhans cells or possible transmission of the 
retrovirus to the T-cell compartment in skin or lymph nodes, with subsequent
depletion of CD4+ T cells via widespread syncytia formation between
HIV-1-infected and noninfected cells. The facts that herpes simplex virus,
specific cytokines, and ultraviolet B radiation can activate signals for HIV-1
expression and that epidermal cells can elaborate large amounts of cytokines,
particularly with enhanced ultraviolet B exposure, may have important clinical
implications for HIV-1-infected patients.

DOI: 10.1016/0190-9622(90)70165-e 
PMID: 2193948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

