
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28974. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028974. Epub 2011 Dec 28.

Protection in macaques immunized with HIV-1 candidate vaccines can be predicted
using the kinetics of their neutralizing antibodies.

Davis D(1), Koornstra W, Mortier D, Fagrouch Z, Verschoor EJ, Heeney JL, Bogers
WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Biomedical Primate Research Centre, Rijswijk, The
Netherlands. davis@bprc.nl

BACKGROUND: A vaccine is needed to control the spread of human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1). An in vitro assay that can predict the protection induced
by a vaccine would facilitate the development of such a vaccine. A potential
candidate would be an assay to quantify neutralization of HIV-1.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We have used sera from rhesus macaques that have been
immunized with HIV candidate vaccines and subsequently challenged with simian
human immunodeficiency virus (SHIV). We compared neutralization assays with
different formats. In experiments with the standardized and validated TZMbl
assay, neutralizing antibody titers against homologous SHIV(SF162P4) pseudovirus 
gave a variable correlation with reductions in plasma viremia levels. The target 
cells used in the assays are not just passive indicators of virus infection but
are actively involved in the neutralization process. When replicating virus was
used with GHOST cell assays, events during the absorption phase, as well as the
incubation phase, determine the level of neutralization. Sera that are associated
with protection have properties that are closest to the traditional concept of
neutralization: the concentration of antibody present during the absorption phase
has no effect on the inactivation rate. In GHOST assays, events during the
absorption phase may inactivate a fixed number, rather than a proportion, of
virus so that while complete neutralization can be obtained, it can only be found
at low doses particularly with isolates that are relatively resistant to
neutralization.
CONCLUSIONS: Two scenarios have the potential to predict protection by
neutralizing antibodies at concentrations that can be induced by vaccination:
antibodies that have properties close to the traditional concept of
neutralization may protect against a range of challenge doses of neutralization
sensitive HIV isolates; a window of opportunity also exists for protection
against isolates that are more resistant to neutralization but only at low
challenge doses.

Â© 2011 Davis et al.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028974 
PMCID: PMC3247218
PMID: 22216149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

