
1. Parasit Vectors. 2012 Jan 10;5:8. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-5-8.

Changes in the geographical distribution and abundance of the tick Ixodes ricinus
during the past 30 years in Sweden.

Jaenson TG(1), Jaenson DG, Eisen L, Petersson E, Lindgren E.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Entomology Unit, Department of Systematic Biology, Evolutionary
Biology Centre, Uppsala University, Norbyvägen 18d, SE-752 36 Uppsala, Sweden.
Thomas.Jaenson@ebc.uu.se

BACKGROUND: Ixodes ricinus is the main vector in Europe of human-pathogenic Lyme 
borreliosis (LB) spirochaetes, the tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) and other
pathogens of humans and domesticated mammals. The results of a previous 1994
questionnaire, directed at people living in Central and North Sweden (Svealand
and Norrland) and aiming to gather information about tick exposure for humans and
domestic animals, suggested that Ixodes ricinus ticks had become more widespread 
in Central Sweden and the southern part of North Sweden from the early 1980s to
the early 1990s. To investigate whether the expansion of the tick's northern
geographical range and the increasing abundance of ticks in Sweden were still
occurring, in 2009 we performed a follow-up survey 16 years after the initial
study.
METHODS: A questionnaire similar to the one used in the 1994 study was published 
in Swedish magazines aimed at dog owners, home owners, and hunters. The
questionnaire was published together with a popular science article about the
tick's biology and role as a pathogen vector in Sweden. The magazines were
selected to get information from people familiar with ticks and who spend time in
areas where ticks might be present.
RESULTS: Analyses of data from both surveys revealed that during the near 30-year
period from the early 1980s to 2008, I. ricinus has expanded its distribution
range northwards. In the early 1990s ticks were found in new areas along the
northern coastline of the Baltic Sea, while in the 2009 study, ticks were
reported for the first time from many locations in North Sweden. This included
locations as far north as 66°N and places in the interior part of North Sweden.
During this 16-year period the tick's range in Sweden was estimated to have
increased by 9.9%. Most of the range expansion occurred in North Sweden (north of
60°N) where the tick's coverage area doubled from 12.5% in the early 1990s to
26.8% in 2008. Moreover, according to the respondents, the abundance of ticks had
increased markedly in LB- and TBE-endemic areas in South (Götaland) and Central
Sweden.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that I. ricinus has expanded its range in North 
Sweden and has become distinctly more abundant in Central and South Sweden during
the last three decades. However, in the northern mountain region I. ricinus is
still absent. The increased abundance of the tick can be explained by two main
factors: First, the high availability of large numbers of important tick
maintenance hosts, i.e., cervids, particularly roe deer (Capreolus capreolus)
during the last three decades. Second, a warmer climate with milder winters and a
prolonged growing season that permits greater survival and proliferation over a
larger geographical area of both the tick itself and deer. High reproductive
potential of roe deer, high tick infestation rate and the tendency of roe deer to
disperse great distances may explain the range expansion of I. ricinus and
particularly the appearance of new TBEV foci far away from old TBEV-endemic
localities. The geographical presence of LB in Sweden corresponds to the
distribution of I. ricinus. Thus, LB is now an emerging disease risk in many
parts of North Sweden. Unless countermeasures are undertaken to keep the deer
populations, particularly C. capreolus and Dama dama, at the relatively low
levels that prevailed before the late 1970s--especially in and around urban areas
where human population density is high--by e.g. reduced hunting of red fox
(Vulpes vulpes) and lynx (Lynx lynx), the incidences of human LB and TBE are
expected to continue to be high or even to increase in Sweden in coming decades.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-5-8 
PMCID: PMC3311093
PMID: 22233771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

