
1. Diagn Cytopathol. 2013 Apr;41(4):354-9. doi: 10.1002/dc.21775. Epub 2012 Jan 27.

Ascitic fluid due to type II herpes simplex virus infection: report of a case
with immunocytochemical confirmation.

Yoshida K(1), Miyahira Y, Ishida M, Iwai M, Kagotani A, Arita N, Iwamoto N,
Takikita M, Kojima F, Okabe H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diagnostic Pathology, Shiga University of Medical Science, Shiga, 
Japan.

Herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection is usually observed in the oral cavity and
external genitals, and HSV peritonitis is extremely rare. Herein, we report a
case of type II HSV peritonitis successfully diagnosed by ascitic cytology. A
66-year-old Japanese man, who had been treated with steroid inhalation for 5
years due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, was suspected to have acute
cholecystitis. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy and intraoperative cytological
examination of ascitic fluid were performed. Cytological study of ascitic fluid
revealed that abundant granular cell debris, degenerative cells and apoptotic
bodies were present, as well as some single or multinucleated cells with ground
glass nuclei. However, vivid mesothelial cells were rarely seen.
Immunocytochemical staining for type II HSV was positive in single or
multinucleated cells with ground glass nuclei. Therefore, a diagnosis of type II 
HSV peritonitis was made. This is the first reported case of type II HSV
peritonitis successfully diagnosed by ascitic cytology. This report highlights
that the presence of abundant cell debris, degenerative cells and apoptotic
bodies, and the absence of vivid mesothelial cells are the key cytological
findings to suspect HSV peritonitis, and the diagnosis can be confirmed by
careful surveillance for characteristic nuclear findings of single or
multinucleated cells. The frequency of opportunistic infection is increased
because of the increased numbers of iatrogenic immunocompromised patients as seen
in this case, therefore, cytological examination is a useful method for early
detection of the causative agent of peritonitis including HSV.

Copyright Â© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/dc.21775 
PMID: 22282082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

