
1. Transfusion. 2012 Sep;52(9):1940-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2011.03524.x. Epub
2012 Feb 5.

The clinical relevance of persistent recombinant immunoblot assay-indeterminate
reactions: insights into the natural history of hepatitis C virus infection and
implications for donor counseling.

Makuria AT(1), Raghuraman S, Burbelo PD, Cantilena CC, Allison RD, Gibble J,
Rehermann B, Alter HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Section, Department of Transfusion Medicine, National
Institute for Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recombinant immunoblot assay (RIBA) is used to determine the
specificity of antibody to hepatitis C virus (anti-HCV). The RIBA result is
recorded as positive, negative, or indeterminate. The interpretation and
significance of RIBA-indeterminate reactions are unclear. We addressed the
clinical relevance of these reactions in the context of the natural history of
HCV infection in a prospectively followed cohort of anti-HCV-positive blood
donors.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Donor demographics, exposure history, and humoral and
cell-mediated immunity (CMI) were compared in 15 RIBA-indeterminate subjects,
nine chronic HCV carriers, and eight spontaneously recovered subjects. Serum
samples were tested for anti-HCV by a quantitative, liquid luciferase
immunoprecipitation system (LIPS). CMI was assessed by interferon-γ enzyme-linked
immunosorbent spot assay.
RESULTS: In the LIPS assay, the sum of antibody responses to six HCV antigens
showed significant (p < 0.001) stepwise diminution progressing from chronic
carriers to spontaneously recovered to RIBA-indeterminate subjects. CMI responses
in RIBA-indeterminate subjects were similar to spontaneously recovered subjects
and greater than chronic carriers and controls (p < 0.008). A parenteral risk
factor was identified in only 13% of RIBA-indeterminate subjects compared to 89% 
of chronic carriers and 87% of spontaneously recovered subjects.
RIBA-indeterminate donors were older than the other groups.
CONCLUSION: The CMI and LIPS results suggest that persistent RIBA-indeterminate
reactions represent waning anti-HCV responses in persons who have recovered from 
a remote HCV infection. In such cases, detectable antibody may ultimately
disappear leaving no residual serologic evidence of prior HCV infection, as
reported in a minority of long-term HCV-recovered subjects.

© 2012 American Association of Blood Banks.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2011.03524.x 
PMCID: PMC3346857
PMID: 22304422  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

