
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32428. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032428. Epub 2012 Feb 23.

Conditionally immortalized mouse embryonic fibroblasts retain proliferative
activity without compromising multipotent differentiation potential.

Huang E(1), Bi Y, Jiang W, Luo X, Yang K, Gao JL, Gao Y, Luo Q, Shi Q, Kim SH,
Liu X, Li M, Hu N, Liu H, Cui J, Zhang W, Li R, Chen X, Shen J, Kong Y, Zhang J, 
Wang J, Luo J, He BC, Wang H, Reid RR, Luu HH, Haydon RC, Yang L, He TC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Bioengineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(1). doi:
10.1371/annotation/2f1c6442-0ecb-4a33-9534-aae89b5fbbc1.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent cells which reside in many tissues 
and can give rise to multiple lineages including bone, cartilage and adipose.
Although MSCs have attracted significant attention for basic and translational
research, primary MSCs have limited life span in culture which hampers MSCs'
broader applications. Here, we investigate if mouse mesenchymal progenitors can
be conditionally immortalized with SV40 large T antigen and maintain long-term
cell proliferation without compromising their multipotency. Using the system
which expresses SV40 large T antigen flanked with Cre/loxP sites, we demonstrate 
that mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) can be efficiently immortalized by SV40
large T antigen. The conditionally immortalized MEFs (iMEFs) exhibit an enhanced 
proliferative activity and maintain long-term cell proliferation, which can be
reversed by Cre recombinase. The iMEFs express most MSC markers and retain
multipotency as they can differentiate into osteogenic, chondrogenic and
adipogenic lineages under appropriate differentiation conditions in vitro and in 
vivo. The removal of SV40 large T reduces the differentiation potential of iMEFs 
possibly due to the decreased progenitor expansion. Furthermore, the iMEFs are
apparently not tumorigenic when they are subcutaneously injected into athymic
nude mice. Thus, the conditionally immortalized iMEFs not only maintain long-term
cell proliferation but also retain the ability to differentiate into multiple
lineages. Our results suggest that the reversible immortalization strategy using 
SV40 large T antigen may be an efficient and safe approach to establishing
long-term cell culture of primary mesenchymal progenitors for basic and
translational research, as well as for potential clinical applications.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032428 
PMCID: PMC3285668
PMID: 22384246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

