
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2012 Mar 13;12:55. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-12-55.

Epidemiology of severe pediatric adenovirus lower respiratory tract infections in
Manitoba, Canada, 1991-2005.

Alharbi S(1), Van Caeseele P, Consunji-Araneta R, Zoubeidi T, Fanella S, Souid
AK, Alsuwaidi AR.

Author information: 
(1)Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Most pediatric adenovirus respiratory infections are mild and
indistinguishable from other viral causes. However, in a few children, the
disease can be severe and result in substantial morbidity. We describe the
epidemiologic, clinical, radiologic features and outcome of adenovirus lower
respiratory tract infections (LRTI) in Aboriginal and Non-Aboriginal children in 
Manitoba, Canada during the years 1991 and 2005.
METHODS: This was a retrospective study of 193 children who presented to the
department of pediatrics at Winnipeg Children's Hospital, Manitoba, Canada with
LRTI and had a positive respiratory culture for adenovirus. Patients'
demographics, clinical and radiologic features and outcomes were collected.
Adenovirus serotype distributions and temporal associations were described.
Approximate incidence comparisons (detection rates) of adenovirus LRTI among
Aboriginal and Non-Aboriginal children were estimated with 95% confidence
intervals.
RESULTS: Adenovirus infections occurred throughout the year with clusters in the 
fall and winter. Serotypes 1 to 3 were the predominant isolates (two thirds of
the cases). The infection was more frequent among Canadian Aboriginals, as
illustrated in 2004, where its incidence in children 0-4 years old was 5.6 fold
higher in Aboriginals (13.51 vs. 2.39 per 10,000, p < 0.000). There were no
significant differences in length of hospitalization and use of ventilator
assistance between the two groups (p > 0.185 and p > 0.624, respectively) nor
across serotypes (p > 0.10 and p > 0.05, respectively). The disease primarily
affected infants (median age, 9.5 months). Most children presented with
bronchiolitis or pneumonia, with multi-lobar consolidations on the chest x-ray.
Chronic (residual) changes were documented in 16 patients, with eight patients
showing bronchiectasis on the chest computerized tomography scan.
CONCLUSIONS: Adenovirus infection is associated with significant respiratory
morbidities, especially in young infants. The infection appears to be more
frequent in Aboriginal children. These results justify a careful follow-up for
children with adenovirus LRTI.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2334-12-55 
PMCID: PMC3323892
PMID: 22414179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

