
1. Immunobiology. 2013 Jan;218(1):40-51. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2012.01.019. Epub 2012
Feb 2.

RNAi screen in apoptotic cancer cell-stimulated human macrophages reveals
co-regulation of IL-6/IL-10 expression.

Ley S(1), Weigert A, Hériché JK, Mille-Baker B, Janssen RA, Brüne B.

Author information: 
(1)Goethe-University Frankfurt, Institute of Biochemistry I/ZAFES,
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany.

Tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) are a major supportive component within
neoplasms and are characterized by a plethora of functions that facilitate tumor 
outgrowth. Mechanisms of macrophage attraction and differentiation to a
tumor-promoting phenotype, defined among others by distinct cytokine patterns
such as pronounced interleukin (IL-10) production, are ill-defined. We aimed to
identify signaling pathways that contribute to the generation of TAM-like
macrophages using an adenoviral RNAi-based approach. Primary human
monocyte-derived macrophages were stimulated with apoptotic tumor cell
supernatants (ACM) to induce a TAM-like phenotype, characterized by secretion of 
IL-10, IL-6, IL-8 but repression of IL-12. For the high-throughput screen,
macrophages were transduced with 8495 constructs of the adenoviral shRNA
SilenceSelect(®) library of Galapagos BV, which aims at identifying druggable
targets. We identified 96 genes involved in IL-10 production in response to ACM
and observed a pronounced cluster of targets regulating both IL-10 and IL-6.
Validation of five targets within the IL-10/IL-6 cluster was performed using
siRNA or pharmacological inhibitors in human primary macrophages. Among those,
interleukin 4 receptor-α and cannabinoid receptor 2 were confirmed as regulators 
of IL-10 and IL-6 secretion by ACM-stimulated macrophages. Our approach
characterizes cellular functions of transfection-resistant, highly plastic and
versatile cells and identifies novel targets involved in the generation of a
TAM-like phenotype in human macrophages.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2012.01.019 
PMID: 22445721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

