
1. Gene. 2012 Jul 10;502(2):94-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.04.041. Epub 2012 Apr 25.

Expression pattern of a single transgene cassette located in endogenous GLIS3 of 
cloned pigs; a nested situation.

Jakobsen JE(1), Dantoft TM, Johansen MG, Jørgensen AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, The Bartholin Building, Aarhus University, Denmark.
jannikhumgen@hotmail.com

One of the main focus areas in transgenesis is the choice of a promoter driving
stable expression over time of the gene of interest. Besides promoter identity,
the genomic environment of the transgene plays a pivotal role in transcription
regulation. Studies in higher mammals describing transgene expression from a
defined locus are very limited. We set out to determine the expression pattern of
two transgene promoters, the human PDGFβ and the viral SV40, in a single cassette
positioned in the largest intron of the porcine GLIS3 locus. The PDGFβ promoter
drives a variant of the amyloid precursor protein gene named APP695sw and the
SV40 promoter drives the neomycin resistant gene, Neo. The nested gene scenario
was investigated in three transgenic cloned pigs sacrificed at 3 months, 2 years 
and 3 years of age. With identical genetic make-up and same environment, the
three individual pigs are considered representative of 3 year lifespan of a
single pig. Selected organs from the pigs were analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR
for transgene promoter activity as well as endogenous GLIS3 promoter activity. No
apparent effect of the transgene cassette was observed on endogenous GLIS3
expression. In addition, one year old homozygous pigs showed no phenotypic signs 
of dysfunctional GLIS3. Both transgene promoters showed and retained their tissue
specificity with stable expression over time. Our study indicates that transgenes
inserted in a nested situation might be applicable for faithful and long term
transgene expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.04.041 
PMID: 22555020  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

