
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2012 May;8(5):653-61. doi: 10.4161/hv.19503. Epub 2012 May
1.

The human potential of a recombinant pandemic influenza vaccine produced in
tobacco plants.

Jul-Larsen Å(1), Madhun AS, Brokstad KA, Montomoli E, Yusibov V, Cox RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Influenza Centre, The Gade Institute, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
asne.jul-larsen@gades.uib.no

Rapid production of influenza vaccine antigen is an important challenge when a
new pandemic occurs. Production of recombinant antigens in plants is a quick,
cost effective and up scalable new strategy for influenza vaccine production. In 
this study, we have characterized a recombinant influenza haemagglutinin antigen 
(HAC1) that was derived from the 2009 pandemic H1N1 (pdmH1N1) virus and expressed
in tobacco plants. Volunteers vaccinated with the 2009 pdmH1N1 oil-in-water
adjuvanted vaccine provided serum and lymphocyte samples that were used to study 
the immunogenic properties of the HAC1 antigen in vitro. By 7 d post vaccination,
the vaccine fulfilled the licensing criteria for antibody responses to the HA
detected by haemagglutination inhibition and single radial hemolysis. By ELISA
and ELISPOT analysis we showed that HAC1 was recognized by specific serum
antibodies and antibody secreting cells, respectively. We conducted a kinetic
analysis and found a peak of serum HAC1 specific antibody response between day 14
and 21 post vaccination by ELISA. We also detected elevated production of IL-2
and IFNγ and low frequencies of CD4(+) T cells producing single or multiple Th1
cytokines after stimulating PBMCs (peripheral blood mononuclear cells) with the
HAC1 antigen in vitro. This indicates that the antigen can interact with T cells,
although confirming an effective adjuvant would be required to improve the T-cell
stimulation of plant based vaccines. We conclude that the tobacco derived
recombinant HAC1 antigen is a promising vaccine candidate recognized by both B-
and T cells.

DOI: 10.4161/hv.19503 
PMCID: PMC3495720
PMID: 22634440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

