
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38333. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038333. Epub 2012 Jun 4.

Fine mapping of the Bsr1 barley stripe mosaic virus resistance gene in the model 
grass Brachypodium distachyon.

Cui Y(1), Lee MY, Huo N, Bragg J, Yan L, Yuan C, Li C, Holditch SJ, Xie J, Luo
MC, Li D, Yu J, Martin J, Schackwitz W, Gu YQ, Vogel JP, Jackson AO, Liu Z,
Garvin DF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agro-Biotechnology, China Agricultural University,
Beijing, China.

The ND18 strain of Barley stripe mosaic virus (BSMV) infects several lines of
Brachypodium distachyon, a recently developed model system for genomics research 
in cereals. Among the inbred lines tested, Bd3-1 is highly resistant at 20 to 25 
°C, whereas Bd21 is susceptible and infection results in an intense mosaic
phenotype accompanied by high levels of replicating virus. We generated an F(6:7)
recombinant inbred line (RIL) population from a cross between Bd3-1 and Bd21 and 
used the RILs, and an F(2) population of a second Bd21 × Bd3-1 cross to evaluate 
the inheritance of resistance. The results indicate that resistance segregates as
expected for a single dominant gene, which we have designated Barley stripe
mosaic virus resistance 1 (Bsr1). We constructed a genetic linkage map of the RIL
population using SNP markers to map this gene to within 705 Kb of the distal end 
of the top of chromosome 3. Additional CAPS and Indel markers were used to fine
map Bsr1 to a 23 Kb interval containing five putative genes. Our study
demonstrates the power of using RILs to rapidly map the genetic determinants of
BSMV resistance in Brachypodium. Moreover, the RILs and their associated genetic 
map, when combined with the complete genomic sequence of Brachypodium, provide
new resources for genetic analyses of many other traits.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038333 
PMCID: PMC3366947
PMID: 22675544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

