
1. J Med Virol. 2012 Sep;84(9):1344-52. doi: 10.1002/jmv.23315.

Human immunodeficiency virus enhances hepatitis C virus replication by
differential regulation of IFN and TGF family genes.

Zhang X(1), Daucher M, Baeza J, Kim CW, Russell R, Kottilil S.

Author information: 
(1)Immunopathogenesis Section, Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland.

HIV co-infection significantly impacts the natural history of hepatitis C virus
(HCV) by increasing plasma HCV viral load, accelerating liver disease
progression, and reducing rates of HCV clearance. Cytokines play an important
role in regulating hepatic inflammation and fibrogenesis during chronic HCV
infection, yet the impact of HIV on cytokine expression is unknown. In this
study, an HCV continuous infection cell culture system was modified to permit
co-infection with HIV to test the hypothesis that virus-induced disregulation of 
immune-response genes, particularly interferons and TGF-β, may create a
permissive environment for the initial establishment of HIV/HCV co-infection in
the host. CCR5-expressing Huh-7.5 hepatoma cells were transduced with human CD4
antigen to allow HIV infection in vitro. Co-infection of CD4⁺ Huh-7.5 cells with 
HIV and HCV or co-culture of HIV-infected CD4⁺ Huh-7.5 cells and HCV-infected
Huh-7.5 cells increased the level of HCV RNA compared to HCV mono-infection.
Quantitative gene expression analysis revealed HIV-induced up regulation of most 
tested IFN family genes when compared to HCV or co-infection. HCV infection
induced up regulation of many TGF family genes that were subsequently
down-regulated in the presence of HIV or HIV/HCV. Interestingly, co-infection
resulted in down regulation of several IFN genes and significant up regulation of
TGF-β genes leading to an overall enhancement of HCV replication. These data
suggest that HIV infection may influence HCV replication in vitro by increasing
levels of HCV RNA, possibly through the differential regulation of endogenous IFN
and TGF family genes.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.23315 
PMID: 22825812  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

