
1. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2012 Jun 22;66:437-45.

[NET and NETosis--new phenomenon in immunology].

[Article in Polish]

Matoszka N(1), Działo J, Tokarz-Deptuła B, Deptuła W.

Author information: 
(1)Katedra Mikrobiologii, Wydział Biologii, Uniwersytet Szczeciński, Szczecin.

Neutrophils are one of the first cells of the immune system recruited to the site
of infection, representing the host's most effective and numerous front-line
defenders. Recently, a novel antimicrobial mechanism of neutrophils has been
described: upon activation, they release DNA and a subset of their granule
content, forming neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). These extracellular,
chromatin structures, which contain histones and neutrophil granule proteins, can
trap and kill a broad spectrum of microbes, including Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacteria, fungi, protozoa and viruses. Some of the pathogens, which
are trapped and exposed to high local concentrations of antimicrobial compounds, 
employ strategies against NET binding, including surface modification and/or
degradation of NET by DNases. It has been suggested that NETs are formed during
active cell death, recently named NETosis. New data indicate that this novel
mechanism of cell death requires interaction between three processes--reactive
oxygen species generation, histone citrullination and autophagy--and
significantly differs from previously known types of cell death, including
apoptosis and necrosis. Moreover, the release of nuclear chromatin was also
described for other types of cells--mast cells and eosinophils. Mast cells, like 
neutrophils, under certain conditions release nuclear chromatin and may undergo a
similar active cell death program, while eosinophils release only mitochondrial
chromatin, and its release does not lead to the death of these cells.

DOI: 10.5604/17322693.1001178 
PMID: 22922143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

