
1. Bull World Health Organ. 2012 Sep 1;90(9):652-658B. doi: 10.2471/BLT.11.100818.
Epub 2012 Jun 27.

From caution to urgency: the evolution of HIV testing and counselling in Africa.

Baggaley R(1), Hensen B, Ajose O, Grabbe KL, Wong VJ, Schilsky A, Lo YR, Lule F, 
Granich R, Hargreaves J.

Author information: 
(1)HIV/AIDS Department, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVE: To describe recent changes in policy on provider-initiated testing and
counselling (PITC) for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in African
countries and to investigate patients' experiences of and views about PITC.
METHODS: A review of the published literature and of national HIV testing
policies, strategic frameworks, plans and other relevant documents was carried
out.
FINDINGS: Of the African countries reviewed, 42 (79.2%) had adopted a PITC
policy. Of the 42, all recommended PITC for the prevention of mother-to-child HIV
transmission, 66.7% recommended it for tuberculosis clinics and patients, and
45.2% for sexually transmitted infection clinics. Moreover, 43.6% adopted PITC in
2005 or 2006. The literature search identified 11 studies on patients'
experiences of and views about PITC in clinical settings in Africa. The clear
majority regarded PITC as acceptable. However, women in antenatal clinics were
not always aware that they had the right to decline an HIV test.
CONCLUSION: Policy and practice on HIV testing and counselling in Africa has
shifted from a cautious approach that emphasizes confidentiality to greater
acceptance of the routine offer of HIV testing. The introduction of PITC in
clinical settings has contributed to increased HIV testing in several of these
settings. Most patients regard PITC as acceptable. However, other approaches are 
needed to reach people who do not consult health-care services.

DOI: 10.2471/BLT.11.100818 
PMCID: PMC3442388
PMID: 22984309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

