
1. RNA Biol. 2012 Oct;9(10):1266-74. doi: 10.4161/rna.22081. Epub 2012 Sep 20.

Specific temperature-induced perturbations of secondary mRNA structures are
associated with the cold-adapted temperature-sensitive phenotype of influenza A
virus.

Chursov A(1), Kopetzky SJ, Leshchiner I, Kondofersky I, Theis FJ, Frishman D,
Shneider A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Oriented Bioinformatics, Technische Universität München, 
Wissenschaftzentrum Weihenstephan, Freising, Germany.

For decades, cold-adapted, temperature-sensitive (ca/ts) strains of influenza A
virus have been used as live attenuated vaccines. Due to their great public
health importance it is crucial to understand the molecular mechanism(s) of cold 
adaptation and temperature sensitivity that are currently unknown. For instance, 
secondary RNA structures play important roles in influenza biology. Thus, we
hypothesized that a relatively minor change in temperature (32-39°C) can lead to 
perturbations in influenza RNA structures and, that these structural
perturbations may be different for mRNAs of the wild type (wt) and ca/ts strains.
To test this hypothesis, we developed a novel in silico method that enables
assessing whether two related RNA molecules would undergo (dis)similar structural
perturbations upon temperature change. The proposed method allows identifying
those areas within an RNA chain where dissimilarities of RNA secondary structures
at two different temperatures are particularly pronounced, without knowing
particular RNA shapes at either temperature. We identified such areas in the NS2,
PA, PB2 and NP mRNAs. However, these areas are not identical for the wt and ca/ts
mutants. Differences in temperature-induced structural changes of wt and ca/ts
mRNA structures may constitute a yet unappreciated molecular mechanism of the
cold adaptation/temperature sensitivity phenomena.

DOI: 10.4161/rna.22081 
PMCID: PMC3583857
PMID: 22995831  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

